A SURVEY OF THE SPIRITVALL ANTICHRIST.

OPENING The secrets of Familisme and Antinomianisme in the Antichristian
Doctrine of John Saltmarsh, and Will. Del, the present Preachers of the Army
now in England, and of Robert Town, Tob. Crisp, H. Den, Eaton, and others.

In which is revealed the rise and spring of Antinomians, Familists,
Libertines, Swenck-feldians, Enthysiasts, etc.

The mind of Luther a most professed opposer of Antinomians, is cleared, and
diverse considerable points of the Law and the Gospel, of the Spirit and
Letter, of the two Covenants, of the nature of free grace, exercise under
temptations, mortification, justification, sanctification, are discovered.

In Two PARTS.

By SAMUEL RUTHERFURD Professor of Divinity in the University of St. Andrews in
Scotland.

Every spirit that confesses not Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of
God, and this is the (Spirit) of the Antichrist,

1 John 4.3. For there shall arise false Christ's, and false prophets, and shall
show great signs and wonders, insomuch that (if it were possible) they should
deceive the very Elect.

Matthew. 24.24. LONDON, Printed by J. D. and R. I. for Andrew Crook, and are to
be sold at his shop at the Green-Dragon in Paul's Churchyard. 1648.

A brotherly and free Epistle to the patrons and friends of pretended Liberty
of Conscience.
IT is a question not easily determined whether the Church of Christ suffer
more by brethren, her mothers sons Edom within, or by strangers, Babel
without her walls: It is undeniable that thousands of godly people are carried
away to Familisme, Antinomianisme and love to follow strangers because people
are floods and seas, and teachers sit upon the waters as fair or stormy and
rough winds; I have been long silent, but when I did see not long ago
privileges of state, if in a feather violated must be judged bloody and
unexpiable by sacrifice, or any way else, and heresies, fundamental
blasphemies, foul inventions of men, are thought to be zealous errors, godly
phancies, things of the mind not to be spoken against, except M. Tho. Edwards,
or any other who out of zeal to God, cry against the New alter, would be
charged to sin against the Holy Ghost, therefore I dare not but give a
Testimony for the truth. Silence may be a washing of the hands with Pilate,
saying, I am innocent of the blood of lost souls, but it washes away the guilt
with waters of ink and blood. And except my heart deceive me, give me leave to
borrow an expression of Job, If I lift up my hand, or a bloody pen against the
truly godly, or have a pick at holiness, Let mine arm fall from my shoulder
blade, and mine arm be broken from the bone. Job 31.21, 22.


I am not to oil any man's head who has been exorbitant in his superpluses or
overlashings against personal infirmities of the true godly, as if godly and
elect men, and elect Angels were terms reciprocal (I would the Antinomians
had not biased too many with such an opinion) for Judas the Traitor, for ought
we read, was orthodox in point of doctrine, and Peter not so in playing Satan's
part to dissuade Christ from suffering, and in complying with the masters of
out-dated ceremonies, nor should cummin and mint devide us, though there may be
a little pearl of truth in these, and I would not willingly side against lower
and underground truths, that Christ will own, though little and small. But
sure it is not Christian, but Asses patience, to open the bosom and the heart
to lodge Familists, Antinomians, Arminians, Arrians, and what not under the
notion of the godly party, and to send to hell others sometime judged the godly
party, because of two innocent and harmless relations of Scottish and
Presbyteriall: As touching the former M. Henry Burton Conformities deformity.
p. 17
is pleased to call the Scots the vilest of men, and if I mistake him not
Preface to the ^. Major of London.
partakers with murderers, with rebels, with Traitors, Incendiaries,
underminers of Parliament and City, that they may reign, whose violent and
fraudulent practices proclaim them to be not friends, but such as in whom to
put the least confidence, is to trust in the reed of Egypt, whereon if a man
lean, it will pierce him through And Page 20.22.
speaking of the General Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland, he says, Thus in
reference to the spirituality or the Church there seems to be set up in their
National Assembly the like Supremacy, which the Pope himself claims over
Kings, States, Kingdoms, Commonwealths, and M. Rutherfurd in his government
of the Church of Scotland tells us that though none in this Grand Assembly have
decisive voices, save only Commissioners, yet the acts of the Assembly oblige
all the absents not present in all their members, and that because, what is by
these Commissioners determined and concluded is matter necessary and agreeable
to Gods word, as being no less infallible then those decisions of the
Apostles, Act. 15. -- And whosoever shall not conform in all things to the
constitutions of that General Kirk Assembly, when once the horn is blown,
then ipso facto imprisonment, confiscation of Goods, banishment, and what not?
-- What? to set up in the Church an Oracle of infallibility and such a
Suprema^ie, as no true bred English Christian can interpret for other then
Antichristian Tyranny -- and thereby shall our fundamental Laws, privileges,
and power of Parliaments, liberties, and freedom of all true bred English
subjects be brought under perpetual bondage -- worse then that either of Egypt
or Babylon. But that we may speak for our selves. I answer to all these, in the
following considerations, without recrimination.

1. If any truths of Christ because holden by the Church of Scotland leave off
to be truth then shall we say, these that by divine providence (which casts a
measuring line of acres and lands to every Nation) have obtained the warmer
side of the Sun in South Britain, and a fatter soil have the more excellent
Christ, as if Gods grew in gardens, Juvenalis. O sanctas ^entes quibus hoc
nascuntur in hortis ^umi^a --
as they said they did in Egypt. But as Religion should not wear the shape,
fashions and hew of men, so sure England and Scotland differ non specie and
natura sed accidentibus meris, a little vicinity to, or distance from the Sun
is a poor difference, when we come up to our fathers house the higher
Jerusalem (which he who brings many children to glory, I pray, and hope
shall do) I trust we shall not stand in a vicinity to, or a distance from his
face who sits on the throne and the Lamb, as English and Scottish, and though
Scotland be resembled to Egypt, as M. Burton says, we have not peirced through
our brethren, but are the causes under God far more now, why M. Burton and
our brethren breath in English air, then when we came first into this land,
for M. Burton said himself, to some of our number then, we was then the
Kingdom of Judah, helping the Ten tribes their brethren against the
Taskmasters of Egypt, and spoylers of Babylon, and our General Assembly in
Scotland was then beautiful as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, terrible as an
army with banners. But now the tables are so far turned* that our General
Assembly is a Papal throne above Kings and Kesars, and we our selves are worse
then Egypt or Babylon. Does a fountain send forth at the same place sweet
water and bitter? My brethren, these things ought not so to be. But what
although Scotland be Egypt and Assyria, Esaias says, chapter 19.18. And in that
day shall five Cities in the land of Egypt speak the language of Canaan and
swear by the Lord of hoasts. And though we be Assyria (as M. Burton the title
page says) we like that better of the same Prophet, v. 24. In that day shall
Israel be the third with Egypt, and with Assyria, even a blessing in the midst
of the land, whom the Lord of hoasts shall bless, saying, blessed be Egypt my
people, and Assyria the work of my hands. But I am afraid* that Familists,
Antinomians, Arminians, Socinians, whom M. Burton calls the Saints, shall not
be found the only true Israel of God.

2. We pass not to be judged the vilest of men by M. Burton, or partakers
with murderers, with rebels, with Traitors, Incendiaries, underminers of the
English Parliament, Antichristian and Papal Tyranizers over the bodies,
estates, consciences of the free borne English, under the notion of
Presbyterians.

For 1. M. Burton is but a man, and speaks thus from the flesh, and has
three times changed his mind or profession touching Church Government and
other points of tollerating Arminians, Socinians, and the like against which he
gave a testimony in his Apology and other writings, he that changes thrice,
may change four times and ten times.

But if we should stand or fall by the Testimony of men, I should rather name
Apostolic Calvin, renowned Beza, godly and learned Cartwright, Prophetical
Brightman, with other worthies, M. Dod, M. Hildersam, M. Dearing, M. Greenham,
M. Perkins, M. Baynes, M. Pemble, D. Ammes, D. Sybs, D. Preston. I speak not
of many eminent lights in Scotland, who now shine in another firmament, of M.
Knox, M. Bruce, M. Welsh, and many the like worthies, if these who are asleep
in the Lord, were now living, they would deny you, and your Independencie, and
separation, your Schisms* Atheistical and Epicurean tenets of toleration of
all Sects, Religions, false ways, your Antinomians, Familists, Socinians,
Arminians, Arrians, Antitrinitarians, Antiscripturians, Seekers, Anabaptists;
all which I cannot but judge to be yours, because you are so far from
writing against them, or denying them, that in your books, to write against
them, is to persecute the Saints of the most high, few or not any of your way
wrote ever one jot against them. But you spend all the blood and gall of your
pen on Presbyterians, on the Scots, the City of London, the Assembly of
Divines, on Sion College, as against Egypt, Assyria, Babylon, Antichrist,
tyrans over the conscience, persecuters of the Saints, such as would inslave
England. You plead for a toleration to them all, they are the Saints, the godly
party, the only Anointed ones. I deny not but many carnal men may, and do
crowd in amongst Presbyterians, but are they owned by them? plead they for
them? do they book them in their accounts as the godly party? But the
Presbyterians spread a thousand lies of them: yea to say no more of them then
what their Printed books speak, which were never disclaimed by them. They
cannot be lies when the Authors and Patrons who plead for toleration to them,
are not only silent, but reply and duply in Press and Pulpit for the
vindication of their innocence.

But if Antitoleration may go pari passu equal foot and pace with
Antinomisme, Arminianisme and Socinianianisme, and such like heresies, and
false ways as consistent with godliness and Saintship; why should
Presbyterians be blotted out of the Calendar of Saints? and ought ye not also
to restore them with the spirit of meekness? to oppress, imprison, fine and
confine them, to decourt them out of places, judicatures, offices, societies,
is no persecution, why should devouring pens be sharped and inked with gall
and venom of Aspes against them only as Antichristian, Popish, Tyrannical,
profane, bloody-persecuters, the sons of Pope and Prelate? you are more
debtors to them for your lives, free-holds, estates, victories, free sitting
Parliaments, peace, plenty, freedom from grievous Taskmasters of Egypt,
ceremonies, will worship and other toys, which the godliest rather tolerated
then approved, then to any sects in England. Your Antinomians, Familists,
Socinians, Antiscripturists, the Gedeons, and Saviors of the land of whom the
maids in their dance sing, they have slain their thousands, and their ten
thousands, when both Kingdoms were in the post way toward Babylon were as men
buried, and in the congregation of the dead, and as still as salt, we heard
nothing then, not one sound, nor the least still whisper of the wars of the
Lamb, of a two edged sword in the hands of the Saints. M. Del then to some
purpose, as a man in the streets might have said of men of these times, what he
most un^ustly and calumniously says of the Reverent Assembly of Divines, if
they approve not his Familisme. They are the enemies of the truth of Christ,
and (he hopes) the last prop of Antichrist in the Kingdom. This is the
bloodiest tongue-persecution ever I read of, to lay such a charge on men
godlier then himself, because they cannot, and dare not command their
conscience to come up to the new light of H. Nicholas, and such blasphemers:
yea at that time there were faint and cold counsels and encouragements given
to their brethren for the prosecuting the innocent and harmless defensive
wars of the Lamb, Gideons sword was then among all the sects of England no
better then an oaten reed; not one sect then durst face the field against the
Antichrist, they were like silly Doves and fainting Does, if I may have leave
in humility to say it, desiring that Christ lose not, when Instruments gain,
motions owe much to the first moover. And posterity will know to the second
coming of Christ, from whence came the first stirring of the wheels of
Christ's Chariot in Britain, and who first founded the retreat to return back
again from Babylon. Partial and lying stories cannot prevail against a truth
known to all the Christian world; Europe and the Sun are witnesses of lies,
and partial reports made on the contrary. The sects were innocent men of
conveening of a free Parliament.

Now the worst representation ye can put on our judgment of Antitolleration,
is that we maintain that opinion, not out of weakness and want of light as
the Saints do all their opinions, which you plead ought to be tolerated, but
out of wickedness, and that we would with high hand force upon the consciences
of others our opinions, which is the most direful persecution ever was heard
of.

But brethren, why do ye break windows in our consciences to charge us with
wickedness, in our opinion of Antitoleration, and will have all your own
errors (if they be errors) to be veiled with mere weakness, measure out to us
some scruples and grains of charity, if you would have pounds and talents of
meekness, and forbearance, weighed out to your selves. You will not buy and
take in with a little weight, and sell and give out with a great measure?
Double weights are abomination to the Lord. Give us but quarter measure, and
charge us not with persecution, and slaughtering of the Saints, because we
judge a toleration to all, even to such as will not come up to the unity of one
faith, and confession thereof, that is, Socinians, Anabaptists, fleshly
Familists and Antinomians, Arrians, Arminians, Antiscripturians, Enthusiasts,
Seekers, and the like, to be right down Atheism, we conceive the godly
Magistrate does not persecute the Saints, if he draw the sword against
adulteries, murderers, rapts, robberies, even in Saints, and we hope you, at
least some of you are of the same mind with us: now spiritual whoredom,
perverting of the right ways of the Lord, Socinianisme, professed and taught
to others, even in Saints, to us is worse and more deserves the sword then
adulteries: for false teachers are evil doers, and so to be punished with the
sword, Romans 13.3, 4. and called evil workers, Phil. 3.2. such as rub the pest
of their evil deeds upon others, and therefore not to be received into any
Christian society, house, or Army, 2 John 10. such as the Holy Ghost said,
under the Kingdom of the Messiah when the Spirit was to be powered on the
family of David, and the fountain opened, should be thrust through, wounded
and killed, because they prophecy lies in the name of the Lord, Zach. 13.1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6. c. 12.10. all the godly think of Antitoleration as a truth of God,
they are persuaded of in conscience must stand, when the hay and stubble of
Liberty of conscience, Antinomianisme, and the like, shall be consumed with
fire, so do the godly in the Churches of N. England think with us: refute
this opinion of ours, and of these whom you esteem to be Saint-murtherers with
reasonings, and not railing, nicknaming us Antichristians, Babylonish Lords
over the conscience, to shame us out of this opinion which is the truth of
Christ with the odious and bloody charge of persecuters of the Saints, sons
of Babel, Tyrants over the consciences of the godly; this is the heaviest
club-law on the conscience, and the saddest tongue-persecution we know, else
the sharp arrows of the mighty, and coals and firebrands of Juniper, with
which M. Burtons writings are salted against his sometimes dear brethren the
Presbyterians, the sometime Saviors and Redeemers of the oppressed and crush^d
Saints, are not persecution, contrary to Psalm 52.1, 2, 3, 4. Ps. 120.2, 3, 4.
Jobs friends persecuted him, Job. 19.20. sure they lifted neither sword, nor
spear against him; whether our Brethren did counsel in private and public
to send an Army against their brethren of Scotland to destroy them, who in the
sincerity of their hearts did sacrifice their lives for their safety, peace,
liberties, and Religion, or no, I leave to their own consciences.

As for the forcing of our opinions upon the consciences of any; It is a
calumny refuted by our practice, and whole deportment since we came hither.
Our witness is in heaven, it was not in our thoughts or intentions to obtrude
by the sword and force of Arms, and Church Government at all on our brethren
in England, but we conceive that Master Burton, and the renowned Kingdom of
England, are engaged by the oath of God to receive such a Government as is most
agreeable to the word of God, and the example of the best reformed Churches,
and are obliged sincerely, really, and constantly, through the grace of God to
endeavor in their several places and callings, the preservation of the
Reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland, in doctrine, worship, discipline,
and government against our common enemy. Now if M. Burton have sworn the
covenant, he has engaged himself in the first Article thereof really,
sincerely, and constantly, to endeavor in his calling the preservation of the
like supremacy which the Pope himself claims over Kings, Confor. defor. page
20.21.
Princes, States, Kingdoms, commonweal^hs, the preservation of infallible
General Assemblies on earth, of that spirit of Antichristian pride and
tyranny, of Rebellion and Treason in lifting up a Papal throne above Kings and
Kesars, above Kingdoms and Commonwealths, to the enslaving of the whole Nation
(of England) in their souls, bodies, and estates, -- whereby the fundamental
Laws, privileges, and power of Parliaments, liberties, and freedom of all
true bred English subjects, are brought under perpetual bondage, worse then
that either of Egypt or Babylon. Now I desire Burton to awake, and all our
brethren of the way of Liberty of conscience in England, who I suppose have
sworn the Covenant sincerely and really, if a Preacher of the Gospel, and
Saints who preach, cry, print, that the government of the Church of Scotland,
and of all the Reformed Churches, is Antichristian, Tyrannical, rebellious,
treasonable, destructive to the liberties, laws and freedom of the English
subjects, worse then that of Egypt and Babylon, do in their callings of
preaching the Gospel professing the truth sincerely, really and constantly
endeavor the preservation of the government and discipline of the Church of
Scotland? O but they do endeavor its preservation only in their callings
against the common enemy. What is this, but they swear to defend Antichrist in
the Presbyterial government against Prelates, that is, against Antichrist in
Prelacie, and yet black it as Antichristian: and how? in your several
callings: now M. Burton and our brethrens calling is to preach and write for
the truth, then must their calling bear them to preach and print to the
Prelaticall party, and to Cavaliers, that the government of the Church of
Scotland is lawful, Apostolic, and of Divine right, otherwise they cannot in
their several callings defend it against the common enemy, (for it is not
Pastors calling, nor I suppose, a lawful calling in our brethrens mind to
defend it with the sword) and must the preaching and printing to Antinomians,
Socinians, Arminians, to Saints hold forth an Antichristian, a worse then
Egiptian and Babylonish government, exclame against it as undefendable, and yet
defend it against the common enemy the Prelates?

But whether our Brethren did swear the Covenant with a purpose to keep it or
no* and whether they have not endeavored not to preserve but to destroy and
extirpate the Reform^d Religion, doctrine, worship, discipline and government
in Scotland, and persecuted us because we assert it, or if more can be done
then the proposalls of the Army and the Parliament hitherto have done (if they
do no more) to promove all heresies and errors contrary to sound doctrine, we
must remit in silence to the only final determination of the most High. They
are stronger then we; but I am confident the earth shall not cover the blood
that is shed in Scotland, but it shall stand before the Lord against such of
the Kingdom of England (for many generations) who engaged their faithful and
well-minded brethren in a blind cause to establish abominable Liberty of
conscience, Familisme, Antinomianisme, Socinianisme, Prelacy, Popery, etc. And
the righteous Judge of the world knows we never intended any such thing; but
we might have believed the words of King Charles, who told us they minded not
Religion in that war. But now when we are wasted, ruined, dispeopled, we are
not only forsaken by these (whose safety, peace, religion and happiness, we
minded with loss of our own lives (I with many others dare appeal to the
Sovereigne Judge of all the earth, in the sincerity of our hearts) but almost
utterly destroyed, yet diverse of the Sectaries profess they had rather fight
against the Scots as against Turks. O Earth cover not our blood, arise O Judge
of the world, and plead the cause of the oppressed, let all the Nations about,
and the Reformed Churches, and all the generations not yet born, bear witness
to this oppression and violence. For if such as did swear the Covenant, which
was the only thing that engaged us, had said ingenuously at that time, we
swear to endeavor the extirpation of Popery, Prelacie, Superstition, Heresy,
Schism, Prophanenes, and whatsoever shall be found to be contrary to sound
doctrine -- lest we partake in other men's sin. But in the mean time we
purpose to plead, print, write, preach, and in our places endeavor both in
Parliament, and out of it; in the Assembly, and out of it* in our Ministry and
Christian walking for toleration and brotherly forbearance of Popery, Prelacie,
Superstition, Heresy, separation and gathering of Churches out of true
Churches; judging the Presbyterians of Scotland (whom by the oath of God they
are to defend) the Schismatickes, and indulgence by Law and otherwise to be
yielded to Papists, Arminians, Socinians, Arrians, Familists, Antinomians,
Seekers, Antiscripturists, Enthusiasts, etc. but none to Presbyterians at all:
we should have blessed your right down ingenuity, yet have our Brethren really
so sworn, and so practiced.

But (says Burton) the Scots are the vilest of men, p. 17. partakers with
murderers, with rebels, with Traitors, Incendiaries, underminers of Parliament
and City, etc. Words of butter and oil, soft and sweet, would sooner convince
us, and arguments of iron and brass, that are strong, hard, invincible, should
more edify and persuade. The truth is fire, but not passion; Burton speaks
fire, not always truth. These are not the words of such as war under the
banner and colors of love, and fight the battles of the Lamb. Passion is a
paper-wall to a weak cause: your Brethren stood once in your books for
talents and pounds; but now for halfpennies, consider where the change is, we
was at that time the same you call Presbyterians now, and professed the same to
you. Dear brethren, be humble and lowly to your old friends, be not perjured
for ill will to us, we shall mourn to God for that wicked revenge, the
Covenant will pursue you, and God in it* dally not with God, they shall all be
broken and splitted upon the Covenant of God, who labor to destroy it. Now
when you have the sword, the purse, the Army, the Parliament for you, insult
not over your brethren. Quem dies vidit veniens superbum
Hunc dies vidit fugiens jacentem
-- summisque negatum stare diu.
He was but an Atheist and a mis-interpreter of providence who said, Victrix
causa diis placuit, sed victa Catoni. Success in an evil cause is not
happiness, believe it, Heresy when she is heir to her mistress, is a
burden that the earth trembles under: ye know Heresies goes with broad
Peacocke wings through the Land, and takes in Towns and Castles, but they had
good help from Presbyterians, their Antichristian brethren, as they like to
call them. Sects are courted, multitudes take hold of the skirt of a sectary
now adays. But the Court is paved with glass, and to you, all the faithful
Ministers of Christ are but Antichrists Priests.

The white golden breathings of success may blow you asleep, but cannot
secure you: your Brethren have been low in Scotland for your cause; I shall be
satisfied without recrimination. The Scots are not the vilest of men, they are
not partakers with murderers: but I shall only answer that I judge that in
England the Lord has many names, and a fair company that shall stand at the
side of Christ as his conquesse in the day, when he shall render up the
Kingdom to the Father, and that in that renowned Nation, there be men of all
ranks, wise, valourous, generous, noble, heroic, faithful, religious,
gracious, learned. And I hope to reap more peace in naming England from the
choicest part, then M. Burton can find comfort in his passion, in denominating
the Scots or their Army from the worst and vilest part; not to deny but there
be too much wickedness, and profaneness in both the Nation and Army: yet
shall I desire all the Sects whom M. Burton and his brethren would have
tolerated, to look at their brethren as men compassed with infirmities, and let
these of such, as thus accuse them that are without sin, cast the first stone
at them, which were a good way to try, if Antinomians would not arise and stone
to death so many as they were able to master, alleging God cannot see such
violence and bloodshed to be sin in them: also we profess, to be orthodox
and a strong Presbyterian is but a poor old rotten Coach to carry men to
heaven, there is more required of these who shall be heirs of salvation, but
this cannot justly impeach the Presbyterian way of Antichristianisme.

And wherein is the General Assembly of Scotland Papal, and set up above
Kings and Kesars, and may bring Presbyterians under a praemunire? Had M. Burton
any arguments to make out this sad charge against his brethren, but the stolen
and reprinted, not reasons, but railings of Prelates, and Oxford opposers of
Reformation, and particularly out of a lying Treatise called Issachers burden,
the father of which was the excommunicated Apostate Jo. Maxwel, sometimes
pretended Bishop of Rosse? for M. Burton has nothing in this passionate
Treatise of his own, but is an Echo in grammar and matter to Whitegift,
Bancroft, to lying Spotswood, to the flattering time-serving Balaams, who to
gratify King James, and Bishop Laud, and these of the Prelaticall gang,
objected the same with more nerves and blood against the Scottish-Geneva
discipline, then M. Burton does. That book of discipline was the Prelates
eyesore, and Mr. Burton must bring the weapons of his indignation out of the
Armory of Babylon against Presbyterians.

I love not to compare men with men; only good Reader, pardon me to name that
Apostolic, heavenly, and Prophetical man of God, Mr. John Welsh, a Pastor of
our Church, who for this same very cause was first condemned to death, and then
the mercy of King James changed the sentence to him and other six faithful and
heroicke witnesses of Christ, and Ministers of the Gospel, into banishment to
death: this worthy servant of Christ preached everyday, and in France, in his
Exile, converted many souls; the King of France gave the same command
concerning him, when the Town he preached in, was sacked and taken (as the man
of God foretold them publicly it should be razed,) that the King of Babylon
gave touching Jeremiah, do him no harm, see well to him, his person, wife,
children and servants; from the godly witnesses of his life I have heard say,
of every twenty four hours, he gave eight to prayer, except when the public
necessities of his calling did call him to preach, visit, exhort in season and
out of season; he spent many nights in prayer to God, interceding for the
sufferers for Christ in Scotland, England, France* when he was in prison and
condemned, he and his brethren as traitors, he has these words as a full
answer to the Prelaticall raylings against the meeting of a General Assembly
at Aberdene, and all the Erastian party, and to M. H. Burtons present words,
and his objecting of a poor praemunire by the Laws of England against Christ
Jesus his free Kingdom: Who am I that he should have called me, and made me a
Minister of the glad tidings of the Gospel of salvation, A letter of M. John
Welsh. An. 1605.
these sixteen years already, and now last of all to be a sufferer for his
cause and Kingdom?

To witness that good confession, that Jesus Christ is the King of Saints, and
that his Kirk is a most free Kingdom; yea as free as any Kingdom under
heaven, not only to convocate, hold and keep her meetings, Conventions and
Assemblies, but also to judge of all her affairs in all her meetings and
conventions amongst her members and subjects.

These two points, first that Christ is the head of his Kirk; secondly, that
she is free in her government from all other jurisdiction except Christ's.
These two points are the special cause of our imprisonment, being now
condemned as traitors for the maintenance thereof; we being waiting with
joyfulnesse to give the last testimony of our blood in confirmation thereof, if
it would please our God to be so favorable as to honor us with that dignity:
yea I do affirm that these two points above written, and all other things
that belong to Christ's Crown, Scepter, and Kingdom, are not subject, nor
cannot be, to any other Authority, but to his own altogether, so that I would
be most glad to be offered up upon the sacrifice of so glorious a truth. The
guilt of our blood shall not only lie upon the Prince, but also upon our own
brethren, Bishops, Counselors and Commissioners: It is they, even they, that
have stirred up our Prince (King James of great Britain) against us, we must
therefore lay the blame and burden of our blood upon them, especially however
the rest above written be also partakers with them of their sins. And as the
rest of our brethren, who either by silence approve, or by crying peace, peace,
strengthen the arm of the wicked, that they cannot return, in the mean time
make the hearts of the righteous sad, they shall all in like manner be guilty
of our blood, and of high Treason against the King of Kings, the Lord Jesus
Christ his Crown and Kingdom.

Now I but propone to the real conscience of M. Burton that speaks in his
dialogue: 1. If there be not more of Christ in this one letter (if he will
read it all) then in all the virulent pieces he has written against his
brethren, Confor. Defor.
who when he suffered, did intercede for him, and lie in the ashes, and behaved
themselves as one at his mothers grave.

2. Whether or not, he and his brethren who did plead against the Assembly of
Divines in favors of an Erastian party, do not stir up both Prince and
Parliament in both Kingdoms in this very cause, to bring on a National guilt
on the land to inslave the free Kingdom of Christ to the powers of the world,
and whether in this do they not build the sepulchers of the Prophets, and
bring upon their own heads the blood of the slain witnesses of Christ?

3. Whether a distinction will help them at the bar of Gods justice, that
they sided in hatred of the Presbyteriall government, and of their brethren of
Scotland, with Erastians, in opposing truths of Christ in these and the major
proposition, against the light of their own conscience, in laying the headship
of the Church of Christ on the shoulder of King and Parliament, and then keep
in their mind, a mental reserve of the Presbyteriall Church only?

Now they knew that the question between Erastians and us, was, whether there
be a power of government distinct from the power of the Civil Magistrate in
the Church of Christ: but they strike in with Erastus against Christ to reach a
blow to the Presbyterians; but since that time God has brought down the sects
lower and lower in the hearts of the godly in this Kingdom, and I hope shall
lay their honor in the dust; In the same manner M. Burton says, the giving of
this power to the General Assembly above the Parliament, incurres a praemunire
against the Laws of England, so says the Erastian. But M. Burton knows that
is not the question, and that his congregationall way makes no bones of a far
higher praemunire.

For 1. The Parliament has nothing to do at all in Church matters, more to
judge of them, or to punish heretics then if they had no souls. For M. Burton
says, p. 14. Confor. Deform. if it be true that Christ has left such a power
to any state then to a Popish state. But I deny your consequence. Christ has
given to no state a power to inact wicked Laws, or to ratify wicked Popish
constitutions, ergo, he has not given to a Christian state a power cumulative
to bring their glory to the N. Jerusalem, and to be Christian nurse-fathers to
see the bride of Christ suck healthsome milk, it follows just as this does.
God has not given Kings any power to butcher and destroy the sheep of Christ,
ergo he has not given to Kings power to rule and govern a Christian people in
equity and justice.

2. Our Brethren put a stranger praemunire on us. For would they speak out the
mysteries and bottom of Independencie, they acknowledge not this Parliament in
any other sense then they would do a Parliaments of Pagans or heathen, for
there be no Christian Magistrates at all to them, but such as are members of
their Congregationall Church, that is, such as they conceive to be regenerated;
and had they a world at their own will, then not the twentieth man of this
present Parliament, nor Judge, nor Justice of peace could be chosen
Magistrates, if the congregations of England, were all of the Independent stamp.

But you may say I slander them, they pray for the Parliament as a Parliament,
and obey Justices of peace and the King as lawful Magistrates.

I answer, its true, so would they pray for Nero, Dominitian, and heathen
Justices of peace, sent by them as lawful Magistrates, but not as Christian
Magistrates, nor such as they would choose to reign over them, because in their
apprehension of them, they are no less without the Church then heathens; then
let the world be judge of their candor in contending for a power of Premunires,
and in voting that heathen Justices of peace and unchristian Parliaments should
be above a free General Assembly of England, but they could not endure either
Magistrates or Parliaments, of the gang they are now in England, to be above
one of their Congregations, though consisting of seven.

3. They are jealous of any supremacy of General Assemblies. But say the
Congregations of England were all Independent, they would not baptize the
children of the twentieth Parliament man, Judge and Justice of peace, nor of
the King or most professors in England as they are now in England, nor admit
them or their wives or children to the Ordinances, because they are no
Church Members, and no better then Ethiopians or Indians to them; and if
Parliament or Justices of peace should take on them to judge or punish them for
this; I believe, M. Burton and our brethren, would tell them, these that are
without the Church, as you are, have no power to judge the Church of Christ,
are to judge of Church administrations, or to whom Ordinances should be
dispensed, or not dispensed. Judge, if this be not a supremacy given to seven
above the Parliament, and Judges of the Kingdom, which M. Burton so much
condemned in a National Assembly of all the godly Ministers and Elders in
England.

But its a fault that the General Assembly has power to make rules according
to the word of God, appertaining to the good behavior of all the members of
the Kirk, and abrogate Statutes and Ordinances about Ecclesiastical matters
that are found noisome and unprofitable without the Magistrate: So did the
Assembly at Jerusalem appoint such rules as should bind Caesar, so he had been
a good Constantine, and though they cannot abrogate Ordinances and Acts of
Parliament by making or unmaking Acts of Parliament (our book of discipline
never meaned that, as M. Burton, ignorant of the discipline of our Church,
says) yet as the Ministers of Christ, they may juridically declare, yea and
preach authoritively that Acts of Parliament establishing the Mass, are
unlawful and godless laws, commanding Idolatry, and denounce a woe against
unjust decrees and laws, as Esaias 10.1. else when M. Burton preaches against
such laws, he then must incur a praemunire, before God, and set himself in a
Papal throne above the Parliament, and enslave the English Subjects; for he
preaches that Statutes of Parliament that establishes Mass, and the burning
of heretics, that is, Protestants, are to be abrogated, as well as the
General Assembly of Scotland does; and so M. Burton must set himself above
Kings and Kesars.

And when a Synod or Church conveened in the name of Christ binds on earth
according to the word of God, Matthew 18. there is no lawful appeal from them to
any Civil judicature, not because they are not men, but because they are a
Court acting in the name of Christ according to his word, and Christ with them
binds or looses in heaven, yea there is no reclamation to be made, nor any
appeal from one faithful Pastor speaking in the name and authority of Christ,
according to that, He that hears you, hears me, he that despises you,
despises me, and there is no danger to be feared either of Papal tyranny, or
Parliamentary breach, or praemunire.

But M. Rutherfurd says, The decisive voices of a General^ Assembly binds the
absent as well as present.

Answ. So says the Holy Ghost, the Churches of Antioch, Syria, and Silicia,
were bound to receive and obey the decrees of the Synod so soon as they hear
them, Act. 15.22, 23, 26, 27, 28. Act. 16.4. Act. 21.25. as they that despise
the doctrine of faithful Pastors dead and buried, despise Christ: so says
that learned and godly man M. Cotton, and all the Churches of N. England, who
to M. Burton must set up a Papal throne, as well as the Church of Scotland, if
this be Popery; for what need Churches absent (says Cotton, Keys of the
Kingdom p. 26.) send to a Synod for light and direction in ways of truth and
peace, if they be resolved aforehand how far they will go? and if they be
not obliged to submit thereunto in the Lord.

M. Burton says further, p. 21. that M. Rutherfurd says chapter 20.312. Gov.
Chur. Scot. The acts of the Assembly oblige all the absents, not present in all
their members, and that because whatsoever is by these Commissioners determined
and concluded is matter necessary and agreeable to Gods word, as being no less
infallible then those decisions of the Apostles, Act. 15.

Answ. I dare appeal to the conscience of M. Burton well informed, and to all
the godly, if they conceive any such thing to be my judgment to assert with
Bellarmine and Papists, the infallibility of any Counsels, now on earth: yea
if he had read, what I have said, chapter 14. p. 209.212. I prove that the Apostles
acted not in that Synod as Apostles, but as ordinary Elders; and Doct.
Whittaker and M. Cotton say the same, though M. Tho. Goodwin and M. Nigh,
contradict both M. Cotton, and Whittaker, and Calvin, and all both Papists and
Protestants, yea and Independents, who acknowledge Act. 15. to be a pattern for
Synods to the end of the world. But the Independents now in England, and
Anabaptists side with Bridgesius, Grotius, Socinians, and Arminians, the
enemies of Synods: and say that Synod, Act. 15. was an extraordinary
Apostolic meeting that obliges not the Churches now. The Seekers say, there
shall never be Synods till Apostles arise again, which they say without all
word of Scripture.

2. I speak not one word page 312. of that purpose, but page 322. I speak,
and M. Burton both detracteth from, and adds to, and perverteth my words,
which I impute not to malice, as others do, but to his ignorance of the
Discipline of the Church of Scotland; my words, chapter 20. page 322. are these:
The acts of the Assembly oblige all the absents not present in all their
members, as Act. 23 24.28. Act. 15.16.4. chapter 21.25. not because of the
authority of the Church, but because of the matter which is necessary and
agreeable to Gods word. Beside that, M. Burton leaves out all the Scriptures I
cite because he could not answer them, he leaves out these words, not because
of the authority of the Church, which cleareteh my sense, and directly
excludes all infallible authority of Church or Assembly. For I hold they
oblige the consciences not for men, or the Authority of the Church, or because,
so says the Church, as Papists make the testimony of the Church the formal
ob^ect of our faith, and the Church to be as infallible as the Scripture,
which I expressly deny, and lay the rationem credendi, all the weight, burden
and warrant of the obligation of conscience, that the decrees or constitutions
of an Assembly can lay on, not on the fallible and weak authority of the
Church or men, but on the matter of the decrees, because or in so far as it
is the necessary matter of the word, or agreeable to the word of God.

Now may not the Reader consider this logic. The Gospel that M. Burton
preaches obliges all his flock absent or presenct (for their presence makes
it not to be Gospel) and that not because of the authority of M. Burton, who
is but a sinful man, but because the Gospel he preaches is necessary truth
and agreeable to the Scriptures, ergo, whatsoever M. Burton preaches is no
less infallible then the decisions of the Apostles. The Antecedent is most
true, and more I do not say; but the consequence is most blasphemous and
false, yet are all the lawful Pastors in Britain to preach the sound word of
God, after the example of the Prophets and the Apostles, ergo, whatever all the
faithful Pastors in Britain preach, is as infallible as the decisions of the
Apostles; the Antecedent I can own as a truth of God, but the consequence is
M. Burtons.

2. He adds to my words, and says, M. Rutherfurd tells us -- whatsoever is by
these Commissioners determined and concluded, is matter necessary and agreeable
to the word of God. This I say not, I never thought whatsoever they say, is
matter necessary: find these words under my hand, and I will crave M. Burton
and all the Church of England pardon. But I know General Assemblies can reele
and err, Every man is a liar. I never say, whatsoever is concluded by them is
necessary. I say, what is determined by them is de jure, that is, ought to be
agreeable to Gods word, for I show that General Assemblies have their warrant
from Act. 15. and my meaning and words are clear. These are M. Burtons words,
not mine, What is determined by them, binds not as, or because its from men,
but as agreeable to the word of God. M. Burton expones my (is) as he pleases
best, and has need to crave God pardon for that he rashly and ignorantly (I
say no more) fathers untruths on his innocent brother, who writes and speaks
honorably and respectively of him; for let logic of conscience be judge, if
this be a good consequence: What a General Assembly determines, binds no
farther but as it is necessary, and as it is agreeable to the word* ergo,
Whatsoever a General Assembly determines is necessary, and is agreeable to the
word of God, it follows in no sort at all, yea the ^u^t contrary follows,
ergo, if it be not necessary, and in so far as it is not agreeable to the
word, it obligeth-neither these that are present nor absent, and is not
infallible at all.

4. I may say without any just ground of offending either M. Burton or any of
his way, that write against Synods, that had they rightly understood the state
of the question between P^otestants and Papists they would not have so
inconsiderately clashed with the word of God, and all the Reformed Churches in
Christendom; for we deny,

1. All absolute, unlimited, and infallible authority, to Synods. Papists
press that Counsels cannot err, and in so doing they make them Lords and
Masters of the conscience of the people of God: and Independents and others
charging this upon us, cannot before the bar of the alone King and head of
the Church, bear out their charge, and the like unlimited and boundless power
of Civil and politic ratifying and passing in penal laws, what the Church
or Synods determine we deny to any Magistrate on earth. M. Burton 9, 10, 11,
12. will not, and cannot make good his bitter, virulent and unchristian
challenge he lays on his innocent brethren, Confor. d^for.
who may, and I hope do in humility and confidence claim a Saintship and
interest in the Lord Jesus as well as he; That they with Diotrephes, exalt man's
power above all that is called God, are Antichrists, Apostates from the truth,
do carry on the mystery of iniquity, this he also must answer for, as a
slander laid on all our Reformers, Calvin, Luther, Beza, yea on Reynold,
Whittaker, Perkins, etc. all the Protestant Churches, all the host of
Protestant Divines.

But, 2. All the power and authority of Synods we conceive to be ministerial,
not Lordly, limited, regulated by the only word of God in the scripture, and
in matters circumstantiall, of order, and decency, as time, place, persons
(observe I say not in mystical Religions, Ceremonies, called, but unjustly,
indifferent, or the like) by the law of nature, rules of piety, charity, and
Christian prudency, for the edification of our brethren, and the glory of God,
and a lawful Synod, we judge has power ministerial from Christ, to pass
constitutions (...) decrees, Acts 16.4. (Laws I do not call them, because
Christ is the only Lawgiver, King, and head of his Church, his Officers are
only servants, and Heralds to hold forth his Laws) and these constitutions
condemning Arminianisme, Socinianisme, Familisme, Antinomianisme, etc. as
sometimes Mr. Burton being but one single Pastor by word and writ condemned
them* and that in the name, and authority of Christ (as he then said) and
commanding in the Lord that they consent to the form of sound doctrine,
rebuking all that subvert souls, and trouble the Churches, Acts 15.23, 24. are
to be obeyed, and the conscience submitted to them, not absolutely, not for the
sole will, and mere authority of the Heralds, as if they were infallible, not
with blind obedience, not without reclamation, or appeal, if they be either
contrary or beside the scriptures, but conditionally in so far as they are
agreeable to the Word of God, even as the single Independent Congregation is to
be heard in things lawful under pain of excommunication, as our brethren say
from Matthew. 18. and yet, Matthew. 18. sets not up Antichrist, and caries not on
the Mystery of iniquity. And we teach that the Magistrate, as the Minister of
God, after due examination according to the word, is obleiged to add his
civil sanction to these constitutions, and to guard the Ministers with his
Sword; and to punish Arminians, Socinians, Familists, etc. as Mr. Burton cried
against them of old, and appealed to the supreme Magistrate, the Kings Majesty
against them: though we judge the Magistrates sword in all this, keeps such a
distance from the conscience, that this is so far from being a State
Government of the Church, that these constitutions have no power at all over
the conscience from the sword, and are alike binding, and were, Acts 15. Though
the Magistrate were not on earth, and though he should oppose them, as he did
then. And we think Arminians, Socinians, and Familists, who deny all power of
Synods, less or more, except only, Sir, if it please you this is Gods mind,
if not, Sir, you are where you was, ^e a Sceptick to Christ's second coming,
and change your faith every New Moon, we have nothing to say, but fare ye
well, are the Antichrists in this, not we.

Nor dare we conceal our fear of the ^ad ^udgements of God, and his highest
displeasure for the breach of the Covenant of God in this Land.

And that, First, since so many victori^s, and great deliverances bring forth
no other fruit, but persecution of the Godly and faithful Ministers of Christ,
and more virulent hating of, and railing against the Church and Kingdom of
Scotland, these that are most zealous for Reformation, and most conscientious
and sincere for the Covenant, and settling of Religion: Above, and beyond all
that Prelates or those of their way ever attempted. Yea, and the crushing, and
ruining of these that have wrought a greater salvation for the Kingdom than
all the sectaries in England, when such are persecuted, impeached, imprisoned,
cast out of the Parliament and Kingdom for no cause (if the bottom of the
business were examined) but for their adhering to the Presbyteriall
Government, Covenant of God, their brethren of Scotland, opposing (as the
Covenant of God obleigeth them) the Heresies and Blasphemies abounding in this
Land, when vile and naughty men, because they side with sectaries, such as
blaspheme God, deny the deity of the holy Ghost, not only go free, but
Familists, Antinomians, Libertines who join in these blasphemies, Arminians
and Socinians, the old Courteours and darlings of the late Prelates and popish
affected, Seekers, Anabaptists, Seperatists, and Independents of another stamp
then these of New England, Covenant breakers and the like, are not only
connived at against the Covenant, but sit in Parliament, are advanced to
highest places in the State and Army, and such Familists as Mr. Del and
Saltmarsh are allowed and authorized to be ordinary preachers to the Army. But
know (I beseech you) that the Lord will discern between him that fears an
oath, and fears not an oath.

2 God must reckon with the Land because the Ambassadors of Jesus Christ are
despised, hated, and persecuted.

3. The City that have borne the weight and burden of the charge of the War, is
badly requited, to say no more.

4. When cursed Pamphlets, uncharitable railings against the Covenant,
Reformation, Reformed Religion, the godliest in the Parliament, the Church and
Kingdom of Scotland, the Assembly of Divines, the razing of the foundation
stones and principles of the Gospel, pass Press and Pulpit uncontroled,
whereas even Papists (as Calvin said against Libertines) have not dared, in
terminis, to remove such march-stones of Christ Jesus as do disterminate
Christian Religion from Judaisme, Paganism, Turcisme, may not the Lord say to
England and to the Parliament, that which he said to the people of old, Jerem.
2.9. Therefore I will yet plead with you, says the Lord, and with your
childrens children will I plead. 10. For pass over the Isles of Chittim and
see and send to Kedar, and consider diligently, and see if there be such a
thing. 11. Has a Nation changed their Gods, which are yet no Gods? But my
people have changed their glory for that which does not profit. 12. Be
astonished O ye heavens, at this, and be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate.
And Esa. 29.21. They make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him
that reproves in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of naught.

5. And what can we answer to all the Sister-Churches in Christendom, who
have heard of so many Declarations, Letters, Ordinances, Remonstrances,
promises before God, the world, and the elect Angels, that we came to this
Reverend Assembly as willing to join with the professed desires and invitation
of the honorable Houses of Parliament to remove not only government by
Archbishops, Return from the Parliament of England to the Commissioners of the
General Assembly. an. 1642.

Ordinance of Parl. an. 1643. Feb. 9.

Declarat. of both Kingdoms. an. 1643. Declaration to the General Assembly of
the Kirk of Scotland. an. 1642. Declarat. to the Parl. of Scotland. 1642.
Declarat. given to the Commissioners. August. 1643. Ordinance. 1645. Oct. 20.
Ordinance 1645. Mar. 14. Ordinance 1645. Nov. 9. Ordinance 1646. Feb. 4.
Ordinan. for Oxford. 1647. May 1. Treatise between the Kingdoms. Ordin. 1643.
Sep. 18. Declarat. of the House of Com. an. 1646. April 18. Letters of the
Assembly to the Reformed Churches. an. 1644. Ordin. 1644. Iun 3.


but likewise to settle such a government as is most agreeable to the word of
God, most apt to procure and preserve the peace of the Church at home, and a
happy union with the Church of Scotland, and other Reformed Churches abroad, in
doctrine, worship, government, and one form of Catechism, and to establish
the same by Law. To oppose heresies, errors, schisms, injoyne the National
Covenant by Ordinance of Parliament to be taken by all; when now indulgence
and more is yielded to all heresies, blasphemies and sects, and an army
pleading for Liberty of conscience to all Religions, Popery not excepted, is
owned and authorized by the Houses, whereas other humble and modest petitioners
for a government according to the word of God, against the Erastian and
unwarrantable government set up but in quarters and pieces, of which the Lord
may say, Offer it now to your Governor, will he be pleased with it and accept
your persons? have been checked and dismissed without an answer till his day,
yea and censured as guilty of breach of privilege of Parliament, as it faired
with the Reverend Assembly of Divines, for a submissive and humble
supplication, for the Royal Prerogative of Jesus Christ in his own free Courts
and Assemblies.

6. Shall not the Reformed Churches abroad who have hitherto prayed for the sad
calamities of the Church of England, when they hear (as they must hear in
languages known to them) that the Parliaments of both Kingdoms have made
their humble address to the Kings Majesty, and the Ambassadors of Christ, and
the godly have lain at the footstool of the throne of Grace, soliciting the
Lord, in whose hands is the heart of the King, that he would graciously incline
his spirit to take the National Covenant, for the extirpation of Popery,
Prelacy, superstition, heresy, schism, profaneness, and whatsoever shall be
found contrary to sound doctrine. Wonder and be astonished, when it is
reported that the Parliament of England joined in the same Covenant with us!
have not only, not pressed the same on the Subjects, which they desire of their
Prince, but suffer satyrs, raylings, reproaches to be cast upon the Covenant
of God in Press, and Pulpit, highly promote those that are greatest enemies
thereof, and countenance an Army, who labor with all their power to render the
heart of the Prince averse to the Covenant, and the sincere promoters thereof,
and do require the open toleration ( not the extirpation) of all heresies,
blasphemies, yea of the Kingdom and throne of Antichrist, against which we
Covenanted, and to take off all Laws for pressing the Covenant, that so it may
be buried in England, though many of the Army, and Independents, Antinomians,
Socinians, and others, did solemnly with their hands lifted up to the most
High, engage themselves to the Lord, never to suffer themselves directly or
indirectly to be divided and withdrawn from that blessed union and
conjunction: So that what the Kingdom and Church of Scotland, and the most
faithful adherers to the Covenant, labor to build in public, with this
underhand dealing is destroyed and casten down.

I do not say this of all, I am confident there be diverse in the Honorable
Houses, many in the Church and Kingdom, who abhor from their souls the
ways of heresy, superstition, schism, Popery, profaneness, treachery,
wicked policy, which never did so much prevail in this land as since we did
swear to endeavor the extirpation of all these, and that though this Covenant
were buried, it must rise from the dead again, and that the Lord must make his
Jerusalem in Britain a cup of trembling, a burdensome stone, a hearth of fire
among the wood, a torch of fire in a sheafe, Zach. 12.
against all her enemies, both Babylon without, and Edom within, that no weapon
formed against them shall prosper, that every tongue that rise against them in
judgment shall be condemned, and that the Lord shall clear the ^udgements of
his chosen on^s that they shall not finally be seduced, and shall bring the
blind by a way that they know not, and return to a people of a poor language
that they may all call upon the name of the Lord, and serve him with one
shoulder, and the Lord may be one, and his name one, and his going forth, in
the three Kingdomees, may be as the morning. O that the Lord who has founded
Zion, and has chosen Jerusalem would do this in his time.

S. R.

Contents of the first Treatise,
ANtinomians in the Apostles time, and have their descent from the old
Katharoi, called Puritans, who taught that regenerate men could not sin. Chap.
II. Of Libertines. The Libertines who sprang up, an. 1525. of kin to the
Familists and Antinomians. page 2 Finer Antinomians deny the Incarnation of the
Son of God. ib. Copinus, Quintus, Antonius Pocquius, the first Libertines under
that name. 2.3 Pocquius a Priest affected obscurity, and objected ignorance to
Calvin. ib. Libertines and Antinomians in many things like other. 3. and ib.
Quintinus the Libertine and Antinomians slight the Scripture. 4 Libertines say,
Angels are but motions of the mind. ib. Libertines make God the author of sin,
Antinomians conspire with them. 4.5 Antinomians and Libertines have the same
conceptions touching mortification and the conscience of believers. 5 Chap.
III. Of Anabaptists, N. Stork. Th. Muncer, Jo. Be^old, etc. and their Tenets.
6.7.8. etc. Hen. Pfeiffer and Muncer, their seditious spirits and miserable
end. 7 Above an hundred thousand killed in Germany, by the Antinomian spirits
impulsion which wants the light of Scripture. ib. Tho. Schuker beheaded his
own brother-germane by the impulsion of the Spirit. 8 The Spirit, bloody
attempts, and miserable end of Becold, or John of Leiden. ib. His poligamy and
fifteen wives. ib. His twenty eight Apostles above the number of Christ's. 8.9
His bloody spirit. 9 The tenets of Anabaptists. 9.10 Diverse kinds of them,
which hold all of them something, common with Antinomians. 9.10.11 M. Beacon
says, all external worship is indifferent. 10 Antinomians and the Anabaptists
called liberi fratres, teach freedom from the Law, Covenants, vows, paying of
tithes, from sinning. 11.12 Melchior Hoffman, Menno Simonz. 12 Chap. IV. Of
David George. 13.14 Antinomians comply with David George. ibid. Chap. V. Of
Casper Swenckfeld his Tenets complying with Antinomians. 15.16 His rise, life,
errors. ibid. Swenckfi^ld his many books, his ignorance, he was admonished and
confu^ed by famous Divines. 16 His foul tenets touching Christ. 17.18 Christ
in glory remains man, contrary to Swenckfield. ibid. That the Scripture is
the word of God, is demonstrated against Swenckfieldians and Antinomians. 19.20
The arguments of Swenckfield, against the word of God, which are also the
Arguments of Antinomians, answered. 20.21. etc. The internal and external
world differenced. 21.22.23 Swenckfield and Antinomians reject the Scripture
and outward word, and make the Spirit all. 22, 23, 24 Chap. VI. How the word
converteth. 25, 26, etc. Certain necessary considerations how the Spirit and
the word act together. 25, 26 How the acting with the Spirit is mediate. ibid.
How immediate. ibid. The external word concurreth instrumentally with the
Spirit. 25, 26, 27 The word not a dead letter. 27, 28 Swenckfield and the
Antinomians destroy the word and Ministry, the absurdities that follows their
doctrine. 29, 30, 31 Of the internal and substantial, and the external and
vocal word. ib. Swenckfield and M. Del acknowledge no word but the internal
and substantial word, and make Scripture and all externalls indifferent. 30,
31, 32.33, 34, 35 Its no consequent, the word without the Spirit is not
effectual to convert, ergo, it is no instrument of conversion. 34, 35 The word
of it self a common sound. 34 The Arguments of Swenckfield and Antinomians to
prove that the word is an instrument of conversion, because carnal, vocal,
^odily, literal, discussed. 36 How we believe in God and in his word. 36, 37
Of the union of the word and Spirit. 37, 38 Waldesso and Antinomians make the
Scripture an horne-book for babes only, and useless to believers. 38 Chap.
VII. Of revelations and inspirations. 38, 39, 40 Of revelations active and
passive. 39 Four kinds of revelations; to wit, Prophetical. 2. Special to
the elect. 3. Extraordinary. 4. Satanicall. 39, 40, 41, 42 Familists have no
true revelations 40 Internal revelations proper to believers. 40, 41 How
particular revelations are not in Scripture 41 Of the Prophesies of Knox,
Luther, Wicliffe, Hush, and their revelations, and how they are differenced
from the Satanicall revelations of Anabaptists and Familists. 42, 43, 44, 45
Chap. VIII. Of humane industry, Arts, Sciences, Tongues, and whether they be
lawful to the opening and supernatural knowledge of the Scripture. 45, 46
Indevours of freewill consist well with grace. 45 How far Sciences and Tongues
are to be acknowledged as the good gifts of God. 47 Science and Tongues in
their nature, though not ever in the way and manner of acquiring them,
necessary for understanding of the Scriptures. 47, 48 Christ and his Apostles
learned though their learning was not acquired by humane industry in Schools
and Universities. 48, 49, 50, 51 How the inward teaching, or teaching of the
Spirit, excludes not the outward. 52 Frivolous objections of Sam. How, against
Arts and Tongues, answered. 52, 53, 54 The teaching of the Spirit excludes not
Arts and Tongues. 55 Chap. IX. Of Henry Nicholas, his birth, writings. 55
Calling. 56 His wicked doctrine. 56, 57, 58 M. Del and Hen. Nicholas comply in
the same doctrine. 57, 58 Mr. Del inclines to deny Christ God incarnate. 58
What God manifested in the flesh, is to Familists. 58, 59 H. Nicholas with M.
Del and M. Beacon reject all ordinances and repute all external worship and
confessing of Christ before men, all controversies in Religion, indifferent.
60, 61, 62. Which was refuted by Calvin. 62. Reasons against this. 62, 63, 64.
Christ is true man not a holy disposition as H. Nicholas blasphemously taught
65, 66 Scripture is not to be exponed allegorically as H. Nicholas dreameth.
67, 68 Chap. X. of Joan. Islebius or Joannes Agricola, the first Father of the
Antinomians under that name. 68 His calling, his soundness, his falling away.
68, 69 His Recantation of the Antinomian error in an Epistle of D. Luther to
Mr. D. Guthel containing the mind of Luther touching Antinomians as a Sect
that had their rise from the Devil. 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74 Luther is for the
Law. 70, 71 That none is perfect in this life, and we are to sorrow for sin.
73, 74 Islebius recanted his Recantation and returned to spread Antinomianisme
after Luthers death. 80, 81 The tenets of Islebius and Antinomians in Luthers
time. 81, 82 The Antinomian way of Paulus Crellius in Luthers time 182, 183,
184 How Antinomians stated the question of old. 83 How the Law is a patient to
believers. 84 Of the Antinomianisme of Michael Neander. 84, 85 Diverse
distinctions touching the use of, and freedom from the law tending to clear
Luthers mind, 86, 87 Three special uses of the law according to Luther. Ibid.
Luther refuteth Antinomians in terminis, and is most contrary to them. 86, 87,
89 How faith only justifies as Luther says. 100 How faith and works are
contrary. 101 How according to Luthers mind the Law has power over the flesh
and not over the renewed conscience. 102, 103 How Good works conform to the
law are not necessary. 103 The law the same now, and under the covenant of
works. Ibid, The law is given properly to the new man, not to the flesh. 103,
104 How the terrified conscience is freed from the law. 105, 106 How the law
condemns and terrifieth, how not. 106, 107 How the law is given to the New
man, how not. 108, 109 Excellent replies of a believer to the accusing law.
109, 110 The tempted believer freed from challenges of the law. 110, 111 How a
tempted believer is to comfort himself against law-temptations in the
conscience 112, 113 Luther is for conditions in the Covenant and for
preparations before conversion. 114, 115 Sundry excellent answers to Satan, and
the law, what a sinner is at the brink of despair 115, 116, 117, 118 How we
are patients in justification, how not. 118, 119 How the law is weak. 119 How
good works are naught. 120, 121, How the law is abolished, how not. 121, 122
That the law is to be preached to all. 119, 120 Of the union between Christ
and a believer, opposite to the phancied union of Familists and Antinomians,
who say that a believer is Godded and Christed. 123, 124, 125 Of our legal
union, our union by faith, our union by marriage, by nature, and the
intervening of interests and conditions with Christ and a sinner 125, 126, 127
Luther makes sin to dwell in the justified, contrary to Antinomians 129, 130
How it is in them, and how removed, pardoned sin is essentially sin. 131,
132, 133, 134 How we are under the law, and under grace in regard of the flesh
and the Spirit. 134, 135 The diverse respects of Law and Gospel 138 How the law
is a dead Letter. 139 Of the Letter and the Spirit. 139, 140 Luther detesteth
allegories. 139 How the believer needs not the Law in the Letter. 142, 143
None are perfect in this life, as Luther says, contrary to Antinomians. 143,
144 We must then have patience. 144, 145 Sin in the believer rages to their
feeling, and yet is made less sin. 145, 146 Luther taught that the Jews were
Justified and actually pardoned by faith, as we are, contrary to Antinomians.
146, 147, 148 Chapter IX* Of Christian liberty, and of true and false sense. 148,
149, etc. Luther in the point of Christian liberty, is against the Antinomians.
148, 149 How the Law has nothing to do with the conscience, according to
Luther. 149, 150, 151, 152 Antinomians distinction that we sin not against
the Law, but against Christ, removed. 151 Luther unduly charge these he
calls Sacramentarians, with making the Spirit without the word their rule, it
being the doctrine of Antinomians in his time. 153, 154 How we are to judge of
our spiritual estate by sense, how not. 153, 154 Luthers mind of freewill,
and contrary to Antinomians therein. 155, 156 How the will is a patient rather
then an agent in good. 157, 158 Of the subjective and active power of freewill.
158, 159 Thirteen considerations of the Author touching freewill. 160, 161,
162, 163 An absolute independent power in the will, to do without the
predeterminating grace of God, neither peculiar to the Covenant of works
before the fall, nor to the Covenant of grace, after the fall. 160, 161 Chap.
XIV. Of the piece called Theologia Germanica, and of the Bright star. 163,
164, etc. Libertines sprang from the Gnostics, Familists from Libertines,
Antinomians from both. 163, 164, 165 Of John Waldesso, who has sundry
principles of Familisme and Antinomianisme in his book. 164, 165 God is the
creature says Theologia Germanica. 165 To ascribe any thing to the creature is
sin, the new man is Christ. 165, 166 How creatures are under-causes of their
own working. 166 The hell and heaven of Familists. 167 The Familists
acknowledge no Christ, but a metaphorical Christ. 167, 168 So Theol.
Germanica, and the piece called the Bright-star. The works of H. Nicholas. 168
Familists of England dissemble their grossest points. Their Petition to King
James. 168 Vent their malice in the Petition against Puritans, were tolerated
by Prelates, because they railed against non-conformists. 169 The contents of
the Petition of the Familists in England to King James. 168, 169, 170 Chap. XV.
Of the Familists, and Antinomians in New England. 171 Their rise. ib. Their
tenets. 171, 172, 173 The Saints suffering are God manifested in the flesh, as
Saltmarsh and Familists say. 172, 173, 174 Saltmarsh Chaplain to the General
Sir Tho. Fairfax goes along with the Familists of N. England. ibid. Ordinances
of preaching, reading, hearing, Sacraments, are not to be separated from the
Spirit, nor the Spirit from them. 175 Chap. XVI. Of the first Authors of
Antinomianisme, and Familisme in N. England, as Mistress Hutchison, M.
Wheelwrit, their preaching, seditious railing, and foul tenets. 176, 177, 178
Mrs. Hutchison bold, maintained she might preach to a Congregation, and
alleged the example of Priscilla. 178 Her abominable tenets, in which she
denied the immortality of the soul, the resurrection, Christ, heaven,
sanctification, asserted revelations beside and without the word of God. 178,
179 A General Assembly at Cambridge in N. England confuted and condemned M.
Hutchison, M. Wheelwright, and others. 180 M. Hutchison bare thirty formed
monsters. 181 Was excommunicated, banished to the Road-Iland, killed by the
Indians, she and all her house. 181, 182. as is reported. Mrs. Dyer a Familist,
the wife of William Dyer, a prime Familist, brought forth a terrible monster.
181, 182 Chap. XVII. Of the late Familists banished out of N. England in
Massachusetts, and now inhabitants of Shaw-omet, otherwise called Providence.
188 The blasphemous tenets of Sam. Gortyn, a wicked Familist, who preaches
openly in and about London. 183, 184, 185 Gortyn and these Familists deny God
incarnate, and say every suffering Saint is Christ, and there is not another
Christ. 184, 185, 186 So does M. Beacon maintain the same. 189, 190 Joh.
Waldesso despises Scriptures. 190, 191 Gortyn condemns swearing before a
Judge. 192 Repentance, baptising, preaching by any that have not the Spirit of
sanctification, or premeditate, or study what they are to preach. 192, 193 Of
other Antinomians in England, as Town, Eaton, Crisp, Paul Hobson, Beacon, Del,
Saltmarsh, and Den. Chap. XVIII. Saltmarsh clears his mind of personal
mortification faintly, holds many other points of Familisme, of Christ
crucified, risen, ascended, etc. in figure, not in his true real manhood.
Personal mortification must be commanded in the Gospel to believers, otherwise
mortification which is purchased by Christ's merits 1640. years ago, cannot be
commanded us now. 196, 197 Saltmarsh with Familists deny the first Adam to be a
real single man. 198, 199 Saltmarsh denies a visible Church. 200 And external
baptism. ibid. Chap. XIX. Saltmarsh with Familists phancie many new
administrations of Law, Joh. Baptist, Gospel, all-spirit. 200, 201 What the
Antichrist is to Saltmarsh and Familists. 201 Saltmarsh says, that arts, and
tongues, and Scripture brought in Antichrist, and banished the Spirit. 201, 202
Saltmarsh with Familsts makes three special administrations, the Law, the
Gospel, the Spirit, and rejects the Protestant faith, and takes a new way of
the Spirit. 203, 204. from H. Nicholas. Wars to Saltmarsh were mere types done
away. 204, 205 The Ministry and baptism of Christ, are made different from
that of Christ's. 205 The different ministrations, even that of all-spirit, in
this life. 205, 206 Saltmarsh and Familists will have the day of judgment and
an administration without Ordinances to be in this life. 206, 207 Chap. XX. Of
the ceasing of Ordinances since the Apostles dyed, as Saltmarsh with Seekers
teach. 208, 209 Separation from a false Church lawful. 209 No new lights after
the canon of Scripture is closed. proved fully. 210, 211 The place Matthew.
28.19, 20. Lo I am with you to the end, proves the continuation of a Ministry
till the last judgment. 212, 213, 214. what ever Saltmarsh, with his Seekers,
say on the contrary. Saltmarsh takes away all Ministry, calling, and sending
of Pastors, as Seekers do. 214, 215 Chap. XXI. The doctrine of Saltmarsh and
Familists touching Magistracy, and the spiritual discerning of Saints among
themselves. 215, 216 Saltmarsh makes Magistracy the image of Christ the
Mediator to men in the flesh not to Saints. 216 Of the discerning of the
Spirits. 216, 217 Familists are against war, and yet practice it. 217
Defensive wars lawful. ibid. Chap. XXII. The highest discoveries Familists
have of Christ, to wit, that neither the first, nor the second Adam Christ, is
a true and real, but only a figurative man. 218, 219 Praying and supernatural
acts in us suppose some actings in us, and Christ on the cross crucified not
our natural faculties, as Saltmarsh with his Familists dream. 220, 221, 222
Chap. XXIII, Praying a law-bondage to Saltmarsh and Familis^s. 223, 224
Saltmarsh holds that neither written Law, nor written Gospel is our obliging
rule, b^t only the Spirit, as did Libertines. 224, 225 Chap XXIV. Of the
indulgence of sinning under Law and Gospel granted by the Familists. 225, 226
That men under Prelacy may adore Altars and Images, and not sin, but walk with
God in these dispensations. 226 Chap. XXV. Familists will have us to be
Christed and Godded. 226, 227 Chap. XXVI. The Familists phancie of our passing
from one ministration to another of higher glory in this life 227, 228
Saltmarsh with Familists phancie a day of judgment in which we burn old
ministrations and truths, and ge^ new light. ibid. Saltmarsh expones the place
2 Pet. 3.10. Which is clearly of the day of judgment, to be a day in this
life, as did Hymeneus and Phile^us. 228, 229 Of the Lords Prayer. 228, 229 And
the Sabbath according to Saltmarsh. 229 Familists against the written
Scripture. 229, 230 Chap. XXVII. How Ordinances and the letter of the word are
instruments of conveying of Christ and his grace to us, and neither adored of
us, nor useless to us. 230, 231, 232, etc. The letter and the Spirit, who are
Ministers of the letter, who of the Spirit. 231, 232, 233 Serving God in
Ordinances unjustly called Idolatry, by Saltmarsh and Familists. 234, 235
Ordinances are not bare shadows. 236, 237 Natural men stumble not at the
letter of the Gospel, but at the thing signified, 1 Cor. 1. 237 Chap. XXVIII.
Of our assurance and comfort from acts of free grace. 238, 239 Or as suitable
to the rule, or not suitable. 239, 240, 241 Chap. XXIX. The scope of
Saltmarshes book, called Sparkles of glory, and how he denies Christ to be
any thing but a man figuratively or mystically, as (...) taught. 242, 243
Saltmarsh denies (...) come in the flesh, or has any body he dyed in, but his
(...), which is the Saints suffering affliction. 243, 244, 245 Christ really
crucified, not in figure. 244, 245 What Christ's offering his flesh on the
cross is to Saltmarsh and Libertines. 246, 247 Saltmarsh with H. Nicholas
teaches that every creature is God or a substantial part of God. 247, 248
Chap. XXX. Familists will have all externalls indifferent. 249, 250, 251, etc.
We may be of any Religion we please to serve in love the sects we converse
withal for the time. 250 A letter printed by Authority under the name of
Oliver Crumwel opened, and found to contain many secrets of gross Familisme.
250, 251, 252 Independents and Presbyterians cannot pray with the same Spirit,
and receive the same answer. 252, 253 Familists condemning all outward
Ordinances, condemn all unity, but what is inward and invisible. 254, 255
Saltmarsh says, that God manifested in the flesh, is nothing but God by his
Spirit discovering new light. 256 What uniformity we mean in the Covenant.
257, 258 No rule for uniformity in doctrine, worship, discipline but the
Spirit. 259 The sword a means of hindering men from being perverted, but not of
being converted. 261, 262 That we must in outward things please one another,
though in Idolatry and Sin, is taught by Saltmarsh, Beacon and other Familists.
264, 265 The place Gal. 6. neither circumcision etc. cleared. 266, 267
Familists will have it lawful for no man to come out of Prelacy, Popery, or
any unlawful way, till the Spirit effectually draw them 268, 269 How Saltmarsh
is against duties. 269 Saltmarsh, Seekers and Familists are for any
Church Government. 270, 271 Chap. XXXI. Saltmarsh and Familists teach that
there is salvation in all Religions. 171, 172 Every man's conscience is his
Bible, as Saltmarsh thinks. 172, 173 Chap. XXXII. What certainty of faith the
Saints may attain to beyond the Familists fluctuation of faith, of Heresy and
Schism. 274, 275 A twofold infallibility. 274, 272 One of the Prophets and
Apostles, and another of all beleivers. 277, 278 Saltmarsh professedly
deserteth Protestants, and takes him to Familists. 275, 276 Saltmarsh and
Beacon against the Trinity and the union of two natures in Christ. 276
Saltmarsh devises a new union between God and Man, Devils and Angels. 276,
277 Saltmarsh defines Heresy in relation to the Spirits teaching, not to the
written Word. 279 And Schism to be in relation to the invisible, not to the
visible Church 280 Chap. XXXIII. Familists mind touching prayer 281, 282 Chap.
XXXIIII. A taste of the wild allegorick interpretations of Scriptures that
Saltmarsh fathers on the spirit. 282, 283, 284, etc. All in Covenant with God
are preachers of the Gospel to Saltmarsh. 282 Saltmarsh and H. Nicholas makes
Christ's coming again and judging of the world to have been these 1640.
years 284 Saltmarsh would prove by Scripture there should be no baptizing by
water. 284, 285 Christ crucified is nothing to Saltmarsh but the Saints Godded
and Christed, and suffering with faith and patience. 285 Ordinances are only
for the unconverted before (...) to supply the absence of the spirit. 285, 286
The story of Adam but a figure to Saltmarsh. 286 The Doctrine of John Baptist
is gone says Saltmarsh* 286. Saltmarsh with Socinians will have the love of
our enemies not commanded in the old Testament. 287* Saltmarsh dreams of a
Church on earth that shall want Ordinances. 287, 288 The place Gal. 4.1. Of the
Heir under Tutors vindicated from Saltmarsh's gloss. 289 The Corinthians
called carnal unduely, 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. by Saltmarsh; the place vindicated. 290
Christ's disciples not under a stinted liturgy. 291 The place 1 Cor. 10. they
did all eat etc. speaks nothing of the Idolatry of means and Ordinances, as
Saltmarsh phancies. 292 The Disciples of Christ not under a carnal
ministration, but had the revelation of the spirit as well as we. 293 2 Thessalonians.
2. touching the Antichrist vindicated. 293, 294 The place John 17. Father
glorify me etc. foully abused, vindicated. 294, 295 Exodus 33. None can see me
and live, vindicated from Saltmarsh his gloss. 295, 296 The place Zach. 13. of
killing false Prophets under the Gospel,, vindicated. 296, 297 Chap. XXXV. Of
the anointing of the Spirit and the Letter. 297, 298, etc. Of the knowledge of
such as are under actual vision in a Trance. 297, 298 Prophets not ever under
actual visions in actual prophesying to men, as when in a dream or trance
they see the visions of God. 298, 299 Prophets see not really the things
themselves, but the speces or images in the opened decree of God. 300: 301 The
spirit opposed to bodily and external. 300 External Ordinances in sensu
composito and diviso how they suit with the Spirit. 301, 302 Three ways of
union between the word and the spirit. 302, 303 The real influence of
spiritual operations on the body. 303, 304 We adore not Characters. 304 The
spirit because the spirit, and separated from the word, not our obliging rule
but the law and the testimony. 304, 305 We are to wait on God in the use of
outward means, though the spirit work not ever upon our hearts. 305, 306
Diverse ways of the spirits concurring with the word. 306, 307 The places Jer.
31. They shall no more teach his brother; and 1 John 2.27. The anointing
teaches you all things, cleared and vindicated. 307, 308, 309 We make not the
word to have two senses, one external and preparatory, another internal and
spiritual. 309, 310, 311 The one literal sense, the true and native sense of
the word. 311, 312 Diverse other considerations of the word and Spirit. The
Spirit opposed to humane eloquence 312, 313 To cold, dead and dry speaking.
313, 314 To that which smells most of our wit. 314 To wild logic. 314, 315
The characters of a spiritual condition. 315, 316 The Spirit determines the
actions according to the specification, and to the exercise. 315, 316, 317 The
Spirit how he goes along with the Law 315, 316 The obliging Law and the free
Spirit consist together. 316 The moral compulsion of the Law, is exhausted by
the freeness of a Gospel Spirit. 318 Threatenings legal had influence on the
will of the first Adam, not of the second, or of confirmed Angels. 318, 319 The
place 2 Pet. 1. Until the day star arise, etc. vindicated. 319, 320 How the
Spirit is the day star. 320 How true that is, the more of the letter, the
less of the Spirit. 321, 322 How we are changed into the same spiritualnesse
contained in the Gospel. 322, 323, 324 Familists have no new discoveries. 325,
326 How duties are spiritually taught in the Gospel. 326, 327 The Word the
formal object of our faith, the Spirit the eff^cient. 327, 328 The Gospel to
Antinomians a mere killing letter. 328, 329 The word spiritual beyond figures
and letters in every consideration. 329, 330 The spirit determines the actions
of the spiritual man. 330 The order of acting in supernatural actions often
from the Spirit. 331, 332 The assumption of a syllogism of conscience proven
by the Spirit. 332, 333 How far the Saints are to leave Rome for new light.
334 3^5 Preaching of duties not contrary to the spirit. 335, 336 What the Law
of the spirit of life is. 336 Characters of a spiritual condition. 336, 337
The written Word to Familists is but a type and a shadow. 337, 338 Ordinances
to continue to the end. 338, 339 Climbing from ministrations natural or civil
to higher ministrations, an unwritten fancy of Familists. 340, 341 The garment
wherewith the Son of God was clothed, is ope^e^ to consist in six points, by
Saltmarsh, and to be diverse ministrations. 339, 340 How mortification is a
sign of a spiritual condition. 341, 342 A Petition of the Familists of
England to King James, anno 1604. 343, 344, 345, etc. Their virulency and
malice to Puritans. 343, 344 Their extolling of H. Nicholas. 346, 347 They will
have us saved by works of righteousness that we do. 347 Prelates never
troubled Familists, because they were enemies to Puritans, and conform to the
Prelates ways. 341 They clambe to the Apostolic Church, and reject the
Apostolic Scriptures. 348 Diverse of the Court of Queen Elizabeth and King
James were Familists. 349 Familists are for universal grace. 349 They labor
to pervert King James to Familisme. 350 They condemn all as Antichristian that
are not of their way. ibid. They profess uncouth phrases that Protestants
cannot understand as Libertines did, ibid. They profess they will take and
embrace, reject or refuse their Religions which is the only true way to
salvation, as the King and his Laws shall enjoyne. 350, 351 An abjuration
tendered to Familists in England a^. 1580. the 10th. of Queen Elizabeth's reign
by the Lords of the secret council declaring H. Nicholas to be an Heretic.
353, 354.
II. Part, Contents of the second Part called a Survey of Antinomianisme.
CChap I. Antinomians unjustly accuse us. p. 1, 2 Chap. II. Antinomians are
Pelagians. Chap. III. Protestants hold no preparations with Pelagians, Papists
and Arminians going before conversion. 2, 3, 4 Sinners are not healed of Christ
as sinners, but as such sinners who are freely chosen and loved of God. 4 Chap.
IIII. How we teach a desire of grace to be grace. ibid. Chap. V. How we are
freed from the law, how not. 5 Chap. VI. How the Command of the law lays an
obliging bond on us. 5, 6 Proven by six arguments. Chap. VII. How the Law and
the Gospel require the same obedience. 7, 8 Chap. VIII. Of the promissory part
of the law, the differences between the two Covenants mistaken by Antinomians
are opened. 9, 10 Chap. IX. of the threatening of the Law and the Gospel. 10,
11 Chap. X. of Gospel-feare. 12 Serving for a reward not mercinary. ibid. Chap.
XI. Law-feare and Gospel-faith are consistent. 12, 13 Antinomians make the
Gospel the very spirit of grace. 13, 14. And remove all Ordinances. 14 Chap.
XII. Antinomians deny remission of sins to the Jews. 14, 15 Chap. XIII. Of
the nonage of the Jews what it was. 15, 16 Chap. XIV. The old man or the
flesh to the Antinomians is under the law, the new man freed from all law. 16
Chap. XV. Antinomians hold that the justified sin before men, and as touching
their conversation: not before God, as touching their conscience. 17 Chap. XVI.
Antinomians take justification to be an extirpation of sin, root and branch,
17 Chap. XVII. Christ not intrinsically and formally the sinner. 18 Chap.
XVIII. We are not justified till we believe. 19, 20 Antinomians hold that we
are united with Christ, before we believe. 20 Chap. XIX. Gods love of goodwill
and of good likeing a warrantable distinction. 20, 21, 21 Chap. XX. There is a
real change of our state in justification. 22 Chap. XXI. We mix not works
and grace in the matter of justification. 23, 24 Chap. XXII. Antinomians deny
sin to be in the justified. 24 Chap. XXIII. Antinomians say to faith there is
no sin. 25 Chap XXIV. The Reign of faith not absolute, as Antinomians say.
25, 26 Chap. XXV. God sees sin in the justified. 26, 27 Chap. XXVI. Confession
required in the believer. 27, 28 Chap. XXVII The law is to be preached to
believers. 28, 29 How duties are to be preached. 29 Chap. XXVIII. Strict and
precise walking a Gospel-duty. 30 Chap. XXIX. God truly angry at the sins of
believers. 31 Chap. XXX. The justified countable to God for sin. 32 Chap.
XXXI. God punishes sin in believers. 32 Chap. XXXII. believers are to mourn
for sin. 32, 33 Chap. XXXIII. Antinomians deny that believers should crave
pardon for sin, or have any sense thereof. 34 Chap. XXXIV. Men boiling in their
lusts without any humiliation foregoing are to believe, say Antinomians. 34, 35
Chap. XXXV. Spiritual poverty mistaken by Antino. 35, 36 Chap. XXXVI.
Repentance mistaken by Antinomians. 36 Chap. XXXVII, How good works are
necessary. 37, 38 Chap. XXXVIII. The Gospel conditional and how. 39, 40 Chap.
XXXIX. Antinomian mortification rejected. 43, 44 Chap. XL. Antinomians the
perfectists of the time. 43 Chap. XLI. We are completely saved in this life,
say Antinomians. 44 Chap. XLII. Our happiness in sanctification as well as in
justification. 45, 46 Chap. XLIII. Sanctification crushed by Antinomians. 46,
47, 48 Chap. XLIIII. All doubtings inconsistent with faith say Antinomians. 49,
50* Chap. XLV. Antinomians Merit-mongers, not we. 50, 51 Chap. XLVI. There is
grace inherent in us. 52, 53 Chap. XLVII. We are not mere patients in acts of
sanctification. 53, 54, 55 Antinomians abet all reasoning c^nsequences
promises. 57, 58, 59 Chap. XLVIII. Believers cannot sin against God, but
against men, say Antinomians. 60, 61 How the justified are not obliged to
eschew sin according to the Antinomian way. 61 Towns vain objections
tending to prove that good works are not the way to salvation. 61, 62, 63 Good
works are not necessary either by a necessity of means or of a command of God
to Antinomians. 62, 63 How sanctification fitteth us for heaven. 64, 65 Chap.
XLVI Antinomians free us from any obligation to Evangelick commands and
exhortations to duties, and say faith is the only thing commanded in the
Gospel. 65, 66 Chap. L. How we are freed from the law in regard of
sanctification, as of justification. 68 Chap. LI. Antinomians ignorant of
Jewish law-service and of Gospel-obedience. 69, 70 Neither the Jews under the
Law, nor we under the Gospel could ever buy the love of God. ibid. The error
of the Jews touching righteousness, and the state of the Jews confounded by
Antinomians. 70, 71 Chap. LII. That we are not freed from outward ordinances.
73, 74 Chap. LIII The necessity of outward Ordinances. 75, 76 Chap. LIVE. What
peace we may fetch from gracious performances. 76, 77. Peace with God, not the
same peace from our selves 77, 78. What qualified performances can ^ottome
peace. 77, 78 Antinomians reject all experiences. 7^, 80 Antinomians condemn
all experiences. ibid. Chap. LV. How far inherent qualifications, and actions
of grace can prove we are in the state of grace. 81, 82 Mere ^xternall
performances prove nothing. 62. To eye the actings of the Spirit, and overlooke
our selves is the surest arguing of a spiritual state. 82 Keeping of the
Commandments may prove to our own Spirits that we are in Christ. 82, 83
Supernatural acts may reciprocally prove one another. 8^ Antinomians conspire
with Papists to deny all evidences of our certainty of our being in Christ,
because all acts or qualifications or works of sanctification may be called in
question 86, 87, 88 Their certitude of faith being no less questionable. 88,
89 Good works, means, not pillars of our assurance. 90, 91 Chap. LVI. How
duties and delight in them take us not off Christ* 91, 92. How they may be
abused. 93 Chap. LVII. Of liberty purchased by Christ. 93, 94 How we are freed
from the Law, how not. 95, 96 Magistrates cannot punish ill doers by the
Antino. way. 100, 101 Chap LVIII. Antinomians teach that believers must not
walk in their conversation as in the sight of God, but must live by faith,
with God. 101, 102 Chap. LIX. How justification is one indivisible act not
successive as sanctification. 104. and sins yet are daily pardoned. 105, 106
Chap. LX How sins are remitted before they be committed 106. Chap. LXI. How
faith justifies. 107. And Saltmarsh's arguments that Christ is not ours by
faith. 108, 109, 110. Answered. The order of conversion and of justifying the
sinner. 111, 112 Chap. LXII. The Antinomians way and method of a sinners
coming to Christ, confuted. 114, 115, 116 The abuse of preparations to merit,
Pelagianisme, the abandoning of the practice of humiliation and sin sickness
before we believe, is presumptuous Antinomianisme. 116, 117 Chap. LXIII. The
law and the spirit subordinate not contrary. 117, 118 Saltmarsh a Familist. 118
Chap. LXIV. Antinomians differences between the law and the gospel, confuted.
119, 120 Law-obedience did not win God to be our God. 119 The authority of God
a Lawgiver and God a Father not contrary. 120. The Gospel commands not any
thing by the Antinomian way* 121, 122 The Gospel does both command and
persuade. 122. Antinomians call obedience to God a miserable yoke. ibid. How
Law-rigor and Gospell-sweetnesse do consist. 123 Antinomians reject all
arguing and logical inferences of the Holy Ghost in scripture and matters of
faith. 123, 124 Though we be regnerate, yet we need scripture-teaching. 124 The
written scripture not given to the flesh. 124, 125 Chap LXV. The Gospel is a
rare Covenant in all things. 127, 128 Chap. LXVI. Antinomians errors touching
the Covenant of grace. 128, 129. In the conditions thereof. ibid. The time of
it. 129, 130. And in the parties. 130, 131 Chap. LXVII. Of legal and
Gospell-conversion. 131 How mere commands work no change. 132, 133 Natural
men cannot propose a supernatural end. 134 Obedience at set hours not legal.
135, 136 Whether Covenants, Vows, Promises be legal. 136, 137. What other
things are legal. 138, 139 Chap. LXIX. The dead and bastard faith of Antino.
140, 141 Faith, and nothing commanded but only faith in the Gospel how true.
140, 141 Of Antinomian faith. 143, 144 Reason for immediate believing without
all preparations. 143, 144, 145. Taken off. Who immediately invited. 144, 145,
146 Chap. LXX. Faith not the only work of the Gospel, as Antinomians say.
148* 149 Doing subordinate to sweet Gospell-attractions. 149 The way to heaven
not so short as Antinomians dream. 149, 150 Chap. LXXI. The justified obey not
God by necessity of nature, as the fire burns. 151, 152 Chap. LXXII.
Glorifying of God in sanctification needful. 153 Of our active and passive
glorifying of him. 153, 154 Chap. LXXIII. Sanctification concurres as well as
justification to make Saints. 155, 156 Chap. LXXIV. The harmonious compliance
of old Libertines Familists and Antinomians. 157, 158. In seventeene paralels
to chap. LXXXVI. p. 221 Antinomians with Libertines refute all personal
mortification. 158, 159 Chap. LXXV. Libertines, Familists, and Antinomians free
us from all law. 161 Chap. LXXVI. Libertines and Antinomians deny all scripture
163, 164. H. Nicholas makes two words of God. 164, 165 Antinomians turn
Perfectists with Libertines. 166, 167 The Fathers of old saved as we. 167 Chap.
LXXVII. Antinomians and Libertines foul opinions touching God and the author
of sin. 169, 170, 171 Chap. LXXVIII. Libertines and Antinomians take away all
sense or remorse of conscience for sin. 172, 173 Chap. LXXIX. Libertines and
Antinomians parallel believers with Christ incarnate. 173, 174 Chap. LXXX To
follow sense and natural inclination as a law is our rule, say Libertines and
Antinomians. 174, 175 Antinomians sin according to their own lying sense, and
declaratively, not truly, not really, and in the Court of God. 175, 176 Chap.
LXXXI. Antinomians plead for liberty to popery and to all Religions. 177, 178
Chap. LXXXII. Libertines and Antinomians doubt of the resurrection, and of the
life to come. 178, 179. H. Nicholas and New England Familists teach the same.
179, 180, 181 Chap. LXXXIII. Familists, Libertines, Anabaptists go before
Antinomians in denying all external worship and obedience. 181, 182, 183 Chap.
LXXXIV. M. Del, Saltmarsh and Familists deny all outward Reformation,
scripture, seals and ordinances. 187, 188 Del denies any work of the spirit
or conversion to God in the Old Testament with Socinians^ 188, 189. Del a
Familist. 180, 181. Del a Libertine. 193, 194. He denies all laws. 195. Del a
disciple of Muncer, an Anabaptist. 196, 197. How ecclesiastical reformation is
spiritual. 198, 199 Del a Libertine in removing all the working of second
causes. 199, 200 Dels arguments for only internal reformation, against all
the Ministry and Ordinances of the Gospel as Swenckfeldians taught. 201, 202
Believers, as spiritual as Angels, says Del, What need then of preaching to
them? 204, 205. Outward Reforming no more our duty then to redeem the World.
206, 207 Del makes Gods absolute decrees to destroy all the working of second
causes. 208, 209. Del and Familists deny the scripture and contend for an
internal enthysiasticall word. 210, 211, 212, 213 The middle way between
Papists and Enthysiasts. 216, 217, 218 Chap. LXXXV. Libertines and Antinomians
come near to other, in making God the author of sin. 219, 220 Chap. LXXXVI.
Libertines and Antinomians would have us do nothing, ^eca^se God does all
things. 221 Chap LXXX^II. Antinomians refuted in saying that we make the
actings of the Spirit like to the acts of moral Philosophy, and the
differences between these two. 222, 223, 224, 225 Chap. LXXX^III. That we are
t^uly righteous in the sight of God, and yet sinners in our se^ves, proved
against Antinomians. 225, 226, 227, 228 Chap LXXXIX. Antinomians are ignorant
of faith, to dream that its faith to believe against sense, that our sins are
no sins. 230, 231 Chap. XC. Antinomians free all converted or non-converted,
from obligation of obedience. 233.234 Chap. XCI. How, and for whom Christ
intercedeth for in heaven. 234.235 Chap. XCII. Antinomians contend for the
faith of assurance, and reject the faith of dependence. 235, 236 Chap. XCIII.
Antinomians deny the Law to be an instrument at all, of our sanctification.
236, 237 Del, with Libertines, makes the word and the Spirit all one. 238, 239
Errata.
Page 14. line penult. for the r. that p. 15. l. 18. d, p. 17. l. 5. till he
made. r. till he be made. p. 21. l 17. r. from. p. 44. l. ult. for 4. r. 5. p.
50. l. 14. for and r. an. p. 53. l. 37. for they. r. there. p 64. l. 3. d. in.
p. 99. l. 7. r. simply. p. 101. l. 33. for none. r. now. p. 123 l. 4. r.
claram. p. 135. l. 32. r, reatu. p. 162. l. 25. a castro. p. 194. l. 18. but.
r. both. p. 223. l. 25. for, not be. r. not to be. p. 235. l. 11* form, to
Scriptures and ordinances then r form to Scriptures and ordinances. Then p.
254. l. 5 for is. r. as at Troas. p. 268. in marg. will it. r. will have it. p.
275. l. 3* r. yielded. 290. in mar. r. 1 Cor. p. 307. l. 34. r. contrariety. p.
316. l. 33 r. because.

Errata in the II. Part.
Page 3. l. 12. who ever will have Christ. r. who ever will, have Christ and
pay not a penny, p. 17. l. 18. r. makes. p. 65. for Chap. XLVI. r. Chap. XLIX.
p. 65. l. ult r. calls. p. 72. l. 17. r. gives. p. 83. l. 9. for has. r.
have. p. 96. l. 5. d. and. p. 159. l. 27. for glorification. p. 80. l. 28. d.
^hen. r. gloriation. p. 199 l. 21. d. is. 209. l. ult. for them. r. him. p.
223. l. 15. r. in spicitis. 236. l. 16. without was. r. was without.

THE DESCENT OF ANTINOMIANS and FAMILISTS.
PART I.
CHAP. I. The Original of Antinomians and of other unclean Sects who have
taught the same things, not unlike to their blasphemies.
THOUGH out of doubt, Antinomians have given signification of the first dawning
of that Heresy, in Paul the Apostles time, Shall we continue in sin that
grace may abound? Romans 6.1. and, Is the Law sin? God forbid, Romans 7.7. and
James his arguing against the dead faith, void of good works, Jam. 2.
intimates they were peeping up in his days, and John hinteth at some denying
signs of Justification. Antinomians in ^he Apostles time, have their disce^^
from the old Katharoi, called puritans.


Yet their Original seems to be from the old Katharoi, called Puritans, who
rose about the year 1115. 1118. who being justified, affirmed they were perfect
and free of all sin, as the glorified in heaven, as Saltmarsh, Free Grace, p.
140. and Mr. Town Assertion of Grace say, p. 69.77, 78, 79. though Flaccus
Illyricus Catolo. testi. ver. l. 15. fol. 1531. say the Papists ascribed this
opinion to the Waldenses, but most unjustly, and Gualterius the Jesuit in his
fabulous Chronicle, to the Lutherans, Tabula Ch^onographica, An. 1200. c. 10.
or we may say they came from these called Aetiani from Aetius or Eun^^ius the
Disciples of Aetius, who taught that sin and perseverance in sin, could hurt
the salvation of none, so they were partakers of his faith, that he taught, so
Augustine de Here Is. tom. 6. Here Is. 54.

CHAP. II. Of Libertines.
The Libertines who spra^g up, (...) 1525. of ki^ to the Famili^^s and
Antinomians.
IF we come a little lower, about the year, 1525. arose the Libertines, which
are a kind of men that come near to the Antinomians, and Familists, and all of
them savor strongly of the Manichaeans, Valentinians, and Cerdonites. Calvin
advers. lib. c. 2. observes that Libertines under pretense of Christian
Liberty, trampled under-foot all godliness, so do Antinomians. Before them
C^rdo, the Disciple of Heracleon as Epiphanius in Anaceph* stood for his two
principles, one good, another evil, as Tertull. also says, de praescript. He
said, that Christ suffered imagi^^rily, Finer Antinomians deny the Incarnation
of the Son of God.
as Tertull. relates, so Familists and finer Antinomians deny the Incarnation,
and say, Every believer is Christ incarnate, and is Godded and Christed, with
the holy anointing; Cerdo denied the Resurrection, so do Antinomians and
Familists. Marci^n his Disciple taught the like. With Manichaeans, they are not
far from rejecting all the Old Testament, for Antinomians will have no
actual Remission of sin in the Old Testament so says Den^e, Doctrine J^h.
Baptist, p. 51.52. Del. sermon. p. 3, 4. no inward conversion of sinners to God,
no holy Spirit given, no Covenant of Grace then, as Crispe and Mr. Del say. The
first man of the Libertines was an unlearned rude fellow, Coppinus. Quintus.
Antonius Pocquius the first Libertines.
Coppinus a Flanders man; after him arose one Quintus a Tailor in Piecardi^, a
drunken proud man and to him was joined one Bertrandus who dyed soon, and one
Claudinus persevalus: But a chief man among them was Antonius Pocquius a
Priest, who still said Mass, though Papists shamelesly call them Calvinists,
Anton. Pocquius a Priest, the first libertine affected to be obscure and
objected ignorance to Calvin, that be could not understand his foole^i^s.
these fellows spread their fles^ly Heresies in Holland, Brabantia, and other
parts of Low Germany, and infected thousands, drew away many in France.

Antonius Pocquius, a dissembling hypocrite remained at Geneva for a space,
desired of Calvin, a Testificate that he might pretend Calvin's name, but what
he could not obtain from Calvin, who saw him a fantastic fool, he found at
Martin B^c^r who was more simple then Calvin, and that Quintinus said to
Calvin, when he rebuked him, for his vain and new expressions, that he
understood not his words; so do Antinomians and Familists say, none but
themselves know anything of the Spirit, and of the mystery of free grace.

2. Libertines revealed none of their secrets but to those of whom they exacted
an oath to follow them: So do Familists and Antinomians cautelously keep up
their minds from any they know to be contrary to their way. Libertines and
Antinomians in many things like other.


3. They spoke in dark, obscure, mystic, and sublime words, not with the
Scriptures; and so do Antinomians, alleging they are Godded and Christed.
Moses is not in their conscience, they live in Heaven, they are neither male
nor female, they walk by the rule of the new Creature.

4. Libertines professed they would speak so ambiguously, as their words might
carry two senses, because Christ preached dark parables to the people:
Antinomians have not to this day explained in their writings, whether the
justified can sin or no; ^ut in practice they say they may, lie, whore, swear,
cosen; God sees no such sins in them.

5. Nothing was more frequent with Libertines, then the Spirit, the Spirit,
Antinomians say, to preach duties, to rebuke sin, is not a Spiritual strain
of Gospell-preaching, it is legal, literal, Moses-like, not Christ-like.

The chief errors of Libertines, which I prove to be holden expressly,
Libertines and Antinomians agree in opinion^ in most things.
or by undeniable consequences by Antinomians and Familists are these.

1. The Scripture is a dead and killing letter, the Spirit that quickneth is
our Calvin adver. libert* cap 9. p. 441, 442.
rule, so say Antinomians.

2. Calv. 442.
The Scripture is to be exponed in an allegorical and spiritual sense, so
Antinomians.

3. Ibid.
The Evangel is a spiritual doctrine, because it comprehends Christ who
quickneth us: the Antinom. Del. page 19. to prove this, cites the same Text
with Libertines, John 6. The words that I speak are Life and Spirit.

4. (d) The word is nothing but the Spirit, that Christ is the Spirit; we are
made Spirits (Godded with him say Antinomians) with Christ, and our life should
be the Spirit it self, so Familists and Antinomians teach.

5. Rise, reign ^r. 2.3.
God is that one Spirit, that acts and works all, in all creatures;
especially in Angels and men, good or ill* and works in us all vital
actions, of living, growing, willing, understanding, in place of our soul: so
do New England Antinomians teach.

6. Quintinus that hog (says Calvin) called Paul a broken vessel, Adv.
lib^r^. c. 9. p. 411.
John a foolish young man, Peter a denier of his Lord, and Matthew an Usurer. We
know Antinomians say, Rise reign unsav. speech ^r. 8.
Peter leaned more to a Covenant of works; Paul's doctrine was more for free
grace then Peter's, to Antinomians Moses, the Prophets, Christ, John-Baptist are
legalists, ^
preach carnally, literally. The Old Testament is a dead letter, (says Del
sermon. page 3.4. under all the outward Religion) men (he excepteth neither
Patriarchs nor Prophets, nor Godliest then living) were inwardly as corrupt and
wicked as very Heathen: for all their circumcision in the flesh* they were
uncircumcised in heart; for all their outward washing, they were inwardly
unclean.

So that notwithstanding the outward worship of God, the people remained
inwardly corrupt, filthy, and unclean, and without any true Reformation
before God, till Christ who was God in the flesh came with the Ministration of
the Spirit; and then indeed was the time of Reformation: then the Spirit was
not given to Moses, David, Abraham, till Christ came in the flesh, more then to
Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezar, or other heathen.

7. They say, with Sadduces, that Angels good or ill, are nothing but
imaginations, thoughts, and motions of the mind of man; as if imaginations
were sent to deliver the Saints, Libertines say Angels are but motions of the
mind.
bear them in their arms* pitch their tents about us, open prison doors,
taught us Gods will, saw the face of God, tempted us to sin, send diseases on
us, lied, teached lies, spoke Scripture to Christ, as good and ill Angels do.
They say, man was made of a body, and opinion in place of a soul; that the
other enemy the world is nothing, and sin an naked opinion.

Libertines make God the author of sin. Antinomians conspire with them.
8. They said God was not only he, in whom we live, move, subsist, have a
being, Act. 17. but there was neither reason nor will in us, more then in
stones; God does all the wickedness, villainies, perjuries, incests in men.

9. No men are to be rebuked for sins; sin and all wickedness is to be
imputed to God: so the Antinomians Rise, reign er. ^ 3.
make the Holy Ghost the cause and author of all the good we do, and say,
reason, will, all the faculties of the soul are destroyed in the conversion of
a sinner; who then acts all sins and wickedness in believers? Famili^ts
teach the same expressly: see Bright star, and Theol. Germanica.

10. Men are to convert all their sins to good, and to repute them their gain
and advantage.

11. They said Christ incarnate, was nothing but a godly man, or a believer
made of a body, and of an opinion, that he could not sin, nor know good and
ill; and when Christ died, he dyed in opinion. Antinomians say, Christ is God
incarnate Rise reign. ^r. 11.
in every believer. God (says Th^l. Germ. ca. 22. p. 52.
Theol. Germ.) is in man, and works his will alon^, and does do, and leave
undone any thing, without any I, to me, mine and the like; where these things
are and exist, there is true Christ, and no where else.

12. They said sin was but a vain opinion, because God is the author of it,
(says M. Archer, with Antinomians) and God can do no ill.

13. Regeneration (they say) is to return to the ignorance of good and ill,
Antinomians and Libertines have the same conceptio^s touching mortification and
conscience of believers.
(as it was Adam's sin to know good and ill) and mortification is to lay
aside all conscience and knowledge of sin* and as child^en to cast away sense
and conscience, and therefore when any mourned, or were grieved in conscience,
or repented for sin, they said, to such a man: O Adam, live thou yet! and
keep thou still the gust and taste of the apple that Adam eat; after the
same manner Antinomians now, Town assert. gr. 97, 98, 99.115, 116.42, 43
Sal^m. free gr. 83, 84, 85.

Den. conference with the sick man p. 30, 31, 32, 33.

Eaton honeycomb^, c. 8.171, 172.


say repentance, grief, sorrow for, sense or conscience of sin in a believer
is legal, carnal, fleshly, from unbelief; and the old Adam and that its
contrary to faith, and Gospel Light to confess sins, and was Town. assert.
page 103.
a work of the flesh in David.

14. They said, a regenerate man is perfect as an Angel; and that he that is
borne of God, cannot sin. So say the Antinomians, Town assert. page 77, 78.
R. Becon Catechis. page 137, 138. page 211, 212. Saltmarsh free grace, 140,
154. Rise reign, er. 70.

15. Calv. a^ver. liber. c. 19. fo. 453, 454.
They said, Christian liberty extended to all things, that in regard we are
under no law nor rule of life, all things are lawful: so Antinomians, as all
know teach the same.

16. They said a regenerate man, as regenerate, sinned not, but only the flesh
or his ass: so Town also assert. page 35, Saltm. free grace, 142. Eaton
honey-combe, c. 4. page 47.

17. That every man follow his calling, that is, his natural inclination, and
the world, that is custom; and so put away his wife when he suteth not with
her, and marry another, is lawful; so as men may live as their corrupt hearts,
as the lust of the eye, and the lust of the flesh, and the pride of life
carries them, which three are not from God, 1 John 2.16. as if sense and
natural inclination were Gods calling, and not the Devils. I prove Den^ser.
man of sin, p. 9, 10, 11, 12.

Saltm fr gr. 142 Honey-combe. c. 4.5.


at length that it is the Antinomian doctrine, to say, the sins of believers,
are not truly and really and in Gods account, sins, but only to our lying
sense, reason, false feeling, and to the flesh.

18. Calvin adver. lib. c. 21.
It Is (say they) the communion of Saints, to have all things common, goods,
wives, etc. Antinomians say, for an unbeliever to take another man's wife is
sin; because they are under the law; but it is no sin to a believer freed
from the law: for God can see no more sin in him, then in Christ Jesus,
honey-combe, ca. 3. c. 25, 26, 27.

19. They said the resurrection was passed, and that we have completely and in
possession life eternal in this life; so say Salt. fr. gr. 140 T^w. ass. gr.
p. 60. Mistress Hutchison Rise and reign, p. 61, 62, 63.

Nich. Stork, Tho. Muncer. his Rise and Tenets how suitable with Antinomian
divinity.


Antinomians expressly, as I prove.

CHAP. III. Of Anabaptists, N. Stork. Th. Muncer, Jo. Becold, etc. and their
Tenets.
ANno, 1522. Did arise in Saxony, Nicholas Stork, who boasted of dreams and
visions and rejected the Scripture, as being a carnal and literal rule;
Antinomians call it carnal, literal and legal. From him and others arose
Thomas Mun^erus, about Ann. 1524. who styled himself in his letters, Thomas
Muncer, the servant of God, with the sword of Gideon against the ungodly. This
man being hungry for glory, hunted for Luthers name to his new designs, but
not obtaining it, said Luther lopped, but rooted not out Antichrist: that
Luthers carnal and literal Gospel was worse then the Pope, and therefore
cried down books, and the letter of Scripture; and said, the Spirit was
leader and rule to believers. As Mistress Hutchison of N. England being demanded
Rise and reig^. p 36.
a warrant for her private assemblies and teaching, said she walked by the rule
of the new creature; which rule she said was the Spirit, but could not give
Scripture for it; so the Antinomian Del in her very Grammar, says, Del. s^r.
26.
he knows no laws in Gods Kingdom the Church, but three. 1. The law of a new
creature, 2. the law of the Spirit of life that is in Christ. 3. The law of
love, not one word of the Scripture here, its but a dead Letter; Antinomians,
Familists, Nicholai^ans, Enthusiasts, Sweckfeldians, Libertines, go no higher,
that they may abase the Scriptures. Luther wrote to the Senate of Mulhuysen a
famous Town in Thuringia, to beware of the wolf Muncer. Henry Pfeiffer a
Monk, Henry Pfeiffer and Muncer their sedi^ious spirits and miserable end.
did blow up Muncerus, he boasting of a vision from Heaven, gathered troops to
the field. The Princes of Saxoni, Hess^n, and Brunswick, the Count of Manfield,
and the Princes in Sweden, Thuringia Alsa^ia, Franconia, Bavaria, Au^tria, and
Stiria, subdued and killed the Boures, or Husbandmen and Rusticks, Great
tumults to the killing of above an hundred thousand through Germany and about
by the Antinomian spirits impulsion which wa^t^th the light of Scripture.
who were sick of love for Muncers Liberty, or rather license due to them, as
the false Prophets said, under the New Testament; on a hill near Frankbusen,
Muncer drew up and cried, The Sword of the Lord, and of Gideon against New
Testament taskmasters, he meant Princes, and lawful Magistrates, yet was
Muncer taken in the Town Frankbusen, and Pfeiffer also, near Isewick, and
Muncer having fained himself sick, and despairing, he and his Prophet were
hanged, An. 1525. By these and other the like bloody inspirations, were above a
hundred thousand killed.

In Helvetia, Felix Montzy, Balthaser Hubmeir, and Conradus Grebelius of
Zurick, spreading by word and writ Anabaptisme of this kind, at Zurick, An.
1525. were confounded in a public dispute by Huldicus, Zwinglius, Leo, Juda,
and Casper Megander; Hubmeir, who professed and promised recantation, in the
Pulpit, preached the contrary, Satan leading his tongue, as he said, Held that
Adams flesh, not his spirit, consented to sin, and that he lost not true
Liberty by his fall, Tenets of Hubmeir.
against him and the Anabaptists pretending the Spirit for their rule, and
rejecting the Scriptures, as Antinomians do. The Senate of Zurick, An. 1530.
past an Act discharging them to Preach, Ann. 1525. 1527. 1529. they were
confuted, An. 1528. Lodivicus, Helser, Joannes Trajer, Joan. Seekler, and other
Anabaptists, were in the matter of Oaths, Magistracy, Pedobaptisme, confuted
by Hallerus, and by Kolvius at Bern, and forced to say, The Spirit taught them,
otherwise then the Letter of the Scripture spoke.

And also at Zosing in Argovia, An. 1532. Conradus, Grebelius with his
laboring to seduce many, were confuted, and cast out of Sengall.

Tho. Schuker by the impulsion of a Spirit without Scripture beheaded his own
innocent brother.
Thomas Schuker the Disciple of Melchior Rinkius, beheaded with a sword his
brother Leonard, by the impulsion of the Spirit, at Sengal (but it was not the
Holy Ghost, who leads us in Scripture truth) saying in that, The will of God
was done, and it was finished, this made a Spirit without Scripture hateful to
many, having made much ado with their Scriptures Spirit, at Str^asbrough,
Worms, Ausbourg, Vlmes, and being driven out of Helvetia, and High-Germany,
they carried their plague to Mor^via, and adjoined to themselves seditious men
in Bohemia, Poland, Hungaria, Austria and Silesia.

Balthazar Hubmeier for tumults in Moravia, was burnt at Vienna.

Hence in West-phalia, Frizland, Holland, and especially at Munster, arose new
Revelations; In comes An. 1533. John Becold, out of his own element, of a
Tailor, amongst the Prophets, with the Prophet Baker, Becold called John of
Leiden his rise, bloody, attempts, spirit without Scripture, an^ Tragical end.
John Matthiz, and some of Munster. Ro^mannus, a faint and fained confuter of
Anabaptists, turns to them, and with him Herman Strepeda, Hen. Rullius, and
Godfrey Stralen, strengthen them, they were confuted in a public dispute and
ordained to depart the City of Munster, and did depart, but they partly steal
in again in the night, partly hide themselves, and make themselves masters of
the city, one Warendrop a Godsmith, prophesies that John of Leiden must be King
of the whole earth, and King of Jerusalem, that all Princes must obey him; John
Matth^z an Enthusiast.
Becold appoints Bernard Knippe^dolling, and Kippenbrugh Consulls, the
Christian Magistrates are deposed.

John Matthiz, after a revelation from heaven, commands all books to be burnt,
except the Bible, all Gold and Silver to be brought and laid down at his feet,
that all might be common. Truteling a Smith called them dirty Prophets,
therefore Matthiz shot him dead, Becolds spirit and visio^s br^ng forth
polygamy and ha^i^g (...) many wives.
and Matthiz himself not long after was cut off by the enemy. Righteous is the
Lord. Becold, after three days lying in a fancied transe, commands Polygamy,
in obedience to his own Vision, marries three wives, then other three, til he
came to fifteen.

Becold, according to the prophecy, of a Tailor is made a most Gorgeous King,
Becold wou^d have d^ub^e the Apostles of Christ and more.
and sent out twenty eight Apostles, to show his Kingdom was above Christ, he
would have this number twice twelve Apostles, and four Angels as Evangelists
sent to the four corners of the earth to Preach Tailor, Becold, King of Kings,
all of them were killed (some say) one only returned to give an account of
spreading the spirit of Anabaptisme Becold appointing a great Lords Supper, the
King Tailor came in to see the Guest^s, Becolds bloody spirit.
and finds a man and reading on his face the want of a wedding garment, others
say he saw him to be a Judas, kills the innocent man presently.

After he had prophesied the Town of Munster now beseiged should be supplied,
and killed one of his wives, who said his prophecies came not to pass, he and
Knipperdoling were deservedly, after Torturing, Killed, and hanged in an iron
cage in the Cathedral pin^cle.

The Tenants of Anabaptists, in which they side with Antinomians are these,
more of this see in the writers cited A Bullinger adv. Anabaptist l. 1.2.3.
Sleidan hist.

Heresbachius historia Anabaptistica Lambert^us Hortensius of the same.

Freder. Spanhemii Diatribe historica de Anabap.

Joan. Clopenburgius Gangrena Anabaptist.

M. Robert Baylie.

2. Part of diswasive Anabaptisme the true fountain of Independencie, etc.

The Tenets of Anabaptists in which, they side with Antinomians.




The Reformation of Luther and others, was Legal, Literal, carnal, not
Spiritual, So Del.

The Father, Son, and Spirit are not three distinct persons, and in essence and
nature one God, so Familists, deny Christ to be God and make every Saint equal
with Christ.

3 The Lord Jesus did not really and truly, but in imagination take our
nature, Antinomians say a believer is God incarnate Godded and Christed. Theol.
Ger. c 22. Rise. reig. er 11.

4 The doctrine of Christ before his suffering is not so much to be observed,
as after his death, for Peter resisted ill. Saltm. says Shadows flying away.
page 7, 8, 9. Christ and John Baptist preached legally and spoke not fully of
free grace.

5 Christ has removed the Law and all its obleiging power, and now the pure
Gospel and Command of faith is our only rule. so Antinom.

6 Christ reformed the ten commandes and brought in a more perfect rule,
Antinomians say they have nothing to do with Moses and the Law: The Law is now
in the Spirit says Saltmash free grace. 146. Del. ser. p. 19.26.

7 Seven ^eaded policy by M. Gortin.
In the old Testament oaths were permitted, perjury only forbidden, all oaths
are forbidden in the new, the Sabbath was kept then, not now, so our
Antinomians and Familists of new E.

8 They deny that the souls of the Godly or wicked go to heaven or Hell, till
the day of Judgment, and deny the resurrection of the same body, that was
buried, or that flesh and blood ^shall rise again, contrary to Scripture, Job
19.26, 27, 28. Esaias. 26.19. Ezekiel. 37* 11.12. Daniel 12.2.13. Phil. 3.19, 20. 1
Cor. 15. 53. Ioh. 20.27. So say Antinomians Town ass^r. gr. p. 60.

Becon Catech. p. 139. he speaks of our resurection as of a thing past, p.
141.142.


life eternal is in this life, the resurrection is past, Rise reign. p. 59.
art. 2, 3, 4, 5.
that the soul is mortal.

9 The visible Church consists of those that are perfect, and only of those;
Town ass. p. 77, 78. Hobson pract. divin. p. 87, 88.

Thelo. German. Bright star Salt Free grace p. 140.


so Antinomians.

10 None can with a good conscience exercise, the office of a Magistrate under
the New Testament. Familists say its against Christian liberty.

11 Universities, Schools, humane arts ought not to be. Saltmar. s^ad* fleeing
away. p. 8. free grace.179 180, 181.

Famili^t Gortyn seven headed polici^.


Saltmarsh, they are legal and litterall.

12 That its unlawful to go to law, and that wars are unlawful. See Del.
sermon. 6, 7, 8.

13 These Anabaptists called Libertines deny all Scripture as a dead Letter,
all preaching, Sacraments, church assemblies, singing of Psalms, praying, all
ordinances, and say the Spirit, the inward anointing, and the internal word
that proceeds immediately out of the mouth of God, as Gideons sword is the
only means of Gospell-reformation; 1. clases of Anabaptists.

Diverse classes of Anabaptists, all which hold something common with the
Antinomians, and Spirituallists.

Beacon says, all external worship in the New Test. is indifferent.


so Antinomians reject all Ordinances as legal and say the spirit is all, and
some as Del. sermon. Beacon. Catechism. tit. say the joyful knowledge of God and
man (and all things else that relate to either) is alone in the Spirit by Jesus
Christ, he counts all ordinances and external duties and worship trivial and
indifferent. O therefore (preface) if distempered Christian Nations, (he
excepteth not Papists, Arminians, Socinians etc.) were once wise to forbear
this clashing and dashing themselves in pieces, one against another, for
matters external, trivial, and circumstantiall in religion, and would content
themselves with that which is alone saving etc. To the Antinomian Beacon,
Idolatry, Angell-worship, preaching, praying, scriptures, duties of the Law,
precepts of the Gospel, of nature, of grace, opinions etc. all controversies
in Religion, these in which the distempered nations, now contravert, yea
Church Government, sacraments, ministers are matters external, trivial, and
circumstantiall in religion, 2. ^^nke of Anabaptests.
not things in which salvation consists, Bullinger ad. Anabap. l. c. 8.
not to be contended for on either side.

14 The second rank of Anabaptists called concionatores, preachers, 3 Rank.
denied all the Old Testament as abrogate. How little Antinomians esteem Moses
and the Prophets we all know. Bulling. adv. Anabaptist. l. 1. c. 9.


15 The third rank called Apostolici, said we must become young with
children. Antinomians abandon sense, nature, reason, and say we must live by
faith only. So hony-combe, Town, Saltmarsh, Den.

16 Bullinger
The third rank were Spiritualists, who abstained from clothing, meat,
feasts, music; to Saltmarsh 177, 178.
Saltmarsh all externalls are legal and carnal.

17 The fourth rank were the holy and sinlesse (...) and would not pray the
Lords prayer, forgive us our sins, and contended for Saints in this life
without spot or wrinkle. Crispe and other Antinomians say the believers are as
clean from sin as honey comb. c. 3. p. 25.
Christ himself, and cite the same place Ephesians. 5.25, 26. for it. So Del the
spiritual Church is led and taught by the anointing, the carnal Church by
councels* letter of the word.

18 These denied original sin in infants, Antinomians deny it in all the
elect, who are justified from eternity, or from Christ's Death, or from the time
of their believing.

19 The fifth rank were Silentiaries, tacentes, they denied necessity of
preaching as Antinomians do, because the anointing is sufficient, they thought
it indifferent to deny their Religion.

20 The sixth rank prayed only, which Antinomians do never* but praise only.

21 The seventh were arreptitiously and Enthysiastically inspired, and fell in
transes and saw visions of lies, Antinomians hold revelations and rapts of the
Spirit, without the word for their Rise reign p. 38 39.4^
rule.

22 The eight rank were these in higher Germany, that are called lib^ri
fratres, free brethren, they were abominable impure, and so unclean that they
were excommunicated by the rest, Antinomians and liberi fratres like other in
that both teach freedom from laws, covenants, from paying of tithes, freedom
from sin, etc.
they said they were delivered by Christ from all laws, covenants, vows,
paying of tithes or debts (as Saltmarsh says, to do any thing from these
grounds is law-bondage; free grace. page 180) they owe no obedience unto
Magistrates, they said marriage was free with any of nearest blood, that men
could not be saved except they were Publicans, and Harlots, they held men might
have many wives at once, that after rebaptization they cannot sin, as Eaton
the Antinomian says, honeycomb c. 3* p. 25. that not they, but the flesh
sinned, as Town says. asser. page 35.

23 The ninth rank were called also liberi fratres, they said, baptizing of
infants, Magistrates, oath^s were things indifferent, preaching, ^earing,
scriptures were needless, because we shall be all taught of God, Sacraments
are but common signs that believers need not, it was free and indifferent to
confess Christ before men, if danger be, God delights not in our blood, nor
requires he that we dye for his truth, we may dissemble our religion, deny
Christ before men, so we keep the truth in our hearts, I often prove
Antinomians to run in this strain.

24 The tenth sort were called Huttites from John Hut, these took on them to
cut off all the Cananites, that is, all the ungodly with the sword, and gave
away their goods, because they said the day of judgment was near at hand:
Ioh. Hut and the like false Prophets in their own name could not learn wit
from Cocheba^ the Jew the son of a star, who called himself the Star of
Jacob and Redeemer of Israel, but proved Benchozba the son of a lie; he and
his were destroyed by Tynius Ruffus president of Palestina, he arose in time of
Aelius Adrianus An. 118. or 120 Eusebius eccle. Hist. l. 4. c. 5. nor would
learn wit from the folly of a Jew who rose Anno. 379 in the time of Theodosius
the great, he called himself Moses, promised to lead the people to Canaan
dry, through the sea, caused the Jews leap into the sea, who drowned
themselves and beat out their brains in the rock, and counterfeit Moses, it
may be the Devil, disapeared, and was seen no more, Tripart. Hist. l. 12. c.
9. Nicep. l. 14. c. 4.

25 The eleventh rank were called Augustinians from one Augustine a Bohemian
Enthysiast, they were ruled by scriptureles dreams.

26 Anabaptists deny that scripture can prove any thing by consequence; but it
must be in so many syllables; logic and consequencies say Saltmarsh shaddows
^leeing p. 8.
Antinomians are to be abandoned in divinity.

27 Melchior Hoffman a Skinner an. 1529 said Strasburg was new Jerusalem.

^^elchior Hoff^an.
2 He was to be called an Apostle from heaven

3 Leaned to Enthysiasmes.

28 Hoffman said he was Elias, and Cornel Polterman Enoch.

29 Menno Simonz the son of a secular priest borne in Frizland, Menno Simon^
near Harlingen about an. 1532 rejected Enthysiasmes, and yet slighted the
scriptures, 2 rejected apostolic calling, 3 maintained the grosest
Pelagianisme, that the saints live free from all sin. as Eaton the
Antinomian. honie-combe

CHAP. IIII. Of David George.
DAvid Georgius born in Del^. was the son of a Mountebank or Iugler say some,
Florimundus Raimundus de origin. her^seon l. 2. c. 15. Gualterius ^e suita in
tabula chonogra. seculo 16. c. 8.

The ris. and Tenent, of Da. George near to those of Familists and Antinomians


by trade a painter, See Blesdikus in vita David's Georgij.
he vented his heresy an. 1540 he was a composed plaistered hypocrite,
austerer than any bare footed Friar or Capucian, did often fast three days
together, was eloquent he taught that He himself 1 was the son of God, the
true and spiritual David borne of the spirit, where as Jesus Christ was borne
of the flesh.

2 He was sent to restore the house of Israel, not by death but by grace.

3 The doctrine of Moses, the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, was unperfect,
carnal, litterall, ( Antinomians) reject all written law and Gospel Rise
reign^
as a legal covenant of works and his was spiritual and perfect.

4 He said the law was abolished, (as do also Antinomians) and he was the true
and living law to his discip^es. Antinomians say the Spirit of life in
beleivers is all their law Del. Ser. page 26. Saltmarsh. free grace. 146.

5 He transformed the scriptures, in allegories, said Angels were but motions
in the mind of man, so do Familists and Antinomians. Randel the Familist
preached that because Christ preached parables, therefore it is lawful to
expound the scriptures in allegories, and that all things in nature, and art,
were sacraments of the supernatural mysteries of the Gospel, therefore they
expound God manifested in the flesh, to be a believer Godded and Christed with
the being of God in Faith and love. The p^ice called Philosophy dissected,
makes all the works of Creation Articles of faith.

6 He said to act adulteries and all villainies, without sense of sin, and shame
as with a deadned conscience was the only spiritual mortification and new
birth, his followers should labor for, and then and not while then, were they
borne of the Spirit; the same Libertines taught, and so do Antinomians and
Familists, Saltmarsh free grace p. 142.

Town ass. p. 35, honey-com. cap. 7.

Den. ser man of ser pa. 9, 10, 11. in the believers flesh and conversation
there is sin, but his adulteries lies bloods are no si^s in or to his
conscience.


that to repent sorrow and mourn for sin, or to be touched with any sense
thereof, or from this sense to confess sin is from fleshly unebeliefe, and the
old Adam, then to sin without sense is faith and mortification, and this is
cosen German with the Libertines regeneration, and nearer.

7 All marriage of nearest of blood, though under Moses and Christ they were
forbidden, yet are they now lawful under this m^re spiritual David,
Antinomians call much for freedom of all kinds.

8 Shame is no consequent of sin, faith banisheth away all shame from bodily
nakedness. Antinomians abandon fear, trouble of mind and the like affections
for evils either of sin, or punishment, Crisp. volu. 3. ser. 3 Archer ser. on
Ioh. 14.
death or any thing else, they are much for abandoning sense and for the
absolute reign Town asser.
of faith.

9 Heaven and Hell and the last Judgment are no where, but within a man, in a
spiritual manner, Heaven is in this life. Antinomians, as Town Town asser.
grace p. 60.
and Saltmarsh Saltmar. free grace. p. 140.
hold that in this life we have as much of Heaven in full and complete
possession, as the glorified in Heaven,

10 Confesion of Christ and his truth is not necessary.

11 Under David George is the time of perfection, when all Ordinances shall be
useles^ so Ant. ut supra.

12 David George is Judge of quick and dead.

13 It is the sin against the Holy Ghost to refuse the spirit in David George
his ministry and to go back to the Prophets and Apostles. Antinomians extol
their spirit above the scriptures.

14 The resurrection of the dead, the blowing of the last Trumpet, the shout of
the Arch-angell, the coming of Christ to Judge all are to be taken in a
spiritual sense, of the doctrine and discipline of David George, as Hyminaeus
and Phyletus said, see hereafter the Parallel between Antinomians and
Libertines, so said Libertines Calvin. advers. libert. c. 22. p. 458.

15 Marriage-covenant tyeth the parties no longer together, then their temper
and natural dispositions agree.

16 The Kingdom of God is the spirit of Jesus which shall shortly be under
David George.

17 David George shall rise from the dead, which he did in that his body for
his impostures found after his death, was dragged out of his grave, and his
books burnt, though he promised to his disciples, to reveal wonders and to
rise from the dead again shortly.

18 The body or flesh sins, but not the soul.

19 The Heaven was empty, but he was sent to adopt children to God.

20 All the prophecies of the old Testament were to be applied to David George.

21 Christ and his Apostles were but shadows and types of David George.

This beast dyed of an Apoplexy an. 1556 and left the seed of his heresies in
low Germany and Transylvania.

CHAP. V. Of Casper Swenckfield his Tenets complying with Antinomians.
CAsper Swenckefield was borne about the year 1499 spread his errors in and
about an. 1520 as he died in Sweden 1561. he was a Knight of Ossing in Silesia,
he was so grave, civil, Casper Swenckfeeld his rise, tenets and the compliance
between him and Antinomians.
fervent in prayer, that it was said of him he wanted not a good heart, but a
solid head and wit, he allured to his way Valentinus Krantwald, a simple
religious man, and Joan. Sigismundus werner, pastors and professors of
Lunenburgh. Schlusserburgins catalo. hereticorum. l. 10. p. 27. says that
Luther and Melancthon gave him the name S^enckfeldius from the noisome smell of
his doctrine; he was eloquent, unlearned, ignorant of the Latin tongue, wrote
all in Germans, ignorant of arts, once a hater of Romish Idolatry, but seeing
God honored Luther, being a proud man, he sought a name, pretended that he
stumbled much at the bad conversation of the Churches, turned from popery,
pretended the spirit, and Enthysiasticall dreams, as Antinomians and Familists
do, he was a Sceptick and a Neutrall between papists and Lutherans, through
occasion of Anabaptists risen then he cried down a litterall carnal church
framed by Luther (as he said) and called for a new and perfect Church, as
Antinomians do. Rise, reign. er. 79, 80, 81. In Silesia he seduced many with
his eloquence and new speculations, he calls for spirituallnesse and the
spirit, and the internal word, that we must not depend on the external word.
Just as M. Del does. But (ye may say) Schlusserburgius ^ata. hereticor. l. 10
p. 32. Swenckfeldius ait preces faciendas, ut deus interiorem illuminationem
largiatur, nihil omnius legenda esse Biblica scripta, quibus externus homo
crudiatur
Del. page 7. ser. calls for an outward change, such as flownes from an inward
change in his Gospel Reformation. So did Swen^ckfeldius say the Scriptures
must be read that the external man may be instructed, and so said Saltmarsh.
Scriptures were given by divine inspiration and profitable, but (if I mistake
not Antinomians) neither law, nor any letter of the word is needful to their
regenerate persons, he adhered to somewhat of Anabaptists, somewhat of Calvin's
way, to somewhat of the papists, he was banished out of Silesia by the prince
of Lignice Fredricke, wandering through Germany, came to Luther and revealed
his phancies, was sharply rebuked by him, but to no purpose, pertinacie cleaves
to the plague of Heresy, he went through Sweden, Nornburg, Vlms, Tubinga, in
private houses, accuses the Pastors, that no man was the better of their
preaching, extolls the spirit that does all.

At Argentorat he infects a little, Wolfangus Capito. at Ulms he was
confounded, at a dispute by Marti^nus Frechus before the Senate. At Augusta he
perverted many, men, and silly women, Swenckfeldius wrot^ many books though
unlearned and ^gnorant of Gramme^ o^ Arts*
he wrote many epistles to Men, Women, Virgins; he writes an. 1556. that in
18, years he had written above fifty books. He troubled Luther with his
books which he sent to him for an answer. Luther said to the Messenger, the
Devil was the Author of them, and, the Lord, rebuke thee o Satan. Satan
raised up Swenkfeldius to trouble the Church of Christ, (...) and many (...)
after Servetus, was burnt at Geneva, Bucerus, Calvin, Pet. Martyr, Beza
Musculus, Fre^bus, Simon Grynaeus, Dani. Tossanus admonished him, but without
any fruit. In Saxony, Luther, Melanthon, Illyricus, Nich. Gallus refutes him.
In Hasia. Corvinus and Kymeus, in Silesia Hyronimus Wittich, Joan Gigas,
Laurentius Harenraffe refute him A Synod at Norimburg. an. 1554. condemned the
errors of Swencfeldius. The confession of the divines of Mansfeild in 1555.
condemns him, and says he has now 30. years vexed the Church. ^ Rise
re^gn. (...)*

Theolog German. c. ^2. H. Nicholas epistle to the daughters of wa^ick

The errors of Swenckfeld, a ^ine to Familists and Antinomians*




His Errors and Heresies are shortly these.

1. Christ as man is borne of the essence of God, and grew till he obtained the
full essence of the Godhead by birthright, and was disposed to be our Savior:
for it is said we grow to the stature of God and are partakers of the divine
nature.

Who is such a stranger in the writings of Familists and Antinomians, who
reads not these blasphemies, the Saints are Christed and Goded, a believer is
Christ, a believer is partaker of the Godhead, being a justified man is God
manifested in the flesh; now to be partaker of the divine Nature is to partake
of graces and created goodness and anointing of the Spirit, otherwise the
essence and nature of God in us should be subject to change, sadness, sorrow,
fear, despair, unbeleefe, sin, etc.

The errors of Swenck. touching Christ.
2. the flesh of Christ is not a creature, nor created of the Father, but
conceived and borne by himself through the Holy Ghost and changed in the
essence of God, and glorified with the glory he had with the father before the
world was.

3 Though there be two natures, in Christ, yet now is the flesh of Christ made
equal in essence and glory with God.

4 Christ is not once only borne, but often till he made perfect and wholly of
the essence of God: the father said. Thou art my son this day have J begotten
thee, nor is it impossible that God can make his own son a God, though
unrenewed men understand not this* Antinomians speak not so honorably of
Christ for Rise Reig. er. 11 every beleiver is God incarnate. But Christ is
here in words made the substantial son o^ God, by Swenckfield.

5 Christ in both natures is the only begotten son of God and Lord of glory
and King of the Church in both natures.

6 Christ now at the right hand of God having obtained fully all the power,
honor, and kingdom, and essence of God works as much for our salvation as
man, as he does as God.

7 Whole Christ undivid^d according to both natures, perfects the justification
and washing of a sinner by the spirit, and whole Christ according to both
natures undevided obtains the state of the second person in the Trinity,
Theolog. Germani^. Bright Star^^.
as one and coequall God in power and honor with the Father. Familists make God
in his nature and essence to dwell and work in all creatures, especially in
the regenerate. But these are but fanci^s. 1. Because after Christ was raised
from the dead to the glory of the Father and so en^red into his glory, there is
evidence that his manhead was entered in no degrees of communion in the essence
power and glory of God equally with God; The manhead of Christ after (...)
glorification remains manhead, and is not changed into the essence and name
of God as Sweenkfield dreameth.
because there remains a body with flesh and bones that may be touched and
handled. Luke 24.36.37, 38, 39, 40. with the print of the nails in his hands
and sides Ioh. 20 27. now there is nothing of the nature, essential honor, and
glory of God an infinite Spirit, that fills heaven and earth yea or of any
spirit, in a body of bones flesh hands and feet and having in it such material
and sensible qualities as the impression of wounds. 2. Christ did eat with his
disciples after his resurrection. Ioh. 21.12, 13, 14* and so after he was
entered in some degrees of glory and was seen of five hundred brethren at once
1 Cor. 15.6. Of Cleophas, of the twelve Apostles, of Paul also, now what ever
partaketh of the essence of a Spirit, cannot eat* nor be seen with bodily
eyes, and the disciples with their bodily eyes saw him ascend to heaven even
till the clouds took him out of their sight. Acts 1. (3) The eyes of all
believers and reprobates, even his enemies that peirced him, in the general
Judgment shll see him: in which state Swenckefeldius dreams that the manhood
is fully changed in the essence of God Rev. 1.7. now that the bodily eyes of
men, and of Reprobate men, shall see the essence of God, who is invisible 1 Timothy 1.17. is a dream, for He dwells in light which no man can approach unto,
though we nothing doubt but the man Christ, as man, is elevated now in heaven,
to our uncomparable comfort, to such eminency of glory, above Men and Angels,
as the capacity of a created thing can receive 4. the Manhood of Christ is a
creature, having beginning and a cause of being in time Mat. 1. Luke 2 in the
fulness of time Gal. 4. 4 was borne of a woman. Now what is man borne of a woman
that he should be equal in essence and nature with God? who is like unto God?
Angels and created powers, cannot answer the question. God is essentially
eternal, and eternity differenceth him from all things beside himself; Esaias.
9.6. chap. 43.10. Before me there was no God, neither shall there be after me
c. 40.28. Psalm. 99.1, 2. Psalm. 102.26.27. 1 Timothy 1.17. it is then an everlasting
contradiction, that a creature in time, can be a creator and a God before time,
or partake of the essence of the eternal God, for God must then create another
God, different in number from himself 5 our bodies shall be made conform to the
glorious body of Christ. Phil. 3.21. if the Manhood of Christ, and so his body,
which is a part thereof, be changed into the essence of God, we must be like
the very invisible and eternal essence of an infinite Spirit, and there is no
glorifying of our bodies then, nor any resurrection, nor any caughting up of
our bodies to the air to be ever with the Lord, but an utter extinction and an
anhihilation of our bodies and the body of Christ. Hence the flesh profits
not, then the manhood does not spiritually quicken, give the Holy Ghost,
justify, as Swenckefield says, but Christ God does these.

7 The chief argument of Swenckefeld was because Christ as man obtained a name
above all names, was adored as man: but if ^his stand sure, then in the state
of humiliation as well as glorification the manhood was changed in the nature of
God which yet Swenckefeldius denies; for in the state of humiliation what is
proper to the Godhead, is ascribed to the Man^hood, per (...) as God purchased
a Church by his blood whereas God has no blood: they Crucified the Lord of
glory and by this argument, we may well infer that the Godhead in the state
of humiliation was changed into the manhood and flesh which is blasphemous, for
so should God die as man dyed: and there was a book given out in the name of
Swenckefeldius that denies the manhood of Christ after his resurrection to be a
creature and calls all of the contrary mind Creaturistae. hence

8 These wild assertions of Swenckefeldius. The Gospel is the Essence of God,
faith and joy in the heart is the essence of God.

9 He charged Luther with these: The preached word is the substantial word of
God, the flesh of Christ is not glorified, a renewed man has not free will.
God dwells not in beleivers, Good works profit not to salvation, the preaching
of the word and Sacraments are effectual without God. As Famil. and Antin^m.
charge us with many of these, because we cannot say that a beleiver is so
Christed that he is very Christ himself and God incarnate, and as free from
sin as Christ.

10 The doctrine contained in the scriptures, is not properly the word of God,
but improperly* by a Metonimy, where the sign is put for the thing signified.
Christ only is properly and essentially the word of God Swenck. liber. de
sacris liberis pa. 27, 28. Antinomians say the Scripture and the Law is but a
dead letter, not the word of God, so Del. in his whole sermon rejects, all that
is external in the Gospel-reformatinn, makes nothing in it, but the Spirit,
and the incommunicable act of Redeeming which is only in Christ to work our
conversion to God.

Before I proceed Swenckefeldians and Antinomians; err for its said of the ten
Commandments Exodus 20.1. And God spoke all these words. All the Prophets cry,
Thus says the Lord. The Scripture i^ the word of God against Swenckfeldians
and Antinomians
Luke 1.70. He has spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets. 2 Chro.
36.21. The word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah. Esa. 1.20. The mouth of
the Lord has spoken it, Micha. 4.4. The mouth of the Lord of Hoasts has
spoken. Deuteronomy. 30*8. Obey the voice of the Lord. How often is it said the Lord
has said. Esa. 29. Because they have not heard my words says the Lord, which
J spoke to them by my servants the prophets rising and sending them etc. 1
These. 2.13. For this cause also thank we God, without ceasing, because when
ye received the word of God, which ye heard of us, ye received i^ not as the
word of men, Swenckefeldius epist. ad Ecclesiascum, (...) ^ustifica^is (...)
rerum spiri^^^ (...) Spir^tus sancti (...) igitur (...) pote^t (...).

The (...) against the written word which are the reasons also (...) the
Anti^omians. M. Del. Answered. Swenckefeldius epist. v^rbum (...) non potest
(...) p^r Ie^um Chr^stum prius (...), aurib (...), et (...) effectum car^alem
simila^^ (...) effectae (...) suo arbitr^o, nec dia ^^rantem (...).


but (as it is indeed) the word of God, which also works effectually in you
that believe. Heb. 13 7. Remember them which have the rule over you, and have
spoken to you the word of God all which and many other places can carry no
other sense, then the word external written and preached which God renders
effectual by his Spirit is an instrument of conversion.

11 Err. Faith and conversion to Christ comes not mediately by the preaching
of the word, but immediately from the inspirations of the holy spirit and from
heaven. His arguments are not a whit different from the reasons of Mr. Del: in
which Del proves, laws, synods, ministry, are all external, carnal, and
literal things so Del. ser. page 6, 7, 8, 9. etc. Gospel reformation is
internal, Spiritual, and the law written in the heart as Ier. 31.33. the word
vocal, external, or written reformes by halfes, not constantly, and
intermits* and again lies still as dead as a stone, because men can do it,
But Gospel-reformation is as proper to God as to redeem the world, and to take
away sin and bring in everlasting righteousness; if all the Angels in heaven
should undertake the work of reformation, they should sink under it, how much
more the powers of the world Del. ser. 10, 11, 12, 13. Just so argues
Swenckefeld Epistola ad quendam Ecclesiasten, excussa Basil. an. 1527 his 1
argu. which is Dels also ser. page 6, 7. is this, justifying faith is of the
nature of internal and spiritual things, for it is of God, yea faith is the
gift of the Holy Ghost, then it has not its original from things bodily, the
word and hearing, but comes from the internal word, for the natural man
perceaves not the things of God.

2 Says Swenckefeld, what ever is not of faith is sin, then outward hearing of
the word, without faith, is sin.

3 All preaching is in vain, except the man have ears to hear Mat. 13. since
the word cannot be received but by an enlightened mind, and the light of
faith, and the grace of God, the soul being fore-disposed by Jesus Christ,
though you should hear the word a thousand times in thy unbelieving ears,
they shall receive no more but a sound, they shall reci^ve no more but a
carnal affection of a fanzied and counterfeit faith, from free will which
shall not endure long, so read Del. sermon page 4.5. and as if Swenckefeldius had
spitted him out at his mouth, so he speaks.

4. The Ministers (says Swenckfeld) should be some^what.

5. Then Paul and Apollos should give increase.

6. Then the word of God should be tied to Elements and sounds and and all that
hear the word should believe. Saltmarch the Antinomian says after Swenck.
free gr. p. 146. the law is now in the Spirit, and holiness and sanctification
is not now such as (...) fashioned by the law of outward commandment,
Sweckfeld epst* 16:

Si per vocal^ verbum sive ex predicato et auditu externo esset fides
Iustificans; sequeretur quod ex opere, sive per opus manuum nostrarum esset
Iustificatio.

-- homo poner^t primum lapidem, no ^ Deus, at quale tum edi^icium fit,
experientia nos do^^t, quum per discursus ^idem historicam, cogitatu^ et
a^serssum quendam rationis ex verbo literae ample^timur.

Sal^march debaseth the scripture and preached Word, the same way that
Sw^^ckfeld does.




7 But says he, he that is of God hears the word of God, th^n must Grace
prevening prepare us before we can hear the external word with fruit.

8 Their is one Master Christ the chief corner stone, and he teaches the
external man, not by externalls, but by his Spirit, when God teach^s, as he
does. Ephe. 3.5. he needs no perishing and vanishing thing to help him, to
save us, Conspice hic (inquit Swnckefeld. epist. 16.) verum doctorem, veram
doctrinam, veritatem ipsam ^ternam, quae nullo Caduco, sive transitorio, in
adminiculum sui egea^, ut nos salvet. 9. If the vocal word did necessarily go
before justi^ieing faith, then justification should be the work of our hands,
or not without our help. But Abraham believed God, not the word preached. 10.
Then should man* not God, lay the first stone in our Justification and
experience teaches us; what a building it is, we have an historical faith,
and a certain apprehension and assent of (natural) reason form the letter of
the word, so Saltmarch the Antinomian. 146 fr. g. the law is now in the Spirit
and in the Gospel for a believer to walk by. Now the Spirit and the Gospel is
all one, to the Antinomian, to the Enthusiast Libertines and Swenckfeldians so
Saltmarch says. Nor is the holiness and sanctification now such as is
fashioned by the law of outward commandment (Swenckefeld calls it verbum
vocale) but by the preaching of faith, by which the Spirit is given, which
renewes and sanctifies a believer and makes him the very law of commandment
himself: what this Antinomian calls the preaching of faith Swenckefeld calls
verbum substantiale, Christ himself, not any created thing, so do the
Familists teach Rise, Reign. er. 9. The whole letter of the Scripture (say
they) holds for a covenant of works so er. 7. er. 8.

Know that it is most false, that sanctification is not now fashioned by the
Law of outward Commandment, that is* by the word externally preached, as by an
instrument subordinate to the working of the Spirit, for his conscience knows,
we never ascribe more to the word, for more is contrary to the word. Romans
10.17, Faith comes by hearing, that is, the word of the Gospel externally
preached. 1 Cor. 1 24, we preach Christ to the Jews a stumbling block, but to
the called, Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God, this preaching of
Christ, is the preaching of faith, but not in the Antinomian sense, this is the
effectual working o^ the Spirit, for so Saltmarsh means, as his exposition
evidenceth, for the effectual working of the Spirit can never be a stumbling
to the Jews, then this preaching of Christ and of faith must be outward and
external preaching of the Gospel which instrumentally gives the Spirit, For
Gal. 3.2. Paul opposes the hearing of faith, that is, the external hearing of
the letter of the Gospel, that gives the spirit instrumentally, to the works
of the law or the external doctrine of the Law, that can neither promise to
give, nor give the Spirit instrumentally, for if by the hearing of faith, he
mean the inward hearing and effectual working of the Spirit, then he says as
much, as ye received the Spirit, by the effectual receiving of the Spirit,
and also he must mean that all that hears externally the doctrine of the
Gospel, as the Galatians did, must receive the Spirit, whereas Paul clearly
makes an opposition between the external preaching of the Gospel, and of the
Law; otherwise, by the external preaching of the law, accompanied by the
Spirit, we also receive the spirit.

But let Saltmarsh answer, if either now, or under the Old Testament, true
holiness and sanctificattion was fashioned by the law of outward Commandment,
without the Spirit, in some measure or degree. 2 If sanctification in the
Gospel be fashioned without the external preaching of the Gospel and an
outward commandment? if no: why excludes he an outward commandment as
contrary to the preaching of faith? Swenckfeldius and Enthysiasts make an
opposition between the word preached, and the preaching of faith that is, the
Spirit, we make a subordination, no opposition. 3 whether Saltmarsh or any
Antinomian in conscience can say that we so go on with Pelagians, Old
Anabaptists and Arminians, as to say Sanctification is framed now, or at any
time, by a law of outward commandments, the Antinomian Del. who has printed in
defense of Anabaptists, Arminians, and Antinomians teaches so, not we. So Del
joyneth with Swenckfeld Ser, page 6, 7, 8. read the style words, and doctrine
of Enthysiasts all along in the sermon.

11 Swenckfeld said that that is born of the flesh is flesh* these that say
justifying faith is from external hearing, they teach that the Spirit comes
from the carnal letter, the heaven is born^ of the earth 12 Blessedness comes
not from externals, nor was Thomas blessed, because he saw and believed, nor
Simon Peter, because flesh and blood, but because the father, revealed Christ
to them.

12 Swenckefeldius taught that the preachers of his time were not sent of God;
because no man was the better or converted by their preaching. So Antinomians
say all but themselves are but litteral and carnal teachers.

13 Swenckefeldius said that he himself preached the Spirit inwardly teaching,
and that men must live by the rule of the Spirit, else they could not be saved.
so speak Anti. of Gospel reformation of life. so Del. ser* p. 26, 27.

14 Neither Baptism nor the Supper of the Lord should be Administered till the
true doctrine that he taught, be preached and be revealed immediately from the
substantial and eternal word Christ without preaching, or reading or hearing
the word. so Del. uniformity examined the worship of the New Testament is only
inward.

15 In such dissentions of minds among Teachers the word should not be heard.
Antinomians say all may be heard, sects and opinions are but names and things
indifferent.

16 The word has a twofold sense, one literal, which profits nothing,
another the true and spiritual, which only the spiritual do understand.

17 We must try the word by the Spirit, and not the Spirit by the word. so say
the Antinomians, rise reign er. 61. All doctrines, revelations and spirits are
to be tried by Christ the Word, rather than by the word of Christ, this is
against Christ's way who, when it was a controversy, whether he was the son
of God, or no, was content that they should Judge of him, and decide the matter
by Scripture. Joh. 5.39. so (2) are all controversies ended. Act. 17.11. Act.
9.11. Act: 24.14, 15. 1 Cor. 15.3, 4. Mat. 22.29.30, 31, 32, 33. Esaias 8.20
which were a rule impossible, if the scripture have two senses, one literal
that proves nothing, and another spiritual and allegorick (as Enthysiasts and
Antinomians say) that none can understand but the spiritual, now when Christ
and Paul prove the resurrection of the dead, and that Christ is the Messiah by
the scripture, and referres the denyers of these, Jews and Pharisees and
Saduces to the scripture to be the Judge, he supposes the scriptures hold
forth a clear literal sense, which these men, though not spiritual, might
understand. 2 nor could Christ say, ye both know me and whence I am. Ioh.
7.27* 28. if they could not see any thing of Christ by light of scripture. 3*
all the murders, whoredoms, villainies practiced by Muncer, T. Becold, David
George, Swenckfeld they fathered on the Spirit leading them without the
Scripture, or on such an allegorick sense, as their unclean spirit expounded
the word, so as men know not when they sin, when they serve God.

17 The preachers not being taught by the immediate teaching Spirit, are such
as the Lord speaks of. They ran, and J sent them not.

18 There is a middle reformation to come, between papists and Lutherans.

19 No doctrine of word, Sacraments or any external thing written in the
writings of Moses the Prophets or apostles do conduce to salvation, God is to
be sought in his naked Majesty in dreams, inspirations and revelations of the
Spirit.

20 Repentance, contrition, the knowledge of sin is not to be taught out of the
Law, but by Christ only. How near Antinomians side with this I leave to the
reader.

21 The Law is not unpossible, but easy to be fullfilled by Grace. Antinomians
teach that both the persons and works of beleivers are perfect free of sin,
then must they be perfectly agreeable to the Law Honey^combe. c. 3. page 25. c
11, 12.322, 323, 324. Town. ass. grace page, 76, 77. Salt. free grace. p 140.

22 Our renovation is the very Holy Ghost, so Antinomians Rise Reign er. 1,
2.7, 8.

23 Our Righteousness and justification is not in the imputed obedience and
righteousness of Christ; but in a conformity with Christ in glory by the
undwelling Spirit of Christ.

24 Faith and works justify us.

25 All beleivers are the natural sons of God begotten of the essence and
nature of God, so Familists and Antino. teach that we are Christed and Godded.

26 There was no remission of sins, no righteousness, no entrance unto heaven
before Christ dyed. So say Antinomians under the old Testament, there was no
inward nor heart reformation, no covenant of grace, no pacefying of Gods wrath
for sin etc. So Saltmarsh free grace, page 166, 167, 168. Honey-combe. chap.
11.334, 335, 336. Del. ser. page 2.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. etc.

CHAP. VI. How the Word converteth.
TOuching the necessity of the word of God preached for the conversion of
sinners against Swenckefeldians, Enthysiasts and Antinomians, these conclusions
we hold, premising some considerations.

1 The vocal or preached word is the instrument and Organ of the Holy Spirit
in our conversion, not the author, nor efficient thereof

2 The word written or preached is a created thing, not the formal object of
our faith, and affiance, nor the obje^tum quod but the objectum quo, or the
interveening means or medium of our faith.

3 The word, as all instruments are, must be elevated above its nature to more
then a literal impression of Christ believed in.

4 The writing, speaking, conveyance of Christ to the soul in the word
preached may be humane and literal, but the thing signified by the word,
Christ, faith, the Image of the second Adam is divine supernatural, Certain
necessary considerations how the Spirit and the wo^d act together.
and the way of conveyance of it to the soul, in regard of the higher
operation of the Spirit above the actings and motion of the letter, is divine,
heavenly, supernatural.

5 The action of the Holy Ghost, in begetting faith, may be said to be
immediate two ways. How the acting of the Spirit with the word is mediate.
1 as if the word did only prepare and literally inform the external man,
but the Spirit comes after, and in another action distinct from the word,
infuseth faith, this we cannot deny, but then the Spirit of regeneration is not
said to work with the word, but a more common operation of God there is which
begets literal knowledge, or some higher illumination. 2 the Spirit works
with the word, so as in one and the same act, the Spirit opens the heart to
hear and receave what is carried along in the letter of the word, and so the
Spirit works mediately, not immediately.

6 How in the infusion of the new heart, How immediate.
and of the habit of the grace of God* in which we are mere patients and put
forth no cooperation with God, more then the dead does to quicken it self,
Ephesians. 2.1, 2. and the withered ground to receave the rain, I see not. Esai.
44.3, 4. in regard, that though the word go before, and the word may be
preached in the mean time yet the act of infusion of the new heart is no
moral action of God, but as it were physical, and it is a real action,
received by us by no subordinate literal action or moral apprehension of the
mind, or act of the will, and therefore in this formal act of infusion, what
the word does, but by way of disposition or preparing I must profess my
ignorance, though it be most true that faith comes by hearing, and in the
very mean time Act. 10.44 whilst Peter yet spoke these words, the Holy Ghost
fell on them which heard the word; Then if conversion be taken in congregato,
vel concreto in the humbling self disparing of a sinner and all preparatory
acts; going before the infused life of Christ, and in the first operations
flowing from this infused life, the word is an instrument of conversion, but I
cannot see how it is any active or moral instrument in the souls lying under
the Lords act of infusion of the life of Christ, except ye call it a passive
instrument, because it persuades not the soul to receeve the new life: nor is
the soul, being a mere patient, an apprehending, knowing, choosing, or
consenting faculty under this action of omnipotency while the Lord powers in a
new heart. It is true the word is thus far the instrument, that the Spirit
works in us the same habit of new life, and the same Spirit of grace and
supplication that is promised in the word Esa. 44.3, 4. Zach. 12.10. Ezeck.
36.26, 27. and the same Spirit that the Scripture says Christ by his merits
purchased Ioh. 1.16, 17, 18. Ioh. 12.32. Revel. 1.5. Heb. 10.19, 20, 21, 22.

^ Conclusion. The word concurreth inst^ument^lly with the Spirit, and this is
the external, not the internal and substantial word.
1 Conclusion. The word preached is that mean that instrumentally concurreth
with the Spirit for begetting of faith. Romans 10.14.17. faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God and that he speaks, of the external,
and not of the substantial increated and internal word, is clear, ver. 14,
15, 16. he speaks of such a word, as a sent preacher carries. 2. such glad
tidings as messengers on the mountains bring, which is not the Spirit of
faith, to all that the messengers are sent to. 3 It is such a word as he
calls ver. 16. a report. Now this is not an inward substantial report or
word, because all that hears the father to them the Spirit makes an inward
report, they come to Christ and believe the report Ioh. 6.45. But few or none
believe this report ver. 16. Who has believed our report? 1 Cor. 1.23, 25. But
we preach Christ crucified to the Jews a stumbling block, to the Greeks
foolishness* But unto them that are called both of Jews and Greeks, Christ
the power of God and the wisdom of God, then the word externally preached is
instrumentally the power of Go^: and that he speaks of external preaching,
not of the substantial word, or Spirit himself, is clear. 1 Because the
Spirit internally preached is received as the power of God. Esaias 59 19, 20. And
a God teaching Spirit, but this word of it self is not such a Spirit. 1
Because the Apostles preach it, Men such as the Apostles were, do speak, or
preach of Christ and of the Spirit, but they cannot preach or effectually
inpreach (to speak so) Christ and the Spirit to the hearers, for then should
they give the Holy Spirit to al those they preach to, which both is against
scripture and experience, Act. 12. Act. 14. Act. 17. and is blasphemous, for
God only gives the Holy Ghost. 2 Because the internal and substantial word
preached, to the ears internally is effectual conversion, but this preached
Christ must be externally preached only, to some, to Jews and Greeks, who
stumble at Christ, and believe not, 1 Pet. 2. And the same is proved by 2 Cor.
2.15. We are unto God (preaching the Gospel v. 14) a sweet savor of Christ
in them that are saved and in them that perish, to the one we are the savor
of death unto death, and to the other the savor of life unto life. Now the
internal substantial word is to none a savor of death. 1 These. 2.13. For
this cause also thank we God without ceasing, because when ye received the
word of God, which ye heard of us, ye received it no^ as the word of men*
but, as it is in truth, the word of God, which effectually works also in you
that believe. That is, 1 The external word, which ye heard of us, 2 It is the
instrument of the Spirit. Ye received it not as the word of men, but (as it is
indeed) the word of God. 3 Its not the internal word, for it was not received
of all that heard it, for ver. 14, 15, 16. the Jews that heard it, received it
not.

2 Conclusion. The word preached of it self, is not a dead letter, as
Swenckfeldians say with Antinomians, 2 Conclusion.
Paul calls the Law a dead Letter, Because it teaches what we should do,
but promises not the Spirit of Grace, to obey as the Gospel does. And punit
delinquentes punishes eternally delin^u^^ts, says Chrysostom, 2 Cor. 3. hom. 7.
and Oecumenius* (...) (...). August. de Chir. ^t lit. c. 4. Quoniam legis,
l^^era, quae doce^ ^on esse peccandum, si spiritus vi (...) ^esit, (...) f^cit
peccatum (...) quam (...)
Theophylact says the same* Augustine says the Law makes us know, not eschew
sin, and the Gospel is not a dead letter of it self, even as the Letter of
it is void of the Spirit, except by accident, in the same sense, that it is the
savor of death unto death, and a rock of offense to those that stumble at the
word. But is not (may some say) the law also by accident, and through our
sinful condition, a condemning letter, as well as the Gospel, and so both,
because they are external, and literal, must be a dead letter? I answer, not
so, because the Gospel in the letter and literal sense of^ereth a way or
means of reconciliation to those that believe, but the Law as the Law in no
sense, can either offer or give life, but in regard that all have sinned, the
proper use of the Law to all under the Law, is to give out a sentence of
condemnation in the very external and literal sense of it. If the Law lead as
a Paedagogne any to Christ that is now by a higher Spirit then that which
speaks in the letter of the Law, it is true, its the same infinite Spirit, The
Lord that speaks in all Scripture, but in the Law he says nothing but either
perfectly, do all or die eternally. But in the Law as handed by the Prophets,
Christ and the Apostles the Lord condemns and convinces, that we may flee to
the surety of a better Covenant, Heb. 7.22. Now in this sense Law and Gospel
called the word of God, is not a dead letter in it self for Psa. 19.7. The Law
of the Lord converteth the soul, etc. Romans 1.16. The Gospel is the power of
God to salvation to every one that believes, both to work faith, Romans 10.17.
and to give salvation. Romans 15.4. For whatsoever things were written aforetime
were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfor^ of the
Scriptures, might have hope, this must be the written scriptures (...) 1 Cor.
1.21. For after in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom (natural) knew
not God, It pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that
believe, then is the word preached a mean to save the believers, Act. 13.26. To
you is this word of salvation sent. Yet the Jews, to whom it was sent,
Blasphemed, and judged themselves unworthy of eternal life, ver. 46* Act.
20.32. I commend you to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, 2
Cor. 10.4. For the weapons of our warefare are not carnal, but mighty through
God, to the pulling down of strong holds, casting down imaginations and every
b^ight that exalts it self against the knowledge of God. That which is the
strong weapons, by which men fight, word and discipline, and is mighty through
God, is not a dead letter, though these weapons be mighty through God: so is
the word a hammer and a sire, and the people wood and the sword of the Spirit,
and sharper then a two edged sword to discern the thoughts and intentions of
the heart, Ier. 5.14. Ephesians. 6.17. Heb. 4.12. Re. 1.16. Ps 45.3. The Rod of
Christ's lips, by which he smites the earth, Esa. 11.4. The Sceptor of his
Kingdom, all which evince that the word externally preached has power in it
self to destroy, and being accompanied by the Spirit, has power to co^vert,
and so is an instrument of the Spirit both ways.

3 Conclusion, The Lord has made and sanctified a ministry, 3 Conclusion.
and ministers to be fathers of the second birth and instruments to save
themselves and others, 1 Cor. 4.17. 1 Timothy 4.16 2 Cor. 3.2. Ye are our Epistle
written in our hearts read of all men. 4 Forasmuch as ye are manifestly
declared to be the Epistle of Christ* ministered by us, written not with ink,
Swenckfeld, interne agit deus cum Christiano, per verbum Spiritus et vitae: in
quo se variis div. tiis bonorum Caelestium per Christum revelat, exter^e vero
ag^t cum carne hominis per verbum licerae, seu praedicationem et per symbola.
Swenckefeld and Antinomians grant a ministry and Scriptures in word, but deny
it in very deed, both say it is given to the outward man and the flesh not to
the inward man.
but with the Spirit of the living God, not in tables of stone, but in the
fleshy tables of the heart. 1 These. 2.19. For what is our hope, or joy or
crown of rejoicing? are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ,
at his coming? 20. For ye are our glory and crown. Swenckfield denies that
he destroys Scripture, or the ministry or preaching, but says he Epist. An.
1529, In a Christian there be two things. 1 The new and internal man. 2 The
old or external man, called the flesh. God deals with the Christian man
internally by the word of Spirit and life (he means the substantial word) in
whcih he reveals himself through Christ, by the various riches of heavenly
blessings, but externally he deals with the flesh of man by the word of the
letter, and by preaching and by signs and seals. So Saltm. as if brought up
at his feet, says, free grace. page 150. And this Gospel fits man, who is
made up both of flesh and Spirit, and so has need of a law without and in the
letter, as well as in the heart and Spirit; The law is spiritual, but we are
carnal. Romans 7 nor can such a state of flesh and Spirit be ordered by a law
only without; for the word of the law and Spirit merely is for a spiritual
condition or state of glory, as Angels, who only live by a law spiritual and
word of revelation, then both agree in this, that the law is given to the
outward man, the flesh the body: and the law of the Spirit of life to the inner
man the soul and Spirit, hence these foul consequences.

1 The law belongs not to a believer, but to civil courts, as Isl^bius said.
Absurdities that follow from the Swe^ckfeldian and Antinomian distinction of an
internal or substantial, or a vocal and external word


2 The word of God can lay no tie no band on the inner man to know God, believe
in Christ, love God, intend his glory, long for heaven and Christ's second
appearance; for the law is given to the flesh and the outward man, nor can the
letter of the Gospel bind him to any Gospel or heart obedience. absurd

3 There can be no sins in spirit or soul or inner man, because no law, and
so no obedience. most absurd

4. All Ministry and scripture is not to raise an inward spiritual conformity
between the Soul and the Gospel, nor to make us lowly and meek in spirit as
Christ is, but to put on us an outside of external conformity, between the
flesh or outward man, and the law* how then is the law spiritual? I should
rather think that the spiritual law and commandments of the Gospel were given
first and principally and most kindly to our spirits, and thoughts, and
intentions, and rather secondarily to the body and outward man, so far as the
acts of the outward man fall under the dominion and command of the will and
faculties of the inwardman.

5. The spirit without the word is the law, and only rule that regulateth man
in all his inward and most spiritual actions, and not the scripture, and so
the more spiritual, the more lawless, loose, and carnal.

And Mr. Del goes farther on with Swenckfeld, for he will have the
accomplishing of Gospel reformation, that is the justification of a sinner and
his conversion to Christ, M. Del the Antinomi^n his subverting of the ministry
and the preached Gospel.
to be done by the spirit only; without all power of man, and so it is not
visible, nor ecclesiastic, ser. page 4.

It stands not in making laws to consciences (add Mr. Del contrary to the word
of God, act. 15.22, 23, 28 etc.) by the sacred power or clergy (by the
messengers of Christ and of the Churches) for external conformity (only and
merely external; its false, we aim at more) in outward duties worship and
government, and to have these confirmed by civil sanction. To have Artaxerxes
and Kings to ratify and command, under penalties, the building of the house of
God, and to have Kings and Queens nursefathers and mothers to the Church is
lawful, and should be our aim and prayer to God 1 Timothy 2.1.2, 3. and that the
Kings of the earth, bring their glory and honor to the New Jerusalem Revel.
21.24. we heartily desire, though the Lord can build Jerusalem, without the
sword of sectaries, and the arm of the Magistrate.

And Del says this Gospel reformation does not much busy it self about
outward forms, and external conformity, but only minds the reforming of the
heart, and when the heart is right with God, the outward form cannot be
amiss; and therefore says Christ, touching the worship of the New Testament,
God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and
truth: but speaks not one word of any outward form. So that God in the
Gospel-reformation aims at nothing but the heart, p. 6. Swenckfeld ascribes
something more to the ministry of the word, God (says he) deals externally
with the flesh and outward man, by the letter of the word, or by preaching, or
by signs, or seals. But Del is so much for this spirit that he will have the
gospel to mind only the reforming of the heart, and to aim at nothing but the
heart. So these foul consequences must follow hence. 1 The Gospel cares
nothing for outward duties, or outward worship, all externalls must be left
free and indifferent, to bow to Idols, or not to bow, Absurd consequences
following from M. Del his Enthysiasticall Reformation.
to murder, or not to murder, which is the false charge that the Council of
Trent puts on us, the falsest calumny the Devil can devise, that in the
Gospel, except faith, all other things are indifferent and neither commanded
nor forbidden.

2 Conseq. The Apostles and Elders Act. 15. in forbidding fornication and
uncleanness, minded no Gospel reformation, such as Del pleaded for.

3 Conseq. David's heart was right, and Peter's also in the maine, when the one
committed adultery and treacherous murder, and the other denied his Lord, then
shall murder and denial of Christ before men, be things indifferent; for
Gospell-reformation minds only the reforming of the heart, and when the heart
is right with God, as was David's, whose heart was according to the heart of
God, long ere he fell in these sins, 1 Samuel 13.14. and Peter's heart Mat.
16.17. the outward form cannot be amiss: then outward practices of adultery,
and treacherous murder, and denying of Christ with oaths, were not amiss.
Old Anabaptists, called Fratres liberi, and Nicodemites, come and learn at M.
Del, to keep the heart right, and violate all the ten Commandments, your
false worships, your lying, whoring, couzening etc. cannot be amiss, your
Gospel needs not busy it self with these forms* For says he, What Christ
speaks not one word of in the N. Testament worship Ioh. 4 that has nothing to
do with Gospel-reformation: I Assume. But Christ speaks not one word of
forms, of right external worship, not adding Idol worship: bowing to Baal,
not one word of speaking or preaching as the Oracles of God as it is 1 Pet.
4.11. nor of consenting to the wholesome words, even the words of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine, that is according to Godliness, 1 Timothy 6.3,
nor speaks Christ one word Io. 4. to hold fast the form of sound words. 2 Timothy 1.13. Nor to obey from the heart that form of sound doctrine once
delivered, Romans 6.17. yea many say Christ speaks in that place Ioh. 4. not one
word of faith, love, fear, hope, of preaching, hearing, praying, praising, or
of any worship either external or internal, but only of the manner and
sincerity of worship, then by Dels arguing there should be no external worship
under the Gospel: yea more, Reformation in worship, is but the half of
reformation. Christ there speaks not one word of the other half of
reformation of the duties of the second table; of love, mercy, righteousness,
sobriety; not killing, not whoring, not couzening, and oppressing, the widow,
the Orphan, as Antinomians do, then Gospel-reformation, aiming only at the
heart* cares nothing for any of these.

4 The power, wisdom, and righteousness of men have no place in Gospel
reformation, because says M. Del, it is the hautinesse and loftiness of men
that must be laid in the dust, in the day of reformation, page 12, 13. Now the
power of preaching the Gospel, and the Keys of the Kingdom, to shut and
open, to proclaim ministerially the remitting and reteining of sins, are the
only means on man's part to reform the Church, the word preached by sinful
men, is the chief means, now these are not pride and hautinesse, because
Christ gives these to men Mat. 16, 18, 19. Ioh. 20, 21. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. 2
Cor. 10.5. 2 Cor. 4.7. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. 1 Cor. 12.28. But he gives not pride
and hautinesse, nor infuseth he these into any, they are from that evil one
Satan.

5 It is true: M. Del in words, says it is the word that only reformes, not
the power of the world, nor the sword. But he knows in his conscience, we
plead not for the sword to reform. The sword was never sanctified of God to
turn a soul to Christ; but when an Elimas perverts ^oules and the Gospel, we
hold, the sword should be drawn against him, that he pervert no more: But this
word, that works Gospel-reformation, Del Distroyes the written word and with
Swenck^feld pleads for (...) which is the Spirit himself.

The Law is a means of (...) conversion (...) the Gospel, and cannot be
excluded from (...)


is yet the internal and substantial word of Swenckfeld and of all the
E^thysiasts for he says page. 17.1. This word is not the Law, but the Gospel,
so say all the Enthysiasts: now if Enthysiasts mean that only the Law is made
by us the means of conversion excluding the Gospel, their conscience bear
them witness, that that is a calumny, the Law, it alone makes none perfect,
and converts not any, nor speaks it one word of Christ; But if they mean that
the Law is wholly excluded from the work of conversion at all as they teach;
Then 1 The Law ought not to be taught at all in the Church. But Christ and his
Apostles taught the law and the Gospel both. But what use has the teaching of
that at all that has no influence in the conversion of sinners? 2 That by
which is the knowledge of sin and our sickness, and is a paedagogne to lead
us to Christ, is not wholly excluded from being a means of our coming to the
Physician, but such is the Law Romans 3.20. Gal. 3.23, 24.

3 That which lets us see our condemnation, and that we have ground of self
despair, and stops our mouths as guilty before God: that which lets us see
our debts, and that we are drowned and broken, for this end, that we may flee
to Christ our rich surety, that which closes us under sin; that God may show
mercy, that is a means of our conversion, But such is the Law, Romans 3.19. Romans
8.2, 3. Romans 11.32. Swenckefeld: epist. an. 1529. verbum c^pi non pote^t nisi
ab i^lumi^a is mentibus. Tametsi millies verbum Dei auribus (...) inculcav^ris,
nihil nis^ sonum sus^ipient, et s^ltem affectum carna^em (...) ^idei et
effectae, e libero suo Arbitri^ nec diu (...).
Gal. 3 22.

2 Del and his Antinomians mean no other thing by the word, but what
Swenckefeld means: to wit, the internal and substantial Word: hear him then
speak with the mouth and tongue of Swenckefeld, ser page 18. So that the word
whereby Christ reformes, is not the word without us, as the word of the law is
but the word within us as it is written, the word is nigh the^ etc. if thou
live under the word many years, if it come not to thy heart, it will never
change thee nor reform thee. 2 he add page 19. that in the Gospel the word
and the Spirit are always joined, and therefore says Christ the words that I
speak are spirit and life that is, they come from the spirit, and carry spirit
with them.

Then 1 the Gospel p^eached externally to Del and to Antinomians, is not that
word by which Christ converts souls, faith is not from outward hearing as an
instrument of our conversion, the contrary of which we have proved. Its from
the inward word in the heart, now the word in the heart is very faith it self,
the argument of both Swenckefel. and Del is nothing: for it is this, the word
outwardly preached, except it come to the heart, can never convert the soul,
because it is but a mere sound, ^t is no good consequent, that the word is ^o
Instrument of our conversion, because it can do no thing without the Spirit.
says Swenckefeld, its but a very letter, say Antinomians, therefore the
external word is no instrument of our conversion but only the internal word,
I utterly deny the consequence; lay a pen well inked to paper a thousand times,
it shall never write, except the hand of the writer draw the characters, ergo
the pen is no instrument of writing, it follows not: So bread except by the
blessing of God it be turned into blood and flesh, can never nourish, ergo the
bread, that the Baker bakes, is no instrument, by which we are nourished. Its
an unjust consequence and distroyes all ordinances natural and Spiritual: It
only follows, ergo the word without us, is no efficacious cause of
conversion, and no principal cause, and can do nothing except the Spirit
inact, and animate, and concur with the word which we with both hands yield
and believe as a Gospel Truth.

The word is but a sound and a letter, I answer it is not a common sound, The
word of it self is not a common sound.
such as the odes of Horati^s and Epistles of Seneca render, but it is in it
self, a sound filled with Majesty, power, heaven, so as every word seems to
be with-child of grace and life, yea and separate the word from the Spirit, and
in the style, conveyance, method, there is so much divinity, majesty,
holiness, life, gravity, as the child bewrayes heaven in its forehead, and
looks like the Father and Author God, and therefore its more then a sound, to
a deaf soul actu secundo, it has but a sound, and whereas Antinomians say,
its but a dead letter, they speak of the paper, ink and printed characters of
the word but we take it not so, but as the words do connotate and involve
the things signified, the precious promises and as the Lord says, (...)
Hose. 8. The great things of my law, and so they are not dead letters, but the
instrument, chariot, means of conveyance of Christ and the Spirit to the
heart, and though without the Spirit the word works not, as no instrument,
no tool, nor hammer, no axe can build a house, except the Mason and Carpenter
act and move them: shall it follow, they are not for that instruments at all? 2
Del and Antinomians with Swenckefeld will have the Gospel preached to none,
Antinomians and Swenckefeld ^vert scripture and all ministry.
but to those that have the internal word and Spirit in their hearts: then
when Christ and the Apostles Mat. 13. Act. 28. Act. 13. preach Christ and the
Gospel in the letter, as some other thing then the Law, it is not the word of
God, nor the Gospel, why? it wants the Spirit to go along with it, and can
never change, nor reform, says Del page 18. and begets but a literal and
feighned faith, says Swenckefeld, and the word and the Spirit are always
joined, says Del page 19. now this is not the written read, nor externally
preached Gospel, nor the Scripture, so they must but co^sen us for they mean
the internal word, not verbum vocale; And the preaching of faith that
Saltmarsh speaks of, free grace page 146 is not the Scripture nor preached
word, which I demonstrate. Del speaks of such a word, as has the Spirit
always joined with it page 19. But the scripture and the external vocal word
has not always the Spirit joined with it, for when it is preached to
Reprobates and to malicious obdured souls that stumble at Christ and the word
being thereunto appointed, 1 Pet. 2.7. Mat. 13, 14, 15. Ioh. 12.37, 38, 39.
Ioh. 9.39. It has not the Spirit joined with it. 2 They speak of such a word
as has the Spirit actually converting, and which is therein differenced from
the Law, that is but a dead letter, and cannot minister the Spirit, so Del,
ser. page 18, 19. So Saltmarsh, free grace, page 146, 147, so Swenckfeld ibid.
therefore all that Antinomians and Swenckfeldians say that they take not away,
Word, ministry, ordinances, preaching, are mere delusions, for by the word of
God that begets faith they mean the internal word, not scripture nor the
written and preached word, and so they say nothing to take off this error
justly laid upon them; to wit that under the Gospel, there is no need of
Scripture, Preaching, Sacraments, hearing nor doing of any duties to men, nor
abstinence from murdering killing, whoring, stealing etc. all exter^alls are
indifferent.

3 You see how false it is that the Gospel is not to be preached to any but to
those that are converted; because it cannot be received by faith, by any but by
such, contrary to Christ's express commands to his Apostles Mat. 28.19, 20. Go
teach all nations; so Paul preached to the obstinate Jews. Act. 13 to the
scoffing Athenians Act. 17. Is it not therefore the Gospel that they preach^

The arguments of Swenckef. and Antinom. to prove that the word is not an
instrument of conversion, because, carnal, bodily, managed by man etc.
discussed.
4 It is an undue arguing of Swenckefeldians and Antinomians: The word is a
literal, carnal, sensible thing, ergo God works not faith, which is a
spiritual grace, thereby: for it follows only; God works not faith by the
vocal word alone, except he put to the pull of omnipotency of grace* 2 The
assumption is false the preached word, though in its sound, it be carnal,
literal, bodily, yet in its power, Majesty, and the thing signified, which is
the birth in the womb of the word, it is spiritual, lively, heavenly.

5 Nor does it follow, that Justification begins at man, if the vocal word be
the instrument thereof, except they say that hearing and preaching did
necessarily and effectually produce justification and conversion: they are no
parts, no members, no efficacious causes of conversion or Justification.

6 Justifying faith and salvation both, are, in their nature, things
spiritual, and yet have their original from the word preached as an
instrument, The word though bodily and vocal and carried ^n by man, is yet an
instrument of conversion.
yea from the foolishness of preaching, 1 Cor. 1.21. Nor is the word
altogether bodily, because it incurres in the sense of hearing, but taking the
word preached, as it includes the great things of God, not as it is letters and
sounds* it is not carnal but spiritual, 2 Cor. 10.5. Sharper then a two edged
sword, to save or kill on either edges, Heb. 4.12. yea even when it is
rejected, the savor of death unto death 2 Cor. 2.16* 17. And the Everlasting
Gospel, Rev. 14.6.

7 Nor can it follow that justifying faith is a work of man, or that, because
^raile men, that are but earthen pitchers come out bearing this heavenly
treasure, How we believe on God and how in the word.
that we believe in the word as in God, as if the principal author were the
instrument, or the Master and Lord, the servant. For it is the Word of God,
that is the instrument of conversion, not the word God, for the substantial
word God is author and the only finisher of our faith, nor do we any
otherwise trust, hope in, or believe the word, then as a mean or instrument
sanctified of God* for so blessed an end. God is the only formal object of
our faith and fiduciall recumbency; but God cloatheth himself in a way of
con^iscention with his own word and ordinances for our capacity: neither does
it follow, because a sinful man preaches the word, that man lays the first
stone of the new creation; and that faith and conversion has its first rise
and spring from man, or from the free will of the preacher, as Swenck^eldians
imagine; because faith, as faith, has no beginning, no part of it from the
naked act of preaching, or from the letter or bare sound of words; no more then
Lazarus had his soul fetched into his body, by the created and vocal sound of
those words uttered by Christ-man. Lazarus come forth, because faith comes
from the word preached tali modo, so and so, as the wind and breathing of the
Holy Ghost goes along with the vocal and literal air of words preached by a
sinful man; for the soul of Lazarus entered his body by Christ's words,
animated and quickened with the power of the Godhead, who indeed raised the
dead man: only this difference I conceive there is, that words and sound of
words uttered by Christ were not so much as an active instrument of the raising
of dead Lazarus, nor was the blowing of Rames horns any active instrument of
the falling of the walls of Jericho, but at the naked presence of both, the
dead man was quickened, and the walls fell. But I should conceive the word
preached, being in that which it signifies, a divine sign, and indeed the
word of God, as the scripture every where calls it, and a real message from
heaven, may, and (I nothing doubt) does contribute an organicall,
isntrumental, active influence to the begetting of faith, but ever as it is
elevated as it were above it self, and above the nature and sphere of a mere
vocal, and audible sound, and powered by the Spirit. Now I should think it
but curiosity to inquire how the Spirit and word are united in the working of
faith: for let those, that ask, Of the union of the Word and Spirit.
show the union between bread eaten and the nutritive power that turns
bread, and transsubstantiateth it into blood, and flesh, and works the last
work which Physicians call (...) or assimulation, the very substantial
turning of bread into a piece of the child's hand, foot, shoulder to cause the
parts and members increase and grow to the stature and real bigness of a
perfect man. I shall not think that the Spirit enters into the bodily sound
of words, and comes along enclosed in it, to the hearers soul* and makes him
believe. I rather think with learned Pemble, that the Spirit quickneth rather
the dead man that hears the word, then the dead letter of the word: for the
Holy Gho^^ never so far reproached the word of God as to call it a dead
letter in the sense of Swenckefeldians, Familists and Antinomians, whose mind
is that word and seals and all ordinances are but the Alphabet to unconverted
men, as Io. Valdesso says, and so say they of Images and Crucifixes that are
as books to teach the ignorant and rude, Valdesso divine consider 32 p. 106,
107. An^inomians make the Scripture but a Catechism for babes, and fruitless
and useless to believers.
but when men are once Justified, called, regenerated they have no more need of
word, and ordinances of oblieging Laws to lead them, awe them, teach, direct,
or obliege or command them, then a learned man has need to go back to the
Catechize and learn the abc and spel and read again; Therefore the word does
but prepare and dispose the outward man, say they, and when men are perfect as
they are, being once Justified, and as sinlesse and clean as Christ:
honycombe, c. 3. page 25. Saltmarsh, free grace, page 140 and their sins are
but seeming and imaginary not really and truly sins, Saltmarsh free grace.
32.142.154. Town asser. grace 39 40. honycombe Chap. 5.47. Den, man of sin.
page 9, 10, 11. after they need nothing that Man or Angel can do to them,
they need no laws, says Del ser. 26. but these three, 1 The law of a new
creature, 2 The law of the spirit of life that is in Christ, 3 The law of Love;
not any of these are the written scripture, or the preaching of the word.
Saltmarsh, free grace page, 240 the^ believer is as free from hell, law and
bondage on earth, as if he were in heaven, nor wants he any thing to make him
so, but to make him believe that he is so; sure in heaven he needs not
preaching, written scriptures, sacraments, praying for forgiveness repentance,
faith, nor to complain as Paul does Romans 7 of the indwelling of the body of
sin. The bright star c. 11 p. 108, 109. tells us that all means,
ordinance, light, understanding, willing, thinking are annihilated and
nothinged, and that the believer c. 12 beholds God without means in this life
and so we have no more to do with the word or to grow in grace and knowledge.

CHAP. VII. Of Revelations and Inspirations.
AS Swenckefeld and his; so Familists and Antinomians now, as also the
Nicolaitans, of which hereafter, were all for immediate inspirations,
revelations, without scripture, or endeavors or studying, or books or
reading. It was observed in New England, when Familists grew, that, especially
in the Town of Boston and in other parts of New England, Familists devised
such a difference between the covenant of works, and of grace, especially
after a sermon preached by M. Wheelewreight a prime Familist, that he that will
not renounce (says the author of the story of the rise, reign. etc. page 24
25) his sanctification, and wait for an immediate revelation of the Spirit,
cannot be admitted, be he never so Godly, and is looked on as an enemy to
Christ, and he that is already in the Church and will not acknowledge this new
light, is undervalued.

Now as touching revelations and inspirations of the Spirit, I conceave with
all submission to the Learned and Godly.

1 There is a twofold revelation, A Revelation twofold, active and passive*
one of the letter of the word and Gospel, this is nothing but the Lords
active uttering of his will and Gospel which was hid before as Ephesians. 3.9, 10*
Ezech. 20.11, 12. Hosea 8.12. Rev. 1.19. This is a revelation proper and
immunicable to any, for God only did devise the Gospel; when neither Men nor
Angel could dream of a way of redemption for lost man, and reveeled to Adam
that the seed of the woman, Jesus Christ, should break the head of the
Serpent, and dissolve the works of Satan. This revelation of the letter of the
Gospel is made to thousands, that never believe, and therefore though it be
but literal and external, yet none could thus reveal the mind of God to
Prophets and Apostles, but God only, as none were inspired of God, but writers
of Canonnick scripture, and Scripture only is given by divine inspiration, 2 Timothy 3.16. 2 Pe. 1.21. and as this revelation active is Gods only, and from him
as the author and fountain, men do as Herolds carry this message of
revelation to others: so passively, it is common to believers and unbeleevers,
for the letter of the Gospel may be revealed to all within the vissible
Church, and yet the most part are destituted of an internal revelation.
Therefore there is an internal revelation, of things that men believe. And
this I conceave to be fourfold.

1 Prophetical. Passive revelation fourfold prophetical, special to
believers, extraordinary, Satanicall.
2 Special to the elect only. 3 Of some facts peculiar to Godly men. 4 False
and Satanicall.
Prophetical Revelation is that irradiation of the mind that the Holy Ghost
makes on the mind and judgment of the penmen of holy scripture, whether
Prophets or Apostles and that by an immediate in-breathing of the mind and
will of God on them, whether in visions, dreams, or any other way, without
men, or the ministry or teaching of men, as he did to Esaiah, Jeremiah, Esa.
1.1. Ier. 1.1 or to Paul Gal. 1.11. Paul an Apostle not of men, Of propheti^^^l
(...).
neither by men, 11* 12. But I cert^fie you, brethren, that the Gospel which
was preached by me, is not after man, for I neither received it of man neither
was I taught it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ. 15, 16. But when it
pleased God to reveal his son in me, immediately I conferred not with flesh
and blood, neither went I up to Jerusalem, to them that were Apostles before
me, but I went into Arabia, and returned again unto Damascus. Ephesians 3.2, 3. If
ye have heard of the dispensation of the grace of God, which is in me to you
ward, how that by revelation he made known unto me the mystery etc. I dispute
not of the way of the Lords imprinting the speeches, images, and
representations of his mind to Prophets and Apostles; I conceave it is the
same way, that God revealed himself to Jeremiah c. 1.11, 12, 13* etc. and to
Paul Act, 16.9* 10, and that as Ezechiel, c. 3.14 so John the Apostle Re. 1.10.
was in the Spirit, and saw, by an immediate brightness of light, perfectly and
understandingly the will and mind of Christ, in what they prophesied and
wrote. And this Revelation is so far from being beside the mind of God, that it
is formally the express word sense and mind of God: if Fami. have such
Revelations. 1. they see the Visions of God. 2 They speak as acted by the
Spirit immediately, and so we are with the like certainty of faith to believe,
what H. Nicholas Wheelwright, Mrs. Hutchison, M. Del, Saltmarsh, Beacon, Den,
Crispe, Collier, etc. speak and write, as we are to believe the writings and
sayings of the Prophets and the Apostles, Familists have no prophetical
Revelations.
and both must be alike to us, the mouth of the Lord: and what they both write
or preach must be the object of our faith, and their writings must be added to
the book of the revelation, which is forbidden. Rev. 22.17, 18* 19. Deuteronomy.
12.32. Deuteronomy. 30.5, 6. This is the Antichrist himself. 3 Let them show the
signs of their Apostle-ship; by miracles and speaking with tongues and
foretelling things contingent, that are to come; and we shall believe them;
Familists produce your strong reasons.

Internal Revelation proper to believers.
2 There is a special internal revelation, made of things in scripture,
applied in particular to the souls of elect believers, by which, having heard
and learned of the Father Ioh. 6.4. there is made known and revealed to them,
by the Spirit of wisdom and revelation, what is the hope of their calling,
and what is the riches of the glory of the inheritance in the Saints. Ephesians.
1.17, 18, 19. and that revealed to them, which flesh and blood reveals not,
but the Father of Christ, Mat. 16, 17. And that which the Father reveals unto
babes, and hides from the wise and prudent, Mat 11.25, 26. And this is common
to all that believe, and not engrossed as peculiar to the Familists and
Antinomians only, for if it were, then my faith should be in vain, and I have
fallen from my portion and share in Christ, and of the inheritance of the
Saints in light, for there should be no converts in the world but Familists
only.

Now this Revelation is a clear evidence in the conscience by the Testimony of
the Spirit* that I am a child of God Romans 8.16 whether it be immediate; or from
speaking signs and marks of sanctification 1 Ioh. 1.3* 1 Ioh. 3.14.18, 19 20.
2 It is the knowledge of no new Article which is not contained in the word in
the General* and is not proper and incommunicable to none but to Antinomians,
but is the mystery of the Spirit revealing these things, that are graciously
given to us of God* How p^rti^ular rev^l^tions are not in Scrip^^^e
1 Cor. 2.12. even to all believers, 3 Its true as touching me, by name its not
revealed nor written in scripture in express words, that I am by name written
in the Lambs book of life, and a child and son of God and an heir annexed
with Christ, of life and glory* nor are the individual and numericall
manifestations and inshinings, flowings, motions, inbreathings, outgoings of
the Spirit of life, and stirrings of the new birth, to John rather then to
Mary, to this believer rather, then to another in Spain written in the
Scripture: yet the Spirit acts never ordinarily, but a believer may know and
hear the noise of his feet; now if all these individual manifestations,
ebbings and flowings of tides of free grace were written, then should also be
written their degrees less or more of Christ, the names of the believing
Saints, that can say I Paul, I John, I Anne etc. Live not, but Christ lives in
me; for these I presume add a numericall particular and individual being to
every single act or motion of the dispensation of grace, and if all were in
number, weight, and measure written in scripture, the world (as John says of
Christ's facts) should not contain the books, that should be written.

The Holy Ghost speaking of a collective body the Church and spouse of Christ
in Solomon's song, in the book of the Psalms and of the Lamentations of
Jeremiah, shows us of the outgoings, incommings of the beloved in the soul,
of his cloudings and outshinings of free love, of the acts of the hands of
Christ, Can. 5. Touching the handles of the bar, and the smell of the myrrh
of Christ, that he leaves behind him when he is departed, of the souls feelings
of the impressions, or the withdrawings of Christ, as if the whole Church
Catholic of Invisible believers (for so the Church is taken especially, Psalm.
45. and in the book of Solomon's song) were but one particular believer, which
is a demonstration that the particular actings of the spirit of grace cannot be
written in the scriptures, yet are they not to be thought unlawful
revelations, and destitute of the word, no more then we can say, all the
particular actings of Devils and of all wicked men, since the creation, of
whoring, swearing, Idol-worship, lying, stealing, oppressing, mis-beleeving
etc* are not contrary to the express law of the Holy Ghost speaking in the
word, because these sinful acts are not particularly all specified and
written in scripture, with the names of the actors.

Of revelations extraordinary of men in our (...) not immediately inspired and
how they (...) charactered from Satanicall Revelations. Read a prohecy of M.
Luther epist. ad Spalatinum an. 1520. et epist. ad Wenceslaum li^eum an. 1521
he prophesied of of the wars of the B^ures.
There is a 3 revelation of some particular men, who have forefold things to
come even since the ceasing of the Canon of the word, as John Husse,
Wickeliefe, Luther, have foretold things to come, and they certainly fell out,
and in our nation of Scotland, M. George Wisha^t foretold that Cardinal Beaton
should not come out alive at the Gates of the Castle of St. Andrews, but that
he should dye a shameful death, and he was hanged over the window that he did
look out at, when he saw the man of God burnt, M. Knox prophesied of the
hanging of the Lord of Grange, M. Ioh, Davidson uttered prophecies, known to
many of the kingdom, diverse Holy and mortified preachers in England have done
the like: no Familists, or Antinomians, no David George, nor H. Nicholas, no
man ever of that Gang, Randel or Wheelwright, or Den, or any other, that ever I
heard of, being once engaged in the Familisticall way, ever did utter any but
the fourth sort of lying and false inspirations: Mrs Hutchison, said she should
be delivered from the Court of Boston miraculously as Daniel from the Lions,
which proved false, Becold prophesied of the deliverance of the Town of
Munster which was delivered to their enemies, and he and his Prophet were
tortured and hanged, David George prophesied of the raising of himself from
the dead, which was never fulfilled, now the differences between the third and
fourth revelations, I place in these. 1 These worthy reformers did tie no man
to believe their prophecies as scriptures, we are to give faith, to the
predictions of Prophets and Apostles, foretelling facts to come, as to the very
word of God, they never gave themselves out as organs immediately inspired by
the Holy Ghost, as the Prophets do, and as Paul did Romans 11. prophesying of
the calling of the Jews, and Ioh. Revel. 1.10. and through the whole book;
yea they never denounced Judgment against those that believe not their
predictions, of these particular events and facts as they are such particular
events and facts, as the Prophets and Apostles did* But Mrs. Hutchison said
Rise, Reign, page 61 art. 27. That her particular revelations about future
events, were as infallible as any scripture, and that she is bound as much to
believe them as the Scripture, for the same Holy Ghost is author of both* Mr.
C^^mwell and Familists of old England say she and he^s were the more spiritual
and only Saints in New England, and the rest were but Antichristian
persecutors; Its known they held revelations without, and beside the word of
God, Rise reign er 4^. and said the whole letter of the Scripture holds forth
a covenant of works, er 9. And so the whole letter of the Scripture, Law, or
Gospel is abolished to believers, and does no more oblige them, then the
covenant of works can curse those that are under grace. For T Collier marrow
of Christianity, page 25.26. says many spiritually enlightened of late, are
brought to Gospell-inioyments, some other way which is spiritual, then by
verbal preaching; but Familists take the word preached for the printed inkie
letter, or the air, dead sound of the Gospel, we take it for letter and sound
of preaching, as it includes the thing signified, to wit, Christ, and all his
promises, in which sense the sounding of the Gospel heard works many years
after it is preached, and the word long ago preached may be awaked up by a sad
affiction, an inspiration from God, and produce the work of conversion, and
still it is the word of truth in the scripture that produces faith as it is
the same seed that lies many months under the clod and grows and brings
forth fruit after: And we know Antinomians reject the scriptures and build all
upon inward revelations, as their binding and obleiging rule Del ser. page 26
Saltmarsh, free grace, page 146.

2 The events revealed to Godly and sound witnesses of Christ are not contrary
to the word: But Becold, John Mathie, and Ioh. Schykerus (who killed his brother
for no fault) and other Enthysiasts of that murdering Spirit Satan who killed
innocent men, expressly against the sixth command. Thou shall not Kill, and
taught the Boures of Germany to rise and kill all lawful Magistrates, because
they were no Magistrates; upon the pretense of the Impulsions and Inspirations
of the Holy Ghost, were acted by inspirations against the word of God; All that
the Godly reformers foretold of the tragical ends of the proclaimed enemies of
the Gospel, they were not actors themselves in murdering these enemies of
God, nor would M Wishart command or approve that Norman and Ioh. Leslyes should
kill the C^rdinall Beaton, as they did.

2 They had a general rule going along that Evil shall hunt the wicked man:
only a secret harmless, but an extraordinary strong impulsion, of a
Scripture-spirit leading them, carried them to apply a general rule of divine
justice, in their predictions* to particular Godless men, they themselves
only being foretellers not copartners of the act.

3 They were men sound in the faith opposite to Popery, Prelacy* Soci^ianisme,
Papisme, Lawless Enthysiasme, Antinomianisme, A^minianisme, Arrianisme, and
what else is contrary to sound doctrine, all these being wanting in such as
hold this fourth sort of revelations we cannot judge them but Satanicall having
these characters. 1 They are not pure and harmless; but thrust men on upon
bloody and wicked practices forbidden by God: though ^od bad Abraham kill his
only son for him* to try his obedience yet God countermanded him, and would not
have him act accordingly: these Spirits actually kill the innocent upon a
pretended Spirits impulsion. 2 They have no rule of the word to countenance
them, and if they lead men from the Law and the Testimony, its because there is
no light in them, Esa. 8.20. 3* These revelations lodge in men of rotten and
corrupt minds destitute of the truth, and they are opposite and destructive to
sanctification. 4. They argue the scriptures to be imperfect, and to be a lamed
and man^ked directory, of faith and manners, contrary to Scripture, Psa. 19 7,
8, 9. 2 Timothy 3.15* 16. Luke 16.30.31. Ioh. 20.30, 31. Act. 26.22. Psalm.
119.105, etc.

4 Then the Scripture shall not decide all controverted truths, nor be that, by
which we shall find the truth and the rule of trying of the Spirits, whether
they be of God, or no, contrary to Io. c. 39. 1 These. 5.21. And contrary to the
laudable example of the noble Bereans who tried Paul's doctrine by the
Scriptures Act. 17.11. 6 Christ's knock and stirrings on the heart* sounds and
breathes the breathings of God in his word, the Devils knock is a dumb and
dead knock and is destitute of the word of truth 7 Men do and act all things
from their own Spirit, and walk in the light of their own Sparks and there
is no end of erring and wandering from God, when they act by no certain known
rule of the word.

CHAP. VIII. Of Humane Industry, Arts, Sciences, Tongues, and if they be
lawful and necessary to the opening and supernatural knowledge of the
Scripture.
UPon the same ground Familists teach, because the Spirit acts them
immediately, that 1 All humane industry and endeavors of free will are vain. 2
That arts and sciences have nothing to do with the right understanding of the
Scriptures.

2 The word of God teaches us that grace strengthens our Endeavors, but
destroys them not, Cant 1.3. Draw me, Endeavors and Industry of fre^ will
consists well with grace
we will run, Psalm. 119.^2. I will run the way of thy Commandments when
thou shall enlarge my heart. Ioh. 6.45. All that have heard and learned of the
Father come to me. I shall not need to say that Paul extolleth grace highly,
when he says, 1 Cor. 15. J^laboured more abundantly then they all, and that he
traveled spreading the Gospel, from Jerusalem to Illy^i^um* and that he and
Barnabas, and the rest of the Apostles, divided the earth amongst them, as some
think, or that they went through the most part of it, journying and sailing to
spread the Gospel in journying often, through Cities, Wildernesses, Countries,
Seas. 2 Cor. 11.26, 27, 28. Watching night and day, fasting, caring for all the
Churches. I shall crave no more, but that the Apostles stirred their limbs,
did sweat, travel, and use free will, as other men, though the grace of God,
and an extreme hunger to add glory declarative to the crown greatness and
Majesty of their highly exalted prince, did stir and principle them, yet its
enough to our purpose, if the Apostles pieces of frail tired out flesh, were
not mere patients, stones and blocks carried sleeping in all their journying,
cares, pains* and endeavors in preaching and that in the Spirits Bosom, as
in a soft bed, they neither knowing, hearing, feeling, willing, endeavoring,
longing, swetting, or acting, by any natural industry, more then Aristotle's
dull and formeles (...) matter: if they were so, as Antinomians suppose as dead
(...) in their actings and the Spirit did all, only, adequately* irresistibly
and immediately, and they themselves did nothing then. 1 Paul vainly did glory
in his infirmities, he was not any thing but 2 Cor. 11. like a windy lying
soldier numbering his wounds, when he never appeard in the field, nor recieved
any one wound, nor faced an enemy for he was not so much as a patient, if no
agent at all in these, for he compares himself; without pride, as not
inferior to the greatest, in his sufferings, in his stripes, imprisonment,
fasting, even with all the pretended Apostles his adversaries; now if he acted
nothing to make him to be cried up in comparison of them as being as choice and
excellent an instrument of God as the best of them, but the Spirit acted all,
then was there danger, that the Holy Ghost should be drowned, suffer shipwreck,
be killed with stripes and fasting, and deaths, for in sufferings especially,
he glories, this we cannot say; and so the former must be rejected. 2 When he
says in fasting and watching often, he must mean in not eating, and not
sleeping often, for if he acted nothing as a man, which is repugnant to all
sense, all his actings are but a pure froathy enumeration. 3 What can be a
stronger motive for us to disobey Christ, who commands striving to enter in at
the narrow gate, Mat. 7. forsaking of all, hating of all, for his names sake,
Mat. 19. Laboring and that without fainting and wearying, Rev. 2.3. Gal. 6.9.
running, Phil. 3.13, 14. then to think such promises made to those that
overcome are made to the Holy Ghost, and to persuade and beseech the Holy
Ghost, not men, or that the promise of a crown of glory, upon condition of
faithfulness to the death is made to the Holy Ghost, not to believers, who
may, and can sin? 4 you may easily smell the Antinomian license of enmity
against works, laboring, patience, working out our salvation in fear and
trembling, Rev. 2.3. Phil. 2.12, 13, 14. for their aim is to lay a hugh weight
upon the Antinomian faith, which (if I know any thing) is a dead, imaginary,
froathy speculation, not saving faith.

Touching sciences, arts, and knowledge of the tongues, How far arts, sciences,
and knowledge of tongues, Hebrew, Greek and Latin, are to be acknowledged the
good gifts of God, and how far they are to be rejected.
Antinomians are ignorant of the state of the question: for we grant sciences
abused to the perverting of the simplicity of the Gospel 2 Sciences gloried in,
3 Sciences are reputed saving knowledge as if such masters of arts, and grand
Rabbis* because learned, were taught of God, and heard and learned of the
father, as the elect of God are. Ioh. 16.45. 4 Sciences reputed sufficient to
teach Christ are but vainly so called sciences.

Antinomians grant sciences, and arts, and tongues, in their proper place
profitable and excellent for Statesmen, Lawyers, Physicians, but bring them
once as helps to understand the mind of God in the holy Scriptures, and then
if ye believe Sam. How they are detestable filth, dross and dung.

2 Sciences, arts, and tongues, are either considered in their substance and
nature, or in the way of acquiring them, either by supernatural infusion, as
they were in the Prophets and Apostles, or by education, industry, pain,
studying, reading and teaching of men. In the former consideration, the same
knowledge of the doctrine of Moses and the Prophets, and of speaking with
tongues in the substance and nature of the gift that is in Paul and the
Apostles by supernatural and immediate revelation, or infusion, is in men that
acquire the same knowledge and speaking with tongues, for Paul otherwise, who
received this knowledge not from, or by flesh and blood, not his own industry
Gal. 1.11, 12, 13, 14 15, 16, 17, 18. Ephesians. 3.2* 3. should then counsel and
exhort Timothy to labor for another knowledge of the Gospel and so another
Gospel by reading, studying, Sciences, arts and tongues, in their nature,
though not in m^nner of acquiring them necessary for understanding of the
scriptures and both ways they are the good gifts
meditating and industry. 1 Timothy 4 15, 16. 2 Timothy 3.14, 15, 16, 17, then he
himself had received by revelation, which is a manifest untruth, for he says,
But continue thou in the things which th^^ have learned, and have been assured
of, knowing of whom thou have learned them, and that from a child thou have
known the Holy scriptures, which are able to make the wise to salvation* And 2 Timothy 2.1. Thou therefore my son be st^ong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus*
now least any should imagine, as Antinomians do, that the grace that i^ in
Jesus Christ, is contrary to, and inconsistent with the industry of learning
and studying and acquired knowledge* he adds. ver 2. and the things that thou have heard of me, amongst many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful
m^n, then as the same rose may grow by nature, and by the industry of the
gardner, and by singular art, as by causing an Oven hot to send warmenesse and
heat to the root of the rose in the winter, when otherwise the cold earth
should produce no roses at all, nor can these three sort of Roses be said to be
different in nature, and spece, though produced 3 sundry ways, by nature
industry, and art fomenting and supporting weak nature, so also the same
knowledge of the Scripture, does come to Paul by revelation, to Timothy by
industry and teaching, and the same knowledge and faculty of speaking with
tongues is Act. cha. 2 in some, by the coming down of the Holy Ghost without
education and teaching, and in some by education, and teaching ver. 4 5, 6.
compared with ver. 8* when therefore it is said Act. 4.13* That the council
perceiving Peter and John were (...) unlearned m^n they were amazed* it cannot
infer as Sa^uel How sufficiency of the Spirits, teaching 3 Re^sons.
Antinomians think that humane learning and knowledge of tongues were not
requisite in the Apostles, or that the Apostles were void of such learning, but
they only marvelled that men unlearned, in regard of education, at schools
and universities, being fishermen, and unlearned in a pharisaicall sense,
which only went for learning in their time, could so promptly and boldly
speak of the mysteries of the Gospel, and were so skilled in the doctrine of
Moses, and the Prophets, and they wondered at their Master Christ's learning,
seeing he was a Carpenters son and never taught at schools* Christ and the
Apostles were learned, though they had not their learning from industry
studying, teaching in Schools, and universitie as we have.
and M. Beacon. Sam. How and other Antinomians are of the Pharisees opinion, if
they believe Christ was destitute of learning, now what way he had his
learning, whether by infusion from heaven, or the personal union, or by
education at schools, (which is not apparent) is a far other question, and
they are no less deceived, who imagine that those fishermen now Catholic
ambassadors of Jesus Christ, and on whom the Holy Ghost descended in cloven
tongues, with the rest, Act. 2.1, 2, 3* 4. were ignorant of the tongues,
Hebrew, Greek and Latin, or that they who preached and wrote scripture, and
such divine epistles to the Churches, were unlearned men void of the very
literal knowledge and skill of the very letter of the scriptures, of the old
and new Testament, which these men call falsely profane and heathenish, so
Christ and his Apostles had all the learning and tongues, that we now have, and
what we have by industry and pains, reading, studying under teachers and in
schools and universities, that they had by immediate infusion or some other
way. Enthysiasts go upon a false principle that learning, arts, tongues, are
in their nature and kind, heathenish, whereas of themselves and in their kind
and nature, they are neither heathenish nor Christian, but natural and well
polished habits and acquired qualities indifferent and extrinsecall to either
the state of Ethnicisme or Christianity, and good or ill, as they are well
used, or abused, in either states, they argue vainly then who thus reason: if
Christ and his Apostles carried on a ministry without learning, arts, and
tongues, then so may we: but the former is true, therefore so is the latter,
the major is false, because sectaries want the immediate inspiring Spirit that
Christ and his Apostles had to supply defects of education and industry, and
the assumption is palpably false also: who ever therefore now will take on
them, to be public ministers of the New Testament, and go from weaving,
sowing, Carpentarie, Shoo-making to the pulpit to the representing of God, and
being his mouth to his people, being void of all learning, tongues, logic,
arts, sciences, and the literal knowledge of the scripture, and yet cannot
show that either the Holy Ghost has given to them the Gift of tongues, and the
knowledge of the mystery of the Gospel by revelation without the teaching of
flesh or blood as he did to the Apostles, or without some more then ordinary
competent measure of knowledge and supernatural dexterity to cut the word of
truth aright: and yet allege that fishermen never brought up at schools and
universities may be preachers of the Gospel, and why not Weavers, Tailors,
Button makers, Shoo-makers, etc. they are but intruders, and run, and the
Lord sent them not, how then can, M. Beacon in his Chatechisme, page 153, 154.
Prove that the ministry of the Spirit can be carried on without that which we
commonly call Humane Learning from Act. 4.13. Because Christ and his Apostles
carried it on so? For Christ and his Apostles wanted not that which we commonly
call humane learning, yea and most properly call so, they wanted learning
acquitted at schools and universities, but that is not the question: whether
men may be preachers though they never were educated and trained up in
universites? Humane learning is not called so from the way and manner of
acquiring of it, but from its own nature, And Christ and his Apostles made use
of humane arts and tongues, for the understanding and opening of Scripture.

1 Christ and his Apostles cite Scripture out of the Hebrew text in the old
Testament, That Christ and his Apostles had learning and made good use of
sciences arts and tongues, is proved.
into the tongue known to the hearers, yea and the Apostles do translate the
scripture in Hebrew into the Greek tongue, and expone it, and draw Logical
consequences from the Old Testament, so Christ Mat. 22. God is the God of
Abraham now dead, ergo the dead shall rise again. Antinomians say, Christ
makes no use of Logic and of Logical consequences, because they are Logical,
for that which he says there is Scripture, because Christ so says, not
because there is such Logical arguing in the words.

Ans. The same way that we argue from an Antecedent to a consequent by natural
logic* so does Christ: we deny not but Christ and the Holy Ghost in the
Evangelist Matthew does put the stamp and impression of Scripture on natural
and sinlesse arguing from an Antecedent to a consequent: but it follows well
Christ made use of logic in Scripture-discourses, therefore humane learning is
lawful for, and necessary to the opening and understanding of the Scripture.

2 Whereas Antinomians say consequences are not Scripture, but darken the glory
of the Gospel. Salt. shadows fleeing away. p. 8. It is clear Christ calls
this very logical consequence. God is the God of dead Abraham, ergo dead shall
rise, by the very name of scripture, which yet was but a consequence drawn
from Exo. chap. 3.6. ye err, not knowing the Scriptures, and further he
rebukes the Saduces as ignorant, who did not make use of the like logical
consequence to see the truth of the doctrine of the resurrection, ye err, not
knowing the scriptures. Mat. 22.31. Have ye not read that which was spoken to
you? etc. ergo it was their unbeleife and dullness that they did not read and
understand the logic of the Holy Ghost, and they ought to have read the
article of the resurrection, Exodus 3.6. in the consequence of it, as the
Scripture it self. 2 Paul draws arguments, by good logic, and so does Christ
and the Apostles, from the scripture, it is written, it is written, and what
says the Scripture? And Isaiah says, Hosea says; then arguing by Logic from
the old Testament to prove articles of ^aith in the new, which is a faculty of
reasoning by art acquired by industry and learning, is lawful and necessary
for the understanding of the Scripture.

3 The Prophets and Apostles almost in every line, use logical reasoning, from
nature, from the cause, the effect, the consequent, and motives from good, to
convince and rebuke, to exhort and stir up to duties, from wrath, life,
reward, threatenings, promises, etc.

4 Paul cites Heathen Poets, as Aratus, Act. 17.28. to convince the Athenians,
and Menander, 1 Cor. 15.33, to convince the Corinthians, and Epimemdes, Titus
1.12. to silence the Cretians.

5 Our own language, that we understand by education and teaching from the
breasts from parents, and others we hear speak, has an use of natural
necessity, that faith may come by hearing* Romans 10.14. were the Gospel to be
preached by the English to the Indians* we must make use of arts and tongues.

6 In the Books of Moses, are secrets of Physic, true antiquity of tracts of
rare historical providence* Exodus a rule of Justice and righteous laws,
Joshua a glass of holy war. Judges of Magistrates and Tyrants, Samuel,
Kings, Proverbes, Ecclesiastes, sacred polititicks. In Job use is made of
Astronomy, etc. And Herodotus, Josephus, Quintus Curtius, Xenopho^, and other
heathen writers conduce not a little to give light to the textuall knowledge of
Chronicles, Nehemiah, Ester, Daniel, as all those that write of the Babylonish,
Assyrian, and Persian Kingdoms and Empires, and the Roman history may, in
regard of our dullness, add light to the Prophets and Evangelists, Acts and
Epistles of Paul in the New Testament, so that these Spirits like M^^hie Becold
and Swenckefeld, who would have all books burnt, except the Bible, in regard
that humane arts hinder the spiritual understanding of the Scripture, declare
their madness, for upon the same ground God should, in the conversion of a
sinner, root out the natural understanding, senses and faculties of soul and
body, for except they be sanctified and Elevated above their natural sphere,
in an actual illumination, they can do nothing: yea and all Bibles translated
out of the originalls, in Germans, Latin, Italians, French, English,
Sl^v^^icke, Persian, and Arabic etc. tongues, must be burnt, for all these
translations must be done by singular art and the knowledge of tongues All that
can be said on the contrary may be blown away easily, for the natural
sinlesse knowledge of sciences, arts, tongues, are a substra^um, a foundation
to, and for the Spiritual knowledge, and faith of the mysteries of the Gospel.
Christ and his disciples knew the art of sowing corn on diverse grounds, How
the inward teaching excludes not the outward, but complyeth therewith.
of fishing, of buying a field where a Pearl is, and this knowledge did not
hinder, but much contribute to the spiritual knowledge of the mysteries of the
Gospel, nor is the literal sense of the scripture, in the Saints, distinct
from the Spiritual, but it is the same with two sundry lights and evidences,
as with the same eyes, and seeing faculty I read the book of God in the night
with candle light, and in daylight with the sunlight, then none can say I have
for that two diverse or contrary Bibles, and so the capacity natural that makes
me see and know, Jesus to be the savior of the world, literally, is heightened
indeed with a real removal of spiritual blindness, and a real addition of
a new distinct, higher supernatural visive faculty, the Spirit of revelation:
but I see with this new faculty, the same Jesus the savior of sinners, not
another* but with a light and a sunshine and daylight raying of a far
higher nature, then I saw before. But this proposition, Mary's son Jesus is
the savior of the world* has no new different sense and meaning, nor foundes
it another new objective Christ different from that Christ objected before to
the literal or natural visive capacity or humane understanding only the
proposition shines with the same very sense now, as before, but now it is seen
with a higher daylight irradiation and splendour, and apprehended with the same
natural, literal understanding, the same humane vital and created faculty,
to which is added a new real power, a new visive heavenly capacity to see the
same Jesus in his beauty and glory, nor yet get I two natural understandings,
nor can the scripture have two senses.

Ob^e^t. 1. 1 Ioh. 2.26, 27. Th^se things have I written to you concerning them
that deceave you: but to fence them from this d^ceeving, he opposes the
anointing so as they needed not that any man should teach them, for the
anointing taught them. Now that anointing did never teach them such tongues and
arts (...) were humane, therefore the Saints had not need of any such learning,
Privolous objections of Sam How against arts and tongues removed.
and yet this anointing taught all truth and obedience in it also, Ioh. 16. He
shall lead you in all truth, ergo no more truth is necessary.

Ans. 1 Had this man a head to frame a Syllogism, as he brings a confused
argument, it should appear how weak he is, thus, he that teaches us all
truth, so that we need not humane teaching, is a sufficient teacher without all
humane teaching of arts and tongues, But the anointing or holy Spirit is such a
teacher. How the teaching of the Spirit excludes not arts, learning and
tongues, or the teaching of men.
ergo we need no other teacher, so the old Anabaptists and Enthysiasts. I
answer to the major, he that teaches us all truth, as the only inward,
principal and efficacious teacher of all truth immediately, and without all
instruments and external means: so that we need no other external teacher.
It is true, he is in his kind a sufficient teacher, but the assumption, (to
wit that the anointing and Spirit teaches us so without all instruments and
external means) is most false, the Holy Ghost, by this reason, should
immediately, and only in his own sole and singular person preach to us
without so much as speaking in our own known mother tongue, and without
vocal preaching of pastor or gifted prophet. Now Christ who promised the
Spirit did also, when he ascended on high, promise and actually Ephesians. 4.12*
Give some Apostles and some prophets and some Evangelists, and some pastors and
teachers 12 for the perfecting of the Saints* for the work of the ministry,
for the edefying of the body of Christ. Now the place speaks not exclusively,
but comparatively, he that teaches all truth mediately, by the ministry of
men, needs not any teachers as organes and instruments in the ordinary course
he has set, to gather saints, by a ministry, it is most false for this
argument does with equal strength conclude against all ministry, preaching and
coming of faith by hearing, as well as against ar^s* and tongues, for neither
does the Spirit teach immediately and without schoole^* universit^^^ and humane
teaching. The way of preaching* more then he teaches arts and tongues, yet
this, the anointing did (...) teach them arts* and tongues, is impertin^^^ly
(...) overplus in the (...) which is no^ (...) conclusion, for without the
Spirit of reve^^^ion (...) maybe, and are learned. And whereas* John says,
(...) no^ that any man teach you, it is but that which Ier. said 3.1* 34. And
they shall no more ^each every man his neighbor, and every man his brother,
saying, know the Lord* in which words John and Jeremiah (...) no other thing,
then there shall be more then only literal knowledge of man teaching man,
because they shall be more, even inward teaching by the anointing, Esa. 54.19.
Ioh. 6.44; 45. they shall all be taught of God, nor is it the intent of the
Holy Ghost to reject the ministry of men which Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. Must
endure t^ll we meet all in the unity of faith in heaven, but only the Holy
Ghost speaks comparatively, and denies, the teaching of men to be reaching,
if it be compared with Gods inward and effectual teaching. So Psalm. 50.8. I
will not reprove th^^ for thy sacrifices, v. 14 Offer to God thanksgiving, that
is, I offend rather at thy unthankefulnesse, then that thou multiplyest not
sacrifices to me.

Object. 2 God places our salvation in enmity to man's wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.23
24. We preach Christ crucified to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the
Grecians foolishness, the Jews cried away with him, at Athens, the Gentiles
mock Christ and Paul, and God will have no flesh to glory but in the Lord, now
this learning is but fl^shly and carnal.

Ans. 1. God places our salvation in enmity to man's wisdom, simply, and in
the simple natural and sinnelesse knowledge of arts and tongues, Its most
false, in enmity to to man's wisdom abused, gloried in, its true. and God
brings to nothing the wisdom of this world, by which Jew and Gentile slighted
Christ, and denied him, and willed a murthererer Barrabas to be released before
him. What is this to the Lords condemning of humane learning, arts and tongues
of which the Apostle; 1 Cor. 1. speaks not, but of their carnal abuse of
these and glorying in them? and it is to beg the question, to say that this
learning is carnal and fleshly, in it self, which is now the question. 2 Nor
was it out of pride of humane learning, tongues, and arts that the Jews
stumbled at Christ and the wisdom of the Cross, but out of false glosses
they put on the Scriptures of the Old Testament, seeking by the law salvation,
Romans 10* 1. and by this argument the Old Testament is condemned as well as arts
and tongues, as an impediment to faith.

Object. 3. We are complete in Christ.

Ans. It is not worthy an answer, for as touching spiritual furniture,
righteousness, salvation, teaching by the Spirit, we are complete in Christ,
ergo the ministry and teaching of men is no instrument, no external means of
our compleatnesse in Christ, it follows not at all.

Object. 4 Christ sent me not to preach the Gospel with the wisdom of
words; least I should make the cross of Christ of no effect.

Ans. By the wisdom of man's word^, he means, not learning, Rhetoric,
eloquence simply, for ^aul preached the Gospel with more of that, and spoke
more tongues, then they all; but the fond, affectate, vain soaring and
confiding in these, as if they could ad virtue to the Gospel to save souls.

Object. 5 The weapons of our warefare are not carnal.

Ans. None of us are so mad as to say that humane learning, arts and tongues
can convert souls, and lead high thoughts captive, to the obedience of Christ:
but that Rhethorick, Logic, Tongues, learning sanctified, fitly made use of,
by the Spirit being Spiritualized, as we see in the Prophets and Apostles may
conduce to the opening and due understanding of the Scriptures. Other abused
scriptures and bablings, I will not answer nor trouble the reader with all.

CHAP. IX. Of Henry Nicholas, and older Familists and Antinomians. The birth
and qualities of Henry Nicholas the father of the Family of Love.

H.N. Epistle to the two daughters of Warwick.



HEnry Nicholas was borne at Amsterdam as some think, he spread his heresy a
little after David George, about the year 1556 he was an ignorant, foolish
man, a crafty hypocrite, had a sort of deceiving violence in his smooth
eloquence of love. he calls himself The first illuminate Elder of the Family
of Love, was at the beginning austere, riged, and fasted, waked diverse nights,
and prayed and praised, spread his errors through Holland, and Lower Germany
pretended visions, and conferences with the Angels from whom he had his way of
exponing scriptures by allegories, but turned afterward, loose and vain; he
came over to England and spread his foul heresies, and seduced a number of
Artificers, and silly women, and wrote an Epistle to two daughters of Warwick,
dissuading them from regeneration by the word of God, read or preached, and
called that regeneration Ceremonial, ^lementish and false and labored to
persuade the maids to a spiritual new birth, by the Spirit and internal word,
and did forbid suffering for the truth* or confessing of Christ to the death,
before men, and exponed the laying down of the life for Christ* of the
mortifying the body of sin: he had his errors from the Antitrinitarians and
denied Christ to be God. This Epistle was answered and r^futed by H. Ainsworth,
he wrote a Book of Documentall sentences, another called Evangelium regni. The
Gospel and joyful message of the Kingdom^, his doctrine and that of David
Georgius was confuted by M. Martyn Micronius Minister of the Dutch-church at
London, under Edward the Sixth of England, and by M. Nicholaus Charineus,
Minister also of the Dutch Church, who dyed, An. 1563. H. Nicholas his tenants,
especially his joyful message was refuted by M. John K^ewstub preacher in
Queen Elizabeth^ time, the book was printed at London, An. 1576. and Dedicated
to Ambrose Earl of Warwick. H. N. wrote in dark and obscure terms, following
much that wicked pe^ce called Theologia Germanica, set out by Randall, 1646.
this form of writing says Knewstub is an evident note of a seducing spirit.

This blasphemous Impostor, as if he were an Apostle, speaks of his calling
like a false Christ.

1 Chap. Evangelium regni. The joyful message of the Kingdom.

H. Nichol^s, through the grace and mercy of God, through the holy Spirit of
the love of Jesus Christ. What H. Nicholas called h^m^elf.


Raised up by the highest God from the death, Ephesians. 2.1. according to the
providence of God and his promises.

Anointed with the Holy Ghost, in the old age, of the holy understanding of
Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 4.13. Godded with God in the Spirit of his love.
Illuminated in the Spirit with the heavenly truth, The true light of perfect
being.

Made Heir with Christ in the heavenly goods, of the riches of God.

Elected to be a Minister of the gracious word, which is now in the last times
raised up by God, according to his promises in the most holy service of God,
under the obedience of his love.

The Familists of New England, and Antinomians, profess all of them are
Christed with Christ. The Apostles do not so extol themselves. Town Assert.
of Justifica p. 39. So soare^h. Keep the Law (says he) and works here below on
the earth, and as Enoch converse in Spirit and walk with God in the alone
righteousness of Christ apprehended by faith. As if a holy conversation and a
spiritual walking with God in faith and duties, were low, base, and for men of
the earth only.

H. Nicholas his wicked doctrine*
The speciall^ errors and Heresies holden by H. Nichol. are such as are for the
most part either abominably blasphemous or much like to the errors of
Anabaptists, David-Georgians, Swenskfeldians, from whence they sprang, as have
been, and shall be, God willing, cleared to be the same with Libertines and
Antinomian errors.

1 H. N^cholas challenges to himself that which is proper to Christ Esa* 61.
Lu, 4. H. Nicholas evangel, c. 15.
that the Spirit of the Lord is on him to preach glad tidings to the poor. The
Antino, Beacon Beacon cat^^chis. 155, 156.
says that none can be true preachers, but they run unsent, that run without
the Spirit of sanctification.

2 H.N. says c. 1 Evan. not one man Adam sinned, and we in him, but man from
the beginning to this day was disobedient: Hence Adam was no one man. 2 We
have no more sin from the first Adam, then by following the sins of all
men. 3 The story of Adam of the tree and fruit, is but an allegory. Antinomians
Rise reign er. 53, 54.
turn all in allegories. Randal. sermon. a sower went out to sow; here is a
warrant from parables to expone scriptures by allegories: all things of nature
are sacraments of Gospel mysteries, as do this in rememberance of me.

3 H.N. says c. 1 All that walked not in the form of Abel, according to the
manner and ordinance of Seth, were not of the right stock of Seth. Then
righteousness comes by personal imitation of Seth, not by the imputed
righteousness of Christ.

4 Christ to H. N. is head of Abraham's faith, not Abraham's flesh, which
destroys his humanity, for H. N. applies these words, the power of the most
high shall come on thee, and overshadow thee; by an allegory to all believers,
which H.N. e^. ^. c. 5.
had their descent out of the faith of Abraham partakers of the Godly nature
and being, and according to the will of God, are wholly minded with God so Rise
reig. er. 11.
Antinomians, as Christ was once made flesh, so is he now first made flesh in
us, ere we be carried to perfection. Del. ser. 17, 18, 19* 20. tells us of two
means of Gospel-reformation.

1 The word dwelling in the flesh reformes the flesh, M. Del and H. Nicholas
the familist, sympathiz^ in the same Grammar, and it^ to be feared in the same
doctrine touching God manifested in the flesh.
and it dwells in us through faith, this word is not the word without us, then
it is not the scripture word, but the word within us; It shows us Christ and
changes us into his image. The 2 means is the Spirit, which God promised long
before to power upon all flesh and so to reform all flesh, the Spirit
reformes, 1 By taking away all evil out of the flesh, as pride, ^nvy, and all
errors and false doctrines, for the Spirit burns up all errors as ^ay and
stubble. I fear Del give us no more for God manifested in the flesh but this,
not one word of the Scripture or preached Gospel is once mentioned hear, for
fear Enthysiasts offend, 2 The Spirit reformes by changing the flesh into its
own likeness, as fire changes every thing into its self, so does the Spirit
in the flesh, make the flesh spiritual, M. Del inclines to deny Christ God
incarnate. It were good he would clear himself of Familisme, and of this
point in particular.
heavenly* holy, meek, good, loving, etc.

Here I desire M. Del, to separate from H.N, and give a reason of his faith to
those that offend at his doctrine. 1 How is the Spirit powered on all flesh, and
so is all flesh reformed? p. 19. l. 20. Is he for universal salvation of all?
the Scripture speaks not a word of the heart reformation of all, This Devil
is going abroad in our times. Del speaks like this wandering Spirit. 2 How is
the inward word, which he carefully distinguishes from the outward word, p.
18. l. 3* 4. differenced from the Spirit? p. 19. for the inward word, is the
word made effectual by the working of the Spirit, and he says the word (not
the letter without the Spirit which is but the dead law, (says he) and Spirit
are always joined, that is the inward word, (that is) faith wrought by the
Spirit as I take it, is ever joined with the Spirit; who doubts but the Spirit,
is ever with the Spirit? (3) The Spirit takes all evil out of the flesh, what
is that? out of the man, out of the soul and body, this is a rare expression.
4* How dwells the word in our flesh? page 18. l. 1. God the substantial word
the son of God dwells in our flesh, that is, personally in the nature of man,
Ioh. 1.14. why does Del speak with heretics and not explain himself? 5 How
does the inward word change us into the image of Christ? p. 18. he has not
told us of the Spirit all this while p. 19. which only changes us into the
image of Christ. 6. How does the Spirit change the flesh into its own
likeness? by flesh, ye mean not corruption, so the scripture Romans 7. Romans 8.
Gal. 5.17. and in many places takes the word flesh. Now the Spirit makes not
corruption, and sin spiritual, heavenly, holy, meek, good, loving, etc.
then by flesh ye mean the fabric of the nature of man, soul and body. Why
speaks not Del with protestant divines and calls it the mortification of
the old man, and the vivification of the new, but he speaks with H. N. and
puts us to request him for the truths sake, to expone what a God manifested in
the flesh, and what a word dwelling in the flesh he acknowledges, for H.N.
grammar rules his pen and tongue, What Christ, God manifested in the flesh is
to Familists.
not the Holy Ghosts.

5 To H. N. Every Godly man partaker of the being of God and Spirit of love is
God incarnate, and Christ; and Christ is not any one man the son of Mary, but
the condition of all men believing, and loving* and Christ is no where else
says, Theo. Ger. p. 22. but he is the same man.

6 H. N. ^. ^xh cap. 7.
Gods being is love it self. The damned apostate, should acknowledge his being
to be some other thing then love only, as Moses does Exodus 34.6. The Lord
strong, gracious, slow to anger, etc.

7 H. Nich. 1 exh. c. 17. sect. 26.
There is no diety belonging to God but love, of which mortal men do partake
in this life, so H. N, The Lord has Godded me with God in his Godly being with
the Spirit of his love.

8 By our obedience of love we become sons.

9 Love is faith, working and doing is faith. Whereas faith works love and
obedience as the cause of love, Sect. 9*
says the scripture. Iam. 2. Heb. 11.

10 Obedience of love and misliking of sin, brings us unto the being of
Christ, Sect. 9.
clear against the freedom of the grace of God, Tit. 3.3. 2 Timothy 1.9* Ephesians.
2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

11 All that believe not as H. N. are unbaptized, no christians more then
heathens. So Del and the Antinomians esteem all, Sect. 10.
not of their way, legal Pharesies.

12 H. N. Evan. c. 13. Se. 2.
Christ not God, nor man* but the state of perfection in believers or
anointing, or the Sabbath; yea sect. 8, 9, 10. Oh how grosely (says he) have
then certain wise of the world overreached themselves, which have without
diversity, forsaken the law of the Elders Testament (Moses his law of
Ceremonies) and of the priests office after the order of Aaron, and set back
the same as a thing unneedfull. But have all for the most part cried, Christ,
Christ, and we are Christians, and attributed to themselves much freedom ere
ever the time of the appearing of Christ, or the anointing of the Holy Ghost
was come to pass: which doctrine M. Hutchison approves, and the Antinomian M.
Cornewell in his preface to the conference of M. John Cotton approves her way
and all her followers. page 7, 8. now she was (Rise reign, ruin, page 37,
38.) much perplexed to know the meaning of that 1 Ioh 4.3, Every Spirit that
confesses not Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is the Spirit of Antichrist,
for neither Papist nor Protestants deny that Christ is come in the flesh: and
are the Turks then the only Antichrist? At length the Lord revealed immediately
to that Iezabel from heaven that all opposite to her way of Familisme and
Antinomianisme, who did not preach the N Covenant, their way were Antichrists
for these (said she) who deny the covenant or Testament, deny the death of the
Testator, hence while Antinomians of England resolve me, I think she and hers
believe God incarnate is not the man Christ like us in all things in the days
of his flesh except sin, but the anointing of the Holy Ghost, by which
Antinomians preach free grace and the new Covenant their way, so by H. N.
Christ is that condition of state by which men leave the written word, and
betake themselves to revelations.

13 The old Testament Ceremonies are in force after Christ's incarnation
resurrection and ascension even till the Holy Spirit and anointing come to make
every believer Christ: and this anointing is all the God manifested in the
flesh, and the Christ that H. N. knows.

14 H. Nich. In his Epistle to the daughters of Warwick sect. 4 says The
being of Christ in love, H. Nicholas, with Antinomians, M. Del. M. Beacon,
reject all ordinances and repute all external worship and confessing of Christ
before men all controversies in religion indifferent* this wic^ed opinion is
re^uted by 8 arguments.
is received through the power of the Holy Ghost, not by any ceremonial Christ
which one man speaks to another, and sect. 5.7.10. He condemns all
scripture, as literal, fleshly, Elementish, ceremonial, all preaching of the
word, seals, sacraments, ordinances, as literal and indifferent* and all
regeneration that way as unlawful, and extolleth a spiritual regeneration of
the Family of Love, done by the Spirit, without the preaching of man, so does
the Antinomian De^ page 6, 7, 8, etc. in his sermon extol inward reformation,
but withal cries down all external reformation, that is done by laws,
synods, the power of men, yea or of Angels, as carnal, antichristian
hypocritical and false.

15 All Ordinances, hearing, preaching, Scripture, scripture-learning,
Baptism, the Lords Supper, all confession of Christ before men, all externalls
in religion are things of no worth, indifferent, free, trivial, laid on us by
no law of God, so H. Nich. sect. 5.7.10. Epist. to the daughters, so the
Anabaptists (as Bullinger says) so Antinomians, so Swenckefeld, as
Schlusserburg, says Cato heret. l. 10. p. 30. and another reformation beside
this of the heart, I know not, says M. Del. But the Apostle James calls for
the clensing of the hands, as well as the purging of the heart, and
Gospel-reformation (says Del) only minds the reformation of the heart then
nothing is minded by the Gospel of walking worthy of the Lord in our
conversation among men. So Beacon the Antinomian in his Catechism in the
Epistle to my Lady Say and Seal. Oh that they were once wise to forbear, this
clashing and dashing themselves in pieces for matters external, trivial, and
circumstantiall in religion. These be most like the words of Galli^. Act.
18.15. But if it be a question of words, and names, and of your law, look ye
to it, for I will be no judge of such matters, 16. and he drove them from the
Judgment seat. So says he Catech. page 188, 189.

Q. Are you bound to this doctrine and practice of baptizing, by a law?

A By the law of love.

Q May you use it or not use it?

A I have liberty so to do. 1 Cor. 10.29.

Q How?

A If I use it I am not the more accepted. 1 Cor. 8.8* and if I use it not, I
am not the less accepted.

Q Is it then in that respect, of the same nature with circumcision?

A Yes, and all other outward things, Gal. 6.15.

Q May we suspend the use of some outward things?

A Yes, Gal. 2.14.

Q When?

A When religion is placed in them, Gal. 2.14.

Q Does not religion consist in them?

A No.

Q In what then?

A In righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit.

Q They are not then heavenly things themselves?

A They are Jews, that know not Christ, that so think.

Q What then is the baptism of water?

A A Shadow, 1 Pet. 2.21.

Q Why do men strive about it?

A It shows our unacquaintance with the substance, Phil. 2.7. Mic. 6.6, 7.

Q Of what is it a shadow?

A A shadow of Christ, Col. 2 17.

Q Is there a teaching by shadows in the New Testament?

A Yes. 1 Pet, 3, 21, etc.

In all this good Reader observe, this absurd doctrine from this Antinomian way
of Mr. Beacon, for ^he raises the old heresy of a sectary whom Calvin in a
treatise called Confutatio Hollandi, refuteth, who said it was lawful to bow
to Id^^ls, because Christ violated the Sabbath, and because Christ has
perfectly fulfilled the Law, and restored us to spiritual liberty, he has
freed us from all external observance of the law, either ceremonies, or any
other thing, if we love God, and our neighbor, we are now in Christ made
spiritual, and are to seek the things that are above, and that Christ calls
us from all externalls, ceremonies even of the Lords Institution, baptism, the
Lords Supper, hearing, reading, and he spoke in the Grammar of M. Beacon nos de
umbra a asini et de inani atque infantili naenja certare cultum d^i nihil
amplius esse atque ejus neque legem neque normam habendam. So is Del against
all externalls and outward reformation, and for the heart reformation only. And
Calvin, in his treatise called excusatio ad Psedonic. an Apology to the false
disciples of Nicodemus, refutes them who thought they might go to Mass,
worship an Idol, so they keep their heart to God, and this they did to get
into rich benefices, to be Bishops, Pry^rs,, and the like, being taken with the
wares of the whore of Rome, for Calvin beside the example of Paul Act. 17.
whose Spirit was stirred at the Idolatrous Alter at Athens, brings the
Testimony of 1 Melancthon who says, Nec tantum interior cultus nec^ssarius
est, sedetiam externa significatio, seu confessio, seu professio, Mat. 10 qui
negav^r^t me coram hominibus, negabo eum coram patre coelesti, so Mar. Bucerus,
Peter Martyr, and Calvin condemn the same external observance of popish
superstition, Calvin excusatio ad Pseu. Nicode. page 521, 522.

It follows then that from Beacons way, I preaching of the Gospel, false
opinions of Papists, controversies between Protestants and Socinians,
Antinomians, Arrians, Familists, Enthysiasts, Brownists, Jndependants, etc.
must be but matters external, trivial, and circumstantiall in religion 2 the
profession of truth, since it is an external and outward thing, and a
testimony of Christ's truth before men, and of Christ before the world then is
trivial and so indifferent and free, which yet is commanded by Christ and
hedged with the greatest reward and threatening in the word, Mat. 10.32. 3 Yea,
for outward things and all externalls, reading, hearing, scripture, preaching,
seals, praying, baptism, the Lords Supper. There is no law, but the law of
love, not a law of the sovereign authority of God the commander, contrary to
Mat. 28.19, 20. and so men sin not in neglecting a command of God, in not
observing all things whatsoever Christ has commanded, Mat. 28.20. whereas we
conceive the Lord commands not only in the Gospel by the law of love* but by
his sovereign authority, as God in covenant with us, that we do all whether
inward or outward things that he commands.

4 So all externalls under the New Testament of being baptized, or not
baptized, hearing or not hearing, a sent ministry, confessing or not
confessing Christ before men, are as free and indifferent, though expressly
commanded of God, so as we sin if we despise prophecy, 1 These. 5. and reject
the counsel of God as did the Pharisees and Lawyers in not being baptized,
Luke 7.29* 30. whereas the publicans in obeying these commandments Justified
God. They are (I say) as free, trivial, and indifferent to Antinomians, as
eating, or not eating meats merely indifferent in the case, 1 Cor. 10. 1 Cor.
8. so if it were not a scandal, we may refuse baptism, the Lords Supper, the
scriptures* hearing the word, confessing Christ before men, teaching and
admonishing our brother, yea all duties of keeping our body clean, of speaking
the truth, of not lying, not killing, for all these are commanded believers, by
no law, but by the law of love, for say the Antinomians we are under no moral
Law else.

5 Yea* so also we may suspend the use of all outward things, by Beacons
Antinomian argument, we need not hear, pray, praise, receive Sacraments, teach
the ignorant, comfort the the feeble minded, releeve the poor, visit the sick,
etc. Why? al these are both outward things and are abused, most men place all
religion in them, as in Paul's time, Gal. 2. they placed religion in
circumcision, and the Jews placed all holiness in them, Es. ^. Mi. 6.

6 Why then was Christ circumcised? for in his time many said they were
Abraham's circumcised sons, and that was enough to save them, which was to
place all religion in circumcision; but though we may suspend the use of things
indifferent, when religion is placed in them, yet may we not neglect commanded
external ordinances, because they think they are good christians, if they be
baptized and go to Church, nor does Paul Gal. 2. think circumcision to be
nothing but a thing indifferent, for that the false Apostles and be witched
Galatians thought their Justification stood in circumcision, but Paul says,
Gal. 5. Not only circumcision was not indifferent, but damnable and whosoever
was circumcised, had fallen from Christ.

6 Conseq. To Beacon, they are all Jews, who judge baptism, the Lords Supper,
the scriptures read and preached heavenly things. Its true they are external,
and without the Spirit they avail not, but there is a Majesty and divinity in
the Scriptures, and in the power of God, in the foolishness of preaching and
baptism also, and they are in themselves spiritual ordinances of God, and
though baptism be a shadow, yet striving about the doctrine of baptism is in
Moses and Paul no token of their unacquai^tednesse with Christ, the substance
of all ordinances, as M. Beacon imagines.

7 This is to turn all orthodox and sound opinions touching Christ, free
grace, redemption, worship, scriptures, over into Septicisme. doubtsome
bickerings, and to leave us doubting and knowing nothing with certainty and
full assurance of faith, but to halt between two, in all opinions touching
God, Christ, the Spirit, Trinity, incarnation, free grace, scriptures, law,
Gospel, resurrection, heaven, hell, as these opinions are professed before men
and Angels, and this will turn to professed Atheism, to doubt and profess we
doubt of all things 5 And to be ever learning* and never to come to the
knowledge of the truth.

8 If they be Jews who think not all things external, all observances and
our outward conversation with men (which is most external) most indifferent
and free, then the letter of the written and preached old and N. Testament must
be free and indifferent, and it must be Iudaisme to read, hear, or study the
scriptures, for they are outward things in which carnal men ever have and ever
will place all religion.

9 We are to contend earnestly for the faith, and for every truth of God, Jud.
3. Touching baptism and all the ordinances of God, and to consent to wholesome
words, against all perverse disputing of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of
the truth, 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, 5. 2 Timothy 2.14, 15, 16. nor,

10. Can any Antinomian say that Paul was unacquainted with Christ the
substance of ceremonies and circumsion, when, with such Godly animosity, he
withstood Peter to the face, Gal. 2.11, 12, 13. and so sharply rebuked the
Galatians c. 3. c. 4. for lesser truths then we now contend for. But in this
Antinomians bewray of what Spirit they are, when they profess all religions,
Popish, Protestant, Socinian, Arrian, Arminian, Antitrinitarian, Antinomian,
Familisticall, to be free and indifferent, and if we have love and faith in the
heart, we are perfect Christians, though we live in wickedness, disobedience and
rebellion against God.

16 Our second birth is our savior Christ and dominion over sin the very son
of God, said H. Nicholas.

17 H. N. His Christ is neither man nor the consubstantiall son of God, but a
holy disposition or Godliness, whereas the Lord Jesus himself appeals to the
senses, the eyes and fingers of his disciples even after his resurrection, when
he was most spiritual and now in some measure entered into glory, Christ is
truly and really perfect man, not a holy dispo^^tion as H. N. blasphemously
says.
that he was a speaking man, and had flesh and bones, and the print of the
^ailes in his hands and sides, yea the scripture says he was the son of
Adam, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, Mary, 3 he was like us in all things,
sin excepted. Luk* 24.39, 40. Ioh. 20.26, 27.

18 The second birth is the Godhead, and Gods true being, obtains the
victory, bears rule with God, and brings forth the name of Israel or Christ
it self. sect. 12.

19 Christ is not true man, nor Abraham's seed after the flesh, but God only in
so far as he follows Abraham's faith.

20 H. Nicholas and all his illuminated Elders are Christ, all not of his way
the Antichrist, so some Antinomians now at Oxford.

Say 1 That Jesus Christ is not God essentially, but in name, 2 That his nature
was defiled with sin, as well as ours. 3 It is as possible for Christ to sin, as
for any of us. 4 The Trinity of the Persons is a fiction. 5 The fullness of the
Godhead does dwell bodily in the Saints as in Christ, and that when this
Godhead shall be manifested in them, they shall have divine honor, and have
more power then Christ, and do greater works then he. 6 The scripture is but
a shadow and a fiction* now the word says 1 The father and Christ are one, and
he thought it no robbery to be equal with the father Phi. 2 and maintained he
was the consubstantiall son of God, Ioh. 7. Ioh. 10, else the Jews would
never have said, he blasphemed in calling himself the son of God by
adoption, for they knew Godly men, to be so the sons of God. 2 By him the word,
the heaven and earth were created, Ioh. 1.1, 2, 3. Col. 1.16* 17. now God only
created the World. Ier. 10, 11, 12. Esaias. 44.24. Genesis 1.1. Psalm. 33.6, 7, 8. 3
He was anointed above his fellows with grace, Psalm. 45.2.7. and we receave
out of his fullness, and light our halfe-penny candles at this sun of
righteousness, Ioh. 1.14.16. and he gives the Holy Ghost, Ioh. 16.14. And
has received a name above all names, Phil. 2 9* 10. and God said to none of
the Angels, far less to any man, save to the man Christ, sit thou at my
right hand, Heb. 1.

21 The Familists are perfect in this life, and so are Antinomians Town as. p
77, 78. Saltm. free grace 140.

22 To say the three persons are one God is, a foolish making three Gods.
Antinomians profess that Antitrinitarians, Arrians, Socinians are their
brethren, so they believe and love God as they do.

23 There is but one Spirit in all creatures and that is essentially God,
Epist, to the the two daughters of Warwick.

24 Love and well doing and good works, are the cause of our rereconciliation,
and the very saviors that bears our sins: whereas Christ bare our sins in
his body on the tree, Esaias. 53.6, 7, 8. 1 Pet. 2.23, 24.

25 Christ's dying on the Cross, is nothing but H.N. and his illuminated
Elders, their obeying constantly the doctrine of H. N. so as no suffering could
cause them to forsake it.

26 Then is Christ put to death, when any of the Family of Love is no longer
led by the Scripture, but by the Spirit of revelation, that is as sure as the
Scripture, so said Mrs. Hutchison Rise reign. p. 61. er. 27.

27 Mortification is to H.N^ justification and removing of sins so do
Antinomians confound these two.

28 The resurrection of Christ was but a passing out of the flesh, or letter of
the law to the spiritual being of illuminated Elders.

29 Christ sits not in our flesh, at the right hand of God, but in the
spirit.

30 The coming of the Holy Ghost in cloven tongues, was the coming of Christ
again from heaven in the Spirit.

31 Christ's ascending to heaven, was his coming to heavenly mindedness and
fullness of knowledge.

32 The resurrection of the body is a rising in this life from sin and
wickedness.

33 In H. N. God this present day judges the world, the family of love are the
many thousands of his saints, that Judges with him, even now and reigns on
the earth. Evang. c. 1. sect. 9.10.

34 The Marriages of all not enlightened are unlawful.

35 Men shall marry and have wives at the resurrection.

36 The illuminated Elders cannot sin nor pray for forgiveness of sins, so
Antinomians hony-combe c. 3. page 25. c. 7 page 139, forgiven sin is not, or
has no being before God, Saltm. free grace, page 44.

37 Heaven and Hell are in this world, Antinomians say we are fully and
completely, not in hope only, saved in this life.

38 The family of love is under no law.

39 All things are the act of God.

40 Angels and Devils and wicked men, are acted immediately by the Spirit of
God.

41 The Scripture is a shadow.

42 Ordinances are for babes, in their family of love only.

43 The perfect are to live above all ordinances.

44 Jf temptations lay hold on us and force us to sin, and we cry to God for
help, and find no help, we are as guiltless as the maid forced in the
field, who cried and had no help; and is not for that a whore H.N. documentall
sentences. sect. 13. sect. 8.

It is true the believer shall not be charged to eternal condemnation, for sins
of infirmities, that are his burden and affliction, as well as his sin: but
sins of infirmities are essentially his sins who acts them, and make him
liable to wrath: If God should contend with David; for his adultery, and
murder displeased the Lord, but God cannot charge the sin of whoredom on a
maid that is forced and does cry out: if she do cry out, and have no help, it
is no whoredom on the maids part.

45 All the scriptures are to be exponed by allegories. This makes 1 The
Scripture a mass of contradictions and lies. 2 This turns our faith and
knowledge into a phancie, for the scripture it self cannot be a rule of
exponing scripture, if the gloss destroy the text. 3 The scripture shall not
Judge all controversies, as Christ referres the gravest question that ever was,
Whether he be the son of God or no, to this tribunal: Search the Scriptures
for they testify of me, Ioh. 5. 4 All the articles touching Christ his birth,
life, death, burial, resurrection, ascending to heaven, sitting at Gods right
hand, his second coming, etc. Creation, providence, histories shall teach
nothing, Scriptures are not to be exponed allegorically but where the Holy
Ghost so exponeth them.
an Allegory shall cause scripture say the contrary. Antinomians call all their
allegories the spiritual sense of Scripture. Bread may in an allegory signify
comfort, then the love of God dwells in a brother, who sees his poor brother
famishing and gives him neither clothing nor bread, but only faith in good
words, Brother go in peace, and be warmed, and clothed, an^ feed, for he
gives the poor man allegorically bread, and clothing contrary to James 2.14,
15, 16, 17. 1 Ioh. 3.17, 18. yea so all scripture shall be turned over in lies,
dreams, and phancies all covenants violated, all faith private and public
among Christins may be broken, and yet truth kept in an allegorical sense
according to scripture. A man may murder his brother, and have life eternal.
Contrary to 1 Io. 3.15 in regard that killing him, he saves him from sinning
any more, and so does not murder him, though violently, he take away his life;
for the scriptures calls the soul the man.

CHAP. X. Of Ioannes Agricola Eislebius the first father of the Antinomians.
The first rise of Antinomians under that name to wit of Joannes Agricola
Eislebius the Author of Antinomians.
THe first man that appeared under the name of an Antinomian was Ioannes
Islebius Agricol^ a Schoolmasters or Reader of divinity in Eisleben as Luc*
Osian. ^er, epi^o. hist. eccles. Centur. 16. l. 2. c. 29.
Luc. Osiander says: he was a proud, vain unconstant man, so says
Schlusselburgi^^, S. Theol. Doct^r Gymnasio, Tralesund^nsi^i^ pomerama, in suo
^atologo ^aer^ticorum lib 4. p. 35, 36.
Conradus Schusselburgius.

This man in the Augustine Assembly defended with Melancthon and Brentius, the
Augustine confession an 1530, as Osiander* ibi.
Osiander says, and adhered to the Saxon confession, so says Sleidanus, (...)
l. 7.
Sleidan. And after the battle of Smaldack, says Osiander; with Julius
Pflugius Bishop of Numburg, and Michael Sidonius he composed that unhappy book
called the Jnterim. For Antinomians are much for indifferency of all Religions,
especially in externalls, see R. Beacon in his Catachis. page 194* 195. and in
this they comply with the Anabaptists called fratres liberi, free brethren who
think all things under the Gospel are free, and neither forbidden nor
commanded, which the council of Trent (as also Alphons. a castro) said, was
the doctrine of Lutherans; but Osiander with reason said, this was a Calumny,
and lays the charge justly upon Eislebius and the Antinomians.

The lying Jesuit Gualterius in tabula Chronographica, s^cul. ^6. c. 36.
Gualterius says that Antinomians are the disciples of Luther: But Luther
(says Osiander) Instituted six public disputes at Wittingberge against the
Antinomians, and brought Eislebius to a Recantation, and in an Epistle at
length cleares himself of the Antinomian way with a great deal of vehemence
and indignation against them.

Eislebius an. 1538. brought in this error in the Church, he was first
admonished privately, by Luther, before he wrote. But that Luthers innocence
may appear, I have from a Godly and Learned Divine caused to be printed an
Epistle of D. Luther in which the Reader may see how vainly Antinomians of our
time boast that Luther is for them, in which both the Recantation of Eislebius
and the judgment of Luther may appear.

CHAP. XI. A Treatise against Antinomians written in an Epistolary way, by D.
Martin Luther, translated out of the high Dutch original; containing the mind
of Luther against Antinomians and a reca^tation of Ioannes Agricola Eislebius
their first father.
Doctor Martin Luther, Against Antinomians.
To the Reverend and most Learned M. Gasper Guttill, Doctor and Pastor at
Eisleben his singular good friend in Christ. Loving Mr. Doctor
I Suppose you received long ago the disputations against those new spirits,
the Antino. which have undertaken to thrust the law of God, or the ten
commandments out of the Church, and to remit them to the secular court: which
kind of proceeding in points of divinity, I never imagined, that it should have
entered into any man's purpose, much less into his practice. But God warnes us
by such passages, to take heed* to our selves, and not to fan^y* the Devil so
far from us, as those secure daring spirits presume. Verily, God must
incessantly be implored, with fear, humility, and earnest supplications, that
we may have his assistance and protection; Otherwise truly it may soon come to
pass, that the Devil will present before our eyes, such a Phantasme, that we
should swear it were the true Holy Ghost it self, as not only those ancient
Heretics, but in our time also examples (which have been and still are great
and dreadful) do forewarne.

I could indeed have easily forgotten all these things, which had so much
greived me, but that I rested in hope, that by means of those forementioned
disputations, I had performed my part, and defended my self. But Satan would
not be content with this, but still he brings me upon the stage, as if matters
stood not so ill betwixt me and them. I am afraid that had I dyed at
Smalkalden* I should have been proclaimed forever the Patron of those Spirits,
because they appeal to my Books, although they have done it behind my back,
without my knowledge and against my will. Nor did they afford me so much
respect, as to show me one word or syllable of it, or to confer with me about
it. I was therefore necessitated to convent more then once M. John Agricola,
besides my former dealings with him in the disputation it self, And in the
presence of our Doctors and Divines (because he had been the beginner and
Master of this Game) I did let him know all my mind, that he might be
thoroughly sensible, what a pleasure he had done to my Spirit, which I repute
also to be of good proof.

Whereupon he humbly submitted himself (as much as words and behavior could
evidence) promising to intermeddle no further, if he had gone too far, and
to comply with us in the same judgment. This so overruled my belief, that I
was satisfied. But it being otherwise construed, yea vaunted of, in pamphlets
sent hither* that Doctor Martin and M. Eisleben were in good terms; I further
pressed him to publish in print, an open Recantation, there being no other
remedy left, to expel this poison from the town of Eisleben and the country
round about. To this likewise he willingly assented, and offered himself.
fearing he should not hit it so well, as to gain a due approbation by it; he
most earnestly referred the matter to my self, entreating me to do it, as
well as I could, professing for his part that he would be well contented with
it. This induced me to undertake it, and now presently to perform it,
especially least it should be given out, D. M. Luth. vehement against
Antinomians who abolish the Law, sets down the Recantation of John Islebius
in the name of Islebius.
after my decease, either by M Eslebius himself, or by any other, that I had
neglected these things, and permitted them to pass without control.

To come then to the matter; the said I. Eisleben, Mr. of Arts, wills me to
make a recantation in his behalf, of what he had preached, or written against
the Moral Law, or Ten Commandments; and to profess that he is of the same
judgment as we are here at Winterberge, as likewise at Augspurg, according to
the tenor of our confession and Apology tendered to the Emperor: And if
hereafter he shall hold or teach the contrary, he wills me to pronounce the
same to be Null and condemned. I could find in my heart to commend him for
stooping so low, but it being so manifest, that he was one of my best and
nearest friends, I will spare my praises for another, least the cause should be
prejudiced by it, as if I had not gone in good earnest about it. If he continue
in this lowliness of mind, God can, and will exalt him, but if he
transgress, he may be sure that God can as well throw him down.

Let me therefore entreat you, good M. Doctor, that you would take this to be
written not as to your self alone, but that you would make it known to
others, wherever you can, especially to those that cannot read. For therefore
also it is printed, that every one, who will, or can read, may peruse it, least
it should be conceived that it was penned only for your sake: Since I am not
able to disappoint Satan by any other means, who still labors by writings to
traduce or misconstrue both my person and opinions.

And truly, I wonder exceedingly, how it came to be imputed to me, that I
should reject the Law or ten Commandments, there being extant so many of my
own expositions (and those of several sorts) upon the Commandments, which
also are daily expounded, and used in our Churches, to say nothing of the
Confession and Apology, and other books of ours. Add hereunto the custom we
have This was no custom in the Apo^^o^^cke Church, but by superstition kept
for the times being the dawning of Reformation.
to sing the Commandments in two different tunes; besides the painting,
printing, carving, and rehearsing them by children, both morning, noone and
evening; So that I know no other way then what we have used, but that we do
not (alas!) as we ought, really express and delineate them in our lives and
conversations. And I my self as old as I am, use to recite them daily, as a
Child, Word for Word; so that if any should have mistaken, what I had written,
he might (seeing and feeling as it were* how vehemently I use to urge these
Catechisticall exercises) in reason have been persuaded to call upon me, and
demand these or the like questions. What? Good Doctor Luther, d^'st thou press
so eagerly the ten Commandments, and yet teach withal, that they must be
rejected? Thus they ought to have dealt with me; and not secretly undermine me
behind my back, and then to wait for my death, that so they might afterward
make of me; what themselves* pleased. Well, I forgive them, if they leave these
courses. Verily, I have taught, and still teach, that sinners must be moved to
Repentance by the preaching and pondering of the sufferings of Christ, that
they may see how great the wrath of God is against sin: and that it cannot
be otherwise expiated; but by the death of the son of God: Which is not
mine; but St Bernards doctrine. But why do I mention St Bernard? It is the
doctrine of the whole Christian world, and which all the Prophets and Apostles
have delivered. But how does it hence follow, Contrary to th^s, Town the
Antinomian says, assert. ^ree grace, p. 3. we are ^re^d from the Moral Law or
Decalogue, with all its authority, domi^ion, offices and effects so Saltm. free
grace, p. 140.
that therefore the law must be taken away? I find no such inference in my
Logic, and I would gladly see or hear that Logician, that would demonstrate
the truth of this conclusion. When Isaias says, chap. 35, I have smitten him
for the sins of my people; I pray tell me; here Christ's sufferings are
preached, that he was smitten for our sins: Is the Law hereby rejected? what
is the meaning of these words: For the sins of my people? Is not this the
sense of them: Because my people have sinned against my law, and not kept the
same? Or can it be imaginable, that there should be any sin, where there is
noe law? Whoesoever abrogates the law* must of necessity abrogate sin allsoe.
But our Antinomians say we can no more sin, being once Justified, then Christ
himself. Ea^on honey comb. c. 3. p. 25. Saltmar. fr. g. 140.146.41. honey com.
c 4.5.
If he must suffer sin to be; he must much more suffer the being of the
law. For the Apostle says: Rom: 5: Where noe law is, there is noe sin. If
there be noe sin, then Christ is nothing. For why died he, if there were no
law nor sin, for which he ought to die? Hence you may see, that the Devil
intends, by this Ghostly Gambold to take away, not so much the law, as Christ,
the fulfiller of the law.

For he knows too well; that Christ may quickly and lightly be forgotten:
but the law being engraven in the bottom of the heart, it is impossible to
raze it out, as you may observe in the complaints, which are uttered by the
blessed Saints of God in the Psalms, that are not able to undergo the wrath
of God: which can be nothing else but the lively preaching of the law in their
consciences. Satan removing the law which is deeply engraven in the heart,
would drive men to all kind of sensuality.
And the Devil also is not ignorant of this, that it is impossible the law
should be taken out of the hearts of men, as the Apostle prooves in his second
chap* to the Romans v. 14:15. For when the Gentiles, which have not the law (In
the German Copy: which received not the law by Moses) do by nature the things
contained in the Law they having not the Law, are a Law to themselves: which
show the work of the Law written in their hearts etc. His maine plot therefore
is, to make people secure, and to teach them, to slight both law and sin, that
when they are once suddenly overtaken, either by death, or in an evil
conscience, they might without any remedy sink into hell; as having bin^
accustomed to all manner of sensuality, and taught nothing else in Christ but a
sweet security; so that when terrors of conscience seize on them, they take it
for a certain sign, that Christ (who can be nothing but sweetness it self)
had reprobated and forsaken them. This the Devil seeks and would feign
compass.

But it appears to me, that these fanatic spirits are of opinion, that all
those, which attend the preaching of the word, Justif^ed persons have sin
dwelling in them, yet is it the cu^rent doctrine (...) the Antinomi^^s of our
time, to teach that a believer is not to sorrow for sin, nor to fear either ill
of sin or punishment, but to live for ever in a merry pin, ye^, he wa^ts
nothing that the glorified in heaven have (says Saltmarsh) fr^e gra. p. 140.)
but believe he is in heaven, and is in heaven.
must needs be such Christians, as are altogether without sin: whereas indeed
they are such, whose hearts are altogether sorrowful and pensive, such as
fear God and feel their sins, and therefore they ought to have comfort
administered unto them. For to such the love of Christ can never be made sweet
enough, but they still need more and more of it, as I have found in experience
in a great many, to say nothing of my self. But these teachers are themselves
far short of such Christians, because they are so jocund and secure; Much
less their Auditors* who likewise are as fearlesse and foole-hardy. There is a
godly Virgin, an excellent singer, who speaks thus in a certain Hymn. He has
filled the hungry with good things, but the rich he has sent empty away. He
has put down the Mighty from their seats, and ^xalted them of low degree. And
his mercy is on them that fear him, from generation to generation. God cannot
but be angry (if there be any truth in the Magnificat) with such spirits, who
are secure and dread nothing* and such of necessity must those hold Bayards be,
which take away both law and sin.

Let me therefore beseech you ( Good Mr* Doctor) to continue, as hitherto you
have, in the pure doctrine, and to preach, that sinners can, and must, be
drawn to Repentance, not only by the sweetness of grace, that Christ suffered
and died for us, but also by the terrors of the Law. For when they pretend,
that we must follow but one kind of Method in teaching the Doctrine of
Repentance (to wit, The preaching of the Law necessary both before and after
conversion.
that Christ suffered for us) lest all Christendom should deviate from the
true and only way; this is little to the purpose. For it is our duty to
improve all manner of means (such as are divine Menaces, Promises, Punishments,
Blessings, and what ever helps we can) to bring men to Repentance: I mean, by
all the Presidents in the word, to bring them to the acknowledgement of sin,
and of the Law. Thus do all the Prophets, Apostles, and Saint Paul, Romans 2.
Know thou not that the goodness of God leads thee to Repentance? But admit
I had taught or said, that the Law should not be preached in the Church
(although the contrary be evident in all my writings, and in the constant
practice of my Catechizing from the beginning) why should men so stiffely
adhere to me, and not rather oppose me, who having ever taught otherwise, were
now revolted from my self (even as I dealt with the Popes Doctrine?) For I
will, and may boast of it in truth, that there is no Papist now adays so
conscientious, and in such good earnest, as once I was. For those that now
profess Popery, do it not for any fear of God, (as I a poor wretch was
given over to do) but they seek something else, as the world may see, and
themselves know. I was feign to learn by experience, what Saint Peter writes:
Crescite in cognitione Domini. Nor do I find, that any Doctor, Council, or
Fathers (though I should distill their books, and extract the quintessence out
of them) have on a sudden, and in their first entrance perfected their
Crescite, (...) Town asser. grace, p. 76.77. pleads for perfection both of
persons and works, of believers and all Antinomians do the same, as I prove.

Antinomians will not yield it* lawful to a believer to pray for remission of
sins. Town says David in the flesh, and out of weakness prayed for it, Psalm.
51. asser. p. 103.


Or that the word Crescite, should be as much as perfectum esse. For instance,
Saint Peter himself did learn his Crescite from Saint Paul, Gal. 2. and Saint
Paul from Christ himself, who told him by way of encouragement, Sufficit tibi
gratia mea, etc.

Good God! will not men endure it, when the holy Church acknowledges her sins,
believes the remission of sins, asks in the Lords Prayer, the forgiveness of
sins? But how come we to know what sin is, if there be no Law, nor conscience?
And where shall we learn what Christ is, and what he has done for us? if we
could not know, what the Law is, which he has fulfilled, or what sin is, for
which he has satisfied? And though we should not stand in need of the law for
our part, but could pull it out of our hearts (which yet is impossible)
notwithstanding there is a necessity of preaching it in respect of Christ
(which also is done, and must be done) that the world may know, what he has
either done or suffered for us. For who could know, what, and wherefore Christ
has suffered for us, if no body could tell, what sin was, or the law?

I conclude therefore, that the Law, will we, nill we, must be preached, if we
mean to preach Christ, though we should not use the word Law. For, do what you
can, the conscience will be terrified by the Law, when it is told, The Law
preached wit^ Christ's sufferings, for the preaching thereof, terrifieth more.
that Christ was to fulfill the Law for us, at so dear a rate. Why therefore
should any go about to abolish it, when it cannot be abolished? Yea, when by
the abolition of it, it is the more firmly established, and deeper rooted? For
the Law terrifies far more dreadfully, when I am told, that Christ the Son of
God must necessarily satisfy the same for me, then if without Christ, and such
great torments of the Son of God, it had been preached to me, with bare
threatenings. For in the Son of God, I really see the wrath of God, which the
Law declare^ but verbally, and with far less operation and efficacy.

Alas! that my own friends should thus molest me; I have enough to do with
Papists, I might say almost with Job, and Jeremiah: O that I never had been
born! Yea, I might almost say: O that I had never appeared in Books! I did not
care, but would be content, if all of them were already perished, And that the
works of such haughty spirits, might be sold in all Booksellers shops, which
is that indeed they would have, that so they might be satiated with their
goodly vainglory.

Again, I must not count my self better then our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Master of the house, who complains once and again: In vain I have labored,
and spent my strength in vain. But it is so, the devil is lord in the world,
and I could never be brought to believe, that the devil was the Master and God
of this world, till I found by a pretty deal of experience, that Princeps
Mundi, Deus hujus soeculi, was also one of the Articles of Faith: Howbeit the
children of men still remain in their unbelief, and I my self but weakly
believe it. For every one is in love with his own way, and all persuade
themselves, that the devil sure lives beyond Sea, and that they carry God in
their pocket.

But for the godly, which desire salvation, we must live, preach, write do,
and suffer all things. Otherwise, if you regard the devil and false brethren,
it were better to preach and to write nothing at all, but presently to dye and
to be buried. For, do what you can, they will be still perverting and
traducing all things, and raise mere Scandals and mischiefs, according as the
devil does ride or lead them. There is no remedy, but we must, and will fight
and suffer. We must not think to fair better, then the blessed Prophets and
Apostles, which were used as we are.

They have invented to themselves a new Method, which is that the doctrine of
Grace should be preached in the first place, and afterward the revelation of
wrath, that by no means forsooth the word [ Law] might be heard or spoken of.
This is a curious Crotchet Germany a stool for Catts Anti^omians are against
all Law, humiliation that goes before conversion contrary to Luthers method in
this passage.
wherein they might please themselves imagining that they can turn; and wind,
the whole Scripture, as they list, that so they may be Lux mundi* But S. Paul
must, and shall be that light, Romans 1. These men see not how the Apostle
teaches that which is directly opposite to their tenants, denouncing first the
wrath of God from Heaven, and making all the world to be sinners and guilty
before God; When he has made them so, then he teaches further, how they may
obtain Grace, and be justified, and this the 3 first Chapters mightily and
clearly evince. But is it not a singular blindness and folly of theirs, to
conceit that the manifestation of wrath must be something else, beside the law,
which cannot possibly be. For the manifestation of wrath is nothing else, but
the Law, where it is acknowledged and felt, according to that of the Apostle,
Lex iram operatur. And have they not now bravely hit it, when in abrogating the
Law, they teach it again, by teaching the Revelation of wrath? But thus they
preposterously put the Cart before the Horse* teaching the Law after the
Gospel, and wrath after grace.

But what foul errors the Devil drives at by those juggling Gypsies, I
discern (in part) well enough, but cannot now stand to discuss them. And
because I hope they will proceed no further, it shall not need.

It has been a special piece of pride and presumption in those men, Conceit
of singulari^y an occasi^n of Antinomianisme.
that they would bring something to light, that is new and singular, that the
people might say, He^r's a brave fellow indeed! Here Is another Paul! Have they
of Wittenberg ^ngrossed all knowledge? have not I also a good head? Yes truly,
thou have a head, but it is such a head, that ^^ekes its own glory, and
be^^ummers it self in his own wisdom. For you resolve to casheere the Law,
and yet would preach wrath which only the law must do. Thus you do no more in
effect, but throw away the poor letters L.A.W. but ratify the wrath of God
which is pointed at, and signified by those letters save that withal you
wreath St. Paul's neck behind him and put that, which is foremost, hindermost. Is
not this forsooth a high mystery, and a good reason, why all the world should
stand amazed at it? But let this suffice at this time; For I hope, seeing that
M. Eisleben is converted, and makes a recantation, that they likewise which
have been his followers, will surcease: which God grant! Amen. From all these
premises, if we would, we might learn to understand the histories from the
beginning of the Church, that evermore when the Church of God, did shine forth
at any time, and if its little flock began to be gathered, then the Devil,
espying the Divine light, raised from all corners huge great storms and
hideous tempests, to put it out: And though one or two puffes were stayed, and
kept off, yet he never gave over to bluster through some other hole against the
same light, without any end or ceasing. And so he will continue to do, I
warrant you till doomes-day.

I think, that I alone (to omit the Ancients) have undergone more then twenty
several storms and sects, by which the Devil has puffed at me.

The first was the Papacy. And I persuade my self, 1 Luthers suffering from
Sects
that almost all the world knows, by how many tempestuous winds of Bulls and
Books, the Devil by those his instruments has raged against me, how
direfully they have torn me in pieces, devoured and brought me to nothing. I
confess that sometimes I have also bestowed some little breath upon them, but
it did them no good, but made them more angry and mad, raging and raving,
without any intermission, till this day. 2


And when I was almost freed of the fear of these devilish whirlewinds,
another stormaticall devil, breaks in upon me through another hole, by
Munster, and those uproares, which had near blown out my candle. But when
Christ had almost stopped that gap, Satan breaks some panes of glass in my
window by Carolast wheirling and whizzing, that I thought he would have
carried away both weike and candle; but here also God assisted his poor Taper,
preserving it that it was not blown out.

After this came the Anabaptists, who to put out the light, thought to have
thrown the house out at window.

Into hazard all they brought,
But their wills they have not wrought.
Some also have raged against the ancient Doctors the Pope and Luther
altogether, as Serveto, Campanus, and the like.

As for those which have not openly in print fallen upon me, since their
venomous malignant papers and speeches, touched only my person, I will not
insist upon them. Only let me add thus much, that by my own experience (If I
should not reflect on histories) I have learned that the Church will never be
at quiet for the good words sake; but must still expect more new tempests from
Satan, as it has been from the beginning, as you may read in the
Ecclesiasticke and Tripartite history, and in the books of the holy Fathers.
But should I live yet a hundred years, and could I (by the grace of God)
appease not only the former sects, and modern storms, but also those, which
should arise hereafter; Yet I see well, that no rest can by such endeavors be
procured to our posterity, so long as the Devil lives and domineers. This
makes me also pray for a gracious hour, as desirous to be quiet of such
matters.

O you of succeeding generations, pray likewise, and study diligently, the word
of God Preserve the poor Taper of God. Be warned and armed, as those that must
look every hour, where the Devil will attempt to extinguish the light,
either by breaking the whole window, or a piece, or else by pulling off the
door of the roof. A warning to the following generations to look for
sectaries, such as Antinomians, Familists, Anabaptists, and yet to believe that
the power of Christ shall preserve his own Church.
For he dies not till the last day. I and thou must dye^, and when we are
dead, yet he remains the same, that he was ever, For the Fiend cannot leave
his storming.

I see yonder a far off, how vehemently he blows his cheeks, till he grow
red; intending to bluster and storm. But as Christ our Lord from the beginning
(even in his own person) did stricke with his fists upon those pouch-mouthed
cheeks of his, that they proved but mere blasts of the Devil (though they
left but an ill favor behind them) so he will do still both now and for ever,
For he cannot lie when he says, I am with you to the end of the world. And the
Gates of Hell shall not prevail against the Church. But let us do our duty
withal, as we are commanded, which is to watch and to preserve the light, as
much as in us lies. It is written, Be vigilant, and the devil is called Leo
rugiens, a roaring Lion, who goes about seeking whom to devour, not only in
the Apostles time, when Saint Peter spoke those words, but to the worlds end.
This we must look for: the Lord help us as he has helped our forefathers, and
as he will help our posterity, to the honor and praise of his glorious name,
to all Eternity.

For alas! what are we, that we should be conservators of the Church; our
forefathers could not do it, nor can they that come after us. He only it is,
that has been, that is, and that shall be: He that says, I am with you to
the end of the world; or as it is Heb. 13^ Jesus Christ heri and hodie and in
soecula [Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and for ever.] And in the Revelat.
He that was, that is, and that shall be. This is the man, thus he is called,
and there is none other besides him. For thou and I were nothing a thousand
years ago, when the Church of God was preserved without us; For He did it, who
is called [ Who was and yesterday] Qui erat, and heri. Nor can we do it now in
these our days; For the Church is not preserved by us, because we cannot stave
off Satan, who is in the Pope, Sectaries, and other Malignant people. And for
ought we can do, the Church might be ruined before our eyes, and we with the
Church, (as we have daily experience) were there) not another who does visibly
protect both Church and us This is so palpable a truth, that we may even touch
and feel it, had we no mind to believe it; And therefore he only must do it,
who is styled [ who is ever and to day] qui est semper and hodie. Nor are we
able to do ought for the preservation of the Church, when we are dead. But he
will do it who is called [ Who is to come, and who is for ever] Q^i venturus
est, and in soecula. And what we now say of our selves in this point, the same
also our Progenitors were forced to say, according as the Psalms and other
Scriptures testify: Yea, our posterity will even experiment the same, and must
sing with us and the whole Church, the 124 Psalm, If God were not with us, now
may Israel say, etc.

O! What a lamentable thing is it, that we should have so many dreadful
examples before us, of such men, who were so highly conceited of themselves, as
if they had been the only pillars to support the Church, and as if the Church
had been founded upon them; and yet see to what a shameful end they were
brought at last. Yet these terrible judgments of God, cannot abate our pride
and daring, nor make us lowly and humble? What is befalne Muncer in our time
(to say nothing of Elder and former ages) who was persuaded, that the Church
could not subsist without him, but that he might bear and rule her? And of
late the Anabaptists have warned us (with a vengeance) to remember, how
puissant, and nearly advancing that specious Devil is, and how perilous it is
to have such gallant thoughts of our selves. Let us be wise at last and learn
when we enterprise any thing, first, to look (according to the counsel of
Isaiah) into our hand, whether it be God or an Idol, whether it be gold or
clay. But all this availes not; for we still remain secure, without fear or
care. We can put the devil far from us, and believe not, that there is such
a body of flesh in us, as Saint Paul complains, Romans 7. That he could not do
that which he would, and that he was led captive. For we (forsooth) are those
Heroic Champions that need not fear our flesh and thoughts: but we are all
Spirit, and have wholly captivated both flesh and devil; so, that whatsoever
we think, or is cast into our minds, that must be a certain truth, and
infallibly the Holy Ghost. How can it be otherwise? Therefore, what other fine
Catastrophe could be looked for at last, but that both horse and rider must
break their necks. But enough of those lamentations. The Lord Christ be, and
remain our Lord Christ* blessed for ever, Amen.

I conceive, without failing against charity, I may say that Eislebius after
the death of Luther, returned to his vomit, and recanted his recantation, upon
these reasons:

First, because I think, we may credit Osiander his testimony, who says, in
his old age, he turned Epicure.

An vero ante mortem ad meliorem mentem redierit affirmare nequeo. Audivi tamen
eum etiam in provecta admodum aetate homini Epicuraeo, quam pio Theologo fuisse
similiorem. Lucas Osiander, Epit. hist. Ecclesiast. ^entur. 16. l. 3. p. 802.
De^to. Agric. Eislebi. Printed at Wittingburgh, by Joseph Klug, an. 1539. that
is, Whether or no, Eislebius before his death repented of his heresy, I dare
not affirm, but I heard by report in his old age, that he lived more like a
voluptuous Epicure, then a Godly Divine, 2 The Divines of Eisleben in their
large confession published an. 1560 say that after Luthers death, he again
defended his error in his public writings, So Schlusserburg, Catalo.
heretic. l. 4. page 36, 37. 3 he declined to publish in writing his own
recantation, as Luther desired him, but shifted the business, and laid it upon
Luther to do it, though he was a learned man and able to do it himself: How
ever Osiander is so far from thinking that Luther favored the Antinomian
way* that he says he believes that there was not any that held the opinion of
Antinomians, Lucas Osiander ubi enim Lutherus docet (ut saepe com. supe^ epis.
ad Galatas) paeni^entem peccatorem non debere audire Mos^m per legem peccata
accusantem, sed in Christum salvatorem oculos conjiciendos qui sanet co ^rita
corda, inde Eislebius et alij colligerunt legem non esse docendam.
and though Luther have hard phrases in his Comment on Galathians yet Osiander
says Cent, 16. l. 2. c. 29. page 314. That a sinner broken in Spirit, should
not hear the Law condemning sins, but should turn his eyes to Christ, who
healteh the broken in heart. Luther was a man much exercised in conscience, and
writes much from his own experience, especially in his Commentary on the
Epistle to the Galatians. Therefore I purpose God willing* further to vindicate
Luther in all his writings from the Antinomian error, when I have further, from
Schlusselburgius, Sleidan and Osiander, cleared the errors of Eislebius and
his, that the Reader may see, that they are the very errors of present
Antinomians and Familists.


1 The Law is not worthy to be called the Word of God.

2 When thou art in the midst of sin, only believe, and thou art in the midst
of salvation.

3 The Law of God belongs to the Course or Benches of Civil Judges (to
men-ward) not to the pulpit or conscience (to Godward. The tenants of
Eislebius and other Antinomians in Luthers time.
)

4 Men are not to be prepared for the Gospel or conversion by the preaching of
the Law.

5 Who ever have to do with Moses, go straight to the Devil.

6 In the Gospel nothing now should be spoken of violating of a Law, But only
of the offending of the son of God.

7 To hear the word and think of it in the heart is the proper consequence of
the Gospel.

8 Peter understood not Christian liberty.

9 To make our Calling and Election sure by good works is needless..

10 If you think the Church should be so governed, as men must be sober* holy,
good, chaste* now ye have erred from the Gospel.

11 The Law teaches not good works, nor is the Law to be preached, that we
may do good works, but only the Gospel.

12 The Law and Moses cannot show us the true God.

13 Christians are not to be rebuked by the Law.

14 Our faith and New-Testament-religion was unknown to Moses.

15 Good works profit nothing to salvation, Ill works tend not to damnation.

16 Christians with all their good works belong to the Devil.

20 The Holy Ghost converteth by himself, not by the Law, nor convinces he
the conscience of sin.

21 A believer is above all law, and all obedience.

22 The Legal Preachings of the Prophets, belong nothing to us.

23 We should not use these phrases, A Christian conversation, a christian
obedience, good works of christians.

24 The law, good works, new obedience belong not to the Kingdom of Christ,
but to the world, as Moses and the Popes supremacy belongs thereunto. So
Saltmarsh. Christ is our new obedience, and our mortification by imputation.

25 We should so live, as Jews, Anabaptists and others should see no good
works in us,

26 The law only, without the Gospel reveals not sin in its greatness and
deformity.

27 The Gospel only argues the contempt of a mediator.

28 Paulus Crellius the Antinomian prop. 85 Negant nostra ecclesiae (...)
vocabulum evangelij se generaliter in hac disputatione pro corpore doctrinae
accipere tam legem, quam evangelium.

It is true the Law, in its rigor, condemning and cursing and denying
righteousness or justification to a sinner, is no part of the Gospel, as the
Gospel is the pure doctrine of free justification in Christ's alone imputed
righteousness, nor can the law as it curses and condemns, justify, or
convert the soul, but sure what ever Antinomians say on the contrary, The Law
of the Lord converteth the soul, Psalm. 19.7. that is, the law in the hand of
Christ and spiritualized with a Gospell-Spirit converteth, which is not to be
taken as M. Town dreameth asser. page 42. The Law is established in our
sanctification, but that is in the inward Spirit, not in the outward letter,
for he and Antinomians imagine that we fulfill and obey the law, because the
Spirit immediately and irresistibly draws us, and acts on us as on blocks, and
that we are not to obey God and abstain from sin out of conscience to the
written Law [ Thou shall not kill] but so all we do, must be will-service
wanting all warrant of one letter of the word, contrary to Romans 14.23.

These Antinomians Schlusselbu. cat. hereticorum, l. 3. p. 45, 46, 47.
descended to a more subtle and finer way of the Laws use* they said it was no
question, but the just man or believer having received the Holy Ghost, does
every thing of the Law and lawfully uses the Law, to discipline and repress
those that were politically or in a Theological consideration unjust or
unregenerate, or to terrify and punish their own flesh, or unrenewed part
(which Town Town asser. p. 35.
with them says is under the Law, and is no better (said they) then the flesh
of the unjust, for none on earth keeps the Law, but the believer by the Spirit
of Christ, for he, by faith, establishes the Law.

In this, the old Antinomians are not so gross as new Antinomians, for I make
it good in this Treatise, that whereas old Antinomians said, caro justorum non
est melior carne injustorum, the flesh and unrenewed part of believers is no
better then the flesh of unbeleevers, and so the Adulteries and murders of the
one, are sins as well as the murders of the other. Our Antinomians, as
Saltmarsh free grace^ 154.
Saltmarsh, say the Scripture calls us ungodly and sinners, and children of
wrath; not that we are so, but seem so; or not so in Gods account, but in the
worlds. then by good Logic, the flesh, the sins, the murders of the believer
are but seeming sins, and sins in the worlds false account, not in Gods just
and true account. Yea, they are as clean (says Eaton Honey comb c. 3. page 35.
from sin, as Jesus Christ, and Saltm. fr. gr. p. 140.
(as Saltmarsh says) as the glorified in heaven, and they are sins says
Sermon the man of sin discovered rather veiled p. 10.11 The old Antinomians are
not so gross as Saltmarsh and our new Antinomians.

Sclusselbur. p. 46, 47, 48, 49. The state of the question touching the Law, as
the old Antinomians framed it


De^, to men ward and in the conversation, but not to Godward, or in the
conscience, that is, right down, they are no sins at all.

The question is (said the old Antinomians) whether or no, there be a law given
to the just man, or the new man, that is, whether or no does the Law teach the
new man, or the unrenewed part to do good works, and require them of him, or
does it teach him that he must do good works, as a mere patient or does he,
without the Law urging, teaching, commanding, do the Law, being created in
Jesus Christ to good works, or more shortly, whether is the Law a mere patient
toward a just man; or is it active in teaching, ruling, regulating of him in
doing of good works, for to teach, rule, exact, require, command, do all
import some activity, or is the law proposed as a teacher and commander only
to the flesh, or to the unrenewed part of a believer? Antinomians say that the
Law is a mere patient to a believer and does neither command, direct, nor give
him any glance of light to do Gods will, the spirit is his only light.
this is the cardo hinge of the controversy (say they Saltmarsh fr. gr. p.
146, 147.
) Saltmarsh says, We being once justified, have no need of one beam of light
from the Law to teach us: no more then the world has need of the first days
light of the creation, or of a candle, when the Sun is risen, and Town asser.
gr. p. 10. what if it be affirmed that even in true sanctification, the law of
works is a mere passive thing, as the Kings high way, which a christian
freely walks i^? you can never have face to deny it. Psalm. 119.^, 2.
Town says, the Law in teaching, ruling, or commanding, is a mere patient,
that is, the Moral Law is as close abolished in teaching us, what we shall
do, as the Ceremonial Law, now if the Spirit should teach us to be
circumcised and to keep the Ceremonial Law, that Spirit should be judged to be
Enthysiasticall and not of God; for the Apostle says the contrary, Gal. 5.1.
and calls it a falling from Christ, if then the Spirit teach us to honor our
Parents, not to kill, whereas the Law teaches us no more, that we should do
such a duty, then the Law teaches us to be circumcised, or then if a
Candlelight should show us what is black, we are to believe it is so, and the
light of the sun, show the contrary, we were to believe that black is not
black; so if the Spirit teach the Mother to kill her child, and offer it in a
sacrifice to God, because it was baptized, as an Anabaptist mother in Dover
lately has done; the mother is to believe and follow the light of that spirit,
contrary to the express law, and the law is by this way a mere patient, and
the believer freed from the direction of the sixth Commandment ( Thou shall not
murder,) for the teaching, ruling, commanding thereof are activities, and yet
is the Law a mere patient to the regenerate part, so the woman's regenerate
part killed the child, and sinned not in so doing, for the regenerate part (say
they) is under no Law; and the Antinomians who did chide with the Minister,
because he convinced the Mother of sinning against the sixth Command, in killing
her own child, said right, Why speak ye to the believing Mother of the Law,
the Law does not rule nor teach the regenerate part, and she has killed the
child according to the Spirits dailight, and the regenerate part, not
according to the Laws starlight, and the flesh, speak (say they) to her of
free grace.

So Michael Neander, a gross Antinomian wrote in an Epistle, to a friend in
his time, To the just man, there is no Law given in any use or office, as he is
just and lives in the Spirit, as he is one with Christ, and converseth in
heaven, where there is no law, that acts in a just man, the just dialect of the
English Antinomian Town. page 129. asser of grace. Being Justified by faith we
are admitted to the favor and presence of God, there to live and abide for
ever, here by sense and light in the kingdom of glory, etc. and Saltmarsh.
free grace. 140. page 142.
Saltmarsh speaks in the same Grammar, as if the believer were at the right
hand of God, and the old Antinomians said, in the words of Town asser. grace
page 34.
Town, read his words, the justified man (as Schusselburgius Schlusse^.
catalogo. haeriticorum. l. 3. page 47 48, 49. Novus homo ^ustus, regeneratus
renatus -- perfectus in Christo Jesus, et completus in ipso Sanctus justus
innocens unum cum Christo, caro de carne, et os ex ossibus eius: illud ipsum
denique ex gratia, side, et imputatione, quod Christus est natura in quo
Christus vivit loquitur, facit, et operatur omn^a, nam omnia opera eius sunt
opera Christi, ^uius* ipse est mera passiva ma^er a.
relates their mind) is holy, just, neither male nor female* etc; but one
with Christ, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, and the same by grace,
faith and imputation* that Christ is by nature, in whom Christ lives,
speaks, works all things, for all the works of the just man, are the
works of Christ, and he is the mere passive matter of these works. Therefore
all the doctrine of love, good works, and new obedience, which Christ and the
Apostles give after the doctrine of justification, is given only for the unjust
man, or the flesh, and old man in every man. So say the English Antinomians,
that the precepts of a Christian conversation do only obleige the hypocrites
under the law that are mixed with true believers, so does Town ass. grace page
41, 42, 43.
Town, all the duties Mat. 5. Blessed are the meek etc. are performed by the
believer in Christ, and Christ presses not these ^uties as obleiging the
believer, but that he may destroy all vain boasting and confidence in man's
own righteousness of works, bred by the Scribes and Pharisees, which is an
abominable doctrine, for then there was no believer on earth blessed through
personal meekness, spiritual poverty, hungring for Christ: and the
Apostles, and believers were not blessed, nor had any reward to look for in
heaven, in that they were persecuted and killed for Christ's sake, the contrary
is clear in scripture M^t. 10.18* 19, 20. Ioh. 16.1, 2. Luke 21.15, ^6, 17,
18, 19, 20. Ioh. 21.18, 19, 20. 1* Pet. 3.14, 15, 16, 17.
The putting on of the new m^n (said they Schluss. cat. haer. l. 3. p. 82.
) and walking in newness of life is nothing but external discipline and has
nothing common with the Spirit. So Eaton, Crispe, Den, Saltmarsh, its but to
walk according to the outward conversation, honestly, as in the sight of men,
not as in the sight of God, yea walking contrary to new obedience, and after
the lusts of the old man, in believers is no sin, which God Hony^co c. 4 43,
44, 45, 46, 47, 48 etc* c. 3.23, 24, 25.
can see in believers, say Eaton Hony^co c. 4 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48 etc* c.
3.23, 24, 25.
Town Tow. ass. gra. p. 95, 96* 97, etc.
Saltmarsh Salt. free grace. 144, 145, 146. and c.
in Luthers time Christopherus Petzelius wrote a bitter piece for
Antinomianisme, against Ioannes Wigandus, Crellius in spo^gia contra. Io^n.
Vigandum, Mart. Luther more against Antinomia^s then any man.
and others as Petrus Paladius in catalo aliquot haereseor relates.

Antinomians now, as of ol^, pretended that Luther is of their mind, and
allege diverse testimonies out of Luther. But Luther instituted six public
disputations, at Wittingburg against the Antinomians, but the style of Luther
was according to his Spirit and zeal; hot, hyperbolicke, vehement against
justification by works, and therefore these distinctions are to be observed to
clear Luthers mind.

Diverse useful distinctions touching the law and the believers freedom from
it tending to clear the mind of Luther and Protestants.
1 Luther speaks one way of the Law, and the works of the law, in the matter
of justification, and a far otherway of the Law and works simply as they
obleige all.

2 To Luther the law teaching, squaring, commanding is one thing, and the law
in strict terms commanding perfection, under highest eternal pain, and
compelling, terrefying, cursing, condemning, is another thing.

3 The Law compelling legally, and condemning that it may condemn, is one
thing, and the Law compelling and condemning materially, not that it may
destroy and condemn, but condemning to the end it may chase the sinner to
Christ, and save intentionally, is a far other thing.

4 The conscience simply is one thing, and the conscience terrifyed, crushed,
shaken with despair, a far other thing, Luther constantly ^aught that the law
obliges the conscience of believers, as well as unbelievers, and yet that the
law ought to exercise no dominion over the terrified and affrighted conscience
of a believer, to press him to despair.

5 The Law according to Luther has three special uses.

1 That it may reveal sin and wrath, and by this be a paedagogue (...) lead
the sinner to Christ. Three special uses of the law according to M. Luther


2 To be a rule of a holy life.

3 To discipline and compesce, with the fury and fear of wrath, hypocrites and
wicked men, that they may be disciplined externally, and not go with loose
raines after their lusts.

6 The Law in its rigor, as it sounds out of the mouth of Moses and is
violated, and presses us to absolute obedience out of our own strength,
without a Mediator, or a Mediators free grace is to the believer a rough and
bloody enemy, and preaches bloody tragedies, and craveth and exacteth hard
things, but the Law as pacified with the blood of a surety. and as it is the
sweet ^reathing of the love of Christ, through the Spirit, and as it says
walk in love through the strength of him that has loved you to death, it is a
sweet, warm, kindly lovely friend, and leads us being willing.

7 The law is eternal, the law condemning, forceing, cursing a believer is not
eternal; but cease to the believer in that bloody office through the
satisfaction of Christ.

8 Luther highly magnifieth good works in themselves, but as the agent rests
on them with confidence, he abaseth them.

9 The law without the Spirit is a poor, thin, liueles, hopeles, useles, dead
letter: the law animated with the Spirit, and tempered with some ounces of
Gospel-breathings of free grace, concurreth instrumentally to convert, quicken,
revive us and to promote salvation.

10 The law as it teaches, directs, commands, obliges, binds to duties
for the authority of the lawgiver, and is ever an active rule to the believer;
and never a passive thing: But as it condemns and ^urseth, it is to a
believer a mere passive, and a naked stander by, and has no activity, nor can
it act in that power upon any in Christ, as the law of Spain is merely passive
in condemning a free borne man dwelling in Scotland.

11 The binding authority in the law laying on the sinner an obligation to do
and act, is different from the binding power of the law to suffer punishment,
for transgressing of the law. The former agrees to the Law simply, as it is a
Law: the latter agrees to the Law a^ it is violated and disobeyed. 2, The
former is eternal and urges the believer, unbeliever, before the fall. after
the fall, in the life to come, the latter is removed in Christ, to all those
that are in Christ, for the law fully satisfied, neither condemns, nor can it
condemn to eternal suffering, for Christ's passive obedience removes all
possibility of our passive obedience for sin in a satisfactory way.

12 The Law admonish^th but helps not.

Hence these conclusions for the clearing of the truth, and of the mind of
Luther more fully.

1 Conclusion, Luther expressly declared himself against Antinomians, by that
title and name Luther to, 2 in Genesis c. 18. fol 18.
They are (says Luther) pernicious teachers, who in our time moved by ways I
know not what, contend that the law should not be preached in the Church,
would thou not preach the Law, where there is truly a people for Law, to
wit, men greedy, proud, unclean, usurers, Idolaters.

Luther writes against the Antinomian^ by name
In the Antinomian sect (says Luther) this is a peculiar proposion, if any was
an adulterer, a murderer etc. let him only believe that God is gracious to
him, Luther ^o 2. in Gen c. 18 f. 119. Luth^r ^^fu^eth the Ant^nomians under
the name of Antinomians, is enemies to the law of God.
and that is enough, but what a Church is this in which so horrible a voice does
sound? But we must teach that there be two sort of sinners, some who
acknowledge their sin, some who securely please themselves therein. I entreat
Saltmarsh, Eaton, Crispe, Den, Town, Del, Randel, Simson, who are so much
against all preparations for Christ, and for sole believing, and cry out so
much against strict walking with God, to consider this.

Luther to. 2. in Genesis c. 18. fo. 119.
How can the preaching of the Law be excluded out ^f the Church? do ye not
also exclude the fear of God, and a great part of the works of God.

19. fo. 118.
The Antinomians these new prophets contend that men should be sweetly handled,
and ought not to be terrified with examples of Gods wrath, but Paul teaches
another thing, 2 Timothy 2.3. when he says The Scripture is profitable to rebuke,
to correction. So Saltmarsh, Crisp, Den, Del, Town, Randel, preach a honey
Gospel, and a short cut to heaven, and exclude all gall and vinegar, from the
law.

Luther to. 2. in Genesis c. 19. f. 132
Let Us not fall to the madness of Antinomians, who remove the law out of the
Church, as if they were all holy that are in the Church the world loves such
teachers and say, preach to us pleasant things.

Luther tom: 2 in Gen: c: 2. fol: 132.
Antinomians teach that all sins are simple, taken away, and are not to be
rebuked, and that because they are pardoned and damnation is removed and sin is
nothing so Honey-combe. c. 3. p. 23. Saltm. free grace, 140. Town asser. gr.
71.72. Believers are as clean from all sins as Christ or the glorified
Saints, pardoned sin is no sin, God cannot see adulteries to be sins in them.

2 Conclusion, Luther, tom* 1. pa: 555. Luther extolleth good works against all
Antinomians.
Luther says for justification, the law is unpossible, but its given to show
sin to work wrath, and to make the conscience guilty. But Luther tom: 3. fol.
109.
lay aside the matter of justification (says he) no man can too highly commend
good works commanded of God and Luth. ttm. 3: f^l: 165
Its necessary that Godly teachers press as diligently the doctrine of good
works, as of faith. Satan is angry at both and resists with all his strength
both.

(k) Faith only is not sufficient and yet only faith justifies, for if it be
true faith, it obtains the spirit of love. This Spirit fullfilleth the law,
and obtains the kingdom of heaven.

Luth: tom: 1: fol: 449.
Except faith be without the least good works, it justifies not, Luth: tom:
1: fol: 522.
yea it is not faith, it is impossible that faith can be without assiduous and
great good works.

Luther to 2 in Genesis c. 15. fol. 57.
Faith justifies not as our work, but as a work of God for the promise is a
work of God, not our work in which we do or give something to God, but in
which we receave something from God and that through his mercy.

Luther to 2 in Genesis Luther teach^eth that only faith justifies and yet faith
is not alone with out good works.
Thou hold in thine hand seeds of diverse kind, but I ask not what seeds
are conjoined with these or these seeds; but what is the proper virtue of every
seed, in this case, show plainly, what faith it is alone does in justification,
but not with what other virtues it is conjoined, faith it alone apprehends
the promise, believes God promising, and puts to its hand, and receaveth
something that God promises: this is the proper work of faith only: Love,
hope, patience, have objects about the which they work, and other bonds within
which they consist, for they embrace not the promise, but fulfill the
commandments:

So Luther in the matter of justification puts reproach on good works, just
as Paul Phil. 3. makes all his privileges, and his very works of
righteousness that he does by the grace of Christ dung and loss in the
comparison of imputed righteousness.

Luther tom. 2* fol. 517.
Works (says he) cannot be taught, except ye hurt faith, seeing faith and
works in the matter of justification are extremely contrary; How faith and
works are contrary to Luther.
so that the doctrine of works must necessarily be a doctrine of Devils, and a
departure from faith.

Pernitiosi Doctores sunt qui hodie nescio quibus occasionibus adducti, Luther
to, 2 in Genesis c. 18. fol 18.
contendunt legem in ecclesia non praedicandam. Tu legem non doceres. ubi verus
legis populus est, scilicet, avari, supe^bi, adulteri, usurarii, Idololatrae.
Luther writes against the Antinomian^ by name


In Antinomorum dogmate erat haec propositio, sig^is esset adulter, tantum ut
crederet se habitu rum Deum propitium. Luther ^o 2. in Gen c. 18 f. 119. Luth^r
^^fu^eth the Ant^nomians under the name of Antinomians, is enemies to the law
of God.
Sed qualis quaeso Ecclesia, in qua tam horribilis vox sonat? faciendum
discrimen erat and docendum, quod adulteri s^u peccatores* duplices sunt,
quidam qui agnoscunt adulterium, se^ p^ccatum suum, alii secure indulgent.

Quomodo predicatio legis potest as debet ex Ecclesia ejici; Luther to. 2. in
Genesis c. 18. fo. 119.
nonne simul, excludis timorem Dei and maximam partem operum Dei.

19. fo. 118.
Luth. tom. 2. in Ge. Antinomi novi isti prophetae contendunt homines
tractandos suaviter, nec terrendos irae divinae ex^mplis, sed diversum Paulus
dicet, 2 Timothy 2.3. Vbi dicet scripturam utilem ad objurgandum, ad castigandum.

Luther to. 2. in Genesis c. 19. f. 132
Ne in Antinomorum insaniam in^idamus, qui legem ex Ecclesia tollunt quasi vero
in ecclesia ommes si^t sancti, Luther tom: 2 in Gen: c: 2. fol: 132.
mundus quidem tales doctores amat, sicut apud Hierem. dicunt loquer^ nobi^
placentia.

Antino. docent omnia peccata sublata, nec arguenda esse, nec homines terrendos
lege, pescatum esseremissum, nibil damnationis, igitur peccatum est nihil, et
prorsus sublatum. Lex non tantum non est necessaria ad justificationem, Luther,
tom* 1. pa: 555. Luther extolleth good works against all Antinomians.
sed plane inutilis et impossibilis sed data est ut peccatum ostendat, iram
operetur, hoc est, conscientiam ream fa^it,

Luther tom: 3. fol. 109.
Extra causam iustificationis nemo potest bona opera a Deo praecepta satis
magnifice praedicare.

Aeque necessarium est ut pij doctores tam diligenter urgeant doctrinam de
bonis operibus, Luth. ttm. 3: f^l: 165
quam doctrinam de fide: Satan enim utrique sensus est, et acerrime resistit.

Non sufficit sola fides, Luth: tom: 1: fol: 449.
et tamen sola fides iustificat, quia si vera est, impetrat, Luth: tom: 1: fol:
522.
spiritum charitatis sic legem implet et regnum Dei consequitur, fides nisi sit
sine ullis etiam mini mis operibus non iustificat, impossible est fidem esse
sine assiduis et magnis operibus.

Luther to 2 in Genesis c. 15. fol. 57.
Fides justificat non tanquam opus nostrum, sed tanquam Dei opus: promissio
enim non est nostrum opus, cum nos Deo facimus aut damus aliquid, sed accipimus
aliquid a Deo, idque tamen per ipsius miserecordiam.

Luther to 2 in Genesis Luther teach^eth that only faith justifies and yet faith
is not alone with out good works.
Texes manu varia semina, non autem quero ergo, quae cum quibus conjuncta sint,
sed quae cuiusque propria virtus, hic aper^e die, quid faciat sola fides: non
cum quibus virtutibus conjuncta fit, sola enim fides apprehendit promissionem,
credit promittenti Deo, Deo porrigenti aliquid manum ^^m^vet et id accipit, hoc
proprium solius fidei opus est, charita^, ^pes, patientia, habent alias
materias, circa quas versa^tur, habent alios limits intra quos consistant, non
enim amplectuntur promissionem, sed mandata exequuntur.

Luther tom. 2* fol. 517.
Opus non potest doceri, nisi laedas fidem: cum fides and opera in re
justificationis extreme adversantur ita a fit ut doctrina operum necessario sit
doctrina daemoniorum et discessio a fide. How faith and works are contrary to
Luther.


Luther speaks so of Good works, only in the matter of justification, But
our Antinomians speak so of the whole course of sanctification in order to
heaven, and as they are the way to the Kingdom, not the cause of the crown.
as both they follow the person already justified and as they go before him who
is yet to be justified: for Crispe says vol 1. ser. 4, page 89. But withal I
must tell you, that all this sanctification of life is not a jot the way of
that justified person to heaven.

I persuade my self Luther had an eye to Antinomians, when he said, (...)
feared after his death that the doctrine of the true office of the law should
be obscured, Luther to 3. fol. 102, admoneo pietati^ amatores, praecipue qui
aliquando sunt futuri doctores ut diligenter ex Paulo dis^^^t intelligere verum
et proprium usum legis qui (ut timeo) post t^mpora nostra* interim
obscurabitur, et prorsus obruetu^. to 4.106 timeo quod ista doctrina (de vero
legis usu) nobis extincti^ ^bscurabitur.

3 Conclusion. Luther says the New man needs no law, its the flesh, the old
man, the body of sin that is under the Law,

Luther to 4, fol. 6.
The law in a Christian ought not to exceed his bounds, and ought only to have
dominion over the flesh which is subject to it, and remains under it. but oh
law! will thou invade the conscience and exercise dominion there, and accuse
the conscience (of a justified believer none terrified) of sin, and take away
the joy of heart, thou do this beyond thy office.

Luth. tom. 4* f* 114.
When I behold Christ, I am all holy and pure knowing nothing of the Law (as it
curses and condemns the believer) but if I behold my flesh, I find avarice,
lust, wrath* pride, Luth: tom: 4. fol: 114. How according to Luther his mind,
the law has power over the flesh and not over the renewed conscience.
fear of death, sadness, horror, hatred, murmuring and impatience against God,
in so far as these are present, Christ is absent, or if he be present, he is
weakly present, here there is need, yet of a paedagogoe. who should exercise
and vex this strong ass (the flesh) that by this paedagogue sins may be
diminished, and a way prepared for Christ.

Luther to 4, fol. 6.
Luther Lex in Christiano non debet excedere limits suos, sed tantum dominum
habere in carnem, quae et ei subiecta sit, et sub ea maneat, hoc ubi fit, lex
consistit intra suos limits lex, si tu vis ascendere in regnum conscientiae et
ibi dominari (loquitur de conscientia hominis justificati sub tentationibus
terrefacta) et eam arguere peccati, et gaudi^m cordis tollere, hoc praeter
officium tuum facis

Luth. tom. 4* f* 114.
Si Christum inspicio, totus sanctu^ et purus sum, nihil plane sciens de lege.
Si vero meam carnem inspicio, Luth: tom: 4. fol: 114. How according to Luther
his mind, the law has power over the flesh and not over the renewed conscience.
sentio avaritiam, libidinem, iram superbiam, timorem mortis, tristitiam,
pavorem, odium murmurationem, et impatientiam contra Deum; quatenus ista
adsunt, catenus abest Christus, aut si adest, infirm adest: hic opus est adhuc
paedagogo qui fortem asinum carnem exerceat et vexet ut hac paedagogia
minuantur peccat^, et Christo via paretur.

I grant Town ass. p. 35.73
the Antinomians now* as Town Salt. free. grace. 154.152.
Saltmarsh Den. ser. man of sin p. 9.10.
Den, and the old Antinomians Schluss. cat. heret. l. 3. p. 53.54* 55.
in Luthers time spoke after the same Grammar and style, and so did the
Libertines in Calvin's time say, non ego pecco, sed Call. adv. lib. c. 18 452,
A^inus meus. Its not I that transgress the law and am under the law, but my
ass. But they have a far other mind then Luther, for the Antinomians (as
Schlusfelburgius says cato heriti. l 3. p. 53, 54.) taught that the flesh only
and the unrenewed man was under the law, but the renewed and justified man was
under no law, more then if it had been never given to him, and the law was no
rule of life and obedience to a believer. Luther cries against this as most
false, and Luther Luther tom. 2 in Ge. c. 18. fol. 119.
says, those that believe in Christ must be daily mortified by daily
Law-rebukes, and c. 19 f. 132.
arguenda sunt peccata et proponenda ira dei propter incredulos qui in eccl^sia
sunt, imo etiam propter credentes ne adhaerescenti peccato et innatae
imbicillitati indulgeant: lex manet Luther contra Anti. disp. 3. propos. 27.
dis. 4 pro. 33.
inquit ante evangelium et justificationem, in justificatione et post
justificationem.

Luther tom. 2. fall. 5^9.
Luther, verum tunc amplius non sunt opera legis, sed Christi in nobis per
fidem operanti^, et viventis per omnia: ideo non possunt sunt Mogis omitti,
quam ipsa fides, n^c sunt minus necessaria quam ipsa fides. Caeterum opera
(legalit^r perfecta) quae vere sunt legis, ficta et falsa sunt.

Luther tom. 2. fall. 5^9.
Good works (says Luther) are not any more the works of the law, compelling
under the pain of damnation, (for he says in the same place libere et gratis
facienda sunt) but works of Christ working in us by faith, and every way
living in us: therefore they can no more be omittted, then faith it self, and
are no less necessary then faith it self.

Observe this in reading Luthers works, How good works conform to the Law are
not necessary. The new man is under the same law as a rule of life which was in
the covenant of works, and though we be changed, the law is the same
that he takes the law, as opposed to justifieing grace, and as it may
condemn or justify, and so as an instrument of the Covenant of works exacting
perfect obedience in a legal sense, otherwise neither Luther nor any of our
Divines will say good works absolutely perfect and in all things conform to
the Law are necessary to salvation, for it is false, all believers are saved by
faith in Christ without any such good works or perfect legal obedience. Then
we must hold this to be Luthers mind, that if good works be commanded to the
renewed man, in the law, as well as faith, and be as necessary as faith, then
the renewed part is under the law commanding good works, as well as it is
under the command of faith but Luther says, the former Antinomi. say nothing
sins but the flesh, and nothing is under the law, but the flesh* and so nothing
is under a command and an obleiging rule of law or Gospel to do good works
and believe, but the flesh: a senseless untruth, For it is the new man by the
Spirit of Christ, says Luther from the word of truth, that does good works
and believes. So Luther to 4. fol. 499, in Psalm. 130. (2) and excellently
says Luther to 1 fol. 436* Christiana l^bertas est, quando non ^utata leg^,
m^ta^tur homines, ut l^x eadem, quae prius libero arbitrio odiosa^uit, The Law
is given to the new man (...) of lif^, and not proper^y to the flesh, but as a
sin* condemning law.
iam defusa per spiritus sa^ct^ charitatem cordibus nostris iucunda fiat. Hence
Luther says two things, that contradicts the Antinomians. 1. The Law is not
changed, when the sinner is changed, but that which was hateful to free will
before, is the same law, but now sweet and pleasant to the heart, then if the
law be not so much as changed, it is not abolished to the believer, its made of
hateful pleasant. 2. That Law that is pleasant to the heart, and sweet, it is
not given to the flesh and unrenewed part, but especially to the renewed part.
3 The renewed part in the believer does either do good works by the grace of
Christ and so keep the law, though unperfectly, or not do good works at all.
If the latter be said, the renewed part, is not renewed, but dead and is the
very old man, which is a contradiction, but if the former be said, that it is
the new man or renewed part that does good works in the believer, then the new
man either does th^se good works contrary to the law, which is nonsense, for
to be merciful, sober, just, true, chaste, are agreeable, not contrary to the
law, or the new man does good works without the law, and so without the word
of either Law or Gospel, this is will-service to God and separateth the Spirit
from the word, and is a high way to legittimate, murder, adulteries,
paricides, under the veil of the Spirits working, and leading without the word,
if the new man work according to the law, then is the law a rule, and what the
new man does according to a ruling law, he does it ex debito out of obligation,
then must the new man be under this law and obligation as a rule, nor can it be
said that the flesh does good works for Paul says in his flesh there dwells
no good nor can it be said the new man works not according to the law, but
according to the Gospel* because the Gospel as distinguished from the Law,
shows us cred^nda non fac^^nda, what we should believe* not what we should
do (4) the new man works by love, the flesh works not by love, but love is
the fulfilling of the law To. 1^.8 9. Ga. 5.14.18.19* 24. Ga. 6.2. th^n must
the new man be under the debt of love, and so under the law as an obleiged
rule, and to this Luther ^e^reth witness.

Luther to. 4.178. Eaton
Sponte faciunt quod lex requirit, fide enim Spiritum receperunt, qui non si^it
eo^ esse otiosos si caro resistit, Spiritu ambulent. Sic Christianus implet
legem, fide: Christus enim perfectio legis est ad salutem omni credenti: f^ris
operibus, et remissione peccatorum intus.

But our Antinomians mean that there is no indwelling sin in believers, they
are Hony-com c. 3. page 25.
as clean as Christ from all sin, as Saltm. free grace. page 140.
the glorified in heaven; that God can see no sin Hony-com. chapter 5 73, 74.
in believers, Crispe vol. 2. ser. 4.136, 137 138* 152, 153, 154, 157.
because there is no sin in them Hony-com, c. 71, 72.
he cannot be displeased with them for sin, because it is not, forgiven sin
is no sin, it Hony-com c. 7.134.
has no being before God, its but a seeming sin, Saltm. free grace. 145.
not really and to faith.

3 But Antinomians, as Town asser. page 77, 78. Salt. free grace. page 140 44,
45. Eaton Hony-com. c. 11.322. teach that all the natural, civil and
religious works of believers, as well as their persons, are made perfect and
conform to Gods law, then Christ cannot be absent in any measure, nor weakly
present, as Luther says nor have they need of the paedagogie of the law to
make way to Christ.

Luther to. 4.178. Eaton
Believers of their own accord do what the Law r^quireth, for by faith they
have received the Spirit that suffers them not to be idle, if the flesh
resist, they walk in the Spirit, so a Christian fulfilleth the Law of God by
faith, Hony-com c. 3. page 25.
for Christ is the end of the Law for salvation to every one that believes, he
fulfilleth the law without, by good works and remission of sins within. Saltm.
free grace. page 140.


2 Luther Means that the flesh the ass in believers truly sins, and
violateth the Law, and brings the believer under condemnation, if God would
enter into judgment with them, so as God sees sin, adultery in David to be
sin, Crispe vol. 2. ser. 4.136, 137 138* 152, 153, 154, 157.
denying of Christ in Peter to be sin, and hates it and is displeased with
it, and Hony-com, c. 71, 72.
believers have carnem peccatricem a sinning sin in them Luther Tom. 2. c.
18. fol. 119, pride, avarice, Hony-com. chapter 5 73, 74.
murmuring against God, and in so far as they have these in them, Hony-com c.
7.134.
Christ is not in them. To 4. fo. 114. Saltm. free grace. 145.


3 Luther in these words expressly says the justified man is not perfect, nor
are his works perfect, because the sin of them is pardoned quatenus ista
(avaritia, libido, superbia etc.) adsunt, Christus abest, aut si adest, i^firme
adest, hic opus est adhuc paedagogo qui fortem asinum carnem excerceat et
vexet, in so far as there is sin in the believer, Christ is absent, or if
he be present, he is weakly present, etc. and has need of the paedagogie of
the law.

3 Conclusion, How Luther according to Scripture says the new man and
terrified conscience in the believer, is simply freed from the law, and the Law
is abrogated to him, and has only power over his flesh.
Taking the Law simply as the Law and an instrument of the covenant of works
exacting by Law-compulsion perfect obedience without a Mediator and that under
the strictest penalty of eternal wrath for the least breach, as it is opposed
to the Gospel, which is a milder King, and taking the conscience not in its
latitude, as it is in both the believer and the unbeleever, but as it is in the
believer renewed, and withal troubled and terrifyed with the sense of sin,
so the Law as Luther says, is abrogated, and has no dominion over the renewed
man or the renewed conscience to condemn it, but only over the old man and the
sinning and lusting flesh to chase the believer to a more strict closing with
Christ, and arguing and convincing him of too real and true sinning, not of
seeming and imaginary offending against a Law, as Antinomians dream, so is
Luther Luther tom. 4. fo. 178.
to be taken.

Lex justo non est posita; sie enim vivit, ut nulla lege opus habeat, quae eum
admoneat, urgeat, ^ogat, ^ed sine ulla coactione legis, sponte facit, quae lex
exigit, Id^o lex non potest accusare; and reos agere credentes in Christum, nec
enim conscientias perturbare, terret quidem and accusat, sed Christus fide
apprehensus a^igit ^am cum suis terroribus and minis. Itaque lex iis
simpliciter abrogata est, non igitur habet jus accusandi eos, Sponte enim
faciunt, quod lex requirit.

Luther tom. 4. p. 112.
Luther, ingrediendum est igitur Regia via, ut neque legem, pla^e rejiciamus,
neque plus ei tribuamus, quam ^portet.

Luther tom. 4.119.
Luther, Ante Christum [lex] est sancta, post Christum est mors: Ideo ubi
Christus venit (justificans impium) nihil simpliciter scire debemus de lege,
How the law condemns and terrifieth, and how not.
nisi quatenus imperium habet in carnem, quam coercet and premit.

Luther tom. 4. fo. 47.
Luther, lex etiam dedecalogi sine fide in Christum est mortifera, non quod lex
mala sit, sed quod justificare non possit, quia pl^^e contrarium habet effectum.

Luther to. ^. p. 112.
Luther, Legis (c^ge^tia cond^mnantis) proprium officium est nos reos facere,
humiliare, occidere, adinfer^um d^ducere and omnia nobis auferre sed illo fine,
ut justificemur and non ergo simpliciter occidit, sed ud vitam occidit.

Luther to. 1 128. How the renewed man i^ freed from the Law.
Luther, Dominetur sa^e lex in corpus and veterem hominem, is sit sub leg^,
h^ic praescribat lex, quid facere, quid perferre debet, cubile enim in quo
Christus s^lus quiescere and d^rmire debet, non contaminet id est, novum
hominem nullo suo usu aut officio perturbet.

Luther. Fatemur justis non esse p^sitam legem, Luther tom. 1. fo. 546.
quaten^^ just^ sunt and spiritu vivunt, sed quatenus in c^rne sunt, and corpus
peccati habent, esse sub lege, and facere legis opera, id est, non esse justos
nec facere bona opera.

The Law is not given to a just man, who so lives that he has no need (in
his terrified and quaking conscience of the Law as compelling and forcing with
curses and as condemning) of a Law which should admonish press and compel
him, but without any compulsion of the Law of his own accord, he does what
the Law requires, therefore the Law cannot accuse and impleade believers as
guilty, nor can it trouble their conscience, it terrifieth and accuses* but
Christ apprehended by faith, chaseth it away with the terrors and threatenings
thereof: therefore the law to them is simply abrogated, nor has it authority
to accuse them, for they do willingly what the law requires.

We must then walk (says Luther tom. 4. p. 112.
Luther) in the Kings way, that we may neither utterly reject the Law, nor
ascribe more to it then is due.

Luther tom. 4.119.
Before Christ [the Law] as it rigidly commands and condemns* is holy, after
Christ justifies, it is death. Therefore when Christ comes (being
apprehended by faith) we should know (or acknowledge in the renewed conscience
nothing of the compelling and condemning Law) nothing simply of the Law* How
the law condemns and terrifieth, and how not.
but in so far as it has dominion over the flesh, which it owes and
presses.

Luther tom. 4. fo. 47.
So the Law (says Luther) of the ten Commandments without faith in Christ
brings death, not that the Law is evil, but because it cannot justify, but
has the plain contrary effect.

Luther to. ^. p. 112.
The proper office of the Law (as the Law without a Mediator) is to make us
guilty, to humble, kill, bring to hell, take all from us; but for this end (as
it is the hand of the Mediator) that we may be justified, and then it kills
not simply, but kills to salvation.

Therefore Luther to. 1 128.

How the renewed man i^ freed from the Law.


Luther, the Law has dominion indeed over the body and the old man, let this
man be under the Law, let the Law prescribe what he ought to do, what he ought
to suffer, let it not pollute the chamber in which Christ only ought to rest
and sleep, that is, let it not trouble the new man with its use and office.

Luther tom. 1. to. 546.
We grant (says Luther) there is no Law given to the just, as they are just
and live in the Spirit, but as they are in the flesh, and have in them a body
of sin, and are under the Law, and do the works of the Law, for that is not
to be just* nor to do the works.

But the Antinomians in Luthers Schlusselburgiu^ ^at* heretic^ l. 3. p. 53.
time, and in our days, do wickedly Town ass. grace. p. 35. p. 3.
infer then, these, and the like commandments, Walk in my Laws, put ^n the
new man who is created according to God, serve one another in love, do not
belong to the new man, How the Law is given to the new man, and how not.
but only to the flesh, and to those that are under the law, for what need is
there (said the old Antinomians) to bid a man put on his coat, when his coat is
already on him? therefore we say this to a man that has not put on his coat,
that is to a man under the Law, and to the old man in the believer, not to the
new man: for it is true these precepts, as they are merely legal and to be
obeyed without the grace of the Mediator, and as they exact perfect Law
obedience in a compulsive way under the pain of death eternal, are not given
to the new man, nor to the believer at all, that is most true. But that these
commands, Evangelically considered, and as they urge obedience unperfect and by
the grace of God, are not given to the new man, but to the old only, is a most
palpable untruth, for Christ bids the believer and the new man put on his
coat, though he have put it already on, but imperfectly, there is a sleeve or a
shoulder of his new wedding coat not on yet, it is not perfectly buttoned in
this life; though the coat of imputed righteousness be perfect, and if
sanctification be sincere, yet it is not every way so sewed and pinned on us,
but the very new man has need, in regard that his faith is in the growing
hand, of that command. Put ye on the Lord Jesus. The just, as just, should
have no need of a compelling Law, if they were perfectly just both in person
and works* as Antinomians say they are. And it is most false that the Law is
giv^n formally to the flesh, as if sinful flesh were commanded to believe and
put on Christ, or were capable of righteousness, as before is cleared.

4. Conclusion.
Luther says, the conscience of a believer weak, and tender, terrified,
challenged, accused* has nothing to do with the Law.

Luther tom. 1. f. 541.
Luth. Nunquam p^c^at homo horribilius quam in eo articulo, in quo incipit
lege^ sentire, s^u intelligere.

Luther tom. 2. l. 253.
Impossible est Christum and legem simul habitare in cord: aut enim legem aut
Christum cedere oportet.

Luther tom ^ f. 5^.
Discamus igitur diligentissime hanc artem distinguendi inter has duas
justitias, The guilt^ conscience (...) believer no^ under the (...).
ut sciamus quatenus legi parere debeamus, diximus autem supra quod lex in
Christiano non debet exced^re limits s^os, se^ tantum h^bere dominium in
carnem Christiani -- Dicas legi, consiste intra limits tuos, and exerce
dominium in carnem, conscientiam autem n^ attingas mihi, ubi nulla lex est.

Summa^^rs and sapientia Christianorum est, Lu^her tom. 4 f 5.

Excellent replies of a believer to the accusing Law.


nescire legem, ignorare opera and totam justitiam activam, presertim cum
conscientia luctatur cum judicio Dei: sicut extra populum Dei summa sapientia
est, noscere, inspicere, and urgere legem, opera and activam justitiam.

Luther. Luther tom. 4. fo. 15.
Diabolo accusanti: tues peccator: ergo damnatus: respondere possumus: quia tu
me peccatorem dicis, ideo vol^ esse justus and salvus: imo damnaberis: non,
confugio enim ad Christum qui sem tipsum tradidit pro peccatis meis.

Luther to. 4 fo. 40.
Cum conscientia perterrefit lege, nec ratio nem nec legem consulas: sed sola
gratia ac consolationis verbo nitar^^: ibi omnino sic te geras quasi nunquam de
lege Dei quicquam audieras* sed^scendas in tenebras, ubi nec lex nec ratio
lucet, sed solum aenigma fidei quae certo statuit te salvari extra and ultra
legem -- est and lex audienda sed suo loco and tempore.

Luth. Christiano nihil prorsus nego^ii* esse debet, Luther to. 4. f. 46.

A tempted bele^ver freed from the chalinges of the condemning Law.


praesertim in tentatione cu^ lege and peccat^, quatenus est Christi^nus, est
supra legem and peccatum, habet enim in cord praesen^em and inclusum, ut (...)
gemmam, Christum d^m^num legis, itaque cum lex cum accusat, peccatum perterre*
facit, int^^tur Christum, quo fide apprehenso, habet ^^cum victorem legis
peccati ^orti^ and diaboli, qui illis omnibus imperat, ne no^ere possint.

Luth tom. 4.117.
Luther, Exten^^tiones legis referend^ sunt ad certamen conscientiae.

Luth: tom: 4. f. 11^.
Nequ^ satis viliter and odiose, cum in hoc argumento versamur, de ea loqui
possumu^, ideo conscientia in vero agone nihil prorsus cogitare and nosse
debet, nisi unicum Christum, acsummis viribus adnitatur, ut tum legem quam
longissime e confl^ctu abjiciat.

Luther tom ^ f. 118.
Extra locum justificationis debemus cum Paulo reverenter sentire de lege and
eam summis laudibus evehere, appellare sanctam, bonam, justam, spiritualem,
divinam, ^ebemus extra conscientiam facere ex ea Deum, in conscientia vero est
vere Diabolus.

Luther tom. 1. f. 541.
A man (a believer) terrified in conscience, and under the despairing
apprehensions of wrath does never sin more horribly, then in that article of
time, when he begins to feel and understand the Law (in its condemning
power.)

Luther tom. 2. ^. 253.
Its unpossible that Christ and the Law can dwell together in one soul; for
either must the Law or Christ yield the one to the other.

Luther tom ^ f. 5^.
Luther, Let us learn to distinguish these two righteousnesses, The guilt^
conscience (...) believer no^ under the (...).
that we may know how far we are to obey the Law, for we said that the Law
ought not to exceed its limits, but only have dominion over the flesh of a
Christian (to show that he is a sinner, Saltmarsh says free gr. 145. he is but
a seeming sinner) -- say thou to the law, stay within thy limits, and exercise
dominion over the flesh, but come not near my conscience (to condemn me,
otherwise to obliege as a rule of obedience it does) where there is no Law.

Its the great skill and wisdom of Christians to be ignorant of the Law and
works, Lu^her tom. 4 f 5. Excellent replies of a believer to the accusing Law.
and of all active righteousness, especially when the conscience wrestleth
with the justice of God, as without the Church of God, it is the great wisdom
of God to know, consider, and press the law, works and active righteousness.

Luther tom. 4. fo. 15.
To the Devil accusing; thou art a sinner, and therefore damned, we may
answer; because thou call me a sinner, therefore I shall be just and saved:
yea thou shall de damned: no, for I fly to Christ, who gave himself for my
sins.

Luther to. 4 fo. 40.
When the concience is terrified with the Law, and wrestleth with the justice of
God, consult neither with natural reason, nor with the Law* but lean only to
free grace and the word of consolation, and the^e thou may behave thy self
as if thou had never heard any thing of the Law of God: there thou may
enter in darkness, where there shines neither law nor reason, but only the
mirror of faith, which may save thee without and beyond the Law -- the Law is
also to be heard in the own time and place.

Luther to. 4. f. 46.

A tempted bele^ver freed from the chalinges of the condemning Law.


Luther, A Christian has nothing at all to do, especially under a temptation
with the Law and sin, in so far as he is a Christian he is above the Law and
sin, for he has Christ the Lord of the Law enclosed in his heart as a ring
has a pearl indented in it; therefore when the Law accuses him, and sin
terrifieth him, he beholds Christ, who when he is apprehended by faith, he
has with him the conqueror of the law, sin, death, and hell, who commands
these that they hurt him not.

Luth tom. 4.117.
Extenuations of the Law, are referred to the conflict of conscience.

Luth: tom* 4. f. 11^.
Nor can we vilely and hatefully enough speak of the Law in this argument;
therefore the conscience in a true conflict, ought to think of, or know
nothing but only Christ, and with all its might endeavor to remove the Law as
far as can be, from the conflict.

Luther tom ^ f. 118.
Setting aside the case of justification, we ought with Paul to think
reverently of the Law, and extol it with great praises, as holy, good, just,
spiritual, divine, and when the Law is out of the conscience, we are to make a
God of it, but in the conscience its the Devil.

Now Antinomians not only in the case of Justification debase the Law, but they
cry it down as a rule of life, they have nothing to do with Moses and his
Law, or strict walking.

And where as Antinomians tell us the sins of believers are but sins to our
sense and feeling, or before men, or sins in our conversation, not really,
not before God, not in our conscience, not to faith, they never learned this
from Luther, who expounds sense and faith a far other way.

For so Luth^r tom. ^ f 154.55. A tempted s^nner is (...) from a sensitive
(...) imp^ted rig^teousnesse.
Luther speaks, in a conflict of conscience we know by experience, sense of
sin, wrath, hell, death, has dominion, then we must say to the tempted,
Brother, thou would have a sensitive righteousness; that is, thou desire
to h^ve such a sense of righteousness, as thou have of sin* that shall not
be; but thy righteousness must go beyond the sense of sin, and believe thou
art righteous before God; that that is, thy righteousness is not visible or
sensible, but there is hope it shall be revealed in its own time,

Luther Luth^r tom. ^ f 154.55. A tempted s^nner is (...) from a sensitive
(...) imp^ted rig^teousnesse.
In certami^e conscientiae, experienti^ doctiscimus, fortitor dominatur sensus
peccati, irae dei, mortis, inferni-Ibi tum dicendum est, tentato: Tu frater vis
habere iustititam sensitivam, id est, cupis ita sentire iustitiam, ut peccatum
sentis, hoc non fiet. Sed tua iustitia debet transcendere sensum peccati and
sperare te coram Deo justum esse, hoc est, ^ustitia tua non est visibilis, non
sensibilis, sed speratur suo tempore revelanda.

Luther never denied the sins of believers to be real sins, and that there
was ^o more original sin dwelling in a believer then in Christ, as our
gross libertines do. But he forbids the tempted to measure their own
condition, as forlorn and hopeless, from sense; because they feel sin,
wrath, hell, death, terrors of conscience, but contrary to the sense of all
this, the weak soul must believe an invisible and spiritual righteousness,
and seek no sensitive righteousness, as most men do in conflicts of
conscience.

Luther has diverse comfortable grounds of believing when the Law in its
condemning power breaks in upon the conscience.

Luther tom. 4.54.

Christ on the cross is to be e^ed to comfort the weak believer against his
own sin.


In cruce aliud peccatum invenio contra meum peccatum quod me accusat and
devorat, peccatum scilicet aliud in carne Christi qui tollit peccatum mundi,
omnipotens est, damnat and devorat peccatum meum.

l Fateor me peccasse sed peccatum meum quod peccavi, damnatum est in Christo,
qui est peccatum damnans, est autem peccatum illud damnans fortius damnato.

2 Luther tom. 3 f. 376.

The ways of overcomming Law temptations.


Luther, Sicut tutissimum est canem latrantem contemnere and praeterire, ita
una vincendi ratio est contemnere rations Satanae, neque cum iis disputare
diutius.

Luther tom. 3 f. 396.
Textatus a Satana, cum nullum evadendi modum sent is, simpliciter claude
oculos, and nihil responde, and commenda causam Deo.

Luther tom. 3 376.
Luther, Satan nihil minus far potest quam sui contemptum.

Luther tom. 3. fo. 489.
Hi sunt amplexus ejus quibus amplectitur sponsam prae impatientia amoris.

Luther tom. 4 f. 6.
Luth. Non enim feram te (O lex) Tyrannum durum and crudelem exactorem in
conscientia mea regnare; siquidem ea seeds est and templum Christi filii Dei.

Luther tom. 4* f. 76.
Qui possum esse sanctus cum habeam and sentiam peccatum? quod sentis and
agnoscis peccatum, bonum est, gratias age Deo, ne despera. Est gradus ad
sanitatem, cum aegrotus agnoscit, and fatetur morbum suum. S^d quomodo,
liberabor a peccato? accurre ad medicum, mactata ratione, creed in eum.

Disce credere Christum non pro fictis aut pictis, sed veris, non pro parvis,
Luther tom. 4. f. 14.
sed maximis: non pro uno atque alt^ro; Sed pro omnibus, non pro devictis
(nullus: etiam Argelus velmi nimum peccatum vincere p^test) sed pro invictis
peccatis traditum esse, and nisi inveniaris in numero eorum, qui dicuntur,
nostri, hoc est qui ha^c fidei doctrinam habent* ^^cent, a^diunt, discunt, and
ei credunt, tum plane de salu^^ tua actum est.

As 1. Luther tom. 4.54.

Christ on the cross is to be e^ed to comfort the weak believer against his
own sin.


Luther, When I find remorse of conscience for my sin, I look up to the
brazen Serpent Christ on the cross, and there I find another sin against my
sin, that other sin in the flesh of Christ which takes away the sin of the
world, is an omnipotent sin and condemns and swallows up my sin.

And l I confess I have sinned, but my sin is condemned in Christ who is
made a condemning sin, and the condemning sin is stronger then the condemned.

2. Luther tom. 3 f. 376.

The ways of overcomming Law temptations.


As its most* safe to contemn and pass by a barking Dog, so the only way of
overcomming is to despise Satan's casting in thoughts, and dispute no longer
with him.

And Luther tom. 3 f. 396.
when there is no escaping* close thy eyes and answer nothing, and commend the
cause to God, he gives a reason Luther tom. 3 376.
Satan cannot endure to be a contemned enemy.

3. Luther tom. 3. fo. 489.
Luther, Tentations are the throngings or embracings of the bridegroom to the
bride from impatience of love.

4. Luther tom. 4 f. 6.
Luther, The tempted is to say, I cannot endure thee (O Law) a rigorous Tyrant,
and a cruel exacter, to reign in my conscience, for it is the seat and temple
of Christ the Son of God.

5. Luther tom. 4. f. 76.
Luther, Its true the tempted says, how can I be holy, when I have and f^el
sin? that thou feel and acknowledgest sin, its good, give thanks to God,
despair not; its a degree to health to feel sickness. But how shall I be
freed from sin? fly to the Physician, follow not reason, believe, and
sacrifice reason.

Antinomians comfort us thus, the sin of believers is seeming sin. Luther
says, its too real, and must be cured by Christ.

6. Luther tom. 4. f. 14.
Luther, Christ dyed not for the painted and phancied, but for true sinners,
and the chief sinners, not for one or two, but for all, not for conquered, but
for unconquered sins, and if thou be of the number of these that believe, its
good.

Luther, here would have the weak ones that find hearing, learning, loving of
his doctrine, (...) believing, that is such as have qualifications and
conditions in them to know Christ dyed not for phancied men, but for them,
Antinomians reject all qualifications and conditions* Yea.

Luther is for conditions in the Covenant of grace, and for preparations before
conversion. Antinomians deny both.
Luther comforts only these against the Law, who have this condition of Christ
enclosed in their heart, as a pearl set in a ring, Luther tom. 4. f. 46. Yea
though Luther be against all preparations of merits, yet is he clear for
preparations of order against the Antinomians.

Luther tom. 4 f. 112.
Legis proprium officium est nos reos facere, humiliare, occidere ^o fi^e ut
justificemur.

w Lex non facit filios Dei - atqui praeparat ad novam nativitatem qua fit per
fidem.

Luther to 4.10^.
Luther, Malleus lex opprimit pertinacem best a^ presumptionem ut ista
contusione homo in nihilum redactus desperate de sui^ viribus: justitiam --
^itiat misericordiam and remissi^nem peccatorum.

Luth. to. 1.472. Per fidem Christi non sumus liberi ab operibus, sed ad
opinionibus ope^u^, id est, a stulta praesumptione justificationis per opera
quaesitae, fides enim conscientias nostras redimit, rectificat, and servat: qua
cognoscimus justitiam esse non in operibus, licet opera abesse neque possint,
neque debeant.

Luther. Sentiens terrores and minas tuas, O Lex, immergo conscientiam meam in
vulnera, sanguinem, mortem etc. Christi. Venit in mentem Christum velle
expostulare nobiscum velle rationem a nobis exigere transactae vitae, etc.

Luther tom. 4 f. 156.
Luther. Cor dictat Deum adversum, verbum Dei sequi debeo, non sensum meum.

Luth. 9. tom. 4. f. 289.
Luther. Est diabolus persuasor mirificus -- Verbum pingit Christum, non
accusatorem, non durum exactorem.

Luther. Luther to. 4. f. 289. Temtations and how they are resisted in the
conscience.
Quanquam caro non nihil murmuret, tamen Spiritus gemit ad Deum and potius
intentatione perpetuo manner and perire cupit quam ad impietatem a Deo recidere.

Luther tom. 4 f. 147.
Hic canon est, quod in omnibus tentationibus, nos -- ipsi alium fingimus Deum
esse, quam sit, putamus enim Deum tunc non esse Deum, sed phantasma, id est,
horrible spectrum.

Luther. Peccator es, igitur te odit Deus. Luther tom. 4 f. 387.
Haec consequentia vera est in natura, in jure civili -- ad tribunal Christi --
hoc sequitur, peccator es ergo confide.

Luther to. 4.391.
Luther Cum Satan vexat conscientiam per legem, ^tile est opponere Satanae.
Quid ad te tamen, non peccavi tibi, sed Deo meo. Non enim sum tuus peccator.
Quid igitur juris est in m^? -- non peccavi tibi, non legi, non conscientiae,
nulli homini, Angelo nulli, sed soli Deo.

Luther tom. 4 f. 112.
It is proper to the Law to make men guilty, to humble, kill, bring down to
hell, and take all from us, for this end, that we may be justified.

w The Law makes not men sons of God -- but it prepares us for the new birth.

The Law is a fire and a hammer breaking the rocks, Luther to 4.10^.
to suppress that pertinacious beast presumption, that a man may be brought to
nothing, and despair of his own strength and righteousness, and being
terrified, may thirst for mercy and pardon. More of this ye may see in Luther
to. 1. fol. 11. p. 286.412. to. 4. f. 5. f. 296. to. 1.53.

Luther never meant that we are freed from the Law as a rule of good works,
Luther to. 1.472. by the faith of Christ, we are not freed from works, but
from the opinion of works; that is, from a foolish presumption of
justification by works.

Luther. Finding thy terrors and threatenings, O Law, I dip my conscience in
the wounds, death, blood, resurrection of Christ; beside these I will see
nothing, hear nothing For we think Christ will quarrel with us, and seek a
reckoning of our ill ^ed life, and will accuse and condemn us.

Luther tom. 4 f. 156.
In tentations though sense say, that God is an enemy, I follow the Word that
says the contrary.

Luth. 9. tom. 4. f. 289.
The devil is an admirable perswader to cause us think a little sin a heinous
crime. But the word points Christ sweet, meek.

10. Luther to. 4. f. 289. Temtations and how they are resisted in the
conscience.
Luther. The flesh murmureth, but the Spirit sighs to God, and had rather dye
in the tentation, then depart to wickedness.

11. Luther tom. 4 f. 147.
Luther. This is a rule in all temptations, we fancy another God, and believe
God not to be God, but a phancie, a Ghost.

12. Luther tom. 4 f. 387.
This consequence (thou art a sinner, therefore God hates thee) is true in the
Civil Law or Court, but in Christ's Tribunal; its true thou art a sinner,
therefore believe.

13. Luther to. 4.391.
Luther. When Satan vexes the conscience with the Law, its fit to say to
Satan, what is that to thee, yet I have not sinned against thee, but against
my God* for I am not thy sinner; what Law then have thou in me? -- I have not
sinned to thee, not to the law, not to conscience, to no man* to no Angel, but
only to God.

Luthers meaning is, that he has not sinned to the Law, or so against it, that
he should be therefore condemned, because he is pardoned in Christ.

Luther to. 4* f. 400.
Luther. Nulla alia re potest sanari hoc vulnus conscientiae quam verbo divinae
promissionis.

Luther tom. 4. fo. 413.
Luther. Si es calamus contritus, noli te amplius conterere, aut Satana
conterendum dare, sed da te Christo qui est (...) and amat conquass^tos and
contritus Spiritu.

Luther tom. 4 ^* ^92.
Luther. Desperatus non orat, dum desperatio durat -- sed cum remittitur
paroxysmus tum primum incipit clamor -- plurimus adjuvatur animus, cum audit
fratrem commode tractantem verbum Dei* -- cum ad hunc modum siducia in Deum --
animo anxio inculcatur: tum surgit sci^tilla fidei and gemitus cordis, O si
possem; sequitur tandem sensus gaudii, neque potest Deus hos gemitus negligere.

Luther tom. 4 f. 502.
Luther. Deus mammam gratiae etiam justificatis nonnunqu^m subtrahit, ut
discamus. Quid nostra ipsorum justitia soleat facere, nempe, quod solet
opprimere desperatione.

Luther tom. 4 758. in Ps. 2.
Luther. Cum Satan objicit, ecce es peccato^, non sic credis, non sic or^s,
sicut requirit verbum: tu contra dic, quid me vexas his visibilibus? been
sentio ista, nec opus est, ut tu me doceas, illud opus est ut verbum sequar and
transferam me ad invisibilia.

Luther ex ad Cus. Aquilam. an. 1528. f. 393
Luther. Maxima pars fallitur, quod non credunt has cogitationes esse
tentationes Satanae.

Luther to. 2. in Genesis c. 21. f. 188.
Luth. Docemur in hoc certamine apprehe^denda^ promissionem in baptismo factam,
quae certa and clara est, sed hoc cum fit, non statim cessat Satan, sed
reclamat in cord tuo, te non esse dignum ista promissione, est autem opus
ardenti oratione -- ne extorqueatur nobi^ promissio -- Dic, scio promissam mihi
propter filium Dei gratiam. Haec promissio non mentietur, etiamsi in exteriores
tenebras abjiciar.

14. Luther to. 4* f. 400.
Luther. This wound of conscience cannot otherwise be healed, but by the word
of God.

Luther tom. 4. fo. 413.
If thou be a broken reed, do not break thy self any more, or give thy self
to Satan to be broken, but give thy self to Christ, who is a man-lover, and
loves the broken and bruised in Spirit.

16. Luther tom. 4 ^ ^92.
The despairing soul prays not, while the despair continues, -- but when
the fever turns to a cool, the cry begins -- he is much helped when he
hears a brother rightly handling the word of promise -- when faith in God is
thus inculcated in a sad heart, then glimmereth up a sparcle of faith, and a
sigh of heart, O if I could -- then follows sense of joy, God cannot despise
these sighs.

17. Luther tom. 4 f. 502.
God withdraws the paps and (...) of Grace from the justified, that we may
learn to know what our own righteousness uses to do, even to press us with
despair.

18. Luther tom. 4 758. in Ps. 2.
when satan objecteth, behold thou art a sinner, thou do not so believe,
thou do no^ so love as the word requires: say thou again, why vexest thou
me with those visible things? I feel these well, there is no need that thou
teach me, there is need I follow the word and turn to invisible things.

19 Luther ex ad Cus. Aquilam. an. 1528. f. 393
Luther. The greatest part of men are beguiled, that they know not that the
thoughts of their utter casting out from God, is a tentation of Satan.

20. Luther to. 2. in Genesis c. 21. f. 188.
Luther. In a conflict of despair, we must hold the promise made in baptism
-- if Satan cease not, but cry in thy heart, thou art not worthy of that
promise -- we must ardently pray that the promise be not thrown out of our
hand. -- Say, I know there is a promise of grace, for the Son of Gods sake made
to me; this promise shall not lie, though I were cast in utter darkness. I
have stayed the longer on these, because possibly every Reader cannot have
Luthers works at hand.

4. Conclusion.
Luther and our Divines say, that we are patients in the business of
justification, How we are patients in justification, how not.
which tends not to favor the Antinomian dream, that we are justified
without faith, and before we believe, or that we are ^locks and dead passive
creatures in the act of believing, or in other supernatural acts. The
Antinomians of old, as Schlusselburgius. i^ Ca^^logo. heretico. l. 3. p 49.
Town ass. 3.9, 10.
now t Town, and others teach that the Law has no activity over the new man,
by teaching* ruling, commanding, requiring, exacting or demanding obedience of
him, because the Christian man is Lord of the Law and the Sabbath, and does all
without a Law teaching or commanding; for the new man, as new, does good works
by nature, as the fire casts heat then not by law, or teaching or command.
But Luther will have justification to be passive, and the Law in justification
a patient in a far other sense. 1. Because the broken debtor is free in Court
for nothing he does himself; but because the rich surety did all, and paid his
debt. 2. Because the Law, and the fulfilling thereof in the person of the
justified is utterly unpossible, and he is justified freely in Christ's rich
grace, without Law or works, and the Law makes him no help for justification
at all, but is a mere patient. 3. Because Christ that justifies the ungodly,
and is the head of the justified, owes nothing at all to the Law, and needed
not to be teached what to do by the Law, and did and over-did, and
out-suffered more abundantly by grace, then the compelling, cursing and
threatening Law can teach or command, had we suffered for the breach of one
Law, and done all the rest of the Law most perfectly and exactly, yet could we
never have given such glory to God, nor such exact payment and satisfaction to
the Law, both by doing and suffering, as Christ did, we should have paid to
the Lord and his Law, but copper and brass. Christ paid our Law-debts in fine
and precious gold. And what our new obedience wants in quantity (for we cannot
by Grace keep the Law exactly, nor thereby be justified) it has in quality,
being wrought by Grace, and perfumed with the glorious merits of Christ in
these respects; says, Luther tom. 4 f. 399.
Luther. The whole nature of justifying us, in regard of us, is passive.

Luther to. 4.130.131.
Actively the Law is a weak and poor ^lement (the letter of neither Law nor
Gospel can give strength to obey) and its weak passively, because of it self
it has not strength to bring righteousness* and newtra^ly its infirmity* and
poverty it self.

Luther ^^. ^ 95.
Luther. Our merit (by doing the Law) is just nothing. What can a cursed
sinner, ignorant of God, dead in sins, liable to the judgment and wrath of
God deserve? therefore that is the only way of eschewing the curse to believe
in God. Thou, O Christ, art my sin, and my curse, or rather I am thy sin, and
thy curse, thy death, thy wrath of God, thy hell; on the contrary, thou art
righteousness, blessing, life, the grace of God, my heaven; for the text says
clearly. Christ was made a curse for us, then we are the cause why he was
made a curse; yea, we are his curse.

Luther tom. ^. f. 52.
Good works are not to be drawn to the article of justification, as Monks
do.

s We grant we must teach of good works and charity, but in the own time and
place. When the question is without the lists of this Article of Justification
--. We say with Paul, by Faith in Christ only, not by the works of the law or
charity, we are j^st, not that we reject works and charity as our adversaries
say -- When then we are in this common place of justification, we reject and
condemn works, -- we simply reject all laws, and works of the Law.

Luther tom. 4 f. 399.
Tota ratio justificandi, quoad nos passiva est.

Luther to. 4.130.131.
Active Lex est elementum infirmum and egenum quia reddit homines infirmiores,
and egentiores, passive, quia ipsa per se non habet vim and opes justitiae
donandae and afferendae* neutraliter est infirmitas and paupertas ipsa.

Luther ^^. ^. 95.
Ergo meritum nostrum plane nullum est, Quid enim mirerer maledictus, peccator,
ignorans Dei, mortuus in peccatis, obnoxious irae and judicio Dei? Quare illa
unica via est evadendi maledictionem, credere and certa fiducia dicere. Tu
Christ, es peccatum and maledictum meum, seu potius, ego sum peccatum tuum,
maledictum tuum, mors tua, ira Dei tua: infernus tuus. Tu contra es justitia,
benedictio, vita, gratia Dei, coelum meum. Quare textus clare dicit, Christus
factus est pro nobis maledictum. Itaque nos sumus causa quod factus sit
maledictum, imo nos ipsius maledictum sumus.

Luther tom. ^. f. 52.
Luther, non sunt trahenda bona opera in articulum justificationis, ut Monachi
fecerunt.

s Concedimus docendum quoque de bonis operibus, and charitate: sed suo loco
and tempore, quando, scilicet, question est de operibus extra hunc capitalem
articulum -- Respondemus cum Paulo, sola fide in Christum nos pronuntiari
justos, non operibus legis aut charitate, non quod opera aut charitatem
rejiciamus, ut adversarii nos accusant -- Cum versamur in communi loco, de
justificatione, rejicimus and damnamus bona opera.



Our Antinomians point blanck to this in all the way to heaven condemn them,
so Crisp, Saltmarsh say, the only work of the Gospel is faith.

Therefore the law is passive only in the article of Justification, in which
article it condemns, compels, curses, and so is just nothing, and is
passive in justifying, but in binding the New man to obey, and in laying on him
a rule of life, it is active.

We can then easily expone Luther tom. 4. f. 451.
Luther. The just man ought not to live well (in regard of any compulsion of a
legal curse, How the law is abolished, and how not.
that the law (from which in Christ he is delivered) can inflict on him.
Neither stands he in need of the Law to teach him, (in a compulsory legal
way) to live well, for he lives not well, because the Law (forcing, and
cursing, and not furnishing Grace, as the Gospel does) requires that he live
well.

Justus non debet been vivere, Luther tom. 4. f. 451.
sed been vivit (hoc est, non obligatur compulsione legali, How the law is
abolished, and how not.
and vi condemnatoria legis, quia nulla condemnatio iis qui sunt in Christo)
ibid. Nec indiget lege, quae docet eum been vivere. Injustus autem debet (nexu
legalis condemnationis) been vivere, quia non been vivit, quod lex requirit,
hoc totum urget, ne ex lege and op^ribus justifieri presumant etc, Luth. l.
1.451.

In this regard Luther doubts not to say, How the law is abolished.
that the Law is simply and absolutely abolished to a just man. 2. That the law
is not the law, if it be not a condemning law. But he takes the law strictly
as a covenant of Works, and as opposite to Grace, as Paul does, Romans 7. Ye
are not under the Law, but under Grace.

Luther tom. 4 f. 178.
Then the law is absolutely abolished to a just man, it has no power to accuse
them, for they do willingly, what the law requires.

Luther tom. 4. fo. 521. in psa. 90.
The law is not given for this end to justify, but to discover sin, terrify,
accuse, and condemn.

Luther tom. 1. in Genesis c. 3. f. 57.
This is the fruit of the law, when it is alone, without the Gospel, and the
knowledge of grace, that it leads men to despair, and final impenitence.

The law (without Christ and the Gospel) is omnipotent -- Yea, Luther tom. 4 in
Exodus 19, 20 f. 130.
its invincible omnipotency, the conscience compared to it, most weak and
poor, for its a tender thing, so that except it be strengthened, it is
terrified, waxes paile, and despaireth for the least sin, therefore the law in
its proper use, has more strength and might then heaven and earth can
comprehend, so that one tittle or iota of the law can destroy whole mankind.

Luther to. 1.4^9.
By the law we have no help, but the revealing and warning of our misery.

Luther tom. 4* f. 178.
Luther, Itaque lex eis simpliciter est abrogata, non habet igitur, jus
accusandi eos, Sponte enim faciunt, quod lex requirit.

Luther tom. 4. fo. 521. in psa. 90.
Luther, non data est lex ut justificet, sed ut ostendat peccatum, terreat,
accuset, and condemuet.

Luther tom. 1. in Genesis c. 3. f. 57.
Hic legis effectus est quando sola est, sine evangelio, and cognitione
gratiae, ut adducat in desperationem, and finalem impaenitentiam.

Lex in suo usu -- est omnipotens; Luther tom 4^ in Exodus 19, 20 f. 130.
imo est invinbilis omnipotentia - ad qua^ collata conscientia est infirmissima
et pauperrima, et enim tam tenera res, ut propter leviss mum peccatum, ita
pavefi^t, and pallescat, ut disperet, nisi rursus erigatur. Quare lex in
proprio suo usu plus virium and opum habet, quam coelum and terra comprehendere
potest, ita ut etiam unus apex and unum iota legis totum genus humanum occidere
possit.

Luther to. 1.4^9.
Per legem non adiutorium, sed nostri mali indicium and monitorium habemus.

All this is true of the Law as a Covenant of works without Christ and the
Gospel, as Luther says, quando est sola si^e evangelio, Tom. 1. in Genesis c. 3.
f. 57. Then Luther thinks that the Law conjoined with the Gospel, and as it
is in the hand of Christ, has the being of the law, and not such terrible
effects, 2. Luther acknowledges that the law as it condemns is to be
preached to believers, that they may crucify the flesh with the lusts thereof,
to the wicked, that they may feel sin and be humbled. 3. He will have the law,
as it condemns to be the only law that is opposed to grace, and so means
the Apostle, Romans 7.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, etc.

Luther tom. 1 f. 506.
Luther, Lex docenda promiscue -- impiis -- ut territi agnoscant peccatum suum
-- humilientur. Piis ut admoneantur carnem suam crucifigere cum concupiscentiis.

Luther to. 1.561.
Luther, Qui legem damnantem negat Docendam esse reipsa legem simpliciter
negat, ac siquid de lege docet, velamen Mosi, non faciem clarem ac veram, id
est carnaliter intellectum docet. Lex non damnans est Lex ficta and picta,
sicut Chimera and trag^laphus. Nec politica ac naturalis Lex quicquam est, nisi
sit damnans and terrens peccatores, To. 3.

Luther tom. 1 f. 506.
Luther, the law (condemning) is to be preached promiscuously to the wicked,
that they may feel sin, and wrath, and be humbled; and to the godly, that they
may crucify the flesh and the lusts thereof.

Luther to. 1.561.
Those that deny the condemning law should be preached. Deny absolutely the Law
(as Paul opposes the Law to the Gospel) -- the Law not condemning, is a
fancied and painted Law, a chimera -- for the civil and natural Law is
nothing, if it be not a Law condemning and terrifying sinners.

1. It is clear both that the Law, as the Law, and as its opposed to the
Gospel, and as it condemns all the world, is abolished to the believer, as
we teach with Paul, and all our Divines. 2. That Paul in this notion compares
Law and Gospel as opposite, and so we, with him, teach that believers are not
under the Law, in its rigor, exaction and condemnation, but under grace. 3. Yet
is the Law not made void, but established by grace, in that the sinner is
justified by Christ's passive obedience to the Law, not in any sort by his own
active and personal obedience. And so his justification is to him passive, for
both the Law is a mere patient to justify the believer, for it condemns
him, but justifies him not, and he is a mere patient in being justified by
the Law, for he never does, nor can by his own holiness active and personal
be justified; for that holiness is contrary to, and swerveth from the perfect
and spiritual Law of God. 4. It is evident that Paul, that Luther, Calvin, and
our Divines following Paul teach that believers are under the Law as a rule and
a commanding and obligeing Law laying on them a necessity of living according
to the Law.

5. Conclusion. Of the union between Christ and a believer, holden by Luther,
opposite to that fancied union of Familists and Antinomians.

In regard of the strict union between Christ and a believer, Luther has many
pithy and hyperbolick expressions, that made Antinomians, as they pervert
Scripture to their own destruction, to perverr Luthers doctrine, to say a
believer is Godded with God, and Christed with Christ, and that God is manned,
and huma^ized by a believer. Its necessary to set down some of Luthers
expressions and the reasons, why he speaks so, and both out of his own
writings.

Luther tom 1 f 232.
Luth. Re vera quicquid de Christo ipso dicitur, mox de quolibet ejus membro
vivo and proprio dicitur.

Luther tom. 1 f. 432.
Luth. Vita Christiani non est ipsius, sed Christi in eo viventis.

Luther tom. 1. fo. 106. some say tom 4.
Christianus est filius Dei, here is regni, frater Christi, socius Angelo rum,
dominus mundi, particeps divinae natura.

Luther to. 4. 438.
Luth. Christianus non vivit, non loquitur, non operatur, non patitur, sed
Christus in eo, omnia opera ejus sunt opera Christi, tam inestimabilis est
gratia fidei.

Luther tom. 4 f 59.
Luther. Tunc fiunt bona opera quando Deus ipse solus ac totaliter ea facit in
nobis, ut operis nulla pars ad nos pertineat.

Luther to. 4. f. 65.
Christus ergo (inquit Paulus) sic inhaerens and conglutinatus mihi, hanc
vitam, quam ego, vivit in m^; imo vita qua sic vivo, est Christus ipse: itaque
Christus and ego jam unum in hac part sumus.

Luth. tom. 4. f. 35.
Luther. Fide homo fit Deus. 2. Pet. 1.

Luther tom. 1 f. 353.
Verum est hominem Dei gratia adiutum plus quiddam and Augustiorem esse, quam
hominem, atque adeo gratia Dei ipsum deiformem reddit, and quasi deificat, ut
Scriptura ipsum dominum and Dei filium vocet.

Luther tom 1 f 232.
Luther. What ever is said of Christ, may be said of every living and true
member of his; so every Christian is a Lamb, just, holy, a rock, a foundation.

Luther tom. 1 f. 432.
The life of a Christian or a believer, is not his own, but the life of Christ
living in him.

Luther tom. 1. fo. 106. some say tom 4.
A Christian is the Son of God, heir of the Kingdom, brother of Christ, a
fellow of Angels, Lord of the world, pertaker of the divine nature.

Luther to. 4. 438.
Luth. The Christian man lives not, speaks not, acts nothing, suffers
nothing, but Christ in him, all his works are the works of Christ, so
invaluable and incomparable is the grace of faith.

Luther tom. 4 f 59.
Then are good works done when God himself only, and wholly does them in us, so
that no part of them belongs to us.

Luther to. 4. f. 65.
Christ therefore (says paul) so remaining in, and glewed to me, lives in me,
the life that I live, yea the life by which I live, is Christ himself,
therefore Christ and I am one in this part, or respect; then we are not one
simply.

Luth. tom. 4. f. 35.
A man by believing becomes God. 2 Pet 1.

Luther tom. 1 ^* 353.
It is true a man helped by the grace of God, is more, yea and more excellent
then a man, and therefore the grace of God makes him of the form of God, and
as it were Goddeth him, so as the Scripture calls him, the Lord, and Son of
God.

Such hyperbolick and Rhetorical passages in Luther, Luthers expressions
mistaken drew Antinomians into their heresy.
which he softened with a ( quasi) and a ( ut ita loquar) that I may so speak,
as Catachresticall and hard sounding speeches, have driven blasphemous
Familists to think and say, as the Bright Star, Theologia Germanica, Hen.
Nicholas, Dav. Georgius say, Christ incarnate, or God manifested in the flesh,
is nothing but a believer doing by grace greater works then Christ, and that
the Saints have by love and faith communicated to them the being, essence, and
nature of God, that H. Nicholas that so was Godded with the being of God. That
every Saint has a more excellent Spirit of grace then Christ, as is maintained
of late in Oxford, by a Socinian Sectary, so the Familists of new England Rise
reign, er. ^ er. 2.
say the holy Ghost is turned in the place and stead of the natural faculties
of the soul, of understanding, conscience, will, memory. 2. That love er, 3.
is the Holy Ghost himself. 3. That er. 7.
the new creature, or new man, is Christ himself. That er. 8.
by love and the Armor of God is meant Christ. That er. 11.
Christ is made flesh in the Saints. That er. 14. The light and life of a man
in Christ.
the living Christ works in a man in Christ, as in a dead passive creature,
so speaks a Familist, in a blasphemous pamphlet. That Rise er. 15. Town asser
gr. 11.12.
there is no inherent grace in the Saints, but Christ immediately works all
in them, and grace is only in Christ, and therefore we Rise reig er. 49
are not to pray, but when the Spirit acts in us. That 49.50, 51.
we are mere patients in all we do, and God the immediate agent, and Calv.
adv. lib. c. 14, 15.
that God (as say the Libertines) w is the author of sin and righteousness, no
man is to be rebuked for sin, nor to be touched in conscience for sin, 448,
449, 450. Archer ser. on Joh. 14.^.
because God is the Author and worker thereof, and there is no letter of a
command Saltmarsh free gr. 146.
of either Old or New Testament, that does obleige a believer, The Law is now
(says Saltmarsh) in the Spirit. There be no Laws ^el sermon. before the
Commons, p. 26, 2^.
(says Del) now in Gods Kingdom, but Gods Laws, and they are these three.

1. The Law of a new creature. 2. The Law of the Spirit of life, that is in
Christ. 3. The Law of Love.
Farewell Scripture then. But Luther exponeth himself, in what sense he means
Christ and a believer is one, and a believer is God, and as it were Christed,
to wit* in regard of the union of the grace of Faith, and the marriage between
a believer and Christ. and the legal interest that the broken man has in
Christ his surety. and of the new birth, so says Luther, Luther to. 4. f. 74.
Fides est res omnipotens and virtus ejus inestimabilis, and infinita, Faith is
an omnipotent thing, and the power thereof unvaluable and infinite. Now faith
is not Christed, nor Godded with the infinite essence of God or Christ, no more
is a believer.

Luth. tom 4.57.
Luther, fides pure docenda est, quod scilicet per ^am sic conglutineris, ut ex
te and Christo quasi fiat una persona, quae non possit segregari, ut cum
fiducia dicere possis: Ego sum Christus, hoc est, Christi justitia, victoria,
vita est mea, and vicissim Christus dicat: Ego sum ille peccator, hoc est, ejus
peccata et mors mea sunt: Quia adhaeret mihi, and ego illi. Conjuncti enim
sumus per fidem in unam carnem and os. Ephe. 5. Ita ut haec fides Christum and
me arctius copulet quam maritus uxori copulatus est.

Luth. tom. 4. f. 91.
Christus quod ad suam personam attinet, est innocens, ergo non debet suspendi
in liguo. Quia vero omnis latro secundum legem suspendi debuit, debuit and
Christus secundum legem Mosis suspendi, quia gessit persona^ peccatoris and
latronis, non unius sed omnium peccata portat -- non quod ipse commiserit ea.

Quaecunque peccata ego and tu, and nos omnes (clecti) fecimus and in futurum
faciemus, tam propria sunt Christi, quam si ea ipse fecisset.

Luth. tom 4.57.
Luther, Faith is purely to be taught, because by it thou art so glewed to
Christ, that of thee and Christ, there is as it were quasi, made one person,
which cannot be segregated, so that with confidence thou may say, I am Christ,
that is, Christ's righteousness, victory, and life is mine, and again, Christ
may say: I am that sinner, that is, his sin and death are mine, because he
adhereth to me, and I to him. We are conjoined by faith, in one flesh and bone,
Ephesians. 5. so that this faith does more nearly couple Christ and me, then the
husband to the wife.

Luth. tom. 4. f. 91.
Christ in his own person is innocent, then he ought not to be hanged on a
tree, but because every robber ought to be hanged, Christ according to Moses
Law, ought to be hanged, because he did bear the person, not of one sinner and
robber, but of all sinners and robbers, -- He behoved to be the robber -- He
bears the sins of all, in his body, -- not that he committed them.

What ever sins, I, or thou, or we all have done, or shall hereafter do, are
as proper Christ's sins, as if he himself had done them.

Not that they were Christ's intrinsecally, How our sins were Christ's, not
intrinsecally fundamentally, or personally, but legally.
in the fundamental guilt, and law-obligation to suffer for them, as Crisp
says, but legally the believers sins are Christ's, the client and the advocate
are in Law one law-person, they have but one cause, the surety and the broken
man are one, the debt owed by both is one, therefore Christ is the sinner
legally.

Luth. tom. 4. f. 471. in ps. 117.
Luther, The believer in doing nothing, (but believing in his surety) does all
things. and in doing all things (in Christ) does nothing.

Luther to. 3. in Genesis in c. 12. f. 64.
One Christian tempted, can do more (by faith in him who does all things for
him) quam centum non tentati, than a hundred not tempted can do.

Luth. tom. 1. in Genesis 3* f. 55.
A Christian by faith becomes a conqueror of sin, Law, and death, so as the
Ports of hell cannot prevail against him.

Luth. tom. 3* in Genesis 60. ^. 27.
Luther, Omnipotency is conjoined with nothingnes and weakness, and causes
the weak to do things unpossible and incredible.

Luth. to. 1* f. 466.
So incomparable is the grace of faith, that it conjoyneth the soul with
Christ, as the Bride with the Bridegroom, by which mystery Christ and the
Soul are made one flesh, and if they be one flesh, then are all things common,
whether good or evil things, and what ever Christ has, the believing soul
may presume and glory in them, as its own, and whatever things are the souls
own, Christ may ascribe these to himself.

Luther to. 2. f. 1^8.
Luther, Faith in Christ causes him live in me, and move, and work as a saving
ointment works on a diseased body, and is made with Christ one flesh, one
body, by an intimate and unspeakable transmutation of our sin into his
righteousness.

Luther to. 2. ^ 15.
Faith brings to us Christ, that is, makes us one flesh with him, bone of our
bone, and makes all things common with him.

Luther tom. 1. f. 178.
A man in faith may glory in Christ, and say, it is mine that Christ lived,
did, said, suffered, died, no otherwise then if I had lived, done, spoken,
suffered, dyed, as the Bridegroom has all the Brides, and the Bride all the
Bridegroomes, for all are common to both, they are one flesh, so Christ and his
Church are one Spirit.

Luth. tom. 4. f. 471. in ps. 117.
Pius nihil faciendo facit omnia, and faciendo omnia nihil facit.

Luther to. 3. in Genesis in c. 27. f. 64.
Luther, Vnus Christianus tentatus plus prodest, quam centum non tentati.

Luth. tom. 1. in Genesis 3* f. 55.
Christianus fide constituituitur victor p^ccati, legis, and mortis, ut ne
quidem inferorum portae ei praevalere possint.

Luth. tom. ^ in Genesis 60. ^. 27.
Luther, Omnipotentia conjungitur cum nihilitudine -- eo perducit infirmum ut
faciat impossibil^a et incredibilia.

Luth. to. 1. f. 466.
Luther, Fidei gratia incomparabilis hac est, quod animam copulat cum Christo,
sicut sponsam cum sponso, quo sacramento Christus and anima efficiuntur una
caro, quo^si una caro sint, sequitur and omnia eorum communia fieri, tam bona,
quam mala, ut quaecunque Christus habet, de iis tanquam suis presumere and
gloriari possit fidelis anima; et quaecunque animae sunt, ea sibi arrogat
Christus tanquam sua.

Luther to. 2. f. 1^8.
Luth. Fides in Christum facit eum in me vivere, moveri, agere non secus atque
salutare unguentum in aegrum corpus agit, efficiturque cum Christo una caro and
unum corpus per intimam et ineffabilem transmutationem peccati nostri in illius
justitiam.

Luther to. 2. ^ 15.
Fides nobis Christum affert, hoc est, unam carn^m, os ex ossibus nostris, and
omnia communia cum illo facit.

Luther tom. 1. f. 178.
Luth. Homo eum fiducia possit gloriari in Christo and dicere. Meum est, quod
Christus vixit, egit, dixit, passus est, mortuus est, non secus quam si ego
illa vixissem, egissem, dixissem, passus essem, mortuus essem, sicut sponsus
habet omnia quae sunt sponsae, and sponsa habet omnia, quae sunt sponsi, omnia
enim sunt communia utriusque: sunt enim una caro: Ita Christus and ecclesia
sunt unus spiritus.

Conclusion 6.
Antinomians contend, as I prove, at length, from their writings, that there is
no sin in the believer, more then Eaton hon^y comb. c. 3. p. 25.
in Christ, that Justification is a taking away of sin, root and branch, in its
essence and nature, so that pardoned sin is no sin, and has lost honey comb.
c. 7. p. 139.
the nature of sin, the justified man is Saltmar. free gr. 154.
but a sinner seemingly, not in Gods, but in the worlds account. So
blasphemously they speak. But Luther and all Protestant Divines say they are
licencious teachers, and gratify the flesh, and belie the Holy Ghost that so
teach.

Luther to. 1.543. Antinomians say that we once being justified, there is no
sin in us, Luther says the contrary.
Luther who ever is justified, he is still a sinner, yet he is as it were fully
and perfectly reputed righteous, the Lord pardoning and showing mercy.

Saltmar. free gra. 154.
Saltmarsh contradicting Luther says the Scripture calls us (being
justified) ungodly and sinners and children of wrath, not that we are so, but
seem so: or, not in Gods account, but the worlds, so De^, Crisp, Town, Eaton.

Luther tom. 4. f. 103.
Luther, We are just, and declared to be the Sons of God: but sin originally
remains in us, rebelling against us, we are not free from all pollutions.

Luther to. 1*406.
Its better that Peter and Paul falling in unbelief, be accursed, then that one
iota of the Evangell pass away.

Luth. tom. 1.449.
All the Saints have sin, and are sinners, and also none of them do sin, L^^h.
tom. 1.46^.
they are righteous according to that which grace has wholled, and sinners in
that in which they are to be wholled.

Luther to. 2.^6.
By Gods mercy, the Saints when they are hardened, fall in manifest sin -- and
with so great care, God is forced to save them, that contrary to mercy, he
leads them to mercy, and by sin freeth them from sin.

Luther to. 1. 543. Antinomians say that we once being justified, there is no
sin in us, Luther says the contrary.
Luther, Peccator est adhuc quisquis justificatur, and tamen, velut plene et
perfect justus reputatur, ignoscente et miserente Deo.

Luther tom. 4. f. 103.
Luth. Sumus quidem justi and declarati filii regni sed peccatum originis manet
adhuc rebellans in nobis. Non sumus puri ab omnibus vitiis and inquinamentis.

Luther to. 1*406.
Melius est Petrum and Paulum in infidelitatem lapsos, imo Anathema haberi quam
unum iota Evangelii perire.

Luth. tom. 1.449.
Luth. Omnes sancti habent peccatum, suntque peccatores; L^^h. tom. 1.46^.
and nullus peccat: iusti sunt juxta illud, quod gratia in iis sanavit,
peccatores, juxta quod adhuc sanandi sunt.

Luther to. 2.^6.
Luth. Proinde fit miserante Deo -- ut si sint Sancti crassioris duritiae,
cadant aliquando in man^estarium opus peccati, -- tantaque, cura illos Deus
cogitur servare, ut contra misericordiam suam eos ad misericordiam perducat,
and per peccatum a peccato liberet.

It is a proverb (says Luth. tom. 1. f. 479.
Luther) they must have strong bones, who can bear many fair days of
prosperity. Oportet esse ossa robusta, qui serant dies bonos. So say I, not
sinning, and not being acquainted with our own weakness in falling in sin,
has broken many bones, and the falls of David and Peter has cured their bones.

Luth. tom. 1. f 56.
Relative non formaliter a^t substantialiter est peccatum sublatum, lex
abolita, mors destructa.

Luth. tom. 1. f 56.
By way of relation, not formally, nor essentially, is sin taken away, the Law
abolished, death destroyed.

Hear this, Antinomians, who teach that sin pardoned loses the nature and
being of sin, so that God can see no sin in a believer.

Luth. 6. c 2. f. 314,
Originis peccatum transit reatu, manet actu.

Luth. tom. 4.385.
Luth. Deus peccata delet quoad remissionem culpae and ipsam vim peccati, non
quoad rem seu materiam peccati: Haec vi^ peccati per miseri^ordiam gratuitam
tollitur, and tamen mane^t verae hujus veneni reliquiae: ergo utrumque verum
est: Quod nullus Christianus hab^t peccatum: and quod omnis Christianus habet
peccatum-hinc duplex p^ccatum apud Christianos, peccatum remissum and peccatum
reliquum, quod extirpandum and abluendum est.

Luther to. 4. f 385.
Christianus non est formaliter justus, non justus secundum substantiam aut
qualitatem, -- sed est justus secundum praedicamentum ad aliquid, nempe
respectu divina gratiae tantum, and remissionis gratuitae quae contingi^
agnoscentibus peccatum and credentibus.

Luth. 6. c 2. f. 314,
Sin original passes away after baptism in the guilt, it remains actually.

Luth. tom. 4.385.
God takes away our sins, as touching the remission of the fault, and the
power of sin, not according to the thing it self, and the matter of sin, this
power of sin through free mercy is removed, and yet the true relics of this
poison remains; then both is true, none in Christ has sin, every one in
Christ has sin: there is a twofold sin in Christians, a sin pardoned,
and a sin remaining; a sin to be rooted out, a sin to be washen out.

Luther to. ^. f 385.
Luther. A Christian is not formally just: he is not just according to the
substance or quality -- but according to relation; to wit, in regard of grace
only, and of remission of sins, which befalls freely to such as confess
their sins and believe.

This is our very doctrine, point blanke contrary to Antinomians. Crisp says,
Sin is taken away, as money removed out of a place, it was once in, it is no
more in its being and nature there, Pardoned sin is sin, and dwells still in
justified believers.
then if it had never been there. The believer is as just and as clean from
sin as Christ; God cannot see sin in a believer, because pardoned sin as
lost the nature of sin, and both his person and his works are perfect and
sinlesse before God. The devil cannot teach more fleshly doctrine; for we are
only by justification just by a relative righteousness as the prodigal
bankerupt is just legally, and free from debt, for which is his surety has
satisfied. But the bankerupt personally, inherently, subjectively and in
himself, is an unjust waster a thief and a robber, and has in him still a
sinful disposition to take one new debt, except both inherent and assisting
grace hinder him; there is not this injustice in the surety, far less can any
such thing be dreamed to be in Christ, nor is pardoned sin taken away in its
nature and being, as money removed out of a place, its only in its law,
obligation, and rigid power of condemning removed, as if it never had been; and
we, with Luther, say, that sin remains formally and essentially sin in the
complete being and nature of sin, both in our person and best works after we
are pardoned and justified, though God see it not as a judge therefore to
condemn us; the sting and condemning guilt of sin, not the sin it self, in
its nature and being, is removed, as a Serpent without a sting* has still the
being and nature of a Serpent. A Lion, chained that it cannot devour, is still
a Lion: so is sin pardoned, still sin in the kind and nature of transgression
against a divine Law.

Luther. Haec est justitia infinita and omnia peccata in momento absorbens,
Luther to. 1.1^8.
quia impossible est quod peccatum in Christo haere. at, and qui credit,
haeret in Christo, est que unus cum Christo, habens candem justitiam c^m ipso.

Luther tom. 1. ^. ^^5.
Luther. Impossible est ut peccet filius Dei quicunque, tametsi verum est,
quod peccat: sed quia ignoscitur ei, ideo vero etiam peccans, non peccat.

Non videt Deus dubitationem de voluntate ejus, Luther. tom. 4 (...).
diffidentiam -- and alia p^ccata quae adhuc hab^o. Don^^ enim vivo in carne,
vere peccatum est in me.

Luth. tom. 4. ^. 7^.
Luth. Peccatain nobis manent, quae Deus maxim odit, ideo propter illa oportet
nos habere imputationem justitiae.

Luther tom. ^ f. 420. How sin remains in us* and how (...) moved.
Luther. Non est dicendum, quod baptismus non tollat omnia peccata. Vere enim
omnia tollit, non secundum substantiam, sed plurimum secundum substantiam, and
totum secundum vires ejus, simul quotidie etiam tollens secundum substantiam,
ut evacuetur.

Luther tom. ^. f. 182.
Luther. Renatus non peccat* and peccat, peccat in opere eodem propter
voluntatem carnis: non peccat propter contrariam voluntatem spiritus.

Luther to. ^ f. 240.
Quotidie peccat omnis homo, sed and quotidie poenitet.

Luther to. ^. f 537.
Toto vitae tempore durat peccatum in carne nostra, and adversatur Spiritui
sibi adversario: Quare omnia opera post justificationem sunt aliud nihil quam
paenitentia, aut bonum propositum contra peccatum.

Luther to. 4.111.
Luther. Quotidie Spiritualiter in quolibet Christiano subinde invenitur per
vices tempus legis and gratiae.

Luther tom. 4.111.
Luth. Multae horae sunt, in quibus cum Deo rixor, and impatienter ei repugn^:
mihi and judicium Dei displicet: ipsi vicissim displicet mea impatientia: How
we are under the Law and under Grace, in regard of the flesh and Spirit.
hoc tempus legis est, in quo Christianus sub carnem semper est: car^
concupiscit, etc. -- Tempus gratiae est, cum cor iterum ^^igitur and dicit,
Quar^ tristis es anima mea etc. Qui istam artem been nosset, ille merito
diceretur Theologus: Ego and mei similes vix tenemus hujus artis prima elementa.

Luth. tom. 4. ^71.
Luther, Imo quo quisque magis pius est, hoc plus sentit illam pugnam.

Ego Monachus statim putabam actum de sal^te mea si quando s^ntiebam
co^cupiscentiam carnis; tent^bam multa, confitebar quotidie, sed nihil prorsus
proficiebam, si tum recte, intellexissem Pauli sententiam, Caro concupiscit
adversus* Spiritum, non usque adeo me a^^lixissem: sed, ut hodie soleo,
cogita^^em. Martine, tu non carebis probus peccato, quia carnem adhuc habes --
Staupicius dicere solitus, millies vovi me probi^rem fore, ^^nquam praesti^i,
amplius non v^vebe.

Luther tom 4 172.
Luther. Hoc quod vere peccatum est contra legem, lex pro peccato non potest
accusare in piis.

Luther tom. 4.385.
Luth. Peccatum remissum est, quod fiducia misericordiae contritum est, ne
damnet, ne accuset, and tamen propter hanc carnem, adhuc pullulat and militat
in carne.

Luth. tom. 4.386.
Cavendum ne illas peccati reliquas extenuemus -- vilescit enim purgator.

Luther tom. 2. in Genesis c. ^0. f. 156.
Luther. Manent in nobis reliquiae peccatorum quae quotidiana remissione opus
habent.

Luther. to. 4. in Genesis c. 42. f. 94.
Luther. Remissa quidem and tecta sunt omnia peccata, sed nondum expurgata,
haeret in nobis tantum libidinis, superbiae, odii -- sed occultae etiam
maculae, dubitatio, imputientia.

Luther t. ^.163.
Luther. In carne nostra etiam cum justificati sumus; reliquiae peccati manent,
ne scilicet sumus otios^, s^d habeamus exercitia pietatis.

Luther t. 4*385.
Peccatum, sicut Augustinus loquitur, actu manet, reactu tamen transit, hoc
est, res ipsa qu^ vere peccatum e^t, and remissa est, and a Deo tolleratur, ea
manet in carne reliqua, nec dum plane mortua est, nisi quod per Christum, caput
serpentis contritum est, lingua tamen adhuc mi^at and cauda minatur ictum.

Luther t 4.382.
Luth. Quid, Inquies? an non decalogus praestari debet? si autem praestatur, an
non ea justitia est? Respondeo volumus decalogum praestare and servare sed cum
larga, hoc est vere Evangelica dispensatione seu distinctione. Quia accipimus
tantum primitias Spiritus, and gemitus Spiritus in cord manent, item caro
nostra cum suis libidinibus ac concupiscentiis, hoc est tota arbor cum
fructibus etiam manet: haec causa est cur decalogus nunquam pleno praestari
possit.

Luther to. 1.1^8.
Luther. The infinite justice of God in a moment swalloweth up all sin; because
it is impossible that sin remain in Christ, and he that believes in Christ,
remains in Christ, and is one with Christ, having the same righteousness
with him.

Luther tom. 1. ^. ^^5.
It is unpossible that a Son of God should sin, though it be true, that he sin,
but because his sin is pardoned, therefore when he truly sins, he sins not.

Luther. tom. 4 (...).
Because of says, God sees not my doubting, my unbeleefe, my sadness of
spirit, and other sins, which I have yet in me; for so long as I live in the
flesh it is truly sin that is in me; but because I am under the shadow of
Christ's wings, I am protected as a chicken under an hen.

Luth. tom. 4. ^. 7^.
Sins remain in us, which God hates; for them therefore we must have the
imputed righteousness of Christ.

Luther tom. ^ f. 420. How sin remains in us* and how (...) moved.
We must not say that baptism takes not away al our sins* for it truly takes
them all away, not in their essence or nature, but in some respect in their
nature, and wholly in their dominion, and it removes them daily in their being
and nature, through the growth of sanctification, that sin at length may be
fully exhausted and spent.

Luther tom ^. f ^8^.
Luther. A renewed man sins, and sins not: he sins in the same work, in
regard of the will of the flesh, he sins not because of the contrary will of
the spirit.

Luther to. ^* f. 240.
Luther. (every renewed) man daily sins, and daily repents.

Luther to. ^. f 537.
All our life sin dwells in our flesh, and resists the spirit, as an adversary,
therefore all our works after justification, are nothing but repentance, or a
good purpose against sin.

Luther to. 4.111.
Luther. Every day there is by course spiritually in every Christian a time of
the Law and of Grace.

Luther tom. 4.111.
There be many hours in which I quarrel with God, and impatiently fight
against him, the wrath and judgment of God displeases me: and again, my
impatience displeases him, How we are under the Law and under Grace, in regard
of the flesh and Spirit.
this is the time of the Law, in which a Christian is under the flesh, for the
flesh ever lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, in some
more, in some less. The time of grace is when the heart is erected, and says,
why art thou cast down, O my soul, etc. He that knows this art well, is
deservedly a Divine. I and those like me, know scarce the first elements
thereof.

Luth. tom. 4. ^71.
The more godly any is, the more he feels this battle.

When I was a Monk, I thought my heaven gone, so often as I felt the
concupiscence of the flesh, I assayed much, I confessed every day but in vain,
while I understood Paul, saying, The flesh lusts against the Spirit, then I
was not so afflicted, I thought then as now. Martin, even thou, though godly,
shall not want sin, and this battle, despair not, but fight then, thou art not
under the Law. Staupicius said, I have vowed a thousand times to be godlier,
but I keep not, I Will vow no more, etc.

Luther tom 4 172.
Luther, That which is truly sin against the Law, the Law cannot accuse as sin
in the godly.

Luther tom. 4.385.
Luther. Sin that is pardoned, is broken, through confidence of mercy, that it
condemn not, or accuse not, yet because of the flesh it springs up and wars
in the flesh.

Luth. tom. 4.386.
Beware to think little or much of the relics of sin, for so the purger, the
holy Spirit is lightly esteemed.

Luther tom. 2. in Genesis c. ^0. f. 156.
The relics of sin remain in us, which need daily pardon.

Luther to. 4. in Genesis c. 42. f. 94.
All (the believers) sins are pardoned and covered, but not yet purged, so
much pride, hatred, lust, etc. yea, inward blots, unbeleefe, impatience,
murmuring, remain in us.

Luther t. 1.163.
The relics of sin remain in our flesh, even when we are justified, least we
should be idle, that we may have exercises of godliness.

Luther t. 4*385.
Sin, as Augustine speaks remains in us actually, and in guilt it passes
away, that is, the thing it self that is truly sin, is both pardoned, and
tolerated by God, and the remnant of it remains in the flesh, and is not
close dead, except that by Christ the Serpents head is bruised, yet his tongue
moves, and his tail threatens a stroke.

Luther t 4.382.
What, you will say? ought not the ten Commandments to be kept? or if they be
kept, is not that our righteousness? I answer, we will perform and keep the
ten Commandments but with a large, that is, with a truly Evangelick
dispensation and distinction, because we receive only the first fruits of the
Spirit, and the sighs of the Spirit remain in our heart, also our flesh with
the lusts and concupiscence, that is, the whole tree (the whole body of sin in
its nature and being, say Antinomians what they will) with the fruits thereof
remains, this is the cause why the Law can never be perfectly kept.

Luther does most excellently deliver the differences of Law and Gospel, of
which Antinomians are altogether ignorant, Luther calls the Law a letter, a
dead, a condemning letter, not as Antinomians say, because in the Gospel, as
Del Del Sermon. 19. Antinomians ignorant of the mind of Luther in the point of
difference between the Law and the Gospel
says, The word and the Spirit are always conjoined, and therefore Christ
says, the words that I speak are spirit and life, that is, they come from the
Spirit and carry Spirit with them, which the Law does not: but Luther means
that the Law, as the Law and Covenant of works, has nothing at all of the
Spirit, but as a pedagogue to Christ it has the Spirit conveying it in the
hearts of the elect, and the Gospel, as the Gospel, promises and has
conjoined with it, the Spirit, not always, not when preached to Capernaim, as
Del cites ignorantly the text Joh. 6. not when preached to Pharisees, but when
preached to the elect, and not always, not when their hearts are hardened,
Mark. 6.52. Mark. 8.16, 17. but when God is pleased to open their hearts, and
effectually to concur with the word of the Gospel: Luther to. 1.556. Quiequid
ostendi^ peccatum, i^ram, mortem, id exercet officium legis, sive fiat in
veteri, sive in novo Testamento.
For Luther says what ever reveals sin, wrath, and death, does the office
of the Law, whether in the Old or New Testament, according to Luther, the
Gospel may act the Laws part on a hardened hearer: and so it has not the Spirit
always accompanying it, and the Law, when it is made a Pedagogue to lead us to
Christ, carries the Spirit with it; but Antinomians mean no other thing but
that the Gospel is the very holy Spirit himself. A most absurd Doctrine, the
Gospel is the word of grace, the Holy Spirit is God making the word of grace
effectual.

Luther tom. 1 f. 471.
Luther. The Evangell is a word both of power and grace, while it beats on the
ears, and within powers in the Spirit. But if it power not in the Spirit, a
hearing man differs not from a deaf man. Then the Gospel is sometimes
without the Spirit, as well as the Law.

Luther to. 1.399. What is a dead, and what a quickening letter.
Except the doctrine of faith, by which the heart is purified and justified, be
revealed, all teaching of all commands is literal, and the tradition of
Fathers.

Luther to. 1. f 412.
The Law teaches what is your debt, and what you want, Christ gives what you
should do, and what you should have.

Luth. ^om. ^.16.
Augustine says, the Law of works says do what I command: the law of faith
says to God, grant, Lord, what thou command: and again, what the Law of
works commands by threatening, that the Law of faith obtaines by believing,
the people of the Law is hauty, the people of Faith, sighs for pardon.

Luth tom. 2. f. 356.
Every law, especially Gods Law, is a word of wrath, the power of sin, Luther
speaks of the Law as given to us now in the state of sin.
the law of death: the Gospel is the word of grace, life, salvation, the word
of righteousness and peace.

Luth. tom. 4. 2. Tim. 2.5.
It is a wonder, and unknown to the world, to teach Christians to be ignorant
of the Law, and to live so before God, as if there were no Law. For except thou
be ignorant of the law, and conclude in thy heart, there is no law, no wrath,
but only grace and mercy in Christ Jesus, thou cannot be saved, for by the law
is the knowledge of sin, by the contrary, so the law and works must be pressed
on the unbeleeving world, as if there were no Gospel promise, no grace.

Luther to. 4.^1.
Luther, The Gospel is a preaching of Christ, that he pardons sin, gives grace,
justifies and saves sinners. Whereas there are Commandments in the Gospel,
they are not Gospel, but expositions of the law, and consequences of the Gospel.

Luther tom. 1 f. 471.
Evangelium verbum virtutis and gratiae simul est dum aures pulsat, intus
Spiritum infundit. Quod si Spiritum non infundit, nihil differt audiens a surdo.

Luther to. 1.399. What is a dead, and what a quickening letter.
Luther, Nisi doctrina ^idet, qua cor purificatur and justificatur, reveletur,
omnis omnium praeceptorum eruditio, Literalis and paterna traditio.

Luther to. 1. f 412.
Lex docet quid debeas, and quo careas, Christus dat quod facias and habeas.

Luth. ^om. ^ 16.
Augustinus dicit, lex factorum dicit homini, fac quod jubeo: Lex autem fidei
dicit Deo: da quod jubes: iterum, quod lex factorum minando imperat, hoc lex
fidei credendo impetrat.

Luth tom. 2. f. 356.
Luther, Lex quae cunque presertim divina est verbum irae, Luther speaks of
the Law as given to us now in the state of sin.
virtus peccati, lex mortis: Evangelium vero est verbum gratiae, vitae,
salutis, verbum justitiae and salutis.

Luth. tom. 4. 2* Tim. 2.5.
Res mira, mundo inaudita, Docere Christianos ut discant ignorare legem, utque
sic vivant coram Deo quasi penitus nulla lex sit, nisi enim ignoraveris legem
and in cord tuo statueris, nullam esse legem, and iram Dei, and tantum,
graciam and misericordiam propter Christum, non potes salvus fieri. -- E contra
in mundo sic urgeri lex and opera debent, quasi prorsus nulla sit promissio and
gratia.

Luther to. 4.^^.
Evangelium est predicatio De Christo, quod remittat peccatum, donet gratiam,
justificet and salvet peccatores. Quod autem praecepta in Evangelio
reperiuntur, ista non sunt Evangelium, sed expositiones and apendices Evangelii.

Luther means that as the Gospel is distinguished from the Law, and
contains the Doctrine of justification by free grace without works, so the
precepts of good works, are not Gospel-precepts* but otherwise taking the
Gospel in its latitude, it confirms and establishes the law, and commands
the same works of sanctification, which the Law commands.

7. Conclusion.
And whereas Luther calls the Law a dead letter, Luther calls the Law a
dead letter in a fair other sense then Antinomians mean.
as the Gospel is a saving word, he has not the same meaning with Antinomians
to exclude all outward commands, to cry down the Scriptures and the written
Law and Gospel, and turn the Gospel in the Spirit, and to remove all outward
ordinances, word, Sacraments, praying, and make faith all our work, and the
Spirit of life, that is, in Christ all our Law, as Del. Sermon. ^6
Del and Saltm. free grace. p. 146.
Saltmarsh and other Antinomians do; and as Theolog. German. c. 2^ p. 71.72.
vide Lutherum* to. 3.215.490.344 544. t. 4.^62.283.286.376.415.424. and f. 457.
in Ps. 126. and 654 in Ho^. 10. to 1. in Gen c. 3. fol 45 51.
Theologia Germanica does, and other Familists teach: for Luther aims highly
to extol Scripture, as you may read in Luther tom. 1.166. to. 1.252.531. to.
2.22.237.310. to. 2. in Genes. c. 17. fol. 85. and to. 2. in Genesis c. 19.143. I
hate my own books, often I wish they may perish, for fear they take the
readers, and draw them from reading of the Scripture, to 3. in Genes. f. 45. c.
24. Its a common proverb, Princes letters should be thrice read, so far more
Gods letters. Vel millies legendae, should be a thousand times read; and
whereas Antinomians and Familists are all for allegories. Luther is not so.

The literal sense of the Scriptures is the whole substance of Christian faith
and divinity, Luth. tom. ^ 83.
which only carries a man out in tentation.

Luth. tom. 1. in Genesis c. 3. fo. 67. Luther detesteth allegories
Allegories are empty speculations, and the froath of Scripture.

Luth. Genesis 3. c. 30. f. 117.
An allegory is a fair whore that cannot but be loved for the present by idle
men, that are not tempted.

to. 3. c. 30, f. 117.
Only the historical sense does rightly and solidly instruct, fight, defend,
conquer edify.

Luth. tom. ^ 83.
Luther. Literalis sensus scripturae s^lus tota est fidei and Theologiae
Christianae substantia qui in tentatione solus subsistit.

Luth. tom. 1. in Genesis c. 3. fo. 67. Luther detesteth allegories
Luther. Allegoriae sunt inanes speculationes and tanquam spuma sacrae
Scripturae.

Luth. Genesis 3. c. 30. f. 117.
Est allegoria tanquam formosa meritrix quae ita blanditur hominibus ut non
possit non amari praesertim ab hominibus otiosis* qui sunt sine tentatione.

to. 3. c. 30, f. 117.
Luther. Historicus sensus recte and solid erudit, pugnat, defendit, vincit,
aedificat.

And Luther acknowledges a literal sense of the Law.

Luth. tom. 1. ^. 433.
Luther, Spiritualis intelligentia legis est ea, qua scitur lex requirere
Spiritum, and nos carnales convincere* literalis ea, qua putatur, imo erratur,
legem posse impleri operibus and viribus nostris citra Spiritum gratiae.

Luth. tom. 1. ^. 433.
The Spiritual understanding of the Law, is that by which the law is known to
require the Spirit, and to convince us that are carnal, and that is the
literal meaning of the Law, by which men think, yea, erroneously imagine, the
law may be fulfilled by works and our strength without the Spirit of grace.

Then to Luther, the literal knowledge of the Law or the old letter of the
Law, is the false sense of the Law, that we can be justified by works; and
Luther never condemns Law or Gospel, because written and in outward
commandments, as Antinomians do. And again, the law without the Spirit, as
also the Gospel, is literal and legal to Luther.

Luth* to. 2. f. 21^.
Lex litera est, sive scribatur, sive dicatur, sive intelligatur, donec ametur.

Luth* to. 2. f. 21^.
The law is a letter, either written, spoken, or understood, till it be loved,
this is not a work of the teaching Law, but of justifying faith converting
souls.

It is true, Luther holds that all commandments of law and Gospel, are then
sweet, and Christ's yoke easy, when the Spirit concurreth to make them sweet;
but neither does this cry down the Scriptures, nor make the Spirit, the only
obleiging rule, as Del, Town, Saltmarsh, Crisp, do.

Luth tom. 1. epist^l ad S^aupicium f. 69 an. 151^.
Luther, Ita dulcescunt praecepta Dei quando non in libris tantum, sed in
vulneribus dulcissimi salvatoris legenda* intelligimus.

Luth. tom. 1. ^. ^11.
Luther, Duplex est lex: una Spiritus and fidei, qua vivitur Deo, victis
peccatis, impletaque lege: altera, lex literae and operum, qua vivitur peccato
nunquam impleta lege, per legem enim suscitatur odium legis, sed per fide^
infunditur dilectio legis.

Luth. tom. 4.88. Tu urges servum, hoc est, scripturam and eam non totam -- sed
locos de operibus, -- Ego urgeo dominum (Christum) qui est Rex Scripturae, qui
est factus mihi meritum and pretium justitiae and salutis. Then the law without
Christ is the letter of bondage and fear.

Luther tom. 1.412.
Lex literae and lex spiritus differunt, sicut signum and signatum: sicut
verbum and res: Ideo obtenta re, jam signo non est opus: Itaque neque justo lex
est posita, habito enim solo signo, docemur rem ipsam quaerere.

Luth tom. 1. epist^l ad S^aupicium f. 69 an. 151^.
Luther, So the Commandments of God, become sweet, when we understand them to
be read, not only in books (then as written they are sweet,) but also in the
wounds of the most sweet Savior.

Luth. tom. 1. ^. ^11.
Luther, There is a twofold law; one of the Spirit and faith, by which we live
well to God, sin being subdued, and the law fulfilled: The other, the law of
the Letter and of works, by which we live to sin, the law never being fulfilled
but with a fained fulfilling. For by the law (the mere letter of the law
without faith or grace) is stirred up a hatred of the Law, but by faith is
infused a love of the law.

Luther tom. 1.412.
The Law of the letter and the law of the Spirit differ, as the sign and the
thing signified: as the word and the thing, the when the thing is obtained,
there is no need of the sign. So there is no law to the just man* but having
only the sign, we are taught to seek the thing it self.

This expression of Luther, with another in the same Tome, Luther to. 1. f.
451. Justus non debet be^e vivere, sed been vivit, nec indiget lege, quae
doceat cum been vivere.

In justus autem debet been vivere, quia non been vivit, quod lex requirit, hoc
to^um urget, ne ex lege et operibus justi fieri praesumant, sed per fidem
accipiant Spiritum sine lege and operibus, quo legi satisfaciant.


to wit, The justified man ought not to live holily, but he does live holily:
gave occasion to Antinomians to dream (but its but a dream) that Luther is
theirs, as if Luther had been of their mind, that the justified is under no
commanding power of the law, and that being once justified, and having obtained
the Spirit, they are not obliged by any obligation of a command involving sin
in case of disobedience, to either, read, hear, or meditate in the Scriptures,
but are so freed from the sign, having obtained the thing, that they are not
under the letter of law or Gospel written or preached, or under any outward
command, or Ordinance, or Law, or Sacrament, or sin, or obligation at all, but
are led by a free arbitrary Spirit separated from all letter of the word. A
vain dream. For Luther holds the letter of the Law, to be an erroneous,
false, and wicked seeking of righteousness by the works of the Law, and a
living to sin, and from the oldnesse of the letter in this sense we are freed
by the Spirit of faith; How the believer needs not the Law in the letter,
neither is under it.
and Luther explaineth himself, when he says, Obtentare jam signo non opus,
having obtained the Spirit, we need not the letter. He means nothing less
then when we have received the Spirit, we need not the written Scriptures or
the Commandment or any outward Ordinances, nor any commanding. Sure Satan
devised that sense, it came never in Luther, never in Paul's mind; but he
means having obtained the thing, that is, the Spirit, we need not the sign,
that is the letter of the Law only, without the Spirit: now the letter of the
Law only commands perfect and exactly absolute obedience under the pain of
eternal damnation. But Luther explaineth himself in the very next words, Ideo
obtenta re (Spiritu) jam signo non opus: Itaque neque justo lex ost posita:
What is that? Luther to. 4. fol. 178. Lex justo non est posita, sic enim justus
vivit ut nulla lege opus habeat etc. He so lives that he has not need of the
Law to teach and command without Christ that he must perform absolutely
p^rfect obedience to the Law, otherwise he is eternally condemned; this is the
letter of the Law, for the just man is in Christ. Ideo Lex (says Luther there)
non potest accusare and reos agere credentes in Christum, the Law cannot accuse
and condemn believers in Christ: in the same sense, says Luther, to. 1.451.
Justus non debet been vivere; the justified man ought not to live holily,
according to the letter of the absolute commanding Law enjoining obedience
under pain of eternal condemnation; for faith loses him from this, debet,
and from this Law debt yet, vivit been, he lives holily, and he ought to live
holily in an Evangelick sense; and that this is Luthers mind, is clear; the
just man is loosed from that Law, that the unjust and believer is under; as
Luther says in the same place, Injustus debet been vivere. Now the believer
being under the Law, he is a full debtor to pay active and passive obedience to
the brim, he owes in a manner, as much as Christ paid to the Law. 2. Luther
says in the same place, Hoc totum urget, etc. God presses all this that we
seek not a letter-righteousnesse, that is righteousness by the works of the
Law, for the Law in its letter requires absolute obedience under the pain of
death. But Christ's intention and sense is not that the ^etter of the Law,
Cursed be he that obeys not in all that is written in the Law to do it,
shall stand against the believer; but that the spiritual sense shall stand,
that the believer shall be cursed in his head Christ, suffering for him, and
that he shall fulfill the Law, not in the letter, that is perfectly and
completely, (for so the old letter is now out of date, and passes away to the
believer) but in the Spirit, that is an Evangelick obedience to the Law.

8. Conclusion.
Antinomians hold Town all. 7^* 77, 78.
that a justified man is perfect and free from sin both in person and works, as
if he were Saltmarsh. free grace. 140.
in heaven, and that the Eaton honey comb. ^. 11.322.323.324. etc.
natural, civil, and religious works of believers are made perfect in the
sight of God. Then must they perfectly keep the Law, and Christ must make our
good works exactly conform to the Law, what can hinder us then to be justified
by works? Randal the Antinomian and Familist, said Randel Preface to the
Bright-star. Lu^her never dreamed believers to be perfect as Antinomians think.
These are ever learning and never come to the knowledge of the truth, who say,
That perfection is not attainable in this life* So Bullinger l. 1. c. 8. tells
of the fourth sort of Anabaptists in his time, that said they could not sin,
and the Church was without spot and wrinckle, they left out in the Lords
prayer, Forgive us our sins: and said we are justified by works, and could
keep the Law perfectly. Sure Luther denies the believers to be perfect in this
life.

Luth. tom. 1. f. 65.
Say not, I am perfect, I cannot fall, but be humble and fear, thou* that
stands to day, may fall to morrow.

Luth tom 4. f. 343.
Luther So is the life of a Christian, that he who has begun, may seem to have
nothing; therefore Paul says, I believe not that I have apprehended, Phil. 3.
because nothing is more pernicious to a faithful man, then that presumption as
if he had apprehended it, and there were no need to seek; so many make
defection, and whether through security and negligence. So Bernard, to stand in
the way of God is to go back, then to him that is be-back, then to him that
is begun to be a Christian, this remains, to esteem himself, not a Christian,
but to seek to be a Christian. A Christian is not at his end, but in his way,
that he may glory with Paul, I am not, but I desire to be, and as many of us as
are perfect, let us remain in this rule, -- then he that is a Christian, is no
Christian, that is, he that believes he is made a Christian* when he is to be
made a Christian -- we endeavor toward heaven, we are not in heaven: so he is
already in heaven who indevours toward heaven, because God counts him to be in
heaven. -- woe to him that is wholly renewed that is, who believes he is
renewed. Then woe to Town, Saltm^rsh, for these, that are as free from sin as
Christ, must be perfect.

Luther to. 3. in Genesis f. 2. in c. 25. Patience required that sin dwell in us.
Luther, The mind of man, when it is in temptation and danger, with difficulty
rests on this consolation, for thus it does perpetually complain: What shall
be done? when shall it be done? where shall it be done? I answer then, wait on,
wait on, if it be longer deferred, and the mind ask again, when shall it be?
say thou, I have no other advice, but that thou endure and wait on longer, one,
two, three years, he that comes will come, and will not ^arry.

Luth. tom. 1. f. 65.
Luther. Ne dicas ego perfectus sum, non possum labi, sed humiliare, et time:
ne hodie stans, cras cadas.

Luth tom 4. f. 343.
Luther. Sic est vita Christiana, ut qui caeperit, sibi videatur nihil habere,
sed tendit and pergit ut apprehendat: unde Paulus: non arbitror me
apprehendisse Phil. 3. quia re vera nihil pernitiosius est homini fideli qua^
ista praesumptio, quasi apprehenderit, and opus quaerendi non sit, hinc etiam
multi relabuntur and marcessunt securitate and ignavia. Sic Bernardus: Stare in
via Dei est retrogredi, quare qui caepit esse Christianus, hoc restat, ut
cogites, so nondum esse Christianum, sed quaerere, ut fiat Christianus, ut cum
Paulo possit gloriari: non sum, sed cupio esse -- Christianus, non est in
facto* sed in fieri -- igitur qui Christianus est, non Christianus est, hoc
est, qui se putat Christianum factum, cum sit tantum facien^us Christianus --
tendin^us in coelum, non sumus in coelo. -- Vae illi qui jam totus renovatus
est, id est qui putat sese esse renovatum, ille absque dubio non caepit
renovari, nec unqua^ gustavit quid sit esse Christianum, etc.

Luther to. 3. in Genesis f. 2. in c. 25. Patience required that sin dwell in us.
Luther, Animus humanus quando est in tentatione and periculo, difficulter hac
consolatione acquiescit: sic enim perpetuo a^gi and quaeri solet. Quid fiet?
Quando fiet? Vbi fiet? Respondeo igitur: exspecta, exspecta. Quodsi longius
differtur and rursus quaerit, non habeo aliud, quod consula^, inquies quam ut
^era^ et exspectes amplius annum unum, duos tres, veniens, veni^^ and non
tardabet.

Saltm. ^re grace 140.
Saltmarsh and Town asser. gr. 15^.157* 158.159.
Town, teach contrary to this, a believer wants nothing (say they) of heaven
in this life, but believe he is in heaven, and he is not saved by hope, but
has heaven already in this life.

Luther tom. 4 f. 63.
Luther, Grace does not so change the godly, that it makes them in all things
new and perfect. Many things are purged, especially the very head of the
Serpent, unbelief* ignorance of God is loved, but the scally body, and the
relics of sin remain in us.

Luther tom* 2. f. 432. Sin rages more in the godly then in the wicked.
Luther, Sin in the Saints not only has being, life, will, operation,
fighting, but also it robs and leads captive, yea, (which is a greater wonder)
it rages like a mad man, more in the godly, then in the wicked.

Luth. tom 2* f. 434. How sin pardoned is no sin.
Luther, It is one thing to speak of God incarnate, or man made God, and
another thing of God and man simply, so sin out of the element of grace is one
thing, and sin in grace another, as you may imagine, grace, or the gift of God
made sinlesse, and sin graced, so long as we are here, so that because of grace
sin shall not be sin.

Luther tom. 4 f. 63.
Luther, Gratia non ^ic mutat pios, ut per omnia reddat novos and perfectos.
Multa quidem purgantur, praecip^^ autem ipsum caput serpentis, i^credulitas and
ignorantia Dei praeciditur and conteritur, sed squamosum corpus and reliquia
pec^ati manent in nobis.

Luther tom* 2. f. 432. Sin rages more in the godly then in the wicked.
Luther, Peccatum in sanctis non solum est, non solum vivit, non solum vult,
non solum operatur, non solum repugnat* sed etiam furit, and captivat: Imo quod
mireris, in impiis non sic furit.

Luth. tom 2* f. 434. How sin pardoned is no sin.
Luther, Aliud est de Deo incarnato, vel homine Deifica^o loqui, and aliud de
Deo and homine simpliciter. Ita aliud est peccatum extra gratiam, aliud in
gratia, ut possis imaginari gratiam ^eu donum Dei esse impeccatificatum, and
peccatum gratificatum, quamdi^ hic sumus, ut propter donum and gratiam,
peccatum, jam non peccatum sit.

If Antinomians would learn: Luther has a necessary mystery in this, for he
means, that sin is exceeding sinful in its own element, in a wicked man,
being not pardoned in Christ, in him sin is sin, but sin in a believer, though
it keep still the nature of sin, (justification destroys not, nor removes
(as Antinomian, ignorantly dream) sin in its nature: but only in its guilt, or
actual condemnation) yet in a believer, sin is made as it were sinlesse or no
sin, in regard that sin in them is lustered and graced with pardon, and so
leaves off to be sin-condemning, and cursing, as it is in the wicked.

Luther to. 4. f 173.
Luther, Libenter (in credente) Spiritus vellet totus esse purus: sed caro
conjuncta illi non permittit.

Luth. tom. r. in Genesis c. 3. f 57
Frustra exspec^amus in hac vita perfectionem hanc, ut toti justi simus, ut
Deum perfect diligamus, etc.

Luther to. 4. f 404^
Luther, David fatetur Spiritum sanctum se habere, sed nondum perfect aut
totum, sunt enim tantum primitiae Spiritus.

Luther to. 4. in Genesis c. 42. f. 96.
Luther, Haec propria scientia Christianorum est, scire ^se in peccatis natum
esse, idque in carne haerere usque ad mortem, nec posse nos ab eo perfect
liberari and mundari nisi per mortem, vermes and ignem extremum.

Luther to. 4. f 173.
Luther, Gladly would the Spirit in the believer be wholly pure, but the flesh
conjoined therewith will not permit it.

Luth. tom. r. in Genesis c. 3. f 57
In vain look we for perfection in this life, that we should be all just and
love God perfectly, and our neighbor as our self.

Luther to. 4. f 404^
Luther, David acknowledges that he has the holy Spirit, but not perfectly:
or in whole, for they be but the first fruits of the Spirit.

Luther to. 4. in Genesis c. 42. f. 96.
This is the proper knowledge of Christians to know that they are borne in sin,
and that it sticks in the flesh to death, and that we cannot be freed and
purged perfectly therefrom, but by death, the worms and the last fire.

Luther taught that the Jews were justified by faith as we are, the
Antinomians say the contrary.
9 Conclusion.
Luther is far from denying remission of sins, and that complete and actual
to the Jews under the Law, or any way of Justification to them by the Law, but
by faith in Christ, as we are justified and saved.

Luth. tom. 2* ^5.
Luther, ipse Moses and qui sub eo fuerunt, non sunt justificati ex lege:
JustiJustitia enim non est facere legem, sed credere pr^mittenti Deo.

Luther to. ^*397.
Luther Peccatorum remissio omnibus ^aeculis fuit eadem; Christus autem heri
and hodie idem est etiam in saecula: illi igitur fiducia Christi venturi, nos
fiducia Christi exhibiti, passi glorificati salvamur, and remissionem
peccatorum consequimur.

Luther to. ^, 413.
Holaca^s^a in lege a sanctis and justis exhibita eo sine off^rebantur: non ut
justificarentur per ea, sed ut testarerentur se accepisse misericordiam -- sic
bos immolatus est testis gratiae, seu ut ita dicam, operaria vox gratitudinis,
seu gratitudo manualis, qua manus effundit gratitudinem, tanquam realibus
vocabulis.

Christum illi crediderunt futurum, nos scimus eum exhibitum and abiisse ad
patrem ut pararet nobis mansiones, etc.

Luther tom. ^* in Genesis c. 13* f. 35.
Vidit Abraham diem Christi, Joh. 8. sed vidit in fide and Spiritu tantum.

Luther ^. ^* 523.
Idem Christus eademque fides ab Habel ad finem mundi per varia ^aecula
regnavit in electis.

Luth. tom. 2* ^5.
Luther, Moses himself, and those that were under him, were not justified by
the Law, for righteousness is not to do the Law, but to believe God promising.

Luther to. ^* 397.
There was the same Remission of sins in all ages. Christ is the same to day,
yesterday, and the same for ever, they were saved and justified by faith in
Christ to come, we by faith in Christ come, suffering, glorified.

Luther says, tom. 1. p. 529. Non facta sed fidem patrum imitemur, let us
follow not the deeds, but the faith of the Fathers.

Luther to. ^, 413.
Luther, burnt offerings were not for justification, but a sacrificed Ox was a
witness of grace, and to speak so a working voice of thankfulness, or an
handy or manual gratitude, by which the hand powered out thankfulness by real
words.

They believed in Christ to come, we know he is come, and gone to the father to
prepare dwelling places for us.

Luther tom. ^* in Genesis c. 13* f. 35.
Luther; Abraham saw Christ's day in faith, and the spirit only.

Luther ^. ^* 523.
Luther, the same Christ, the same faith from Ab^l to the end of the world, and
did reign in diverse ages of the world.

Antinomians, as Den, Crisp, Saltmarsh, Del, deny any heart-Reformation* true
conversion to God, actual remission of sins, and of all sins, or free
justification by free grace in a Gospel-way, to the Jews under Moses, as we are
justified, and saved under the Messiah, and make the promises and covenant of
grace, with Papists, and S^^inians, to differ in substance and nature from our
Gospel-promises and free covenant, as if their law tutory, Gal. 4. had varied
the way of Justification and salvation to them, and to us.

CHAP. XII. Of Christian Liberty, and of sense, true and false.
10 Conclusion.
Antinomians have not Luther for them in the Doctrine of Christian Liberty.

Luth. tom. 4.164.
Luther, Vnusquisque Christianus sciat; s^ per Christum constitutum esse in
conscientia dominum legis, Luther in the point of Christian Liberty against the
Antinomians.
peccati, mortis: contra sc^at quoque hanc servitutem externam corpori suo
impositam, ut per charitatem serviat p^oprio. Qui autem aliter intelligunt
libertatem, etc.

Luther to. 2. ^* 78.
Luther, Omnia sunt libera nobis per fid^m, omnia serva per charitatem: ut,
simul stet servitus libertatis, et libertas servitutis.

Luther tom. 1 ^* ^31.
Libertas Evangelii non tollit res, and corpora, and debit^, nominum, sed
conscientias liberat a vinculis spiritualibus.

Luther to. 3.394.
Luther, Christianus in conscientia debet esse medicus, in externis moribus
debet esse asinus.

Luther tom. 1 473.
Per fidem Christi non sumus liberi ab operibus, sed ab opinionibus operum id
est, a stulta praesumptione justitiae per opera quesitae.

Luth. tom. 4.164.
Let every Christian know, that by Christ he is made in his conscience (as he
believes in Christ) the Lord of law, Luther in the point of Christian Liberty
against the Antinomians.
sin, death, so that these have no power over him. On the contrary, let him
know that this external servitude is laid on the outward man, that by love he
is to serve his neighbor. Those who otherwise understand Christian liberty (as
Antinomians, who think they owe no obedience to the Law) they enjoy the gain
of the Gospel to their own destruction, and are worse Idolators under the name
of Christians, then they were in Popery.

Luther to. 2. ^* 78.
All things are free to us by Faith, yet all things are under obligation of
Law, in regard of charity, that so the servitude of liberty, and the liberty of
servitude, might stand together.

Luther tom. 1* ^* ^31.
The liberty of the Gospel takes not away things, bodies, nor duties of men,
but freeth the consciences from spiritual bands of wicked opinions.

Luther to. 3.394.
The Christian in his conscience should be a physician, but without in
external conversation, an Ass, to bear the burden of Brethren. Luther
means in things indifferent, that are without the case of scandal, as he
exponeth himself, Tom. 1 472.528. and clearly, To. 1. In Christum credentibus
omnia munda, indifferentia licita sunt, quaecunque vel praecipiuntur vel
prohibentur externis ceremoniis, etc. and Tom. 2.154, 155, 156 158.

Luther tom. 1 473.
Through faith in Christ, we are not free from works, but from opinions of
works, that is, from a foolish presumption of righteousness to come by works.

Now by opinion of good works, Luther means conscience, and the resting of
the conscience on good works, How the Law has nothing to do with the
conscience in Luthers meaning.
as our righteousness, hence so often, says Luther, the Law has nothing to
do with the conscience, the Law has no power over the conscience, the Law
ought not to reign over the conscience. And so* 2. he places our Christian
liberty, not only in freedom from the Judicial Law. Tom. 4 on 1 Pet. 2. Romans
13. and from the Ceremonies of the Law of Moses, Tom. 4. fol. 145. But also
from the condemnation of the Moral Law. As is clear, Luther tom. 4* 150.
Luther, That Christian liberty which Christ has purchased, is not so easily
believed as spoken, if it could be apprehended by a sure and firm faith, no
fury, nor terror of the world, of law, sin, death, and the devil* could be so
great, which would not be swallowed up as a little spark of fire by the great
sea.

Luther tom. 4* 150.
Libertas illa, quam nobis Christus peperit, non tam cito creditur, quam
nominatur. Si certa ac firma fide apprehendi posset nullus furor aut terror
mundi, legis, peccati, mortis et diaboli tam magu^ esse posset, qui non (...),
seu scintilla a mari, ab ea absorberetur.



Then Luther evidently thinks our Christian Liberty is not from duties
commanded in the Law, but from the terrors, accusation, and condemning power of
the Law, after we have sinned against the Law.

Luth tom. 4.149.
Luther, Verba illa, libertas ab ira Dei, lege, peccato, morte, etc. Dictu
facilia sunt, sed Magnitu dinem hujus libertatis sentire and fructum ejus, in
certamine, in agone conscientiae, applicare, hoc plus qua^ dici potest,
difficile est.

Luth. tom. 3. f. 421.
Luther, In carne nulla debet esse libertas: Debemus enim subjecti esse
parentibus, Magistratibus, and in summa, omnium servi esse, sed in Spiritu and
conscientia Liberrimi ab omni servitute, ibi nulli credimus, nulli confidimus,
nullum timemus, nisi solum Christum, qui regnat inter medias afflictiones cum
gaudio, and laetitia, inter media peccata, cum virtute and fortitudine.

Luth tom. 4.149.
These words, Liberty from the wrath of God, law, sin, death, etc. are soon
said, but to find the greatness of this liberty, and the fruit thereof, in a
conflict and agony of conscience, and apply it practically, is more hard then
can be spoken.

So he expressly, clearly, this Liberty, Luth. tom. 3. f. 421.
in the flesh (that is, in sinning) there ought to be no liberty: for we ought
to be subject to Parents, Magistrates, and finally the servants of all, but in
the spirit and conscience we are most free from all servitude: for there we
believe none, trust in none, fear none, but only Christ, who reigns in the
midst of afflictions, with joy and gladness, in the midst of sins with
strength and courage.

Its clear, by the flesh, Luther cannot mean, as Antinomians, and Papists, with
Libertines do, the sensitive part, which they call the Ass, How the
conscience is free according to the mind of Luther.
contradistinguished from the mind, will, and conscience, as if the renewed
man in whole sinned not, with will, affection, reason, conscience, for the
reason that Luther gives, is contrary to that, for, says he, We ought to be
subject to Parents, Magistrates, and the servants of all; Now not the flesh
only, but the whole man, and the conscience is subject to the fifth
Commandment* and to all the ten, to obey Parents and Magistrates, for
otherwise the ten Commandments should no more oblige the conscience of
believers to obey, then the Ceremonial Law, which is blasphemy: Therefore by
Conscience and Spirit, Luther must mean the afflicted conscience, under great
conflicts; and in the midst of challenging and accusing sins; So the believers
conscience is free, and fears none, but fears filially, and with a son-ly
fear, Christ Jesus only, and is fully free from the fear of condemnation.

Antinomians reply, that the conscience of believers is freed from the ten
Commandments; That distinction of Antinom. that We cannot sin against God as a
commanding lawgiver, but against God Redeemer only, removed.

Rise reign ruin of Antinomia^s in New England. p. 60, 61. art. 2^.


as they are a Law and enjoin obedience to the conscience by power or Authority
of a Lawgiver, for so say they, no believer can sin against the Law as the
Law, either commanding, promising, or cursing. But the believer may sin against
the Law, as sin is ungratitude to Christ the Redeemer, not as it is a thing
offending God, the commanding Lawgiver, or failing against his Authority. So
Mistress Hutchison, and her followers said, Art. 25. Since we are not bound to
the Law, as a rule of life, it is not transgression against the Law to sin or
break it, because our sins are inward and spiritual, and so are exceeding
sinful, and are only against Christ.

Answ. There would be some color in this Answer, if Antinomians did not teach
that Believers are as free from sin, root, and branch, in the nature and being
of it, as Christ himself then being once justified, they cannot so much as sin
against Christ, nor against the Law, as in the hand of Christ, therefore I
hear that Den maintained before a godly and learned Minister, That Christ
satisfied for sins only against the first Covenant, and that we our selves
satisfy for sins against the Covenant of grace, which is to make us
joynt-Saviours with Christ. 2. Sins committed by Believers once justified,
are not si^s, because they are against no Law, and involve the trespasser under
no guilt, curse, or wrath, for he is as free, as Christ, from all danger of
wrath. 3. These sins against the Law in the hand of Christ, or against
Christ, are pardoned and fully removed in their nature and being, ere they be
committed, say Antinomians. 4. What Scripture shall warrant us to think that
Christ who came not to dissolve the Law, in the least Commandment, Mat. 5.18,
19, 20. And who says, To do to all men, is we would they should do to us,
is the whole Law and the Prophets, and obliges us, has freed us from the
commanding power of the Law, and subjected us to the same Law, as given by
Christ.

CHAP. XIII. Of good works according to Luther.
11 Conclusion.
Luther clearly contradicts Antinomians, touching certainty from signs.

Luth. tom. 4. f. 410.
Bona opera placebunt, Deo propter fidem in Christum quod non fiunt ad
jus^^itam, sed ad testimoni^m quod grati simus et gra^^^ ju^tificati.

Luth tom. 4.403.
Spiritus sanctus nunquam o^iosus est in piis sed semper agit aliquid quod
pertinet ad regnum Dei.

Luth. to. 1. in Genesis c. 24. f. 23^.
Si Muncerus and Sacramentarii, cum audirent nos docere Spiritum and rejicere
opera, hac doctrina abuti potuerunt, and neglecto verbo and Sacramentis nihil
aliud nisi Spiritum sonare idque nobis viventibus, docentibus, and
repugnantibus, quid futurum est ubi conticuerit nostra Doctrina?

Luther tom. 3 in Genesis f. 38.
Post meam mortem multi meos libros proferent in medium, and inde omnis generis
errores and deliria sua confirmabunt.

Luther tom. 4. in Genesis 41. ^. 84.
Sed simul etiam exierunt Anabaptistae, Sacramentarii and alii fanatici qui de
Trinitate and incarnatione Christi palam impia tradiderunt, non enim fuerunt ex
nobis, etc.

Luth. tom. 4. f. 410.
Good works shall please God for faith in Christ, to their own end because they
are not done that we may be righteous, but that they may be a testimony that we
are accepted and justified freely.

Luth. tom. 4.403.
Luther, The Holy Ghost is never idle in the godly, but ever doing something
that belongs to the Kingdom of God.

Luth. to. 1. in Genesis c. 24. f. 23^.
Luther, If Muncerus and the Sacramentarians, when they hear us preach the
Spirit, and that we reject works (in the matter of justification only, as I
have cleared from his own words) can abuse this Doctrine, and neglecting word
and seals, sound nothing but the Spirit, (as Familists and Antinomians did
then, and now) and that while we live, and teach the contrary, and resist
them, what shall be done, when we shall teach no more?

Luther tom. 3 in Genesis f. 38.
After my death (says Luther) they shall allege my writings, and therewith
strengthen errors of all kinds, and their own dreams.

Luther tom. 4. in Genesis 41. ^. 84.
Also there are gone from us Anabaptists, Sacramentarians, and other fantastic
men, who have openly taught impious things of the Trinity, and Incarnation of
Christ, but they were not of us.

It is true, Luther falsely charge those whom he calls Sacramentarians,
who rejected the dream of Consubstantiation, yet as Calvin observed of the
Libertines, hey had nothing more frequent in their mouth, then the Spirit, so
Anabaptists, Familists, Antinomians, who all pretend that Luther is theirs,
allege nothing more then the Spirit, the immediate testimony of the Spirit
without the word, or any signs or marks of sanctification, by which men know
that they are in Christ, and I appeal to the Reader, if they observe any scope
or drift in the Sermon preached by Del, before the House of Commons, but to cry
down all Word, Scripture, Preaching, Sacraments, Laws, lawful and necessary
constitutions of Orthodox Synods, against Familists like himself, for all
these, without the Spirit, can work but an outward Reformation, and he
extolleth so the Spirits inward, omnipotent and only working of an inward, and
heart reformation, as that men, ministry, preaching can have no more
influence in Gospel-reformation, then in Christ's redeeming of the world, and
the taking away transgression, for says he, Del ser. 12.13* 15.
he only that can do the one, can do the other, now in redemption Christ has
no fellows, no under Mediators, no instruments no with-workers, he alone by
himself, and none with him, Hebr. 1. Purged us from our sins, and so in all
Reformation Familists contend: for God is sole Reformer, as Jesus Christ is
sole and only Redeemer.

Antinomians deny any certainty of our being in grace, to judge of our
spiritual condition by sense, has a two fold, meaning.
by signs, marks, and characters of holy walking, which Luther is utterly
against in all places* especially where he extolls good works as the fruits of
our justification.

It is true, Luther says often we must not judge of our spiritual good
estate, by sense, but by faith, and so say Antinomians, and Eaton most
frequently. But the word sense is taken two ways, 1. for the enditement of the
flesh, and unrenewed part opposed to faith, and so Luther and we with him,
teach that in a conflict of conscience, when the Law challenges a believer
especially* we are never to look to sense, but to faith, and the promises* for
the unrenewed part, never told us good news of our selves, our Spiritual
estate, or of Christ, except it speak truth* as the Devi^l speaks to deceive,
and to render us secure, sluggish, haughty, proud, vain, but Antinomians say
all the murders and adulteries of believers, are sins only in our sense, that
is, in the apprehension of our unrenewed part, not to the light and judgment
of faith, now so Antinomians follow sense. But,

1. I should as soon believe the Devil, saying that the adultery of a believer
is no sin, as believe sense, that is, the indictment of flesh, and the
unrenewed part, it is true the devil can say truly, as the flesh also, the
adultery of a believer is a sin, that actually condemns for ever to hell, and
argues the committer thereof to be in nature, not in Christ, which is a lie,
both in the matter, and specially in the end, to cause a believer despair.

2. The sense and apprehension of a believer, that says adultery in him is no
sin, because it was pardoned before it was committed, is as false as the
Devil. Now the light of faith says the contrary, the Word of God says,
adultery in justified David is sin, but the inference and logic of the flesh
is not to be believed, therefore David is not in Christ, and so far, sense is
not to be believed.

3. Antinomians know no sense, but the sense and indictment of the lying flesh,
which they teach men to believe, when it says falsely, that the adultery of a
believer is no sin, now no whorish mother will call her own child a Bastard,
and its no wonder that the flesh, especially in the fleshly Antinomian plead
for the Devil and sin, but sense is taken in another meaning in the Scripture,
for the spiritual knowledge and apprehension of the Spirit, as Heb. 5.14. The
strong in Christ have their senses exercised to discern both good and ill, so
the use of the spiritual sense is spoken of, Cant. 2.3. I sat down under his
shadow with great delight and his fruit was sweet in my mouth. Cant. 1.3.
Because of the savor of thy good ointments* thy name is as anoyntment powered
out, therefore the Virgins love thee, Joh. 6.45. All that have heard and
learned of the Father come to me. Here is the actual exercise and use of the
spiritual and renewed sense which we are to believe no less then faith, and
what this sense indyteth, that the Holy Spirit in us indyteth, and teaches,
and that we are to believe. Luther never wills us to close our ears, and to
hear nothing that this sense says to us.

12 Conclusion.
Luther speaks pathetickly of the slavery and impotency of our free will by
nature, Luther in the matter of free will against Anti^omians and Familists.
but no ways to favor Antinomians and Familists, who would have us blocks and
stones in all we do, and not to pray but when the Spirit acts us immediately.

Luth. tom. 1. f. 9.
Man cannot naturally desire God to be God, for he would have himself to be
God, and God to be no God.

Luth. tom. 1. f. 9.
Non potest homo naturaliter velle Deu^ esse Deum, imo vellet se esse Deum, and
Deum non esse Deum.

Luther, in regard that the efficacy and success of free will, as of all
second causes, is from God, depresseth the creature to heighten God, Tom.
3.103. Deus labor nostro utitur s^u larva quadam sub qua benedicit nos and sua
largitur ut fidei sit locus. God uses our labor as a shadow or cipher, under
which there is place for faith.

Luther means of imperated acts of the will flowing from the corruption of a
natural man desiring to be above a Law, and without God, that he may sin
without being awed of Justice or of a God, but there is a natural inclination
going before acts of will and reason, by which a natural man desires the being
of God, in so far as he desires his own being, that he may subsist in God, if
we suppose reason to be in no shadow, we cannot think it naturally and simply
would desire that the body on which it depends were just nothing, or that the
rays of the Sun, would wish the Sun to be turned into pure nothing, or the
streams, that the fountain were nothing.

Luther to. 1. f. 11.
Luther, The will of every man would desire there were not a law, if it were
possible, and that it self were altogether free; grace is necessary to friend
the law, and the will, and the Gospel.

Luth. tom. 1. f. 27.
Free Will since the fall by a subjective power can be carried to good, by an
active power ever to ill; nor could the wills active, but only its subjective
power, stand even before the fall, or promove into good.

Luth. tom. 1.306
Luther, Free Will is merely passive in every act that is called willing,
because the will is nothing except it be pulled, drawn, moved, which drawing
having influence on the members, and strength either of soul or body is the
wills activity, and no other, as the drawing of the Saw, cutting the wood is to
the Saw merely passive from the Sawer, nor does it confer any thing to the
drawing, by way of cooperation, but only being drawn, it works on the tree,
being more drawn then drawing, which Sawing is called the work of the Saw with
the Sawer, when yet it merely suffers.

Luther to. 1. f. 11.
Luther, Voluntas cujuslibet mallet, si fieri posset esse nullam legem, and se
omnino liberam; necessaria est mediatrix gratia quae conciliet legem
(evangelio) voluntati.

Luth. tom. 1. f. 27.
Liberum arbitrium post peccatum potest in bonum potentia subjectiva in malum
vero activa semper: nec enim in statu innoce^tiae potuit stare, activa sed
subjectiva potentia, nedum in ^onum proficere.

Luth. tom. 1.306
Liberum arbitrium est mere passivum in omni actu suo, qui velle vocatur: quia
voluntas non nisi rapitur, trahitur, movetur, qui tractus redundans in membra
and vires, seu animae seu corporis est ejus activitas and nulla alia, sicut
tractus serrae secantis lignum' est serrae mere passivus a sectore, nec ad
tractum suum quicquam cooperatur, sed tantum tracta jam in lignum operatur,
impulsa magis quam impellens, quae serratio opus ejus cum serratore dicitur,
cum tamen mere patiatur.

It is clear that Luther makes us not blocks, and stones in believing,
praying, or other supernatural works, as if after our conversion, we were mere
patients, and ought not to pray, but when the wind of the Spirit blows fair
upon the flowers, and the Garden. Or, as if the person of the Holy Ghost and
Christ's grace were the only formal efficient cause and principle in all
supernatural works, and we truncks and stones, and not to be rebuked as
slothful servants in sins of omission or commission.

Luther says the contrary, To. 2. in Genesis c. 24. f. 232. Antinomoi docent
simpliciter omnia peccata sublata, nec arguenda esse, nec homines terrendos
lege. Antinomians say simply, all sins are taken away, and are not to be
rebuked, nor are men (renewed) to be terryfied by the Law, for Luther 1. speaks
comparatively, and denies not all subordinate activity to renewed free will,
after conversion.

Luther to. 1.46.
In every good work, the Sons of God are rather acted upon, then do act.

Luther to. 1.46.
In omni opere bono potius aguntur, quam agunt filii Dei.

Then Luther means that they act, but grace rather acts upon them, for To. 3.
in Genesis in cap. 28. fo. 82. Luther says, there is a twofold holiness in us,
one imputed, by which we are sanctified by the Word, and is perfect, another,
by which we are holy by our work and conversation, which is unperfect.

The other holiness is of works, Tom. 3. f. 82.
it is charity that makes us acceptable to God, there not only God speaks to
me, but I study to follow God speaking.

Luther to. 4. f 174.
When I was a Monk, often I desired that happiness to see a godly man in life
and conversation, in the mean time I dreamed of an Eremite, that abstained from
meat and drink, and fed on roots and cold water -- but they are holy who are
holy with a passive, not an active holiness -- if every man do his duty, by
rule, according to his calling, and obey not the flesh, and in the Spirit
suppress the desires and lusts thereof.

Altera sanctitas operum est charitas gratum faciens, Tom. 3. f. 82.
ibi non solum Deus loquitur, sed studeo ego sequi loquentem Deum.

Luther to. 4. f 174.
Ego Monachus saepe ex animo optabam eam faelicitatem mihi contingere, ut
possim videre, conversationem and vitam alicujus sancti bominis. Interim
somniabam talem sanctum, qui in Eremo agens, abstineret a cibo and potu and
victitaret tantum radiculis herborum and aqua frigida -- and sancti sunt
sanctitate passiva, non activa -- si unusquisque ex praescripto verbi Dei
faciat officium in vocatione sua, carni non obsequatur, sed Spiritu reprimat
desideria ejus.

And where ever Luther speaks of inherent holiness, he calls it imperfect
and active, then renewed freewill must be an Agent in it.

2 The subjective power of doing good that Luther calls a passive power, and
which was in man before the fall, in the renewed man is not simply passive, for
in regard of it, says Luther, Voluntas magis est impulsa quam impellens, the
will rather is drawn, Of the subjective and active power of free will.
then it does draw and act, but inclines more to be drawn; but it is
passive, because free will in pure naturalls, before the fall or after
regeneration, is a subject receiving a holy sanctified rectitude of will: and
before the fall, that rectitude was that concreated and natural Image of God
in the first Adam, in regeneration it is the supernatural image of the second
Adam, which we call the new heart, and before the fall Adam did not love and
serve God by free will simply, but by free will gifted with that natural
accident of concreated sanctity and holiness added to the will as a
connaturall gift to make the will complete in its operations. Now the will is a
mere patient in receiving a supernatural active power to will according to
Christ, and in this regard the will is patient and must be elevated in its
natural activity, by receiving a new infused heart Ezeki. 36.26. Zech. 12.10.
Deuteronomy. 30.6. And because free will acts according to Christ in believing,
hopeing, loving out of faith, all by the strength of new supernatural habits
therefore does Luther call the renewed man a patient, and his supernatural
works like the drawing of a Saw which yet has its own activity of cutting the
tree and has teeth by art for that effect, yet it is called a patient in sawing
the tree, because it is moved in its motion by him that draws the Saw,

3 In the receiving the active determination of actual assisting grace, the
will is a patient in the reception and subjective and passive lying under the
actual motion of him who works in us to will and to do, for we can do
nothing more than clay, when God infuseth a spirit in it, to move the
predeterminating wind of the spirit, to blow right on us, in regard of both
these, though being acted by habitual grace, and by actual assisting grace
being drawn, Cant. 1.2, 3. and Psalm. 119.32. compared with Ezeki. 36.26, 27.
we do and have our own subordinate active influence in all the works we do
toward Heaven, and life eternal, yet Luther says, we are patients.

Luth. tom. 2. f. ^06.
Luther, Heraeseos venenum est quod tribuit libero arbitrio virtutem disponendi
se ad gratiam (sive habitualem sive actualem) recipiendam quale faciunt in
illo, Zech. 1. Convertimini ad me, and ego convertar ad vos.

Luther to. 3.200.
Homo mere passive se habet nec facit quidquam, sed fit totus.

Luth. tom. 3.457.
Luther, Deus in materia privativa non positiva operatur.

Luth. tom. 2. f. ^06.
Its a poison of Heresy that gives to free will power to dispose it self to
receive grace, as they say from Zech. 1. Turn to me, and I will turn to you.

Luther to. 3.200.
Man is a mere patient, he does nothing, but is acted, or done upon.

Luth. tom. 3.457.
God works on a privative, not a positive matter.

4. Luther holds men to be mere patients because grace and grace only
begins all supernatural works.

Luther to. 2.215.
Luther, How shall free will remain, and our doing what we can. When we are
taught that we are wrought upon, and we work not but God works? we are the
work, not the workers, so all the Divinity of proud men utterly perishes.

Luth. tom. 3.218.
Faith is wrought in us, not thinking, not wisely understanding, not willing,
but who-ever is gifted with faith, is prevented by the incomprehensible and hid
work of the Spirit, by the only hearing of the Word, without all work of us.

Luther to. 2.215.
Vbi manebit liberum arbitrium, ubi facere, quod in se est, cum hic fieri nos
doceamur, non facere, and non nos operemur, sed Deus nos operetur? facturae,
non factores simus, funditus scilicet ruit omnis Theologia superborum.

Luth. tom. 3.218.
Non nobis cogitantibus, sapientibus, volentibus, sed incomprehensibili and
occulto opere Spiritus, praevenitur, quisquis fide donatur in Christo, ad solum
verbi auditum, citra omnem nostram aliam operam.

4. Luther is much, as he cannot be enough, in depressing the glory of nature
and free will and exalting God.

Luth. tom. 1. f. 46.138.
We are not good by working, but by suffering, when we suffer the actings of
God on us, and are quiet.

Luther. tom. ^ 140.
Whatever shall give thy self to thee and permit thee, hold that in suspicion,
for it will cause thee find thy own will in fasting, as Esa. 58. Whatever
shall take thy self from thy self, follow that.

Luth. tom. 1. f. 46.138.
Luther, Non operando sed patiendo boni sumus, cum patimu^ divinas actiones
quieti ipsis.

Luther. tom. ^ 140.
Quicquid tibi teipsum dederit, and permiserit, tene suspectum, quia facit ut
inveniatur voluntas tua in Jejunio tuo, ut dicitur, Esa. 58. quicquid autem
teipsum tibi abstulerit, hoc sequere.

Therefore I add these few considerations touching the Antinomians way of
free will.

1 Consideration.
^
We are not able to master a good thought, but when the spirit works in us to
will and to do, yet are we not freed from the Gospell-command to do, will,
believe, love, hope, pray, fear, obey, even when the spirit acts us not.

2 Consideration
Note.
Nor is it peculiar to the covenant of works that what ever God commands, man
has absolute and independent power to obey.

But it is common to the dispensation both of the covenant of works and the
covenant of grace, an absolute independent power to do what ever God
commands, peculiar neither to the covenant of works, before the fall, nor to
the law or Gospel after the fall, but i^ ever was common to all States to the
creature to act dependently upon Gods predetermination.
and not peculiar to pure law more than to the gospel, but common it is to all
states, that Angels or man can do nothing but as predetermined by God who did
show what frail nature is, for though Adam had a sanctified and strong
free will to obey God, yet when God was pleased to withdraw his
predeterminating influence, by which Adam should actually have continued and
persevered in actual obedience and in a holy abstinence from eating of the
tree of knowledge, hic and nunc, it was no more in Adams independent power to
keep that commandment, ^ate not, then the sun can move or the fire cast
heat, when God denies his actual influence to either. So the law had so much
of beggarlinesse, frailty and impotencie of the creature, before its fall that
the Image of God in its flower and Summer-prime and beauty could not keep Adam
from falling on his own weight, yet was he obleiged not to fall by law and was
not able to stand without the predeterminating influence of God, and so sin,
in falling when he could not stand, and this is the same in the covenant of
grace, the Image of the second Adam keeps us not indeclinably from sin, and
though in the Gospel, God gives grace to do what he requires, yet can we
do nothing even when we are gifted with a new heart, and with a new spirit,
except the Lord work in us to will and to do, hic and nunc. Antinomians say,
when God with-draweth his predeterminating grace, without which we cannot
work, nor pray, nor believe, no command obliges us in that case to work,
pray, or believe, because we are not under the law, and it is legal that we
should be obliged to fulfill a command which we cannot fulfill so Del ser. p.
19. In the Gospel the word and the spirit are always conjoined. a manifest
untruth, for the spirit is free to deny his influence hic and nunc, when the
Gospel is preached to believers. And it is no law-straine that we be obliged
to obey a Gospel-command when the spirit works not.

3 Consideration.
What is our own only and nothing but pure, unmixed created free will in any
good work is not to be our darling, as if that were all. A higher principal
must lead us then will, else we are misled and stuck in the briars.

4 Consideration
Even to carry grace and to be subjective and passive under grace, and to have
a new heart, soures us with pride, therefore the spece and nature of mankind,
let alone our individuals, must break in Adam under habitual grace, far more
when we are active by grace; therefore all must be ascribed to God, I
labored more abundantly than they all, to prevent boasting he must add. Not
I but the grace of God in me. And least he should be proud of being the
subject of grace, as if a poor Horse should boast of a golden Saddle. He
says, by his grace I am that I am, pride is so subtle, that it would creep in
under the golden crown and enter in the heads of the four and twenty Elders
glorified in heaven, if there were not grace to cause them Rev. 4.10. Cast
down their Crowns before him that sits on the throne: most refined grace,
where it wants dross, even in Heaven, in the element of grace, can swell us
and puff us up, except another grace pull down our top-saile.

5. Consideration.
It is safer that we be chosen, then that we chose, that we be acted upon, then
that we act, and that that choice and fine piece of us, free will, be like a
rare Jewel, kept in a case of gold, and in such a cabinet, as the grace of
Christ.

6. Consideration.
Free-wills Sabbath and rest is to lie quietly and contentedly under the sweet
actings of grace, and our non-resisting of Christ in his sweetest operation, is
our only happiness; would we be patient of the Holy Ghosts omnipotency of
saving operation, and not withdraw our hearts from under the bedewing
celestial showers, and droppings of the heaven of heavens, we should improve
to good purpose, free will, and rest in the bosom of Christ's love, and sleep
and lie, and drink in Christ, and then we were undeniably happy.

7. Consideration.
True, free will is a sparkle of God, so much of a loosed and unfettered will
to do good, so much of God, grace is golden wings, for nature to flee to
heaven withal. Freedom to do ill, and to move to hell, is the devils fetters
of vengeance.

8. Consideration.
Created free will and Law are enemies, as fire and water: what Law wills,
Will refuses. The love of Christ sodereth them in one, and grace makes Law
honey and milk to the soul.

9. Consideration.
Man chooses God, because he is chosen. And marries Christ, because he was
first married against his will, for without consent, the consent is conquered
to Christ.

10 Consideration.
That we cannot lose Christ and the Crown is our best freedom.

11 Consideration.
Antinomians by fathering their heresy on Luther, harden the Papists in their
lies: for Alphonsus a Casco de haeresibus, l. 6. Verb. Evangelium, says
Luther, Melanthon, Brentius teach that the Gospel commands no duty at all,
and removes all necessity of good works, which they do only in the matter of
justification. But this was that which Antinomians taught in Luthers time,
which Luther refuted. For Luther often speaks of the Gospel, as opposed to
the Law of Works, and as it teaches the way how the ungodly is justified. And
says with Paul, that we are justified by faith only, without works, which
Papists cannot endure.

12 Consideration.
Broken free will that first, and ever lost credit, is a field fit for
free grace to grow in. And the less that the free will of Angels could do to
stand, when their fellow-Angels fell, the higher is the rate and worth of
free grace, in sustaining them, and except we would have elect Angels to divide
the glory with God, of their standing when their fellows fell, we must say the
lot of grace falling on these blessed Spirits, not nature, separated them from
others, as good by nature, as they were.

13 Consideration.
Let nature at its flower be a broken gold chain, that Christ may soder it. It
was a depth that our wise Lord would create such timber or metal, as
free will, that Christ might ingrave on it the artifice and elaborate skill of
never-enough admired free grace.

CHAP. XIV. Of other Fountains and springs of Familists, and Antinomians, and
of the Treatise called, The Divinity of Germany, or, Theologia Germanica, and
that called The Bright-starre.
THE Gnostics having their name from knowledge, had their rise not from
Nicholas, one of the seven Deacons, as Philaster thinks, but rather as
Irenaeus says, lib. 1. here is. c. 24. from Carpocrates, they said the Soul was
made of the substance of God, or, It was the very essence of God; I conceive
the Monkish Familists had their rise from the Gnostics, and Manicheans, who
sprang from the Gnostics. The Libertines, David George, Libertines sprang from
the Gnostics, Familists from Libertines, Antinomians from both
and H. Nicholas seem to have their first spring from these two, to wit,
Theologia Germanica, and The Bright-starre. For Philosophy and Divinity
dissected, is but a rude, foolish, and unlearned Pamphlet, of late penned, and
changing as Familists and Antinomians do, Scripture, and God, and Christ, into
Metaphors and vain Allegories.

The Author of Theologia Germanica is not named, one John Theophilus translated
it out of High Dutch into Latin, and it was Printed at Antwerpe, Anno 1558.
The Author was a superstitious Priest, of the Order called Teutonici or Dutch
lads, in French, the Knights of the Rhodes, it is like the Author was before
Luther, and it is certain Familisme is a branch that grew from the root of
Popery, and was whelped in a Monastery, by men that would be perfect above all
Law, Ordinances and Acts of a practical life, and would live on spiritual
Monkish contemplations, and they are much of blood to the Antichrist, though
they will not acknowledge their father, and call all but themselves
Antichristian.

John Valdesso a Spaniard of noble birth, a Chevalier of the Emperor, who being
a Bishop repented, wrote in the Spanish tongue, a Treatise of Practical
Divinity, called Divine Consid^rations, in which though there be sundry good
and excellent Meditations, yet are there in it, many fooleries, and the grounds
and poysonable principles of Familisme, Antinomianisme, Enthusiasme, for he
rejects the Scriptures, magnifieth Inspirations, vil. fi^th good works,
heighteneth the dead faith, ext^nuateth sin, etc. The man leaving his
Bishopric, came to Naples, and dyed there, Anno 1540. Vergerius caused to be
Printed the Treatise out of the Spanish language* at Basil, An. 1550. It is
Englished, and Printed at Cambridge, An. 1646. The Antinomians, Familists, and
others in England of that stamp specially M* Beaco^, Catechism, page 138*
salute the book as happily arrived in the English coasts, far above any piece
that Calvin ever wrote; Such Lettuce such lips, But to return:

This Author of Theo. Germanica, and of the Bright Star, say, There is
nothing in the Theol. Ger. ^.2^. p. 53.
Creature, but God the Creator, as there is nothing Bright stare c. 8 p. 11.
in the heat and beam of the Sun, but the Sun it self, and fire. Just so (as
Libertines teach) there is but one Spirit, one God, one internal form in God,
Angels, and Men, good and ill, and in all creatures. But

1 The Holy Ghost makes this the highest Treason in Tyrus, who being clothed
with a bit of corruptible glory, says, Ezekiel. 28.2. I am God.

2. Creatures can err and be tempted to sin, God cannot be tempted, Jam. 1.3.

3. Creatures are changeable bits of dependencies on God, Romans 11.36. Prove.
16.4. The Lord is without, and above change, or shadow of change, Mal. 3.6.
Jam. 1.17.

4. All Nations to God are nothing, Isa. 40.17. God calls himself to Moses, I
am, and, I am that I am, as the fountain of being, and being by nature, and
the alone infinite, only wise, happy being, as all Scriptures clear,
Creatures, even Angels are in their essence, but time-dependencies, created
results of God, Lame-nothings, frothy yesterday start-ups, poor
time-accidents* branches budding out of mere mother-nothing, by the alone will
and goodness of God, there was folly found in th^se Sons of the morning, the
head-peeces and master-creatures, the Angels, Job 40.18, 19.

2. God becomes all things in man, Man or the Creature should arrogate to
himself nothing, not life, essence, power, knowledge, doing, or not doing,
there is nothing that is not God, and belonging to God -- for it is God only
who lives, understands, is able, loves, does, or leaves undone all, So
Theolo. Ger. c. 56. Nothing is but God and his will, and this will is God, and
whatever is in God is God, and nothing is but God alone, 1. Because God is
infinite, and if there were being in us, then should infinite being be
bounded, where our being begins. 2. If man be being, he is good, for being
and good are convertible, but there is none good but God. 3. Philosophers and
fathers say there is but one only truly being. 4. God says, I am that I am.
5. The son of God made himself of no reputation and descended to be a man
and nothing, then man is nothing. so Bright-stare.

The old Adam and disobedience or sin, is nothing, but when the creature
ascribes to it self Being, The wild stuff that is in Theologia Germani. and
the Brightst. Theol. Germ. c. 14. vetus homo est Adamus and inobediemia
ipseitas, egoitas ^t ^imilia: ut nov^s homo est Christus and obedientia.
and life and essence and goodness. So sin is nothing, but I, my self,
Egoitie and such like and the new Adam or Christ is nothing but obedience and
an ascribing of all to God.

So chapter 2. Faith and Scripture says, sin is nothing else but that the
creature does divert it self from the immutable God and adhereth to a mutable
thing that is, does turn it self from that which is perfect, and to that
which is in part and imperfect, and especially to it self. Now this observe,
when the creature does chaleng any good thing to it self, as to be, to live,
to know, briefly to be able to do any thing that can be termed good, as being
in it self that good thing, or as though that good thing were appertaining to
it, then it averteth it self, what other thing then did the Devil? This
arrogance to be I, to be my self, to be me, and to be mine, was the devils
aversion and fall.

I answer nothing is a being of it self, by heritage, essentially, and without
dependence on another, as its father, cause, Author, Creator, but God; and
nothing lives, works, does good, independently, infinitely, immutably, from
and of it self, but God only. And all Creatures, Angels, and Men, are but
borrowed beeings, beeings by adoption, gift, loan, and little shaddows, How
creatures are under-causes of their own working, and yet in be^ing and working,
depend on God.
remaining shaddows, by the essence, goodness, and free pleasure of God. And
as their being is dependent, so are they Gods dependent tools, and
instruments of working, they do, and do good, but dependently and so as both
power and actual doing, and doing good is from God principally, by moving,
exciting, and determinating them to do, and from, ego, egoitas, ipseitas, from
themselves actively as instruments and tools in Gods hand, if the creature
seek a world of its own, in being and working without God, that egoitas, that
I, that my self, is the great Lord of pride, but otherwise the creature is not
in its essence God. There was a comparative self-denial required in Adam, and
is in the man Christ and the elect Angels, though no sinful self was in any
of these three, and it is that the sinlesse creature should yield its being,
lust, will and desires, rather to be trampled on, despised, or turned to
nothing, before God be dishonored; All the essential attributes of goodness,
holiness, wisdom, grace, justice, power, sovereignty, etc. that are all
infinite in God, proclaim that there is an infinite distance between the
Creature and the Creator, but if we speak of a borrowed being, and a borrowed
working, at the second hand, and by loan, then it is no sin, for creatures to
say they are creatures, for the Holy Ghost says it, and bids man say, that
he is clay, and a living soul, nor is it sin to the Creature to ascribe doing
of good to it self, as the Church says, I have sought thee, O Lord, Isa. 26.
and David, I love thee, O Lord; and Paul, I have labored more abundantly then
they all; though it was a laboring borrowed from grace, and sure the Creature
acts sin and against a law, and not in subordination to God as Lawgiver acting
him against a Law.

4. Error, Obedience is to deny self; The creature is all good in the Creator,
and to value and esteem all being, and all good, God himself, Theol. Ger. c
13.

5. All creatures, the body and soul of man were hid potentially in God, and
shall return to silence, and to nothing after.

This is clear against the immortallity of the soul, that, Scripture says,
sees God, injoyeth his face, goes to Paradise, or torment after death.

6* Hell stands in these, 1. when a man sees himself worthy of all ill, 2.
Perpetually damned and lost. The heaven and hell of Familists included within
the lists of this life.
3. Neither wills nor conceives comfort from any ^^eature. 4. Yet he waits for
deliverance. 5. Bears nothing waywardly but sin. 6. And when he cannot think
ever to be delivered, or comforted.

He is in heaven, when he regards nothing, desires nothing but the eternal
good, so this becomes his, he may often, in one day, pass from heaven to hell,
and from hell to heaven, and is safe in both.

This is a hell and a heaven unknown to Scripture, 1. They are within the
bounds of this life, hell and heaven are after death and burial, Luke 16. 2
There is a marcet way, between this heaven and this hell. But Luke 16. there is
a gulf, and no passage between the right-heaven and Scripture hell, Luke 16. 3.
These may end, the true hell and heaven are eternal, Mat. 25. last. Psalm.
16.11.

7. When God alone works in man, and leaves undone in him, without any I, to
me, or mine, there is true Christ and no where else, Theol. Germ. c. 22.
Christ crucified in Mount Calvary, is but an imagination, to suffer with
Christ, is Christ crucified. Our sufferings and Christ's are one by union of
will and Spirits. Bright star. c. 18 ^89, 190, 191. etc. 200.

Then is Christ not true man. 2. nor dyed he really, The Familists acknowledge
no Christ, but a Metaphorical Christ*
but only Spiritually in us, when we suffer with the like meekness and
patience, as he dyed and suffered; and yet he is but an Allegorick or phancied
man to the Familist. The like Familists say of his Resurrection, Ascension, and
judging the world. Its but to do what is already done, to open these rotten
graves any farther; These two pieces, so fleshly and abominable, agree well
with the Tenants of H. Nicholas, and are now set out, An. 1646. by the Familist
Randel, to the insnaring of the souls of many thousands in London.

In the year 1^75. the Familists of England published a confession before King
James came to the Crown of England but laxe and general, Of the Familists in
England in reign of K J^mes, and the contents of a supplication they ^r^sented
to the King.
I know not what, for H. Nicholas wrote books of sundry sorts. As his
exhortation 1 c. 6. 5.7, 8, 9. His instructions of the upright, and Christian
baptism: his crying voice: his first exhortation: and these (says he) may
be confess^d among the adulterous and sinful generation and the false
hearts of the scripture learned: for so he called all the godly in England,
and all that are not of his way. But for his love-secrets, he says, ye shall
not talk of your secrets (either yet utter your myster^^^) openly or nakedly
in the hea^ing of your young children or disciples, Familists dissemble and
cover the^^ foulest and grossest points of doctrine from the simple.
but spare them not in the ^ares of your El^^rs, which can understand the same,
or are able to bear, or away with the sound thereof. But they have their
private Traditions and unwritten verities (says H. Nichol. in his Elidad. 5.)
By which they grow up in love according to the requiring of her service, where
all things needful to be known, or declared, are always according to the
capacity of their understanding brought and declared to them, to the ( 17)
young or newborn children according to their youngnesse, to the weak
according to their weakness, and to the eld^r^ according to their driednesse
or old age, where ( 18) neither some hear all, nor all hear some private
mysteries; but the confession might have a sound meaning. Though as they meant,
there is nothing sound in it.

About the year 1604. the Familists of England presented with this fraudulent
confession a supplication to King James which was printed at Cambridge anno
1606. And answered by one of the Universitie, in the supplication they hid
their soul tenets and say,

We do beseech your Princely Majesty to understand that the people of the
Family of love, or God, do utterly disclame all obsurd and selfe-conceited
opinions, and disobedient and erroneous Sects of the Anabaptists, Brown,
Penry, Puritans, and all other proud-minded Sects, and Heresies whatsoever,
protesting upon pain of our lives, that we are not of consent, nor agreeing
with any such brainsick Preachers, nor their rebellio^s, or disobedient Sects
whatsoever, but have been and ever will be truly obedient to your highness
and your Laws, to the effusion of our blood, and in this part of their
supplication the Reader may see the bloody persecuting minds of Familists, for
they exhort King James to persecute all the truly godly that were non-conforme
to Prelates, prelates patrons of Familists.
and went under the name of Puritans, and tacitly praise King James for
executing the Laws against such as in conscience durst not bow to the then
Prelaticall Baal: and the Familists principles carry them to esteem any
Religion indifferent: yet half an eye may see how desirous they are the Sword
should be drawn against the godly, whom they all Puritans, and therefore judge
if Antinomians and Familists now in England, who cry out against the use of the
Sword for matters of Religion, and plead for a Catholic license and
tolleration to all Religions, that themselves may be tolerated also, if they
had the Sword and Power, if they would not be most bloody Dragons, in cutting
the flesh and drinking the blood of those they call Presbyterians and Puritans;
for think not their doctrine is different from that doctrine of their fathers.

So here they quit the Protestant Doctrine maintained by those that are called,
but unjustly, Puritans, and promise to conform to all Popish Ceremonies, to
Arminianisme, Popery or what else is, or shall be by law established* without
once promise of obedience in the Lord, and according to the rule of holy
Scripture.

They well knew that Puritans were hateful to King James and all such as were
non-conform to Prelacy, and Ceremonies, in either Kingdoms, and therefore to
ingr^tiate themselves into the Kings favor, they rail in their fleshly manner
against all the godly in England, for which cause the Prelates did overlook
them, partly because they made work of controversies for the times, and
diverted many from eye-ing and considering the corruptions of Prelates, partly
because Prelates and they were common enemies to those that were truly godly,
and unjustly called Puritans, and what shall we think of those that went for
Puritans in England, not many years ago, who now turn Famili^ts, as many now
adays do?

2. They defy all to object any thing against them, except disobedient
Puritans, who maliced them these 25 years, and what marvel, for Hen. Nichol.
says (prophet of the Spirit, c. 13. 8.) He can no more err in what he says,
than could the Prophets of God, or Apostles of Christ, He says 9. Almost all
of his way were an unclean whorish covetous and fleshly company.

3 They acknowledge their obedience to Ceremonies, sacraments, and the Kings
supremacy. Yet amongst them are neither Kings nor Masters H. Nicho. Spirit c.
34. Sect. 8. But are equal in all degrees among themselves as they say.

4 They say, only right gracious Sovereign, we have read certain books,
brought forth by a German Author under the Characters of H. N. -- out of which
service or writings we be taught all dutiful obe^ience toward God and a
Magistrate and to live a godly and honest life, and to love God above all
things and our Neighbor as our selves agreing therein with all the Holy
Scriptures, as we understand them.

But nothing of the blessed Trinity is here, nothing of the Gospel, of Christ,
God man, of the justification of the ungodly by faith and the rest of our
Articles of faith, but only of a mere legal way to heaven, as if they were in
the state of innocence. So they extol fleshly Henry Nicholas and his doctrine
that disclaimes all the protestant faith. 2. They will not have the scriptures
a rule of faith, but as they understand them.

5 They complain that H. Nicho. is shamefully slandred, and his disciples
traduced, persecuted and imprisoned.

6 That nothing could ever be proved against them. But that was because they
hold it lawful to deny Christ and their religion before men, what then could
be proved against them?

7. They entreat the King to read H.N. his books, and commit to learned men the
examining of them, and promise they will bring over some disciples out of
Germany who knew H, Nicho. while he lived, to resolve the K. of hard phrases
in his writings.

8 That they maintain no errors wilfully.

9 They desire enlargement upon bail out of prison. Yet the Puritans maintain
error wilfully.

But the truth was the Prelates, because the Familist^ bowed to their Baal of
conformity and hated Puritans and counted any religion indifferent; fostered
them, and would neither refute them* nor suffer any others to refute them.
which is the cause of all the fects this day in England, they lay under warm
prelacie, spoke nothing against their domination and now in this time of
liberty they come out to the sun and daylight.

CHAP. XV. Of the Familists and Antinomians of New England.
ABout the year 1630. The Christians of England, The rise of the late
Familists in N. England.
who could not bear the Antichristian yoke of prelacy, nor submit to the
Popish Ceremonies and new inventions of infamous Laud, the late persecuting
Antichrist of Canterbury who for his Tyranny to souls, and treason against
the state, dyed by the hand of the Hangman on the Tower Hill of London, were
forced to remove from England and to plant themselves among the wild Americans,
with no intention (as godly ministers informed me) to pitch on a
Church Government, either that of Independencie, or of the stricter Separation,
or any other different from the reformed Churches, but only to enjoy the
ordinances of Christ in purity and power, and to be freed of Prelatical
Monarchy, a plant never planted, in the Lords Viniard, by our heavenly Father,
they were not well established in New England, when Antinomians sprang up among
them for the Church cannot be long without enemies. These were Libertines,
Familists. Antinomians, and Enthusiasts who had brought these wicked opinions
out of Old England with them, where they grew under prelacie, I heard at
London, that godly preachers were in danger of being persecuted by Laud for
striving to reclaim some Antinomians. They held these wicked tenets
especially, that follow, as may be gathered out of the story of the Rise,
Reign, and Ruin of the Antinomians and libertines that infected the Churches
of New England penned (as I am informed) by M. Winthrope Governor, a faithful
witness, and approved by M.T. Weld in his preface to the book.

1 In the conversion of a sinner the faculties and workings of the soul on
things pertaining to God, are destroyed and instead of them the holy Ghost
comes in and takes place, just as the faculties of the humane Nature of Christ
does.

2 Love in the Saints is the very holy Ghost.

3. As Christ was God manifested in the flesh, so is he incarnate and made
flesh in every Saint.

So says Saltmarsh, sparkles of glory opposing the Protestants p. 255. Others
say (Familists, in opposition to Protestants, as he clears, p. 254.) Christ
in us, is when we are made the anointed of God, which is the Christ, or the
whole entire Christ, as one sp^rituall new man 1 Cor. 12.12. and that the Image
of Christ ^n us, is Christ manifested in our flesh, as to sufferings, and
death, whereby the flesh is crucified in the power of God and of the Spirit,
and the outward man or the flesh is dying* now Christ in the flesh, 1 Cor.
12*12. is the mystical body of Christ his Church, and this is to Saltmarsh and
Familists, God manifested in the flesh.

4. The New Creature, or new man, Love, or, the armor of God, Ephesians. 6. is not
meant of grace, but of Christ himself.

5. The whole letter of the Scripture holds forth a Covenant of works. By
which, believers under grace are not to hear, or read the Scriptures, nor to
search them, so Saltmarsh, Sparkles of glory p. 247, 268 269.

6. The Faith that justifies, has not any actual^ being out of Christ, it is
Christ believing in us.

7 The due search and knowledge of holy Scripture, is not a safe way of
searching and finding Christ, So also Saltmarsh, Sparkles of glory: p. 244, 245.

8 The Law and preaching of it, is of no use to drive men to Christ, Salt^
Spark. of glory, p. 235.236, 237, 238.

9. All Covenants to God expressed in words, are legal, Saltmar. Spark. p. 244.

10 A Christian is not bound to the Law as a rule of his Christian walking.
Saltm. ibid.

11 Christ's example is no pattern to us, because it is external and void of the
spirit.

12 The soul may have true union with the Father, son and spirit justification
and sanctification, and the person remain a Hypocrite.

13. There is no difference between hypocrites and believers in their kind.

14. All graces in the regenerating are fading.

15. In the Saints there is no inherent grace, but Christ is all. So also
Saltmarsh Sparkles of Glory, p. 254.255.256.

16 We are united to Christ, and justified without faith, yea from eternity, So
Saltmarsh Sparkles of glory, p. 190, 191, 192. as if the decree of
Justification, and ^ustification it self were all one, and the decree of God to
create the world, and permit sin, and redeem the Elect, were all one with the
creation of the world, permission of si^, Redemption of the Elect. Yea so that
which is from eternity, and since God was God, and that which falls out in
time, must be all one.

17 Faith is not a receiving of Christ, but a discerning that the man has
received him already, Saltmarsh ibid.

18 A man is united to Christ by the work of the Spirit on him, without any
work of his own, he being a mere patient first and last, Ibi.

19. A man is never really and effectually Christ's, till he have such assurance
as exludeth all doubting.

20 The witness of the Spirit, is merely immediate, without respect to
sanctification or acts thereof, as signs, or concurrence of the word, So
Saltmarsh Spark. of glory. p. 274, 275, 276.

21 He that has once assurance, never doubts again, contrary to Ps. 77. Ps.
88. Ps 32.22. Jona 2.4.

22 To question assurance of a spiritual good estate upon the commission of
murder or adultery, is a token of no true assurance.

23 Sanctification can be no evidence of a good estate, Saltm. Spar. of Glor.
275 276, 277* 278.

24 I know I am Christ's, because I believe that Christ has crucified my lusts
for me, not because I crucify them my self.

25 What tell ye me of graces and duties, tell me of Christ, as if Christ and
duties of sanctification were contrary one to another; by this means, Christ
and living to him, that on the tree bare our sins, Christ and walking worthy of
Christ, Christ and willing and doing by the grace of Christ, must be contrary
one to another, which is an inverting of the Gospel, indeed before the
tribunal of Divine Justice, a wakened conscience has peace by being justified
by Christ, but not by duties or works even wrought by grace.

26 I am not better accepted of God, because I am holy, nor the worse, because
unholy, sure he that has elected me will save me.

27 To be Justified by faith, is to be justified by works.

28 No comfort, no ground of assurance or peace can be brought from a
conditional gospel, or gospel-promise^ because all depen^s on our free will,
which might say something, if Grace did no^ efficaciously work in us to will
and to do, and determine irresistibly the will to choose freely and invincibly
that which is good.

29 None are to be exhorted to believe but such as we know to be the Elect of
God, and to have the spirit working in them effectually, Saltmar. sparkles* p.
256, 257.

30 It is true poverty of spirit to know I have no grace at all.

31 A child of God is not to sorrow for sin; and trouble of conscience for
sin argues a man to be under a covenant of works.

32 To act by virtue of, or in obedience to a command is a Law-worke, Saltm.
Sparkles of glory p. 242, 243, 244.

33 We are not to pray against all sin, because it cannot be avoided, but sin
must dwell in us.

34 The efficacy of Christ's death is to kill all activity of graces in his
Members, that Christ may be all in all, Saltmarsh Sparkles of glory p. 254,
255.

35 All the activity of believers is to act sin.

36 The spirit acts most in the Saints when they endeavor least.

37 Sanctification rather darkens justification, the darker my sanctification
is, the more evident is my justification.

38 A man cannot evidence his justification by his sanctification, but he must
needs build upon his sanctification and trust to it.

39 Frequencie and length of holy duties argue the party to be under a
covenant of works, So Saltmarsh, says Spark glory. page, 224, 225, of prayer
as if to bring forth much fruit, which is to glorify our heavenly father Joh.
15. To go about doing good Act. 10. To be abundant in the work of the Lord 1
Cor. 15. To pray continually 1 These. 5. savored of the law and had nothing to
do with Gospel Grace.

40 It is dangerous to close with Christ on a promise. Contrary to Joh. 5.25,
26. Joh. 11.25, 26. Joh 7.37. Joh 3.16. Math. 11.28, 29. Rev. 22.17. Rev. 2.7.
Rev. 3.20.

41 All doctrines, revelations and spirits must be tried by Christ, rather
then by the word.

42 It is no way of grace that a Christian support his faith in ill hours with
the comforts of former experiences, contrary to Psa. 18.6, 7, 8, Psa, 34.8. 1 Samuel 17.34. Romans 5.1, 2, 3, 4. Joh 35, 10.

43 The soul need not go out to Christ for fresh supply, but is acted by the
inhabiting spirit, contrary to Christ's continuated intercession that we fall
not. Luke 22.32. Heb* 7.25. 1 John 2.1. to the prayers of the Saints, who are
ready to dye if they be not quickened. Psa. 119.25.32.35.36.

44 Christ works in the regenerate as in those that are dead and passive in all
spiritual acts so that Christ loves, prays, believes, praises formally in
them, and they are wholly Christed and Goded ^o Saltmarsh sparkles of glory.
254, 255, 256.

45. A Christian is not bound to pray, nor to any spiritual acts, but when the
spirit exciteth and moves him thereunto. As if the impulsion of the spirit
were our binding and obliging rule, and not the scripture, nor any command of
law and gospel; yea, Saltmarsh goes so far on with Swenck. H, Nic. Joh.
Wa^ldesse and Del, in this that he refuses Scriptures as not necessary to the
perfect ones as is clear to the reader in his late piece called Sparkles of
glory p. 289, 290. etc. p. 315, 316. and clearly pa. 245. others say (
Familists in opposition to Protestants:) that outward ordinances in the letter
are not commanded of Christ 246, 247* That the new Covenant, or God revealed in
his, and teaching of his, is not by any outward (...) or ministry or means (So
the elect of God may burn all the Bibles and pack away Saltmarsh and all
Ministers out of the land)* but by the inward or unction, or anointing, ye are
all taught of God, no man shall teach his neighbor or brother any more: saying
know the Lord, and all conference and discoveries in letters and speech is but
mere witnessing to the Lord, and the discoveries of God of what we are taught*
not any ministry (as formerly) for teaching. Why then says Christ, search
the scriptures, and why does John say, Blessed in he that reads Rev. 1.3.
and Paul charge that his Epistles be read to all the brethren, Col. 4.16. why
should the seven Churches read or hear the seven Epistles that Christ wrote
to them? For all these are lega^l shadows that are done away and the spirit
without the word must only teach Seekers, Familists and Antinomians, then is
Saltmarsh a legalist in writing and preaching, for sure he can but write
letters and speak words, he cannot speak spirit, nor is he the holy Ghost.

46 He that has the seal of the spirit can infallibly judge of another,
whether he be elected or not, Saltmarsh Sparkles of glory 256, 257.

47 A man may have grace and poverty of spirit, and want Christ

48 It is legal to say we act in the strength of Christ. As if it were legal
to be able to do all things in the strength of Christ. Phil. 4.13, Ephesians. 6.10.
2 Timothy 2.

49 No Minister can convey more to another than he has experience of in his
own soul.

50 He that has true faith of dependency is not justified. Whereas the
Scripture says frequently we are justified by faith, and faith of leaning and
dependency on God is true faith, Psa. 22.8. He rolled himself on the Lord
Esa. 10.20. The remnant shall lean upon the Lord. Psa. 18.18, The Lord was my
stay. Esa. 26.3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on
thee. Psa. ^12.7. His heart is fixed leaning on the Lord. And full assurance
may be wanting, where there is faith, and fainting conflicting together Jona
2.4. Psa. 31.22. Mark 9.24.

51 All, that preach and believe not as Familists and Antinomians do, are
under the Law, not under grace, and so under the everlasting curse.

52 Paul's Doctrine was more for free grace than Peter's.

53 No Christian must be pressed to duties of holiness. So Saltm. Sparkles of
glory p. 245, 246.

CHAP. XVI Of the first sowers of the tares of Antinomianisme and Familisme in
New England.
Of Mistress Hutchison and her tenets.
THe first Authors of these wicked opinion^ were N. Wheelright some adherents to
M. Wheelright, and Mistress Hutchison. This woman is called the American
Jesabel, she was the wife of M. William Hutchison of Boston, the daughter of M.
Marbury, sometime preacher in London: She was hauty, bold, active in wit,
eloquent, vain, and selfe-conceited, would not stick to lie, and brought these
opinions from old England and so was holden for a time out of Church communion,
yet admitted, deceived many with extolling of Christ as working all in the
souls of believers, as in dead and passive Organs and depressed sanctification
and all qualifications of inherent graces as nothing held union with Christ and
justifica^ion without faith, she drew to her way many godly people and many
loose and profane by a weekly lecture she held in her house, under pretense of
repeating sermons, took on her to sit in a chair and to teach men. All these
foresaid errors were condemned by a general assembly of the Churches of New
England, at New-towne August 30. 1637. They learned by sad experience of these
seducers from that time, as I am informed to remove farther from M. Robinsons
democracie and popular government, and come a little nearer to Presbyteriall
Government, and while they embrace that Apostolic Government, they shall ever
be infested with heresies, as now they are this day with new Bee-hives of
Anabaptists, Seekers Enthusiasts, Familists, and Antinomians: they come,
blessed be the Lord, a little nearer to it then they did, M. Cotton in his
Treatise of the keys of the kingdom of heaven, set out by M. T. Goodwin and
M. Philip Nigh, is well sound in our way, if he had given some more power to
assemblies, as is clear Act. 15. and in some lesser points, Though Independents
in England oppose that Godly and learned Divine, and as we hear have
suppressed his judgment touching constitution of visible Churches, and are not
willing that Antinomians, Familists, Socinians, Anabaptists, or other
abominable sectaries be brought to the trial of a lawful Church assembly, but
plead for a toleration to them, which the Churches of New England deservedly
abhor as Atheistical and distructive to the truth, peace and unity of the
Church of Christ.

Mistress Hutchison ought to have been convened before this Church-assembly, Of
M. Wheelwright a preacher in N. England, a prime Familist.
and M. Wheelright and others were convened before a civil court in
Massachusset. Octo. 2. 1637. For disturbance of the public peace, where in the
month of March, M. Wheelright was convict of sedition: upon occasion whereof, a
number of Familists gave in a Petition or Remonstrance complaining that their
beloved M. Wheelright was condemned for no fault, whereas his doctrine was no
other then the very expressions of the holy ghost himself, though he had said
expressly, That Magistrates, Ministers, and most of the people were under a
Covenant of works, and therefore were enemies to Christ, such as Herod,
Pilate, Scribes and Pharisees, and encouraged the people to rise up against
them, as Philistims, and pronounced the curse of Meroz on them who would not
join with them against the churches of the legallists. And made mention of
Moses his killing the Egyptian. Much falls doctrine and debates and disputes
raised he in the Church there, which were not known before his coming to the
Country, where upon he was sentenced to be disfranchized and banished out of
their jurisdiction and committed to safe custody till he should find surety to
depart before the end of March, upon this he appealed to the Kings Majesty.

Others of his Disciples saying he held forth nothing but the truth of Christ,
were censured, some banished, some fined, and imprisoned. Mistress Hutchison
boldly justified her self, that she might teach as Priscilla did, reproached
the Ministers as Legallists, told by revelation and many misapplyed Scriptures
that she was forewarned by God, in Old England that she should separate from
all Ministers because legal men: except M. Cotton and M. Wheelright; that she
should come to New England, suffer for the truth. She said she should be
delivered as Daniell was from the Lions. Such Prophets love to foretell things
past and say they knew them before they came to pass.

She having received the sentence of banishment, though she had before
dissembled and lied, now stood to own all these Articles laid against her.

1 The souls of men by generation, are mortal, as beasts. Eccl. 3.8* but made
immortal in regard of Christ's purchase who bought the souls of the wicked to
eternal pain, and of the Elect to eternal peace.

2 The united to Christ have new bodies, and two bodies 1 Cor. 6.19. She knew
not how Jesus could be united to our fleshly bodies.

3 Those who have union with Christ shall not rise with these fleshly bodies. 1
Cor. 15.44.

4 The Resurrection 1 Cor. 15. and John 5.28. is not of the body but of our
union with Christ in this life. so said Hymeneus, Phyletus, the Libertines, the
Georgians, Henry Nicholas, and his.

5 There be no created graces in the Saints, Christ takes them out of their
own hands into his.

6 There was no created graces in the human nature of Christ, he was only acted
by the Godhead.

7 The Image of God in Adam was not in holiness, but in being like to Christ's
manhood.

8 No scripture warranteth Christ's manhood to be now in heaven, but the body of
Christ is his Church; So Saltm. Sparkles of glory, as before observed.

9 We are united to Christ with the same union that Christ's humanity on earth
was with his Godhead, Joh. 17.21. that is right down, Christ and every Saint
is one person* then were the saints personally and really crucified, dyed,
buried, rose again, and ascended to Heaven with Christ.

10 No evidence of our good estate, is either from absolute or conditional
promises.

11 The Disciples were not converted before Christ's death, Matthew. 18.3.

12 The Law is no rule of life to a Christian.

13 There is no Kingdom of heaven but only Christ.

14 There is a first ingraffing in Christ by union, from which a man might fall.

15 The first thing God reveals, is to assure us of election.

16 Abraham, till he offered his son, and saw the firmness and certainty of
his election, was not in the state of grace.

17 Union to Christ is not by faith.

18 All commands even of faith, kill, as the Law does, Romans 3.17. Contrary to
the Gospel that gives life, and commands faith in Christ also.

19 There is no faith of dependence, but only that of assurance.

20 A hypocrite may have Adams righteousness, and perish, and is obliged to
keep the Law.

21 There is no inherent righteousness in us.

22 We are dead to all spiritual acts, and only acted by Christ.

23 Not being bound to the Law, it is no transgression against the Law, to sin,
for our sins are inward, spiritual, exceeding sinful, and only against
Christ.

24 Her own revelations about future events, are as infallible as Scripture,
the Holy Ghost is author of both, she is obliged with certainty of faith to
believe the one as well as the other.

25 So far as a man is in union with Christ, he can do no duties perfectly,
and without the communion of the unregenerate part with the regenerate,

26 Exhortations to work out our salvation, to make sure our calling and
election by good works, are given only to those that are under a covenant of
works.

M. Weld shows, when preaching could not prevail to gain Familists, though
thereby many were gained to the truth, many doubting ones confirmed, an
assembly was appointed at Cambridge, then called New-Towne: M. Hooker, and M.
Bulkley were chosen Moderators. The Magistrates sitting by as hearers, and
speakers when they saw fit, Liberty being given to the people, to hear, that
they especially might be satisfied in conscience, touching the truth then
controverted by wicked wits, A place was appointed for all the Opinionists to
come in and speak, due order being observed. Which if done by citation and the
Ministerial power of Jurisdiction, as may be gathered from Matthew. 18.15, 16,
17, 18, 19, 20. 1 Timothy 5.19. And they accused upon the Testimony of witnesses,
and publicly rebuked, and not only the Heresies condemned, but the holders of
such opinions, ministerially, and by authority and power given of Christ for
edification, 2 Cor. 10.8. declared publicly to be such as trouble the
Churches, and pervert souls, Act. 15.24. and that the people of God believe no
such lying opinions, nor follow such wicked practices, Act. 21.25. and if the
Opinionists should refuse to hear the Church or Churches offended, they should
be excommunicated and holden for Heathen and Publicans, as Matthew. 18.15, 16,
17, 18. 1 Cor. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. that they leven not the whole lump of many
Churches, Gal. 5.9, 10. compared with Gal. 1. v. 2. if, I say, so they had been
dealt with, it had been right. But though this Synod did much work upon many,
the chief leaders remained obstinate.

When four Elders were sent to Mistress Hutchison, she with a fiery
countenance, asking whence they came, received this answer,

We come in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, from the Church of Boston, to
labor to convince you, Answered, with disdain, from the Church of Boston? I
know no such Church; call it the whore and strumpet of Boston, no Church of
Christ.

As men turn to these abominable opinions, God gives them up to vilde
affections, for diverse of them became unclean, M. Weld says, they had no
prayer in their family, no Sabbath, insufferable pride, hideous lying, some of
them convicted of five, some of ten lies, one smitten of God, in the act of
lying, fell in a deep swoune, and being recovered, said: Oh God, thou might
have struck me dead, as Annanias and Saphira, for I have maintained a lie.

Mistress Hutchison and others were excommunicated for lies, others for other
foul scandals. Mistress Hutchison defended her twenty and nine errors in the
Church of Boston openly, with ly^ng, known to many that heard her, she brought
forth deformed Monsters, to the number of thirty.

Omnipotency of Divine Justice further interposeth a revenging hand from
heaven, for at Boston, 1637. October 17. When God was beginning to take
vengeance on persecuting Prelates and their adherents in Scotland, (for the
Assembly of Glascow was convened the end of the next year, Anno 1638.) in which
the Prelates of Scotland were excommunicated, and the morning of Britans
Reformation was dawning, at this time the Wife of William Dyer, a proper comely
young woman, was delivered of a large woman child, (as the Story says, Rise,
Reign, p. 43* 44) it was still-born, about two months before the time, the
child lived a few hours. The child was a fearful and rarely prodigious
Monster: It had no head, but a face which stood so low on the breast, as the
ears, most like an Apes ears, grew on the shoulders, the eyes and mouth stood
far out, the nose was hooking upward, the breast and back was full of sharp
prickles like a Thornback, the Navell and all the belly, with the distinction
of the sex, were where the lower part of the back and hips should have been,
and those back-parts were on the side the face stood, the arms and hands were
as other childrens, but instead of toes, it had upon each foot three claws,
with talons like a young foul, upon the back above the belly, it had two great
holes like mouths, and in each of them stuck out a piece of flesh, it had no
forehead, but in the place thereof above the eyes four horns, whereof two
were above an inch long, hard and sharp, the other two shorter.

The Father and Mother were the grossest and most active Familists, malicious
opposers of the godly, the father of the Monster, after a Months absence came
to Boston, the Lords day the just time when it was borne, and the same day was
convented before the Church, for making Christ, and the Saints a monster, he
maintained that Christ and the Church together are the new creature, that there
is no inherent righteousness in believers, that Adam was not made after Gods
Image, and other monstrous lies he held, which do make the first and second
Adam, in divinity, Monsters.

2 The Midwife, one Hawkins Wife of St. Ives, was notorious for familiarity
with the Devil, and now an active Familist.

3 The Monster was concealed five months, yet in the day Mistress Hutchison was
excommunicated, she revealed the Monster, the Magistrate caused to dig up the
grave, and it was seen in the horns, claws, holes in the back, and some
scales, and that by an hundred persons.

4 When the child dyed, being two hours after the birth, the bed violently
shook, that all in the house conceived it to be an earthquake.

5 The manner of concealing it was strange, all present with the traveling
woman were taken with violent purging and vomiting, some fetched home to their
children in a new convulsion, none left but the Midwife with two other, of
which one fell asleep.

Mistress Hutchison, who defended her opinions with lies, and equivocations, and
pretended she was still of Mr. Cottons judgment, and that she was by
revelation in England, that she durst hear none, by M. Wheelright, and M.
Cotton, all the rest being Satan's Ministers, still spoke of the things of the
Kingdom of God, and professed Repentance, and yet kept her wicked opinions. M.
Cotton, and M. Davenport, convinced her of her errors all to the last, and she
confessed in the Congregation, her Errors, her contempt of the Magistrates,
that she was deserted of God, deluded in her revelations, desired the
Congregation to pray for her, afterward she was found to be a liar, gave no
satisfaction in her answers, but lying circumlocutions, and denied she held any
such opinions as were imputed to her, the contrary whereof was known to many
godly persons: she was banished to the Isle called the Road-Island, from thence
removed to the Dutch-plantation, near a place called in the Map Hell-gate,
where the Indians, beside their custom, slew her and her daughter, and
husbands daughter, some say the Indians burnt her house, and all she had.

CHAP. XVII. Of the late Familists banished out of New England in Massachusetts
and now inhabitants of Shaw-omet, otherwise called Providence, and their tenets.
THere is a piece lately Printed and Licensed, Aug. 3. 1646. called
Simplicities defense against seven-headed Policy, Or, Innocence Vindicated,
being unjustly accused and sorely censured, by that seven-headed
Church Government united in New England. Its a piece stuffed with wicked
principles and gross and bl^sphemous deductions of Familisme, smelling ranckly
of the abominable Doctrine of Swenckefield, Muncer, Becold, David Georgius, and
of H. Nicholas the first Elder of the Family of Love, of the piece called
Theologia Germanica, and the Bright Star. It is flowred with a Poem,
inveighing against the godly in New England, who hate the deeds of the
Nicholaitans, cannot endure those that call themselves Apostles, and are not,
and oppose wicked Liberty of Conscience, and have banished Antinomians and
Libertines out of their bounds, these Libertines say, that the same spirit of
persecution works in Papists, Jews, Turks, and the Churches in New England. The
Author of the Poem, who makes ^one Saints, and of the Kingdom of Christ, but
Familists and Antinomians, and all the rest enemies, is reported to be R.
Beacon, who wrote a Catechism, of stuff not unlike this.

1 Samuel Gortyn, and his late Disciples of Familisme, The tenets of the la^t^r
familists called Gortenianss
hold all the godly and sound, of the Churches of New England, that are not
theirs, to be Antichrists, Idolaters, worshippers of the star of their God
Remphan, figures that they made to themselves, Pharisees, Scribes, Herodians,
children of disobedience, in whom the God of this world Satan works, false
teachers, etc. and what not, and themselves the only Saints.

2 The calling of the Apostles and ministers, extraordinarily without the
ministry of men, and the calling of them now ordinarily by men, must argue a
Change in the son of God and a nullitie. Then must the ceasing of sacrifices
and old Testameent-Ceremonies, and Gods diverse ways of revealing himself to us
say Christ is not the same yesterday and to day, and for ever, contrary to Heb.
13.7, 8, 9, 10.

3 Libraries, books, and humane learning are to be condemned, Simpl. defense
p. 15. as Antino. do.

4 The rising of Anabaptists, Familists and sects, which the truly godly in
New England fear and abhor, is the Messenger of the Covenant, Christ coming
to his temple, Ibid.

5 Herod, Act 12. Taking on him to be a Magistrate, to protect the people with
wisdom and Counsel, to minister Justice unto them, took on him an office that
belongs only to God, (and so did Brother Winthrop, the Governor of New
England) for which cause Herod was stricken with worms, Magistracy then in it
self must be unlawful, Simplic. Defen. p. 17, 18.

6 The two Olive trees and candlesticks standing before the God of the earth,
are the two witnesses whom the godly of New England do kill, and these two
witnesses are the life and death of our Lord Jesus Christ, the strength and the
weakness of Christ: for he was crucified through weakness, but lives by the
power of God, Simplic. Def. p. 19, 20. Thus these Wizzards change the true
Christ, true man like us in all things, except sin, into a Metaphorical
imaginary Christ; for Gorton in the Postscript, expounding these words, Except
ye eat the flesh, etc. Joh. 6. says p. 104. And whereas he says, I say unto
you, or, as the word is, I say in you, it signifies, that what ever the Saints
utter in point of Religion, it is, and must be the voice of the Son of God, and
not of themselves; so that as he suffers death in them, else can he have no
death at all, and then no Savior, even so he speaks in them, or else has he
no voice or language at all, and therefore without them, no revealer of the
will of his Father, For where Christ is silent, there can be no revelation,
therefore he is the word, or expression of his Father. Hence by the new way of
new Familists, Gortine and the latter Familists of New England deny the
incarnation, or that Christ was true man and dyed for us.
it is clear, Christ is not true man, dying in his manhood for man, but he
dies in the Saints, and suffers in them, else (says Gorton) He cannot dye,
nor suffer, because p. 105. He is that fountain of life, yea, life it self.
Then all the dying and suffering of Christ-man, is the dying and the suffering
of the Saints; But the Saints dying and suffering, offer not themselves a
sacrifice to God for their own sins, and the sins of the world, nor are they
our Redeemers, nor Saviors, to save the people of God from their sins, as
Christ was, Matthew. 1.21.

The Son of God is made flesh, that is, weak and frail, in regard of us, or
our nature that he took. But he means that Christ took our nature, not in his
own person (that I cannot fasten upon their words) but the Son of God became
flesh in us, that is, weak in the Saints, who bear his image; therefore Gorton
expounding flesh and blood, Joh. 6. says, p. 106, 107. By blood is here meant
the life, Spirit, and power of the Son of God, as he discends from the Father,
even as the life, spirit, power, virtue and vigor of the Son of man, runs in
the blood in creatures, and such is the life, descent, and power of the Son of
man, as he is of the life, descent, and power of the Father from above, and so
is God blessed for ever, Amen. So the Apostle, this is he that came by water
and blood, that is, by weakness and strength, -- that is by weakness in us,
or in our nature, (then not in Christ personally) but by power in God, or in
that nature divine, so is he said in the like sense to be crucified in the
flesh, but quickened in the Spirit, then its but metaphorical flesh and blood
that Christ took, not real and material, but in regard the Saints that bear
his image are men, Christ is a man in them, and Christ weak in them, that is,
Christ lives in them, according to the wisdom, skill, strength, study, and
forecast, about the things of God, that a creature (merely as he is a creature)
is able to procure and bring forth, now the best thing that is in man (says he
p. 106.) which is his wisdom, is enmity with God, for it is not subject to the
Law of God, neither indeed can be, so we have from these Familists, an
imaginary and a Metaphorical Savior, And if we eat the flesh of Christ and
drink his blood (says he, p. 107, 108.) that is, if we eat and communicate
with that weakness and frailty that is naturally in man, and which the Son of
God assumed and took into unity, (he says not unto the unity of the second
person) with himself, without alike drinking in, and communication with that
spirit and life, wherein he visits us, and comes into our nature from on high,
(even out of the bosom of the Father) then do we surfeit and suffocate the
Spirit (so is flesh eaten to the body without drink) and dye in our selves and
in our sins, and so also if we neglect that weakness that is in us, (as though
no such thing were) and dream of an high and spiritual estate, which does not
arise out of, and is the result (through the wisdom of God) of that weakness
that is in us, then do we either sink in our folly, and become sottish, the
things of God being drunk up only with the things of this natural life, else
are we puffed up, and become giddy in our selves, thinking that we know
something, when indeed we know nothing as we ought.

In all these, Familists 1 Deny the Trinity, three persons in on God. And if
the reader consider it Saltm. speaks the same way with Gortine and H. Nich.
Sparkles of glory p. 288. Others say (he means himself and Familists whom he
divides from Protestants) the mystery of salvation is no other then Immanuel
or God with us, or God in flesh, Christ being no more but an anointed one, and
that anointed one is our nature or weakness anointed with the spirit, even
God himself who is strength. There is not a word here of God and man in one
person, and of true God consubstantiall with the Father, and man like us in all
things except sin, in the unity of one person, but Christ is our nature (in
every Saint and believer) and weakness anointed with the spirit. Then every
saint is Christ, and Christ has no body and soul of his own, but every
believer, Goded, deified, and anointed with the spirit, is Christ.

2 Christ is not one single man, who was crucified on Mount Calvery: But every
weak believer made of flesh, and a frail body, and of a soul Goded and
anointed with the spirit, is God manifest in the flesh, and another Messiah we
have not but every Saint is his own Savior, Christ is nothing but mystical
Christ by his spirit dwelling in the flesh and weak nature of all Saints; is
not this the Antichrist who denies that Christ is come in the flesh?

Now Christ suffers in us says Gortyn p. 105. Because no other creature in the
creation was made according to the Image of God but man alone, and so no other
creature in regard of degeneration can bear the image of death and hell but man
alone. Then the Father and Spirit suffers in us and our weakness, because of
the unity of images that is in God, and in us. If this be all, here is no
incarnation or suffering personal in the Son more then of the Father and the
Spirit.

2 This is but the imaginary and Metaphorical Savior of H. Nich. and unclean
Familists; for if flesh and blood be but Metaphors, that is, the weakness and
nothingnesse of man, and blood be Metaphorically only the power of the divine
nature, and if the blood and water that issued from Christ's side was not
material blood and water, and if Christ's being crucified according to the
flesh, and his living according to the Spirit, be but fair Metaphors, as we
say, the Medows laugh, when they are but vigorous, green and flourishing, and
are not capable of material laughter, more then of a reasonable soul, then
surely Christ was not true man borne of the virgin Mary, but a Metaphorical
man, that is, weak in us who alone are his Image by creation.

3 Then dyed he but in fantasy and Metaphorically, for his flesh that he
was crucified in, is not true flesh; nor the true manhood assumed in the unity
of his person, but only it is Metaphorically the weakness that is in us. And
John says, He saw the water and the blood that came out of his side, and did
bear record, and his record is true, yea, they heard Christ with their ears,
they saw him with their bodily eyes, and looked on him, and their hands handled
the Lord of life, John leaned on his bosom, they pierced his hands and his
feet, they parted his garments among them, they took down his body off the
Cross, folded it in clean linen, laid him in a new Tomb, he truly rose
again, eat with his Disciples, when they doubted if it was he, he called to
them to make their senses and fingers witnesses, a spirit has not flesh and
bones as ye see I have, 1 John 1.1, 2, 3. Joh. 19. Mat. 26, 27, 28. Luke
22.23. chapter 24.39, 40, 41. And he was seen of all the Disciples, and was seen
of more than five hundred brethren at once, 1 Cor. 15.5, 6. And he showed
himself to his Disciples after his suffering, by many infallible proofs,
being seen of them forty days, and spoke of the things concerning the
Kingdom of God, yea, Paul says, Act. 20.^28. God purchased a Church by his
blood. Our Divines with good reason say, Here is concluded against the
Socinians a real satisfaction, a true, real, not a moral or exemplary dying by
way of imitation only to teach us the like patience, but that Christ God-man
really offered to the Father blood as a perfect ransom to redeem his Church.
The deceiving Familists eluding the whole history of Scripture, and this
Impostore Gortyn says his blood is to be expor^ed only of the power of his
Godhead, and his flesh of the weakness of our natures, or of us, who only in
creation are made according to the Image of God; Yea, Gortyn says, p. 104.
Christ suffers in them, that is, in the weak Saints, else can he have no
death at all, and then no Savior, then he suffered not in his own Manhood,
then has he not by himself purged our sin, Heb. 1.3. Nor was it Christ
himself who in his own body on the tree bare our sins, 1 Pet. 2.24. The body
of Christ say the Familists and Antinomians, is his Church; Now the Church is
his mystical body, but Christ had and yet has another true, real, natural
body besides his body the Church. This seems to me to be the doctrine of M.
Saltmarsh, who in his latest piece (that I cannot now examine this work being
printed, but it is the very picture of the spirit of Henry Nicholas) gives
hints that Christ is not true man, Sparkles of glory* p. 39. The baptism of
Jesus Christ is that whereby we are baptized into his body. Now his body is a
spiritual one, and fashioning like his glorious one, that place, Phil. 3.20,
21, that speaks of Christ's natural body, Saltmarsh exponeth of his mystical
body the Church, as if Christ had not another body then his Church his
mystical body; Now Christ's mystical body suffered not on the Cross for our
sins. And page 43. When Jesus (says he) went out of flesh into spirit, or
ascended, he confirmed this ministration etc. Then Christ's ascension to heaven
in his manhood is not local and visible, though the scripture say Act. 1. His
Disciples saw him locally and visibly ascend, and the Angels said these men of
Galilie should see him after the same manner come to judgment, but his
ascension is but his leaving of his flesh or mystical body on earth, and being
turned into a spirit, or his entering in a more spiritual and glorious being
into heaven, and if this be true that his ascension is but his going out of
flesh into spirit, then has not Christ taken our nature and flesh and a man's
heart to heaven with him that he may be touched with our infirmities. Contrary
to these Scriptures Ephesians. 2. ver. 6. Phi. 3.20.21. Heb. 4.14, 15. Heb. 7.24, 25,
26. Heb. 10.20, 21.

Again by blood in scripture is never meant the power or life of God. How
shall we then make sense of that Heb. 2.14. For as much as the children are
partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same,
that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is,
the Devil. And what is that but he was true man? v. 17. Wherefore in all
things it behooved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a
merciful High Priest.

Now the Children were not partakers of flesh and blood that is of weakness
and the power of God, or the Godhead, for so Familists expone flesh and blood,
except we say that every believer is both borne of the seed of David according
to the flesh, and is God blessed for ever. A horrible blasphemy, for so Christ,
Romans 9. partakes of flesh and blood according to the Familists way.

And this way of changing all histories of the word in allegories, is the way
to elude all truth. When it is said, God created the Heaven and the Earth, the
Sea, Man, Beasts, Birds, Fishes, we must make the world an Imaginary and
Metaphorical world, the Creation must be but an allegory, men must be
figures, allegories and metaphors, so must heaven, earth, sea, land, birds,
fishes, be metaphors, for there is as true a real history of all that Jesus
did and said until the day he was taken up to heaven, Act. 1.1, 2. As of all
other true histories in the word. Else Familists puts us to a stand in all the
Articles of our faith. Del ser p. 19.
I confess the way that Del and the Familists take, when they cite these words
for an internal word, and a spiritual and allegorick sense, besides the
litterall sense, The words that I speak are spirit and life, Is an unavoydable
way to elude all scripture, and M. Beacon in his Catechism while he clear
himself, is a gross Familist to me, for he speaking of Christ crucified,
turns all Christ in a Metaphorical Imaginary Christ in these words page 137.
M. Beacon turns Christ over in a metaph^ricall Savior as all Familis^^ do.


Q. how long did this suffering last?

A. Till he gave up the Ghost.

Q. Who was crucified hereby?

A. The old man.

Q. What was the old man?

A. The sinful man.

Q. Is the sinful man ceased?

A. Yes, in Christ.

Q. How so?

A. He was left nailed on the cross.

These words ( who was crucified) in a Catechism, ask in what nature Christ
suffered, and whether or no Christ God and man in regard of communion of
properties may be said to suffer. Who did suffer? Now he should answer the Lord
of life in his humane nature. But passing the answer touching all personal and
material sufferings of Christ, which is a special and fundamental article of
our faith, and ought not to be omitted in a Catechism, he comes to a moral
suffering of the body of sin by influence of Christ's death on our souls; now
first and primarily Christ himself was nailed to the Cross as a sacrifice,
for our sins (this is omitted by Beacon) secondarily as a fruit of his death,
the Old Man is crucified with him, Romans 6. but not as Beacon means, that the
Old Man is ceased, and we sin no more being once justified, as if the Old Man
were perfectly crucified, as he answers. And it is true, that Christ's dying
teaches us to die to sin, and so Christ's death is spiritually to be expon^d,
where the scripture exponeth it, as Romans 6.1, 2, 3, and 1 Pet. 1.23, 24. and
else where. But that is no ground for Papists, Antinomians and Familists to
take away all the truth of histories touching Christ his incarnation, death,
resurrection, ascension, sitting at the right hand of God, redeeming of the
world, heaven, and hell, and to subvert our faith and change all in spiritual
and allegorical senses under pretense of a spiritual Gospel-preaching, we
cannot then by the learning of these Jugglers expone the story of the drowning
of the world by waters, but of allegorical men, allegorical drowning, not
literally. For if we expone the stories of the Scripture literally, Familists
say we are literal expositers and know nothing of the spirit and spiritual
learning.

7 These Familists teach, that Christ reveals his will by no voice, but the
voice of the Spirit in the Saints, p. 104. that is, the internal Spirit and
word is our only rule, and not the written word, suitable to H. Nicholas his
Spirit, and to the Enthysiasmes of Swenckefield, and to John Waldesso, (a piece
that M. Beacon highly extols, p. 138. Catechi. who says, Consideration 3. p.
8.) That believers make use of some rules (of Scripture) to preserve the health
of their souls, John Waldesso so much extolled by M. Beacon is an Enthysiast
and rejects the scriptures.
as they do for the health of their body, rather to conform themselves
outwardly with the sons of Adam, then because they feel themselves to stand in
need of such observations: forasmuch us they being governed by God alone,
observe the will of God, and wholly depend on it. And the same Popish Author,
Cons. 32. p. 107, 108. makes crucifixes, Images, and the holy Scriptures
Alphabets of Christian Piety for beginners (M. Beacon who commends this
superstitious Famil^sticall book, must always judge Images unlawful) so as a
Christian having first (says Waldesso p. 108.) served himself with holy
Scriptures as with an Alphabet, he afterward leaves them to serve for the same
effect to beginners, he attending to the inward inspirations, having for his
proper Master the Spirit of God, and serving himself with holy Scriptures, as
with an holy conversation, and which causes refreshment unto him, altogether
putting from himself all these writings which are written by an humane Spirit.
So they judge Scripture to be written by an human spirit contrary to 2 Pet.
1.19, 20, 21. 2 Timothy 3.16.

8 Its folly to conclude of certainty of Scripture, and not of infallibility in
the interpretation thereof, So M. Saltmarsh, and M. Dell, deny the Scripture to
be an obliging rule to the Saints, but only the word written in the heart.
Hence, as the Holy Ghost dited the Scripture, so also dited be the exposition
of Scripture to the Familists, and their exposition is as infallible as the
Scripture, because the same Spirit speaks in both, for the same spirit that
dites the word must expone it.

Answ. Then must the writing of H Nicholas, and the uncle^n house of Love, and
of Antinomians, be as infallible as the writings of the Prophets and Apostles,
who were immediately inspired; Horrible blasphemy. Men, and holy men may err
in their Expositions, but the Word of God is infallible truth.

2. The Scripture is our rule, by which all other Truths, Doctrines, Spirits,
Revelations must be tried, and if they be not according to the Law, and the
Testimony, there is no light in them, Esa. 8.19, 20. Luke 16.30, 31. Psa.
119.130.105. Luke 4.17, 18, 19, 20, 21. Joh. 5.39. 2 Timothy 3.16. Act. 26.22.

3 No marvel that Antinomians be Anti-scripturians, and deny Scripture to be
the Word of God, affirming it to be a dead letter, a humane thing of Ink, and
that what the Spirit speaks to the soul, is only the word of God, and no
other thing contained in the Old and New Testament.

9 Faith justifying is no fiduciall recumbency on Christ, God and Man. Nor do
we eat his flesh and drink his blood spiritually by believing in Christ
crucified, but by acts of humility, Seven headed policy p. 111.
seeing our self to be flesh and nothing, and Christ to be in us blood, that
is, the spirit, life, and power of God, as if we were Goded with him.

10. God and man united in one eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his
blood, or man as Goded, and God as humanized, p. 111

11 The reasonings and dictates of our spirit, are translated into the (...)
and dictates of the Spirit of God, and so the writing, (...)* and arguments
become Divine and eternal, not humane and ^empora^y. Wind-mils, and phanacies
must they be big (...)* who leave the Scriptures* and imagine that God only
acts, understands, wills, loves, fears, hopes, etc. and does (...) in the
Saints.

12 Swearing at all, though before a Judge, is unlawful, Simpl. Defenc. p. 22.

13. While you tell the people (say they to the godly in New England:) that by
sorrow, compunction, and anxiety of Spirit, and would of mind, they
communicate in the sufferings of Christ, it is nothing else, but to conclude
the Son of God to be Beliel.

14 Baptism is unlawful, except it be conjoined with the cross and
sufferings of Christ, ^o Saltmarsh Sparkles of glory, p. 30, 31. denies all
Baptism.

15 As every Saint ought to hear the word, so ought he to preach it, Calling of
Ministers is groundless, so p. 66.67. so the An^^nom. Beacon, Catechi. p 7.8.
and Saltmarsh Spark. p. 131.

16 They are Idol Shepherds of Rome, who cannot preach to the people but in a
way of so much study and ease, not laboring with their hands for their bread,
p. 67.

17 If I preach the Gospel willingly (say they) I have a reward, 1 Cor. 9.17.
that is, if I do it out of any ability, skill, or will of mine own, gotten,
or acquired by any pains, or industry, as men do attain to Arts and Trades,
wherein they are to be preferred before and above others, then I have a reward,
that is, something to be attributed, and contributed to me for the same, then I
go about to deprive my Lord of his right, showing my self an unfaithful
Steward, and^. Simpl. Defen. P. 68. then was Gorton unfaithful in writing this
book, for pains of art he must have taken in writing, in consulting, by reading
the Scripture, to set down Chapter and Verse, but all this is the
Enthysiasticall gang of Divinity, in which Antinomians in praying, believing,
loving, bereave us of the use of mind, will, reason, affections, and make the
Holy Ghost and Christ in his person united to us to do all.

18 To preach for stipend or contribution, is to give unto God, and unlawful,
contrary to 1 Timothy 5.17, 18, 19. which I grant, if stipends be the preachers
design and end.

19. None is to forethink of what text or subject he is to preach on, but as
Gods Spirit for the time casts in his mind, p. 75. that is, he is to speak
phancies, without sense, method, or intention to edify, which thing the
Prophets, Christ, and Apostles, did not in their preachings. But of this before
and somewhat hereafter.

20 He denies the resurrection, exponing these words, My flesh shall rest in
hope, that is, my weakness and tired out condition has rest and strength in
another, though not in my self, for hope, that is seen is no hope. This place
Psalm: 16. is exponed Act. 2.26, 30, 31, 32. of the hope of the resurrection of
Christ and of ours in him who is the first begotten of the dead, but Gor^on, p.
106. wresteth it most foolishly to another sense, as if it were metaphorical
flesh and burial, and so an allegorical and spiritual resurrection only.

21 He most corruptly and unsoundly turns all the Scripture in childish
Allegories, as is to be seen, p. 96, 97* 98.

In the following Treatise you have other Antinomian conceits holden by To.
Town, who coldly refuteth Doctor Tailor, Of other Antinomians now in England.
and by M. Eaton in his Honey comb, and Saltmarsh of late fallen off conformity
to Antinomianisme, and Tob. Crisp, a godly man (as is thought) But
Melancholions, who having builded much on qualifications and signs, fell to
the other extremity of no signs of sanctification at all, by H. Den, an High
Altar man, a bower at the sillables of the name Jesus, and conform to all the
abominable late Novations introduced by Canterbury, who also opposed the
Remonstrance and Petition of the well affected, pleading for a riddance from
Episcopacy, Ceremonies, and other corruptions, and is now a rigid Arminian, and
an enemy to free Grace, an Anabaptist, an Antinomian, to these join Paul
Hobson, who speaks more warily then the rest, and R. Beacon, in his late
Catechism, who holds sundry gross points, and M. Del in his Sermon before the
House of Commons, whose noble Ancestors could not have endured Familisme,
S^einianisme, or the like to be preached in their ears.

CHAP. XVIII. Saltmarsh clears his mind touching personal mortification
faintly, and holds many other points of Familisme, as of Christ crucified,
risen, ascended to heaven in a figure, or in the spirit, not really in his true
Man-head.
SAltmarsh is now the chief Familist in England, has written of late a
Treatise called Sparkles of glory, which contains the spirits and extractions
of the doctirne of Swenckfeld, David Georgius, Henry Nicholas, and all the
Familists, Antinomians and older Libertines, in which he professes himself A
Seeker, and disclameth Presbytery, Independency, Anabaptisme, and that there is
neither Ministry, Church or Ordinances, nor any promise of continuance of them
till Christ's second coming, contrary to Mat. 28.19, 20, 21. Ephe. 4.11, 12,
13. Mat. 26.13. Mat. 24.14. And pleads for liberty of conscience, and yields
that he will write no more against that learned and Godly man M. Tho. Gittaker.
He further labors to clear himself, ( Sparkles of glory page 323, 324, 325,
326,) That he said, that Christ has believed perfectly, repented perfectly,
mortified sin perfectly for us; which he thus explaineth to wash it from
Antinomianisme and so calls it a pretended Heresy.

(...) would c^eare how he said (...) has perfectly believed repented, and
mortified (...) for us, but (...) no purpose.
1 (says he) that Christ has done all for us is truth, he has fullfilled
all righteousness for us, b^^ that which is of the Law and that which is in
the Gospel in graces etc. And upon this account is made unto us righteousness,
etc.

2 Faith, Repentance, Mortification, were all in Christ origiginally,
primarily, as in their nature, their fountain, their root, or seed, and
therefore he is said to give repentance to Israel, and he is the Author and
finisher of our faith, and it is caled the faith of the son of God, and of his
fullness all we have received, and grace for grace, for every grace in him, a
grace in us.

A. 1 If Saltmarsh have no other sense, but that our faith, repentance,
mortification, are in and from Christ as the meritous cause, because Christ by
the merit of his death procured grace to us to believe, repent, mortify sin.

2 That these are from Christ efficienter, as the efficient cause or from the
spirit of Christ infusing the life of God in us, and actuating the
supernatural habit of grace in us and working in us to will and to do, this is
that which Protestant Divines say, that Christ is our Savior merito and
efficacia, by the merit of his death, against Papists, and the effectual; yea,
and the irresistible applying of his death to save us, as we teach against
Papists, Pelagians, Socinians, then surely I hope neither that learned man M.
Gattaker, nor any of ours censured M. Saltmarsh for Antinomianisme or any
heresy, in his point we agree, and then we say that M. Saltmarsh in these
words, gives us a fair and ingenious Recantation. I am glad of this.

But Saltmarsh will be found to wash Antinomianisme off himself with
Ink-water, and he has no face, at least it is much ignorance to call
Protestants Legallists, because they teach that our faith, repentance, and
mortification are from Christ by way of merit and the effectual working of
grace, nor did ever Protestant deny this.

1 Saltmarsh free grace p. 61, 62. excludes personal not acting such and such
a sin and our personal sanctification from being part of Gospel pure* and
spiritual mortification, p. 62, 63. And says, our pure and Gospel
mortification is to believe that Christ mortified sin perfectly for us, and
the like he says of sanctification, and repentance, p, 84, 85. So Saltmarsh
wills us not to repen^, nor believe, nor mortify sin in our own person,
but to believe Christ has done these for us perfectly, and then we believe,
repent, and mortify sin perfectly

2 He cites Scripture, But ye are sanctified, but ye are justified etc. This
is out of all doubt personal sanctification flowing from Christ's merits, and
his spirit. And I can do all things through Christ, which strengthens me.
This is personal doing in Paul's person by the grace of Christ, and we are
his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works. Those be good works
that we in our own person do, by the spirit of sanctification. But Saltmarsh
exponeth all these to be not ours, but the very personal actings of Christ,
for his words are these, page 84. free grace.

All these scriptures set forth Christ the sanctification and the fullness of
his, the all in all. Christ has believed perfectly for us, he has repented
perfectly, he has sorrowed for sin perfectly, he has obeyed perfectly for
us, and all is ours, and we are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. Now Saltmarsh can
have no such sense as here he would force on himself: For never man doubted,
but personal acts of grace, or, don by the strength of grace, are ours; but
how are they ours? as we are Christ's? only as Christ acts them for us
without us. No, are they not ours? the Spirit of Jesus works them in us, and
causes us personally to do and act them, Ezekiel. 36.27. John 7.39? If Christ's
perfect believing, perfect repenting, and his perfect mortifying of sin be
ours, because Christ did these acts for us in the days of his humiliation
while he was in the flesh; then are they ours before we be born, and the holy
Ghost must exhort us to do all in the strength of Christ, and to be
sanctified, and to believe perfectly to justification, and that we be his
workmanship, to walk in good works, that we put on the new man, that we
mortify sin 1640 years before we be born: for so many years ago Christ
performed all these things for us: but we are this day exhorted to put on the
new man, and to walk in good works. Now the holyghost in scripture must either
speak nonsense or when he says, walk in love eve^ this day, repent while it is
to day, stand up from the dead to day, believe to day; he must mean, you need
not stir foot or hand, or any power of your soul to these acts: for Christ
performed all these acts for you 1640 years ago. For then he must mean Christ
has repented perfectly in me a believer, and wrought perfect repentance free
of sin in me a sinner, and Christ has obeyed perfectly in me a sinnerr; that
is, by his merit and Spirit, Christ has wrought in me and in my sinful person,
perfect obedience, and so has made my personal sanctification, my personal
new obedience by his grace perfect, and perfectly conform to the Law, which is
most false. And when Paul says, I am able through Christ's strength to do all
things, his meaning must be, Christ works in me, in my sinful soul,
understanding, will, affections, and whole man, to do all things through
Christ's strength perfectly, as Christ does all things perfectly. Now, sure,
Christ does all things perfectly, and without sin: But did Paul by Christ's
strength all things perfectly, and so as he was free of si^ne? I think not. 3.
Saltmarsh takes upon him to yield us some purer and finer Gospel
mortification, then the Protestant Legalists have done in former times, as he
says* page 61, 62. Now if his mortification be in Christ only, and not in the
sinner himself, nor any act of him, and a perfect mortification in Christ
only, as the meritorious cause, and also as the only efficient, not in us,
and as in Christ the only subject not in us: then I grant he gives us a finer
mortification, because what Christ does only and perfectly, and in himself,
not in us, must be finer then any mortification or acts of sanctification we
do in our person, though we do these by the Merit and Spirit of Christ
working in us to will and to do. But then Saltmarsh nill he, will he, must
say, the Gospel-mortification is that whereby Christ has perfectly mortified
sin for us, and not that (which he says. Sparkles of glory, 324, 325.)
mortification which Christ first does in himself, and then in us through
himself; and so he vindicates not himself. (4.) I never yet (says he) denied
graces and fruits of the Spirit of God, which appear in faith, repentance, new
obedience, mortification of sin. I speak it in another conception* and
measure of light. -- The Christian as the English or French, can only speak in
his own tongue or language, till the Lord be One, and his Name One amongst us.
It is true, 1. Saltmarsh and Antinomians say, there are graces of Faith,
Repentance, Mortification, or rather, (as Town says) gifts of Faith, etc. But
1. they are not Gospel-mortification. Why? Gospel-mortification is perfect in
Christ, says Saltmarsh, Free Grace, page 84. these that are in us, are not
perfect at all, nor conformable to Law and Gospel. 2. They are not commanded
so, as the contrary omissions should be sin, they are only free and
arbitrary acts of the Spirit, and of a spirit separated from the word. 3.
Saltmarsh denies not graces in faith, repentance, and mortification. But he
denies the necessity of the things themselves, as acted personally by us; Yea,
Saltmarsh says, Confession, Repentance, are sins, at least infirmities or
sins of weakness. For free Grace, page 87. he says, You say well: For David
c^yed out in the bitterness of his soul, that his sin was ever before him,
and then his sanctification was out of his sight, and that God had forgotten to
be gracious but I said says he, this is my infirmity. In which words, David's
confessing of his sin, which is a^ act of (...) is joined with his
quarrelling with God, (...) had been a changed God, Psalm. 77. and of both it is
said, that David said, This is my infirmity, or my sin. Now if he spak not
of both, the words can bear no sense; and if so, confession of sin, (and by
the same reason, repenting of sin) must be a sinful infirmity. How then can
Saltmarsh acknowledge grace or fruits of the Spirit, except he acknowledge
grace in sinning, which were absurd.

4. Saltmarsh calls his unsound speaking, a Christian speaking, till the Lord
be one, and his Name One; as if the expressions of Antinomians and their
Heretical doctrine, were the language of a Christian, when it is the language
of the Antichrist. And if Saltmarsh failed but in expression, he should have
answered his own Arguments, and the Scriptures that Mr. Gattaker alleges on
the contrary, and confessed Mr. Gattakers doctrine was found in that point, and
his own Familisticall, in his way of expression of it, at least.

Yea Saltmarsh further enlarges himself in other Articles of Familisme, more
unsound then before, and worse, if worse can be; as

1. Man is said to be made after Gods own Image, which Image was Jesus Christ,
Sparkles of glory, p. 3.
called by Paul, the Image of the invisible God, the brightness of his glory,
the express Image of his person.

Scripture says not, that man was made according to the Image of God Christ:
for Christ is the Substantial and eternal Image of the Father. Man was
created in the created participation of God in righteousness and holiness,
Ephesians. 4.23, 24. and especially if Saltmarsh speak of Christ as Mediator, as he
does, it is most false.

2. Man while he stood was the figure and Image of Jesus Christ in his new
creation, or whole body, or Saints. p. 4. Sparkles of Glory.

An. P. 201. he sets down this as the last and highest discovery of God to
man, above and beyond what Protestants say of salvation by faith in Christ
crucified, died, buried, ascended, sitting at the right hand of God, etc. For
all these Gospel truths he rejects as literal and fleshly, They say, (says
he, speaking of Fumilists) Adam was a way by which God preached first to man,
and was not the first man in whom all stood and fell, but a way (figurative and
allegorick, not literal and historical, as if Adam were a true real man) by
which this mystery of God was made to appear. But what Scripture is ^here,
that Adam ^n the st^^e of Innocence was a figure of the Mystical body of
Christ Mediator? We may not at our will fancy figures and types where the word
goes not before us.

3. This excellency and glory of the first man, as it left God, life and
communion in him, was a figure or image of this creation departing from God,
and living out of God.

Ans. What reason has Saltmarsh to speak with H. Nicholas who says man sinned
from the beginning, bu^ speaks not one word of the first Adam that sinned* as
if the first sinner were not one single man, s^e Knewstub against H. Nicholas.

2 The Scripture says, Romans 5. All sinned in the first Adam, as the head,
root, Familists deny the first Adam to be a true man, but a figure only, and
Christ to be man only figuratively in regard of his mystical body the saints
in whom he dies and suffers.
first nature and public father of all mankind. By one man many were made
sinners, inherently and intrinsecally. Saltmarsh will have all men to sin in
Adam, as in the first figure, type and Sampler by imitation, only as Pelagius
said, or he will have the first Adam, a man figuratively only, not really and
indeed, and we know Familists change the whole story of Adams fall, and say
the tree, the Garden, eating were not material trees, gardens, etc. but mere
figures.

4. Jesus Christ is the Revelation of God, even the Father, this is the glass
or Crystal of God, in whom we with open face see God, p. ^.

Ans. In all the wild expressions, he has of Christ, as that he is Gods
Revelation, Gods Crystal. He calls him not the Son of God, by an eternal
generation, as Divines from Scripture speak.

5 The veil of this first Temple or creation, was rent by him who crucified
all flesh through the eternal spirit and en^red in his glory.

Ans. What Scripture says Christ crucified all flesh through the eternal
spirit; has Christ nailed all his flesh to the Cross? or must he mean, as he
elsewhere hinteth, that Christ had not a proper natural body of his own, in
which he dyed, but all his mystical body the Church is his body, in which he
suffers afflictions and death in his Saints, as in his image, then must the
sufferings of the Saints be that satisfaction and price of Redemption, paid to
justice for our sins, and so as many afflicted suffering Saints, as many
Saviors.

6 Sparkles of glory, p. 15, 16, 17. He acknowledges no visible Church, but
only the invisible baptized into one Spirit.

Ans. The word acknowledges a visible kingdom like a draw-net that gathers in
good and bad, a barn floor in which is chafe and corn, Familists
acknowledge no visible, bu^ only invisible Church.
a field, in which is wheat and tares, Matthew. 13. a visible house of sons and
servants.

7 The man of (...) 2 Thessalonians. 2. is the corrupt flesh in every man, not the
Antichrist the Pope of Rome.

An. So said H. Nicholas judging all the externalls of Popery indifferent.

8 Page 29, 30. The Baptism of water, is John Baptists Ministry till Christ,
Christ baptized none, nor his Disciples, but from John's Ministry so that
Baptism of water is done away, as other legal shaddows, and all baptizing
spoken of in the Epistles, is spiritual baptizing.

An. Christ gave a contrary mandate, Mat. 28.19, 20. and Peter says, Act.
10.47. Can any man forbid water? Act. 8. the Eunuch was baptized with water,
Act. 16.33. Col. 2.11, 12. 1 Pet. 3.20, 21. Antinomians judge baptism, the
Lords Supper indifferent, as they do all external administrations, for to
them they are but the killing Letter, the flesh.

9 Christ ascending to heaven, went out of flesh into spirit, p. 43. Sparkles.
Familists teach that Christ is not ascended to heaven in our flesh and nature.


An. He has not then our nature and flesh in heaven, contrary to Ephe. 2.6. He
is not then our High Priest now touched in heaven, with a feeling of our
infirmities, his flesh is now not the new and living way, contrary to Heb.
4.15.16. chap 7.24, 25, 26. chapter 10.20. Nor does the Heaven contain him till
the last day, as the Scripture says, for his Spirit is every where.

CHAP. XIX. Saltmarsh with Familists phancyeth diverse new administrations, of
the Law, of John Baptist, of the Gospel, of all spirits.
10. ANtichrist, or the mystery of iniquity came in upon this ministration by
gifts and Ordinances, and the glory of the spirit, and power of gifts, went off
from the visible Church, as the glory of God from the Temple to the threshold,
till it was wholly departed. -- and all things in the absence of the spirit,
and of gifts were Administered by Arts and Sciences, and Grammatical knowledge
of tongues and languages, p. 45. Sparkles of glory p. 49.
The ministry that shall destroy the Antechrist, is Jesus himself, the
Prophet whom we must hear, and the God of whom we shall be all taught, pa. 49.
Not that of Arts and Sciences acquired by natural power and industry.

An. The falling away was not the ceasing of extraordinary gifts of the Spirit
in the Apostles. What is Antichrist to Famili^^s, not the Pope but the Protesta
(...) whom they fasly call legal teachers
But the Antichrists bringing in of another Gospel, Joh. 2. ver. 10. and the
Spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh 1 John 4 3. is
Antichrist as the Libertines H. Nicholas, Joh. Saltmarsh and Familists who page
219. parts with the common Protestant to behold a state of condemnation in
sin and a way of salvation by Jesus Christ and faith in him -- to be but a
knowledge of Christ after the flesh and of Christ as one single person or
figure of a man and the first glimpse of the love of God, and but merely a
discovery beyond the Law and all but a fleshly spiritualty. And why? because
this comes not by a Yard-length up to the Family of Love, and teaches
salvation by Christ whom these men call a figure of a man, because not true
man. And the Antichrist came in the Pope also, and denied Christ to come in the
flesh, nullified his manhood, with transubstantiation, a visible head of the
Church, Images, merits, traditions of men, etc. invocation of Saints, prayer
for the dead, works of supererogation etc. but all these are indifferent to
Mr. Saltmarsh and on^y Antichristian because literal and external, not because
they are not warented by scripture. and he brought in the abuse of Philosophy,
Logic, Arts and tongues, which much darkened Gospel-glory.

1 The Apostles with gifts and the Spirit made much use of arts and tongues as
inferior helps in their kind to convert souls, because sinners are not
Angels, Saltmarsh makes the Antichrist to come in with arts and tongues, and
yet flowers the Margin of his book with bits of broken Greek, such as he can.
and faith came by hearing of known languages and sent preachers, Romans 10.14.

2 Saltmarsh his Sparkles of Glory, must be an administration by arts and
tongues, and so not that Ministry that can destroy the Antichrist, and sparkles
of flesh and Antichristianisme not of glory, for he besprinckles the margin of
his book in the beginning, till his breath fail and he dry up, with the popish
lace of bits of Greek, as p. 1, 2, 3. etc. and citations of Scripture; and he
has had some Art such as it is, in writing Treatises to the School and Family
of Love, the professed enemies of Puritans; yea, there is no writing, no
speaking of English, no consequences (of which there be many monstrous ones
that follow not from Scripture such as no confession of sin, no working in
the Gospel, but only believe, etc. in Saltmarsh his books) but from Tongues,
Arts, Logic, and so Familists yet must be under the Law.

3. Observe that Saltmarsh in bringing in Antichrist, is deeply silent of
Popery, and the Romish Religion. For H. Nicholas, and Familists deny the Pope
to be Antichrist, and think the Mass and Romish Priesthood indifferent, as all
Religions are to them, and there is no Antichrist but the Legal Protestant
void of the Spirit, because he speaks Greek and Hebrew, and has some skill in
Logic, and would have the Scriptures in use, and the preaching of Gospel,
which Saltmarsh in his Reformation would lay aside, as contrary to that, Ye
shall be all taught of God, he has such a stomach against subordinata non
pugnant; but whether he will or no, teaching by the Word, and so by Tongues and
Arts, and by Timothies attending to reading, shall go together till Christ's
second coming, as is clear Esaias 59.21. Esaias 61.1. where Christ is anointed
with the Spirit to preach, and yet that Scripture was fulfilled when he spoke
by Art and Tongues, Luke 4.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, etc. And that Sermon was but
a dead letter to the hearers, v. 28 29. nor was Christ for that under any
absence of the Spirit, 1 Timothy 4.14, 15, 16. and Revel. 1.3. compared with Rev.
2.7. whereas he says, The Ministry that is to destroy Antichrist, is more
glorious then Arts and Tongues, and this is Jesus Christ himself.

1. Libertines said, the Gospel or Word was the Spirit himself, Saltmarsh here
says, the Ministry destroying Antichrist, is Christ, which is most false. The
Ministry is but 1. an Instrument, 2. a created Ordinance* Christ is God, Man,
and Mediator.

2. The Ministry that destroys him is the Word preached as an instrument,
and Christ the principal cause: But the principal cause removes not the
Instrument, as Familists imagine; but the Ministry of Familists shall never do
it.

Whereas former Antinomians made two contrary administrations, one under the
Law in the old Testament, Familists with Saltmar. make three adm^nistrations*
of Law, Gospel, and all Spirit. Antinomians two* Law, and Gospel, as they
expone them.
another under grace or the Gosp^l, in the new Testament; Only John Baptist
was pinned in as half a Legalist between both.

Saltmarsh p. 68. after he with the Familists has made a greater number of
spheres and circles of Administrations, following the spirit in his fullness
and variety, he foldeth them up in three, of Law, Gospel, and Spirit, or of
Letter, Graces, and God, or of the First, Second, and third Heavens. After the
cut of David Georg^, who said the first Ministration was the law of death, and
the letter, the second was under Christ and the Apostles, but not very
spiritual, but fleshly, literal, carnal; but the last under David George the
true Messiah was spiritual, purely spiritual, beyond that of Christ and the
Apostles, and so spiritual, that to have conscience or sense of uncleanness,
or sin, was a work of the flesh. And Saltmarsh says it is fleshly, and
literal that a pardoned man should confess sin, p. 69, 70, a Christian (says
he) passes thro^gh several ages, even as Christ was under the Law,
circumcision, Supper of the Lord, Baptism, and then he crucified all that
flesh he walked in under these dispensations, and entered unto glory.

Answ. Then he crucified Baptism, the Lords supper, preaching of the Gospel,
the Ministry, the visible Church, and every outward letter of conference,
praying, for Saltmarsh now turned Seeker, denies all these, and he must have
crucified all his preaching, tongues, writing of books.

2. What tongue or Science of the Holy Ghost taught Saltmarsh to call the
Ordinances of the New Testament, flesh, or fleshly Ordinances? for I doubt, he
means not that Christ true man, dyed for our sins, for 185, 186. he says; It
is a discovery of the highest attainment of Protestants generally, that we are
born in sin, -- And that the way of salvation was by Jesus Christ the Son of
God, born of a Virgin in the fullness of time, made under the Law, bearing our
sins, crucified, dead, buried, and risen, and ascended, and entered into
glory, etc. but page 190, 191. he forsaking this as legal doctrine, tells us of
a further discovery, as to free grace as if the Protestant Doctrine were merits
of men, not the free grace of God; And he sets down that of the
Antinomians, and not a word of Christ God-man, crucified and dead for our sins;
And the confession of Faith, made in this Assembly at Westminster, yea, all the
Reformation now, is only in some outward ordinances (says he) not any purer
or more glorious discoveries of God, or the Spirit, or Jesus Christ, or our
union with the Spirit, or glory as to spiritual things, or Christ risen, but
as to Christ in the flesh, or under the Law, of which these Ordinances were a
sign, And p. 198, 199, 200, 201. which he calls the last, highest, and most
glorious discovery of God, by love and grace, for (to the Familists) there is
no Article of the Protestant faith that savours of truth, for to them all our
Doctrine is a dead Letter. Nor did Christ die for our sins, and rise for our
righteousness, but only the dying of Christ is a mere figure, insinuating
that he dyed not in our nature as true man, but as Gortyn says, the sufferings
of every Saint who is the figure and image of Christ, is all the Christ
crucified the Scripture knows. There is nothing in all the books or writings of
Familists discovered touching the controversies between Protestants and their
Adversaries, Papists, Arminians, Socinians, Arrians, Antitrinitarians,
Sabellians, Libertines, Swenckefeldians, Anabaptists, etc. Concerning Election,
Reprobation, the power of free will, the supremacy of the Pope, Idol-worship,
the consubstantiality of the Son of God, Christ's manhood, his dying,
satisfaction, merit, burial, resurrection, ascension, the last judgment,
heaven, hell, the resurrection of the body, in all which they are unsound, and
ought to give a confession of their faith, as Anabaptists have done.

12 The Jewish Church, (says Saltmarsh p, 70.) or dispensation that was
according to Moses, and the Letter, in which they were led out in carnal and
more fleshly courses, as in proceeding against the Nations by war and
fighting, with all their other legal Rites, and Rudiments, were a clear figure
of the Christian under age, or under tutors and Governors, and worldly
Rudiments.

Wars under the New Testament for any religious caus^ not lawful to Familists
who yet practice them not a little.
Here lawful Wars, and the use of the Sword, are made legal rites and
figures. War (says he) with all other legal Rites; then War is no more
lawful to us under the New Testament, then Circumcision, and all the Law of
Ceremonies. Saltmarsh then would no more go as a Priest to the Camp, to
preach to the General, then he would be Circumcised, except with H. Nicholas,
he thought all Moses Law indifferent, and that the spirit without scripture led
him to be accessorie to unlawful blood^shed, and the spirit is his rule, not
the word of God.

2 If the ceremonies of Moses be the figure of a Christian under Tutors, and
worldly rudiments, such as hearing of the Gospel, baptism, prayer, confession,
reading; then all these must be abolished in this life to the Christian; and
if Christ have crucified all these as fleshly ordinances, to Pray, hear, must
be as unlawful as to be circumcised, which Paul says, Gal. 5. is to fall from
Christ. See if these men mind God.

13 The Disciples of Christ (says, p 70, 71.) according to John's ministry
were a type and figure of such as are under Tutors, as Gal. 4.1. and as carnal
and Babes in Christ, 1 Cor. 3.1, 2.

Answ. These under nonage, The Baptists ministry and the Apostles are made
different by Familists and Papists.
Gal. 4.1. are under the Law of Moses, and yet Heirs of the promise: The
Disciples were under Christ's ministry, and believed in Christ as come, and
were blessed, in that the Father revealed Christ to them, not flesh and blood,
Matthew. 16.16, 17. The Baptists ministry, and his Doctrine, and baptism, were
all one with the ministry and baptism of Christ and the Apostles, as our
Divines prove against Papists, for both preached Christ the Savior that takes
away the sins of the World, justification by free grace, faith, repentance to
life, sanctification etc.

Corinthians are called carnal, not because they prayed* and heard* and
believed, but because, though Babes and weak, yet they were contentious, and
Shismaticks, ver. 3, 4. For one says I am of Paul, and another I am of Apollo.
Sure Saltmarsh ordinarily expones Scripture by consequences which are fleshly
and legal, and phansies types by a spirit that contradicts the spirit speaking
in the word.

14 And the great and excellent design (says he speaking of the marrow of
the Family of love) or mind of God in all these things is only to lead out his
people, Church, or Disciples, from age to age, Sparkles of glory 71, 7^.
The different ministration of law Gospel and all Spirit, and that the l^fe to
come is alr^^dy in this lif^ ^^co^^ing to (...) way of ^amilis^s.
from faith to faith, from glory to glory, from letter to letter, from
ordinance to ordinance, from flesh to flesh, and so to spirit, and so to more
spirit, and at length to all spirit, when the Son shall deliver up the
Kingdom to the Father, which is not only when the fullness of time, or ages is
come, but in transacting and finishing in par^s and Members of the body of
Christ, and is not one^ single act, point, or effusion of glory, but a
per^ecting and fulfilling it, in several members of Christ, till the fullness
of the stature of Christ; for the day dawnes, 1 Pet. 2.19.75. And for a
Disciple to stay longer in any ministration then the Lord, or the life and
Spirit of Christ is in it, is as if Lot should tarry in Sodom. For (says he,
p 73.) A Christian must crucify each condition he passes through.

We must then learn from Familists, 1. That Christ was a legal and literal
Savior, as David George said, for he passed through all these ministrations.
And Saltmarsh must be nearer to all Spirit, then Christ and the Apostles.

2. Saltmarsh grows in transitions to new Orbs and Heavens: Familists say the
day of judgment is in this life.
For in his Treatise of Free Grace, we heard of nothing but Law and Gospel; now
he is upon the secrets of Famil^sts, and Enthusiasts, to crucify Scripture,
praying, hearing, writing, and he is become all spirit. And this is a third
state. I grant the Scripture says, that the Messiah shall, Dan. 9.27. cause,
in the midst of the week, the Sacrifice and the Oblation to cease; and that
shadows of good things to come shall be abolished, when the body and life of
ceremonies shall come. But I desire one letter of Scripture that says, when
the Spirit comes, even in this life, he shall cause praying, believing,
prophesying, seals, the Scriptures, to cease, and we shall be above and beyond
all Gospel Ordinances even in this life.

3. For Familists that are all Spirit, to hear, be baptize^ with water, read,
is as unlawful, and fleshly, as for Lot to stay in Sodom, after the Lord had
commanded him to depart.

4, Then the delivering up of the Kingdom spoken of, 1 Cor. 15. and the day of
judgment is already begun, and is in doing these many centuries of years. So
we heard before H. Nicholas say, even now in this present day, does the Lord
sit in his Throne, and judge the world. I rather believe Paul then Saltmarsh or
H. Nicholas; For Paul says, 1 Cor. 15. speaking of the Resurrection of our
bodies, which I am sure the Familists have not yet seen, 1 Cor. 15.24. then
comes the end, (...), etc. Then, when the resurrection of the body shall be,
Then shall be the end, when he shall render up the Kingdom to the Father. So
the rendering up of the Kingdom to the Father, (which Saltmarsh faith, page 72.
is even now, when the day dawneth, and the Day Star arises,) shall not be
till the end, and till the general Resurrection of all be: And therefore
Saltmarsh misseth a step in his new devised order, except he say with
Libertines, and Hen. Nicholas, that the resurrection is to be exponed
spiritually, as Hymaeneus and Philetus said, and there shall be no more
resurrection, nor day of judgment, nor rendering of the Kingdom, nor heaven
nor hell, but such as we see in this life, (as it is most like Saltm. believes
with all the Nation of the Familists) for the administration of the spirit is in
this lif, as well as the ministration of Law and Gospel were in this life. The
Scripture speaks of the day of judgment, as of a thing not yet come, 2 Thessalonians.
2.2. Let no man trouble you, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter, as
from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand. Then some by the spirit of
Scripturelesse revelation, ^s now Anabaptists and Familists, have said, the day
of judgment was near, or begun in this life; yea, the Scripture says, It is
a day appointed of God, Acts 17.31. and shows us the foregoing tokens of
that day, beyond which there is no more time nor Gospel, as 1 Thessalonians. 5.1, 2.
Matthew. 24.22, 23, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47. Matthew. 25.31,
and. 46. 2 Pet. 3.1.2, 3, and 10, 11, 12, 13, and. 1 Cor. 15.24, 25, 26. And
what needed the Holy Ghost bid us watch and be sober, and beware that that day
come not on us unawares, and tell us, if we have not oil in our Lamps at that
nick of time, when the shout shall be given that the Bridegroom is entered in
his chamber, Matthew. 25. there is no more place for repentance, or buying oil,
or any possibility of salvation, when that day is once come; because, if the
day of judgment be now, and the rendering up the Kingdom to the Father, be
in this life, how is it that so many daily repent and escape out of the snare
of the Devil? And the market of buying oil in this life, is not passed: For
Peter, Act. 8. wills Simon Magus, while he lives, to repent and sue for
pardon. And so the time of the offered Gospel, and the day of judgment cannot
be both together Paul could never s^y, 1 Cor. 3. I could not write to you as to
spiritual, but as to ca^nall, except he meant that he wrote to some spiritual
man, nor could he say, the spiritual man discerns al things except the last
ministration, which is the spiritual ministration, were begun in the time that
Paul wrote to the Corinthians, and then began the ministration of the Spirit,
and our seeing of the Lord with open face, 2 Cor. 3. and so then was the rising
of the dead, and the rendering of the Kingdom to the Father. And where are we
now, If the d^^d have been a rising now these fifteen hundredth yea^es, and a
dying all this (...)* For Saltmarsh as^ured u^ that the (...) of the Kingdom
is not in the end of (...) ^orld, when the ful^^s^e of ^ime or ages is come,
but it is a (...) in parts, till the fullness of the stature of (...) Ephesians.
4.11, 12, 13. that we meet all in heaven, and the Lord Jesus his myst^cal body
be filled up and perfected, and so long as Pastors, teachers, and a ministry
shall be on earth, and when this shall be, the scripture tells when the end
shall come, 1 Cor. 15.24. and when all rule, power, and Authority shall be put
down, and Christ's enemies subdued, and when all things shall be subdued. Now
this is not in this life.

5 That Saltmarsh and his Spiritualists should stay under the ministration of
Ordinances of preaching, praying, believing, hearing, reading, or that they
should preach, is as unlawful as for Lot to remain in Sodom. But when is
there a ministration that Peter, Paul, and believers in this life, should pray
no more, when they are to pray continually? to hear and read no more, when
John says they are blessed who read, and Christ that they are blessed who
hear and do; and they are to watch to the end, to grow in grace?

CHAP. XX. Of the ceasing of Ordinances since the Apostles dyed as Saltmarsh
teaches.
SInce Antichrist now reigns, and Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists are no
more, Saltmarsh Sparkles of glory.
there is no warrant to labor a reformation like the Ap^stolicke times. God
has no where said he will have them restored, but he aims at a pure
spiritual worship, more glorious than that of the Apostles, when there shall be
no Temple nor Ordinances; and that place Ephesians. 4 Till we all meet in the unity
of Faith, is till he fill all things. Saltmarsh is for the cea^ing of all
ordinanc^^ since the (...) now Ap^stles ^^se.


1 ^or who (...) perfect the Saints but Christ? Apostles cannot do it, and we
(...) no Apostles now nor any of the pure gifts of the holy Ghost. Does the
scripture any where speak of Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, only for the
first age, and Pastors and teachers only for the ages after? And that of
Matthew. 28. Lo I am with you to the end of the world is (if more clearly
translated) to the finishing of the age, or that age of ministration, page 108,
109, 110, 111.

Answ. It cannot be denied but Antichrist reigns, but where? in false
Doctrine in the Protestant Churches? It is most false. We have separated from
Babylon. Nor is it true that Saltmarsh says, local separation is Legal and
Jewish, and has begotten strife and abated love, p. 53. For separation out of
Babylon cannot be Jewish, Separation from Rome lawful.
when the Lord has expressly commanded the Christians, come out of her my
people; and a Church-separation, where there is nothing found, as to come out
from the unclean Family of Love, is Christian not Jewish, except we should
communicate with the unfruitful works of darkness, and not care to defile
our garments. And Familists separation from Protestant Churches upon their own
ground must be fleshly, legal, and Jewish, and has begotten much (...) and
abated love. But any outward performance or duty done out of conscience of a
command, even not to go to Mass, not to worship Jdols, is legal to
Familists, if we do it not upon the impulsion of the Spirit separated from
the command; as for corruption in conversation, if that be the reign of
Antichrist (our separation (I confess) is to scarce) then must he reign more
in Familists the uncleanest of sects, then in the truly godly who hate the
deeds of the Nicolaitans.

2 Familists and Seekers would have no Churches reformed according to the
Apostlick pattern; because they think the Apostles legal and Jewish men, and
they judge all externals and outward Ordinances, as hearing, baptism, praying,
to be Jewish and legal, and hold that love is all. And another commandment
there ought not to be. Upon this ground I judge Antinomians say, this is the
only gospel-worke and way to believe, and there is no sin but unbelief;
adultery, murder, sodomy, covenant-breach, perjury, treachery of Arm^es,
Servants to Masters, are sins before men only, but not against God, and in
these we are obliged by no Law, but to please one another in love, adultery is
against no obligation of command, Saltmarsh free grace 193.74.14^ 154. Town
39.40. Honeycombe 95.37. Den sermon of the man of sin 9, 10.

3 Another more pure, and spiritual, and more glorious Ministration where love
and all spirit reigns, then is warranted by the Doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles, we know not. Yet Saltmarsh page 194, 195. condemns the Assembly of
Divines, There are no new lights nor doctrines more to be expected, after the
canon of holy Scripture is closed.
the seven Churches of the Anabaptists, their confession and reformation,
because they endeavor a Reformation only in some outward Ordinances, and not
any purer or more glorious discoveries of God, or union with the spirit or
glory. Why? and what cause is there? For these new discoveries and new lights
of a more pure and glorious spirit, are either warranted by the Word of God in
the Old and New Testament, or they are not warranted: If the first be said, the
Assembly and Reformed Churches, Calvin and Luther, whom Saltmarsh carpeth at,
as p. 107. dark, legal, and Jewish reformers, because they loved not the
Spirit of the Family of Love, ought to have gone no further on to reform or
measure the Temple then according to the golden Reed of the word of God.

But Saltmarsh cannot away with any reformation, but such as sets up a
firmament of new lights especially of Antinomian and Familisticall wildfire to
shine to men, and we confess we endeavor no new discoveries of that kind,
for they are not known to the Apostles, such as that the justified cannot
sin, their Adultery is no Adultery, they are as free of any indwelling sin as
Jesus Christ.

2 They are not to be touched in Conscience for sin.

3 Nor to crave pardon.

4 Nor to do any duty because commanded in the Law.

5 Nor to believe that Christ died for sinners, rose for their righteousness.

6 Or to pray continually.

7 To hear.

8 To be baptized with Water, etc.

Answ. 1. Paul says, 1 Cor. 2.1. He determined to know nothing but Jesus
Christ and him crucified, then Paul knew no discovery or new light, nor any
more spiritual way that is all spirit, and a dispensation beyond the Law and
that of the Prophets, and beyond the Gospel, which is that of the Spirit, all
spirit, and pure spirit, For Paul would have, no doubt, desired to know it,
yea, all other things (...) whatever they be, are dung and loss to him in
comparison of the super-excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord, Phil.
3.2. John the Apostle who saw so many Divine revelations and discoveries of the
spirit, if any man else, must be above Law and Gospel, and up at this highest
and most spiritual discovery: But John even in his actual visions, and
spiritual ravishments, Revel. 1.10. was never beyond sinning, and a capacity of
exhortations, consolations, and rebukes for Idolatry, as is clear, Revel.
1.16, 17. Revel 19.10. Revel. 22.8, 9. Then there can be no such pure and
spiritual dispensation to the Saints in this life as is beyond all ordinances
of exhortation, consolation, rebukes; for the Holy ghost tells us that John,
in the discoveries of God that are most spiritual, had need of these. Fear
not, I am the first and the last, and see thou do it not, I am thy
fellow servants, worship God.

2* It will be found that the anointing and the holy spirit that leads in
truth, leads by no other means then by the word preached, Romans 10.14. Esa.
59.19, 20, 21.

But if these new discoveries be not warranted by the word, they must be the
traditions of men, and argue the imperfection of the word of God; and if they
be another Gospel, then though the Apostles or an Angel from heaven preach
them, let alone Familists, we are to pronounce them as accursed, knowing well,
that the word of God is able to save our souls, John 20.31. Luke 16.29, 30, 31.
To make us perfect to salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. To convert the soul, to
make wise the simple, Psa. 19.7. and that new spirit must involve us under a
curse, and the breach of a commandment, if we add to the word of God, Revel.
22.18, 19. Deuteronomy. 12.32. chap. 4.2. Prover. 30.6. And the spirit of God bids
us not follow a rule contrary to the word.

3 There is not any in this side of Heaven that need not a Temple, nor
Ordinances, but such as need neither the light of the Sun, or of the Moon,
or of a Candel, Revel. 21.22, 23. chap. 22.5. and so are freed of their bodies,
and glorified with the Lamb, and such as see God face to face, and are not in
the dark moone-light of faith, 1 Cor. 12* 12. 2 Cor. 5.7. We read not of any
clothed with clay-bodies, all spirit, all perfect, or that can say they sin
not, Pro. 20.9. 1 John 1.8, 9, 10. Eccles. 7.20 nor of any beyond the reach of
praying, believing, growing in grace.

4 Nor can there be any more in Heaven than the perfection (...) Saints, and
the meeting of us all in the unity of Faith, unto a perfect man, and the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. For the most perfect and most
spiritual, that are all Spirit, shall have mortal and corruptible bodies till
the blowing of the last Trumpet, which must be changed in a moment, in stead of
dying, 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. and so cannot be perfect; they must be watching, and
girding up the loins of their mind, and so ruled by ordinances.

5. It is true, Christ only perfecteth, as the principal cause; but the
Apostles and Ministers of Christ present men perfect in Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2. 1 Thessalonians. 2.19, 20. and they save themselves and others, 1 Timothy 4.16.

6. We have not Apostles now so eminent in gifts, tongues, miracles; but a
Ministry there is, and believers, till Christ's second coming there shall be:
And if so, their faith must come by hearing, and hearing there cannot be
without preaching, and so ordinances of Preaching, Preachers, Sending, Romans
10.14. else the gates of hell must prevail against the Church builded on the
Rock, Matthew. 16. and therefore the Scripture warranteth us to think there were
Apostles, for the first age, and Pastors and Teachers till Christ's second
coming.

7. Saltmarsh exponeth, or rather depraveth the place, Matthew. 28.20. with the
help of the Greek Tongue: then he must be a Legalist* and in his Book give us
Sparkles of Law, Flesh, Judaisme, The place Mat. 28.19.^0. proves that a
ministry there must be, and a Church, till Christ's second coming, what ever
Seekers and Saltmarsh say on the contrary.
not of glory.

And sure his Interpretation comes not from all spirit, nor must we take his
allegories, types, corrupt glosses, phansied consequences, to be Discoveries of
pure glorious light, and all Spirit. For (...), the world, is not an age
containing the life time of the Apostles only, but it is the world. For the sin
that ( Mat. 12.32.) is said, not to be forgiven in this world, nor in the world
to come, Mark 3.29. has not forgiveness, (...), it cannot be that it has not
forgiveness for that age, because it is punished with eternal damnation.
Matthew. 21.19. Let no fruit grow on thee for ever, (...). Saltmarsh his new
Discovery of all Spirit, must say, the Fig Tree for all this might bring
forth fruit the next age. Luke 1.55. as he spoke to Abraham and his seed for
ever, John 6.51. If any man eat of this bread, he shall live, (...), for ever;
And must he but live one Age, and die the next? John 4.14. He shall not thirst
for ever. So is the same word, John 8.51. chapter 8.52.

2. Saltmarsh by this new Discovery, has found a good way to make heaven and
hell endure but for an age, and then have an end. For John 10 28. Christ's sheep
shall never (...), perish. He that lives (says Christ, John 11.26.) and
believes in me, shall, (...), never die. But do Seekers and Familists think
he shall die the next age, and live the first age? John 12.34. We have heard
that Christ abides for ever. John 14, 16. The holy Ghost abides with you,
(...), for ever. Demas has loved this present world, 2 Timothy 4.10. 2 Cor. 4.4.
Satan is called, the God of this world, (...), in opposition to the world to
come, 2 Pet. 2.17.17. To whom the mist of darkness is reserved (...), for
ever. The darkness of hell endures not for an age only.

3. And (...) is simply everlasting, and that which has no end, John 3.16. He
that believes shall not perish, (...), but has eternal life; that is, not
life for an age only. So John 3.36. John 4.14. John 4.36. He gathers fruit
to life eternal, John 5.24. John 6.40. v. 54. John 10.28. John 17.2. Acts
13.46. and ye judge your selves unworthy of eternal life. Romans 2.7. Romans 6.22.

4. The same expression that is here, notes ( the end of the world.) For it is
that endurance beyond which there is nothing but heaven and hell, Matthew. 13.40.
So shall it be in the end of the world, (...). The same expression is, v. 49.
v. 39. and the harvest is the end of the world. And Matthew. 24.3. What shall be
the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world? And here, Lo, I am with
you, (...), even till the end of the world.

5. And if Christ promised to be with his Church for an age, so as Apostles do
cease in the next age, then must there be no Saints on earth now, but only in
the first age after Christ's resurrection: For this promise of Christ's presence,
is extended not to Apostles only (for Christ walks with all true Churches,
Rev. 10.2.) but to all the faithful. Then certainly, Christ is the head of his
body the Church, Col. 1.8. but he has no body; he is a husband, but has no
wife on earth; he is a King, and a King for ever, but has neither people nor
kingdom, nor Scepter of Word or Ordinances. He reigns in the midst of his
enemies by his Word; slays the wicked with the rod of his mouth; has an
everlasting kingdom, and has dominion till all his enemies be subdued, Psalm.
110.1, 2. Psalm. 2.6.7. Heb. 1.8. Psalm. 72.7, 8, 9. Esaias 9.7. chapter 11.4. And if
there be no Ordinances, no Church, no word of righteousness preached, which is
the Scepter of his Kingdom, no Sword of the Spirit coming out at his Mouth,
no word of the Kingdom, no Ambassadors, no Ministers of the Gospel, his
Kingdom had an end above fourteen hundred years ago.

6. Now to all this we must say, Christ's order is strange. First, he led his
people through the Law, then to a purer and more glorious Gospel Dispensation,
and (say Familists) to a pure spiritual way of all Spirit. And yet after his
ascension, and ceasing of Apostles, he led them by a retrograde motion, and
^ook away all ordinances of the preached Word, all Seals, all Preachers and
witnesses, all Churches, and they have been so under a darker then a
Law-dispensation these fourteen hundred years, and shall be till men of the
Family stamp shall arise, even men that are all pure spirit, such as H.
Nicholas, and Mr. Dell, Randall and Saltmarsh, who teach that believers cannot
sin, nor confess sin, nor are to walk in any Commandment of God, nor
after any Ordinance of Word, covenant of Grace, Seals, Faith, Prayer. etc.

16. In this most pure, most spiritual manifestation of God (says he page
36.) all shall be spiritual Disciples. This ministry is of the whole body of
the Saints, not of one Tribe, or sort of men, page 51, 52. and that immediately
in all gifts and operations, without studying or industry.

Answ. Here 1. all distinction of Church Officers, which Paul says, Saltmarsh
takes away all ministry, and calling thereunto, and makes all Saints
Preachers without industry and study, in his third orb or circle of
ministration.
shall endure till we all meet in the unity of Faith, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. and is
proven from the order Christ has established, that some (not all) shall be
Apostles and Teachers, 1 Cor 12.28, 29. and only those that are sent, Romans
10.14. and only such as have such and such operations in Christ's body, 1 Corinthians. 12.19. Romans 12.4. But it is apparent, Familists dream of a
dispensation, when either Christ shall not be head, and have no body, and the
Familists so denude him of his headship; or if Christ have a body, then all the
members have the same Office, contrary to Romans 12.4. and all the body is one
member, and so no body at all, 1 Cor. 12.19. and when there shall be none to
obey in the Lord, and none to command, contrary to 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. Heb.
13.7.17. Tit. 1.5, 7, 8, 9, 10.

2. There is a clear contradiction in this, That all shall be Teachers and
Edifiers, and yet there shall be none to be taught and edified, No Temple, no
Ordinances (they are fleshly and Jewish carnalities) none but all Spirit, and
taught of God, page 88, 89. page 72, 73. page 66, 67.

3. A time in this life there must be, when Timothy shall give no attendance
to reading, and yet be a Prophet, and all men and women shall preach the Gospel
without studying. Now the Scripture speaks of no such time, and we cannot
take such a point upon tradition from Familisis.

17. The Christian is and was (says he 93, 94.) under Prelacy, Presbytery,
Baptism, Independency, etc.

Why not under Popery, Socinianisme, Arrianisme, Judaisme, and the profession
of all these? For they are Christians, believers, and saved under all
Religions, by H. Nicholas his grounds, Mr. Saltmarsh indifferent in all
external worship.
who says, we may deny Christ and Religion before men.

2. Saltmarsh says, p. 100, 101. under all these Religions (he excludes not
Gentilisme) if they wait to come up to higher revelations of the Spirit when
discovered, they are true and spiritual Disciples of Jesus Christ. This is
grace universal, given to every man to gain, and purchase by his industry and
honest merit more and more of Christ, till he come to the highest measure of
all spirit. It is known H. Nicholas established a righteousness by the Law and
works.

CHAP. XXI. The Doctrine of Saltmarsh and Familists touching Magistracy, and
Spiritual discerning of Saints amongst themselves.
Magistracy (says he, p. 135.) is a power ordained of God, an Image of the
power and judgment committed to Christ; Scripture and the gift of wisdom,
justice and righteousness, are his unction now. Page 138. They are set up more
specially to minister peace and judgment to Gods people in the flesh.

Then Nero, the great Turk, the Indian Kings, being ordained of God, Romans 3.1.
as the image of Christ, must be his submediators and under Deputies, little
spiritual Kings, and Prophets, and Priests under Chr^^t as Mediator. And who
gave the Scriptures, the Law, written Gospel, and such an unction to the Indian
Kings? for they are Magistrates. The man cannot speak of Christian Magistrates;
for Romans 13. which he cites, speaks of Nero, whose head was dry from all
unction of the Gospel, or new Testament. If the Magistrate be an Image of
Christ's power, and that power committed to him; they may under the Mediator
Christ, ministerially judge of the doctrine preached by Ministers, if true or
false. And if they be set up to minister justice more specially to Gods people
in the flesh; then the people of God in the Spirit, and in all Spirit, as
Saltmarsh says most of them all are, shall be under no Magistrate; but this he
says of all, page 288, 293, 200, 201, 202, etc. And by this every Magistrate
must be a Christian ^f an image of the Mediators power; or then no Christian,
or spiritual man can be a Magistrate.

2. They are set up to minister justice to the people of God in their flesh.
But these that are spiritual, having no flesh, how are they under Magistrates?
The flesh is to Saltmarsh that which is under Law, H.N. Spirit land, c. 34.
Sect. 8, 9 c. 37. Sect 9* c. 8 4.

One man of God ^or^eth not ov^^ another: that were slavery.


not under grace: then Saints are no more under Magistrates, then under the
Law, to him; and when they are not under the sword of the Spirit, or any
ordinances, are they under the steel sword of the Magistrate? And what
judgment minister they to Saints, in whom there is no more sin, nor in
Christ? And is a believer obliged to confess murder, paricide, adultery, to a
Magistrate who is a man, and to crave him pardon, when Saltmarsh says, he is
not to confess any sins to God, page ^92 He see^s to grant Magistracy, and
so do the Familists in their petition to King James, But it was their doctrine
there should be no Magistrate* 141, 142.

19. Spiritual men may know each other in Spirit and in Truth, as men know men
by the voice, features, statures of the outward man. Of the discerning of the
Spirits that Familists have, and certain knowledge they (...) know one anoth^r.


An. It Is true, there is a spiritual instinct that will try the spirits, but dull
in many, and cannot go in to election and reprobation, nor do Seekers, and
Familists any other thing then take their marks by the Moon, when they say,
Presbyterians, Divines of the Assembly, to their spirits, are the Antichrist,
the false Prophet.

2 Familists will have none judged Heretics, because none can see whether they
be truly Godly and selfe-condemned that hold such Doctrines. Here they say they
know one another, whether they be Saints or Heretics to be avoided, as one man
by sense knows another.

3 Let us judge none before the day: tares grow and go for wheat even to the
most spiritual.

4 The Familists of New England take on them to judge who are elect and who are
reprobate: and Saltmarsh will have one Saint to know another, as well as we know
one another by voice, features, statures of the outward man; then must the
light of this new spirit be as certain as our knowledge by sense, why then are
we bidden, try the spirits, and believe not every spirit? Peter (says he page
150, 151, 152.) walked in his fleshly appearance with his sword, not knowing
God was to call him out of that dispensation of the flesh to more glory, into
the same glory he had with God before the world was. Eye for eye, and wars, are
from the Law and legal principles.

Ans. Peter was not called to the glory that Christ had with his father before
the world was, in this life, so long as his flesh needed the defense of a
sword, except heaven and the resurrection be in this life while we are clothed
with flesh, as Familists teach.

2 Sinlesse, Gallesse, selfe-defence and defensive wars, without malice,
desire of revenge, Famil^sts are against all wars.
are perpetual moral duties under the Gospel oblieging the most spiritual
man by the sixth Commandment ( thou shall not murder) to defend his own and
brothers life from unjust violence, Ephesians. 5.28. 1 Chro. 12.1.2.22.36. 1 Samuel
26.2. 2 Kings 6.32. 1 Samuel 14.44. Pro. 24.11. So Fortunius Garcias Comment. in
l. ut vim vi ff. de justit and jure. So the Law l. Gener. c. de decur. l. 10.
l. si alius bellissime ubique gloss. in verse. etc. Ferdin. Vasquez. illustr.
question. l. 1. c. 8.11.18. the Gospel, the spirit loses no man from the Law
of nature ( thou shall not murder).

2 Eye for eye, was a judicial Law, falsely exponed by the Pharisees to
maintatne hatred of our enemy, and private revenge, which both Law and Gospel
forbids.

3 If because we are clothed with flesh, we may not in an innocent way defend
our selves, as the worms and all beasts do, but the Gospel must forbid this,
the Gospel must forbid to eat, drink, sleep, cloth our selves.

4 Saltmarsh in this condemns Christians and Familists to bear arms, or to
be Magistrates, the contrary of which is their daily practice, ( preserve thy
self) and ( deny thy self) are nor contrary as Saltmarsh imagines, page 160.
nor did God ever command contraries in Law and Gospel.

CHAP. XXII. The highest discovery Familists have of Christ, to wit, that he is
a man only figuratively not true man.
OF the highest and last discovery of God to man says Saltm. 201. They say
(speakinge of Familists) Adam was a way by which God preached first to man, and
was not the first man in whom all stood and fell, The first and second Adam men
only in figures not truly and realy by the way of Saltmarsh.
but a way by which this mystery of God was made to appear first to the
creation, and Adam held forth nature or a part of this creation in communion
with God as to grace and love while he stood, and another part of the creation
or nature out of communion with God, as to love and grace, (he should say as to
no love, no grace) but in communion or union to God as to Law and Justice, and
thus they interpret these scriptures of man's first glory, and fall, less in
the very letter, and more in the mystery, and in this twofold state were all
the rest, Cain and Abel etc. -- They say the Gospel or fullness of time of the
clearer discovery of this mystery was the Lord Jesus himself, or God
manifested in the flesh, or as in one man, a figure of the whole mystery, as to
grace and love, or God in flesh, or in his; or of God in that other part of his
creation his Church or Saints -- And all that Christ did from his childhood to
his crucifing, death, and cross, was a discovery of God by this figure in the
whole mystery, how God is in all his, and how he works, and has his times of
law and of graces, and gospel, of crucifing and offering up all to death
through the eternal spirit which is the blood of the everlasting Covenant, or
Seal, whereby God witnesses to his people, that he is their God, and they his
people, by killing all the strength, and life, and power of the first creation,
and carrying it up into a more excellent life, his own Spirit: And so all
Christ's birth, growing, submitting to ordinanecs, crucifying, death, burial,
resurrection, ascension, were so many discoveries as to us in the flesh, of the
whole mystery of God in the Saints, made out in these parts and degrees, and
several ages and conditions, to show how God weakens and brings to nothing the
life of nature, or of this creation in which he will dwell, and make his
Tabernacle, and carry it up into a higher and more excellent life, even
himself and his own glory: So, as they say, all that is spoken of Christ, as
in that person that was born of a virgin, who was crucified, dead and buried,
risen and ascended, is spoken in figure, (in a myst^ry* an ^llegory, not in
Christ as a true real man) of the (...) into which God enters, or is born into
the world, and so (...) along with him, through several admini^trations into
(...).

Answ. In all this observe a greater and higher mystery of Familists then in
Antinomians, though they be birds of the same nest. Saltmarsh speaks of them
in the third person* that he may seem not to own them, but they are his own
Sparkles of vain glory, while as he would speak his Antinomianisme and
Familisme, in so high, mysterious, su^lime a strain, so far above and beyond
the L^tter, and written Scripture, that Mr. Gattaker, and those whom he calls
Legali^ts, do not understand him, page 320 3^1* The same very thing says
Calvin of Libertines, They used strange and dark language, so prating of
Spiritual things, that they could not be understood Instruct. adve^s.
Libertinos, cap, 3. in Opus^* p 435. Caeterum obscuro and peregrino sermon
utebantur, ut de rebus spiritualibus ob^annientes minime intelligi possent
Libertini. But lest this high and last discovery of the Spirit, should not be
known to all the Familists of England, he will reveal it them, and in print
too, to all Legalists, whereas before we heard Familists reveal their secrets,
but to some few of the perfect^^^ of their own Tribe. So H. Nicholas tells us,
Exhor. 1. c. 6. Sect. 5.7 8, 9. And in his Elidad. Sect. 5.

But 1. there is nothing of the first Adams sin imputed to us: that is
plainly denied: They say Adam was a way, that is, a figure, mystery, or
example, by which God preached first to man, Law, Justice and Wrath, and was
not the first man in whom all stood and fell. What then? He was not a material
man at all, it was no tree, no fruit, no eating material or bodily. For all
that is according to the Familists way, to expone the word in the letter and
flesh, not in the Spirit. For says he, thus they interpret (...) Scriptures of
man's first glory and fall, less in the very Letter, and more in the mystery.
So to expone all the histories of the first Adam, and of Christ, not in the
Historical, Literal, and Grammatical sense, but in the Mysterious,
Allegorical, and Spiritual sense, is the way of Legalists; who (say they)
follow the Letter, and know nothing of the Spirit; but the Letter kills, and
the Spirit quickneth. Read Philosophy dissected, and the pieces called
Theologia Germanica, and the Bright Star, and H. Nicholas his Exhortations and
Documentals, and you shall find strange Allegories. And Saltmarsh is as Monkish
in Allegories as they.

2. Antinomians tell us often of imputed righteousness, which supposes Christ
was a true real Man, and God-Man in one person, and that we are saved by the
merit an satisfaction of his obedience and death imputed to us. But Saltmarsh
and Familists her^ tell us, Christ is a mere figure, sampler, document or
example only, in which God discovers to us grace and love, And, all that is
spoken of Christ as in that person, (not in that person really, but
figuratively as in that person) that was borne of a virgin, who was
circumcised* etc. is spoken in figure of the whole nature. What? Was not Christ
real and very Man, our only surety, Mediator, High Priest, who offered a real
sacrifice for us? Is he nothing but a figure? and if Adam was not the first man
in whom all stood and fell, so that all have sinned in him, neither can Christ
be the second Man, in whom all his sons are justified, redeemed, and saved.
But Familists deny that Adam was the first man in whom all stood and fell, as
Saltmarsh told us before, and therefore Familists deny that doctrine of the
first and second Adam, Romans 5. and 1 Cor, 15.

3. It is a mystery, that all that Christ did from his childhood to his
crucifying, death, and cross, was a discove^y of God by this Figure in the
whole mystery, how God is in all his, and works and has his times of
Law-crucifying, etc. Was his crucifying but a discovery, or a document of God
by this figure? The Scripture rises higher: He was wounded for our
transgression, he was bruised for our iniquity, the chastisement of our peace
was upon him, with his stripes we are healed, Esai. 53. And him that knew no
sin, God made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God
in him, as it is 2 Cor. 5.21. And in his own self on the tree he bare our
sins, 1 Pet. 2.24. The Familists make Christ a discovery, and a teaching
figure, not a true Man. The Socinians make him a Man, but a mere example of
patient suffering, if we follow him, his example will save us; but they denied
he paid a real satisfactory ransom to Gods justice for us.

4. By Christ's death (say they) God witnesses to his people that he is their
God and they his people, by killing all their strength and life, and power of
the first creation, and carrying it up to a more excellent and glorious life,
his own Spirit. How killed Christ the strength, life and power of the first
creation? Christ is but a figure, and Christ but suffers (says Gortine) and
dies in us, when we who bear his Image (For Man says Saltmarsh, p. 3, 4. is
created according to the Image of God, which was Jesus Christ) do suffer and
die, for God cannot die. And to this agrees well what Saltmarsh says, p. 288.
Others say (he himself and Familists, in opposition to Protestants, who make
Gospel-administration to stand in repentance, faith, sanctification
justification, 285, 286. the mystery of salvation is no other then Immanuel, or
God with us, Christ being no more but an anointed one, and that anointed one is
our nature or weakness, anointed with the Spirit, even God himself who is
strength. And this mystery of great and exceeding glory, is revealed in pieces
and parts, and after the manner of men, according to the infirmity of our
flesh, within the Christian in graces, etc. and in the Scriptures, or
expressions and forms without the Christian: then is Christ crucified nothing
but a believer graced within with Gods Image. And p. 283. he says, O how does
the pure appearance of God power shame upon all flesh, and fleshly glory, --
Either by letter or by graces, the day of the Lord will be upon all our Cedars
and Oaks. Now a Saint anointed, is God manifested in the flesh to Saltmarsh,
and will the Lord power shame on God manifested in the flesh? or is the day of
the Lord against Christ ^evealed within the Christian in graces, and in the
Scriptures without the Christian? Then is Gods wrath kindled against grace
within, and Scripture without; brave Divinity. The Scripture says not, that
Christ on the Cross killed the strength, life, and power of the first
creation, that is, Gospel Grace, believing, and God manifested in the Saints,
that is, the new creature in them; and the first creation, that is, as they
say, the natu^rall faculties of knowing, willing, nilling; so as the holy
Ghost, and the Lord Jesus must come in place of these faculties, and in us,
love, fear, believe rejoice; and we and all our powers that we had in
creation, must be dead passive organs; Industry, Arts, Sciences, Tongues,
Laboring, acting of Duties, quite removed, as flesh and corruption, and we
turned in all spirit. See Rise reign, Er. 1, 2. For Saltm. says, Sparkles of
Glory, 230, 231. all other askings or seekings of God, which are not thus in
Spirit, or in the will or mind of God, in some evidence or pure work of the
Spirit, is but the askings of creatures, as creatures. All exhortations in
Scripture to this duty, as, Seek ye my face, Pray continually, are only then
rightly, effectually, and properly applied and obeyed, when the Spirit of God
does it in the Christian, when the Spirit of God breathes in, and reveals the
will of God, and acts in the duty, or expressions, and the Christian speaks in
himself, or the presence of others, that mind of God, and so the Spirit of God
clothes it self in flesh, or letter, or expressions as to the outward man. If
by a pure work of the Spirit, Saltmarsh mean, that the Spirit acts as the
principal determining, moving, acting cause, carrying on the work so, as our
Spirit, and natural faculties of mind, will, affection, have their own
subordinate, and inferior active influence in the work, the holy Ghost helping
our infirmities, it is good; but this is no new light, nor Familisticall secret
of all Spirit, but that which Protestants teach against Den, and other
Arminians, and old liers, and new lights. But ^ fear, a pure work of the
Spirit, is as much as the Spirit acts purely, wholly, only, in praying, and all
supernatural acts, and the natural faculties, strength, power and life of the
first creation are destroyed and annihilated, so as we are dead passive Organs,
doing nothing, but the Spirit does all, as Libertines say: Second causes work
nothing, but God, as the soul of all, works all in all creatures. This is the
secret, and so the praying, and all the supernatural duties of believers, are
pure works of the Spirit, and works of all Spirit, and perfect according to the
rigor of the Law: for the acts of the pure Spirit admitting of no retardment,
pollution, or sin from our nature, must be as perfect as pure works of
Angels. And if our natural faculties be not wholly dead, they are but acts of
the creature, as the creature: then are all our supernatural personal duties,
no less perfect and sinlesse, then the imputed righteousness and actings of
Christ. 2. Then the holy Spirit only, is to be blamed, when either the Saints
pray not, or pray not in the Spirit, or not with that fervor, faith, feeling,
and pure spirituality that God requires in his holy word: this, if any thing,
is a pillow of security.

3. So all the exhortations to pray continually, to act and work out our
salvation in fear, to love the brethren, must be given to the holy Ghost, not
to us: the contrary whereof is evident, we the Saints (not God, not the Spirit
of God) are exhorted to praying, and acts supernatural, which cannot be if the
Saints have no more active influence in all these, then stones and blocks have;
for that is none at all: then are we mere passive and dead in all these* then
must a praying Christian be God, or his Spirit manifested in the flesh, as to
this; and a Christian believing, praising, is the like.

CHAP. XXIII. Praying a Law-bondage, the letter of the word no obliging Rule to
those that are in the Spirit, by the way of Saltmarsh.
22. WHile Christians are in bondage, Praying is to Familists a part of Legal
bondage.
and not yet brought into the glorious liberty of the sons of God, Romans 8.
they are under the ministration of prayer, as children are to a Father in
nonage vnd ^upillage. Sparkles, p. 232.

A. His sense is, that the Saints may be in a state of not praying at all in
this life; but taking bondage for a state of frailty, and absence from God, it
is true, praying argues some Bondage, and want of full and complete
redemption, that we, as women traveling in birth, long after. But Saltmarsh
means of Legal Bondage and fear of the curse, and fleshly and carnal
fear, and most blasphemously he makes Paul's thrice praying to remove the
Messenger of Satan, and Christ's thrice praying, O my Father, if it be possible,
remove this cup, not be praying in the sp^irit, but in weakness, or the flesh,
according to their own wills; which must make praying in faith to be in the
same act, praying out of legal and fleshly unbelief, and make Christ under a
fit of unbelief, and not to pray in the Spirit, when he said, Remove this Cup,
etc. Now Saltmarsh could not have brought a place more against himself, to
prove that prayer is not a fit of Legal bondage, then Romans 8. For it is said,
v. 15. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but the
spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.

23. The mere Commandments and letter of Scripture, is not a Law to a
Christian, Saltmarsh holds that neither written law nor Gospel is any
obliging Rule to the creature.
why he should walk in duties, but the law written in our hearts, Sparkles,
page 243, 245.

Ans. Then the written Gospel, and promises of the new Covenant, obliges not a
believer to pray, believe, give alms, or not to kill his father or King; but
when the H. Ghost breaths in the soul to do these duties, then if a
believer whore, swear, kill, rob, blaspheme, misbeleeve, etc. he sins not
against any command in Law or Gospel, because the holy Spirit acted him not to
abstain, and God the holy Ghost is the only cause of all the sins of the
Saints, because he concurres not with more then the letter, even with saving
grace, to prevent these sins. We sin not in not praying, not believing,
when the grace of God joins not; then a man being in Christ, may whore, rob,
blaspheme, misbeleeve, etc. if God will be wanting to him with his flowings, and
out^shinings of free grace, let him see to it, blame himself, he fails against
no Law, Commandment, or Obligation. Libertines taught the very same, to wit,
That God is the only cause of sin, Calvin Inst. advers. Libert, c. 13. c. 14.
c. 15. p 445, 446, 447, 448.
no creature, Man nor Angel is to be rebuked or punished for sin, God sins in
them. Oh blasphemy! 2. We never said, that the mere Commandments and Letter of
the Scripture, is our obliging rule, as the Letter is a thing of Ink, and a
Paper, divided from the natural and genuine sense, but as it includes the
things signified, and as it expresses to us what is the good, perfect, and
acceptable will of God: which will obliges Christians with an obligation
different from any obligation that the L^w written in the heart lays on us.
But this is as much as when a Sectary being justified, robs and kills the
innocent, he fails nothing against this written commandment, ( Thou shall not
murder) and a Saint cannot sin, yea if the Law written in the heart, excite
him not to ab^taine, he sins against no commandment of God; but the Law
written in the heart, is the new creation as acting, which cannot be a Regula,
or Rule, but a regulatum, a thing ruled; and this is to make the Spirit within
us, not the spirit as speaking in the Word, the formal object of our faith,
the Judge of controversies, and that is then lawful, that every unwarranted
spirit bids us do and believe.

3. The Law written in our hearts, is either an obliging Law to the Christian,
because it is only written in the heart, or because it is written in the
Scripture, or agreeable to that which is written in the Scripture: If the
former be said, then is the impulsion of the Spirit in the heart, without any
relation to the Word, our warrant; this is nothing but Scripture less
revelation, if then a Spirit in the heart, command Becold and Knippe^d^^ing to
^oe a^ts of murder and Rebellion, ^s they did, they (...) in not obeying these
impulsions, which yet are contrary to the revealed will of God. Now it is a
contradiction i^ one and the same act, to obey the revealed will of God, and
that lawfully, and not to obey it, and that also lawfully. If this heart-law be
an obliging law, because it is also written in the Scripture, then is the mere
Commandemement and Letter of the Scripture, the last obliging law at least to a
Christian. And then yet when the Spirit does not conjoyne his sweetest
breathings to procure in us an holy abstinence from murder, harlotry, perjury;
but the Christian falls in these sins, he sins not, because no man sins,
when he does what he is not obliged to forbear, or not to do: For every one
that sins, does against an obliging Rule. But when there is no inspiration,
nor actual moving or stirring law in the heart, there is no obliging Rule at
all that the Christian can contravene: For if the law in the heart be the only
Rule that obliges a Christian, it must oblige as it stirs and moves us,
then when it stirs or works not, it is no Rule; and if so, in all the sins
committed by Christians, be they never so hey^ous, the Christian sins not;
for he go^s against no Law, no^ any obligi^g Commandment.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Indulgence of sinning under Law and Gospel, granted by the
Familists.
GOd had a time before Christ came in the Spirit, as he had before Christ came
in the flesh, in which he suffered with patience their sins; so -- now under
Episcopacie, Independency, Presbytery, he uses much forbearance; but he has a
time in which he will judge the world, and destroy Antichrist, and then shall
all the Saints Indulgencies cease to all these things under which they are
walking, some in conscience, some in liberty. Sparkles, 251, 252, 253.

Answ. The Scripture speaks of no Indulgency to sinning after the revealed
Gospel; because after his ascension he came both in the flesh and Spirit, and
men have no excuse for their sins. Acts 14.16. Acts 17.30. In times of
ignorance God winked, but now, even in Paul's time, he commands all to repent. 2
Cor. 6.2. Behold now is the day of salvation. And Romans 13.12. Now the night is
far spent, and the day is at hand. The Gospel day is dawn, a day of the Spirit
beyond the Gospel day the Scripture knows not, except the incomming of the
Jews, which is a Gospel day, in which the Moon light shall be as the Sun in
his full strength.

2. Here is a new Familistical day of judgment begun in this life, and why not
also the Libertine and Nicolaitan resurrection in this life?

3. Sinning in conscience and liberty excuses no sin, nor can Saints sin
at all in the Antinomian way, as is proven, and shall be hereafter, God
willing. Now under Episcop^cie must God give dispensations to Prel^ticall
Saint^, under that Antichristian ministration, to bow to Altars, and (...), to
all their Popery that now they profess and practice, and they sin not in that
case; yea, and such walk with God in all ^is removes, p. 316. and in all
outward religious Administrations, page 314. and even following Popery.

CHAP. XXV. Familists will have us to be very Christ or Christed and Godded.
25 SOme say, CHRIST in us is no other then the habit of grace, and such a work
of sanctification wrought by the graces of the Spirit, We are Christ, and made
very Christ, and God manifested in the flesh by the Familists way.
and this they say, is CHRIST formed in us. This the Protestant Generally.
Others say, CHRIST in us is, when we are made the anointed of God, which is
Christ, or the whole entire Christ, as one spiritual new man, 1 Cor. 12.12.
and that the Image of Christ in us, is Christ manifested in our flesh as to
sufferings, and death, whereby the flesh is crucified in the power of God, and
of the Spirit, the outward man or flesh dying daily, and it is no more we that
live, but Christ manifested in us, as in resurrection, Sparkles, 255, 256.

Answ. Saltmarsh here quits the Protestant, but leaves him with a slander and
blot, that Christ in a Christian is but a habit of mortification: but he
speaks nothing of imputed righteousness, and Christ living by faith in the
heart, which he knows the Protestant teaches to be Christ in the Saints, the
hope of glory.

2. He takes him to H. Nicholas, and makes every Saint one entire whole
Christ, and the whole mystical body of the Catholic Church in every believer,
1 Cor. 12.12. that is, every man is Christ, and God manifested in the flesh,
and Godded with God, and Christed with Christ in suffering: and this is all the
incarnation of God, and crucifying of the Lord of glory, that Saltmarsh will
allow us. But we believe Christ died, and rose, and in our flesh is sitting at
the right hand of God, and withal, that in a spiritual manner he dwells in us
by faith, clothing a sinner in his whites of glory, and breathing, living,
acting in him as in a Tabernacle, a redeemed and graced palace, which he will
cast down, and raise up at the last day, and plaster, and more then over-gold
with finest purest glory; This is Christ in us, the hope of Glory.

CHAP. XXVI. The Familists fancy of our passing from one ministration to
another of higher glory in this life, and the Lords Prayer, and Christian
Sabbath.
27 THere is a fiery trial of the Spirit, Sparkles of glory, 256, 57
1 Cor. 3.13.15. 2 Pet. 3.10. Rev. 2.9. in which a Christian passing from Law
to Gospel, and from a Gospel state of graces, gifts and ordinances, to more
glorious manifestations of God, and all Spirit, burns and crucifieth all his
former works and ministrations, as vile and nothing. Familists fancy a day o^
judgment in this life, in which we cast of all our former ministrations, and
enter into a new ministration of all Spirit and glory.


Answ. Law or Gospel-merit, are daily to be burnt and trampled under foot, and
not only when we pass from Law to Gospel, except men under the old Testament
be saved by Law-righteousnesse.

2. When we pass from Law to Gospel, we leave shadows, and approach nearer to
the Sun, and the night-torches of ceremonies are blown out, because the day
dawneth. But that we are to admit new lights contradicent to the old, is an
untruth: there was ever the same truth from the beginning, 1 John 1.1. Jer.
6.16. Genesis 3.16. Heb. 13.8. neither Christ nor Truth wears out of fashion, the
matter is not thus.

It was not of old, Confess sin, and now it is sin to Saints to confess
sin. Nor was it of old, that David was justified by works; but now Paul is
justified without works by the imputed righteousness of Christ. Nor was it of
old, a pardoned man can sin, and is forbidden to murder; but now a pardoned
man can not sin, and no written law forbids a Saint to murder. Thus, we burn
no, we crucify no truths, no acts of righteousness, the grace of God commands
them now, as then, Tit. 2.11.12. and never bad crucify them. Thus we wash our
hands of new lights, or rather new lies, contradicent to old truths; new and
clearer manifestations of ancient Christ, are our new lights.

2. 1 Cor. 3. There is no passing from Law to Gospel, the Law and Gospel Truths
are never called Hay and Stubble, and opposed to silver and gold; truth is not
opposed to truth.

2. God burns that trash, law-merits we are to burn.

3. That hay is laid upon a golden foundation, Christ; Law or Gospel-merits are
not builded on Christ: the Spirit expones not this text so as Saltmarsh does.

3. It is Saltmarsh his hap to misexpone all places for the last judgment, and
the resurrection of the body. I dare say, the Spirit of truth never minded his
passing from one ministration to another, 2 Pet. 3. the burning of the earth,
and the works of it, is not men's burning of all their works. For 1. Scoffers
mock the last day, and the promise of Christ's coming, but not the joyful day
of their passing from their scoffing, merits, selfe-righteousnesse, to a new
ministration of glory. 2. Peter minded a real, not metaphorical destroying of
the world in Noah's time, not with figurative, but most real waters, and from
that of burning the earth with fire really, not figuratively. 3. The whole
frame of the creation here is put out of order, v. 10.11. 4. It is the day that
shall come as a Thief in the night; which is the day of judgment, Matthew.
24.43, 44. 1 Thessalonians. 5.1.2. 5. It is the day before which God will gather in his
own, willing them to be saved. 6. It is called, The day of the Lord, v. 4.9,
10. I should not spend time to refute such new dreams.

Of the Lords Prayer.
28. Page 262, 263. Saltmarsh censures the Lords Prayer, as a legal piece,
because it says, Our Father which art in heaven; but as we are not to dream
of a local God, so neither should our thoughts be creeping low, and clayie in
prayer.

29. The Spiritual Christian knows no Sabbath but the bosom of the Father,
266.

Answ. No wonder Antinomians destroy the fourth Commandment, they destroy the
other nine, Saltmarsh and Familists are against the Lords day.
and all the letter of the Bible, as fleshly, and a killing Letter. I believe
the Lords day is moral and perpetually moral till Christ's coming, from Genesis
2.2. Exodus 20.8* Deuteronomy. 5.12. Matthew. 24.20. John 19.42. Luke 24.56. 1 Cor. 16.1.
Acts 20.7. Rev. 1.10. Let Saltmarsh and Familists call for the book of sports
on the Lords day: I knew never any truly Godly in either Kingdom despise the
Lords day.

30. The Scriptures, or writings, are the true Scriptures; Familists are
against the written Scripture.
not as they are merely in their Grammatical construction and sense, or common
reading, which any that understand the Hebrew and Greek may perceive. And
according to such and such interpretations, are not to be imposed as mere
things of Faith and Fundamentals; Sparkles, 269.
but so far as the Spirit of God reveals them to be the very mind of God,
else they are received for the authority of Man. The Pharisees had the
Scriptures in the Letter.

Answ. Scriptures are not the word of God, but in their Grammatical sense and
reading; otherwise Jews and Pharisees have not the Scriptures in the letter,
that is, in the true literal sense; for the Pharisees corrupted the
Scriptures, and made them null: the literal sense is the most spiritual
sense, because Familisticall and Popish allegories, and new-light-senses, are
wildfire, not Gods word. Saltmarsh and H.N. do as corruptly also expone
Scripture as the Pharisees did of old. For example, 1 Timothy 3. God manifested in
the flesh, and Zach. 13.3, 4, 5. and 2 Pet. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. and Romans 5. that
notable place concerning the first and second Adam, and 2 Thessalonians. 2. and the
place, Rev. 11.1, 2. where Saltmarsh says, p. 17. the outer Court of the
Temple, trodden upon by the Gentiles, is the flesh and first creation, and all
outward administrations, and many the like, so as they leave off to be the word
of God, being abused by their fantastical allegories and senses, that are not
the mind of the Spirit, nor his scope.

2. If ye receive not Fundamentals, but in so far, as the Spirit reveals them
in the literal sense, ye do well. But a natural Spirit may receive the
Orthodox sound sense, and be far from inward revelation, that makes the word
effectual.

3. We will no man to receive the Word beleevingly, because men or Churches
command so to do. But of this before: the same is Swenckfields argument.

CHAP. XXVII. How Ordinances and the letter of the Word are Instruments of
conveying of Christ and his grace ^o us, and neither adored of us, nor useless
to us.
31. NO outward Ordinance or Ministration of the Creature, or of Letter, can
convey or confer any spiritual thing, they are but images or shadows of
spiritual things, the seeing of things darkly, as in a glass, 1 Cor. 13.
Sparkles of glory, p. 247.

Answ. This is that which Swenckfield and Mr. Dell, and all Libertines teach,
that the written, read, and preached Word, is no instrument of saving souls;
because it is not an effectual instrument without the Spirit; but the word
internal, or the Spirit within teaching, must be all; then is every man's
inward word, Spirit, Conscience, his Bible, Rule and obliging L^w: and every
man is obliged to follow his blind guide, his conscienc^, and then he is not
infallible. Hence no compulsion in matters of Conscience; yea, nor in Polygamy,
murder, For the Word is no Rule, say Familists.

2. There is not one faith, but every man has a faith and Religion of his own,
by which he is saved.

32 Saltmarsh now rises higher, for whereas he said, Free grace c. 49. p. 179,
180. To do any thing merely as commanded from the power of an outward
commandment, brings but forth legal and mixed service, or at best finer
hypocrisy. Now he says in his Sparkles of glory, now the outward Ordinance
or ministration of the creature or of the letter cannot convey spiritual
things to us, and epist. to the Reader p. 6. The other opinion (of Protestants)
is that the letting up of such a form (of worshipping God in ordinances,
scripture, letter of the word, praying, faith, habits of graces, etc.) is an
immediate way of fixing God and his Spirit upon it; which is indeed, a finer
kind of Idolatry, The mind of Saltmarsh and his Familists concerning
ordinances such as scripture, praying, preaching, sacraments etc.
to conceive that God enters into out^ard things, and conveys his alglorious
and allmighty spirit by them, when as they are only signs, figures, and
Images of more spiritual things enjoyed, or to be enjoyed, and that of Gods
appearance, and conveyance of himself in outward things according to this
opinion, is such as the Papists hold, as to Images, etc. Or things conferring
grace ex opere operato, and all Idolaters accordingly conceiving that God
immediately informs and glorifies, and spiritualizeth those forms and figures
to the beholders; as the Israelites when the Calfe was made cried these are thy
Gods O Israel.

I know Ordinances used in their true nature and as things that are the
parables, figures, and types of spiritual things, are not to be rejected, but
many Christians do sweetly partake of them in this their estate of weakness
or bondage, wherein God makes heavenly things appear by earthly, that men as
Thomas may see and believe, though blessed are they that have not seen, and
yet do believe. -- Th^re is something of the mystery of God in this, and
som^thing of a mystery of Satan in it: That of God is this, that the Lord does
in much wisdom suffer the weakness of some spiritual men to come forth, and
by this he carries spiritual things in more mystery, and manageth the glory
of his spirit through ways and things which are an offense and scandal before
the world, by which some stumble and fall and are broken, Christ was set up for
the falling as well as rising of many in Israel. That of Satan is this, of
reproaching the pure spirit of God by reproaches, viz. Of praying by the
spirit, and preaching by the spirit, and new revelations, and new lights, thus
making the world blaspheme, and the weaker Saints afraid of the glory of the
spirit* lest it prove delusions.

Answ. Here is, good Reader, a more avowed reproaching of the wisdom of God in
Ordinances, Familists and Antinomians willingly mistake and pervert Scripture,
while they conceive the letter that kills (which is the Law of works, as
opposed to the Gospel, and nothing else,) to be the whole Ordinances of God as
in forms, that is, the written scriptures, praying, preaching, seals,
hearing, conference, and that if we believe, God conveys his spirit in, or by
these, What is meant by le^ter and Spirit in the Gospel.
we are Idolaters and worship God in forms, images and signs: the very
Doctrine of H. Nicholas, but Romans 7.6. the oldnesse of the letter is the law
commanding entire and absolutely perfect obedience under a curse, and having no
promise of the spirit and grace, to obey, and this oldnesse of the letter is
the mere letter of the law, as law-holding us as the Sons of the old Adam
under condemnation. And the newness of the spirit is the grace of the Gospel
inabling us to obey what the law commands, and whereas we cannot obey
perfectly, assuring us we are under a new Husband and Surety who by his merits
takes away the guilt of our sin, for the oldnesse of the letter is opposed to
the newness of the spirit in the Text, as two contrary states, to wit, the
state of Law, and the state of Grace, which are as two contrary Husbands, the
one saving, the other condemning.

But the oldnesse of the letter, or of the law is not contrary to the
ordinances of scripture, Hearing, Praying, Sacraments; for then the law should
condemn and forbid all these, which it does not.

2 Because Paul had called the Law the oldnesse of the letter, some might say,
then the Law is essentially an ill thing, and sin. He answers, ver. 7. What
shall we say then? is the Law sin? God forbid. Then it is clear, by the
oldnesse of the letter, he meant the law.

3 The oldnesse of the letter is opposed in the Text to the newness of the
spirit, then the oldnesse of the letter cannot be ordinances, scripture, the
letter of the Law and Gospel, the written and preached word, for the written
and preached word is never opposed to the grace of Christ, or the renewing
spirit. The word and spirit are diverse, never opposite or contrary. And 2 Cor.
3. the letter is not the written word, and seals, and ordinances, and
Ministers preaching the Gospel.

1 Because Paul says expressly, God has made us able Ministers of the new
Testament. Now sure, in this sense, they were Ministers of the letter to the
far largest part to whom they preached, yea the savor of death unto death, 2
Cor. 2.16. and their Gospel hid, and so a mere letter to these that perish,
yea, and to the most part to a world, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. but they were Mininisters
of the spirit, not of the letter, not because they preached not the letter, and
external word of the cross to the effectually called, for the contrary is
said, 1 Cor. 1.23. and if the letter be ordinances, the Apostles were Ministers
of the letter to all saved, and not saved; for word, and seals, and Law, and
Gospel, were written, spoken, preached, held forth by the Apostles, to both
saved, and lost in the visible Church. But Paul expressly denies that they were
Ministers of the letter, but of the spirit.

2 The letter is the ministration of death. The ministration of death, written
on stones only; And not on fleshly tables of the heart, not the Law written in
the inward parts. Jer. 31. For this Law on stones, is the Law commanding, but
promising no grace to obey, and commanding all, and perfect obedience under a
curse and eternal wrath, and for that a killing letter, yea, for that, the
ministration of death, the letter is not then new Testament ordinances, as the
written and preached Gospel and seals of the Covenant, for as these are
written on paper, and not on the heart, they are also a killing letter, but not
in the Apostles sense, and yet the Apostles were Ministers of the new Testament
in these, to those that were lost and to those that were saved.

3 The ministration of death had a glory that Israel could not behold, and if a
glory then a spiritualnesse, as it is v. 7. and v. 9: it is called glory, but
letters graven on stones are dead of themselves, and have no glory at all,
except in the thing signified, then the written Law, as it is here spoken of,
is not a naked sign, figure, and shadow, But a spiritual ordinance including
the thing signified, and so something of God, and therefore the Letter or
ministration of death here, cannot be so large as all written or preached
ordinances and seals, and that as they are mere forms, types, figures.

4 The letter spoken of here, v. 11 is done away and opposed to that which
remains, and is not done away, but the letter of the written Law, and the
Ordinance of the Gospel, preaching of Christ, and the seals of the new
Covenant, and expressly the Lords Supper, are not in this sense a letter, a
mere sign, figure, and shadow, for they are not done away. The old and new
Testament do remain, and must be preached till Christ's second coming. Yea,
that the letter and outward ordinances are not done away, as Moses his veil,
and his shaddows and types, is most evident in that John who wrote after the
ministration of the Spirit was come, and to these who have the anointing that
teach them all things, 1 John 2.27. says expressly, 1 John 1.3. we declare unto
you (by writing) the word of life, 1 John 2.1. I write these ver. 12. I write
to you little Children, 13. I write to you Fathers, 14. I have written, 26.
These things have I written to you concerning them that seduce you, and Paul
must be a Minister of the letter in all the Epistles he wrote to the Churches
by this way.

5 The Gospel and new Testament Ordinances are delivered with much plainness
of speech, v. 12. and the old Testament is yet to be read, and far more the new
Testament is to be read and preached, as is clear v. 14. Then the letter
cannot comprehend all Ordinances, and old and new Testament in their forms,
and preaching to be done away, as Familists dream.

2 As touching the supposed Idolatry of serving God in Ordinances, written,
read, and preached Scriptures of the old and new Testament. 1. We do not
include and imprison the infinite God who is incomprehensible in sounds,
letters, written or spoken; in creatures, Sacraments, that are not God (we
confess) but holy and warrantable Ordinances of God, for we are here to do as
God himself does, for we teach no man to fix or pin the Almighty within his
ordinances, the way of the Spirit with the word we dare not determine, but the
Spirit goes along with the word, the Lord puts his word and his Spirit in
the holy seed in Covenant with him, Esa. 59.21. The foolishness of preaching
is a mean to save 1 Cor. 1.23.18. And if it be Idolatry to serve God in his own
Ordinances. Familists stumble the same way at preaching, calling it Idolatry,
as these that were lost break their necks upon the preaching of the Gospel as
foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.18.23. And these that stumbled at the word, 1 Pet.
1.2.8. stumbled not at the internal word and the law written in their heart,
the only word of Swinckefeld and Familists, Saltmarsh and Familists call it
Idolatry to se^ve God in ordinances, the contrary is proven.
but at the external word preached, for they never knew the internal word. 2.
When (says he) Protestants set up such a form of worshipping God (in
Ordinances, hearing, searching the Scriptures, reading, praying, seals) it is
an immediate way of fixing God and his Spirit upon it, and indeed a finer kind
of Idolatry to conceive that God enters into outward things; he means the
written and preached Scriptures, Sacraments, praying, hearing, etc. so the
Antichristian Beast H. Nicholas speaks, Evangely, or joyful message of the
Kingdom, chap. 34. But the while now that the Figurative Services and
ceremonies of the Christians flourished in their vigor, he has raised up me H.
N. H. Nicholas means hearing, reading of Scrip^ures, and all outward
Ordinances, which he calls Figurative Services and Ceremonies; and Saltmarsh
says, worshipping God according to the Scriptures, is an immediate way of
fixing God and his Spirit to this form. To Scriptures and Ordinances then he
gives us his good leave, except we would be finer Idolaters to follow the
Spirit without and beside the Scripture. For the Scripture is but a Form, and a
thing of Figures and Letters: And though the Lord and his Spirit be not tied or
fixed to Scriptures, yet are we tied to the Law and Testimony; and if any
spirit, any Apostle Paul, any H. N. or Saltmarsh, will lead us by a Spirit,
with another Gospel, we pronounce him accursed, Esaias 8.20. Gal. 1.8. 2 John 10.

3. We confess, if to tremble at the Word, as Josiah did, 2 Kings 22.19. and
these in whom God dwells, Esaias 66.1, 2. Esaias 57.15. be a making of an Idol
of the Word, and a Legal service, then did God command and reward Idolatry in
the old Testament, which is abominable; and then we profess that we, under
the new Testament, worship God after the way which these men call Idolatry, but
mourning and shedding of tears at the seeing of him in the Word preached, whom
we have pierced, Zach. 12.10, 11, 12. is no Legal Idolatry, but a Prophecy to
be fulfilled under the kingdom of the Messiah: and when the Saints are pricked
in heart, and tremble at the Word preached, Acts 2.37.38. Acts 9.5, 6. Acts
16.29, 30. Luke 7.37, 38. They adore not the Letters, nor sounds of the Word,
but God that conveyes himself to their souls by these means of his own
appointing.

3. It is abominably false, that God conveyes himself in outward things, as
Papists say, he conveyes himself to the soul by Images: For Images, or
Portraits of God, are in themselves religious means of worship utterly
unlawful and forbidden in the second Commandment; when as Ordinances are
lawful conveyances of God to sinners. 1 Cor. 1.18. For the preaching of the
Cross, is to them that perish, foolishness; but unto us who are saved, it is
the power of God. 21. It pleased God by the foolishness of preaching, to save
such as believe. 23. But we preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a
stumbling block, to the Grecians foolishness, 24. But unto them that are
called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God.
Romans 1.16. For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of
God unto salvation, to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and also to
the Greek, 1 Cor. 2.4, 5. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Rev. 1.16. and this is never said of
Images in old or new Testament.

4 We utterly deny that God immediately informs, glorifies, and spiritualizeth
these forms and figures, Ordinances are not bare shadows and Figures.
as the Israelites thought that God informed the Calfe. If any idolize the
preached or written Word, it is not our doctrine, nor did Saltmarsh ever aim to
prove any such thing to be our doctrine, or that the Word heard conferreth
grace ex opere operato: If hearing be not mixed with faith, it profits
nothing, the carnal moralist dreameth, that forms and Church Service will
save him, but Protestants teach no such thing.

5. Ordinances are not mere figures and signs, but holy, divine, powerful
signs, like a Hammer, a two edged Sword, weapons mighty through God, and the
life, majesty, divinity, power, heaven that is in the Word, do be-ly
Familists: Therefore it is false that in their nature they are but Parables,
Figures, and Types. For the words and letters are so* but in their sense, as
they include the thing sign^fi^d, they are another thing of a higher strain.

6 These Ordinances are the everlasting Gospel, the Covenant, the Lords Supper,
in which we annunciate the Lords death till he come again 1 Cor. 11.26. and
therefore are not for the state of bondage only.

7. Nor are Ordinances earthly things, but lively, spiritual, heavenly
treasures, 2 Cor. 4.7.

8. Who ever exponed Scripture as Saltmarsh and Familists do? For he calls the
seeing, groping and feeling of the holes in Christ's side, and the print of the
nails in his hands and feet, the ordinances of the written and preached Word,
and Seals, or Sacraments, by which he clearly insinuates that some never enjoy
ordinances of Word, Scripture, and Seals, and yet believe in Christ, as ^hri^t
says, that ^ome never saw, never grop^d the holes in his (...) and side, ^s
Thomas did and yet do believe, and so are more bl^ss^d the^ Thomas. But let
Saltmarsh show who are these who believe, and yet their faith came not by
hearing, contrary to Romans 10.14.

9. It is true, Natural men do not stumble at the letter of the Gospel, but at
the thing signified thereby.
Christ preached and conveyed to the souls of men by the foolishness of
preaching, is a scandal to many. But not that only, but that Christ on^y so
low and despicable, as a Savior, shamed, crucified, cursed, rejected, should
be the Savior of the world, and the way to eternal happiness, is the great
scandal, so it is not the Letter, or sound ^f words, or the foolishness of
Figures and Signs, that occasioneth men's stumbling at Christ; but the thing
signified in this letter and sound of words: For the Grecians and great wits of
the world, did convey their happiness they promised to men, by Characters,
Letters, and figures, namely, by the Divine writings of Plato, Aristotle,
Cicero, Seneca, Socrates, and so did the wise Philosophers, who by words and
grave sentences would make their Disciples and their Sectaries happy. Then
Christ is not appointed for the ruin of men, and to be a sna^e, because he
conveye^h himself, his Spirit and faith, salvation and grace, by words: but by
words of so despicable and base a Redeemer as Ma^ies Son, hanged on a tree.

10. We cast no reproaches on the Spirit, but are as much for praying by the
Spirit, preaching by the Spirit, as he; but not by the Spirit separated from
the Word and Revelations. Such 1. as the Word knows not: 2. Revelations
contrary to the wo^d, for the Scripture says, the justified person can sin,
must confess sin, because God is faithful to forgive: But Antinomians say,
the spirit, that exponeth Scripture to them without arguing, discoursing,
reasoning, or comparing Scripture with Scripture, but by an immediate
revelation, teaches that the justified cannot sin, are not to confess
sin, and that they are no more to sorrow for sin, then ^o go back again
to Legal bondage after they are justifi^d in Christ, which is contradicent to
the word of Truth, and therefore such a spirit we know not.

11. The weaker are much d^l^ded by S^ltmarsh and his, if they believe a Spirit
separated from the Word.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of our assurance and comfort from Acts of free Grace
33. THe pure, rational, and glorious assurance of salvation, comes from the
pure manifestation of the Spirit bearing witness. This is the white stone,
Sparkles of Glory p. 274.
Rev. 2.17. The unction whereby we know all things, 1 John 2.20. and the things
freely given us of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. There is assurance, 1. by Reason, or the
mere light of nature, and works of this creation, as in Job and Cornelius; but
sure there is no salvation out of Christ. 2. By graces, gifts, or fruits of the
Spirit, self-denial, faith, repentance, and by the Letter, Promises, or
outward Ordinances or duties: this assurance is of no higher and clearer, and
more glorius certainty then God through these does afford, and that is darkly
(as the Apostle says) as in a glass.

Sermon on Wisdom justified of her children, p. 204
Paul Hobson, who speaks more congruously to Scripture then any of this way:
I read (says he, speaking of our joy) It is one thing to rejoice in an act,
and another thing to draw our joy from an act. It is one thing to rejoice in
our suitable walking up to a Rule, another thing to draw our joy and refreshing
from the apprehension of a sutablenesse betwixt the Act and the Rule. Men may
pray and mourn for sin* or perform any other particular duty, and have much
joy in that opportunity* and yet not draw their joy from it, but only their
joy is distilled from a s^cret in-come of Christ, which carries them above it,
while they are acted in it; but these poor souls, they only are joyful when
they see they act suitable to a Rule, and they draw their joy from that
suitableness, which appears in this, that if their suitableness flagge,
their joy is destroyed. I do not say, but that every sin e^ought to produce
sorrow in us; but it is one thing to mourn for sin, ^n^oying faith with
peace; and another thing to mourn for sin to confirm faith, and to beget peace.

Of assurance, joy and sorrow in our acts, as suitable or not suitable to the
rule of the law or word of God.
Answ. 1. I deny not but there is a pure and immediate assurance that flows
from the witness of the Spirit, Romans 8.16. 2 Cor. 1* 21, 22. Ephesians. 1.13* 14. So
as the shining of the Su^ne makes eviden^ that it is day, without a syllogism
and discourse, and the seeing of the mother teaches the Lamb, without any
argumentative light, to follow the mother, and to follow no other. And the
Sunshine of glory on the soul, teaches it is in a state of happiness with
immediate light; but I utterly deny, that, in every moment of time, when the
person believes, he is assured he is in the state of salvation: for this
reflect assurance is not essential to faith. Many believe and say, My God, and
yet complain that God forgets them, and shutt^th up their prayers, and
casts off their soul, as is clear in prayers put up to God in faith, in
which the Saints want assurance, Psalm 22.1, 2 Psalm 31.22. Jonah 2.4. Esaias
49.14, 15. Cant. 5.4, 6.7, Cant. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

2. Many doubt, and these both godly and learned, of the immediate word and
testimony of the Spirit, they say it is from signs and effects of saving
grace, by which as by Arguments the Spirit testifies, that we are the children
of God, as thus, He that believes and loves the brethren, and has a hope
causing a man to purify himself, is in the state of salvation. But I am such
an one, therefore I am in the state of salvation. Both the Major and Assumption
may be witnessed by the Spirit of God, and our own sense. And the places
alleged by Saltmarsh, speak not of the way or the manner how the Spirit, the
white stone, the ^unction does teach us, or bear witness; they only say, they
bear witness and teach* but say nothing of the manner; and if the Spirit teach
us to know the things freely given to us of God, and the annoynting teach us
all things, then far more does the Spirits anointing teach us that we are the
Sons of God, because we love the Brethren, because we believe, and says is
our victory by which we overcome the world.

3 There is assurance by reason of the mere light of nature and works of this
Creation, that there is a God, and that he rewards them that seek him, but
that men have assurance of salvation, or that they are in a state of salvation,
(as Sal^marsh his title of the Chapter intimates) or that Job and Cornelius
have assurance or salvation by reason, or the mere light of nature, and works
of this Creation, is the new Divinity of Jesuits, but has no warrant in the
Scriptures, and that Job and Cornelius were void of all Gospell-revelation, is
contrary to Job. 19.25, 26.27. Act. 10.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.34, 35

4 Far less was it ever heard that Protestants teach that men may have
assurance of salvation from the m^er letter of scripture* Saltmarsh fathers
many untruths on Protestants to make his own way of all spirit takes better
with the people.

5 I ^^ove else where that the way of assurance, by diverse places of Scripture,
^s ration^^l and Argumentative, and that most of all the Articles of our faith
in the new Testament are proved (...) from the old; nor are the assurance of
the spirit, and ^ation^ll and argumentative discourses of the (...), contrary
one ^o another; For the Holy spirit almost i^ every (...) of scripture is an
arguing spirit, and infers on conclusion from an antecedent, and from an other
conclusion.

6 Nor did we ever teach men to build assurance on mere outward duties done
without the grace of Christ.

7 Nor can the assurance, by the immediate testimony of the spirit, be more
clear and glorious, then God does afford light, more then certainty by signs
and effects can be.

8 It is a wonder to me that Saltmarsh so undervalueth all assurances by
effects and works of grace, so as they assu^e us darkly, and as in a glass.
Then the immediate Testimony of his all spirit must yield an higher ^vidence
(...) darkely and in a glass; this must be the light of the immediate vision
of God in heaven: Hence Familists will but have the day light of mo^^ing or
noone day glory shin^ on us in this life whereas the Apostle makes all the
light we have in this life to be dark and in a g^^sse, 1 Cor. 1^.12, 13. and
opposes it to seeing of God face to f^ce, v. 12.13.1^ the life to come: And
Saltmarsh shall teach us n^w Divinity, if there be any evidences to found our
assurance but two in Scripture; one, of walking by ^aith; and another, b^
si^ht, 2 Cor. 5.6, 7. The one, while we ar^ absent in the body from the Lord in
this life; the other, when we are at home in our country in the life to come,
yea, the highest light, in which we see with open face, and are changed thereby
from glory to glory, is in a ^lasse, (...) Cor. 3.18. is called a seeing, 1
Cor. ^3.12. (...): then must Saltmarsh make the certainty of says to be as
conjec^urall and low as the certainty by signs, which he says is dim,
formal, discoursive, and that is shadow^d (...), which overthrows the
Antinomians Principles touching the assurance of says, which they say,
excludes all doubting.

A^ for the conceit of Paul Holson, that we may rejoice in an act, and not draw
our joy from the apprehension of the suitableness between the Act and the
(...), he is much out: For 1. if we joy in the act, and joy not in the
suitableness between the Act and the Rule our joying and rejoicing is vain;
for then do we rejoice in sin: for an act not suitable to the Rule, and
reveal^d w^ll of God, is sin, though it be not in a strict legal way suitable
to the Rule.

2. We may have our joy distilled by a secret in-come of Christ, but not from
the Act (says he,) but these two are not contrary, but friendly agree: For
this in-come of Christ that procures our joy, is for the graciousnesse of the
act rather then for the act it self. And if by an in-come he mean an influe^ce
of the grace of Christ causing us rejoice in the g^^ci^us act, because
gracious; we yield it willingly. But then (...) gather neither joy, nor peace,
nor assurance, from the act simply, but from the act as gracious and as wrought
in us by the in-come and supernatural influence of Christ, who works in us
both to will and (...).

3. And we may well draw joy from the suitableness between the Act and the
Rule, in regard this suitableness is nothing else but that gracious
conveniencie between the Act and the Rule, which stands in this, That the
substance of the act is agreeable to the will of God revealed, and in the
principle of faith, and the end for Gods glory; which conveniencie and (...) of
the act, is wrought by free grace, and so we ye rejoice, gather assurance from
the father of the act, to wit, the holy Ghost the worker, rather then from the
act; and though the suitableness flagge, yet if it be sincere, the joy may be
l^ssened, not destroyed: but the reason presupposes we can neither have joy
nor peace in the act, except it be perfectly suitable, and ^word every degree
agreeable to the law, which is a most false supposition: For we cannot come up
in our acts to that perfection the law requires.

4. Upon the same ground we may mourn for sin, to strengthen faith, in regard
an act of believing does arise from the act of mourning, as occasioned thereby,
or wrought in us by the holy Ghost, who causes us see him whom we have
pierced, and mourn therefore, as one does for his only child, Zach. 12.10, 11,
12.

CHAP. XXIX. The scope of Saltmarsh his Book called Sparkles of Glory, and of
his denying Christ to be any thing but a man figuratively and mystically.
34. THe only scope (says he to the Reader) of this Book is to mind you of an
higher excellency then mere created things can afford you, of the truth that
is in Jesus, or in Spirit: and of that unity of Spirit which Christians should
live in under their several forms and attaintments, and I have not held forth
any discovery of Truth, or of any higher dispensation, so as to darken too much
other dispensations in which Christians live, or to lessen and under value
their attaintments, but only to be faithful in the power of God to his
discoveries in mine own spirit.

The mind of Saltmarsh concerning high Familisme, and other administrations
that to him are lower, and touching the law, repentance, duties, Synods, Church
government, Episcopacy, Presbytery.
I desire we may bear one another burdens, and consider that God is in all
his several dispensations, and measures; and Christians are not to hasten out
of any, till the Lord himself say, Come up higher, and the stronger are to
bear the infirmities of the weak.

I am not against the law, nor repentance, nor duties, nor ordinances, as some
would say: so all these flow from their right principles to their right end. I
am not against the settling of Church government prudentially, as now, so as all
of another way be not persecuted, because I know God has his people under
several attaintments and measures, and is to his people in all these in his
mere grace and love, as formerly to Bishops, and thousands of weak Christians
in Queen Elizabeth's and Queen Mary's days of martyrdom in their forms. I am
only against any form as it becomes an engine of persecution to all Christians
differing from it.

I am not against a sitting of an Assembly of Divines at Westminster, that are
so persuaded, because this is but to allow such liberty to others consciences
as we desire our selves: And surely, if they would propound such things only
as they have received, or they are in conscience persuaded of to all the
kingdom, and so leave it to the Spirit of God, and their Ministry, to
persuade and convince, and not desire power from others to compel: this were
but to minister as they had received.

Answ. If the scope of a Book be taken as it ought to be, from the subject
matter contained in it, then the scope of this book is a far other thing,
then the truth that is in Jesus and in Spirit: but to deny that Christ is come
in the flesh, as I here evidence, which is the mystery of Antichrist, is the
scope of his book, 1 John 4.3. For every Spirit that confesses not that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh is not of God, and this is that (Spirit) of
Antichrist whereof you have heard that he is come and even now already is in
the world. Saltmarsh denies that Jesus Christ is come into the flesh.
But Saltmarsh confesses not, but denies, that Christ is come in the flesh,
or is true man, or has any other body that he suffered in, but the mystical
body, the Saints, Sparkles of glory, p. 13. The Son of God did not only
fulfill this bringing home this first creation or man to God according to his
first excellency and communion with God, but in this appearance of the flesh,
he was a figure of God whose design is to make his Saints his Temple, his
tabernacle, his body, his new creation, his habitation or house; and God thus
manifested in the flesh was a figure of that mystery of godliness in us, or
God becoming Immanuel, or God with us. He has a large description of the
second Adam, page 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. he never once says, Christ
the Son of God was made true and very man in all things like unto us, sin
excepted, or the second person of the Trinity assumed the nature of man in the
unity of his person, or Christ was the true Son of David, borne of a woman,
etc. as Scripture and Divines speak, but by the contrary only in this
appearance of flesh he was a figure of God, whose design it is to make his
Saints his temple, his tabernacle, his body -- and God thus manifested in the
flesh; that is, God by his Spirit giving us faith and a new birth to be the
Sons of God, in whom he dwells by faith, is the Immanuel God with us; that
is, all the God-man, or God incarnate, which this spirit of the Antichrist will
yield to us, is nothing but, every Saint anointed is Christ and Immanuel: now
the Father and Spirit, both make the Saints the Temple of God, the new
creation, the body of Christ thus; and so the Son is no more God incarnate then
the Father: and God is thus manifested in the flesh, in making us his dwelling
house, and Temple, and body by faith, as Saltmarsh is sure not to speak
against, but with the heretics who denied Christ to have a true body, or to
be true man, but only to be a figure or appearance of a man, or a man in
representation, in form, in mere shape, not truly and really* so as the
Discipl^s heard, saw with their eyes, and looked on, and their hands handled
the Lord of life, 1 John 1.1. of him they said, He is not here, he is risen
again; except ye believe that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins. And in
his crucifying (says Saltmarsh p. 13.14.) all his first glory in which he
appeared, revealed that old design of God, that mystery hid from ages, Christ
really crucified and dyed, and not in a figure, as with his Familists, says
Saltmarsh.
and now made manifest to the Saints, nayling all the flesh of his Saints to
the same cross, and being lifted up draws all men to him, which is the
mystery of the Gospel, or Christ crucified. H. Nicholas document, c. 3. sen. 5.
to be borne of the Virgin Mary out of the seed of David after the flesh is to
be borne of the pure doctrine (of H.N.) out of the seed of love. How Christ
nailed all the flesh of his Saints to the cross except mystically and
figuratively, and in a spiritual sense, I know not, but this is all Christ's
dying on the cross, except Familists say that Christ dyed not really and
truly, but only in a figure; or they say Christ, as an extraordinary holy man,
was God manifested in the flesh, and that he was not the consubstantiall Son of
God, but being a man Godded with the holy being of love, dyed as an example of
singular love and patience, and most submissive obedience, and so nailed to his
cross, all the flesh of his Saints exemplary, that we should follow him, as
the Socinians teach, and so his death must be no real, no true satisfaction,
nor any satisfactory ransom to justice for us, but that God forgave all men
their sins without a price or ransom of blood; and Christ gave not himself
as a real ransom, price or satisfaction for our sins, but dyed as a rule
and pattern of holiness, that we should imitate him and without his, but by
our own personal merits we might be saved, as we were saved by following the
godly lives of other holy men. The Scripture says, he nailed his own flesh to
the cross; for so it is, 1 Pet. 2 24. Who his own self bare our sins in his
body on the tree. And Act. 13.28. Though they found no cause of death in him,
yet desired they Pilate that he should be slain, 29. And when they had
fulfilled all that was written of him, they took him down from the tree and
laid him in a sepulcher, but God raised him from the dead: Now the man Christ
that was nailed to a tree, and buried in the grave of Joseph of Arimathea, that
same man God raised from the dead, but Christ nailed not the Saints flesh, and
the bodies of believers, of Saltmarsh and others, really to the cross, nor
were their bodies really laid in Joseph's new tomb, nor did God truly and
really raise them from the dead, only in a spiritual meaning, we dyed, are
buried with Christ, and partakers of his resurrection. But (says Peter) Act.
5.30. The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on a
tree. But Saltmarsh says, the Christ, crucifying and nailing all the flesh of
his Saints to the same cross, and being lifted up, draws all men to him, is
the mystery of the Gospel, or Christ crucified. But Christ crucifying the
flesh, and sinful corruption of believers in the same cross, is Christ
mystically and spiritually, and by the merit of his bloody death, mortifying
sin in the Saints, and the sufferings of the Saints are not satisfactory to
divine justice, as Christ's sufferings were, but castigatorie, to deaden them to
the lusts of the flesh: and the Saints sufferings are not Christ crucified, nor
Christ on the cross drawing all men to him For Christ died and was but once
really and truly in his blessed flesh and humane nature crucified, H.N. 1. Exh.
c. 16. The Elders of love are godded with God, incorporated to God in all love,
with whom God in one being, and power of his holy Spirit, is homified or become
man; and this is their God incarnate.
Heb. 9.26, 27, 28. Matthew. 27.34, 35. Mark 14.24. Luke 23. v. 33, 34. Joh.
19.23. on Mount Calvarie. But the Saints were not really crucified with him,
for many of them were not borne, when he dyed. I have observed before, that
Gortyn and H. Nicholas make the Saints who bear the image of God suffering and
persecuted in the world to be Christ crucified, and nothing else, because says
Gortyn, Christ being the Lord of life, cannot dye, nor suffer in himself, and
therefore he suffers in his Saints, and so every suffering Saint is all the
crucified Christ that these men grant. Yea H. N. never confesses Christ to be
true God and very man, but sometime the sabbath is Christ Evang. c. 2. s. 15.
or the service of love is Christ. Exhor. 14. s. 1. or the godly being in men is
Christ Evang. 13. s. 16. or the eldest Elder of the family of love is Christ,
that is, H.N. or a godly life is Christ, so are we saved by our own good
works. And Saltmarsh says, p. 14. Now all this of this new or second creation,
as they are spiritual and heavenly, are only in, and through the same Spirit,
and discerned in the same Spirit. Hence a Christ of flesh and blood, who is
true man and dyed for us, is but Christ in the letter, and the Protestant
legal Christ that, as a killing letter, kills and perfecteth nothing, and
cannot give life, but the true Christ is a Spirit and spiritual, and discerned
in the Spirit, that is to say, only the family of love knows, by the Spirit
abstracted from Scripture, and from all flesh and letter, the true God
manifested in the flesh of every Saint, and crucified in believers, and
disclaimeth the Protestant Christ that dyed and was crucified on Mount
Calvarie, and was buried in a new Tomb, and rose the third day, and ascended
into heaven. And p. 17. This is the Temple (says he, speaking of the invisible
Church) which the Angel measures with a golden reed and the alter thereof, or
the eternal Spirit, upon which all the first creation is offered in the
Saints, as it was offered in Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered
himself, leaving out the outward court or the flesh and first creation, and all
outward ministrations which are given to the Gentiles to tread down. Ans. I
fear that by nailing the creation to the cross, and offering it up to God
when Christ's flesh was offered up, is meant that which H. Nicholas said
Spi^land. c. 56. sect. 7. if a man would enter into life, he must be taught in
the service of love, and unlearne again all that he has taken and learned to
himself; that is, as Libertines said, he must cast off the knowledge of good,
and all sense and knowledge of sin, and as a child, know and feel neither
adultery, murder, lying, stealing, nor acts of mercy, justice, chastity, but
have a conscience past feeling of both good and ill, and this is the offering
on the cross, the creation of God, the crucifying of the natural faculties of
the soul, and to unlearne all you once learned of Christ, because it was
literal, fleshly and carnal; and so to crucify it, is one of the first
lessons that Familists teach their new disciples when they enter into the
service of love. H. Nicholas exhort. c. 13. s. 9. He has a good head that can
take these giddy fleshly notions of Saltmarsh, and can render the sense either
of Gortyns book, or of this. But it is clear, when Christ offered his life
and body on the cross to the Father for our sins, he offered no flesh, no
true real body to God through the eternal Spirit, for in that offering (says
he) he left out the outer court, and the flesh or the first creation, and
outward administrations, then the crucifying of Christ in the flesh, as the
Scripture calls it, is but a dream; Saltmarsh says, That is the outward
court the letter, the flesh, which all the Gentiles trample upon, and these
Protestants that believe Christ suffered according to the flesh, are heathen
and profane men. Christ in the flesh or under the Law, is to Saltmarsh p. 195.
the same with the literal Christ of David George, not the spiritual true
Messiah.

Henry Nicholas said every creature in the first state of creation was God, H.
N. Evang.
34. c. sent. 10. he has now declared himself and his Christ together with
all his Saints, unto us his elect, and also made a dwelling with us, and
brought even so unto us out of his holy being, the most holy of his true
tabernacle with the fullness of his garnishing and spiritual heavenly riches,
to an everlasting fast standing Jerusalem, and house for Gods dwelling
according to the Scripture. To be made partakers of the divine nature,
according to Familists sense, is to be of the substance, nature and essence of
God, and to live with the true being and very life of God. Saltmarsh with H.
Nicholas teaches that every creature is God, or a substantial part of God.
It is true, Familists say in words, they mean not that the creature is the
Creator; nor that man is God, because man (says Randal in a Sermon) is vanity
and a lie, but not man as created or renewed to the image of God, and let the
Reader judge, if Saltmarsh in his sparkles of glory, delivers not the same
doctrine, speaking of two Creations, or two natures of flesh and spirit, p. 3.
See Saltm. Sparkles p. 19 200, 201, 20
While man was thus in the image of God, and stood and lived in communion with
God, walking in that paradise, or that glory of his first creation in obedience
to God, and participation of God, he was the image of all, or any created
excellency, as it was, or is, or shall be in order to a more excellent life, to
a life out of it self in him, who is the fountain of life. Saltmarsh cannot
mean that man was created in a participation of God in the sense that
Protestants mean, in regard of the image of God, but with H. N. in regard of
the godly being, wherewith man was godded and diefied at the beginning. And p.
6. Saltmar. phraseth with H. Nicholas, Now all this excellency and glory of the
first man, did leave God being tempted of the woman, and the Serpent which were
a figure of fleshly wisdom without God, and of the weakness of this creation
in its own nature, as it was drawn away from its life in God, and communion
with God to live in its self, or own life, or to be its self what God should
have been, wisdom and life, righteousness, and power, and strength, and
preservation; and all things. If Saltmarsh mean with Protestants, that Adam did
leave his moral or spiritual being and living in, and with God, while he yet
stood in the state of innocence, why does he not speak with Protestants? for
this is nothing, but Adam lost the image of God, but not his life and being as
he came from the hands, or as it were, out of the shop of the Creator, in which
he was molded according to the image of God. But I fear Saltm. both speaks
and has the same sense with H. Nicholas, that Adam lost his life, and lost the
very created being and holy self which was the very substance and nature of
God, and now having fallen into sin, he falls into self, and lives in self,
separated, as touching the essential dependency of a creature from God, and
lost his substantial self and being, which is a piece and substantial
parcel of God. For Familists say that Adam, or an Angel should have ascribed
being, power, or any thing to it self, was sin and nothing else but the
devil, and denying self or substantial being had been in Adam, and was in
him, his standing in innocence, and to arrogate to self, being, and living,
was a sin and a leaving of God. So Theolo. Germanica and Saltmarsh p. 14.
sparkles. All the life or excellency of his first creation, is crucified in the
Saints as in Christ, whereby they enter into their glory as he did into his and
are in the same glory of God made one, as he and the Father are one, Joh. 17.
The life or being of the first creation, as it is a part of God or the sinlesse
workmanship of God, is not crucified in the Saints as in Christ; for in the
Saints, only sin is crucified, and that spiritually by the merit and efficacy
of Christ's death, and his Spirit, the natural being and life of the Saints as
they are living men consisting of soul and body, is not crucified; but no
sin, nor lusts nor dominion of sin, were in Christ to be crucified, but he
laid down his natural, real life and blood, as a ransom satisfactory to the
justice of God for our sins: But this deceiver means that Christ's
anihilating on the cross all the natural faculties, power and excellencies
that the Creator gave to us, when we were created, and nailing these to the
cross, was Christ's crucifying of the flesh, and we are the same way crucified
with Christ, as so many joint Saviors with him, by suffering afflictions, and
in place of this crucified flesh, all the Saints have the Spirit to act in
them; and our conversion to God, or restoration in the second Adam, is, in
that we are made again in Christ, partakers of the divine nature, and of the
substantial being of God, or godded with the new heavenly being of God, in
love, and Christed with Christ, and turned, when we are perfectly renewed, into
all spirit. Saltmarsh Sparkles of glory, page 71. And the natural faculties of
our soul, mind, will, affections are, in our conversion, removed, and in place
of them comes the very Holy Ghost in person, and very Christ himself acts in
us. Rise, Reign, Ruin of Antino. art. 1. art. 2. page 1. and lives in us, not
by faith and created grace, but substantially and personally, and for this they
allege, Gal. 2.20. I live not, but Christ lives in me, and so neither our
natural power or any thing, nor is created grace any thing, but Christ is all
in all.

CHAP. XXX. Familists will have all externals indifferent.
2. SAltm. says, Christians should live in the unity of the Spirit under their
several forms and attaintments. Now by forms and attaintments he means
Prelacie, Presbytery, Independencie, yea Popery* and all outward worship and
ordinances of which he says, there is no form nor model in the letter of the
Scriptures, and so he makes the Scriptures as unperfect as the Papists do,
the one dreaming of a Spirit in the breast of the Pope and cursed Clergy to be
the master of our faith, the other an Anabaptisticall Spirit of unwritten
revelations to be our leader, and they reproach the word of God, as forms,
characters, figures, a faith Ceremonial, and figurative services out of the
knowledge of the Scripture, as H.N. says, Evang. chapter 34. sent. 10. And by
Christians he means Saints of diverse and contrary sects, ways, Religions,
such as is the Chaos of a Church in the Sectaries Army, in which there are
Arrians that say Christ was but a mere godly man, Antitrinitarians, Socinians,
Arminians, Seekers, Anabaptists, most of them all being Arminians, Familists,
Antinomians, Enthysiasts, and all these should agree in the unity of the
Spirit; and as he says after page 20. in these outward things, they ought to
please one another to edification, Romans 13.10. Romans 8.2. Col. 2.20. the Law of
love, and spirit, or life, being more royal and excellent then any worldly
rudiments whatsoever. Now it is clear that his meaning is they should keep the
unity of the Spirit, and please one another in all outward things, as Romans
15.1.2. (so I think he should cite the place) that is, do as Anabaptists
among Anabaptists, be a Presbyterian among Presbyterians, an Independent among
Independents, Prelaticall among Prelaticall men, that we offend not one
another, because the Law of loving our neighbor, is above being baptized or
not baptized, and using of the sign of the cross or not using it; and all the
five Popish bastard Sacraments are less then loving our brother: upon this
ground Familists make all externalls free and indifferent; and so does Oliver
Crumwell in his letter to the House of Commons 1645. which I set down here,
that many in both Kingdoms who looked on him as a godly man may be satisfied
toward him, whether he favor Familisme or no, for it smells rankly of that
fleshly sect, it was printed before by Authority.

Presbyterians, Independents, all have here the same Spirit of faith and
prayer, A Letter Printed by Authority under the name of Oliver Crumwel opened,
and found to c^ntain many secrets of (...).
the same presence and answer; they agree here, know no names of difference;
pity it is it should be otherwise any where: All that believe have the real
unity, which is most glorious because inward and spiritual, in the body and to
the head; for being united in forms, commonly called uniformity, every
Christian will for peace sake study, and do as far as conscience will permit:
and from Brethren in things of the mind, we look for no compulsion, but that
of light and reason, in other things God has put the sword in the Parliaments
hands, for the terror of evil doers, and the praise of them that do well, if
any plead exemption from it, he knows not the Gospel, if any would wring it
out of your hands, or steal it from you, under what pretense soever, I hope
they shall do it without effect, that God will maintain it in your hand, and
direct you in the use thereof, is the prayer of,

Now because this Letter was publicly Printed, and contains doctrine unsound
and scandalous to me and many other, and every Christian is obliged to be ready
to give an answer to every man that asks a reason of the hope that is in him,
with meekness and fear, 1 Pet. 3.15. especially when he gives a public
scandal of unsoundnesse in the faith, I thought my self tied in conscience
(and others are debtors to me for the same freedom of conscience in the truth,
which they crave to themselves in errors and here^ies) to show how scandalous
and unsound this Letter is.

Pres^yterians, Independents all have the same Spirit of faith and prayer, the
same presence and answ^r.

Answ. This is no just enumeration to prove the inward and spiritual unity in
the Army, which he intends; for there be in the Army Socinians, Arminians,
Anabaptists, and by name Jo. Saltmarsh, Mr. Del, and Seekers, who in Print
disclaim both Presbyterians and Independents, and to my knowledge there is not
this day in England any that is a mere Independent which maintains nothing
but Independencie with most of these of N. England, and does not hold other
unsound and corrupt tenets, especially that of Liberty of conscience, which
bordereth with Atheism, Scepticisme, and with all faiths, and no faith.

2. I am not of the Authors mind that Presbyterians and Independents as now
they are, can have the same spirit of faith and prayer, except we say with H
Nicholas, the first Elder of the family of love, that all externalls in
Religion, Presbyterians, Independents, Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Priests,
Deacons, Sextons, Services, Ceremonies, yea and the Church of Rome, till
contentions arose about these as H N. Evangelie c. 32. c. 33. says, are
indifferent, and no ways unlawful. H. N. says, his followers are subject to
no Gods, no Laws, or Ceremonies, but only to the Lord their God, and to his
most holy service of love, they are not likewise subject in bondage unto the
creatures, neither yet to any created thing, but only to the Creator, etc, all
their life, mind and delight only is in God, and God himself likewise with
his mind, life or Spirit is in them, and they are even so of one conformity or
substance with each other, namely God and his people, of peace, Spirit. l. and
c. 55. l. 9. No wonder then this Author cry down outward forms, and cry up
inward spiritual unity: For the same Spirit of faith they cannot (...), that
believe contradictorie articles of faith. But many that go under the name of
Independents and Presbyterians, believe with Familists that Jesus Christ dyed
not as true man for sinners, and that he dyed as true man for sinners; that the
justified can sin, that the justified cannot sin; that the justified are
perfect in this life, that the justified are not perfect in this life; that the
justified ought to confess and crave pardon for sins, that they ought not to
confess, and ought not to crave pardon for sins: For Saltmarsh tells us,
there are contradictions between the faith of Protestants touching Christ his
birth, dying, crucifying, burial, ascending to heaven, etc. and of others (he
means Familists and Antinomians) who have attained the highest and most
glorious discoveries of the Spirit, Sparkles of glory, p. 185, 186, 187, 190,
191, 192, 198, 199, etc. then such Independents and Presbyterians, as the
letter intends cannot have the same faith, except also we hold every man's
conscience within to be his rule and faith, if he have love (as the Familists
say) and that all faith or Religions without are indifferent, as Familists in
their Petition to K. James, An. 1604 profess they will take or leave Familisme
as the King and his Laws think fitting it may be for State intere^^s, their
practice now is a little eccentrick to their faith.

2. Nor can they have the same Spirit of prayer, the same prayer or answer; for
Presbyterians pray for the nearest uniformity in Religion, faith, worship,
government. And for all the ends in the Covenant, extirpation of heresy, of
Fami^i^me, Antinomianisme, Scepticisme, a^ominable Liberty of conscience. I
should be glad, if Independents, and the Author of this Letter would pray and
endeavor the same; for William Del, and John Saltmarsh have preached and
printed to the world the grossest points of Familisme, and they are ordinary
Preachers to the General, and the rest of the Commanders, when Arminians and
Socinians, and men not half so absurd and monstrous in the faith as they, did
preach before the King, the godly in both Kingdoms mourned for it to God, and
prayed against these things; and I conceive the godly Presbyterians do the
same yet, and have not forsaken their principles, or the truth in a jot. If the
Presbyterian pray, as they do, that God would avert that Athesticall plague of
Liberty of conscience, and extirpate Familisme, Socinianisme, etc. And
Independents pray that God would grant them the grace of Liberty of conscience,
and that Familists, Socinians, etc. may be tolerated and promoted to highest
places: Can the Spirit bestow the same access and presence to the prayers of
the one as to the other* Have contradictory prayers the same answer from God?
Will God hear and satisfy both? But I observe here that Saltmarsh and
Famili^^s father all their new lights on the Spirit, and make the holy Spirit
the author of Scepticisme, and contradicent truths, for Saltmarsh says, if
there be not a toleration of all Religions, all the glorious discoveries of
God, above or beyond that systeme or form of doctrine etc. (established and
concluded by the Assembly of Divines according to the word) shall be judged and
sentenced as heresy and schism, and so God shall be judged by man; Why?
because God himself speaks Familisme, Arrianisme, Socinianisme, and all
heresies in these that now go for Independents, and God speaks the ju^t
contrary in Presbyterians, and if men udge either, because the same Spirit of
faith is in both, then God must be judged by men.

3. Are not many Independents now turned Familists, and so beyond any nece^sity
of Ordinances, praying, reading, Sacraments, Scriptures, and live upon only all
Spirit, pure glorious revelations?

4. We know no names of difference: True, we did all with one mind (as we
believed in the simplicity of our hearts) with lifted up hands to the most high
God swear, to endeavor according to our places, to defend the Reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland, to endeavor the extirpation of
superstition, heresy, schism, profaneness; who has left this oath of God?
Know we not Presbyterians now by their names? Are they not now the most
persecuted men in England? Can God suffer persecution and blood in
Independents, because Independents?

All that believe have the real unity which is most glorious, because inward
and spiritual in the body and to the head, for being united in forms,
commonly called uniformity, every Christian will for peace sake study, and do
as far as conscience will permit.

Answ. No union to this Author, is real and most glorious and spiritual but
the inward union: external union is excluded from being a real union. Why?
this union in hearing the same word of faith, receiving the same seals of the
Covenant, bowing our knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ in the Church
of Corinth, 1 Cor. 11.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. is at Troas, Act. 20.6, 7, 8,
9, 10. Drink ye all of this, Eat ye, is an unity in the external, visibly
acted, and performed worship of God, is it not both commanded and real? it is
no notion of the brain, but external worship commanded. True, but not in the
same form, manner, way, time, place; but we disclaim an uniformity in the
Physical circumstances of time, place, and never tie any but to the general,
natural, simple conveniencie of time, place, persons.

But the Author has a higher aim then to exclude this uniformity; for I find
Mr. Del and Saltmarsh, professed Familists, speak to the mind of this Author
most gross Familisme, for Mr. Del preached a Sermon before the Commons against
outward Reformation, and outward forms; all his arguments conclude against the
written word of God, against the preached word by men, Paul or Apollo, because
Gospel-Reformation is a work not of the creature, but of God, and as proper to
God as to redeem or create the world. Now Preachers can have no hand in
redeeming or creating the world: and when this Author says, inward unity is
the real unity. Observe, he calls it the unity, the real unity, then that we
all speak the same thing, 1 Cor. 1.10. is no unity, not any real unity; and
that we all walk according to this rule of the new creature in our
conversation and Christian practice before men, as Gal. 6.16. and according to
the same rule, as we are commanded Phil. 3.16. that we all walk in love, and
as children of the light, abstaining from fornication, uncleanness,
coveteousnesse, as Ephesians. 5.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. And that we all walk in Christ
as we have received him, Col. 2.6, 7. etc. honestly as in the day, not in
rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and
envying, Romans 13.12, 13. 1 Thessalonians. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 1 Pet. 2.11, 12, 13. is
neither a part of the unity, nor real unity, but imaginary unity, because
outward, and in visible forms before men, not inward, not spiritual, not most
glorious; so are whoring, lying, chambering, sins in the justified, only
before men, and done by the flesh, not sins before God, nor against any Law;
all that preach duties, and against such sins, to our Familists are literal,
outside, carnal and legal preachers: to H. Nicholas Evang. c. 4. s. 4.
unilluminated, unregenerated, unrenewed, ungodded, unsent, and all because they
are Scripture-learned; and to these men the Scripture is but as forms and
outward things, and so no sin to neglect it, there is no unity of professing,
hearing, speaking the same truth, of walking as the Redeemed of the Lord. Love
in the heart is all. H. Nich. 1 Exhor. c. 16. s. 2. calls all Ordinances, and
Chri^tian walking in Christ, false exercises or usages which bear a godly show.

1. The Author will have no real unity, but inward and spiritual. What then
is become of all outward Ordinances that have an outside by Christ's appointment
answering to an inside, and these two united make but one and the same
spiritual Ordinance? for the body follows the soul, and both follow the
Spirit of Jesus according to the written word, and the vocal praying, the
preaching, the hearing, visibly acted by a believer in the outward, is no less
spiritual (when inside and outside both join with the word and Spirit) then
the inward acts of the mind transacted only within the soul. This Author
following H. Nicholas and Mr. Del and Saltmarsh would exclude all unity in the
body to the head that consists in outward Ordinances, as if Christ were not the
head of the body visible, and of the true visible Church, as well as of the
invisible Church; and as if Christ, as the head of the Church, did not command
and appoint there should be a visible Ministry, an external
Church Government which is spiritual, and outward Ordinances of hearing,
preaching, praying, Sacraments, written word of the old and new Testament, but
had left all these, free to men: therefore H Nicholas condemns all knowledge of
the Scriptures, as Ceremonial, false, literal and fleshly wisdom. So his
Epist. to the two daughters of Warwick speaks, and Evangel. chapter 34. he
rejects the figurative services and Ceremonies that arise from the knowledge of
the Scriptures, as contrary to the spiritual and inward service of the holy
being of God in love, and godly wisdom. Therefore these Authors call the word
of God and external Ordinances nothing but forms, the letter, characters,
figures, flesh or external fleshly Ordinances, that perish with the using, and
are no better then the Ceremonies of Moses Law that are gone and buried, and
may not be used, Saltmars. Sparkles of glory, p 293.287, 288, 243, 244, 245,
246, 247. Del uniformity examined page 7.8. we know Familists, and especially
Mr. Dels Sermon before the House of Commons p. 7, 8, 9, 10, 18, 19, etc. cries
down all Reformation but that which is of the heart and inward and spiritual.
So Saltmarsh Sparkles p. 217. And this Antichrist is one who denies Christ
coming in the flesh, or God in his people, who is coming and coming, that is
ever flowing out in fresh and glorious discoveries and manifestations of
himself, Saltmarsh writes that God manifested in the flesh is nothing but God
by his Spirit discov^ring new lights of Familisme and other damnable heresies.
forbidding all beyond them, as new lights and false revelations, and fixing
God and his appearances in their conceptions, votes and results, and councels,
and consequents and Laws of worship. In which you see these are one and the
same, denying Christ coming in the flesh, and denying his coming in fresh and
glorious discoveries of himself; then must God incarnate and manifested in the
flesh, and borne of a woman, and of the seed of David, be nothing but God by
his Spirit opening a new light of Familisme, as H. N. taught, every spiritual
man was Christ, and there was not another second Adam, and every sinning man
the first Adam.

2. Christ in the flesh is but a form, and flesh, and to be under his
heavenly and spiritual teaching, as he preaches, Matthew. 13. Joh. 13. Joh. 15,
16, 17. etc. is to be under the Law, and the bondage thereof as under a more
legal Christ, then that of all Spirit, and pure and glorious Spirit. It is
most considerable that Familists and Antinomians, who make every Saint to be
Godded and Christed with the godly being, make every believer to be God
manifested in the flesh. And as Papists make as many hosts, as many Christ's in
their dream of Transubstantiation, so only Familists and Papists multiply many
Christ's to us: and no doubt Christ had an eye to both, but specially to
Familists, Matthew. 24.23. then if any man say unto you, Lo here is Christ, or
lo there is Christ, believe it not, 24. For there shall arise false Christ's
and false Prophets, etc.

3. The forbidding of new lights, and new discoveries of God beyond what is
revealed in the Scripture, to which, under pain of a curse, we may not add,
Rev. 22.17.18. is unlawful, because the scripture to Saltmarsh is but a form
that perishes with the using; and to Familists a fixing of God Idolatrously
w^thin created forms. Union in forms commonly called Uniformity, every
Christian for peace sake will study. Why should the Author speak of
Uniformity, with such an estranging and detestable expression, for with his
hand lifted up to the most high God he swears to endeavor to bring the
Church^s of God in the three Kingdoms to the nearest Uniformity in Religion,
confession of faith, form of Church government.

Now by uniformity we understand not figures, words, What Uniformity (...) in
thi^ Co^^^nant.
characters, which we tie no man too, so they speak not as Heretics and
Familists, who tell us of an incarnating of God in every Saint, or a Godding, a
Christing of a Creature, see H. Nicholas Evange. c. 34. Nor do we mean union
in time, places, persons, as Mr. Del ignorantly phancies, in his Uniformity
examined: he may examine his own examination, for he speaks he knows not
what, by Uniformity we mean union in the things, and in the true Doctrine, and
substantial practices of faith, worship, government of the Church in the
fundamentals: But the Arguments of Del and other Familists prove that the
Saints are not to be taught by any ordinances, preaching, reading, hearing, (I
should be glad this Author were neither of the faith of Del nor Saltmarsh, but
h^s letter smell^th rankly of them.) Yea, by this way all England are licenced
(...) do what they list on the Lords day, and the Book of spo^^s, licencing
all Plays and pasttimes from morning till night on the Lords day, must be
called for aga^ne, which (...), Bishops were ashamed of; for Uniformity of all
Christians and Churches to ^e^pe the Lords day is but a form, and no spiritual
worship to Familists.

Del says, U^^formi^y examined pa. 10.
the spiritual Church is taught by the anointing the carnal Church by
councels. By this the Familists d^ny all Oaths, and Covenants, and abjuration
of false Doctrine under the new Testament, in which they will have nothing but
inward spiritual worship, and say now it was unlawful to take ^he Covenant,
and the deepest Familists say it was at that time dangerous to refuse the
Covenant, and they might lawfully take it, and keep their heart to God, for H.
N. Epistle to the Daughters of Warwick so teaches. Now councels, as sermons,
and preaching, and the written word, are but forms to these men. Anointing is
the work of the alone Holy Ghost 1 John 2.27. and no work of men; and they are
all carnal ^en, or such (as H. Nicholas speaks) are wise with Worldly
Antichristian, false and fleshly wisdom.

2 He tells us, the New Testament worship consists in faith, hope, love, and
cites John 4.23. and Paul preached at Troas and administered the Lords Supper
till break of day: all that believed were together and continued daily in the
Temple. and did break bread from house to house, here was union, but not a
word of external Uniformity.

Answ. Here was all the Uniformity we crave, for that which Peter preached in
one house, Matthew or another Apostle preached not the same very words, and in
the same form of Grammar, but all the twelve preached the same thing in
Doctrine, and prayed for the same thing, and all administered received the
Supper of the Lord according to the Institution of Christ all did sit at table,
all did take, break, and eat,, all did drink after the elements were blessed,
this Uniformity or unity, call it as you will, we seek, and an union in the
external acts and ordinances, but this unity is not among Presbyterians,
Familists, Antinomians, Arrians, neither Doctrine, nor praying, nor believing
of these same fundamentals are one, as the letter would say: for if all have
love, and all give faith and belief to the dictats of their Conscience and a
Spirit leading without scripture. This unity suffices not though Familists
believe Christ is not God incarnate, yet we believe he is God incarnate, and
though Antinomians believe a justified man cannot sin, needs not confess nor
sorrow for sin, yet we believe the just contrary, here is neither unity (say
we) nor uniformity, we have unity of faith hope and love, say Familists, but no
uniformity, because there is an indifferency in what ye believe, if ye believe
what Conscience or an Enthysiasticall spirit speak to you, it is all one, you
have true faith and true love. By the way of these men.

The Un^formity that Familists cry down is the tying of the spirit and his
various working to one form and way of working, for this were to rule, order,
enlarge and straighten the spirit of God by the spirit of man, (says Del.) But
we judge Familists to be ignorant of the state of the question. For the
preaching and worshipping of God in spirit and truth is not the thing in
question, but how the outward Ordinances, whither the spirit concur with
them, or concur not, ought to be ordered? we say. God has not left men at
freedom to follow the dictates of Conscience at will, which often is conceit,
not Conscience, the word regulateth us sufficiently, that we look to the rules
of edification, charity, prudency, order, decency, and especially the word of
God.

But the mystery is this, all outward things are indifferent, and we are to
please one another in them, and the spirit without the word is a rule to us, in
the ordering of externals. We hear Saltmarsh and M. Beacon say, we must please
one another in love in outward things, so H. Nicholas says, pattern of the
pres. Temp. The Services and Ceremonies (he means all the Idolatrous service
of the Church of Rome) shall not save any one without the good nature of Jesus
Christ, and of his service of love, nor yet condemn any one in that good
nature of Jesus Christ, nor in the service of love.

I see not then how Becold sinned in taking fifteen wives at once, for to
follow the word and figures of the Law, ( thou shall not commit Adultery is) as
Del and Familists tell us, the spirit of man that inlargeth and straitens the
spirit of God, which would have some color, if preaching of the word,
sacraments, hearing, were to be ordered by the wisdom of mere men, and if
Orthodox Doctrines of councels in their matter were men's devises, and not Gods
word, and if the spirit of God did not agree to go along with his own
Ordinance.

In Uniformity every Christian will do for peace sake, No rule for Uniformity
of doctrine worship, Government in the word, Familists make the fancy of a
spirit without the word, the only rule.
as far as Conscience will permit. But shall the Christian do nothing for
truths sake, and for the commanding law of God in Uniformity or in unity or
oneness in external worship? In external worship then we have no law, but
please one another in love, and the law of peace, or if Conscience have any
acting therein, it is Conscience acted by the Spirit without the word, so in
all externals (if we keep faith and love in the heart, we may live as we
list,) A good loose world: there is an Uniformity in wars, in marrying, in
whoring, in invading the rights of the Subjects, their power, liberty, goods,
possessions, we have no law in these, but peace and pleasing one another in
love* And what may we not do then? If we keep Familistical love in our heart,
which is the Godly being, and the Godding of man with God, a permitting
Conscience, no word of God is our rule, But the only rule (say they) is
Conscience, Led with peace, that is with a desire to please one another in
love, in all externals, in cursing or no cursing, murdering or no murdering,
whoring, no whoring, lying, blaspheming, railing, no lying, no blaspheming, no
railing. For the written word and law of God, the Old and New Testament to
Antinomians and Familists is a form. a letter, and some certain figures,
which yet are not the Christian man's obliging rule Saltm. sparkles of glory p.
238, 239. for p. 216, 217. The whore is adorned (says he) with gold and
pearl, which are those excellencyes of nature and forms of worship, and
Scriptures with which she decks her self as a counterfit Spouse of Christ page
243.245. So the Uniformity of having the same Old and New Testament, and the
same Law and Gospel preached, is here covertly condemned, and the having the
same outward Ordinances, is contrary, to inward and spiritual unity in the
Godly being of love and faith, as if we had no word of God for to read
Scripture, partake of Ordinances, but all externals were free. In things of the
mind, we look for no compulsion, but of light and reason.

The Author means in Religion and faith, which cannot be compelled, we look
for no compulsion; This was as much; As we look not from the Parliament, for
any Laws or use of the Sword to punish us, then if one should deny there is a
God, as many fools do: if any should blaspheme and rail against the Godhead,
we look the Parliament should not take notice of it.

2 all Religion here comes in under the name of things of the mind. Then
Familists, who seek no more but love in the heart, will be glad that all
externals be cut off, now there is nothing then of Religion but Opinions,
knowing, believing, hoping, fearing, loving, for bowing to Idols, perjury,
adoring of the Devil, vocal covenanting with Satan these have nothing to do
with Religion, for they are not things of the mind, I observed before that H.
Nicholas epistle to the two Daughters of Warwick, said, Christ gives leave to
any man to deny his Religion before men, if the heart be good Christ is not so
cruel nor taken with the blood of men, as to will any to lose his life, his
houses, children, brother, sister, lands, for him and the Gospel. He may deny
God and Christ, and both Law and Gospel before earthly Judges, if he keep a
good heart to God, he fails not against Religion, or any of the first four
commands; for Religion is fettered within the circle of the mind.

2. If all Religion be a thing of the mind: If any think and believe he may
take fifteen wives, and offer his child a sacrifice to God as Abraham did,
and that he may take his neighbors goods, because the Saints are the owners
of the earth, and may marry his wives sister, his own mother in law, he cannot
act according to his faith, because he may be compelled to unact and abstain
from such things of the mind by the power of the sword. Now this is great
compulsion to things of the mind.

3. I know not any, that ever I read, or heard, said, the sword of men can
compel the mind, or compel men in things of the mind; for let the
persecuting Emperors, and all the Tyrants on earth, armed with the fury and
power of the Prince of the bottomless pit, torture, torment, or kill, they
cannot reach soul, mind, will, conscience and affections, The sword a means
of defending souls from being perverted from the truth, but no means at all by
our doctrine to or for the conversion of men, to the truth or propagating of
the Gospel.
we never said that the sword is a means of converting souls to Christ, or
that Religion is, or can be compelled: but we hold that the sword is an
external, though not simply necessary means to hinder wolves and grievous
foxes to destroy the souls of others, by bringing out of their corrupt minds
in word, writing, teaching, professing another Gospel, such as fleshly and
abominable familisme; now the not perverting of the souls of others, the only
object of the Magistrates sword, is not the conversion, nor any sign that the
false teacher thus hindered to hurt the flock, is converted to the faith. The
Magistrate then defends only, and guardeth the Law of God and Church from
pestilent heresy, but neither he, nor his sword is hereby made a means, way,
or cause of conversion of souls, or propagating the Gospel: who ever usurp
the sword to defend ravening wolves, that, with such doctrine destroys the
flock of Christ, they give their power to the beast, and their horns and
strength to the false Prophet, and I writ it, God shall deliver souls out of
their captivity; (for the elect cannot finally be seduced, Matthew. 24.24.) and
shall make their carcases fall as dung upon the open field, and as the handful
after the harvest man, and none shall gather them, and make them as a wheel
and as stubble before the wind, and fill their faces with shame.

But if conscience ought to be the ruling principle in all we do in acts of
the second, as well as the first Table of the Law; yea in eating and drinking,
1 Cor. 10.31. the sword has no place at all over Christians, or any at least
professing Christ: these that marry many wives at once, and sacrifice their
children to devils, and thrust men out of their possessions, and take them to
themselves, because they, being Saints, are the only just owners of the earth,
and the meek shall inherit the earth, these that swear a Covenant when they
are low, as Familists do profess they may, and deny their Religion before
men, as H. Nich. taught and diverse Anabaptists and Nicodemits in Calvin's time,
and then unsweare and perjure and break their Covenant with God and men, when
they have the sword in their hand, will swear and suffer for it, that they do
all these from mere conscience, and upon Religious grounds in the mind, and
the Magistrate is as much obliged to believe that conscience leads them in all
these, as he is to believe all Religions are to be suffered, and the justified
man cannot sin, cannot steal, murder, swear, whore, blaspheme, cosen, and
he ought not to compel with the sword, godly men in some things of the mind,
and not in all things, except he be partial in the Law.

In other things God has put the sword in the Parliaments hands, for the
terror of evil doers -- If any plead exemption from it, he knows not the
Gospel.

Answ. If for the terror of evil doers, then for the terror of false teachers,
who are grievous wolves not sparing the flock, Act. 20.29. evil workers, Phil.
3.2. and make these that receive them in their houses, and far more in an
Army of Saints, partakers of their evil deeds, 2 John v.10. who subvert whole
families, Tit. 1.11. make their followers twofold more the children of hell
then themselves, Matthew. 23.15.

2. If by other things the Author mean all things but Religion, then
Parliaments have no place to be Nurse-fathers to the Church, they have done
usurpingly to swear to defend the Reformed Religion of the Church of Scotland,
to extirpate heresies, and what is contrary to sound doctrine; that is, to root
out Familisme, Antinomianisme, Socinianisme, Arrianisme, Antiscripturisme,
Papists, Prelates, Seekers, Arminians.

3. If any plead exemption from the Parliaments sword, he knows not the
Gospel: that is a poor punishment, vale at totum, many, of the Authors way,
subvert the doctrine of the Gospel, as all the familists: But the Author says
not, he shall feel the weight of his sword; but only, he knows not the
Gospel: then many Anabaptists who hold this thing of the mind: under the new
Testament there ought to be no Christian Magistrate, no Christian ought to
bear the sword, cannot know the Gospel; there are of these that think they
know the Gospel as well as this Author. And Saltmarsh the prime Chaplain of
the Army professes he knows more of the Gospel then Wicklef, Calvin, Luther,
and all Protestants generally. Yet he sets the Magistrates up for worldly
societies, and more principally for the people of God in the flesh. Sparkl.
glo. p. 138. but the Saints in this life (says he) attain to all Spirit, page
71, 72, 198, 206, 207. and are above the flesh and Ordinances, and to return
to a dispensation of the flesh that needs Magistracy, is to come back and
remain in Sodom, page 75. when the Lord has bid you come out, page 121.122.

The Author and M. Saltmarsh must herein renounce H. Nicholas (and they are so
near of kin that all the water in Thames cannot wash their blood asunder, the
one from the other) for H.N. says Spirit. Laud. c. 34. s. 8.9. The family of
love have no heads, nor Kings which are borne of the flesh and blood of sin.
And c. 37. s. 7. It is well-pleasing of God, that one man of God lordeth not
over the other, neither that the one be the others bond-servant, c. 38. s. 4. A
King is the scum of ignorance. Then the Saints cannot return to that carnal
dispensations to be under Magistrates, but Familists by their principles, have
leave to say one thing and believe the contrary. So does H.N. teach Epist. to
the two daughters of Warwick.

M. Bowls for ungratitude a monster of men, if he be the Author of that lying
Pamphlet, called Manifest truths, could have witnessed more against the sense
of this letter, but he, defending it, betrayeth the truth, the Covenant of God,
as too many like him do now, for he casts a covering over this letter, and
passes it in a word, and boldly asserteth for truths many gross lies, and
spoke never one word in Print of the heresies and foul tenets which he heard
as an eare-witnesse in the Army, though his charge was to be a preacher.

To conclude, I know none that would wring the sword out of the Parliaments
hand, but these that force the Parliament by the terror of twenty thousand
armed men, either to grant their unjust demands by Thursday at night next, or
they will take some extraordinary course with them.

So Beacon in his Familisticall Catechism, p. 189. would prove the truth of
this, That we must in outward things please one another in love, as if all
outward acts of Idola^ry, murder, perjury, were indifferent, is taught by
Familists, Saltmar. Beacon, and others,
that all externalls are indifferent, by Gal. 6.15. For in Christ Jesus neither
circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature, and 1
Cor. 10.29. Now by outward things Familists must mean all outward worship or
Idolatry, and why not acts of saving or destroying our brother, the taking or
not taking of your neighbors wife to please her in love, for the Law of love,
of Spirit and life is more Royal and excellent, then committing Idolatry or
not committing Idolatry, then murder, adultery, perjury, etc. or not doing of
these outward things, because the Law of love, is the cause and general
Commandment of the whole Law and above externalls; but if these be
indifferent, so as we must, for love and the unity of the Spirit, do them, or
not do them; then Peter was not to be blamed by Paul, Gal. 2. for he pleased
the Jews in that he did, but Paul says in Judaizing in a less matter, he was
to be blamed, and looked awry to the Gospel.

Nor can Familists say in externals in the first table we are to do, or not do,
as the Law of love, in pleasing one another, shall permit, but in matters of
the second Table before men, we are not to murder, or not murder, whore or
not whore, because the Law of love cannot stand with murdering, whoring,
stealing.

Ans. I see not but the indifferency upon the Familists ground is the same as
touching both Tables of the Law.

1. Because if Christ free us from the Law as a rule of life, he freeth us from
the Commandments of the second Table, as a rule of life, as from these of the
first Table, because the Gospel-liberty is alike from all and every part of the
Law, except we say Christ leaves us under condemnation as touching sins
against the second Table, but freeth us from condemnation as touching Idolatry,
perjury, blasphemy, Atheism, unbeleefe, which is absurd.

2. We are to please one another in love, Romans 15. especially in acts of
charity between man and man, in eating or not eating, Romans 14. and why not in
acts of adultery and murder? he that said, (Thou shall not worship false Gods)
said (Thou shall do no murder.)

3. The Law of loving God which is more worthy then the Law of loving our
neighbor, makes the keeping of the first Table as strong a band to please God
in loving him, and in keeping all his Commandments, as the Law of loving of
our neighbor, if it be true, that we must obey God rather then man.

4. But here is the mystery, there is no sin, in relation to God, can be
committed by a pardoned man, because pardon makes him he cannot sin; but for
scandals sake he must not displease his brother.

2. If we must, in outward things, please all, in love and the unity of the
Spirit, then does the Law of love oblige us to contradictory observances at one
and the same time, which is unpossible: for to be circumcised, offended Paul,
and believers of the Gentiles, and not to be circumcised, offended the Jews,
then do what ye can, ye must fail against the Law of love and the unity of
the Spirit: And then Saltmarsh and Beacon among Jews must be circumcised, and
Paul says, that is to fall from Christ; then may we whore or not whore,
murder or not murder, to please one another in love, and profess or deny
Christ before men, to please one another.

3. The law of God and command of Christ, that must flow from the law of love,
(for love is a fullfilling of the law) does command the Apostles to teach and
baptize, and command the people to hear, and be baptized, and to eat and
drink till the Lords second coming, in remembrance of Christ crucified, then
except we sin against the love of God, we cannot wholly omit these outward
things.

4 Upon this ground, Saltmarsh and Beacon do preach, writ Books, pray, which
are outward things, yet they cannot but displease their brethren the Seekers,
and the most spiritual or rather most carnal of the Family of love, in so
doing, for they break the unity of the Spirit in these outward things, when
they ought in love to please one another, and not writ any thing, which they
think and profess to be a ly. The place Gal 6. has this sense, neither
circumcision of the Jews nor want of circumcision in the Gentiles of themselves
and separated from a divine commanding Authority and inward renovation can save
a man, The place Gal. 6.15. neither circumcision nor uncircumcision avaleth
etc. cleared,
but a new Creature by faith only.

Or rather, neither the Jew, called circumcision, nor the Gentiles, called
uncircumcision, (as in Gal. 2.7.) is any thing, nor are men saved, because
Jews, or because Gentiles, but as new Creatures in Christ, as Gal. 6.28, 29.
There is neither Jew nor Greek in Christ, etc. as the ver. 16. clears, as
many as walk according to this rule, etc. Then it makes nothing, for the
indifferency of circumcision, which to use at that time was to run in vain,
and to fall from Christ, Gal. 5. and for Romans 15. Paul speaks of meats at
that time indifferent, in the which we are to please one another in love, but
not but according to the rules of love and charity, yea, we are to displease
one another rather, ere we displease God and murder our brothers soul: Paul
would not please Peter in Judaizing, Yea, if an Antinomian, or a Familist, a
Socinian, an Arrian or any false teacher come to us, he not bringing this
doctrine of the Gospel, we are not to please him in love, though preaching
another doctrine be an outward thing, yea, we are not to receive him unto our
house, nor to bid him God speed, for he that bids him God speed, is partaker of
his evil deeds, and we are never bidd^n keep the unity of the spirit with false
teachers.

5 It is true, love is more then outward things, and the greatest commandment
next to the love of God. But loves excellency stands not in this, that we must
break any Commandment of God, to please our Brethren in love. Christ should
have the pre-eminence in all things above our Brother.

6. Saltmarsh has no warrant to call the Commandments of Christ in outward
things such as to read, and search the Scriptures, to preach the Gospel, to
hear the preaching of faith, to be baptized, worldly rudiments, which name,
Gal. 4.9. and worse, yea the name of weak and beggarly rudiment; Paul gives
to Jewish Ceremonies, (...).
that were then in their use unlawful. Christ speaks more honorably of the
Commandments of the New Testament, Mat. 28.20. teaching them to observe all
whatsoever I have commanded you, Joh. 15.14. You are my friends, if you do
whatsoever I command you, Joh. 13.17. If ye know these things, happy are ye
if ye do them, Mat. 12.50. whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is
in heaven, the same is my brother, my sister, and my mother, Mat. 7.21. Not
every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven, but
he that does the will of my Father which is heaven.

I well remember that H. Nicholas, Evang. c. 31. s. 1.2. and s. 23. Calls the
Church of Rome, the communion of all Christians; the Pope the chief anointed,
the most holy father, the Cardinals most holy and famous, and next to the most
ancient and holy father the Pope, in most holy Religion and understanding; no
doubt because there is no sin, no Idolatry in external worship, if love be
in the heart. The Familists repute all personal morfication and sanctification
done in the strength of Grace, worldly rudiments and all outward things,
killing or not killing, whoring or not whoring, pleasing our neighbor or
sister in whoring or not whoring, hearing the word, or not hearing, praying or
not praying; Prelacie, and Popery, or the contrary, as they please or displease
men, indifferent, and nothing to one that is in Christ Jesus. This is a fair
way for John of Leyden to take fifteen wives, and for plurality of wives, and
promiscuous lusts, robberies, and the world of David George, to act all
villainies external; for the Familists and Saltmarsh say the outer man cannot
sin, and in all externalls we are to please one another in love, and not to
count a rush or a straw of pleasing, or displeasing of the Lord our God, if
there be familisticall love, or Antinomian faith in the heart, all is well.

3. I do not (says Saltmarsh) undervalue other attaintments or lessen them;
he means, Prelacy, Popery, Presbytery, Independency, though he be in words
against them all, being now turned Seeker, but if they be unlawful, as you
judge them, ye should not only undervalue them, but hate them as spots of the
flesh, have no communion with them, as being unfruitful works of darkness,
but rather reprove them, Ephesians. 5.11. as mere will worship, and lies spoken in
hypocrisy, but all, that is contrary to true sanctification, is but trifles to
Familists.

4. In several dispensations, Christians are not to hasten out of any, till
the Lord himself say come up hither. Familists will it lawful for no man to
come out of Prelacy, Popery or any unlawful way till the spirit effectually
draw them.
This (come up hither) is a call of the Spirit, effectually moving and drawing
men from Prelacy, Popery, the way of Legalists (for these are the attaintments
he speaks of) up to higher attaintments, to a Gospel way of Antinomianisme,
to a higher way of all Spirit, and pure Spirit, which now Saltmarsh has found
out, though H. Nicholas, David George, Munc^r and Becold of Leyden, have saved
him a great deal of labor. For H. Nicholas proverbs chapter 3. s. 12. divised
sundry orbs or several out-breakings of light; 1 From Adam to Noah. 2 Then
from Noah till Abraham. 3 Till Moses. 4. Till Samuel and David. 5 Till
Zorobabel. 6 Till Christ. 7 Till cursed H. N. But if these lower attaintments
of Popery, Prelacy, etc. be sinful and unlawful way^s, and if the state of
Law-bondage be a denying that Christ is come in the flesh, and the attaintment
of Presbytery* that teaches the Magistrate should use the sword against wolves
and false teachers, be to Sal^m. persecution; then must Christians not hasten
out of that dispensation, of Popery and persecution of the Saints, but must
sleep in Sodom, as being obliged by no letter of a commandment to has^en out
till the Spirit inwardly call, Come up hither, as John was in a rapture and
vision, called to come up hither, Rev. 4.1.

So then 1. We must bear one another burdens of Popery and persecution; so
does Saltmarsh countenance a bloody War against the Presbyterians, and that for
Liberty of conscience; this is to bear our corpse in a wet and bloody winding
sheet to the grave, in waiting for raptures of the Spirit.

2. Then are we not obliged to come out of any sin, or way of Popery,
Presbytery, or persecution, till, by a vision and rapture of the Spirit, God
speak effectually to the heart, and say, Come up hither.

3. Then we do nothing against a Law obligation, till the Spirit move us. So
the Spirit not moving shall be the cause of all sin, and not the sinner; for
he does nothing against an obliging rule, because the Spirit saying, Come up
hither, is the only obliging rule of men, not the letter of any Commandment
say they. Saltmarsh Sparkles p. 243.

4. Saltmarsh but the last year said, Free grace pa. 97.98. We cannot too
hastily believe in Jesus Christ, and hasten from out of the inthralling law,
now this year, he will have men staying under any dispensation, and not hasten
out till God say, Come up hither.

5. All men must please themselves in the false religions and know its Gods
will they hasten not out of Sodom, till a Rapture say, Come up hither, and if
that never come, they are, contentedly and submissively unto Gods revealed
will, to sit still, there in a sinful and unlawful worship, for this is Gods
will so to do.

^. I am not against the Law (says he) nor repentance, nor duties, nor
ordinances, so as all flow from the right principles.

Ans. But I never knew a controversy between Antinomians and Protestants, How
Saltmar. is against Duties.
whether repentance and duties flow from the principles of Free grace, and the
in-dwelling Spirit of Jesus, if Antinomians move this question, their Arminians
and Pelagians, (of which, diverse are with them,) not we, are their adversaries.

2. For the right principle of ordinances, we know none, but the Spirit
speaking in the word. Familists will have no ordinances, but the Law written in
the heart, this we disclaim. But

3. The question is touching our obligation to repentance and duties; they say
to sorrow for sins that Christ has so blotted out, that they have neither
name, being, nor nature of sins, is unlawful, and we are obliged by no
Commandment of God (say they) to duties, the Spirit makes us willing, but the
word and Spirit are not contrary (as we conceive) and the Spirit does oblige as
it goes along with the obliging word; for if ye commit murder, or lie, say
they being justified, ye sin not, but the flesh in you. 2. We are not
guilty therein, because the Spirit acted us not to forbear. 3. It was pardoned
and remitted before it was committed, and so has neither name nor nature of
sin* for the right end of duties, we know no other, but to glorify God, to
be landmarks or a way to our country, and to testify we love our Redeemer,
we make them not one penny of payment for heaven.

^ I am not against the settlement of Church Government prudently as now.

Saltmarsh is for any Church government of men's devising.
Ans. If Prudential-government be from Christ and his Testament, it is not
enough, not to be against Christ, but ye must be with him; if it be not of
Christ, the more shame to you, and all your way, not to be against that which
has not Christ for its Father and Author.

2 The King of the Church, in all substantials, has set out a plat-forme in
his word; Humane prudence is too bold to prescribe to Christ how he should rule
his House. But this way, Saltmarsh is not against the Church Government of
Rome, by Popes, Cardinals, Patryarchs, Metropolitans, Arch-Bishopes, and the
Government abjurd in his Covenant, for these be prudential Church-governments.

3 It is a wide Familisticall conscience to teach there is no Church, no
ministry, no preaching, no censures now on earth, as you and all Seekers do,
and yet not to be against a Church Government in a prudential way, in which
the Magistrate sits as a Church Officer to judge. But this is the detestable
Neutrality of Antinomians in all Religions to be neither hot, nor cold, this,
nor that.

6 Nor is this any cause or reason why Saltmarsh should not be against the
Prudentiall Government of man's devising, because God has his people under
several attaintments and measures, as in Queen Mary's Martyrdom, for then,
because God has saved some under Prelacie, some under Popery, yea, before
Christ's coming, some under Gentilisme, as Saltmarsh thinks of Job, for then
Saltmarsh and Familists should not be against the settlement of Prelaticall
Government and of their Romish Ceremonies: not against Popish and Heathenish
Prudentiall and Idolatrous Church Government, I think then Saltmarsh will be
any thing in externals, Paganish, Popish, or Prelatical, no wonder then, that
Familists in their Petition rail against Puritans for none-conformity, and
profess in their Petition to King James their obedience to all the Prelaticall
will worship.

CHAP. XXXI. Saltmarsh and Familists teach that there is salvation in all
Religions.
I Am only against a form, as it becomes an Engine of persecution, etc.
Saltmarsh and Familists ^each that there is salvation in all Religions.
Ans. So Saltmarsh here opens a great mystery of Familisme, which is Liberty of
conscience, and salvation under all Religions, for if any form of Religion,
never so sound be commanded even by a Law of God, and ratified politically by a
Law of man, and none left free to men's own Spirit as to the only binding rule,
though it be a Spirit of Satan, it is no lawful Religion to Saltmarsh. Now
that this is his mind is clear from that he says Spark. 171, 172. In books
of controversy, we can but set letter to letter, and Scripture to Scripture,
and argument to argument, and nothing can be judged till the day or time of
more revelation of truth, till the Holy Ghost and fire sit upon each of us,
trying every man's work, and burning up that in us which is hay and stubble, in
which words beside that Saltm. judges and condemns himself in writing this
same book of Controversy in favor of the Familists condemning, in express
words, the Protestants in all the articles of their faith, he will have no man
to see truth, or to judge any otherwise, or know what he believes but by
conjectures, till the day of revelation come, that he turn Familist and become
all Spirit, and all glory; so all the Protestants that are not Familists set
but letter to letter, and are literal legalists, and have no certainty what
they believe, and when this Spirit comes, he teaches not by the word,
setting letter to letter, and Scipture to Scripture, but by immediate
inspiration, above and beyond the word.

2. This Spirit even having come upon Saltmarsh, as he plainly says, p. 68.
And in his Epistle to the Parliament p. 2.3. does but dictate to him errors,
hay and stabble that must be consumed; for if he so do, when he has taught
these toys he teaches the contrary the next day, what a spirit is this?

3. If the Scripture be not the judge of controversies, by setting letter to
letter, Scripture to Scripture (understood according to the natural, and
genuine grammatical sense, which the words yield without constraint) then is
the Scripture, as Scripture, and in its native sense, a nose of wax, and has
no native sense, but we are to expect a higher, spiritual allegorick sense,
then the letter can bear, and that from the Spirit. We have by this way then
no certain rule of faith the un^^able then may lawfully wrest the scripture to
their own des^ruction* Paul proves Jesus to be the true Messiah, and that
convincingly, he confounded the Jews, (...), confuting them, that they were
confounded in their mind, and strongly proved, with violence and strength of
Scripture light, that this is the Christ, (...) Act. 9.22. and Christ remitteth
the Jews to the Scriptures as the judging rule, Act. 5.39. If the Scriptures be
so dark, uncertain, doubt some to natural men, void of the Spirit, ye shall
not convince Cain by the 6. Commandment that he is a murderer* nor Achan by
the 8 Command, that he is a thief nor Ananias that he is a liar. All may say
the Spirit has the contrary sense, and that truly by this way.

And in the following words, he would not be against an Assembly or Synod at
Westminster (though he deny there is any such Ordinance of God) now, as Synod,
or Ministers or Church) if they would minister as they have received; that is,
propound to all the Kingdom (he says not, Every man's own conscience, and
own spirit is his only Bible and obliging rule in all Religions to Mr. Saltm.
and Familists.
all the Churches) what they are persuaded of in their conscience, and leave it
without compulsion to the Spirit of God to persuade; for this were true
liberty, where we see, to minister as we receive, 1 Pet. 4.10. to Saltmarsh, is
to teach and propound to others, and walk themselves, and accordingly believe
as they have received, that is according as they are persuaded in their
conscience; then if the Assembly of Divines were persuaded in their consciences
that to one man to have fifteen wives at once, as John of Leyden, and his,
believed, and that the Alcaron were the truth of God, he should think they
minister as they received, all the Familists and Antinomians in England, if
they should sit down in a Synod, and all the Papists in another Synod, all the
Socinians, in third Synod, all the Arrians in a fourth, all the Prelatic all
Reconcilers in a fifth, all the Anabaptists in a sixth, and propound such things
only as they have received or they are in conscience persuaded of, to all the
Kingdom, they should then all minister as they had received, and should be
good stewards of the manifold grace of God; for so Peter speaks, 1 Pet. 4.11.
for sure Saltmarsh cannot say, the commandment of the Parliament must be
required to make a Synod, if men speak their own drunken persuasions, to M.
Saltmarsh they fulfill the Apostle Peter's rule, Let every one minister as he
has received. Now, by this, to minister as we receive, is not to minister, as
we receive from the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.23. nor according as Ministers, Hear the
word at the mouth of G^d, Ezeck. 2.8. chapter 2.10. or as the anointing teaches
us, 1 John 2.^^. Joh 6.45, 46. because the Lord or his Spirit, or the anointing
cannot teach men lies, contrary to the word of truth; but the persuasions of
men often are lies, errors, mistakes, then shall every man's erroneous
conscience, and his own dreaming spirit be the rule of his own faith, and his
teaching of others.

And 2. This is clear from his words in the former Epistle to the Parliament,
if such as conform not to doctrine and discipline of the Church, and preach
without ordination, shall be proceeded against by fines, imprisonment, then all
the glorious discoveries of God above, or beyond that systeme, or form of
doctrine, shall be judged and sentenced as heresy and schism, and so God
himself shall be judged by man. Now this consequence is nothing, that God must
be judged by man, except the persuasions of the consciences of Familists,
Antinomians, Socinians, Arminians, Arrians, and all the sects that say they are
the godly party, be very God, believing, professing, teaching in them, then, if
such can no more be judged then God, what ever their spirit persuades them,
must be truth; for God cannot but persuade truth, then I confess the Sects
must be infallible, because the Scriptures say no more of the Prophets and
Apostles, then God spoke in them; and the mouth of Prophets is called the very
mouth of God, Luke 1.

3. Why? These judges, the Saints, now called Sectaries, are not infallible?
but when Sectaries come twenty thousand armed men against the Presbyterians,
who in conscience believe and have proved that the Sectaries speak lies in
hypocrisy, must not they be infallible in both, judging them to speak against
their conscience, and in opposing Liberty of conscience, and also in killing
them, or then they kill men upon fallible conjectures: Then if Presbyterians be
persuaded in their conscience, that liberty of conscience is Atheism, not true
liberty, then must Sectaries, who are but men, judge God, and punish us,
because we minister to others what we have received, for we are persuaded of
the truth we teach.

4. This way promises salvation in all Religions, so men in these be persuaded
in their conscience of the truth thereof, against which the Assembly has
determined according to the word of God, chapter 20. Sect. 3. and. c. 10. Sect. 4.

CHAP. XXXII. What certainty of faith the Saints may attain to beyond the
Familists fluctuation of faith: of Heresy and Schism.
5. FAmilists, and Antinomians, go one with the Belgicke Arminians, and all
our late English Independents, who are for Liberty of conscience, and a
Catholic toleration and punishing in a coercive way no kind of men never so
blasphemous, for their conscience teach and print what they will, there being
no infallibility now in any, A twofold infallibity.
since the Apostles expired: But this is a most false ground; for there is a
twofold infallibility; one in teaching, flowing from immediate inspiration,
proper to the Prophets and Apostles: and another infallibility and certainty of
persuasion common to all believers. Now Libertines turn all our faith in a
topicke and conjecturall opinion, so most of them are turned Scepticks and
affirm that we know nothing with any certainty; yea the more supernatural and
sublime that fundamentalls of salvation are, the more indulgence and latitude
of liberty is to be yielded to the consciences of all men, because the higher
the subject is, the ranker is our propension to err, God having given a
thinner and more scarce measure of knowledge in supernatural things, that do
so far transcend the sphere and orb of natural reason, then of knowledge in
natural things, our minds being in their own element, and in a capacity to
reach their connaturall and proper object when they are among natural things
knowable by the light of nature, hence that opinion now so prevailing* that all
and every Religion is to be Tolerated, and an indulgence yielding to all in
superstructurs in foundamentals, though a man should deny that Christ is the
Savior of the world, therefore Saltmarsh takes on him, Sparkles of glory as p.
185, 186, 187, 188 to recko^ out the articles of our faith, especially
concerning the first Adams sin, sin original, of Christ borne of the Virgin
Mary, made under the law, bearing our sins, dead, buried, ascended into Heaven,
siting at the right hand etc. and speaks of the highest attaintments of the
Protestants generally in the mystery of salvation. but speaks not one word of
the general resurrection of our bodies, of Christ coming to judge all men, of
a Heaven and Hell after this life, as if these were none of the highest
attaintments of the Protestants generally in the mystery of salvation.

And Saltmarsh, as I conceive with Hymeneus and Philetus, and other Libertines
in the Army, doubt of, or deny these; therefore not owning these points of
faith, nor the doctrine of faith, repentance, love, new obedience, praying,
preaching, sacraments, as if he professed himself no Protestant in these
points, says, these are believed by Protestants, but does not own them as a
part of his own belief, but he goes on p. 190. and teaches us of a further
discovery as to free grace, as if Protestants had never attained to a further
discovery as to free grace, and here he falls in on his own secrets of
Antinomianisme and contradicts the Protestants, and debaseth the confession
of the late Anabaptists the seven Churches and of the assembly of Divins at
Westminster: and speaks not one word in this new discovery of Christ God-man
born of a woman, under the law, etc. or of the Articles of the faith of
Protestants yea, pa. 198, 199, etc. he tells us of the last, and as some say, of
the highest and most glorious discovery concerning the whole mystery of God to
men, and his creation, in which he again says nothing of the Protestant
faith, not one word of Christ, God and Man, of the Resurrection, of the last
Judgment, of the Life to come, which yet the Apostle Heb. 6.1, 2. makes
fundamentals of salvation, though the Chapter tells us in the Title, of the
last discovery, and highest concerning the whole mystery of God to men.

But in that Chapter, 1. He denies the Trinity and makes the three persons
(as Mr. Beacon does, in his Catechism also p. 47, 48, 49, 50, 51.) but
manifestations of God. Thus God being infinitely one, yet in a threefold
manifestation (says he) to us of Father, Son and Spirit, etc. a person is not
a manifestation, but has need to be manifested to us, and denying the
personal union of the second person with the Man Christ, Saltmarsh with
Familists, denies the personal union of the two natures in Christ God-man.
he makes it but God present with men and Angels in the manifestation of grace
and salvation, and with Devils and wicked men in the manifestation of Law and
Justice. So God is no more united to our nature in the man Christ, then he is
united, to Angels and Devils, and to elect men and the wicked and the
reprobate: and Christ is no more God-man in one person, then he is God-Angel,
or God-Devill, (I tremble to speak it) in one person, and Christ is just
God-man the Son of Mary, born of a woman and of the seed of David, as he is
God-Peter, God-Paul, God Cain, God-Judas Iscariot; for says he, p. 199. God
makes out himself in an image in this creation or nature, and therefore he
takes to himself one part of it into union to himself, according to one way of
manifestation called in the Scripture light, love, grace, salvation, Father,
Bridegroom, glory, and that part which injoyes. God in this manifestation is
called the Angels, the Saints, the elect, the Son, the Tabernacle of God, the
new Jerusalem, What a new union between Christ, God and man, devils and
Angels, Saltmarsh has devised.
the Temple, the Spouse, -- he takes to himself the other part of the
creation, and there he is present, but not in this way of grace and light, but
of another manifestation called Law, justice, wrath, everlasting burning, and
these are called devils, wicked men, flesh, which live in God and subsist in
him as creatures in their being. Now the Scripture calls this the great mystery
of godliness, God manifested in the flesh. Saltmarsh makes this as great a
mystery, God manifested in the Devil to cast him into hell. And as the new
Jerusalem, the Spouse is Christ, or God in the flesh of the Saints and Angels
by grace and salvation, and Christ lives in Paul, and Paul is by grace, Godded
and Christed, and the Angel Gabriel Godded and Christed, so Christ lives in
Cain, Judas, Beelzebub, by justice and condemnation; and the union of God is
neither personal in the son of Mary, nor in Satan, but only in the effects of
grace and salvation in all the elect, and by Law and justice in all the damned
Angels and men, and here is the mystery. God is all that part of the creation
that comes under the name of reasonable creatures, men and Angels, and all
the Angels and men created of God were crucified with Christ; and all are the
Lord of glory by union, so that as Libertines made God the soul, form, and
life of all things, men and devils, and said that God wrought all good, all
ill in the creatures, and no creature was to be praised for doing well, nor to
be blamed or punished for ill doing, because God is the Author of
righteousness and sin; so the Familists say that Christ is the form and soul
of men elect and reprobate, of Angels elect and reprobate, and that God works
in them, and is united to them, and they are mere passive organs in all good or
ill. So I believe Saltm. and the Familists do subvert the whole faith, and hold
nothing with us, but doubt of all.

But I return to that I said, there is a twofold infallibility: now, A twofold
certainty one Prophetical, another of faith, the former was peculiar to the
penmen of Scripture, the other to all believers.
though believers have not that infallibility proper to Prophets and Apostles,
in prophesying and writing Scripture, yet must we not run to the other
extremity, and say as these that fight for Liberty of conscience, that there is
not, since the Prophets and Apostles fell asleep, any infallible persuasion and
certainty of faith; but all our knowledge is conjecturall, and a mere
fluctuation and fleeting opinion, and a faith for a year, a month, or an
hour, which we may lay aside the next month, and that anointing even the
Spirit of God infuseth in us opinions of God contrary among themselves, and
false and true which is the present judgment of our mind, which we are to
stand to and to suffer for, or to deny as we see the times go.

For 1. The Scripture tells us of a sure persuasion of things believed, Luke
1.1. (...) and Luke holds forth to Theophilus a certainty of knowledge (...)
that thou may know the certainty of these things whereof thou have been
instructed, So the word imports a certainty, Act. 5.23. Act. 21.34. Act. 22.30.
Act. 25.26. Act. 2.36. Let all the house of Israel know (...) assuredly. A full
and certain persuasion excludes all doubting and deception or mistake, and
this the Saints have and may have, Col. 2.2. That their hearts might be
comforted -- unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, (...) 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. The Gospel came not to you in word only -- but in much assurance,
Romans 4.21. being fully persuaded. This was the persuasion of a faith, and such
a faith as by which we are justified without works, Romans 14.5. Let every one
be fully persuaded (...) in his own mind, 2 Timothy 4.17. That by me the
preaching might be fully known. Nor is that persuasion of Paul's Apostolic,
or by revelation extraordinarily, but common to all Christians, Romans 8.38. For
I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, etc. shall be able to
separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, 2 Timothy
1.12. I know in whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to
keep that which I have committed to him against that day. This certain
persuasion must be certain and infallible both to themselves, and grounded
upon the promise and truth of God, who cannot lie, Tit. 1.2. Yea and our
Divines with good warrant say the Catholic in visible Church is thus far
infallible that in 1 fundamentalls, What infallibility agrees to the Saints,
and the Church Catholic, and invisible.
2 necessary for salvation they cannot, 3 finally and totally, err and fall
from the faith.

But all our Divines and your own confession of the Assembly at Westminster
says, chapter 31. Art. 4. All Counsels, general or particular, since the
Apostles times, may err, and many have erred.

To which I answer, No Counsels, nay nor the whole invisible Church is
infallible in the sense that the Apostles are infallible, both in believing and
teaching by immediate inspiration, and so their word is not a rule of faith.

2. A General Council conveened in Council may err in particular Synodicall
acts, that is for a time and in some points as the Synod means; but it
follows not, ergo, the invisible Church at all times, and finally may simply
fall from the sound faith of fundamentalls necessary for salvation, more then
this is a good consequence, this particular believer may in one particular
fundamental point err foully and grossly for a time; ergo, he is not
infallibille simpliciter, but may finally and totally fall away. And that of
our Saviors, I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not, Luke 22.32.
though it free not Believers from particular failings both in doctrine of
faith, and conversation of life, and that grossly and foully, yet it secures
them by Christ's intercession in a state of infallibility in fundamentalls, and
in a condition of indeclinability in conversion, so as believers are infallible
in point of faith touching fundamentalls necessary to salvation, except
Familists hold the Apostacy of the Saints, or that all may go to heaven
finally doubting.

Page 174.175. Sparkles Saltmars. tells what are the tradions of man, How
Familists define heresies.
and for Mark. 7.9. he cites Matthew. 9. or heresies* Now, a heresy (says he)
is something against the doctrine of faith in the word or Scriptures not
against any interpretations, doctrins, conclusions, glosses, comments, or
preaching of men, who speak not Scripture originally nor infallibly as the
Apostles did, but so far as that is the very Scripture they speak, and so far
as they speak the truth in Jesus, and in the Spirit of God, else they teach for
doctrines the traditions of men.

Answ. Traditions of men, are not necessarily errors in fundamentalls, except
only by a remote consequence as all errors are against the fundamentalls.

2. There are heresies that are by good consequence against fundamentalls; else
the Saduces their denying of the resurrection, Mat. 22. was no heresy; for
Christ proves by a good consequence that they denied the Scripture, I am the
God of Abraham; when Abraham was then dead when God spoke out of the bush to
Moses Exodus 3. yet they denied but conclusions deduced from Scripture.

3. There is another strange ingredient in heresy according to Familists; and
that is, because God speaks not now immediately his word to us as he did to the
Apostles: no man is an heretic that denies the whole faith, except he that
denies the Scripture as the Scripture, and except he deny it in so far as
teachers speak the truth in Jesus, and in the Spirit of God, else (that is if
they be not Famili^ts, that teach and speak not in the Famisticall spirit)
they teach for doctrines the traditions of men, that is heresies for Gods
truth; then to speak heresy is to speak only against fundamental truths,
when a Familist in the Spirit of God speaks them.

2. But then, when a heretic reads in the word this fundamental, Christ
came in the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15 though he deny it, and spit at
it, that is no heresy, because the paper and printed book speaks not in the
Spirit of Jesus.

3. The written word of God is not the word of God, but only the word is spoken
by a Familist in the Spirit of Christ.

4. When Preachers void of the Spirit speak that which is the very word of God
and fundamentalls of faith, these truths are not the word of God, but the
traditions of men, and heresies: so his Master H.N. taught the Scripture and
preaching to be but figurative service, the word of God was never published to
the world, till H.N. the least among the holy ones of God -- was made alive
through Christ, anointed with his godly being, manned himself with H N. and
godded H.N. with himself, The Schism that Familists acknowledge
published the light of glory. H. Nicholas, Evangelic. c. 34. sent. 9.

Page 175. Schism is a dividing from Christians who are in an outward
profession of truth. Now there may be schism i^ visible Churches or
fellowships of Saints upon this account, but there can be none in the true
body of Christ, or the spiritual Church; -- for they that are joined to the
Lord, are one spirit, and they are made perfect in one.

Answ. There is no outward Schism or renting but it begins at the heart.
Schism is a dividing of the hearts as well as a visible parting with the
Church or a part thereof, else schism were no sin, which yet Paul reproves
as a sin, 1 Cor. 1. 1 Cor. 3.1.

2. The Church of Corinth, and these that made a rent, were both the visible
and the invisible Church, that they were the visible, Saltm. cannot deny, they
were the invisible Church also, 1 Cor. 1.13. Christ was crucified for them, and
they were babes in Christ fed with milk, 1 Cor. 3.1.2. and built upon one only
foundation. v. 10. Saltmarsh must say they were all unconverted that made the
schism.

3. Familists will have none the true body and spiritual Church of Christ, but
the invisible Church: so that upon this account, they that believe and visibly
profess neither Christ nor his truth before men, yea who all their days deny
Christ, and so shall be denied of Christ before the Father and his holy
Angels, Matthew. 10.32, 33. may be and are the true body of Christ and the
Spiritual Church* so H. Nicholas Epistle to the two daughters of Warwick.

4. May not a schism and separation fall in these that are both the true body
and spiritual Church, when of a Church of believers effectually called
consisting of four hundred, two hundred separate, from two hundred? I think
they may as well as Barnabas, a good man and full of the Holy Ghost, separated
from Paul.

But in so far as they are (says he) in that one Spirit they cannot be
divided.

Ans. True, but Saltm. speaks lies in hypocrisy, when he says, the
spiritual Church are made perfect in one Lord in this life, upon the same
reason as they are one, and as united to the Lord they cannot lie, whore,
steal, murder; but out of some remnants of corruption they can sin. But
Familists put them in a condition they can in this life sin no more, or if
they sin, their transgression is not sin; it is not they but their Ass the
flesh that sins, as Libertines said, but that is no violation of the Law of
God.

CHAP. XXXIII. Saltmarsh Sparkles, page 22^. Familists mind touching Prayer.
ALL constant speakings to God in this (as they call) a conceived way or
impremeditate or extemporary way, is taken commonly amongst Christians for
prayer in the Spirit, and for that Spiritual way which the Disciples of Christ
used in the Gospel, who were grown up from the infancy and childishness of
forms or words taught them, which is but a mere natural or outward thing, as
they say, which any may perform by strength of natural parts, as wit, and
memory, and affections.

Saltmarsh here first condemns prayer morning and evening, under the words of
constant speakings to God, because he will have no praying but when the Spirit
acts immediately.

2. All extemporary prayers go not for praying in the Spirit, among Christians
commonly, he belyeth Protestants, and the truly anointed of God in this, words
are but the outward skin of prayer, the Spirit must add soul, heat and breath
to words.

Some have a sort of eloquence in praying who have as little of the Spirit of
adoption, as some that cannot pray without a book, a growing up from book
praying* to extempory praying is no growing in the Spirit, because if we
distinguish (as we should) between a gift of praying and preaching, and the
grace of adoption, or of praying and preaching in the Holy Ghost, many al their
days have a natural liberty of praying, and say Lord, Lord without a Book,
that are but workers of iniqu^ty, as diverse Antinomians and Familists are for
the most part, and their mere shining gifts and golden words are bought and
sold by the simple, for grace and the spirit of adoption.

3 Nor is extemporary prayer always a mere outward thing, because wit, memory,
and affections act therein, these powers are not mere blocks and stones in
praying, and by this argument, all that Saltmarsh writes is but a mere natural
and outward thing, and not writing in the spirit, as he vainly boasts in his
Books, because wit, memory, affections act in the producing of such prayers,
yea, they that are fleshly may write all the new discoveries and sparkles of
darkness, and flesh that Saltmarsh writes, for the Spirit never taught such
dreams, or rotten phancies, nor such interpretations, as he does offer to us,
as dictates of the pure spirit.

CHAP. XXXIV. A taste of the wild allegorick interpretations of Scripture that
are in this piece of Saltmarsh, which he fathers upon the pure immediate
actings of the Spirit beyond law and Gospel
Saltmarsh will have as many public preachers as are in covenant with God.
FRom this, Is God the God of the Jews only, and not of the Gentiles also? Romans
3. He infers that God has not limited ordination to the Presbytery, so as
none in a constituted Church should preach but they, as if to be a God to his
people in Covenant were to make al in Covenant men and women sent preachers of
the gospel.

2 Psa. 50. Thou thoughtest I was such a one as thy self: Because I punished
thee not, but was silent at thy Adulteries and Slanders, so the true sense is,
but Saltmarsh says, that is a God merely of one image, or figure: Therefore
God is not in one form of worship, (says he) the law, the gospel, but in
another beyond both, to wit the spirit. What greater violence can be done to
the scripture?

3 And the Heavens cannot contain him, therefore God is not in one form of
worship, doctrine or confession. He may infer, therefore he has not
sufficiently revealed himself to us in his word and works contrary to Psa. 19.

Saltmarsh 284. The day of the Lord will be upon all our Cedars and Oaks, and
pleasant Pictures and Idols of gold, and judgment shall be upon all the
Merchandise of Babylon, the pearlesse and precious stones, the Cynamon and
Odors. then must God pour shame upon all flesh, and fleshly glory, upon all
the visions and dreams that man has of God by reason, creature-imagerie, or
outward administration, and notion by letter or by graces etc.

Answ. In such a noonday light of the Gospel, can we believe that Antichrist
should call Gospel-administration by the letter, that is, the preached Gospel,
inward graces, and faith, laying hold on Christ's imputed righteousness, with
the name of flesh, dreams, imagerie, idols, oaks of Bashan, Babilo^s precious
wares? Did the Holy Ghost Isa. 2.12, 13. etc. Rev. 18, 12. intend any such
thing?

4 Touch not mine anointed, ergo, give the anointed liberty of conscience to
preach or teach of God, what they please. An. but that (do my anointed no
harm) will warrant that the Prophets should not s^dden the hearts of the
anointed in the way of righteousness. But it shall never follow, ergo Nathan
may not rebuke David the anointed of God, for his adultery and murder: ergo if
an anointed of God commit murder, the Magistrate should not punish him for it,
nor ought the anointed to be rebuked or hurt with the tongue, though they deny,
God, Christ, Scripture.

Not as Lords over Gods inheritance, or having Lordship over your faith, ergo
liberty of all Religions is lawful.

Answ. Saltmarsh shall never prove this consequence.

To the weak I became as weak, then are all outward things in worship
indifferent.

We are to please one another to edification, Romans 15.2. ergo all outward
things are indifferent see Sparkles p^ 20.

Answ. The place Romans 15. is to please one another in acts of the second Table,
as not to offend our Brother in meats, then may we please him in drunkenness,
gluttony, whoredom except the words be other wise exponed.

2 Thessalonians. 1. Christ shall come to be gloryfied in his Saints, that is, the Lord
Jesus his (second) coming in spirit and glory, in revelation in his Saints.
Sparkles p. 22.

Salmarsh makes Christ coming in judgment to have been these 1647 years as
H. Nicholas did before him, and Hymeneus and Phyletus said the resurrection was
past, H. N. evangel. chapter 34, and chapter 35 ser. 8.
Answ. Then Christ's second coming is not in the end of of the World, in a
bodily manner, but so spiritual, as it is daily fulfilled, and the day of
Judgment is even now and in this life, as said Henery Nicholas and it has
been these 1647* years.

Antichrist or the man of sin, 2 Thessalonians. 1. is the old man.

Answ. Saltmarsh will not have the Pope the Antichrist, because Popery and all
Religions are indifferent.

The first Tabernacle stood in meats and drinks and diverse washings and carnal
ordinances, then baptizing with water is Jewish, Sparkles 29.30. we are
circumcised with him in baptism, ergo, there is no baptizing with water,
Spark. 31.32.

Answ. The affirming, in some respect of the operation of the first cause, does
not anull all the actings of the second cause, nor bring to nothing all
ordinances.

Job 29.2. The candle of God shines upon their heads, and the secret of the
Almighty on their Tabernacle, S^ltmarsh proves by perverted Scriptures that
there is no baptizing with water.
that is, the Disciples had the Summer sun shining on them, while Christ was
among them in the flesh, when that ministration came but to its point -- it
became a place for Satyrs and Owls.

Answ. Job speaks of his worldly prosperity, before his troubles came on him,
and Psa. c. 13.19.20. of the desolation of Babylon, neither of which the
Disciples saw: Salmarsh cites the place of Job as if the Holy Ghost intended
his monki^h sense, which was never in the heart of God.

He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire ergo, there is no
water-baptisme. 33.

Answ. It is no consequence.

Go t^^ch and baptize, that is, go Disciple and baptize; now Paul and Apollo
were nothing and cannot wake Disciples, then he must speak of the
ministration of the Holy Ghost or gifts, which were to continue for that age
only.

Answ. But the Apostles ministerially as instruments and Servants could make
Disciples, and baptize^ outwardly: Christ only inwardly and effectually as the
principal cause.

Col. 2. Being circumcised with circumcision made with^u^ hard: then as true
circumcision is made without hands, so is baptism.

Answ. But it follows not, circumcision with hands is forbidden Gal. 5.3, 4.
but b^ptizing is commanded, Matthew. 28.19, 20. By this argument Saltmarsh should
not preach, nor write books, nor bow his knee, nor pray, nor read Scripture,
because true preaching to the heart, is God teaching without a man's tongue, and
true writing is God writing his Law in the inward parts, without ink or paper,
and true praying in the Spirit is without knee, tongue, or lifting up eyes, or
hands, etc. by such arguments H. Nicholas and Enthusiasts abolish all
ordinances.

Jesus Christ is the Prophet whom we are to hear, and they shall be all taught
of God; ergo, no ministry by the letter can destroy the Antichrist, p. 49.

Ans. It follows not, for when the Antichrist is revealed to men to be the
Antichrist, he is destroyed, otherwise the Antichrist must be converted to the
faith by this way.

Christ is perfected and entered into glory, Luke 24. that is, all Christ's body
and Saints are made Ministers and preachers, Sparkles p. 51. and a pure Spirit
without all ordinances.

Ans. Saltmarsh with H. Nicholas turn Christ, dying and entering into glory,
over into a Christ spiritual, Christ crucified is nothing but the Saints
Godded and Christed with grace, and with all the S^^* suffering patiently as
Familists say.

All externalls, Idols, and will worship to Saltmarsh are indifferent.


that is God living by grace in the Saints, then as many Saints as many Christ's
crucified and rising again.

1 Cor. 8. We know that an Idol is nothing, nor an Idol Temple; then outward
forms and orders are only a supplement to the absence of the Spirit of God,
and to order the outward man amongst men to their fellow-Saints or the world,
while the Law of the Spirit of life is not in them shining and conforming them
in Spirit and love to the image of Christ* then preaching and ordinances are
but characters of bondage to the unregenerate, and while they see darkly, and
in a glass, and not face to face, 1 Cor. 13.

Ans. The meaning of that, an Idol is nothing, is, or is vanity, as the
Prophets say, an Idol is of no force or power to hallow or pollute meats, that
of themselves are indi^ferent, yet the things sacrificed to Idols should not
be eaten before the weak, and if they be eaten in the Idol Temple, we partake
of the devils Temple, and that is nothing, what ever Familists imagine. Then
we are to abstain from Popish Idols, and to ab^^aine from murder, and to
walk in love, according to the rule of the Gospel and Law commanding good,
forbidding ill, only while we are unrenewed men, Ordinances are as the
horne-booke to children come to the family of love, that are old men in Christ,
and need no Ordinances, an Idol is nothing, but an indifferent thing to them,
all the Scripture is but to order our walking before men and the world, not
before God, nor to lay any obligation of conscience on a Saint or Familist, so
as he should sin in kneeling to, or praying before an Idol, or abstain
therefrom.

The story of Adam and his fall, but a figure to M. Saltmarsh
The Serpent, Genesis 3. was fleshly wisdom, the espousalls of the woman, the
weakness of creation. p. 57.

Ans. Then the story of Adam, Paradise, serpent, trees, eating, man, woman,
marriage, are no real histories, but mere allegories and metaphors, and
mystical things, which only can be expounded by the spirit of Familists and
Antinomians, and this is the only spiritual preaching, praying and expounding
of Scripture that Saltmarsh gives us.

Saltmarsh Sparkles p. 64.65. By meekness of the Saints only shall the
Jelousie and enmity of their enemies be allayed, Revel. 14. here is the
patience of the Saints.

Ans. There is not in the text one jot of overcomming the enemies with
meekness, here is matter of ground for the patience of the Saints, as chap.
13.10. and with as good ground he may say the keeping of the Commandments of
God, and of the faith of Jesus, is that which allayeth the hatred of the world
contrary to 1 John 3.12. Joh. 15.19.22. Matthew. 5.11.12. for the enemies do
expound Christ's meekness and silence to be guiltiness; they wonder that
Christ answered nothing, the world hate and malice the meekness of the Saints,
though an eminent grace, as they do all other shinings of Christ in them, and
yet by dying they strengthen the faith of others, Rev. 12.13. Joh. 3.30. He
must increase, I must decrease, The doctrine of John Baptist is gone and away
if we believe Saltmarsh.
that is, my ministration by word and water must be gone, and another more
spiritual must succeed, and as the fire from heaven, licked up the four
barrells of water, so the baptism of the Spirit, as fire, was to lick up this
of water, 1 King. 18.34. to.38. p. 60.

A. But. John speaks not so much of his Ministry, which was in the same
doctrine and Sacrament to continue to the end as of John's evanishing in his
person, and as the day star at the rising of the Sun, for John was to be gone
and to dye, and his time of actual service to expire (though the doctrine
lives till this day) and in his graces, the fullness whereof was in Christ,
and that Elijahs sacrifice was a type of the Spirit, and Baals of John Baptists
Ministry is a Monks dream the Spirit of God never intended such a thing, for
we are still builded upon the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus
Christ being the chief corner stone, Ephesians. 2.20, 21, 22. and so an habitation
of God through the Spirit; and so the same doctrine of the Prophets and of the
Baptist must continue; but this is to deprive us of all the old Testament as
the Anabaptists do.

Eye for eye, and tooth for tooth, was the Law, Matthew. 5.39. And love your
neighbor, Saltmarsh with Socinians and Papists will have the love of our
enemies not commanded under the Old Testament
but there is a higher ministration of the Spirit in the Apostles time, Love
your enemies, avenge not.

Ans. The Spirit never meant, that under the old Testament, we might revenge
our selves, and hate our enemies, the contrary is evident, Deuteronomy. 32.35. Prove.
20.22. Prove. 25.21, 22. and this was long before Christ came in the flesh, this
is Socinianisme and Popery, if Saltmarsh understand either of the two.

Blessed are the meek. Sparkles p. 64.65.
Christ prophesied of a ministration in the Spirit by meekness and patience of
the Saints, Revel. 14.12. and Heb. 4. there remains a rest to the people of
God.

Ans. This meekness and patient suffering of injuries and heavenly Sabboths
was in the old, as well as in the New Testament, Ps. 37.7.8. v. 11. Ps. 34.2.
Heb. 11.33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38.

I saw no Temple there: Revel 21. Saltmarsh dreams of a Church on earth that
shall not need Ordinances.
then in this life the Saints shall be without ordinances, and the Kingdom
shall be delivered up to the Father, he that can receive it, let him receive
it, p. 65.66. This ministration is not only done upon the whole body of Christ
at last, but is fulfilled in its particular accomplishments, and mystery of
Spirit here.

Answ. 1. There is no more ground for such a ministration in this life, then
there is for no death, no crying, no sorrow, no pain in this life, Rev. 21.4.
no Sun, nor Moon, v. 23. no unclean thing, no sin, v. 27. and no more
warrant for delivering up the Kingdom, in this life, 1 Cor. 15. then for the
resurrection of the dead, 23.37. and the blowing of the last Trumpet, 52. and
the swallowing up of death in victory, 55, 56, 57. as if all these should come
to pass in this life agreeable to this, says H. N. Evangel. chapter 35. se 9. In
which resurrection of the dead, God shows unto us that the time is now
fulfilled, that his dead, or the dead which are fallen asleep in the Lord,
rise up in this day of his judgment and appear unto us in godly glory, which
shall also henceforth live in us everlastingly with Christ, and reign upon the
earth, wherein the Scripture comes to be fulfilled in this present day. And
Saltm. wills these that are as spiritual as himself and his Familists, to
believe this and receive it, that is, except, we make shipwreck of faith, and
say the resurrection is past in this life, as did Hymeneus and Philetus, we
are all legal literal men, and void of the Spirit.

2. Saltmarsh is unwilling to contradict the truth of God, 1 Cor. 15.24. too
openly, to wit, that in the end the Kingdom shall be delivered up: Now whether
this be meant of Christ's reigning no more in his Church in this life by
Ordidinances, or as Chrysostom does expound the place, it be the rendering up
to the Father his conqu^is^d and purchased people, as it is most agreeable to
Ephesians. 5.27. I dispute not now, but Saltmarsh says faintly, This is not only
done on the whole body of Christ at the last, but also here. He dares not say
this rendering up is not only at the last day, but also in this life; yet the
Apostle is clear, he thought of no rendering up of the Kingdom in this life,
as Saltmarsh by this new spirit supposes, for the text is clear, v. 22.23.
every man shall rise again from the dead, Christ first and then his members
(...) Then is the end when he shall deliver up the Kingdom to the Father. Then
there is no rendering up till the dead in Christ be raised, v. 23.24. but the
dead in Christ in their bodies (of which undoubtedly the Apostle speaks, 1
Cor. 15.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. do not rise in this life. 2. This rendering up, is
not till the end, then shall the end be. 3. It is when all rule and authority
shall be put down, v. 27. This is not in this life. 4. It is when, the last
enemy shall be subdued, 26. 5. When God shall be all in all, 28. These are not
in this life, therefore Saltm. dreams.

Saltmarsh Sparkles p. 165. Jer. 38 2. He that goes forth to the Chaldeans
shall live, but if ye stay in the City ye shall be consumed; this is a figure
of abiding no longer under any dispensation, Law, Christ in the flesh, Gospel,
Spirit, then God, and his presence appears upon it.

Ans. We know not this Spirit that dreams of phansied types, and allegories
without shadow of reason in the holy Scripture, we have no ground to believe
that the Holy Ghost intends any thing of this kind, only Saltmarsh his Popish
Spirit says so; the Scripture is silent.

Saltmarsh page 145.147, 148. he says Mal. 3. ver. 18. Ye shall discorne
between the righteous and the wicked, proves the Spirit of discerning, by
which we shall know false teachers, Antichrists, as in the Apostolic Church,
and who fears God truly, who not, as the sense knows its object.

Answ. By this Familists deny the spirits and heretics are to be judged by the
word, but that man is the Heretic, the Legalist though never so heavenly, if
he be a Puritan the spirit of Familists discerns him to be a Cain or a Judas.

2 The place of Malachie is this ver. 14, 15. Ye say it is in vain to serve
the Lord, and there is no reward for it. But serve ye God, and ye shall find
in your own experience a reward and comfortable fruit in differencing between
him that serves God, and serves him not, for chapter 4.1. Christ's trying day
comes.

Saltmarsh also sparkles p. 70, 71. abuses these Scriptures Gal. 41. and 1
Cor. 3.1.2. He applies the former to the Disciples of Christ under John's
ministry and Christ's in the flesh, but these words, The place Gal* 4.1. of the
Heir under the law corrupted to gross Familisme by Sal^mars^*
The Heir so long as he is a child differs not from a servant, though he be
Lord of all -- Touch not the times of John Baptist or of Christ in the days of
his flesh, though in these times the Ceremonies were still in vigor, but the
Heir under nonage and Tutors, Gal. 4. is the Church of the Jews under the
bondage of the Law and the Ceremonies thereof, and the Rudiments of the World:
it was not the Holy Ghosts mind to speak of Christ in the flesh as a Mosaicall
Lawgiver, or that his heavenly Sermons he preached Matthew. 5. Matthew. 23. John
10. Joh chapters 13, 14, 15, 16. his heavenly Prayer John 16. h^s death, and
sufferings, and resurrection was a dispensation to be laid aside as the tutory
of the law and beggarly Ceremonies, Sabbath, and shadows he speaks of Gal. 4.
for then the Apostles in vain call us to mind of the words, and commandments
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, as he commanded them to do Matthew.
28.19, 20, 21. 1 John 1.1, 2, 3, 4. 2 Pet. 1.15, 16, 17, 18, 19. and though
Christ promised at his ascending to send the Spirit, this was not to abolished
the doctrine of John and that which Christ had taught them in the days of his
flesh, for of that Spirit he promises to send, he says, Joh. 14.16 Ye know
that Spirit, for he dwells in you (for the present) and shall be in you, in a
larger measure when I shall send him, Act. 2. But Familists and Antinomians
must have no ministration of the Spirit till Christ ascended to heaven.

And for the other place, Paul 1 Cor. 3.1.2. calls the Corinthians carnal,
Spark. p. 70.71. The place 2 Cor 3.1, 2, 3. where the Apostle calls the
Corinthians carnal perverted by Saltmarsh.
and could not write to them as spiritual, not because they were under the
doctrine of John Baptist and Christ as Saltmarsh dreameth: for that doctrine
taught no carnal divisions, but he calls them carnal on this ground, v.
3.4. Whereas there is among you envying, strife, and divisions, are ye not
carnal and walk as men? For while one says, I am of Paul, another I am of
Apollo, are ye not carnal? if the Apostle call the Corinthians carnal, as
Saltmarsh says, because they were under the doctrine of John Baptist and
Christ in the flesh, (of which there is not a syllable in that text or in all
the Scripture) then must Christ and John Baptist have taught their hearers
striving, envying, schisms, and one to say, I am of Paul, and another, I am of
Apollo, which is blasphemous. Now it is against sense and reason that ever God
ordained any ministration so carnal, as that these under it were carnal,
because of their striving and envying.

Saltmarsh tells us as I observe, every man should stay under the ministration
he is in till the Spirit say, come up hither, then Paul calls the Corinthians
to abide in this carnality of envying, striving, and schism, till the Lord
say, come up hither, whereas he sharply rebukes them for their envying and
schisms. Now if for envying and schism the Corinthians be carnal (as no
doubt they were carnal in so far) and if therefore under the ministration of
Christ in the flesh, and not under all Spirit, upon some other considerations,
they must have been spiritual, and so under the all-Spirit, or pure glorious
spirit of M. Saltmarsh; for as they are called carnal, so also spiritual, 1
Cor. 1.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. washen, justified, sanctified, in the name of our
Lord Jesus, and, by the Spirit of our God, temples of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor.
6.11.15.19. changed into the same spirit from glory to glory as by the Spirit
of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. espoused to one husband Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2. let
Saltmar. answer if none of these were converts that are called carnal for
their envying? 2. whether one part of this Church were under John's and Christ's
Ministry, some under all-spirit?

1 Cor. 1. Christ sent me not to baptize but to preach. Then he baptized
according to his spiritual liberty, to the Jew he was a Jew. We have free
liberty to all external worship to take or leave, do or leave undone at will,
as Saltmarsh says.
p. 82.

Ans. He sent not Paul to baptize rather then to preach; for Paul baptized 1
Cor. 14.16. then he did it as sent, but it is a trick of Familists to comply
with all Religions, and deny the true Religion where there is hazard as H.
Nicholas said, Epist. to the two daughters of Warwick, and call that compliance
the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free.

2. Then baptizing with water was a part of Paul's Ministry, which Saltmarsh
denies. Heb 12.


The spirits of just men made perfect, or the true Christian in spirit, are
these true spiritual Elders in the New Testament.

Ans. The spirits made perfect, are the glorified in heaven associated with the
Angels, Heb. 12.22. But Saltmarsh will have life eternal confined within this
life only to the Elders of the New Testament, that is, as I conceive Elders of
the family of love.

The true trial of the gifts, How Saltmarsh would have the spirits tried.
is when the spirits of Prophets are subject to the Prophets, that is, when the
gift by which any one speaks of Jesus Christ is manifested in the hearts or
spirits of the Saints, when they see the truths, they minister, as they are in
Jesus, and in themselves, and in them that are spiritual and truly anointed,
by the same Spirit, 91, 92.

Ans. Christ's Disciples not under a stinted liturgy in the days of our
Saviors conversing with them on earth (as Saltm. says) at which time they
were the anointed of God as well as afterward.
Such a subjection to the Prophets has no warrant in the Text, for it
supposes none to be Prophets, but those that are inwardly anointed, and
manifest their spirit of Prophecy to the anointed only; as if the anointed may
not take him, for an anointed Prophet who is only gifted and void of saving
grace.

So H. Nich. Exhor. 1. c. 16. No man can rightly, according to the truth of the
holy Scripture, or according to the spiritual understanding of the godly
wisdom, deal in, or use the true Gods service, -- nor should take in hand to
busy himself therein, but only the illuminated Elders in the godly wisdom
which walk in the house of love, etc.

(...) nothing in this trial of his aptness to teach, (...) in the Scriptures.

(...) p 272 They did all drink the same spiritual drink, that is, the
Ordinances of the Old Testament were as much spiritual as these of the New,
and signified Christ in the flesh: But he concludes, be not ye Idolaters, that
is, idolize not outward forms, the rock, baptism, 271. these both of Old and
New Testament are alike outward letter, visible, and perish with the using.

Ans. The Ordinances of the Old Testament are called carnal in opposition to
endless life, Heb. 7.16. and because weak; and they could not, though bloody,
take away sins, Heb. 7.18, 19. Heb. 10.1, 2. for the new Covenant promises, in
Christ the true, better, eternal Mediator, do all these, then it is against
Scripture that the Ordinances of both were alike carnal, though without the
Spirit, neither availed.

2. The Idolatry of outward Ordinances is condemned, as trusting in lying
words. The temple of the Lord, sacrifices, new Moons, etc. Jer. 7.8.9. Esa. 1.
But it was never in the mind of the Holy Ghost that Israel worshipped Manna,
water, Passover, or that the Corinthians did adore preaching, baptising: for
their Idolatry, 1 Cor. 10.7. is the worshipping not of the Passover, Manna,
water, but of the golden calfe, Exo. 32.6. when they feasted and played. Saltm.
then devises an Idolatry the Holy Ghost never intended. So here 1 Cor. 10. he
disswades from Idol feasts in Idol temples. 18, 19, 20. And never did Paul
intend, 1 Cor. 10. to charge the Corinthians with that sin of idolizing or
worshipping baptism, written Scripture, figures, letters, or outward
Ordinances, but of sitting at the Idols table, which was to be partakers of
the table and cup of devils: and the Holy Ghost would in the Old Testament have
told us of some such adoring of Manna, water, Passover: but Salm. his new
Spirit devised it to reproach all Ordinances, Scripture, Sacraments, Prayer,
Church, etc.

Lord teach us to pray, as John taught his Disciples: Then they were under a
form and rule of prayer, they saw little more of Christ then his fleshly
presence and miracles, they loved him, and clave to him, but had very few
discoveries of him in the Spirit, except some few at his transfiguration.

Answ. No Prelate, nor Priest, nor any I know say Christ's Disciples during
their conversing with him in the flesh, were under a form and stinted liturgy,
so that they prayed only the Lords prayer.

2 It is clear, the revelation of Christ in the Spirit we now have, the
Disciples had the same: for Christ Mat. 16, 17. Declares Peter to be blessed,
because that the Father, that is the Spirit of the Father, had revealed that to
him, which flesh and blood had not revealed, and Mat. 11. Christ thanketh his
Father 25. for revealing to Babes, his Disciples and others the Mysteries of
the Kingdom, and to none other though Worldly wise and great, and Mat. 13.11,
12, 13. The Mysteries of the Kingdom are revealed to them, not to others who
are judicially blinded, and John 1.11, 12. John says they have the privilege
of Sons, and so the spirit of adoption Romans 8.14. and so have the seal and
witness within them 15, 16, 17 26, 27, 28. who believe in him, which faith
undoutedly the Disciples had. And for the discovery of God at the
transfiguration, it was rather an extraordinary rapture not bestowed on men in
this life as believers: as Familists would live upon raptures of spirit without
the word, but an extraordinary revelation bestowed of special favor on three
Disciples Peter, James and John, who were to be Apostles and Penmen of
Scripture, as the Prophets were, 2 Pet. 1.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. If Familists
be all Organs and Penmen of scripture immediately inspired by the Holy Ghost,
we say no more, they are seen to others as well as to us, to be Impostors and
not infallible Prophets and Apostles.

2 Thessalonians. 2. page 110, 111. The Antichrist is not the Pope, Saltmarsh esteems
our Reformers Calvin Luther men that had little of the spirit, much of the
letter and legal strain.
but a ministry in the letter, and 107. Hush, Luther, Wiccliffe, Calvine,
Martyr and Bid had but faint and small discoveries of the spirit, and letter,
and page 111. page 24, 25. He, that did with hold and hinder the revealing and
the dominion of the man of sin, was the spirit. He that sits in the seat of God
is men in Synods, judging the spirit himself, and God in the Saints p. 147,
148. H. Nicholas Evang. 31. Sect. 1, 2. says the Pope is the chief anointed.

Answ. Except H. Nicholas and Saltmarsh, no Protestant Divine exponed the man
of sin to be any other then the Pope, and the Hinderer that he should be
revealed the Emperor, and only Saltmarsh and the Anabaptists of Munster put a
note of shame and Antichristianisme on Luther and Calvin as literal reformers,
and no question, because Martyr refutes Anabaptists, Calvin the Libertines and
Anabaptists, Bullinger the Anabaptists and Enthusiasts, Luther the Antinomians:
Mr. Saltmarsh sets himself above them in the all-spirit and highest discovery
of glory. I am with you to the end of the world, Saltmar 13 4 135.
that is, to the end of that ministration, till the Apostles dyed and no
longer. A. of this before.

The Jews (sparkles of glory p. 151, 152.) were not only a type of the true
Christian Church, but of the Christians in the lowest dispensation, and in
their armed tribes and Generals (as Moses and Joshua) were a figure of
Christians under pupillage and bondage to nature, and so they were led out
against the nations, who were a figure of worldly tyranny and oppression, to
recover their land of rest, or such worldly privileges as they had in promise
and donation from God: under the Gospel the Lord suffered the same figure in
Peter, Saltmarsh mocketh the Scriptu^e in exponing Peter's sword, and the laying
of it aside to be a type of glorifying his Disciples with the glory that Christ
had with the father before the World was.
who walked about with Christ in his fleshly appearance, with his sword girt
about him, till Christ had him put up his sword in his sheath, because he was
goeing out of that dispensation of flesh into more glory, into the same glory
he had with God before the world was.

Answ. Who ever mocked the word of God as these men do? Yet these froathy
allegories must be discoveries of all-spirit, above Calvin's and Luthers light.

1 Such types or dreams have nothing, so much as in a shadow, of ground in the
word.

2 Christians under bondage to nature is a new fancy, while men are in mere
nature they have nothing of Christ or Christianity, nor feel^ any Law bondage,
yea, nor know it.

3 If Peter's Sword was a figure of ministration of the flesh, to be laid
aside, when Christ now ascended to glory, how dare Christian Magistrates then
bear the sword? for after the ascension of Christ, they are entered into glory
with the Father, and such glory as Christ had before the World was, golden
imaginations.

What mocking of the word of God is this? Because Christ prayed, John 17.
Father, gloryfie me with the glory that I had with thee, before the world was,
therefore Christ mystical and the Saints his body were then to enter into the
glory that Christ had with the Father before the world was that is eternal
glory when Peter was at Christ's command to lay aside his sword.

1 What warrant to make Peter's Sword, a figure of Christ's fleshly dispensation,
and his laying down of his Sword a type that Christ and his Saints ought after
this to fight no more, but to enter into a glorious dispensation, into which
all the Saints were to enter, even the same glory that Christ had with the
Father, before the world was.

2. Whether ought the Saints to dye, eat, drink, marry, after Christ has
commanded Peter to lay aside his sword? should they not enter into the same
life of glory, far above and beyond all these infirmities, and be as Christ
was dwelling in the glory he had with the Father from eternity? Then should not
Familists war any more, but disband and break their spears into plowshears.

3. Who made them capable of the glory Christ had before the world was?

4. What Spirit fancied this interpretation? Father glorify me, etc. that is,
Father, carry my Saints; out of a dispensation of blood, wars, to a life of
pure, and all-Spirit and glory even in this life. Saltmarsh despises
interpretations by consequences, and whence had he these more then monstrous
consequences?

161. p. In that a Christian is bone of Christ's bone, he is more then a
conqueror, To. 8. quenches the violence of fire, Heb. 11.

Ans. Our having the same flesh and nature that Christ had makes us not
victors, but our faith is that which overcomes the world.

1 John 5.4. None can see me and live, (page 282.) so as they that see God do
not live, or that thing called themselves do not live, that which is called a
man's self is his own reason, his wisdom, his righteousness, his desires, or
will, his lusts, etc. Now if these live, God was never yet seen.

Ans. This place Exodus 33.20. is foolishly wrested by Saltmarsh, The place Exo.
33, is corrupted by M. Saltm.
for God speaks not in that place of the seeing of God by faith in the light
of his Spirit, as if these natural faculties were annihilated and pulled out
in regeneration; and God did actually see, know, believe, love in us, and our
souls were turned over unto dead passive organs; nor does God speak there to
Moses of regeneration, but he represseth the spiritual and too much curiosity
of Moses, who desired to see God face to face, and more then the Lord was
pleased to reveal in this life to him or to any in the state of mortality,
Moses desired to see more then the Lords back parts, v. 18. Moses said, I
beseech thee show me thy glory. God answers, so much as is good and profitable
for him he should see, but his glory, as in the life to come, he could not see
in this life.

Saltmarsh 307.308. exponeth the place, Zach. 13. more spiritually By the false
Prophet is meant the Spirit of Antichrist, by the father and mother that begat
him, they who made him a Prophet or cried him up, and their thrusting of him
through for lies, is the spiritual smiting of the Antichristian working with
the sword of the Spirit, through some new enlightnings from God.

Ans. Such lying wresting of Scripture from the literal and native sense of
the Spirit is the way with Origin to turn all Scripture into allegories, and
types; for read the words, and they are a Prophetical threatening of death to
the false teacher by his nearest bloud-friends, alluding to Deuteronomy. 13. where
father and mother were to cast stones at those, dearest to them, if they should
prophecy lies, and this is to be fulfilled under the Messia's opened fountain
of his blood, v. 1, 2, 3. I will cause the Prophet to cease, his father shall
threaten him. Thou shall not live, he shall be ashamed, and shall not dare to
profess himself a false Prophet, but a herdman, and he shall have visible
wounds; these are the wounds I received in the house of my friends.

2. What sense is there here? these that begat him, that is, his cryers up that
extolled his learning shall say, thou shall not live, that is, thou shall be a
Prophet no more in request, and they shall thrust him through by strength of
reason and confound him. What is it to mock the word, if this be to expone it?
his cryers up are his Disciples and seduced followers? shall they refute him
and they only? not the Pastors and teachers?

3. This thrusting through of the false Prophet shall cause the false Prophet
dissemble and deny his Religion for fear of his life, and say, I am a herdman,
not a Prophet. This is the great argument that Libertines have against the
coercive power of the Magistrates sword against false teachers, and here it
follows upon the strong convincing arguments used against them by Libertines,
as the sole and only way of extirpating heresy? and are false Prophets so
afraid of arguments that convince them, that they deny their Religion for fear
of them? this is prodigious; false teachers boast that they cannot be answered.

4. These false teachers show the visible wounds they received in the house of
their friends, and complain of the zeal of their friends against them in
delivering them up to the Magi^^rate to suffer bodily punishment, v. 6. less
then death, pro merito culpae, if they be silenced by strength of truth, they
shall be ashamed of no such thing.

CHAP. XXXV. Of communion with God, and serving him in the Spirit.
THere is much talking by Enthusiasts and Familists, of the Spirit, teaching in
the Spirit. I shall therefore speak to to that: And, 1. Of the Prophetical
Spirit. 2. Of the Spiritual life, and serving of God common to all Saints.
Hence these Conclusions of the former.

1. Conclu. All the Saints, as Saints are not Prophets, but some only called by
God thereunto, 1 Cor. 12.29. Are all Prophets? Ephesians. 4.11. Christ gave some to
be Prophets. Obey them that are over you in the Lord. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13.

2. The Spirit of prophecy is master of the man in whom he is, Rev. 1.10. I
was in the Spirit in the Lords day. Heb. 13.7.17 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 Timothy 3.1, 2,
3.4, v. 12. 1 Timothy 5.19. Rev. 1.16. Rev. 2.1.
He says not, the Spirit was in me, but I was in the Spirit as in a capacious
house. Glory went round about me, above me, below me, on every side of me. I
was as a vessel casten into the sea, there is more of the sea without it, then
within it. So these that are in a trance are said to fall, Numb. 24.4. from
themselves. Hence that question, whether these that Prophecy do know
perfectly what they prophecy?

To which I answer, there is a twofold knowledge, one natural and conjoined
with organicall knowledge; Of the knowledge of such as are under actual vision
in a trance,
another intellectual and abstract.

2. There is an evident intellectual knowledge, and a more imperfect and
darker knowledge.

Then if we speak of an organicall knowledge, the man under actual vision
knows not whether he be in the body, or ^ut of it, as Paul 2 Cor. 12.2. yea
and Peter in a trance, not only could not see, hear or eat, Act. 10.10. but
was wholly acted upon by God: but Act. 12. an Angel comes to him and loses his
chains and causes him gird himself and bind on his sandals, and he thought
it had been a vision, and knew not that it was any thing but an intellectual,
visionall, representation, not a real deliverance, till he came to himself,
v. 11. yet something of a trance there was, for he was not at himself, then
we may see and act bodily with Angels, and walk and not know the necessity of
what we know, see or do.

2. If we speak of a weaker Prophetical sight, since the light of Prophecy
can let us see in the opened speces things to come, and we may know that we
know them, and that they are revealed: but when the Prophets preach of new what
they have seen in a vision, and prophecy to Kings and to men, they are in far
other condition, Prophets not ever under actual vision as Prophets, when they
preach their visions to men, and in a far other case then when they are in a
^rance and actu^^ly see the visions of God.
then when under an actual vision, because under an actual vision, I conceive
they are not under the dominion of free will. Jeremiah cannot choose but see a
seething pot toward the North, because the object naturally offers it self to
the fancy, and God never threatens a Prophet under pain of punishment, to see
visions, for he cannot here wink and close the eyes of his mind. Balaam could
not choose, but see the visions of God, and the goodlinesse of Jacobs tents,
Number. 24. and if the Spirit thus should act the Saints to pray, praise, hear
with faith, I think their acts should not be acts of free obedience, nor
capable of a precept, nor the omission of these acts lie fair for a
threatening, rebuke, or punishment.

But when the Prophets deliver these truths that they did see in raptures and
visions, they do not ever speak these truths to men, and preach them by a
Prophetical rapture, but by the Spirit of grace sometimes, or by a common
Prophetical gift, as in wicked Prophets, not that Prophets do actually
publish their visions and Prophecy, not as Prophets but as godly men, I have
not that meaning, but that an immediately inspiring impulsion of an actual
ecstasy does not ever lead them to preach. So God never does command and
threaten men to see the visions of God, for here there is no place for free
election, but God charge and commands Jeremiah to preach the truth, which
he saw in a vision, Jer. 1.17. Thou therefore gird up thy loins, arise and
speak unto them all that I command thee; and he threatens him in case of
disobedience, Be not dismayed at their faces, lest I confound thee before them;
and he comfort him in the following words, 18. Behold I have made thee this
day a defenced City, and an iron wall. So the Lord speaks to Jeremiah also,
c. 15.19, 20. then we need not say necessarily that Jeremiah did actually
prophecy or see the visions of God, when he says, chapter 26.15. of a truth the
Lord has sent me to you: at least there is no warrant to say that when the
Prophets do speak and publish their visions to these to whom God has sent
them to Prophecy, that they are in the act of publishing and preaching to men,
under the same actual and immediate impulsion of the Holy Ghost that they are
under while they are in a trance, and actually see the visions of God, as
Jeremiah was c. 1.11.12. when he sees these visions. Jeremiah only obeys
Gods command, and relates his visions that he had seen before, and did this
by the Spirit of grace common to other believers by which he was inclined to
be faithful in speaking, what he had heard and seen: and the like I say of
Micajah in preaching to Ahab, and of all the true Prophets, who did not ever
from a Prophetical instinct, utter or preach to men the things they had seen
in extaticall visions, but often from a principle of grace by which they were
to be faithful to him who sent them, and durst not preach smooth things, nor
conceal the visions of God. False Prophets as Balaam and Caiaphas do out of a
Prophetical impul^^on both see and speak the visions of God, and are punished
of God, for speaking Prophetical truths which they cannot choose, but must
speak, for they preach them not, because they are awed of God, and dare not
heal the wound of the daughter of Gods people with fair words, but beside
their intention as Balaam did, Number. 23. chapter 24.

And thus it is not necessary, when Prophets reveal visions that in that act
of revelation, they see them to be true revelations, with only a Prophetical
light. And because the Prophetical light is not perfect, but infused ad modum
recipientis as we are capable to receive, the speces of things may be objected
to the Prophets understanding, and they see them as things, but not in the
spiritual signification they stand under; so John saw seven stars, and seven
golden Candlestickes, but knew not that the one noted the seven Angels of the
Church, and the other the seven Churches.

Prophets see not really the things themselves present, offered to them in the
visions of God, but only the speces or images thereof in the decree of God or
some other way.
The way God offers the speces to the understanding is not known to us, but it
is suitable and congruous to the nature of Spirits. Yet does not God let the
Prophets see the things themselves, but only the intellectual speces for 1
King. 22.17.19, 20. compared with v. 28. clears that Israel was not really
scattered, nor Ahab really killed at Ramoth-Gilead, but only visionally, for
Ahab then should really both be dead and alive, and Israel scattered, and not
scattered, at the same time, which involveth a contradiction, yet Micajah said
he had seen the one and the other: then he saw the visionall images printed in
the revealed decree of God, or some other way offered to his imagination. Now
this Prophetical Spirit does not act the Saints in believing and praying, or
the like, as Antinomians would have all to be Prophets but the Spirit of grace
and supplication, of which these considerations may serve to clear truth
between us and Antinomians, who run the way of Enthusiasts.

Hence, 1. That we may more exactly know the nature of worshipping God in
Spirit and in the letter.

We are to consider 1. a spirit is opposed to that which is a body and bodily
and external, The Spirit opposed to that which is bodily and to that which is
external.
as Luke 24 39. Handle me and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as
you see I have; thus they call Christ in the flesh, not a spiritual Christ.
David George, and H. Nicholas call him a fleshy and a literal Christ, because
such a Christ (say they) comes under the senses, as if Christ, because true
man in the flesh, who was filled with the anointing above his fellows, and
because he was clothed with our flesh, could not preach and pray more
spiritually then David George or H. Nicholas.

2. A spirit is opposed to that which is literal and external, and is only a
sign, a form, a sound, and has nothing of life and spirit in it, Ioh. 6.63.
It is the Spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing, the words that I
speak unto you, they are spirit, they are life. The Spirit there is opposed to
carnal, these of Capernaum dreamed of an orall, carnal, material, bodily and
external eating of Christ's flesh, and drinking his blood, Christ refuteth
that, and says it was the Spirit of Christ, not his bare flesh that quickneth
dead sinners, and that his words spoken, v. 54, 55, 56. Of eating the son of
man's flesh, and drinking his blood, must be taken spiritually, not carnally and
grossly, and so Antinomians falsely impute to us that we expone all tropes and
allegories, that should be exponed spiritually, in a carnal and literal sense.

3. 2 Cor. 3. The Spirit and inward working is opposed to the letter and
outward working; and so external and outward worship only and in the only
letter and sound of words, is opposed to the spiritual and internal worship
in life and power.

But if ye speak, in sensu composito, only and merely, How external
Ordinances are contrary to the Spirits acting, and how not.
external and literal working is hypocritical, when there is no heart-worke,
and it is as if a painted man should speak, no heat, no warmness of breath
comes out of his mouth, this acting, is no Ordinance of God, but an act of
hypocrisy, so we do not plead for external reformation in concreto, nor for
the reading, hearing, meditating, and preaching on the Scriptures with this
positive act of doing these hypocritically, if we speak again in sensu
divi^o, of the word in the letter, and Scriptures, in themselves not including
the Spirit, or any influence thereof in, or with the word, we judge these two,
the word and the Spirit to be subordinate, not contrary, and see not but we are
to stand for, and defend all Ordinances in themselves, Scripture, reading,
hearing, praying, Sacraments, as in, or of themselves Ordinances of God, and of
divine institution, though as they are such the Spirit join not with them, nor
does the word of God make any such opposition between them, as that some
Christians should be under these external Ordinances as being more legal and
less spiritual, and others beyond and above all Ordinances external, and
taught of God immediately, because they are (forsooth) under all-spirit* and
purely spiritual, and so taught of God, as they have no more need of
Ordinances, then learned Doctors have to read the horne-booke, as Waldesso
says. But how the word and Spirit are particularly united, happily, is more
then the learned and godly can define.

I should think the word and Spirit are united, as the King and the Kings Law
revealed to his Subjects are one, Three ways of un^^n between the word and the
Spirit.
as we say the King is in every Court, in regard the Kings Law is there, or the
Master is with the servant in his masterly authority that the servant carries,
when he speaks in the name of his Master. So as when Jeremiah and Esaiah,
yea, or any faithful Ambassador speaks in Christ's name the word and will of
God, God is said to speak by the mouth of those his holy Prophets and servants.

2. The word and the Spirit are united as the principal and isntrumental
cause, as Christ is where his word is either converting or convincing, and
because the way of Christ's working by the word is much in a moral way, as by a
sign conveying the thing signif^ed by his Spirit.

Therefore the 3. way how Christ, or his Spirit is in the word, may be thus:
Christ cloatheth himself with the word or Scripture read, or sounding in the
ear, as the thing signified is in the sign, as the King carries himself to
the mind and affection of his Spouse in a far Country by the pourtrait of
the King, or by a friend, an Ambassador, or (...) by whom she is married to him
though she never saw the King himself in face and countenance.

And when Christ is in our hearts by faith, and we regenerated by the immortal
seed of the word, 1 Pet. 1.23. after this new birth, How the word remains in
the new birth, and how it passes away.
there remains something of the word, some other thing passes away; that
which remains is the thing signified in the word, or produced by the word,
which is Christ formed in the heart by faith, or the new creature. But the
characters and letters we read, the sound of preaching we hear, remain not,
but are transient and passing away things, they are not limbs nor members of a
new creation, the speces or images of the word may remain in the memory, but
in the new creature there is nothing transient or corruptible such as figures,
letters, signs, and sounds, as when a grain of wheat is casten into the earth,
the husk passes away and rotteth, but the substance of the grain remains
and is turned into thee stalk, blade, and ear of growing wheat, and (though
these expressions and similitudes come short of the thing it self) Christ is
pleased thus to convey himself through words and sounds as a chariot, of his
own appointing, which we must not neglect except we would despise God, and so
Christ lodges himself in the heart passing through the outer gates and
senses, eyes, taste, and feeling in the Sacraments, and the ears in the word
preached.

But what ever here I speak of the Spirits actings, not separated from the
word, let me not be mistaken as if I did think that every acting of the Holy
Ghost should go along in an exact Mathematical length and breadth, with the
letter and sound of the word, as if the word were the bellows, the Spirit the
hand, that stirs the bellows; for though all utterings and stirrings of the
soul that flow from the Spirit be warranted by the word, yet I am assured some
are, and have been, even in our time, so changed from glory to glory, as by
the Spirit of the Lord, that their faces have shined like the face of an Angel
they have been at singing and a desire to shout for joy, yea to leap and dance,
and have been so filled with the fullness o^ God, that they could not speak,
and have been like vessels filled with new wine that wanted vent, that one
said Lord, hold thy hand, thy servant is an old vessel and can hold no more of
thy new wine; and another cried, Full, full, pained with a fullness of God with
marrow and fa^nesse, Heb. 3. which I am sure is the joy unspeakable and
glorious, spoken of 1 Pet. 1.8. and the begun fullness of God, Ephesians. 3.19. and
a bodily soule-sicknesse for Christ, a fit of the swoone that John fell into,
Rev. 1.17. And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead. It is true that was
a Prophetical ecstasy in John like that of Daniel, c. 10.7, 8, 9.15. in which
the operations of the bodily senses, or organicall actions were suspended; so
as the Prophets in these cases could not eat nor drink; so by proportion here
I know some stricken with palenesse, trembling, and deprived of the use of the
body for a time which I judge to be a trembling at the word: one a dying said,
I feel a strong rank smell of perfume, and the sweetness I feel, but cannot
speak. Another said, I enjoy, I enjoy. Another, I see heaven open and the high
throne prepared. Another, could do nothing but smile and look like heaven:
All these to me are the over-banke and high tides of the Spirit by way of
redundancie acting on the body, because of its near union with the soul, and
I know warranted by the word, produce no new doctrine; but how the word and
Spirit in these actings are united and move together, I confess I am ignorant.

2. We profess we hate with our souls that Christians should adore and fall
down before an inke-Divinity, and mere paper-godlinesse, as if the Spirit
were frozen into ink* and dead figures, writings, letters, or as if naked
languages of Hebrew, Greek and Latin, could save us. The Kingdom of God is
not in letters, nor in externalls, but in life and power. The glass of the
Physician works not the cure, but the oil in it. The Doctors written
directions in the sicke-mans pocket helps him not a whit; no man shall lay the
only outside of ordinances lower in the dust then we. All the obliging power is
from the letter of the word, all the strengthening physical power, by which we
are enabled to act, is from the Spirit that works with the word, and if we
speak properly, a believer is not under an obliging and moral commanding
power, because the Spirit acts them in prayer or believing, for the naked
Spirit, as the Spirit is not a moral rule to me to act by, nay it is not to me
the Spirit of God; now when the Canon of Scripture is closed, but as the Law
and the Testimony, goes along with it, for by the Law and testimony, I know now
that it is no deluding Spirit, but the Spirit of God, but all the commanding
and morally obliging power is from the word as it notes the sign and the will
of God signified: for I must obey, because God intimates his will to me in the
word, and I am strengthened to obey from the acting of the Spirit of the Lord.

But Saltmarsh Sparkles of glory, page 245. refuteth this, in the Protestants
generally. Outward Ordinances are commands of Christ, and therefore to be done,
because they are commanded, and that they are sanctified by God and by his
Spirit, and that we are to wait on God in the use of means, his reason (which
Swinkfield used also) is, that spiritual things are not by Ordinances conveyed
into the souls of men.

Now Antinomians deny outward Ordinances to be commands of Christ that oblige
to obedience, for p. 243. the mere Commandments or letter of Scripture, is
not a Law to a Christian why he should walk in duties, but the Law written in
our hearts (he says) and he cites Romans 6, 14. Rom 7.1, 2, 3, 4. because sin
has no dominion over us, and we are not under the Law, but under grace, and
under a new husband Christ, being dead to the Law.

Ans. The outward Commandment sure is neither sin nor the dominion of sin,
nor is the Law sin, God forbid, the Law is holy, just and good, Romans 7.12.
and the unconverted stand under an obligation to outward Commandments, though
they want the Spirit, or then the unconverted cannot sin more then the
justified, because these that fail against no commandment sin not, and
Christ has laid upon justified David, Peter, and all believers outward
Commandments that we sin not, We are to wait on God in the use of outward
Ordinances, though the Spirit work not ever with the word, nor upon our hearts
1. Joh. 2.1. v. 26. that we keep our selves from Idols, though the Spirit act
us not to abstain from sin, otherwise no man can sin whether unconverted
or justified.

2. Christ bad his Apostles write, and yet has not enclosed his Spirit in ink
and paper, then the written Command must be an Ordinance sanctified of Christ,
for blessed is he that reads. But whereas Saltmarsh will have the
Commandments of the Gospel not to oblige the elect to obedience except the
Spirit go along with them, in that they conspire with Arminians and Pelagians,
who will have the Covenant of grace an unjust bargain, as obliging to things
unpossible, except God bestow sufficient grace on all; and again they must say
none unconverted are condemned for not believing that Gospel, because it is
unpossible in the letter, as well as the Law to any, except the Spirit work in
us to will and to do.

3. He denies that we are to wait on outward Ordinances, or on God in the use
of means, which has a double sense:

1. As if we were to wait for conversion from only outward means, or as if the
letter of the word, the sound of men's voice, the seals or Ordinances of
themselves could work faith, or of themselves convey spiritual things to the
soul, this we teach not. But we teach that faith comes by hearing, not
internal hearing, for that is conversion it self, but by hearing of a sent
Preacher, Romans 10.14, 15, 16. But the way of Gods conveying spiritual things
by the word preached we dare not determine: but sure we are to wait on
Ordinances external, as the man waited thirty eight years at the poole for his
health, though not the pool, but the Angel troubling the water healed all that
were healed; and while the Eunuch reads and hears Philip expone Esa. 53. the
Spirit acte^h upon his soul, and while Lydia hears, the Lord opens her heart,
while Peter preaches the word, the Holy Ghost fell on all that heard the word,
Diverse ways of the Spirits concurring with the word.
Act. 10.44. Act. 8.34, 35, 36. Act. 16.14. while three thousand hear Peter,
the Holy Ghost pricketh their heart and adds them to the Church, Act. 2. that
they gladly receive the word, v. 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42. the inward opening
goes along with Gods outward teaching. By Saltmarsh his way, we are nor to
hear the word, nor to wait on God in the use of any means, nor to use any
means and commit the success to God, but to wait on extraordinary raptures,
and inward teaching (say they) not on outward means, but our wating on the
outward means piously used is all in order to the breathing of the Spirit of
life and the inward word (say we) as some sail and seek the wind both at
once; and does this offend Familists, that we serve and wait on the Lord for
the desired harvest? and that some wait on the tide and then sail: so is
Saltm. angry that we hear, preach, read, (though the unconverted do not these
spiritually) and in the Lords good hour, when the Angel comes down and
troubles the water, the Spirit lifts up the sick man and puts him into the
water, and he is healed: Protestants generally are not ashamed to own this as
the way of God. 1. In hearing and outward means, no man is to limit the holy
One of Israel to his time, the time of the Fathers teaching, the third or the
twelfth hour is not known to us, but all our life it is our duty to lie and
watch at the posts and gates of wisdom, Prove. 8.34.

2. We are not to idolize means, and to take Scripture, or Ordinances for
Christ, they are creatures, not Christ, and of themselves cannot save; then let
us use the means, not give them any higher place then means, neither think all
is done if we use means: thus it is not Christ without us, but Christ within,
that effectually saves us.

3 Nor is the acting of the Holy Ghost so as if the word must first stir the
spirit of God, but by the contrary, as the Poole of Bethsoida moved not the
Angel, to bring him down, but the Angel came down and stirred the Poole; so
the Spirit first stirs and blows upon both our spirit, and the word, and
then the word, and we both are inlived; for any stirring upon the word, and
blowing of the North and South Wind upon the flowers, and Garden, to wit, the
souls of the elect, is first and principally from the spirit, for the spirit
is the Author creator and in the immediately inspired Organs, the Prophets and
Apostles, the Penmen, and the Spirit, devised and dictated the the words,
letters and doctrine of the old and new Testament, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. 2 Pet.
1.19, 20, 21. Luke 1.55, 70.

2 Its he that sends Messengers to speak in his name Esa. 48.16. Esa. 6.1, 2,
3, Jer. 26.12.

3 When we do not actually hear, or partake of Ordinances, the Holy Ghost
brings the word to our remembrance, and wakens up the memory and faith of the
word, by works of divine providence Joh. 16.13. Joh. 14.26. Joh. 2.21.22.

4 The Spirit acts by rods, judgments, and afflictions, Deuteronomy. 30.1, 2, 3, 4,
5. Hos. 5.15. Luke 15.15, 16, 17. Yet so as he reviveth the memory of the word
preached, read, and heard and works in, and by it.

5 In praying, promising, threatening in the fervor and zeal of God, there
comes upon the souls of the servants of God some strong and mighty
prophetical impression, and violent impulsion that they speak and prophecy
what otherwise they would not, in cold blood speak, and God has made good the
words of his servants, which as it is not ordinary, so it must be tried.

Familists have no ground to dream that Jeremiah or John intended a contrary
between the outward teaching, as a killing letter, and the inward teaching, as
the only quickening of the Spirit, excluding the letter, and all teaching of
men, because the one said, Jer. 31.34. And they shall teach no more every man
his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying know the Lord: for they shall
all know me, etc. and the other said, 1 John 2.27. And ye need not that any
man teach you, for the same anointing teaches you of all things, and is truth.

1 The Author to the Hebrews c. 8. applies the saying of Jeremiah to Christ
and his dispensation under the Gospel, and the former Covenant to the law and
dispensation of the old Testament, so as if it prove any thing, it must be
against all teaching of men, by men, by the Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors, and
Doctors which are certainly brethren teaching brethren, and neighbors
instructing neighbors, which close subverteth the end of Christ's ascending to
give some to be Apostles, etc* for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work
of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ and that to the end,
till we all come in the unity of faith, etc.

2 It must be against the writing of the new Testament, and the teaching and
doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, upon which we are built, Jesus Christ
being the chief corner stone. Ephesians. 2.20.

3 The Author to the Hebrews applies this (they shall be all taught of God)
to all new converts, under the New Testament, and the same does Christ John
6.45, 46. But Saltmarsh and his Familists say only the perfect ones and these
that are all Spirit are beyond and above all Ordinances of man teaching man,
Sparkles of glory pa. 247.87. Yea John should in writing this epistle
contradict himself, for he was a man, not God who wrote, and he says even to
these who had the anointing in them in the same place, ver. 26. These things,
have I written to you concerning them that seduce you, 1 John 2.1. these things
write I unto you, that ye sin not, and ver. 12, 13, 14. He professes, he
writes to little children in Christ, to young men, to fathers, then either
John wrote what was not needful, to wit, that a man should write to anointed
ones; or then John was more than a man, or then in writing that he might teach
the anointed, he contravened what he wrote in all his exhortationes, and
teaching in these three epistles, and the Evangel, and the Revelation.

Again, it is a clear Hebraisme of which there be many in John's writings, for
the Hebrews deny positively when they intend to deny only comparatively, or
secundum quid, as when God and men are compared together, or the action of God
with men, Ps. 127.2* the sense is, so great shall be the abundance of the
Spirit of grace (would Jeremiah say) under the New Testament, that rather God
himself shall be the teacher, then one man shall teach another, there shall be
such exuberancie and seas of knowledge under the Messiahs Kingdom, and the new
Covenant, above the Covenant God made with his people, when he brought them out
of Egypt: And ye need not (would John say) so much that men teach you, so
full, so rich, so glorious is the Anointings teaching, it is like to this, Hos.
6.6. I desired mercy and not sacrifice, yet sure he desired and commanded
sacrifice, so he exponeth it. I desired the knowledge of God, more then burnt
offering, and Christ exponeth it so, Matthew. 12.7. that mercy to the life of the
hungering Disciples, who plucked ears of corn on the Sabbath, is more then
external observing of the Sabbath; yet does not Christ deny positively the
external observing of the Sabbath. So 1 Samuel 8 7. They have not rejected thee,
but they have rejected me. Certain it was, they rejected Samuel, and would not
have him, to judge them, but would have a King. But the words are to be
exponed in a comparative sense, though they be spoken positively, that is,
rather, or with a more heinous measure of disgracement and reproach they have
rejected me their Lord and God in Covenant, that I should not reign over them,
then my servant Samuel, 1 Cor. 15.9, 10. Not I, but the grace of God with me,
that is, not I so much, who am but a weak man, but far rather the grace of
God, was the cause why I outstripped all the Apostles in labor. And 1 Cor.
3.7. So then, neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that waters;
but God that gives the increase, that is, he that planteth or he that
waters, is nothing, in comparison of God; yet the planter is something, he is
the Minister of Christ, and Steward of the mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1. Paul
says, 1 Cor. 1.17. Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel,
yet Mat. 28.19. he sent all the Apostles to baptize also.

Nor can we believe that the word of God has two senses, one internal,
spiritual, more excellent, and perfect, that does affect the heart, and is
diverse from the literal and genuine sense; and another written sense of the
letter that is less excellent, and but preparatory for the more excellent, as
Arminians falsely impute to us. Sim. Episco. par. 1 Thessalonians. 17. dispu. 2. But
as it is the opinion of Enthusiasts falsely imputed to us, because we teach
that there is a nece^sity of the supernatural illumination of the Holy Ghost,
to cause us savingly know and believe the one only true and literal sense of
the Scripture, with an evidence of light spiritual and supernatural, which we
knew before with a common, natural, and literal light and evidence, which is
not wanting in Devils, otherwise they could not believe and tremble,
apprehending Christ as their tormenter, and in many wicked men, or then they
should not be inexcusable.

2. The Scripture could not say they know God, Joh. 7.28 Joh. 3.2. etc.

3. Nor could they mock and scoff at the wisdom of the cross, if they were
void of all knowledge of the doctrine of the cross as they do, 1 Cor.
1.18.23, 24. 1 Cor. 2.14. this opinion we lay at the door of the Antinomians,
and judge to be absurd.

For 1. The unregenerate man were obliged to believe and apprehend one sense of
the word, and the enlightened another different sense, whereas both may
literally know one and the same sense that Jesus is the Son of God, and
Savior of the world, and the one believes and the other scoffs, mockes and
stumbles at the word, Matthew. 11.25. 1 Cor. 1.18.25. 1 Timothy 1.15. 1 Pet. 2.6.7.8.

2. Then should these words, ( Christ is God and man the Savior of bel^e^ers)
have one sense to believers, which they receiving by faith, saves them, and
another to others, that Christ is not man, but only God, as manifested in a
Saint, is Christ the Savior of Saints, but not the man that on Mount Calvery
dyed, and bare the real punishment due to us by divine ju^tice for our sins:
for the spiritual sense is either all one with the literal sense or diverse
therefrom; if all one we have our intent, if diverse, no man can have certainty
of faith.

For 1. How can we be assured by any supposed Spirit or internal rapture of
mind, that this is the true sense of the Gospel. That Christ is but God, or
the anointing of God suffering, afflicted, and dying in the Saints, when the
words in the letter do bear the just contradicent, that he was a man like us
in all things except sin.

2. The Scripture should be no light to our eyes, no lantern to our feet, if
it have two senses; for how should we with assurance of faith and an undoubting
conscience in all we believe in all we practice, do all? for how shall poor
people be resolved which of the two senses to follow, since contradictory
senses were offered to them, for Protestants literal sense and Familists
spiritual sense, are as contradicent one to another as yea and no, light and
darkness.

3. Since Familists deny that they are infallible in exponing any Scripture,
and yet the Spirit does suggest these spiritual senses, that Antinomians and
Familists boast off, and ^^at immediately acting on our souls as dead, pa^sive
org^ns without discoursing, reasoning and arguing, which to ^e is the very
Prophetical immediately inspiring Spirit that carried the Prophets and
Apostles in seeing the visions of God this must be a Spirit that is fallible,
and a Spirit that immediately suggesteth and teaches untruths to some, and ^o
others, such truths and senses as may admit of a further light, and of a
retractation and a believing of the very contrary, and so a Spirit both
fallible and infallible, like to the Spirit immediately inspiring the Prophets.

We take literal exposition sometimes as it is exposed to figurative and
typical, and in this sense we condemn such as press all borrowed
metaphorical and allegorical speeches in Scripture according to the letter,
whereas these by analogy of faith must have a spiritual sense, and yet the
grammatical and the spiritual sense are opposed, as Ps. 72.16. There shall be
an handful of corn in the earth upon the top of the mountains, the fruit
thereof shall shake like Lebanon, Jer. 31.12. Therefore they shall come and
sing in the height of Zion, and shall flow together to the goodness of the
Lord, for wheat and for wine, and for oil, and for the young of the flock and
the herd.

These words and the like, Calvin and our worthy Reformers, Musculus and Luther
(of whom Saltmarsh says, they had but little discoveries of the Spirit,
because Calvin wrote against his fathers the Libertines, Luther against
Antinomians, Bullinger against the Anabaptists, and the Enthusiasts) in regard
of himself and the Family of love, (as Barrow railet^ more against Calvin then
any Jesuit can do.) These words (I say) our worthy Reformers expone of the
spiritual glory and fruits of the Spirit under the Kingdom of the Messiah,
because the the Scripture cannot bear another interpretation which says, Romans
14.17. The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, etc. So we detest their
gross and literal exposition, who expone Christ, as meaning that we must
dismember our body, when he compared the renouncing of our vilde affections to
the plucking out of our eyes, and cutting off our hands and feet, because this
literal and gross exponing of Scripture is contrary to the sixth command, Thou
shall not murder, and we say here that figurative speeches have no literal
sense, but that which they would have, if they were turned into modified and
simple expressions, though none more then Enthusiasts and Familists reject all
literal expositions, and so cast away Scripture, Ministry, reading, hearing,
because the Scripture depresseth all these and calls them nothing in
comparison of the operations of the Spirit that are above nature. But that the
literal and spiritual sense are one and the same and the Letter and Spirit
subordinate, not contrary, we affirm: for Scripture has not two senses, but
the grammatical and native sense that the words offer, without violence or
straining of Scripture, is the true meaning of Scripture: indeed there be two
evidences and lights that manifest one and the same sense, as the natural man
sees the true sense of the same Scripture with the natural, literal and star
light of mere natural reason, and the evidence of a natural, literal,
orthodox Spirit, and the renewed man sees the same sense with the
supernatural, spiritual, and Sunne-light, and spiritual evidence of a Spirit
of grace above nature.

Hence, how far the spirit, and spiritual actings of the Holy Ghost are
opposed to external, How the Spirit is opposite to the lette^ and to externals.
literal, and natural actings and the letter of the word, and external
ordinances. to what is said I add th^se considerations

1 To preach (the like I say of praying, hearing, and the using of all
ordinances in their kind) with the wisdom of words, 1 Cor. 1.17. with
excellency of speech with the loftines, high riding, and soaring of words, or
humane eloquence, and wisdom, a predominant star shining in all fa^se
teachers, The spirit contrary to human eloquence.
especially in Enthusiasts, Familists, and the like, who give out that they
speak coals, and fire-flaughts, when it is but wildfire 2 Pet. 2.3. Romans
16.18. much in request now) to preach (I say) so loftily, is contrary to
preaching in the evidence or demonstration of the spirit, so Saltmarshs
Sparkles of glory, Gortynes dreams, H. Nicholas his writings are far from
any spiritual or heavenly forcing and convincing power, they have great
swelling words like globes or balls of capacious swelling bags, or blathers
of wind, but every word is not a pound weight, but a wandering cloud, a
fleeting air, (such as the spirit, pure spirit, discoveries of the spirit,
hightenings of pure, free grace, all God, all Christed, fully, and purely
spiritualized Saints, that live not on any of these creatures below, no not on
ordinances) are ordinary to them. But then, 1. They speak none-sense, that
others more heavenly then themselves not understanding them, may go for
carnal, legal, literal men as not having the spirit, and so not able to
understand or judge of the things of the spirit, whereas they are the only
spiritual men that judge all things, in the mean time they know not what they
say, and speak contrary to the Scripture, and to sense. 2. They have a sort of
high and lof^y speaking, but far from the Scripture-stile, that as it is high,
yet runs with Christ's feet and pace in the simplicity of Jesus Christ, now
their eloquence is a combing, decking and busking of Christ, and the beauty and
glory of the Gospel, which is, as if you would cloth the noon-day-sun with a
gown of cloth of gold, set with rubies and precious stones, or as if one
would make a purple coat of fine pure silk, to a fair Rose or Lilly; the Sun
and the Lilly are twice more beautyfull without these, then with them.

2 To speak in the spirit, is to speak with power, life, majesty, in a
peircing way in the power of God, (...).
1 Cor 2.5. and this is not a natural power. Again to speak or preach in the
letter, is to speak drily, coldly, deadly, To speak drying and coldly is not
to speak in the Spirit.
or if it be with sense and affection, it is natural, like Cicero,
Demosthenes, but without the majesty and some what of heaven, and Christ in the
tongue, like a very Scrib and Pharisee in the chair, not as Christ who spoke
with Authority, for when pursevants were sent to take him with bodily violence,
he took them with heavenly power they could not lay hands on him, but returned
with their apoligie, never man spoke as this man, suppose the same sermon and
th^se very words in matter and sense had come out of the mouth of a Pharisee,
they had lost the Majesty in his tongue, I confess every hearer cannot know
this, and a spiritual Preacher can no more cause a natural ear hear this,
then ye can write sounds, or your eyes can discern the sweetness of honey
where the tas^e is only judge, and a bas^^rd Spirit may go on far to
counterfeit the true Spirit, but in the manner of speaking, he comes short, but
so nigh he can come, as, if it were possible, he would deceive the very elect,
Matthew. 24.24. and keeps many elect, and many precious Christians in England
this day captives under the power of abominable heresies, but God shall (I
hope) rescue them, and seek out his sheep that are scattered in the dark and
cloudy day.

3. That which excludes humane industry, and much of the actings and
ratiocinations of man in the first moulding of heavenly truths, is most
spiritual. So the Prophets were inspired (...) carried, rolled, moved, acted
immediately by the Holy Ghost, for God used not reason, or humane discour^ing
as an intervening organ or acting instrument to the devising and inventing of
spiritual or Gospel truths, 2 Pet. 1.20, 21. but yet this immediately
inspiring Spirit spoke written Scripture, commanded the Ordinance of actual
prophesying, commanded the Prophets to write, and the people to hear and to
read the words of the Prophecy, Antinomians and Familists conceive that now,
when divine truths are framed and come forth to the immediately inspired
Scripture, That which is most spiritual excludes most of us, yet not always
our discoursing and arguing part.
that the same immediately inspired Spirit must act the Saints as mere passive
organs, to preach in the Spirit, immediately to pray, to hear, to write in the
Spirit; but then Familists should be as infallible, as the Prophets, both in
preaching, praying, interpreting Scripture, but the ordinary actings of the
Spirit does include and carry along the actings of reason, mind, will and
affections, but elevated above themselves.

The Spirit is contrary to wild and carnal logic.
The Spirit is opposed to carnal and wild logic and ratiotinations, and so
all carnal thoughts and sinful (...) discourses, are Satan's fortifications
and Souldier-works against the knowledge of God, 2 Cor. 10.5, 6. 1 Cor. 2.1, 2,
3, 4. 1 Cor. 1.17. but the Spirit siteth upon and acts reason to make our
whole service (...) reasonable service, yea and all the Scripture is a mass
and book of discoursive refined reason, unbeleevers are (...) absurd,
unreasonable men, going against sense and sound reason. And the spirit goes on
in a persuading way, 2 Cor. 5.11. Gal. 1.10. Paul Act. 13.43. persuaded them to
continue in the grace of God, Act. 18.4. he persuaded the Jews and Greeks,
Act. 19.8. he persuaded the things concerning the Kingdom of God. So does the
Spirit carry us along with exhorting, Act. 2.40. 2 Cor. 9.5. 2 Thessalonians. 3.12. 2 Timothy 4.2. Heb. 3.13. 1 Pet. 5.1. Jude. v. 3.

5. Amongst the characters of a spiritual state and condition. Some concern
the state, some the actions. For the state, a renewed man is said to be in the
Spirit. The expressions of the spiritual estate.


Gal. 5.25. If ye live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the spirit. So as
the Spirit is the life of the man, in his spiritual walking; so are we, as
touching our state, said to receive the Spirit, Gal. 3.2. Romans 8.15. to be
borne of the Spirit, as receiving a new spiritual nature, Joh. 3.6. Gal. 4.29.
and the Spirit said to dwell in us, Jam. 4.5. and the spirit is given to us,
Romans 5.5. The Spirit determines the actions of the spiritual man according to
their specification, or nature and kind.


For the actings; the Spirit determines the action according to the nature and
specification, and rendereth the action spiritual, so as they are led in their
conversation by the Spirit, and so are known to themselves to be the Sons of
God, Romans 8.14. If ye mortify, through the Spirit, the deeds of the flesh ye
shall live, Rom^ 8.13. Paul was pressed in Spirit, and testified to the Jews,
that Jesus was Christ, Act. 18.5. Apollos fervent in Spirit, spoke and taught
diligently, Romans 8.25. For we through the Spirit wait for the hope of
righteousness by faith.

6. The exercise of spiritual acts is managed most from the Spirit, when there
is more Spirit, and less Law in our acts of obedience. But that this may be
rightly understood, give me leave to distinguish in the Law.

1. Directive and obliging light revealing the binding will of God.

2. The setting of it on with power and life upon the mind, will and
affections.

3. The compelling rigor of the Law in exacting highest and superlative perfect
obedience in thought, word and deed, and the terrifying threatening.

How obliging Law and a free Spirit consists together.
Directive and obliging light being the commanding will of the Lawgiver revealed
to us in the written word is not contrary to the Spirit, but written to us by a
divinely and immediately inspiring Spirit, as all Scripture, and as the written
letter of the Gospel, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. though to us naturally fallen in sin
in the second respect, or in regard of the setting on of this directive
obliging light upon the soul with power and life to produce actual obedience,
the written and preached Law as Law, and as a Covenant of works is void of the
Spirit, and has no more power to cause us obey then dead and spiritlesse
figures and characters, written on ^^one can work men to bow their neck to
obey the Law of God, 2 Cor. 3.6, 7. yea but so the written and preached Gospel
externally proposed without the Spirit is a dead letter also. I grant the
Gospel in its letter both promises a new heart and a new spirit, which the
Law as the Law does not, and, when the Spirit joins with the preached Gospel,
and the Law also does prepare the sinner for Christ, by the word of the Gospel
the Spirit is given, and so the Apostles and Pastors, are Ministers of the New
Testament, not of the letter, but of the Spirit.

But 3. The Law in compelling under the pain of eternal death to
superlatively perfect obedience, has the Spirit by accident and extrinsecally
conjoined with it, as it is the Spirit of the Mediator that makes use of it to
cause the broken man see his unpayable, and to him, impossible debts, and cause
him hear the tinkling and noise of the fetters and chains of hell, that he
may fly to the Gospell-surety, which the same Spirit reveals to him in the
Gospel. Now this is an extrinsecall use of the Law.

For 1. The Law should have its entire and perfect essence and full operation
in rewarding or punishing, if we suppose there never had been a surety for
sinners, nor a Gospel.

2. Its a Gospell-spirit that makes this use of the Law above its nature, for
that, which can but reveal to the broken man, debts unpayable by him, and
incloseth him in an eternal jayle, and gives no strength, nor way of
redemption, cannot have of it self any influence to lead the broken man to a
surety. But this the Law does of it self, has not of it self one fourth part
of an ounce of Gospell-courtesie, or grace, to bestow on the sinner.

But 2. The compelling rigor of the Law, as touching perfect and eternally
active and passive obedience, must be considered in its several branches, as
it commands perfect active obedience, or as it obliges to passive obedience,
it respects two sorts of persons; the man Christ, in the days of his flesh,
and the elect Angels; or 2. fallen sinners.

In the former consideration, the Law, in it self as the Law, eternally and
immutably presses perfect active obedience, but gives not strength to obey,
but supposes strength to these, to whom it is first given: but if so be that
these to whom it is given, have abundance of the Spirit and strength to obey
perfectly, as Christ in the days of his flesh and the elect Angels have, the
Law, in its highest rigor of commanding perfect obedience, (it is not properly
rigor, though we must use the word, but strictness) has no compulsive power
over them; for ye cannot say that a willing man, or a man delighting to obey
God, is compelled to obey God.

But if we speak of man fallen in sin, who is unable to perform perfect
active obedience, the Law stands over him in a highest pitch of moral
compulsion: for whether he be willing to obey or have the Spirit, or be unable
and void of the Spirit, the Law stands above him exacting a sum of ten
thousand talents from him, that cannot pay the hundredth part of half a talent,
or an halfpenny, as he ought.

And the man, out of Christ and under the Law, is still compelled in both
active and passive obedience; the letter of the Law and this ministration of
death without the Spirit hailes and draws him, as the literal prisoner
fettered by a extremely exacting Law void of all Spirit, and conferring no
saving strength on him to do or suffer, the penalty of the Law.

And for the believer in Christ, the rigor of the Law is abated, not that the
Law, as the Law, requires less of him then absolutely perfect obedience, but
because in what he comes short in performing of new obedience, from a new
principle, to wit, a Gospell-spirit in him, he is pardoned in Christ, and the
rest is accepted for Christ's sake, as if it were obedience.

Now in this new obedience, the Spirit so oyleth the wheels of free will as
obedience, in its kind, is as free, connaturall, delightful, being sweetened
with the love of God, as if there were not an awing Law, but a sweetly alluring
and heart-drawing free love, so that the believer obeyes with an Angell-like
obedience; then the Spirit seems to exhaust all the commanding awsomenesse of
the Law, and supplies the Laws imperious power with the strength and power of
love; if we suppose there had been no Law commanding Christ absolute obedience,
yet if we suppose a mere directing light, How moral compulsion of the Law is
exhausted by the freeness of a Gospel Spirit of love.
without any compelling, to show him what is good and agreeable to Gods
commanding will, so did Christ obey perfectly from a principle of love, and so
does the justified believer give obedience, though imperfect, yet sincere to
what is Gods will? then it follows:

1. The higher and larger measure of willingness, or the more superlatively
the will be bended, the light of a divine Law shining on the mind and will,
the more of the Spirit, (because the Spirit is essentially free, Ps. 51.12. 2
Cor. 3.17.) the more freeness: and the more freeness, the more renewed will
in the obedience: and the more renewed will the less constraint, because
freeness exhausteth constraint, and especially when constraint looks toward
eternal punishment, and the Law compels, under pain of eternal death,
those that are under Law-obligation, Threatening had influence on the will of
the first Adam, not of the second, or of confirmed Angels.
to obey. Now fear of eternal wrath is wholly swallowed up, where a free
spirit of love and strong delight to obey, intervenes between obedience and
such fear, as is clear in the man Christ in the days of his flesh, and the
confirmed Angels: and though I doubt nothing, but fear of the second death was
in its way, and so far as was congruous and convenient for a state of
sinlesse innocence, to work upon the will of the first Adam and Evah to
deter them from sinning; otherwise that threatening of God (In the day thou
eatest thou shall dye) had no intrinsecall end, nor was it rational, which
cannot be said: yet Law-threatnings had no influence on the will of the
confirmed Angels, much less on the perfect and holy will of the second Adam,
which was so filled with God, so balasted with so many talent weights of sweet
delight and free love, Ps. 40.7, 8. Joh. 4.34. as Angels and Christ obeyed,
without any eye-looke or glance of their thoughts to Law-threatning. And the
justified beleever^ now obeying as a Son, not as a bond-slave, yields
willing obedience, from a free leading Spirit, the Spirit of adoption proper to
sons, who obey their father, out of an instinct of love, not out of a principle
of commanding awing and terrifying Law, as slaves under bondage do obey their
masters, Rom 8.14, 15, 16, 17. And the Law of the Spirit of life comes in
into the place of the compelling and cursing Law (not that the directing and
obliging power thereof is removed) and acts a believer to obey, as if there
were no Law over him at all, and freeth him from the Law of sin, from the
dominion of the Law in binding him over to a curse, Romans 8.2. Romans 7.1, 2, 3.
as if there were not a Law given to a justified man, 1 Timothy 1.9. And look how
we say the willing free obedience of men consists well with the necessity of
Gods absolute decree, so sweet delightful freeness of a Gospel Spirit led by
God, does well consist with the necessity of an obliging and strongly
commanding Law, though the sting of the cursing, and threatening be removed.

7. Now the fond conceit of Waldesso, consideration 63. is utterly to be
rejected, for (he says) the Scripture shines as a light in a dark place
until the day star arise in the heart, The place 2 Pet. 1. until the
day star arise vindicated, as making nothing for a naked light of the Spirit
without the Scriptures.
2 Pet. 1. and then the man has no more need to seek that of the holy
Scripture, which departs of it self, as the light of a candle departs when the
Sunne-beames enter, even as Moses departed at the presence of Christ and the
Law at the presence of the Gospel. But ((...) until) notes not a certain
time of the removing of the light of the word* since Peter there preferres it
to the revelation at Christ's transfiguration. Matthew. 1.25. Joseph knew her not
until she brought forth her first borne, it follows not, ergo he knew her
after, so Matthew. 11.13.15. the Law and Prophets are (...) until John, then no
more Law and Prophets after John, it follows not, Matthew. 12.20. he shall not
break a bruised reed, (...); till he bring forth judgment to victory,
therefore when he has brought forth judgment to victory, he must then break
the bruised reed, and be no longer tender to weak ones, Matthew. 14.22. he
constrained his Disciples to go to the other side till he send the multitude
away: then he sent not the multitude away, when the Disciples were come to the
other side? it is absurd. So Matthew. 16.28. they shall not taste of death until
they see the Kingdom of God come, ergo, they shall live no longer then they
see the Kingdom of God come? it follows not: Matthew. 22.44. Sit thou at my
right hand till I make thine enemies thy footstool, ergo after Christ's enemies
are subdued, he shall sit no longer at the right hand of the Father: Joh. 5.17.
My Father works until now and I work, (...) ergo my father works no more
after this in his providence, in governing the world; what more absurd? 1 Timothy
4.13. Till I come, give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine;
then must Timothy read, exhort and preach no more after Paul is come? The place
presses us to wait on the Ordinances and hearing, until the day star, the
saving light of the Spirit (that goes before the Sun and daylight of the
vision of glory) shine in the heart, to make the word effectual: for though
candlelight and sunne-light cannot concur to make one light, because the
lesser light evanisheth and disappeareth at the coming of the greater light,
and the moonlight or starre-light of faith cannot be mixed with the
noonday-light of glory, 1 Cor. 13.11, 12. no more then the knowledge of a young
child, and of the same, come to be an aged man, can be in one and the same man;
yet the light of the Scripture and the light of the Spirit may, and must
necessarily be together, and are no more contrary, as Waldesso and Familists
vainly suppose, How the Spirit is called the day star.
then the light of the Sun without, in the air is contrary to the visible
faculty of seeing within, in the eyes; the Spirit is by a metaphor called the
day star, for the Spirit is not formally light, but effectually only; for it
is that faculty by which the eyes of the understanding are strengthened to
perceive the things of God; and therefore called the spirit of Revelation, Ephesians.
1.17. the eye salve is not properly the light that makes colors visible,
though I may say to a dim sighted man when I give him an excellent eye salve,
see I give you the light of your eyes. When I give him but that by which his
seeing faculty is strengthened to see perfectly: that Scripture is not to be
laid aside upon pretended sufficient light of the Spirit, without the
Scripture light, is clear, Romans 15.4.

2. Because the perfectest believers have patience and comfort in the
Scripture, meditating in it day and night, Ps. 1. and are strengthened through
reading again and again the premises, lest they faint Ps. 119.49.

3. Because the Scripture, to every new reading and hearing suggesteth some new
thing of God, as a fountain that can never go dry, Ps. 119.96.92, 93.72. 2
Pet. 1.13, 14, 15. Phil. 3.1.

8. That saying, The more of the letter, the less of the Spirit, has truth,
as touching the only and mere letter rested on and confided in: but is not
simply true, that the more of the knowledge of the letter the less of the
Spirit, but the more rather of the Spirit.

9. The nearer to glory, when we shall be all-spirit, and have nothing of a
Temple and of Ordinances, how true that is to be taken (the more of the letter,
the less of the Spirit) and what truth is in it.
and of the mirror or glass of the word, the less literal we are, that is,
we repose the less on the letter, and are the more spiritual, as the nearer
to the morning, the less of starre-light, 2 Pet. 1.19. 1 Cor. 13.10, 11, 12,
13. But it follows not that the nearer believers are to an immediate vision
of glory, the less knowledge they have of the letter of the Scripture, (though
this knowledge of the letter shall fully be abolished at the dawning of that
morning) for the nearer it be to the full harvest, the more abundance of the
first fruits, and yet when the full harvest comes the first fruits cease and
give place to the harvest, and the more of the morning twilight, the nearer
day, though the morning twilight evanish when the perfect day comes; yea the
nearer that the dawning of the morning face of God shine in at the windows of
our soul, when we are in the childbirth pain of eternity, the more of the
knowledge of the will of God we have, in regard we are, 1 Pet. 3.14. to grow in
grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and this
knowledge does include, not exclude the knowledge of the letter.

The Spirit is not a part of the rule of faith or of the word; the Spirit is
not the word, the word is not the Spirit, but the Spirit is that which makes
lively and effectual application of the word to our souls; as the Mason is
not the art of building, but he is regulated by the precepts of art and reason,
and ties himself to the following of art in all the works of building; the
word is that which tyeth us as our guide, rule, conduct, but the Spirit goes
along in a real uniting of our hearts to Christ (as it were) enclosed in the
word, and in applying the word to our heart, and so is called the anointing.

10. The spiritualty of our souls is in a sort of dominion over the letter of
the word, when our souls are transformed into the things contained in the
Gospel, and we are changed into the spiritualnesse of the word, so Romans 6.17.
the Gospel is called a form, a mould, a signet, for look what letters and
characters are in the signet of silver or brass, these same characters, in
length and breadth and just proportion, are instamped on the wax or the paper,
the Gospel contains the Lord Jesus, How we are changed into the same
spiritualnesse contained in the Gospel.
his image the lineaments of Christ in a new mind, new will, renewed
affections, knowledge, love, meekness, patience, lowliness, etc. it is a
moral containing of Christ, as the sign contains the thing that is
signified by the sign, the Spirit instamps and forms (as it were) another
Christ, that is, his living spiritual image in our soul, Gal. 4.19. a new
ingraving of the new work and new creation of the second Adam, 2 Cor. 5.17. on
our hearts, Jer. 31.
which is called the Law in the inward parts, when we have the same stamp and
image of Christ, and are changed over into the Gospel, not into the letters of
the Gospel, or into the external words, but are new-moulded into the Spirit,
and new spiritual nature of the second Adam, and are borne of the Spirit, Joh.
3.5, 6. the word is called the seed, 1 Pet. 1.23. the tree is vertually in the
seed; the new birth, and new Spirit we receive in regeneration is in the word
vertually, as the thing signified in the sign; so are we said, 2 Cor. 3.18. to
be changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of
the Lord. And the Spirit looks to his copy or sampler, and look what
lineaments, legs, limbs, proportion of members are in the second Adam, these
same the Spirit by the word preached, draws and frames in us, now the second
Adam, the man Christ, in his spirituals, is the first borne of every creature
Col. 1.15. Christ is the master piece, the flower and glory of the Acts of God,
in creating new creatures after the second creation, and there is framed on him
holiness, lowliness, meekness, humility, patience, heavenly mindedness, and
the spirit according to this glorious mould draws the legs, arms, and all
the several limbs and members of the new creature in the Saints, and he makes
efficaciously good, that part of the word: Learn of me that I am meek and
lowly, Mat. 11.29. let him take up his cross and follow me, Matthew. 16.24. let
this mind be in you that was also in Christ Jesus, Phil. 2.5. so does the
Spirit change us unto al Spirit, and this is the right Christing of the Saints,
when the Lord by the word Spiriteth, and of new, Natureth us over again into
new spiritual children like our brother the fairest among the Sons of men,
holy, heavenly, spiritual, meek, lowly like Christ, though because of
in-dwelling sin in all, all the new Creatures come far short of the first
copy. And when we are thus changed and made spiritual, the Gospel is acted on
us, so are we spiritualized into Christ and made one with him by faith and
planted into the similitude of Christ Romans 6. now the letters and characters or
sounds of the written and preached Gospel are transient things, but the Gospel
and new Covenant in the glorious promises and spiritual privileges contained
therein stand still as the everlasting rule according to which we are daily more
and more conformed till we become one spirit with the Lord. And because the
continuation of the lif hid up with God in Christ, is a protracted thread of
continual dependence by renewed acts of faith, of patience and comforts through
the Scriptures, of growing in faith, the word must give a daily new objective
life to our faith, and the renewed acts thereof; for faith is our victory, 1 John 5. and we overcome by the word Rev. 12.11. if Antinomians can give us a
time when we shall be secured from the fiery-darts of Satan on this side of
heaven, we yield that the shield of the word is to be laid aside, but that we
know not, see Ephe. 6.15, 16, 17. 1 John 2.14. 1 Pet. 5 8, 9. Were we indeed
made perfect, entire, without spot or wrinckle of indwelling sin in this life,
and such as we can sin no more. as Antinomians vainly boast of themselves as
Town, Eaton, Salmtarsh, Den and Crispe will hereafter teach us, I could yield
there were some more color or hew of reason to say that we are, being
justified, invested in a state of all and pure spirit, beyond the orb and
sphere of all necessity of Ordinances, and Scripture, because pure spirits
need no characters or letters of Scripture, seals, or other ordinances, no more
then learned Doctors need the Horn-book, to use the vain comparison of John
Waldesso. But we must go in over the threshold of heaven, holding the book of
the Old and New Testament in our hand, growing in knowledge, till we be
perfected with him who dwells in light inaccessable: and so there is not any
thing signified, and holden forth to us in the scripture; nor promised or
prophesied in the Covenant of grace Deuteronomy. 39. Ezech. 11. Jer. 31. Ezech. 36.
Heb. 8. but the copy extract or the double thereof is written, engraven and
created in the souls of the elect in which sense the assumption of this
syllogism.

Whosoever believes shall be saved.
But I, John, Marie believe. ergo.
Is in Scripture and the same spirit of faith and the believing spoken of by
Esaiah, Jeremiah. Ezechiel, etc. The same circumcised and new heart that they
prophesied of, is in John, Mary: and so the Spirit works the same new heart,
and the work or act of believing in length, breadth, figure, limbs, parts (to
speak so) that the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament promise, as a
Painter draws the portrait, head, face, eyes, cheeks, mouth; whole body in
colors, and al by looking on a liveing man, now how the man John or Mary, in a
reflect knowledge, can prove the same to his own comfortable assurance and
peace, is another thing. But here is no new discovery of God or of the Spirit,
which Saltmarsh calls for, Sparkles of glory pa. 194, 195. for he complains
that there has been no reformation further (in this Assembly at Westminster)
nor any higher attainment in these things (points of doctrine as to
justification, sanctfication, faith, etc. the ministry, word, Sacraments,
which they call means of salvation) then the Bishops made and the Synods in
England formerly. We grant all, we know no new cut, nor other new way of
justification, then the way David and Paul were justified Romans 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6. Psa. 32.1. and we glory that we add nothing to Articles of faith contained
in the Scripture, we only explicate them, and vindicate these Articles from the
false glosses of Popish Bishops, and the same that Saltm. objecteth to us,
might any object against the Canonical Epistles of John the Apostle, and say,
This fellow tells us only of some outward things, We know none of the Familists
new discoveries of the Spirit, that are not warranted by the word.
and outward Ordinances of Christ precepts of love to the brethren of doing
righteousness, and all these but written with paper and ink too, we see no
higher seize then these that the Prophets Christ, and Paul, and James and
Peter told us, he tells us nothing of any purer or more glorious discoveries of
God or the Spirit, or Jesus Christ, or our union with the Spirit, or glory as
to spiritual things and Christ risen, but as to Christ in the flesh or under
the Law, of which these Ordinances were a sign* we grant' we can reveal
nothing but old truths, and we cannot give to Saltmarsh any other new cut or
fragment of truth, but what the Scriptures, held forth.

2. We can but hold forth outward things, that is, truths of ancient faith,
spoken by sinful men and printed in paper, and these of Christ both dead,
risen and ascended to heaven; and we confess we can but baptize with water,
and can but build, plant, water, and are but underworkmen and instruments of
words, forms, sounds, printed books, and the Prophets and Apostles received
these and no other thing from the Lord, but our Master can do more, he can,
and does by our weak labors, and the foolishness of preaching, give the holy
Spirit. If Saltmarsh can give purer or more glorious discoveries of God, of his
Spirit, Christ Jesus, etc. let him take H Nicholas and Da. George to help him,
let us hear them, produce your reasons, etc. for we ever urge this, these new
discoveries of God or the Spirit, are either revealed in the word, or not
revealed; if in the word, then are they but outward Ordinances, such as former
Synods have discovered, and so according to Saltmarsh, to be rejected, if they
be not revealed in the word, they must be additions to the word, and so
unlawful, Rev. 22.18. Deuteronomy. 12.32. Prove. 30.6.

2. The Spirit that comes with new positive doctrines without the word, must
prove it self to be from God by signs and miracles, as Christ and his
Apostles did.

3. Isaiah, Malachy, prophesied of John Baptist, though he did no miracles.
Let us see the like warrant, for these new discoveries.

4. This Spirit must be tried by the word, as Christ was willing to make the
Scripture judge, Act 9.23. Act 26 23. Luk 4 20, 21, 22, 23.
whether he was the Messiah or no, Joh. 5.39. Paul out of Moses and the
Prophets proved that Mary's son must be the only Savior, so did the rest of
the Apostles.

5. We are commanded to judge them cursed impostors, and not to receive them
in our house or bid them God speed, who bring any new discoveries of God or the
Spirit, which is not the doctrine that Paul and John received from the Lord,
Gal. 1.8. 2 Ioh. v. 10. 1 Cor. 11.23. But Familists will have the Scriptures to
bear witness to us of, and to reveal, the Father and the Son; but for the
holy Spirit, he must be revealed without the testimony of Prophets and
Apostles, though Christ our dying friend has left us his will in his last
testament confirmed by the death of the Testator, and forbids us to expect any
farther revelation, Heb. 1.1.9.16.17.27.28. Rev. 22.12.18.19.

Is it not safer to believe the Prophets and Apostles, upon whose word and
doctrine, we are builded as living stones and a habitation to God, Ephesians. 2.20,
21, 22. then to rely upon the word of such seducers, as H. Nicholas, Del,
Saltmarsh, and the like, who come in their own name, and bring neither word
nor works to witness their doctrine, not so much as Simon Magus and the
Antichrist, who bring wonders and living miracles to evidence that they are
sent from God? Familists have no escape but to say that their new discoveries
are revealed to them by the Spirit to be contained in the spiritual and
allegoricke sense of the Scripture. Now undeniably the Scripture has a
literal sense, and here it has a mystical and spiritual sense, and so many
senses, as the Papists teach. So Bellermine de verb. dei. l 3. c. 3. Thomas p.
1. art. 10. So Cajetanus ibid. Alp^onsus a Castro. l. 1. adver. her. Lyra in 2.
Reg. 7 Bucanus in Theolog. Scolastic. part. 2. c. 3. q. 5.

11. The same Gospell-truths in the manner of preaching and delivering of them
may be spiritually by some, and literally and dryly published by others; How
du^ies are (...) in the G^spel.
and nothing is thereby either added or taken away from the substance of truth.
But duties commanded in the Law are then pressed upon the consciences of the
hearers in a legal way, when they are forced upon the consciences of the people
upon legal motives, Law-obligations, threatenings of curses and sad judgments,
but they are then spiritually preached when they are pressed upon the hearers
in a terrible Law-way; but for that end discovered to them, that they may be
chased into Jesus as to the Gospel-sanctuary, and City of refuge to such as
run themselves out of breath to be in the bosom of our Savior.

2. They would be pressed so spiritually, as there may be still a pointing at
a pardoning ransom, and a healing and curing spirit, and so that all obedience
must be new from new principles of the Mediators grace, and upon Gospel
motives only, not from Hagar and the covenant tending to bondage.

Nor 3. upon the same necessity and account they were to be performed by virtue
of a Covenant of works.

What I before said touches the question whether the formal and last object
of our faith be the word of God, or the anointing, strength saving, grace and
eye salve of the Spirit (as some Schoolmen, Granado and others affirm the
latter) but the word is the formal object of faith, the saving grace or
anointing the efficient, by which we are anointed, enabled and quickened to
believe the word: now the eye salve or anointing is not that which we see and
believe, that which we see is the saving Gospel Truths we believe.

Saltmarsh with Familists denying the Scripture to be the word of God, will
have the inward supernatural grace and anointing to be the only obliging rule
of faith, otherwise (says he) its in vain to write books one against
another, for we then but set letter to letter, argument to argument, reason to
reason; but all in vain without the Spirit, as if Christ in proving the
resurrection against Saduces, Paul in proving justification by faith without
works, against such as turn the grace of God into wantonness, had not set letter
to letter, argument to argument, and all in vain, for they remained still
blind; yet Christ and Paul convinced and silenced these obstinate wranglers,
by the word of God, without pouring the Spirit on them, without whose power
they remained unconverted and hardened against the truth, the formal object is
that into which our faith is resolved when we give a reason of our faith, as
thus, for what cause or formal motive do you see with the eye of faith; and
believe that Mary's son is the Messiah, and only Savior ye do answer, because
so says the Lord in the Old and N. Testament, and that is the true object, but
ye do not give an account of your faith, when ye answer I believe it because
I have eyes within enlightened, because that is not to answer what is the true
object of your faith; if any ask you, upon what moral grounds go you to
Rome? yea give no reason, if ye answer, I go to Rome because I have a will
and a locomotive power in the nerves and muscicles of my body to move; for now
you answer by the efficient cause when the question is made of the formal
objective cause. If any ask, why do you see colors in daylight? ye do not
answer, because I have eyes and a seeing faculty; but to the former you say, I
go to Rome for such business, to the l^tter I see colors in daylight,
because they are seeable, and colors clothed with light before my eyes: so 1
Ioh. 5.10. He that believes on the Son of God has the witness^ within him,
that is the believer has objectively the the truth stamped in his heart, but
the anointing by which he was enabled to receive the testimony and truth, is
not for that the object or the thing believed or received, but the saving help
by which we are strengthened to believe and receive the testimony, the inward
speaking of God to the heart, as Augustine says, lib. 11. confess c. 3. sine
strepitu syllabarum, without noise of words, is the saving apprehending of
Christ and Gospell-truths, but it is not the thing or object savingly
apprehended: the day star in the heart, is not the Gospell-truth that we see
and receive, but the light of Christ inabling, and the Spirit strengthening the
soul to believe and receive these Gospell-truths; for without the day star
and Spirit, no man can see these truths.

A^l the Gospel to Antinomians a m^ere killing letter as the Law is.
12. Upon the principles of Antinomians and Familists, these and the like
Gospell-promises, I will give you a new heart, and a new spirit: Behold I make
all things new, a bruised reed shall he not break; Come to me all ye that
are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you; Him that comes I will in no
wise cast away, but will raise him up at the last day; Ye that have no money
come buy, and eat, etc. are as literal and legal being written and preached,
and as carnal (for they value them to be but outward ordinances) as this,
Cursed be every one that abides not in all that is written in the Law of God to
do it; or as the very Law and Covenant of works, which promises not any new
heart, but presses the Law in its condemning rigor in the old heart: for the
Gospel is but a form to them, and these Gospel-promises of pure free grace as
opposite to the Law of works in their gramaticall sense, are but carnal,
legal, fleshly outward visible forms, 271. now to us, the promises of free
grace in that which they signify and promise are no killing letter as the Law
is but the ministration of the Spirit and of life, except we say, the promises
of the Gospel are but fair lying words, and that God intends to keep nothing
he promises to us, and no more to give a new heart in Gospel-promises nor in
the Law, which undoubtedly is false; when we consider the word of God,
especially the Gospel, the spirituality thereof above and beyond all letters
and characters, appears in that,

1. The Author can be none other but God an infinite and glorious Spirit.

2. The matter spiritual, so heavenly, as the imputed righteousness of a
slain Savior justifying the ungodly, The word spiritual beyond figures and
letters, in every consideration.
eternal life by a despised and crucified man bosomed in an union with God, a
spiritual communion with God, mortification to every thing eminent to the
creature, the hidden manna, the white stone, the new name, the flesh lying down
in the dust with the seed of the hope of a glorious resurrection, the invisible
imbracements of Christ, love-sicknesse for him, joy in tribulation, etc. all
smell beyond characters, paper, ink, or any thing visible.

3. The form is spiritual, if we consider the Majesty, Divinity, the
omnipotency of God (as it were) instamped on it.

4. The end and intrinsecall effects are most spiritual, for it changes men
into spiritual and heavenly Citizens of another world, deadneth them to the
created glory of the creature, peirceth between the marrow and bones, even the
Law, part of it is sharper then a two-edged sword, peircing even to the
dividing asunder of the soul and spirit and to the joints and marrow, and is a
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, Heb. 4.12 carries along
Christ to the soul, casts in a lump of love in the heart, that contrary to
nature and all the strong impressions of nature, it stampeth and seals
eternity, heaven, apprehensions of glory beyond all the visible sensible
borders of time, days, life, royalty, fathers, mothers, children, wives,
lands, inheritances, and that on the tables of the soul. It is in upon the
Spirit, down in the reins, and ye know neither door, window, nor passage,
it came in at: then how does the Spirit act with the word? so all the actings,
motions, turnings, ebbings, flowings, various ups, downs, high tides,
hell-downe-castings, heaven-visits, raptures of love, signs of joy, actings of
morning-dawnings of eternities glory, are more hardly discerned, then the
growing of the bones in the womb of the woman with child.

The Spirit determines the actions of the spiritual man according to the
exercise of them.
14. For the exercise of spiritual acts, through the Spirit, we then testify a
spiritual being in Christ, when the strain of our conversation runs most
in a heavenly communion with God, and we have our City-dwelling and conversing
in heaven, our love, our heart, our life, our Lord, being there and upon these
grounds as risen with Christ, we are there, Phil. 3.20, 21. Col. 3.1, 2, 3.
Matthew. 6.20, 21. Heb. 10.19, 20, 21.

2. When we savor much of the Spirit, and the breath that comes out of the
mouth, comes from the abundance of the Spirit in the heart, and the speech is
much the language of Canaan, Isa. 19.18. and smells of a savoury heart, Col.
4.6. Ephesians. 4.29, 30. And though humane wisdom and learning in the Scriptures
that is merely literal, be not of it self not idolized contrary to the Spirit,
but is capable of being spirituallized and heightened above it self, and is
actually gilded and skied with saving light coming from God in the face of
Christ, yet when the Spirit reigns, all knowledge, learning, and arts are
hunted for only in order to a saving communion with God, and when in the
creature and gifts the spiritual man feels and tastes nothing of Christ,
but misseth Christ in all these, they are as tastelesse to him as the white of
an egg, yea all dry, sapelesse, dead, his Lord Jesus is not in that empty
grave, and therefore his heart lodges not a moment there, Cant. 3.1, 2, 3, 4.
Phil. 3.7, 8, 9. yea the spiritual man fathers no good upon the empty creature,
1 Cor. 3.8. the creature smells of flesh and vanity to him, Zach. 4.6.

2. Ordinances, inherent righteousness, saving grace created, because
creatures are saluted by him as creatures, he gallops by them as a Post that
sees them not to be his home, but a far other poor, lean, and despised
nothing in comparison of Christ, in point of confiding, or glorying: for the
gold-bracelets are not the bridegroom, the Spirit aims, pants, and breaths
after a personal enjoyment of God himself in Christ. The joy and comforts of
the Holy Ghost to him, are but accidents, created chips, and fragments that
fall from Christ.

3. The Spirit carries the soul from the sight of all things as from visible
objects, things created of God, up to the bosom of God, and there the
spiritual soul loves, lives, breaths, dwells.

3 When the outward senses suck spiritual apprehensions out of earthly things,
from the Well of Jacob Christ draws a consideration of the Well of life, John
4.13.14. Paul possibly from his Tent-making, draws thoughts of the falling of
this Tabernacle of clay and our being closed with our house from above, 2 Cor.
5.1, 2. so the outside of the creature, the skin of it that lies before our
senses is turned into inward and spiritual thoughts of God. Because the
believers sense of smelling is spiritual and draws all in to God. And mind,
will, affections, thoughts, intentions, tongue, yea, and the natural actions
of eating, and drinking are spiritualized, and for God and his glory.

Nor could I think that as touching the order of marshelling and drawing up
our spiritual thoughts and actions, The order of acting in supernatural
actions, often from the spirit^
as why we do this spiritual action first, this second, this third, why we
marshall this Petition first, this second, but this ranking is not so bound up
by the rule of Scripture; but a spiritual soul in the order of his acting,
secundum prius and posterius, is carried on by the only free blowings of the
spirit of grace, It Is true, the acts must be regulated by the word, that what
we petition for, must be lawful, and must be warranted from the sound Doctrine
of the Gospel according to the proportion of faith, but the ordering of them
often comes from the Spirit of utterance and so immediately as it is hard to say
at least ordinarily and in a set constant rule, there is any consulting with
Scripture, reason, memory, art, but the immediate breathing of the spirit
orders and ranketh all. And these fit words like apples of gold, not others,
which meets, hic and nunc, at this time, with the heart of a sinner and
catches Matthew, Peter, Saul, flows from Spirit-worke.

2 This Major Proposition, whoever beleev^ shall be saved, is certainly known
by the light of Scripture, when the Spirit is pleased to open the eyes, to
cause us to see and believe, savingly this truth

The assumption of a syllogism of our reflect acts of knowledge of our
spiritull state is at lengh proven only by sense and the testimony of the
spirit without discoursing.
But this assumption.

But I believe. Is proven not by the shining light of Scripture, but in the
kind of reflect knowledge that is clear by the light of the spirit, reflect
knowledge, I take, is the immediate birth of the Spirit, in so far as it is
reflect, for when it is to be proven by discourse and another syllogism,
thus. He that loves the brethe^^ believes. But I love the brethren, ergo, I
believe. The assumption which is not ever clear but often needs an higher
proof, must either be made good by another Scripture, and so in infinite, or
ye must come to some immediate light, coming only from the spirit, ye cannot
go in infinite, for ye leave the soul in that case in perpetual doubting, and
therefore some immediate light there must be to discern such a thing as this,
which is not known, by the light of nature, for the object is supernatural,
and the light of Scripture does not serve the turn if we speak of a reflect
knowledge on which the conscience does rest without any further proof,
because the scripture prooveth not to you, that either you, such a man, by name
believes, or that the characters of beleiving, to wit, that you John, Anna by
name, love the brethren, that you know him, because you keep his commandments
more than it does evidence the same to any other by name, and so except your
name were in Scripture, nothing can be proven by light of Scripture, as
touching the truth, and evident and clear reflect knowledge of the assumption.
But I believe, except you say a major proposition can prove an assumption, and
make this a good consequence all that believe are saved, ergo, John and Anna
are saved, which is no good consequence, and can not settle the conscience, or
that this is a strong consequence these that keep his commandments, those
that love the Brtheren, know Christ savingly, and are translated from life to
death, ergo I John, Anna, we are by name such as know Christ savingly, and are
translated from death to life; either must the assumption I, John, Anna, we are
such as keep his commandments, and love the Brethren, be proven by Scripture,
which is unpossible, except your name were there, or then by sense and the
immediate light of the Spirit. But the truth is, from the book of nature ye
may prove, all that have life and perfect eyes see and discern colors, but
except it be in the book of nature, that John, Anna, have life and perfect
eyes, or except by your own immediate light of sense and life, yea prove that
John, Anna, have life and eyes, ye cannot make good that John, Anna, do see
and discern colors, if they shall thereof doubt.

2. Our Divines upon warrantable grounds of Scripture say as I know, he that
believes shall be saved, by light of Scripture, and I know that I believe by
the testimony of an enlightened conscience; so I know that I see colors both
from the shining of the Sun, and from my own sense convincing me, even so I
know by Scripture, and Cain knows, he that hates and maliciously kills his
brother Abel, is condemned. But that Cain may know he hates and maliciously
kills his brother Abel, he needs not to have it proved to him by Scripture,
his own conscience can prove it.

7. If then the question be, How far the Saints are to leave room for new light.
whether or no the Saints do so grow in knowledge, that they must ever leave
place for new light from the Spirit?

I answer in the sense the Sectaries intend, it is most false: for John, Paul,
and the Saints know and are persuaded that Christ, God man dyed for sinners,
rose for our righteousness, justifies the ungodly that believe, etc. and
other manifest Scripturall truths, not fundamental, as that there were eight
persons saved from drowning in the arc: so as it is blasphemous to say they
leave place to a new light of the Spirit to believe the contrary of these, to
wit, that Christ God-man dyed not for sinners, as Familists teach, and that he
rose not for our righteousness, that he justifies not the ungodly that
believe in him; and that there were not eight persons, but only two saved in
the arc. For this were,

1. To lose the old true light, to get a new false light.

2. This were to subvert all certainty of faith, and to doubt of all we believe.

3. This were to make the Spirit of truth the doctor and teacher of lies and
untruth, for of two contradictory truths the one must be false: but God is
light and truth, and there is no darkness in him, and so the Spirit cannot
teach two contradictorie ways

If we make the question whether are we to know and learn so by the Spirit,
that we must grow in knowledge and light of old truths to know them more
distinctly and with a higher measure of farther knowledge which is new, not in
nature, but in degrees; we acknowledge in this sense new light, because, there
are new consequences and deductions of the Spirit from the old truths
implicitly, and more darkly known which were not so distinctly known before,
and so after ages has more light then former ages, and that because,

1. The least of the Kingdom of God is greater, in regard of saving light,
then John Baptist, the greatest of Prophets.

2. Under the N. Testament, its said, they shall not teach one another, but
they shall be all taught of God, Jer. 31.34* Esa. 54.11. which was fulfilled in
part in John's time, and when the Apostle wrote to the Hebrews, 1 Ioh. 2.27.
Heb. 8.10. and the Spirit is to be powered on all flesh, as was prophesied, Joel
2.28, 29. and fulfilled Acts 2. when the Holy Ghost was sent down, as Peter
says, Many new deductions from ancient truths may be known which were known
before only implicitly and in the an e^edent not distinctly.
but I judge, though the day began then, yet it was but the morning and dawning
of the Christian Summer season, that is to endure to the end of the world, and
therefore I crave leave to doubt, if these Prophesies be fully and completely
accomplished, Esaias 2.1.2. as touching the peace that shall be under the
Messiahs Kingdom, or that which is Esaias 11.6, 7, 8. especially that v. 9. For
the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the
sea, and that of Isaiah, chapter 30.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. and that v. 26.
Moreover the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun and the
light of the Sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven days, in the day
that the Lord hindeth up the breach of his people, and heals the stroke of
their wound: and that of Isaia^ chapter 54. and chapter 60. c. 61. c. 62. and of diverse
other glorious Prophesies, which I humbly conceive, God shall fulfill at the
incomming of the Jews to their Messiah at that resurrection from the dead, when
Antichrist shall be fully destroyed, and the riches of the Gentiles added to
the Jews, there shall be one shepherd and one sheepfold and admirable unity
and peace like a river among the Saints, and though Sectaries of old in
Germany, and now in England, do it by the Sword, we have no prophecy that
that shall be the way of God, or that Christ shall have a personal, external
visible glorious reign on earth, and the Law of God is exceeding broad, and
contains the unsearchable riches of Christ, for who knows all the glorious
deductions and eonsequences of knowledge contained in the word? and who can
bind up the Spirit that he should not reveal more of Christ, and more yet
till the knowledge of the Spirit cover the earth? But this new knowledge is of
ancient truths, and the Spirits ancient truths made out in broader and larger
consequences, and not such as destroys the former articles of Protestant
Re^igion, in the faith of which, millions are arrived safe to heaven, and are
now up before the throne.

Saltmarsh in his late giddy treates, gathers these articles of Protestant
Religion together, and as chalk stones casts them away, and will lay a new
foundation, and put in a figurative Savior of H. Nicholas and make a new
building of his own.

15. Nor is the preaching of duties, Preaching of duties or of external
worship not contrary to the teaching of the Spirit, as Antinomians dream.
yea even of such as are external and obvious to the eyes of men contrary to
spiritual teaching or worship in Spirit, for then should it have been our
Saviors intent, Joh. 4. when he will have us to worship him in spirit and
truth, to remove in the New Testament vocal praying, bowing of the knees to
the Father of our Lord Jesus, contrary to Act. 20.^6. Paul kneeled down and
prayed with them all, Ephesians. 3.14. and he should not charge us, Do this in
remembrance of me, and obey these that are over you; if it were so; yea all the
exhorting of the Apostles that children obey parents, servants their masters,
brethren admonish one another, should be against the discoveries of the Spirit
to the Apostles and and Saints, upon which ground Antinomians will have all the
government of the Church, inward and in the Spirit and invisible, as if one and
the same worship might not both be external and spiritual.

And now the Army send Laws to the Parliament to remove the penal statutes
against all heretics, what ever they be, Arrians, Libertines, Davi Georgians,
Familists, Antiscripturists, such as deny there is a God, a Savior that bought
them, Antinomians, and what hell can devise, that their impure conventicles and
Churches may be tolerated through out all England, except only Popish
Recusants and found and proven to be such, because the Papists dis^urbe the
peace of the state, yet under the deck, this lies hid, that all Religions,
being professions of the outward man, are indifferent and no sin in any
worshipping of the Devil, or any creature.

Yea there is nothing to be builded in favor of Familists on the Apostles
words, What the Law of the Spirit of life ^s.
Romans 8.2. For the Law of the Spirit of life, is indeed the indwelling Spirit
of sanctification, mortifying the lusts of the sinful flesh, called a Law in
opposition to the Tyranny of sin, and this Law as it is in Christ, is the Law
of faith and of the new Covenant, by which we are freed from the dominion and
overmastering power of sin and life, and as the Law is in Christ, we are
meritoriously freed, as in us, we are freed by begun sanctification, as a new
Master freeth us from subjection to the old.

9. We are then spiritual, when we observe the ways and various actings of
the Spirit in externalls also, Characters of a spiritual condition.
as how God suggesteth motions into some by the crowing of a cock, as by it
the Lord caused Peter to awake, and by the appearing of a Star, some come to
Christ by the working of a miracle or a wonder or rare providence in Church and
state others are converted.

2. When we observe the Spirits various dispensations in leading some through
hell and deaths and despaires to heaven, Other characters of a spiritual
dis^osition.
Ps 88.15. and that from their youth, and in feeding others with the flower of
wheat, with the honey combs of inward and spiritual feasts of joy and
consolation, filling them with marrow and fatness. When the Spirit ebbes the
f^owes to the sense of a believer goes and comes, casts down and
benighteth the soul, and again shines in glory and beauty.

3. When we obey the breathings of the wind, and yield with cheerfulness to
the comforting, shinning, witne^sing, sealing, enlarging of the heart with
boldness and access, to the overjoying, strenthening, quickening directing,
inlightning, confirming works and acts of the Spirit

4. When we obey from freeness and the sweet at^ractions of grace, from a
Spirit of love, not of fear and Law-bondage.

5. When we try the spirits: for the dumb knockings of revelations without, or
contrary to the word, are not from God, and when we can judge that fire, heat,
eagerness of affection in praying for a way, a sect, a war, when we hate
the contrary sect, Presbyterian, as we imagine, is not spiritual boldness and
freedom of heavenly access to God through Christ.

6. When we enclose not the Spirit or God in the letter or sound of words, nor
obey for the awe of dead characters or sounds, but formally are led because the
Spirit goes along with an obliging precept or promise, and we adore not dead
characters and sounds, but tremble at, or submit to the word, for the thing
signified, and do not separate the sign and the thing signified: Sparkles of
glory, p. 271.
therefore Saltmarsh is far out when he denies the distinction of
Gospel Ordinances in opposition to legal ordinances, because (says he, p.
270.) nothing is pure, spiritual divine-Gospel, but that which is light, life,
glory, Spirit: The written word to Familists is as a type or shadow of the
ceremonial law that perishes: but we hold the word written and preached to be
the everlasting Gospel.
for he takes the fruit of the Gospel and the spiritual efficacy of the
Gospel for the Gospel. But as the Law is one thing, to wit, he that does these
things shall live thereby, is truly Law, and actual obedience to this Law is a
far other thing so the Gospel ( he that believes shall be saved) is truly
Gospel and a Gospel way to salvation, but actually by the grace of Christ to
believe is a far other thing.

Saltmarsh says, the letter and outward form is a thing that perishes with
the use, which is spoken of meat and drink, that waste away while we use them
and as Christ says, Matthew. 15.17. enter into the belly, and are casten out
with the draught, not of the written Gospel which perishes not as meat and
drink, but both in the letter, and the thing signified has endured since Moses
and the Prophets were, and shall do to the end of the world, and in regard of
the thing signified, Christ the yea and amen of all promises (which we do not
separate from the sign and letter) is an everlasting Gospel, Revel. 14.6. and
the word that endures for ever, and perishes not, as corruptible things do,
1 Pet. 1.23, 24, 25. such as are meat and drink that are made for the belly,
and shall be destroyed with the belly, so the Prophets dye, but their word does
not, Za^^. 1.5.6. yet Saltmarsh tells us the mind of the Familists as some
of his Sparkles of glory, 247. that outward ordinances are perishing and
evanishing shadows, such as circumcision, sacrifices and old Testament
Ceremonies, for as these past away, when the ^^dy Christ came, so shall they at
the coming of the Spirit, and they being the beholding of God in a glass, 1
Cor. 13.12. there comes an administration of all-Spirit, in which these glasses
must be broken then we must say, reading, hearing, preaching, Scripture, seals
are as unlawful now to Familists, as falling from Christ, and denying of the
coming of the holy Spirit, for to use Moses Ceremonies now, were to fall from
Christ, and to deny Christ to be come in the flesh.

2 Christ is with his Disciples to the end, in preaching and baptizing Matthew.
28.19, Ordinances of the written word, and preaching are to continue to the end.
20. and Paul charge Timothy to keep inviolably, and unrebukably this
command of prophesying, preaching, sound doctrine, reading, meditating* 1 Timothy
4.14, 15, 16. to teach and exhort, 1 Timothy 6.1, 2. and of governing the House of
God, by Elders that labor in the word and doctrine and some that labor not in
the word and doctrine, 1 Timothy 5 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, etc. even to the appearing
of our Jesus Christ 1 Timothy 6.14.

It is known that Swenckefeld denied the Scripture to be the word of God, and
made only the internal instinct of the mind the word of God, so says
Palladius de heresibus hujus Temporis, and his own writings, and so do
Saltmarsh and Del.

When the Holy Ghost highly extoll^s the word of God* and recommends it to us;
he cannot mean the internal word or the Law of the Spirit of life written in
the heart, but the preached word, Act. 6.4. we will give our selves to the
ministry of the word, that is, to preach, and not serve tables, it cannot be a
ministry of the internal word, and law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus,
that internal ministry is not given to Paul or Apollo, who are nothing, Joh.
14.25^ the word which you hear is not mine, this was not the internal word,
Acts 13.26. to you is the word of salvation sent: 46. it was necessary the word
of God should be spoken to you: the internal word was not spoken to them, for
they blasphemed, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. if any man obey not our word no^e such a one:
none can disobey the internal word, Jam. 1.23. if any man be an ^earer of the
word and do it not: rebelling against the Lord is rebelling against his word,
Number. 20.24. because ye rebelled against my word, ye shall not enter into the
land, Isa. 30.12, 13. because ye despise this word -- this iniquity shall be
to you a breach: not to humble our selves at the word is not to humble our
selves before the Lord, 2 Chro. 36.12. Zedekiah did that which was evil in the
sight of the Lord his God, and humbled not himself before Jeremiah the Prophet
(speaking) from the mouth of the Lord, Mat. 10.32. he that denies me (says
Christ) before men, I will deny him, but Mark. 8. v. last. he that shall be
ashamed of me and my words, etc. to be ashamed of the truth and word of the
Gospel then, Sparkles of glory, 314, 315.
is to be ashamed of Christ, and to deny him. What then shall be said of that
which Saltmarsh says? all outward administrations whether as to Religion, or
to natural, civil and moral considerations, are only the visible appearances
of God as to the world, or in this creation, or the clothing of God, being
such forms and dispensations as God puts on amongst men to appear to them in:
this is the garment the Son of God was clothed with down to his feet, or to
his lowest appearance -- and to worship such an adminstration when God is gone
out of it, is to worship an Idol, an image, a form without God, or any
manifestation of God in it, save to him (who as Paul says) knows an Idol to
be nothing, 1 Cor. 8.4.

Ans. Would Saltmarsh and Del give us Annotations on the Bible, they should
furnish us with many monsters in Divinity: here he makes the garment wherewith
the Son of God was clothed, Rev. 1. all the forms of worship wherewith God
manifested himself to the Jews under the Law, to Christians under the Gospel,
yea to the heathen that had but natural and civil Revelations of God. Diverse
ways and forms of worshipping of God, and of leaving these forms, and
ascending higher and higher, from natu^^ll, to civil and moral Religion, from
thence to Law then to John's baptism, then to Christ in the flesh, then to pure
Gospel, then to poor and all-Spirit, or Familists phancies,
Shall we ask a warrant for playing thus on visions, types, allegories?
Familists tell us, the Spirit taught them so.

But 1. what Spirit made Christ the Son of God Mediator to appear to heathen in
their Poets-Religion, their idolatrous images and false Gods, for they worship
devils, not the Son of God, Levit. 17.7. Deuteronomy. 32.17. Ps 106.37. 1 Cor. 10 20,
21.

2. Is not here a saying of every man in his own Religion? and a saying
revelation of God in the works of creation?

3. What ground of so many circles and new forms of Religions, a natural,
civil or moral Law, Joh. Baptists way, Christ's way in the flesh, the Spi^its
way, which is (say they) after Christ's ascension to heaven, all glory, without
ordinances, at all? the Scripture tells us of none but Law or Gospel, and the
Son of God is in none of these, without Law or Gospel that we read of.

4. That we worship God in all these forms acceptably, in the heathens way of
adoring Jupiter and Bacchus we know not.

5. We know not what this means to worship the Law, the heathens Religion,
the Gospel, we know no worshipping of created things, of word, Sacraments,
figures, Scriptures, reading, all these being means of tendering worship to
God, not things worshipped, Christians worship none but God.

6. It must be Idolatry to a Familist to worship God in hearing, Sacraments,
reading, praying, for God has left all these to him, and he lives in a higher
way upon the Spirit without Ordinances.

7. But to him that knows an Idol to be nothing, as Familists do, an Idol
is nothing, because Idolatry and the sins of the outward man, adultery,
lying, swearing, forswearing, a tongue speaking vanity, a right hand of
falsehood, are no sins, because done by the outward man, and Saltmarsh and
his fellow-libertines, have that much knowledge of the Spirit, as to know
adultery is no adultery to a ^ustified man, or an Elder of the family of love,
and that which is ^dolatry to an unrenewed man, to adore figures and forms, is
no Idolatry to renewed men who have knowledge that an Idol is nothing, not any
externalls to Familists, the wickedst prankes hell can devise are no sins,
and sin is but an opinion, know then killing of your father, and bowing down
and adoring the devil to be no sins, and lay by conscience of sin, as Dav.
George, and Anton. pocquius, and such swine teach us, and they are no sins. But
these words, we know an Idol is nothing, has another sense, as before I
cleared.

16. Another special sign of a spiritual condition is mortification, How
mortification is a sign of a spiritual condition.
which is not merely and only in a total abstinence from sin or hat^red of
the world, Heathens void of the spirit of Jesus, upon moral principles, of
their moralizing Philosophy of Plato, Socrates, Seneca ^an go far on this
way: But when a believer sees him self, and his life incorporated in Christ
and his cross, Gal. 2.20. I live not, but Christ lives in me, not because his
deadness to the creature comes without being procured (as Waldess^
consider.92.345 says) or sought with human industery, for though human
industery it is alone, yea, or helped with supernatural Gospell-truths, or some
common grace can never produce any, but a bastard mortification. Yet acts of
sanctified reason and Industery spiritualized with the infused life of Christ,
and informed with the pure light of f^i^h beholding Christ crucified, do work
mortification; But then our Spirit must be as dead to these acts, as acts, as
if they were not in us in the point of reffect feeling and confiding in them,
not I, but grace, not I, but Christ in me.

2 The powers of the body or outward man by the soule-redoundance of actings,
stand or lie dead to sin, Romans 8.9. But yea are not in the flesh, but in the
spirit, if so be that the sp^irit of God dwell in you. i:d: And if Christ be in
you the body is dead, because of sin, or for sin, but the Spirit is life
because of Righteousness: The body is a part of the flesh, and in so far as
it is renewed with the soul, there is not that fire and fervor in bodily
actings of sin as in a man void of the spirit, because though flesh and body
both act too strongly in sin, yet are these powers blunted and the senses do
not so welcome lusts as once they did, but the spirit is life or lively, as
touching righteousness both to be acted and laid hold on by faith, so the
renewed man is in a manner greived that he must satisfy his natural life, yea
so that he could rejoice, if he were deprived of his senses, or at least, were
freed from extreme quickness of fervor in his senses apprehending their
delighting objects: hence comes in the mortified, a sort of holy challenging
of his liberty, as a servant made free can tell his old Master, he now owes him
no service, so the spiritual man says, Romans 8.12. Therefore brethren, we are
debtors not to the flesh, to live after the flesh, we hold now of a new Lord,
and are vassals to the Spirit of Jesus.

3 If the soul be much spiritualized, and have much of Christ's life in it, the
man is much satisfied with the active mortifying defrauding of his lusts and
fleshly pleasures, and there is much will, and so much life of God, in subduing
the body, in Covenanting with the eyes, in bearing down, and subduing the
flesh 1 Cor. 9.27. But I keep under my body, but how? As those that run a
race for a Crown, there is much will in such a running and sweating for the
garland, and much consent and eagerness of mind, that the flesh, body,
musecls, and loco-motive power pay for it, so do spiritual runners for the
incorruptible Garland, this argues deadness to that flesh which loves to sleep
and lie rather then to sweat for a ^ools birds-nest that it sees not, and in so
doing, he deadly suspects his own will of selfe-seeking, which is a singular
note of deadness, for he trembles for fear that self came in with the spirit
and cry half mine 1. Cor. 9.25. every one that striveth for the mastery is
temperate in all things Temperance of the mind is much afraid of
vaine-gloriation.

4 There is much will also in joining consent with suffering Gods will: so
rejoicing in suffering, argues that Paul desired much that the power of Christ
might rest on him, 2 Cor. 12.10. therefore I take pleasure (here is much
deadness^ of will to satisfy flesh and self* and much life of will to join
actively with God in suffering) in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities,
in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake: but he suspectes himself in
this deadness, ver. 11. I am become a fool in glorying, he checkes himself,
that he may suffer for Christ's sake, not for his own sake, and the more dead
the will is, the more mortification and the more mortification, the mo^^ o^ the
spirit, and the less of the flesh is in the man, Romans 8.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16.

Reader, thou have here, though I intended it should have been printed with the
rise of Henry Nicholas (but it came later to my hand) a Petition or
Protestation of the Familists which was printed and spread in England, an.
1604. and is said to have been presented to King James.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty James the first, by the grace of God, King
of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith, etc.
The Family of love. an. 1604.
MOst Gracious Sovereigne There is nothing in this Petition the smells of
Christ's ointments, nothing that looks with any face, like the anointing that
teaches all things, nothing to heighten Christ, much to flatter K James, all
to lift that abominable impostor H. Nicho^as up above Christ, the style and
words full of gall against Puritans, and the truly godly in England, th^e words
base, earthly, low, devilish, heretical, temporizing* and.
Lord, where there is published, in a book written by your Highness, as an
instruction Basilicon Doron w^itten to Prince Henry.
to your most noble Son (whom Almighty God bless with much honor,
happiness and long life) of a people that are of a vile sect Their fleshly and
abominable doctrine, as especially that the Familists may wallow in adulteries,
blood, rebellion, perjury, and if the Spirit help them not against these
sins, they are as innocent, as the maid forced in the field, who did cry and
there was none to help, and so by no Law can be guilty. See their tenets, as
H. Nicholas taught.
among the Anabaptists called the Family of love, who do hold and maintain
many proud, uncharitable, unchristian, and most Their foul opinions may here
be read in this Treatise, and in H. Nicholas writings.
absurd opinions, unto whom your Highness does also give the name of King
James was misinformed in that, for Familists and the godly unjustly called
Puritans, are as contrary as light and darkness.
Puritanes, affirming in the said book that diverse of them (as The unjustly so
called Puritans, did never own Brown, nor Penry, who set on foot the old
doctrine of the Anabapt^sts in England, and Enthusiasticall revelations beside
the word of God
Brown, Penry, and others) do accord with them in their foul errors, heady
and fantastical opinions, which are there set down at large by your Majesty,
advising your royal Son (as is most meet) It is not unlike that such fleshly
teachers who crave Libert^ of con^cience to themselves, will petition the
Prince that the tyrannous laws of Prelates, be executed against the truly
godly, and that liberty be denied to all save to themselves only, a proper
character of Heretics and Schismatics.
to punish them, if they refuse to obey the Law, The Familists and Antinomians,
because Purirans are esteemed the godly party, now call themselves, but most
unjustly, the true successors of the Puritans, and all the godly opposite (...)
their way, who strive to walk with God, they call Legalists, Pharis^es,
literal Doctors; but because they change all colors, with the court and wind
often times, they are enemies to old non-conformists cal^ed sometime Puritans, in
that 1. against Puritans they make all externalls indifferent. 2. They reject
Scripture and embrace revelations. 3. They contemn close walking with God as
pharaisme and law-living.
and will not cease to stir up rebellion.

Now most gracious Sovereigne, because it is meet that your Highness should
understand by their supplication and declaration of the truth herein by
themselves (of whom your Majesty has been thus informed) prostrate at your
Princely feet, as true But I noted before that Familists will have no
Magistrates over them, and we may see it to be their practice this day.
faithful, loyal and obedient Subjects to all your Laws and Ordinances,
civil, politic, The Familists subjection of their consciences to the
spiritual Popish laws of Prelates prove them to be men of more wide
consciences then Puritans, they need not fear to be called Puritans.
spiritual and temporal, they with humble hearts do beseech your Princely
Majesty to understand that the people of the family of love, or of Deceivers as
Simon Magus and others take godly titles to themselves, for H. N. says,
fidelitas docl. c. 4. sect. 11. beside Gods service of love there is not
another in heaven or in earth: here they call themselves the family of God.
God, do utterly disclaim and detest all the said absurd and They knew well
that Prelates imbittered the mind of K. James against Puritans his faithfullest
subjects.
selfe-conceited opinions and disobedient and erroneous sorts of the They say
it to the praise of their Mr. Henry Nicholas that he names no man's name, but
here they name both sects and names.
Anabaptists, Brown, Penry, Protestants know Puritans to be godly, and sound
in the faith. Familists turn their back then on the Protestants and the
soundest of them.
Puritans, and all other proud minded sects and heresies whatsoever, protesting
upon pain of our lives, that we are not consenting nor agreeing with any such
Reader judge how the Familists and Antinomians now in England shall deal with
Puritans and the truly godly, what a bloody heart they bear toward them, since
their fathers the old Familists do persecute them with so bloody a tongue
before their Prince.
brainesicke preachers, nor their rebellious and disobedient sects whatsoever,
but have been and ever will be truly obedient to your Highness, and your Laws
to the effusion of our blood Obedience to the Kings laws to the effusion of
their blood, can have no orher sense, but they will raise bloody wars against
Puritans if the K (which I hope shall not be) command them, I pray God it be
not fulfilled in their children this day in England: they promise they have
been, and ever will be obedient to the Kings laws which respects the time to
com^, so as if the King and Parliament should again establish Popery they say
for all time to come they shall be ever truly obedient, and add no limitation,
condition of obedience in the Lord. You may see the consciences of Familists
that (as after ye shall hear) they prostitute themselves to avouch or deny,
take or leave all Religions, as the times and men's laws shall (...) prove them
or not.
and expenses of our goods and lands in your Majesty's service, highly lauding
Almighty God, who has so graciously and peaceably appointed unto us such a
virtuous, wise, religious and noble King, and so careful and unpartiall a
Justitiar to govern over us, beseeching him daily to bless your Highness
with his godly wisdom and holy understanding to the furtherance of his truth
and godliness, and with all honor, happiness, peace and long life, and to
judge rightly between falsehood and truth.

And because your Majesty should have a perfect view or an assured persuasion
of the truth, of the same our protestation, if therefore there be any
indifferent man of the Kingdom that can justly What Pharisees be these? does
not Paul judge himself the chief of sinners? is not Elias a man compassed
with infirmities? No wonder it be h^rd to prove any wick^d doctrine or
practice, for H. Nicho^as in his Epistle to the two daughters of Warwick would
prove men may belly and dissemble, and deny their Religion and Christ before
men, so the heart be good.
touch us with any such disobedient and wicked handling of our selves, as
seems by your Majesty's book, it has been informed unto your Highness,
unless they be such our Shall we then believe that Familists now in England
will not be deadly persecuters of Puritans?
mortal enemies the disobedient Puritans, and those of their heady humors,
before named, who are much more zealous, religious and precise in the tything
of mint, annis and cummin, Puritans are against all religious ceremonies of
men's devisings, so that tything of mint, is unjustly ascribed to to them.
and in the preferring of such like pharisaicall and self chosen To Familists
all outward worship and ordinances are traditions, they live only upon love
within, and are swine, without, and yet sin not.
outward traditions and grounds, or hypocritical righteousness, then in the
performing of judgment, mercy and faith, and such like true and There is to
Familists no judgment and mercy, but that which is inward; let men, as
touching the outward man, be swine for filthiness, Lions for blood and rapine,
they may have inward righteousness, and that is all and enough.
inward righteousness which God does most chiefly require and regard (Matthew.
15.15. etc.) and whose malice has for twenty five years past and upwards, Then
Puritans only none or few of the prelaticall way or other Sectaries refuted
Familists.
and ever since, with very many untrue suggestions, and most foul errors and
odious crimes, the which we could show if need were, sought our utter overthrow
and destruction, but that we have behaved our selves in all orderlinesse and
peaceablenesse of life, where we dwell, and with whom we had to deal;
Familists count all Religions, popery or any thing, as they come out to the
view of men neither up nor down.
or if we do vary or swerve from the But the Saints of love (say Familists) are
above and beyond all laws and Rulers, Magistracy is but for fleshly men.
established Religion in this land either in service, ceremonies, Sermons, or
Sacracraments, or have publicly spoken Familists by their principles may
profess or deny any Religion, as the Market goes.
or inveighed either by word or writing against our late Sovereigne Princess
government in cases spiritual or temporal, ^hen let us be rejected for
Sectaries, and never receive the benefits of Subjects.

Only right gracious Sovereigne, This is no little exception in which they
swerve from the Religion of England, in that they are Famili^ts, and of a sect
destructive to all Christian religion, to Christ, his person, office,
righteousness imputed, faith, repentance, Scriptures, heaven, hell, judgment,
resurrection, etc.
we have read certain books brought forth by a Germane Author under the
characters He that does evil hates the light, H.N. was once thought to be homo
novus. But H. Nicholas was a fleshly abominable seducer and false prophet, a
Mercer in Amsterdam.
of H.N. who affirms therein that he is prepared, chosen and sent of God to
minister and set forth the most holy service of the love of God and Christ or
of the ^oly Ghost unto the children of Neith^r Calvin nor Luther knew any thing
of God, but only H Nicholas is the Catholic Apostle of the world, and cannot
err.
men upon the unive^^all earth, out of which s^rvice or writings we be taught
all dutiful obedience toward God and Magistrates, and to live a godly and
honest life, and to love God above all things and our neighbors as our selves
Nothing here of Christ by whose name only we are saved Act. 4.11.12. dutiful
obedience to God and Magistrates, and to love ^ur neighbor, are such
Law-^ighteousnesse, as pagans do diefie, as highest devotion; in all this
petition, nothing smells of Christ his Spirit, eternity, noth^ng of
Scripturall or spiritual communion with God in Christ Jesus.
agreeing therein with all the holy Scriptures, as All heretics make the
Scripture their rule and only judge, but not simply, but as they understand
them, which is to make their own understanding only umpire and judge in the
matters of God.
we understand them. Against which Author and his books we never yet heard nor
knew any Law established in this Realm by our late gracious Sovereigne. But
that we might read them without offense, whose writings we suppose under your
Highness correction your Majesty has yet never seen They afterward tempt the
King to forsake the Protestant Religion, and to turn Familist.
or perused, heard of by any indifferent nor true information: for the said H.
N. in all his doctrine and writings (being as we are credibly informed as much
matter in volumne, if they were all compiled together as the whole Its a pure
commendation that H Nicholas wrote much, the more the worse, since he writes
against the Prophets and Ap^stles.
Bible contains) does neither take part with, nor write against any
particular party or company Christ and his Apostles name false teachers
Saduces, Hymeneus, Philetus, Simon Magus, Elimas, etc. but though he name
neither Calvin nor Luther, yet their doctrine he calls often, carnal,
fleshly, false, ceremonial wisdom, the letter, the flesh, the devil,
hypocrisy.
whatsoever as naming them by their names, nor yet praise nor dispraise any of
them by name; but does only show in particular in his said writings (as says
he) the unpartiall service of love, requires what is good or evil for every
one, wherein the man has right or wrong in any point, Th^se men that cry out
a^gainst Scripture-wisdome as carna^l, ceremonial, ^evilish, selfie, as H.
Nicholas and his, cannot speak h^nourably of the perfection of Scriptu^e.
whether it be in the state of his soul toward God or in the state of his
body toward the The family of love have no heads or Kings that are borne o^ the
flesh and bl^od, of sin, spirit, lau^ c 4. sect. 8. they themselves reign as
only Kings on earth everlastingly, fide^it^s decl. c. 4. sect 18.
Magistrates of the world, and toward one another; to the end that all people
(when they hear or read his writings, and do thereby perceive their sins,
and estranging from God and Christ) might endeavor them to bring f^r^h) Of all
the means by which men are saved through Christ, they speak only of the works
of the Law, of inherent righteousness and repentance, not one word of free
grace, faith in Christ, and the impu^ed righteousness of Christ. Familists
then are the legal Pelagians, not we: no reformation is known to Familists
but inward, and that of the heart.
the due fruits of repentance, which is reformation and newness of life,
according as all the holy Scriptures does likewise require the same of every
one. And that Not more said then truth can bear, for H Nicholas his doctrine
is a se^tina, a pumpe dunghill, and a sea of many fleshly errors and heresies.
they might in that sort become saved through Jesus Christ, the only Savior of
all the world.

Notwithstanding, dear Sovereigne, yet has the said Author and his doctrine a
long time, and still is, most shamefully and falsely slandered by our foresaid
adversaries both in this land and in diverse others, as to be replenished with
all manner The due fruits of repentance, and newness of life, are here made
antecedent means and ways going before our saving in Christ, or our free
redemption that is in Christ Jesus, so as we must be justified by works,
otherwise let any man make sense of these words.
of damnable errors and filthy liberty of the flesh.

And we his wel-willers and favorers in the upright drift of his doctrine (as
aforesaid) have also been of them complained on, and accused unto our late
gracious Sovereigne. Our Savior says ye shall know them by their works.
And the Magistrates of this land, both long time past, and now lately again
as to be a people so infected and stained with all manner of detestable
wickedness and errors, that are not worthy to live upon the earth, but yet
would never present any of his books unto his Majesty The foulest of the books
of H. Nicholas containing the mystery of Familisme and fleshly looseness, are
only to be seen by the wise and experienced Elde^s who can digest them. ^. It
is hard to prove any thing against them who prof^sse it lawful to deny their
Religion before men* H.N. Epist* to the daughters of Warwick.
to peruse, nor yet set them forth It is not lik^ but Q. Elizabeth heard of
these books and saw them, since many of her and K James his Court favored
them.
in any indifferent or true manner to the view of the world lest their
malicious and slanderous reports and accusations against the same and us,
should thereby be revealed and disproved to their great Ioh. Knewstu^. M
Microni^s, H. Amsw^rth wrote against th^se filthy errors, and set down their
own words to the world.
shame. Through which their most odious and false complaints against us, the
Magistrates did then, and also have now lately cast The Prelates, the Popish
Magistrates never troubled these licentious men, because they took part with
them ag^i^st the Puritans, only some godly Magistrates nicknamed Pu^itans,
cast some of them in prison.
diverse of us into prison to our great hindrance and discredit, but yet have
never proved against us, by sufficient and true testimony, any one of their
many foul accusations, as the records in such cases and the Neither by oath or
any other way could they be brought to make confession of the secrets of unpure
Familisme.
Magistrates that have dealt therein can testify, but are so utterly void of
due and lawful proof thereof, that they have framed diverse subtle articles
They say they will take or leave their Religion of love as the Laws think fit,
but they lie, f^r here being cast in prison by the inferior Magistrate, they
persist; then the infe^iou^ Magistra^e to them is no Mag^strate, the Law is no
Law.
for us, being plain and unlearned men, to answer upon our oath, whereby to
urge and gather somethings from our selves, so to approve their false and
unchristian accusations to be true, or else will force us to renounce, recant,
and condemn that which we do not All heretics and impure sectar^es say they
d^e wilfully maintain no heresy, and therefore plead for liberty of
conscience, and a toleration of all religions
wilfully maintain nor justify, (much like as it was practiced in the
Primitive Church against the The Familists defame the doctrine of the Apostl^s
and Scriptures, and have nothing to do with the martyrs of the primitive
Church, for H. N. as I observe, taught that Christ never had any man lay down
his life for him, or his truth, his meaning was only allegorically to renounce
his lusts for Christ, otherwise Christ rejoices not (said he) in our death or
blood.
Christians) yea they are not ashamed to lay their own and all other men's The
Pu^itans refusing the Popish ceremonies, and the Romish denomination of
Prelates are branded by those men as disobedient to Magistrates.
disobedient and wicked acts (of what profession soever they be) upon our
backs, to the end cunningly to purchase favor and credit to themselves, and to
make us seem mon^trous and detestable before the Magistrates and the common
people every where, for that we and the doctrine of H.N. might without any
indifferent trial and lawful or orderly proceeding, as heretofore has been
used in the They desire the Popish Laws against heretics to be used against
them by which any man, that denies his heresy and ^ai^h, he believes as the
Church believes, is absolved which Familists do.
Christian Church in such cases, for confuting and condemning of heresy, be
utterly rooted out of the land: with diverse other most cruel practices
proceeding out of their bitter and envious hearts toward us, tending to the
same unchristian and merciless purpose, the which we will here omit to speak
of, because we have already been over tedious to your highness, and most
humbly craves your most gracious pardon and patience therein, in respect that
we speak to clear our selves of such matters as may touch our lives and
liberties (which are two of the chiefest jewels Faith and a good conscience
then are not the two chiefest jewels that God has g^ven to men.
that God has given to mankind in this world) and also for that The Prelates
and profane courtie^s, and the multitude were their friends, as they are to
all licentious religions.
we have few friends or any other means then this to acquaint your highness
with the truth and state of our cause, whereof we think your Majesty is
altogether ignorant, but have very many Diverse of the court of Queen Elizabeth
and of K. James, and some nobles were Familists, I would these who now rule
all, by violence and force, were not of that abominable way, for enemies they
had few or none, except Puritans they lived under the shadow of Prelacie and
court, when many thousands of precious Christians for n^n-conformity were
silenced, banished, prisoned, wasted.
enemies whom we do greatly suspect will not be slack to prosecute their false
and malicious purpose against us unto your highness, even like as they have
accustomed to do in times past unto our late sovereigne Queen, through which
prevailing in their slanderous defacing of us and our cause, diverse of us for
want of friends to make it rightly known unto her Majesty have sundry times
been constrained to endure their injurious dealing toward us, to our great
vexation and hindrance.

Wherefore, most gracious Sovereigne, this is now our humble suit unto your
highness If the way of H. Nicholas be^ the only true way of salvation, as here
they say fidelitas decl. c. 4 sect. 11. the King should be petitioned without
delay to take it to his consideration as a matter to be preferred to all his
most important Kingly affairs, but they petition for a delaying trial,
because every one that does evil, hates the light.
that when your Kingly affairs of importance, which your Majesty has now in
hand shall be well overpast (for the prosperous performance whereof we will (as
duty binds us) daily pray unto Almighty God) that then your highness will be
pleased (because we have always taken the same Authors work aforesaid to
proceed out of the great grace and love of God and Christ's Then they allow a
share of the grace of Christ on all rulers, (for they except none) though
heathens and persecuters, and on all mankind on the universal earth.
extended toward all Kings, Princes, Rulers and people, upon the universal
earth (as he in many of his works does witness no less) to their salvation,
unity, peace and concord, in the same godly love) to grant us that favor, at
your Majesty's fit and convenient time to peruse the books your self with an
unpartiall eye, conferring them with the holy Scriptures, wherein it seems by
the books Gross flattery.
that are set forth under your hignesses name, that you have had great travel,
Then they can settle upon no Religion till K. James find leisure to try and
read the heretical and fleshly writings of H. Nicholas.
and are therefore the better able to judge between truth and falsehood. And we
will whenever it shall please your Highness to appoint the time, and to
command and license us thereunto, do our best endeavors In this they profess
their z^ale to have K. James an illuminated Elder of the family of love, as it
would be their joy this day to have K. Charles of their way, that so he might
compel all others to that way, for they talk much of liberty of conscience to
themselves, but we find, when they have the sword, they strain and squeeze to
the blood, the consciences of all contrary to their way.
to procure so many of the books as we can out of Germany (where they be
printed) to They conceive King James and all not of their way, that are but
Scripture-learned with the fleshly wisdom (as they speak) of the letter to be
the very Antichrist, and all lies that the ungodded or unilluminated men out of
the imagination or riches of their own knowledge, and of the learnednesse of
the Scriptures bring forth, Institute, preach or teach, See Evan. ch 32. chapter
33.34. and H.N. Exhor. c. 14. Sect. 9.
be delivered unto your Majesty, or such godly, learned and indifferent men, as
it shall please your Majesty to appoint.

And we will also (under your Highness lawful license and commandment in
that behalf) do our like endeavor to procure some of the learned men in that
Country (if there be any yet They doubt if there be any of their way and family
in Germany which evidenceth that it is a noto^ions lie that H.N. says, Evan
chapter 34. that he is godded to publish the joyful mess^ge in all the world. And
H.N. Exhor. 12. sect. 40. and Exhor. 14. sect. 9. that all the Kingdoms of the
world should assemble them to this one Kingdom of peace and love: and this
same love service shall break in among all Nations and let it self be heard
over all lands; but here they doubt if in one corner of Germany one man of this
way can be had.
remaining alive that were well acquainted with the Author and his works in
his life time, and which likewise have exercised his works ever since) to come
over and attend upon your Majesty at your appointed time convenient, who can
much more sufficiently instruct and resolve your Highness in any All
heretics, as Calvin noted of libertines, delight to speak in uncouth
language, beside the Scripture, that they may be the only spiritual men, whom
none can understand but spiritualists of their own way.
unusual words, phrase or matter that may happily seem dark and dou^tfull to
your Majesty that any of us in this your land are able to do.

And so upon such your Highness advised consultation and censure thereupon
(finding the same works heretical or seditious and not agreeable to Gods holy
word and testimonies of all the Scriptures) to leave them, to take them as your
Majesty's They clearly profess they will not suffer for familisme, nor that
which to them is the only true Religion, and make K James the absolute and
peremptory judge, that if he find them heretical, they shall submit, faith,
conscience and salvation to the King, to leave or take the writings of Henry
Nicholas as his Majesty's Laws shall appoint them, this is a Religion for the
times and the flesh. This well agrees with the Familists of our time Del,
Saltmarsh, B^con, R^ndel, and others, to whom profession of truth and of Christ
before men is an external and a form in Religion, and who cry out against
forms and uniformity, and teach that we should please one another in love in
all these externalls, we may do or leave undone, Sabba^h, preaching, hearing,
Sacraments, let them be enrolled in the Kallender of the late indifferent
ceremonies, since they are Jewish, c^^nall, literal, fleshly, and perish with
the using, and let the Service-booke, bowing to altars, the name of Jesus,
Episcopacy, Socinianisme, professed Acianisme be recalled, these belong nothing
(say ^hey) to Refo^mation or Religion. Reformation is only in the heart,
Religion is (...) of the mind. The Kingdom of Christ is neither promoved nor
hindered by these, Familisticall love in the heart is all, then surely, the
Nicodemites in Calvin^ time, these that buy a religion with every new mood,
err not
Laws, shall therein appoint us, having no intent nor meaning to contend or
resist there-against, however it be, but dutifully to obey thereunto according
to the counsel of Scriptures Then the Scriptures and H. Nicho. bids us follow
the Kings religion, what ever it be; and denying of obedience to the King and
his Laws, if they forbid a Religion that is the holy service of the love of
God (as they say) is resisting and undutifull disobedience to the Law; so must
we obey men rather then God.
and also of the said Authors works.

And our further humble suit unto your Highness is that of your gracious
favor and clemency you will grant and give order unto your Majesty's officers
in that behalf that all of us your faithful loving subjects which are now in
prison in any part of this your Realm, for the same cause, may be released
upon such bail or bond They seek not the truth and cause of Christ to be
cleared for the present, but only present ease to the flesh and enlargement
under ba^le.
as we are able to give, and that neither we nor any of that company (behaving
our selves orderly and obediently under your Highness Laws) may be any
further persecuted or troubled therein until such time as your Majesty and
such godly learned and indifferent men of your They are willing to submit their
c^u^e to the C^ergy, that is to the godly Prel^^es who would be (...) to (...)
them, because they take the Puritans off from thinking upon their lordly
domination and will worship, and the more enemies and persecuters the Puritans
have* the more ease and less contradicting of the Prelaticall cause, as this
day the Prelaticall party declare themselves willing to comp^und wi^h Arrians,
Socinians, Fam^lists, Antinomians, Anabaptists, Seekers, Separatists and all,
so the Presbyterians that stand for the Covenant of God and reformation may
fall.
Clergy, as your Highness shall appoint thereto, shall have advisedly
consulted and determined of the matter whereby that we may not be utterly
wasted, by the great charge of imprisonment In all ^ges (...) and Sectaries
have called punishing of seducers, or not receiving them in our house as being
evil doers, 2 Ioh. 10* and so ^ustly punishable, Romans 13*4, 5. with the name of
persecution.
and persecution, and by the hard dealing of our adversaries; for we are a
people but few in Yet they p^stered twelve Coun^ies in England, and would God
they were few in number this day.
number, and yet most of us very poor in worldly wealth.

O Sacred Prince, we humbly pray, that the Almighty will move your Princely
heart with true judgment, to di^cerne between the right and wrong of our
cause, according to that most certain and Christian rule set down by our
Savior Christ unto his Disciples, Matthew. 7.12. Ye Yet may Familists live in
all sort of fleshlinesse and Idolatry, murders, lying, whoring, etc and if the
Spirit help them not, they are no more guilty then the maid forced in the field
that did cry, and there was none to help, and so by Law she was innocent,
Document. sent. 6. c. 10. they cannot bring forth any thing but all good and
love, Document. sent. c. 2. sect. 1. in many places H.N. extolls his disciples
as Gods habitation, the seal of Gods Majesty, the holy City of peace, the new
Jerusalem, one with God, God one with them, etc. And whereas John makes the
love of the brethren a mark of these that are translated from death to life, 1
Ioh 3.14. Ye may know Familists by their works, they are malicious haters (as
is evident in this petition) of the truly godly in England whom they call their
enemies these twenty five years.
shall know the tree by his fruits, and in our obedience peaceable and honest
lives and conversation to protect us, and in our disobedience and misdemeanour
to punish us as resisters of Gods ordinance, of the Kingly authority and most
high office of justice committed to your Majesty to that purpose toward your
subjects, Romans 13.

And gracious Sovereigne, we humbly beseech your Highness with Princely regard
in equity and favor to ponder and grant the humble suit contained in this most
lowly supplication of your loyal true-hearted faithful subjects, and to
remember that your Majesty in your book of Princely, grave and fatherly
advice, to the happy Prince, your royal son does conclude The Puritanes are
the proud ones that King James is to subdue, all others the Antichristian sect,
and the Familists only the house of God, of love, of the godly being, etc.
Principis est parcere subjectis and debellare superbos, and then no doubt, God
will bless your Highness with all your noble offspring with Twice they pray
God for the King and his son, that they may have long life, honor, happiness,
a long reign, but not one word of life eternal and the blessings of the life
to come; we know the doctrine of H. N. is that the resurrection, the last
judgment, all the happiness of Saints is closed with in this life, the day of
judgment, of resurrection, is even now in this present day, H.N. Evang. c. 1.
sent. 9 chapter 33. c 34. s^nt. 1, 2, 3. the immortality of the soul, the
resurrection of the body, heaven, hell, or judgment beyond this life there is
none.
peace, long life, and all honors and happiness, long to continue over us;
for which we will ever pray with incessant prayers to the Almighty.

Most gracious Prince, here follows the brief rehearsal and confession of
the Christian belief and Religion of the company This confession was seen by
few, it is said to be Printed an* 1575. It cannot be known that ever either
this petition or that confession was offered to the eye and view of King James,
how ever that confession was not theirs, for the word of God to them is the
only internal word in the mind, the word as they expone it, but not the
Scriptures of the old or new Testament. But it were good that the Familists and
Antinomians now in England would publish to the world a confession of their
faith. But I expect it not this year, they that do evil, hate the light.
that are named the Family of love, which (for the causes therein specified)
was by them set out in Print about the time when they were first persecuted and
imprisoned in this Realm for the same profession by their aforesaid
adversaries, and by means of their false accusations and complaints unto the
Magistrates against them; the which we have thought necessary to present here
unto your Majesty: for that you may thereby the better understand of our
innocent intent and profession whatsoever you shall hear reported to the
contrary by our enemies or by any that be ignorant thereof. Humbly beseeching
your Highness to vouchsafe to read the same, and with your unpartiall and
godly wisdom to consider and judge of us and our cause in equity and favor
accordingly, till your Majesty, shall have further true intelligence thereof.


Here follows also the true copy of an Abjuration tendered to the Familists
an. 1580. october. 10. of Elizabeth by ten Lords of the Privy Council. Because
there were diverse Courteours and Nobles familists, the Prelates that respected
ever the persons of men, would not publicly accuse them by name, because they
were eminent men, as they are now, and because also they were friends to
Bishops, and enemies to non-conformists then called Puritans.

The Abjuration.
WHosoever teaches that the dead which are fallen asleep in the Lord, rise up
in this day of his judgment, and appear unto us in godly glory, which shall
henceforth live in us everlastingly with Christ, and reign upon the earth is a
detestabl heretic. The Antinomians and Familists now in England, especially,
Randel, Saltmarsh, Del, Eaton, (...), disseminate in printed books and Sermons,
the same very doctrine.
But H.N. teaches so, Evangel. c 37. sect. 9.

Whosoever teaches that to be borne of the Virgin Mary out of the seed of
David after the flesh is to be exponed of the pure doctrine out of the seed of
love is a detestable heretic. But H.N. teaches so, Document. sent. c. 3.
sect. 5.

Whosoever teaches that Jesus Christ is come again unto us according to his
promise to the end that they all which love God, and his righteousness and
Christ and perfect being, might presently enter into the true rest, which God
has prepared from the beginning for his elect, and inherit the everlasting
life is a detestable heretic. But H.N. Evan. c. 1. sect. 1. teaches so, etc.
Having examined these reasons with the books of H.N. we do find that in truth
he holds these heresies, and we think in our hearts, and of our own knowledge
affirm that H.N. is in these heresies a detestable heretic, promising
faithfully before God and your honors never hereafter to have any dealing with
his books and doctrine, nor to go about to bring any to the love, liking, or
reading of them, and that we now speak is the true meaning of our heart, as we
look for mercy at his hands which searches the heart.

It shall never be well with England till the like abjuration of the doctrine
of H.N. of Will. Del, Joh. Saltmarsh, of Town, Eaton, Den, Crispe and the
scandalous Antinomians be tendered to most of the Army of Sir Thomas Fairfax,
and all the Sectaries in England; but the Arm of the Lord must still be
stretched out against the land in fury and indignation, till it be destroyed,
and till he thoroughly avenge the quarrel of the Covenant; with so high a hand,
and so presumptuously broken by the Kingdom of England.

A MODEST SVRVEY of the secrets of Antinomianisme; with a brief refutation of
them from the word of truth.
CHAP. I. Antinomians unjustly aceuse us.
IT cannot be judged, either a wounding of the weak, who side with Familists
for a bastard love, with Antinomians for a dead and rotten faith, with
Libertines, the enemies of holy walking with God, to 1 Pet. 3 1^.
answer those that ask a reason of our hope; especially when we are nicknamed
Legalists, Antifidians, Pharisees, Antichristian teachers, enemies to free
Grace; because we stand for a rule of righteousness in the Law, repentance
from dead works, strict and close walking with God; against all which, that is
to me a wall of brass, 2 Cor. ^ ^.
As deceivers, and yet true; as unknown, and yet well known. Yet I give a
brief account of those saving and innocent Doctrines of the host of
Protestant Divines, if possibly truth may pierce through their eyelids, who
wink, because they will not see. Of old the Albigenses were called Heretics;
but (says an indifferent man) genus haereseos nunquam nominant. So now neither
the heresy nor the Protestant Divine can be named, that teach that the Law and
Gospel are mixed in the matter of justifitation; or that tears of repentance
wash us from our sins, that the covenant of grace is a covenant of works*
that we are to seek righteousness in our selves.

CHAP. II. Antinomians are Pelagians.
We are far from Pelagian grace, that an unconverted man ^^ltmarsh (...) 12
and 45 (...).
can leave sin, because sin, Page ^6 17
has an earnest desire of soule-saving comfort, Page ^6. (...) 13. There is a
new birth under the covenant of works.

The Scripture knows no such birth


cannot speak nor do, but in fear of sin; that Town assert^ of free grace,
page 7.
an hypocrite under the Law can in good earnest, and down-rightnesse of heart,
yield himself wholly to the law of God, as a wife to her husband, to be
instructed and ordered in all things, inwardly, and outwardly, after the mind
of God in the Law. So Saltmarsh Free grace, page 34.
Saltmarsh tells us of a Legally-Gospel-way of conversion, in which Christ,
in truth, is received. Much like to that of Familists of New Rise, r^igne,
rui^e of the Antinomians Familists, L^b^rtines of N. E. e^. 12. page ^
England, that a Legalist for truth may attain, the same righteousness, that
Adam had in innocence before the fall; and (...). Unsavory speeches, er. 6.
page 19.
a living faith, that has living fruits, may grow from the living law.

We judge that an unconvert is so far from a conformity to the Law, that his
conscience is burnt with a hot iron, and he never saw his keepers face, he
being under the law a captive in thick darkness; and therefore all his fair
virtues are white sins. (2.) He is an ill tree that cannot bring forth good
fruit. (3.) True mortification is wrought Romans 6.13, 14, 15.
by the Gospel Spirit. (4.) The law cannot give life Gal. 3.21. Romans 7.8, 9, 10*
. 5. An hypocrites faith who is under the Law, is dead J^m. 2.^7.
.

CHAP. III. We hold no moral preparations with Pelagians, Papists, and
Arminians going before conversion.
We teach not that, which Saltmarsh Free grace.
Saltmarsh falsely charge us, that Vows and undertakings never ascending to
Christ, fit us for conversion, nor do we too much burn, or bear the wine of
Gospel Grace, with the Law-fire of works and conditions ^
For 1. we deny, against Antinomians and Arminians any such Gospel-promise; he
that does this and this, and is so, and so fitted with such conditions,
quallifications, as money and hire in hand, shall be converted, as a reward of
his work. The question touching preparations is not, whether an humbled soul,
because humbled, has a good warrant to believe and receive Christ. ^tate of
the questi^n ^ou^hing the (...) of conversion, with Antinomians.
We conceive the bottom of no man's faith is within himself, but the common
ground and Royal charter, warranting all to believe is the free and money
less offer of a precious Savior; who ever will have Christ, and pay not a
penny of condition or law work for him, take him freely. But the question is,
of Christ's order of bringing us to believe and close with Christ; and the
question is, whether a damned Pharesee on his high horse of merits and
law-righteousnesse, an undaunted Heifer, a Simon Magus, a despitefull Atheist,
Elymas a Witch never broken, nor convinced by the law, must in that distance to
Christ and the Gospel, be charged to believe an everlasting love of election
toward himself, and without more ado, be led into the Kings chamber of wine,
to the slowings of soule-redeeming blood; or must he first be humbled,
convinced of sin, burdened with everlasting burning due to him, and so led to
Christ. Antinomians Crisp (...) ser. 7 p. ^9^. While (...) thus sinful (with
all sinfulness that can be imagined in a (...)) Christ may be your Christ.

Ans. In Gods d^ar^e, its tr^e so the world was (...) laid, but Christ is never
(...) yours, so long as you have the Devil reigning as a Prince in your soul
nay, never till you believe.


say, Sinners as sinners belong to Christ, Saltmarsh Free grace, p^ 184.
and have Christ offered to them as sinners, and Page 98. C^ispe vol. ^ se^.
7.210.
none can believe too hastily in Christ: but sure, they can believe, or
presume, too misorderly, and arrogate Christ to themselves (as you teach them)
while they know no sinne-sicknesse for Christ. For 1. some too hastily will be
Christ's Disciples, before they make their reckoning what it will cost them.
Luke 14.28.29.30.31.32.33.
2. The Lords order is to cast down, and then convert; first he draws away
some of the ill blood and rank humors, and pricketh the heart, and then
brings the sick to the Physician, the trembing Publicane to his Savior; as
the Acts 2.37. Acts 9* 6, 7. Acts 16.27.28.29. Zach. 12.^0. Jer. 18.19.
word says, 3. Christ converteth not sinners as sinners; so as their sinful
condition should be the ratio formalis, the formal reason why they are
converted; for then should Christ convert all sinners, all Pharisees, all
Americans, Indians, Tartarians; he heals none but sick sinners, but neither
as sinners, nor as sick sinners; a gracious Physician who heals the sick
without money, heals none but such as are sick, for that were a
contradiction: Yet their sickness is not the formal ^eason, why he heals
them, for so he should heal all. So Christ cures sick sinners, and these
only; Luk^ 19 8. (...). 3 7. (...). 61.^^. Acts ^ 6 7 8. (...). 9.12, 13.
(...) 15.^, 2, 3 4 5 6 7. and (...) Christ, as sinners nor as, or because
repenting, or sick sinners, but as freely (...) grace to th^^ bl^ssed
translation from death to life.
but not because they are sinners, nor because they are sick, but because, and
as they are freely chosen of God, Joh. 17.6. Thine they were, and thou gave
them me; here the cause and the reduplication, for which he says, they have
kept thy word. But this suiteth with Familists, who will have no new creature
at all, no grace inherent in a believer, as we shall hear; and so no real
change made, but only a putative or relative change.

CHAP. IV. How we teach a desire of grace to be grace.
We never taught that a desire of the grace of conversion, in the unconverted,
is conversion; or that a desire in them, to pray and believe, is prayer or
belief; as Saltmarsh Free grace, 17 18, 19.
Antinomians charge us. But in the converted, a real unfaigned supernatural
desire of grace goes for grace. 1. In that its virtually the seed, and of the
very nature of grace; the same Spirit that works the will, works the deed.
D^nns conference between a sick man and a Minister. P^. ^.3.
2. Its grace in Gods acceptance. Abraham's aim to offer Isaak, is in the
Lords books an offering of him. (...). ^.3.
Because thou have done this thing, etc. 3. Where ever a desire of grace is,
concomitantly there is grace. Genesis 22.16 (...). 11.7. ^ Cor 8.12.
With my soul I have desired thee in the night; this desire is blessed of God,
Esa^. 26.9. Neb. 1.1^.
as saving grace; judge then of Familists, Power of (...). p. 21.
who say it is a vain and delusive Doctrine, that God passes by our daily
infirmities, acccepting our wills for our performances. But they contend for a
perfection here in this life.

CHAP. V. How we are freed from the Law, how not.
THree things are to be considered in the Law. The full commanding, ^. the
promising* 3. the threatni^g power of the law.
1. The commanding, 2. The promising. 3. The threatening power of the Law. Now
as for the mandatory power of the Law; we are to consider. 1. The motives,
bands, and helps of obedience to this command of the Law. 2. The quantity of
it.

The Law as steeled, and clothed with constraining love, and 2 Cor. 5.^4. Romans
12.1, 2.
lovely authority of thankefulnes to God-Redeemer, and as due debt to the
Lord-Ransomer Jesus Christ, (and this is a moral motive) and as it comes
from the grace of Christ, binds us to obedience, not only in regard of the
matter, but also of the authority of the Lawgiver, though Town asser. 3.
Town say, We are freed from the Law in its dominion, offices, and effects;
and another, Theo^o^. G^rmanica, cap. ^8. page 70.71, 72.
the sons of God are not subject to the Law, that is, they are not to be
taught what they should do, or leave undone, seeing the Spirit teaches them:
-- they need look for no Law, Command, or precept, but are above all
ordinances, Reading, hearing, etc. as Christ was: and another, Saltmarsh cap.
29. Free grace, page 140
The Spirit of Christ sets a believer as free from hell, the law, and
bondage here on earth, as if he were in heaven, nor wants he any thing to make
him so but to make him believe he is so.

CHAP. VI. How the command of the Law lays an obleiging ^and on us.
BUt 1. we say not that the moral Law binds under that reduplication, as
given by Moses, for then all Ceremonials should bind us also who are
Christians. But that God intended by these ten words delivered by Moses, to
obleige all Christians, to the worlds end, to perpetual obedience, is clear.
1. Christ, and his Apostles, press the moral Law upon the Gentiles. Paul
commands the Romans the Rom* 13.8* 9, 10*
fulfilling of the Law in love; the Ephesians Ephe. 6.^.^
the first Commandment (given by Moses, Exodus 20.) with promise. James his
hearers Jam. ^.8.9.10*
the fulfilling of the royal Law, according to the Scripture, (no Scriptures
but the writing of Moses and the Prophets) and that not for the matter only,
for so a Sabbath day could not obleige the Gentiles, if the Lawgiver did not
command it; but from the authority of the Lawgiver, for verse. 11. He that
said (this is the authority of the Lawgiver) Do not commit adultery, said
also, Do not kill; and ^am. 4.12.
There is one Lawgiver; so the Apostles add in their Epistles these very
things that Moses commanded, to the doctrine of faith, showing that they are
Christ's ten Commandments, rather then Moses. 2. Notwithstanding that all Law (
Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not steal,) should expire in regard of any
binding they have from God, just as this, thou shall be circumcised; when
Christ dyed and rose again: yet there is Scripture for removing of shadows,
Act. 15. Gal. 5. Col. 2. but none for removing the love of God and our
neighbor, except in the case of justification* Romans 3. Gal. 3. Act. 15. 3.
Paul expressly resolves the Antinomian question. Romans 3.31.
Do we then make void the Law, through faith? God forbid. Yea, we establish
the law. And Romans 6.1. What shall we say then? shall we continue in sin (that
is, in a breach of the Law) that grace may abound? that is, that the riches of
pardoning grace in justification may flow largely, God forbid; and Romans 7.7. is
the Law sin? because it irritateth our corrupt nature, God forbid. For what
ever is a sin to the believer, argues subjection to the Law; as Adultery in
a believer, argues that he is under a commanding Law; to say its a sin
against Christ the Redeemer, makes all the ten but one: love Christ, and no
sin in the world but unthankefulnesse: but this should be no sin to a
Tartarian to murder; why? he never heard of Christ. Joh. 15.22. and so can be
guilty of no unkindnesse to Christ; and for sin against the morrall Law, if
it be abrogated in Christ, as the ceremonial Law is, Murdering his brother is
no more sin, then if this Tartarian be not circumcised, it can be his sin
to be so. 4. The law of Nature binds perpetually, and binds the Gentiles,
(...) 1 Cor. 5.1* Romans 1.19.20. Romans 2* 14.
then must also the Moral law bind; for the authority of the Lawgiver, for
the law of Nature has all its obligation from God, who wrote it in the heart.
When the Heathen were charged by their consciences for great sins, they
naturally feared vengeance from a Lawgiver, who had written these laws in
their hearts; now the Moral law has all its obliging power from the Lawgiver
also. 5. The Law, by the operation of the Spirit, is a mean of our conversion.
Psa. 19.7. as all the obleiging power that the rest of the Word of God, even
the Gospel is useful for 2 Timothy 3.16
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, to
make us perfect to salvation; and the Gospel without the Spirit is a dead
letter as well as the Law; and if so, then to sin against any mean of
conversion, must be against the law of God; and so this law which commands to
hear and obey all that God commands us, must obleige us perpetually. 6.
Christ says expressly Math. 5.18 19*
that he came not to loose any from obedience (...), though unperfect to the
least jot of the law. The (...) covenant of works (for so Deuteronomy. 4 13 He (...)
unto (...) his covenant, even ten Commandments. Deuteronomy. 19.11, ^^.13. ^ King.
18.12.
the Scripture calls it) is now so far forth abrogated Gal. 3.^0.13. (...)
3.^9, ^0, etc. Gal. 3.10.
as that we are freed from the necessity of justification, Heb. 7.18.19. Heb^.
8.6 7, 8, 9.
by the Law, and the curse of it; and thus far go the Antinomian Arguments,
and no further

Antinomians free us Saltmarsh Free gr. 146.
from the Law, as its a beam of Christ in substance and matter, so as we are
not to seek the light of one beam; now when the Sun of righteousness is
risen himself; though Master Town be not so strict.

Hence is it that they offend so much, that any glimmering of light should come
to us from the letter of Commandments either of Law or Gospel; that to search
Christ in the Scriptures is not safe; and Rise, reign 35. Er. 74. Th^ol. Ger.
70.71, 7^*
all covenants in the written and preached. Word take men off Christ.

CHAP. VII. How the Law and the Gospel require the same obedience.
BUt seeing the Law cannot contradict the Gospel, and speaks nothing of a
Surety and Mediator, and so is negatively diverse from the Gospel, yet
positively it is not contrary, nor denies that there ought to be a Mediator
(for so should there be two contrary wills in God, and so it had bin injustice,
The Law and Gospel are not positively contrary (...) to another.
and against a just law, that God should send his Son to die for sinners.) It
is the same very obedience commanded in the Law, as a strict covenant of works,
to be done by strength from our own nature, and for the authority of the
Lawgiver, and the love of God, and now enjoined in a mild covenant of grace,
from the strength of the grace of Christ, and now not only acts on us by
Legal motives, the love of God, the authority of the Lawgiver, (which the
Gospel excludes not) but upon the love of a free Redeemer and Ransome-payer:
as it may be the same debt, which a man pays of his own proper goods, and
of the money borrowed from a rich friend.

1. Perfect obedience, which the Law requires, and imperfect obedience which
the Gospel accepts (for it requires perfection as well as the Law does) are
but graduall diffe^ences; as the same sum of gold, though clipped, if
accepted by the the creditor as full payment, the rest which is wanting being
pardoned, may in grace and value, be as good as the full payment. It is the
Law that commands the love of God, under pain of eternal death, for the
least fail, and by way of a covenant of works. Now the tenure of a covenant of
works is an accident of the Law.

2. A new obligation of obedience varieth not the nature of it; as it is the
same moral obedience that God commanded to the heathen, and the Jews, but that
it was written and preached to Jews, adds more guiltnesse, when they Hos.
3.11. P^. 9.19.20
disobey, and these same duties that Moses commanded of righteousness,
holiness, and sobriety, Exodus 20. does the grace of the Gospel injoyne. Tit.
3.11. and the Apostles command as acts of sanctification; and though Moses
should not command them by the motives of the grace of Redemption (which yet is
false, except when he presses the Law as a covenant of works) yet
Gospel-motives vary not the nature of duties: as a Master may command the same
duties to his son and his servant, upon different grounds.

The Gospel commands all that the ^aw (...).
3. The Gospel abateth nothing of the height of perfection, in commanding what
ever the law commands in the same perfection; for it is as holy, pure, and
spiritual in commanding, we be perfect as our heavenly Father, and holy, as
Mat. 5.48. P^. 1.^. Deuteronomy ^7.26 Gal. ^.^.
he is holy, as the Law is. In acceptance of grace, the Gospel accepts less
then the law, but commands no less, therefore the Gospel grants pardons,
but no dispensations; the Law though it deny not pardons, nor forbid them
positively, yet it grants neither.

CHAP. VIII. Of the promissorie part of the Law; the differences between the
two covenants mistaken by Antinomians are opened.
FOr the promissory part of the Law. It promises life and reward to no
obedience, but to perfect and absolute obedience, if there be the least defect
in the least jot; the garland and crown promised is forfeited; so as there is
no reg^ining of it for ever by that bargain. But the Gospel promises to the
least sincere obedience, were it but a cup of cold water to a Disciple, a
reward of glory. Therefore the difference stands not as Antinomians dream,
between the covenants chiefly in doing, and not doing, as if the Gospel or
covenant of grace did not also command doing, in relation to life eternal;
yea, 1 Timothy 4.^.
and with a promise, as well as the Law does, but in a far other way: for
Ma^h. 19* 2^, 29.
Godliness has the promises of the life that now is, and that which is to
come: and to the followers of Christ, (and though they halt in their walking)
and such as forsake all for Christ's name, is promised sitting on thrones, and a
hundredth fold in this life, and in the life to come, life eternal. But the
difference is, 1. That no obedience is accepted in the Gospel without a
Mediator, not so in the Law. 2. That the Law is given in its strictest
bargain, to a holy, perfect nature, the Gospel to a lamed, wounded and dead
sinner. 3. The Law gives, by way of debt, not excluding boasting Romans ^.^.
in some measure, not that Adam could merit an infinite crown, by a piece
finite-work, or could do beyond obligation, more then we; but because, for
holy works, by strict covenant, without the Mediators grace, without pardon,
the worker might claim his wages humbly, yet glorying, he had won them by
natures good deeds, and by works, and for works, not of grace. Romans 1.^.
When Paul says, Romans 4.2. If Abraham has whereof to glory, its not before
God. He means not, that justification by the works of the Law gives ground
of boasting, or glorying in our selves. For 1. a conditional proposition can
conclude nothing positively. 2. He speaks of glorying, as chap. 3.27.
comparatively. Law-justification is more like glorying, then grace; for Angels
cannot boast, Romans 11.36, ^7. the Gospel gives of free grace. But 4. the ^aw
could not accept another man's imputed righteousness, that is supernatural;
and to believe this required grace, and strength of a higher strain then Adam
had; it demands but ^ man's own personal and perfect righteousness, and
curses the sinner for the least wrinesse or crookedness in the first bud, or
spring of the inclinations or motions, 5. The Gospel lea^^th place to
repentance (which the Law does not) and opens a door of hope, to a lost
sinner; and the special condition is Faith, that a ransom paid by Christ
shall buy me a title and right to heaven, of which the Law says nothing. 6.
The Law gives a reward as a due debt, though not merit; the Go^pel gives a
reward against merit.

CHAP. IX. Of the threatenings of the Law and Gospel.
TOuching the third part, as the Law is in strict terms divided from the
Gospel. 1. The Law-threatnings are on the person for the actions, and for the
least fail in thought, word, or deed; but the Gospel-threatnings are rather on
the ^tate, then the actions; or if they be on the actions, it is for the
condition and state; therefore the learned Pareus ^
says, that the Gospel, as the Gospel, has no threatenings at all. For indeed
the state of the kingdom of the believer fenceth him from the curse; Romans 8.^.
Io^. 3.^8.
he is free from condemnation, because he is under another King, then the man
that is under the Law. As the man in Scotland is free from Murder which he
committed in Spain, not because his act of Murder deserves not he should
die; but because he is a member of the state of Scotland, and no penal law of
Spain can reach him in that Sat. Pareus thus far says true, that it is the
Law properly that curses, and that the Gospel, as the Gospel, curses not, but
is properly glad tidings. For 1. He that believes not (...), is already
condemned; that is, before his unbelief, sentence is passed on him by the Law,
and the Gospel does but ratify the sentence. For if we suppose there had never
been a Gospel, nor a Mediator, the sinner should have been a castaway and
sentenced man; but now because he believes not ^
he shall not see life, but the wrath of God (...): abides on him; then it was
on him before, if he should believe in the Son of God, the sentence of the
Law should be taken off, the Prince offers a pardon of grace to a man that
has (...) h^s Son, so he will accept of it, he refuses to accept of a
Pardon, and therefore dies rather for his bloud-sh^d then for his not
accepting pardon, it would seem among men too l^w a cause of death, to put him
to death, for refusal of a pardon; at (...) the sentence was given out for
killing the Kings Son, only he dies more deservedly, that both he killed
the Son, and despised his Princes grace; or rather his doom is aggravat^d, and
the chains of Capernaum, are made heavie^, because they comparatively justify
Sodom, and so the Gospel-vengeance is an addition to the Law-vengeance, as he
that dies of an extreme distemper of body, and by a gracious Physician may be
cured, but refuses the medicine, the distemper is the Physical cause of his
death, his contempt of the art of the Physician is the moral cause, and a
reason why he dies without the compassion of his friends, and with greater
torment of mind to himself; Yea, Faith is not properly the cause that has any
effective influence on so noble effects, as are free pardon, and free
salvation, far less is it any meritorious cause. Christ has no joint causes
with him in this excellent work of saving a sinner; unbelief is a moral
cause, non removens prohibens.

2. The Gospel is an exception of grace against the Law; for the Law says, He
that sins shall dye; the Gospel adds, except he believe; or, he shall
certainly dye, except he believe in him who justifies the ungodly; so that the
Gospel says Amen to the Laws threatening, and takes them not off, nor
contradicts them in their own nature*

3. What ever threatenings are executed against an unbeleever, they are the
Law-threatnings; its a Law-death that the unbeleever dies; for all that
eternally perish, do perish under the law, and the covenant of works; never
man* is lost under Christ; if therefore the Gospel say, Whoremon^ers,
Adulterers, Murderers, Drunkards, shall not inherit the kingdom of God, this
threatening does necessarily presuppose a Law-state, if they which do such
things, remain under the Law, otherwise the Gospels intent is not that they
perish, but that they believe and be saved,

CHAP. X. Of Gospel fear.
(...) with Gospel-freedome to fear hell, so we (...) and punishment more
then sin; for sin is a (...) then punishment. For 1. we are commanded to
(...) him, who can cast both soul and body into hell ^
. 2. Its not a Law-spirit of bondage, that some tremble at the word of (...), ^
nor for Josiahs h^^rt to melt at the reading of the ^aw. 3. Not to be afraid
of judgment, is a part of a heart rockie and hardened. Though Felix his
trembling at judgment did prove him to be under the Law, because he feared
only judgment, and judgment as a greater evil then sin. Nor is it
mercinary to love the reward, so it be not more in our intention, then a holy
communion with God. For 1. Moses by Faith had an eye to the recompense of
reward ^
. Paul set the garland before him as his end ^
. 2 We are commanded so to run, that we may obtain ^
: to lay up a sure foundation, that we may ^
lay hold on life eternal. Only we are not to make happiness, and our
created blessedness, so much out formal end in running our race, as holiness
and our objective happiness, which is God himself, If Antinomians would
difference between love of a hire, and hireling love; then should not ^
Town condemn the just; nor can the Fathers under the Law, be said to have
served the Lord with an upright heart, if they served him for hire, which Satan
judged hypocrisy in Job cap. 1. verse. 9.10. See Psalm. 73.25. Job 13.15.

CHAP. XI. Law-feare and Gospel-faith consistent.
NOr does Master Town and Antinomians infer by good arguing, because
believers may be stricken off sins, upon the consideraton of
Law-threatnings, that their sins, deserve not wrath, as well as the sins of
others, as ^ Job says, What then shall I do, when God rises up? and ^
Destruction from God was a terror to me. But it follows not, that therefore
to obey God sub paena; for fear of the condemning Law, is not free,
Gospel-obedience. For its most false, seeing this obedience for fear of the
desert of sin was in Paul, though he was persuaded, that eternal wrath
should never be inflicted on him, ^
as is clear by his words. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we
persuade m^n. And ^
we know if our earthly house be dissolved -- we have an house not made with
hands, but eternal in heaven. 2. Law-threatning (when Faith assures the
conscience, of freedom from the wrath to come) and love-perswading are most
consistent. For most clear it is, that Christ and his Apostles do command,
and strictly charge in the Gospel. So Antinomians err, who Saltmarsh (...) 4^
14^,
teach that the Gospel persuades rather then commands -- and reasons and
argues us to duties, rather then binds and enforces; and that Psalm. 19* ^.
holiness and sanctification now is not such, as is fa^hioned by the Law of
outward command, but by the preaching of Faith, by which the Spirit is given,
which renewes a believer, and makes him the very Law himself, and his heart
the two Tables of Moses. For, 1. persuasions and commands may w^ll stand
together, and all Law-inforcings are but mere reasonings, and moral and
objective acts on the mind and will* and so the Law no more inforceth then the
Gospel. 2. Holiness and Sanctification comes by the Law, animated by the
Spirit, as well as by the Gospel: for the Law converteth the soul; Antinom^a^^
(...).
but it does this (says the Antinomians) not as the Law, but as the Gospel
revealing Christ. But I am sure, neither can the Gospel ^^terally, only
revealing Christ, and being void of the Spirit, it cannot convert the soul;
and the Law as animated by the Spirit, leads to Christ as a Pedagogue, I
mean as mixed with the Gospel. For the Law without the Gospel can never
sanctify, nor lead to Christ; and neither of them without Christ's Spirit can
do any thing. And I find Saltmarshes Euthysiasticall pulse and strain of
Familisme, when he says, that the Preaching of Faith is the Spirit given to a
believer, and it makes him the very Law it self. For 1. the Preaching of
Faith, or the Gospel preached, even to hardened Pharis^^s, cannot give the
Spirit renewing the Pharisees; for Faith was preached to them by Christ and his
Apostles, but they stumbled at Christ, and never believed, 2. The preaching of
Faith and the Spirit differ as much, as the principal cause and the
instrument; now who can say, the writing of the pen is the writer? 3.
Antinomians mean by the Gospel, or the preaching of Faith, here divided from
the Law, not the glad tidings of peace preached, but the renewing Spirit,
without all letter, or word of promise, or command, that is, the teaching
spirit, and the inward anointing without the Law, or Gospel either. Now
Sanctification in this sense must be wrought without Law* ^
Gospel, Precept, Command, Promise; and we may lay aside the Bible then, and
all Ordinances; and therefore no wonder then, Antinomians tell us so often of
the Letter, and the Spirit; for to them old and new Testament, and all the
sweet promises are a very Letter, and in the new Testament we are not to serve
God according to the Letter; and therefore all Preaching, Commands,
Exhortations, Promises, Threats of both Law and Gospel must be laid aside. The
Lord keeps us (says ^
Town) under the Gospel in righteousness, without all Law Ceremonial and
Moral; and every where they say, (...) serve God now according to the Spirit,
not (...) to the Letter: outward Ordinances then to Antinomians are matters of
mere courtesy.

CHAP. XII. Antinomians deny actual pardon of sins to the Jews.
ANtinomians deny that the knowledge of ^
actual and eternal remission was an Article of the Jewish Creed, but a
mystery not revealed till the Gospel. But then ^
David, and the Fathers, Abraham, and others, were justified by the imp^^ed
righteousness of Faith, as we are also. David must Psalm. 2.1, 2. describe an
happiness he knew not what. David says, Thou forgavest the iniquity of my
sin, verse. 5, 2. We believe ^
through the grace of the Lord Jesus, we shall be saved as well as they. 3. All
the Fathers dyed in the faith, ^
(...) did eat the same spiritual meat, ^
and did all drink of the same spiritual Rock, and the Rock was Christ. 4. The
Scripture foreseeing, that God (...) away, but some sins were upon them for
that time, which was (...) of their complaint. (...).
would justify the heathen thr^ugh Faith, reached before the Gospel to
Abraham, Esaiah prophesied of Christ cap* 35.
as an Evangelist. Daniel of the slaying of the Messiah, and everlasting
righteousness through him. The Prophets 1 Pet. ^.^^.
testified before hand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should
follow; actual remission then was no mystery to them. Abraham I^h. ^.^^.
rejoiced to see Christ's day, and saw it.

CHAP. XIII. Of the nonage of the Jews, what it was.
NOr was the tutorie, bondage or nonage of the Jews any thing, but 1. A less
measure of the Spirit then is now. 2. A harder pressing of the Law on them. The
Jews were not under the Law but under grace, though more (...).
3. A keeping of that infant Church, as a child under Pedagogues and Tutors, in
regard of the Elements of Ceremonies; partly, teaching them rudely; and partly,
warning them by blondy Sacrifices, and diverse washings of the desert of sin,
and the filth of it: but this is nothing to prove the Jews were under the Law.
For 1. then should they be Gal. 3.1^
under the curse; and so must eternally perish, contrary to the Word, Heb. 11.13
nor was their pardon of sins by halfes and quarters. 2. Then must they be
saved by works; Paul R^m. 10.3
says, They came short of righteousness, because they sought to establish
their own righteousness, and Romans 9.^
stumbled at the stone laid in Zion, and sought it not by faith. And it was
never lawful for them, more then us, to seek righteousness and justification
Romans ^.9, 10, 11, 12, 13
by works of the Law; so they were in this under no Law-Spirit more then we,
but justified, the same way, that we Romans 4*2* 3, 4, 5, 23.
are. 3. Yea, many sweet Evangelike promises are made to them, as to us, Is 5
^.1, 2 3.
Ho, every one that thirsts, come to the water, etc. Isa^. 2^.16.
Behold I lay on Zion a stone, etc. H^b. ^*2 4.
The just shall live by fath. Mat. 7.1^.
Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity. Esaias. 4^.25.
I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions, for mine own sake; and
diverse Psalm. 130. 7 ^^ Psalm. 10^.8, 9, ^0, 11, 12, Exo^ ^4.67.
other Scriptures prove this. 4. The Prophets cried Is^ ^.1^, 12* 16 Psalm* ^.5
1.8, 16* 17. Esaias 6^.12
against legal and outward service, and pressed washing in Christ's blood, and
faith and repentance, as the Apostles do. And to A^ts 10 4^
Christ gave all the Prophets witness* that through his name, whosoever
believes in him shall receive remission of sins. Psalm. ^^.1. Psalm 88.1, 2.
Ps. 69.1, 2, 3. Psalm. 63.1, 2, 3, 4.
There is much of the Spirit of adoption, Genesis 32.26, 27, 28, 29. Exodus ^^.10*
Isai. 62.6*7.
of spiritual liberty in praying, ^
wrestling with God, ^
giving no rest to God* ^
Heavenly boldness, and access to the throne of grace, in J^^kob, David,
Moses, and sweet Evangelike, and Gospel-familiarity ^
between Christ and his Spouse, the Church in the Song of Solomon, ^
Feasting and banqueting together; only the Law^s administration was wrath by
accident, through our corruption, less glo^ious, because of dark typs, and a
spa^^r measure of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. Ephesians. 3.9, 10. and Paul heightneth
Gospel^glory, and lesseneth the Law in the vain sense that false Apostles, and
legal Teachers, put on it in over-^xalting it, as if without Christ it could
save, ^
or with Faith it could justify. 6 All under the Gospel, Elect and Reprobate,
must be freed from the Law, if the Jews were under it, all to whom the Gospel
is preached must be freed from it; and to De^ne, and Moore, who are both
Arminians and Antinomians, all and every one of mankind must be under ^race,
none under the Law of Commandments: for the argument holds for all in
opposition to the Legal Jew.

CHAP. XIV, The old m^n, or the flesh to Antinomians is under the Law, the new
Man freed from all Law.
IT is admirable, that ^
Town will have the Old man in believers, shut up under the Law, and the New
man above all Law, or subject to none at all; as Familists and Libertines when
they sinned, said, Non ego pecco, sed asinus meus; not I but the flesh does
sin; or sense, reason, the Old man does sin, because the Old man only is
under the Law, not the New man. 2. Guiltiness and sin, is a thing that
falls on the person, not on a part of man. 3. The command is given to the
person, the person is the subject of punishment and condemnation, not his sense
only. 4. Thus Den and Saltmarsh say, Faith, righteousness, light, joy, and
peace is in conscience, in the sense, f^^sh, conversation is sin; yet nothing
that can condemn, because the conscience is washed in justification; but sin
is in the conversation, says Den, ^
and ^
in the sense, reason, or flesh, says Saltmarsh, so here original sin shall
be no sin

CHAP. XV. Antinomians hold the justified to sin before men, and as touching
their conversation, not before God, and as touching their conscience.
SO Antinomians D^nne ibid. Saltmarsh Free grace, ^ 42 and 40. compa^ed
together. Power of love* page* 28, 29.
say, the justified have no sin in their conscience, nor can God see any
sin in their conscience; yet there is sin in their conversation, and flesh.
But 1. sin Original, and the flesh lusting against the Spirit, dwells
inherently in its essence, being a blot in the conscience, and whole man;
though guilt and actual condemnation be removed: so was Paul Romans 7.23.
a wretched man, only for sin, in mind, will conscience, affection, no ill,
but the ill of sin, could make him cry out of his wretched condition. 2. The
justified must be as perfect as Angels, if no sin dwell in them, and they
need not pray for pardon, wanting all sin. 3. Sin in conversation, as murder
in the hands, oppressing of men, blasphemy in the tongue, are against the Law
of God, and must be sins in the conscience, else they are against no Law of
God, which make the sins of the justified and their doing golden graces.

CHAP. XVI. Justification is close mistaken by Antinomians, when they judge it
to be an extirpation of sin, Root and branch, as Papists fancy, venials to
remain only in the justified.
Justification to us is not as Antinomians dream an utter extirpation of sin
in its essence, root and branch, for Papists conceive of justification, so as
nothing that is sin remains in the justified, but some gentle venials,
which we can satisfy for our selves: but we judge justification to be a
judicial, and law-removall of the guilt or obligation to eternal punishment.
1. It is a judicial and forinsecall Law-declaration that is opposed to
condemnation; but this removes Law-guiltinesse to die, not the intrinsecall
inherent blot of sin, as if the sinner had never sinned, and were now no
sinner. 2. By it the sinner is not (as Antinomians say,) C^^spe vol. 2. Ier. 3.
page 89. Christ himself is not so completely r^ghteous, but we are as
righteous as he was.
as righteous as Christ: because Christ could say in truth, I have no sin,
but we even being justified are liars, if we say we have no sin 1 John ^, 9.
. 3. Sin dwells not in Christ at all, nor was there in him flesh and
concupiscence, lusting against the Spirit, as in Romans 7.18, 19. ^0. Gal. 5.17.
us. For it is clear from the Scriptue Eccl. (...) Prove. ^.9. Psalm. 14.3. R^m.
^.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. 1 John 1.8, 9* 10. Romans 7 19, 20, 21, 22.23.
Matthew. 6.^.
that sin dwells in the justified.

CHAP. XVII. Christ not formally the sinner, as Antinomians dream.
NOr was Christ so made sin, as the intrinsecall guilt of sin was laid on
him, as Cr^spe vol. 2. (...). 3 page 90.91.92.93.
Crispe says, Christ was only the Adulterer, the Idolater, the sinner
imputatively, not inherently, and formally; in that he did bear the
satisfactory punishment of wrath and hell due to our sin. 1. Christ was so
made sin, not in the imagination, but really suffering in our person; yet so
as sin physically and inherently, in its blot, remains in us, and after we
are justified, 1 Ioh. 1.8.10.
we have sin. Rom 7.14, 17.
We are sold under sin, and carnal; Iam 3.2.
in many things we offend all. Now its blasphemy to say that Christ was so
sinful as we are. 2. Nor is the surety the principal any way, save only
legally, penally, imputatively, the debtor: there is no injustice in the
surety, as in the principal in borrowing money, and profusely wasting it, and
wronging his brother; nor can the surety be called formally the unjust man,
the waster; though he be legally the debtor, and holden in justice and really,
not in imagination, to pay the sum; so was Christ never inherently and
formally the sinner, as the snow is formally white; because Christ in himself,
in his physical person and natures, was innocent, holy, harmless, undefiled,
separated from sinners, even while he was a surety for sinners. 3. Scripture
expounds Christ's bearing of our sins, not as if the essence, form, and
intrinsecall, fundamental, and essential guilt of sin had been on him, then
he should have been a sinner as we are, and so not a sinlesse sacrifice for
sin, but in bearing the punishment due to us in his own body 1 Pet 2.4.
on the tree, in being Esa. 53.5. Rom 4 25* Romans ^.6.
wounded for our transgressions: but its the Antinomian^ way to confound
Sanctification and Justification, and to make us as inherently and
intrinsecally, in our very persons, holy, sinnelesse, righteous, free of the
indwelling of Original sin, and the old man, and the flesh, as Christ
himself: We are not as innocent and sinnelesse as Christ.
and this is the Famil^sts principle; That Christ has Goded and Christed a
Saint, and Christ is incarnate and maned in the believer; so that the believer
is God manifested in the flesh, and dwelling personally in us: all the sins
that a believer commits, are no more sins then the actions of Christ: for all
our sins were swallowed up and annihilated in Christ: He that is borne of God
(say they) cannot sin; and Town asser. page, 3^.
M. Town tells us, that justification is regeneration; and Asser. 71.72.
to faith there is no sin.

CHAP. XVIII. That we are not justified until we believe.
We hold against Antinomians that we are never justified till we believe. They
say The Author of the Faithful Messenger sent after the Antinomians relates
this of them, page 1.2.3. and brings their arguments for it, and answers
them fully.
from eternity we were justified; or Crispe vol. 2 ^er. 5.^56.157.158.159.
from the time that the Messiah dyed, all sins were finished, and we
justified, or from our birrh. But justification in Gods decree and purpose from
eternity, is no more justification then Creation, sanctification,
glorification, the crucifying of Christ, and all things that fall out in time;
for all these were in the eternal purpose of God. 2. In justification, our
sins are, in their guilt, fully done away, as a Es^. 43.^5.
thick cloud, cast Mic. 7.19.
in the bottom of the sea, Ie^. 31.34*
remembered no more, I^r. 50.^0.
sought for, and not found; if all this was done from eternity, believers were
never sinners, never children of wrath, really, as Paul Ephe. 2.1, 2
says; never dead in sins, never Col. 1.21. Romans 5.6.
enemies to God, or ungodly; they were only such in a mental consideration.
3. It is true, God loved his chosen ones from eternity to salvation; and
Ephesians. 1.2.
from that love, sent his Son Ioh. 3.16.
to die, to Revel. 1.5.
wash, justify, and sanctify them; but this is not their justification, but a
fruit of justification in time. When our time is the time of love, Ezech. 16.6,
8.
and we are dying in our own blood, he washes us Ezech. 16.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, etc.
. 4. We behoved to believe from eternity, for we are justified by Romans 3.
cap. 4. cap. 5.
Faith. 5. All the justified have a real union and interest in Christ, to live
Habak. 2.4. Romans 1.17.
by faith, and wait on God in all their troubles by faith; but though their be
an union of love in Gods mind from eternity, between the elect and God, yet a
complete union between us and Christ, without the Spirit, and without any
faith, though it be boldly Rise, reign, er. 37.
asserted by Familists, is against the Scripture: for then might we be borne
again, and not receive Christ by faith, contrary to the Ioh. 1.11, 12
Antinomians hold an union with Christ before we believe.
Scripture; and be united to Christ, as branches to the Vine-tree, and not
abide in Christ, Ioh. 15.1, 2, 3, 4 5, 6.
have Christ dwelling in our heart, and not by faith, contrary to Ephesians. 3.17
Paul; so might Christ live in us, and we eat and drink him as the true Manna,
have the Son, and yet want faith, contrary to Gal. 2.20. Rev. 2.7^. Ioh.
6.35, 40.4 47.54 55.
the Scriptures. All which, or most of them, prove that we were not justified,
when Christ dyed on the cross. 6. All that are justified, are unseparably
sanctified and called, Romans 8.30 1 C^r. 6.^1, ^2 R^m. 6.18.
and the blessing of justification has with it, the receiving of the promise
of the Spirit, through Gal. 3.14.
faith, and Romans 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
peace with God, through the Lord Jesus Christ, access by faith into grace,
whereby we stand, rejoicing in the hope of the glory of God, glorying in
tribulation, patience, experience, hope; but many for whom Christ dyed have
none of these, till they be justified by Faith; the distinction of
justification in, or before God, or to our own sense by faith, will not help
this; for the Scripture no where speaks of justification, but by faith only;
the meritorious price of our justification is paid on the Cross, but that is
not justification.

CHAP. XIX. Gods love of good will, and of good liking, a warrantable
distinction.
NOr can we stand to that Antinomian ground: that in Justification there is no
change of our state and spiritual condition before God; and that God has the
same love to us, before and after conversion, and that it is a vain
distinction of Gods love of good will, called amor, (...), vel benevolentiae,
and good liking, amor complacentiae Den Ser. of grace, m^r^y, 33.34.35
because God loves, because he loves, and for no cause in the creature, not
their most eminent works, done by the influence of Gospel Grace.

But if this distinction be right taken, it has an evident ground in
Scripture. We teach that the love of benevolence and good will is the liking,
free delight, and choice of the person to glory, and to all the means, Gods
love of good will toward our person, and of good liking toward our faith and
holy walking, a necessary distinction grounded on Scripture.
even to share in Christ's Mediatory love, and the fruits of his death: in this
love he wills, and ordains, and lays up good and happiness for us,
expecting no payment at our hand, the other love is only denied by
Antinomians, but without ground; for this love of complacencie is of things,
not of persons; and when we say, God loves his Saints, for their inherent
holiness, and delights in them for it; we mean no other thing, then that
God loves the sparkles of his own rarest work, his saving grace, so far as
to make it a means to fulfill the love and gracious decree of good will, of
free election; not that any new immanent act of love, arises toward the person
loved, God creates a love-worthy object to himself, freely, and loves it
freely.
that was not in God toward that person from eternity: but the truth is, God
first creates a lovely, and love-worthy object, and then out of that love that
creates being, and the lovely object, he goes on to continue the former act
of loving and delighting in that object, and renders it more lovely. Creatures
cannot create the object of their love, but find it created to their hand, and
expect to have some perfection added to them in an union of love, with that
excellent thing they love, and they are often deceived; and ever their love
has a cause, and hire, and reward in the thing loved. Now, when it is said,
that God loves all that he has made, then he created his own lover, and his
own love. 2. When he loves the chains and bracelets about the neck of his
Spouse, Cant. 4. He there creates, in his Christ, a new rare piece liker to
himself, then the works of pure and simple creation; this is not pure love,
but a continuation of his creating good will; nor does the creature engage God
to love it; but as divine love gave being to these ornaments of grace, the
inherent holiness in his Bride; so that the same love continues it self in
delighting in his own work. 3. So he is said to love his Bride; for, or
because of her excellency and beauty, that he Ezech. 16* 14.
puts on her; and still he loves his own in Christ, for his own rare
workmanship, not that the creature was cause or begetter of that love; and he
crowns his own gifts, not our merits, says Augustine, his own work, not
our work; for we are mere vessels to contain grace as grace; and mere
patients in this love: and so he loves Christ's imputed righteousness in us;
and this righteousness imputed is not simply eternal, but has its rise in
time. If then Antinomians say, we make our time-holinesse a cause and condition
of eternal love, they must remove this objection themselves; for imputed
righteousness which they make the cause of eternal love will stand against
them, more then against us. For we say, both imputed and inherent
righteousness are mere conditions, no causes of eternal love, and that not
simply, but as they are protracted and continued, to carry us on to glory; yea
imputed righteousness is no more a cause of eternal love, being only a thing
temporary, and not eternal, a part ante, nor inherent righteousness; so must
all these be expounded. The Lord Psalm 146.8
loves the righteous. Psalm. 51.6.
The Lord loves truth in the inward parts, Ps. 147.11.
he takes pleasure in them that fear him. The Lord is ravished with Cant.
4.9.7
one of his Spouses eyes, with one chain of her neck; to him she is all
fair, and not a spot in her. All these include not only inherent holiness,
but imputed righteousness, and both have their use in time, but can never
prove that our time excellency, whether imputed or inherent, is the cause,
condition, reason, merit, or ground of the Lords eternal, immanent, and
unchangeable love; but the fruits thereof and the condition of its continuance.
And that our Lord loves us with the same love of complacency, that is, that he
drives on his chariot paved with love, in sweet fruits of free election, the
same way, with the same delight; But that when the justified person, whores,
swearers, kills the innocent, denies the Lord Jesus, as did Peter, and David,
God loves us as much as when they believe, pray, walk in all holy
conversation, and that God is not a whit displeased with the Saints, for these
sins, because all his displeasure, or revenging justice, was drowned and
swallowed up in Christ's sufferings, is to us abominable.

CHAP. XX. There is a real change of our state in justification,
YEa, clearly before God, there is an excellent change in the state of the
Saints, from ungodliness to justification, so as they were not from eternity,
nor before they believed, justified and godly, 1. because the Lord says, Hos.
1.10. 1 Pet. 2.10.
In time past the Gentiles were no people, and obtained no mercy, and now are
a people, and have obtained mercy. Jerusalem Ezech. 16.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
was once polluluted in her own blood, and the Lord looked on her so, and he
washed her, and adorned her. 2. The Apostle was once to God 1 Timothy 1.13
a blasphemer, a persecutor, and God saw him so, else neither was the Apostle
so, nor could he speak truth in saying so, but he obtanied mercy. So in other
Scriptures Romans 6.17.18. Tit. 3.3. Ephesians. ^* 1, 2, 3, 4 Ephesians. 4.20. 2 Timothy 1.9.
a most real change is holden forth, and that in Gods eye.

CHAP. XXI. We mix not works and grace in the matter of Justification.
We utterly deny that Antinomians can make good their charge, that we mix
works and the Law in matter of justification, with faith, and the free grace of
God.

1. Works done by grace smell of the mired fountain they spring from, they are
polluted with sin; now Paul Romans 3. says, All Jews and Gentiles have
sinned, none does good. Psalm. 14. Psalm. 53. Void of sin, therefore by the Law
can no flesh be justified; and so the righteousness by which we stand before
God must be free of sin, and free of a breach deserving a curse, which must
fall on us, if we continue not in all the Law in the most gracious works we can
do, Gal. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 27* 26.
yea, if not in all that the Law requires to the least jot or tittle; we are
not justified now with such a Gospel-inherent righteousness as no man has.

2. Christ must be a Savior by halfes and quarters, if we divide the
righteousness of our Savior between faith or works, between Christ and our
merits. Free grace is a jealous thing, and admits of neither compartner,
corrivall, or fellow with Christ. Paul will have his own righteousness in the
plea, but dung.

3. It quite brangleth the peace of God that issues from justification, that
it is a peace that free will creates to my self from my own works, and not a
peace dipped in satisfactory blood.

4. It takes much glory from Christ, that we wear a garment foreternitie of
our spinning, better the wedding garment be begged, and all its threeds be of
free grace, and that full glory be given to the Lamb Romans 4. ^^. 2. verse. 20.
Rev. 5.9.
.

5. Law and Gospel, Grace and Law-payment must be confounded.

6. Christ must die in vain.

CHAP. XXII. Antinomians deny sin to be in the justified.
ANtinomians Eato. Honey comb, c. 3. ca. 30.31.32. Town asser. page 131.
Saltmarsh free grace, 140.
will have no sin remaining at all in a justified person, and nothing
contrary to Gods holy Law; And Crispe vol. 2. ver. 5. page 154.155.156.
Crispe says, Its close removed, as if it had never been. All which is true of
the Law-guilt, and actual obligation to eternal wrath, but of the Essence,
being, or blot of in-dwelling-sinne in us, its most false. 1. Pardoned sin,
that Christ paid for, is so sin, that if we 1 Io^. 1.8.
who are pardoned, John and the rest of believers, who have 1 Ioh. 2.1.
an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, say we have no
sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. (2.) Who (even of
the justified) can say Prove. 20.19
I have made my heart clean, I am pure (inherently) from my sin? there is
not Eccl^s. ^.10
a just man on earth, that does good, and sins not. There is none R^m. 3.1^.
Ps^. 14.3.
that does good, (not David who is justified by faith) no not one. 3. The
flesh, in the regenerate, sins and lusts against the Spirit, and the holy Law
of God, and the body of sin, though subdued, having lost the Kingly dominion,
as a Tyrant, though not the nature; and being (as Augustine August. Inest, non
ut non sit, sed ut non imputetur
says) of sin, Romans 7.14, 15* 16. Gal. 5.^7.18. Heb. 12.1.
as an underling dwells in all the justified, but is not imputed. 4. What we
want of the perfection that God requires to be in our sanctification, and
mortification, which are but in growing, while we are in this life Aug. contr.
du^s epi^^. Pelag^^^. ^. c. 1^. ^nest non ut non sit, sed ut non imputetur
, must be sinful imperfection. 5. For we daily ask of our Father which is in
heaven, forgiveness of sins Col. 3.7.8, 9. Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 4. 2 Pet. 3.4.
; which we could not do, except sin remained in us: nor do we with Papists
say, that Christ but covers, but washes not away our sins in his blood,
for the guilt obleiging to satisfactory punishment, is fully washen away not
covered only. Matthew. 6.12. Town Asser* of Free grace, 131.
Romans 7.22* 23.


CHAP. XXIII. Antinomians say, to faith there is no sin.
We judge that unsound, which Town Town ass pap* 71.
says, To Faith there is no sin, nor any unclean heart; for then should
Christ dwelling in the heart by faith, and sinning, be inconsistent, which is
known to be contrary to Scripture; to the experience, weaknesses, complaints of
the Saints groaning under a body of sin, as Romans 7.23.
captives in bolts and iron fetters. 2. And must argue, that who ever believe,
are as perfect as Angels in heaven. 3. That a justified person believes not
only pardon, but the perfection of Angels, and that he sins not, and must
be perfectly sanctified, if he believe a lie, to wit, that he sins not, but
is perfectly holy; and this fancy they build on Luthers words perverted, who
says, I believe that there is a holy Church, which is indeed nothing else, but
I believe there is no sin, no malediction, no death in the Church. Whereas
Luther speaks not of sin, in its in-dwelling blot, but of sin as in point
of Law, it does actually curse, condemn, and inflict the second death; in
which sense, in point of free justification, there is no sin in the invisible
Church of the justified and effectually called Saints. Saltmarsh Free grace,
page 154. Thus the Scripture calls us ungodly, and sinners, and children of
wrath: not that we are so, but seem so: or not so in Gods account, but in the
worlds.

CHAP. XXIV. The reign of Faith not absolute, as Antinomians say.
ANtinomians Town asser. of grace, page 75.
will have the reign of faith so absolute, that in faiths kingdom of grace,
there is no sin, which were more then a golden heaven on earth: for so 1.
Faith were perfectly strong, and in the highest pitch of fullness of perfection
in all the justified. 2. If, withal, the whole moral acts of a justified
person, should flow from no other spring, but this strong faith, ever acting us
to good. But we cannot yield to either Libertines, or Antinomians, that Faith
is so absolute a Prince, as that all sin, rout, and branch, not only in its
fullest dominion, but also in its being, and simply indwelling must be banished
out of Faiths dominions, so as once believing, we could no more, as sinful
men, but must act as believers for ever; but we think under faiths reign,
sin dwells as an underling, as of old the Gibeonites dwelt, under
conquering Joshuah, and victorious Israel, as hewers of wood, and drawers of
water. Yet these Cananites were said to be spued out of that good land. 1. Jure
bell^, by the Law of conquest, and of victorious inheritors, as sometime they
were. 2. They make the state of justification, a state of sinnelesse and
absolute perfection, and of complete sanctification, to which nothing can be
added, which is not possible in this life, and then we should yield a scepter
of highest royalty to faith. 3. If the Law of Faith did free us from the Law,
as a rule of righteousness, good works were not our convoy and friends to
accompany us to heaven.

CHAP. XXV. The Antinomians ground, that God sees no sin in the justified,
refuted.
We judge it abominable to say, that God can seen no Adultery, no lying, no
blasphemy, no cousening, Town (...). 96.^7.98. ^aton Honey-combe (...). 7.
1^6.137.138.
in believers, though they do fall in such enormities. It is true, he sees no
sins in believers, as a just Judge to condemn them, therefore; but will
Antinomians, who deny that the Jews under the (...) vol. ^. ser. 5.^. ^49.
Their covenant took not all their sins away, but some sins were upon them
for that time, which was the cause of that com^^^int.
Old testament, and first covenant had a complete and full pardon of all their
sins, say, the Jaakob of God, with whom God was in covenant in Balaams time,
and therefore that false Prophet Numb. cap. 23. v. 20.^1, 22.23.
could not be able to use enchauntment against them, were capable of such a
complete remission, as that God could see no iniquity in them? God then must
see some iniquity in Jaakob, and no iniquity in Jaakob. But sure, God must as
God, that knows all things, and as a Father see all the sins that justified
persons commit. But Antinomians deny, that the sins of believers, committed
after they are justified, are sins at all, and so God cannot see them to be
sins, which are not sins; but so we cannot see sin in our selves, except by
the sight of unbelief, which is a false sight. And that is their meaning,
which I prove. Because says Eaton E^ton H^n. c^mbe. 7.139. and p. 47.^2.68
of that which is not, there is no temporal punishment, correction, or pain;
forgiven sin is not, or has no being before God, Joh. 1.29. Therefore of
forgiven sin, there is no punishment. I assume. But David's Adultery, Peter's
denial, all the sins that the justified, yea, of all the elect, are (say
Antinomians) Crispe vol 2. ser. 3. page 91.92.93.94. Honey comb cap. 1.3.5.7.
through the whole work. Town 71.96.97.98.
pardoned and remitted, before they be committed, and taken away on the Cross,
by Christ's blood; then the sins committed by justified persons, are no
sins. 2. To faith there is no sin (says Town.) 3. There is no sin under
the reign of faith. 4. Nothing remains in a justified person that is sin.

But that God sees sin in the justified, though not as a Judge to condemn
them for sin, is clear. 1. He sees the thoughts a-farre off, Psalm. 139.^.
and knows all things, Ioh. 21.17. Psalm. 11.4. Psalm. 139.1.2, 3, 4, 5. 1 King
8.39.
and so must know evil and sinful thoughts. 2. He forbids David's
Adultery in the 7. Command, and Peter's denial of his Lord in the 3. Command,
even after they are justified persons, except David, because justified, have a
dispensation to sin under the Gospel, contrary to the Word Math. 5.27, 28.29.
Mat^h. 10.32.
. 3. The Lord rebukes sins in the justified, in David, 2 Samuel 11, 7, 8, 9
. in Peter, Math. 16* 23
Get thee behind me Satan. 4. The Lord punishes sins in the justified 2 Samuel 11, 9, 10.11. 1 Cor. 11 30*
. 5. He is displeased with them, 1 Cor. 10.21.
do ye provoke the Lord to jealousy. But the thing that David had done
displeased the Lord. Sure not so as to condemn David eternally, then there
must be in God another displeasure, for sin, by which he must see it as
sin, then his everlasting displeasure. 6. The Lord records the sins of
justified 1 Samuel 11.27*
persons in his Word; as of Moses, David, Peter, John. 7. He hates them. 8.
Gives his Saints grace to see and bewail them. Deuteronomy. 1.37. 2 Samuel 12. Gal
2.11.12. Matthew. 26.69.70, 71, 72. Rev. 19* 10. cap. 22.8 9.
9. Directs them as sins to his own glory, Zach. 12.10.
which he could not do, if he saw them not as sins committed by his elect,
Acts 2.37, 38, 41, 42, 47. 1 Timothy 1.15.13, 14.
to manifest the glory and riches of his free grace.

CHAP. XXVI. Confession required in the believer.
TO confess sin in the justified, cannot be a work of Psalm. 5* ^.3. 2 Samuel
24, 10.
unbelief. I have sinned, says David. 2. And forgiveness is promised to the
sins confessed by believers Prove. 28.13 ^sal 32.5. (...). 1.9.
nor can it be said, that the justified may confess their sins committed
before their effectual calling, as Paul 1 T^m. 1.13
does, or that the Church may confess their sins, according to the
unjustified and unregenerated number that are mixed with the visible Church;
because these truly, as they make one visible body with the justified, have
sinned. The bel^ever is to confess (...) against Antinomians
To which I answer. 1. By the Antinomian grounds, Paul's sins which he
confesses, 1 Timothy 1.13, 14, 15. were pardoned before they were committed, and
so taken away, as if they were no sins, before they can be named blasphemy,
or persecution, and so Paul must lie in calling himself the chief of sinners;
for he could never truly say to God, Antinomian (...).
he was a sinner; pardoned sins to Antinomians are no sins. 2. Antinomians
must say, there were not one elect nor regenerated of that part of the Church,
of which Moses Psalm. 7.3.
speaks; and E^. 64.^, 7 ^ Es^. 59.11, 12 1^, 14. D^n. 9.5 6, 7, 8 9.10, 11,
12, 13.
Esaiah, Ier. 14.8.9, 10.
Daniel, Io^. 1.8.
Jeremiah, when the Church says, Thou have set our sins in the light of thy
countenance; and our trangressions are multiplied before thee, and our sins
testify against us; which Antinomians can never prove, and is a mere
conjecture, and manifestly false, for that company confesses* Psalm. 90. Who
had God their God from everlasting to everlasting, Verse. 2. and that says
Esai. 64.8. But now, o Lord, thou art our Father; and who acknowledges God to
be their hope and Savior, Jer. 14.8. Nor is it confession, that we have
sinned, as Crispe vol. ^er. p^. 160.^61*
Crispe says, to acknowledge that Christ has satisfied for our sins. 1.
Because confession is an acknowledging, what we have done against the law of
God; that is, to acknowledge not what we have done against the Law, or what we
are, but what Christ has suffered, according to the Law and will of God. 2.
Confession is an act of sorrow expressed in words; But that is an act of Faith
flowing from joy and assurance, that Christ has dyed for our sins.

CHAP. XXVII. The Law is yet to be preached to believers.
THe Law is yet to be preached, as tying us to personal obedience, whatever
Town ass. grace p. 31.
Antinomians say on the contrary; in the covenant of works, personal and
perfect obedience was craved. Antinomians judge that by the Gospel, Christ has
done all for us, which is most true in the kind of a meritorious and deserving
cause, satisfying justice, but they do loose us from all personal duties, or
doing our selves, or in our own persons, so as we should be obliged to do,
except we would sin. We think the same Law-obligation, but running in a
Gospel-channel of Free Grace, should act us now as if we were under a covenant
of works, but not as if the one were Law-debt, and the other wages that we
sweat for, and comes by Law-debt; Antinomians make all duties a matter of
courtesy. Yet would we wish 1. Preachers to extol Christ, How duties are to
be preached.
and study Christ as their daily Text, and heighten free grace. 2. Preach
Christ the garland, crown, and flower of all duties. 3. Press duties as
taking their rise from Gospel Grace, and running as in a channel of free
grace, and into Christ's bosom. 4. Let people often know, doing is no merit. 5.
That selfe-righteousnesse is the great Idol, the bosom and breast-God brought
up with us from our youth, and warmed with us in Egypt with our first
life-heat. 6. That imputed righteousness is a way too high for a fool, from
the womb, while grace casts us in a new mould. 7. That litterall, and moral
preaching of dead and letter-works, too Seneca-like, is far from the
Gospel-free-Spirit, and the subduing of corruption; that Moral Philosophy of
virtues and vices cannot draw blood of a wounded conscience. 8. That
Antinomians Town a^ser. 36.
vainly argue from the strength the Law gives, to obey (which is as good as
nothing of it self, without the Spirit) to disanull all binding power of the
Law. 9. Beware of license to the flesh, under the coat of liberty of the
Spirit; and let none think that Law-curses, loses us from all Law-obedience;
or that Christ has cried down the ten Commandments; and that
Gospel-liberty is a dispensation for Law-loosenesse; or that free grace is a
lawless Pope. Grace is active, dutiful in acting, thankful, holy, solicitous
in doing, as if there were not a Gospel; free, fearelesse, bold; as if there
were not a cursing Law; tender of the honor of the Lawgiver, and of
Gospel-glory due to him who justifies the ungodly.

CHAP. XXVIII. Strict and precise walking, a necessary and commanded
Gospel-dutie.
THe quitting of our own righteousness is scarce a toe, or an inch of that
large body of strict, precise, and accurate walking in all manner of godly
conversation; so far is the strait and narrow way from being nothing, as
Crisp vo. ^. s^. 4 page 109 110.

Town asser. of grace, page: 1.8.


Antinomians say, but only believing and disclaiming our own righteousness;
Nor did the Spirit of God speak that Power of love, page 31.
for want of the knowledge of love; we walked very uncomfortably spending our
time in fasting, weeping, mourning, praying, reading, and hearing, and in
performance of other duties, and all to get Christ. Suppose that heat be
natural, holy fire, from a right principle. Romans 12.15. in a right object.
Gal. 4.18. in a right manner, and due end, Numb. 25.15. ye cannot be too
holy, except God be too holy. 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. if the path be hell-ward, the
fervor of the pace makes it worse. If it were to merit Christ, and make
purchase of him, I should say this weak man says right; and Town. asser. 139*
Town also who says, away with your strict injunctions; as if he would
nickname Gospel Grace to be a sour and uncomfortable Puritan. But 1. sure
the needles eye is a strict Mar. 10.25. Luk 18.25.
way, 2. Travelers must sell all, and buy the Matthew. 13 46 47.
pearl; hate father and mother -- yea, and their own Luke 14.26.
life: so run that they may obtain, strive for the 1 Cor 9.24 25.
mastery, resist unto Heb. 12 4.
blood. As strangers and Pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts, (this is more
then lusting after selfrighteousnesse) that war against the 1 Pet. 2.11.
soul; fight, endure 2 Timothy 2.4.
hardness, Rev. 2 ^6. cap 3.21.
overcome, die in the cause, and war your mothers son on, Rev. 12.11 Epbes.
5.5.
walk (...), accuratly, Puritanically; Jude 23.
beware of the ^east spot of the Ephesians. 5 3. Psalm. 16.3.
flesh; and of the very wrong use of the Math. 5.28
lip, or glimpse of the Luke 13.24.
eye. 3. Many seek to enter in, and shall not 1 Pet. 4.8
be able; and the righteous shall scarsely be saved. Antinomians say, we are
Pharisees in all this; and Power of love, page 2.
that God ever intended to man a pleasant and a comfortable life; he means,
loosed from the sour life of a Precisian. But Antinomians shall wish to die
Puritans. Matthew. 5.47. what over-banck or singular thing do you?

CHAP. XXIX. God is truly angry with the sins of elect, and believers.
ANtinomians hold, that God cannot be angry at the sins of the justified,
because they are done away, and abolished in Christ. Anger is in God (says
Saltmarsh answ to M. Gattaker.
Saltmarsh) only by way of allusion and Allegory. God is not angry at the
sins of the elect (says Asser. grace page 107.
Town,) and Eaton Honey comb, page 127.128.129.
Eaton. Its true of anger flowing from justice, which Christ has fully
satisfied, and removed; but not true of Anger and displeasure against the
sins of the justified, both to hate, rebuke, and correct their sins, though
God hate not their persons. 1. Because then God should be angry at no sins
committed by the elect, before their effectual conversion, as well as after;
for both these sorts of sins are abolished in Christ's blood, ere they be
committed. 2. The Adultery and murder 2 Samuel 11.27.
committed by David, Ps. 32.^, 2. Rom 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
when he is justified by Christ's imputed righteousness, the same way that we
are, displeased the Lord. Lam..1.
The Lord covered Zion with a cloud in his anger. Psalm. 79.^.
How long Lord, will thou be angry for ever? Psalm. 80.^.
How long will thou be angry against the prayer of thy people; Psalm. 90.
all our days are passed away in thy wrath. The Lord was angry D^ut. 1.^*
with me (says Moses) for your sake. The Lord Deuteronomy. 9.^.
was very angry with Aaron. Though thou Esa. 1.^*
wast angry with me (says the Spouse of CHRIST) thine anger is turned away,
and thou comfortedst me. And in the New Testament Christ rebukes Peter in
Anger, Matthew. 16.22.23.
Get thee behind me, Satan, for thou art an offense to me. 1 Cor. 10.12
Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we stronger then he? 3. The command
laid upon believers, Thou shall not Murder, cannot not be an Allegorical
command, nor was it a figurative sword that followed David's house for his
sin; nor does the Lord speak by figures, after the manner of men, when he
says to believing Ephesians, Honor thy Ephesians. 6.1.
Father and thy Mother. And the Lords hatred of, and displeasure at the sins
of a son, may well stand with love to his person, except the Adultery of the
justified be no Adultery.

CHAP. XXX. The justified countable to God for sin.
ANtinomians hold that the justified are not countable to Town asser. page
13^. A^ Papisticall Spirit, is a man justified, and yet countable for sin?
^^^spe vol. 1. ser. 8 pa. ^45. Though a b^l^ev^r sin, the Law has no more to
say to him, then if he had not sinned. Saltmarsh Free grace. page 140. He is as
free from the law on earth as if he were in heaven.
God for sin. Its true, they are not thus far to be countable for sin,
that they must suffer eternal wrath and answer the Lawsuit and plea of
sinne-revenging justice, which Christ answered; but they are so countable for
their sins, as if they receive five talents, they sin, if they gain not
ten. 2. They are to fear sin, before it be committed, as being under the
Law, and to look for the rod of men, and temporary corrections after it. 3.
Nor can Antinomians deny but temporal punishments, as well as eternal are
threatened in the law.

CHAP. XXXI. God punishes sin in believers.
SO does the Lord inflict temporary punishments, and spiritual, on
unbeleevers, though David for his Adultery, felt not the stroke of revenging
justice; yet sure it was Evangelike justice; that he who took another man's
wife secretly, that lay in his bosom, and killed the innocent husband with the
sword of strangers, that another should take his wives openly, and lie with
them before the Sun, and that the sword in his own house should pursue him;
and the one brother kill the other: and it was just, that Peter who proudly
trusted in his own strength, should fall on his own weight, and deny the Lord.
And these that eat unworthyly, should eat judgment; and for 1 Cor. ^1.30.
this cause many among the Corinthians were weak, many sickely, many dead.
Zachary was stricken with dumbness because he believed not the Angels word,
Luke 1. 2. The Covenant in which perseverance is promised, threatening the rod
of men to believers that transgress the Lords Law, Lev. 26.^^.4. Psalm. 89.3^,
32, 33, 3^.
prove the same. 3. God was angry, and in a merciful anger, punished Exodus 4.4.
Moses, Deu^. ^.^0.
Aaron, 2. Ch^. 1^.9.
Solomon, 2. (...). 19.
Jehoshaphat, Nor is it of weight, that God smote men to death in the Old
Testament for light sins, but its not so in the New; he is not so severe now.
But is not our God (even in the New Testament) a consuming fire? Were there
ever more Hell-like vengeance that fell on any then on Jerusalem; so as Christ
said, barren wombs should be blessed, and they should cry, hills fall on us,
and cover us. 2. Did believers in the Old Testament make satisfaction to
revenging justice for their sins that Christ did bear? 3. Were there any half
satisfactions made by men to infinite justice? 4. Were they their own
redeemers from Hell?

CHAP. XXXII. Believers are to mourn for sin.
We judge the Spirit of grace to be a mourning spirit, Zach. 12.10.
They shall look on me whom they have pierced, and mourn. Ez^. 7.16.
They that escape shall be on the mountains, like the doves of the valleis,
all of them mourning, every one for his iniquity. 2. As this is promised, so is
it practiced; Mat. 26.75
Peter having denied his Lord, remembered the words of Jesus -- went out, and
wept bitterly: and Luke 7.18.
a woman that was a sinner stood at Jesus feet, behind him weeping, and began
to wash his feet with tears. We roar Esai. 59.11.
all like Bears, and mourn like doves, -- for our transgressions are
multiplied. 3. It is commanded Iam. 4.8.
Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep. Iam. 4.9.
Let your laughter be turned into mourning. 4. Mourners are Math. 5, 4.
blessed. Antinomians after Adultery, rapine, bid us believe, rejoice; for God
Honey comb page 449.
loves not heaviness, dullness, sorrowful cogitations: there is nothing to a
believer Town as. 25.26.34. Honey comb, c. 16.446.447
but joy, comfort, rejoicing; sorrow for, or sense of sin, is sorrow for a
shadow, and sinful unbelief, for pardoned sin is no sin. But (say we)
pardoned sin is sin, and sorrow for offending him whom we have pierced, is
the Gospel-groaning of the Turtle, and sorrow according to 2 Cor. 7.10 1^.
God; and this is the Libertines mortification to sin, without sorrow or
sense; and to know and feel sin after it is committed, said Da: Georgius, is
an act of the flesh: and the taste of the apple that Evah did eat, say the
Libertines.

CHAP. XXXIII. To crave pardon for sin, or to have any sense of sin denied
to believers by Antinomians.
Upon this ground, its a work of fleshly unbelief, (say they) Town asser.
page 32.
that a justified David crave pardon of sins committed after he is justified,
1. But why more of sins committed after, then before justification? for both
sorts of sins are removed by the blood of Christ's Cross, and cease to be
sins, as Antinomians teach: and if we be justified ere we believe, a believer
having committed Adultery, must^ly, when he says, out of the sense of sin,
Lord, in this, I have sinned against thee. These that call God Father, Mat.
6.12. pray for forgiveness daily.

Sense of sin is an act of unbelief to Antinomians, if believers judge sin
pardoned to be sin, or any thing but a slip in our conversation before men,
not a breach of a Law in the sight of God, and if they judge of adulteries, and
murders committed after they believe pardon in Christ, as of sins to be
mourned, or humbled for, they judge amiss, not by the light of Faith, but by
the carnal feeling, and mis-apprehension of sense, reason, the flesh. Honey
comb cap. 5. page 87. cap. 9. page 95.
So to be deadned to all sense of sin, to have a conscience burnt with a hot
iron, is mortification. Saltmarsh Free gr. par. 2. cap. 32. p. 142. A believer
in Christ has perfectly obeyed the whole Law, perfectly suffered and satisfied
for all his sins, is perfectly righteous, sits in heavenly places, -- but
if he live only by sense, reason, and experience of* himself, as he lives
to men both under the power, and ^^o^ing of sin, and the Law.


CHAP. XXXIV. Antinomians hold, we are in the boiling of our lusts, without
any foregoing humiliation, immediately to believe on Christ.
Upon this ground, that we are justified by Christ's bearing our sins on the
Cross, and before that of unbeleevers, by the grace of Christ, we be made
believers, without any real change of our state and condition before God; or
any humiliation of soul, or sickness for the want of Christ, we are
immediately to believe in Christ, though remaining Adulterers, Murderers,
Paricides, etc. Christ's counsel to Laodice^. page 35.
Yea, nor is salvation tied to belief, nor is Faith a condition, without which
no man can be saved. And a man may be the greatest sinner Power of love. p. 29
30 Crispe vol. 1. ser. 6. page, 159 In the covenant of grace man is tied to no
condition, that he must perform, that if he d^e not perform, the covenant is
made void by him.
imaginable, and Christ may be his Christ. So that Christ may be the Savior
of a believer, and he truly united unto him; Christ may dwell in his heart
C^ispe vol. 1* ser. 7. page 190.
by faith; and in that same state and time he be kept captive in the Rise,
ra^gne, err.
snare of the Devil at his will; and he walk according Ephesians. 3.17.
to the course of the world, according to the prince of the power of the air,
that now works in the children of disobedience; which clearly stateth, a
communion between Christ and Belial, God and the Devil, the enemy of God, in
one and the same soul. 2 Timothy 2.26.
Ephesians. 2.2.


CHAP. XXXV. Of spiritual poverty and how its mistaken by Antinomians.
TRue poverty of spirit does not kill and destroy all sight of grace in our
selves, as Antinomians Rise, reign, er. 17.
say, and when we have grace, to see we have no Rise, reign er. 50.
grace. its grace (says Town ass. Page 66.
Town.) But it is true, to know that we are poor, wretched, blind, and of our
selves miserable, Rev. 3.19.20.
is spiritual poverty: and the more we find our nothingness, money-lesse, and
beggarly condition, the more Matthew. 8. v. 9, 10.
grace: because the poverty of humility is riches; he is nearest to Christ, who
finds he cannot buy him. 2. Its true, that not to be too quick-eyed in a
reflect knowledge, to know our graces, and not to rest on them; nor make big
undertakings, as Peter did, that we can do all, is also spiritual poverty. A
believer cannot lay a sowme and a great wodfie on himself; but grace does not
undervalue grace, and belie the Spirit in it self. Ephesians. 3 8. 1 C^r. 15.9.
1. The Saints give judgment of their own graces; Mark. 9.^4.
Lord I believe I am black, but comely as the tents of Kedar, Cant. 1.5.
I slept but my heart waked; Cant. 5.1.
for I am 1 Cor. 15.9, 10.
the least of the Apostles, and am not meet to be called an Apostle, -- but by
the grace of God I am that I am. In which the Saints do lay low themselves,
yet not slander the holy Spirit in themselves. If I may not slander another,
then may I not slander Christ in my self. 2. The office of the Spirit is to
know Cor. 2.12.
the things that are freely given us of God. 3, The Spirit of Christ does not
counter-worke himself, Now his light lets us see the work of grace in us, for
our own comfort, grounds of rejoicing, 2 Cor. 1.12.
and that we may see our debts, and we may praise Christ, because we cannot
pay him.

CHAP XXXVI. Repentance mistaken by Antinomians.
REpentance is not (as Den Den conference with a si^ke mar. page 31.32.33.
says) a part of Faith, or a change of the mind, to look no longer for
righteousness from the Law, but from Christ; but a change of the endeavors to
please God, whereas before, self was our God, and an endeavor to turn from
dead Heb* 6.^.
works. 2. True repentance is sorrow according 2 Cor 7.10 11, 1^
to God, and has acts different from Faith, 3. To repent is, out of godly
sorrow, to endeavor new obedience, and amendment of life. Faith is an
apprehension of Divine truth, to which we give credit; or an heart-dependance
and recumbence on God through Christ 4. We are justified by faith, R^m. 3.
Gal. 3.
never by repentance. We think not that tears wash away sins; Protestants*
speak not so.

Repentance not a formal bottom and ground of peace.
2. Nor that they make peace with God by tears; they make way to sense of
peace, or awake us to run to a promise: the formal bottom of our peace, in
regard that the Lord promises to revive the contrite Spirit, Es^i. 57.15.
to accept broken bones, Psalm. 51.7.
to comfort mourners in Zion Esai. 61.1, 2, 3.
; and we think neither repentance, nor good works, proper and formal
conditions of the covenant of grace, but rather conditions of the covenanted.

CHAP. XXXVII. How good works are necessary.
FOr good works, 1. We call not these good works that are extorted by the
terrors of the Law: as a captive keeps the high way, because his Keeper
leads him in an iron chain. Nor 2. these which flow from the sole authority
of God as Lawgiver. Or 3. which issue from mere moral principles, without
saving grace: but these we call good works in an Evangelicall sense, that not
only are done from the authority of the Lawgiver, but also from a mediatory
and Evangelike obligation, from the sweet attractions and drawing coards of the
secrets of Christ's love. And 2. from Evangelike faith that purifieth the heart.
3. From Physical principles, and supernatural habits of grace, good works are
this way necessary.

1. That as grace and glory differ not in nature, but gradually as the morning
dawning of twy-light, and the noone-day-light; so the good works done by the
grace of Christ, and that perfect love of God, and our brethren in heaven, are
of the same nature, different in degrees, and the one degrees and ways to the
other; especially when from Gods free promise of the blessings of this life,
and that which is to 1 Timothy 4 8.
come; the Lord has made a pass between the one and the other; and the Lord
has tied himself to himself, not to us, to carry on grace out of mere
grace. Every branch Ioh. 15.2.
that brings forth fruit in me (says Christ) my Father purges, that it may
bring forth more fruit, unto every one that has shall Math. 25 29
be given, and he shall have abundance. He that sows G^l. 6.8.
to the spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting. There is a harvest
promised to this sowing; 2 Cor. 9.6. Phil. 4.17.18.
as to a special furtherance of our reckoning in the day of Christ; he that
sows bountefully, shall reap bountefully, yea sent once and again unto my
necessity; not because I desire a gift; but I desire fruit that may abound to
your account, Romans 8.13.
if ye, through the spirit, do mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye shall
live. But being made free Romans 6 22.
from sin, and become servants to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness,
and the end everlasting life. Blessed are they that Rev. ^2 14.
do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may
enter in through the gates into the city. And lest we should think the commands
are all but one only precept of believing, he adds for without are Dogs and
Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Murderers, etc. Ioh. 14 2^.
He that has my commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me, and
he that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him and manifest
my self to him. All these evidence to us, that holy walking is a way to
heaven, as sowing is to harvest, and that Christ makes a promise of life
eternal to him that does his Commandments: only the question is, in what
terms the promise is made to the doer of Gods will, as a doer, or as a
believer, whose faith is fruitful, and with child of Evangelike doing.

But we may say the formal promise of the covenant of grace is made to
believing, as the Law-promise is made to doing Legally, and perfectly out of
our own, without grace; and that the Gospel, as it is larger then the covenant
of grace; and as it contains the whole doctrine of grace, taught by the
Prophets and Apostles, is a promise of life eternal, made to Evangelike and
unperfect doing through the strength of grace. And that because 1. God
commands good works through the whole Romans 1^. ^, 2, etc. Ephesians. 4.1, 2.
Matthew. 7.21, 22, 25, 26, ^7. Matthew. 12* 50. 1 These. 4. ^, 3, 4. E^hes. 6.1, 2.
Ephesians. 5 1, ^, 3, 4. Col. (...), 3, 4, 1 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3, etc. 1 Pet. 4.1, 2, 3,
etc.
New Testament. 2. They are so necessary, as without them, our faith is a dead
and vain faith, and cannot Iam. ^.
justify us. 3. They are the end, for which Christ redeemed us, that 1 Pet.
^.24.
we should live to him, 1 Pet. ^.3.
be redeemed from our vain conversation, G^l. 1. ^.
from the present evil world, that Tit. 2.24.
we should be a purified peculiar people to him, zealous of good works, and in
this title also they are commanded. 4. They are conditions without which we
cannot be saved. For John Baptist taught this with the Gospel, Math. 3.10.
Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down, and cast
into the fire. What shall we do Act. 2.37.38.
to be saved, receives this answer, Repent, and be baptized every one of you;
Except Luke 13.3.
ye repent ye shall all likewise perish. 5. They are commanded as acts of the
new creature; and partly, as contrary to sinful fiery, and mighty
temptations of Ephesians. 6.14.15, 16.
Satan, and the flesh, as mortification to fleshly lust, faith to unbelief.
Partly as expressions of thankfulness for the free Col. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5* 6, 7.
1 Pet. ^.1, 2, 3, 4.
redemption in Christ, and commanded in the Law, in the great Commandment of
the Mat. 2^.37. Deuteronomy. ^.5.
loving of God with all our heart, just as this Law of loving God did oblige
Abraham to offer his Son Isaak for God, and Judah to be thankful to God,
for redeeming them out of the Babylonish Captivity; though the Law neither
commanded any father to offer his Son, nor the people to return from
Captivity; yet the eternal Law of love commands both these, and us to do,
what ever God-Redeemer commands us, as well as what ever God the Lawgiver
injoyneth; only we cannot say, Good works do merit salvation, or purchase
right to life eternal, Christ's blood is only so a ransom of life. 2. Nor
have they any proper condignity to such a high reward, being so imperfect. 3.
Nor can they have any effective influence, or proper causality thereunto, nor
are they causes or conditions of justification: but that which Crispe Crispe
vol. ^. ^er. 4. page 89.
says is not of God; But withal (says he) I must tell you, that all this
sanctification of life, is not a jot of the way of a justified person to
heaven; it is true, they are not the meritorious, the efficient cause or way,
nor the formal covenant-condition; but a way they are, as sowing is to
harvest, running to the garland, wrestling to the victory.

CHAP. XXXVIII. The Gospel is conditional,
ANtinomians deny all conditions of the covenant of grace, of justification, or
of salvation, or that the Gospel Crispe Ser. 6. vol. 1. p^. 160.16^.162.
has any conditions at all. Yea Power of love, page ^1.
though ye should not believe, yet God is faithful, and cannot deny himself
to be your Redeemer. So (says Saltmarsh Free grace. page ^06.207.
Saltmarsh) its not the way of a covenant Saltmarsh Free grace, pa. 152.153*
that the Gospel uses, but rather the promise or grace and salvation. It is
true, if we take a condition. 1. For an antecedaneous quallification going
before Redemption, the Gospel is no covenant of grace, so as God will neither
redeem us in Christ, nor propose a covenant of grace, nor transact
covenant-waies to be our God, while we believe. So faith is no condition.
Antinomians ignorant of the doctine of Protestants, fancied that of us; Nor
does it follow, as Crispe and Antinomians say, Faith, obedience, and repentance
are not conditions, because pardon, and justification, and salvation go before
them; or because by them we purchase not Christ, it only follows, they are
not such conditions as are antecedent, and purchase Christ, which we grant. 2.
If a condition be taken in Law terms for a condition, qualification, or some
thing that issues from free will, without the determining grace of Christ, and
such a condition as salvation and righteousness imputed depends on, in a
proper way of condition; so faith is neither strictly a condition of
justification, nor of righteousness, or salvation; because God of mere grace
works, both the condition, faith and the thing conditioned; for a condition
is properly a qualification, or work to be done by a party, What a cond^^^on
(...).
by way of contract, league, and bargain, and done, of the parties own
strength, as the one side, half, or quarter of a covenant, that obleigeth the
other party, to bestow a favor or reward for the performed condition, as
Arm^nians say, and neither in this sense, do we ascribe a condition to men.
1. Because Christ as surety undertaketh by promise to fulfill both our part,
and his own, I will writ my Law in their Ier. 31.33, 34. (...). 32.19, 40
(...) 5^.11. H^b* 8 10. Ezech. 36.26.
hearts. Christ subscribeth the covenant for me, and himself, and leads our
trembling hand at the pen, and causes us consent; in this notion, the Gospel
is all promise, rather then a covenant, or a bargain; and there is neither
limb, nor lith, nor joint of the covenant, but its all pure grace, both work
and wages. Antinomians cannot say that we teach, We are redeemed, justified,
saved for faith, for works. But if a condition be taken Evangelically for a
qualification wrought in us, by the grace of Christ, and without which we are
not justified, nor saved; then to deny the Gospel to be a conditional
covenant, is to belly the Gospel. For the whole Gospel says, He that Ioh. 5.25.
Io^. 2.18, ^6.
believes, has life, is freely justified; he that believes not, is damned,
and the wrath of God abides on him. And that repentance Luke 3.11. Act: 2.3.
Io^. 5.4.
and doing of Gods will, and new obedience, are conditions, is evident by Mat.
7.21. Ephesians. 4.24. Put on the New Man. Romans 8.13. If ye live after the flesh,
ye shall die. Heb. 12.14. Without holiness none shall see God. Matthew. 1^.20,
21. Matthew. 10.30.
Scripture. Nor is it a Popish way by works, to say, We seek glory, and
honor, and immortality Romans 2.7^
by well doing. Works are not so much conditions of justification, as Faith
Romans 3.26, 27, 28, 29, 30.31. See Ioh. 8.24. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. 1. Matthew. ^8.3.
Ephesians. 5.5 Acts 16.31. Hebr. 11.2. Matthew. 16.24. Matthew. 1^.50. 1 Ioh. 3.3.
is; yet are they conditions required in these that shall be saved. And because
Christ works faith in us, it proves it is not a condition of our own
working, but not that it is no Evangelike condition.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of Mortification.
We judge Repentance, and Mortification of the old man, to be a personal
turning from sin, and the abating of the lusts of the old Adam, a deading of
the heart to the pleasures of sin, a growing in a heavenly disposition, to
rise with Christ, and seek the things that are above; flowing from the death
and resurrection of Christ, apprehended by faith. Antinomians say, Saltmarsh
free grace, 5^.60, 6^.6^.63.64.6^.
To repent, and to mortify sin, is to believe that Christ repented, and
mortified sin for us, and obeyed the whole Law for us; It is not, the not
acting of sin, nor is it Eato. Hon comb, c. 8. ca 164.16^.

A man in Christ, p. 3^^.


the mortifying, clensing, and purifying our sins out of the sight of God, no
not by the Spirit of sanctification, but it is to purify out of our own
sight, and sense, before the world, and declaratively, these sins which the
wedding garment has purified out of the sight of God. What is Mortification
(says Den d^ct. of John Ba^^^st page 45.
Den) but the apprehension of sin slain by the body of Christ? What is
vivification but our new life? the just shall live by Faith. I must needs say,
this is a shorter cut to heaven, and a more Hony-Gospel then Christ and his
Apostles knew. For 1. They command us to mortify our members which are on
earth, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate Col. 3, 5.^ Antinomians Make
mortification no re^d or personal work in us, but an imputative apprehension,
believing Christ was morti^ed for us.
affection, etc. And to forbear lying, Antinomians free us from all personal
mortifying our selves, and put us on an imputative mortification, to believe
that Christ has satisfied justice for our fornication, and that Christ was
chaste in his own person, and abstained from fornication, and lying, for us;
this is to blow away all sanctification, and make justification all. 2. So, may
we live in our lusts, and believe our lusts to be mortified in Christ, and they
are so; and if we should live slaves of sins, and sons of the Devil, and
under the dominion of our lusts, if we believe that Christ has mortified our
lusts, our naked act of believing, without any personal change in our selves,
makes us sons of God; which is nothing else, but to turn the grace of God
into wantonness. Antinomians tell us, it is but an abusing of grace to
wantonness, to sin, because grace does abound, and he that believes cannot
walk still and live according to the flesh, if he still lives in his lusts,
his faith is no faith.

Answ. Its most true, if Faith be taken for the affiance and recumbency of a
broken sinner on Christ; but the Antinomian faith is a persuasion of a fleshly
Pharisie, standing on his tiptoes, proudly resisting Christ, burning in his
lusts, and believing his boiling lusts are pardoned, and remitted before ever
they were committed, and that they are no sins.

2. We grant it is not grace, but the abuse of grace, that teaches David,
Peter, to act adultery, and deny Christ: but if it be the grace of Faith, that
is to believe, contrary to sense, that Adultery, and denial of Christ, are not
sins; because sins pardoned are no sins, then grace it self does teach
us to sin.

3. We must be justified by mortification, if mortification, he the faith or
apprehension of our lusts crucified with Christ.

4. When the Holy Ghost bids us believe, repent, pray, mourn, rejoice in
God, we have this Gospel-sense of these from Antinomians, we do all this
completely, when we believe that Christ believed, repented, prayed, mourned,
rejoiced in God for us; and there is an end: for sure the doing of all these,
came from a Spirit of Faith, drawing life and strength out of Christ's death and
resurrection to do all these; as we draw strength from Christ to mortify the
lusts of the flesh.

5. The word expounds mortification not to be in relative acts to believe
Christ mortified our, or his own lusts for us, but in real and personal acts
of obedience, to be deadned to to the world, Gal. 6.14. To abstain from
fleshly lusts, that war against the 1 Pe^. 2.11.
soul, from fornication, uncleanesse, inordinate affection, evil Romans 10.14.
concupiscence, and such sins, for which the wrath of God comes on the
Children of disobedience, to wit, on the Gentiles that never heard the Gospel;
now in reason, wrath cannot come on the heathen, who never heard of Christ,
because they believe not Io^. 15.22.
that he, of whom they never heard, has crucified those sins for them on the
cross*

CHAP. XL. Antinomians, the perfectists of our time, say, we and our works are
completely perfect.
ANtinomians Town ^sser. of grace, ^^. p^. 76.77.78. ^a^on Honey comb, (...)
13.173
ascribe not only an imputative perfection, in that Christ's perfect
righteousness is made ours, but also an inherent perfection to the Saints. But
we judge our state and persons through Christ to be perfect, but our duties,
and begun sanctification are not perfect, but is so in growing as the Moon,
as a vessel not full to the brime and banks of the soul, it receives quarts
and gallons more. Its true justification removes the evil of works, as
touching all guilt, or obligation to eternally revenging justice. But as
Christ's grace adds to our good works no dignity and perfection of meriting,
as Papists say, so does it not remove the inherent blot of sin, How Christ
removes the sin* cle^ving to our work.
that cleaves to our good works, so as it should give to these works, inherent
perfection, and remove their sinful defects; for as sin dwells in our
persons after we are justified, though it be not imputed: so does sin
cleave to our most gracious acts, but is not accounted on our score, because
the surety has answered our bill, and removed the sinful imperction from
them, but has not made them inherently perfect, so as there should remain
nothing in the works of the justified, that is contrary to the Law of God.

But the truth is, Antinomians, with no face of truth, can say, that Christ
removes the sinful imperfections that adhere to our good works done by the
Grace of Christ, when we are in the state of justification, because if nothing
we do in the state of justification be sin; since pardoned sins to
Antinomians are no sins, and have lost the nature and being of sin, being
remitted and pardoned before they be committed, these sins that cleave to our
good works are no sins, and so the good works must be perfect, as the person
is perfect.

1. Because Antinomians go upon this ground, that nothing inherent in the
persons, not the in-dwelling corruption of nature, nor the adherent sins that
cleave to our works, nor any thing a justified man can do, is sin, or
contrary to the Law; but that person, or works, being pardoned, both are as
perfect as the person and works of Christ. A most blaspemous ground; for what
we want of perfect sanctification, (and we want much in this life) so far
are we sinnefully imperfect. 2. Paul acknowledges his sinful imperfection,
Romans ^.23, 24 25. Gal 5.17. Phil. 3.^^
I find a Law in my members, rebelling against the Law of my mind, not as I^m.
^^. Ec^les. 7.20 Prove. ^0.9. Romans 3.12.
if I were already perfect 3. In many things we offend all: If any man offend
not in word, the same is a perfect man. Hence the man that is perfect, sins
not; but 1 Ioh* 1* 8.9.10.
there is none in the earth that sins not, and does good. 4. We crave
pardon of sins, as we seek daily our daily bread? Its contrary to Christian
humility, to say we are perfectly 1 Ioh* 1* 8.9.10.
clean.

Object. God can accept nothing that is unperfect and sinful because they
are accursed, Gal. 3.10. For God is verity it self, and will not suffer the
loss of the least jot of the righteousness the Law requires. But all our
best works are polluted with sin. Town of. page 77.78.
Town.

Answ. This proves with the Papists, that God cannot judge us righteous by
faith, because we are sinners in our selves. 2. God cannot accept sinful
works, as no sinful works at all, he cannot accept of sins as no sins,
and of our good works as not polluted with sin in themselves, his judgment
then should not be according to truth, true; but he can well accept our works,
though polluted with sin, as pardoned and washen, not from their sinful
imperfections, inherent, or adherent to them, (for then they should be
intrinsecally perfect, and God should judge amiss of them) but as washen from
their guilt, and obligation to eternal wrath; so he can well judge them
perfect in Christ. 3. Legally clean, so as they shall never actually condemn
us; and 4. that of mere grace.

CHAP. XLI. Antinomians say, we are completely saved in this life as in heaven.
SO we think Antinomians fail wickedly with Libertines, who say, Town ass.
pagpunc; 58.59 60
We are as actually saved, and as perfectly, as (...). 155.156
the glorified in heaven; and not Saltmarsh Fre^ g^. 140.
in hope only, or in real beginning, in regard of Christ's sitting in heaven,
and therefore good works can no more be the way to heaven (says Town) then
my walking in the City, in which I am already, can be my walking to the City.
But so while we are absent from the Lord in the 2 Cor. 5, 6.^, 2* 3.
body, even in this life we should be in heaven, whereas the dissolution of
our earthly Ioh. 6.37, 44.
tabernacle, the raising of us up at the last Phil. ^.23.
day, are between us and the full redemption of our bodies. And this is that
which Libertines and Familists say, that all the resurrection of the body, and
life eternal, they know is our union with Christ in this life, the Grammar of
Hymeneus and Philetus, who said, the 2 Timothy ^.18
Resurrection was already past. 3. We know but in part, our love is not
perfected in this life, 1 Cor. 13.11, 12, 13. And we are not perfect men in
Christ, till we meet all in the unity of Faith, Ephesians. 4.13. (3) The general
assembly of all the first borne, is not yet convened; we need a Temple, and
Ordinances, and a Sun, and a Moon; in the other life the Lamb shall be our
Temple. 4. The other life is such, as in it we can neither marry, nor dye, but
are as the Angels, Luke 22.36, 37. Phil. 3.20, 21. 1 Cor. 15.40.41. (5.)
Antinomians say, this dreaming that we are as clean of sin as Christ, and so
Christed and Goded with Christ, as the Libertine Pocquius, said; Calvin. in
Opus. page 463. and Nicholas the Libertine, cap. 34. (6.) Paul says, We are
saved by hope, and we Romans 8.24.
hope not for what we have already. Our life is hid with Col. 24^. 1 Ioh. 3.^.
Christ in God. 1. He that believes has life, not in the complete and full
fruition; yet really, in the certainty of faith and hope. 2. In the right
claim purchased by Christ. 3. In the beginning, first fruits, and the degrees
of grace tending to glory.

CHAP. XLII. Our happiness is in sanctification, as well as in justification.
OUr happiness is not merely passive, as Town. asser. page 47, 48.49.
Saltmarsh. 56 57.
Town says, and in being justified as if that were all; for though our
blessedness be in justification, as the cause and fountain, in that sin is
not imputed to us, yet it is in sanctification and acting of holy duties, as in
the effect, in that there is Psalm. 32.1.^.
no guile in the Spirit, that we are undefiled in our Psalm. 119.1.
way, and are Matthew, 5.2.3.4^.
poor in Spirit, meek, that we mourn, hunger, and thirst for Christ, etc.
2. We should not oppose Antinomians, if they mean nothing, but that Christ is
the seed, flower, and Mother-blessing, and that our chief blessedness is in
being freely justified in his blood. 2. If their sense be that all blessedness
in acts of Sanctification, do so far render us blessed, as they flow from
the free grace of Christ, and as we bring forth fruits to God, being imped and
ingraffed in Christ, as a branch of wild Olive, is blessed, not because it is
such a crabbed and fruitless branch, but because it is ingraffed in the true
Olive, and partaketh of the sweetness, life, and sap thereof, and from
thence brings forth fruit; but we know Antinomians do reproach acts of
Sanctification, as Pharisaicall Popery. 2. That they call so walking,
selfe-seeking of righteousness in our selves; which to us is a cursed, not a
blessed condition: and 3. they cannot endure that holy walking should be any
thing but a matter of courtesy commanded by no Law, nor by any written
Gospel-command, but a fruit of the immediate acting of the Spirit. 4. They
censure us for ascribing blessedness to any acts of Sanctification, whereas we
say with our Savior, Ioh. 13.17.
if we know these things; happy are we if we do them, they that hear the Luke
11.28.
word of God, and do it, are more blessed then the womb that bare Christ, and
they are blessed who Revel. 2^.^4
do his Commandments, that Psalm. 10.6.^.
keep judgment, that Psalm. 1*9.2.
keep his testimonies, that keep Prove. 8.3^.
the ways of wisdom, that Math. 5.10 1 Pet. 3.14.
suffer for Christ; all which we judge inconsistent with that which Crispe vol.
1. ser. 4.89.
Crispe says, that Sanctification is not a jot of the way to heaven.

CHAP. XXLIII. Sanctification crushed by Antinomians.
ANtinomians while they clear themselves further then we can see in their
writings, must be judged grand enemies to Sanctification. 1. They confound
Sanctification and inherent holiness, which undoubtedly is unperfect, and in
this life growing more and more into the perfect day, with Justification which
is perfect; for nothing can be added to Christ's righteousness, yea, they
destroy, and utterly cry down all Sanctification.

For, 1. Town asser. of grace, page* 32.
Town says, The new birth, Joh. 3.3. is our justification, or the making of
us of unjust, just -- and every true Christian is a fulfiller of the Law. Its
true in regard of justification, but in regard of the inherent new life of
grace, which is put in us in this life; we cannot fulfill the Law, except we be
justified by regeneration, and our own works done by the grace of Christ,
which Antinomians will not say; therefore all our inherent holiness to
Antinomians must be nothing at all, but the imputed righteousness of Christ;
so we have fulfilled the Law perfectly, as Christ has done, and are
regenerated, though there be no inherent holiness in us, nor any walking with
God at all.

2. They teach E^ton H^n. c^mbe. cap. 13 page 37.^.373.
That justification heals the children of God, of the imperfections of
Sanctification from before God, and that Town ass. of grace p. 123
justification alone gives to our good works both beauty and acceptance; so as
Town assert. 122. page 77.78.

Honey comb cap. 1^. page 367.368.369 370.^71.


they are made perfect, No sin in the believers nor can they sin as
Ant^^omians imagine.
and free from sin adherent to, or inherent in them, and both our persons and
works made so complete, that there is no blot of sin in them; nor any
in-dwelling of original corruption, that has the being or essence of Eaton
Hon. comb cap. 13. page 374.375.
sin. Yea, M. Honey*comb c. 13 p. 375.376.
Eaton says on these words, But now ye are washed, etc. What can be more
plain then that the time, state, and condition, wherein they were foul and
sinful was past and gone, but the time, state, and condition, wherein they
were washed and made righteous to Godward by justification, and also to
man-ward by Sanctification, was only present and biding for ever. But Eaton
Honey comb, ca. 4.43.44.45. cap 7* ca. 9. ca. 10. through the whole.
Eaton, Crisp vo. 2. ser. 5 page 14^*143. Ser. 6.
Crispe, Saltmarsh Free grace, 44* Where there is no Law there is no
transgression, where there is no transgression there is no trouble for sin.
But says Salatmarsh pa. 173*174.175. There is no sin in believers, no law
on, or over them at all, page 146.
Saltmarsh, Den Doctrine of John Baptist* 51* 52 5^* 54.
Den, Town asser. of grace, page: 71.72.
Town, and all Antinomians contend that there dwells no spot of sin,
nothing contrary to the holy Law of God, in the Saints once justified, no more
then in Christ Saltmarsh Free grace, page 140.
himself, or the glorified in heaven; then must our Sanctification be all one
with our Justification, and as this is perfect, so is that; and what wonder the
Adulteries of the justified, their perjuries, and lies committed after their
justification, be no sins, nor they more capable of sinning in that case,
then Jesus Christ; for pardoned sin (says Eaton, Honey-combe, cap. 7. page
139.) is not, or has no being before God. Antinomians answer, Before they be
pardoned they are sins, and their Adulteries are truly then contrary to Gods
Law.

Answ. They were pardoned before they had being, or were committed, sixteen
hundred years ago, on the Cross; then were all the elect justified; sure all
these sixteen hundred years the elect could no more sin before God, or do
any acts against a Law, then Christ, or the glorified Angels: not to say, that
Adulteries of the justified had being before they were committed, and had no
beei^g when they are committed, and have being, they have then no being: this
is to say, sins are not, when they are, and have being, when they have none
at all. God must take away common sense and bereave them of reason, who detain
the truth of God in unrighteousness. But if sin be against Sanctification, as
1 Thessalonians. 4.2.3.*
Fornication is directly; yea, and a fashioning of our selves according to our
former lusts, is as contrary to Sanctification by Peter's 1 Pet. ^.14 15, 16, 17.
arguing, and 1 Thessalonians. 5 4, 5* 6 7, 8, 9. R^m. 13.^^, 12, 14.
Paul's, as light is to darkness, and day to night; then the Saints
Sanctification must be imperfect, and far different from justification, and
to walk in Sanctification, to repent, to obey God, must be another thing, then
to believe Christ walked for me in Sanctification, Christ repented, and obeyed
for me.

Sins of believers to Antinomians, their lying, swearing, co^soring,
deceiving, are not truly and really to says which sees things as they are
sins, but only seemingly, falsely to our deceiving sense and feeling.
3. Sanctification to Antinomians is not our personal walking in holiness
before God, because walking in the flesh, and sinning, Adulteries, lying,
swearing, deceiving, in justified persons, which are opposite to
sanctification, are not sins before God, but only sins to our sense, and
to our reason and Saltmarsh Free grace, pa. ^42.
experience, or to our feeling, Eaton Honey comb, ca. 13.368.369.
to our flesh, or men-ward, or they seem sins to the Saltmarsh Free grace,
^54.
world, but are not to God, in his account, and in the apprehension of faith
(which sees things as they are) sins at all. Now things that seem to be,
and appear so to our unbelief, and misapprehending sense, are not so in
themselves; so both our sins, we being once justified, and our acts of
sanctification upon the same ground, must be mere fancies and delusions, and
if we judge our lies, and murders, after we are once justified to be sins,
it is our false apprehension. They must then be lying differences, that M.
Honey comb cap. 16 p. 459.
Eaton tendreth between justification and sanctification. Yea, upon this
ground, the Libertines Rise, reign, er* 17. True poverty of Spirit does kill
and take away the ^ight of grace.
say, if we see graces or sanctification in our selves, we are not poor in
spirit; and Rise, reign, er^or, 46*
that it is no sin in a believer not to see his grace. Which is all one, as
not to know, try, and prove himself, whether he be in Christ or no. And so we
may contravene a 2 Cor. 13.5. 1 Cor. 11.28.
command of God, and not sin; and to sin against one of the 1 Cor. 2.12^.
offices of the Spirit, which is to make us know the things that are freely
given us of God is no sin^. And in Calvin's time, Libertines say, to know good
or ill, was the old Adam, to know and want the feeling of grace, of holiness,
or of sin, was mortification; and a dead conscience, not to be moved, nor
touched with sorrow or feeling of sin, nor to fear it in justified persons,
is faith and and true mortification; so the Rise, reign, ^r. 64. A man must
take no notice of his sin, or of his repentance for sin.
New England Libertines.

CHAP. XLIV. Antinomians say, all doubtings is inconsistent with Faith.
THe Justified (say the Antinomians) are to Town asser. 34.
doubt no more, freedom and liberty purchased in Christ, frees you from all
Saltmarsh page 140.
bondage, as if you were in heaven, and gives assurance Town, asser. 7.
without all wavering, fear, or doubting. We are Crispe vol. 111. S (...). p.
19.10, 21, 33. etc. 40, 41, 45, etc.
not to fear our sins, nor any thing else. Which keeps good harmony with
Rise, reign, er* 32.

Power of love page 27* 28.


New Englands Libertines, who say, that doubting in any sort is inconsistent
with true assurance; especially Rise reign, er. 2^.
after the revelation of the Spirit, which some call the broad Seal^, and Math.
14.31.
to doubt upon the commission of some heinous sin, whether God be my Father,
argues the party doubting to be under a covenant of works. Rise, reign, er*
4^.


No question, doubting in justified persons is a sin. Christ rebukes it,
Math. 14.31.
Why doubt ye? 2. Christ Math. 21.21.
requires faith without doubting. 3. He forbids Luke ^2.25. Acts 1^.12.
it. 4. Its contrary Rev. 21.8. 1 Timothy ^.8. Romans 14.23.
to faith. 5. And Luke ^. 20.
punished. But it is in the truly justified; Faith and fainting are almost
woven through either in the same prayer in David, Psalm. 31.22. I said in my
have, I am cut off from before thine eyes; this is great fainting, yet there is
fire under ashes, faith bordering with fainting, nevertheless thou hardst the
voice of my supplication: So is it with Jonah 2.4.
Jonah, Es^i. ^8.13.14, 15, 16, 17
Ezechiah, Job 16.12.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
Job. Dregs in the bottom when the wine is jumbled, appear in the Prophets
complaint, an ague of madness starts up beside reason, and above faith, even
after Psalm. 77.7.
Asaph, and Ier. 5.18.
Jeremiah, both had received the broad seal of the revealing Spirit; when
Faith sickens, it dies not; Will the Lord cast us off for ever? and will he be
favorable no more? is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise fail
for evermore? And will thou be altogether to me as a liar, and as waters that
fail?

2. This goes on another false ground; that being freed from the curse of the
Law, we are freed from all fits of the old agues of the Spirit of bondage, and
that all trouble of conscience Rise, reign, er. 70.
argue a Law-state of works; but that old guest upon sense of sin, and
apprehension of wrath, can make a new plea between the soul and Christ, and
there will arise new storms of love-jealousies and complaints against 2 Cor.
7.^1, 1* Can^. 3.1, ^, 3, 4. Can^. 5.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Esa. 6.7, 18 Es^. 64.7,
8, 9 Psalm. 90.7, 8.
the beloved, surmises of unbelief, because sin dwells in the justified.

3. David's Psalm. 51.8.
bones were broken, for sin, and for his sins the arrows Ps. 39.2, 3.
of God stick in his flesh, and his Ps. 31*^, 3, 4
moisture is turned into the drought of summer.

4. There can be no nearer way to despair, and shake the very foundations of a
believers faith, then comfort him so miserably, as say, if ever he doubt, he is
under the Law, and under the curse; since it argues the strong man to be cast
out when he throws in firebrarnds of doubtings in at the windows, to see if
he can regaine his place.

CHAP. XLV. Antinomians, not Protestants, Merit-mongers.
Of Merits.
ANtinomians Town asser. of grace, page 144.
say, that we teach the same with Merit-mongers, who say the reward is given,
ex pacto, by covenant, as due debt, because of the fidelity of God, and not
that our works in strictness of justice deserve such a reward, to which we
answer.

1. None of us say, the crown is given, either for faith, or for good works,
as if they should determine the Lord to give a reward, or lay bands on him for
the intrinsecall dignity and meritorious virtue that Christ's merit has put on
our works; we utterly deny any such virtue, either in our good works,
considered in their own nature, or as they borrow some perfume of Christ's
meriting virtue. Paul, Romans 3. argues, that none are justified by works,
because (says he) all have sinned, verse. 9. both Jew and Gentile, every
mouth, verse. 19.20. stopped, and all the world is become guilty; if then our
works were thus perfect, that they were void of sin, they should have a power
to justify. But Town asser. 77.78. Eaton Honey comb^, cap 16.459.460.461.
say, Christ gives perfection to our works, and makes them free of inherent
sin; this is as much as Papists say, Christ's blood conferreth a power of
meriting on good works.

2. They say, we fulfill the Law in Christ, when he makes our works perfect and
sinnelesse, then we also justify our selves by our good works in Christ. But
we know that Antinomians give more then a meriting power to good works, while
they make them perfect as Christ, and free from sin as his actions are; Why?
but then should they not justify us before God? if they be perfect and render
us before God, perfect as M. Town Town ass. 77.78.
says; and Eaton Honey comb c^. 16. page 459.
Eaton says, Justification is meritorious of all the favor and blessings of
God: Sanctification of it self merits nothing at all. This is more horrid
merit then ever a Papist taught. For Justification if it merit all the favor
and blessings of God, then must it merit the favor of eternal election to
glory, of effectual calling, of Christ's coming in the flesh, of free
Redemption, of the sending of the Gospel of grace to this nation, rather then
to this; whereas all these go before justification, and flow from a more
ancient and eternal free grace then Justification; even from eternal election
and everlasting love.

2. But Sanctification (says he) of it self merits nothing; nor do
Merit-mongers say, their best works of themselves merit any thing, but as dipped
in Christ's blood, Vt tincta sanguire Christi* vim merendi habent
from whose grace they borrow a meriting power; and of justice, besides a free
promise and paction. God owes a crown of glory to these works, say Papists;
and this meriting power (say they) though it be borrowed from Christ, yet our
works have from the grace of Christ the formal principle of them, a meriting
power beside, before, and without all free paction and promise of reward that
God makes to our works: and here we part ways with all Merit-mongers, and
shall never (we hope) meet. But that God has made a promise, of his free
grace, to reward our works, and has tied himself to himself, not to us, is
clear: For Heb. 6.10.
God is not unrighteous to forget your work (says the Scripture) and labor
of love; and 2 Thessalonians. ^.6, 7.
it is a righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble you, and to you who are troubled, rest with us, etc. And Merit-mongers
say, our good works are made condignely and morally meritorious from Christ's
merits, and so are made and dignified with a sort of infiniteness to buy
heaven, as Antinomians say, they have sinnelesse perfection from Christ's
merits, and are made as white, fair, spotless, as God can see no sin in
them, but looking on them, sees them as fair as the works of Christ, or the
elect Angels. We judge that there is no worth to come near in value or
proportion to grace or glory, and that no reward is promised for them, none to
them, but as to signs and fruits of grace.

CHAP. XLVI. That there is grace inherent in the Saints, beside that free
favor and good will that is in God.
We accord not with Antinomians who say, that grace is only in Christ, none
in us, they are but Town ass. Page ^3.
gifts and effects of grace in us, G^^ace inherent.
says Town. The new Rise, (...) ^r. 7.
creature, the Er. ^. Er. 15.
armor of God, and 2 Cor. 5.17.
love is nothing but Christ. But we say, Grace, or free favor, is in Christ,
as the cause, root, spring; but this is the infinite God, freely of mere
grace, imparting his goodness, mercy, redemption, calling us without hire or
money; and this indeed is not in us, but in him; but there is a grace created
the fruit of this free grace in God, that is in us subjectively, and
inherently, and denominates us gracious, and new creatures; grace is in Christ,
as the flower in the root, but in us, as the smell, that comes from the flower,
and is communicated to us who have senses. The Scripture says, 1. If any man
be 2 Cor. (...)
in Christ, he is a new creature; a new creature cannot be Christ the Creator;
the new man is created in righteousness, and Col. 3.^.^0. Ezech 36 26, 27.
true holiness; and these be created graces in us: as the lusts of the flesh,
contrary to these are not the first Adam, but the fruits of this sin, so
neither can these be the second Adam. 2. The Armor of God, Ephesians. 6. Faith,
Hope, the Word of God, Prayer, the chief parts of that armor have Christ for
their object, and subject, and we are to pray in Christ's name, then they
cannot be Christ himself, faith may be weak, Christ cannot be weak; prayer
less fervent, Christ not so. 3. The Scripture says, God puts in the Col.
3.^.^0. Ezech 36 26, 27.
Saints a heart of flesh, a new heart, Esai. 44.3.
powers water, that is, his spirit on the Zach. 12.1
thirsty ground, the Spirit Ier. 31 32.
of grace and supplication on the Family of David; writes his Deuteronomy. 30.6.
Law in our inward parts, gives, 1 Io^. ^.9.
a circumcised heart. 4 There is an in-biding principle, 1 Io^. 2.37.
The seed of God remaining in the Saints, 1 Timothy 4.
the annoyting that teaches them all; Grace in ^ Tim. ^.6.
Timothy, 2 Cor. 5.17.
faith unfeigned dwelling in him, and his grandmother. 5. The Saints are
denominated 1 (...). 1.^. Romans 1.6.7. Epes. ^.1, 2. Phil. (...).
new creatures from grace inherent I^h. 3*^.
faithful and sanctified in Christ Jesus, 1 Pet. (...). Romans 8.17.
borne again of God, Sons, and heirs, 2 Pet. 1.4.
partakers of the Divine nature, Rev. 1.5, 6.
Kings and spiritual Priest* to God, Romans 12.^. Ephesians. 4.23.
changed and renewed. 6. From this Rise, ra^gne. er. 16.
Libertines say, there is no difference between hypocrites and believers,
whereas they are blessed, meek, shall see Matthew. 5.
God, shall be satisfied, have a great reward in heaven; which is falsely said
of Job 27.8. Job. 20.5, 6, 7, ^. Math. 7.2^.
hypocrites: and its near of kin to that foul error. Rise, reign, er. 18.
The Spirit works in hypocrites, by gifts, and graces; in the Saints immediately,
whereas the Saints do many things from the fear of God, Job 31.^3. Heb. ^1.7
from Faith, Heb. 11.10, 25, 26.
from humility, and Col. 3.1^, ^3
meekness, which are graces in them, and it neighbors with that heresy,
that Christ acts immediately in the Saints, he being incarnate in them, and
they Rise, reign, er. 11.
Christed and Godded with him; Christ dwelling in their flesh, which makes
every Saint, Christ, and the only begotten Son of God; and it sides with that
error Rise, reign, er. 35.
that the efficacy of Christ's death does kill the activity of all graces, and
that Rise, reign, er. 36.
all the activity of a believer is to act sin, there being nothing in him but
sin; Christ without acting all in him.

CHAP. XLVII. That we are not mere patients in the acting of the Spirit of
Sanctification.
SO do Antinomians hold that we are mere patients under the actings of the
Spirit, Town ^ss. page 49.50.55.6^.68. What can ye do more toward the
sancti^ying, or changing of your self, then toward the just^fying of your self
the Spirit acting in us immediately as on blocks and stocks. So there is,
Rise, reign, er. 49.
say they, no obligation to pray, at set hours and times, but when the Spirit
acts and stirs us immediately thereunto. And Saltmarsh Saltmarsh Free
grace, pa. 179.
says, this is a bondage to times, and no spiritual serving of God. So has
Randel the Familist, prefixed in an Epistle to two Popish Tractats, furnishing
to us excellent privileges of Familisme, the one called Theologia Germanica,
and the other the Bright star, which both advance perfect Saints above Law,
Gospel, Scripture, Ordinances, Praying, hearing, to a Monastike contemplative
life, in which their perfectists see, enjoy, live in God, without beholding him
in forms, (or material images, the sign of the Cross, lawful books, as
they think, to young beginners,) without any acting in them, either of
understanding, will, desire, or any power, they, and their love, desire, joy,
being all drowned, annihilated and swallowed up in God, immediately enjoyed, and
the Spirit acting immediately, Euthysiastically, in them as men dead, crucified,
mortifyed, and if they have any acts of knowing, or willing, or loving, they
be acts of the old man and the flesh. And upon the same ground, God not
efficatiously and immediately concurring in moral actions, to act upon the
creatures, men and Angels. The Libertines of old, some Familists, and
Antinomians of late, have said, that God is the author of sin, that his
working, or not working on the creature, is the cause of good, and ill;
righteousness and unrighteousness. 1. Because sin is nothing but Gods not
working. 2. It cannot hurt God, and why should he hate it? 3. It has its first
being in God. 4. It is his servant, and conduces to heighten free grace, and
rich mercy; I do not impute this to all Antinomians, yet some have said it,
and written it, the same principles common to Libertines and Antinomians, as
you may read in worthy Calv^n. in (...) I^structione adversus Libertinos
Calvin, incline to the same conclusions. It is true, Saltmarsh comes not up to
truth in this. Man's sins was serviceable (says he) to the glory of
Redemption, and was but for the bringing forth of this, Saltmarsh Free gra^e.
page 116.117.
though not decreed of God, but occasioned by man, God foreknowing the
changeableness of his creature, etc. In which words, not knowing what to make
out of the Protestant doctrine, out of ignorance he makes sin the mother,
and glorious Redemption the birth, that was warmed with life in the womb of
sin, and was serviceable for the bringing forth of this. We know what M.
Archer Archer on John, 14.^ Saltmarsh his mistake of providence ^ouching sin.
said of late, (I scarce believe, that that godly man would have spoken so;)
fair and glorious grace was warmed and enlived from eternity, in the sweet
bowels and heart of God; and never lay, never fetched heat of life from the
foul womb of sin. 2. In the other extremity, Saltmarsh denies simpliciter
any decree of God* so much as permissive touching sin, and gives him no more
but a bare foreknowledge, without any decree, and makes man only the occasion
of sin, who undeniably is such an occasion, as father and mother are of their
own births. Man were to be pitied and excused, if he were an occasion only
of sin.

But 1. if the Spirit act immediately on us; so as we we are passive in
believing, praying, and in all acts of Sanctification, as Town says, and we
must be the same way passive, as when God justifies us, which he does ere we be
born again, and as Crispe Crispe vol. 1. ser. 7. p^. 19 5.
says, by forcing grace on us, as a Physician violently stops Physic in
the mouth, and down the throat of a backward patient against his will: and if
we be not obliged to pray, believe, and upon the same ground, not to abstain
from Adultery, Murder, (for grace must act in both) but when the Spirit does
stir and excite us, then we are no more guilty of sin in omitting good, and
committing evil, then a stone falling off a tower, is guilty of beating out a
man's brains; for in these the man is a passive block, as the stone is in its
motion: and if we abstain from praying, not being obliged to pray, because the
Spirit acts not on us, we sin not; judge then who is the father of sins of
omission, by the good leave of Antinomians, and upon the same ground, it is as
unpossible but we must fall into sins of commission, as swearing, lying,
blasphemy, heresy, unbelief, adultery, murder, stealing, except either the
restraining grace, or the renewing sanctifying Spirit act upon us, as we
cannot choose but sinnefully omit duties of praying, believing, when the wind
of the Spirit blows not fair on us for these duties; and so Antinomians must
either be Pelagians, and say, there is no need of grace to eschew sin, and so
they must be un-friends to free grace; or then, men must be guiltless in all
sins, by this opinion, and let them then choose upon whom they will father
all sin.

2. We are to pray continually 1 These. 5.17
, and watch thereunto with all perseverance, Ephesians. 6.18.
and keep our selves in the love of God. Watch Jude v.21.
and pray. Wait Math. 26.41.
for the coming of the Lord with girded up loins, Luke 21.36.28. Math. 24.^2,
43, ^4, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49. Romans 28.13, 24.
wait for the day of our redemption. Then are we obliged by the command of
Christ, whether the holy Ghost breath on us, or the wind of the Spirit blow
fair from Christ's heart, on our heart, or no, to the supernatural acts of
praying, believing, hoping, watching. Nor is Christ's act of free grace in
drawing, stirring, and actual inliving, our obliging rule, but the revealed
will of God in the Law and Gospel; 1 Pet. 1.13.
and if we be mere passive as stones, and only obliged to supernatural acts,
when the tide of free love, and rich grace flows on the shore and banks of
our whithered Spirits, then we must not only say, we are freed from the Law,
but from all Gospel-commands, all free invitations of rich grace, according to
the letter, or then that the Spirit is obliged to attend and join his
bedewings and flowing of free love and grace, ever when we hear or read the
Gospel. But when Saltmarsh, 15^.153.154 155.156.157.
Saltmarsh, Town ^sser. page, 12.13.9. and through all.
Town, and others of that Tribe say, the Gospel is not in the letter, duty,
opinion, sense, reason, but in the Spirit, life, grace, faith, they mean the
same with New England Rise, reign, er*
Libertines; That the will of God in the word, or directions thereof, are not
the rule whereunto Christians are bound to conform themselves, to live
thereafter. So as old Anabaptists taught, we shall all be taught of God, and
the anointing teaches us all things, and therefore the written Scripture,
Law, Gospel, the Ordinances of Preaching, Reading, Praying, Sacraments, belong
not to us: to be under them, is to be under the Law, and the old dead Letter,
and the livelesse, passive, Inkie, and poor Paper-ordinances of Men, and not
under the Gospel, that is, under the immediate actings of the Spirit; contrary
to the Word of God, which makes an harmonious subordination, not a contrariety
between outward ordinances, and the inward working of the Holy Ghost, to the
Esai. 8.20.
Law, and the Testimony, 2 Cor. 10 4.
the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but spiritual and mighty through
God. Here are both Word and Spirit. As for me Esa. 59.21
this is my covenant with them, says the Lord, my Spirit that is upon thee,
and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth,
nor out of the mouth of thy Seed, etc. 2. It is a close rejecting of the Word
of God, written in the Old and New Testament, which the Hos. 8.12. Deuteronomy. 8.26.
Deuteronomy. 7.^8. Ier. ^0.2.^^.^6.28. Deuteronomy. 31.19.
Prophets, Ioh. 20.32. Matthew. 4.4. Mar. 1.2. Ioh. 6.31.^^.10.^4 ^. 5.35. Luke
24.25, 26, 27, 44.
Christ, and the Ro^. 15.15 Hebr. 13.2^. Gal. ^.11. 1 Pet. 5.2. 1 Ioh. 2 14.
R^m. 1.17. ca. 2.24. ca. 3.4 10. ca. 4.^7. 1 Pet. 1.10. 2 Timothy 3.16.
Apostles recommend to us, as our only rule: it is to subvert all Ministry,
and Ordinances, contrary to Eph^s 4.11. Romans 10.^4. 1 Timothy 4.15.16. 1 Cor.
12.28. Revel. 2.1. Revel. 1.20.
Scripture, and to make the Gospel written, the holy Ghost himself. 3. This i^
to loose us from the Commandment, and Gospel-exhortations to holy walking,
delivered by the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles.

3. And sure if we obey Gospel-commandements, as stones and blocks without any
action in us, or from us at all, and must then obey only, when the Holy Ghost
acts, and stirs the fire. Commandments, and Gospel-promises, Reasonings,
Preaching, Ordinances, must be as vain and unreasonable, to move men, as
stones and dumb wood; Upon this ground, Saltmarsh, with Antinomians would have
all Logic abeted. But carnal ratiocinations and discourses, (...),
Antinomians will have (...) reason (...) consequence^* all the l^tter of the
Law, Gospel, Precept, Pr^mis^, threatenings, (...) ^inde not ^s under the N
Testament.
That exalt themselves against the knowledge of God, we are more willing
should be abeted and exiled from Divinity then Antinomians: who set free grace
on pinnes of love rather then Faith, as if we were justified by love, as their
brethren of the Family of love dream: And 2. who be they who remaining
Antinomians turn Arminians, and fight for free will, and universal
atonement, and general Redemption, of all and every one, upon the mere
principles of carnal reason, and such a natural pity, and impotencie of love
to all, and every one of mankind as God cannot make out, and which by natural
principles tends to the universal salvation of all, and every one of
mankind; yea, of a world, including Devils also? And upon this ground (...)
confe^^^ce of M. I. Cotton at Boston, pa. 17.
Cornwell says, Such a faith as is wrought by a practical Syllogism, because
it follows from the strength of reasoning, or reason, not from the power of
God, is but an humane faith. And Shadows fleeing awray, page 8.
Saltmarsh. The interpreting (says he) of the Scripture thus in the letter,
and in consequence, has much darkened the glory of the Gospel. And the Gospel
(says he) Free grace* page 163.
is formed of exhortations, persuasions, -- conditional promises,
commandments, -- to the end that divinne and spiritual things might be more
naturally conveyed, in a notionall and natural way; as the key is made fit to
the wards of the lock, -- rather then for any supposed free will in man, as
some imagine.

Which does farther evidence the mind of Familists and Antinomians. 1. That
they would have the Gospel a body and susteme of non-senses, and foolish
dreams, and all Logic banished, that the Gospel may be a fardell of phancies,
under the veil of spiritual and supernatural knowledge for the perfect; like
that piece called the Bright Star, and Theologi^ Germanica, and the Power of
Love, and the Tree of knowledge of good and evil. 2. All reasonings, and use
of Logic, which the Prophets and Apostles make a heavenly and spiritual use
of, in the Scripture, to them are Legal, and smell too much of the dead
Letter, the sour and killing Law; yea the Letter of written Gospel, because
written, and because preached and opened in spiritual discourses to Cornwell,
and others, is a humane thing, and begets but a humane faith, so that ( Faith
comes by hearing) is to Saltmarsh not vocal Preaching, but the very Spirit
of grace working faith, as I observed before. 3. All expounding of Scripture,
by consequence, is expounding of Scripture in the Letter, Cornwel confer. page
17.
says Saltmarsh; in the Letter to Town, is in a Law-way; to Cornewell, is in
a humane, not a Divine way. Then Christ, Matthew. 22. must be a Legal Preacher,
and must argue after a Law-way, or a humane, not a Divine and Gospel-way, and
must much darken the glory of the Gospel; for he proves the resurrection of
the dead, only by a consequence, I am the God of Abraham, etc. Ergo, the dead
shall rise, and he sharply rebukes the Sadduces, as ignorant, both of the
Scripture, and the power of God, because they did not thus argue, in the
Letter, and in the consequence, to the darkening of the glory of the Gospel.
Libertines said also, to reason against committing of Adultery, as Joseph does;
Shall I do this, and sin against God? Is a work of Old Adam, discerning
good and evil, as we shall hear, if the Lord will. And Saltmarsh says,
Exhortations, persuasions, conditional promises, and Gospel-commandements are
natural, and so conveyances carnal, Legal, and of the Letter. Which to me is
a foul aspes^ron laid on the Gospel, and a mixing of Law and Gospel, Works and
Faith, according to the Antinomians way, and a rendering of the preaching of
the Gospel, which is the 1 Cor. 1.24.
power of God, and the wisdom 1 Cor. 1.23.
of God, as odious, as the Jews and Greeks Act 9.21.2^,
made it of old, that is to make it a mere natural and humane thing. But
reasoning from Scripture, is as Divine, as to convince, silence, 2 Timothy 3.^6
Acts 16.14.
rebuke, Act^ 2.37, 38, 39
convert, and open the heart, though the Spirit be the principal agent in
these. 4. If we be mere patients, and act nothing, by any obligation, but as
the Spirit acts on us, and in us; then not only the moral Law, but the very
Law of nature, and the dictats of a natural conscience, shall not of
themselves oblige us, as to honor our Parents, to love our brethren, to do to
all, as we would that men should do to us, except the Spirit act us to these
duties, and then must either the Holy Ghost attend the suggestions and dictats
of the law of nature to blow with, and concur with them, and with the Word
read and preached, which were a fettering of the Holy Ghost, to attend the
inclinations and motions of our heart, or then no man could sin at all
against either the Law of nature, or written Scripture, save only these
heathen and others, who resisted the Spirit; not to say, that grace were not
grace, nor every way free, if the will of the creature should be master, and
exercise a dominion over grace, to command, at its nod, the spirations and
breathings of the Holy Ghost, then should it be in the power of free will to
dispose of desertions, absence, and the ebbings of the joyful outgoings, and
manifestations of the Holy Ghost; so should we command the North and South
wind of the Spirit to blow upon the garden, that the Spices may flow out, and
command the out-flowings of the river, and the tide that gladneth the soul.
Which, sure, we cannot admit, or then, our doubtings, complaints,
love-jealousies, should be free of all unbelief, and disquieting doubts,
contrary to Scripture, and experience: yea, and all our sins, and darkness,
and false apprehensions under sad desertions, should be counted on the Holy
Ghosts score, as his sin, who did not act us to the declining of these sins,
and the performing the contrary duties, and not be imputable to us; for all
sin must be contrary to some Law-obligation.

5: We hence clearly see, Antinomians must come fully up to New England
Libertines, that Rise, reign er. ^.
In the saving conversion of a sinner, the faculties and workings of the soul
in things pertaining to God, are destroyed, and made to cease; and Rise, er. 2*
the holy Ghost comes in place of them, as the faculties of the humane nature
of Christ; whereas grace purges away the oar, but destroys not the gold,
and does not remove, nor substantially change the soul and heart; but makes
it Ezec. 36.26
new, 1 These 5.23.
sanctifies it, Romans 12.^.
renews the Spirit, Heb. 9.^4.
purges the conscien^e, Ioh. ^4.26.
brings all things to our memory. When Christ casts the old heart in his
furnace, or puts it on a new frame, it loses no substance, but receives a
new mould.

6. It fomenteth the presumption of Rise reign, V^sav^u^^e speech, ^.4.
the Libertine, who says, If Christ will let me sin, let him look to it,
upon the peril of his honor be it. Which may have this good sense, as to be
a word of boldness of faith, holding forth as much as it highly concerns the
honor of Christ, his faithfulness and unchangeable grace, who is entrusted
with all the flock, young and old, to suffer none to fall in such sins, as
may tend to, or be a final falling from Christ, but that upon the peril of
his glory, He will lose none, but raise them up at the last day; but as
Libertines sense carries the matter, the justified cannot sin; Christ's
Spirit is engaged to enact immediately, and to preserve the ransomed man from
all sin, if the man fall, Christ's Spirit not inacting him to stand, is the
Author and cause of his fall, Whereas we are commanded to keep our selves in
the love ^
of God; David Psalm. ^^.23.
kept himself from his iniquity.

CHAP. XLVIII. Antinomians hold that the believer cannot sin against God, but
against men, in his conversation.
We believe that the Law or Commandment of Christ respects our salvation
with God, as well as our conversation with men; contrary to Antinomians, Town.
^ser. page 149.
who will have us as completely saved being once justified, as sinnlesse, and
perfectly holy, as the glorified in heaven; Yea, we have not so much as the
blot of Papists venials, or Protestants sins of infirmity, or original sin
dwelling in us. So as I judge the man that said to a learned opposer of the
Anninomians, spoke right Arraignment of the Antinomi^ns page ^5.
in the Antinomian way; Sin is nothing, how then can Christ hate nothing? If
from eternity it was so pardoned and remitted, before it was committed; I see
not how to Antinomians it must not be mere nothing, as concupiscence is to
Papists, who make justification the expulsion of the habit of sin, and the
bringing in of habitual righteousness, which expels all sin, except
venials, which indeed are no sins; for sin pardoned to Antinomians and
Papists, who are harmonious in this point, are no sins.

2. Nothing, be it adultery, or parricide, or any work of the flesh, committed
after justification can be sin, for it is against no Law, by this way, and
does not so much as pr^judge salvation by demerit; it only scandalizeth men,
but cannot offend God. My soul enter thou not into these men's secrets.

3. Sins against Christian conversation, such as the adulteries of the
justified, are no sins before God, because all sins, as sins, stand in
the way, as contrary to salvation; then ask Antinomians is a justified person
obliged to eschew Adultery, they shall answer, Yea, he is obliged, but how?
There is a two fold obligation, one of Law, another of the free Spirit, How the
justified are not obliged to eschew sin, according to the Antinomian way.
the former is removed; the justified man by no Law, or Law-obligation, is to
eschew Adultery, as a sin against God. 1. Because he is freed from the Law,
and all directing and obliging power of the Law. 2. Because it involveth a
contradiction, that his Adultery should be sin, when committed by him, and
pardoned before it be committed; for so it should be sin, and no sin. How
then is he obliged to forbear Adultery? Only by an obligation Physical, and
of the Spirit, such as we call an obligation of naked courtesy, if he
forbear, it is an act of love and arbitrary freedom, but if he commit it, it
is not sin, because it is in him against no Law-obligation, no more then an
Englishman committing felony against the Laws in England, (it is the
Antinomians own comparison) or killing a Swan in Thames, which is forbidden by
the Laws of England, does fail against the Laws of Spain. So his sin is
against love, not Law, as if the Law commanded not all love, and love with all
the heart; and as if these two were contrary, and the Law and the Gospel did
involve two contrary, and contradictory wills in God; and the Lord should be
changeable and unconstant in Law and Gospel; and his Adultery should be
contrary to men and Christian conversation only, not to God.

4. All acts and personal duties of sanctification, which we must pursue and
follow, (else we cannot see Heb. 12.1^*
God,) are but degrees and parts of the complete Sanctification that we hope
for in heaven, and the path of the just, is as the shining light Prove. 4.18.
that shines more and more till the perfect day: therefore they must be
commanded as the way to salvation, and not as arbitrary acts of good
conversation before men; but I shall here answer M. Towns objections, tending
to prove that good works are not so much as the way to Town 56.57, 58.
salvation. 1. If good works be such necessary conditions, that without them
happiness is not attainable; then 1. though the grace of God do save as the
alone cause; yet it does not freely, for what God does freely, it is without
all condition, or consideration of man's works or worthynesse.

Answ. It is good that Town grants, though good works be commanded in the
Gospel, Towns objection, ^ending to prove that good works are not the way to
salvation, removed.
yet grace may, for all that, be the only cause of salvation; but
contradicting himself, he says, If good works be commanded in the Gospel,
then grace is not the only cause of salvation, but grace and works, Law and
Gospel, must be confounded. We say not, they are so necessary, necessitate
medii, by necessity of means; but that any savingly believing at the nick of
the extremity of his twelfth and last hour, God taking away all opportunity of
good works, is undoubtedly saved; but in the work of that faith, there is a
seed and supernatural disposition to good works. Now that this mother never
brings forth the birth, hinders not but good works are necessary to
salvation, necessitate precepti, in regard of Gods commandment; but
Antinomians deny good works to be necessary by any commandment of God. 1.
Because to omit them, makes the justified party liable to no guiltiness, or
sin before God, say they, Because he is under no Law, and where there is no
Law, there is no transgression, nor guilt, says Saltmarsh. 2. We being
justified are under no Commandment, Antinomians (...) good works to be
necessary, by necessity o^ a command.
so as we can violate this Commandment, be it of Law, or of Gospel; for it is
pardoned before it be committed. 3. What God does freely, is without conditon,
as a meriting cause, or as a cause, or condition slowing from the strength of
our nature without grace. Without a perfect condition, free of all sinful
imperfection adhering to it, such as the Law required; it is true, but now the
assumption of the objection is false. What he does freely is without all
condition Evangelicke, wrought by the strength of grace, and mixed with
sinful infirmities; so the major is most false; for Faith should not then be
a condition of justification; good works are so conditions, as they be graces
also. How often said Augustine, with Scripture God crowns his own free gifts
in us, D^us ^o^onat in nobis non nostra (...), sed sua do^a.
not our merits. 4. The same way I distinguish the consideration of good works,
either Legal, or Evangelike. And 5. Town does conjoyne our worthiness which
is none at all, with our good works, which are something, for they are
conditions of mere grace.

Object. 2 So says he, Ye make works the causes of salvation.

Answ. It follows not, that they are con-causes, or joynt-causes with Christ,
but only conditions; just as a man's journeying on foot or horse, to a City,
Calvin. Instit. lib. 3.
or a Kingdom to inherit it, is the way, condition, of his entering the City;
But it is not his Charter, or Law-title, or right to enjoy the Crown, as his
inheritance; any effective influence to the title of the Crown of heaven, I
dare not ascribe to any works in us, or to any but to Christ; but undeniably,
August. Bona opera non precedunt j^st^ficandum, (...).
good works are not so much as conditions of justification, they follow a man
justified, but go not before justification; no more then the Apple goes
before the tree, or the cisterne before the fountain; nor are they the
conditions of the Covenant of grace: they are the conditions of covenanted
ones, not of the covenant.

Object. 3. If salvation depended on condition of our good works or dignity, it
would be uncertain and doubtful, Romans 4.16.

Answ. The Apostle, Romans 4.16. clearly is on the theme of Justification by
faith, and the condition of it, Phil. 2.13. Heb. 13.21, 2^.
which is faith only. 2. We say not that salvation depends on works, as a
condition, but on the grace of God, which works every good work in us
freely, without hire or money, neither works nor free will are our sure free
hold of heaven.

Object. 4. Ye confound Law and Gospel, and run on that common error, that
the Gospel is conditional; remission of sins depends not on works.

Answ. It is a new heresy of Antinomians to deny a conditional Gospel, it is
all one, as to belly the Holy Ghost, who says, He that believes shall be
saved, he that believes not is condemned already. Or they may say, Whether
men believe or no, they are saved, as D. Crisp says. 2. Remission is but one
of the promised mercies of the Gospel; C^ispe vol. 3. ser. 5 page 176.
and because it depends not on works, as a condition, for the which life is
given, as Antinomians charge us, but most unjustly; it follows not that works
are no conditions in any sense; this is vain Logic; they are not such
conditions of dependencie, and causality, therefore they are no conditions at
all.

Object. 5. Ye strengthen natural knowledge, and the opinion of men, Town
asser. 57.
that God will justify none that are unworthy and unclean, freely; for every
natural conscience does require a worthynesse in man, the Gospel teaches the
contrary.

Answ. Town confounds ever justification and salvation, and perverteth the
state of the question. 2. The natural conscience is a Merit-monger and
dreameth of inherent satisfaction, and hand-paiment to God, The G^sp^l (...)
between d^spa^re and presumption.
for heaven without a Mediator, in so far as it looks on its own natural
whiteness, and hellish civility, but the natural conscience does also
presume, and fancy an Anti-Gospel on the other hand, that God is merciful, so
as to carry dogs and swine, as mere blocks, sleeping in Christ's bosom, to
heaven; the Gospel goes a middle way that we are justified and saved, in,
through, and for the righteousness of another, and these who are thus saved,
must be new creatures, have their fruit in holiness, else they cannot have
life eternal; and the natural conscience knows neither ways.

Object. 6. It must follow, that imputed righteousness is not sufficient to
make men capable of salvation; (...) asser. ^7.
so that a godly life fitteth us for heaven, and the more holy our life is, the
fitter it makes us for heaven.

Answ. Sanctification fitteth us in the own kind for heaven, Sanctification
^^teth us for heaven, and how.
though not in any sort as the meritorious cause; and when the positive is
denied, the comparative degree cannot be affirmed; a Raven is not white at all,
therefore it cannot be said to be whiter then snow. Sanctification conferreth
no meritorious capacity and fitness for salvation, therefore it cannot add
any higher degree of fitness, above that which sinners have from the merits of
Christ. We grant all: but when Paul says, Col. 1.12. Giving thanks unto the
Father, which has maedeus meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the
Saints in light. The Antinomians are as far out as carnal Gospellers can be;
if, with Town they say, all this fitness was in justification only; for it
was in that, in the which, and for the which, Paul gives thanks to the Father,
and prays for them. Now this object of his praying, and praising, was not for
their justification only, but verse. 10. Their walking worthy of the Lord unto
all wel-pleasing, being fruitful in every good work. Verse. 11. Strenghned
unto all patience. This was a part of their fitness, and that holy walking
conferreth a fitness and disposition for salvation to me is clear, because no
unclean thing can enter within the gates of that higher 1 Rev. 21.27.
City, and because that love which we have here in our way, being the same in
nature, though not in degree, with that which in our country 1 Cor. 13.^.13.
shall remain, as a part of our garland, and crown, the one must be a fit
disposition to the other; and when the Apostle says Heb. 12.1^
Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the
Lord. It cannot be meant of imputed righteousness, for by the same reason;
peace with all men, must be meant of peace with God. But the truth is, these
arguments fall of wll: therefore I come to that which is the bottom, the
mother Heresy of Antinomians.

CHAP. XLVIX^ Antinomians free us from any obligation to Evangelike
commandments, and exhortations to duties, and say faith is only commanded now.
THey refuse all Evangelicke holiness, all Commandments, and
Gospel-exhortations of holy walking, and make believing and faith the only
Evangelick Command. Unbelief the only Evangelick sin; and acknowledge no
righteousness of inherent sanctification, imputed righteousness must be all
that the Gospel requires, and to bring the Saints under a commandment of holy
walking, so as they sin, if they neglect so to walk in Christ, as they have
learned him, is to them, to bring them back from under the sweet
Sommer-Sunne-warmenesse of the Gospel, to the cool and dark night shadows
of the Law, and to re-enter them in, and shut them up under the old prison, as
if they had come out from under the Law, upon bail and surety, to enter in the
old Goal again upon demand.

For, 1. Mr. Town Town asser. 71.72.
tells us, that D. Tailor, and all ours, are strangers in the Scriptures (as if
he, and his, were the only domestics, and children of the Prophets and
Apostles) who grant not, that to Faith there is no sin, and he that believes
cannot sin: and Eato. Ho^ comb, cap. 8. page 163.164.
Eaton, that Free justification does make us so perfectly holy, and righteous,
from all spot of sin in Gods sight, that he sees no sin in us; he means,
of perfection, both of persons, and works, both imputed and inherent
mortification: and says, that the inherent mortification of Protestants, Honey
comb cap. 8. pa. 172* 173.
by the Spirit of sanctification, was the foundation of Eremits, Monks,
Anchorits, Nunneries, who shut themselves up within walls, to mortify their
sins out of Gods sight, by the Spirit; and call Sanctification Page 171.
the very heart of Popery, and the essential form of Anabaptisme.

2. So we have Antinomians affirming, that no Justified person sins before
God, in Gods sight, really; or if they look on things with the eyes of Faith,
but only they sin imaginarily before men, in their conversation, and
seemingly to the world, or in their own carnal sense of unbelief, which is a
blind Honey comb cap. 5. page 95. page 87.

Saltmarsh Free grace* p^. 5 and par. 2. cap. ^2. p. 142.


Judge. For says Saltmarsh free grace, 154.
Saltmarsh, The Scripture calls us ungodly, and sinners; not that we are so,
but seem so, or not so in Gods account, but in the worlds. So as the justified
man's Adulteries, Murders, are but seeming and fancied Adulteries, and painted
sins in the eyes of the deluded world, and the Judge ought not to punish
imaginary and fancied felony, or paricides; so his acts of sanctification, and
holy walking, that follows from justification, are mere fancies, and and
holiness only before men; for they are no conditions, no ways at all to
heaven; Yea, nor commanded so as the justified sin, if they disobey such
Gospel-commandements. For if we say we have sin, and do any thing contrary
to Gospel-precepts, which injoyne acts of Sanctification to the Justified, that
sin is no sin, nor against the Law of God, or in the account of God, says
Honey comb cap. 5 page 95.87.
Eaton, Den ser. of the man of sin, page 9.10.11.12.
Den, and Saltmarsh Free grace, p^g. 154.
Saltmarsh, but only before men, in our conversation, or seemingly, in our
sense (says Town) and in the worlds account, as Saltmarsh speaks.

3. Mr. Town says, to believe is to do all duties; and he cites Town
^sser. page 39. Rollo. in Joan Dum jubeo credere, omnia j. beo. Calvin. Fides
omnia in se contine^.
Rollock on John, and Calvine; It is Towns aim, as it is the marrow of
Antinomianisme, that there is no sin condemned in the Gospel, but unbelief;
so there is no command of holy walking, and sanctification in the Gospel, but
only Faith, therefore Saltmarsh Saltmarsh Free grace, page 84.85. Heb*
13.20.21.
says, All these Scriptures that set forth to us sanctification, and
mortification, Christ is made to us sanctification, I live not, but Christ
lives in me. But ye are sanctified, but ye are justified; we are his
workmanship, created unto good works; I can do all things through Christ that
strengthens me, etc. All these Scriptures set forth Christ, the sanctification
and the fullness of his, the All in All. Christ has believed perfectly, he
has repented perfectly, he has sorrowed for sin perfectly, he has obeyed
perfectly, he has mortified sin perfectly: and all is ours, and we are
Christ's, and Christ is Gods. And so we are to believe our repentance true in
Christ, who has repented for us, our Mortifying sin true in him, Antinomians
deny ^ll pe^s^nall holiness, or any necessity thereof, and make cantiona^y
righteousness all.
through whom we are more then corquerours; our new obedience true in him, who
has obeyed for us, who is the end of the Law to every one that believes; our
change of the whole man true in him, who is righeousnesse, and true holiness;
and thus without faith, it is unpossible to please God. And this is the
divinity of Den conf. page 30.31.
Den, That mortification, and vivification, are but the living by, or through
faith, and believing in him that justifies the sinner. And that learned Divine
Mr Tho. Gataker Gataker, Shadows without substance, page 36. answer to
Saltmarsh of Free grace.
says of one Heyden, a follower of Eaton, That in a Sermon on 1 John 3.7. He
that does righteousness is righteous, he expounded that place of our doing
righteousness in Christ, who has done righteousness for us; so he expounded
the doing of our heavenly Fathers will, Math. 7.21. Math. 12.50.
the putting on of the New man, which is created in righteousness and Ephesians.
4.24.
holiness, abounding 1 Cor. 15.58
in the work of the Lord, to be the believing of Christ's imputed
righteousness, to be ours. So do Saltmarsh, and his fellows teach us to
expound all the Gospel-precepts, and exhortations, to holiness; to walk in
Christ, to be abundant in the work of the Lord, to walk in love, to love one
another, to honor our father and our mother, to obey Magistrates, and Masters,
to deal justly with servants, to abstain from fleshly lusts, to mortify our
members, not to defraud one another, not to lie, etc. to be nothing but,
believe Christ has done all these for us. So as the grace of God, and the
Gospel, lays on us no tie, or obligation in our persons, to deny our selves,
to live holyly, justly, and soberly in this present world, to love one another,
by virtue of a Commandment, for that is Legal, says Saltmarsh Free grace,
168.169.
Saltmarsh, and Jewish; so as Christ Jesus is made the same very way, our
imputed sanctification, as he is our imputed righteousness: and so personal
holiness should no more be added by any obligation of command to Christ our
sanctification, then to Christ our righteousness.

CHAP. L. How we are freed from the Law in regard of Sanctification, as of
Justification.
NOr do we deny, as Town asser. 9.^0.
Antinomians would charge us, But we are from under the Law, in regard of
Sanctification, as well as of Justification, thus far; that the Apostle
says, As many as are Christ's, Romans 8.14.
are led by the Spirit of Christ, and so not under the Law; and Gal. 5.18.
if ye be led of the Spirit, ye are not under the Law. But this only bears
so much, that our voluntary, free, sweet, and loving obedience, comes not
from the fear of cursings, The obliging rule of the Law, not contrary to
Gospel love.
Romans 8.15. or the Spirit of bondage; but yet from the binding and obliging
authority of the Lawgiver, nor is this obliging rule, and government of the
Law, contrary to the sweet cords of Gospel-love, by which the Spirit kindly
draws, and gently leads the Saints in the way of Sanctification, these two
are made friends in Christ, and jarre not as contraries; which is the cardinal
and first principle of gross mistaking in the Antinomian, while he grosely
conceives, there is no awe of love in the Law, which commands all gracious
acts of fear, though not from Law-principles; for the Law is terrible, and
causes Moses fear and H^b. 12.2^.
quake, but it is because it acts and breaths out curses on Moses, as a
sinner, and a broken man, to chase him in to his surety, and the sweet
sanctuary of a terrified conscience; but the Law demands the same awe and
fear of love, of sin as sin, and as done against a Father in a covenant of
grace. It is true, when the man is once under sin, he cannot pay the debt of
lovely awe, out of his own unbroken and sinnelesse nature. How the Gospel and
the Law demand the same debt of obedience, how not.
Yet the Law still craveth as the Law, and it craveth the same debt, if the
broken man pay it out of money borrowed from his surety, that is, from the
sanctifying Spirit of Christ; the Law is the same craver, the sum is the same
debt now paid in gold, though clipped, and wanting many grains, because of
the sinnefulnesse of flesh, out of the Kings treasure; the fullness of Christ,
and his Spirit of grace; the sinner is the same debtor, that is obliged to the
same creditor and Lawgiver, only the bond, and the tenor of it is changed;
grace is in the bond, and it is paid now not as Law-debt, this do, and live,
by Law-right, and a covenant of works, which pre-supposeth neither a bankrupt,
nor a breach in the debtor, nor an offense to the creditor, nor a surety or
Mediator to be bail for the broken man, but its paid with the same
obligation, and Law-power, and commanding authority, but also now from a new
principal, the sum is better money, and in one respect is choiser; it is the
coin of a new King, and stamped with a new Image of Gospel Grace; in another
respect it is worse, because tainted with sin. Whereas obedience under the
covenant of works, was to be perfect and sinnelesse, or not at all.

CHAP. LI. Antinomians ignorant of Jewish Law-service, and of Gospel-obedience.
ANtinomians speak evil of that they know not. Saltmarsh says, Saltmarsh
Free gracc, 168, 169.
All Gospel Ordinances are only ways and means for God, to reveal his love
and grace by the Spirit of adoption, not any ways or means of ours, for
getting some love from God, which Christ himself has not gotten for us. So
there is not now (says he) Gospel-teaching and obeying, but men now run in a
Legal strain, and would work God down into his old and former way of
revealing himself. as under the Law, when he seemed to be only in the way to
reconciliation and peace, rather then pacified, and thus in prayer and fasting,
and other acts of obedience, they deal with God, as under the Old Testament,
not considering the glorious love revealed in Christ crucified.

We cannot but complain to God of these men, who slander our Doctrine, and
cease not to pervert the right ways of God. For if Saltmarsh mean, that we
think by fasting, praying, and acts of Evangelick Sanctification, Neither the
Jews under the Law, nor we under the Gospel, could ever buy the free love or
grace of Christ.
to buy the love of God to our selves, that is, the free favor and love of
God, that is, only grace objectively, in God, not in us; or yet grace
inherent; We profess before the Lord, and his Angels, that that is an other
Gospel, and though an Angel, and Paul teach it, let him be accursed. 2. Let him
answer us, if any Protestant Divine, or if he himself believes his own
pen, does any other but lie, when it scribles that the Law-straine and
Divinity of the Jews under the Law, did work God down to such an old way, as
for fasting, and praying, and other acts of obedience, they got some love from
God, which Christ himself had not gotten for them? Fasting and praying was
never since God had a Church on earth, a hire, a bribe to free grace, neither
Jew, nor Gentile could by doing; nay, not Adam before his fall, nor the Elect
Angels, could ever buy, prize, or morgage the free love of God. 3. We conceive
the love of God to be the sole cause, fountain, wellhead and adaequate
reason, why the Lord chooses some to glory, rather then Rom 9.11, 12, 1^, 4,
^5, 16, 7.
others, why the Lord sent his Son Christ to die, even because Job. ^.^6. 1
Ioh. 4.9.
God extremely and freely loved the lost world; and therefore fasting, and
praying, was never the cause of Gods choosing and electing love, either to Jew
or Gentile, either under the Old or New Testament; except they say, there was
another way of election to glory in the Old Testament, and another way in the
New; and that the love of God was at a dearer rate under the Old, nor New; it
was then for hire, and for works, but we had not in Esaiahs days, wine and
milk without money and price; the Market was dearer then, it is at a lower
rate now. But I perceive, Antinomians miserably mistaken, The error of the
Jews a far other thing then their state and Pedagogie, though
in confounding the error of the Jews, and the state of the Jewish Church.
Paul Romans 4. says right down, Abraham and David paid not a farthing more for
justification, and freely imputed righteousness, then we do; and it was the
error and sin of men, not the state of the Church in its nonage, under Tutors,
nor the dispensation of God, that Romans 9.31, 32. Romans 4.1, 2, 3.4.
The Jews followed after the law of righteousness, Antinomians confound then*
but obtained not the Law of righteousnsse. Wherefore? Because they sought it
not by faith, but as it were by the works of the Law: for they stumbled at the
stumbling stone. Yea, being ignorant (then it was their pride and error, not
their state of nonage) of Gods righteousness, and going about to establish
their own Rom 10.13.
righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God. It
was never lawful for the Jews to dream they could get, or earne Gods free
love, and undeserved grace, by fasting and praying, and other acts of
obedience; no more then it was lawful for them to stumble at, and break their
neck upon Christ, the stone laid on Sion, it was never lawful for them to go
about to establish their own righteousness, and not to submit to the
righteousness of God; this was their sin. But sure it was not their sin to
be under Tutors, and the Pedagogie of the Law, for that was Gods holy and
innocent dispensation, as the Scripture G^l. 3.^4.25.^^.8.19, 20, 21 22. Gal.
4.1* 2* 3, 4, ^.
says. And it was not any Legal justification by works; But it was, (1) in
that they were kept 1. under shadows, elements of the world, Ceremonies
representing forth Christ to come, and (2) God kept them under a greater
terror, because of Law-transgressions; and (3) a sparer measure and diet of
grace, then we have. But 1. it was never lawful for them or us to seek
justification by works, and by fasting and prayer. 2. The Lord cried out
against Merit, and placing all godliness in their new Esai. 1.11, 12, 13, 1^,
15, 16, 17. (...). 4^.^3, 24.25. l. r. 7 21, 22, 23, 24. M^. 6.7, 8. Es^. 66.1.
Moons, and in saying, We have fasted, and thou Zach 7. verse. 5 6. Esa. 8.
ve^s. 3.4, 5.
see it not; So there was no Legal strain in getting the love of God by
fasting, praying, etc. To the Jews, more then to us. 3. It was never a Legal
strain, nor a way approved of God under the Old Testament, that they should
serve God for hire, which the Devil acknowledges to be Job. 1.9. cap. 2.4 5.
hypocrisy; and that they should H^^. 7.^4.
pray, or rather howl, like hungry dogs, for corn and wine, or follow Christ*
Ioh 6.^6, 27.
for loaves. 4. Nor was the obeying of God, for fear of the curses of the Law,
and plagues, rather then out of love to God, as a Father, a way of the Old
Testament-worship, approved of God, as Town Town osse^. Grace, pa. 120. Honey
comb, page 15.
imagines, it being a sin; for their duty it was, to fear him as a Father,
no less then ours, to Es^. 64.8. Esa. ^3.16. Deuteronomy. 32.18. Ma^ach. 1.6.
rejoice in trembling, to fear his goodness, Psalm. 2.11.
his mercy; Ho^. ^.5. Ier. 33.9.
to esteem God rather then his gifts, their reward, their Psalm. 130.4.
portion, their souls Genes. 15.1
love; so were they to love and Psalm. 16.5, 6.
worship him as a Husband, to admire and praise him as God, and for his
essential perfection, beauty, loveliness; and all mercenary love and service
for fear of punishment, not out of love, and for hire and Psalm. 73.25.
rewards, was damnable, then as now. Now what was Gods active dispensation in
severe punishing of them, for an irreverent look into the Psalm. 45.10, 11.
Cant. ^.16. Cant. 1.7. C^nt. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. Cant. 5.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 1^.
Arc, and his hiring them Psalm. 78.34, 35, 36.
with a good and fertile land, and many 1 Samuel 6.19.20. Deuteronomy. 28.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Esa. 1.19.
temporal blessings to serve him, was another thing, and can never prove it
was lawful for them to serve God for hire, and in a mercenary way, and that it
is a Legal and Old Testament way of serving God, now under the New Testament
to believe 1 Timothy 4.^.
that godliness has the promises of this life, and of that which is to come,
and that now under the new Testament: yea, we may look to the 1 C^r 9.24 25.
We strive for an incorruptible crown Heb. ^0.34. Ye have in h^aven a better and
enduring substance Heb. 11.1^.26.
Rev. 2^.3, 4 Phil. 1 ^3.
reward of life eternal, as a motive to blow wind in our sails, in our
journey to heaven, though not as the formal object of our desires, in serving
God; for we are only, and ever now and then, to serve God for himself, not
for hire. 2. If we speak comparatively, a created Crown of incorruptible
glory is to be labored for, rather then trifles and feathers of corruptible
clay, and that both to us, and to these under the Old Testament.

4. How Prayer reveals the love of God, I know not, Saltmarsh, by the next
may expound it. Christ says, his Father giver the Holy Ghost to those that
pray and seek him, and Luke 18 6.7
he avengeth the blood of his Saints, and Mat^. 7.7.
he gives whatever Ioh. 14.13.
we ask the Father in his name. We pray, Lord increase our faith, is this
nothing, but, Lord, reveal the Holy Ghost to us, which we had before? And are
these prayers, that God should give us no new thing, but reveal what we had
before? So then we desire God would reveal the glory of his justice on the
enemies of the Church, which he had wrought before, and reveal the gift of
illumination, growth of Faith, victory against temptations, daily bread,
destruction of Satan's kingdom, the propagating of the Gospel, deliverance from
war, the pestilence, insight in the mystery of the Gospel, the Spirit of
revelation, etc. All which things we had before, but prayer, hearing,
preaching, Sacraments, reveal them only. This is no Gospel-divinity.

5. Nor was God in a way of reconciliation and peace with the Jews under the
Old Testament, rather then pacified; except Antinomians say, God saw sin in
Jaakob, under the old Testament, Numb. 23.21. He blotted not out their sins
as a thick cloud, Esai. 43.25. and cast not their iniquities in the depth of
the Sea, Mich. 7.19, 20. Nor blessed them with pardon, Psalm. 32.1, 2. but kept
an after reckoning of wrath, as a non-pardoning, as an unpacifyed God toward
them, which belyeth the Holy Ghost, in the Old Testament, almost in every page.

6. Nor is it true that Christ gets us the love of God, he purchases to us
all the fruits of Gods free love, such as Redemption, pardon, imputed
righteousness, effectual calling, justification, repentance, faith,
perseverance, glory. But we all maintain against Papists, that Christ given as
Mediator, Christ dying for us, is the fruit of Gods free love, and of our
election to grace and glory; but not the cause, or a mean getting to us Gods
love. Learned Twist, and protestant Divines, (to whom Saltmarsh, though he
undertakes to write of free grace, is but a yesterday novice) prove against
Papists, Dominicans, Jesuits, that Christ Mediator his blood is not the
Meritorious cause, of the free and eternal love of God to man. 1. Because
nothing in time is, or can be, the cause of that which is eternal; Christ is
given in time, and dies in time, as our surety; he is an eternal Mediator
dying in Gods decree, but that cannot make him the cause begetting Gods love to
us. 2. Gods free love and his grace is the cause, why he gives his Son to
dye for us, Joh. 3.16. 1 John 4.9. then Christ dying cannot be the cause of
Gods love. 3. The free love of God should not be free, if it had a meritorious
cause.

CHAP. LII. That we are not freed from outward Ordinances, nor is it Legal to
be under them, as Antinomians say.
ANtinomians pick a quarrel against the Law, and Town ^ss^r. 8.^.
would have us freed from it, because it sanctifies not, and cannot give us
grace to obey; but by this we are not under the Gospel, because the Gospel of
it self, or any word of grace without the Spirit cannot work faith, or give
grace or sanctify. But I know Antinomians think that the Spirit freeth us
from all outward ordinances, from any obligations, that an outward command can
lay on us, whether of Law, or Gospel. For Saltmarsh S^ltmarsh Free grace, 179*
180.
teaches us, That the Spirit of Adoption works Legally, not freely; when we
do things merely as commanded from the power of an outward Commandment, or
precept in the word, that brings forth but a Legal, or at best, but a mixed
obedience, and service of something, a finer hypocrisy. But if he mean, by a
mere outward command, the letter only pressing obedience, without the acting
of the Spirit, or any influence of the life of Christ; this is a dead work, and
cannot come at all merely from the power of an outward command; for the very
outward command of the Gospel holds forth to the understanding, in the very
Letter (which is a signification of Gods good and holy will) the authority of
God, the love of Christ; as this, Peter, love thou me, feed my Lambs: and
none can out of the conscience of the majesty, authority, and love of Christ,
obey this command, without the influence of the Spirit of grace; so he
refuteth not us, for we teach no such thing. ^
But Saltmarsh his meaning is, that the mere outward Letter of the sweetest
Gospel-command or promise; such, as (He that believes in the Son has life,
and shall never come to judgment,) (him that comes, I will in no sort cast
away, but will raise him up at the last day, etc.) lays no obligation of
obedience on us at all; but the Spirit acting, and immediately moving us
effectually to obey, lays on all the obligation, and all alongs. M. Town
Town^ ass^r, p^g. 3.4.5
proves, we are freed from the Law, with all its authority, offices, and
effects, and are not under the Laws rule to direct or teach; yea nor is it to
give us, (says Saltm^r^h Free grace.
Saltmarsh) So much as a heame of light; nor to command, bind, or oblige us,
because the Law (says Town. ^sser* page 6.
Town) has not any sanctifying virtue and power to subdue sin, but we are
under grace, that is, the grace of the Gospel, which effectually subdueth sin
and sanctifies. And this is Towns Argument all alongs, Town asser. page 9.10.
page 12.13.
the Law of works is a mere passive thing; and Town asser. page 38.
urge the Law never so earnestly with all its motives and means, ye can never
make me keep it, ergo, we are freed from the Law, and clearly Town asser.
1^7.
then are we under the commanding power of no outward ordinances, because they
cannot effectually sanctify and subdue sin; not the preaching of the Gospel,
nor the Law, nor praying, nor hearing, nor Sacraments; we are under nothing
but grace, and that only actual, such as is the effectual and irresistible
blowing of the Holy Ghost, for sure habitual grace in us cannot effectually
work for the subduing of sin. So say Rise, reign, ^r. 22. Antinomians will
have us o^liged to no duty, which we have no^ power to perform, as the old
Pelagians (...).
Libertines of New England, We are under no Gospel-exhortations to believe; and
none are to be exhorted to believe, but such whom we know to be the elect of
God, or to have his Spirit in them effectually. The reason is, outward
exhortations oblige none, but the Elect, and not them all; whereas Christ
commanded, to preach the Gospel to every M^rk. ^6.15
creature, to all Matthew. 18.19.20.
Nations. So say they, We are not to Rise, reign, er. 34.
pray against all sin, because the old man must be in us so long as we live;
So said the Pelagians of old; and Rise, reign, er. 59.
A man may not be exhorted to any duty, because he has no power to do it.
All tend to this, that to preach the Gospel to sinners, and for Saltmarsh to
write a book of free grace, is a Legal strain of teaching, and not becoming
the glory of the New Testament, because grace goes not ever along with
teaching literally.

2. We are not under the Gospel, or any Gospel Ordinances, because of our
selves we have no power to obey them; this is to make us guilty of no sin at
all, because to sin is to act against an obligation of a Law, and when grace
acts not on us, we fail against no obligation at all, because we can do no
otherwise.

3. This is deep Pelagianisme, to say, we cannot sin; if we have not power
to eschew sin, and obey God, and to make our own strength, or the strength
of another without us, the measure and binding rule of our obedience.

CHAP. LIII. Necessity of ordinances, and of written and preached Scripture to
the most perfect.
FRom this it comes, that Antinomians Rise, reign, er. 51.
judge, there is no need that a soul once in Christ go out for new and fresh
supply of actual grace, because it is acted by the Spirit inhabitating. And
S^ltmarsh Free grace, 1^0. New supply from Christ necessary notwithstanding of
a s^^cke within.
Saltmarsh, The more any motion or obedience is caused from things without, the
more forced and unnatural is all such obedience, and the less from a
spiritual power within. The believer is (says Town) washed from all sin,
made perfectly, just, and holy, the friend and Son of God, the Spouse of
Christ, the heir of all things, the conqueror of all his enemies, advanced to
sit and remain in the glory of heaven with Christ for ever and ever. -- he is
out of the power, kingdom, and limits of the Law; he is one Spirit with
Christ, -- hence is peace, security, consolation, joy, contentment, and
happiness of a Christian.

He is a complete man (if we believe Antinomians,) 1. The word preached,
though it dwell within him, yet that it be applied by a Preacher from without
is necessary, and that Peter writ, Stir up, and put in remembrance the 2 Pet.
1.12, 13. 2 Cor. 7.6.
Saints that Paul be comforted by Ph^l. ^.13.
Titus, and that Christ from without, blow on, and act the soul to will, and 2
Co^. ^.8.
to do; and that Paul beseech Christ R^m. 7 23.24 25.
thrice, and have a new answer, my grace is sufficient for thee, is most
needful. 2. There shall be no ground of new emergent complaints to God. And 3.
of praises to Christ, for particular victories over our lusts, and the 2 Cor. 2
14. 2 C^r. ^. 9, 10
world. 4. Nor any ground of spiritual submission and patience, while the Lord
be pleased to deliver; And 5. of trusting in God, and exercising faith in him,
who delivers us 2 Cor. 1.9 10.
from so great a pa^ticular death as came on Paul in Asia; and from heaviness
1 Pet. 1.6, 7.
through manifold temptations, if need be, for the trial of our faith. Now if
all were within us, and the obedience more violent and Legal, less free and
connaturall, because we must go to helps without, faith needed not go without
doors, or without it self to Christ, and the in-dwelling Spirit should be one
for all means and ordinances, and new showers and bedewings, and fresh drops
from Christ the honey-combe of heaven, should be useless, our stock within
should do all, nor should we know what it is to walk or stand on our own
clay-legs. Its true, if externalls, and the Cross, or the Letter of Law, or
Gospel, only move us to obedience, and there be no internal principle of
grace within us, then the obedience is but finer hypocrisy, and less free,
and more violent, and as it were, forced. But Antinomians imagine a believer to
be so perfect, because pardoned, that the Spirit within him does all, and
needs neither Ministers nor ordinances; because helps without are Legal, not
Gospel-like.

CHAP. LIVE. What peace we may fetch from gracious performances.
THe Spirit acts Legally, say Saltmarsh Free grace. 180.181.
Antinomians, when men measure forgiveness by their sin and sanctification,
and can believe no more then they have peace for, and that peace depends on
some of their own performances; in so doing (says Town) Town asser. grace,
page ^9.
Legalists had rather gather peace and security from repentance and
reformation of life, then from justification, which is only effectual to make
and cause true peace.

But our mind is this;

Asser. 1. We are not to measure forgiveness so, by sin and sanctification,
How we g^ther peace from s^irituall performance.
as the measure of pounds and talent-weights of pardon should arise from the
like weight of pounds and talents of sin and sanctification; because great
sinfulness and drames, and half ounces of sanctification, and love to Christ,
may argue to the believer the pardon of ten thousand talents. Christ argued,
the woman loves much, ergo, many sins are L^k. 7.47.
forgiven her; we read not, that this was the woman's own Logic. 2. We draw
peace and pardon not from so many yards, or else of obedience, as merchants
measure cloth; the Spirits consequence is not from the quantity, but from the
quallity of sanctification; sparkles of gold may prove there is a gold mine in
that ground, and that in abundance; nor draw we the consequence from sins
simply, but from sins hated, subdued, resisted.

Asser. 2. Peace with God, Peace with God, not the same with peace from our
selves.
or the peace of faith is not every way the same, with peace with our selves,
and of our own spiritual sense and apprehension. Peace fundamental, and with
God, is solidly grounded on pardon; Being justified by faith Romans 5.7.
we have peace with God; its often so with the Saints, that they have faith for
pardon, and yet no feeling for peace.

Asser. 3. We may have peace with God, when we have not peace with our selves:
as the covenant stands sure between God and us, when we have great
disquietnesse of mind, either through some heinous transgression, or present
unbelief, and it is not fit we should have peace with our selves, under some
great sin, it is but carnal security; if Peter after the denial of Christ,
be quiet in Spirit, and have deep peace: the disquietnesse of unbelief,
apprehending eternal wrath is sinful; but in regard of anxiety of godly
sorrow, its kindly; there be storms in winter, when there are causes of them,
and fair Sommer-like weather is not so good for the season in Winter; because
not so kindly and suitable to a right frame of nature.

Asser. 4. Peace with our selves may arise from the works of saving grace, but
neither assurance, What qualified performance* can bottom our peace.
nor peace can flow from naked acts of love, and sanctification, not quallified
and goldned with Christ, and his grace, as Town asser. 1.9.120.
Town falsely slandereth us; because such bastard works as are but white and
comely sins; and being in men out of Christ, can but produce sandy and rotten
peace, but such acts of holiness, as essentially flow from heightened
principles of soule-saving grace, and are floured and crowned with Christ's
merits, may be grounds of solid peace, though not causes, and though some of
our dross still accompany our best performances, yet may we difference in them
Christ's gold from our oar; his wine, from our dregs; this peace is a heart not
smiting, but smiling, and saying. Our rejoicing is this, 2 C^r. 1.^2.
the testimony of our conscience, etc. and where there is joy, there is peace,
R^m. 14.17
both are fruits growing in the same soil: so speaks the Church, Esa. 26.9.
with my soul I have desired thee in the night, -- whence follows, ver^. 1^.
Lord, thou will ordain peace for us. Why, For thou have wrought all our
works in us.

But we had not rather draw our peace from walking with, nor from believing in
God through Christ: nor did we ever mean that faith, far less holy walking
should be the cause of that fundamental peace, of peace between God and the
sinner, as Town (...) page ^^^.
Town supposes, works are not fellow-mediators with Christ, works had no
blood to interpose, as Christ the peacemaker had, ( for he is our peace;)
works, faith, nor any thing in us, were not actors, nor commissioners in the
treaty of pacification: and the truth is, the peace we have in our conscience,
and apprehension, even from faith is the result, the bloome that grows on the
stalk, the flower or rose of Jesse, rather then peace, and it has the right
hew and resplendencie of peace, because there is so much of Christ in either
our faith or holy performances: the rosy, pleasant, and beautiful morning
sky is not the Sun, but the result and daughter of the Sun, and the fair
sky, together; and faith that acts much upon the promises, as upon the
report of credentiall letters, does, and must apprehend more pardon then peace
can bear witness to; sin has a bloody tongue, and cries fury and
vengeance aloud, faith must lie on the atonement of the blood of Jesus, which
our sense cannot reach: Faith is a star of a greater magnitude, and higher
el^vation then our poor low-creeping feeling. So we think we had more of
Christ, and the acting of the Spirit at our first conversion, then long after,
because when our spiritual apprehension is young and tender, the acts of
apprehension are more wanton, and fiery; but when experience and growth of
grace comes, the motions of sense are more stayed, and solid, and as spiritie
and active and more, but to green sense, little seems much. But that which
Antinomians aim at, is to blow away all peace that comes from personal
sanctification, because they are enemies to personal mortification, and make
this to be our peace of repenting, and mortifying sin, abstaining from
fleshly lu^^s; that Christ repented, mortified sin and lusts on the Cross
for us; and we believe this, and there is an end. Hence they condemn a^l
experience of the acting of God in, and on the soul, to comfort the R^se,
reign, er. 5^.
soul, or help faith in times of desertion. For Saltmarsh, who in his cures
of all our Legal and carnal agues, is silent of experience, and thinks
outward ordinances, and the promises written for our learning and comfort,
because outward, and Sa^tm^rsh Free grace page 1^0.
written, and vocal, to be old Testament, and Legal ways, though Peter call
them, 1 Pet. ^.2.
sincere milk, 2 Pet ^.^.
exceeding great and precious promises; and Paul, Think they were written Rom,
^5.4.
for our learning, that we, through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures,
might have hope; and Christ Ioh. 15.10,
speaking of his Commandments, which were written and spoken by him, and so
outward, says, that they were a badge visible to all the world, that they were
his Disciples, If ye keep my Commandments, ye shall abide in my love, even
as I have kept my Fathers Commandments, and abide in his love. And to Job
23.12.
Job, the words of the Lords mouth were more then his necessary food. And
Christ gives his judgment in a spiritual, not a Legal song of outward
ordinances. Cant. 4.11.
Thy lips, O my Spouse, drop as the honey comb: honey and milk are under thy
tongue. To David Psalm. 19.10.
they were sweeter then the honey or honey comb, Psalm. 119.103.
sweet to his taste, yea, above gold, Verse. 127.
or fine gold, as Verse, 14.
all riches, better Verse. 72.
then thousands of gold and silver, his Verse* 111.
heritage for ever. To Saltmarsh the Word is a dead outward, legal thing; and
all this to them must be spoken of the inward and spiritual word written in
the heart, as Libertines taught; So Bulling. advers. Anabapti. It is true, it
is for that soule-acting and Spirit-converting power so; but in the mean time,
upon this ground, old Anabaptists rejected the Word, and the Ministry, and
took them to (...) Law written in the inward parts, and the annoin^ing that
(...) all things, abusing Jer. 31.^3. and 1 John 2.27. So do^ Antinomians upon
this ground, reject all experiences, contrary to the Scripture, Romans ^.4.
experience works hope; then it should cheer us in sad hours: thus the
Church comfort her self. Psalm. 77.^, 2, ^, 4, 5, 6. verse. 11.
I considered the days of old, and called to remembrance my songs in the
night. So Psalm. 63 2.
David looks back to this longing, to see (says he) thy power and thy glory,
so as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary. 2. Peter puts it on the Saints, 1
Pet. 2.3.
If so be ye have tasted, that the Lord is gracious. 3. Its a sinful neglect
to look to no experience. Job. 35.10.
But none says, where is God my maker, who gives songs in the night? says
Elihu. 4. Antinomians are angry at experiences; Antinomians reject experiences.
1. Because they teach, there is no difference Rise, reign er. 16.
between the graces of hypocrites, and believers in the kinds; and so no
experiences between the one and the other can render any difference. 2.
Experience is an outward ordinance of gathering from such and such a
dispensation of God, such a tried conclusion. Now Saltmarsh thinks all
outward ordinances, as outward Saltmarsh Free grace, page 179 180.
Legal things, and so it would appear Christ in the New Testament-worship
which is spiritual, and in nothing Legal, has appointed neither preaching,
nor praying, nor hearing, nor Sacraments, nor Christian Assemblies, nor
conferences, nor admonishing, exhorting one another, nor writing, for all these
are outward things; and I grant, if Christ join not his influence of grace,
neither is Paul's 1 Cor. 4 7
planting, nor Appollos his watering, any thing. Yet Apostles and Teachers are
not Legal ordinances. 3. Antinomians offend at all inherent grace and created
quallifications in us, as evidences, or helps, to testify we are in Christ,
Saltmarsh Free grace. 61.6^.63.64. Town asser. grace, page 120.

C^^spe v^l. ^. Ser. 15.4 2.433.3^.435.4^6.

R^se, rain, ruin, er. 33. To act by virtue of, or in obedience to a command,
is Legal.


for they are all deceiving differences, says Crispe, and may be in hypocrites;
and (say I) they can be no otherwise in hypocrites then deluding signs, then
the voice and testimony of the Spirit, for there is a thing like a voice in
the Temporaries, and also a thing like faith, which is no faith. Now
experiences remain as inherent and habitual observations of the Spirits
actings in the Soul.

CHAP. LV. How far inherent qualifications, and actions of grace can prove we
are in the state of grace.
ANtinomians make a hideous outcry against signs and marks of our
justification, because indeed they are enemies to sanctification.

For establishing souls (says Saltmarsh Free grace, page 31.
Saltmarsh) upon any works of their own, as away, mean, or ground of
assurance, as that upon such a measure of repentance, or obedience, they may
believe by; I dare not deal in any such way of our own righteousness,
because I find no infallible mark in any thing of our own sanctification,
save in a lower way of persuasion or motive. -- I find none in the Old or New
Testament, but have cause to suspect their own righteousness, as David,
Peter, Paul. So the Libertines of New England, Rise, reign, er 60.
Though a man can prove a gracious work in himself, and Christ to be the
author of it, yet this is but a sand^e foundation. And Rise, reign, e^. 72.
it is a fundamental and soule-damning error, to make sanctification an
evidence of justification. And Rise, er. 75
it were to light a candle to the Sun: Yea, er. 77.
it darkeneth justification; the darker my sanctification is, the brighter is
my justification. And Vnsav^urie. speeches, er. ^.
I may know, I am Christ's, not because I do crucify the lusts of the flesh,
but because I do not crucify them, but believe in Christ that crucified them
for me. So Cr^spe vol. 2. Ser. 5. page 32 430 431.432 433. etc.
D. Crispe, Cornwel confer. of. M. Cotton, page 8.9* ^0.11.12, etc.
Cornewell, Town asser. of grace, page 25.
Town, teach; that love to the brethren, sincerity, etc. are marks, by which
others may know us, rather then we our selves; So Saltmarsh Free grace, page 31.
Saltmarsh follows Crispe.

We never said, that a natural man's devotion, or his bastard prayers, or
wildfire of blind zeal, can argue the translation of the man from death to
life, as Saltmarsh Free grace, page 17.18. Shadows fleeing away. page 5.6.
Saltmarsh dreameth; or that we labor to draw assurance of a good spiritual
estate from outward reformation; which says Town assert. grace, page 137.
Town, Protestant Legalists labor for, when the heart is naught. Antinomians
say, that all our evidences are dung. True, they are not evidences of Legal
perfect righteousness, more they prove not.

Asser. 1. Love to the brethren, sincerity, and the like, that have not grace
for their stock, Natural and external devotion cannot argue the man's
translation from death to life.
a right fountain and principle, the Spirit for their Father, Christ for their
Crown, and garland, are no evidences at all that we are in Christ; for they
rather darken, then render justification evident.

Could we look over our self, and abstract our thoughts from our self, as
if we were nothing and dead, and behold the actings of grace, and Christ's
love-raptures, and the glancing of love on his members, To eye the actings of
the Spirit in our selves, and overlooke our selves, is the surest arguing of a
spiritual^ state.
as on bits, pieces, and little images of a super-excellent transcendently
glorious Christ, and see these in the Spirit, the worker; then were surer
inference to be made thus, then when we eye our selves. As beholding the
excellency of a Godhead in Sun and Moon, when we look above the
shaddow-creature, and with senses abstracted, and the elevation of the Spirit,
we see these created excellencies in the deep and boundless Sea, which has
no shoares nor coasts, nor bottom, in a vast and great God, we are farther
from Idolatry, then when we pore on, and pine away in the minds restings in
this side of an infinite Majesty; and so is it here.

If it be natural Logic, and the light of our own sparks that make the
inference, Keeping of the Commandments, may prove to our own spirits, that we
are in Christ.
I love the brethren, therefore I know I am translated from death to life; its
but Moone-light of one half sleeping, that is suspected to be daylight: but
if natural light, by the daylight of saving grace make the inference, it is
sure arguing. As, 1 Ioh. 5.13.
And hereby do we know, that we know him, if we keep his Commandments, and
we 1 Ioh. 3.14.
know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren. 2.
All these are equivalent to the same. But 1 Ioh. 3.^8.
if we walk in the light, as he is light, we have fellowship one with
another; and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from all sins.
And He that 1 Ioh. 2.22.
loves his brother abides in the light, and there is none occasion of
stumbling in him. And if ye know that he is righteous, ye know that every one
that does righteousness, is borne of him. This is written for our own
personal security and knowledge of our own state, as all the Epistle aymeth
at this, and not so much, as we may know one another; as is clear, when John
shows us the scope of his Epistle, is to give marks; and I nothing doubt, but
the Holy Ghost aymeth at the discovery of a dead faith, and to refute the
Antinomians, as is clear, 1 Ioh. 5.13.
These things have I written unto you that believe on the name of the Son of
God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe on
the name of the Son of God. So says he, 3. Putting a difference 1 Ioh. 3.10.
between the children of the world, and the children of the devil; in this
the children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil, whosoever
does not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves not his brother.
Then certainly some has said in John's days, It is enough to salvation, if a
man believe in Christ, he is obliged by no Law, nor Commandment that is
outward and written, to do righteousness. John says, such a one is not borne
of God. And 1 Ioh. 3.18.
My little children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed
and in truth; and hereby (by real loving of the brethren) we know that we are
of the truth, and shall assure our hearts before him. And 1 Ioh. 3.22.
Whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his Commandments, and
do the things that are pleasing in his sight. Now, sure this cannot make the
keeping of his Commandments, and our good works, fellow-Mediators with Christ.
Then John must argue from the effect to the cause, and intimate, that its
false, that some may be borne of God, who keep not his Commandments; as
Antinomians say. When one that walloweth in fleshly lusts, is to believe
without more ado in Christ, and he is a saved man. So says John, 1 Ioh. 3.7.
Little children, let no man deceive you; he that does righteousness, is
righteous, as he is righteous; he that commits sin is of the Devil. Then
some have deceived themselves and others, in saying, That doing of
righteousness, was neither condition, nor way, nor mean to salvation, nor any
infallible sign of a man's being in the state of grace; Now who says all these
this day, but the Antinomian?

Now if Antinomians, Cornwel ^onfer. of M. Co to. page ^7.
as they do, say that a discourse by way of a practical Syllogism, or
natural Logic, can produce no Divine, but only a humane Faith. And Saltmarsh
Shadows fle^ing away, page ^.
that all Logic is to be abeted; the carnal and corrupt discoursings by
Logic, that exalt themselves against the knowledge of God, are to be abeted,
but that the use of natural reason not corrupt, should be disclaimed, is
against the tenor of the Old and New Testament, in which there be Laws,
Ordinances, reasonings, practical Syllogismes to beget faith, to cause us slay
sin, Calvin. Inst. advers. Libeti. An Pockq^^us ut. Ex^^^i^iabam nu a^iquid
intell^ge^e, nec quic quam intell^g^: D^us en^m intel ectus meus est, virtus
(...). Calv. page 460.
follow holiness, which no man can say is a humane thing, except Antinomians
following their old Masters, the Libertines, who said, to lay aside natural
reason, discoursing, to know neither good nor ill, was true mortification, and
natural reasoning and knowledge of sin, or righteousness, sense of ill
doing, or fear of sin, or judgment, are but the tastings of the old Adams
forbidden fruit, as we shall hear afterward.

Asser. 2. Yea, we may know our selves to be in the state of grace, by holy
walking, and acts of believing, and we may know our holy walking to be true, by
other acts of holy walking and believing; so John says by the loving of the 1
Io^. 3.^4. 1 Ioh 1.7 1 Io^. ^.3.
brethren, we may know we are in Christ, and so that we believe and love God;
and again, reciprocally, 1 Io^. 5.^.3. Su^^rnaturall acts may reciprocally
prove one another, and argue our spiritual con^^^or.
By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God, and keep
his Commandments, for this is the love of God, that we keep his Commandments.
Then the loving of God, that may argue, that we believe, may also evidence our
Justification; and all depends on this, as the Spirit joyneth the light and
evidence of grace, to cause us know our loving of God, and translation into
Christ, by our loving of the children of God; and again, our loving of the
Children of God, by our loving of God, 1 John 3.14. 1 John 5.2.

Asser. 3. One and the same cloud that is the cause of our doubting, whether we
believe or no, is not the cause of our doubting, whether we love the brethren
or no, and so they must furnish different evidences: from a misty twylight, or
evening of desertion from some apprehension of the sins of youth: often our
faith is clowded, that Job, David, Heman, Jonah, say they are cast off of God,
yet at the same season, Psalm. 42. David's heart was toward the Saints, with
whom he went to the house of God. 2. Many we see dying, who doubted for a time,
if ever they believed, or were in Christ, and yet were convinced that they
loved the Saints; but because they loved the Saints, they could not make an
actual inference, ergo, they were translated from death to life, because that
actual inference requires the actual blowing of the Holy Ghost; a Saint in
natural Logic, may be forced to yield an antecedent, and the necessary
consequence, because both must be the clear Word of God, as 1 John 3.14. I
yield, I love the Brethren; and ergo, I am translated from death to life. But
because he sees both the truth of the Antecedent and Consequence, by the
sparks of a mere natural light, he may be far enough from faith, and a
supernatural evidence of the Spirit, to make him to believe it for his own
inward peace, comfort, and quieting of his soul; and this deceives
Antinomians, that they think the knowing of their spiritual condition, by
marks, being convincing and strong in a natural way, is presently the
supernatural evidence of the Spirit, which it is not: and 2. they infer,
that it is to trust in their own righteousness, and stand on their own
legs, if men come by assurance of a spiritual interest in Christ, by their
own inherent righteousness, and then must they be justified (says Cornwell)
Cornwell confe. with Cotton, page 18.19.20.21.
by works. Yea, 3. the Rise, reign, er. 67.
New England Libertines say, A man cannot evidence his justification by his
sanctification, but he must needs build upon his sanctification, and trust to
it. And M. Town asser. page 66.
Town says, The Saints are to forget, and never remember their own holy
walking. So say they, Rise, reign, er. 17.
That true poverty of Spirit, does kill and take away the sight of grace. But
all the three consequences are false; for a natural evidence of my being in
Christ, cannot quiet my soul with the assurance of peace; and for the other
two, we are to forget our holy walking: yea, and as Town says, to judge it
loss and dung, in the matter of our righteousness before God, and thus to
forget it so, as we trust not in it, is poverty of Spirit; but simply to forget
all our love to the Saints, so as we do not remember it for the strengthening
of assurance; and our comfort is contrary to the whole Epistles of John, and a
begging of the question. For sure it is damnable pride to trust in our own
righteousness, in that regard Paul may say, I know nothing by my self, yet am
I not thereby justified. And so also we are to cast all behind us, as loss and
dung; but it is utterly unlawful, and contrary to spiritual poverty, to make
no use at all, wholly to forget, and not to strengthen our faith, and our
assurance and comfort, in any holy walking at all. For, Ezechiah dying,
comfort himself in this. Esa. 38 3.
Remember now, O Lord, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a
perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. And David, Psalm.
18, 21, 22.
I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly departed from my God,
all his judgments were before me. And Job, Job 23.11, 12.
My foot has held his steps, his way have I kept, and not declined, neither
have I gone back from the Commandment of his lips, I have esteemed the words
of his mouth more then my necessary food. And Jeremiah, Ier. 15.15, 16, 7.
Thy words were sound, and I did eat them, etc. And the Church, Cant. 1.5.
I am comely. Can^. 3.1.
In my bed by night I sought him whom my soul loves, etc. Cant. 5.1.
My heart waked. Esa. 16.8.9.
In the way of thy judgments, Lord, we have waited for thee, the desire of our
soul is to thy Esa. 57.^5. ca^ ^^.^. cap. ^ 1.4. Psalm 37, 11. Psalm 15.9
name, etc, Nor can a Legal Pedagogie be objected; for spiritual poverty R^m.
9 3^.32, 33. R^m. 0.3. P^al. 130.^. Psalm. 14.2.
was enjoined, confidence in our own righteousness condemned in Acts. ^0 31
3^, 4 Heb. 13 18 2 Timothy 4.7* 8 1 Cor. 15.9.10. Antinomians conspire with
Papists to deny al^ evidence of our certainty of being in Christ, and the state
of salvation, from inherent gracious qualifications in us.
the Old Testament, as well as in the new; and Paul has the same in the New
Testament.

Asser. 4. What ever objections, Crisp, Saltmarsh, Town, and others, have to
prove, that all the marks of sincerity, love, universal obedience, agree to
hypocrites, and so can be no certain evidences of our faith, and assured
interest in Christ; are 1. such as Papists bring to prove, None can have
undoubted assurance they are in the state of grace. 2. The arguments that prove
these marks may be counterfeit, because they may be such in hypocrites. We
conclude also, that the Faith of the Saints, and their bro^d Seal, and
immediate Testimony of the Spirit, may be in hypocrites? A white Devil, and a
noonday Angel, may interpose himself in a bastard voice, counterfeiting the
tongue of the immediate speaking-Spirits, and the faith of the Elect; and there
can be nothing that Saints can rejoice in, no work of grace in themselves, by
the in-dwelling Spirit, and Christ may as well dwell in the heart of an
hypocrite by faith, as of a Saint, contrary to Ephesians. 3.17. Hypocrites may be
filled with all the fullness of Ephesians. 3.9.
God, as the Saints, and have the seed of God remaining in them. The anointing
abiding in them, which teaches them all things, and need not any to teach
them. 1 Ioh. ^.9.
And the Holy Spirit in them, and abiding with them. 1 Ioh. 2.27.
The Father and the Son making their abode with them. Ioh. 14.16.17.
A new heart in the midst of them, and the stony heart removed. Ioh. 14.23.
A circumcised heart, Ez^ch. 36.26 27. D^ut. 30.6 Ier. 31.33.34
the law in their inward parts. All these are as doubtful and litigious
evidendences of interest in Christ, and the counterfeits of these in hypocrites;
as universal obedience, sincerity, love to the brethren, and any inherent
qualifications that are in believers; for says Crispe vol. 2. ser. 15.
Crispe, All these may be in hypocrites. But its true, there is not a living
man, or beast, or bird in nature, but a painter can counterfeit the like by
Art; nor a rose, or flower in the garden, but there a is wild flower and rose
in the mountains like it. The Devil is an exact painter, But this will not
prove, but that he that has a new heart, and the anointing dwelling in him,
and inherent quallifications of the Spirit of Christ, knows with a full
persuasion, that these are not counterfeits, or such as may be in hypocrites;
nor does it follow, as Papists and Antinomians argue, a mad man, or a sleeping
man, knows not that he is mad or sleeping; (for madness and sleep remove
all reflect acts of knowledge) that therefore a sober man, and a waking man
knows not that he is sober. Paul was not in a golden transe, nor in a
pleasant night-dreame, when he said, 2 Cor. 1 12
For this is our rejoicing, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity
and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we had
our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to you-wards. Nor do the
Saints speak to God wildfire, and windmills in the skies, when they say,
Lord, the desire of our soul is toward thy name, Lord, Esai. 26.8*
our heart is not turned back Psalm 44 17.18.19 20.
neither have our steps declined from thy way, etc. They knew and were
persuaded of a saving work of grace inherent in them; and we doubt not, but
the Prophets (to speak of a case of another nature) knew that God spoke to
them, when Jeremiah, upon life and death said, Ier. 26 15.
of a truth, the Lord has sent me to speak all these words in your ears. And
Amos Amos 3.8.
The Lord has spoken, who cannot but Prophecy! And Abraham did not upon
conjectures, but upon Faith know, God had commanded him to sacrifice his Heb.
11.17.
son. Now God speaks to his Saints by his works of 1 Ioh 2 3. 1 Ioh. 4*18.9.
1 Ioh. 3^14. 2 Cor. 1.12.
grace, no less then by his word of the Gospel. Augustine Augustinus confess.
Discerno, nescio quo sapore, quem verbis explicare non postum, ^nter Deum
r^velant^^ and anim^m meam somniantem. The testimony of the Antinomian spirit
is a m^re litig^^us and contraverted evidence of s^ving grace, ^h^n acts of
sound sanctification.
said, By a certain heavenly taste, he knew a difference between the Lord
revealing himself to him, and his own soul dreaming.

But say Antinomians, When we teach, that all our assurance comes from faith,
and the testimony of Christ, and his own Spirit speaking to us, we led men to
borrow light from the Sun, which can abundantly inlighten them, when ye send
them to their own good works to borrow their assurance of faith, and their
interest of Christ, ye desire them to fetch light from a candle shining at
noone day, and ye cause them rest on a fallible guide, which may deceive them,
and at best, breed a probable and conjecturall assurance only, not an
infallible and undeniable confidence, such as Christ rested on, by faith,
breadeth.

Answ. 1. But the question is as great a doubt to a weak one, if he receive
Christ, and his immediate noonday irradiation and light, for the weak
believers act of knowing his full interest in Christ, from either the immediate
light that comes from Christ, or the immediate voice and testimony of the
Spirit, especially separated from the Word, as Antinomians fancy, is in him a
created act, and an inherent quallification, and if inherent qualification
furnish no infallible evidence to ascertaine me of my interest in Christ, how
shall I know, it is Christ I rest on, or his Sunshine light, and the
immediate irradiation of the Spirit, speaking to my Spirit, more then I know it
is Christ's spirit assuring me, I am translated from death to life, because I
love the brethren? Antinomians say, the Sun cannot deceive when it gives light,
a candle beside the Sun may deceive. But say I, a noonday Devil may
interpose, and speak, and irradiate as the Sun, and it is but a counterfeit
Sun, and what know ye, that your act of knowing this to be the true Sun,
seeing it is but an inherent act of grace in you, is a perfect metal, and a
true Sun? And that it is Christ that shines and speaks to Mary Magdelen,
not the Gardener; more when he immediately speaks and shines on your soul,
then when he speaks and shines through such a medium, as the love of the
brethren; for the same Spirit that inlighteneth you in the assurance of your
translation into Christ, and your interest in him, upon this objective light,
because ye love the brethren, is he who shines on you in his immediate
noone-shine-irradiation; is not the Spirits teaching as sure by one beam of
teaching the light of his utterings of grace in us, as in his other immediate
conveiance of light, when the Scripture says, it is the same Spirit, that
makes us know the things that are freely or graciously given us of God, 1 Cor.
2.12. and bears immediate witness that we are sons, what ever be the
means, as Abraham was to believe he was to kill his Son, if God should
command him, by a Prophet immediately inspired; suppose such a one as Moses, to
have been sent with the Mandat, no less then when God spoke immediately
himself, and might not Abraham have been deluded in thinking God, was not the
true God, that immediately said, Abraham, take now thy Son, thy only Son,
and offer him to me, as he might have doubted if a Moses (say he had then
lived) sent with the same message, was a true and and immediately inspired
Prophet, and not a counterfeit, who ran and the Lord sent him not? When
Antinomians loose this knot, they answer themselves.

Asser. 5. First, the truth of what the Spirit speaks, Note.
depends not on the Word, but the credence and faith that I owe to the
Spirit, depends on the Word, Assurance from evidences and assurance from the
Testimony of the Spirit, are both divine and supernatural evidences.
because I know the Spirit by the Word, as I know the substance of the body of
the Sun by the light, but I know not the Word by the Spirit, as I know not
the light by the substance of the body of the Sun; yea now, when God has put
his last seal to the Canon of Scripture; the word of Prophecy is surer to us
then the Fathers voice from heaven, 2 Pet. 1. and we may know the Spirit that
bids John Becold, kill so many innocent believers, and that says the man
walking in darkness, and a Pharesee obstinatly going on in killing Christ,
and his members, and regarding iniquity in his heart, as he is such, is
reconciled to God, and justified, and Christ by faith lodges in the same
heart, with loved and delighted in iniquity, can be no true spirit. The Spirit
of Christ as he cannot belly his own Word, so will he not take it ill* to be
tried by his own handwriting, and seal, and his own works.

Secondly, it is needless to make comparisons between assurance resulting from
inherent graces, and the immediate voice and speaking of the Spirit; as if the
former were our own spirits reasoning, the latter only the testimony of the
Spirit, for we judge both to be the testimony of the Holy Ghost; as it is the
same love sealed to the Spouse from the Bridegromes own word, and seal, and
handwriting, and confirmed to her by his Bracelets, Rings, Jewels, and
love tokens that he sends to her, nor are there for that two loves, two
love tokens, two Bridegromes. For say that the love tokens are true, not
counterfeit, and that they carry with them the warm and lovely characters, and
undeniable expressions of the true Bridegromes soule-love, and that they came
not from a stranger* as Antinomians say, they may be bastard and fained
love tokens, and come from another lover then Christ; Yet the Lord Jesus
manifests himself, and gives evidences of his love by them, no less then by
the Spirits immediate testimony.

But we think, and can prove the Saints passing, even in their speeches,
prayers, and confession to God, their judgment of themselves, and of their
own sincere walking, as is clear, Cant. 5.1. Cant. 3, 1, 2, 3. Cant. 1.5, 8.
Isai. 26.8, 9. Job 23.11, 12. chap. 31.1, 2 3, 4, etc. Psalm. 18.21, 22, 23, (so
Ezechiah holds forth his holy walking before God, Esai. 38.3. and Jeremiah,
cap. 15.16, 17. and Paul, 2 Timothy 4.7.8. 2 Cor. 1.12.) do certainly know the
graces of God in themselves, to come from no other principle then the Holy
Ghost; and that none can do these works in them, but Christ, and the inference
made from them, are the reasonings of the Holy Ghost, and the result is an
infallibly assurance. Antinomians think both they may be counterfeit works,
and the reasoning and inference from thence to be a work of our own Spirit
only. We say of the Spirit of grace joining with our Spirit, as is clear, 1
Cor. 2.12. (3.) The inference (say they) breeds no certain and infallible
assurance, but probable only, and conjecturall evidence. (4) If these works
were not done in faith, and known by us to be so done; I should grant they
could give but an uncertain and controverted evidence; Antinomians say, we
separate them from faith and saving grace, and that thus separated, they bear
testimony, that we are in Christ, which is a calumny of theirs, not our
Doctrine.

Asser. 6, The assurance of our spiritual acts resulting from our Christian
walking, The good works of Saints not pillars, yet means of faith and
assurance.
is a mediate assurance collected by inference, not immediate, as when we see
the Sun. 2. It is called knowledge and assurance in the Word, 1 John 2.3. 1 John 3.14. verse. 18.19. but it is not properly Faith, but sense; therefore we
do not build assurance of justifying faith on works of grace. Antinomians say,
that we make our works the pillars and causes of our Faith. But the promise*
the sufficiency of Christ, the free grace of God to us, are the only pillars
of our faith, and our works of grace are the ropes by which the ship and
passengers are drawn to the rock that is higher then themselves, but they are
not the rock; they are not the formal objective Sunne-light, by which we
pass our judgment and determination of Christ the Mediator, his sweetness
and power to save, nor the causes of the souls resting on the blood of
atonement* as Sunne-light is the formal reason and medium without, of our
judging of colors and their beauty. They are only landmarks, by which we may
the better judge of our state, and not the shore; the land-marke only shows
how near we are to shore; by them we know, that we know and believe in
Christ. Finally, they are rather negatives against unbelief, then positive
evidences of faith, and serve for encouragements that we cast not away our
confidence. For if I doubt of my state, whether I be translated, and in Christ,
or no, I cannot but doubt of my actions, if I doubt if the tree be a natural
Olive, I cannot but think the fruit must be but wild Olives; and when we shall
be unclothed with our darkness of body, we shall not need such crutches to
walk by Faith, for sight shall lead us.

CHAP. LVI. How duties and delight in them, take us not off Christ.
HEnce Antinomians, when they say, we must not so much as see our Town asser.
grace, page 66.
good works, for not to see them is Rise, reign, er. 67.
spiritual poverty, and we cannot see them, but we must trust Rise, reign,
er. 50.
in them, and build on them. And therefore best remove such chalk stones, and
rotten foundations, as holy walking, and live loosely, that we sowing sin,
may reap pardoning grace; So they say, Unsavory speeches, er. 7.
I know I am Christ's, because I do not crucify the lusts, but believe that
Christ has crucified them for me. And our sanctification, Rise, reign, er.
77.
when dark and less makes justification brighter. And Rise, er. 70.
frequencie and length of holy duties, are signs of one under a covenant of
works, and so under the curse of Law. And Er. 57.
to take delight in the holy service of God, is to go a whoring from God. And
Rise, er. 43. Libertines say, frequencie and delight in holy duties take us off
Christ.
the Spirit acts most in the Saints, when they endeavor least. All these say,
to be rich in works of sanctification is to be poor in grace. 2. To do and
act nothing, and so sinnefully to omit the duties that the grace of God calls
for. Tit. 2.11. is the way to have the Spirit acting graciously; then sin
that grace may abound, be sick, and exceeding sick, that Christ may bestow on
you much Gospel-physicke; To be abundant in the work of the Lord, to delight
in the Law of the Lord in the inner man, to labor more abundantly then they
all, to be rich in good works, are nothing else but to go a whoring from God.
So Saltmarsh Free grace. 84.
Saltmarsh expounds these words, I can do all things through Christ which
strengthens me. Such were ye, but ye are justified, but ye are sanctified,
etc. That Christ believed, repented, sorrowed for sin, mortified sin
perfectly for me, and this (says he) is sanctification, and the fullness of
his, the All in All. Then to do nothing my self, but sinnefully to omit all
duties, and let Christ do all, is full sanctification; and the less ye do,
the more Christ does for you.

Object. 1. Christ says not, Peter be encouraged to believe, because thou art
an holy, obedient, loving Apostle. But I have prayed that thy faith fail not,
Saltmarsh, Free grace, page 32.33.

Answ. In that place he does not show Peter how he should know by such and such
signs, that he believed; but for Peter's comfort and faith, he shows him the
true cause, why he should not fall away, to wit, because his Advocate
interceedeth for him.

Object. 2. Christ says not to his Apostles, O my Disciples, though I be from
you, yet ye have been thus and thus humble, penitent, obedient, and let this
be your ground and assurance when I am gone, but he lays in promises, ye
believe in God, believe also in me, I will send the Comforter Saltmarsh, page,
33.

Answ. We make no qualifications, object, or ground, or cause of faith, but
only signs to know we have faith, therefore might Christ have said, ye shall
know ye love me, and believe, How we may ab^se our evidences from walking by
looking to much on our own sanctified acts, and ^o little on Christ.
because you love those begotten of me.

1. But we think, though natural sweating at duties, sets not the Spirit
on edge to work graciously; yet to work by the grace of God, increases both
talents and grace.

2. Nor the frequent actings of grace, nor the simply looking on them
especially under sad hours, to wine to our feet again are ill, but the abuses
to be avoided. As 1. the comparative poring, and the more frequent living on
the comforts of our own gracious actings, more then on Christ himself and his
death, is as if I would live to much on a sight of a new created birth in my
self, and the Image of the second Adam, when I have Christ himself to live
on. 2. Excessive out-running, and over-banke-flowings of wondering at what is
done in our selves, by the grace of Christ, cannot want a great deal of
mixture of our self; for we are not so found on acttings of grace in others,
and that is a token there is a selfe-reflection in the work, and that I sit
down, and write of my self a hundred in stead of fifty. 3. All comparative
over-loving of created comforts must take the heart, in so far off Christ. 4.
We should wonder more at the depth and height of free grace in the Creator, and
in Christ the wellhead, then in our selves, for the beauty of grace, and
gracious actings are in Christ, pure, spiritual, clean abstracted; In us, in
whom there dwells a Law in the members, it is muddie, clayie, in dregs, and
concretion, abstracta sunt puriora concretis. 5. What we over-behold, that we
over love; what we over-love, in that we over-confide; the affections both in
their flowings, and their over-banke-flowings are linked together: so we see
not that actings of grace are made secret substituted Mediators with Christ;
but these flow from the corruption of our nature, not from the strain of our
Doctrine in these points.

CHAP. LVII. Of the liberty which Christ has purchased to us by his death.
ANtinomians Town asser, grace, page 26.
generally contend for a Christian liberty wherewith Christ has made us free,
and we contend for the same, but the question is, wherein the liberty
consists, it concerns us much, that we take not license for liberty. We
think, 1. We are freed by Christ, from not only Gal. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
the Ceremonial Law, so as Christ profits us nothing, if we come under that
Gal 5.1. Act. 15.10.
yoke again, but also from all Commandments of men; for all these Ceremonies
being now not commanded, but forbidden of God, become the Commandments of Col.
2.18.19.^0. Man. 15 9. 1 Cor. 7.23. Ye are bought with a price, be not the
servants of men.
men, from which both Jews and Gentiles were freed in Christ. 2. We are freed
and redeemed, Gal. 3 10, 11, 12, 13.
from the Moral Law as cursing, Romans 1.2, 3, 4.
and condemning, by Ioh. 8.36.
the Son of God who makes us free indeed. 3. We are redeemed from the dominion
of Romans 6.1^.13 14
sin, by the Spirit of 2 Cor. 3.17.
grace, for where this Spirit is, there is liberty; and Christ Ioh. 3.34, 35,
36.
freeth us from this service of sin, in regard that the Law is a Lord by
irritating our Romans 7.5, 6, 7.
corruption more and more (though this be accidental to the Spiritual Law)
Romans 7 6. Romans 8.3.
that brings forth in us Romans 7.11.13.
sons and children to death; and 2 Cor. 3.7, 8, 9.
over-aweth, and compels us to keep the Law, as a manifestation of wrath;
whereas the Spirit of the Lord is a free, sweet, lovely-constrayning-Spirit in
the Gospel-working, Romans 8.2, 3, 4. Gal. 5.18. Romans 8.15. 1 Ioh. 4.17.18.
in a far other way, obedience to the Law, then the Law-spirit of bondage
does. And upon these are we 4. freed from a necessity of being justified by the
Gal. 3.1.2, 3, 4 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
Law, or the works thereof. 5. From all conquering Law-power of all Luke 1.74.
Rom 8.37, 38.39.
enemies. But we are not delivered and freed from the commanding, directing,
obliging and binding power of the Law, as a binding rule of life; so as
believers once being believers sin not, because they are under no Law, far
less is it such a freedom, as is that which is from the yoke of the
Ceremonial Law, as Town asser. pa. 8.26.
Town says. But if we be free from the Law, with this kind of freedom, which
is license, it is free to us to sin, whereas the end of our Redemption is to
change the yoke of a condemning and cursing Law, in a sweet easy yoke of
Math. 11.29.
Christ, to serve God Luke 1.74.45. Tit. 2.11.1^.
in holiness and righteousness (the compend of the two Tables of the Law) to
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts. 2. The Word of God calls freedom from
doing Gods will, a not using Gal. 5.13.14.
our liberty in Christ, as an occasion to the flesh; and commands doing and
fulfilling of the Law, in loving our neighbor as our self. 3. The service of
sin is the greatest bondage that is, and the sinner is overcome by this
Tyrant; now Ioh 8 24, 25, 26. To. 6.^6, 17.
the Son of God has freed us from this bondage. Whosoever commits sin, is
the servant of sin; if the Son make you free, then are ye free indeed. And to
serve God is a free man's life, as David says, Psa. 119.45.
I will walk at liberty, for I seek thy precepts; and Christ has loved us, and
washed us in his blood, R^v 1.^.
and made us Kings and Priests unto God. Now Kings are, of all men, the freest
on earth: but Kings and Priests to God, are Lords over their own lusts, which
is more then to take a walled City, and are to offer themselves, and their
bodies, as Rom 12.1.
a holy, living, and acceptable sacrifice, which is their reasonable service.
4. And the whole Gospel urges the same; for it subjecteth us to Gods external
Commandment, of honoring father and mother, Ep^es. 6.^.
of having our conversation honest amongst the Gentiles, 1 Pet. 2.12.
in abstaining from fleshly lusts; of walking in Christ, as we have received
Col. 2.6.
him, and 1 These. 4.^.3.
it is the Commandment that the Apostle gave by the Lord Jesus, which is our
sanctification, and that we should abstain from fornication; and the whole
doctrine of the Apostles, that we be holy, as he is 1 Pet. 1.16.
holy; nor does the Law cease to be the Law to Town Asser. 143.
believers; as Town says, Because it neither can, nor actually does condemn
and curse these Page 3.^4.9*
that are in Christ, and consequently it cannot oblige them as a commanding
rule, for you cannot separate the condemning power of the Law (says Town
asser. page 31.
he) from the commanding power of it. If the Law cannot condemn, it loses the
being of the Law, and Luther says, it is no more Law, Lex non damnans, non est
Lex; not one jot or title of the Law Town asser. page 30.31
can perish. But the truth is, the Law as it is an instrument of the covenant
of works, How we are freed from the Law, how no^.
and justifies or condemns, cease to be the Law to the believer, as Luther
says, it cease to be the Law of life and righteousness, and the way to
heaven, according to the tenor of the first covenant, which is, He that does
these things, abiding in all things written in the Law, in thought, word, and
deed, perfectly, without the least breach, in one Iota, by his own strength, he
shall live, that is, he shall be justified, and obtain eternal life, by the
Law, without a Mediator, and shall be saved, but not be in Christ's debt, nor
obliged in one grain, to the grace of the Gospel. But where lives (I pray
you) this good man? Neither in heaven, nor earth, except the man Jesus Christ.
So the Law is not such a Law as can save, to any man now under sin: so Luther
says right, but it was never Luthers mind, that the Law simpliciter, cease
to be the Law commanding, and obliging to holy walking. So it is a sophisme a
(...) ad dictum, (...); the Law (...) as it justifies and saves Legally, is
no damning Law, and loses its being, as it is a covenant of works to all
believers. True; ergo, it is in no sort a Law to them, it follows not, such a
just Judge and King condemns not this guilty man, because his Son, the
Prince and heir suffered for him; ergo, he is not a Law-judge, condemning the
poor guilty man, true, but ergo, he is not King and Judge to command this man
to be obedient to all his good Laws, and ergo, this pardoned man, is in all
other things, and good Laws, loosed from this oath of allegiance and the band
of loyalty, and he is no more the the Kings subject; so as if the man now
break the Kings Laws, and he does not sin against the King, as Lawgiver, or
his Laws: surely it cannot follow, that the Law be urged in tenor of a mere
covenant of works; yea, or as hedged with ceremonial and bloody sacrifices,
that are Heralds of our guiltiness and handwritings of condemnation, is
accidental to the Law, not essential, though the Law have its denomination
from this sad office, Romans 7. Romans 8. Ye are dead to the Law, ye are not
under the Law; so that under the Gospel the Law is substantially and formally
the same, says Luther, as death is essentially the same, before the fall under
Moses, and under Christ, Luth. tom. 1. fol. 56. Relative non formaliter aut
substantialiter, est peccatum sublatum, Lex abolita, mors distructa, then the
Law in its essence and obliging power is eternal, never abolished.

But Antinomians will have the Gospel Grace to loose a man from all commanding
Laws, because he is pardoned, and because he gets a pardon for Adultery,
and murder, and such like, they conceive this pardon gives a dispensation,
that though he commit Adultery and Murder, being once a pardoned David, he
sins now against no Law; henee believe and be pardoned (says the
Antinomian) and sin if you can. The most ingenious Antinomian I know, is M.
Randall, who as M. Gataker says, Preached, that its as possible for Christ
himself to sin, as for a child of God to sin. Gatt^k^r Prefat. to Gods eye
on Israel, Mart^n (...).
And M. Simson, That if a man know himself, by the Spirit, to be in the state
of grace, though he be drunk, or commit murder, God sees no sin in him --
And when Abraham denied his wife, and lied, even then, truly, all his thoughts,
words, and deeds, were perfectly holy, and righteous from all spot of sin in
the sight of God. And Randall, Its blasphemy for a child of God to crave pardon
for sin. And it cannot be avoided, the Adultery of a believer is but seeming
Adultery, and he is an Adulterer and a sinner, so (says Saltmarsh Free grace,
page 154.
Saltmarsh) to the eyes of the world, and elsewhere to sense and feeling, not
truly and before God, or in his account; for to Faith (says Tow^e asser.
71.72.
Town) there is no sin, And even that same Text, That not a tittle of the
Law can perish, proves the same; for Matthew. 5.19. Whosoever (believer, or
unbeleever) shall break one of these least Commandments, The place Math.
5.19. I came not to destroy the Law, etc. opened.
and shall teach men so, (as Antinomians do) shall be called the least in the
kingdom of heaven; and whosoever shall do, and teach the same, shall be
called great in the kingdom of heaven. Now, 1. that Christ speaks of the Law
there, as ordinarily, it was taken for a binding and obliging rule is clear,
verse. 17, Think not I am come to destroy the Law and the Prophets; for he
speaks of that, which he came to fulfill; but he came to fulfill the Law by
doing and suffering. 2. That which may be broken in a sinful way, is a
binding and obliging rule; but the Law Christ speaks of there, may be broken;
for he says, Whosoever therefore shall break, etc. (2.) That he intends
that the Law stand as a rule binding to personal obedience, and not to
imputative obedience, only in the Mediator is clear. For 1. he says,
Whosoever shall break the least of these, it must be understood of personal
breaking not imputative; for he that breaks the Law in Christ, his breach
being imputed to Christ, shall not be the least man, but a chief man in the
kingdom of heaven, even a heir of heaven. 2. If the binding and obliging Law
be not understood, Christ came, in the Antinomian sense, to free believers
both from the cursing, and obliging, and commanding Law. Now sure Christ came
to destroy the Law, as it curses and condemns believers, for he exhausted
the curse, and dyed the cursed death for us, but he came not to take away the
binding power, because he both threatens the breaker, and the Antinomian
teacher of breaches, with being the least of the kingdom of heaven, that is,
with being excluded out of heaven, by a meiosis, for it is opposed, to be great
in the Kingdom, and also he promises a reward to the doer, he shall be great
in the kingdom. Now that Law which is hedged with threatening, and reward is a
binding Law. 2. The believer can neither break the Law in order to punishment,
nor keep and do the Law in order to reward, by the Antinomian way, because
they are freed from all binding and obliging Law (say the Antinomians) as well
as from all cursing and condemning Law: so Christ could do no more, if he
intended to come in the flesh, to destroy the Law, then if he should take away
the whole, nature and being of the Law; for he removes (say the Antinomians)
all the binding and commanding, all the threatening and minatory power, and the
rewarding and promissory power of the Law from believers. What then leaves he
of the Law to any man who believes? Just nothing. Antinomians say; Christ came
to fulfill the Law by doing and suffering, and so came not to destroy it.

An^w. That cannot be his meaning here; for the Argument of our Savior should
so conclude nothing; and it is this, If whosoever breaks the least
Commandment of the Law, and teaches others, to do so, be debarred out of
heaven, and who so does, and teaches men to do the Law, be great in heaven,
then I the Savior of man, came not to destroy, but to fulfill the Law. But the
former is true. Ergo, so is the latter. The major proposition has no truth;
for by the Antinomian way, believers, according to the Antinomian Gospel, are
neither excluded heaven in breaking the Law, nor admitted to heaven in doing
the Law; but Christ does all for them, and they are not excluded heaven, for
breaking a Law; they are freed from all binding, commanding, and obliging power
of the Law; and who can break a Law, who is under no Law? Where there is no
Law, there is no transgression, says Saltmarsh, applying it wickedly to this
case, and to all trouble of conscience for sin, when we are once justified.

5. The Antinomians place liberty from the Law, in the free, loose, and wide
walking, without any fear of sinning against a Law, which to them is a
shadow, a fancy, and nothing and in being compelled for fear of wrath and
eternal vengeance, T^wne asser. 137.
to love and serve God, as if the Law of God did command us to serve God, for
fear of wrath, and hire or hope, of reward. But the holy Law of God bids us
fear sin before and after it is committed. For Levit. 19.3 Deuteronomy. 4.10. Deuteronomy.
5 29. 1 Chr^. 16.30 2. C^ro. 6.31 Ne^ 1.11. Psalm. 31 1^. P^al. 7.^. Ps^^.
76.1^. Esa^. 59 19. Ie^. 10.7.
the Law commands the whole fear of God, and the offending of his Majesty by
sin. And ^rov. 8.^4.
happy is the man that fears always; this fearing of sin is contrary to
hardness of heart, he is happy who Eccles. 9.2. Antinomians are ignorant of
the Law, and of our freedom from it, as if the Law should command slavish
fear and mer^^nary service.
fears an oath, lest he be ensnared. Now fearing sin as sin is contrary
to a law. is bondage, and flows from the Spirit of bondage (say Antinomians)
Yea it is unbelief, and a making God a liar, because (say they) there is no
spot of sin in the believer; But the believer is not, and shall not be, till
his dying day, as free of sin, and spotless in the sight of God, as Christ
Eaton Honey comb, p^. 41 108. ^^d cap. 3. p^g. 25. C^isp. vol. ^. ^er.
himself, and whosoever fears sin, and believes not that Honey comb page
40.108.
God sees no sin in him, being once justified, robs God of his glory, and
is undoubtedly damned, say they; for its unpossible, God can see sin, where
there page 108.
is none at all, say they; nor is this our freedom to be freed from the Law,
that is from the servile fear of eternal wrath, or mercenary hope of reward,
as if the Law of God could command such slavish fear and hireling hope, as
Honey comb cap. ^. page 77 78 79.
Town says. For the Law never did, never could command sin, but so to fear
or serve God, as to seek him early, when his rod is on us, and when he Town
ass. 137. It cannot be (...) said that my spirit does tha^ v^luntarily which
the command of the Law binds and forces unto, page 11, 12.13.14.
slays us, when the heart is like a deceitful bow, as Psalm. 73. v. 34.35, 36
37.38.
Pharaoh did, is slavish fear, and to serve the Almighty, for hire or gain is
Exodus 6.22, 23.24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
sin; to fear the punishment, and love the reward, more then God, is slavish
and mercenary: Gods holy Law can command no fear, no obedience, but what is
free, liberal, ingenuous, sinlesse, sonnely, filial and holy, for the Law is
Job 1 9. Job 21.15. Mal, 3.14.
spiritual; it is Romans 7.14.
holy, just, and good.

6. Christian liberty is not in freedom from subjection and obedience to
Magistrates, Masters, Kings, Parliaments; for this, Peter Romans 7, 14.
says, is to use our liberty as a cloak of maliciousness, and that opened
the mouths of ignorant and foolish heathen, 1 Pet. 2.10. 1 Pet. 2.16.
who objected this to some peeping-up Antinomians in these days, who said,
their Christian liberty freed them from that yoke of subjection to lawful
Authority, Kings, Governors, Masters; now beside that, Antinomians teach, that
Saints should not serve, nor obey those that are not Saints, nor believers, as
if Dominion and Civil power were founded on grace, as Papists teach. They do
not speak out, but when they teach that Murders, Adulteries or any thing done
against our brethren, or to the disturbance of the peace of humane Societies,
committed by believers, are no sins before God; and that there is no more
sin in the children of God, then in 1 Pet. 2.14.15. Christ freeth us not from
obedience to Superiors; as Antinomians insinuate, if they would be plain
Christ himself: and upon this ground, God in justice cannot Eaton Honey
comb, cap 3. page 25.
punish, yea, nor Honey comb, cap. 7. page 138.
rebuke them for sin. Then say I, these Adulteries, and Murders committed by
believers, if they be no sins against God nor his Law, they can be no
sins before man Honey comb, cap. 4.72.
neither. For the Magistrate bears the sword R^n. 13.3.4. 1 Pet. 2.14.
to take vengeance on evil doers; if these be not sins against God, even
because they are sins against our neighbor, then the Magistrate does
unjustly punish them. 1. The Magistrate is the Vicegerent of God, 2 Chronicles. 19 6.
not judging for man but for the Lord, and so should not punish, but for these
ill deeds, for the which the Lord himself would punish. But the Lord judges
them, Magistrates cannot draw the sword of God against (...) murders,
adulter^es, are oppressions of believers, because by the Antinomian way, they
are not real, but imaginary sins.
neither sins against his Law, nor can, in justice, punish them, say
Antinomians. Ergo, neither can the Lords Vicegerent judge them sins; for they
are against no Law of God, nor can he punish them upon the same reason. 2. The
Law commands to Love our neighbor as our selves, no less then to love God;
and he that loves not his brother, 1 Job. 3.15. 1 Job. 2.8* 9, 10.
loves not God; and then, who ever sins not as an evil doer against God,
cannot sin against his brother, and the peace of humane Societies, and so the
Magistrate ought not to draw his sword against him. I grant, Gods not punishing
sin, is not a ground, nor rule, to the Magistrate; not to punish sin, but
sure, Gods not punishing sin, and his none-displeasure against any thing, as
no sin, as having lost the nature and being of sin, as being against no
Law; as all the Adulteries, Murtherings, Cousonings, Cheatings, Robbing,
Stealing, false-Witnesse-bearing of believers are supposed to be, in regard
they are no more sins against a Law of God, then any thing that Christ does,
must be a rule to the Civil Magistrate, who may no more strick the innocent,
who fails against no Law of God, nor he may kill, rob, and oppress.
Antinomians make a found escape from this, they say, The Adulteries, Murders,
lyings of believers, are sins before men, not before God, or sins to their
sense and feeling, not to their faith, and before God, or sins in
conversation, not in conscience, or sins in the flesh, not in the Spirit; So
Town assert. 39 40.
Town, Saltmarsh Free grace. page 57.
Saltmarsh, De^ne Ser. Of the Man of sin, page 9.10 11.12.
Den, Eaton Honey comb^, ^ap. ^. page 87. and 95.
Eaton. So the Magistrates do punish men for seeming Adulteries, and Murders
fancied to be murders, but are not so indeed, nor before God; only the
unbeleeving weak conscience, and erring sense, or flesh takes them to be
sins, but they are not any real injuries to God, nor contrary to any Law of
God. 2. The Magistrate in conscience cannot judge that to be violence to the
life of a brother, nor worthy of death, which no Law of God can condemn as a
sin; nor can he, in justice, for imaginary Murder inflict real death. 3.
Adultery and Murder must be then true and real innocencies.

CHAP. LVIII. Antinomians teach, believers must not walk in their
conversation, as in the sight of God, but must live by faith with God.
ANtinomians from their mis-understood justification (of which they be utterly
ignorant) with Familists, infer, That justified persons must not walk, and
live blamelesly with men, and by sense, but must live, and have their daily
conversation in the sight and presence of God; and so they abandon all
sincerity of holy walking before men, and must live by faith, up with God
without sin. Dr. Tailor strongly proves the Law to be in force to believers,
because the same sins are forbidden, after faith, and before faith, and so the
same holy and sincere doing of the Law, by personal strength of free grace, is
given to us in Christ; and Town asser. 39.10.
Town answers him, Keep the Law and works here below on earth, and as
Enoch, converse in spirit, and walk with God, in the alone righteousness of
Christ, and though justification be one individual action, and not by
succession and degrees, as inherent holiness, yet the virtue and efficacy of
it is to clear the coast of the conscience from all sin, to keep the
unbeleever in everlasting favor, peace, security, happiness, though the
Jebusite must be in the Land, and the prick in the flesh, uncessantly forcing
us to sin more, or less, inwardly, or outwardly; yet Faith banisheth all the
vapors that arise from our earthly members. The same Saltmarsh Free grace*
page 74.^42 cap. 32. p^c^. 2
Saltmarsh has. But this is a subtle way of fleshly living. 1. The word
requires sincerity, as in the sight of God, in our walking and conversing,
here on earth below with men. Servants (says Col 3.11.
Paul) obey in all things, your masters according to the flesh, not with
eye-service, as men-pleasers, but in singleness of heart, fearing God. Then
servants are to serve, as believing they are under the eye and sight of God;
and childrens obeying their parents, is Col. 3.20.
well-pleasing to God; then does God see and judge our works; and Enoches
walking with God, was not in only believing that GOD walked with God, or the
Son Christ with the Father for him, as Town asser. 41.42.
Antinomians say, making imputative sanctification all in all that is required
in us, but also in Enochs personal, holy, and sincere conversing with men.
Hence that goes as a description of the good Kings of Israel and Judah; He did
right in the sight of the Lord. Which includes their conversation on earth
with men, as well as their faith in God So to walk as the 1 Thessalonians. 5 6 7.^.
children of the day. As wise men, not as fools G^l 5.15.
in Christ, as Coloss. 2.6.
we have received him, and to live no longer the rest of our time 1 Pe^. 4.2.
in the flesh, to the lusts of men, but to the will of God, to have our
conversation 2 Cor. 1.12.
in the world, by the grace of God, in simplicity and godly sincerity. All
these, and many the like, hold forth necessarily a sincere walking before God,
as in his sight, in our daily conversation with men; and the Antinomian
doctrine in this, is that, though believers walk as carnal men, serve their
lusts, whore, lie, cosen, deceive, yet they are strongly to believe, that God
sees them not, nor any fleshly and sinful walking in them. God seeeth not
their whoring, lying, cheating, cousening to be sin, and their believing
that God sees not their wickedness, is their living by faith, and walking in
the Spirit with God up in heaven, as Enoch did.

2. Nothing of believing Antinomians sins, but their flesh, as the Libertine
said in Calvines time, I sin not, but mine Ass, Non ego pecco. sed A^inus
meus, caro mea.
the flesh; the conscience the justified person that is in Christ sins not,
because the flesh is under the Law, (as Town Town asser. page 35.
says) nor is this sinning of the flesh, sin; because sin essentially is
against a commanding Law, and cannot but in the sight of God be, accounted
sin, for God cannot (seeing all his judgments and ways are according to
righteousness) but account Adultery to be Adultery, Murder to be Murder;
but Antinomians say, nothing that a believer does, no Adulteries, nor Murders
are sins, nor can God see them as sins; For how can the Lord see sin
(says Eaton H^ney comb ca^. 3. page 77.
Eaton,) where there is none? There is no more sin Honey comb cap. 3 25.
in a believer, then in Christ himself.

3. It is no matter (says Honey comb cap. 3 25.
Eaton) that we feel sin and death still in us, as if Christ had not taken
them away, because God thus establishes the Faith of his power: and therefore
that there may be place for Faith, we feel the contrary; for it is the nature
of Faith to feel nothing; but letting go reason, shuts her eyes, and
opens her ears to that which i^ spoken by God, and cleaves to the word
spoken both living and dead. Its true, Faith believes pardon, and freedom
from the guilt and obligation to eternal wrath, which is a Gospel Truth, far
from sense, but faith closes not its eyes to believe a lie, that Adultery is
no sin before God, because a justified man committed it. The glory of God
needs not to beg help of a lie, that it may be manifested.

4. By this the justified man lives and abides (as Town Town asser. f grace,
page 129.130.
says) for ever, by faith, in the sight of God. But what haste? The
Resurrection is not past yet, except Antinomians with Familists follow Hymeneus
and Phyletus, nor are the justified yet glorified, they abide not ever under
Gods eye sinnelesse, and as clean as Christ, (as Honey comb cap. 3. page 2^.
Eaton blasphemeth, to his everlasting shame) for the Jebusite (says Town
assert. page 40.
Town) remains in the Land, the Law of the members, and sinful corruption
of the flesh, dwells in them. 2. They must say daily, Forgive us our sins,
if God be their Father, else they need not pray daily, Hallowed be thy name,
thy Kingdom come, etc. 3. The flesh of sin dwells with the Spirit, Romans 7.
while they live. 4. Death is not an imaginary lie and fancy, so as Faith must
believe the contradicent; that is, that believers breath goes not out, they
return not to their dust, they are to believe; sure, believers see corruption,
Acts 13.36. Act. 2.27, 28, 29. 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44. Then Antinomians cannot
say true, that there is no more sin in believers, nor any thing having the
nature and being of sin, then is in Christ. 5. They are not yet enjoying God
in a vision of glory, as Christ did, even in the days of his flesh, for he was
both viator and comprehensor, a traveller to the Crown, and an enjoyer of the
crown, and therefore though justified, they must walk here below, and cannot
choose but sin, though they be not forced to sin, (as Town asser. grace,
pa. 40.
Town says.)

CHAP. LIX. How Justification is one indivisible act, not successive, as
Sanctification, and yet God daily pardons sins.
We make no question but we are at once justified, and not by degrees and
succession, as we are sanctified, because justification is a foreinsecall, and
Law-change, or judicial sentence of God, absolving the person of the sinner
from all punishment, or obligation to punishment due to him for sins, past,
present, and to come, according to the rule of revenging, and Law-persuing
justice, and that for the alone righteousness of the surety Christ, freely
imputed, and by faith received of him, 1 Ioh. 1.8.
and the blood of Jesus Christ shall purge you from all your sins: Ephesians. 1.7.
in whom we have redemption, the remission of our sins in his blood. Now the
Scripture no where intimates a favor of free grace in purging us from sins,
by halves or quarters, as if some were half washen, half delivered from the
wrath to come; and half unwashen, and half under wrath. 2. There is no
condemnation to a soul once in Christ, and justified, Romans 8.1. then there can
be no re-acceptation, or second receiving of a soul into the state of a
justified person, from the state of an ungodly man, as if he had fallen from
the former state, and there can be no second deliverance from eternal wrath,
to be inflicted for a new committed sin.

Yet do I not see that one and the same justification negagatively, because it
is never retracted, is therefore a successive and graduall work that grows
more and more, as sanctification does; for so predestination to glory, which is
negatively, one and the same should be a graduall growing work; for as no
shadow of change can fall on God, so neither can Predestination be retracted.

Yet is there no cause to deny that sins are daily pardoned, and remitted as
they are committed; for God is said to remit sins daily, when he renews the
sense of the once passed act of atonement, and applies what he once did to
the feeling and comfort of the believer, for we never taught that Faith is a
cause, or so much as an instrument or condition, without which Christ does not
on the Cross, by the power of his blood take away sins, now he that denies
that God by his Spirit renews the lively apprehension of this act of
atonement, must deny that a believer can oftener then once lay the weight of
his soul, in a filial recumbencie on God, and with adherence to Christ
crucified for pardon of sin; which were to abolish the daily exercise of our
faith on Christ crucified. 2. God forgiveth sins, when he removes the
temporal punishment, and fatherly rod inflicted for sin. Hence to bear our
whoredoms, to bear sins, to bear iniquity, is to bear the punishment of
sins Lev. 7.^8. The sou^e that eats shall bear his iniquiti^. Lev 20 19.
L^vit. 5.1, 17. Levit. 10.17. Levit. 21.16. Ezec. 18.19, 20. Ezech* 4 4. ^srael
shall bear their iniquity, Esa^. 53.^1 Christ shall bear their iniquities;
that is, he shall be punished for their iniqu^ties, Levit 20 20. they shall
b^^re their (...), they shall dye, (...) bears the iniquity of the holy
things of the people.
To bear the indi^nation of the Lord, because the Church has sinned, Micha
7.8, 9. is to bear the temporal punishment: for otherwise the Prophet
speaks of a Church in favor with God, and freed from eternal wrath. The
Lord shall be^ my light. Thou shall be d^mbe because thou beleevest not my
word, says Gabriel to Zachary, Luke 1.20. then to remove the temporal sword,
must be a forgiving of, and a relaxing from the temporal punishment. So
Nathan says to David, 1 S^m. 12.13. Sin is daily r^mitted, (...) t^mporal^
punishment is removed.
The Lord also has put away thy sin. But how makes he that good? Thou shall
not dye; He means, especially a temporal death, as the words following
clear, verse. 14. Howbeit, because by this deed, thou have given great occasion
to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme; the child also that is borne to thee
shall surely dye. Ergo, his sin was not fully taken away, in regard of the
temporal rod: for the rod did never depart from his house for it, nor do we
thus add fuel to purgatory; to say with Papists, that pardoning of sin, is
the taking away of the guilt of sin, when the punishment remains* for the
Papists have a wicked meaning, that God does so forgive sins, as he removes
guilt, and remembers not the sin, but leaves the sinner also as good as half
drowned in it, to revenging justice, by suffering for these same sins
satisfactorie punishment both in this life, and in purgatory, or the life to
come, which we think impious; for only Christ's blood is a satisfaction to
revenging justice for sin. 3. The Lords taking away, and pardoning of David's
sin, is not the Lords justifying of David, because justification is the real
or law-translation, in a forensecall way of a sinner, an ungodly man, an
unwashen one from the state of sin, into the state of grace and favor with
God for the imputed righteousness of Christ, as is clear, and such were some of
you, but ye are washed, 1 Cor. 6.11. Taking away or remitting of sin, in
some sense, a far other thing then justification.
but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, so God justifies the sinner
and ungodlie; then by justification the person is washed and translated from a
state of ungodlines, of enmity, and received in a court of acceptance and
grace, reconciliation and atonement, in a covenant-state with God for Christ's
imputed righteousness, so as this justification is an act of incorporation and
ingraffing of a stranger and enemy to be a free Denison, and Burgess, and free
Citizen of the new Jerusalem, entitled to all the privileges and liberties of
the brough. Now David was not this way pardoned; for undeniably he, for his
person was justified, and all his sins pardoned; that is, he was freed from
obligation, to eternal wrath and condemnation; therefore seeing God justifies
but once, as he makes us heirs and Citizens of heaven but once, and yet
pardons sins daily, justification, and some remitting of sins, must be of
a wide difference.

CHAP. LX. How sins are remitted before they be committed, how not, and the
Antinomian error in this point.
BUt then it may be said, do Antinomians soundly affirm that sins are
remitted before they be committed? To which I answer, taking remission in a
good sense, not in theirs; its true, a believer when he is justified, is freed
from condemnation for these sins that are not yet committed: that is, he is
put in such a condition, as he shall never come to condemnation; yea, not for
these sins he shall hereafter commit: as when a forfeited Father is relaxed
from treason, and his lands restored, the Pardon extends to the heir in the
mothers womb, and not yet borne, yea, possibly not begotten; but this is
neither a justifying of the unborne heir, nor a pardoning of the treason, nor
a relaxing of the punishment, in a strict and right down sense; he that is
not, and is not capable of guiltiness and treason, such as is a child, neither
begotten, nor borne, is not capable of pardon. But in the Antinomian sense, we
judge it abominable, that sins are removed, before they be committed. 1.
Because Antinomian remission is the destruction of the being of sin, and the
extirpation of his nature, root, and branch: for so it cannot be sin, nor can
it be against the Law of God, nothing is capable of the grace of free pardon,
neither the sin, or the poor sinner; but by the Antinomian way, the
Adulteries, and Murders of the believers, when committed, are neither against
Law, nor the Commandment of God, for they are freed from all commanding and
obliging power, of either Law or Gospel; so as they cannot sin or offend God,
in contravening of either. 2. It is against common sense, that the being or
nature of Adultery, can be removed, and made nothing, and yet when it is
committed, it should offend humane society, and raise an evil report on the
name of God and the Gospel. For that which is mere nothing, and has neither
being, nor nature, can neither offend God nor man. But neither Law of God, nor
Gospel, does forbid the Murders of a believer, but only of an unbeleever, by
the Antinomian way. 3. Their remission of sin, before the commission thereof,
charge confession of committed sins with sinful lying, craving of pardon
with unbelief, fearing of sin with distrust; sorrow for, or feeling of sin
with a work of Legal bondage, and of the old Adam, as Libertines did, because
these committed sins are mere fancies against no Law of God.

CHAP. LXI. How Faith justifies, and the Antinomian error discovered in this
point.
SAltmarsh Saltmarsh Free grace, page 188.189.
says, That neither Faith nor Repentance are to be preached, the one without
the other, neither without Christ, and yet neither of them as bringing in
Christ to the soul, but Christ bringing in them.

But if he charge us with Preaching faith and repentance one from another, or
both without Christ, he should have proved his charge. 2. He badly joyneth
them both together. For 1. Faith is a condition of justification; we are
justified by faith, not by repentance. 2. We receive Christ by Ioh. 11.12.
faith. He Ephesians. 3.17.
dwells in our hearts by Faith; Hab. 2.4. Rom* 1.17*
We live by faith; none of these can be said of Repentance. 3. Saltmarsh says,
this is to debase faith; yea, but it is to make swine wallowing in their lusts
one with Christ, though they believe not: hear his reasons.

Saltmarsh Free grace 1.8. Saltmarshes reas^^s to prove we are not (...) by
(...), answered.
Object. 1. Christ is not ours, by any act of our own, but by an infinite act
of Gods imputing his righteousness. Ergo, Christ is not ours by faith.

Answ. Christ is not ours, by any act of our own, as by a ransom, a
meritorious and principal cause. True, Ergo, not by faith, as a condition
knowing, apprehending, feeling, applying, receiving, opening the everlasting
doors, that the King of glory may enter in. Its false. So bread is ours only,
by an omnipotent act of him that causes the earth to bring forth, as by the
first principal and effectual cause: Ergo, Bread is not ou^s in a civil way,
by plowing, sowing, earing, and in a spiritual way, by laying hold by Faith on
the Covenant, in which the world, the things of this life are made ours, 1 Cor.
3.21. this is a laxe and vain consequence.

Object. 2. If Faith should give us an interest in Christ, then as our Faith
increases, Saltmarsh Free grace. 189.
our interest increases, and we should be more and more justified and
forgiven.

Answ. Nor does this follow, but only we should be the more assured, the
stronger our faith is. And the reason why it follows not, is this; Faith
justifies not as great or small, or as strong in life, or as weak, but as
living and true. And so it follows not, because this beggar has a stronger
arm then a paralitick beggar, that therefore he receives more money then the
paralitick does.

Object. 3. If Christ be ours by faith, then when faith cease, we should
cease to be justified.

Answ. Nor does that fellow more, then because a beggar is not ever in the act
of stretching out his hand, and receiving, that therefore he receives nothing;
and because a hungry man does not eat when he should sleep, night and day,
therefore he is not fed; as if Christ should reach pardon and righteousness
to us, when we actually believe, and when ever out of infirmity, or any other
way, we doubt, and our feet slip, he should pull in his pardon, and strip us
naked of our wedding garment, a Novation way of despairing.

Object. 4. Can a sinner be too foul for a Savior, too wounded for a
Physician to heal? and too filthy for a Fountain opened to wash?

Ans. Nothing is concluded against justification by faith; but it presumes a
believer the humblest nothing; that is, to be so proud that he cannot look out
to Christ for salvation, physic, and to be washen, he is so filthy, sick,
wounded, and polluted: a believer thinks not himself too good, and too holy
a sinner to be washed and made fair; like some, in whom pride and want contest;
beg they must for extreme necessity, and beg they cannot, for extreme
hautinesse, because they beg not in Silks and Purple.

Object. 5. He that offers Christ, offers all conditions in him, both of Faith
and repentance, for Christ is exalted to give repentance.

Answ. The Argument presupposes a faith of the sinners own creating, which is
a bastard, and cannot own, nor receive Christ, and a condition of the same
nature. In Justifying the ungodly, Christ both works the condition, and that
which is called the hire (though indeed no money, no price, is Faiths money and
price) and gives both; as in effectual calling, Christ is both without doors
knocking, Revel. 3.20. and within doors opening, Act. 16.19. yet he never
comes in, but upon condition we open, and the condition is his own work; he
comes in to no soul in a miracle, when the doors are shut, for by his grace
he removes the handles of the bar; so in justification, he both offers
imputed righteousness, so the sinner believe, and he works belief, and
brings of his own, when he comes to sup with us; for repentance we give it
not the room of Faith, as Antinomians do.

Object. 6 It is no more to offer Jesus Christ, Saltmarsh ibid. 190.
then any grace of Christ to a sinner; for a sinner is as unprepared and unfit
for the one, as the other, equally in sin and pollution to both.

Answ. All proceeds on a false ground, and concluds as much against Paul, Romans
3. and 4. Gal. 2. and 3. as against us, to wit, that we hold faith to be a
meritorious preparation of our own to conquiesse justification, and freely
imputed righteousness, and we are alike unprepared for Christ, as for Faith,
and for Faith as for Christ, except Christ give both freely. But it follows
not therefore, Christ justifyeth no ungodly man, but a believer only; no more
then it follows, faith is no meritorious qualification for life; then must it
follow, he that believes not, is not damned, and he that believes is not
saved, which is down right against the Gospel.

Saltmarsh ibid. 190.
Object. 7. This spiritual work is a new creation, Ergo, it needs no
preparation.

Answ. It is a creation or a work of omnipotency only, that Christ reveal to
me that he dyed to justify sinners, and to justify me; then it needs no
faith to my sense and feeling, to apprehend and know that Christ justifyeth me.
This consequent Antinomians will deny; then we may deny their consequence. For
conditions are preparations of grace, such as faith is, cannot be contrary to
rewards and favors that omnipotency only can work.

Object. 8. Should sinners refuse to receive blood freely, and of grace holden
forth, because their vessels are not clean enough for it, when it is such a
blood as makes the vessels clean for it self?

Answ. Grants all; then must it follow, we are not justified, except by a faith
as strong and great, that it is free of sin, and condignely meritorious,
worthy of Christ's blood, as a clean vessel is fit to receive so precious
blood; we grant, we receive not first imputed righteousness, and Christ's blood
in a clean vessel, with a faith perfect, or in a soul void of sin; yet its
as true, that no unbeleever remaining an unbeleever, can receive Christ; and it
is as true, Christ before hand fitteth the vessel, and gives faith first, and
then his own blood, and imputed righteousness, and both without price and
hire. But hence is never concluded, Ergo, Christ's righteousness is not made
ours by Faith, apprehending Christ's righteousness, as a condition or
instrument, but the contrary must be a true consequence.

Object. 9. If God justify no man but a believer, then he does not, as the
Scripture says, justify the sinner and the ungodly: for a believer is godly,
holy, and clean from sin.

Answ. We grant, the Lord does not justify an ungodly man, as an ungodly man,
and as void of faith, for by order of nature, he is first a believer, and in
Christ, and then he is justified, though there be no ordinary time between his
ungodliness and his justification, the Lord justifies the ungodly, in sensu
diviso, not in sensu composito, as the Scripture says, The lame man shall
Esai. 35.6.
leap, the tongue of the dumb shall sing, and Math. 11.5.
the blind see, the deaf hear; but no man dreamed that the lame as lame
remaining lame, does leap, and that the dumb remaining dumb can sing, and that
the blind, as blind, and wanting eyes and organes do see. I confess, if
Christ had caused the blind, as blind, to see; and the dead, as dead, and lying
in their graves, to live; the miracle should put all Divines to School again,
to try their contradictions, if one, and the same man, at the same time, in
the same sense, (...), as Aristotle taught us, be both lame and whole in the
legs, blind and seeing, deaf and hearing, dead and living; it may be
Antinomians who will have the believers Adultery no Adultery, have a way of
Logic of their own, to go with Libertines, who said, knowing sin to be
sin, holiness to be holiness, was a work of the flesh, and of old Adam,
who through eating the forbidden fruit, knows good and evil. But so you will
say, If God justify the ungodly, believing, which is an act of sanctification,
must go before justification, then are we sanctified, and can do that which
is pleasing to God, before we be justified, and be in Christ, then must we
please God, as believers, ere we be in Christ, and so exercise acts of the life
of grace, before we be in the Vine tree, and before we be branches ingraffed in
Christ; for sure, to believe is an act of the life of Christ in us.

Answ. If belief or faith be an instrument, and so a cause in its kind, or a
condition (call it as you will) without which Paul in the Epistle to the
Romans, and Galathians, and Hebrews, etc. says, we cannot be justified, I
see not any inconveniencie of this order.

1. The sinner dead in sin, a son of wrath. 2. A walker after the course of
the prince Satan, The order of conversion, and ^f the Lords justifying the
sinner.
who rules in the children of disobedience. 3. The Gospel of free grace is
Preached to the dead, to the Elect, heirs of wrath, but freely for Christ's
sake, and with an intent on the Lords part of the same circumferance and
sphere, with the decree of the election to glory, though they know not. 4. The
Law and curses of it preached to them (with the Gospel, lest they despair) to
humble them. 5. The sinner Legally humbled, slain in the dead throw, Romans
7.11. with a hal^e-hope of mercy, prepared for Christ, though the preparation
have no, 1. promise of conversion. 2. No ground, nature, or shadow of merit.
3. No necessary connection with conversion, save only that God may intend the
same preparation, in an elect, for conversion; which he intends for no
conversion in a reprobate. 6. The stony heart of mere grace removed, in the
same moment, a new heart put in him, Ezech. 36.26, 27. Zach. 12.10. Deuteronomy. 30.6.
Jer. 31.33. or the habit of sanctification infused. 7. In the same moment, the
soul believes in him that justifies the ungodly. 8. In the same moment, God,
for Christ's sake, of mere grace justifies the believing sinner.
And every one of these necessarily presupposes the former. Nor can
Antinomians free themselves, How the infused habit of sanctification, and the
habit of faith, and the act of believing, by order of nature, go before
justification.
or any with them, of the pretended inconveniencie, they would put on us, to
wit, that we must believe, before we be actually joined to Christ, in
justification; for they will have us justified, and so please God, and actually
enjoy the fruit of election, which is justification, Romans 8.29. before we
believe, that is, before we feel, and to our own sense know, that we are
justified. Now this feeling and knowledge, is an intellectual act of the life
of God, and the habit of an infused new heart, of regeneration, as well as our
justifying Faith, and so we yet exercise an act of the life of Christ, which
must be an act of saving grace, actus secundus, or a life-operation flowing
from the infused habit of sanctification, before we be justified, in the sense,
that Scripture speaks of justification, which says all alongs, We are
justified by faith. God justifies the man that believes in him that justifies
the ungodly. Now sure the Lord gives to us faith to believe justification,
before he justify, in the sense, that Paul speaks of justification. For the
Lord gives the Spirit of sanctification, of grace, of adoption, of faith, etc.
for all these are vital and supernatural acts of the same Spirit, to these
that have not the Spirit at first, to the uncircumcised in heart, Deuteronomy. 30.6.
to the wilderness and dry ground, Esai. 44. verse. 3. to these who pollute his
name among the heathen, and have stony and rockie hearts, Ezech. 36.21, 26. to
these that are a dying, polluted in their own blood, Ezech. 16.6, 8. to those
that are dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and this the
Lord does, for Jesus Christ's sake freely, Gal. 4.4, 5. then before we be
actually in Christ, by justification, and branches in him, by order of nature;
first, we so far find favor in the Lords eyes, or please him, or rather he
is of free grace pleased with us, that he gives his holy Spirit to us, and
upon the same ground may we, being yet not justified; and so, in that sense,
not in Christ, by order of nature, first believe, before we be justified; nor
is it justification that formally united us in this actual union, as branches
to the Vine tree, but union is a fruit of life, as is the joining of soul and
body together, and so a fruit of the infused life of God, or of the habit of
sanctification, and thus it follows not, that we believe before we be united
to Christ, as branches to the Vine tree, but only that we believe, by order of
nature, before we be justified, which the Scripture says.

But to return, we are not obliged to M. Saltmarsh, who argues against
justification by faith, slandering Protestants most ignorantly, and the
doctrine of Paul, as if to be justified by faith, were to be justified by a
faith of our own framing, without the grace of Christ, or by faith as a merit
and hire* that hireth and purchases Christ to be ours.

It is a curious, and an unedifying question, to search out (as Cornwell, 5^
Its not much up or down, whether Faith be active or passive in justification.
Cornewell does) Whether faith be active or passive in receiving Christ's
imputed righteousness: though if he speak of actual believing, to call it
passive, is an unproper speech, i. we hold that (...) credere, to believe is
not imputed, as our righteousness, which is Socinianisme.

2. That for the dignity, worth, and merit of Faith, Christ's righteousness is
not imputed to us; and therefore neither we, nor Scripture before us, says,
we are justified for Faith, but by Faith.

3. That Faith receiving Christ, is the free grace of God, given to us in the
state of sin. They say, The beggar puts forth an act or actions, both of
petitioning for alms, and reaching out his hand to receive it, and so it is
not every way, so of free grace, as Christ's imputed righteousness is to us.
But should we suppose the tongue and speech, the arm, and the act of
stretching it forth to receive the alms, the sense of poverty, the opinion of
the goodness of him, from whom he seeks alms, does bow the consent and will,
to seek alms, and receive it, were bestowed on the beggar, of the same free
grace and compassion of the giver of the alms, by which he gives the alms;
ye would say alms, and stretching out of the hand, were both of free grace,
and the acts of the beggar do no ways impeach the freedom of the grace of
the giver. Now, here not only the gift of freely imputed righteousness, but
faith, a mind to bel^^ve, sense of poverty, and want of Christ; the actual
exercise of faith are all from the free grace of God, and so except one free
grace, clash and counterworke against another; I see no inconvenience, to say
by the act of Faith, as a condition, or instrument, we receive and apply
Christ's righteousness; and whether ye call it a hand, an instrument, an act
of free grace, a condition; I judge there is no reason to contend for words: so
ye say not, as Cornewell, Saltmarsh, and other Antinomians, We are justified,
whether we believe or not and long, yea, from eternity, say some, before we
believe.

CHAP. LXII. The Antinomians way and Method of a sinners coming to Christ,
confuted.
THe way and method that Saltmarsh Free grace, cap. 34 page 144.145.
Saltmarsh takes to lead a sinner to Christ, is not Gods way, for he thus
goes on. A believer in all his dealing with God, prayer, or drawing near in
the first place, puts on the relation of Sonneship and righteousness, and
considers all his sins, as debts paid and cancelled, and himself made free
by the Son -- and now he comes in the Spirit of adoption, and calls God
Father; and here begins all faith, hope, confidence, love, liberty; when as
others dare not believe themselves in such a condition till upon terms of
humiliation, Saltmarsh his Antinomian Method, and order of bringing a sinner to
Christ.
sorrow for sin, works of righteousness, they have, as they think, a
reasonable measure, price, or satisfaction to come with; and then believe,
hope, and be confident, and thus in way of compounding and bargaining with God,
deal with him at all occasions; but such submit not to the righteousness of
God; for they that believe upon something first in themselves, shall as they
have kindled a fire, lie down in the sparks of their own kindling, and have
nothing in Christ, because they will not have all in him; and though some will
have all in Christ for salvation, yet they will have something in themselves to
believe their interest in this salvation.

Answ. 1. Saltmarsh dresseth up a man of straw to come to Christ. 1. In all his
dealing with God (says he) and so before ever he come to Christ, or at his
first believing, he believes his sonne-ship, that is, being a hog, or a
limb of the devil, he believes himself to be an heir of heaven: we say, he
first puts on the relation that he lived in, so in the womb, to wit, of the
son of the Devil, an heir of wrath. 2. He believes his sins as debts
paid and cancelled, (says he) What? ere ever he come to Christ in the Spirit
of adoption, he believes remission, that is, he puts on the wedding
garment first, and then comes to Christ, who only must give him fine lyning,
the righteousness of the Saints. So Saltmarsh makes him first a washen man,
(for so he must be) if he first believe Sonne-ship, and then come to Christ the
fountain to be washed; he first gets money, and bread, and wine, and milk;
for he first believes his Sonne-ship and pardon, and then he comes in the
Spitit of adoption to Christ's waters, his wine and milk, to his fatness and
bread without money; that this is Saltmarsh's method, is clear, for the title
of the Chapter is, We must come before God, as having put on Christ, first, not
as sinners and unrighteous. 2. His words are clear in the first place, (says
he) He believes Sonne-ship, and cancelled debts, -- and now he comes, -- and
calls God Father, and here begins all faith. -- What? when he considered
himself as a Son, and all his debts cancelled, had he no faith? Saltmarsh is
afraid, if the sinner stand a far off, and look to God with a rope about
his neck, that he be hanged and accursed eternally.

3. So C^ispe vol. 3. ser. 8. page 260 261.262
Crisp says, coming to Christ notes no more disunion nor distance between
the comers and Christ, then before; they believe they are united and
justified, and also Page 263.
coming to Christ (which we call believing) is wholly passive, as we say, a
Coach is come to town, when it came drawn with horses; which is clearly as
much, as we are Christ's, and our sins pardoned, and both these we are to
believe before ever we come to God. Show a pattern for this preparation
before we come to God.

4. Others (says Saltmarsh, meaning Protestant Divines) Dare not believe, till
upon terms of humiliation, sorrow for sin, works of righteousness, they
have a price and satisfaction to come with, The abuse of preparations before
conversion, to merit, or no preparation is presumption, both condemned, the
former in Pelagians, of the later in Antiominans
and in way of compounding and bargaining they deal with God, etc. This is a
forged calumny of Saltmarshes, not our doctrine; some carnally minded men,
think they dare not go to Christ, because they have not holiness and enough
of preparations to merit saving grace, so do Pelagians, Arminians, for merit
is natural to us all, this is the abuse of humiliation, of sense of sin, not
humiliation it self, but swelling Pharisaicall pride; we forbid any to
believe, and come to Christ upon such terms; but on the other hand,
Antinomians fail foulely on the other extremity, through presumption, which is
as deep naturally in our bones, as merit; and that is, because some look on
all preparations, such as humiliation, sorrow for sin, as a price and hire,
to buy or compound for saving grace, so they may have it at an easy rate;
therefore (says the Antinomian) away with all preparation, away with all
humiliation, all sinne-sickenesse for the Physician. Saltmarsh has found a
shorter cut to Christ; let every Pharisie, and proud undaunted heifer, every
Dragon and Dromedary that stands on his tip-toes to justify himself,
remaining wedded to his lusts, without any humiliation, or sense of sin,
though as proud as a Pharisee, and a Beelzebub, believe all his debts are paid
and cancelled, and come to Christ, and there begins all faith, hope,
confidence, love, liberty.

5. We make humiliation, sorrow for sin, no warrants, no ground of believing,
no price at all: landmarks we make them in order to believing, The Antinomians
condemn both the opinion and the practice it self of humiliation and all
preparations before that we bel^eve, and approve Pharisaicall pride in men,
before believing, as selfe-righteousnesse, we only condemn the vain opinion,
but opprove the duty it self.
and require the sinner to put the price of dog on them, have such
preparations, be humbled for sin, sorrow, and in this order believe, not for
your humiliation, nor for your sorrow; Judas may have more then you, and never
believe; therefore in point of merit, or selfe-confiding, forget all your
preparations, cast them away in your esteem, and cast your self on Christ:
but the Antinomian says, cast them away both in your esteem and practice; to
have such preparations, to sorrow for sin, and be humbled before you believe,
is to seek righteousness in your self, and not to submit to the
righteousness of God.

6, That is an often abused place, Walk in the light of your own sparks; as
if it were in sense, if ye be humbled, feel the burden of sin before ye
believe, and upon that ground believe, ye shall lie down in sorrow. Ye may
as soon bring the East and the West together, as make the place speak any such
thing. Vatablus says, The Lord threatens judgment, that their own fire, and
idolatrous ways, shall yield them sorrow, and a tormenting conscience in the
day of wrath, and no comfort.

7. To be humbled, and sorrow, and hear, and then believe, if ye judge your
self worthy of ten hells, notwithstanding of all these, and yet come
trembling, and touch the hemme of Christ's garment, is not seeking of
righteousness in your self, nor any refusing to have all in Christ, but a
sure way to Christ.

CHAP. LXIII. We need Law-directions, the Law and the Spirit are subordinate,
not contrary.
ANtinomians Saltmarsh Free grace. page 146* 147
denying holiness to be now fashioned by the Law of outward Commandment, but
by the preaching of Faith, will not have us to borrow so much as light and
direction from the Law; because 1. The Law is the beam, the light in the first
day of Creation, the candle the Sream, and the Word is made flesh and dwells
amongst us; and he the Sun, the true light, the day light, the fountain, and
Christ will not be beholding to any of the light on Moses his face. But the
place 2 Cor. 3. that Saltmarsh alludeth to, is the light of a convinced
conscience, We need Law-light to teach us our duty, whether Antinomians will or
no.
by which a man sees himself condemned by the Law-ministration of wrath; this
light and glory is done away, where the Spirit of Jesus is; but the light of
teaching direction to know our duty, and how we are to order our walking in
Gospel-holinesse, which the Spirit borrows from the ten Commandments
delivered by Moses, is established and taught by Christ, and not removed; for
if Gospel Grace extirpate this light of the Moral Law, either out of our
heart, or out of the written Commandments and writings of Moses; then surely
Christ is come to dissolve the Law, and to teach men neither to do, nor obey
Law-commandements, seeing it is essential to the Law, as a Sun shining,
whether hell, and Antinomians will or not, till Christ's second coming, to give
light, and show what is our duty, Psalm. 19.7, 8.9. Math. 5.1, 2, 3, etc.
19.20. And 2. if the light of direction that the Law yields be removed, and
lay no obliging power on us, more then a candle serves to give us light in
daylight; or the light created the first day of the creation, which is gone
now, when Sun and Moon are created, I see not, how we sin not in
worshipping God, in abstaining from Idol-worship, blasphemy, swearing, in
loving, and honoring our Parents, and in loving our neighbor as our self;
for we have no warranting light to do these, but that Law of Moses, which
Christ expressly said, he came not to destroy in the personal practice of his
Saints; yea these beams in all their smallest titles, must stand firmer then
heaven or earth, Math. 5.17, 18, 19, 20. and therefore the spirit of Satan
devised a combat and contrariety between the directing light of the Law and
the Gospel, and between Moses and Christ, in this sense; as if Sanctification
by the light of the Law, and the grace of the Gospel, which are sweetly
subordinate, were contrary one to another, as fire and water; eternal fire
must be their portion, that so teach, except they repent. 3. Saltmarsh cites
these, The word is made flesh -- We saw his glory, Saltmarsh sides with
Familists.
etc. to prove that the Law is now not in the Letter, but in the Spirit, and
we need not the Law, the Spirit sanctifies. Just so did Henry Nicholas, and
the Familists say, God incarnate was Christ manifested by love, and a vision of
God, in the hearts See the Bright Star.
of their perfect ones; and the incarnation was but every holy Saint, Godded
and Christed in H. Nichol, and such like, and God manned by the Saints; and the
Familists Rise, reign, er. 21
of New England say, As Christ was once made flesh, And Theologia Germanica.
so he is now first made flesh in us, ere we be carried to perfection. The Word
of God speaks but of one incarnation; for the Lords coming in the flesh may
prove a fuller measure of grace, but it never proves, that 1. The Law is now
in the Spirit. 2. That the ten Commandments under Moses are removed. 3. That
all their directing light is quite gone, and as useless now as a candle in day
light. I should wish Saltmarsh would come from under his veiles, and speak
truth, and fear not to own Familists, if they be his, and renounce
Protestant Legalists, as he speaks.

CHAP. LXIV. Antinomian differences between the Law and the Gospel, confuted.
We cannot be satisfied with the Antinomian differences between Saltmarsh
143. Town assert. grace, 53.54. How can good works be required as necessary
conditions toward the attaining of justification, salvation, and blessedn^sse,
since these are possessed before we can do any good works? Town asser. 144* I
see little difference between merit, and the reward you stand for.
Law and Gospel. The Law (say they) ^ommands us to obey, to love, to fear, to
be holy, that God may be our God, and we his people; the Gospel commands us to
obey, and love, because we are the people of such a God.

Answ. The Law never, neither before, Law-obedience did not win God to be our
God in the first covenant, nor Evangel^ek believing, or acting, to be our God
in covenant of grace.
nor after the fall of Man, did command obedience as a merit and deserving
cause of having God to be our God, for so Antinomians speak of all
Law-obedience, that it hireth God, and of all our Gospel-obedience, that it
puts God in our debt, as if we were hirelings, and God a Master obliged in a
Legal way, and in terms of buying and selling, to pay us our wages.

2. How will Saltmarsh prove God was not Adams God, till he should work out
his days work of Legal service perfectly, and win his wages, without a
slip or sin? This is a conjecture. I would conceive, by creation the Lord was
Adams God, and the indenture or paction to reward his obedience with eternal
life was to go on, that Adam should have his other reward of life by doing,
according as he kept the Law. But I take it thus, God could not require
Law-obedience at all of Adam, but he was first his God, but God was to remain
his God, no longer then Adam should perfectly serve God.

3. None of us, whom Saltmarsh would, if he could, confute, do teach, That we
are to obey, and do Gods Commandments, according to the Gospel Grace and
strength from Christ, to the end, that God may be our God, else if we fail he
is not our God. Now this Gospel-service he must say, we teach, if he refute us.

Diff. 2. The Law (says Saltmarsh) commands us in the power of God, as a
Lawgiver, and tutor, or Minister: the Gospel in the power of a Father.

Answ. When Saltmarsh shall make these two contrary, to command as a Lawgiver
and as a Father, The authority of God as a Law g^ver, and of God as ^ Father,
not contrary, as Antinomians imagine.
as wrath and love, we shall say Amen to this difference. But Antinomians
think to command as a Lawgiver cannot be, except God command under the pain
of an eternal curse, for (say Town ^ssert. page 30.
they) The Law not condemning, is not Law. So the Lawgiver not cursing and
condemning, must be no Lawgiver; But this is a false principle. God commands
as a Lawgiver in the Gospel, all that eternal righteousness which he
commands in the Law; for neither the Gospel, nor Christ dissolveth one tittle
or jot of the eternal Moral Law of God, but he commands, not as a
condemning Judge, the curse is removed from the Law, Gal. 3.10. Not the Law it
self, nor the authority, majesty, nor spiritual holiness of the Law, or
Lawgiver; and so God both commands in the Gospel, as a God, and Lawgiver,
even as our God a consuming fire to such as are not under grace, and as a
Father to his own in Christ.

Diff. 3. The Law (says Saltmarsh ibid 148.
he) commands, by promises and threatenings, blessings and cursings, the
Gospel rather persuades then commands, and rather by promises; and exhorts
rather then bids, and reasons us to duty, rather then inforceth, and rather
draws us, then drives us, and setting forth promises, and privileges, and
prerogatives, done on Gods part, and Christ's part for us, rather argues us to
doing, and working, and loving reflections again, and Christ is chiefly
proposed to us for holiness, obedience, mortification, newness of life. So
the Gospel commands rather by pattern, then precept, and by imitation, then
command, Hebr. 12.12, 13.

Answ. 1. The Law did also persuade by promise^, Do this and live; and argues
out of highest love, with all the heart to obey the Gospel, (I confess) adds
a transcendent and incomparable motive, which is the soule-conquering love of
God, to give his blood and precious life a ransom for his enemies. But (I
pray) why does not Saltmarsh speak accurately, in setting down the
differences between the Law, and Gospel (For they are the very hinges of the
controversy between Antinomians and us:) he speaks doubtfully, neither
denying nor affirming, but the Gospel commands, only he says, it rather
persuades and argues, then commands. If he mean, it commands not the same
way that the Law does, that is, that we give personal perfect obedience, of
our own purse and stock, without the grace of a Mediator, under pain of
everlasting burning, then he should not have said, it rather persuades, nor
commands, which is as much, as it commands, but swaies more to the persuading
hand, but thus it commands not at all any in Christ, it speaks its commands,
and issues forth royal mandats, as a King to his own Subjects, that is, to
these only that are under the Law, not to these under Gospel Grace.

But if Antinomians state the difference between Law and Gospel, aright to
speak against us; the truth is, the Gospel commands not, The Gospel commands
not any thing by the Antinomian way.
by their way of obedience to the ten Commands to a believer, so as the
believer does sin against any Command, or Law of God, (call it as you will)
or violate any authority of the Lawgiver, if he disobey. 1. Because the
Lawgiver, in the Gospel, gives up all his authority as Lawgiver, to command
believers, as well as he resigneth his Law-giving Authority to curse and
condemn believers: for the same way that God by no Law can condemn and curse
believers, because Christ was condemned, and made a curse for them; so neither
can the Lord command by the authority of a Lawgiver, any duty in the ten
Commandments to a believer, as a believer. For says Town^ asser. of grace,
page 140.
Town, with the Antinomians; What Christ performed for us, that we are freed
from by him, but Christ not only was made a curse for us; but also performed
completely all active obedience that the Law commanded us. Therefore we are
freed from all active obedience to the Law. So 1. as an arbitrary command is
not properly a command, but rather a will-counsell and free advise, that one
friend gives to another; so that the friend refusing the counsel, sins
against no Law; just so is it here. Antinomians may say, Believers sinning
against Gospel-hortations, (for commands of God they are not) sin against the
love, and deepest, and broadest grace of God, which is a higher offense, then
to sin against a Law of God, and so its not arbitrary to them to obey. I
answer. 1. Sin is no sin, if it be not now under the New Testament, a
transgression of the Moral Law; but we are no more under the Law, say
Saltmarsh, Crisp, Town, and Den, then an Englishman can fail against the
Laws of Spain, and where there is no Law; to the same purpose, says
Saltmarsh free grace, page 44.
Saltmarsh, there is no transgression, nor trouble of mind for sin. 2. If
offending against the love of Christ be a greater sin then offending against
the Law, then it is a sin; but this is false, for sure if it were a sin in
them, God who sees all, should see it to be a sin in them; now this God
cannot do, for there is no more sin in a believer, (say Honey comb cap. 3
25.
they) then in Christ; then the Gospel-exhortations must be arbitrary
Commandments, that is, no Commandments of God.

3. If God in the Gospel give up, and denude himself of authority of
commanding, then came Christ to dissolve the Law, contrary to his own Word,
Math. 5.18, 19, 20. For nothing is more essential to the Law, then its
commanding authority, even to command us to do, and teach others to do all,
even to the least of the Commandments.

That the Gospel both commands and persuades, agree friendly together, but are
not cont^ary, as Anti^omians s^p^ose.
4. The Gospel (says he) persuades rather then commands. But say we, it both
commands, (as the Law does) and with a more strong obligation of the
constraining love of Christ, beside the authority of the Lawgiver, and also
persuades; so here be no differences at all; for Christ has not redeemed us
from the curse of the Law, to free us from active obedience by his grace to the
Law, that we should be Sons of Beliall, from under all yoke, but that with a
stronger tie, we should live in holiness and righteousness to him who dyed
for us. O then (says Town asser. pa. 40. Libert^nes call obedience to God, a
mis^rie, a yoke, and a bondage.
Town) I am sure if we be faster tied to the obedience of the Law, then
before; we have no help by Christ, but rather he has made our case more
miserable, -- why do you unloose the coards, and abate so much of the rigor
of the Law.

Answ. Miserable be they, with Herod and Pilate, who call it a miserable case,
that Christ's silken coards of love, and ties of free Gospel-bands, oyled and
sweetened with the love of Christ, renders us no help, but makes our yoke and
Law-chaines heavier. It is happiness, not misery, and sweetest liberty to
serve God. But to Antinomians, Puritanicall walking, and strickt adhering to
the Law of God, as a rule of righteousness, sweetened and perfumed with
Gospel Grace, to perform any personal obedience (they lay all on imputative
mortification abused, Wherein Law rigor and Gospel-sweetnesse do consist.
not rightly expounded) to God is bondage. 2. The rigor of the Law is not in
commanding holiness, the Law then should be unjust, but in that it now
obliges us to obedience under a curse, when we are utterly unable to obey, but
Christ abateth the rigor of the Law, in that 1. He removes the curse, which
Town seems to esteem a poor courtesy Christ has done us. 2. Gives grace
to obey. 3. Pardons in Christ's blood the sinful defects of obedience. 4.
Justifies us not by Law, (that door to heaven is shut, never to be opened to
sinners) but by faith, (which is his own gift) laying hold on the
righteousness of Christ freely, and of only pure grace imputed to us.

5. Conference of M John Cotton. p. 17. Saltmarsh, 155, 156.
Cornewell and other Antinomians make arguing obedidience, and persuading
comforts, by inferences and consequences, works of man, not able to produce
assurance; and Saltmarsh thinks, discoursing and reasoning not enough to
produce assurance of faith, and he thinks it a Legal bondage to support the
soul from marks, and such things as cannot give evidence but by inferences;
yet all the superstructures of faith in Gospel-obedience, as binding upon
persuading, arguing, reasoning. All other assurances (says Saltmarsh Free
grace. 85.

Antinomians reject all inferences, and arguing in matters of faith, as humane
and Legal.

The Gospel contains precepts, as well as patterns to be followed.


Saltmarsh) beside the assurance of the light of faith, such as are from marks,
and love to the brethren, (that come by way of reasoning and arguing) are
rotten conclusions from the Word, and such things as true legal teachers have
invented, not understanding the mystery of the kingdom of Christ; then all
Scripture and Gospel-arguing, are vain janglings by this.

6. Nor does the Gospel command by pattern rather then precept, as if the
examples of the cloud of Witnesses, who running their race with patience,
inherit the promise of free salvation, Hebr. 12.1, 2, 3. should destroy
commands, or as if patterns without Law, or any otherwise, but in so far as
they are warrantted by the Law of God, did tie and oblige us to obedience and
imitation; for if patterns, as patterns did tie us, then should we be obliged
to follow the Fathers, and Christ, in their extraordinary works and miracles,
which neither Law nor Gospel commands us to do.

7. But the truth is, outward commandments written or preached by Antinomians
are given to us in the Gospel only by accident, and because we are carnal and
sinful; but were we as spiritual as we should be, we should need no Law,
but that which is spiritual, and written in the heart, no more then Angels
need a written and outward Law. Now that Antinomians mean this, is clear by
Saltmarsh Free grace, 170 p 2. c. 37.
Saltmarsh his Divinity, -- Commands (says he) are for obedience, as well as
tidings of forgiveness; -- this kind of Gospel fits both God and man: and God
the Father may be seen in commanding holiness, and the Spirit in forming the
holiness commanded, and the Son in redeeming us to holiness, even to the
will both of the Father and the Spirit. And this Gospel fits man, who is made
up both of flesh and Spirit, and so has need of a Law without, and in the
Letter, as well* as in the heart and Spirit: the Law is spiritual, but we are
carnal. Romans 7. Nor can a state o^ flesh and Spirit be ordered only by a Law
within; for the word and Law of the Spirit, merely is for a spiritual
condition, or estate of glory, as Angels who live by a Law spiritual, and
state of revelation.

Though we be regenerate and spiritual, (...) need we sc^iptural teaching, and
the written Scriptures are not given to the flesh only and the unrenewed part,
as Antinomians fancy.
Answ. 1. Here be strange conceits of old libertinisme. Gospel commands are as
well (says he) for obedience, as tidings of forgiveness. But why for
obedience? Any disobedience to them, is no sin in a believer, as is proved;
then they are not to a believer for obedience. 2. I know not how man, because
he is flesh, has need of a Law without, and the letter of an outward command;
then because he is spirit, or as he is spiritual, he has need of no Law, nor
letter of an external command. Timothy then has no need, as he is a renewed
man, to give himself to meditation, and reading, and doctrine; 1 Timothy 4.14, 15.
nor to continue in the things that he had known from the Scriptures, which
are 2 Timothy 3.14 15, 16, 17.
given by divine inspiration to save his own soul 1 Timothy 4.16
and others, and to make him ^ Tim. 3, ^7
perfect to every good work. Nor have the Saints at Col. 3.^6.
Colosse need, that the word of Christ dwell richly in them. Nor the called of
Jesus Christ at Rome, Romans 1.6.
as they are called and sanctified, any need of learning from Romans 15.4.
the Scriptures, that they through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might
have hope. Only the flesh and the old man, possibly has need of the
Scriptures, and the letter of the command; then it was not David's inward man,
that esteemed the testimonies of God and his promises sweeter then the honey
and the honey comb; and as his heritage, and more then thousands of silver and
gold. Nor did Peter, or the Saints as regenerated to a lively 1 Pet. 1.
hope 1 Pet. 1.3. and as they obtained the 2 Pet. 1.3.
like precious faith, relish the promises as great Verse. ^.
and precious: but only their flesh found sweetness in Gods word. And Mary,
not as renewed, but Luke 10 39.40.41.42 43.
according to the flesh and corruption, sat at Christ's feet, and heard his
word, and choosed the better part, that could not be taken from her. And this
sorts well with the old Anabaptists, who said that the unregenerate only
needed outward ordinances, as the Word preached by men, and hearing, reading,
Sacraments; but for the regenerate, there is no need, that Ier. 31.34.
any teach his neighbor, because we are all taught of God; and 1 Ioh. 2 17.
the annoynting teach-them all. And Th^o^og. Germanica* cap. 28. p. 72.
the Sons of God are not subject to the Law, that is, they are not to be
taught, what they should do, or leave undone, seeing the Spirit of God which
is their instructor, will teach them sufficiently, neither is any thing to be
commanded or enjoined them, as to do good, or eschew evil, or the like. The
same Spirit, I say, does command or enjoin them; likewise to retain the best,
and quit the contrary, and obey them accordingly. And so speak the Libertines
of Rise, reign, er. 4.5.
N. England, These that be in Christ, are not under the Law, or commands of
the Word, as the rule of life. 3. If man, because he is flesh, has need of a
Law without, and in the Letter; by flesh is either understood a body and
sensitive soul; but then the meaning must be, that the Law of Word and Gospel
is given to the outward man, to regulate him in his animal and vital actions,
as eating, sleeping, walking, seeing, hearing, and other senses, as if no Law
were imposed on the Spirit, heart, understanding, conscience, and will, a
carnal dream that many put upon the Pharisees; or by the flesh must be
understood, the unrenewed and sinful corruption. This must be the sense of
Saltmarsh, for he cites, Romans 7.14. The Law is spiritual, that is just, and
holy; as verse. 12. Wherefore the Law is holy, and the commandment is holy, and
just, and good; but I am carnal: that is, sinful, flesh, unholy, and sold
under sin. Now thus, Law and Gospel commands threatenings; Gospel-promises
sweet invitations of free grace, that laden sinners would come to Christ, and
be refreshed, eased, saved, are all given to man, because he is sinful; and
no outward Commandment would be laid on man, if he had not sinned, which is a
conjecture and fancy. Divines say, the Tree of life, and of knowledge of good
and ill, were Sacraments to innocent Adam, the Sabbath was ordained for Adams
worshipping of God, an outward Law was laid on him, If thou eat, thou shall
die, when as yet Adam was not carnal, or sold under sin. Yea, so it would
appear to Antinomians, nothing in man is under an outward Law or Command,
either of Law, or Gospel, or any Gospel-promise, or Law-threatning, save only
the fleshly body of sin; then Christ came in the flesh to redeem and save
only the Old Adam, and the corrupt flesh; then is the corrupt flesh, and it
only obliged by a Law without, and the Letter to believe in Christ, to eat the
flesh and drink the blood of the Son of man, to live with, and in Christ, to
sit in heavenly places with Christ, to have right to the Tree of life, to have
the hid Manna, the White stone, the new Name given to it. And what then shall
be the condition of the New man; shall not he believe, walk in Christ,
converse with God, seek the things that are above, rejoice evermore, repent,
mortify the deeds of the flesh, etc. this is strange Divinity. 4. This savours
strongly of another Antinomian and Familisticall fancy, Town ^sser. grace,
page 35.
The old Adam sins, Jam. 3.2. is found to be a sinner, reproved, accursed,
condemned; he, and all his works, shut up under the Law and wrath of God; then
the man sins not, is under no Law, no Gospel, No Law without, and in the
Letter, only the flesh; the Libertines Ass, corrupt Adam sins, is to be
reproved, sent to Hell; and whither shall the other half, or quarter of the
man go? to heaven? But, if ye will listen to Scripture: that which was under
the Law, was under the curse; what was under the curse is redeemed by Christ;
believes, is justified by Faith, is blessed with Abraham, Gal. 3.10, 11, 12,
13. But is the old Adam, the flesh, sin dwelling in Paul, redeemed from the
curse, justified by faith, blessed and saved with Abraham? Or is the believer
freed from the Law, because of the flesh, and for the old Adam that dwells in
him? Then because the flesh and sin dwells in him, while he is in this
life, he must then sin, be under the Law, deserve the curse in so far? Or
must the flesh be an invisible Spirit, that lusts in man, against the holy
and just Law? but God sees it not? What dreams are these?

The last difference Saltmarsh Free grace, page 148.149.
is, The end of the Law (says he) was to bondage, fear, tutorship, revealing
of sin, outward conformity, the end of the Gospel-Lawes is to love, newness
of Spirit, praise and thankesgiving for righteousness, and life received.

Answ. Bondage and fear (servile, such as he means here) was never any
proper, or intrinsecall end of the Law, the Law is spiritual, and can command
no sin, nor have any intrinsecall end that is sinful; servile fear, is
sinful fear. This is an use of the Law which God makes, through occasion
of our sinful condition: and holy fear that the Law commands, is the end
of the Gospel-Lawes as well as love, Gospel Grace teaches us to fear God, and
to walk in godly fear. Its true, we were shut up under the Law, that the Law
might be to us, in its bloody ordinances, and legal washings, and cursings, a
herald of our guiltiness, and a rigid exactor and craver of our debts, to
compel us to run to the surety, and as the persuer and avenger of blood, to
drive us to our feet, that upon life and death, we may escape to Jesus, our
City of refuge, our sanctuary, and be safe; not that for doing of the Law we
may be justified, but we come to Christ, also to the end, we may sow to the
Spirit, walk in holiness, not because we have heaven in complete fruition
already, but that we may attain the resurrection of the dead, and may come by
life eternal, the free reward of grace.

CHAP. LXV. The Gospel is a rare Covenant of grace.
We agree, that the Gospel is not a Covenant; such as is between God and man
in Law-termes, like this, If ye do, without a Mediators grace, perfectly, ye
shall live? God in a manner said of the Crown, Buy heaven, and win it, and
have it. Give works without grace, and its your own. 2. Nor is the Gospel such
a covenant, Every thing singular and rare in the covenant of grace*
as is between man and man, in which he fulfils his part, and he is the one,
not helping the other: but because this is the covenant of grace, all the
bones, articles, joints, limbs, lithes, and parts of the covenant, is free
grace. Christ undertaketh for his Father, he shall faithfully make good all he
says, he undertaketh for himself as surety, to make sure work of the
purchase, to buy all with a ransom, an over-ransome; he shall give an
over-summe, an infinite price for all he indents for; he ingages for the Holy
Ghost. I will send you the Comforter. Christ impawneth his word for all the
three. Christ binds for his people in covenant, to give them of his fullness,
to keep them in his truth, to intercede and Advocate for them, that their
faith fail not, and to raise them up at the last day; this last is in no
covenants between man and man. But Saltmarsh speaks not Saltmarsh Free grace.
page 15^.153. Saltmarsh finds fault with the holy Ghost, because he terms
the Gospel a Covenant.
soberly, when he indirectly challenges the Holy Ghost, as a Legalist; for
using the word Covenant, which has a little (says he) corrupted some in their
Notion of free grace, and makes them conceive a little too Legally of it, for
it is a promise. But with his leave, a promise is as legal a word as a
covenant, and there be as peculiar characters of God, and of free grace in Gods
Gospel-promises, above all Law-promises, or promises and bonds between man and
man, as in the covenant of grace: nor is any promise between man and man,
capable of such free grace, as the Gospel-promises are; and this is a false
principle of Antinomians falsely asserted, and never proved. Saltmarsh Fre^
grace* (...). 153.154.
That if righteousness and life, be covenanted to us, upon conditions merely
Evangelick, and which the pure, free, unmixed grace of Christ, works in us,
then life should be purchased by us, not for us.

CHAP. LXVI. Antinomians errors touching the covenant of grace.
ANtinomians Saltmarsh Free grace, 127.
grossly mistake the conditions of the Covenant of works, and of grace: they
would hold forth, That we were taken into the Covenant of works, upon some
condition in us before. But in the New Covenant (says Saltmarsh) we are not
his people, before he be our God first. But I know none who ever wrote, or spoke
of free grace, d^d draw the covenant of grace in such a proportion, There are
no conditions in us moving God to be our God, but the covenant takes its rise
and spring from free grace in God.
as that Christ should first woe and sue us to a condition, in which by some
preparing grace, we might earne, and as hirelings, work our selves into a
meriting condition, and make our selves first Gods people, and first choose
Christ, and provoke free grace; so as, in all reason, and congruitie, God must,
if he be rational, join in league, and article himself to be our God. Why?
We have first articled our selves, by the condition of honest hirelings, to be
his people.

1. This is as much as Christ will never covenant, nor indent to be our
husband, while we first make our selves, by some preparing grace, his married
Spouse. For sure this is a Marriage-covenant; we must first make our selves his
people, and then, for shame, he must be our God: as if Marriage-love bred first
in our breast, and stood upon this poor leg, the grace of man to God, not
the grace of God to lost man.

2. We teach that faith in Christ is both a condition of grace on our part, but
not Antecedent and preparatory to the Covenant, and also a grace promised, when
the new heart is articled to us; so that Christ brings into the covenant
himself, his righteousness, his free grace, and the condition of Faith that
receives him; just as if the heir of a King should offer to marry a Maid of
low birth, upon condition she wear about her neck on the Marriage day, a gold
chain, having in it a rich Diamond of the Crown, and withal should oblige
himself, under his hand and seal, in the Marriage-contract, both to bestow
this chain on her freely, and to infuse a Spirit of grace and love, to close
in her heart with such a lover, and to yield consent to the match, and to
adorn her self with this chain. Just so does the Prince of life here, and
its a vain thing to parallel this covenant of grace with other covenants.

3. Nor did ever any man before Saltmarsh dream, that Law-obedience was an
Antecedent condition of the Covenant of works, with Adam, No antecedent
condition on man's part in the covenant of works, as Antinomians dream.
nor were Adam and Eve in their state of sinlesse innocence, The people of
God, before God was first their God; for then never man, Adam, nor any other,
were under the Law, or Covenant of works, till first they absolved, and kept to
the end, a course of perfect obedience. Yea, so there was never on earth, such
a thing as a covenant of works, except made with Christ, nor can we say, that
God made a Covenant of works with Adam, for his perfect obedience; yet sure,
perfect obedience was a condition of the Covenant of works.

Antinomians have a second great mistake of the covenant of grace, while they
make it as old as election to glory, 2. Mistake how the covenant of grace is
eternal.
and the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, S^ltmarsh Free grace,
p^g. 123. Crispe Ser. on the Cove.
its an everlasting covenant indeed, but that is not, because it is not made in
time. Christ is an eternal Mediator, and an eternal Priest, and the Lamb
slain from eternity, but that was only in Gods decree, and eternal purpose,
as touching the beginning of his Mediatorship and Priesthood, and so the
creation of the World is eternal; but sure, Christ, in the fullness of time,
was made of a woman, entered by a calling of God, in time to be Mediator, and
Priest, and dyed not for sinners, till the reign of Tyberius Caesar, as he was
borne in the reign of Augustus; nor were we justified, pardoned, and redeemed
from eternity, more then we were effectually called, sanctified, and gloryfied
from eternity. But Antinomians will have our sins pardoned from eternity
before we believe. And when were we then borne in sin, and the heirs of
wrath by nature, and under condemnation, by the second Adam? Never really. When
were we sometimes dead in sins and trespasses, and in time Ephesians. 2.1.2
past; walking according to the course of this world, according to the Prince
of the power of the air? And sometimes, Tit. 3.3. See 1 Timothy 1 13. 1 Cor. 6 9
10, 11.
foolish, disobedient, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, lyving in malice,
and envy, hateful, hating one another? Not when we were justified, if we were
justified from eternity, and when we were chosen to glory, before the World
was. But so must all our sins before conversion be, but sins in
conversation, not in conscience; and our Murders, cousening, stealing,
persecuting, whoredoms, if we be chosen, and so justified and washed, when we
are chosen, are Honey comb cap. 5.87.95 Saltmarsh Free grace. 57 79. Den,
Ser. Of the Man of sin, page 9.10 11.12. ^ Town asser. grace, pa. 39.40.
seeming and fancied, not real sins; nor such in themselves, nor to the
light of faith, or in Gods sight, by this Antinomian dream.

Their third great mistake in the covenant of grace, is in the parties,
Saltmarsh Saltma^sh Free grace, 125 126.3. Mistake. How the covenant is made
with Christ in the Antinomian way of Libertin^sme.
tells us that the new covenant is no covenant properly with us, but with
Christ for us. Its true, Christ stands for us, as principal undertaker; who
articles, as the second Adam for us, yea, for all his seed, to work the
conditions in us; he is the Mediator, surety, witness, Messenger, or Angel of
the Covenant for us. But Antinomians Saltmarsh Free grace, page 84.
will have him so for us, as the Covenant shall oblige us to no duty, or
condition of believing to be performed by us, and the Gospel shall tie us to
no holy walking. Why? We are, (says Saltmarsh) to believe, that our
believing, repenting, new obedience, mortification, are all true in Christ, who
believed, repented, obeyed for us. It is true, we are to believe our
repenting, obeying, believing, are true in Christ. 1. As in the meritorious
cause, who has satisfied justice for all our sins, and for the sinful
defects in our believing, repenting, obeying. 2. We are to believe, they are
true in Christ, as the author, and principal cause, who works in us to will
and to do, by his effectual grace. But Antinomians will not have us to
believe, they are true in us; as personally, and in our selves, though by
Christ's strength acting them, or doing, or performing the duties of believing,
repenting, mortifying our lusts by any obligation of the Law or Gospel
commandment.

CHAP. LXVII. Of Legal and Evangelicall conversion.
We deny not, but there is a Legal conversion, and Gospel terrors, and
Gospel-hell fire, and condemnation, and the worm that never dies, and that
nature may propose ends to it self, in turning to God outwardly; and that as
incident to Antinomians, as to any generation of people. For it is known that
many Antinomians are deluded, not converted by a work of the Law, storming and
quelling the conscience, with the smoke and fire-slaughts of everlasting
burning, especially where the conscience neighbors which a Melancholic
complexion, and when the party comes to such a Physician as M. Saltmarsh,
though there be no inward change in the heart, no evidences either to him, or
the deluded soul of a new and inward work, but the party still in the gall of
bitterness, no sense of sin, but a dumb beastly feeling of the flashes of
hell fire, a Pharaoh-like disposition, the counterfeit white Angel says to the
perplexed soul, Believe everlasting love, and read Pharaoh, and Simon Magus,
The Antinomians Conversion.
and your own names in the Lambs Book of life, believe and apply immediately,
without care, conscience, or sense of sin, or humiliation, (all these are
reprobate money to buy grace, away with them) to come to the blood of
atonement; come, though ye be neither weary nor laden, nor pricked in heart
with sin; and be ye assuredly persuaded, that that blood was shed for you,
that ye are as clean from sin 160. ago, as Christ himself. Honey comb,
cap. 3. page 25. Mourn no more, be not humbled, do nothing at all, but rest
upon what Christ has done for you, rejoice evermore; sorrowing for sin is
Legal unbelief, severe and strict conversation, and a care by doing, to
please God, any personal walking with God, is but a legal bargaining with
God, to out-buy Christ, and evacuate free grace, and a mixing of Law and
Gospel, and confounding of the two Covenants, and of heaven and hell: and
presently upon this, the party is as free of doubting till his dying day, as if
he were in heaven, still in a merry pin, as if he were above the stars,
before the throne, under no Law, above all duties; reads, hears, prays none,
but when some immediate rapts of a living active God comes on him a dead
passive block in Christ, the Scripture, either Law or Gospel is but a dead
Letter, he is neither tied nor awed with Law or Gospel, Precept or Command,
nor preaching, nor seals, but is acted by a free Spirit, an immediate light
and speech of a Spirit above, and beyond all outward word, or Letter of old or
new Testament; except when the Spirit shall speak or apply them to the heart,
and then these Commandments tie the outer man, and the flesh, and then they
bind not for any authority of the Lawgiver, but for the only Gospel love of
Christ, as if Christ had put his Father out of office, whereas Gospel-love
commands obedience upon, and for, both the authority of the Lawgiver, and the
love of Christ; and when this convert falls in Adultery, murder, swearing,
lying, robbing. 1. It is not he, but the flesh, and sense, and the outward man
that does these. 2. They were remitted and made no sins, and he as clean as
Christ from them, before they be committed. 3. The Law has no more to do
with him, then the persuer (says Saltmarsh) has to do with the murderer,
who has fled to the city of refuge.

But Saltmarsh Free grace. page 177.178.
Saltmarsh's Legal convert (he means all, not converted the Antinomian way)
is not our convert as he dreameth. 1. Because we look not at conversion merely
as a change in affection and conversation, without Christ, Faith, and saving
grace. 2. Antinomians make all the change in conversion, to be merely
imputative, to believe that Christ was converted, and repents for us, Saltmarsh
How mere commands from the Word, cannot work a change.
and to regard no inward change, 3. It is false, that Saltmarsh says, That
pressing of mere commands, from the word, may work a Legal change of
affection and conversation. For if by mere commands from the Word, he mean,
1. commands without the Spirit, that is, such as are written and preached
Gospel, or Law, that of themselves want all grace and joining of the Spirit.
Then sure, Cicero and Seneca, their mere words without God, cannot change a
Zeno, a Xenephon, from debauched slagitious men, into white cive^l Moralists,
without some Spirit, if he mean that the Gospel-letter, as a Letter, can do
more then the Law-letter without the Spirit, he is much deceived: for words, as
words, whether of Law or Gospel, without God, can work no change. But Saltmarsh
(if I mistake not) has a third meaning, that mere commands from the authority
of God, the Lawgiver, can work but a Legal and counterfeit conversion; this
is most false. We have a grave controversy with Papists, touching the formal
object of Divine Faith. Whether it be the testimony of the Church, as Papists
say, or the authority of God speaking in his Word, as we teach. Now we hold
that the testimony of the Church, is but the testimony of men, and can produce
but an humane faith, not a Divine; but the testimony of God himself, speaking
in the Scriptures, can only beget a supernatural and divine faith, when the
Holy Ghost follows the Word, and rendereth it lively. If then we believe
divine truths, and Scripturall commands* because so says the Lord, in his
Word, either Law or Gospel, this is a divine and supernatural faith; so to
believe upon Gods mere commands, as Lawgiver, not because natural reason so
dictateth, nor because the Church, or man so says, nor because the times
favor the Gospel, (as the seed is received with a sort of belief, that
falls on stony ground) is divine Faith, and is not contrary, but sweetly
complyeth with faith grounded upon the love of Christ, and wrought by the grace
of God in the Gospel; Antinomians dream that these two are contrary, when they
are not so.

4. Its most false, that the Law is in the heart before hand, How the Law is in
the heart by nature.
by nature, so as we believe it naturally for the authority of the Lawgiver;
for so natural faith of the Law, should fight with natural unbelief, and
deep security, to laugh and sleep sound under the curse of God. We naturally
know much of the Law, but we have not a Legal faith, to believe, because so
says the Lawgiver, by nature.

5. Its false also, that Nature can propound to it self life eternal, as
Saltmarsh Free grace, 178.
its end, as Saltmarsh says. Balaam could not desire it, far less intend
it, he only wished the end of the just. 2. The end must be the last end
subordinate to Gods glory. Antinomians are Pelagians, and poor friends to free
grace, as I noted before: for when salvation is the end, all means are gone
about, when the end is intended that may conduce to that end, all means that
may cross the obtaining thereof, Natural men cannot propose a supernatuend to
themselves.
eschewed. Now natural Legal converts, cannot go about all for salvation,
and in reference to it, its clear, when gold is a man's end, as in the
covetous; pleasure the end in the voluptuous, honor the end in the ambitious;
if all acts about the means, or that may thwart the attaining of the end, bow
not to this end; its not so in Legal converts. 3. When the end is attained but
in hope and assurance, the mind is satisfied and quieted, Legal converts are
not so satisfied. 4. Legal converts order salvation to and for themselves, and
the happiness of it, not the holiness, to please themselves, not to honor
God, because heaven is a Honey-combe, that very Nature believing an eternity,
desires to suck. 5. Severe and strict walking, in our sense, is walking in all
duties, by the light and conduct of saving grace, and the faith of the elect of
God, which we contend for against most Antinomians, who are but loose livers,
and cannot fall on a Legal convert.

CHAP. LXVIII. How the Spirit works freely in the Antinomian way.
SAltmarsh Page 179.
boldly goes on to hold forth, When the Spirit of adoption works not freely,
but servilly and legally.

Object. 1. When men put something of satisfaction on any performance, as if
God were prevailed with by any thing of their own.

How our performances prevail not, or prevail with God.
Answ. Satisfaction to revenging justice, or of merit, or of perfect obedience
to the Law, in our performances, we disclaim; or that we prevail with God, by
any thing of our own, as if our performances were causes of turning God, were
any thing without the grace of Christ, and his merits, but for prevailing with
God to obtain a blessing by prayer and tears, we say it with the Scripture,
Hos. 12.3. Jaakob by his strength had power with God, yea, he had power over
the Angel, and prevailed: he wept and made supplication to him Genesis 32.24, 25,
26. nor is this an old Testament-Spirit, the parable of the unjust Judge and
the Widow is in scope, a doctrine of prevailing with God, by importunity of
prayer. James Iam. 5.16.17.
brings the example of Elias for the prevailing of prayer; and Christ, Mat.
17.21.
This kind of devil is not cast out but by fasting, and prayer; and so the
Spirit of adoption works Romans 8.23.24.25.
freely.

Object. 2. Saltmarsh; Saltmarsh Free grace. 179.

Who look on Christ in the by.


The Spirit works not freely when we take in Christ; but by the way, and
rest not wholly on him.

Answ. They look on Christ by the by, who take in their good works as
fellow-causes with Christ, thinking to be heard for them; Christ is but a
by-Mediator, if he be not whole Mediator: its a practical error naturally in
us, to improve the the sufficiency, and incomparable weight of Christ to
little purpose; and dote more upon done duties, then on Christ; yet this is not
our Doctrine, but our sin that we are to be humbled for.

Obj. 3. Saltmarsh; When we are in bondage to some outward worship of
circumstances, as time, place, person, the Spirit works not freely.

Answ. It may be Saltmarsh thinks the Lords day under the New Testament
legal; men of his gang do it. 2. And not to pray, but at such hours as the
Spirit moves him, Rise, reign,
because the Spirit only, and the Spirit acting, and ravishing, is the only
obliging Law and command under the New Testament, the Letter or written
Scripture, to pray continually, 1 These. 5.17, 18.
in all things to give thanks, to 1 Cor. 1^.5^.
be abundant in the work of the Lord, 1 Timothy 6.^7.
to be rich in good works, Luke 16.9.
and to make our selves friends with the Mammon of unrighteousness, at any
time ere we be put out of our stewardship; except when the Spirits wind
blows fair, that so they may receive us into the everlasting habitations, is
a law bondage; yea, to abstain from adultery, murder, swearing; except the
Spirits acting, Antiominans hold it legal service to be obliged in holy
performances to any written rule of the Word but only to the Spirit.
which is our only obliging Law now; is a legal, not a Gospel-service, nor
can a believer sin, when he commits adultery, murder, for he does nothing
against the only obliging New Testament Law, the acting of the Spirit, when the
Spirit actually does not act him, and stir him to duties of charity, and
love of the brethren; and does not actually deter, and pull him back, by his
immediate impulsions, and breathings, from adultery, and murder: I desire an
answer, intimating a difference between sins of Adultery and Murder; and so
sinful omission of duties, of Chastity, and saving the life of innocent
brethren for a Month, which must involve a sinful not-loving our brother
for a Month, and the not praying to God for thirty days, as the heathen Kings
Law was, upon supposition that the Spirit act not, and stir not up to prayer
for thirty days; and if so, it is a question if Adultery be sin, and if
abstinencie from Adultery, upon the conscience of the seventh Command, be not
an impeaching of the free working of the Spirit of Adoption, and a spece of
legal bondage.

As for Saltmarsh his fourth ground of bondage, to wit, that to do any thing
from the power of an outward commandment, or precept of the Word, that it
brings forth but finer hypocrisy, and his seventh, To take any outward thing
to move them rather then apply Christ for strength, life, and Spirit, is mere
bondage. I have answered already, it is an Enthusiasticall opposing of the
working of word, works, and well grounded experiences of the Saints, to the
actings of the Spirit, and a looseing of us from believing, and obeying
Scriptures, from trembling at the Word, and a most wicked way of Enthusiasme.

Object. 5. Saltmarsh Saltmarsh Free grace 180.
when they do, because of some vow, or covenant they have made, etc. It is
more properly the service of the Old Testament, and part of their bondage, for
wanting the power and fullness of the Spirit of adoption, to work them to
obedience freely from within, they were under the power of outward principles,
to put them on from without.

Answ. 1. If nothing move men to do, but the Letter of the Covenant, Vow, or
Promise, not the Spirit of grace, then can the Spirit never be said to work
Legally, or not freely, because the Spirit works not at all; nor can this be
called properly the service of the Old Testament, except Antinomians say, the
Spirit of grace wrought none at all in the Old Testament, but only the Letter,
contrary to all the heavenly Psalms made by the Holy Ghost, and the acts of
faith, in Moses, David, Job, Jeremiah, which every Page of Old Testament
refuteth, and we must say, mere nature, and the dead Letter without the Spirit
acted them. So Hebr. 11. Psalm. 51.10. and infinite other places on the contrary.

2. Nor can ye say, by the same reason, that a natural conscience, a desire
of a name, lest they should be reputed covenant-breakers, moved these in the
Old Testament to act, for so none could have been termed, men according to
Gods heart, nor perfect and upright men, as David Job, Ezechiah, Noah, because
upon this Antinomian ground, they were all but fine hypocrites.

If I mistake not, Saltmarsh condemns all who have taken the Covenant in the
three Kingdoms; and are moved for fear of the oath of God, to stand to it, as
Legalists, and Old Testament Spirits: The Covenant that Asa, Josiah, caused the
people to stand too, was a Law-bondage, that we are not now obliged to; and
upon the same grounds to keep faith and promise upon lawful contracts and
oaths between King and people, or made to God to keep Marriage-covenants,
contracts, legues, and bargains between man and man, which we conceive to be
of the Law of Nature; must all be the proper service of the Old Testament, and
contrary to the Gospel: to keep my lawful promise made to a man, to pay my
debt, because I promised, when I borrowed money. To keep the Covenant of God
made in Marriage, because it is an outward covenant, is to do because of some
Covenant; and to be in Law-bondage, and to do, as being under the power of
outward principles; and Paul must writ to Philemon, as under the bondage of the
Old Testament. Phil. ver. 18
If Onesymus has wronged thee, or owes thee ought, put it on my count; if he
should pay Philemon, seeing he became his debtor, by an outward promise and
covenant, he did not pay him by the Spirit of adoption, working freely; but by
a Legal Spirit, as being under the Law, not under grace, by this learning. A
Jesuiticall way to loose men from all covenants, promises, bargains in buying
and selling, treatise, and Indentures between persons, Nation and Nation, to
loose us from all the bonds of the Law of Nature, and Nations, and free us from
that which is the Law and the Prophets, Whatsoever ye would men should do to
you, the same do ye to them. Then shall nothing bind us under the New
Testament? Does the Spirit of adoption make us Covenant-breakers,
Truce Breakers, Traitors; I thought the Gospel had Romans 1.3^.
condemned all these and taught us 2 Timothy 3.3.
to live righteously, and 1 These 4 6.
not to cosen and defraude one another. Who now come nighest to the lying
Antichrist, who can dispense with all Laws of God? For Saltmarsh who calls
Presbyterians, Antichristian Legalists, because they cannot away with
Antinomian Heresies, says, To do or perform, what we have promised and
covenanted because we have promised and covenanted, is more properly the
service of the Old Testament, and part of their bondage, for wanting the power
and fullness of the Spirit of adoption; then a Gospel-obedience by the free
Spirit of adoption. I remember Simplicities de^ence against Si^ver headed (...)
p. 22.
Sam. Gortyn, and other Familists, the deadly persecuting enemies of the
faithful, and gracious people in New England, deny it lawful to swear at
all; Page ^3.
deny Magistracy, or any subjection to them; deny the Law, the Letter of the
Law and Gospel; all Learning, Lybraries, Books, reading, and all such
externals, as Saltmarsh argues against in this Chapter, as savouring of Legal
bondage. But to keep Covenants and promises because ye have put your selves
under them by a willing ingagment, is a fruit of the free Spirit, and is not
contrary thereunto. Gal. 5.12. Ephesians. 4.15. Col. 3.8, 9.

Object. 6. Saltmarsh; When Act. 1^.9.
they come to God in any act of worship or prayer, etc. as to a Creator, rather
(says Saltmarsh) then a Father, and as a God, rather then as a God in Christ,
they put themselves under such an infinite purity, as they can neither have
access with faith nor boldness.

Answ. 1. But Saltmarsh, I conceive, speaks of the Spirit of adoption his not
working freely, but in a Legal way, as under the Old Testament bondage; by
which he must insinuate, that the Saints under the Old Testament, in any act
of worship or prayer, came to God as Creator, rather then Father, and as God,
rather then as God in Christ. How then saw they the day of Act. 1^.9.
Christ? How were they saved by Act. 15.^1.
faith, purifying the heart? And by the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, the way
of Jew and Gentiles both? And were justified by the imputed Romans 4.1.2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8.
righteousness of Faith, as the Gentiles?

The 7th. being refuted before; I come now to the last, which is a strange
Character of a servile Spirit. When they measure (says he) their forgiveness
by their sin and sanctification, Saltmarsh 189.
and can believe no more then they have peace for, and that peace upon
something of their own performed, and not from believing on him who has
performed all. God has not given us the Spirit of fear, but of power, and of
love, and of a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1.8. or of a mind not corrupted with any of
these.

Answ. 1. To measure forgiveness by sin, that is, How sin and sanctif^catio is
a measure of forgivenes and how not, and the Antinomian (...) thereof.
to think our sins are too many for Christ to pardon, and we too foul for
Christ, out of free grace to wash is indeed a Spirit of bondage: but that is
not the Antinomians sense. But thus, To measure forgiveness by sin and
sanctification. As to argue thus, I wallow in the mire with the Sow, and go on
with an high hand, without remorse and sorrow, adding drunkenness to thirst,
and drawing iniquity with cart-ropes of vanity, void of all sanctification:
Ergo, I have no forgiveness, and am not washed from my old sins; then truly,
it is most false and licentious doctrine, to say in this sense, its Legal to
measure forgiveness by sin and sanctification; for sin is a measure to
sanctification thus: but Antinomians will have living after, and walking in the
flesh, and free pardon of sin to consist together in one.

2. It is good to believe no more of forgiveness, then we have sound and
well-grounded peace for, which flows from justification; as Paul speaks of
peace, Romans 5.1. Being justified by Faith we have peace with God, etc. But we
make not rotten and false peace, or peace of unbelief to be of the same
circumference and compass with pardon.

3 Peace flowing from justification as the cause, we allow; and also peace
flowing from our spiritual performances, What Peace is?
done in the strength of Christ, and his free grace, as from signs, and
landmarks, and evidences; So the wearied night-watch has both comfort, or
freedom from night-feares, and anxities, from the appearance of the
day star, and from the rising of the Sun; from the former, as a sign; from
the latter as a cause.

4. Nor does Saltmarsh truly say, This peace is from something of our own,
and not from something of Christ, except he defame all the spiritual
performances in the Saints, as bastards begotten of pure nature, and father
them not on Christ.

5. Nor is the act of believing less ours, and so less a ground of our peace,
then our performances done by the grace of Christ, except Saltmarsh comply with
Rise, reign, er. 68.
Libertines, who say, that the faith that justifies a believer, is the faith,
that is and remains subjectively in Christ, and not the faith, that is in the
believer himself; which is a way to loose us from all Gospel performances, and
let us live in fleshly license, not in Christian liberty.

6. The Spirit of fear that Paul speaks of, 2 Timothy 1.8. is that servile,
mercenary fear in Devils and hirelings, not the fear of such as keep
covenants, and promises, and pay their debts, and stand to treaties, because
they think just promises and covenants do bind, even believers in Christ, in
the fear of the Lord, to performance, except they would sin against the Law
of God, which Antinomians cannot believe. If this external tie be contrary to
the free working of a Gospel Spirit of adoption I confess, all duties of the
Law of Nature must be cried down by the Gospel; and better covenant with
Indians and Americans, then with Antinomans.

CHAP. LXIX. The dead and bastard faith of Antinomians.
ANtinomians do obtrude a dead, vain presumption to us, in lieu of saving
faith. The doctrine of saving faith utterly corrupted by the Antinomians.
1. We follow Christ's own fashion and order of believing; that sinners sick,
pained, humbled, plowed by the terrors and the Law: who are only under such
breakings, and rentings of preparations, should rely on Christ for salvation;
not for these preparations, nor because they are thus prepared; but merely in
this order, lest they should say, Ier 2.3^. Antinomians teach presumption in
stead of faith.
Because I am innocent, surely his anger shall turn away from me; and I have
no need of Christ, that same sense (Repentance I dare not call it in an
Evangelicke sense) of sin, and pricking of heart, and fear of shutting up
under an everlasting prison, may highten the price of an excellent Savior.
Antinomians will Pharisees, as Pharisees, obdured undaunted heifers, Ier. 31.8.
Hosea 8.9.
swift Dromedaries traversing their ways, wild Asses used to the wilderness,
snuffing up the wind at their pleasure, all sinners as such, Ier. 2.23* 24.
without any order of first breaking the iron sinnow in the neck: even while
they think they are wholly righteous as Pharisees, and count sin as knots of
strawes, to own the blood of propitiation, immediately without any preparation;
to believe and rely on Christ for Salvation. This we judge to be presumption,
and in regard of Gods order, simply impossible, that they that say Ioh. 9.41.
they see, can see remaining such; but rather be blind, and their sin
remain: that the weary and laden, and those that are judicially Ioh. 9
2.39.10. Math. 13.14.1^.
blinded, and hardened, remaining such, and as such should be invited without
any preparatorie sense of their damnable condition, and of their need of a
Savior; and that both are invited equally of Christ, to rely immediately on
him for Salvation; and are as such forthwith, to cast themselves upon Christ,
is unsound. For 1. Christ decrees, and holds forth the very contrary order,
and method of believing, not the merit thereof. 2. When he Ioh. 5 44.
says, How can ye believe that seek honor one of another? He clearly
intimates, that there must be some preparatory abating of that swelling lust,
or then they cannot as such, believe in Christ.

2. To believe now (say Saltmarsh Free grace, 192.
they) is the only work of the Gospel; and Saltmarsh proves it to be the
only work, this is the work (the only work he must mean, if he prove his
conclusion) That ye believe on him whom he has sent, Joh. 6.29. This is the
commandment, (that is, the only work commanded in the Gospel) That ye
believe in his Son Jesus Christ, Faith only and no other duty, commanded in
the Gospel by the Antinomian way.
1 John 3.23. Then nothing falls under a Gospel-commandement, but believing;
now I would hold Antinomians at this, that nothing is a commandment, or a
commanded duty but that which if we contravene, it makes us guilty of sin
before God, and in his Court, if he would actually enter in judgment with us:
so then the Gospel as the Gospel commands not brotherly love, meekness,
patience, temperance, and forbideth not rebellion to Rulers; murder the hating
of our brother, adultery, robbing, stealing, lying, idolatry, swearing; so as
these should be acts of obedience, or of sinful disobedience to God; but as
acts arbitrary, and of mere courtesy, and simply free to believers, and to be
done or omited, only as the immediate rapture of the Spirit, without any
commandment obliging to obedience rewardable, or to sin punishable by Law
does act and draw them, for the Law forbideth none of these to a believer who
is under no Law; if I mistake, I crave pardon, for I cannot make sense of their
commandments; but in this sense: one thing I complain of Antinomians, by any
sect; They seem to me confused, and obscure, and to dissemble; because they
have not yet set down in right down ingenuitie, Antinomians dissemble in that
they say not down right, that the believer cannot sin, and the believers
lying, and whoring, is not lying, and whoring.
that which I persuade my self is their mind; that the believer cannot sin,
his adultery, and his murder is no adultery, no murder: except they
difference between these two. The believer is free of all sin as Christ
himself, and the believer does and can truly sin, lie, murder, deceive,
etc. And between these, sin is wholly removed out of the believer, no sin
dwells in him, and the believer daily sins; nor are they plain whether
the Gospel command chastity, and forbid adultery, and command the loving of
our brother, and forbid murdering, and hating of our brother; as acts
arbitrary, and merely free: or whether no Law command, or forbid, such things
to believers; nor any Gospel at all, so as to contravene them were sin. Yea,
nor so is believing the only work commanded in the Gospel; for by their way,
faith is not commanded as a cause, or merit of righteousness and life, which
we also think, nor as a condition, or necessary duty at all, more then other
duties: For the Elects sins were all removed, either from eternity, or their
first conception, or Christ's suffering on the cross ( Antinomians fall out
among themselves touching this point) so their unbelief, and final
impenitency cannot be sins.

Nor can Christ as God, or Lawgiver, command believing, for the notion of Law,
or Law-giving under penalty of sin, and curses, is contrary to Christ's
Gospel-love; so Christ must renounce his office of Law-giving, and his
authority, as God to command faith and forbid unbelief; and must only as
Mediator put on love and counsel; and advise us to believe: as one friend does
another, so as we have no command obliging us (except we would sin) to
believe, for a command of love, being contra-devided from a command of Law, to
Antinomians obliges neither to sin nor to wrath, if it be disobeyed.

3. If believing void of all working, and such an empty faith be the only
commanded work in the Gospel; it is like John the Apostle, so often commanding
love to the brethren, and forbiding hateing of our brother, does not act an
Evangelist, or Apostle; but speaks as a Moses, and a Lawgiver; and that
amongst the Lords Apostles, who wrote canonick Scripture, in the New Testament;
some were more legal preachers, and leaned more to a covenant of works as
Rise, reign, unsavo. speech er. ^.
Peter (the Familists of New England should take in John and James, for
Saltmarsh says, they speak more for marks, and signs) then Paul, who stood
most for free grace: yet is Paul as much to command some other works then
Faith, as Peter, James or John.

4. For the object of saving faith, Antinomians Saltmarsh, Free grace* p. 185.
look beside the Gospel, for Saltmarsh proving that Christ is offered to
sinners, as sinners says, none can be such a sinner to whom Christ and his
blood may not be tendered, and offered, his words may bear truth, that Christ
and his blood may be offered to all within the visible Church, elect and
reprobate; Antinomians faith is to believe the universal Election, and
Redemption, all and every one
and so say we, but consider his reasons. 1. From the order of Gods decree
(says he) He loved us, and gave Christ for us, when we were sinners Romans 5.8.
God commends his love etc. Joh. 3.16. God so loved the world. And this offer
(says he) is an offer of that love with which God loved us from everlasting.
So then here is the Antinomian faith, that all and every one immediately,
without sense of sin. or any sickness for Christ; be they Elect, or Reprobate,
believe and be persuaded, that God decreed to give his Son for them in
particular, loved them with the special love of Election from everlasting, and
has satisfied, and was crucified Saltmarsh fr. gr. 1^2.
for their sins. Sure this is not the object of Gospel faith; but is a
transparent untruth, and a lie: there was never any such decree, nor such a
love in God, nor is it revealed in the Gospel, that God decreed to give his Son
to all, and for all, Elect and Reprobate; and that God loved all, so even the
world of Elect, and Reprobate, as Christ speaks, John 3.16. and yet to all
Elect, and Reprobate, is Christ offered. Nor can Antinomians or Arminians say,
that the tender, and offer of Christ, and his blood, to all and every one,
Elect and Reprobate, within the visible Church, is an opening, and bringing
forth of Gods eternal love of election to glory; of all and every one Elect,
and Reprobate. Salmarsh should not speak of points of Divinity, of which he is
as ignorant as a child; nor do Antinomians know these points, of the dephs of
eternal free grace, though they talk of them, Saltmarsh^s reasons for
immediate believing without all preparations, removed.
to abuse them to licentiousness.

But let us for the clearing of the Doctrine of Faith, wipe off Saltmarshs
poor reasons, for immediate believing without all preparations, his 3.
Argument to the other two, which yet are but one, is.

Saltmarsh fr. gr. 186.
Object. It exalts grace more to receive a sinner who has no money, no price,
no righteousness.

Answ. Add an assumption. But he that comes dry, empty, sinful, and prepared
with some sense of sin, of the Physician Christ, is the only man that has
no money, the Pharisie, as a Pharisie, Who invited immediately to come. Esa.
55.1.
is the man that has money, and righteousness in himself; and is whole and
needs the Physician in no sort; and in that he is thus undisposed for Christ,
it should debase grace, if the Lord should sell his wine and milk, for the
sinners money; and sure that. And he that has no money, is a restriction of
those who are invited to come unto the waters, for all are not such as have no
money: for though really all want money, and price to buy the waters, wine, and
milk, really; because all are sinners, Pharisees, or no Pharisees; yet there be
none here invited, but only some certain persons, who in their own sense,
and their selfe-humbled condition make objections against themselves; Oh! I am
unworthy and unprepared for these waters, I have no money, nor prayer, and
Christ means them not to me, but to some worthyer then I. Now, Pharisees, and
all sinners, even these that are selfe-righteous never move such doubts, but
take the Antinomian short cut, and think they have money, and presumptuously,
and being whole and unbroken, come, and buy; that is, they believe, but in
truth, they presume. This poor argument confounds preparations of sense and
feeling, which are preparations not of causation or action, but of mere order,
which we assert according to the Scripture, with preparations of merit, or with
the market-preparations of Pharisees, Papists, and Arminians, which we detest
and abhor; and he cannot frame an argument from Esaias 55. against us.

Saltmarsh 186.
Object. 4. Its right lifting up of Jesus on the Cross, as Moses lift up the
Serpent in the wilderness, not for the healed to look upon, but the wounded;
the sixth Objection says no other, Object. 6.
but that its most agreeable to the Gospel-way of dispensation, the whole need
not a Physician, but the sick. I came not to call the righteous, but sinners
to repentance.

Answ. These places are much for us, for the stung and wounded Israelites, did
not typifie sinners, as sinners, not all sinners without exception. 1. All the
heathen in the Wilderness that were stinged with Serpents, and all the
Israelites ignorant of the virtue of the Serpent, were not cured by looking on
the brazen Serpent, Numb. 21.9, 10, 11. but only such as were sensible of
their pain, and looked to the Serpent; then that the type may not halt in
this. 1. Saltmarsh must presume that all, who were stinged, Heathen or
Israelites who looked up were cured as sinners; as sinners have Christ offered
to them as sinners, and so all sinners; now the Text says the contrary, only
the people of Israel had the benefit of the cure. 2. Only such as knew the
virtue of the Serpent of brass. 3. I confess, Antinomians with Pelagians, and
Arminians, take ever the easiest way, and the shortest cut to heaven; How
Christ calls not the righteous, but sinners to repentance.
that as many as are sinners, are sinners spiritually stung, and sinne-sick,
and sinners in their own sense and feeling, as sinners in the Texts alleged,
are opposed to these that need not the Physician, and to the righteous, who
sure are not the sinners, and the sick that the Physician Christ came to cure,
and to call to repentance. Saltmarsh cannot cull out a Text in all the
Scripture, so contrary to his tenent as these, for the Title of his Chapter,
or Article which is L I. is this. Jesus Christ offered to sinners, as sinners,
that is, to all sinners, and to men, because they are sinners, under the
reduplication of sinners, then the Text must bear. Christ came not to call the
righteous but sinners to repentance, that is, in the Antinomian gloss, Christ
came not to call sinners, but sinners to Repentance, for sure the Righteous,
that is, the selfe-righteous and proud Pharisees, who thought themselves no
sinners, but righteous, and whole; were sinners, and obstinate, and proud, and
malicious sinners, and truly needed the Physician no less then Publicans; but
in their own apprehension and swelling conceit, they were neither sinners, nor
sick, nor unrighteous. Then whether Saltmarsh, will or no, by the sick and
sinners, and the stung and wounded, Christ must mean some inherent
qualification, and preparation for the Physician Christ, which was only in
such and such sinners; to wit, who were lost in their own eyes, and sinners in
their own feeling; for really and truly Pharisees were sinners sick, and dead
in sins, and trespasses; and yet the Lord Jesus denies that he came to call
the Pharisees, and selfe-righteous sinners, he came to call his own sinners
only, not all sinners. This then is no Gospel-way, nor way of grace, but the
Antinomian licentious way. That Christ is offered to sinners as sinners, Christ
calls not sinners, as sinners, nor all sinners to repentance.
and Christ came to call sinners as sinners to repentance; for Christ is
offered to sinners, as such and so qualified sinners, and Christ came to call
to repentance not sinners as sinners, no not Pharisees; not the righteous, not
the whole, but sinners, as such sinners, as sick, as self-lost, as
self-sinners, and self-condemned, and qualified with the sense of their own
wretched and sinful condition; otherwise, how will they answer Christ's
Apology giving a reason, why he conversed with Publicanes and sinners, with
Matthew, cap. 9. and Zacheus, Luke 19. and other sinners, Luke 15. Math. 11. and
not with Scribes and Pharisees; for, Christ expressly says, that he did it,
because the fittest place the Physician can be in, is to sit at the sick man's
bedside?

Object. 5. It leaves men (says he) under greater condemnation, when Christ is
brought home to the soul, for then there can be no objecting; Lord, had I
been thus and thus fit and prepared, then I should have received thee, but I
was a foul sinner at that same very time, and so guilty. O will the Lord
answer, I come therefore to pardon thee, and to wash thee in my blood, because
thou art foul, and that is no excuse.

Answ. 1. Nothing can be concluded against the truth from a lie; ex veris non
nisi verum; there is no greater lie then this excuse, had I been thus and thus
fit and prepared, I should have received thee, but I was a foul sinner, at
that very time guilty. For, 1. we teach not, that preparations do infallibly,
yea or necessarily produce faith, and the receiving of Christ. Many are sick,
and pained with storm of conscience, whom Christ never cures. It is like the
rich gluttons challenge of God in hell; Nay, but if one rise from the dead they
will hear and believe. We teach not that men are converted, because they are
in their apprehension sinners.
2. Antinomians mistake our mind in this lying excuse, to wit, that we fancy
that the prepared for Christ are pardoned and justified men; this we never
teach: they are guilty sinners, and these are in their sins, unworthy who are
best qualified and fitted for Christ. We make not cleanness a preparation for
washing, nor a sinnelesse, innocent, and guiltless condition, a fitness
preparatory to justification. 3. Antinomians take not away, by their way, a
stronger shift; Lord, if Christ had dyed for me by name, and thou had drawn
me as effectually to Christ, as thou drewst Paul, and Peter, I should have
received Christ, but thou drewst me, in a way, that thou drewst Judas, when I
was guilty, and my heart rockie. We make preparations Christ's work, as
conversion is, but a far more common work of an inferior nature which may
be in many sinners who are never converted.

Object. 7. All that ever received Christ, Corinthyans, Ephesians, Colossians,
received him in a sinful condition, when they were unwashen, darkness,
dead in sins, enemies in their minds by wicked works.

Answ. Nothing follows against us, preparations removes not a sinful
condition, nor deadness in sin, nor minde-enmity by evil works. Christ's
blood and saving grace only removes both the guilt, and the stain of sin;
but hence it follows in no sort that we are not sinne-sick, and
selfe-condemned, and lost before Christ remove our darkness, and quicken the
dead.

Object. 8. God offers Christ in time, as God gave him; God before all time
gave him to us, because we were sinners, Page 187.
and now he is but offered as he was given.

Answ. God offers Christ in time, as he gave him before time; it is true in
regard of the freedom of grace, no cause, condition, qualification, reason,
Only free grace, preparations neither before time, nor in time, are the cause,
or condition, or reason, for which sinners are converted, or ordained for
conversion.
moved God to ordain and decree, either the sick for the Physician Christ, or
the Physician for the sick before time; and neither preparations is the cause,
nor necessary condition or ground, why he gives Christ to us in time. But it
is not true, in regard of the order of giving Christ, bofore time, or in time;
for, in time, God gives Christ to these that hear the Gospel only; but I
hope he decreed not to give Christ and salvation to men upon this condition,
and upon no other, that they shall hear the Gospel, because he ordained men
for glory of free grace, and upon the same free grace ordained them to hear
and believe, and repent; yet neither faith nor repentance were preparatory
conditions to the decree of grace. 1. God neither before time, nor in time
gives Christ, because we are sinners, or because we are thus and thus humbled
and prepared, but because he will be gracious to whom he will be gracious,
sin is only the occasion and the matter, and preparations are the mere
order of his proceeding; first he humbles by the Law, and then gives Christ
in the Gospel, but not because the sinner is humbled, nor for his humiliation,
nor because he has made any Gospel-promise, whoever is thus and thus fitted
and prepared by the Spirit of the Law, and terrors, and broken, and
selfe-condemned with the burden and sense of sin, shall be converted; we know
no such Gospel-promise.

CHAP. LXX. Faith not the only work of the Gospel, as Antinomians say.
Saltmarsh Free grace, pa. 192.
LEt us also try Saltmarsh his reasons, to prove his short way to heaven, and
that its the only Gospel-worke to believe.

Salvation (says he) is not a business of our working and doing, it was done
by Christ with the Father. All our work is no work of salvation, but in
salvation. We here receive all, not by doing any thing, that we may receive
more, but doing because we receive so much, because we do not that we may be
saved. And yet we are to do as much as if we were to be saved, by what we do,
because we should do as much for what is done already for us, and to our
hands, as if we were to receive it for what we did our selves.

Answ. 1. Here is no Argument. Christ has done all by way of merit, and
purchase of a perfect redemption; therefore we are not to work out our
salvation, in fear and trembling, it follows not.

2. It is most false, That we are to do nothing in the Gospel, that we may
receive more; Doing, because Christ has redeemed and saved, not contrary, but
sweetly subordinate to doing that we may be possessed in the purchased
Redemption.
or, that we may be saved, but because we are saved; for these are not
contrary, but sweetly subordinate. We do because we are saved, and because we
are Redeemed, by merit, and Gospel-right, by hope and begun possession;
therefore we are not to sow to the Spirit, that we may reap life G^lat. 6.
everlasting, it follows not. We both work because we have a crop, and that
we may receive a crop. Servants are to serve their Masters not with
eye-service, both because they have a Master in heaven, who has saved them,
and also in hope, Col. 3.^^.
to receive the reward of inheritance. Elders are to feed the flock, because
they are redeemed, and Ioh. 21.17.
love their Redeemer; and because 1 Pet. 5.4.
when the chief Shepherd shall appear, they shall receive a crown of glory
that fades not away; and because we are redeemed, we are 2 Ioh. 8.
to look to our selves, that we lose not these things that we have wrought
for, but that we may receive a full reward: so our work is both a work of
salvation, and a work in salvation.

3. There is nothing falser, then that Antinomians are to work as much, as if
they were to be saved, by their working: for their working is arbitrary, not
obligatory by any commandment, nor do they sin in not working. Let them in
their conscience say, if they sin, or can sin. 1. being once justified; for
sin is as clean removed, in its nature and being, from the believer, as from
Christ, say the Antinomians. 2. If they sin in doing nothing after they are
justified, if the immediate acting of the Spirit of love stir them not to it;
and therefore it is false, that they should do as much for what is done, as if
they were to receive life for doing; because they should not, non debent, they
are not obliged to do, when they do not, nor are under any guilt for not
doing. By this way: for to Antinomians there is no obliging Law, but God
immediately by his Spirit acting them to good, is all their Law.

Object. 2. This short work; believe, and be saved, Paul tells you. Say not
in thine heart, who shall ascend to heaven? that is, to bring Christ from
above, etc. The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, etc.

Answ. We would not willingly make the way to heaven longer then Christ has
made it: Paul speaks, Romans 10.6, 7, 8. of a Law-way that is long, wearisome,
unpassible, as who would strive to climb up to heaven, or to go down to the
grave to fetch Christ from either heaven or hell. The Gospel-way sure is a
sweet, easy, passible way, Believe, and be saved. Yet must we not fancy that
the way is shorter then Christ has made it, How the way to heaven is sweet and
easy, yet not so short as ^ntinomians say.
and that it is not a puzling work to flesh and blood. Saltmarsh with his
Antinomians makes it but one step, at the very next door. I rather believe
Christ, who says, it is a way of many miles, strait, narrow, and thorny. The
meritorious way to us is easy, believe by the grace of Christ, but the way of
a Christian conversation, whether Antinomians will or no, lies through duties,
doing the will of Math 7.21. Ma^h. 12 50.
God, its not words, Lord, Lord, but working, Phil. 3 12, 13.
sweating, 1 Cor. 9.23 24, 25, 26.
running, L^k 13.24. (...).
wrestling, 2 Timothy 4 7.
fighting, Rev. 2.7.17.26.
bleeding, Rev. 2 12.21. Rev. ^.9.
suffering Hebr. 12.4^
abounding in the work, M^t. 16.24, 25. I^m. 1.12.
Sowing, 1 Cor 15.58.
Selling all the sweetest delights, Gal. 6.6.8.
many tribulations, Math. 13. ver 4.^6. Acts 14.22.
night-watching: which yet all are honyed and sugared with the love of Christ,
so as his yoke R^^. 2.9 Act. 20.^9.
is easy, and his Math. 24^, 2.43, M^^. 1^.29.
Commandments not grievous; yet not so easy, as that the only naked bare act
of believing, should be the only Gospel-worke, and ye might lie in an yvory
bed, and sleep and be carried into an Antinomian fancied Paradise, being under
no Law, no obligation of doing, no danger of sinning, and incurring the rod
of men, and the fatherly and sad displeasure of God for sins; no broken
bones, no terrors, no sense of our sorrow for sin, no progress in personal
repentance and mortification, no care of watchful walking to perfect holiness
in the fear of God, no abstaining from worldly lusts, no strictness of
blamelesnesse of conversation, for fear of sin, only believe, that as Christ
has suffered for all sin, and so you are as clean as Christ from all sin,
original and actual, and Christ has done all these for you, and believe he
has repented for you, mortified lusts for you, walked strictly and holily for
you; 1 Ioh. 5.3.
this is an easy work, and no puzling business, and there is an end.

Object. 2. Saltmarsh, Its the Gospel-way of dispensation to assure and pass
over salvation in Christ to any that will believe. Saltmarsh 194.


Answ. True. But will thou know, o vain man, Iam 2.20.
that faith without works is dead; and faith is effectual by love. See the
Scriptures Iam 2 13, 14, 15. etc. 1 Ioh. 3.17. 1 Ioh. 2.9, 10, 11. Romans 12.1,
2, 3, 4. 1 Thessalonians. 4.^, 2 3, 4. Col 3 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 etc. Ephesians 5.1, 2 etc.
Saltmarsh Free grace, 19 4.
laying other Commandments on us under the Gospel, then believing only, and
threatening disobeyers.

Object. 3. Saltm. There needs no more on our sides, to work or warrant
salvation to us; but to be persuaded, that Jesus Christ dyed for us, because
Christ has suffered, and God is satisfied. Now suffering and satisfaction is
that great work of salvation.

Answ. Here is the work of salvation abridged to a narrower compass, to only
suffering, at least Saltmarsh was wont to take in the actions of Christ, and to
will us to believe that Christ believed, repented, and mortified sin for us,
and that is all our belief, repentance, mortification.

Object. 4.5. They only are justified who believe, Romans 1.17. Acts 13.39. We
are justified by grace, not of works, Romans 3.24.

Answ. And who denies that but Papists and Antinomians. Antinomians say, from
eternity, and from the womb we are justified; and from Christ's time of dying
on the Cross; and sure the date of our believing is not from eternity, or
from the womb, or from 160. years agone, when Christ dyed then they only
cannot be justified who believe; for so thousands who believe not are
justified. 2. We are justified by faith, without works. True. Ergo, We are
carried to heaven being once justified under no command of God, to do good
works, or to eschew evil, and so as we cannot sin; it follows not.

CHAP. LXXI. The Justified obey not God, by necessity of nature, as the fire
burns, as Antinomians fancy.
ANtinomians Eaton H^ney comb^ c^. 8. page 163. Town assert. of grace, 131.
Saltm^rsh Free grace. page ^ 6.
say, the justified cannot sin, they obey God necessarily, as it is the nature
and quality of fire to burn; the grounds of the New England Libertines, are 1.
The Holy Ghost coming Rise, reign, er. 1.2
in the place of natural faculties, of understanding, will, and affections,
does all the works of these natural faculties, and Christ and grace working
all the supernatural works of believing, repenting, and Rise, reign, er.
7.8.15.18.
that immediately; the free will must have less liberty in loving God, and
believing, then the Sun has to give light, and the fire to cast forth heat;
for fire and Sun are thought to be agents in their natural actions; but free
will is a mere patient in these. 2. None are to be exhorted to believe (say
Rise, reign, er. 22.
they) but such whom we know to be elect, or to have the Spirit in them
effectually, and Rise, reign, er. 2.
there is neither inherent righteousness, nor grace inherent in the Saints,
but Christ immediately and only works all their works in them; so all the
faculties of the soul lie as dead passive creatures, and powers void of
freedom and action, and Christ immediately, as the humane nature, and the
faculties thereof does R^se, reign, er. 2.
act and work in the Saints, as er. 11.
Christ is made flesh, and incarnate in the Saints, and does in them believe,
repent, rejoice, love; and believers have neither freedom nor action at all,
more then blocks in their actions. Hence (say Rise, reign, e. 36.
they) all the believers activitie is to act sin. So says the Rise, reign,
unsavory speech, er. 4.
Libertine; If Christ will let me sin, let him look to it, upon his honor
be it.

But 1. there remains true liberty in the regenerate man, his free will is
not destroyed. Ioh. ^.6.
If the Son make you free, then are ye free indeed. But R^. 6.7 18*
God be thanked that ye were the servants of sin, but ye have obeyed from
the heart that form of doctrine which was delivered you, being then made free
from in, ye became the servants of righteousness. Now the 2 ^or. 3.17.
Lord is a Spirit; and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. Psalm.
119. verse. 45
I will walk at liberty, for I seek thy precepts. Hence rejoicing Romans 5.2. 1
Pet. 1 8.
in God, P^^l. 3.4. Psalm. ^.1 Romans 7.^2.
delight in his Law, Psalm, 119,
rejoicing in his word, Psalm. 16.7.^.
choosing of God above all other lovers; and ^sa. 119.30
his testimonies, argue a sanctified elective power of free will in the soul.
2. The justified can sin, otherwise, they should no more be capable of
exhortations to walk in Christ, and grow in grace, and of dehortations from
sin, then the fire and the Sun, can be requested or exhorted to cast out
heat and light. 3. This foolish opinion is bottomed on this conceit: That a
believer as a believer, walks by faith perpetually; is admitted (says Town
asser. grace, page 129.
Town) to live and abide for ever, by sense and sight, in the kingdom of
glory. And wants nothing of heaven (says Saltm^rsh Free grace* 140.
Saltmarsh) but to believe he is in heaven, Honey comb cap. 3. page 25.
is as clean from sin (says Town asser. grace, pa 39.40.
Eaton) as Christ himself. Nothing sins in the regenerate but sense Honey
comb cap. 5. page 87. Den, Ser. Of the Man of sin, page 9.10, 11. Saltmarsh
Free grace, p. 74.75.142.
the flesh, the members of the body of sin, or the Ass; nor is it more sin
that they do before God, then the burning of the fire, or the illumination
that comes from the Sun, for they are no more under any commanding, or
restraining Law of God, then the fire or the Sun. 4. The immediate rapt and
pull of the Holy Ghost removes all freedom, reason, deliberation, knowledge,
action from the soul, in either supernatural works of grace, or sin, as if
the soul were turned in a rock, or a stone. 5. All the sins of believers,
their Adulteries, murders, lying, cousening, must be counted on the Lords
score (I tremble to speak it) upon his honor be it, if he will suffer perfect
Angels to sin, more then he can suffer Angels, and the glorified that stand
before the throne, to fall or transgress.

CHAP. LXXII. Glorifying of God in sanctification needful.
ANntinomians Honey comb ca. 13.394.395.396.397
tell us of a two fold, glorifying of God, one in the eyes of God, primary,
immediate, passive, divine, by faith, in which God glorifieth himself in us,
justifying us, Faith being the Creator, as it were of a certain divinity, as
Romans 4.20. Abraham gave glory to God, whereas unbelief makes him a liar.
There is another glorifying of God that is outward, more fleshly and humane,
secondary, mediate, Our active glorifying of God in acts of sanctification
accepted in the sight of God.
in the eyes of men, by good works, in sanctification, in which we are agents,
and glorify God by the Spirit, by which we are partakers of the Divine
nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. and it is done in a grosser manner, by declaring God
glorified before men by our good works, Math. 5. and greatly inclines to the
glorifying of man; by this Abraham has to glory and rejoice in holy works, but
not before God.

Answ. 1. We are not mere passive in believing, for then should we not be
commended for believing, nor should we know, rely, and trust in an
all-sufficient Savior, in believing on him, though there be a passion in
believing. 2. These enemies of Sanctification abase all holy walking and works
of sanctification, calling holy walking; 1. glorifying of God outwardly, and
before men, in a fleshly manner. Whereas God seeeth it, and acknowledges it in
his own sight, sincere, unfeigned, perfect in its kind, with perfection of
parts, not of degrees; they would have all Sanctification finer hypocrisy. I
know thy works (says Revel. 2.9.
Christ to Smyrna) and tribulation, and poverty, but thou art rich. That we
Luke 1.74.75.
might serve him without fear in holiness and righteousness, (...), before
him, all the days of our life. And whatsoever ye (Servants do) do it
heartily, as to the Lord, not to men. Col. 3.13.
2 Cor 4.2.
Commending our selves to every man's conscience, (...), as in the sight of God.
Abraham, walk before me, and be thou perfect, says the Lord. How many of
the good Kings did right in the sight of the Lord? Its true; our best works are
polluted with sin, and in the matter of justification cannot endure the
strict Law-censure of the Judge of the world, if God narrowly Psalm. 130.3.
Psalm. 143.2.
mark iniquity. But Antinomians are so at odds with holy walking, that they
will have all the sincere works of the Saints wrought by the grace of God, to
be in their substance before God, plaistered hypocrisy: and yet in the
justified, these hypocritical works are no sin, there being no more sin in
the justified, nor any thing contrary to a Law, which the Lord can see as a
sin more then in Jesus Christ. So here is holy, sanctified, and lawful
sin, and an innocent hypocrisy, and holy, and harmless corruption and
flesh. 3. A declarative glorifying of God in the eyes of men, not of God, must
argue the believer to be lawless, and a Libertine before men, and that he
needs not before men, and in his conversation with wife, brother, children,
neighbors in his words, promises, covenants, buying, selling, works of his
calling, do all as in the sight and presence of God, for if he walk
rightteously in his conversation with men, he is behind Gods back, the Lord
sees him not; if he walk unjustly, in fornication, uncleanness, cousening,
lying, God sees not these to be sins.

4. Why do Antinomians exclude from works of sanctification, the work of
believing? Are we not to do all good works in faith, as well as for the glory
of God? and are we not to eat and drink in faith? Romans 14. verse. 22.23. are
they not bastard works, that come not from such a root as faith? As the fruit
is ill, if the tree be ill; and so we must glorify God primarily, immediately,
in the sight of God, passively, in this declarative, and active, and secondary
glorifying of God.

5. The Antinomians exclude a third sort of glorifying God, to wit, in private,
when neither God sees them, nor men, but they are done in a secret closet; as
praying, praising, meditating, and soliloquies of the soul with God, alms
given in private, that men see not, nor do the poor know of it; this is
neither passive, nor active glorifying of God, and so the division is lame,
except Antinomians will have us coming with our secret prayers and alms to
the streets, and cause a trumpet to be blown, as Pharisees do?

6. The gloryfying of God by men that see our good works incline of it self to
no glorifying of man, more then Abraham's giving glory to God, but only as we
either trust to our good works, or vainly conceit we are justified by our good
works, and then being abused, they incline to glorify men, and make us vainly
rejoice and boast in them before God. So if Abraham should think his act of
believing, were his only righteousness before God, his believing in God
should be as fleshly a glorifying of man, as any his works of Sanctification.

CHAP. LXXIII. Sanctification concurs as well as Justification to make Saints.
THough Sanctification, say Honey comb ca. 1. p. 339.340 341.
Antinomians, make men Saints declaratively to men-ward, Sanctification makes
Saints, as well as justification.
yet the true cause that makes them Saints in the sight of God is justification.

To this we say, 1. Take Sanctification, as Honey comb ca. 1^.340. Saltmarsh
borrowing Eatons words has the same free grace, pa. 62.63. Dens ser. of the
Man of sin, page 9.11.
Eaton, and Saltmarsh, and Den say, Protestant Divines, whom they are pleased
to call Legalists, do, for such holiness as they say, is in Anchorits,
Eremits, and Monks for external works done without faith, it makes men neither
Saints before God, nor men, but mere faireded hypocrites; such a
sanctification we disclaim. But take Sanctification for holy walking in the
strength of the grace of justification, and grace inherent in us; so we say,
Justification and Sanctification ought not to be separated, but both concur
to make us Saints; the one as the cause, the other as the unseparable effect.
And most false it is that Eaton Honey comb 339.
says, That Sanctification is so far from being the cause of making us
Saints to Godward, that properly it does but declare, that we are Saints to
man-ward; for so Antinomians make Sanctification nothing but a poor shadow,
like an Yvie bush, that is no cause of wine, but a mere sign to declare and
show in this, there is wine. Now sure, by Sanctification we are partakers of
the Divine nature, and the Spouses beauty, not only in regard of imputed
righteousness, but also a holy and sincere walking and blameless profession
of the truth, in a C^nt. 4.9.
chain of the Spouses neck; and in her personal acts of praying, and
praising, and the sweet ministry of the Cant 7.^, 2, ^, 3, 4, ^.
Gospel, in regard of which, Her lips drop as a honey comb, butter and milk
are under her tongue, and the smell of her garments, like the smell of Lybanon,
her feet beautiful with shoes, her two breasts like two Young Roes, that are
twins, etc. Sanctification must render the Spouse a society of Saints even in
the eyes of God, and not only merely and declaratively to men-ward: as the
Yvie-bush is a sign of wine. Let Antinomians say, Are not the Saints partakers
of the Divine nature, in the sight of God, as well as declaratively in the
sight of men?

2. If the charity of the Philippians Phil 4.8.
be an odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to God?
And Heb. 13.16.
If to do good, and to communicate, be such sacrifices, where with God is well
pleased; though their charity and good works do not justify them, yet these
good works must smell sweetly, to God, and be well-pleasing in his sight, and
by them, God must repute them sanctified (though the sanctification be
unperfect, and not in its measure, every way conformable to the spiritual and
perfect Law,) and they are not then merely declaratively and to men-ward
only, Saints by their works of Sanctification.

3. The contrary works in the Saints, the shutting up their bowels against
their indigent brethren, their biting and devouring, their acts of Adultery,
and Murder, and lying, are ill smelling and displeasing in the eyes of God,
not only declaratively before men, but really and in truth in the sight of
God; in regard that the Lord, 1. is displeased with these sins. 2. Forbids
them in his Law. 3. Rebukes them. 4. Punishes them. 5. Sets the conscience
on against the believer that does them, that they are grieved for them, and
mourn. 6. Hides his countenance from Psalm. 51.10.
them, commands us to Iam. ^.16. 1 Ioh 1.9.
confess, and Math. 6.11.
crave pardon for them; then the Lord must take notice of the contrary acts and
command, commend, and reward them, be well-pleased, with them and they must be
more then naked declarations and signs of Saintship to men-ward. The Lord
himself pronounces the Saints blessed, not only for Christ's imputed
righteousness, which is indeed the first cause, fountain, and ground thereof,
but also for our works of Sanctification; as Psalm. 119.1.
Blessed are the undefiled in their way, Psalm. 12.1
that fear the Lord and delight in his Commandments, that Psalm. 106.3
keep judgment, and that do righteousness at all times, that I^h 13 77.
do what Christ commands, that Rev. 22.14.
do his Commandments. Then God must judge them more then declarations to
men-ward, Mat. 14.23.^4.
because this is the blessing of eternal life in Christ Jesus.

CHAP. LXXIIII. The harmonious compliance of old Libertines, Familists, and
Antinomians.
We do so much the more hate the Antinomian way, as Antichristian and
fleshly, (for there be other Antichrists then the Pope of Rome, and many False
Christ's, Paral I Libertines, Familists, Antinomians, agree in that, all deny
there should be sense of sin in bel^evers.
risen now) in that in the doctrine of sin, sorrow for sin, repentance,
sanctification, etc. they do so comply with the old Libertines in Calvin's
time, and with David Georgius, and Henry Nicolas, and the late Familists.

Parall. I. Libertines in Calvin's C^lvin. in i^struct. adv. Lib^rt. ca. 8 450
451.452 Si De^ sumus, veterem hominem in nobis crucifg^^oportere, and veterem
Adam^m inte^ire. Calvin. Ibid. 451. Quia hoc Adami peccatum suit commedere de
fructu scientiae boni ac mali; fic, ex liber^inorum sententia, veterem A^amum
mortificare nihil aliud est, quam nihil discernere quasi mal^ (^eccati)
cognitione sublata; puerorum more naturalem sensum atque inclinationem sequi,
huic orationi locos Scripturae acommodant quibus pueril^s simplicitas
commendatur.
time, said, The state of innocence was to know nothing good, or ill, more
then children, and Adams first sin is to know good and ill, and regeneration
is to be stripped naked of the knowledge and sense of either sin or
righteousness; and therefore the Libertines Calvin. Ibid. 4 1. Si quem vident
mali conscientia moveri, ^ Adam (inquiunt) adhuc aliquid cernis? Vetus homo
nondum in te crucifixus est? Si quem vident timore judicij divini percelli,
adhuc (inquiunt) po^^ g^stum habes? Cave ne bucella ista te strangulet, fi quis
peccata sua confiderans sibi displiceat, ac maerore afficiatur: peccatum adhuc
in ipso regna^e dicunt: and sensu carnis suae captiv^m ^e^eri.
said to any man troubled in conscience with sin, O Adam do thou yet know
somewhat? Is not the old Adam yet crucified? If they saw any stricken with the
fear of the judgment of God, Have thou yet (say they) a taste of the old Aple,
beware that that morsel do not strangle thee. If any man was touched in
conscience with remorse of sin, and did sorrow or repent for his
transgressions, they, said, sin reigned in that man, he was sins captive.

Just so the Familists Rise, reign, er. 1.2.
of New England. In conversion (say they) the faculties of the soul and
workings thereof are destroyed, and in stead of them the holy Ghost comes in.
And er. 64. Ibid.
a man must take no notice of sin, nor of his repentance for sin. And
Vnsaevorie speeches. er. 7.
frequencie or length of holy duties, or trouble of conscience for neglect
thereof, are all signs of one under a covenant of works; that is, of one in
whom old Adam lives and reigns. And Unsavory speeches, (...).
I know I am Christ's, not because I crucify the lusts, but because I do not
crucify them.

And our late Antinomians say, To be touched with any sense of sin; and for
David Town asser. page 10^.
to confess his sin, or be grieved for it, was says M. Town, from want
and weakness of faith, that is from the old man. I cannot (says he) look on
my self, ^^wn asser. page 97.
my actions (sinful) and my conscience, and see my sins remain -- but I
look to the records of heaven, and Gods justice, and since the bloodshed, I
can find nothing there against me, -- but sins as a debt discharged are
become a nullitie before the Lord, -- and therefore my peace and happiness
consists in the forsaking and not considering my self, and in my living and
abiding in Christ, who is in heaven.

Antinomians with Lib^rtines repute all repentance, sense or sorrow for sin,
acts of the flesh and unbelief.
This not considering himself and his sins, is neither to know, sorrow,
mourn for, fear, or be humbled for sin. Pr^testant Divines say, when the
Lord forgiveth a sinner, yet the sinner will never forgive himself, but know,
consider, fear, mourn, and be humbled for his sins. Antinomians say, all
these are works of the flesh, and of unbelief, and of the Old Adam, just as
the Libertines said: so to feel sin dwelling, in them, as Paul did, Romans 7.
says Eaton Honey comb, cap. 5. page 87.88.
Eaton is an act of the flesh contrary to faith; and if (says Saltmarsh Free
grace. 142.
Saltmarsh) A believer live only by sense, reason, and experience of himself,
and as he lives to men (he means daily sinning by reason of an indwelling
corruption) he lives both under the power and feeling of of sin, and under
the Law. But if he live by faith -- he lives out of the power of all
condemnation, and unrighteousness. Then to Antinomians feeling of sin in us,
and sense reason, and experience knowing, and discerning sin in us, and our
fearing sin, sorrowing, or being humbled for it, or any acts of repentance
are contrary to living by faith, and so the works of the old Adam knowing ill,
and a taste of the sour apple. What then is regeneration, and the killing of
the body of sin, and of old Adam? It is the abolishing of all conscience
knowledge, discerning, feeling, fear, sorrow, dejection of men for fear of
sin. Hence Master Archer Ser on Job. 14.1
Archer, C^^pe vol. 3. ser. 1. page 19 27.
D. Crispe, and Saltmarsh, Free grace. p. 4^.45 p 174 175.176.
Saltmarsh, make Sermons against fear of, or trouble for sin, as works of
unbelief, as contrary to the power of God, faithfulness, providence, death of
Christ, free grace, a weakening of faith, a damping of all religious Page
40.41.42.43.44.45, etc.
service.

And for their not knowing of any good we do, or acts of Sanctification
(which is the other branch of the Libertines regeneration.) Familists Rise,
reign, er. 58.
say, To fetch comfort from experience of grace in our selves, is no way of
grace. And Rise, reign, er 50. Adu^teries, lying, blasphemy of believers; to
Antinomians, are no r^all, but only seeming, and falsely supposed sins.
its poverty of Spirit when we see we have no grace; and Saltmarsh, Den,
Crispe, Eaton, Town, and the Antinomians, reject all comforts, assurance, or
rejoicing from acts of Sanctification, and works in the regenerate, and say,
that its a seeking of righteousness in our selves, and sure then it must be a
work of the flesh to exercise our knowledge that way, to discern our selves
to be sons, because we walk in love, and after the Spirit.

Paral. II. Libertines said, All sin was but an opinion that we sin, and
under opinion, they comprehend conscience, scruples, remorse, sense of Calv^n.
opusc. cap. 18. page 451.452 Notandum peccatu^ mundum, carnem, veterem homi^em
nihil a^^^esse a^ud ipsis, quam ad quod opinatione^ v^cant, sic modo ne amplius
opinemar, ex eoru^ sententia non pe^camus; sub h^c autem opinatione
comprehendunt om^em synterefin, scrupulu^, denique omnem sensum judicii; qui
null^m habent rationem peccati novas creaturas v^cant quod ab opinatione vacui
sunt -- Pe^ Christum Redemptionis benefi^ium p^nurt in hoc quod opinationem, i.
e. mundum, diabolum, peccatum dist^uxerit.
judgment. That Christ's work, of Redemption was to destroy opinion and sense
of sin, and then are men new creatures. And there is no Devil, no sin, no
world that are our spiritual enemies. David Georgius placed the spiritual
life of his, in committing Adulteries without sense of sin, and that
publickely without shame, and that faith in Jesus Christ was the way to abolish
this shame, in acting this filthiness; which shame was the fruit of the first
Adams disobedience. Page 24. ar. 8. in libro perfectionis se^ prophetie, B.
3.4.5.6. In disputatione Argentinae Haebita, An. 1538.
And that they should confess all their sins, to their shame, again and again,
in the public assembly, till all pride and glorification of the flesh be
crucified, that grace and mercy may be seen to be more glorious. And
Blesdikius in Histor. de Geor. Page 32. ar. 18.
they must go in this selfe-denyall, while they be deaden, or to the opinion
of any propriety of goods or possessions, or wives or Marriages, and then they
come naked to the new Kingdom of David Georgius, where they are to live above
all laws of marriage, etc. Ib^d. pa. 29. ar. 15. ar. 16.
or consanguinity, or the like.

H^storia Davidis Georgii conscripta ab ipsius Genero N^colaio Blesdikio, Page
23. ar. 7.
Antinomans do well near border with this way; only that which Libertines
do call opinion or discerning of sin. Saltmarsh, Eaton, and Den, call sense,
Town calls it sense, or unbelief, all call it, sinning not before God, but
before men, and in the conversation. So they say, the Adulteries, Murders
committed by the justified, are seeming sins, sins in men's account, says
Saltmarsh Free grace, 151.

The Scripture calls us ungodly and sinners not that we are so, but seem so:
or not so in Gods account, but in the worlds*


Saltmarsh, but not so before God, and to the eye of Faith. Now to live by
faith is Antinomian Sanctification, or Mortification; or these sins (says
Town asser. page 97
Town) before God, are no sins, to faith they are mere nullities, but to
our sense and flesh they are sins. So Saltmarsh Free grace, pa. 142.
Saltmarsh, and Honey comb ca. 8 page 165.
Eaton, to sense, reason, experience, or to unbelief that can but lie and
deceive, they are sins; to faith, and before God, who sees no sin in us,
they are no sins. Or, as Den^e Ser. Of the Man of Sin. page 9.10.11.12.
Master Den says, They are sins in the conversation before men, not in the
conscience and before God? and all come from this, the Justified are under no
Law of God, and so cannot sin; if then they think their adulteries to be
sin, that is sense, unbelief, ignorance of their Christian liberty, and the
erroneous opinion of the old Adam; Faith believes Adultery to be no sin at
all. Its true, to the believer it is no condemning sin; no sin, such as
actually binds them over to eternal wrath, say we; but not a nullity for
that, not for that; an exorbitancie against no Law of God, as the Libertine and
his brother Antinomian say. Then no sense of sin, no trouble of mind for
sin (as good Saltmarsh says) can be in believers, because where there is no
transgression, S^ltmarsh fr. gr. p, 44.
there is no Law, and no trouble of mind for a breach of the Law. This is an
opinion of faith that Christ has purchased a power, to believe sin to be no
sin; and this is with David Georgius, not to think shame of sin, but to be
deadned to all sense of sin, and so Faith pulls the conscience out of the
justified man, he may sin with ease.

CHAP. LXXV. Libertines, Familists, and Antinomians free us from all Law, and
that we neither sin, nor are to be rebuked for sin.
Paral. III. LIbertines Calvin in opu c. page ^6. Sublata omni destinctione
totam l^g^m abolere v^lunt, inquientes nu^lam, am^lius ejus rationem h^bendam.
said, We were freed from all Law, either directing, commanding, or
condemning. And Blesdiki^s histor. Dav. Georgii, page 29. ar. 16.
so did David Georgius, and so teach the Libertines of New Rise* reign, er.
4.5.
England. These that are in Christ, are under no Law, and Town asser. gr. page
8.19.20.21. etc.
Antinomians; as Town, Sal^marsh Free grace, page ^40.146.
Saltmarsh, Crisp, Den, say, We are freed from all the Law of God, in all its
offices, to direct, give light, rule, bind, oblige, or command, as well as to
threaten and condemn.

Paral. IV. Libertines Calvin. Instruct advers. lib^r. pa. 452. F^ngunt
regenerationem instar A^gelici esse status in quo homo de^inquere aut labi non
p^sset
taught, That when we are once regenerate, we can sin no more, but are as
Angels. So Libertines of New England and Antinomians say, Rise, reign,
V^savory speeches er. 4.
A believer is as free from Hell, Law, and bondage on earth, as if he were in
heaven, nor wants he any thing to make him so, but to believe he is so. And
Honey comb, cap. 3 page 25.
He that believes (says Eaton) that Christ has taken away his sins, is as
clean from sin as Christ himself. And to Faith Town asser. of grace, page
71.
there is no sin, and the believers person Town Asser. page 77.
and works are perfect before God, and free of sin, and sinful imperfections.

Paral. V. When Libertines Honey comb, cap. 11. page 321. ^23.324.
Calv. adver. Liber. 452. Came reprehenduntur de malesiciis dicunt, se ^lla
m^nime admisisse, sed asinu^ suum.

Libertines and Antinomi^ns say, the believer sins not, but his flesh.


were rebuked for sin, they said, Its not I that sin, but my Ass, or sin
dwelling in me, and they cited that text, 1 John 3. He that is born of God,
sins not. Its true, Paul says, Romans 7. Not I, but sin dwelling in me, but
his meaning was, its not I, as regenerate, who sin, because I make not sin
my task and work, nor do I evil with the whole bensell of my soul, the
whole strength of my mind, affections, and will, in regard the unrenewed part
protests against sin; but I, as unrenewed, and as fleshly in part, as half
a sufferer I sin, being as a captive sighing in my fetters, and complaining
that I am wretched through necessity of sinning. I do the evil I would not
do, Romans 7.17.18.22.23. But the Antinomians conspire with Libertines in the
same sense; for Town ^sser. grace, page ^5.
Town says, That the old Adam, and all his works are shut up under the Law
and wrath of God. So it is but the Old Adam, the flesh, the Law of the members
Town asser. pa. 39 40.
that does sin, but it was never the Apostles mind, to deny that a believer
once justified can sin any more, For in many things we sin all, Jam. 3.2.
And if we say we have not sin, we are liars, 1 John 1. But Antinomians deny
that believers can more sin, then Christ Honey comb, c. 5. p 25.
himself, or then Saltmarsh Free grace, pa. 140.
the gloryfied in heaven; and Town asser. page* 71.7^
to a believer there is no sin; Saltmarsh fr. gr. ^42.
God can see no sin in them. Now, sure Libertines who said the state of the
regenerate, was an Angelike purity, did think sins acted by their Ass, the
flesh, were no sins, as Antinomians deny Adulteries, and cousening, and
robbing done by the justified, to be sins, but seeming sins as Saltmarsh,
and no sins before God, as Eaton Honey com. ca. 5.87.
Eaton says.

CHAP. LXXVI. Libertines and Antinomians destroy Scripture, and make the Spirit
all, and some.
Paral. VI. LIbertines (says Calvin. Instruct. advers. Liber. p. 412. Hi
(Liberti^i) adeo se Spirituales simulant, ut nihilo pluris ^aciant sacrosanctum
Dei verbum quam sabulas nisi cum ipsis visum est.
Calvin) are so spiritual in their own fancy, that they count no more of the
sacred word of God, then of Fables, except when it serves their turns. The
places of Scripture Cal^in. Instruct. advers Libert. cap. 9. page 441.
Scripturam naturali suo sensu acceptam literam mortuam esse, ideoque missam
esse faciendam, ut ad Spiritum vivificantem veniamus -- A^legoricis
interpretationibus, -- sublimibus and nobis revelationibus ^udunt.
objected, they said, must not be taken in the Litterall sense, because the
Letter kills, the Spirit quickneth. And they turn the Scripture in
Allegories, and high Spiritual Speculations, and the Scripture in its kindly
sense they called a dead Letter, its the spirit (say they) that quickneth. So
Blesdiki^s page 29. ar. 16. His nullam legem ponendam, etc. ar. 17. Deum enim
arcano Spiritus sui motu effecturum, etc.
David Georgius, and so does M. Dell, Sermon. page 19. citing the same words; so
Randel the Familist, in a Sermon, said, That Christ's Parables, from Sowing, a
Draw-net, Leaven, etc. did prove, that to expound the Scripture by Allegories
was lawful, and all the things of this life, as Seed, the Way-side, a Rock,
the Sea, a Net, Leaven, etc. were Sacraments of Christ, and he cited, Do this
in Remembrance of me; and that a spiritual mind, in all the things of nature,
and of this life, might see the mysteries of the Gospel. This man who preaches
most abominable Familisme, is suffered in, and about London publicly, twice on
the Lords day, to draw hundreds of godly people after him.

The New England Libertines say, Rise, reign* er. 4.5.
The will of God in the Word, and the directions thereof are no Rule whereunto
Christians are bound to conform their life. And the Er. 39.
due search and knowledge of the holy Scriptures, is no safe way of searching
and finding Christ; And Er. 61.
all Doctrines, Revelations, and Spirits, must be tried by Christ, not by the
word of Christ. And Er. 9.
the whole Letter of the Scripture holds forth a covenant of works. Shadows
fleeing away, p^g. 8.
Saltmarsh, The interpreting the Spirit thus in the Letter, and in consequence
has much darkened the glory of the Gospel. But, I pray, are not all the heads
of Libertinisme and Antinomianisme, their rejecting of the Laws direction, of
the Scriptures, of personal sanctification, and of repentance, and
mortification, the perfection of believers persons, and works, etc. all mere
consequences from Scripture, the contrary being commanded expressly in
Scripture. So Shadows fleeing away, p^g. 8.
Saltmarsh says, The power of an outward Commandment and precept in the word,
brings but forth finer hypocrisy, and the Spirit works not freely
therewith. And Town asser. grace, page 4.5.6.7* etc.
M. Town has much of this stuff, through his whole Book.

Much like to this is the doctrine of Henry Nicholas in his Epistle to two
Daughters of Warwick, Ar. 7. While the Apostles daily went about with Christ,
and had the word of the Father daily amongst them, understood not the Spirit of
the the Lord, (till the day of Pentecost that he descended on them) how should
then the multitude of these (which now say, they are Christians, and yet
neither have, nor know neither Spirit nor Word, but go on with their fleshly
prudencie in the Literal Scripture, and set forth the same with their fleshly
hearts, before the simple people, as it seems best unto them, and say even so
very stoutly, We have the word of the Lord, whereas it is but their own word,
wherein they, with their own prudencie are genered and begotten) feel, either
perceive the same? -- They reject the word of the Lord, Jer. 8. Here gives the
Prophet a distinction or diversity between the word of the Lord, and the
witnessing of an unregenerate man, which he brings forth out of the Letter of
the Scripture.

Here H. Nicholas makes a time when the Apostles were under the teaching of
the Father, when they were unregenerated, and not pardoned, but led with the
Letter of the Scripture, and a time when they were under the teaching of the
Holy Ghost, and were regenerated. So the New England Familists, Rise, reign,
Er. 41. say, There be distinct seasons of the working of the several persons,
so the soul may be said to be under the Fathers, and not the Sons, and so
long under the Sons work, and not the Spirits. And just so Saltmarsh Free
grace, page 113. The Fathers before Christ, might conceive themselves rather
not destroyed, then saved, and rather not damned, then redeemed, -- but now is
fullness of the Spirit, and of free grace, (page 115.) discovered, And Den,
Doctrine of John Baptist, p. 51. The knowledge of both actual and eternal
remission, was no Article of the Jewish Creed; but now (55.) is remission past
and done.

2. Here H. Nicholas makes a difference between the word of God as it is in
the Letter, and the word as it is in the Spirit, as between the word of man;
to wit, which is in the Letter, and the word of the Lord, which is in the
Spirit. So does Saltmarsh between the interpreting of the Word, H. Nicholas
makes two words of God, one false, and in the letter, another true, and in the
Spirit.
in the Letter, and in the consequence, which darkneth the Gospel, and the
yielding of the sense of the Scripture, in the Spirit, which must, by
opposition, clear the glory of the Gospel, Shadows fleeing away, page 8. So
does Cornwell, Confer. with J. Cotton page 17. say, A conclusion following from
the strength of humane reasoning, is but a humane, not a Divine Faith; now we
judge the litterall sense of the word to be the very meaning and kindly sense
of the Holy Ghost, and do hold that the word has not two sundry senses, and
that the letter of the Word and Spirit are not contrary, but subordinate;
though the one, that is, the letter of the word may be without the Spirit, and
then the Letter is a dead thing, to the heardned hearer, not in it self; but
yet should not the Letter of the Scripture, and outward ordinances, or
prophesying, be despised more then the Spirit should be quenched.

3. N. Nicholas here makes two sort of regenerated persons. Some regenerated
by the Letter of the word, these have but their own word, not the word of the
Lord; others are regenerated by the Spirit, and these have the word of God. So
the New England Familists, Er. 13. and Saltmarsh Free grace 177.178. as if one
Spirit breathed in all the three, tell us of a legal conversion by the outward
Commandment, Letter, and terrors of the Law and Gospel, and such are but
hypocrites, and others converted by the Spirit; Protestants half, not the
Spirit, and the word, but conjoyne them; for the Spirit is the Father, and
principal cause of the second birth, and the Word the seed and instrument; but
their way is to abolish Word, Seals, and all Ordinances, as Legal things.

It is true, this wretched man seems to give enough to outward ordinances, for
he says, Epist. to the two Maids, They be outward means set forth by God, to
direct people to the inward righteous life of Christ in the Spirit. Yet in the
Epistle, H. Ainsworths answer to H. Nicholas Epistle in the Preface. H.
Nicholas in his first exhortation, ^^p. 16. Ser. 16.
as Answorth in his answer observes, he calls the outward ordinances but
Ceremonies, and persuades them not to suffer death in confessing the Scriptures
to be the perfect rule of our faith and life, against the Romish Antichristian
Doctrine and Ceremonies. For (says H. Nicholas) No man does rightly, according
to the truth of the holy Scriptures, nor according to the spiritual
understanding of the godly wisdom deal in it, or use the true God-services of
the holy word (it becomes not likewise that any man should take in hand to
busy himself thereabout) but only the illuminated Elders in the godly wisdom
which walk in the house of love. And in the Epistle, Let no man (says he)
boast himself in any of the works of righteousness, or take on the same to
salvation, neither to condemnation, before that he in the Spirit of Christ,
through the love of the Father, be renewed in all righteousness of life, not
that I mean in the Elementish Ceremonial righteousness, which the man
sets forth or occupies out of his own prudency, but I mean in that
righteousness which according to the heavenly truth is in the being of Christ,
and is set forth through the Spirit of God. So this abominable wretch makes
all reading, or hearing, or believing the Scriptures to be Elementish, carnal
righteousness, and that we are to do no good works to obtain salvation, nor
to eschew any evil to be freed from condemnation, but to study an inward
righteousness, in being Goded and Christed, and in communicating with the
essence and godly being.

M. Town also makes the Law a sort of directorie of walking, as does H. N.
Assert. grace, page 38. I know not where to learn my duty to my Superior, but
in the matter of the fifth Command, nor what Murder or Adultery is, but in the
sixth and seventh. But Town forgets himself, and page 3. says, We are from
under the Law, in all its authority, dominion, offices, and effects; yea, he
denies that we are under the power and teaching of the Law. And Saltmarsh
will have us not to borrow one beam of directing light from the Law, so as he
seems to stomach, and to be angry, that the old Testament, but especially
the ten Commandments, are printed in the Bible. Yet what ever direction of
walking we have from the Law, I find them in all their writings, grudging at
any Law or Gospel written, because writing, speaking, vocal covenants, are the
dead and killing Letter, fruitless, and livelesse, and that the Spirit
immediately acting is all our rule.

Paral. VII. Libertines speak disgracefully of the (...). adv. Libert. cap. 9.
page 441.
Penmen of Scripture; and called Paul a broken vessel, John, stolidum juvenem,
a foolish young man, Peter, a denyer of God, Matthew, an Usurer. The Church was
in her infancy, (said Da. Georgius) Under Abraham and the Prophets, Histor. Da.
Georg per Ni^ho. Blesdiki^m, p 37 e L^bro memorabilium.
in its young age; under John Baptist, Christ in the flesh, and the Apostles,
its grown, and now presently under David, the Christ, its spiritual and
perfect.

So many Antinomians turn perfectists, Who (say they) having the Holy Ghost,
as well as the Prophets and Apostles, can pen, and speak Scripture from the
same Spirit. The New England Rise, reign, Unsavory sp^eches er. ^.
Libertines are so far on this way, that they disgrace the Apostle Peter, as
a halfe-Legalist, and say, Peter leaned more to a covenant of works, then Paul,
and that Paul's doctrine was more for free grace, then Peter's. And Saltmarsh
Free grace. 167.
Saltmarsh makes all the Prophets in the Old Testament, Legal men; and
Saltmarsh Shadows fleeing away, p 10.
Christ in the flesh, and his Apostles preached free grace, but in degrees and
parts; but we dare not (says he) preach the Gospel so in halves and quarters
as ye do. And Christ Saltmarsh Shaddows, p. 15.
and the Apostles preached grace, faith, repentance, new obedience, in
scantling of Doctrine, as they are merely and barely revealed in the history
of the Gospel, or Acts of the Apostles, where only the Doctrine is not so much
revealed, as the practice. -- But we (Antinomians) preach Christ the power of
all, the fullness of all, that we may exalt him, whom God has exalted at his
own right hand.

Hence Saltmarsh 1. says, the Antinomians in England reveal more free grace,
and fullness of Christ in their Sermons, then Christ and the Apostles did in
the half of the New Testament, or all the Prophets in the Old.

2. Christ, and the Prophets, and Apostles, except in the Epistles, were Legal
Preachers. What be Legal Preachers, (that I wrong not Saltmarsh, as he does
Christ, the Prophets, and Apostles) I give it in his own words. Legalists are
1. Saltmarsh Free grace. page 145.
such as compound and bargain with God for salvation, and submit not to the
righteousness of God, and lie down in the sparks of their own kindling; are
Christ, his Prophets, and Apostles such? Such as from the notion Free grace,
153.
of a covenant, conceive a little too Legally of free grace. Such Free grace
158.
as have neither the use nor freedom of the heavenly inheritance, that are
subject to death and bondage. Such Free grace, 167.
to whom God appeared only, as it were, upon terms and conditions of
reconciliation. Such as Free grace, 169. The Fathers of old Testament saved
contrary to Antinomians.
in fasting, and other acts of obedience, dealt with God, to get some love from
God, which Christ himself had not gotten for us, So belike, the Prophets that
dyed before Christ went not to heaven, but to some chamber, or higher room in
hell called Limbus Patrum* or to some other place: for Saltmarsh says, they
had neither the use nor freedom of the heavenly inheritance, whither then went
their souls after death? 2. They were chosen to salvation some other way, then
Jaakob, Romans 9. they purchased the love of free election, by fasting and
penance. 3. Their sins were not pardoned, nor they reconciled to God, a
belying of the Old Psalm. 32.1, 2. v 5. Cant. 4.7, Isa. 43.25. Isa. 1.18. Isa.
6.7. Isa. 40.2. Isa. 44.22. Mic 7.9.^0.
Testament. 4. The Prophets submitted not to the righteousness of God, but
sought righteousness by the works of the Law. All these, how they agree in
part to Christ, John Baptist, and the Apostles, in the first half of the New
Testament; let Saltmarsh and Antinomians see and consider.

Paral. VIII. Libertines said, The whole Scripture Calvin. in instruct. adv.
Libert. ca. 19 page 442. Verbum Dei Spiritum esse aiunt. 443. Verbum Dei nihil
aliud quam Spiritum esse, similiter Christum esse Spiritum. Vitam etiam nostrum
Spiritum esse debere.
was nothing but the Spirit of God, and the Letter of the Scripture, not
Scripture, but the Spirit was both Christ and the Scripture, and a godly life
must be the Spirit. So the Libertines of New England. Rise, reign, ^r. ^0.
There is a Testimony of the Spirit, and voice unto the soul merely
immediate, without any respect unto, or concurrence with the Word. And er. 49.
from this, We are not to keep a constant course of praying at set hours, or
always, but as the Spirit move us. And ^r. 61.
all doctrines and revelations must be tried by Christ, that is, Christ
dwelling in us, in a spiritual manner, not by the Word of Christ, or the
Scripture.

In this same Grammar speak Antinomians. So Saltmarsh Free grace ^^. 32. pa.
46. Saltmarsh Free grace, 138. The Gospel (...) Christ himself, and love
revealed.
Saltmarsh. The Law now is in the Spirit; What is that? And in the Gospel for a
believer to walk by; nor is (says he) holiness and sanctification now such
as is fashioned by the Law, or outward Commandment, This is like the language
of Swe^ck. seldius, Epist. ad Ecclesiasten. excusa Basiliae, An. 1527. Si
externa praedicatio necessario precederet in justificatione, homo poneret
primum lapidem, non Deus -- Caro and sanguis non revelat Christum -- non igitur
est fides ob auditu externo (nisi sit historica) sed ab inspiratione Dei. --
Non tollimus Scripturam and ministerium, Sed ed in suum locum pro carnis
eruditione statuimus.
but by the preaching of Faith, by which the Spirit is given, which renewes and
sanctifies a believer, and makes him the very Law of Commandment in himself,
and his heart the very two Tables of Moses. This is to say the Word begets
not Faith, but only Historically instructs the flesh; and expressly, in
terminis, the Libertines sense and mind is, that the Word is changed in a
Spirit without Scripture, and the Christian in his walking and conversation
(which to Antinomians is all in faith) is the Spirit it self. Town is Town
asser. gr. page 7.8.9.10.11.12.
much in this, through his whole book, to make the Law a mere dead Letter,
and the Gospel all Spirit, and to free us from the Letter of all Scripture. And
Saltmarsh fr. gr. p. 180.
Saltmarsh upon this ground, of the free working of the Spirit of Adoption,
freeth us from outward Commandments, Covenants, Vows, as if the Word, or
Scripture, and the Spirit, were two contrary and different things, and the one
not harmoniously subordinate too, and complying with the other.

CHAP. LXXVII. Antinomians and Libertines foul opinions touching God and the
Author of sin.
Paral. IX. LIbertines Calv^n. Instruct. advers. Libert. ca. 11 page 443.
Statuunt unicum tantum esse Spiritum Dei, qui sit a^ vivat in omnibus creaturis
-Animarum nostrarum loco aiunt Deum vivere in nobis, vegetare corpora nostra,
nos sustinere, atque omnes vitales actiones efficere -- quia unicus est tantum
Deus qui vere sit.
said, There was but one Spirit in the world, that lives, and moves, and acts
all things in stead of our souls, yea and in all creatures. And that
Blesdikius Histor. Dav. Georgius, page 27. ar. 13.
God was the Author of all good and ill, sin and righteousness, because he
works all our works in us, and the Creature works nothing, and that sin
was but an opinion, the Devils and Angels but motions. And so taught Blesdikius
Histor. de Geor. page 50.51. art. 24* in majore apologia, art. 24. and in libro
mirabilium per totum.
David Georgius, That Devils were but ill motions, and Rise, reign, ^r. 1.
the good Angels are but qualities and motions of men's minds. And the same is
like unto the mind of New England Familists, who say, That in conversion, the
faculties and workings of the soul are destroyed, and Rise, reign, er. 2
instead of them the Holy Ghost; yea, and in place Er. 7. ^r. 8.
of all love and graces, Er. 11.
Christ himself comes in, and Christ incarnate and made flesh is in every
believer.

Now Randell the Familist, and Antinomians has prefixed a commendatory Preface
to a piece, called Theologia Germanica, which Theol German* ca. 4. p. 8
says, That all good is only God; and he makes no difference between
created and uncreated good: and Theol German* ca. 4. p. 8
God becomes all things, in man, nor is there any thing that can challenge to
it self being, or goodness, that Theol. Ger. c. 55. pa. 158.159.
true Christ is in man; and that the true and perfect God, and true and perfect
man are one, and man does so yield and give place unto God, that where God
himself is, there is man, and that God also is there present, and works his
alone, and does and leaves undone any thing without any I, to me, much or the
like, where these things are and exist, there is true Christ, and no where
else. And Theol. Ger. cap. 22. p. 52, Ca. 22. p. 109
he that is illuminated with the eternal love is a divine and deified man. And
the Author of the Bright star, set out by Randell also, Bright star. cap. 8.
p. 70.71.72.
Nothing is, or has being, but God and his will. And God is all, the creature
nothing, Man is nothing, because he is not good nor infinite; being, Page 78.9.
and good are convertible. They say, The Devils and Angels also are nothing. If
any say, that I cannot impute any such opinion to our Antinomians. But 1.
Antinomians confute them not, but still come up to all that the Libertines of
New England hold. 2. They never refused Randell the Familist to be theirs, but
Antinomians are his constant hearers and Disciples. 3. Archer and many
Antinomians say, Sin is nothing, and God cannot hate it. 4. I have proved,
they hold that the personal acts of Sanctification, and sins of the justified
are sins, only in the conversation, to the sense, to the flesh, to unbelief,
and seeming to be so, not in conscience, not really, not before God, not
truly, not to faith. 5. The Antinomians say, that the Spirit acts in the
Saints immediately, and the Saints are mere patients in all their works;
because Free grace. 179.
Saltmarsh says, The Spirit of adoption works not freely, when men are in
bondage to some outward circumstance of worship, as time, etc. and they cannot
pray, but at such hours; no Protestant does teach any such thing; but
Antinomians think, We are holden to pray, at no certain hour, nor at any
time, Rise, reign, er 49. Antinomians come near to Famil^sts, who said, God
wrought all in the Creature, the creature does nothing good or ill, they say,
the Spirit works all in us as in blocks.
unless the Spirit stir us thereunto; which is to make neither Law nor
Gospel our rule of walking, as if the Commandments in the Letter held out not
any obligation to us to do good, or omit evil, but the immediate acting of
the Spirit were our only rule: so Saltmarsh free grace, 146.
Saltmarsh, The Law is now (says he) in the Spirit, and holiness, and
sanctification, is not now such as is fashioned by the Law, or outward
Commandment, as if in the time of the Old Testament, not now, holiness were
wrought in us, by a mere outward Commandment without the Spirit; And ye may
remember Crispe vol. 1. ser. 6. page 161.162.
D. Crispes Argument, to prove that Faith is no condition of the covenant of
grace; because its God only who works Faith in us, and believes in us, (as
M. Town says) We being mere patients, and if we believe not, then God
should break the Covenant, not we; because God does not what is his part,
Town asser. grace* page 51.52. Antinomians Principles make God the Author of
sin.
when he works not faith in us, which is a strong Argument to prove that the
Holy Ghost, is the immediate and only Author of sin in the believer. Because
the holy Ghost only, by this reason, without us works in us to will and to
do, and keeps the believer from Adultery, Murder, sinful non-calling on
God, not believing; when therefore the believer whoores, murderers, repents
not, believes not, God is the cause, and the only cause thereof: So Crisp
Cr^spe vol. ^. Ser. 6. p. 161.
says, The Covenant it self does plainly show that the whole performance of
the Covenant lies only upon God himself, and that there is not one bond or
obligation upon man, to the fulfilling of the Covenant, or partaking of the
benefits of the Covenant. And Ibid. p. 163.
must not (says he) the fault or failing to perform the Covenant be his, who
is tied and bound to every thing in the Covenant, and says he will do it? If
there be a condition, and there be a failing in the condition, he that
undertakes all things in the Covenant, must needs be in the fault. So he. Now
this Argument has no strength, but upon this Antinomian supposition, that
there is no tie, no obligation lying on us to believe, and lay hold on the
Covenant, as Esaiah says, cap. 56. and by faith to subscribe and sign the
Covenant, and to walk in the Lords Commandments; and it must suppose that we
are patients in believing, and walking in Gods Commandments, and that God
only works these in us, as in stones and blocks; and whether Faith be a
condition, or a duty, or no condition, it is all one, if God only work faith
in us, we being dead and passive. As Libertines Rise, reign, er. 14.
speak, and if God promise and undertake to put his Spirit in us, and to cause
us walk in his Commandments, as he undertaketh, Ezech. 36.26, 27. Jer.
32.39, 40. Deuteronomy. 30.6. Jer. 31.33, 34. Ezech. 11.19, 20. Hebr. 8.9, 10, 11, 12.
And if Gods promise to work in us, to will, to do, to walk in his
Commandments, to abstain from fornication, bloodshed, lying, violence,
oppression, unbelief, free us from all tie and obligation to these duties, as
Crispe says; then the Lord must be the only and immediate Spirit that does
in us believe, mis-beleeve, walk in Gods ways, or whore, lie; for says
Crispe, Must not the fault, or failing to perform the Covenant be his, who is
tied and bound to every thing in the Covenant, and says he will do it?
Reader, then judge how far Antinomians differ in this, from Libertines. And
M. Saltmarsh Free grace. 105.
Saltmarsh says the same, What ever promise there is, which has any condition
into it, it is ours in him, in Christ, who was the only conditioned and
qualified person for all promises. And M. Town, Saltmarsh, and all Antinomians
in every page of their books say, we are freed from the Law, as an obliging
rule of holy walking, and under grace, that is under the Gospel; because the
Law is a killing dead Letter, and can never give life, nor Sanctification. But
the Gospel, ( S^ltmarsh Free grace, page 159.
says he) is like the Sun, caries along with it light and life. But I pray,
is not the Gospel without the Spirit a killing Letter, as well as the Law, and
can it ever quicken or sanctify without the Spirit, more then the Law? Then by
this Argument, the believer is tied to nothing, as an obliging rule, either of
believing, or holy walking, but to that which does effectually quicken and
sanctify; so neither Commandment of Law nor Gospel without the Spirit, is the
believers rule, but only the Spirit, and the Spirit effectually quickening,
and actually sanctifying, then the Spirit must only be our rule, and we must
only be obliged to be ruled, and to lie under the actings of the Spirit as
dead creatures. When then we neither believe nor repent, nor abstain from
whooring, robbing, lying, because the Spirit acts not, we sin not, for
sin is against some obligation; Antinomians will not say, we are obliged by
any Law, old or new, to have the actual breathings of the Holy Ghost, when we
omit good, and commit evil, then the holy Spirit must immediately, and only
act good in us, and his non-acting immediately, must be the only cause of
believers murdering, whooring, lying; and is there not then a Spirit in all
under the Gospel, working in them all good, and by no working, causing all the
sins they commit? And what is sin then but an opinion? And can it be our
work, or any thing but Gods work in us.

CHAP. LXXVIII. Libertines and Antinomians take away all sense, or remorse of
conscience for sin.
Paral. X. LIbertines Calvin. cap. 35. adv. Libert. p. 448. Nullius rei
conscientia moveri.
said, We are to be troubled in conscience for no sin, because God works
all in the creature, and nothing is beside the will of God.

Libertines of our time say, If God will let me sin, let him Rise, reign,
Unsavory speeches, er. 4.
see to his own honor. And upon the same ground, Archer. Ser. comfort for
believers, page 35.36.37.
M. Archer says, We are not to be troubled for our sins, because they come
from God, and we may safely say, that God is, and has a hand in, and, is the
Author of the sinnefulnesse of his people. So do other Antinomians though they
speak not out. 2. Upon another ground Antinomians bury all conscience of
believers sins. 1. Because their sins are no sins, being remitted before they
be committed. 2. Because Rise, reign, Er. 64. Town assert. of grace,
115.116.129.130. Saltmarsh Free grace, page 140. Honey comb cap. 7 page 139.
Den Ser. Of the Man of sin, page 9.10.11.12.
(say they) it is against Faith, and from unbelief, the flesh, and want of
mortification, to be moved, or touched in conscience with sin, as I often
have proved.

CHAP. LXXIX. Libertines and Antinomians Parallel believers with Christ
incarnate.
Paral. XI. AS David Blesdikius hist^r Da. G. ar. ^2. page 48
Georgius, and his cursed followers; so Calvin Instruct. adver. Libert. ca. 17*
page 450. Componunt Christum ex Spiritu Dei, qui in nobis omnibus est, and ex
eo quod opinationem ac mund^m vocant -- Christum si^gunt veluti imaginem ac
exemplar, in quo figurata sun^ quae ad nostram salutem requiruntur.
Libertines said, Christ in us dwelling was God manifested in the flesh, or
Christ is but a pattern, type, a representation or figure of patient
suffering, and of these virtues required in these that are to be saved.

So Bright Star, ca. 16.108.109.
the Author of the Bright Star, makes Christ-man the pattern in the mount,
that in worship and conversation we must follow. And when this Bright Star.
ca. 8. page 76.77.78.
Author, and Theolg. Ger. c. 22. p. 52.53.
Theologia Germanica take away God from us, and say, there is nothing in the
creature but God, they do worse then Libertines; Yea, they fancy Christ
incarnate, to be a divine and holy man, and so evert a principal Pillar of our
faith; that is, that we believe in the Son of God, Christ-God made manifest
in the flesh. And the Rise, reign, er. 11.
N. England Libertines teach, That Christ is incarnate in every believer. So
the English Antinomian says, I have nothing to do with Town asser. page 5.
your Moses or the Law. I am Christed, and Goded. And a late giddy, phranticke
Pamphlet, The life and light of a man in Christ, pa. 57.
which I should not honor to cite, says, A man in Christ is baptized into a
living active God, and a dead passive creature. And though Antinomians, as yet
seem to grant, that the Son of God was incarnate, yet we know not how long,
for they equal a believer most proudly Eaton honey comb, cap. (...). 2.
with Christ, making both his person, and all his actions, Honey Comb ^.11. pa
313. and^.
though Adultery, Roberie, Lying, as clean from sin, as Christ, or his
actions, or Saltmarsh ^ree grace, page 140.
as the glorified in heaven. 2. Saltmarsh says, Saltmarsh Free gra 148.
The Gospel commands rather by pattern, then by precept, and by imitation,
rather then command. They deny all obligation, either by Law or Gospel, to lie
on us. 3. Because we are in Christ, they say all our sins, all our
sufferings, are so drowned up, swallowed, and nothinged in Christ, that we are
neither to fear, or be touched with the sense of either (...) vol. 3. Ser. 1.
(...) Se^.
sin or ^^oh. 14.1.
affliction; and that the believer is to remain in Christ always, rejoicing,
triumphing, being in Town Asser. grace, ^. 34.35.1^9.130. Town asser. gr.
page 156.157.158.
heaven already, and Saltmarsh Free gr. page 140.
sorrow and sighing for evermore, being banished away.

CHAP. LXXX. To follow sense as a Law is our rule, say Libertines and
Antinomians.
Paral. XII. LIbertines Calv. adver. Liber cap. 20 454. Q^ia (...) usq^^s^^e in
ea, in (...) vocatione est (...) ere ^ebet, docent unumquemque operic^e
naturalem inclinationem sequ^ atque sic vivere ut libent, and e re sua
videbitur, Hinc sit ut Quint^nas ( fae^us secta Libert. Dux) exc^nd siat,
quoties rogatur, ut valeat, Quomodo, inquit, An Christus male habere po^est?
exponunt, consummandum est, de praeteritis omnibus doloribus Christianorum,
dolores, aut morbos se sentire negabant quod jam preteriti essent, and ipsi in
gloriam cum Christo jam egressi essent.
taught, That any calling was lawful, and to follow callings was to follow
their natural inclination, and to live as they pleased. Quintinus the
Libertine to one that asked how he was in health, said in wrath, Can it be ill
with Christ? When he was present at a solemn Mass with a Cardinal, he said,
He saw the glory of God; from this ground, that Christians cannot sin, that
their inclination and nature is their guide, which they called the Spirit, and
they are loosed from all Law; therefore with David Georgius Blesdiki^s A^t. 17.
Page 19.30.
they said, A marriage-covenant tied Christians no longer, then the natural
temper and disposition of husband and wife would carry them on to agree to live
together, when inclinations of Christians did thwart, they were free to marry
another. And so said they of goods, that they might rob and spoil, calling
inclination a calling, as if it were their calling to rob and oppress.

So, the same do Antinomians teach in their beastly distinction; in which
Town asser. pa. 39.40.
Town, Honey comb cap. 5. page 87.
Eaton, Den^e Ser. Of the Man of S^nne. page 9.^0.11.
Den, and Saltmarsh, Free grace, pa. 143.154.
Saltmarsh say, Believers are as clean from sin, before God, and as they
live by faith, as Honey comb ca. 3 page 25.
Jesus Christ himself, but to men-ward declaratively, and as they live by
sense, or seemingly, as Saltmarsh means, or according to the flesh, as Town
says, (now the flesh is the Ass.) The believers sin, and may whore, kill;
but this following of the sense, and the flesh, is nothing but the Libertines
following of his natural inclination, or calling. Now the believers Adultery
to Saltmarsh, Free grace. page 15^.
Saltmarsh, is but seeming Adultery; then it is not in deed, and before God,
Adultery; and he follows his sense and natural inclination, (as the
Libertine said) in putting away his wife without cause, and Marrying another,
and in robbing the Widow and Orphane, and taking the Ox away from the
fatherless; and so follows his calling. 2. Sinning according to sense, and
the flesh as lying and whoring, are not sins according to Faith, and before
God, sense is unbelief, and a blind judge, and reputeth that to be sin, which
is not sin, says Honey comb, page 87. The Antinomians sinning according to
his own sense, and declaratively, not really, and before God, and to says,
nothing but the Libertines committing all wickedness, which he says is to
follow his vocation, (...) fleshly sense.
Eaton, For Faith sees them above sense to be utterly abolished. 3. The
believer following his sense in Adultery, rapine, lying, is under no law. Ergo,
his following of his sense, his being present at a Mass, his robbing his
brother cannot be a sin; then it must either be in it self lawful, and a
following of his calling, as the Libertine said, or it is unlawful. The
Antinomian must speak condictions, to call that unlawful, which is against no
Law.

2. Randell a Familist, setting forth a piece of Cusanus Entitled, The Vision
of God, has a Familists conscience, to picture God himself, and Clouds
encircling him, expressly forbidden in the second Command, but it is no
Command to him. Master Den, Doctrine of John Baptist, 65. retains the
destinction of Clergy and Laics condemned by all Protestant Divines; and Page
66. he says, He will condemn the removal of Images, Idols, Crucifixes of
Wood, Glass, of Stone, but he mentions no command of God to justify it; for
we are commanded no worship external in the New Testament, but Faith, that is,
no sin, as sin, is forbidden, but unbelief; to this Town assert. grace,
page 94. cannot answer one word. So H. Nicholas in his joyful message of the
Kingdom, cap. 31.33.34. highly extolleth the Romish Church, Pope, Cardinals,
Bishops, Priests, etc. Service, Ceremonies, till hot contention arose about
them.

3. We know Antinomians think nothing of Idolatry, adding to the worship of
God, and that some of them speak their conscience, when deterred from
Adultery, Murder, Rapine, they have said. What? Adultery? God sees no sin
in believers. One of them in Scotland said, he would take the Lords Supper on
the crown of his head, if Authority should command him. Another said, once
dipping, or ten times were indifferent. Most of them are for liberty of all
blasphemous religions; and their saying is, Believe in Christ, and sin against
the Law if thou can? This is to make sense, that which Libertines call
natural inclination; Yea, all outward Commandments to Town and Saltmarsh are
but shadows, the Spirit is all the believers obliging rule. No external
Command can oblige a Believer, under peril of sinning against God, in his
court, in foro Dei, and we know how broad and large their consciences be in
the matter of Marriage and Divorce.

CHAP. LXXXI. Sundry Antinomians say, Irish Papists ought to have liberty of
conscience, and to enjoy their religion.
Parall. XIII. LIbertines Calvin. Instruct. advers. Liber. c^. 22. page 458.
Homo, (inquiunt) sciat animam suam Spiritum immortalemesse perpetuo viventem in
c^^lis: ac Christum m^rte sua, opinationem ab* levisse, (...) que ratione,
nobis r^stituisse v^tam, quae in eo est, ut nos minime mori cognoscantus.
said, they knew that their souls were immortal, and live for ever in heaven,
but Christ by his death has taken away that opinion, and has restored life to
us in that, now we know we shall not die.

Antinomians cannot deny but we die, but they will have no death to be the
execution of the righteous Lords sentence, for sin to the godly, but that
they return to dust believing, and neither feeling, nor fearing, sin or
punishment Crispe v^l 3. Ser 1. page 19 ^7.
for sin; for that is against the 40.
power, 41.
faithfulness, 42.
providence 42.
free grace, 43.
sufferings of Christ, 44.
faith, 44.
all religion: and Archer, Saltmarsh, Crispe, upon the same grounds, that the
believer commits Adultery to his own sense, Antinomians remove all sense of
affections and turn us in stones.
but his Adultery really, and to his faith is no sin; so they are not to
fear, or feel any afflictions, or death, but to believe them to be shadows.
Now the removal of fear, and the opinion of dying, is imputed to Christ's
death; so as 44.
Saltmarsh says, The Spirit of Christ sets a believer as free from hell,
Saltmarsh Free grace. page 140.
the Law, and bondage here on earth, as if he were in heaven, nor wants he any
thing to make him so, but to make him believe he is so; for Satan, sin,
sinful flesh, and the Law, are all so near him, that he cannot so walk by
sight, and in the clear apprehension of it; but the just do live by Faith,
and Faith is the evidence of things not seen. Then beside that, its his
happiness, not his bondage, that the Law is is so near him, that is it
written in his inner parts and heart, it must be his sin and feeling
contrary to Faith, (which was one opinion and sense) that he knows and
believes he must lay down this tabernacle of clay. And Town asser. grace*
page 40.
Town says, Faith banisheth all the mists and vapors arising from these
earthly members, out of Gods sight and presence. -- Thus I am a sinner, and no
sinner, daily I fall in my self, and stand in Christ for ever. But Town
lies, in saying, He is a sinner in himself, and no sinner in Christ. For
sin, in himself, or to his flesh or sense, is no sin at all, and against
no Law, his sense lies, and deceives; Faith, by which he should walk, does
truly say, he is in himself, and really, no more a sinner then Christ Honey
comb cap. 3. page 25.
is a sinner in himself; and upon the same grounds, sense of death, and
sickness, and pain, and fear, are but deceiving opinions, and errors
contrary to faith, and Christ came to dye, and remove from us fear, feeling,
opinion of all affliction and pain, as contrary to faith. Now its a sin not
to walk by Faith, then must the feeling of pain and death be a sin, and
Christ came to give us a sense, dedolency, and dullness of apprehending either
sin, or ill of affliction, and so say Libertines.

CHAP. LXXXII. Libertines and Antinomians doubt of the Resurrection, and life
to come.
Paral. XIV. LIbertines denied the Resurrection, and said with Hymeneus and
Philetus, That it was already done, and in this life, they mocked salvation, in
hope of the C^l^in a^ve^^. ^iber. ca. 2^. p. 458. P^u^us men^^onem f^cit
Phileti and Hymenat qui j^m (...) tempore resurrectio^^^ ^sse tacta^ diseb^nt,
-- rident (Liber ini) spem omnem, quam de resurrectione habemus, idque jam
nobis eve^^sse dicunt, quod adhuc expectamus, Page 459. Clamat Scriptura and
clara voce cote^dit, ut si salute^ in nostram velimus contemp^ari, ad supremum
illum diem animos erigamus Canes vero issi latrant frustra id fi ri, nosque jam
resurrexsse; nullam a^p^us resurectionem expectandam.
coming of the Lord; they said, To walk in newness of life, was the
Resurrection with Christ, and all the resurrection we are to look for. David
Georgius says, As there was Blesdikius Hi^^or. Davi^is Georg^ lib. M^rabil^um,
Page 41.42.43.44.45.46* etc.
a revelation under Moses and the Prophets, and a more clear one under Christ
and the Apostles. So under himself, the true David, the Lion of the tribe of
Judah, the stone hewed out of the Mountain without hands: there was now a
far more glorious revelation, and most spiritual, that he exceeded so far
Christ according to the flesh, and the Apostles; as that all Ordinances and
external worship, and seals, should cease when he comes, because of the
efficacy and spiritualnesse of his doctrine above Christ in the flesh, and all
the Apostles, as the Spirit is above the flesh. And the Page 51. Art. libro
Mirabilium, 24.
clouds in the which Christ was to come, to judge the quick and the dead, must
be Allegorically expounded of the minds of the Saints. Ibid. Art. 26.
The Archangell that shall sound the Trumpet, is the Doctrine and discipline of
this David the Christ. And that the Art. 27.
place of happiness was in this earth, not in heaven. The Art. 28.
kingdom of God is the Spirit of Jesus Christ, and that Christ would have
shortly a glorious kingdom; and that Art 29. The blasphemies of Dav. Georgius.
Paradise, heaven, and hell were within men, and that heaven was the gifts of
the mind, the earth the goods of the body, and their use which shortly should
come to the Saints.

Another false Christ, was Henry Nicholas, Henry Nicho. a Germa^, 100 years
ago, in his Book entitled the Joyful message of the Kingdom, cap. 1 sent.
9. and cap. 34.35 sent. 8.
who called himself, as Ainsworth Answorth Preface, in an answer of an Epist.
of H. Nichol.
says, The Father of the Family of Love, who says, H Nicholas joyful Message
of the kingdom, or his Evangel. cap. 34 sent. 2.
of himself, God has wrought a wonderful work on the earth, and raised up
me Henry Nicholas the least among the holy ones of God, which lay altogether
dead, and without breath and life among the dead, and made me alive through
Christ, as also anointed me with his godly being; Manned himself with me,
and Goded me with him to be a living tabernacle, or house, for his dwelling,
and a seat of his Christ, the seed of David.

And H. Nicholas in the same, cap. 32. The Blasphemies of the deceiver H.
Nicholas touching the Judge of al, the last judgment, the resurrection and the
life to come.
Behold and consider, my beloved, how wonderfully God works in his holy ones,
and how that now in this day, or light of the love, the judgment seat of
Christ, is revealed and declared unto us (the household of love) out of heaven
to a righteous judgment, upon earth, from the right hand of God. And how that
on the same judgment seat of Christ, (that the Scriptures might be fullfilled)
there sits one now in truth (the wretched impostor H. Nicholas) in the
habitation of David which judges uprightly, thinks upon equity, and
requires righteousness.

And H. N^cholas Evangel. cap. 33. Sentence, 8.
again, Behold, in this present day is the Scripture fulfilled, and according
to the Testimony of the Scripture, the raising up, and the Resurrection of the
Lords dead comes also to pass, presently in this same day, through the
appearing of the coming of Christ in his Majesty, ( he means, the false
Christ Henry Nicholas) which Resurrection of the dead, seeing that the same is
come to us (To Henry Nicholas and the Family or Elders of Love) from Gods
grace, we do likewise in this present day, to an Evangelike or joyful
Message of the Kingdom of God, and Christ, publish in all the world under the
obedience of love.

Sent. 9. In which Resurrection of the dead, God shows unto us that the time
is now fulfilled, that his dead, or the dead that are fallen asleep in the
Lord, rise up in this day of his judgment, and appear unto us in godly glory;
which shall also from henceforth live in us (H. N. and the Family of Love)
everlastingly with Christ, and reign upon the earth, wherein the Scripture
becomes fulfilled in this present day, like as there stands written
thereof, Familists in England deny the resurrection and the life to come.
The Lord shall judge his people, etc.

One of the hearers of Randel, a preaching Familist at London was asked, If he
believed the bodies of men dead and buried in the earth, should be raised to
Brief discovery of Familists, p. 1.
life, Answered, I know not.

For Rise, reign, p. 59. Art. 1.2.
Familists, Mistress Hutchison and hers say, That the souls of men are by
generation mortal like the beasts, Eccles. 3.8. But in regard of Christ's
purchase immortal; and that those who are united to Christ in this life, have
new bodies, and two bodies, Art. 3.4. Ibid. page 60.
1 Cor. 6.19. These who have union with Christ shall not rise with the same
fleshly bodies, 1 Cor. 15.44. And that the Resurrection Ibid art 14.
spoken of 1 Cor. 15. and John 5.28. is not meant of the resurrection of the
body, but of our union here, and after this life with Christ. That there is no
kingdom of heaven in Scripture, but only Christ. So said Hymeneus and
Philetus, and the Libertines, who made the resurrection a spiritual communion
with Christ.

Antinomians have never shown their mind of the resurrection, Antinomians
doubt of the Resurrection, and think that our heaven is actually in this life.
and the life to come, and have never contradicted the Libertines and Familists
in these, and yet own their other opinions. Yea, Saltmarsh Free grace, pa. 140.
Saltmarsh to me owneth no heaven, but that which is in this life, if a naked
opinion were added to it. For says he, The Spirit of Christ sets a believer as
free from hell, the Law, and bondage here on earth, as if he were in heaven;
nor wants he any thing to make him so, but to make him believe he is so. So he
wants nothing of heaven, but believe he is in heaven, and he is in heaven; he
will not except the resurrection of, and the glorifying of the body, Phil.
3.19, 20. nor the rooting out of original sin, nor the immortality of the
whole man, nor freedom from sinning, immunitie from sorrow, sadness, perfect
joy, pleasures for ever more, seeing of God, and enjoying of him face to face;
the perfecting of love, and of grace with glory, all which he wants of
heaven, and has here only the first fruits of the Spirit, and is absent from
the Lord, and sigheth in this tabernacle; and since Saltmarsh professes a
finer free grace, and a further revealing of the Gospel in its glory, liberty,
etc. Why does he not once in all his Treatises, mention the last, and
perfecting act of Free grace and Gospel-freedome, that Ioh. 6.39.44
Christ will raise up the believer at the last day?

2. While Antinomians clear us, touching their mind of the sense, the flesh,
sinning before men, not in regard of faith, or in Gods sight or account. I must
conceive, they mean with Mistress Hutchison, and other Familists, a sinning
in the old body, not in the new; and in the old soul, they have by generation,
not in the new soul, or in the conscience, as M. Den Man of sin page 9.10.
says, which they have by Redemption. I therefore attest them, to clear
themselves in that distinction, and either black the Familists, or own them as
their own.

3. Calvin Calvin. Instruct. advers. Libert. ca. 21. page 458.459.
says from Paul, We are in this life saved in hope, we have not heaven, and
life eternal, in perfection and completely here; we do but wait for our full
and final redemption of soul and body, at Christ's coming, whereas Libertines
said, we were completely saved in this life. So Saltmarsh Free grace. 149.
say Saltmarsh, and Town asser. page 157.158.
M. Town, who are angry that Protestant Divines say, We are saved by right,
and in hope, and really in Christ our head; but they will have us fully,
completely, perfectly saved in this very life, though we have not the sense and
feeling of it; and we want nothing of eternal life, but believe we have it
completely, as the glorified, and we have it.

CHAP. LXXXIII. Familists, Libertines, Anabaptists, go before Antinomians in
denying all external worship and obedience.
Paral. XV. HEnry Nich. called love the Being and Godhead of Christ, H.
Nicholas Epist. to the daughters of Warwick, Sect 4.
which we received through the power of the Holy Ghost; and that love within
was all, and that all external obedience from the Letter of the Word was
fleshly and Ceremonial. Just as Master Dell, Ser. 19. rejecting all external
Reformation, calls it hypocritical and carnal, and refusing the Scriptures,
either Law or Gospel, as mere carnal Letters, devoles all on the Spirit, and
acknowledges no Laws at all in Christ's kingdom, but the Law of nature. 2.
The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ, which is the Spirit himself in his
working. 3. And the law of Love, the Spirit of Christ.

And Henry Nicholas forbids all his to boast of Epist. Sect. 2.
any righteousness, or take on the same, either to salvation or condemnation,
before a man be in the Spirit of Christ, and be renewed; not (says he) that
I mean in the Elementish Ceremonial righteousness, which the man sets
forth, or occupies in his own prudencie, but I mean, in that righteousness,
which according to the heavenly truth, is in the being of Christ, and is set
forth through the Spirit of God, and the Christ of God, and E^ist^e to the
(...) of Warwick.
the Christ of God, is not yet declared to you, according to the heavenly
truth, but weell according to man's wisdom or industry, which to the litterall
Scripture add their own prudencie, and even so go forth, or occupy their own
righteousness without the Spirit of Christ, which is a miserable doctrine,
being taught without the Spirit of Christ.

Henry Nicholas, Sect. 5. Epist. These that are not taught by the Spirit of
life, expound the Scriptures upon an earthy or Elementish foundation,
where-through the man cannot attain any renewing of the heart. Sect. 17. They
that are Baptized to Christ, have put on Christ. But I would gladly ask of
these that say, They have put on the Christianlike Baptism, how, or after what
manner Christ has a shape or fashion in them, they shall find themselves not
mighty in the being of Christ; (that is in love, by which they become God
incarnarnate) and that they have received not the Baptism of Christ, but their
own. H Nicholas as he condemns all outward obedience to God as fleshly and
Elementish, so does he condemn laying d^wne our life for Christ, and
expounds it of laying down our sinful life for him.
The like he says of the Lords Supper, Sect. 19. Sect. 20. Sect. 21. When the
Scripture says, we must forsake our lives for Christ's sake, understand, I do
mean of the forsaking of our own life. When God had created the man, then was
the man in subjection to the life of God, and not to his own life, for
thereunto God had created the Man, that he should be of one life and being, one
Spirit, and of one nature with God, but when the man desired in his heart to
love some other thing beside the life of God (namely the concupiscence of the
sin) then went he into his own life and contention, and forsook the life of
God, and lived even so his own life, and the life of the Devil. Sect. 23. The
whiles now, that the office of Christ has its Ministration, for to bring the
man again to God: so cannot Christ bring the man to the Father, unless that
the man forsake his own life, which he has lived so long to the Devil and to
himself, which is all the same wherein he has lived so long to himself.
Sect. 24. Is not this now a great overshooting, or misunderstanding that the
children of men can say and teach, that Christ meant hereby the natural or
Elementish man. Sect. 25. We our selves have not made the natural man,
therefore he cannot belong unto us. Sect. 26. What then shall the man forsake,
that he might be reconciled unto God? Not any thing else but his own life,
that is the man of sin, which has so long lain hid in the heart of man, which
is the Temple of God, and has said, that he was God, H Nicholas denies the
Pope to be the Man of sin, and expounds 2 Thessalonians. 2 Al^egorica^ly, a^ he
does all the Scriptures of sinful concupisce^ce.
2 Thessalonians. 2.27. they are grosely deceived, who apply this to the Pope, the
Antichrist, therefore he forbids the two Daughters to suffer for, or confess
Christ, and highly extolleth erring. Sect. 10. Sect. 14.15.16. cap. 31. Bishops
as Pastors of the Sheep and Lambs of Christ, Parish Priests, or Curats, as
signifying Leviticall Priests; Pastors and Elders, as the holy understanding.
Sect. 28. Oh what a slight and earthly understanding is this, that God should
be appeased with an Elementish body: even like as though God were fleshly, even
as an unregenerate man. So M. Del, Ser. p. 6. The Kingdom of Christ is
Spiritual, so all things that belong to it, are also spiritual. So David
Georgius, in the end, finding many of his to be killed, discharged all his to
suffer in the body, or goods, or name, any thing for his Christ and truth, but
willed them in external profession to be of any Religion, all
Gospel-reformation was in the heart. As Bullinger advers. Anab^p. p. ^. c. ^.
nullam fide^ h^bere (quoad ex^er^am pro^^^ssio^e^) ^unc v^lgare est. Some
A^baptists in the time of Bulinger thought all exte^nall obedience and
reformat^on, needless, and con^^ssion of Christ to the death, not r^quired of
God.
Bullinger in the same place shows us, that the ninth kind of Anabaptists in
his time, that were called, Liberi Anabaptistae, said, That Baptizing of
Infants, Magistracy, oaths, swearing, were things free and indifferent, that
the faithful may use, or not use, at their pleasure, they esteemed nothing of
the preaching of the Word, and the assemblies of the people of God, because
that the Saints were all taught of God, and that there was no need that one
should teach another; and that Sacraments were needelesse, and had little
fruit, for when they had the Spirit, they needed not external signs, and that
it was free to confess the truth of Christ, or not to confess it, as perils
for the Gospel might carry men on; that God delighted not that men should be
tormented, or die for him, it was enough if they kept God in their heart.

Now you see Henry Nicholas held.

1. That the external written Word, H. Nicholas his foul Tenets,
was Ceremonial fleshly, Elementish, that the Spirit was all.

2. All external obedience and Reformation was fleshly, and the being Goded
and Christed with love, and the lovely being of God was Christ, was the being
and nature of God in the Saints; and regeneration.

3. That by love and the works of righteousness which we do, we are
regenerated and reconciled to God.

4. That Christ seemed to die but dyed not, but only in an Allegorical,
Figurative, and Exemplary way he suffered as a pattern and copy for us, that
we might reconcile our selves to God, as sons of the house of love, after his
example, but as Socinus, so the Nicholaitans taught, That Christ really
satisfied not the justice of God, nor obtained everlasting righteousness for
us, any other way, but in a figure, coppie, and good example.

5. That Christ incarnate, was nothing but H. Nicholas Godded and manned by
Christ, or God in the lovely being of God, and that every one that is inhabited
by love, was renewed and made partaker of the substance and nature of God, and
that a child of the Family of love, was the very Christ, and God manifested in
the flesh and incarnate.

6. That the regenerated in England, of which number M. Ainsworth says, were
the two daughters of Warwick, that H. Nicholas wrote to, and all the godly in
England not of his way, were regenerated only according to the litterall
Scripture, not according to the being of God in love and the Spirit: or as the
Familists of Rise, reign, e^. ^2.
New England say, That some are so converted, that they may, and do attain
the same righteousness for truth, that Adam had in innocence. And Saltmarsh
free grace, 177.178.179 180.
Saltmarsh his Legal converts, who may eternally be damned, are of the same
size, if ye diligently compare the tract of his dangerous book together, and
with the principles of Familists, and H. Nicholas.

7. That the Word and the Spirit are two contrary things. Town Town asser.
page 138.
says, If the Spirit be free, why will you control or rule it by Law,
Saltmarsh Free grace. 216.
as if the Law could contradict any Spirit, save the Euthyasticall Spirit of H.
Nicholas and Antinomians.

8. The Letter of the Scripture, external Ordinances, Church Assemblies are
nothing, that there is no reformation, but inward and of the Spirit, as M. Del
lately Preached before the House of Commons, That the Gospel and a believers
Law (as Saltmarsh says) is Christ and his Spirit.

9. All outward ser^ice, ordinances, confession of Christ before men are things
free, and indifferent, and the Popish external Service, of Mass, Images,
Pope, Bishops, Cardinals, Deanes, and such dirt, are lawful and free; only
Antinomians and Saltmarsh will have them a little Legal and literal, and that
is all their fault.

10. The laying down of our lives, and forsaking all for Christ, are to be
expounded Spiritually, and Allegorically, (as Familists custom is, and that
abominable Piece, called Philosophy dissected does) and so are other Scriptures
to be expounded in the Spirit, not in the Letter, and in consequence, as says
Shadows fleeing away, p^g. 8.
Saltmarsh, to wit, not of confession of Christ to the death, as James who was
beheaded for the Gospel, Acts 12. and the Apostle Peter Job. 1.18* 19.
who dyed for Christ, and the Saints Rev. 12.11.12.
who loved not their lives to death, and were R^v. 6.9.
slain for the word of God, and the testimony of Jesus, and the two witnesses
against whom R^v 11.7, 8 9* ^0, 11.
the Beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit made war, and killed
them; and the Apostles who were Act, 4 41.
scourged, the Saints who were killed all the day long, and counted as (...).
3.36.37. P^al. 4^.^2.
sheep for the slaughter, for the Lords sake, and Math 10.32
confessed Christ, and were not ashamed of him before men, lest Christ should
deny them before his Father and the holy Angels. They say, God delights not
in our blood, and laying down our lives, and the outward man, or forsaking of
Father, Mother, Brethren, Sisters, and contrary to the Word Math 19.19.30. H.
N^cholas held there was no need to confess Christ before men, but the ^^ying
d^wne of our life for Christ was to be expounded Spiritually.
of truth; but its spiritually meant of forsaking a Pope within us, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
the Antichrist in our heart, the Man of sin, so that we may lawfully receive
the name and mark of the beast, and conform to the Mass, or any Religion, so
we keep the heart to God. Baal, the Devil, may have the outward man.

11. None can dispense the Ordinances, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, but the
Regenerate. I wish Independents in the constitution of their Churches, without
any warrant of the Word, had not paved the way to this error.

12. Outward Baptism is no Baptism, which yet is a lawful Ordinance of God,
though it be not profitable to save without the inward Baptism of the Spirit.

Antinomians border well-neere with Familists, in many of these points. For
Saltmarsh Free grace, page 16.
Saltmarsh is much upon the Spirit for a Law, and against Saltmarsh, Free
grace, pa. 216.
one beam of the light of the Letter of the Law, and Ibid. 146.
against all external Ordinances, Covenants, Vows, as Legal, and Old
Testament service; Ibid. 179.180.181.
against conditions, or performances, or doing on our part by any
Gospel Covenant, yea against believing in that tenor of a condition, as
contrary to the Spirit, and to Free grace; against Precepts, or Commands in the
Gospel, and he is much for reasoning, and Page 206.207.^97 192
persuading; against all 147.148.
commanding Law, (the Gospel is rather to them a ^28.
promise then a 152.
Covenant,) against personal mortification, 59 48 49.73.74 75.
trouble for sin, as all Legal, unlawful now, smelling of bondage, and
Law-service; and bondage it is to pray at such hours, unless the Spirit move
us, 44. Rise, reign, er 64.
to expound Scripture, to expound the Spirit, (he means the Scripture) in the
Letter, and consequence has much darkened the glory of the Gospel.

Saltmarsh Shaddows fl^eing away. page 8.

The Scripture ha^h but one sense, Antinomians and Familists devise a Literal,
a Mystical, Spiritual and All^gor^call sense.


Now if Saltmarsh know any thing in Controversies between us and Papists; he
may know the Papists give sundry and diverse senses to the Scripture, that is,
Literal, Spiritual, Mystical, Allegorical, Tropologicall, Anagogicall; all
which we reject, and acknowledge that the Scripture has but one litterall,
Grammatical, and genuine sense, which the nature of the words, whether they be
Sacramental or Figurative, (as when Christ spoke of eating his flesh, and said
of bread, This is my body, or without figures) does carry in their face. The
Spiritual sense, is not a sense different from the Literal, as if they were
two contrary or diverse senses; and therefore Saltmarsh rejecting the sense of
Scripture in the Letter, must embrace the Familists, and H. Nicholas, or the
Papists Allegorizing of the Scripture, the greatest violence that can be
offered to the Spirit, the Author of Scripture; the Spirit is the efficient, by
whose grace we gather the right Litterall sense of the Scripture, and gives no
sense diverse, far less contrary to Scripture, as Libertines do in the
fancied revelations without, beside, and contrary to Scripture, and their fond
Allegories, for such we remit Saltmarsh to his brethren, the Familists, and
the Author of Phylosophie defected, and the like.

CHAP. LXXXIV. Master Dell, and Saltmarsh deny all outward reformation, all
Scripture seals, Ordinances, with Familists, and flee to an Euthyasticall
Spirit, and an internal word only.
ANd among other Antinomians, Del Chaplain to Sir Tho: Fairfax, the General,
An. 1646. Nov. 25
Master Dell in his Sermon before the House of Commons, excels in debasing
the Scriptures, and all Ordinances, and setting up his Euthysiasticall Spirit,
not the Spirit of God, for all.

For he holds, that Del Ser. pa. 3.4.
In the time of Moses and the Law, till Christ came, there was no true inward
reformation; but notwithstanding of outward duties, performances, Ceremonies,
and strict Laws did carry along the severity of death, they were inwardly as
corrupt and wicked as the very Heathen, and without any true reformation before
God, till Christ came in the flesh with the ministration of the Spirit. But
this man understood not his own Text, Hebr. 9.10. in which the Spirit of God
opposes Leviticall service in Sacrifices, Ceremonies, to Gospel-life, not to
Moral duties, or inward conversion, as if there had been no conversion, no
remission, no actual salvation, to Abraham, David, who were justified as we
are, Romans 4.4, 5, 6. and saved by the grace of Christ, as we are, Act. 15.11.
as Dell imagines, dancing to Dens Den Do^^. Joh. Baptist* page 51.52 The
knowledge of both actual and eternal remission was no Article of the Jews
Creed.

M. Del is ignorant of his own ^ext, and follows a ^oc^^^an and Popish sense.


piping, one Antinomian to another, for both agree, that David, Asaph, Heman,
Moses, prayed, and made heavenly and spiritual Psalms, being as unreformed
inwardly, and as far from the Gospel-justification which David, Psalm. 32.1.2.
Romans 4.4, 5, 6. esteemed his blessedness, as very heathen.

2. Del makes Moses his Doctrine, the Letter, Christ, Spirit and life. So Del
follows the Antichrist in the Council of Trent, (though he will have all
Presbyterians, the last prop of the Antichrist in England) Sess. 7. cap. 2. Si
quis dixerit ea ipsa novae legis Sacramenta a Sacramentis antiquae legis non
differe, nisi quia ceremoniae sunt aliae, and alij ritus externi, Page 3.
anathema sit. The Sacraments of the Old Testament (say Papists) do but
signify, not exhibit grace. Socinus goes before M. Del in this. For Socinus
says, in 1 Epist. Joan. page 145. Nemo negare potest sub V. T. nec vitam
aeternam promissam fuisse a Deo, nec modum illam consequendi fuisse patefactum.
Ostorodius Inst. lib. 1. cap. 5. page 21. Promissiones veteris Testamenti
tantum corporales fuerunt, spiritualibus in N. T. promulgatis -- Non autem
spirituales and eternae fuerunt and consequenter non accidentale tantum, sed
substantiale discrimen inter Vetus and Novum Testamentum, si res promissas
spectes, statuendum est. Del of the (...) mind, and his Antinomians with
Pap^sts So^ini^ns, and (...) the faith of the ^ewes in the old Tes^ament, and
^urs in the new.
Smalcius de Divin. I. C. page 25.^.6. Fatentur omnes Judaei hodie -- nullum
vitae aeternae apertum extare, in ipsorum lege, ut ut apertius loquar in
faedere, quod Deus cum iis per Mosem pepigit promissum. M. Del boldly says,
They are all Antichristian, that are not Antichristianly Popish, and of the
Socinian way with him, to teach there was no conversion, no inward reformation,
no promise of salvation and life eternal, nor the same covenant of grace in
the old Testament, that is now under the New Testament; and that there was no
saving grace, nor operation of the Spirit accompanying the Sacraments of the
old Testament, but only temporal things promised them. He has Arminians also
on his side, as Episcopius Disp. 11. th. 5. The promises of the Law were
touching temporal felicity, of the Gospel, concerning the everlasting
inheritance. ^h. 7. The doctrine of the Old Testament was known by nature, as
agreeable to right reason, the doctrine of the Gospel was unknown to the
Princes of this world, it is evident there is no precept (say the Belgic
Remonstrants, Apol. cap. 22. cap. 24.) clearly delivered in the Old Testament,
for believing in Christ, nor in terminis any promise of life eternal. Its sure
Arminians, are limbs of Antichrist, and enemies to free grace. Yet Antinomians
with Del join hands with them against Protestants, who all teach to this day,
the same Savior, the same promises of life eternal, the same free grace of
imputed righteousness, the same covenant of grace was revealed darkely, in
shadows and types to the Jews, and more sparingly, and to us more clearly
and abundantly in the New Testament, and that Abraham was saved as we; who now
are Antichistian, whether Del and his Antinomians, or we? These that teach the
same with Antichrist, and contend for perfection and freedom from all sin in
this life, are not the men who must fight the battles of the Lamb.

But 1. was there then no Spirit and life in the Patriachs, Prophets, Moses,
David, till Christ came in the flesh, and reformed them inwardly? What became
then of the souls of those that dyed in peace, and entered into their rest,
before Christ came in the flesh, Esa. 57.1, 2, 3. Dyed they under the curse and
severity of the second death, as never inwardly converted? He belyeth the Old
Testament who says so; and does the Letter of the Gospel without the Spirit
save and inwardly re^orme and justify before God more then the Letter of the
Law? I think Judas and the people, whose hearts were fatted and heardned, and
yet heard Christ in the flesh, and the Apostles, preach Gospel, were as far
from inward heart-reformation, as uncircumcised Jews and Heathen. Mat.
13.14.15, 16. Act. 28.26, 27. 1 Pet. 2.7, 8. Romans 11.8, 9. Joh. 8.21. Joh.
9.41. Job. 5.40. Then Del must mean by the spirit some other thing then the
Gospel, as opposed to the condemning Law. For the Gospel is a condemning Gospel
to thousands, who stumble at the stone laid on Zion, as well as the Law.

3. Del says, Page ^.
No outward Law, of Synods, Councels of men, can make men perfect, as
pertaining to the conscience, more then Leviticall Laws could do, and so the
Gospel abolisheth all such outward Laws, imposed on conscience, as well now as
heretofore under Moses. -- Gospel-reformation (says Page 4.^.
he) is the mortifying, destroying, and utter abolishing out of the faithful
and elect, all that sin, corruption, lust, evil, that did flow in upon them
through the fall of Adam. Or, it is the taking away, and destroying the body of
sin, out of the faithful and elect, by the presence and operation of the
righteousness of God dwelling in their hearts by faith. This is true
Gospel-reformation, and beside this I know no other, Esai. 1.27. Zion shall be
redeemed with judgment, and her converts with righteousness. -- Again,
Christ as he makes us righteous with his own righteousness, and makes us the
righteousness of God in him; so he is called our righteousness, not in
himself only, but in us.

And therefore, you see how grossly they are mistaken, who take
Gospel-reformation ^o be the making of certain Laws and constitution by the
sacred power, or Clergy, for external conformity in outward duties of outward
worship and government, and to have these confirmed by civil Sanction; and
enforced upon men by secular power, when in the mean time, all that inward
corruption, and sin they have brought with them into the world, remains in
their hearts and natures as before, so the old Prelates reformed.

His reasons are 1. All things belonging to Christ, a Spiritual King having a
spiritual Kingdom, are spiritual; a carnal Reformation is not suitable to a
spiritual Kingdom. The reformation of the Civil and Ecclesiastical state is
but carnal, Page 6
wrought by the power of flesh and blood, and stands but in outward things.

2. Gospel-reformation is inward, lays hold on the heart, soul, and inner
man, and changes and renewes that, does not much busy it self about outward
forms, or external conformity, but only minds the conformity of the heart,
for when the heart is right with God, the outward forms cannot be amiss.
Christ says touching the worship of the New Testament, God is a Spirit, and
they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth, he speaks not
one word of any outward forms. So that God in his Gospel-reformation aims at
nothing but the heart, according to Jer. 31.33. I will put my Law in their
inward parts, etc. So that they shall not only have the word of the Letter in
their books, but the living word of God in their hearts. But now Civil
Ecclesiastical reformation is outward, and so industrious and elaborate about
outward forms, Page 7.
outward orders, outward governing, outward confession, outward practices; like
the Reformation of Scribes and Pharisees, notorious hypocrites, who made clean
only the outside of the cup, or platter, leaving them all filthy and unclean
within. So Civil Ecclesiastical reformation makes a man clean outwardly,
with an outward confession of Faith, when inwardly he is all filthy through
unbelief, and whites him over with new handsome forms of worship.

Object. But is there no change of outward things in the Gospel? Ans. Yes, an
outward change that flows from an inward; but not an outward change to infer
an inward, etc.

Answ. 1. Master Del must lay down a ground, that outward Laws were imposed
on the conscience, and forced on them with violence of Magistrates, and Synods,
without any foregoing teaching, under pain of corporal punishments to the
Jews, as he and his says, Presbyterians do now urge consciences, how shall
Del prove that? 2. He must say, that outward, and merely litterall observing
of Laws and Synodicall Decrees, according to the Word of God (for any others
beside or against the Word, the Presbyterians know none) without Faith in
Christ, do make men perfect as pertaining to conscience, which is Dels dream,
not our doctrine. 3. He and his condemn all Laws of the Civil Magistrate,
yea, all the written Scripture, Law, and Gospel; and say, an Arbitrary and
Enthysiasticall Spirit in the Christian Magistrate, without all Civil Laws
inacted, or written, should conclude of the heads and lives of Christians,
without the Law Moral, or Gospel, and so condemns all Acts of Parliaments.

Answ. 2. You could not have heard more, if Henry Nicholas, or Anton. Pocquius,
or David Georgius had been preaching to the Honorable House; for Del follow^s
them at the heels. For Epistle to the two daughters of Warwick. Sect. ^.
Henry Nicholas (if you but change Dels word of Reformation, into the word
regeneration or begetting) in the same Spirit debaseth Christ in the
Scriptures, and all outward worship, as if there were one Christ in the
Scripture, and another contrary Christ in the Spirit, and inward working, for
sure hypocritical, and mere external reformation, and the inward
reformation, are by Protestants made two contrary reformations; the one from
God, the other not from flesh and blood only, but from the Devil. So Henry
Nicholas, If I could give all my goods to the poor, etc. If I had not love, it
were not any thing to me; that is, whosoever has not Christ, he is without
God, and without righteousness in this world, I mean the being like Christ,
which is received through the power of the Holy Ghost, and not any Ceremonial
Christ, which one man speaks to another, or promises to another through the
Ceremonial service, (Dels Grammar is, Page 6. through the word of the letter
in their books, in outward forms, outward worship, outward confession) which
he out of his prudencie, according to his fleshly mind has set up, o no, the
work, or begetting, or procreating of the children of God comes not so
slenderly to pass, as men now at this time teach each other, out of their
unregenerate Spirit (Del, out of a Spirit not inwardly reformed, the body of
sin not being destroyed) no reformation can come.

Henry Nicholas condemning all Scripture as a Literal and carnal thing, and
an Elementish, Epist Sect. 5 Sect 7. Sect. 10.
Ceremonial, and fleshly service; yea, and H. Nicholas Epist. (...). 10
confession with the mouth Del. Sect p. 6 page 7.
as carnal, outward, hypocritical, and Pharisaicall, and does expressly
reject all the teaching of men, or by the ministry of men, which the Apostle
asserteth, Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Cor. 4.2. 2 Cor. 4.7. And the Lord Jesus, the great
Apostle of our profession, Math. 28.19, 20. Act. 1.6, 8. and pronounces the
Ministry of one man teaching another, to be fleshly prudence, and not such a
way, by which the begetting or procreating of the children of God comes to
pass. Now that Monster of men, knew Protestants, whom he refuteth in this,
taught against Pelagians, and the Pope, (whom he denies Ep^st. Sect. 27
to be the Antichrist) and Papists, that we utterly deny, that the Scriptures
of themselves, yea, that the Man Christ's teaching in the flesh, or Paul, or the
Apostles Preaching, or any man's external instructing of another man, most
soundly according to the Scriptures, can without the hearing and learning of
the Father, Joh. 6.45. and his omnipotent drawing of men to the Son, Joh.
6.44. and the inward teaching of the Spirit, inwardly reform, or beget men
over again to God: So his condemning of one man's teaching of another, as
Fleshly, Ceremonial, Elementish, is a simple rejecting of the Scriptures, and
all outward and external worship. And just as David Georgius rejected the
Literal Christ, and asserted himself to be the Spiritual Christ, and true
See Blesdikiu^, Histor. Dav. Georg. page 20.21. ar. 1.2.3 4.
David. In the same manner M. Del speaking of inward Reformation, that is,
conversion of a sinner to God, that only being his Gospel-reformation; he
knows well, Presbyterians and the Ass^mbly of Divines, who are (if they shall
condemn his Gospel for the substance of it,) the enemies of the truth of
Christ, and the last prop of Antichrist in the Kingdom; do teach, that inward
reformation, or destroying of the body of sin, is not wrought by the only
Letter of the Word, and the teaching of men, or Laws, or Constitutions of
Synods; but that we conjoine with all outward means, the inward and
omnipotent power of the Holy Ghost, without whose grace all other means, are
nothing, yea Paul's planting, and Apollo his watering, are nothing effectual to
an inward reformation. M. Del argues against the Holy Ghost and Paul, who
Preached the Gospel to the blaspeming Jews, and scoffing Athenians, Act. 13
Act. 17. for all he could say to them was but outward and litterall preaching,
the Apostles were but men, and not Lords of the heart, and therefore could but
work outward conformity to outward duties, when the heart remained corrupt.

Nor is it much that Dell says, there is need of an outward change in the
Gospel, Del for the fashion only requires an outward reformation.
which indeed is a belying of himself, for an outward change, is an outward
reformation, and he says, Page 4.5. Gospel-reformation is a destroying of the
body of sin in the faithful and elect, by the presence and operation of the
righteousness of God, dwelling in their heart by Faith, -- besides this, I
know no other. An outward change is an outward reformation besides this. But
this is nothing. Del acknowledges neither Ministry, outward worship, or
outward ordinances, as Familists did before him. For the Author of that
blasphemous Piece, Theol. Ger. cap. 28. p. 71.72.
called Theologia Germanica says, Just men have need of no law, are led by
the Spirit, and are not to be taught by any Law, what they should do or leave
undone, seeing the Spirit of God which is their instructor, will teach them
sufficiently, neither is any thing to be commanded or enjoined them, as to do
good, to shun evil, or the like, but Page 72. Yet he says more then Del
does, to wit, That both the life of Christ, as also all Commandments, Laws,
Ordinances, and the like, ought not to be laid aside, and cast off, and to be
neglected, contemned, and derided. And H. Nicholas Epist. sect. 8.9.
Henry Nicholas says, The Lord speaks in the Scripture, but he says
withal, that the Spirit is the Word, not the Letter. So Del makes an
opposition between the Letter in the books, Del Sermon. p. 6.
and the living Word of God in the heart.

3. Del speaks exclusively, Other reformation beside this of the heart, says
he, Del Sermon. page 5.
I know none. 2. Gospel-reformation (says he) Page 6. Del rejects all
outward worship, Script^re, Preachi^g, Hearing, Ordinances, Seals as Familists
and Libertines did before him.
only minds the reformation of the heart. If only, then it minds not
external reformation. 3. Christ speaking touching the worship of the New
Testament, says, (says he) Not one word of any outward form; So that God in
his Gospel-reformation aims at nothing but the heart. Then he aims at no
outward change, nor any external worship, neither reading of Scripture, nor
hearing the Word Preached, nor vocal praying in the Spirit of adoption; for
sure, though these must come from the heart, yet essentially they are external
worship, and something in the outward man, beside that which is only in the
heart; and something of forms they must have; for they are external, visible,
and audible acts of worship. The same was taught by a Silesian, Casparus
Schunenckfeldius in Luthers time, as says Conradus Schlusdelburgius, Catologo
Hereticorum, lib. 10. page 30. Per externum verbum Dei ministerium, and
praedicationem homines non converti; -- non esse homines obligatos ad audiendam
praedicationem verbi, externam praedicationem non pertingere ad eos; tantum
herere in externis sensibus, testificari duntaxat de Christo, fidem aliam non
esse, and praedicationem verbi nisi historicam, neque esse fidem accidens, aut
qualitatem, sed esse essentiam Dei, Scripturam non esse verbum Dei, verbum Dei
non esse aliud quam substantiale nempe Christum. Luther Tom. 2. in Genesis cap. 19
fol. 133. Answers external Ordinances invented by God, profit to salvation;
not these that are invented by men.

4. When the heart (says Page* 6.
Del) is reformed, all is reformed, -- and when the heart is right with God,
the outward form cannot be amiss. It is clear that Del and Antinomians mean,
there is no external worship commanded in the New Testament, neither hearing,
reading, praying, confessing of Christ before men, so as we sin in omitting
these, or that the Letter of any Command obliges us to obedience, as the
Letter of the Law, from the authority of the Lawgiver, obliged Adam before he
fell, and the Jews in the Old Testament. For Del says, If the heart be
reformed, all will be reformed, that is, If the Spirit be in the heart, and act
us to read, hear, pray, confess Christ before men, receive the Seals, we
are then obliged to acts of external worship, and not otherwise; so that no
Command written in Old or New Testament, no authority of God speaking in the
written word, or speaking in the Ambassadors of Christ, either preaching the
Gospel, or commanding by the Holy Ghost in Synods, Acts 15.28. do lay any
obliging Commands on us to any external worship, outward Reformation, or
confession of Christ; for the Spirit speaking in the writings of the Prophets
and Apostles is but litterall, outward, external to believers, except the
Spirit be in their heart acting, and immediately stirring and working, there is
no obliging power laid on us to external worship, or outward reformation by
the Familists and Antinomians way. For we know their Doctrine, Rise, reign,
er. 1.2.
The Holy Ghost comes in place of the natural faculties of the soul, and
acts us immediately to all internal acts of loving, and believing, and to
all external acts of outward worship, or reformation, and er. 49.
we are not bound to pray in our Family, but when the Spirit moves, and
stirs us thereunto; and Er. 14.
Christ works in the Regenerate, as in these that are dead; and therefore Er
21. er. 36. er. 59.
all commands and exhortations are in vain, seeing we have no activitie to
obey, but the Spirit and Christ only does all in us, in as much as Er. 4.5.
no written word is an obliging rule to us, but the immediate actings of the
Spirit only leads us in all we do.

M. Del Page 26. denies there should be any Laws in Christ's kingdom; but Gods
Laws (he knows we are against men's Laws within the Church and service of
God) to wit, that of a new nature, the Law of the Spirit of life that is in
Christ, the Law of love. All these are Laws within men, there is not one word
of the Scripture here, or of the Gospel preached, or of Church-censure,
Excommunication, or rebukes, either from the Word preached, or the authority of
Church, all these are without, and are not the inward Law of a new nature, or
of the Spirit, or of love.

5. If, when the heart is reformed, all be reformed, the outward man must be
under no command, or Law of reformation; but by a result of courtesy, the free
Spirit, and no written Law must lead the outward man, but he who said, Iam.
4.8.
purify your hearts, gave a Commandment for the outward man, cleanse your
hands; and Paul forbids the Saints Ephesians. 4.29.30 31.
who are sealed to the day of Redemption, of corrupt communication, of
bitterness, wrath, anger, clamor, evill-speaking; and that Ephesians 5.3, 4, 5.
all fornication, uncleanness, covetousness, should not be once named amongst
them, as becomes the Saints; yea, and filthiness, and foolish talking, and
jesting, which are not convenient, because sins of the outward man do Ephesians.
5.5 6.7. Col. ^.3.5.6. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10
also exclud men out of the kingdom of heaven, as well as want of
heart-reformation, and consider this is an Argument of the Familists for faith
and love in the heart only, without all works of Sanctification, or walking in
Christ; and of the Nichodemits, who denied any necessity of confessing of
Christ before before men; and of the Bullingeros advers. Anabap^is* lib 1. cap.
1. Doceb it The. Muncerus, Concion^tores qui illis temporibus praedica^ant,
neque ^ Deo missos, neque verum Dei verbum p^^edic^re, sed esse Scribas, and
pr^edicare tantum mortu^m Scripturae literam, ext^r umque verbum non esse verum
Dei verbum, sed solum testimonium very verbi; hoc autem int^r^um and celeste
esse and immediate ex ipso Dei ore prodire, and hoc interius doceri oportere,
non autem Scripturl^ and concionibus, Baptismum aquae vilipend^bat and
infantium a Deo non esse, -- Somnia ut inspirata a Spiritu sancto dicebant
voluntatem Dei esse, borum meritricium and Diaboli prosibulum esse verum torum
et impollutum. Cap. 2. Celestes quasdam revelationes, and visiones jactabant.
Anabaptists, and their head Muncer, as Bullinger tells us, that they in his
time said, The first reformers were not sent of God, nor preached the true word
of God, and that the Letter of the Scripture was not the Word of God, but the
inward word that comes immediately out of the mouth of God should be taught
inwardly, not by the Scripture and Sermons, and that whoredom was the bed
undefiled; they held all these externals indifferent, at least such things as
defiled not the conscience. They said, Dreams and Visions, under the New
Testament, was Gods revealed will, and boasted of revelations beside the
Scripture, and that the Scripture was a dead Letter; And so said that profane
Popish Priest, the monstrous Libertine Calvin. advers. Liber. in. cap. 10. page
442 Verbum Dei Spiritum esse aiunt quia Dominus ait, ve^ba quae loquor Sp^r^tus
and vita sunt. -- Page 441. Verbum Dei nihil aliud quam Spiritum esse:
similiter Christum esse Spiritum; nosque cum ipso spiritus esse oportere; vitam
etiam nostram spiritum esse debere.
Anton. Pocquius Who called the Word of God the Spirit, because Christ said,
The words that I speak are Spirit and life. So says Del. page 19. citing the
same Text. Pocquius said also, That Christ was Spirit, that we and our life
must be spirit; and Page 141. Scripturam in naturali sensu su^ acceptam,
Literam m^r^uam esse, atque o^cidere; ideoque missam esse faciendam, ut ad
spiritum vivificantem veniamus.
that the Scripture taken in its natural sense does kill, and is but a dead
Letter, and therefore we must leave the Scripture, and come to the quickening
Spirit.

Bullinger Bullinger advers. Anabap. Lib. 2. ca. 4. Statuebant Pedobaptismum,
magistratum jus-jurandum esse res liberas and medias, -- exter^am
praedicationem, and sacros coetus and Sacramenta nihili faciebant, -- fideles
omnes, eum habeant Spiritum externis signis non indigere, -- Liberum esse fidem
confiteri -- Si gravia pericula urgent, tum posso sideles dissimulare ac
sacere; satis enim esse coram Deo, si quis veritatem in cord retinent, etiamsi
ext^rius coram hominibus contrarium faciat
also tells us of a sort of Anabaptists called Libertini, or Liberi
Anabaptistae, free or Libertine Anabaptists, who taught, That Baptizing of
Infants, Magistracy, Oaths, were things free and indifferent, which we may
use, or not use, at our Liberty, they judged the Scripture, and Preaching of
the Word was not necessary, because we are all taught of God, believers have
the Spirit, and need not external Signs or Sacraments, it is free to us to
confess, or not to confess Christ, if danger be imminent, its enough to keep
the truth in the heart, for God delights not in our death and torment. After
the same manner, the best argument that Del has from the nature of inward
reformation, will conclude; If Gospel reformation, because it is the internal
destroying of the body of sin, and is spiritual, changes the inner man only,
and minds only the reforming of the heart, and that does change the outward
man, then he excludes all Civil, External, and Ecclesiastical power which
is busied about outward forms, outward orders, outward government, outward
confession of Christ before men, or confession of sins before men, and
outward practices; For as Del says, Page 6.7. Gospell-reformation medleth not
with reforming the external man, and so not with the preaching of the Word,
receiving the Sacraments, reading Scriptures, praying in public, confessing
Christ before men, if in the heart, or the inward man, a believer have the
Spirit, and retain God in his heart; Dels reformation medleth not with outward
practices, to forbid, and rebuke such practices, as Paricides, Murders,
Incests, Adulteries, Thefts, Opressions, Lying, Blasphemy, Idolatry, Sorcerie,
Sodomie; neither the Preachers of the Gospel can reform these with the Word,
nor the Magistrate with the sword, by any warrant of the Gospel; the Magistrate
by the Gospel, Romans 13. bears not the sword to take vengeance on ill doers;
for Gospel-reformation meddles not with outward practices, nor outward order,
then it medleth not with the outward man, nor commands it the outward man, to
walk Ephesians. 5.15
circumspectly, nor to walk in Col 26.
Christ, nor to confess Christ before men, as we desire Christ to confess us
before his father, and his Mat. 10.32.
holy Angels, nor to observe external order in the worship 1 Cor 14.32* 33 40.
Col. 2.5.
of God, nor to abstain from fornication, evil speaking, clamours,
bitterness, for all these be outward practices contrary to the rule of the
Gospel, and though the soul and spirit, not the body, nor whole man should be
sanctified wholly, as the Apostle 1 These. 5 23
prays. Yet by this way, I see not but all externals of either worship, or
conversation that concerns our outward walking, must be things indifferent
and free, neither commanded nor forbidden under the Gospel. It is free to kill
our brother, or not to kill him, to whore, swear, worship Idols, cosen and
deceive, steal, rob, oppress, if the Faith of imputed righteousness be in
the heart, then is the body of sin destroyed (says Del) and another
Reformation that is outward he knows not, and Dels argument runs thus.

The only true Gospel-reformation is spiritual not carnal. But the Civil
and Ecclesiastical Reformation is not spiritual, but carnal, and wrought by
the power of flesh and blood, etc.

Answ. The Major is doubtsome, and the Assumption false. 1. For civil
Reformation as civil, is not spiritual formally, but only materially and
objectively spiritual. But to say, that Ecclesiastical Reformation should be
spiritual, as spiritual is opposed to external and outward, and only
spiritual, and in the heart; Satan could not fancy a more wicked untruth to
destroy all godliness and holiness, as it appears in the outward man, in the
duties of the first and second Table, for Gospel-reformation, as touching Gods
part, is inward, spiritual, invisible, done by him that is Lord of soul and
conscience, but this is but the half, though the choicest half of
Reformation; but as touching man's part, it is external, and also spiritual,
and done by the Preaching of the Word, and discipline of the Church. For sure
the Apostles and Elders, Acts chap. 15. Reformed the Churches of Antioch,
Jerusalem, Syria, and Silicia, and that spiritually, and externally (for these
are not contrary) when they send to them commandments, not to be circumcised,
nor to keep the Ceremonial Law; but to abstain from blood and things
strangled, as at that time scandalous, and from fornication, as a sin against
the Moral Law, because they that held the contrary opinion, were, lying
Teachers, and perverted souls; and so deformed with a spiritual deformity,
the Churches of God, as Del and Familists now do. How Ecclesiastical and
external Reformation is spiritual, not carnal.


Now the Assumption, That Ecclesiastical reformation is carnal as done by
men, and not spiritual, is most false, for carnal it may be in some part,
and in some sense, that is, standing in outward, external Commandments, and
yet spiritual, given by the Lawgiver, an infinite Spirit, tying and obliging
the Spirits of men, and leading to a spiritual end; so the Ceremonies of Moses
are carnal, not sinful, not unlawful, vicious, fleshly, as Del, page
2.3.4. foulely ignorant of the sense and meaning of his own Text he preached
on, expounds it, in opposition to Gospel-reformation, which is spiritual,
lawful, not fleshly and sinful. For then to obey the Ceremonial Law had
been sinful and unlawful to the Jews, and God must have given
Commandments to the Jews, which were sinful and unlawful judgments, and
statutes, and ordinances, External and Spiritual reformations are not
contrary.
which is the blaphemy of old Manicheans; So the Reformation done by the Gospel
preached, and by lawful Assemblies holding forth the truth, and condemning
contrary errors, is carnal, that is, external, and wrought by flesh and
blood: Del means, by the word carnal, the corruption of flesh and blood, as
the phrase is taken, Math. 16.17. which is a manifest untruth; it is wrought by
men consisting of flesh and blood in a carnal, that is, in an external,
outward, audible, and visible manner, and yet spiritual; also it is in that
very external Reformation, is according to the Word of God, who is a Spirit.
2. It lays an obligation on the consciences, and spirits of men, both actively
to reform, in that outward way (though God must make it effectual by an
inward reformation) it leads men, even as it is external, to a spiritual
end, obedience to God in Christ, according to the rule of the Gospel. The
Church and men take not on them to reform hearts, but instrumentally, by going
about an outward reformation, by Planting, Sowing, Watering, and laboring the
Lords husbandry, his Church. I might borrow Dels Argument, and say, true
feeding and nourishing of men, D^l removes with fleshly Libertines, all the
working of second causes.
and upholding their life with bread is from the omnipotent power of God, Deuteronomy.
8.3. For man lives not by bread only, and infer, that they are grossly
mistaken, who take true nourishing of men to be outward plowing, harrowing,
sowing, earing, grinding, for all these are carnal, fleshly, and wrought by
flesh and blood, and by the power of man; but true effectual nourishing
comes not from the plough, or the husbandman, but from the mighty power of
God; and therefore if God nourish, plowing, sowing, earing, cannot be amiss;
So the Libertines made God the only author of sin.

Del cites, Joh. 4. God is a Spirit, etc. A place that Gnostics, Enthusiasts,
Libertines, Anabaptists abused, to deny all external worship and acts of
Sanctification; and Town cannot answer Doctor Tailor, who objecteth, that
Antinomians deny all external worship, for he says, A man is a fulfiller of
the Law in Christ who dyed for him, so that faith is all; and the same says
Del, page 4.5. Gospel-reformation is a destroying of the body of sin, by the
presence and operation of the righteousness of God dwelling in their hearts by
faith. He speaks not one word of sanctification, and personal mortifying of
the body of sin, and of walking with God, but says, He knows no
reformation besides this, as if sanctification were no heart-reformation.

The covenant of grace, and the Gospel, commands external as well as
internal holiness and ref^rmation, whatever Del and Familists say on the
c^^trary.
Del page 5. and page 6. alleges, that the new covenant stands for only a
heart-reformation, and writing of the Law in the heart, Jer. 31. but forgets
that the same covenant says, Ezech. 36.27. I will put my Spirit in them, and
cause them to walk in my Commandments; and that the covenant of grace
expressly forbids, Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32. The forsaking of Gods Law, the
breaking of his Statutes, and the following after the heart of their detestable
things, and commands the external as well as the internal walking in Gods
Statutes, and keeping his Ordinances. Ezech. 11.19.20. and the Separating from
Beliall, and unrighteousness, and the touching no unclean thing, the
cleansing our selves from all filthynesse of the flesh and spirit, and
perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18. chap. 7.1. these
speak outward and inward reformation. M. Dels righteousness of Christ in the
heart, by faith, his only inward reformation he knows must then be to
believe Christ was Reformed inwardly for him, believed, repented, sorrowed for
sin, and obeyed the Law for him, and that is all the reformation (as
Saltmarsh his Colleague says) that is required of us.

Nor is this reformation we urge, Hypocritical; like that of the Pharisees of
old, and of the Prelates of late, because it is external. For though the Church
can do no more, and the Ministers, both in Preaching, and in Synodicall
decrees, holding forth the Laws of God, as Acts 15.22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
but externally reform, the Lord must give the increase, yet they neither
injoyne, nor preach hypocritall reformation.

And its of the same Metal and Coin that Del brings, Page 89.
Gospel-reformation is through and complete in the inner and outward man,
Ecc^esiasticall reformation is by halfs, -- and the power of God in creating
and redeeming the elect, may as well be resisted, as the reforming of them,
the power of God is engaged in it, Ecclesiastical reformation has only the
power of man, and by it the heart and nature can never be changed.

Answ. Gospel-reformation to Del, is the taking away, and destroying the body
of sin, and this (says he) is through and complete, a great untruth, the body
of sin in this life is never complete. But Del means with Honey comb, c. 3.
p 25.
Eaton, and Town asser. page 77.
Town, and other Familists, that we are as perfect, as clean from sin as
the Lord Jesus, or as Saltmarsh Free grace. page ^40.
the glorified in heaven, and as Calvin. adv. Libert. ca. 18. page 45^.
Pocquius the Libertine said, They cannot sin, being once inwardly reformed,
and would prove it from 1 John 3.9.

2. It is an argument against the whole Ministry of the Gospel, seals,
promises, rebukes, commands, threatenings, as the Swink-feldians and Seekers
teach. For Paul is called a Father that begat the Corinthians. Timothy is said
1 Cor. 4.15. 1 Timothy 4.16.
to save himself and others. Dels Argument for only internal reformation is
against all the Ministry and Ordinances of the Gospel, as the Swink feldia^s
of old, and the ^eekers now teach.
Now Dels Argument fights with the Scripture; Paul begets men
Instrumentally, Timothy saves Ministerially; sure neither Paul nor Tymothy do
convert men thoroughly, completely, perfectly, within and without; nor do they
it irresistibly, and by an omnipotency in them, as the Lord does; shall we
then say, Paul and Timothy, their saving, begetting, and converting of men, is
no converting at all? And no more lawful then the Civil and Ecclesiastical
States reformation, which is utterly unlawful to Del? Because saving of men,
and begetting of men by the Gospel, in Paul and Timothy, was external, and of
it self by halfs, without the effectual working of the Spirit, (which Spirit
neither Paul nor Timothy could command to blow) was only external, literal,
incomplete, by halfes, carnal, as all the Ceremonies of Moses were, to Del,
nor could Paul and Tymothy write the Law in the heart and inward parts; so Del
must mean that all Ministry, Preaching, Seals, Covenants, Praying, praising,
fasting, all reading, all books, and Arts, and learning, as all holy practices
and walking with God, and acts of sanctification incurring in the senses, and
eyes of men, might be cried down, because all of a Christian is spiritual,
invisible, and the Gnostic faith in the heart only; in which M. Del and
Familists surpass the deeds of old Enthyasts, For at Munster Bullinger
advers. ^^abapt. l^b. ^. cap. 9.
there arose a Prophet (says Bullinger) named Mathias Harlenius, a Hollander,
by trade a Baker, he professed Visions and Dreams, and by his Prophetical
spirit commanded, that they should bring all their goods, and lay all down at
his feet, and that all Books should be burnt, except the Bible. M. Del
excepteth not the Bible, nor Scripture, because it is an external carnal
thing, and so not suitable to the spiritual Kingdom of Christ.

For (says he page 6.) As the Kingdom of Christ is Spiritual, so all the
things belonging to it are spiritual. Del. page 9. The Gospel-reformation is
constant so long as Gods nature dwells in ours, Del.
it will daily be reforming it, till it be altogether like it, as long as the
Spirit of God dwells in the flesh, it will still be reforming the flesh to the
Spirit, till the whole body of sin be destroyed, and the natural man be made
spiritual. But Civil Ecclesiastical Reformation at first makes a great noise,
but when men have attained their own ends, its activity cease.

Answ. 1. This poor Argument proves great odds and wide differences between
the Lords inward and spiritual way of reforming, Del proves that there is a
difference between internal and external Reformati^n, which is not in
question, but not that ext^rnall Reformation app^r^aineth not to the Gospel.
and the external reforming by the ministry of men, which this man may know
is not the question, but it proves not that ministerial reformation by men,
whether Magistrates, (of which I cannot speak here, but I hope if God will, to
demonstrate, that the Monster of the l^berty of Conscience is Socinian and
Epicurcan Atheism) or Ministers of the Gospel, is either unlawful, or no part
of Gospel-reformation, but only it concludes, that inward reformation is not
outward reformation.

2. M. Dels expression, So long as Gods nature dwells in ours, and so long as
the Spirit dwells in the flesh, it will be still reforming, till the natural
man be made spiritual, is heretical, and not according to the form of sound
words; for there is abominable Heresy in speeches. Henry Nicholas the father
of the fleshly Familist H. Ni^^ols Epist. to the daughters, Sect. 1.
speaks so. God was one in substance with man. In the beginning when God made
all things, there was no more but one God, and one man, and they were one, and
had in all one order, being, and nature, for God was all that man was, and man
was all tha^ God was; and H. Nicholas Evang. cap. 8. Sentence 3.
all must become one being with God, (by love, say the Familists,) by faith,
(say the Antinomians, by regeneration said the Libertine Pocquius, and his) and
his Godded man, and so be all manned Gods, and children of the most high. Let
Del clear himself of this some spiritual fury. Sure, neither Scripture, nor
Protestants, nor any save Familists, say as Del does, that Gods nature dwells
in ours. But if he have one sense with Peter, who says, We are made partakers
of the Divine nature, that is, by Faith, and the created graces of the Spirit,
not that we are partakers of the essence or substance of the Godhead, or
equal with Christ in any respect, he speaks soundly, as the confession of
Britain Assembly of Divines of both Kingdoms at Westminster, cap. 26. art. 1.
art. 3.

Del holds with Familists, that Gods nature dwells in our flesh.


clears; but his words are not sound.

2. Whoever except Henry Nicholas, and David Georgius spoke as Del, who says,
The Spirit of God dwells in our flesh, till the whole body of sin be
destroyed, and the natural man be made spiritual. If his meaning be, as
Familists and Antinomians dream, that Christ incarnate is nothing but every
godly man Christed, and made conform to the image of Christ, we are at a
point, and know his mind; so teach the Rise, reign, er 21.
New England Familists, and Bright Star, cap 19. page 225 226.
the Author of the Bright Star, who tells us, of God humanized, and that Page
19 page 244.
the Cross of God is God.

3. The Spirit dwells not in our flesh, that is, in our sinful and unrenewed
part, for so is flesh taken, Romans 7. who dreamed that grace dwells in
original sin? or if by flesh he mean the natural man, or the carnal man,
or the outward man that is in our person; he then thinks this outward and
natural man, or our body is turned in a spirit, or spiritual nature, so as we
are made by justification spiritual as Angels; and need no more Ordinances,
Word, Seals, reading the written Scripture, then if we were Saltmarsh (...)
grace. ^ag. ^40.
glorified Saints, as Saltmarsh speaks of the believers; and as Del. Ser. pa.
2^.
he himself says, You may as well go about to bring the Angels of heaven
under an outward and secular power, as the faithful, who being borne of the
Spirit, Believers are no more in need of prea^hing, or outward r^formation
(says M. Del) th^n the A^gels in heaven.
are more spiritual then they. If so, then believers being more spiritual
then Angels, and so l^sse literal, and less carnal, because by imputed
righteousness they are Christed and Godded, and so the body of sin destroyed
by the the imputed righteousness of Christ, fully and completely then, as
Angels need no secular power, because they are spiritual, so need they not
hear the Moral Law preached, nor the threatenings thereof, nor need they give
attendance to reading, nor need they marry, nor can they die, nor sin, as our
Savior says, and that because they are spiritual; if then believers be more
spiritual, as Del says, they need far less then Angels the written Word,
or the Preaching of the Law, or any Ordinances, nor should they marry, or dye,
nor can they sin, nor lie, nor whore, nor steal, nor kill, but be as the
Angels of heaven. I cannot but profess my jealousy of all Familists, I much
fear, when Del says, believers are more spiritual then Angels; and that the
natural man must be made spiritual, which is done (says he) by the imputed
righteousness of God, Page 6.7. that he minds, with Mistress Hutchi^on,
that Rise, reign, er. p. 59. ^r. 3.
these who are united to Christ, have in this life new bodies, and two bodies,
1 Cor. 6.19. And Ibid. ^rt. 1.2
that the souls of men are mortal, in regard of generation, like the beasts,
Eccles. 3.8. but made immortal by the purchase of Redemption. And that the
Page 90. art. 5.
Resurrection, Joh. 5.28. is not meant of the Resurrection of the body, but of
our union here, and after this life with Christ. And so taught that abominable
Priest Calvin. Instruct. advers. Libert. cap. 22 page 458.
Anto. Pocquius, and the Quintists with him, with Phyletus and Hymeneus, that
the Resurrection of the dead was in this life, and that we are not saved in
hope only in this life, but really and completely before we die; and the same
perfection of life eternal in this life, is taught by Antinomians, to wit,
Town asser. of grace, page 158.159
by Town, and Saltm^rsh Free grace, page 140.
Saltmarsh, the colleague of Del. These must lie upon Antinomians, while they
condemn their Fathers, the Familists, upon whose principles they walk, which
they have never yet done, nor have they denied the foul Heresies that are in
the Story of the Rise, reign, ruin of Antinomians.

4. Ecclesiastical reformation in the intention of the work has no kindly
ends, that are fleshly and carnal, and therefore is as constant as internal
reformation, except Master Del mean so much as the Nicholaitans do, that the
Letter of the Scripture, and all Ordinances external, Word, scales, prayer,
reading books, under the Gospel are abolished to the Theolog. Germ^nica p.
28.71.72
just man, and only the Spirit leads him; yea, that these are all H.
Nicholas Epist. Ser. 6. p 7.10.
Elementish, Ceremonial, carnal, and fleshly, and that Bright St^r, cap. 2.
p. 11.
its unpossible that any act, meditation, thin^ing, aspiring, or working, can
be sufficient to attain the seeing of God in this life, that no discourse,
exercise, nor rule (of Law, Gospel, Scripture, or Ordinance) or any mean can
be interposed between the soul and God; that B^ight Star, cap. ^. p. 13.
we are only passive in receiving the will of God; that we B^^ght Star, cap.
^^ page 106.107.118 109.^10.
and all our acts of the soul, of willing, loving, trusting, hoping, etc. are
annihilated, and turned to nothing in a spiritual communion with God. And the
reason of the constancy of external reformation in its own nature, I give,
Because as grace in the soul, being a beam and day of eternal and
unchangeable love, is ever like God the Author, constant, and so like its
Father; External Reformation constant in its own kind, as well as inward.
so is external Reformation constant, for the Letter of Law and Gospel
commands ever, and immutably, a perfect conformity between the outward man and
God, that eyes, ears, hands, confession of Christ before men, hearing the
Word, reading, praying, abstinence from fleshly lusts, be ever the same,
according to the rule of the Gospel, as internal Reformation is constant. Its
true, outward Reformation is not constant in the sinful intention of the
worker, because it takes not hold of the heart, and therefore the ends of
external Reformation, in the intention of men is often sinful, fleshly,
carnal, yea, devilish, and so unconstant in good, and therefore its a vain
thing for M. Del to argue from the abused and sinful ends of men against
outward Reformation, which of the own nature is an Ordinance of God.

5. All the differences between inward and outward Reformation, prove an
excellency of Christ's inward Reformation above men's outward Reformation, which
is most true; but proves not, but outward Reformation is a good Ordinance of
God, for honoring of God before men. 2. For an external blameless
profession, and confession of Christ, and his truth before men, is commanded in
the Gospel, Math. 10.32.3^. And ab^^inence from gross and scandalous sins.

Del page ^0. If the Church be to be redeemed, Christ must redeem it; Del with
Libertines m^ke it (...) a^temp^ to Red^em and save (...).
if it be governed, Christ must govern it; if it be to be protected, Christ
must protect it; if it be to be saved. Christ must save it. 1. God has
committed the care of reforming the Church to Christ only, and to no body
else, and this is a thousand times better for the Church, then if he had
committed it to all the Princes and Magistrates in the world. All things are
given to me of my Father. Christ's love to redeem, is his love to reform; he
will not break the bruised r^ed etc. and he reformes not ruggedly, and with
violence.

Answ. This Argument shall prove, that none ought to come out to help the Lord
against the mighty; for sure God only and Christ gives a peaceable and quiet
life in all godliness, and honesty to his Church, as well as God only
Redeemeth, only Governs, only Protecteth his Church, and so we are not to
pray for Kings, and all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life under them in all godliness, as the Word says, 1 Timothy 2.2, 3.
then away with Magistrates, Swords, Gunnes, wars; yea, away with Castles,
Houses, Forts; for if the Church be to be protected, Christ only must
protect it. So if the Church be to be fed in Egypt, or on earth by bread, away
with Joseph and his victual, away with tilling, sowing, earing, trades,
laboring with our hands. Let the Millinaries fleshly Paradise, or the Adamits
world return, for sure Christ only in his way, feeds, cloatheth,
protecteth, saves his Church.

2. So Anabaptists, Libertines, argue, God only teaches the heart, Christ
only breaks not the bruised reed; then preaching of the Gospel, and the
sweet comforting promises thereof are not lawful. Let there be no Watchmen, no
Pastors under the New Testament, for sure the Watchmen that goes about the
walls, will wound and smite the weak ones seeking Christ; and the Letter of
the Scripture is dead, carnal, lifelesse, Christ is a quickening Spirit.

3. And just so reasoned the Calvin. Instruct. adv^rs. Liber. cap. 13 ca. 14
15.16.17.18 pa. 44^ 446.447. etc.
Libertines, to prove, That sin was nothing but an opinion, and that we
should not rebuke any for sin, nor praise any for well-doing, Quia Deus
efficit omnia in omnibus, because God works all in all things, and the sinner
the Creature does nothing. Christ reformeth only, and in a better way then all
the Preachers of the world, and therefore none are to be rebuked for not
reforming, nor do any sin in not Preaching Law and Gospel. For M. Del says,
p. 12. As none can redeem, but Christ only, so none can reform the Church
but Christ only; for he only takes away transgression, and is made
righteousness and wisdom to his people; and he only, Esa. 2. Lays low the
loftiness and hautinesse of men. So he only reformeth inwardly, Angels and
men cannot do that, but it follows not therefore, men by preaching the
Gospel do not reform outwardly, for then if Pastors turn dumb dogs, and
reform not outwardly, they no more sin, nor are they more under any woe if
they preach not, contrary to 1 Cor. 9.16. Act. 20.28. 2 Timothy 4.1.2. 1 Pet.
5.1.2.3. then they sin, or are under a woe, because they redeem not the
world, and take not away transgressions, and are not made to the Church
righteousness, wisdom, and redemption. And M. Del lays no less blasphemy
on the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, Covenant of the thr^e ki^gdomes, Art. 1.
and on the three Kingdoms, when they swear to endeavor in their several
places and callings, the reformation of Religion, in Doctrine, Discipline, and
Government, according to the Word of God, and the example of the best reformed
Churches, then that they have sworn to usurp the work of Redemption, and the
offices of the Mediator.

By Dels way, and the Antinomians, in our callings and places, we shall be
Kings, heads of the Church, Redeemers, great high Priests to offer a
Propitiatory Sacrifice for the sins of the World, Prophets by the Spirit, to
open one another heart, and inwardly reform the Churches of Christ in these
three Kingdoms, which all are only incommunicable and proper to Jesus Christ
the only reformer, as he is (says Del) the only Redeemer; and then how durst
Del usurp Christ's office, in Preaching to the Parliament of England, what way
they should redeem the world. For sure preaching touching the right of
reformation, is an act of outward reformation, but he did in this, in the name
of God, as a Nathan, forbid them to reform the House of God, or build the
Temple, because they were men of blood. But 1. knows M. Del of a Parliament of
peaceable Salomons that shall arise and build the Temple, and intrude on
Christ's sole prerogative, to redeem and reform inwardly? 2. It was both
Typical, Positive, and Temporary, for Solomon to build, and for David not to
build, nor reform that way. But I hope Gospel-reformation is Moral,
Perpetual, not Typical; for Solomon was in that a Type of the Prince of
Peace. 3. He knows the Ministers of the Gospel and the Assembly of Divines by
Preaching and Synodicall conclusions, do reform as did the Apostles and
Elders, Acts 15. should he not say, the Apostles and Elders who reformed
externally, were either men of blood, or intruded on Christ's chair of Lord
Redeemer, and the great, and true, and only high Priest, and that the Divines
are men of blood also, and be they men of peace, or men of blood, they must
be too bold to sit in an Assembly, as so many sacrilegious intruders and
usurping Lord-Redeemers and that by Authority of Parliament. For Del applies
to himself, in preaching Familisme, Socinianisme, Popery, Libertinisme,
calling them all the props of the Antichrist, who are not Familists, Socinians,
with himself, that which is peculiar to Christ, Joh. 7.12. That some will say,
Del in Preaching thus is mad, as they said of Christ, and he is more then a
Nathan, but I think, the truly godly will confess, Christ to be the wisdom
of God, and think him spiritually mad, as other Familists and Antinomians are.

Del Ser. page 13. I doubt not (says he) of the Churches Reformation, because
it is Christ's own work, and he has undertaken the doing of it. As none can
help him to redeem, so no power of hell shall be able to hinder him to
redeem and reform by his Spirit, all belonging to his care and charge, the
rest of the world he lets lie in sin, as not belonging to his charge, so I am
at rest and quiet; Christ will reform.

M. Del with other Familists m^rre all use of means cease, ^f God decries
absolutely.
Answ. So do the New England Rise, reign, Er. 64.
Familists, who abusing the absolute decrees of grace, say, None are to be
exhorted to believe, but such whom we know to be the elect of God, or to have
his spirit in them effectually. Then the reprobate, because absolutely
reprobate, are not to hear the Gospel, nor should the Gospel be preached to
them, who stumbled at the stone laid on Zion, contrary to the Isa* 6.8, 9, 10
Ezech. ^.^, 5. chapter 3 4, 5, 6, 7. Math. 13 ^4* 15. Math. 21.40 41, 42. Ioh.
9.39. chapter ^^.37, 38. Act. 28.2^, 25, ^6. Romans 9.30, 31, 32. ch 10.14, 15, 16,
17. chapter 11.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
express Word of God, and Gods absolute decrees must take away all industry,
care, pains, praying, seeking of God, for if we be chosen to life, Christ has
undertaken to redeem us, if not, we must lie and perish in sin. M. Del says,
He is at rest and quiet, because Christ is as able for the reformation of his
Church, as for the redemption of it. Now he means inward reformation and
conversion to God, then may we all say, we are at rest and quiet, and will not
study inward reformation and conversion of our selves or others, and will no
more hear the Word, pray, repent, believe, or preach the Word to others, nor
labor to be converted, or to convert others, then to redeem them with our
blood; we will be at rest and quiet, what Christ has undertaken to do, the
powers of hell cannot hinder; these that belong not to Christ's care, why should
they hear* pray, knock, or why should the Word be preached to them? Saved they
cannot be, as not belonging to Christ's care. So says the New England Rise,
reign, Unsavory sp^eches. page 19. er. 4.
Familist, If Christ will let me sin, let him look to it, upon his honor be
it. So Del yields to the Pelagian, R monstr. in Script. Synod. art. Object.
4. Infringit praecipuas rations, pietateni promo ventes quae sumuntur ab
utili, inutili, periculoso facili, -- ergo inanes preces.

and Art. 1. in expos. cap. 9. ad Romans page 90 91. etc.


Arminian, and Socinian, that exhortations, motives, reasons, preaching,
praying, ought not to be for these that are absolutely reprobate; and upon the
same ground, they need use no means, who are absolutely chosen to glory.
Christ's love and care is as great to reform inwardly, and to convert, as to
redeem, upon the same ground, these whom God has decreed shall live so many
years, (sure God undertakes to fulfill all his decrees with alike strength of
irresistible omnipotency) they need not eat, drink, sleep, plow, ear,
labor, for no power in hell can infringe one decree of God more then another,
all husbandmen, sit idle, all tradesmen buy and sell, and labor with your
hands no more, be at rest and quiet, take M. Dels word, Gods undertaking, takes
away all reforming in men, all undertaking in second causes: the husbandman
can no more feed your body with bread, then he can redeem your souls with his
blood, both belongs to Christ's care. But though Paul knew it belonged to
Christ's care, Romans 9. To call whom he predestinate, yet he had exceeding sorrow
in his heart, for his kinsmen the Jews, to save some of them, that is, to
reform them, and the care of all the Churches lay on them. M. Del has more
courage, he will not be dismayed. But we heard that Libertines from Gods
working all in all creatures, said the creature cannot sin, cannot do good,
sin Calvin. advers. Libert. ca. 13.14. etc. page 445.446.447.
is but an opinion. And all good (says Theologia Germanica, chapter 4. page 8.
the Familist) is only God. And Theol. Ger. chapter 55. p. 158.159.
God becomes all things in man, and nothing is, Bright Star c. 8. p. 69.70.71.
or has being but God, and his will, Bright Star c* 8. p. 72.
God is all, and the creature nothing.

Del by this Argument inferres a cessation of all second causes, of Ministry,
Ordinances. Reformers, converters of souls by Word and Gospel, of Heaven and
Earth, Sun, Fire, Water, they may all sleep, God undertaketh to do all, and
no powers of Hell can resist him, no less then Christ redeemeth his alone.
Parliaments ought not to sit, Assemblies should not dispute, Ministers should
not preach, nor Print Sermons; sure Christ shall make good his own undertaking
to reform, though Del and I both were buried, and neither trouble our selves
with Pulpit, or press. But shall men therefore omit all duties in outward
reforming? Stoics can say no more.

Del Page 14.15.16. Holding forth the means of Reformation, he says, Christ
reformeth by the Word only, and does all, he calls, rejects, binds, looses,
terrifies, comforts, inlightens, makes blind, saves, damnes, and does nothing
in his kingdom without the Word. Now are ye clean through the Word. The Word
is quick and powerful, he reformes not you with outward power, but by his
Word. I will publish the decree, Del and Familists seem to extol the word, but
they intend to extol an Enthysiasticall Spirit.

Del, Saltmarsh Familists, and Antinomians deny the Scriptures, to be the Word
of God, and call it a dead Letter, as Libertines do.


-- the Spirit of the Lord is upon me. My word shall not depart out of thy
mouth. When the time of Reformation was come, he sent his Disciple to carry on
the work of Reformation, he says, Go teach all nations; he sent them not out
with Swords and Guns, and this Word only truly reformes, the outward power of
the world sets up an image of reformation only.

Answ. 1. Del and Familists seem to extol the Word of God, but they juggle
with David Georgius, and Henry Nicholas, who understood by the word, Verbum
internum, the Enthysiasticall inward word of the mind, and the Spirit; for, he
and Saltmarsh as they are sparing in citing Chapter and Verse of Scripture, so
they never expound this Word to be the Scripture; nor can I observe in all
their writings, that they call it the Scripture; as Christ and his Apostles
frequently say, The Scriptures must be fulfilled, as it is written in the
Scriptures, and in the Prophets. The Antinomians in and about London, Deny the
Scriptures to be the word of God, they say, the Scripture is but the Letter,
not the Word of God. 2. They say, They themselves by the Spirit can write and
dite Scripture. Mistress Hutchison with hers, Rise, reign, p. 61. art. 27.
said, That her particular revelations about events to fall out, are as
infallible as any parts of Scripture, and that she is bound as much to believe
them as the Scripture, for the same holy Ghost is the Author of both. Some say,
they can work Miracles, The Antinomian Spirit cannot Dyte Scripture.
as if the same immediately inspiring Holy Ghost, and in the same measure, that
was in the Prophets, Apostles, and Penmen of Scripture, were also the same
sanctifying Spirit of grace, that is in all believers; whereas these
differences are clear between them.

1. The immediately inspiring Spirit, The immediately inspiring Spirit in
Prophets and Apostles is a Spirit or acting of God, far different from the
Spirit of Sanctification in all Saints.
rendered the Prophets and Apostles in that they spoke and wrote by such
inspiration, the immediate organs of the Holy Ghost, and such as could not
err. So that their word was formally Scripture; which privilege is not given
to the most sanctified.

2. The Prophets and Apostles were acted above the reach of free will, humane
doubtings, discourses, ratiotinations in searching and finding out the truth,
they needed not advise, counsel, teaching from men, or Angels, from flesh and
blood to come to the very knowledge of the Letter of the Gospel, Gal. 1.11.12.
Ephesians. 3. verse. 2.3, 4. But the Saints need such helps, though the Spirit teach
them all things, to come to know the Letter of Law and Gospel.

3. What the Prophets spoke, God spoke. what holy men speaks, is Gods word
secondarily, and in so far as it agrees with the written Word of God, and no
otherwise. Jeremiahs word was not secondarily the Word of God, and so far
forth only the Word, as it agrees with the writings of Moses; and though Paul
forbid Circumcision, and Moses command it, Paul's command is no less primarily
and simply the formal object of Faith, and the written Word of God, then the
word of Moses, or the Ten Commandments, written on Tables of stone by God
himself. But what Del and Antinomians say contrary to the Word of God, is
nothing else but the very word of the Devil.

Antinomians by the Word of God mean the Spirit of God, and the inward word as
Swinckf^ld taught them.
2 That Del and Libertines with him, mean by the Word of God, not the
Scripture, but the Spirit of God, in his graces, I prove, because says
Saltmarsh, This Law (of the Gospel) is not such as it was before, a mere Law
in the Letter; but it is now under the Gospel, a law of life, spirit, or glory,
it is a Law in the hand of Christ, and with the promises of Christ, to make it
spiritual indeed, -- therefore the word is called Scriptures given by Divine
inspiration, Free grace, 151.
-- and the Spirit is called the anointing, and teaches all things, -- and I
will put my Law in their inward parts; But the Gospel as distinguished from the
Law, and written by the Apostles, is but a mere Law in the Letter, except the
Spirit quicken it in the souls of the hearers, as well as the Law; otherwise
the very Law in the Letter, and as written by Moses, was a part of Scripture,
and given by Divine inspiration, as well as the Gospel; and the Ten
Commandments, as given on Mount Sinai, were the formal Word of God, and
Scripture given by Divine inspiration: except Antinomians, Familists, and Del,
make the Law and Old Testament to be expunged out of the Canon of Scripture,
The spiritual word of Dav. George, and of the Antinomians one and the same.
as Anabaptists did, or to come from an evil Spirit, as Manicheans said; for
David Georgius said, The Word of God was preached but literally by Christ, and
the Apostles, and not in the Spirit, and that he himself was the true David,
and the true Messiah, nor borne of the flesh, but of the Bullinger. advers.
Anabap^ist lib. 2. cap. 15.
Spirit. Now its sure, Christ and the Apostles taught the Gospel. But because
they taught as it is written in the Prophets, and in the Scriptures, and taught
not the Dictates of an Enthysiasticall spirit. David Georgius said, they are
Legal and Literal Preachers, and Christ but the Literal Messiah, and he the
true spiritual Son of David, borne of the spirit, not of the flesh. So does
Del mean by the Word of God, or the Gospel, the Spirit of God excluding the
Letter of the Scripture, yea even of the Gospel, as he excludes the
condemning Law, because it was but a written Letter. Now sure the written, yea,
or Preached Gospel without the Spirit, is no less a dead Ordinance in the New
Testament then in the Old.

1. He proves by the only Word of God, Christ reformeth inwardly, and does
all in his Kingdom. He says, All the powers in the world cannot reform the
Church as the Word of God can do, for it is quick and powerful, and sharper
then a two edged sword. Now remember he speaks of inward reformation. 2. Of
the word of the Gospel, excluding the Law; his reason is, Page 17. The Law
makes nothing perfect. Now that by the Word, he means not the Scripture, or
the Letter of the Word, even of the Gospel.

1. I prove the Word that inwardly reformes, excludes all means, but the
Word. Christ (says he) does all in his Kingdom by his Word only; that is, as
he must be expounded by his Spirit only; for the Word cannot be the Letter
of the written Gospel. For its false that Christ does all in his Kingdom, and
reformeth inwardly by the Letter of the Gospel only, for that may be Preached
to Judas, and by Judas to multitudes hardened, but never converted, Math.
13.14, 15. Joh. 9.39. Joh. 12.35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40. Nor can he mean, the
Word in its Letter, but accompanied by the Spirit; for the Word that Del
speaks of, Page 17. clearly excludes the Law; but the Word in his Letter
accompanied by the Spirit does not exclude the Law, for the Law quickened by the
Spirit with the Gospel, is a means of inward reformation, and so cannot be
excluded.

2. This Word excludes all the powers of the world; for he says, All the
powers of the world cannot reform the Church inwardly, as the Word of God can
do. But the Letter of the Word or Gospel does reform only outwardly, not
inwardly.

3. This word that only reformes inwardly, excludes the powers of the world,
and all that man can do. Now man can only outwardly reform by the Letter of
the Word. Hence Henry Nicholas said, the two daughters of Warwick, and the
godly in England regenerated, were but Antichrists, because they were
regenerated only by the Ceremonial, Elementish, Fleshly, Literal Word, he
means the Scriptures that are not H. N^cholas Ep. Sect. 1
Preached by their Enthysiasticall Spirit of Familisticall love, that acts
without, beside, and contrary to the Scripture. Paul and Apollos, when they
water and plant, do preach the Word, but this reformeth not inwardly, nor is
it mighty in operation, and sharper then a two edged Sword, without the Spirit;
so that this is the very Spirit, who only as the efficient and Author of
inward Reformation; not as the means, or the only means (as Del says) does
comfort and convert effectually the soul.

4. Del cites Esai 61.1. to prove that the Word is the only means of
conversion. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, -- he has anointed me to
Preach good tidings to the poor. If Del mean that this Spirit and anointing
on Christ, is the Word of God, Christ should say, The Scripture of God is upon
me, and he has anointed me to Preach, etc. that is, God has Scriptured me,
and gifted me with the knowledge of the written Gospel, excluding all Law or
duties, to preach the Gospel to the poor. Now Del cannot for shame, give us
so Literal a Christ. For sure this Spirit whereby Christ was anointed, was the
Holy Ghost in gifts and fullness of grace given to him above his fellows. And
beyond all Controversy, if Christ says truly, citing that Text, Esai. 61.1.
This day (Luke 4.21.) is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears. Then Christ
Preached in a pure Gospel-way, and not as a Legal Preacher (as Saltmarsh says
he was to some) even to these that were filled with wrath, and persecuted him,
verse. 28.29, 30. and so were under the Law, if then Legal Preaching be to
Preach deadly the naked Letter of the Gospel, without any spirit or life in the
Preacher, then Christ did not speak from the Spirit of God, when he said, The
Spirit of the Lord is upon me, he has sent me to Preach, and this day is this
Scripture fulfilled in your ears; which should be against the Text, and a
horrible blasphemy, to wit, that Christ should be a Literal Preacher, as David
Georgius said, and so a Legal Presbyterian, as Familists and Antinomians say.
But if Familists and Del mean, that the Spirit went not along with the pure
Gospel-preaching of Christ, as is clear from Esai. 61.1. and Luke 4.21. Then
its false that Del says, That the Gospel has the Spirit always joined with
it, Page 18. Ser. 2. The pure Gospel must be preached to such as are under the
Law, which is absurd. 3. Then the Letter of the Gospel coming to the ears of
obdured persecuters, must be that Spirit of the Lord, whereby Christ was
anointed, for so Del expounds it. So does Del cite Psalm. 2. I will publish
the decree, and he expounds Esai. 59. the Spirit to be the Word; which
clears, that he acknowledges no word of Scripture for a means of inward
reformation. For he says, Page 18. The Word whereby Christ reformes, is not
the Word without us, as the Word of the Law is, but the Word within us, as it
is written, the word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart, and
this is the word of Faith. So this is just David Georgius, and Henry Nicholas,
their internal Enthysiasticall word, that is, the Spirit, excluding all Law
and Gospel that are but written, Inkie, and dead Letters of themselves, does
all; the Scripture is nothing. Now the Law, or Word written in the heart,
spoken of Jer. 31.33. is the very new heart and the Spirit, or the heart of
flesh. Ezech. 36.26, 27. the circumcised heart, Deuteronomy. 30.6. the new creature,
the Lord Jesus formed in the heart by Faith, Gal. 4.19. Ephesians. 3.17. it is not
any means, or cause, or author of the new heart, but it is the new heart it
self, formed by the Holy Ghost, as the Author and Father of the second birth,
by the Word written, conveyed by preaching to the soul. Now except Del would
say, Christ only works inward reformation by inward reformation only, (for
this inward word is inward reformation,) he cannot make sense of this inward
word, excluding the Law and outward Word both of Law and Gospel, as he does.
For nothing can be more false, then that the Word whereby Christ reformes, is
not the Word without us, as the Word of the Law is, but the Word within us. For
I find great ignorance, if not worse, in Familists and Antinomians; in this
Saltmarsh Free grace. page 179.180.
Saltmarsh says, The Spirit works Legally, and not freely, when men do
things as merely commanded from the power of an outward Commandment, or
precept in the Word; (he means in the written Scripture.) For (says he)
that brings forth but a Legal, or at best, but a mixed obedience and service,
and a finer hypocrisy, -- and when they do because of some vow or covenant,
-- when they take any outward thing to move them, rather then apply Christ for
strength, life, and Spirit. For it is the outward Word only in its kind, Nota.
How the outward word only reformes us, and how not; and how Saltmarsh with his
Antinomians are deluded Enthysiasts, in speaking against the Scriptures, and
pleading for their new Spirit.
that is the sole and only objective cause, as we see colors only, because
they are colors, and the Light of the day-light-Sun, only because it is
light; and nothing else can be the object of the sense of seeing, but light and
colors; and we only hear sounds, merely because they are sounds; and smell
things odoriferous and smellable, because they cast a smell: and only taste
meats, merely, and formally, because they are sweet, sour, bitter, sharp, or
some way good or ill to the taste. Now life, or the faculty of seeing, hearing,
smelling, tasting, are in no sort, the object of seeing, hearing, smelling,
tasting. Just so, when we do merely for the Word, in the Prophets and
Psalms, without us, and but of conscience, and merely as commanded from the
power of an outward Commandment or Precept; I add, or a Gospel-promise
written in the Word, then we obey God in a free, filial, Gospel-way, out of
mere conscience to an outward Command, as the only objective ground, warrant,
and rule of our obedience, what ever Papists on the one extremity say, A middle
way between Papists and Enthysiasts (...) to believe and ob^y for the written
or preached word as the only objective cause and warrant.
for an unwritten Word of God; and Enthysiasts on the other hand; for a Word
within, or a Spirit acting and obliging as their only rule, excluding the Law
and Gospel; because they are Letters, and written, and Scripture and a Word
without; as the only objective ground and warrant of Divine Faith, was in the
Prophets time. Thus says the Lord. And in Christ and the Apostles time,
According as it is written in the Prophets; in the Scriptures. So Christ, Luke
24.26. Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his
glory. Verse. 27. And beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, he expounded
unto them all the Scriptures, the things concerning himself. Verse. 45. Then
opened he their understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures, and
said unto them, thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and
rise from the dead the third day, and remission of sins should be preached in
his name, among the Nations. -- Then Christ would have believing and
repentance, Preached and commanded for no warrant and objective ground, but
because the Word without the Commandment or Precept in the Word commands it;
and this Satan cannot call finener hypocrisy. So Revel. 2.11. He that has an
ear to hear, an inward, and renewed, a circumcised ear and heart, Let him
hear what the Spirit says to the Churches; this Spirit speaking to the
Churches, is not an inward word, or a regenerating Spirit in the heart of
believers in these seven Churches. Antinomians pervert the Word of God so. But
it is the Holy Ghost speaking in the Word without, the written, preached, and
external Epistles that the Spirit sent to these seven Churches, and so the
only mean of Abraham's obedience, to sacrifice his only son Isaak, and the
only warrant for his faith was the Commandment of God, and a Word without.
Go now take thy son, thy only son Isaak, and offer him to me. Many other
things, natural reason, a seeming contrary word, that he should be the son
of Promise, seem to command the contrary, but Abraham's faith appeared in this,
that he closed his eyes at all Commandments, and carnal inhibitions of nature
on the contrary, and merely for an external command of God, as the sole and
only objective warrant, and formal object of his faith, and of his obedience
without; because God so commanded, he obeyed; and so are we to obey and
believe upon no objective cause, warrant, or ground, but the written, or
preached Precept, or promise of the Gospel, or Covenant of grace, that is, a
word without us, and the only mean of faith, and inward reformation; and this
Word is written, as the Law is, in the Scriptures, and lays an authoritative
binding power on our conscience, to obey God for his only Word, as the Law
does.

But it is not the only Word, that is, the efficient and effectually working
cause of our obedience, if the Spirit of grace do not concur with both the
written and preached Law, and written and preached Gospel and covenant of
grace, we cannot obey. Antinomians make obedience for the outward written
command, as the only objective cause, and warrant of our faith and obedience,
through the effectual working of the Spirit, two contrary obediences imagining
that the former is Literal, Legal, and finer hypocrisy, and the latter the
only true obedience.

A gross mistake, 1. Because none can sincerely obey, merely from the power of
an outward command, or precept in the Word, but the man whose ears the Lord
circumciseth, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Revel. 2.11. and whose understanding Christ opens
to understand the Word without, Luke 24.45. and therefore the Word without, is
the only means of inward reformation.

2. The Letter of the Covenant of grace, holds forth the inward grace
signified, and cannot be contrary to the inward Word in the heart, for the
Holy Ghost, as the principal efficient, causes us to obey for conscience of
the command written and preached in the Gospel; which is, bel^eve in the Lord
Jesus, or the written promise; he that believes shall be pardoned and saved.
And to say, they are contrary, is as good sense, as to say, light and colors,
because they are without us, they are therefore contrary to life, and the
visive faculty of seeing within us; or that sounds, or sweet smelling flowers
without, because they are without, must be contrary to the natural faculty and
sense of hearing and smelling within. And its true, the only naked Letter
without the Spirit, can do nothing without the Spirit; but it follows not,
that the Spirit renewes without the sense of the Letter, received in the
understanding. Ser page 19.


And most false it is, that in the Gospel, the Word and the Spirit are always
joined, as Del says, for then all hearing the Gospel should belong to the
converted and saved only, whereas the Scripture says the contrary, Esai.
53.1. Mat. 13.14.15. Act. 28.24, 25, 26. Ioh. 9.39. Ioh. 3.17.18. Ioh. 12.35,
36 37, 38, 39. Now M. Del will have the Spirit to reform the flesh
for many are hardened, and heard the Gospel without faith, damneth eternally
the hearers, as well as the Law.

It is as wild Libertinisme that Del speaks; That the Spirit reformeth, by
taking all evils out of the Esai. 53.1. Mat. 13.14.15. Act. 28.24, 25, 26. Ioh.
9.39. Ioh. 3.17.18. Ioh. 12.35, 36 37, 38, 39. Now M. Del will have the Spirit
to reform the flesh
flesh; he means in Justification, as if we were Angels being once justified,
and the evil of sin dwelt not in us, while we are in this body; as is proved
before. And its wild stuff, that Del. Ser pa. 19.
the Spirit does change the flesh into its own likeness, for (says he,
dreaming awake) the Spirit is as fire that changes every thing into it self,
Page 20
and so does the Spirit in the flesh, make the flesh spiritual.

But, Master Del, what mean you by flesh? The corruption of sinful nature,
then is sin made Spiritual, heavenly, holy, meek, good, loving, etc.
Familists and Libertines thank you for that, but Libertines speak* So Calvin.
Instruct. adver. Libert. ca. 10. p. 442. Verbum Dei Spiritum esse, asunt, p.
443. Vitam etiam nostram Spiritum esse debere; They say the Word, and we, and
our life, must be changed into the Spirit*
sin is destroyed, as yourself grant. 2. Do you mean by flesh, the body?
Then belike justification turns our bodies into Spirits, and we have two
bodies, as Familists said in Rise, reign, page 59. art. 3.
New England, I cannot like that. 3. If by flesh, you mean the soul, ye
speak as Heretics do, and that without Scripture or example. The Spirit
dwells in our flesh, that is, in our soul and spirit, and changes our
spirit in a spirit; strange Divinity. Familists I know say, As we came from
Gods essence, so we and our souls return to God, and are made in God
eternal, and turned into his essence, and so spiritualized; so teach Calvin.
Instruct. advers. Libert. ca. 11. page 443. Lib^rtini statum animaru^ nostrarum
loco Deum vivere in nobis* vegetare corpora nos^ra, nos sustinere, atque omnes
vitales actiones efficere, quia vivens est tantum Deus qui vere est.
Libertines, and by this they deny the Resurrection. But 4. if by flesh, you
understand the sinnelesse frame of soul and body, take heed of Libertines
gross dream of our dying, and returning to God, who only is, and all beside
him are nothing, Theol. Germanica, and the Bright Star, sport so with the
truth of God.

CHAP. LXXXV. Libertines and Antinomians come nigh to other, in making God the
author of sin.
Paral. 16. LIbertines taught, Calvin. Instruct. advers. Libert. c. 13.14. page
445.446.447.
That all things fall out good or ill by the will of God; Calv. Ibid. cap. 16.
adver. Libert. page 446. Hoc praetextu quod se a Deo regisinant, ex eodem
principio dedu^unt perperam fieri, si de re aliqua iudicatur.
and so that rebukes, and exhortations should cease; and Calvin Ibid p^g. 449.
that so we should pardon the sins one of another, and Antonius Pocquius in
libello suo impio, Q^inetiam dicit: infirmitaes alij aliorum sustinete; nam si
detractores simus, erimus cum Ser^ente, etc.
bear the infirmities one of another. For to the Ibid. Calvin. page 46.
clean all things are clean, and he that is purged is altogether acceptable
to God, but let him beware that he be not an offense to his brother, for it is
written love thy neighbor, neither desire to revenge; and therefore said
Pocquius the Libertine, in his book, Rebuke not one another for sin; since
its Gods will it should be so. Pocquius Scrip. Enim omnia munda mundis: qui
autem fide purificatus est, totus est gratus Deo, sed caveat, ne infirmo frair^
ruina sit: quia scriptum est, ama proximum, usque ulcisc^ velu.
Bullinger advers. Anabapt. lib. 2. cap. 1.
Bullinger tells us, that in the year 1526. there were two brethren Thomas
Schykerus and Leonard, who were at a night-meeting, having spent the night in
Enthysiasticall conference with other Anabaptists. Thomas commanding his
brother Leonard to sit down on his knees before him, in the sight of his
Parents, and others, who admonished him to do nothing but what was to be done,
answered in the same Argument of Libertines, nihil metuendum esse, neque enim
hic quicquam praeter voluntatem Patris fieri posse. Nothing was to be feared,
because nothing here can be done beside the will of our heavenly Father, and
with a Sword he cut off his brothers head, and having done this, with shirt and
hose only, he did run through the Town, and cried, The day of the Lord was
come, and the will of God is done, and gall and vinegar drunk; for which, by
the Magistrate, he was justly put to death. But Gods decree does not excuse us
from sin, nor remove necessity of rebuking, or holy and religious abstaining
from sin, because Gods revealed will in his word, not his secret and
unsearchable decrees can be our rule of walking: rebukes are also acts of love,
not of hatred or revenge.

The same course do the Libertines and Familists of New England take. For
Rise, reign, er. 22.
none (say they) are to be exhorted to believe, but such whom we know to be
the elect of God, or to have his Spirit in them effectually. And we should
Rise, reign, er. 34.
not pray against that which cannot be avoided, nor yet against all sin. The
Antinomians come nigh to this; For Doctor Crisp vol. 3. Ser. 1. pa. 42.
Crispe the Antinomian, and M. Archer Comfort for believers p^g. 36. Libertines
and Antinomians take away prayer, fear, rebukes, and use of means, because
God decrees all things.
Archer, both dissuade believers to be troubled or dismayed at sin; their
reason holds good against all sins of unbeleevers also, because its contrary
to the care and providence of God, and to Free grace, whether of eternal
election, or of effectual calling, to fear for, or sorrow at sin. Surely I
should think then, that sin were not to be eschewed by the Saints, nor to
be rebuked by any. We are not to be troubled at, or fear sin, because all
changes by sins or sorrows come from God. Some Divines (says M. Archer, p.
36 Comfort for believers.
Archer) aknowledge not so much of God in sin, as is in sin and Archer p. 38
Gods will and pleasure is, the womb that conceived, and whence springs every
work of the Creature, whether it be good or bad. Secondly, Ibid. p. 35.
says he, All things by sin, or sorrow, which befall believers, come from
God by a decree powerful, -- yea Ibid. p. 46.
even by that eternal love and counsel in, and by which, they were ordained
to life eternal. And Ib. p. 47.48.
by and through a covenant of grace made with them. Crispe vol. 3. Ser. 5. p.
178, 179, 180.
To the same purpose, M. Del crying down all outward Reformation, says, Sermon.
page 13. I doubt not of the Churches Reformation, because it is Christ's own
work, and he has undertaken the doing of it, and none of the powers of the
earth can help him, nor of the powers of hell can hinder him, -- therefore he
disswades the Parliament from building the Temple; but so he himself should
preach none, for Gods decrees none can hinder. So Antinomians teach, men are
justified, pardoned, and saved before they believe, without faith, upon this
ground, that they were elected absolutely to glory, as if God had ordained them
for the end, but the means might miscary, and as if unbelief could not hinder
them, or as if through unbelief many could not enter into their rest of glory;
or as if sin were an indifferent thing, simply depending on the will of God,
in whose womb M. Archer thinks it was conceived.

CHAP. LXXXVI. Libertines and Antinomians would have us do nothing, because
God does all.
Paral. XVII. LIbertines said, Pocquius. in libello apud Calvin. 16. page 463.
All that are without God are nothing, all that we do or know is but vanity,
therefore are we to deny our selves; this they said, inferring, we may live as
we list, and do nothing, but believe that God works all our works in us, and
for us; and impute all things to God. Saltmarsh Saltmarsh page 84.
speaks most like this, when he says, that all the precepts of
Sanctification, set forth Christ to be all in all; Christ has believed,
repented, sorrowed, mortified sin perfectly for us, and we are Rise, reign,
er. 36. er. 35. er. 14.
but dead passive creatures, and the Spirit so acts in us, as in blocks, and so
we must act nothing, being as blocks, and God must be the author of all sins
of omission. Familists commonly say, I have nothing from the Creature, I can
do nothing.

CHAP. LXXXVII. Antinomians answered, in that they say, we make the actings of
the Spirit, like to the acts of Moral Philosophy.
IT is a most unjust charge, that Saltmarsh Free grace, page 71.72.
Antinomians put on us, That the way of the Spirit is gross and carnal, which
we follow, and our Divinity carnal. But (says Saltmarsh) We (Antinomians)
find it hard to tresse and find the impressions of the Spirit, and do not take
our impressions so low by the feelings of flesh and blood, and signs not
infallible, as to write of Regeneration, as Philosophers do of Moral virtues.

Let us examine, whether Antinomians way be Spiritual Divinity. Antinomian
Divinity most carnal.
We profess it to be a most carnal way of Antinomians, to say as Eaton Honey
comb ca. 3. p 25. l. 24.25.
Eaton does, An unjustified man that believes that Christ has taken away his
sins, is as clean without sin as Christ himself. And Town asser. 71.7^.
To a believer nothing is sin; to Faith there is no sin. Blasphemers, if you
have either face or conscience, can ye say that Christ could sin, or that a
believers denying of Christ, his lying, his Adultery, are no sins? Is not
this carnal Divinity?

2. If God see not Drunkenness, Lying, Murdering in believers to be sins? Are
they not then no sins? And should not the believer say, My light of faith
sees no sin in my self; but my Drunkenness, Lying, Murdering committed, I
believe are no sins; for sure justification, and abolishing of sin, should
be seen by my faith, as they are seen by God, if God see them, and count them
no sins, its unbelief in me to see them, and count them sins? If a
believer steal his fellows purse; does he not lie, if he say, Brother I have
sinned against you; behold, I restore you your purse?) For if God say, it is no
sin, and see it no sin, I know his Judgment is according to righteousness
and truth, then it must be no sin; and the believers judging of it to be
sin, must be a lying and a false judging, contrary to Gods judgment of truth.

3. Do not Antinomians say, to sorrow for, o^ to be troubled in conscience at
pardoned Saltmarsh Free grace, ^4 page 44.
sins, is un^eliefe, and a work of the flesh, and that it is Regeneration and
Faith not to see sin in our selves, and that it was Adams and Eves sin,
Pocquius in libello suo apud Calvin. Instruct adv. Libert. page 4^2.463.
Scriptum est, ( Joh. 9) Qui videt peccatum, peccatum ei manet, and veritas non
est in ipso; deinde preterea dicit, qui p^ocat in uno, peccat in omnibus, ^ed
cum inspiritis in deum, omnia isla non videtis, non enim habitat in Deo
peccatum. -- Prius non videbant (Adam and Evah) voluntatem suam: neque pudebat
eos suae humanitatis; non videbant peccatum suum, sed cum viderant ipsum,
imputatum est ijs in peccatum, and prorsus immutatum est in contrarium. --
Quare reliquamus veterem Adam (ne cernamus amplius peccata nostra) id est,
animam viventem, and veni^mus ad rem majorem, id* est, ad Spiritum, -- nunc
vivificati sumus cum secundo Adam qui est Christus, non cernendo amplius
peccatum, quia est mortuum.
to see their sin; for then it was imputed to them as sin, and the
Pharisees sin was, Joh. 9. that they saw their sin, and therefore their
sin remained. These be the words of Pocquius, that Carnal Libertine, and
are the words of Saltmarsh, Eaton, Town, Den, and Crispe, and their matter
is the same when once we believe, we sin no more then Christ does, but all
these that are supposed to be sins, as the Adulteries, Murders, Lying,
Swearing, Cousening, Oppressing we fall into, being once believers, are no
sins before God, nor to our Faith, nor are we to see them as sins, they be
sins only to our sense, to our flesh, and to menward.

2. This is Antinomian reason, but the old objection of the most abominable
Anabaptists in the time of Bullinger, who said, advers. Anabaptist. lib. 1.
cap. 4. Tota reformatio quae tum justituebatur, illis displicebat, ut minus
Angusta and exilis, non satis spiritualis, alta and perfecta. So Tho: Muncer,
whose followers said against Luther, Zwinglius, and others, the writings and
Epistles of Muncer was more spiritual then theirs, and their whole reformation
was narrow, hungry, not perfect, and high enough.

3. The way of the Spirits Divinity is in this like to Moral virtues, that 1.
both are learned by teaching, Wherein our Divinity touching Sanctification
agreeeth with Moral Phylosophie in acts of Moral virtue, and wherein not.
the one by Moral Phylosophie, the other by the Scriptures, Antinomians are
thus Spiritual with a carnal and divellish Spirituality to reject the
Scriptures, and follow an Enthysiasticall Spirit, and so we acknowledge our
Divinity, in this sense, is not so Spiritual as that of the Libertines and
Antinomians. 2. The way of the Spirit is in this like Moral virtues; that both
bring an external reformation, (though the Spirit thoroughly also changes the
inner side) both enforce a ceasing to do ill, a learning to do well, and
procuring of things that are honest in the sight of men; Antinomians boast of a
Libertine, Idle faith, and of a phancied purifying of the heart, when the hands
are not purged also; and this is carnal Divinity to us. 3. Moral virtues are
increased by frequent exercise, and so are gifts and graces, five talents
rising to ten, the Saints growing in grace, and in the 2 Pet. 3.14. Math. 25,
20.21.22.
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. But Antinomians carnal
Divin^tie Town asser. page 77.78.79.
teaches, we are as perfect, when we are first justified, as we Saltmarsh ^r.
gr. 140. An account of our Divinity as more Spiritual then that of Antinom^ans
and Moral Philosophy.
want nothing of that we shall have in heaven, but to believe we are in heaven,
and there we are; a Spiritual lie cannot but be a most carnal sin.

4. But the Spirituality of our Divinity above Antinomians and Moralists, we
place 1, in that God infuseth supernatural habits in us, even a new Ezec.
36.26. Z^c^. 12.10. Esai. 44.5. Ier. 31.33. Deuteronomy. 30.6. Ezech 11.19
heart, a new Spirit, whereas Antinomians deny any stock of grace inherent in
us. Moralists acknowledge only acquired habits, and deny all infused and
supernatural habits. 2. We judge the Law to be Rom 7.14.
Spiritual, and the Gospel written, read, or preached, the power of God Rom
1.16.
to salvation; the Esai 53.1 Ioh. 12.^9.
arm of the Lord, Hebr. 4.12
and the most lively, quick, and operative word in the world, and when the
Spirit does accompany Law and Gospel, no man can stand before this Word;
Antinomians make the Scriptures but dead Ink, and a killing Letter. 3. Our
Divinity makes men heavenly minded, to savor of the things of the Spirit, so
as they miss God, and the sweetness and excellency of Christ, when the Gospel
is carried only in the bare Letter, and the preaching of the Gospel is but
Literal, with humane eloquence, not in the evidence of the Spirit: Moral
virtues knows not any such power. 4. When the Authority and Majesty of the
Lord commanding in the Letter, leads the will by the Spirit of the Lord
freely, willingly, and withal indeclinably, and irresistibly to yield it self
to God. 5. A Moralist knows no over-clowding of desertion, a sanctified soul
does know it. Nor do Antinomians and Familists know any desertions, or any
ebbings and flowings of the Spirit; for they say, none are converted till they
have faith of full assurance, with excludes all doubtings, or inward
conflicts, this broad Seal being received, they are ever in a merry mood, ever
rejoicing; to mourn for sin, to call in question Gods favor to them is
proper to only unconverted Legalists under the Law, Rise, reign, er. 20. page
4. er. 32. page 6. er. 42. p. 8. er. 64. page 12. er. 70. page 53. (6.) A
believer must have the actual influence of the Spirit to know these things,
that are freely given him of God. A Moralist needs no supernatural light, to
know that he has a mass of Moral virtues, Temperance, Fortitude, Justice,
and his own Spirit teaches him that he is a temperate, valerous, just man.

6. A believer cannot act according to his supernatural habits, except actual
grace stir him; a Moralist needs but natural reason, the stirring of his
own Spirit with a common influence of God, to cause him act according to his
Moral habits.

7. The Moralists habits of virtue are of no better house then his own
conqueise; the new heart and the habits of grace are of a higher and nobler
blood, being from heaven, and infused by the Spirit of grace, Ezech. 36.26.
Deuteronomy. 30. verse. 6. Zach. 12.10.

Saltmarsh does little less then blaspheme, when he says, the supernatural
knowledge of the Spirits impression by signs, which is wrought by the Holy
Ghost, 1 Cor. 2.12. 1 John 2.3. 1 John 3.18.19. Romans 8.15.16. Is as low as the
feelings of flesh and blood; for flesh and blood cannot assure us that we are
translated from death to life, because we love the brethren; this knowledge is
given us by that Spirit, which the World knows not. 1 Cor. 2.12.

CHAP. LXXXVIII. That we are both righteous in the sight of God being
justified, and yet sinners in our selves, is proved against Antinomians.
ANtinomians Eaton Honey comb, cap. 13. page 175* 176, etc.
hold, That we cannot be both righteous in the sight of God, and also sinners
in our selves. It is thus far true, we cannot both be righteous, by Christ's
imputed righteousness, and freed from the guilt of sin, and not righteous by
imputation, and not freed, that should involue a contradiction. 2. It is thus
far true, we cannot be both righteous by imputation, before God, and in our
selves sinners, by sin bearing a dominion over us as a Tyrant does over a
slave, because whoever are justified, they are also sanctified, and
sanctification abateth the dominion, full vigor, and lordship of sin, but
does not remove it, root, and branch, so as it does not dwell in the Saints, so
long as they dwell in the body.

1. David Psalm. 51. verse. 7. says, Purge me with Hysope, and I shall be
clean: wash me and I shall be whiter then the snow. Then he was clean in the
sight of God, being pardoned. And Romans 4.6. Psalm. 32.1. David describes the
righteousness of the man unto whom God imputes righteousness without works;
1. Saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered. And so was Abraham justified, and Romans 4.23.24. Now it was not written
for his sake alone -- but for us. Then David and Abraham's sins were covered,
and they freed from the guilt of all sin in the sight of God; yet Paul, Romans
3. proves, that David and the most righteous on earth sinned, because there is
none that does good, there are none righteous, they are all gone out of the
way, etc. all the world was guilty before God, verse 19. then they were
sinners; if David was a Jew, and one that went out of the way, as the Law of
God makes no exception. Antinomians cannot say, that before David was
justified, and converted, and while he was yet in the state of nature, he
sinned, but being once converted, and justified, he was no more a sinner then
Christ, but as righteous as Christ, as says Crispe; as clean from sin,
says Eaton, as Christ himself. I confess, this is to help the Papists not a
little, for Paul speaks of all that are justified by Faith, and not by Works;
now David converted, was justified by faith, and not by works done, either
before conversion, by the strength of nature, or after conversion, by the power
of saying grace, therefore David must sin, and go out of the way after
conversion, when he was free from all guilt of sin, and so justified and
righteous before God, and yet a sinner, though he sinned not as under the full
dominion of sin.

2. The Lord pardoned and covered the sins of his people in Christ Ps.
32.1.^, 5
in the Old Testament, Esa 6.7.
took away their iniquity, and purged their sin, Esa. 43.25.
blotted out their transgressions, and remembered not their sins, and that
Esa. 44.22.
as a thick cloud: God described himself to Moses Exo. 34.7.8.
not Prophesying what he was to be under the New Testament, but what he was at
that time actually, as he was then, as now, the Lord, the Lord merciful and
gracious, long suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, even a God
keeping mercy to thousands of the Jews, forgiveing iniquity, trangression,
and sin; then multitudes were then justified and righteous in the sight of
God, and freed from the guilt of sin; and yet even then, there was not one
man on earth, justified, or not justified, who inherently, and in himself
Eccle. 7.20.
was righteous, did good, and sinned not; or that Prove. ^09.
could say he had made clean his heart, or was pure from sin; or that Psalm.
130.3.
could stand before God, if he should mark narrowly his iniquities, nor was
there Psalm. 143.2.
any flesh could be justified in his sight. Not a righteous Job, a nonesuch
Job ^.1* 8. Job 2. ver. 3.
on earth, and so justified before God, yet in himself is so sinful, as his
own Job 9.30.31.32.
garments should defile him, though he should wash himself with Snow-water,
Job 9.30, 31.

3. Paul a man not under the Law, Romans 7.1.2.3.
justified, and Ver. 17.18.19.20.
sanctified, regenerated, and Ver. 25.
triumphing in Christ, as freed from sin before God, as touching the guilt
and condemnation thereof, yet remains a sinner in himself, Romans 7.14.
carnal, sold under sin, To. 7.17.18.
sin dwells in him, no good dwells in his flesh Ver. 23.24.
there is rebellion in him against the Law of his mind, captivity to sin,
wretchedness under the body of sin.

4. So the Corinthians were justified, washen, 1 Cor 6.11.
sanctified, and yet these of them 1 Cor. 11.28 29.30.31.32.
who were judged and punished, that they should not perish with the world, did
grievously sin, in not descerning the Lords body; if there were no sin in
these who were justified and espoused to Christ, more then in Christ, how could
2 Cor. 11.3
Paul fear, that as the Serpent beguiled Evah, so their minds should be
corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ Jesus? If there was not sin
dwelling in them, how thought they Paul Ver. 11.12.13.14.15.16.17 18.
a fool, slighted him, and extolled the Messengers of Satan, the false
Apostles?

5. The Apostle John and his fellows; and the Saints to whom he writes, Had
fellowship with the 1 Ioh. 1.3.7.
Father and the Son, were purged from all their sins, had an 1 Io^. 2.1.
Advocate who interceeded for them in heaven; Ver. ^4.
were Fathers, young men, babes in Christ, and so righteous in the sight of
God, yet sinners. For if we say (says 1 Ioh. 1.8.
John) we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and make him a liar.

6. This Novatian and Familisticall opinion, that we cannot be both righteous
before God, and sinners in our selves, but that the justified must be as free
of all indwelling sin, as Honey comb ca. 3.5.
Christ Jesus, or as the Saltm^r^h Free grace, p. 140.
glorified in heaven, and so Town asser. grace, pa 71.72.73.
absolutely perfect in our person, and our works; makes all sanctification no
sanctification before God, and that inherent holiness renders us not a whit
lovely and acceptable to God, more then if we were wallowing in our lusts, and
serving the Devil, contrary to the Scripture that says, 1 These 4.
That our sanctification is the will of God, Romans 1^.^.
that our service is holy, living, and acceptable; that God Heb. 13 16 Phil.
4.^4.18
is well-pleased with our sacrifices of alms in Christ Jesus. And Cant.
4.7.8.9.
that a holy and sincere profession and walking, does take the love, and ravish
the heart of Christ; yea, by this way we sin only in dishonouring Christ,
and in not walking in him, contrary to the end of Redemption, which calls us
to sanctification, not in the sight of God, but Honey comb cap. 13. page
379.380.
merely declaratively; for Eaton tells us, that if any more be ascribed to
Sanctification, but a mere declaration to the eyes of men, that we are healed,
we go on with Papists, and Bellarmine, to make sanctification the only
formal cause why we are justified. But the man is far out. Bellarmine and
Papists say, that God so far accepts works of inherent holiness, that
without Christ's imputed righteousness, we are justified for these works, we
acknowledge that God for Christ loves, and accepts works of sanctification,
and obliges us to them by a command to do them, except we would sin in
omitting them, but that God loves and accepts them as the cause of our
righteousness in part, or in whole, in the matter of our justification, we
utterly deny. Antinomians would have all acts of sanctification merely
arbitrary, and of courtesy, and to come from no obligation of a command, or
Law, and so that these acts being omitted, are no sin before God, and being
omitted, they are but arbitrary, no declarations, we are not healed, or
discourtesies to Christ, no sins against a Law, and being performed, God
loves them no more then he does Adulteries, or Murders acted by justified
persons.

Master Eaton ignorantly objecteth, That God by justification shall place us in
two contrary states, of salvation and damnation, to be the members of Christ,
and of the Devil, that God shall come short of his end Eaton Honey com. cap.
13. page 376.377.^78.
of Redemption, if we be sinners in our selves, then cannot the blood of
Christ cleanse us from all sin: diverse other things that are Characters of
weakness and poor Divinity, he objecteth, as all his gang does.

Answ. Sinners are taken two ways in Scripture. 1. For wicked men, servants of
sin, sin having a dominion and Lordship over the party; as in Psalm. 1.1.
Psalm. 16.9. Prove 1.10. C^ 13.21. Chapter 3.17. Esa ^.^8. chapter 13.9. c. 33.4. Sinners
in Zion^r as said. Am^s 9.10. (...) the si^ners of my people (...). Ioh 9.31.
God hears not sinners. James 4.6. G^l. 2.7. ^rde ver. 15.
many Scriptures is clear. So we say not, that we are both righteous before
God, and sinners in our selves, we should then be both sanctified, and not
sanctified, members both of Christ, and of Satan, as he objecteth. But we
take sinners in this, for these that are sinful, and have sin dwelling in
them; and for such, as, If they say they have no sin, they are liars; and so
the Scripture also takes Mat 9.10. Mark 2 15. Luke 15.1. Luke 7.37. Behold a
woman that was a si^ner, etc. How we are righteous in Christ, and yet sinners
in our selves, and M. Eatons Argument removed as Popish. Pap^sts and
Antino^ians are both ignorant of the doctrine of Justification.
sinners. Now Antinomians deny the justified to sin at all, or to have any
sin dwelling in them; because Christ has washed away all sin. But ignorant
men, they should know, that justification is a forinsecall and judicial
freeing us from all sin, that is, from the Law-guilt and condemnation of all
sin, and so all our sins are removed as a cloud; are taken away, as if they
were cast into the bottom of the Sea; but justification is not a Physical
washing away, and expulsion of all indwelling and inhabitation of sin, and an
introduction of the contrary habit; as when heat comes in the same subject,
in the place of coldness, light in the place of darkness, whiteness in the
subject in which blackness did reside, as Antinomians with Papists fondly
conceit, this is sanctification which is imperfect, and graduall in this life,
not justification; and so it follows not, that one and the same person,
because sin dwells in him after justification; but subdued, and having lost
his dominion, is now, both under the dominion of Satan, and also a member of
Christ.

2. Christ obtains his end in Redemption, which is to free the sinner from
sins condemnation, in justification fully, and in sanctification by degrees,
not fully, while we be perfected in glory. Christ can well dwell in the heart
by faith, where sin dwells as an underling, but not where it dwells as a
King and Tyrant in its full dominion, which dominion is not removed formally by
justification, (though the state of justification, and the full dominion of
sin, cannot stand together in the same person) but properly, and formally, by
sanctification. Its true, God sees sin pardoned, and the sinner freed from
the guilt, but he sees it dwelling in us, not to our condemnation, for the
Lord imputes it not, and therefore it follows not, that the Lord both sees
us righteous in Christ, and not righteous in Christ, but only he sees us
righteous in Christ by imputation of grace, and freed from condemnation; and
sinful in our selves by the inherencie and in-dwelling of sin pardoned and
subdued; which is the doctrine of Prophets and Apostles delivered in the
Scripture.

CHAP. LXXXIX. Antinomians are ignorant of Faith, to dream that its Faith to
believe against sense, that our sins are no sins.
IT is the true Honey comb, c. 4. p 48. Saltmarsh page 142.
nature and essence of Faith, say Antinomians, To believe clean contrary to
that which we see and believe in our selves, if God has spoken the contrary,
-- as if God were not able to abolish that sin, which we daily feel
dwelling in us, Town asser. grace, page 126.129.130
Honey comb c. 4. pa 52.
out of his own sight, above our reason, sense, and feeling. The Mystery is
this, as for the Adulteries, Oppressions, treacherous Covenant-breach, Lying,
that justified Antinomians commit, Faith is to believe, they are no sins
before God, against no Law; but mere nullities in the Lords Law-court, as
Town says, though Lying and deceiving, reason believes them to be sins; for
its true faith Page 50.
To believe the contrary, of what sense and reason apprehends; because Page
48.49.
God so says, and gives his Sons blood, to cleanse us from all sin, and
swears the same.

But this is a dead, false, lying faith of Antinomians. 1. Because the light of
faith discovers the sins of a justified person to be heinous provocations
of the majesty of God, so Psalm. 51.3.
David; I acknowledge my transgression, and my sin is ever before me. And the
Church, Esa. 59.^2.
For our transgressions are with us, and as for our iniquities, we know them.
And Paul Romans 7.18.
in the New Testament; I know that in me (that is, in my flesh) dwells no
good. And Verse 21.
I find then a Law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me. And
Verse. 23. The light of faith clearly finds and discerns sin to be in the
believer.
I see another Law in my members, rebelling against the Law of my mind, and
bringing me into captivity, to the Law of sin, which is in my members; these
three words, (...), I know, I find, I see rebellion and sin in me, were words
that came from the light of Faith, not from lying sense. And Faith, and a sight
of God, can discover more corruption to Esa. 6.5.
Esaiah, Job 42.5, 6.
Job, to 1 Timothy 1.1^
Paul, to the woman that Luke 7.47.
washed Christ's feet with tears, then reason can reveal to them.

2. Faith does not stupifie the conscience, to blot out all sense of sin out
of it; its true, the Libertine Calvin in opusc. advers. Libert. page 464 Nunc
vivificati sumus cum secundo Adam qui est Christu^, non cernendo amplius
peccatum, quia est mortuum.
Pocquius, spoke in the style of Eaton^; now we are quickened in the second Adam
Christ, through seeing sin in our selves no more, because it is dead. But the
second Adam comes in the soul with a candle, to make us see, and know, and
feel by the light of Faith, sin, which was hidden before.

3. The Antinomian dead faith is against confession of sin, because we must
know, and believe, we have sin, if we confess it; this was Gods challenge to
a heardned people. Ier. 2.35.
Yet thou say, because I am innocent, surely his anger shall turn from me:
Behold I will plead with thee, because thou say, I have not sinned. This is
that which the Ier. 3.13.
Lord commands; only acknowledge thine iniquity. Antinomians say, lying
sense, and corrupt reason knows iniquity, but Faith is as blind as a Mole,
and sees no sin in the believer.

4 This faith of Antinomians is repugnant to the godly shame, confusion, and
selfe-indignation that the justified man in Ezekiel. 9.6. Ezekiel. 16.62. Romans 6.21.
2 Cor, 7.11.
Scripture bears against himself for sin. The want whereof is the Whores
Ier. 3.2. Esai. 3.9.
forehead that cannot blush; and therefore must Faith see and know sins, that
are the cause of shame.

5. This lying faith, is to believe, that Adultery and Lying, to come, as well
as the past sins, are pardoned, and abolished, and so that they are no sins
before ever they be committed; what fear then, what holy care, what
challenges of conscience can be required to an Antinomian lying faith, to
eschew and fear these sins ere they be committed? For its the act of lying
sense (say Antinomians) to apprehend them as sins, then sure they cannot
lawfully be apprehended as ills to be feared and eschewed, if it be a lying
apprehension to think that, that is a snare to my feet, which is no snare at
all, but a boggle to affright a child, it must be a lying apprehension to
conceive, that a fancied snare to be an evil to be shunned and declined. If
the Whore be no Whore, the Antinomian needs not eschew the going near her
house, for fear the house fall on him, as Solomon intimates, Prove. chap. 5.
And surely, the justified Antinomian may go on in Adulteries and bloods before
he act them, and feed his lusts without fear; for if he conceive these to be
sins, it is his lying sense, and deceiving reason, for faith is to believe
the just contrary, that they are no sins, and so not to be eschewed as
sins; because an antedated pardon does no less abolish their being, and
nature before they be committed, (in which case they are remitted, and so
nullities and shadows before God) then a pardon does utterly abolish their
being, when they are committed in the Antinomian way.

CHAP. XC. Antinomians free all converted, or non-converted from obligation of
obedience, or practice of Christian duties.
ANtinomians Saltmarsh Free gra. page 40* 44.
cry out against Preaching of duties as a Legal way, and destructive to
Gospel-preaching of Christ and Faith.

1. Because there be no acts of Sanctification commanded in the Gospel: so as
the believer sins, either in omitting these duties, or in doing contrary to
them. I appeal to all their writings, for any such Commands either of Law or
Gospel.

2. They cry out against Preaching of duties, as Legal preaching without any
limitation; we cry out, as much as they, against this Preaching in an unjust
way. 1. If duties be preached without Christ, and not issuing from the grace of
Christ. 2. If they be more Preached then Gospel Grace, and free Redemption in
Christ. 3. If duties as conditions of the Covenant of Works, as parts,
conditions, or causes of our justification, are fellow-saviours with Christ, be
pressed.

3. It will be found they free the unconverted from all doing, or eschewing of
sin, because they can do nothing out of faith, and out of saving principles
of grace: So Saltmarsh advises the troubled in spirit, Saltmarsh Free grace.
page 16.17* 18 18.19* 20.
only to believe immediately everlasting love, without any foregoing
humiliation, desire of the Physician, sense of sin, or setting on any duties.
Much like the Familists of Rise, reign* er 36. er 35.
New England, who say, that the Spirit acts most in the Saints, when they
endeavor least: as if our doings, desire, sense of sin going before
conversion, did so much the more hinder conversion. 2 Nor can our impotency to
do good without the grace of God, loose us from an obligation of doing our
duty, seeing the omitting of these duties in the substance of their acts is a
greater sin, then the doing of them; for so the unconverted should not sin
in not giving to the poor, because they cannot give it for God; nor in
abstaining from murder, because they cannot abstain out of sonly fear; or in
not praying, because they cannot pray in faith; whereas Peter, Act. 8.
commands Simon Magus to pray, though being in the gall of bitterness, he
could not pray in faith. 3. The converted so should be under no obligation to
pray, hear believe, but when the Spirit wrought actually in them to will, and
to do; for without such an actual influence they can do nothing.

CHAP. XCI. How, and for whom, Christ intercedeth in Heaven.
ANtinomians Crispe vol. 3. ser. 5 page 176.177.
hold, that Christ advocateth at the right hand of God, for the unbeleeving and
unconverted elect, as well as for believers; only Christ intercedeth not (say
they) for the manifestation of the purchased Redemption to the elect, not
converted.

Its true, the purchased Redemption and bloodshed of Christ is for the elect,
as well not converted, as converted. But Antinomians go on another ground,
that sinners are Crispe vol. 3 Ser. 5. page 180.
justified, and pardoned before they be converted and believe. But the
Scripture knows not any intercession of Christ; but for applycation of the
purchased Redemption.

Christ's intercession is properly for such as believe.
1. Because Christ lives again, that he may bestow the blessings of his
Testament actually upon his friends; Christ confirms his own Testament,
which no other dead friend does, and the goods of his Testament are peace, Joh.
14.27. The sprinkling of the Conscience from dead works, to serve the living
God, Heb. 9.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. As Moses sprinkled the book, and the
people, the Tabernacle, the vessels, 19.20. So that Christ as our high priest
is entered into heaven as a sprinkler; Now he is no sprinkler to the unconverted.

2. The thing he prays for, as intercessor, is the not failing of the faith
of the Luke 21.31.32.
Saints, and he lives to save the comers to God through him, that is, the
believers, and is touched with our Heb. 4.15.
infirmities, H^b. 7.25.
and that we should Hebr. 4.14.
hold fast our profession, and by him as intercessor; Heb. 10.20.21* 22.23.
We have boldness to enter into the holiest, and to draw near with a true
heart, in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an ill
conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water; all which agree to the
believers only.

3. John 1 Ioh. 1.1.2
deduceth a ground of comfort from Christ's Advocation with the Father, if we
sin. Now this extends only to such, as 1 John 1.7. walk in light, as
confess their sins are pardoned; and they know him by keeping his
Commandments, 1 John 2.4. This comfort cannot be stretched out to the
unconverted who sin not of infirmity, but with a higher hand, as is clear
from Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. Tit. 3.3. 1 Timothy 1.13. though we shall not deny, but
Christ has another eye upon the elect in the course of their sinful vanity,
then on others, and so that he keeps a fountain for them, and indeclinably
calls them to grace and glory.

CHAP. XCII. Antinomians contend for the faith of assurance, and reject the
faith of Dependence.
ANtinomians contending for faith of assurance, and leading men to be Saltmarsh
fr. gr. 200.201.202.203
persuaded, that God loves every one whom he commands to believe with an
everlasting love; and that Saltmarsh free grace, pa. 93.94.95.
no man ought to call in question more whether he believe, or no, then he
ought to question the Gospel, and Christ, do with Rise, reign, er. 55.
Libertines acknowledge a faith of assurance, but deny all faith of dependence
on God through Christ; as if we were not justified by such a faith. Now the
Scripture expresses, saving faith most frequently with a dependence and
recumbency on God, as Psalm. 22.8. he trusted, or he rouled himself on the
Lord, that he would deliver him. Jehovah was Psalm. 18 18.
my stay, or staff. So the same word is used, The Lord takes from Judah the
stay and Esai. 3.1. (...) Ful^rum As (...). Mo^tan. Scip^^ as Iu^ius, and the
(...).
the staff. The residue Esai. 10 20. A faith of dependencie is true faith.
of Jsrael shall lean upon the Lord. So is (...), to believe on Christ, or
rest on the stone laid on Zion.

2. Many weak ones rest upon Christ, and so believe, who cannot come up to an
assurance of persuasion they are chosen to life, and have faith, and yet faint
and doubt. As Mark 9.24. I believe, help my unbelief. Psalm. 31.22. I said in
my have, I am cut off from before thine eyes. Then there has not been in
David much assurance, yet he had faith, else he could not so pray, as to be
hoard, when he says. Nevertheless thou heardst the voice of my supplication
when I cried to the^; a crying faith is Faith, whereas a dumb faith is no
faith. See Jona 2.4.

CHAP. XCIII. Antinomians deny the Law to be any instrument at all of our
Sanctification.
ANtinomians teach, that the Town asser* grace, page 3.^. Del Sermon. page 17.
Law is no instrument of Sanctification, but the Gospel only. Now the reason
they give is, because the Town assert. page 3.
Law commands, but gives no grace; to obey the Town. asser. page 6.
Gospel is the operation of the Spirit, and the ministration of righteousness.
And in the Gospel (says Del S^r. page 19. Antinomians make an ignorant and
unequal comparison between Law and Gospel.
Del) The Word and the Spirit are always joined; and therefore says Christ,
the words that I speak are Spirit and life, that is, they come from the
Spirit, and carry Spirit with them. -- But in the Law their Letter without was
Spirit. Antinomians always compare the Law as the Law, in the cursing Letter
of it against sinners, as in the hand of Moses, void of the Spirit, not with
the Gospel in the Letter of precepts and promises only, and as void of the
Spirit; but with the Gospel in its powerful and effectual operation by the
Spirit, and its actual ministration of grace and righteousness on the elect
only; and so no marvel the Gospel be Spirit and life, and the Law the dead
letter and ministration of death. But compare the Law and Gospel both in their
Letter: and the Antinomian differences are false. Its true, the Gospel
promises a new heart and grace, and righteousness to the elect; which the Law
as the Law does not. But the Gospel in its letter does no more give grace and
righteousness then the Law; but the Gospel only as accompanied by the Spirit,
gives grace. Antinomians do dream, that the Gospel in its Letter is life and
Spirit, whereas it is to thousands the savor of death unto death, no less
then the Law, but ^oth Law and Gospel in their only Letter, through our sin
and unbelief are death; only the Gospel promises a new heart and
righteousness, which the Law does not, but there the Spirit of grace going
alongs with the election of grace, fulfilleth and makes good the promise in
the elect. But the Law in the hand of Christ, even as it condemns by the
operation of the Spirit promised in the Gospel, in the Spirits intention is a
Pedagogue to lead us to Christ, and a means of our sanctification, though a
means inferior to the Gospel.

1. Whatever is a Pedagogue to lead us to Christ our surety is a means of
sanctification being accompanied by the Spirit, for Christ is our
sanctification, The Law an instrument of Sanctification*
as well as our wisdom and righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.31. But such is the Law,
Gal. 3.23.24.

2. That which brings the knowledge of sin, and being accompanied by the
operation of the Spirit, serves to humble us, and render us weary and laden,
leads us to Christ, and is a means of sanctification. But the Law is such in
its office. Romans 3.20. Romans 7.7. and in Gods blessing of it by his Spirit, Acts
2.37. Acts 9.5.6.7. Acts 16.26.27.28.

3. That which we are commanded to do by the grace of Christ, as a testimony
of our thankfulness, and to make our calling and election sure, and to be a
rule of life, obliging us so to walk, that is a means of our sanctification.
But such is the Law; we are commanded to do the Law by grace, as is proved
before.

4. If any thing hinder the Law to be a means of sanctification, as well as
the Gospel, though not in that degree, it is the want of the operation of the
Spirit, but this is no cause; because in the Old Testament, when the
ministration of the Law was in vigor, and that only as Antinomians dream,
the Spirit wrought with the Law, or with that which Antinomians call only Law.
Caleb had another Spirit, Numb. 14.24. A Spirit of Faith, where as others could
not enter in Gods rest through unbelief, Hebr. 3.18.19 A right renewed Spirit,
Psalm. 51.10. And the Spirit was promised to the Seed of Jaakob then, as now,
Isai. 59.19, 20. (2.) They were justified by faith, as we are, Romans 4.1, 2, 3,
4.5.^3.24. Pardoned as we are, Psalm. 32.1, 2. Esai. 43.25, 26. Micha 7.19, 20.
then they had the Spirit of faith. 3. They prayed in faith, and the power of
the Spirit as we do, 1 Samuel 1. 1 Samuel 2. In all the book of the Psalms.
Daniel 9. Ezra 9.5, 6, 7, etc. And because Christ and his Apostles, Math. 5.1,
2, 3. etc. Paul Romans 12.1, 2, 3. Coloss. 3.1, 2, 3. Ephesians. 4.1, 2, 3, etc.
Press the same Law-dueties commanded in the Law as acts of Sanctication.

5. Whereas Del says, the Words of Christ are Spirit and life. Just so said
the Libertines, and cited the same Text, as Calvine says, Instruct. advers.
Libertat. cap. 10. page 442. Verbum Dei Spiritum esse aiant, quia Dominus ait,
-- verba quae loquor, Spiritus and vita sunt. Page 441. Verbum Dei nihil aliud
quam Spiritum esse. -- Page 451. Scripturam in naturali sensu suo acceptam
literam mortuam esse, -- ide^ que missam faciendam, ut ad Spiritum vivificantem
veniamus. Were they to Capernaum, that stumbled at his words of life; to
Corazin and Bethsaida, to the heardned Jews, and the blinded Pharisees, Spirit
and life? they were death to them, as well as the Law. But says he, Christ's
words come from the Spirits, and carry Spirit with them. If he mean a
Ministerial and Prophetical Spirit, not the killing Law came from the Spirit,
it is false. Is not the Ten Commandments, as given by Moses, a part of
Scripture? Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5. Math. 22. And is not all Scripture given by
Divine inspiration, no less then the Gospel, 2 Timothy 3.16? And does the Gospel
ever carry Spirit with it? Then unbeleevers, the blinded, and hardened hearers
of the Gospel, not only resist the Ministerial Spirit speaking in Christ, the
Prophets, and Apostles, but also the saving regenerating Spirit of
Sanctification. Arminians, Socinians, Jesuits, Pelagians, all enemies of free
grace, shall close with Del in this, but Del shall not close with himself; for
he says, inward Reformation caryeth along with it the Omnipotent power of God,
that cannot be resisted, page 8.

6. This opinion confounds the Gospel, and the Spirit making the Gospel
effectual, as if the Gospel were essentially life, and did save all, elect and
reprobate, and were essentially the irresistible special Spirit of
Sanctification* and so the Gospel cannot be the Gospel to these that stumble at
the Gospel, but the naked Letter, which they say is proper to the Law and the
Gospel, shall be no Letter at all, no external command urging us to
obedience; and indeed Del page 26. says, there is no Laws in Gods Kingdom,
but Gods Laws, and he speaks not one word of the Scripture, and written, and
preached Gospel, only he acknowledges three Laws in Christ's Kingdom. One,
that the Socinians acknowledge, The Law of a new nature; other two that the
Enthysiasts and Antinomians acknowledge, The Law of the Spirit of life that is
in Christ; and the third which the Familists call for, to wit, the Law of love.
Farewell then Scripture, Law, and Gospel. And Town goes before him, who
says, If the Spirit be free, Town assert. of grace, 138.
why will you control it by the Law. To which I say, because it is the
lawless Spirit of Enthysiasts, the murdering Spirit of Anabaptists,
Libertines, Familists, who kill all as Antichristian that are not of their way;
as Del threatens all Presbyterians in his Preface, that is a Spirit
controuled, or contradicted, by the Law or written Word; but not the true Holy
Spirit.

FINIS.

