THE TRIAL and TRIUMPH OF FAITH: OR, An Exposition of the History of CHRIST'S
dispossessing of the daughter of the woman of Canaan. Delivered in SERMONS; In
which are opened, The Victory of Faith; The condition of those that are
tempted; The excellency of Jesus Christ and Free Grace;
AND Some special Grounds and Principles of Libertinisme and Antinomian
Errors, discovered BY SAMUEL RUTHERFURD, Professor of Divinity in the
University of St. Andrews.

REVEL. 21 28. And I will give to him (that overcomes) the morning star.

Published by Authority.

London, Printed by John Field, and are to be sold by Ralph Smith, at the Sign
of the Bible in Cornhill near the ROYAL EXCHANGE:

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LADY JANE CAMBEL, Vicountesse of Kenmure, Sister
to the Right Noble and Potent The Marquis of ARGILE Grace and Peace.
MADAM,
I Should complain of these much disputing, and overwriting times, if I were
not thought to be as deep in the fault, as those whom I accuse; but the truth
is, while we endeavor to gain a grain-weight of Truth, it is much if we lose
not a Talent weight of goodness and Christian love: But I am sure, though so
much knowledge and light as may conduce for our safe walking in discerning the
certain borders of divine truths, from every false way, and suppose that
searching into questions of the time were a useful and necessary evil only,
yet the declining temper of the worlds worst time; the old Age of time,
Eternity now so near approaching, calls for more necessary good things at our
hands; it is unhappy, if in the nick of the first breaking of the morning sky,
the night-watch fall fast asleep when he has watched all the night: Its now
near the morning-dawning of the Resurrection. O how blessed are we, if we shall
care for our one necessary thing? It is worthy our thoughts, that an Angel
(never created, as I conceive) standing in his own land; His right foot upon
the Sea, and his left foot on the earth; has determined by oath, a
Controversy moved by scoffers, 2 Pet. 3.3. Yea and with his hand lifted up to
Heaven, swear by him that lives for ever and ever, who created heaven and the
things that are therein, and the earth and things that therein are; and the sea
and things that are therein, that there should be time no longer, Rev. 10.5, 6.
If Eternity be concluded judicially by the Oath of God, as a thing near to us
at the door, now about sixteen hundred years ago, it is high time to think of
it: What we shall do when the Clay-house of this Tabernacle, which is but our
summer house that can have us but the fourth part of a year, shall be
dissolved? Time is but a short Trance, we are carried quickly through it, our
Rose withers ere it come to its vigor: Our piece of this short-breathing
shadow, the inch, the half-cubite, the poor span length of time, flees away as
swiftly, as a Weavers-Shuttle, Job 7.6
which leapeth over a thousand threads in a moment: How many hundred hours in
one Summer, does our breathing clay-Post skip over, passing away as the Ships
of desire, and as the Eagle that hastes to the prey? Job 9.25 26.
If death were as far from our knowledge as Graves and Coffins (which to our
eyes preach death) are near to our senses, even casting the smell of death upon
our breath, so as we cannot but rub skins with corruption, We should not
believe either Prophets or Apostles, when they say, All flesh is grass, and It
is appointed for all to die; Eternity is a great word, but the thing it self is
greater; death the point of our short line teaches us what we are, and what we
shall be: Should Christ, the condition of affairs we are now in, the excellency
of Free Grace, be seen all in their own luster and dye, we should learn much
wisdom from these three; Christ speedeth little in conquering of lovers;
because we have not seen his shape at any time, we look not upon Christ, but
upon the accidents that are beside Christ; and therefore few esteem Christ a
rich pennyworth: But there is not a Rose out of heaven, but there is a blot
and thorn growing out of it, except that one only rose of Sharon, which
blossometh out glory, every leaf of the Rose is a heaven, and serves for the
healing of the Nations, every white and red in it is uncomparable glory, every
act of breathing out its smell, from everlasting to everlasting, is spotless
and unmixed happiness: Christ is the out-set, the master flower, the uncreated
Garland of Heaven; the Love and Joy of men and Angels; but the fountain-love,
the fountain-delight, the fountain-joy of men and Angels is more, for out of it
flows all the Seas, Springs, Rivers, and floods of love, delight, and joy;
imagine all the rain and dew, Seas, Fountains and floods since the Creation
were in one cloud, and these multiplied in measures, for number to many
millions of millions, and then divided in drops of showers to an answerable
number of men and Angels, this should be a created shower, and end in a certain
period of time; and this huge cloud of so many Rivers and drops should dry up,
and rain no more; but we cannot conceive so of Christ, for if we should imagine
millions of men, and Angels to have a co-Eternall dependent existence with
Christ, and they eternally in the Act of receiving grace for grace out of his
fullness; the flux and issue of grace should be eternal as Christ is; for
Christ, cannot tire or weary from eternity to be Christ, and so he must not, he
cannot but be an infinite and eternal flowing sea to diffuse and let out
streams and floods of boundless grace; say that the Rose were eternal* the
sweet smell, the loveliness of greenness and color must be eternal. O what a
happiness for a soul to lose its excellency in his transcendent glory? What a
blessedness for the creature to cast in his little all in Christ his
matchless Al-sufficiency? Could all the streams retire into the fountain and
first Spring, they should be kept in a more sweet and firm possession of their
being in the bosom of their first cause, then in their borrowed channels, that
they now move in: Our neighborhood, and retiring in to dwell, for ever and
ever, in the Fountain-blessednesse, Jesus Christ, with our borrowed goodness,
is the firm and solid fruition of our eternal happy being: Christ is the
sphere, the connaturall first Spring, and element of borrowed drops, and small
pieces of created Grace, the Rose is surest in being, in beauty on its own
stalk and root; let life and sap be eternally in the stalk and root, and the
Rose keep its first union with the root, and it shall never wither, never cast
its blossom nor greenness of beauty: its violence for a gracious spirit to be
out of his stalk and root: union here, is life and happiness, therefore the
Churches last prayer in Canonick Scripture is for union, Revel. 22.20. Amen,
Even so, Come Lord Jesus: It shall not be well while the Father, and Christ the
prime Heir, and all the weeping children be under one roof, in the
Palace-Royall, it is a sort of mystical lameness, and that the head wants an
Arm or a finger, and it is a violent and forced conditon for Arm and finger
to be separated from the head: The Saints are little pieces of mystical
Christ, sick of love for union, the wife of youth that wants her husband some
years, and expects he shall return to her from over-sea lands, is often on the
shore, every ship coming near shore, is her new joy, her heart loves the wind
that shall bring him home, she asks at every passenger news: O saw you my
husband? what is he doing? when shall he come? Is he shipped for a return?
Every Ship that carries not her husband is the breaking of her heart: What
desires has the Spirit and Bride to hear when the Husband Christ shall say to
the mighty Angels, Make you ready for the journey, let us go down and divide
the skies, and bow the heaven; I Will gather my prisoners of hope into me, I can
want my Rachael and her weeping children no longer; Behold I come quickly to
judge the Nations: The Bride the Lambs wife blesses the feet of the Messengers
that preaches such tiding, Rejoice O Zion, put on thy beautiful garments, thy
King is coming: yea, she loves that quarter of the Sky that being rent
asunder and cloven, shall yield to her husband, when he shall put through his
glorious hand, and shall come riding on the Rain bow and clouds to receive her
to himself.

The condition of the people of God in the three Kingdoms calls for this,
that we now wisely consider what the Lord is doing; there is a Language of the
Lords fire in Zion, and His furnace in Jerusalem; If we could understand the
voice of the crying Rod: The Arrows of God flee beyond us, and beside us, but
we see little of God in them. We Sail, but we see not shore, we fight, but we
have no Victory, the efficacy of second causes is the whole burden of the
business, and this burden we lay upon creatures (and its more then they can
bear) and not upon the Lord; God is crying lamenesse on creatures and
multitude, that his eminency of working may be more seen. 2. Many are friends
to the success of Reformation, not to Reformation; Men's Faith go along with
the promises, until Providence seem to them to belie the promise: through
light at a keyhole many see God in these confusions in the three Kingdoms, but
they fall away, because their joining with the Cause was violent kindness to
Christ; it is not a friends visit to be driven to a friends house to be dry in
a shower, and then occasionally to visit wife and children; Christ has too
many occasional friends, but the ground of all is this; I love Jesus Christ,
but I have not the gift of burning-quick for Christ: O how securely should
Faith land us, out of the Gunshot of the prevailing power of a black hour of
darkness? Faith can make us able to be willing for Christ to go through a
quarter of Hells pain: Lord give us not leave to be mad with worldly wisdom:
3. When the Temptation sleeps, the mad man is wise, the harlot is Chaste; But
when the vessel is peirced, out comes that which is within, either Wine or
Water. Yet if we should attentively lay our ears to hypocrites, we should hear
that their Lute-strings do miserably jar, for Hycrisie is intelligible, and may
be found out. Would Parliaments begin at Christ, we should not fear, that
which certainly we have cause to fear, One woe is past, and another woe comes;
The Prophets in the three Kingdoms have not repented of the Superstition,
will worship, Idolatry, Persecution, Prophanity, Formality which made them vile
before the people, and the Judges and Princes, who turned judgment into gall
and wormwood, are not humbled, because they were a snare on Mizpah, and a net
spread upon Tabor: No man repents, and turns from his evil way, no man
smitteth on his thigh, saying, what have I done? Its but black Popery (the name
being changed, not the thing) to think the bypast sins of the Land are
bypast; and a sort of Reformation for time to come is satisfactory to GOD, Ex
opere operato, By the deed done; Yea, the divisions in the Church are a heavier
plague then the raging sword: These same sins against the first and second
Table, the reconciling of us and Babylon, Pride, Bribing, Extortion,
Filthiness, and intemperance unpunished, blood touching blood, and not
revenged, vanity of apparel, the professed way of salvation by all kind of
Religions whatsoever, are now acted in another stage, by other persons, but
they are these same sins; Alia scena cadem fabula
if that head-ship that flattering Prelates took from Jesus Christ, and gave to
the King, be yet taken from Christ, and given to men: if Christ's Crown be
pulled off his head, no matter whose head it warm, its taken from Christ both
ways: I shall pray that the fatness of the flesh of Jacob, for this do not
wax lean, Isa. 17.4
and that the warefare of Britain be accomplished: But if the faithful
watchmen know what hour of the night it is now, there be but small appearance
that it is near to the dawning of Britains deliverance, or that our sky shall
clear in have, would God the year 1645. were with child to bring forth the
salvation of Britain, It was once as incredible that the enemy should have
entered within the gates of Jerusalem, Lam. 4.12.
as it is now that they can enter within the Ports of London, Edinburgh,
Dublin: I speak not this to encourage Cavaliers, for certainly God watches
over them for vengeance; but that we go not on farther to break with Christ;
the weakness of new heads devising new Religions, and multiplying Gods (for
two sundry and contrary Religions argue interpretatively two sundry Gods)
According to the number of our Cities, must come from rottenness of our
hearts: O if we could be instructed before the decree, that is with child of
Plagues to the sinners in Zion, bring forth a man child; and before the long
shadows of the evening be stretched out on us.

But of this Theme no more; Grace is the Proposition of this following
Treatise; when either Grace is turned into painted, but rotten nature, as
Arminians do, or into wantonness, as others do: The error to me is of a far
other and higher elevation, then opinions touching Church Government: Tenacious
adhering to Antinomian errors, with an obstinate and final persistance in
them, both as touching Faith to, and suitable practice of them, I shall think
cannot be fathered upon any of the regenerated: For it is an opinion not in the
Margin and borders, but in the page and body, and too near the Center and
vital parts of the Gospel; if any offend, that I desire to anger them with
good will to grace, I shall strive and study the revenge only of love, and
compassion to their souls.

If some of these Sermons came once to your Honors ears, and now to your eyes
(it may be) with more English Language, I having stayed possibly till the last
grapes were some riper, I hope it shall be pardoned that I am bold to borrow
your Name, which truly I should not have done, if I had not known of your
practical knowledge of this noble, and Excellent Theme, the Free Grace of
God: I could add more of this, but I had rather commend Grace, then gracious
persons: I know that Jesus Christ, who perfumeth and flowreth Heaven, with his
Royal presence, and streweth the Heaven of Heavens to its utmost borders with
glory, is commended that he was full of grace, a vessel filled to the lip,
Ps. 45.2. Ioh. 1.16. Yea, Grace has bought both our person and our service, 1
Pet. 2.24.25. Even as he that buyeth a captive, gives money not only for his
person, but for all the motion, toil, and labor of his body, legs and arms;
and Redeeming Grace is so perfect, that Satan has power possibly, to bid, but
not to buy any of the Redeemed; no more then a merchant can buy another man's
bought goods, without his consent: All our happiness that grows here on the
banks of time, is but thin sown, as very Straw-berries on the Sea-sands, what
good parts of nature we have without Grace, are like a fair Lilly, but there is
a worm at the root of it, it withers from the Root to the Top: Gifts wither
apace without grace; Gifts neither break nor humble; Grace can do both. Grace
is so much the more precious and sweet, that though it be the result of sin in
the Act of pardoning and curing sinful Lamenesse; yet it has no spring but
the bowels of God stirred and rolled within him by only spotless and holy
goodness; Grace is of the Kings house from Heaven only, the matter, subject or
person it dwells in, contributed nothing for the creation of so noble a
branch. Christ for this cause especially, left the bosom of GOD, and was
clothed with flesh and our nature, that he might be a Mass, a Sea, and
boundless River of visible, living, and breathing Grace, swelling up to the
highest banks of not only the habitable world; but the sides also of the Heaven
of Heavens, to over-water Men and Angels. So as Christ was as it were Grace
speaking. Psalm. 45.2. Luke 4.22. Grace sighing, weeping, crying out of horror,
dying, withering for sinners, living again, Heb. 2.9. Joh. 3.16. Romans 8.32, 33.
And is now glorified Grace dropping down, raining down floods of Grace on his
members, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Joh. 14.16, 17. Joh. 16.7.13. Christ
now interceding for us at the right hand of God, Is these sixteen hundredth
years the great Apple Tree, dropping down Apples of Life, for there has been
Harvest ever since Christ's Ascension to Heaven, and the grapes of Heaven are
ripe; all that falls from the Tree, Leaves, apples, shadows, smell,
blossoms, are but pieces of Grace fallen down from him who is the fullness of
all, and has filled all things: We shall never be blessed perfectly, till we
all sit in an immediate Union under the Apple Tree; This is a rare piece by way
of participation, of the Divine nature. Christ passed an incomparable act of
rich Grace on the Cross, and does now Act, and Advocate for Grace, and the
applying of the Grace of Propitiation in Heaven, 1 John 2.1.2. And by an Act of
Grace, has all the Elect and Ransomed ones engraven as a seal on his heart;
and Christ being the fellow of God, Zac. 13.7*
the man that stands straight opposite to his eye, the first opening of the
eyelids of GOD is terminated upon the breast of Christ, and on the ingravening
of Free Grace. All the glory of the glorified, is, that they are both in the
lower and higher house, even when they are the States and Peers of Heaven, the
everlasting Tenants and Freeholders of Grace: so as a soul can desire no
fairer Inheritance, then the Patrimony, Lot, and Heritage of Free Grace: Now to
this Grace commending Your Spirit, as an Heir of Grace, I rest,

Your Honors at all Obliged Respectivenesse in the GOD of Grace, S. R.

The Table of the Contents of the BOOK.
SERMON. I.
THe Scope, Order, and Contents of the Text, Page 1, 2. Matthew and Mark
reconciled, p. 3. Properties of Christ's love, ibid. What woman this was, p. 4.
The Art of the wise contexture of divine Providence, in black and white, fair
and foul, mixed in one for beauties sake, p. 5. Two sides of Providence, ibid.
We err in looking on Gods ways by halfs, especially on the black and sad side
only, p. 7.
SERMON. II.
Christ took an humane will, that he might stoop to God in all things, p. 8.
The strength of corrupt will, p. 9. Two things in the will: 1. The frame of it:
2. The quality and goodness of it, p. 10 There Is a necessity of renewing the
will, ibid. The Dispensation of God, not Scripture, nor a rule of faith, p. 12.
We trust possession of Christ by Faith, more then we do right and Law, through
Faith, p. 13.
SERMON. III.
How Christ and his Grace cannot be hid, in six particulars, p. 14. 1. In his
cause, p. 15. 2^ In the good and evil condition spiritual of the soul, ibid. 3.
In the joy of Christ's presence, p 16. 4. In a sincere profession, ibid. 5. In
the bearing down the stirrings of a renewed conscience, p. 17. 6. In
Desertions, p. 18.
We are to be obsequious and yielding to the breathings of the Spirit, p. 19.
Our hearts are to be variously suitable to the various operations of the spirit,
from four reasons, ibid. Grace falls on few, p. 21. Grace how rare and choice
a piece, in four particulars, p. 22. Grace not universal and common to all,
ibid. Nine Objections of the Arminian and natural man, Answered, p. 22, 23,
24, 25.
SERMON. IV.
Grace falls often on the most graceless, p. 26. Grace makes a great
change; three reasons thereof, ibid. There Is a like reason for Grace on our
Lords part, to the vilest of men, as to Moses* Daniel, Paul, p. 28 The same
Free Grace that we have here, we have it in Heaven in the state of glory, ibid.
In Heaven we reign by Grace, as by the same we War here, p. 29. The justified
in Christ, are corrected for sin, p. 30 The Furnace of affliction, the
workhouse of the Grace of Christ; four grounds thereof, ibid. Mr. Towns
assertion of Grace, p. 32. How Antinomians judge sins to be corrected in the
justified, ibid. How Papists judge sins to be punished in the justified, ibid.
That God punishes pardoned sins; proved by seven Arguments, p. 33. Rules to be
observed in affliction, p. 40. A Land or a Nation must be longer in the fire
then one particular person, p. 42.
SERMON. V.
Satan works as a natural Agent without moderation, p. 43. Spiritual evils
chase few men to Christ; three grounds thereof, p. 44* How men naturally love
the Devil, p. 45. Satan, how an unclean spirit, p. 46, Its true wisdom to
know God savingly, p. 47. What hearing brings souls to Christ, p. 49. Four
defects in hearing, p. 50. Hell coming to our senses in this life, should not
cause us believe without effectual Grace, p. 51. Its good to border near to
Christ, p. 52.
SERMON. VI.
Crying in prayer necessary, p. 53. Five grounds thereof, p. 54. Prayer
sometimes wants words, so as groaning goes for Prayer, p. 55. How many other
expressions beside vocal praying, go under the liew of praying in Gods
account, ibid. 8. Objections removed, p 55.56.57.58*59, 60. Some affections
greater then tears, p. 56. Looking up to heaven praying, ibid. Breathing
praying, p. 57. That wher^in the least of prayer, the Minimum quod sic
consists, ibid. Broken Prayers are Prayers, p. 58. The Lord knows nonsense
in a broken spirit to be good sense, p. 59.
SER. VII.
Why Christ is called frequently the Son of David? not so, the Son of Adam, of
Abraham, p. 62. Christ a King by Covenant, p. 63 What things be in the Covenant
of Grace, ibid. The parties of the Covenant, p. 64 Christ has a sevenfold
relation to the Covenant. 1. He is the Covenant it self. 2. The Messenger. 3.
The Witness, 4. The Surety, 5. The Mediator, 6. The T^stator, 7. The
principal party contracter, p. 64, 65. Christ the Covenant it self, ibid.
Christ a Messenger of the Covenant in 4. particulars, ibid. A Witness in four
things, p. 66. A Surety in three, p. 67, 68. A Mediator in three things. 1. A
Friend. 2. A Reconciler. 3. A Servant, p. 69. Christ a servant of God, and our
servant, ibid. Christ confirmed and sealed the Testament, p. 70, Christ the
principal consederate party, ibid. The Covenant made with Christ personally,
not mystically, proved from Gal. 3.16. The contrary Reasons answered, p. 71. A
Covenant between the Father and the Son proved, ibid. Of the Promises of the
Covenant, p. 73. Two sorts of Promises, p. 74. Christ took a new Covenant right
to God, p. 75. Five sorts of promises made to Christ, and by proportion to us,
ibid.
SERMON. VIII.
The condition of the Covenant, p 77. Libertines deny all conditions of the
Covenant, p. 78. The new Covenant has conditions to be performed by us, ibid.
Six Objections removed, p. 77, 78, 79 80, 81. A twofold dominion of gracious
and supernatural acts, p. 79. We are not justified before we believe, proved
by six Arguments, p. 81. A condition taken in a threefold Notion, p. 83. Its
not a proper condition by way of strict wage and work, when we are said to be
justified and saved upon condition of faith, p. 85. The Freedom, 2. Eternity,
3. Well-ordering of the Covenant, the three properties thereof, p. 87, 88. The
freedom of the Covenant is seen, in regard 1. of Persons: 2. of Causes: 3. of
Time: 4. of manner of dispensation, p. 86, 87. Uses of the Doctrine of the
Covenant, p. 88, 89* 90.
SERMON. IX.
Christ God and man, and our comfort therein, p. 91. Christ immediate in the
Act of Redeeming us, and so sweeter, ibid. Christ incomparable, p. 92. Four
other necessary uses, p. 91 92, 93, 94, 95. To believers all temporal favors
are spiritualized and watered, with mercy, four grounds thereof, p. 96. By what
reason our Father as a Father gives us spiritual things, by that same he
gives us all things, p. 98. Mercy originally in Christ, and how, p. 99.
SERMON. X.
Parents affection, their spiritual duty to children, p. 102. Thirteen
Practical Rules in observing passages of Divine providence, p. 103, 104 105,
106, 107, 108. 1. We are neither to lead, nor to stint Providence, p. 103 2.
But to observe God in his ways, and not to look to by-ways of providence,
ibid. 3. Omnipotency not laid down in pawn in any means, p. 104. 4. God
walks not in the way that we imagine, ibid. 5. Providence in its
concatenation of Decrees, actions, events, is one continued contexture, going
along from Creation to the day of Christ's second coming, without one broken
thread, p. 105. 6. The spirit is to be in an indifferency in all casts of
Providence, p. 106. 7. Low desires best, p. 107. 8. We are to lie under
providence submissively in all, ibid. 9. Providence is a mystery, ibid. 10.
Walks in uncertainties toward us, ibid. 11. Silence is better then disputing,
p. 108. 12. Its good to consider both what is inflicted, and who, ibid. 13. God
always ascends even when second causes descends, ibid.

SERMON. XI.
Every temptation has its taking power from the seeming goodness in it, p.
109. Reasons why this was a temptation to the woman, p. 110. The scope of the
Temptation, to make the tempted believe there is none like him, p. 111. The
non-answering of Christ, is an answering, ibid. 5. Reasons of the Lords not
hearing of Prayer, p. 113. Seven ways prayers are answered, ibid. Praying in
Faith always heard, even when the particular which we suit in Prayer is
denied, p. 114. Faith in one and the same Prayer, seeks and knocks, and
answers, and opens to it self, p. 115. The light of saving Faith, and the
Prophetical light of the Pen man of the word of God, differ not in ^p^ce, and
nature, ibid. The dearest not admitted into God at the first knock, p 116.
SERMON. XII.
Natural men, and even the renewed in spirit, in so far as there remains
some flesh in them, are ignorant of the mystery of an afflicted spirit, p 117.
Peace of conscience is a work of Creation, p. 118. A reason why its so hard to
convince the deserted, p. 119. Christ sweeter to the deserted then all the
world, ibid. Difference between Gods trying, and the creatures temp^ing, in
three Positions, p. 121. A Creature cannot put a fellow creature to act sin
upon an intention of trying him, ibid. In the actions of creatures we must
know, Quis, 2. Quid, 3 Quare, Who ^ommandeth* 2. What, 3. And for what end? In
Gods actions: It is enough to know, Quis, Who, that is Jehovah, p. 122. Four
doubts of the tempted, p. 124, 125. In the sending of Christ to the lost sheep
of the house of Israel, there be three things considerable: 1. His designation:
2. Qualification: 3. Commission. p. 126. The Son most fit to be Mediator ibid.
How Christ is qualified. p. 127 His Commission ibid. It is not properly grace
that we are born, its grace that Christ is born. p. 128. Gods hidden decree,
and his revealed will opened, p. 129 A twofold intention in the promises. ibid.
How, and who are to believe the Decree of Reprobation, concerning themselves.
p. 130
SERMON. XIII.
Its a privilege of mercy that Christ is sent to the Jews first. p. 131 Nine
privileges of the Jews, p. 132. The honor and privileges of Britain, p. 133.
The Redeemed called sheep upon four grounds, p. 134. How passive the Redeemed
are in the way to heaven, in five particulars ibid. The Saints most dependent
creatures, p. 135. How we know the Scripture to be the Word of GOD; two
grounds, one in the subject, another in the object, p. 136. Fancy leads not
the Saints, but Faith p. 137. How the Saints need a fresh supply of Grace from
Christ, though they have a habit and stock of grace within them; proved by six
reasons, p. 138. Grace and glory but one continued thread, p. 140. Three
considerations we are to have of Gods work, in leading us to Heaven, p. 140,
141. Faith is both active and passive, ibid, Desertions have real advancing in
the way to Heaven, in eleven particulars, ibid. We are not freed from
Law-Directions, p. 142. Actual condemnation may be, and is separated from the
Law, ibid. Two Objections removed, p. 142. How works of holiness conduce to
salvation, three things herein to be distinguished, p. 143. We are to do good
works, both from the principle of Law and love, p 145. Other three Objections
removed, ibid. Of the Letter both of Law and Gospel; diverse errors of
Libertines touching the point, p. 146. The Scriptures are not to be condemned,
because they profit not without the teaching of the Spirit; proved by three
reasons, p. 147. Repentance different from Faith, proved against Liberti. p.
148 Repentance the same in the Old and New Testament, p. 149.
SERMON. XIV.
In what sense Christ came to save the lost, p. 150. A twofold preparation, for
Christ to be considered, p. 151. Conversion is done by foregoing preparations,
and successively, proved by four reasons, p. 152. Sense of poverty fitteth for
Christ, p. 154. The Objections of D. Crispe removed; sinners as sinners not fit
to receive Christ, p. 155. How Christ belongs to sinners under the notion of
sinners ibid How the spirit acts most in the Saints, when they endeavor least,
p. 157. The marrow of Libertinisme to neglect sanctification and to wallow in
fleshly lusts, ibid. Christ's death makes us active in duties of holiness,
proved from three grounds, p. 158. How Christ keeps us from sin, p. 159.
SERMON. XV.
Eight necessary duties r^quired of a believer under Desertion. 1. Patience. 2.
Faith, etc. p. 160. Hope Prophesies glad tidings at midnight, p. 162. Its a
blessed mark when temptations chaseth not a soul from duties illustrated in
three cases, p. 166. It argues three good things, to go on in duties under a
temptation. p. 167. Antinomians take men off duties, p. 169. Christ tempted
cannot sin; saints tempted dare not sin, p. 170 Faith traffiqueth with heaven
in the sadd^st storms, p. 171.
SERMON. XVI.
National sins may occur to the conscience of the child of God, in his
approach to God, p. 172, 173. A subtle humble pride, the disease of weak ones,
who dare not apply the promises, p. 175. Sense of Free Grace humbles
exceedingly, ibid. How far forth conscience of wretchedness hinders any to
come to Christ, p. 177. Who ever doub^eth if God will save him, doubts also
if God can save him, p. 179. Sin k^^peth not the door of Christ to hold out the
sinner, p. 180 Sense of sin, and sense of the grace of Christ* may consist, p.
181. Holy walking and Christ's excellency may both be felt by the believer; holy
walking considered: as 1. A duty. 2. A mean. 3 A thing promised in the Covenant
of Grace, ibid^ How we may collect our state and condition from holy wal^ing,
p* 182. The error of D. Crispe, and Antinomians herein, p. 183 Christ a great
house-holder. p. 184. The privilege of the children of the house, ibid. Christ
the bread of life, p. 185. Communion between the Children, and the first heir
Christ, in five particulars. ibid. The spirit of an heir and of a servant, p.
186. There is a seed of hope and comforts in the hardest desertions of the
Saints; in three particulars illustrated, p. 187.
SERMON. XVII.
Grace makes quickness and wittiness of heavenly reasoning, p, 189. Faith
contradicts Christ tempting, but humbly and modestly, p. 190. The Saints may
dispute their state with Christ, when they dare not dispute their actions, p.
191. We are to accept, humbly and with patience, of a wakened conscience, but
not to seek a storming conscience, ibid. True humility and its way, in seven
particulars: see the place, p, 192. How we are to esteem every man better then
our selves, p. 195. The proud man known a far off, p. 195. Graces lowliness in
taking notice of sinners, p. 196. Causes of unthankfulness, p. 197. A
justified soul is to confess sin, proved by three Arguments, p. 199. And to
mourn for sin by diverse reasons, p. 202. If we be not to mourn for sin
committed, because its pardoned: nor should our will be averse from the
committing of it; because before it be committed, it is also pardoned, as
Antinomians teach, p. 203. Libertines conspire with Papists, in the doctrine of
justification, p. 206.
SERMON. XVIII.
How sins are removed in justification, how not, p. 207. There remains sin
formally in the Justified, proved by si^ Arguments, p. 208. How sin dwells in
us after we are justified, p. 209 A twofold removal of sin, one Moral or
Legal in justification, another Physical in our sanctification, p. 210. The
difference between the removal of sin in justification, and its removal in
sanctification, p. 214. Seven grounds why sin dwells still in the justified
person, 216 How sins past, present and to come are pardoned in justification,
p. 224. There Is a twofold consideration of justification, but not two
justifications, p. 225. Sins in three diverse respects are taken away, according
to Scripture, ibid. Christ's satisfaction performed on the Cross for sin, is
not formally justification, but only causatively, fundamentally, or
meritoriously, p. 226. There Is a change in justification, p. 227. How sins not
committed are remitted, p. 228. There is but one justification of a believer,
illustrated by a comparison, p. 229. There Is a difference between Pardon of
sin, the justification of the person* and the repeated sense of the pardon, p.
230. Justifying Faith is some other thing, then the sense of justification, p.
232. How fear, or hope, or reward of glory have influence in our holy walking,
p. 233.234. Objections removed, p. 235.
SERMON. XIX.
The Lord Jesus is so made the sinner in suffering for sin, as there remains
no sin in the sinner once pardoned, as Antinomians teach, especially Doctor
Crispe, p. 235. Sin so laid on christ as that it leaves not off to be our sin,
238 The guilt of sin and sin it self, are not one and the same thing, 241. An
inherent blot in sin, and the guilt and debt of sin, ibid. Two things in debt,
as in sin, p, 242. The blot of sin, two ways considered, ibid. A twofold guilt
in sin, one intrinsecall, and of the fault; another of the punishment, and
extrinsecall, p. 244. Reasons why sin, and the guilt of sin cannot be the same,
245 Christ not intrinsecally the sinner, p. 250. Imputation of sin, no
imagination, no lie, p. 251. Reasons proving that Christ was not intrins^cally
and formally the sinner, p. 253. What righteousness of Christ is made ours, p.
256. The believer how righteous, and Christ how not, p. 257. Christ's bearing of
our sins by a frequent Hebraisme in Scripture, is to bear the punishment due to
our sins, and not to bear the intrinsecall blot of our sins, p. 263. How Christ
is in our place, p. 265. How the debtor and the surety be one in Law, and not
intrinsecally one, p. 267. A perplex^d conscience in a good sense is lawfully
consistent with a justified sinners condition, p. 269. A conditional fear of
eternal wrath required in the justified, but not an absolute fear, and yet
trouble of mind for the indwelling of sin is required, p. 271.
SERMON. XX.
The conscience, in Christ, is freed from sin, that is, from actual
condemnation, but not from incurring Gods displeasure by the breach of a Law,
if the believer sin, p. 272.273. I am to believe the Remission of these same
very sins, which I am to confess with sorrow. p. 276. How the conscience is
freed from condemnation, and yet not from Gods displeasure for sin, p. 272.
Eight cases of conscience resolved from the former Doctrine, p. 277. To be
justified is a state of happiness most desirable, illustrated from the
eternity of the debt of sin, p. 280, The smallest and worst things of Christ
are incomparably above the most excellent things on earth, illustrated in six
particulars, p. 284. What must Christ himself be, when the worst things of
Christ are so desirable? p. 290. The excellency of Christ further illustrated,
and the foulness of our choice evidenced, p. 292. How to esteem of Christ,
illustrated in four grounds, p. 294. Degrees of persons younger and older in
grace, in our Lords house, p. 297. Christ's Family is a growing Family, p. 298
God brings great and heavenly works out of the day o^ small things, p. 299 We
are to deal tenderly with weak ones, upon six considera^tions, p. 303
SERMON. XXI.
The prevalency of instant Prayer put forth upon God in eight acts, p. 303.
Prayer moves and stirs all wheels in Heaven and earth, p. 304. Five things
concerning Faith, p. 312. There is a preparation going before Faith, ibid.
There is no necessary connection between preparations going before Faith, and
Faith, p. 313. Affections going before Faith and following after, differ
specifically, and not gradually only, p. 314. All are alike unfit for
conversion, ibid. Some nearer conversion then others, p. 315. Three grounds or
motives of beeleving, p. 316. Glory, and Christ, the hope of glory, strong
motives of believing, ibid. Faiths object the marrow of Gods attributes, to
speak so, 318. Faith a Catholic Grace required in all our actions natural and
civil, as well as spiritual, p. 319. Christianity how an operous work, p.
321. The six ingredients of Faith, p. 322. Faith turns all our acts which are
terminated on the creature, into half non-acts, p. 324 Faith has five notes
of difference in closing with the promise, p. 331. Literal knowledge works
as a natural Agent, p. 334. Warrants of applying set down in five positions,
p. 337,
SERMON. XXII.
Eight ingredients of a counterfeit Faith, p. 347. Thirteen works, or
ingredients of a strong Faith, and how to discern a weak Faith, ibid. Strong
praying a note of strong Faith, ibid. ^, Instant pleading a note also, ibid.
Strength of grace required in believing, ^bid. Christ rewards grace with
grace, p. 349. How grace begins all Supernatural acts, p. 350. There is a
promising of bowing and predeterminating grace made to supernatural acts, yet
so as God reserveth his own liberty: 1. How 2. When. 3. In what measure he does
cooperate with the believer in these acts, ibid. Four reasons why Grace in the
work of faith must begin, and so begin as we are guilty in not following p.
351. Grace is on the Saints, and to them, but glory is on them, but not to
them. p. 352. Grace to an Angel necessary to prevent possible sins, p. 356. 3.
Note of a strong Faith not to be broken with temptations, ibid. 4. Faith
staying on God without light of comfort a strong Faith, p. 358. The fewer
externalls that Faith needs, the stronger it is within, p. 359, Comforts are
externalls to Faith, p. 360. Some cautions in this, that some believe strongly
without the help of comforts, ibid. Reasons why diverse of Gods children die
without comfort, p. 361,
SERMON. XXIII.
The more of the word and the less of reason, the stronger Faith is, p. 362.
6. A Faith that can forgo much for Christ, is a strong faith, p. 363 7. Its a
strong Faith to pray and believe when God seems to forbid praying, p. 364. 8.
Great boldness argues great Faith, p. 365. 9. To rejoice in tribulation, p.
366. 10. To wait on with long patience, p. 367. 11. A humble Faith is a strong
Faith, p. 368. 12. A strong desire of a communi^n with Christ, p. 369. 13.
Strength of working by love, argues a strong Faith, p. 370. A great Faith is
not free of doubtings. p. 371. Diverse sorts of doubting opposite Faith, p.
372. Some doubting a bad thing in it self, yet per accidens, and in regard of
the person, and concomitants, a good sign, and argues sound grace, p. 373. Of
a weak Faith, p. 375. Negative adherence to Christ, not sufficient to saving
Faith, ibid. A suffering Faith a strong Faith, p. 378. Faith in regard of
intention weak, may be strong in regard of extension, in three Relations, ibid.
The lowest ebb of a fainting Faith, p. 379. What of Christ remains in the
lowest ebb of a fainting Faith, p. 381.
SERMON. XXIV.
A stock of Grace is within the Saints, our Grace is not all, and wholly in
Christ, though it be all from Christ, p. 385. The powers of the soul remain
whole in conversion, ibid. The stock of grace is to be warily kept, p. 386 Four
things are to be done, to keep the stock without a craze, p. 387. The
tenderness of Christ's heart, and strength of love toward sinners, p. 389.
Christ strong in moral acts, and strongly moderate in natural acts: the
contrary is in natural men, ibid. Christ's motion of tender mercy as it were
natural p. 392. How mercy works eternally, and secretly, and under ground,
even under a bloody dispensation, p. 393. Judgment on the two Kingdoms except
they repent, p. 394. A rough dispensation consistent with tenderness of love
in our Lord, p. 395. Free love goes before our Redemption, p. 397. Christ
loves the persons of the elect, but hates their sins, p. 398. A twofold love
of God, one of good will to the person, another of complacency to his own image
in the person, ibid. No new love in Go^, p. 399. Objections of Mr. Den the
Antinomian an^were^, p. 400. What it is to be under the Law, p. 402. How God
loves us before time, and how he now loves u^ in time, p. 405, By Faith and
conversion our state is truly changed before God, p. 407. To be justified by
Faith, is not barely to come to the knowledge that we are justified before we
believe, p. 410. Justification not Eternal, p. 411: Faith is not only given
for our joy and consolation; but also for our justification, both in our own
soul and before God, 415 There Is no warrant in Scripture for two
reconciliations; one of man's reconciliation to God; and another of Gods
reconciliation to man, p. 419. Christ's merits, no cause, but an effect of Gods
eternal love, ibid. What reconciliation is, ibid. Joy without all sorrow for
sin, no fruit of the Kingdom of God, p. 420 The seeing of God, Heb. 12.14. and
the Kingdom, 1 Cor. 6. Joh. 3.3. Not the Kingdom of Grace, but of Glory, p.
421. All acts of blood and rough dealing in God to his own acts of mercy, ibid.
SERMON. XXV.
Omnipotency has influence, on, 1. Satan. 2. Diseases. 3. Stark death. 4.
Mother-nothing. 5. On all creatures. 6. On sin, to speak to them, p. 424.
Obedientiall power in the creation, what it is, p. 425. Omnipotency is (as it
were) a servant to Faith, p. 428. We worship a dependent God, p. 429. We have
need of the devil and other temptations for our humiliation, p. 432. Immediate
mercies, are the sweetest mercies; cleared, 1. In Christ. 2. Grace. 3. Glory.
4^ Comfort. 5. The rarest of Gods works, p. 433. The deceitfulness of our
confidence, when God and the creature are joined in one work, p. 442.
SERMON. XXVI.
Christ in four relations has dominion over Devils, p. 446. Satan goes no
where without a Pass, p. 448. We often sign Satan's conditional Pass, ibid. A
renewed will is a renewed man, p. 451. Eight positions concerning the will and
affections, ibid. A civil will is not a sanctified will, ibid. The yielding of
the soul to God, and to his light, a special note of a renewed will, ibid.
Affections sanctified, especially desires, p. 453. The less mixture in the
affections, the stronger are their operations, ibid. Mind and affections do
reciprocally vitiate one another, p. 454. Spiritual desires, seek natural
things, spiritually: Carnal desires seek spiritual things, naturally, p. 455.
God submits his liberality of Grace, to the measure of a sanctified will, in
four considerations, ibid. Our affections in their acts and comprehension, are
far below spiritual objects, Christ and Heaven, p. 456. More in Christ and
Heaven then our faith can reach in this life, p. 457.
SERMON. XXVII.
Satan not cast out of a land or a person, but by violence, both to Satan and
the party; amplified in four considerations, p. 460. False peace known, p. 462.
A roaring and a raging Devil, is better then a calm and a sleeping Devil, ibid.
Gods way of hardening, as it is mysterious, so it is silent and invisible, p.
465.
The Trial and Triumph of Faith.
SERMON. I.
Mar. 7.24. And from thence he arose, and went into the borders of Tire and
Sidon, and went into an house, and would that no man should know it, but he
could not be hid.

Matthew. 15.21. Then Jesus went thence, and came into the coasts of Tire and
Sidon.

V. 22. And behold a woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and cried
unto him, saying, Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou son of David, for my daughter
is grievously vexed with a Devil.

Mar. 7.25. For a certain woman whose young (little daughter) had an unclean
spirit, heard of him, and came and fell at his feet.

V. 26. (The woman was a Greek, a Syrophoenician by Nation) and she besought
him, that he would cast forth the Devil out of her daughter.


THis Text being with child of Free Grace, holds forth to us a Miracle, of
note; and because Christ is in the work, in an eminent manner, and there is
here also much of Christ's new creation, and a floor planted and watered by
Christ's own hand, a strong faith in a tried woman, it requires the bending of
our heart to attention: for to any seeking Jesus Christ, this Text cries, Come
and see. The scope order, and contents of the Text.
The words for their scope, drive at the wakening of believers, in Praying
(when an answer is not given at the first) to a fixed and resolved lying, and
dying at Christ's door, by continuing in Prayer, while the King come out and
open, and answer the desire of the hungry and poor. 2. For the subject, they
are a History of a rare Miracle, wrought by Christ, in casting forth a Devil
out of the Daughter of a Woman of Canaan; and for Christ to throw the Devil
out of a Canaanite, was very like the white Banner of Christ's Love displayed to
the Nations, and the Kings Royal Standard set up to gather in the Heathen
under his colors. The parts of the Miracle are,

1. The place where it was wrought, Math. 15.21.

2. The parties on whom, the Mother and the possessed Daughter: she is
described by her Nation.

3. The impulsive cause, she hearing, came, and prayed to Jesus for her little
Daughter: In which there is a Dialogue between Christ and the Woman, containing
Christ's trying of her. 1. With no answer. 2. With a refusal. 3. With the
reproach of a dog. 4. Her instancy of Faith. 1. In crying till the Disciples
interposed themselves. 2. Her going on in adoring. 3. Praying. 4. Arguing by
Faith, with Christ, that she had some interest in Christ, though amongst the
dogs; yet withal (as Grace has no evil eye) not envying because the morning
market of Christ, and the high Table was the Jews due, as the Kings Children;
so she might be amongst the dogs, to eat the crumbs under Christ's Table,
knowing that the very refuse of Christ, is more excellent then ten worlds.

4. The Miracle it self wrought by the woman's faith, in which we have Christ's
heightning of her Faith. 2. The granting of her desire. 3. The measure of
Christ's bounty, as thou will. 4. The healing of her Daughter.

Mark says, that the woman came to Christ in a house, Matthew seems to say,
that she came to him in the way, Matthew and Mark reconciled.
as these words do make good: send her away, for she cries after us. Augustine
thinks, that the woman first came to Christ, while he was in the house, and
desired to be hid, either because he did not (for offending the Jews) openly
offer himself to the Gentiles, having forbidden his Disciples to go to the
Samaritans, or because he would have his glory hid for a time, or rather of
purpose he did hide himself from the woman, that her faith might find him out,
and then refusing to answer the woman in the house, Properties of Christ's Love.
she still follows him in the way, and cries after him as Matthew says. For
Christ's Love is, 1. Liberal, but yet it must be suited, and Christ though he
sell not his Love, for the penny worth of our sweating and pains; yet must we
dig low for such a gold-mine as Christ. 2. Christ's Love is wise, he holds us
knocking, while our desire be lovesick for him, and knows that delays
raises and heighteth the market and rate of Christ; we under-rate any thing
that is at our elbow: should Christ throw himself in our bosom and lap, while
we are in a morning sleep, he should not have the marrow and flower of our
esteem: its good there be some fire in us meeting with water, while we seek
after Christ. 3. His love must not only lead the heart, but also draw; 3. Why
Christ s^spendeth the fruits of his love.
violence in love is most taking, and delays of enjoying so lovely a thing as
Christ, breeds violence in our affections; and suspension of presence, oyleth
the wheels of love, desire, joy: want of Christ is a wing to the soul.
Interpreters ask what woman she was? Matthew says, a Canaanite, not of any
Gracious blood; What Woman this was.
a Syrophenician, for Syrophenicia was in the border between Palestine and
Syria; and it was now inhabited by the Relics of the Canaanites; a Greek not
by birth, but because of the Greek tongue and Rites brought thither by Alexander,
and the succeding Kings of Syria: All the Gentiles go under the name of Greeks
in Scripture Language, as Romans 1.14* Gal. 3.28. 1 Cor. 1.22, 24. not because
they are all Greeks, by nation and blood; but because Conquest, Language, and
customs stand for blood and birth; however it stands as no blemish in
Christ's Compt-Book, who was your Father, whether an Ammorite, or an Hittite, so
ye come to him, he asks not whose you are, so you be his; nor who is your
Father, so you will be his Brother, and be of his house.

Mar. 7.24. And from thence he arose and went into the borders of Tire and
Sidon. Christ wearied of Judea, had bin grieved in spirit with the Hypocrisy
of the Pharisees, and the provocation of that stiff-necked people. He was
chased away to the profane Pagans: The art of the wise contexture of
providence in black and white, fair and foul mixed in one for beauties sake.
The hardening of the Jews makes way to Christ's first and young love, laid upon
the Gentiles: Christ does but draw by a lap of the curtain of Separation, and
look through to one believing Heathen; the King opens one little window, and
holds out his face, in one glimpse, to the woman of Canaan, so Christ's works
of deep providence, are free mercy, and pure Justice interwoven, making one
web: He departs from the Jews, and sets his face and heart on the
Gentiles; consider the art of providence here; 1. The Devil sometime shapeth,
Two sides in providence.
and our wise Lord seweth: Babylon kills, God makes alive: Sin, Hell, and
Death, are made a Chariot to carry on the Lords excellent work. 2. The
providence God has two sides, one black and side of that same providence.
Adams first sin was, the Devil and Hell digging a hole through the comely and
beautiful frame of the Creation of God, and that is the dark side of
providence; but the flower of Jesse springing up, to take away sin, and to
paint out to Men and Angels, the glory of a Heaven and a new world of
Free Grace, that is a lightsome side of providence. Christ scourged, Christ in
a case, that he cannot command a cup of water: Christ dying, shamed, forsaken,
is black: But Christ in that same work, redeeming the Captives of Hell, opening
to sinners forfeited Paradise, that is fair and white: Joseph weeping in the
prison for no fault, is foul and sad, but Joseph brought out to reign as half a
King, to keep alive the Church of God in great Famine, is joyful and Glorious:
The Apostles whipped, imprisoned, killed all the day long, are sad and heavy,
but sewed with this, that God causes them always to Triumph, and sow the
savor of the knowledge of Christ; and Paul riding on his iron Chains and
exalting CHRIST in the Gospel, through the Court of bloody Nero, makes up a
fair comely contexture of Divine Providence. 3. God in all his works now when
he raineth from Heaven a sad shower of blood on the three Kingdoms, has his one
foot on Justice, that wrath may fill to the brim the cup of Malignants,
Prelates, and Papists, and his other foot on mercy, to wash away the filth of
the Daughter of Zion, and to purge the blood of Jerusalem in the midst thereof,
by the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burning. And this is Gods way
and ordinary path-rode, Psalm. 25.10. and in one and the same motion, God can
walk both to the East, and to the West, and to the North, and the South.

It is our fault that we look upon Gods ways and works, by halfes and pieces,
Use.
We err in looking on Gods ways by halfs, and on the black and sad side only.
and so we see often nothing but the black side, and the dark part of the Moon;
we mistake all, when we look upon men's works by parts, an house in the building
lying in an hundred pieces, here timber, here a rafter, there a spar, there a
stone, in another place half a window, in another place the side of a door:
there is no beauty, no face of an house here; have patience a little, Simile.
and see them all by art compact^d together in order, and you will see a fair
building: Simile.
when a painter draws the half of a man, the one side of his head, one eye,
the left arm, shoulder and leg, and has not drawn the other side, nor filled
up with colors all the members, parts, limbs, in its full proportion, its not
like a man: So do we look on Gods works, by halfes and parts, and we see him
blouding his people, scattering Parliaments, chasing away Nobles and Prelates,
as not willing they should have a finger in laying one stone of his house; yet
do we not see, that in this dispensation, the other half of Gods work makes it
a fair piece. God is washing away the blood and filth of his Church, removing
these from the work, who shall cross it. In bloody Wars, Malignant Soldiers
ripping up women with child, waste, spoil, kill; yet are they but purging
Sions tin, brass and lead, and such reprobate metal as themselves; Jesuits
and false Teachers, are but Gods snuffers, to occasion the clearing and
snuffing of the lamps of the tabernacle, Mark. 7 2^.
and make truth more naked and obvious.

SERMON II. And he went into a house, and would that no man should know it.
THis will, according to which it is said, He would that no man should know it,
was his humane will, according to which the Lord Jesus was a man as we are,
Two, wills in Christ.
yet without sin; which was not always fulfilled; for his Divine will, being
backed with omnipotency, can never be resisted: It overcomes all, and can be
resisted by none. Consider what a Christ we have, one who as God, has a
standing will that cannot fall, Christ took a humane will to stoop to God in all
things.
Esa. 14.24. He does all his pleasure: His pleasure and his work are
commensurable, Esa. 46.10, 11. Psalm. 135.6. Psalm. 115.3. Yet this Lord did
stoop so low as to take to himself man's will to submit to God and Law. And see
how Christ for our instruction is content, that God should break his will and
lay it below providence, Mat. 26.39. O so little and low as great Jesus Christ
is, all is come to this, O my father, remove the cup; Nevertheless, not as I
will, but as thou will: Christ and his Father, has but one will between them
both, Ioh. 5.30. I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father that sent
me, Romans 15.3. For even Christ pleased not himself. Its a sign of conformity
with Christ, when we have a will so mortified, as it does lie level with Gods
providence. Aarons sons are killed, and that by God immediately from heaven with
fire, a judgment very hell-like, Levit. 10.3. And Aaron held his peace, a will
lying in the dust under Gods feet, so as I can say ( Let his will, whose I am,
enact to throw me in Hell, he shall have my vote) is very like the Mother-rule
of all sanctified wills, even like Christ's pliable will: There is no iron sinew
in Christ's will, it was easily broken; the top of Gods finger with one touch,
broke Christ's will, Heb. 10.9. Lo I come to do thy will, O God. O! but there
is a hard stone in our will, The strength of corrupt will.
the stony heart is the stony will; Hell cannot break the Rock and the Adamant,
and the Flint in our will, 1 Samuel 8.19. Nay but we will have a King; Whether
God will or no, Jer. 18.12. Gods will stands in the peoples way, bidding them
return, they answer: There is no hope but we will walk after our own divices.
Hell, vengeance, omnipotency, crossed Pharaohs will, but it would neither bow
nor break, Exodus 9.27 But the Lord hardened Pharaohs heart, that he would not
let the people go. There be two things in our will, 2. Things in our will, 1.
the fram of it, 2. the goodness of it.
1. The natural frame and constitution of it. 2. The goodness of it. The will
of Angels and of sinlesse Adam, is not essentially good, for then Angels
could never have turned Devils; therefore the constitution of the will needs
supervenient goodness and confirming grace, even when will is at its best.
Grace, Grace now is the only oil to our Wheels. Christ has taken the Castle,
both in-works, and outworks, when he has taken the will, the proudest enemy
that Christ has out of Hell: When Saul renders his will, he renders his
weapon; this is mortification. When Christ runs away with your will; as
Christ was like a man that had not a man's will; so Saul, Act. 9.6. Trembling
and astonished, said, Lord what will thou have me to do? Its good when the
Lord trampleth upon Ephraims fair neck, Hos. 10.11. There is no goodness in
our will now, but what it has from Grace, and to turn the will from ill to
good, is no more natures work, then we can turn the wind from the East, There Is
a necessity of renewing the will.
to the West: when the wheels of the clock are broken and rusted, it cannot go:
When the birds wing is broken it cannot fly: When there is a stone in the
sprent, and in-work of the lock, the key cannot open the door. Christ must oil
the wheels of misordered will, and heal them, and remove the stone, and infuse
Grace (which is wings to the bird) if not, the motions of will are all
hell-ward.

But he could not be hid, for a certain woman, etc. Christ sometime would be
hid, because he has a spirit above the peoples windy air, and their Hosanna;
its a spirit of straw, naughty and base, that is burnt up with that which
hindered Themistocles to sleep. Honor me before the people, was cold comfort
to Saul, when the Prophet told him, God had rejected him. But Christ desired
not to be hid from this woman, he was seeking her, God hides himself, faith
finds him out.
and yet he flies from her: Christ in this is such a flyer as would gladly
have a pursuer. 2. Faith finds Christ out when he is h^d, Esa. 45.15. Verily
thou art a God that hidest thy self: But Faith sees God O God of Israel the
Savior: Thou hidest thy self O God from Israel, but Israel finds thee. ver.
17. Israel shall be saved in the Lord, with an everlasting salvation. God
casts a cloud of anger about himself, he makes darkness his Pavilion, and
will not look out; yet Job sees God, and finds him out many hundred miles,
chap. 19.26. Yet in my flesh I shall see God. 3. Reason, Sense, nay, Angels
seeing Christ between two thieves O Lord, what do thou here: Yet the Faith of
the Thief found him there, as a King, who had the keys of Paradise, and he said
in Faith, Lord, remember me when 23.42. 4. Faith sees him as a witness, and a
record in Heaven, Job 16. ver. 19.20, even when God cleaves Jobs reins
asunder, and powers out his gall upon the ground, v. 13. Believe then that
Christ glowneth that he may kiss, that he cuts that he may cure, that he makes
the living believers grave before his eyes, and has no mind to bury him alive:
He breaths the smoke and the heat of the Furnace of Hell on the soul, when
Peace, Grace, and Heaven is in his heart, he breaks the hallow of Jacobs
thigh, so as he must go halting all his days; and its his purpose to bless
him. Whereas we should walk by Faith, we walk much even in our spiritual
walk, by feeling and sense; we have these errors in our Faith, we make not the
word of promise the rule of our Faith, but only Gods Dispensation: The
dispensation of God not Scripture, nor a rule of Faith.
Now Gods Dispensation is spotless and innocent, and white; yet it is not
Scripture to me, nor all that Dispensation and Providence seems to speak, the
Word of God: Ram-horns speaks not taking of Towns in an ordinary providence
as spear and shield, and a host of fighting men does. Killed all the day long,
and estimated as sheep for the slaughter, speaks not to me that Gods people
are more then conquerours through him that loved us, Romans 8.36, 37. our Faith
in reference to Dispensation, is to do two things. To believe in general,
though Dispensation be rough, stormy, black; yet Christ is fair, sweet,
gracious; and, that Hell and Death are servants to Gods Dispensation, toward
the children of God: Abraham must kill Isaac; yet in Isaac as in the promised
^^ed, all the Nations of the earth are blessed, Israel is foiled, and falls
before the men of Ai; yet, Israel shall be saved by the Lord: Judah shall go
into Captivity, but the dead bones shall live again, read the promise in
general, engraved upon the Dispensation of God: garments are rolled in blood
in Scotland and England: The wheels of Christ's Chariot, in this Reformation, go
with a slow pace; the Prince is averse to Peace, many Worthies are killed, a
foreign Nation comes against us: yet all works for the best to those that
love God. 2. Hope bids us to await the Lords event: We see Gods work, it
comes to our senses, but the event that God brings out of his work, lies
under ground, Dispensation is as a woman traveling in birth, and crying out
for pain, but she shall be delivered of two men Children: Mercy to the people
of God, Justice to Babylon: wait on while the woman bring forth, though you see
not the Children. We trust possession of Christ by sense, more then we do
right and Law through Faith.


2. We trust possession in our part, more then Law and the fidelity of the
promise on Gods part; feeling is of more credit to us then Faith, sense is
surer to us then the word of Faith; many weak ones believe not life Eternal;
because they feel it not; Heaven is a thing unseen, and they find no
Consolation and Comfort, and so are disquieted: If we knew that believing is a
bargaining and a buying, we should see the weakness of many; should any buy a
field of Land, and refuse to tell down the money, except the party should lay
all the Ridges, Acres, Medows, and Mountains on the buyers shoulders, that he
might carry them home to his house, he should be incredulously unjust: If any
should buy a Ship, and think it no bargain at all, except he might carry away
the Ship on his back, should not this make him a ridiculous Merchant? Gods Law
of Faith, Christ's concluded atonement, is better and surer then your feeling;
all that sense and comfort says, is not Canonick Scripture, it is Adultery to
seek a sign; because we cannot rest on our Husbands word.

SERMON III.
Quest. But cannot Christ be hid? Ans. Not of himself: How CHRIST and his grace
can not be hid.
Its hard to hide a great fire, or to cast a covering upon sweet odours that
they smell not: Christ's Name is as a sweet ointment powered out, he is a
Mountain of spices, and he is a strong savor of Heaven, and of the higher
Paradise: You may hide the man that he shall not see the Sun; but you cannot
cast a garment over the body of the Sun, and hide daylight.

From which it appears that Christ cannot be hid.

1. In his Cause and Truth; 1. He cannot be hid in his Cause.
the Gospel is scourged and imprisoned when the Apostles are so served; yet it
comes to light and fills Jerusalem, and fills all the world. What was done
to hide Christ? when he and his Gospel is buried under a great stone, yet his
fame goes abroad; Death is no covering to Christ, Papists burn all the Books
of Protestants, they kill and slay the Witnesses; Antiochus and the persecuting
Emperors, throw all the Bibles in the fire; but this Truth cannot be hid, it
Triumphs: As soon pull down Jesus from his Royal seat at the right hand of
God: as Babylon, Prelates, Papists, Malignants, in these three Kingdoms, can
extinguish the People and Truth of Christ.

2. Believers cannot hide and dissemble a good or an ill condition in the soul;
2. In a good or ill spiritual condition
The welbeloved is away, and the Churches bed cannot keep her: All the
Watchmen, all the streets, all the Daughters of Jerusalem; yea, Heaven, and
Christ must hear of it, Cant. 3.1, 2, 3. Cant. 5.6, 7, 8. Mary Magdalens bed,
and a mornings sleep, and the Company of Angels and Apostles cannot dry her
cheeks, Woman what ails thee? (says the Angel) O she weepeth; O what ayleth
me? They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him: O
Apostles, Where is he? O Sir, Angel, tell me if you saw him? O Grave,! O
Death! Show me, is my Lord with you? The Love of Christ is no Hypocrite: I
grant some can for a time put a fair face on it; when Christ is absent; but
most of the Saints look as a Bird fallen from the Raven, as a Lamb fallen out
of the Lions mouth, as one too soon out of bed in the morning; O sick of Love!
O show him! I charge you tell him, Watchmen, Daughters of Jerusalem, that I am
sick of Love: Love is a paining, feavorous, tormenting sickness: Grace cannot
put on a laughing mask, when sweet Jesus is hidden: Love has no art to conceal
sorrow, the countenance of David, Psalm. 42.5* is sick: There Is death in his
face, when God is not the light of his countenance.

3. The joy of his presence cannot be hid, she cannot but tell and cry out, 3.
In the joy of his presence.
O Fair! O White Day! He is come again, Cant. 3.4. It was but a little that I
passed from him, but I found him whom my soul loved. She numbered all the miles
she Traveled while her Lord was absent: Joy will speak, its not dumb, Cant.
7.9. The roof of thy mouth (is) like the best wine for my beloved, that goes
down sweetly, causing the lips of those that are asleep to speak, Mat. 9.15,
Can the Children of the Bedchamber mourn. as long as the Bridegroom is with
them? (i. e.) they cannot choose but rejoice.

4. Grace in a sincere Professor, and CHRIST cannot be hid, 4. In a sincere
profession.
there came a good fair breath with a blast of a sweet west-wind of Heaven on
Joseph of Arimathea, the time was ill, Christ was dead; and he can dissemble no
longer, Mar. 15.43. (...), with much daring and boldness he went into Pilat
with a Petition: I beseech you my Lord Governor, let me but have this Jesus
his dead body: There was some fire of Heaven in this bold profession; What
would this be thought of, to see a Noble and Honorable Lord-Judge with a dead
and Crucified man's Body in his arms? But Faith knows no blushing: Grace
cannot be ashamed: there was a straight charge laid on the Apostles, Preach no
more in the name of Jesus, Act. 4.13. Peter and John, with a (...), boldly say,
verse. 20. We cannot but speak the things we have heard and seen: Lay as heavy
weights as death, burning quick, sawing asunder, on the sincerity of Faith in
the Martyrs, it must up the Mountain. David's Grace, Psalm. 39.1. was kept in as
with a Mussell put upon the mouths of Beasts: Vatab. an. in Psalm. 39 1.
it was as coals of fire in his heart, and he behoved to speak even before the
wicked; I believed, therefore I spoke, Psalm. 116.10.

5. When Jeremiah lays unlawful bands on himself, 5.
To speak no more in the Name of the Lord; In the bearing down of the stirrings
of a renowed conscience,
there is a spirit of Prophecy lying on him, he is not Lord of his own choice,
Ier. 20.9. But his word was in my heart, as a burning fire shut up in my bones,
and I was weary with forbearing, and I could not stay: There Is a Majesty of
Grace on the Conscience of the Child of God, that must break out in holy
duties; though temptation should hide Christ in his Grace, tempted Joseph is
overawed with this, Genesis 39.9. How can I then do this great wickedness, and
sin against God? This awsome Majesty of the Grace of Gods fear, causes Joseph
see nothing in Harlotry but pure unmixed guiltiness against God; there is an
over mastering apprehension of Christ's love, 2 Cor. 5.14. that constrains
Paul to out the Love of Christ, in dedicating himself to the service of the
Gospel. Though Paul would not have preached: yet he had a sum to pay, Romans
1.14. I am Debtor both to the Greeks and the Barbarians, both to the wise and
unwise. Grace awed him, as a Debt lays fetters on an ingenious mind, he
cannot but out his free and honest mind in paying what he owes.

6. In deserious.
6. Gods Desertion cannot so hide and over-cloud Christ; but against sense the
Child of God must believe; yea, and pray in Faith, Ps* 22.1. My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? 2. O my God I cry by day. Though sin over-cloud
Christ, and David fall in Adultery and blood, there is a seed of Christ, that
must cast out blossoms, he cannot but repent and sorrow. Gods Decree of grace
in the execution of it, may be broken in a link by some great sin, but Christ
cannot but soader the chain, and raise the fallen sinner.

Use.
It shall be useful then for the Saints, when the spirit comes in his
stirrings, We are to be obsequious and yielding to the breathings of Gods
spirit.
and impetuous acts, to cooperate with him, and to answer his wind-blowing:
Its good to hoyse up sail and make out, when a fair wind and a strong tide
calls: sometime Grace makes the heart as a hot Iron, its good then to smite
with the hammer: When your spirit is Docile, and there comes a gale of Christ's
sweet West-wind and rusheth in, with a warmness of heart, in a praying
disposition, to retire to a corner and power out the soul before the Lord, as
we are to take Christ at his word, so are we to take Christ's spirit at his
work: He knocks, knock thou with him: His fingers make a stirring upon the
handles of the bar, and drop down pure myrhe: Let thy heart make a stirring
with his fingers also. I grant, wind makes sailing, and all the powers on
Earth cannot make wind; yet when God makes wind, the Seamen may draw sails
and lance forth: God preventeth in all these, the spirit beats fire out of
our slint, we are to lay to a match and receive, reach in the heart under the
stirrings of Free Grace, obey dispositions of Grace as God himself; Oi^ hearts
must be variously suitable to the various operations of the spirit.
when the Sun rises the Birds may sing; but their singing is no cause of the
Sun rising.

2. Its no truth of God that some teach, that the justified in Christ are of
duty always tied to one and the same constant act of rejoicing with out any
mixture of sadness and sorrow, for so they cannot, 1. Obey and follow the
various impressions of the Lords absence and presence, of Christ's Sea ebbing
and flowing, of his shining Christ, not the affections themselves. 3. Christ
for mere trial sometimes, for sin other times, does cover himself with a
cloud, and withdraw the sense of his favor: and its a cursed joy, that is on
foot, when the Lord hides his face. The Love of Christ must be sick and sad: I
mean the Lover, when the beloved is under a cloud: It is not the new world with
the Regenerate man here nor a Land where there is nothing but all Summer, all
Sun, neither night, nor clouds, nor Rain, nor Storm, that is the condition of
the second Paradise, of the better Adam. 4. Its when the Lion roareth, all the
Beasts of the field are afraid. Grace makes not Job a stock, nor Christ a man
who cannot weep.

And behold a Woman of Canaan: And a certain Woman. Math. 15 Mark 7
Of the Woman, 1. But one person of all Tyrus and Sidon came to him. 2. She was
a Syrophenician by Nation. 3. Her condition, She had a Daughter vexed with a
Devil. 4. With an unclean Devil. 5. The nearer occasion She heard of him. 6.
She adored. 7. She prayed, and so way is made to the conference between Christ
and her: And to the Trial and Miracle.

A certain Woman. There is but one of all Tyrus and Sidon who came to Christ.
Grace falls on few.
1. It beseems the mercy of the good shepherd, to leave ninety and nine sheep
in the Wilderness, 15.4. And when all is done (alas) he has but one of an
whole hundred. Christ has not the tithe of mankind: He makes a Journey while
he is wearied and thirsty through Samaria; yea, and wants his dinner for one
Woman at that draught of his net, and thinks he dineth like a King, and
above, if he save one, Ioh. 4.33, 34. O sweet husbands word, Jer. 3.14. I am
married to you, and I will take you, one of a city and two of a Tribe, and I
will bring you to Zion. Christ takes sinners not by dozens, not by thousands
(its but once in all the word, Act. 2. that three Thousand are converted at
once) but by one's and two's. Though Israel be as the sand of the Sea, yet a
Remnant shall but be saved, (...), Romans 9.27. Esa. 10.22. The Relics and
Refuse shall be saved only. 2. Common Love scarce amounts to Grace; New
Jerusalem, Grace is a rare choice piece.
but all precious stones, the foundations Saphirs, the windows Agats and
Carbuncles, all the Borders of pleasant stones, Esa. 54.11, 12. 3. Christ's way
lies so, of two: Christ will have but one; Christ often will not have both
husband and wife, both Father and Son; but the one Brother, Jacob, not Esau: of
a whole house, Christ comes to the Devils fire side, and chooses one, and
Pearls, not many Diamonds and Saphirs. The multitude be all Arminians from the
womb, every Heresy is a piece of the old Adams wanton wit; thousands go to
Hell, black Heretics and Heterodox; as touching the Doctrine of themselves,
every man has Grace, if you believe himself; Vnusquisque est in ea heresi,
every man takes Heaven for his home and heritage; Dogs think to rest in
Christ's bosom, men naturally believe, though they be but up and down with
Christ; yet Christ does so bear them at goodwill, Grace not Universal and
common to all.
as to give Grace and Glory.

Obj. 1. Gods Love is not infinite, if it be limited to a few. Ans. This
should conclude, that there be an infinite number of Men and Angels to whom
Gods Love to Salvation is betrothed in affection: Obj. 1.
but his love is infinite in its Act, not in its Object: The way of carrying on
his love is infinite.

Obj. 2. To ascribe Gods not loving of men, Obj. 2
to Gods disposition, heart, will, and pleasure, and not to our defects, is
blasphemy. Ans. The Lord ascribes his having mercy, and his hardening to his
own Free Will, Romans 9.17. Exodus 33.19. and his love is as free as his mercy,
and by this means Gods first love to us should arise from our love preventing
his; contrary to his own word, Deuteronomy. 7.7. Ephesians. 2.3, 4. Tit. 3.3. 2 Timothy 1.9.
and man should be the first lover of the two, the creature then puts the
Lord in his debt, and gives first to God, and God cannot but recompense, Esa.
40.13, 14. Romans 11.34, 35. now its no shame for us to live and dye in the debt
of Christ: The Heaven of Angels and men is an house of the debtors of Christ
Eternally engaged to him; and shall stand in his Debt-book ages without end.

Obj. 3. Infinite goodness may as soon cease to be, as not be good to all,
Obj. 3
or withhold mercy from any. Ans. Every being of Reprobate Men and Devils is a
fruit of Gods goodness, but of Free-goodnesse; else God should cease to be, if
he should turn his Creatures to nothing, for he should cease to be good to
things without himself, if these were all turned to their poor mother-Nothing.
2. Mercy flows not from God essentially, especially the mercy of Conversion,
Remission of sins. Eternal life, but of mer Gracc; for then God could not be
God, and deny these favors to Reprobats: Freedom of mercy and salvation is as
infinitely sweet and admirable in God, as mercy and salvation it self.

Obj. 4.
Obj. 4. But God is so essentially good to all, as he must communicate his
goodness by way of Justice, in order to free obedience, and that is life
Eternal to those who freely believe and obey. Ans. But the great Enemy of
Grace, Ja. Arminius teaches us, that all the freedom of Grace, Romans 9. is
resolved in the free pleasure of God, in which he freely and without hire,
purposed to reward Faith, not the works of the Law with life Eternal; whereas
it was free to him to keep another order, if so it should seem good to him, and
by this means God is yet freely, and by an act of pure grace not essentially
good to all, even in communicating his goodness, by way of Justice: For what
God does by necessity of his nature and essence, that he cannot but do, but sure
it is, by no necessity of nature, does the Lord reward works, faith, or any
obedience in us with the Crown of life Eternal: He may give heaven freely
without our Obedience at all, as he gives the first Grace freely, Eze. 16.6,
7, 8. Romans 5.10. Ephesians. 2.3, 4, But this is surer, the fewer have Grace, Grace
is the more Grace, and the more like it self and free.

Obj. 5.
Obj. 5. But I have a good heart to GOD.

Ans. A quiet heart sleeping in a false peace, is a bad heart, most of sinners
give their souls to the Devil by theft, they think they are sailing to heaven,
and know nothing till they shore, sleeping in the land of Death, Matthew. 7.21,
22, 23. Luke 16.27, 28.

Obj. 6. Why, But God has bestowed on me, Obj. 6.
many favors and riches in this world. Ans. Gods Grace is not graven on gold,
it should be but the Logic of a beast, if the slaughter Ox should say, The
Master favors me more then any Ox in the stall: I am free of the yoke which
is upon the neck of others, and my pasture is fatter then theirs.

Obj. 7. The Saints love me. Ans. The Saints can mis-father their love, Obj. 7.
and love where God loves not.

Obj. 8. All the world loves me. Ans. Obj. 8
You are the liker to be a step-childe of Jerusalem and of Heaven; for, The
world loves its own, Ioh. 15.19. better it were to have the world a
Stepmother, then to be no other, but to lie in such a womb, and suck such
breasts.

Obj. 9. I believe life Eternal. Ans. Obj. 9
That Faith is with child of Heaven, but see it be not a false Birth; few or
none come to age, and none clothed in white and Crowned, but they were jealous
of their Faith, and feared their own ways: Natural men stand aloof from Hell
and Wrath.

SERMON IV. The Woman was a Greek, a Syrophenician by Nation.
MUch woe is denounced by the Prophets against Tyrus and Sidon: yet sweet Jesus
draws by the curtain, and opens a window of the partition, and saves this
Woman: Lo here Christ planting in the wilderness, the Cedar, the Shittah
tree, the Mirttle, the Oil tree, Grace falls often on the Most graceles.
Esa. 41.19. and here, Esa. 55.13. is fulfilled: And in stead of the thorn,
(what better are Sidonians then thorns?) shall come up the Fur tree, and in
stead of the Bryar shall come up the Myrtle tree; and no praise to the ground,
but to the good husbandman. And it shall be to the Lord for a name, for an
everlasting sign, that shall not be cut off. Christ then can make and frame a
fair Heaven out of an ugly Hell, and out of the knottiest timber he can make
vessels of mercy for service in the high Palace of glory. Grace makes a great
change.
1. What are they all, who are now glorified? The fairest face that stands
before the throne of Redeemed ones, was once inked and blacked with sin; 1.
Reas.
you should not know Paul now with a Crown of a King on his head; he looks
not now like a Blasphemer, a Persecuter, an injurious person. The woman that
had once seven Devils in her, is a Marie Magdalen far changed; and Grace made
the change. 2. Grace is a new world, Heb. 2.5. 2.
The Land of Grace has two Summers in one year, Esa. 33.24. The inhabitant
shall not say, I am sick, the people that dwell therein, shall be forgiven
their iniquity. Ioh. 11.26. Whosoever lives and believes in me, shall never
dye. They are not mortal men that are in Grace, there is neither sickness nor
death in that Land. 3. We say of such a Physician, he has cured diseases that
never man could, he cured stark death; then you may commit your body to him,
he is a tried Physician, 3.
1 Timothy 1.16. Christ has made a rare copy, a curious samplar of mercy of the
Apostle Paul* For in him he has shown all long-suffering, for a pattern to
them that should hereafter believe in him to life Eternal: Heaven is a house
full of miracles; yea, of spectacles and Images of Free Grace; you may entrust
your soul with all its diseases to Christ, he has given many rare proofs of
his tried art of Grace, he has made many black limbs of Hell, fair Saints in
Heaven; such a man, such an Artificier threw down an old dungeon of clay and
made it up a fair Palace of Gold.

Obj. But what am I? a lump of unrepenting guiltiness and sin, Obj.
to such a vessel of mercy as holy Paul, and repenting Mary Magdalen? Ans.
Grace as its in God, and fitness to receive Grace in us, is just alike to all.
There was no more reason why Paul should obtain mercy, then why thou, or any
other sinner like thee, should obtain mercy; there is alike reason for me to
have noble and broad thoughts of the rich Grace of Christ; There Is alike reason
for Grace on our Lords p^rt, to the vilest of men as to Moses Daniel, Paul.
as for Abraham, Moses, David, all the Prophets, and Apostles, to believe:
There was no greater ransom given by Christ to buy Faith and Free Grace for
Noah, Job, and Daniel, to Moses and Samuel, then to poor and sinful me; its
one cause, one ransom, one Free-love. If there had a Nobler and worthier
Redeemer died for Moses and Paul then for you and me: And another Heaven and a
freer Grace purchased to them, then to me; I should have been discouraged,
Grace is Grace to thee as to meek Moses, The same Free Grace that we have
here, we have it in Heaven.
Christ is Christ to thee as to believing Abraham: And farther, The same Grace
that is here, is in Heaven; 1. As Faith that is freely given us is the Conquest
of the new heir Jesus Christ, Joh. 6.44. Phil. 1.29. Ephesians. 1.3. So are all
Christ's Braclets about our neck in Heaven, and the Garland of Glory, the
Free Grace of God; its the same daylight when the Sun breaks forth out of
the East, and at noonday in the highest Meridian; though we change places when
we dye, we change not ^usbands. 2. We stand here by Free-gra^^, (...), 5.2.
Repentance and Remission of sins are freely given here to Israel by the exalted
Prince Christ Jesus, Act. 5.31. Our tears are bought with that common ransom;
so the high Innes of the Royal Court of Heaven, is a free and open house, and
no bill put upon the Inhabitants; neither Fine, nor Stent, nor Excise, nor
Assessment, nor Taxation, all is upon the Royal charges of the Prince of the
Kings of the earth; there is no more hire, merit, wages, In Heaven we reign by
Grace, as here we serve and do war.
or fees there then here, the income of glory for Eternity, and the life-rent
of ages of blessedness, is all the good will of him which sits on the
Throne. Every apple of the tree of life is grace, every sip, every drop of the
Sea and Ri^ver of life, is the purchase of the blood of the Lamb that is in the
mids of them. 3. They be as poor without Christ who are there, as we are, Glory
is Grace, and their dependency for ages of ages, is that, Rev. 7.17. That the
Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne, does feed them, and lead them unto
living Fountains of waters, and God wipeth all tears away from their eyes:
Then they cannot walk there alone, but as the Lamb leads them; and if Christ
were not there, or if he should take Grace, Glory, and all his own Jewels and
Ornaments from Moses, and Enoch, there should remain no more there but poor
nature: As good Angels do therefore not fall, because in Christ the head of
Angels they are confirmed; and if they lacked this confirming Grace they might
yet fall, and become Apostate Devils; so the glorified in Heaven, do therefore
stand, and are confirmed in the inheritance, not by Free Will there, more then
here, but by immediate dependence of Grace on the Lamb, whom they follow
whethersoever he goes: Grace then for kind, is as good as Heaven: Glory,
glory to our ransome-payer.

3. Her little daughter was vexed, (she says) (...) she is exceedingly
devilled, Math. 15.
or grievously tormented with a devil: Then observe that common punishments of
sin and sad afflictions does follow justified persons, The Justified in Christ
are corrected for sin.
as well as the wicked; for it was a sad burden to the mother, that the Devil
had such a dominion over her daughter; yet the Text clears, that she was a
justified person, as her instancy of praying, adoring, and great Faith, even
prevailing over Christ, under sad trialls, do manifestly evidence; and we see
the reasons that the Scripture alleges: 1. That the gold of precious Faith,
and the upright metal therein, may be seen, 1 Pet. 1.7. Afflictions are the
servants and Pursevants of the accusing Law, sent out to cause us lay hold by
Faith on peace made, and pardon purchased in Christ: The hot furnace is the
workhouse of Christ, The furnace, the workhouse of the grace of Christ
in that fire he takes away the scum, the dross, the refuse of the true
metal, that Faith may be found unto praise, and honor, and glory, at the
appearance of Jesus Christ: 2. Afflictions drive us to seeek God, they being
Gods fire-men, and his hired laborers, sent to break the clods, and to plow
Christ's land, that he may sow heaven there, but Christ must bring new earth to
the soil: In prosperity we come to God, but in a common way, as the grave man
came to the Theater, Martial ad Catonem: Cur in theatru^, Cato severe, venisti?
An ideo tantim venems, u: exires?
only that he might go out again; but in trouble the Saints do more then come,
they make a friendly visit when they come: also the prayers of the Saints in
prosperity, are but Summer prayers, slow, lazy, and alas, too formal; in
trouble they rain out prayers, or cast them out in con-naturall violence; as a
fountain does cast out waters, both these are in one well expressed, by the
Prophet, Isa. 26.16. Lord in trouble they have visited thee, they power out a
prayer, when thy chastening hand is on them; Vatablus expounds (...) Malmad,
A murmuring or prayer which trouble powers out: the Chaldee Paraphrast turns
it silentium, silence, because the conscience weakened is silent; it is a
Prophecy, what Gods fire does effectuate, which you have Hos. 5.15. In their
affliction they will seek me early. 3. We must be made like Christ, in the
Cross, and the Crown, 2 Timothy 2.12. and conform to him, Romans 8.29. Christ the
corner stone, though there was no sin in him, yet before he was made the chief
corner stone, he was by death hammered, Act. 4.10.11, 12. And much more, the
strokes and smiting of the Cross must knock down all the superfluity of
naughtiness, and every height, till by smoothing and chipping, the child of
God be made a stone in breadth, length, proportion, smoothness, some way
conform to the first Copy, and to Christ the samplar-stone. There is a fourth
reason, but its a controverted one, the justified person may be afflicted for
sin, some teach that this is Popery to affirm, that the justified bear the
punishment of their sin, because Christ only was wounded for our iniquity, and
did bear in his own body our sins on the Tree, therefore (say they) respect
seems to be had (as one speaks) to sin, M. after Towns Assertion of grace,
page 112 113.

Ans. to D. Tailor.


not principally, but secundarily and occasionally, not as it offends God,
(who by that one sacrifice is for ever pacified, Heb. 10.14. Mat. 3. but as it
offends and diseaseth the minds of the faithful; not that afflictions
simply, properly, and immeditly do ease quiet, and cure the conscience (for
their natural effect is to deject and terrify, as appendixes of the Law) but
that they awaken and stir up our dullness to a lively apprehension of Christ's
Righteousness, and so while God as a Father corrects for sin, sin has not
properly with God the nature of sin, which is an offense of Divine justice; How
Antinomians judge sins to be corrected in the justified.
But is considered as a disease troubling his child, which in love, and in
pity he seeks to make riddance of, in manner aforesaid, and not in anger and
displeasure.

Its true, Papists hold, that when God forgiveth sin in David, he forgiveth not
the punishment; How Papists judge sins oo be pun^shed in the justified.
for David is punished with the sword on his house for that same sin; but it is
known that this doctrine is a too-fal and Pillar to underprop the Chamber in
Hell, which they call Purgatory; and that their meaning is, that punishment
inflicted on a justified person, is a punishment satisfactory to the justice of
God; that so they may make the merits of the Saints suffering to ride up as a
collateral sharer with the high and noble blood of the killed Lamb of God, who
only satisfactorily, takes away the sins of the world: This we disclaim: But
on the other hand, we hold that there is another justice in God, then that
legal, and sin-revenging justice, which Christ's sufferings has expiated and
fully satisfied, both in regard of Gods acceptance, and of the intrinsecall
worth of the death of him, who was God the Prince of life: And this other
justice, is also the justice of an offended Father correcting though in mercy
(and so it is a mixed justice) the sins of the Saints as sins: 1. Because the
sins of the Saints are not only the offending Sam. 12.7, 8, 9. Exodus 20.1, 2.
Psalm. 81.6, 7, 10, 11 Psalm. 78, 11, 12, 13, 42, 53, 54, 55, 56. Deuteronomy. 32.11,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Amos. 3.2. That God punishes pardoned sins in the
justified proved by seven Arguments
And therefore God does punish, in his own, sins as sins.

2. 1 Cor. 11. Those who are not to perish with the world are for this cause
(because they eat and drink unworthily) sick and punished with death, v. 30,
32, 33. It is clear against the Text, that Mr. Town says, That a justified
person having the least measure of Faith, cannot eat and drink unworthily, the
smallest Faith makes them worthy, and so those who in that Text did eat
unworthily, did but dally with the Gospel, and never actually put on Christ.
But Faith does no more hinder a justified person to receive the Lords Supper
unworthily, then it does hinder him to commit adultery, or incest, or to kill;
and whosoever should come to the Lords Table, under these sins, without
repenting, should Eat and Drink unworthily, and such a sin may a believer
according to Gods heart (as David was) commit; and there is great odds between
being unworthy, and eating unworthily, all believers of themselves are unworthy
of Christ and Salvation, but being in Christ by Faith, they are counted worthy,
and yet they may Eat and Drink unworthily; but Mr. Towns sense seems to
carry, That a justified person cannot sin, nor Eat and Drink unworthily,
because Faith makes him worthy; and if so, the way of Grace is a wanton merry
way; the justified are freed from the Law, and from any danger of sinning.

David was punished according to the rule of that mixed and fatherly justice,
which keeps a due proportion between the sin, and the punishment: his sin was
to cut off Vriahs house out of Israel, God sends the sword against his house
all his days, he took another man's wife secretly, and did commit filthiness
with her, the Lord took his wives before the Sun, and gave them to Absolon, who
defiled his bed: Here Is justice (though I grant mixed with mercy) sword for
sword, bed for bed, 2 Samuel 12. Eli honored his sons more then God, suffered
them to profane Priesthood and Sacrifices; justice rooted out his sons from
Priesthood and Sacrifices: Hezekiah out of his pride showed all his Treasures,
and all that was in his house to the King of Babylons Messengers; and justice
measured out the like to him, all that was in his house, and all his treasures
were carried away as a spoil to Babylon.

4. Ezekiel. 9.6. Slay old and young -- begin at Luke 1.20. And behold thou shall
be dumb -- because thou believe not my word. The Church of God In terminis
says so much, Lamen. 1.18. The Lord is righteous, for I have rebelled against
his Commandment: 14. The yoke of my transgression is bound by his hand: they
are wreathed, and come up upon my neck. chapter 3.39. Wherefore does a living man
complain, a man for the punishment of his sin. 40. Let us search and try our
ways, and turn again to the Lord, Isa. 42.24. Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and
Israel to the Robbers? did not the Lord against whom we have sinned? Mica. 7.9.
I will bear the indignation of the Lord because I have sinned, 2 Kin. 24.20.
For through the anger of the Lord it came to pass in Jerusalem and Judah,
until he had cast them out from his presence, that Zedekiah rebelled against
the King of Babylon. Its not of weight that is brought to take off the force of
these pregnant Scriptures: The Church consisting of mixed persons, good and
bad, elect, and reprobate (say they) is according to the wicked party punished
in justice, but not the believing party: But I answer, all Judah good and and
ill, Jeremiah, Daniel, and all the holy seed were involved with the perverse
and obstinate Idolaters, in the same common calamity of a sad captivity, and it
was not the ill figs, and stiff-necked Idolaters, that did confess the Lords
Righteousness, and their own Rebellion against the Lord, nor did the wicked
party enter in a Trial of their ways, and acknowledge that the unregenerate
man only suffers for his sins, nor did any of that side, with patience, hope,
and silence, bear the indignation of the Lord, it was the true Church, Gods
Jacob, the meek of the earth, that did thus stoop to Gods correction, and yet
these same were punished for their sins, as they acknowledge, Lam. 1.18. Mic.
7.9.

Lev. 26.21. And if ye walk contrary to me, and will not hearken to me, I will
bring seven times more plagues on you, to verse. 41. If then (in their heavy
afflictions) their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they then accept of the
punishment of their iniquity. 42. Then will I remember my Covenant with Jacob,
Psalm. 89.30. If his children forsake my Law, and walk not in my judgments,
etc. 32. Then will I visit their transgressions with the rod, and their
iniquity with stripes. 33. Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not
utterly take from him, etc. Nothing more evident, then that these that are in
the Covenant of Grace, from whom God cannot remove the sure mercies of David,
are visited for their iniquities with temporal Rods.

6. It is against Gods anger and displeasure at Exodus 4.14. The anger of the
Lord was kindled against Moses. Deuteronomy. 1.37. Also the Lord was angry with me for
your sake: And the story shows, because Moses sanctified not the Lord at the
waters of Meribah, God would not suffer him to set his foot in the holy Land. 2
Chr. 11.9. God was angry with Solomon, Deuteronomy. 1.20 The Lord was very angry with
Aaron, 2 Chro. 19.2. The Prophet Jehu said to Jehosaphat that good King, There
is wrath upon thee from the Lord, Isa. 60.10. For in my wrath I smote thee, but
in my favor, I have had mercy on thee.

7. The contrary error is founded upon two But this is false, for Gods rod of
it self, is neither a sign of revenging justice, nor of free mercy; but it
takes its nature and specification, from the intention and mind of God; all
these externalls fall alike, to Elect and Reprobate: The repenting Thief, and
the blaspheming Thief are under the same Rod of God, both die a violent death:
wicked Ahab, and good Josiah are both killed in War: the Botches, and Agues
threatened in the Law, Deuteronomy. 28.60. are upon Job, chap. 2. v. 7. What makes
then the same Rod to be a work of revenging justice in the Reprobate, and of
justice mixed and temperd with mercy and fatherly kindness in the other?
Certainly, Gods pleasure and wise intention, punishing for different ends,
varieth the nature of the rods, so as an intention to take satisfactory
vengeance on the Reprobate, specifieth his Rod, and makes it punishment of
black wrath, of salt, and unmixed justice on him, and this intention is an
essential ingredient in satisfactory punishment. God writes and ingraveth
upon the tooth-ake of a Reprobate, a parcel of Hell; and he stampeth upon
burning-quick, racking, and tortering, the ingraving of Heaven, of mercy, and
loving kindness in the Believer: bastard Crosses, and lawfully begotten
afflictions have the same Father, but not the same Mother: 2. If the Patrons of
this error could make Gods rod as A^bitrary, as they fancy the duties of the
teaching, and ruling Law of God to be, they should cry down all Crosses, and
send all the justified persons to heaven, with a Pass, securing them from all
afflicton in the way to heaven, and so Christ should bring his many children to
glory with dry faces, and whole skins; whereas Christ himself passed to heaven
with the tear in his eye, and a bruised soul. The other error is, that Christ
has made a full atonement for sin, and fully satisfied justice for all that
are justified in his blood, and therefore they cannot be punished for sin
themselves: But 1. There is more in the conclusion then in the premises: Ergo,
the justified cannot suffer satisfactory punishment for sin, either in whole,
or part; this is most true, no man's garments were ever dyed with on drop of red
satisfactory vengeance for sin, Christ has alone trod this Vine-presse, and
of all the Nations, there was none with him: but yet it no ways follows,
that the regenerate does not suffer punishment for sin, according to the rule
of another mixed and tempered justice: 2. If this Argument from Christ's
suffering, have nerves, it shall conclude, that the Elect before they be
justified, are never punished for sin, more then believing Saints are; yea that
God is not displeased with Abraham's Idolatry before his conversion, nor with
Manassehs blood, nor with Saul's persecution, because Christ paid justice for
sins of Elect persons committed before justification, as for sins committed
after justification.

We can fetch no conclusion of a bad condition from affliction. Use 1.
Its a part of tenderness of Conscience in the Regenerate to be too
applicatory of the Law and of wrath: Rules to be observed in affliction.
I am afflicted above all others, therefore God is angry with me, and I am cast
off by God, Its a bad consequence, there be some Rules to be observed in
affliction; 1. Rule.
1. We are not either to over-argue, or to under-argue, neither to faint, nor
despise, Heb. 12. Conscience is too quick-sighted after illumination, and too
dull-sighted before: The reasons why we argue from afflictions to Gods hatred,
are; 1. There Is a Conscience of a Conscience in the believer, that is, even in
an enlightened Conscience; there is some ill Conscience, to deem ill of God,
Psalm. 31.22. For I said in my have, I am cut off from before thine eyes. This
is a hasty Conscience, as we say, Such a one is a hasty man, and soon saddled,
easily provoked to anger; this is a Conscience soon provoked to anger. 2.
2. We have not that love and charity to God, that we have to some Friend; we
have such a love to some dear Friend, that all his blacks are white, his
seeming injuries to us, do not provoke us; we say (I can believe no evil of
such a man) and we over-shoot our selves in an over-charge and surfeit of
charity, which proceeds from a Superplus and dominion of Love to a creature:
We are in the other extremity to God and Jesus Christ: Sense of affliction
cools our Love, and we cannot extend charity so far to our Lord, as when we
see he deals hardly with us, to keep the other ear without prejudice, free
from the report that affliction, and the sense of affliction makes. 3. The
flesh joyneth with affliction against God, affliction whispereth wrath,
justice, sin; 3.
and the flesh says, That is very true: For flesh hates God, and so must
slander his Dispensation: Ahab could not but slander Micaiah, he never
Prophesies good (says he) to me. Is not Gods Truth good? Surely, every word
of Prophecy is like gold seven times tried: The reason of the slander is given
by himself: I hate him. The other extremity is, that we under-argue in
affliction; as 1. We say, Its not the Lord: the Philistims doubted whither God
had sent the Emrods on them, for keeping the Ark captive, or if chance had done
it: its grace to father the cross right. 2. We look seldom spiritually on the
cross, a carnal eye upon a cross is a plague, Esa. 42.23. Gods anger set him
on fire round about, and he knew not, and it burned him, and he laid it not to
heart. Its strange that Gods fire should burn a man: and yet he neither sees
nor feels fire: Why? there is something of God in the cross, that the carnal
eye cannot see: because as Zophar says, Job 20.26. A fire not blown shall
consume him: Some make it (and not without reason) a fire that has no noise of
bellows or wind to make it take fire, and to flame up, some are burnt, and they
neither hear nor see; there is a white powder that burns and makes no noise
or sound; a dumb rod is twice a rod, we scarce see what God is doing in this
War, we are smitten of God in the dark; and so wicked men never do come
lawfully out of affliction, they see not God, nor sin, and for that comes not
out of prison by the Kings keys, but they break the Goal, and leap out at a
window; the Land is to see all the circumstances of this bloody War in these
three Kingdoms.

Use 2.
We are to put a difference between Gods afflicting one man, and a whole Church:
Now, God has his fire in our Sion, and we wonder that Wars have lain on
Germany twenty six years, and that for diverse years the sword has been on us
in these Kingdoms. A Land or a Nation must be longer in the fire then one
particular person.
1. There be many vessels to be melted, a fire for an afternoon, or a war for a
morning, of a day, or a week, cannot do it. Seven days sickness of a dying
Child, puts David to go softly and in sackcloth: Years are little enough to
humble proud Scotland, and England. God humbled Israel 400. years and above in
Egypt, and kept them forty years in the Wilderness, and Judah must lie
smoking in the Furnace seventy years. 2. One Temple was forty six years a
building, God has taken eighty years to Reform England, and many years to
Reform Scotland, and the Temple is not builded yet; give to our Lord time,
hope, and wait on. 3. Babylon is a great Cedar that cannot fall at the first
stroke, its not a work of one day or a year, to bring that Princes, the Lady of
Nations from Her Throne of glory, to sit in the dust, and take the Milstones
and grind meal.

SERMON V.
VExed with a Devil. Satan works as a natural agent, without moderation.
(...) She is Devilled, that is, fully possessed: The malice of the Devil is a
natural agent, and works as intently and bently as he can, as agens maximum
quod sic, the fire puts forth all its strength in burning, the Sun heateth
and inlightneth as vehemently as it can: A Millstone fallen from the sphere of
the Moon down to the earth, uses no moderation or abetment in its motion: The
malice of Hell being let loose, it works mischief by nature, not by will.
Satan's possession is full, Peter says to Ananias, Acts 5.3. Why has Satan
filled thy heart to lie against the Holy Ghost? As there is a fulness of God,
Ephesians. 3.19. so there is a fullness of the Devil, as Romans 1.29. being filled with
all unrighteousness. It is no wonder that Cavaliers and Malignants work as
their Father, the nature of the Father is in the son, modus operandi sequitur
modum essendi, the manner of working, is suitable to the nature of the worker,
hell works like Hell, Ier. 3.5. Behold thou have spoken, and done evil as thou
could, Esa. 5.18. They draw sin and iniquity, not with a rush or a thread,
but with ^ords of vanity, and with a cart rope, Mic. 7.3. They do evil with
both hands earnestly. All that malice and Hell could do of cruelty to young and
old, to women and sucking infants, has been done in Ireland and England: The
Devil in his element is twice a Devil, he is in his own when he forms and
actuateth bloody instruments, and he abounds in his own sphere; Satan's
malice, its alone, is great, and a sinners wrath is heavier then stones and
sand: but when they are conjoined (as united force is stronger) who can stand
before them? Christ's Lambs have been preserved amidst Devils and men, since the
Creation, amongst Wolves, by no humane power and strength.

Observe, That all that came to Christ have been forced through some one
necessity or other, either a leaprous body, blind eyes, a palsy, a bloody
issue, a withered arm, or a dying son, and that some have been brought to
Christ, at least their Parents or Friends have come to Christ through reason of
bodily possession by the Devil; but we read of none that came through reason of
the Devil's spiritual possessing of them, Spiritual (...) chase ^ew or none to
Christ.
either by themselves or others. 1. There is much flesh and much nature in us,
and so much sense and little spirit, and little of God; a blind eye will chase
thee to Christ, a Ioh. 8.44. Ye are of your Father the Devil, says Christ to
the Jews; every child loves the Father. Why? And men love not the Devil; does
not every wretch through natures instinct, abhor the Devil? Is not this the
Mother-devotion of any wretch that knows nothing of God from the womb? God
save me from the Devil, and all his works, How men naturally love the Devil.
I have nothing to do with that fowl spirit. Its true, There Is a physical
hatred of the Devil; as he is a spirit, an Angel and the Pursevant of divine
justice, inflicting evil of punishment on all men naturally; but there is in all
men an inbred moral love of the Devil, as he is a fallen spirit, tempting to
sin; here every prisoner loves this keeper, like loves like, broken men and
Bankrupt flee together to Woods and Mountains; an Outlaw loves an Outlaw,
Fowls of a feather flock together, the Devil and sinful men are both broken
men, and Outlaws of Heaven, and of one blood; wicked men are, 1 Ioh. 3.10. The
children of the Devil, they have that natural relation of Father and Son:
There Is of the Devils seed in sinners, there is a spiritual concupiscence in
Devils, to lust against Gods Image and Glory, and Satan finds his own seed in
us by nature, to wit, concupiscence, a stem, a sprouting, and child of the
house of Hell. It were good we knew our own misery, the man resolves a
prisoner has a sweet life, who loves his own chains because made of gold, and
hates them not because chains, and falls to Paint the walls of his Dungeon,
and to put up Hangings in his Prison, and will but over-gild with gold his Iron
Fetters: Oh! are we not in love with our own Dungeon of sin? and do we not bear
a kind love to our Father the Devil? We bring in provision for the flesh, and
nourish the Old man, as old as since Adam-first sinned: Alas, we never saw our
Father in the face, we love the Devil as the Devil fallen in sin, but we see
him not as a Devil, but only under the embroderies of golden and silken
temptations, we sow to the flesh, we Inn our Crop to the Devil, but we know
not our Landlord; and because sense and flesh is nearer to us then God, we
desire more the Liberties of State, free commerce, and peace with the King,
then Christ's Liberties, the power, and purity of the Gospel, that we may
negotiate with Heaven, and have peace with God.

Unclean spirit] This is the quality of this Devil: Satan how an unclean
Spirit.
An unclean Devil. Now whether he be called so, because he tempted the Maid to
some prodigious acts of uncleanness, or because in general he tempts to
uncleanness of sins; so as uncleanness is but a general Epithet of all the
Devils; I profess my ignorance, how ever all devils have this general name,
unclean spirits, because of their spiritual uncleanness: Its certain, Devils
are, 1. Black, now they being fallen in a smoky Hell, and kept under the power
and chains of darkness, they are but lumps of black Hell, and darkness,
whereas they are created fair Angels: 1. Truth is the fairest thing that is,
obedience to God is truth, Ioh. 3.21. Sin is the most ugly, and deformed thing
in the world: and therefore sinners can have no communion with God, while they
be washed: 2. Devils were once pure and clean spirits, their understandings
were made clear, to see God and his beauty; now these fair spirits are darkened,
for their fellow-Angels who sinned not, are yet Seraphims, and Lamps of light,
and these Angels (says Christ, Mat. 18.10.) Do always behold the face of my
Father which is in Heaven.

Then the more Grace of Christ, the more clearness of saving knowledge and
sound reason; Grace makes more solid wisdom then Art or Learning; by this
David excelled all his Teachers, and the Ancient ones: In Satan's fools the
right principle of wisdom is extinguished; the Prophet spoke it of Statesmen,
or rather State fools, Jer. 8.9. Lo they have rejected the word of the Lord,
and what wisdom is in them? As there be pollutions of the flesh, so are there
pollutions of the mind and spirit, 2 Timothy 3.8. Men of corrupt mind, Its true
wisdom, to know GOD savingly.
are men of rotten minds; false opinions of God are rottenness in the
understanding. 1 Timothy 1.7. The spirit of a sound mind, verse. 13. Hold fast the
form of sound words: There are some words that come from a sick mind, as Tit.
1.13. The Apostle holds forth, that there be some sick of the Faith, as there
be some sound of the Faith, Prove. 2.7. The Lord gives sound wisdom (...) its
Essence and being: Tushija, Pagnin, Substantiam: R. Levi, reservabit rectis id
quod est; Ra. David says, Because wisdom and the Law of God is an abiding, and
(as Aben Ezra says) A living thing that endures to eternity; whereas indeed
humane wisdom, and false opinions of God, are passing-away things, the lie
lives not a long age: wisdom is a Tree of Life, Psalm, 119.80. Let my heart be
sound in thy Statutes: (...) perfect, wanting nothing, a fool wants the best
part of his heart: State-wisdom, not lying level to Christ's ends, but
commensurated with carnal projects, is but folly.

Hearing of him] What had she heard? that Jesus was the Son of God, Art. 5 Mark
7
the Messiah of Israel, and could, and was willing to heal her daughter: two
things are here observable, hearing of Christ drew her to Christ: 2. Its good
to border with Christ, and to be near hand to him: There is a necessity that we
hear of Christ, before we come to him. This is Gods way, Romans 10. Faith comes
by hearing: Christ is not in us from the womb, Faith is not a flower that
grows out of such a sour and cold ground as nature; its a stem and a birth
of heaven: 2. None can come to Christ, except they here a good report of him.
How shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? Those who come
aright to Christ, must have noble, high, long, deep, and broad thoughts of
Jesus, What hearing brings souls to Christ.
and know the Gospel. Now what is the Gospel? Nothing but a good report of
Christ; you must hear a Gospel-report of Christ, ere you come to him: Ill
principled thoughts of Christ keeps many from him, 1 Kin. 8.42. Strangers
shall hear of thy great name, and of thy strong hand. Christ was to be heard by
the deaf Gentiles, Is. 29.18. In that day shall the deaf hear the words of the
book: We hear, and we hear not, because the Lord wakeneth not the ear, morning
by morning, that we may hear as the learned: Many hear, but they have not the
learned ear, nor the ear of such as have heard and learned of the Father: Many
hear of Christ, a voice, and no more but a voice, they know not that Prophecy,
Isa. 30.21. Thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way
walk ye in it: There Is another vice in our hearing men do not hear, that they
may hear, Isa. 42.18. Hear ye deaf, and behold ye blind, that ye may see: That
is, hear that ye may hear, see that ye may see: the Lord gives Grace, that he
may give Grace, and we are to receive Grace, that we may receive Grace: Grace
is the only reward of Grace: 3. We hear, and we hear not; we see, but we have
no reflect-act upon our seeing: Many open their ears to Christ, but they hear
not, they want a spiritual faculty of observing, Esa. 42.20. Seeing many
things, but thou observest not; opening the ear, but he hears not. 4. Many
put Christ in an ear without a bottom, or in ear with a hole in its bottom; we
hear of Christ, Heb. 2. but we are as leaking and running-out vessels, Esa.
42.23. Who among you will give ear to this, and hear for the time to come?
Physicians give their three causes of Deafness: 1. When there is a carnosity on
the Tympanum auris, Three vices in hearing.
the drum, this is Extrinsicall, the world is another lover, and the care of
it, and that hinders hearing. 2. When the organ of hearing is hurt and
distempered, as a lame hand cannot apprehend: now when there be false fancies,
and principles contrary to the Gospel in the heart, the ear cannot hear. 3.
When there is abundance of humors in the brain, and they raise a noise, and
tumult in tympano, in the drum, and hinder sounds to be heard. When Pride, and
Principles of Sensuality and vain pleasures make a noise within, that neither
Christ knocking, nor his voice without can be heard, men are deaf.

But why do we not hear and see Christ revealing himself in his ways and
works? Reason would say, Simile.
If Hell and Judgment were before our eyes, we should hear and come to Christ:
Suppose we saw with our eyes for twenty or thirty years together, a great
furnace of fire, of the quantity of the whole earth, and saw there, Cain,
Judas, Ahitophel, Saul, and all the damned, as lumps of red fire, and they
boiling and louping for pain in a dungeon of everlasting brimstone, and the
black and terrible devils with long and sharp-tooth'd whips of Scorpions,
lashing out scourges on them; and if we saw there our Neighbors, Brethren,
Sisters, yea our dear Children, Wives, Fathers and Mothers, A sight of Hell
should not work Faith without Graces efficacious action.
swimming and sinking in that black Lake, and heard the yelling, shouting,
crying of our young ones and fathers, blaspheming the spotless Justice of God;
if we saw this, while we are living here on Earth, we should not dare to offend
the Majesty of God, but should hear, come to Christ, and believe and be saved.
But the truth is, If we believe not Moses and the Prophets, neither should we
believe for this, because we see with our eyes, and hear with our ears, even
while we are in this life daily, pieces and little parcels of Hell, for we see
and hear daily some tumbling in their blood, thousands cut down of our
Brethren, Children, Fathers, Malefactors hanged and quartered, Death in every
house: These, these be little hells, and little coals and sparkles of the great
fire of hell, and certain Documents to us, that there is a Hell. Yet we neither
hear nor come to Christ.

Nay, suppose a Preacher come from Hell to the rich Gluttons five brethren, Luke
16. and should bring with him all the lashes, and print of the whips of Satan's
Scorpions, on back and side, on thighs, arms and legs; and though he should
bring up to us out of hell, ten thousand damned, and bring with him the fire,
the red coals of the Fury of God, every coal as great as a mountain, and offer
them all to our eyes and ears and senses, such is the power of our deafness
and blindness, that we should not believe: For when many little hells work so
little by length of time, this one great hell should never bring us to hear,
and come to Christ. See how little we are affected with the blood of so many
thousands of our own flesh in the three Kingdoms: Alas! our senses are confined
within time.

Its good to border near to Christ.
The other thing observable, is, That it is good to be near the place where
Christ is. It was advantage, that the woman dwelt upon the borders of the Land
where Christ was; Its good for the poor to be a Neighbor beside the rich, and
for the thirsty to take up house and dwell at the Fountain, and for the sick to
border with the Physician. O love the ground that Christ walks on; To be born
in Sion is an honor, Psalm 87.6. because there the Lord dwells. Its a
blessing to hear and see Christ, Mat. 13.16. we do not weigh, nor duly esteem
what a favor it is, that Christ walks in the midst of the golden
Candlesticks, that the voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land; its ours, to
build him a palace of Silver.

For the sixth Article, which is, Her adoring of Christ; it shall be spoken of
in another place: I hasten therefore to her Prayer.

SERMON VI.
IN her Prayer, as it is expressed by Matthew, we have, 1. The manner of it, She
cried. 2. The compellation or party to whom, she prays, O Lord, thou son of
David. 3. The Petition, Have mercy on me. 4. The Reason, For my daughter is
vexed with a Devil.

She cried: The poor woman prayed (as we say) with good will, with a bent
affection. Why is crying used in praying? Had it not been more modesty to speak
to this soul-redeeming Savior, who hears sometimes before we pray, then to
cry out and shout? For the Disciples do after complain, that She cries so
after them: Was Christ so difficile, to be entreated? The reasons of crying;
are, 1. Want cannot blush; the pinching necessity of the Saints, is not tied to
the law of Modesty: Hunger cannot be ashamed, Psalm. 55.2. I mourn in my
complaint, and make a noise, says David, and Ezekiah, Esa. 38.14. Like a
Crane, or a Swallow, Crying in Prayer necessary.
so did I chatter; I did mourn as a Dove, Job 30.28. I went mourning without
the Sun; I stood up (and) I cried in the congregation. 2. Though O my God, I
cry by day, and thou hear not, Ps. 55.17. At noon will I pray, and cry aloud,
Ps 18.6. In my distress I cried to the Lord, Ps. 88.13. Unto thee have I
cried, O Lord, Ps. 130.1. Out of the depths have I cried, Jon. 2.2. Out of the
belly of Hell, I cried, Psalm. 28.1. Unto thee will I cry, O Lord, my Rock: Yea
it goes to somewhat more then crying, Job. 19.7. I cry out of wrong, but am
not heard, Lam. 3.8. Also when I cry and shout, he shuts out my Prayers: He
who may teach us all to pray, sweet Jesus, Heb. 5.7. In the days of his flesh
offered up prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears, he prayed
with Psalm. 34.6. This poor man cried, and the Lord heard and saved him from all
his fears, Ps. 18.6. My cry came before him, even to his ears: the cry adds
wings to the prayer, As a speedy Post sent to Court upon life and death, Ps.
22.5. Our fathers cried unto thee, and were delivered, Psalm. 34.17. The
righteous cry and the Lord hears: We all know the Parable of the poor Widow,
and the unrighteous judge; if the oppressed be not delivered, Christ and his
Father, and Heaven, shall hear of it: hence, 4. Importunity in Jacob to his
Lord) till thou bless me: So James calls it, chap. 5. v. 16. (...) Prayer
possessed with a spirit, but a good spirit-Prayer, steeled with fervor of
spirit, so fervent that David is like the Post, who lays by three horses as
breathless; his heart, his throat, his eyes, Ps. 69.3. I am weary of my
crying, my throat is dried, There is violence offered to God, in fervent
prayer, Exodus 32.10. Moses is answered, when he is wrestling with God by
Prayer, for the people, Now therefore let me alone, that my anger may wax hot
against them: Let me alone, is a word, of putting violent hands in any: there
be bones and sinews in such prayers, by them the King is held in his Galleries,
Cant. 7.5.

Object. Obj. 1. Praying sometime wants words, so as groaning goes for
Prayer.
But if so be that prayers must be fervent, even to vocal crying and shouting,
then I cannot pray, who am often so confounded, that I cannot speak one word.
Ans. So was the servant of God, in a Spiritual kind of praying, in uttering
the Psalm. 77. when he says v. 4. Thou hold mine eyes waking, I am so
troubled that I cannot speak; yea groaning goes for praying to God, Psalm.
102.20. The Lord looked down from heaven, to hear the groaning of the prisoner,
Romans 8.26. The spirit intercedeth for us, (...) with sighs that none can
speak. Faith does sigh prayers to heaven, Christ receives sighs in his censure
for Prayer: words are but the body, the garment, Obj. 2. How many other
expressions, beside vocal prayer, go under the worth of prayer in Gods account.
the outside of Prayer, sighs are nearer the heart-work, a dumb beggar gets
an alms at Christ's gates, even by making signs, when his tongue cannot plead
for him, and the rather because he is dumb.

Object. 2. I have not so much as a voice to utter to God; and Christ says,
Cant. 2.14. Cause me hear thy voice. Ans. Yea, but some other thing has a
voice beside the tongue, Psalm. 6.8. The Lord has heard the voice of my weeping:
Tears have a tongue, and Grammar, and language, that our Father knows. Babes
have no prayers for the breast, but weeping, the mother can read hunger on
weeping.

Object. 3. But I am often so as I cannot weep, weeping is peculiar to a man as
laughing is, Obj. 3. Some affections in p^ayer are greater and above weeping.
and spiritual weeping is peculiar to the renewed man. Ans. Vehemency of
affection does often move weeping, so as it is but spilt weeping that we can
attain hence, Ezechiah can but chatter as a crane, and a swallow, and moan as a
dove, Is. 38.14. Sorrow keeps not always the Roadway, weeping is but the
scabberd of sorrow, and there is often more sorrow where there is little or no
weeping, there is most of fire, where there is least smoke.

Obj. 4. Looking up to heaven goes for praying.
Object. 4. But I have neither weeping one way or other, ordinary, nor marred.
Ans. Looking up to heaven, lifting up of the eyes, goes for Prayer also in
Gods Books, Psalm. 5.3. My Prayer will I direct to thee, and I will look up,
Isa. 48.14. Mine eyes fail with looking upward, Psalm. 69.3. Because, 1. Prayer
is a pouring out of the soul to God, and Faith will come out at the eye, in
lieu of another door, often affections break out at the window, when the door
is closed as smoke venteth at the window, when the Chimney refuses passage;
Steven looked up to Heaven, Act. 7.55. He sent a Post, a greedy, pitiful, and
hungry look up to Christ, out at the window, at the nearest passage, to tell a
poor friend was coming up to him: 2. I would wish no more, if I were in Hell,
but to send a long-look up to Heaven; there be many love looks of the Saints,
lying up before the Throne, in the bosom of Christ: the twinkling of thy eyes
in Prayer are not lost to Christ; elie Stevens look, David's look should not be
registered so many hundred years in Christ's written Testament.

Object. 5. Alas, I have no eyes to look up; Obj. 5. Breathing goes for
praying.
the Publican, Luke 18. looked down to the earth, and what senses Spiritual
have I to send after Christ. Ans. There Is life going in and out at thy
nostrils: Breathing is praying, and taken off our hand, as crying in Prayer,
Lam. 3.56. Thou have heard my voice, hide not thy ear at my breathing, at my
cry.

Object. 6. I have but a heard heart to offer to God in Prayer, and what can I
say then, Obj. 6. Wherein is that least in which praeyer may be conserved.
wanting all praying disposition? Ans. 1. Therefore pray, that you may pray: 2.
The very aspect, and naked presence of a deed spirit, when there is a little
vocal praying, its acceptable to God; or if an overwhelmed heart refuses to
come, its best to go and tell Christ, and request him to come and fetch the
heart himself: 3. To. 8.23. We our; All is here transacted in our own heart,
the soul cries, O when will my Father come, and fetch his children? When shall
the Spousely in her Husbands bosom? Minimum quod sic, the smallest of Prayer,
in which the life and essence of Prayer may breath and live: Now Prayer being a
pouring out of the soul to God, much of the affections of love, desire,
longing, joy, Faith, sorrow, fear, boldness, comes along with prayer out to
God, and the heart is put in Christ's bosom, and its neither up nor down to the
essenc of sincere praying; whether the soul come out in words, in groans, or in
long-looks, or in sighing, or in pouring out tears to God, Job 16.20. or in
breathing.

Obj. 7.
Object. 7. What shall be done with half praying, and words without sense? Ans.
This is the woman of Canaans case, Piscator observes an Elepsis of the word or
Particle (...) or (because) or (for) Have mercy on me, my daughter is vexed,
she should have said, because my daughter is vexed: But the mind is hasty,
that she lets slip words: so are broken Prayers set down in Scripture, as
Prayers, Psalm. 116.1. I love, because the Lord has heard my voice: There Is
nothing in the Hebrew but one word, Broken Prayers a^e Prayers.
(...) I love, but he shows not whom he loves; its a broken word, because as
Ambrose says, He loved the most desirable thing: I have love (he would say)
but its centure and bed is only God, Psalm. 6.3. My soul is sore vexed, but
thou, O Lord, how long? That is a broken speech also, Psalm. 109.4. For my love
they were my enemies, in the Hebrew its (...) Vani Tephilla, at ego oration: But
I prayer; or, I was all Prayer, as if I in soul and body had been made of
Prayer. The reasons of broken Prayers, are often; 1. The hastiness of the
affections, not the hastiness always of unbelief, Esa. 28.16. But often of
Faith, 2 Pet. 3.10. Love and longing for Christ have Eagles wings, and love
flies, when words do but creep as a Snail: 2. It comes from a delique in the
affections (they are broken as a too high bended Bow) that there is a swooning
and delique of words; every part of a supplication to a Prince is not a
supplication: a poor man out of fear may speak Nonsense, and broken words that
cannot be understood by the Prince, but nonsense in Prayer, when sorrow,
blackness and a dark overwhelmed spirit dictateth words, are well known in,
and have a good sense to God; therefore to speak morally, The Lord knows
nonsense in a broken Spirit to be good sense.
Prayer being Gods fire, as every part of fire, is fire: so here every broken
Parcel of Prayer, is Prayer; so the Forlorn son forgot the half of his
Prayers, he resolved to say, Luke 15.19. Make me as one of thy hired servants;
but v. 21. He prays no such thing, and yet his Father fell on his neck and
kissed him; a Plant is a tree in the potency, an infant man, seeds of saving
grace, are saving grace; prayer is often in the bowels and womb of a sigh;
though it come not out, yet God hears it as a Prayer, Romans 8.27. And he that
scarcheth the hearts, knows what is the mind of the Spirit, because he
makes intercession for the Saints according to the will of God, Psalm. 10.17.
Lord thou have heard the desire of the humble: Desires have no sound with men,
so as they come to the ear, but with God they have a sound as Prayers have:
Then when others cannot know what a groan means, God knows what is under
the lap of a sigh, because his Spirit made the sigh: he first made the Prayer
as an intercessor, and then as God hears it: he is within praying, and
without hearing.

Object. 8. But are all my cryings in Prayer works of the Spirit? Obj. 8.
Ans. The flesh may come in and join in Prayer, and some things may be said in
haste, not in Faith, as in that Prayer, Ps* 77.9. Has God forgotten to be
gracious? Nor is that of Jeremiahs to be put in Christ's golden censure to be
presented to the Father, Jer. 15.18. Will thou be altogether to me as a Liar,
and as waters that fail? nor that of Job 13.24. Wherefore hold thou me for
thy enemy? Christ washes sinners in his blood, but he washes not sin: he
advocateth for the man that prays to have him accepted, but not for the
upstarts and boylings of corruption, and the flesh that are mixed with our
Prayer, to have them made white: Christ rejects these things in prayer that
are essentially ill, but he washes the prayer, and causes the Father accept
it. There be so many other things that are a pouring out of the soul in prayer,
as groaning, sighing, looking up to heaven, breathing, weeping, that it cannot
be imagined how far short printed and read prayers comes of vehement praying;
for you cannot put sighs, groans, tears, breathing, and such heart messengers
down in a printed Book, nor can paper and ink lay your heart in all its sweet
affections out before God, the Service Book then must be toothlesse and
spiritlesse talk.

SERMON VII.
SOn of David, O Lord, thou son of David:] In this compellation, consider why
Christ is called the son of David, never the son of Adam* never the son of
Abraham? Its true, he is called frequently the Son of man, but never when any
prays to him: and he is reckoned in his Genealogy, David's son, Abraham's son,
the son of Adam; but the son of David is his ordinary style when prayers are
directed to him in the days of his flesh. The Reasons are, 1. Christ had a
special relation to Abraham being his seed, but more special to David,
Because the Covenant was in a special manner established with David as a King,
and the first King in whose hand the Church, the feeding thereof as Gods own
flock, was as Gods depositum and pawn laid down; the Lord established the
Covenant of Grace with David, and his son Solomon, who was to build him a
house, and promised to him an Eternal Kingdom, and Grace, and perseverance in
Grace, and that by a sure Covenant, the sure mercies of David, Esa. 55.3. 2 Samuel 7.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. 1 Chronicles. 22.9, 10. 2 Samuel 23.5 Yet
has he made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things and sure,
for (this is) all my salvation, and all my desire, Psalm. 89.3. I have made a
covenant with my chosen, I have sworn unto David my servant. 4. Thy seed will I
establish for ever, and build up thy Throne to all generations, verse. 21, 22,
23, 24, 25, 26, 27.28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37. Gabriel the Angel
speaks the same to Zacharias, Luk 1.32.33 So verse 68, 69. Acts 13.34, 35, 36,
37. Acts 2.30 Now it was necessary that Christ the Messiah should lineally
descend of a King: Why Christ is frequently called the son of David, not the
son of Adam, etc.
Abraham was not a King, Adam was not formally a king by covenant as David was.
2. Christ changes names with David, as he never did with any man: Christ is
never called Abraham, but Ezekiel. 34.23, 24. David my servant shall be a Prince
among them, Hos. 3.5. They shall seek the Lord their God, and David their King:
3. David entered to a Typical Throne against the heart of Jew and Gentile,
Psalm. 2.1.2. And so did Christ, Acts 4.25, 26. And did feed the people of God
in the midst of many enemies, Psalm. 110.1, 2. And so did Christ, Acts 2.34, 35,
36. Not so Abraham, he was a befriended man in a strange Land.

That which I aim at is this, The Covenant. Christ a King by Covenant.
by the received Divinity of the Jews, and of the Gentiles who knew God, Christ
was a King by the Covenant of Grace, and the special party of the new
Covenant, as was David. This may be made more evident, if we enquire a little
in the Covenant: 1. What it is: 2. Who be the parties. 3. What promises. 4.
What condition. 5. What properties. 6. Some uses, with all Brevity: The
Covenant is here a joint and mutual bargain between two, What the Crvenant of
Grace is, and what things are in it.
according to which they promise freely such and such things each to other;
hence God and man made up a solemn bargain in Christ: 2. They both consent:
Christ forced not his Spouse to marry against her will, nor was God forced to
make a covenant. Love and Grace that expression) made all of Grace, grace it
self, we could never have had dealing with God.

Parties in the Covenant.
2. The parties of the Covenant are, God and Man; Oh how sweet! that such a
Potter, and such a former of all things should come in terms of Bargaining with
such clay, as is guilty before him! Now the parties here, on the one part, is
GOD; on the other, The Mediator Christ, and the children that the Lord gave
him. Observe, 1. In the covenant of Nature and Works: God and his friend Adam
were parties contracting: And in the second covenant, God and his fellow
Christ, and all his are parties; a covenant of Peace cannot be between an Enemy
and an Enemy as they are such; those who were Enemies, must lay down wrath ere
they enter into covenant; contraries as contraries cannot be united: God being
the sole author of this covenant, did lay aside enmity first; Love must first
send out love, as fire must cast out heat: Its true, this covenant is made with
sinners, (as God made the covenant of nature with Adam* yet righteous) but an
Union covenant wise could never have been, except God had in a manner bowed to
us, and grace proved out of measure gracious. Christ h^^h a seven fold relation
in the Covenant of Grace.


Christ is the party here; so Christ has a seven fold relation: 1. As he is
more then a creature, he is the Covenant it self: 2. As he deals between the
parties, he is the Messenger of the Covenant: 3. As he saw and heard, and
testifies all, he is the Witness of the Covenant: 4. As he undertaketh for
the parties at variance, he is the Surety of the Covenant: 5. As he stands
between the contrary parties, he is the Mediator of the Covenant: 6. As he
signeth the Covenant, and closes all the Articles; he is the Testator of the
Covenant: 7. As he is a side or the half of the Covenant; he is the Party
contracting in the Covenant.

For the first, Isa. 42.6. 1. Christ the Covenant it self.
I gave thee for a Covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles, Isa.
49.8. I will preserve thee, and give thee for a Covenant of the people: Christ,
God and man, is all the Covenant: 1. Because he is given to fulfill the
Covenant on both sides: 2. He is the Covenant, In abstracto, he is very Peace
and Reconciliation it self, Mic. 5. 5. And this man shall be the peace, when
the Assyrian shall come unto our Land: 2. Christ the Messenger of the Covenant.
As fire is hot for it self, and all things hot for it, and by participation:
so thou art in so far in Covenant with Christ, as thou have any thing of
Christ, want Christ and want Peace and the Covenant.

2. Mal. 3.1. The Lord whom ye seek, Christ as Messenger of the Covenant,
makes report to us of his Fathers ^il.
shall suddenly come to his Temple, even the Messenger or Angel of the Covenant
whom ye delight in: Christ travelleth with tidings between the parties: 1. He
reports of God to us, that its his fathers will that we be saved, Joh. 6.39.
2. Christ reports of himself, for it sets Christ, to be a Broker for
Christ; 2. Of himse^f.
and wisdom to cry in the streets (who will have me) Prove 1.21, 22. Prove. 9.1,
2, 3, 4, 5. It became the Lord Jesus to praise himself, Joh. 6.48. Joh. 8.12. I
am that bread of life, I am the light of the world, Joh. 10.9. I am the door,
v. 11. I am the good Shepherd: 3. Of his father to us. 4. Of us to the father.
3. He praises his Father, Joh. 15. My Father is the good Husbandman. 4. He
suiteth us in marriage, and commends his Father, and our father in law: You
marry me, dear souls, O but my Father is a great person, Joh. 14.2. In my
Fathers house are many dwelling places: 2. He commends us to the Father, a
Messenger making peace will do all this, Joh. 17.8. They have received thy
words, and have known surely, that I came out from thee, and they have believed
that thou did send me. 25. O Righteous Father, the world have not known thee,
but I have known thee, and these have known that thou have sent me: Ministers
cannot speak of Christ and his father, as he can do himself: O come hear Christ
speak of Christ, and of his Father, and of heaven, for for he saw all: O sweet
believer, Christ gives thee a good report in heaven, the Father and the Son
are speaking of thee behinde-backs; A good report in Heaven is of much esteem;
Christ spoke more good of thee then thou art all worth; He tells over again
Ephraims prayers behind his back, Jer. 30.18. O woe to thee, Christ is telling
black tidings of thee in Heaven, Such a man will not believe in me, he hates
me, and my cause, and my people: Christ cannot lie of any man.

3. Christ is an Eyewitness of the Covenant, and heard and saw all; 3. Christ
the witness of the Covenant.
the whole Covenant was a bloody act, acted upon his person, Isa. 55.4. Behold
I have given him for a witness to the people, Rev. 1. 5. The faithful
witness, Rev. 3.14. The Amen, Christ witnesses especially 4. things.
the faithful and true witness. The Covenant says, 1. The Son of man came to
seek, and to save the lost, Luke 19.10. Amen, says Christ, I can witness that
to be true. 2. Christ dyed and rose again for Amen, says the witness, Joh.
1.18. I puts his Seal to that; This is a true and faithful saying, That
Christ Jesus came into the world to die for sinners. I can swear that is true,
says Christ. 3. The world shall By him that lives for ever and ever, who
created heaven and earth, (says this Angel-witnesse; Rev. 10.6.) that is most
true. Time shall be no more. Its a controversy to the world, if Eternity be
coming: Christ ends the controversy with an oath. 4. Christ shall judge the
world, and all shall bow to me. This Amen of God, says that is true, Romans
14.11. For as it is written, as I live says the Lord every knee shall bow to
me. The Covenant of Works had a promise; but because it was, 1. Conditional.
2. To be broken and done away, it had no oath of God as this has. O doubting
soul, thou say that thy salvation is not sure. Why? And its a sworn Article
of the Covenant, thou have Christ's great Oath on it: Alas, God loves not me:
have thou the Son? thou have a true Testimony, its not so; and Pro. 14.5. A
faithful Witness will not lie: Christ has cause to remember that thou art
saved, he bears the marks of it in his body: Athiest! thou say who knows
there is a heaven and hell? Why, the Witness of the Covenant says, I was in
both, and saw both.

4 Christ the Surety of the covenant
4. Heb. 7.22. Christ is the surety of the better Covenant: And in this the
Father is surety for Christ, if he undertake for David, and Hezekiah, Psalm.
119.122. Isa. 38.14. Far more for his own Son; God has given his word for
Christ, he shall do the work, Isa. 52.13. Behold my righteous servant shall
deal prudently, Isa. 50.9. Behold the Lord God will help me, and again, the Son
is Surety to the Father; And the great undertaker, that God shall fulfill his
part of the Covenant, that the Father shall give a Kingdom to his flock, Luke
12.32. Joh. 6.37 38, Christ a Surety.
39. 1. Christ as a Surety for us, has paid a ransom for us. 2. Gives a new
heart to his to lose 17.12. But raise them up at Joh. 6.39. If we could
surrender ou^ selves to Christ's undertaking, and get once ^ word that he is
become good to the Father for us, all were well, woe to him who is that loose
man, as he has not Christ under an Act, and band of Surety, that he shall keep
him to the day of God: we make loose bargains in the behalf of our souls.

5. As Christ stands between the two Parties, 5. Christ is the mediator of
the Covenant.
he is the great Lord Mediator of the new Covenant, Heb. 12.24. 1.
Substantially, our Text calls him Lord the Son of David, by condition of
nature, he has something of God, as being true God, and something of man as
sharing with us, hence is he Mediator by Office, and lays his hands on both
parties; Christ has a threefold relation as a mediator
As a days man does, Job 9.33. In which he has a threefold relation: 1. Of a
friend to both, he has Gods heart for man to be gracious, and satisfy mercy,
and a man's heart for God to satisfy justice: 2. Of a reconciler to make two
one, to Sister and Spouse, come up now to my Father, and your Father, to my
God, and your God; and Father come down to my Brethren, my kindred and flesh:
3. He is Gods servant, Christ Gods servant, and our servant, and smitten of
both.
in a hard piece of service as ever was, Isa. 52.13. Isa. 42.1. Behold my
servant, Isa. 53.11. My righteous servant; yea and our servant, Mat. 20.28. He
came not to be served, but to serve, and give his life a ransom for many:
Alas, both parties did smite him, Isa. 53.10. It pleased the Lord to bruise
him, Romans 8.32. God spared not his own Son, and the other party his own, smote
him, Mat. 21.38. This is the heir come let us kill him (say they) and seize on
the inheritance: This was cold encouragement to sweet Jesus: if it had been
referred to us, for shame we could not have asked God to be a suffering
Mediator for us, there is more love in Christ then Angels and men could fathom
in their conceptions.

6. Christ confirmed and sealed the Testament.
6. The Covenant is the Testament of our dead friend Jesus, he died to confirm
the Testament, Heb. 9.16.17. Every blood could not seal the Covenant, Christ's
blood as dying sealed the everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13.20. It both expiated
the sins of the Covenanters, and also brought back the great Shepherd of the
sheep from death; For Christ having once paid blood and died, it was free to
the Surety to come out of prison, when he had paid the sum.

7. The seventh relation of Christ makes way to the parties, 7. Christ the
principal confederate party of the Covenant.
and here Christ comes under a double consideration, one as God; so he is one
with the Father and spirit, and the Lord and the Author of the Covenant. 2. As
Mediator, and so he is on our side of the Covenant; Then is the Covenant made
with Christ and all his heirs, and assigns principally with Christ, and with
Abraham's nature in him, but personally with believers: 1. The Scripture says
so, Gal. 3.16. The Promise (or Covenant) is made to Abraham and to his seed, he
says not, and to seeds, as of many, but as of one, and to thy seed, which is
Christ. The Covenant made with Christ personally Gal 3 16. Proved from reasons
out of the Text.
I grant, Beza, Piscator, and many expound Christ, for mystical Christ; for
(say they) it cannot be meant of Christ personally, for so it should fight with
the scope of Paul, who proves the Promise of life eternal to be made to all
believers: 2. It should follow that life eternal is given to Christ only, but
with leave this is not sure, for the truth is, the promise is neither made to
Christ's person singly considered, nor to Christ Mystical; For 1. The promise
is made to Christ in whom the Covenant was confirmed, v. 17. 2. In whom the
Nations were blessed, 14. 3. In whom we receive the Promise of the Spirit
through Faith. 14. Who was made a curse for us, ver. 13. Now not any of these
can agree to Christ Mystical, Christ Mystical did not confirm the Covenant,
nor give the Spirit, nor was he made a curse, but Christ Mediator is he, to
whom the Promises are made, and in him to all his heirs and kindred; not simply
in his person, but as a public person and Mediator. A Covenant between the
Father and the Son, pr^ved.


1. Because the Scripture says to Abraham, and to his seed; that is, Christ
was the Covenant made; and these words of the Covenant, Ps. 89.26. He shall cry
to me, thou art my Father, my God, etc. are expounded, Heb. 1.5. And again I
will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a son, and Joh. 20.17. Go to my
brethren and say to them, I ascend unto my Father and your Father, to my God,
and to your God: So Christ the heir of all things, and the second heirs under
him, are all but one confederate-Family. 2. The covenant made with David and
his seed, and the Fathers, is fulfilled to Christ and his seed, Act. 13.34, 35.
As concerning that, he raised him up from the dead, no more to see corruption,
he said on this wise, I will give you the sure mercies of David. 3. As the
covenant of nature and works was made with Adam, and all his, and there were
not two covenants; so here, the better covenant coming in the place of the
former, is made with the second Adam and his children, Romans 5.18, 19. 1 Cor.
15.20, etc. 4. All that serves to make a covenant are here, 1. God demands
of his son, that he lay down his life; and for his labor he promises, that he
shall see his seed, and God shall give him many children, Isa. 53.10. 2. The
son consents to lay down his life, and says, Here am I to do thy will, thou
have given me a body: This is the formality of a covenant, when Christ
consents to the condition. Now this covenant was manifested in time between
the Father and the Son, but it was transacted from eternity. This is
comfortable, that the Father and Christ transacted a Bargain from eternity,
concerning thee by Name. There was communing between the Father and Son
concerning thy heaven, Father, what shall be given to thy Justice to ransom
such a one, John, Anna, etc. And Christ from eternity did bind for such a
person, he shall believe in time. The Redemption of Sinners, is not a work of
yesterday, or a business of chance, it was well advised, and in infinite
wisdom contrived, therefore put not Christ to be challenged of his engagement,
by refusing the Gospel, when thou believe thou make Christ's word good; he
that believes not, makes God a liar, though in another sense; and for ought
he knows, even in this, that he frustrateth Christ's undertaking in the
covenant; Men believe the Gospel to be a cunningly devised Fable, 2 Pet. 1.16.
The Father and Christ are both in this business; Heaven, Hell, Justice, Mercy,
Souls, and deep Wisdom, are all in this rare piece, and yet men think more of a
Farm, and an Ox, Luke 14.18.19. and of a Pin in the State, or a Straw, or of
the bones of a crazy livelihood, or a House.

3. Touching the Promises, 1. There is no good thing, but it is ours by free
promise, Of the promises
and not by simple donation only; this covenant turns over Heaven, Earth, Sea,
Land, Bread, garments, sleep, the World, Life, Death, into free grace; yea it
makes Sin and crosses, golden Sins and crosses by accident, through the acts
of supernatural providence toward us, 1 Cor. 3.21. Romans 8.28. working on and
about our sins. 2. All good comes to us now, not immediately, but through the
hands of a free Redeemer; and though he be a man who redeemed us, yet because
he is God, there is more of God, and Heaven, and free Love, in all our good
things, then if we received them immediately from God, as Ravens have their food
from God, without a Mediator, and devils have their being only by
creature-right, not by covenant-right.

Now for the promises, they flow from God to us, but all along they fall first
on Christ; they are of two sorts, Two sorts of promises.
1. Some only given to Christ, not to us; as the Name above all names to be
adored, and set at the right hand of God, is properly promised to Christ,
Angels share not with him in this Chair, Phil. 2.9.10. Heb. 1.5.13. There is
promised to Christ a seed a willing people, the ends of the earth for his
inheritance, Isa. 53.10. Psalm. 110.2. Psalm. 2.8, 9. Christ's locks and his hair
are bushy and thick. Cant. 5.11. He is not bald, nor gray hair'd, but he has a
seed like the Stars for multitude that no man can number, Rev. 7.9. but all
those hairs grow out of a head of gold; and his offspring of children is as
numerous as the dew of the morning dawning, Psalm. 110.3. Mica. 5.7. though the
devils locks be more numerous; but its woeful, that Christ and his children
standing upon Mount Sion, being a huge Army, and a pleasant sight, yet thou art
none of that numerous house, all round about thee, are graced of him, and thou
live and die in the house, but lay not in the womb of the morning, and
shall not abide in the house with the sons.

But there be other promises which go along with Christ and his seed, and these
of two sorts, General, special: general, the Mother Promise, I will be thy
God, is made both to Christ, Psalm. 89.26. He shall cry to me thou art my
Father, my God, Joh. 20.17. Psalm. 22.1. Jer. 32.38. Zach. 13.9.
And to us (I will be your God) how sweet is it, that Christ having God to his
Father by eternal birthright, would take a new Covenant-right to God for our
cause? Oh what a honor it is to be within the Covenant with the first heir?

Quest. But why are all the promises enclosed in this one, I Will be your God?
Ans. 1. Because as Christ has Covenant-right to the Promises, Christ took a
new Covenant-right to GOD.
by this Mother right, that God is his God by covenant, so we first must have
God under the relation of a God made ours in a Covenant, a Father, a Husband,
and then by Law, all his are ours. Five sorts of promises made to Christ, and
by proportion to us in him.


2. Christ God is more then grace, pardon, holiness, then created glory, as
the Husband is excellenter then his Marriage Robe, Bracelets, Rings; and we are
to lay our love and faith principally upon the Father and the Son, more then
all created graces; the Well and Fountain of Life is of more excellency then
the streams, and the Tree of Life then the Apples of the Tree of Life: Christ
himself, the objective happiness, is far above a created and formal
beatitude, which issues from him, as the whole is excellenter then the part,
the cause then the effect.

Special Promises are made first to Christ, and then by proportion to us; and
they be these, 1. God promises to grace his Son above his fellows, that he may
die and suffer, and merit to us grace answerable to this: A new heart, and a
new spirit, Jer. 32.39. Ezekiel. 36.26.27. For out of his fullness we receive, and
grace for grace, Joh. 1.16. 2. Justification is promised to Christ, not
personal, as if he needed a pardon for sin, but of his Cause, there is a
cautionary or Surety-righteousnesse due to the Surety when he has paid the
debt of the broken man, and comes out of prison free by Law, so he came out
of the Grave for our righteousness, but having first the righteousness of his
Cause, in his own person, Isaiah 50.8. He is near that justifies me (says
Christ) who shall contend with me? 1 Timothy 3.16. Justified in the Spirit. So
have we Justification of our persons, and Remission in his blood, Ephesians. 1.7. and
that by Covenant, Jer. 31.32.33. 3. Victory and dominion Psalm. 110.1.2. Psalm.
89.21. etc. 1 Cor. 15.25. He must reign till he put all his Enemies under his
feet, and victory over all our Enemies is promised to us, John 16.33. and
14.30. Romans 6.14.15. Gal. 3.13. Col. 2.14.15. 4. The Kingdom and glory is
sought by Christ, 17. 5. from his Father; then he had a word of Promise from
his Father for it, Philip. 2.9.10 and we have that also, Luke 12.32. Ioh.
17.24. Ioh. 14.1.2.3. 5. Christ had a word of Promise, when he went down to the
grave, as some Favorite by Law goes to Prison, but has in his bosom from
his Prince, a Bill of Grace, that within three days he shall come out to enjoy
all his wonted Honors and Court, Psalm. 16.10.11. so have we the like, Ioh.
11.26. and 6.38.39.

SERMON VIII.
THe condition of the covenant is Faith: holiness and sanctification is the
condition of Covenanters, 4. The condition of the covenant.
Gal. 4.21.22.23.24. Romans 10.4.5.6.7. This do was the condition of the Covenant
of Works: This believe, is the condition of this Covenant; because Faith
sends a person out of himself, and takes him off his own bottom, that in
Christ he may have his righteousness: works is a more selfy condition, and
gives therefore, 2. less glory to God: Faith holds forth God in Christ in
the most lively and lovely properties of Free Grace, mercy, love transcendent;
hence a believer as such cannot possibly glory in himself; all that Faith has,
is by way of receiving, and begging wise.

But some teach, that this Covenant has no condition at all: Object. Dr. Crisp
Christ alone exalted, Ser. 6. page 160.
So Dr. Crispe and other Libertines; For this is an everlasting Covenant, Man
is not now so confirmed in grace, but he may fail in believing, and so soon as
the Condition fails, the Covenant fails, as we see in the first Covenant.
Ans. 1. That we have no confirming grace to establish us to the day of Christ,
is to teach with some Familists, that There is no grace in sound Believers,
Rise reign and Ruin of Antino^ Families Er. 16. p. 4.
different in kind and nature, from that grace which is in many Hypocrites.
Yea, but the pure in spirit are blessed, and shall see God, Hypocrites are not
so. And what else is this but the Kings Road way to the Apostasy of the Saints,
if believers have not Christ for their undertaker to bring them to glory?
Libertines deny all conditions of the covenant of Grace.
To intercede for them, Heb. 2.10. Luke 22.32.33. 2. And though they believe
not at the first hour, yet this Gospel Covenant is not frustrated, even if poor
souls believe at the eleventh hour; the former Covenant leaves sinners for the
first breach with out remedy, or hope of life, by the tenor of the Law, not so
this Covenant. Christ knocks while his locks be wet with night rain.

Obj. 2.
Object. 2. (I will put my Law in your inward parts) is no condition to be
performed by us, but by God only, and so all the tie lies upon God, if God do
not this as he promises, Ier. 31. Must not the fault or failing be his who is
tied in a covenant to perform his part, The new covenant has conditions to be
performed by us.
and does it not? Now this God promises, Ier. 31. Heb. 8.10. Ezekiel. 36.26.27.
Ans. Either does God promise to give us Faith, and to cause us to walk in his
ways, Ezekiel. 36.26.27. and to circumcise our hearts to love the Lord. Deuteronomy.
30.6. which Arminians deny, contrary to the clear daylight of Scripture, or
then, when ever we sin who are under the Covenant of Grace, by committing and
acting works of the flesh, and omitting to believe, pray, praise, humble our
souls for sin, God is to be blamed, who works not in us by his efficacious
Grace to will and to do, as he has promised, Phil. 2.13. Ezekiel. 36.26.27. and
the regenerate cannot sin at all, because its the Lords fault (God avert
blasphemy) that we sin, for for without his giving of a new heart, and his
efficacious moving us to walk in his way (to which God is tied by Covenant,
Ezekiel. 36.27. Deuteronomy. 30.6.) We cannot choose but sin; hence they teach we are not
obliged to pray, nor do we sin in not believing, in not praying, when the
breath of the wind of the Holy Ghost does not blow, and act us to those holy
duties. Rise, reign of Antinomian Er. 22. page 5*
Hence also it is taught, That none are exhorted to believe, but such whom we
know to be the elect of God, or to have his spirit in them effectually working

Obj. 3. To do any thing in conscience to a commandment is to be under the
Law, Obj. 3.
and contrary to the Covenant of Grace, ib. Er. 33. Ans. The Law of Grace or
Gospel has Commandments, as Romans 6.12. Let not sin reign therefore in your
mortal bodies, And this is backed with a reason taken from the promise of
Grace, v. 14. For sin shall not have dominion over you: A two fold Dominion of
gracious and supernatural acts.
for you are not under the Law, but under Grace, so Phil. 2.12. Work out etc.
for verse. 13. Its God who works in you, Though we have no Physical dominion
over the assisting grace of God so as I can forceably command the wind of the
Spirit to blow, when I please, yet have we a certain Moral Dominion by virtue
of an Evangelick promise, so as faith is to have influence in all acts of
sanctification, and to look to the promise of assistance, which he who cannot
lie has promised, though he be not tied to my time and manner of working; yet
do I sin in not praying, and in not believing, even when his wind blows not:
Gods liberty and freedom of grace does not destroy the Law of either works, or
grace, and free me from a duty.

Object. 4. Believing and obedience of Faith, is but a consequent of the
Covenant, Obj. 4
not an antecedent, so I must believe upon other grounds, but not in way of the
condition of the Covenant, for in that tenor I am to do nothing. Ans. The
Apostle, Romans 10. Expressly distinguishes between the righteousness of the
Law, verse. 5. Which requires doing as a condition; and the righteousness of
faith, ver. 6. Which requires believing, ver. 10. and Gal. 5.5. We through the
spirit wait for the hope of righteousness through Faith: nor can any have
claim to the Covenant but such as believe.

Object. 5. The covenant is Gods love to man, to take him to himself, Obj. 5
and that before the children do good or ill, Crispe 16.167.
and to him that works is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt. Ans.
The covenant is a fruit and effect of Gods love, but it is not formally Gods
love, for because God loved Israel, therefore did he enter in covenant with
them, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. Ezech. 16.8. and Arminians expound, that of Jacobs
embracing of the covenant by Faith, and of Esaus rejecting of it through
unbelief: Whereas Paul speaks of Jacob and Esau, as they lay stated in the
eye and view of God from eternity, ere they were borne, and had as yet neither
done good nor ill: Now the covenant of Grace or Gospel manifested to Jacob and
Esau, is not eternal, but proposed to them after they are borne, and when the
offer of Christ in the Gospel is made, and how could Esau ere he was born
refuse the Gospel, except you say he did evil before he did evil? which is
nonsense: 2. Paul says plainly, To him that believes is the work reckoned.

Object. 6. Our act of believing is a work, and no work can be a condition of
the covenant of Grace; yea Christ alone justifies, Obj. 6.
Crispe 16.168
faith is not Christ, nor any partner with him in the work; yea we are
justified before we believe, and Faith only serves for the manifestation of
justification to our conscience, for we believe no lie, when we believe we are
justified, but a truth, then it must be true that we are justified, before we
believe. Ans. 1. We are not justified before we believe.
Christ alone as the meritorious cause justifies, and his imputed
righteousness as the formal cause; and this way Christ alone justifies the
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles and all believers, ere they be born, but this is
but the fountain ready to wash: but believe it, Christ washes not, while we be
foul, he clotheth us not, while we be naked, he gives not eye salve, while we
be blind, nor gold while we be poor, nor is his name our righteousness, while
we be sinners: 1. Men not born cannot be the object of actual righteousness,
the unborn child needs no actual application of Christ's eye salve, of his
gold and righteousness; now justification is a real favor applied to us in
time, just as sanctification in the new birth, 1 Cor. 6.11. And such were some
of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified; then
they were sometimes not washed: 2. Poverty puts beauty, worth, and a high
price on Christ; sense of sin says, O what can I give for precious Jesus
Christ? But his Father cannot sell him. 2. Yet is Faith a palsy hand under
Christ to receive him, Ioh. 1.11. Its an Evangelick act, and not a mere
passion, but of grace deputed to be a receiver, a certain Inn keeper to lodge
Christ; and so Christ his alone does not justi^ie us, being mere Patients, this
is not to put Faith in the chair and Throne of Estate with Christ, Faith gives
glory to Christ, and takes Grace as an alms, but takes no glory from him,
Romans 4.20. But he was strong in the Faith giving glory to God: We cannot be
justified before we believe: 1. We are damned before we believe, he that
believes not is condemned already, John 3.2. He that is justified is
glorified, Romans 8.30. and saved, Mar. 16.16. 3. We are borne, and by nature the
sons of wrath, Ephesians. 2.2. We our selves were etc. But he has saved us: v. 7.
That being justified by his Grace, we should be made heirs according to the
hope of eternal life, Romans 7. Paul makes clearly two different times and
States of the Saints, on v. 5. When we were in the flesh, and the motions of
sins which were by the Law did work in our members, to bring forth fruit unto
death, then our first husband the law was living, and we under a mother and
father that begat children to death, and so we were justified: v. 6. But now we
are delivered from the Law, and Romans 6.14. Yea are not under the Law, but under
Grace, when Christ our second husband marries the widow freed from her first
husband the Law, then are we under grace and justified, and then new Lord, new
Law: 4. By Faith we are only united to Christ, possessed of him, Christ Ephesians.
3.17. Living in me by Faith, Joh 11.26. Gal. 2.20. Receiving Christ, Ioh. 1.11.
Having Christ, 1 John 5.12. Married to Christ, Ephesians. 5.32. Eating and drinking
Christ by Faith, Joh. 6.35, 47, 45. Coming to him as to a living stone, 1 Pet.
2.4. Abiding in him as branches in the Tree, Joh. 15.4, 5. Now if we were
justified before we believe, we should have a Union by the vital act of Faith,
before we be justified, and so we should live before we live, and be new
creatures, while we are yet in Rise and Reign of Anti. er. 38. p. 7. ib Err.
48. p. 9.
I will be your God: But here a condition. God is not bound and we free,
therefore this is the other part: And ye shall be my people: Now it is taught
by Libertines: That there can be no closing with Christ in a promise that has
a qualification or condition expressed, and that conditional promises are
legal: Its true if the word (condition) be taken in a wrong sense; the
promises are not conditional; For, 1. Arminians take a condition for a free
act, A condition taken in a threefold notion.
which we absolutely may perform by free will, not acted by the
predeterminating grace of Christ, so Jurists take the word, but this makes men
Lords of Heaven and Hell, and puts the keys of life and death over to
absolute contingency: 2. Conditions have a Popish sense, for doing that which
by some merit moves God to give to men wages for work, and so promises are not
conditional: But Libertines deny all conditions: But taking condition for any
qualification wrought in us by the power of the saving Grace of God: Christ
promises soul ease but upon a condition which (I grant) his Grace works that
the soul be sin-sick for Christ; and he offers wine and milk, Isa. 55.1. And
the water of life freely, Rev. 22.17. Upon condition, that you buy without
money; no purse is Christ's Grace-Market, no hire and sense of wretchedness, is
a hire for Christ, Its not a proper condition by way of strict Wages and work
when we are said to be justified and saved upon condition of Faith. Rise and
Reign, Err. 36. p. 7.
and the truth is, its an unproper condition, if a father promise Lands to a
son so he will pay him a thousand Crowns for the Lands, and if the Father of
Free Grace can only, and does give him the thousand Crowns also, the payment is
most unproperly a hire or a condition, and we may well say the whole bargain is
pure Grace; for both wages and work is Free Grace; but the ground of Libertines
is fleshly laziness, and to sin, be^cause Grace abounds; for they print it,
that all the activity of a Believer is to sin: So to be^lieve must be sin; to
run the ways of Gods commandments, with a heart enlarged by Grace, must be no
action of Grace, but an action of the flesh.

6. Paul in the Epistle to the Romans, to the Galatians, takes for granted,
that justification Jesus Christ: but that we are justified by Faith, which
certainly is an act performed by a regenerate person, for a new creature only
can perform the works of the new creature, and Faith is not the naked
manifestation of our justification, so as we are justified before we have
Faith; satisfaction is indeed given to justice by Christ on the Cross, for all
our sins before we believe, and before any justified person who lived these
fifteen hundred years be born; but alas, that is not justification, but only
the meritorious cause of it, that is, as if one should say this wall is white
since the creation of the world, though this very day only it was whited,
because whiteness was in the world since the creation; justification is a
forinsecall sentence in time pronounced in the Gospel, and applied to me now,
and never while the instant now that I believe; its not formally an act of the
understanding to know a truth concerning my self, but its an heart-adherance of
the affections to Christ as the savior of sinners; at the presence of which a
sentance of free absolution is pronounced: Suppose the Prince have it in his
mind to pardon twenty Malefactors, his grace is the cause why they are
pardoned, yet are they never in Law Pardoned, so as they can in Law plead
immunity, while they can produce their Princes Royal sealed Pardon.

5. The properties of the Covenant I call: 1. The freedom of it consisting in
persons: 5. The properties of the Covenant:
2. Causes: 3. Time: 4. Manner of dispensation: 1. Men, and not condemned,
Angels are capable of this covenant: 2. Amongst men some Nations, 1. Freedom in
regard
not others, Psalm. 147.19, 20. 3. So many, not any other: 4. The Father, not
the Son, the poor, not always Kings; the Fool, not the wise man; 1. Of Persons.
the husband, not the wife, not these who were bidden to the Supper, but
beggars, halt, withered, lame. 2. Causes, 2. Of Causes.
in the first covenant there was Grace not deserving, and therefore now as the
Law is propounded, it is a Pursevant of Grace, and the Gospels servant to stand
at Christ's and the Believers back, as an attending servant: 2. Yea mercy unto
thousands, toward those who have but Evangelick love to Christ, comes into the
Law, Christ having (in a sort) married the two Covenants: 3. I am the Lord thy
God, Exodus 20. Is Grace standing at the entry of the door, to these that are
under the Law, to bring them out, but in the Gospel all is unmixed Grace: 1.
Not personal obedience is my heaven, but I stand still, and another does all
that may merit glory: Christ says, Do ye but stand still, behold me, and see,
friends, my garments rolled in blood; I bind for you, only consent, put your
hand to the Pen, but I am the only undertaker to fight it out for you: 3. For
time, the first breach of the Law is wrath; 3. Of time.
and no place by Law for repentance, but here come to Christ, who will, and
when you will, after thou have played the Harlot with many lovers: bring Hell
and sins red as scarlet and crimson, come and be washen, come at the eleventh
hour and welcome; fall and rise again in Christ; run away, and come home again
and repent. 4. Of manner of dispensation.
4. The manner is: 1. That so much as would have bought ten thousand worlds of
men and devils, was given for so many only, an infinite superplus of love, so
(as I may say) Christ did more then love us. Egypt and Aethiopia was not given
for our ransom. 2. Property of the Covenant Eterna^^.
2 A sure and eternal Covenant, bottomed upon infinite love: Why may not the
link be broken, and the sheep plucked out of his hand? Why the Father that gave
them to me, is greater then all. Where dwells he? In what Heaven? Who is
stronger then the Father? The covenant with night and day, is natural, and
cannot fail; confirming Grace in the second Adam is more connaturall: 3. Well
ordered Christ keeping his place, 3. Well ordered.
the Father his place, Faith its place, the sinner his place.

6.
1. Vse^ All without this covenant are miserable; 1. Use.
Christ undertaketh not for them: The Lord deals with them by Law, read Deuteronomy.
28. Lev. 26. Al without the covenant are under the curse of the Law.
Job 20. chap. 18. and 27. They have bread, but its not sure, not so the
believer, Isa. 33.16. His bread shall be given him, his waters shall be sure:
The believer has all by the free holding of Grace, his bread by covenant, his
sleep by promise, safety from the sword, to lie down, and no man shall make
them afraid by covenant; his land is tilled by the Covenant of Grace, Ezekiel.
36.34. The man not in this covenant has all by tenor of the condemning Law,
the weapon of Steel shall go through bones and liver, by virtue of the curses
of the Law.

2. Use.
2. Men never try their standing, whether they be under the first husband of the
Law, Men try not if they be in covenant with God.
or if they be married to the better husband Christ, and under Grace, where art
thou O sinner, in Christ or no? They live at random, and by chance not knowing
that the two covenants has influence on eternity, a man is judged according to
his state, rather then his actions.

3. No state so stable and sure, 3. Use.
as the covenant of Grace. They are stable and sure, and cannot fail.
Christ is surety for the believer that he fall not away: Christ honor is
engaged, he shall not have shame of his Tutory, Isa. 50.7. I know I shall not
be ashamed, says Christ: Its his honor to raise me when I fall.

4. We may use arguments of Faith, challenging God, Jer. 31.18. Turn thou me,
4. Use.
We may plead Mercy from the covenant
and I shall be turned: why, For thou art the Lord my God, The Covenant is
Faiths Magna Charta, the grand mother-promise, all prayers must be bottomed on
this, Jer. 14.21. Do not abhor us: Why, verse. 22. Art not thou he the Lord God,
Isaiah 64.9. Remember not our iniquity for ever, behold, see we beseech thee:
Why, we are all thy people; every one does for its own, the Prince for his own
People, the Father for his own children; yea, the damme for her own young ones,
the Shepherd for his own sheep, and God for his own in covenant with him; an
offensive, and defensive covenant of Peace and War takes in the believer, and
all that serves him, the stones of the field, Job 5.23. and in covenant with
the horse thou ridest on, that it shall not cast thee, and crush thee; in
covenant with the sword, with the Canon and Musket, with the Spear and Bow:
yea, with Death as a Boat to carry thee over the water to thy fathers Land: So
the Covenant, I Will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse
thee, Isa. 54.16. I have created the water to destroy: Creation is a work of
omnipotency only, no creature can do it. Then fire cannot consume, water cannot
drown the Saints, except by a dispensation of the Lord.

5. Christ is not fastened as a loose nail, or as one broken or rotten wedge in
the covenant: 5. Use.
He is there as a nail in a sure place, Zach. 10.4. Isa. 22 23. Hang all the
vessels of the Fathers house on Christ: He cannot break; O sweet! we are given
to the Surety of the covenant, Ioh. 17.3. Son answer for him, thy life for his
life, thy glory for his glory; and render account of him, when the Kingdom
shall be given up to the Father: Adam was surety in the first covenant, and so
it fell out, free will holds all sure in the Arminian Covenant.

6. Use.
6. In desertion, to swim upon the covenant keeps from sinking; so Christ in
his sad and black hour, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

SERMON IX.
O Lord thou Son of David] The one word ( O Lord) holds forth Christ's
Godhead, the other ( Son of David) holds forth his Manhood; Here Is the
perfection of our Mediator, in that he is the substantial Covenant, and
Emanuel, God with us, Christ God and man and our faith and comfort there in.
or God us in a personal union; the substantial marriage and aliance between
the two houses of Heaven and Earth; God and clay: 2. He is not ashamed to call
them brethren, Heb. 2.11. And why would he take part of flesh and blood, but
because he would be a child of our house, verse. 14. 3. He would be of blood to
us, not only come to the sick, and to our bed side, but would lie down and be
sick, taking on him sick clay, and be in that condition of clay, a worm and not
a man, that he might pay our debts; and would borrow a man's heart and bowels to
sigh for us, man's eyes to weep for us, his Spouses body, legs and arms to be
pierced for us, our earth, our breath, our life and soul, that he might breath
out his life for us, a man's tongue and soul to pray for us; and yet he would
remain God, that he might perfume the obedience of a High Priest with heaven,
and give to justice blood that chambered in the veins and body of God, in whom
God had a personal lodging.

1. Use, O what love! 1. Use.
Christ would not entrust our redemption to Angels, Christ immediate in the act
of redeming us, and so sweeter.
to millions of Angels, but he would come himself, and in person suffer, he
would not give a low and a base price for us clay, he would buy us with a great
ransom, so as he might over-buy us, and none could over-bid him in his market
for souls; if there had been millions of more believers, and many heavens
without any new bargain, his blood should have bought them all, and all these
many heavens should have smelled one Rose of Life; Christ should have been one
and the same Tree of Life in them all; O we under-bid, and under-value that
Prince of love, who did overvalue us; we will not sell all we have to buy him,
he sold all he had, and himself too, to buy us.

2. Use. What an incomparable thing must the Mediator God-man be? 2. Use.
There Is no fair creature, Christ incomparable.
no excellent one, but there is a piece of nothing, and creature-basenesse, and
creature-vanity in it, even a thing of blood to the mother-nothing of the
creation of God; there is no Rose, but it has a Brier growing out of it,
except the Rose of Sharon, that flower of the field, not planted with hands,
the Son without a Father ( and who shall declare his generation?) A Rose that
should smell, and cast out odours for a mile of earth, or for ten miles could
draw to it many beholders, but if it should smell for the bounds of the half of
the earth, it should be more admirable, the flower that sprang out of the root
of Jesse, spreads his beauty, and the odours of his myrhe through heaven and
earth; could the darkness of hell stand and look on the face of the Sun,
blackness of darkness should be better seen; but convene all the little
pieces of the Creation summon before Christ, fair Angels, all the Troops of
the sin-lesse, glorified spirits, the broad skies, fair heavens, lightsome
stars, all the delicious Roses, Flowers, Gardens, Medows, Forests, Seas,
Mountains, Birds, all the excellent Sons of Adam, as they should have been, in
the world of innocence, and let them all stand in their highest excellency
before Jesus Christ; the matchless and transcendent glory of that great All,
should turn the worlds all into pure Nothing; what wonder then that this same
Lord Jesus be the delight and heaven of all in it? Rev. 7.17. The Lamb has his
Throne in the midst thereof, Rev. 22.4. And they shall see his face: They do
nothing else, but stare, gaze, and behold his face for ages, and are never
satisfied with beholding; suppose they could wear out their eyes at the
eye-holes in beholding God, they should still desire to see more. To see him
face to face, has a great deal more in it, then is expressed; words are short
garments to the thing it self: Your now sinful face to his holy face, your
piece clay-face to his uncreated soul-delighting face is admirable. We do not
praise Christ, and hold out his virtues to Men and Angels. The creatures, as
the Heaven, Sun, Moon, are Gods debtors, and they owe him glory: but men who
have understanding and tongues, are Gods Factors and Chamberlains to gather in
the rent of glory and praise to God; the heavens do indeed declare the glory of
God; Ps. 19.1. but they are but dumb Musicians, they are the Harp, which of it
self can make no Music; the creatures borrow man's mouth and tongue to speak
what they have been thinking of God and his excellency these five thousand
years; now all the glory of God, and the glory of the creatures are made new by
Christ, Rev. 21.5. And made friends with God, Col 1.20. and are in a special
manner in the Mediator Christ; he is, Heb. 1.3. (...) the irradiation or
brightness of the glory, and the character or express image of his person:
All creatures by Adams sin, lost their golden luster, and are now vanity-sick,
like a woman traveling in birth, Romans 8.22. All the creatures by sin did less
objectively glorify God, then they should have done, if sin had never been in
the world, and so they were at a sort of variance and division with God: And it
pleased, Col. 1.20. the Father in Christ (...) to make friendship between God
and all things, that is to confirm Angels, to reconcile man, to restore the
creatures to be more illustrious objects of his glory: now the in-come of the
rents of glory is more due to Christ, and the debt the greater, in that Christ
has made all things new, and why should we not in the name of Sun, Moon,
Earth, Heaven, which are all loosed from the arrestment of vanity by Christ,
and in the name of Angels and of Saints redeemed, hold forth the praises and
the glory of God in Christ? Pa^, pay what you owe to Christ, O all creatures!
but especially you redeemed ones.

3. Use. 3. Use.
If Christ the Mediator be so excellent a person we are to seek our life the
Gospel-way in Christ; we often conceive Legal or Law-thoughts of Christ, when
we conceive the Father just, severe, and Christ his Son to be more meek and
merciful; but the Text calls him Lord, and so that same God with the Father;
nor has Christ more of Law, by dying to satisfy the Law, nor is he more
merciful then the Father, because he and the Father are one; there are not two
infinite wills, two infinite mercies, one in the Father, another in the Son;
but one will, one mercy in both, and we owe alike love and honor to both,
though there be an order in loving God, and serving him through Christ.

4. Use. Infinite love, and infinite majesty, 4. Use.
concur both in Christ; love and majesty in men, are often contrary to one
another, and the one lesseneth the other; In Christ, the infinite God breaths
love in our flesh, 1. And we see but little of Christ, we know not well the
Gospel Spirit, we rest much on duties to go civil Saints to Heaven; but the
truth is, there be no Moral men and Civilians in Heaven, they be all deep in
Christ who are there; we are strangers to Christ and believing. 2. The spirit
of a redeemed one can hardly hate a redeemed one, or be bitter against them;
Christ in one Saint, cannot be cruel to Christ in another Saint. 3. Christ
cannot lose his love, or cast it away, the love of Christ is much for
conquering hearts; his chariot is bottomed and paved with love; duties bottomed
on Christ's love, are spiritual; as the Father accepts not duties, but in
Christ, so cannot we perform them aright, when the principal and fountain
cause is not the love of Christ, Ioh. 21.15.

Use 5.
5. Use. The Ancient of days, the Father of Ages takes a style from his new
House, The Son of Man; he has an old House, from whence he is named, The Son
of God; he must affect us, and his delight be with the sons of men, when he
takes a name from us, we should affect him, and affect a communion with him,
and strive to have Christ's new name, as he takes our new name, The Son of man,
of David.

2 Art.
Son of David, have mercy on me:] The second Article of her prayer is conceived
under the name of Mercy: To believers all temporal favors are spiritualized
and watered with mer^ie.
Why? Gods mercy is a spiritual favor: deliverance to her daughter, is but a
temporary favor, that may befall a Reprobate: The Devil may be cast out of the
Daughters body, and not out of the Mothers soul. Yea, but to the Believer, all
temporal favors are spiritualized, and watered with mercy.

Christ's bowels and mercy, wrapped about the temporary favor, Mar. 1.41. Jesus
cured the Leper: but how? Jesus, moved with compassion, put forth his hand and
touched him: So is the building of the Temple given, but oyled with mercies,
Zach. 1.16. Therefore thus says the Lord, I am returned to Jerusalem with
mercies; my House shall be builded in it. Epaphroditus recovered health, but
with it, some of Gods heart and bowels also, Phil. 1.27. For indeed he was sick
near to death, but God had mercy on him,

2. The ground of it is Gods mercy; the two Mat. 20.30. put this in their Bill,
they cry, Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou Son of David. They will not have
seeing eyes, but under the notion of mercy: David pained with sore sickness,
as some think, or under some other rod of God, desires to be healed, upon this
ground, Psalm. 6.2. Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I am weak.

3. Faith looks to temporal favors, 3.
as Faith with a spiritual eye, as Christ and his merits goes about them,
Heb. 11.22. By faith, Joseph when he dyed made mention of the children of
Isreal's departure. 23. By faith, Moses come to age, refused to be called the
son of Pharaohs daughter. Why? and that was but a civil Honor. Moses his
faith looked at it in a spiritual manner.

4. That same ground that moves God to give Christ, is enough to move him to
give all other things with Christ; By what reason our Father as a Father gives
spiritual things by that same he gives us all things.
as by what right, even the right of a Son; a Father gives the Inheritance to
his Son, by that same he gives him food, raiment, protection, physic; there
be not two Parents here, but by one and the same covenant, Ezech. 36.25, 26.
The Lord gives to his people remission of sins: and v. 30. He multiplieth the
fruit of the Trees, and removes Famine. In the same spiritual capacity of
sons we pray, that Our father would forgive us our sins, and give us our daily
bread. Get Christ first, the great ship, and then all other things, the
cock-boat saileth after him, with the same motion and wind: they be not two
tides and two winds, that carry on the Ship and the Boat: Christ enjoyed by
Faith, traileth after him death, life, the world, things present, and things to
come: if God give you Christ, in the same Charter all things are yours, because
ye are Christ's, and Christ Gods, 1 Corinthians. 3.21. Christ waters with his
blessing all things, if all that a Saint has be blessed, and every thing (to
speak so) mercied, and christianed, even his basket and his dough, Deuteronomy. 28.5.
His inheritance must be blessed, much more all Christ's inheritance must be
blessed, because he is the seed, the Spring, and abstract of blessings. Now
Christ, Heb. 1.2. is appointed the heir of all things: then he is the heir of a
draught of water, of brown bread, of a straw-bed on the earth, and hard stones
to be the pillow: to the Saints, to the children of God, hell (to speak so) is
heaven'd, sorrow joyed, poverty riched, death inlivened, dust and the grave
animated and quickened with life and resurrection. God save me from a draught of
water without Christ: peace and deliverance from the sword without Christ and
the Gospel, are linked and chained to the curse of God; alas, if men have the
single creature, they make no account how other things go: Give us Peace upon
any terms (say they) you may have the earth, peace, and the creature, and the
Devil to salt them to you with the curse of God. Judas had the bag at his
girdle, but withal, the Devil in his heart, the creature wants life and
blood without Christ.

2. All mercy, that is, graced mercy is to be sought in Jesus Christ; every
mercy is mercy, because its in Christ, every stream is water, because its of
the element of water: every thing in its own element and nature is most
copious; water is no where so abundant as in the sea, so in Christ the great
treasure of heaven, there is fullness, Ioh. 1.16. but Col. 1.18. Mercy
originally in Christ and how
There Is a (...) a fullness in Christ, but 2. A (...), fullness, that fullness,
that all fulness. And 3. that all fullness is not in Christ, as a stranger in an
Inn, coming in, and going out: but it pleased the Father (...) that it should
dwell and remain in him; The grace and mercy that is in Christ must be sought,
and no other, upon these grounds: 1. Its a special choice mercy that is in
Christ, For 1. No person could serve Gods ends in such a way as Isaac should
have been undutifull, if he had refused a wife of his fathers choosing, for
both out of love and much wisdom he choosed her; now when God out of infinite
love and deep wisdom has chosen to us an husband, an head, such a head, such a
Captain, and Leader in whom there is such fullness, shall we refuse him, and
shall we not seek the best things in him? Now Christ is a husband of Gods
choosing, Isa. 42.1. Behold my chosen one in whom my soul delights: 2. Its
not from God, that we now receive mercy immediately, but from Christ, God in
the Mediator, though Grace and Mercy be every way free; yet now mercy is a
flower that grows in our land, in him who is our blood-friend; so now we have
mercy by nature, as well as by good will, we must have it by an act of the man
Christ's will, and when our Writs are waxen old, why seek we not that which God
has laid by for us? Grace is more connaturall to us now, in that it is in the
bosom of our brother, and ours by derivation. 3. There Is a difference between
Angel mercy: As some waters that run through metals, has a more excellent
virtue then those that spring from pure earth; mercy is so much the more
desirable, that its a River issuing through that more then golden and precious
Redeemer; and so to us its twice mercy, to the Angels its but once mercy: Even
as the Be gathers sweetness out of various and diverse flowers; yet its so
composed, that the liquor resulting out of them all, has not any particular
taste from the sundry flowers, the Violet, the Pink, the Rose, the Woodbine,
the Claver, but it tastes of honey only; so we all have meeting in Christ, Wife,
Children, Houses, Lands; honor to the Saints have not their own natural
taste, but out of all there is in them a spiritual resultance of some heavenly
composure of Christ's sweetness, and are so sprinkled, and dipped in Grace and
Mercy, that as fresh Rivers do borrow a new taste from the Sea, when they flow
in to its bosom, so all earthly favors borrow a new smell and relish from the
fountain Christ: What do they say then, that teach that a man may have all
Graces; yea, and poverty of spirit, and yet want Christ? As if these could be
separated: he that believes has the son, Grace and Christ cannot be
separated, Ephesians 1.2. Galatians 1.3. John 1.11. These by-ways sunder souls
and the foundation Christ.

SERMON X.
MY daughter is grievously vexed with a Devill] Children, Parents spiritual
affections* and duty to their chil.
especially to mothers, whose affections are more weak and soft, are taking
lovers, especially being parts and substantial shadows of our self; yet four
things are considerable in us to them: 1. So to hold, as we are willingly to
let go, love them as creatures only; often the child is the mothers daughter,
and the mothers God: 2. We are to strive to have them freed from under the
power of the Devil, as this woman does; for they come into the world fuel for
Hell: Parents make more account all their life to make gold, rather then grace,
their childrens Patrimony and Legacy: 3. Look at them as May-flowres, as born
to come and appear for a space in the element of death; so they sport, laugh,
run, eat, drink, and glister like Comets in the Air, Simil.
or flying Meteors in the Sphere of the Clouds, and often go down to the grave
before their Parents: 4. Beware of selfinesse, for children are our self, and
their sins white and innocent sins to us: Eli honored his sons more then God,
and God put a mark of wrath on his house.

My daughter] Observe the rise of this passage of providence: Christ wearied of
Judea came to the borders of Tire and Sidon: 2. He went to a house to hide
himself from her: 3. She heard of Christ: 4. The hard condition her daughter
was in, tormented with a Devil; upon this God drives her to Christ: 5. Christ
is hereby declared to be the Savior of the Gentiles: 6. An illustrious miracle
is wrought; see a wise consociation of many acts of Providence; as one cluster
of passages of the Art of wise omnipotency; as many herbs, and various sorts of
flowers make up one pleasant, and well smelled Meadow; many Roses, Lillies, and
the like, one sweet smelling Garden, in which these practical considerations
may have our thoughts for Rules.

1. Rule, Go not before God and Providence, 1 Rule Practical Rules in observing
passages of divine Providence.
but follow him, prescription of such and such means to God and no other, is
to stint omnipotency, and to limit the holy one of Ilrael: The true God tied to
a forbidden Image, to receive glory, is made an Idol; so to fetter God to this
mean, as if not free to work by other means, is Idolatrous.

2. Rule, 2 Rule We are neither to lead, nor stint Providence.
The book of Providence is full both Page and Margin, God has been adding to
it sundry new Editions; and like children we are in love with the golden
covering, the Ribbons, Filleting, and the Pictures in the Frontis-piece, but
understand little of the Argument of Providence, Psalm. 107.43. Who so is wise,
and will observe these things, We are to observe God in his ways.
even they shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord, Job 32.7. I said
(says Elihu) days (things of Providence) shall speak, and multitude of years
should teach wisdom: God is worthy to be Chronicled.

3 Rule Omnipotency not laid in pawn on any means,
3. Rule, God has not laid his Godhead and omnipotency in pawn, in the power
of means, so as God uses means, because they are efficatious; but because he
uses them they are efficacious: A Ram horn is as near of blood, to cause the
walls of Jericho fall in Gods hand, as Engines of war; a straw is a spear to
omnipotency.

4. His ways are often contrary to our judgment, 4 Rule God walks not the
way that we imagine.
we lie and wait the way to see God come upon the tops of mountains, but we are
deceived, he comes the lower way through the valleys: we thought omnipotence
must change the Kings heart, ere such Brambles as Prelates be thrown over the
hedge, but our King is himself, and omnipotence takes another way; the
Disciples thought that Christ would make them Kings and restore the Kingdom:
Christ is dead and buried, and he goes another low way, through deaths belly
to make them Kings and Priests to God; Christ goes away, there be great
endeavors, and running through streets, Cities, walls: O streets saw you him,
O broad ways, saw you him whom my soul loves? O dear watchmen, where is he?
But they are all dumb: Christ takes a lower way, Cant. 3.4. It was but a
little that I passed from them, but I found him whom my soul loves.

5. Rule, Slander not Gods ways of Providence, with the reproach of confusion
and disorder; to God all his works are good, Providence in its concatenation of
decrees, actions, events, is a continued contexture going along from creation,
to the day of Christ's second appearance, and not a thread is here broken, all
is fair and white.
very good as were the works of creation. There is a long chain, and
concatenation of Gods ways, Counsels. Decrees, Actions, Events, Judgments,
Mercies; and there is white, and black, good and evil, crooked and straight
interwoven in this web, and the links of this chain, partly gold, partly
brass, iron and clay, and the threeds of his dispensation go along through the
Patriarchs days, Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, and are spun through the
ages of Moses and the Church in Egypt, and the willdernes, and come through the
times of the Kings of Israel and Judah, and the captivities of the Church, and
descend along through the gene^rations of Prophets; Christ, the Apostles,
persecuting Emperors, and Martyrdomes of the witnesses of Jesus, slain by the
woman drunken with the blood of the Saints, while the end of the thread, and
last link of the chain be tied to the very day of the marriage of the Lamb:
now in this long contexture of divine Providence you see: 1. Not one thread
broken, My father works hitherto, and I work, (says Christ) providence has
no vacancy, but causes, events, actions, ways, are all bordered one upon
another, by the wisdom of Providence, so that links are chained, and fettered
to links, not by hazard or chance: 2. Though this web be woven of threeds of
diverse colors, black and white, comfortable and sad passages of Gods
Providence, yet all makes a fair order in this long way; Jacob weepeth for his
dead child Joseph: Joseph rejoiceth to come out of the prison to reign; David
danceth with all his might before the Ark: David weepeth sore for Absalon his
sons miserable death: Job washes his steps with butter, and the Candle of the
Almighty shines on his head; and Job defiles his horn in the dust, and lies
on ashes, and mourns, all is beauty and order to God.

6. Rule. Put the frame of the spirit in Equilibrio, 6 Rule
in a composed, stayed, indifferent serenity of mind looking to both sides,
black and white, The Spirit is to be in an indifferency in all casts of
providence.
of Gods providence: so holy David was above his cross, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26. If I
shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and show me
both the Ark and his habitation: But if he thus say, I have no delight in thee:
behold here am I, let him do to me as seems good: He puts his soul upon
Gods two ( ifs, if he save its good, if he destroy its good: Make sure this
general, Christ is mine: at that Anchor, in this harbor my vessel must ride:
What ever wind blow in externals: Christ, died for me: If I live, its in
Christ; if I die its to Christ; if I ride with Princes on horses, its good; if
I go on foot with servants, it is good; if Christ hide his face and frown, its
Christ, its good; if it be full Moon, and he over shadow the soul with rays
and beams of love and light, its also Christ, its also good.

7. In all things bless Christ, let the desires below, Ier. 45. 5. 7 Rule Low
desired are best.
Seek thou great things for thy self? Seek them not, says Jeremiah to
Baruch: Its easier to add to desires, then to substract, better the heart
ascend from a Sallet of herbs to Wines, then compel thy spirit to descend and
weep.

8. Faiths speculations to the worst and hardest, in point of resolution, is
sweet: 8 Rule Lie under Providence submissively in all.
Job puts on a conclusion of faith, from black premises: suppose the Devil
and Hell form the principles, Faith can make a conclusion of gold and of
heaven: What if God should kill me? What though it were so? Yet I will trust in
God, Job 13.15. What if he throw me in Hell? It were well resolved, I would out
of the pit of Devils, cry, Hallelujah, praise the Lord in his justice,: What if
the enemy in War prevail over me? What if I were brought from Scarlet to
embrace the Dung hill? Faith can shape what Providence possibly may never sow:
What if I be brought to the wheel, to the rack, to burning quick?

9. There Is a mystery of Providence, 9 Rule
that we see not, we know not what God is doing with us, when he is binding us:
as the Sheep has no notion of death in its fancy, even when the knife is at
its throat, so are we

10. Providence walks long in uncertainties: 10 Rul
his way that rules, the world is in the clouds: Peace is within a step, yet
comes not full victory and deliverance near, and the enemy is well nigh
subdued: and the Lord turns the Scales, and lays us low again: life is
within the eighth part of a span to Ahab, yet God so timeth and places
vengeance, that the arrow of God must pitch on no place, but between the joints
of the harness, and Ahab is killed.

11 Rule
11. We are with all silence and quietness of spirit to submit to Gods ways,
not to fret: believing can ease us, disputting cannot.

12 Rul
12. Its easier to see what is inflicted on us, then to see who inflicteth it:
evil comes, and we look no higher then the creature, as if the world created
it self: so is this, when we dream that the creature moves, and is not moved
of God.

13. This is to be observed, that God ascends in all his course, 13 Rul
and Providence never goes down the mount: when Joseph goes down to the pit,
to the Prison, God in his course of Providence is going up, and advancing the
frame of beautiful Providence: for Joseph's going down, and his fall, is a
higher step to Gods exalting of Joseph; and saving his Church: Iudahs falling
into captivity, is not Gods falling, but his advancing of the work to do them
good in the latter end: Reformation goes down, when obstructions and lets come
in the way: but God works on; second causes move backward and miscarry, when
omnipotency carries on the Lords work.

SERMON XI.
Matthew. 15.23. But he answered her not a word: And his disciples came and
besought him, saying, Send her away, for she cries after us.

24. But he answered, and said, I am not sent, but unto the lost sheep of the
house of Israel,

25. Then came she, and worshipped him, saying, Lord, help me.


WE now enter into the Dialogue between the Woman and Christ: The first trial
is, The woman cries: But Christ answers not a word: I show first wherein the
temptation stands: 2. The reasons of it, Every temptation has its taking
power from the seeming goodness in it.
and in what cases Christ answers not: 3. Bring the uses; for the first, Gods
temptations and Satan's, and the flashes, agree in this, that all temptations
are of one color, to wit, white, and seeming good, even when the skin of
temptations is black as Hell, yet there is white in it, as (Curse God and die,
that thou may be hidden in the grave from misery) the reason is, temptation
were not temptation, if it had not a taking power to break in upon reason; this
is clear in Satan's temptations, he knows man is a fallen and broken creature
like himself, yet that there*s reason left: and that must have a fair object,
the first black apple must be good to the eye: so the Devil suiteth a wife
ever in his whites, though if you would wash the Devil and the lie, the bones
are always black: Now this Is this the Lord, the hearer of Prayers? 2. Is this
he that bids us pray, and promises to hear? 3. Is this the meek Lamb of
God, of whom its s^il, He shall carry the Lambs in his bosom, Esaaiah 42.11.
And a bruised reed he shall not break, a smoking Flax he shall not quench: He
answers me not one word: yea, he denies me to be his, as its hereafter, he
reproacheth me with the name of a dog: nature would say, I repent that ever I
came to him, let my daughter suffer twenty, one hundred, a Legion of Devils, I
have done with Christ, I come no more at him: Reasons why this was a temptation
to the woman.
especially supposing what was true, that she had a great Faith: and Faith
cannot be but loving and kind to Christ: What? my heart sadned and broken: my
daughter vexed with a Devil! but oh alas, my Savior answers, not one word,
sweet Jesus rejects me, how can I stand under so many Hells? He cures all
that comes to him: I am the first that ever this King sent away with a sad
heart, he casts none away that comes, he welcometh all, only he will not
look on me poor and miserable? Oh what can I now do! You may know a mothers
heart to her tormented child, and a Believers bowels to a Savior, here is a
burden above a load: But why answers he all sinners, but not one word to me?
Ans. 1. Few or none are tempted, but the upshot of the temptation is to beget
big apprehensions of the temptation: never was man in the condition I am in:
Christ answers the Devils when they cry, he will not give me one look, one
cast of his eye, not one half word: The temptation must represent Christ, as a
non-such for rough dealing, and the tempted a non-such for misery: Elias must
say, Temptations scop is to make the tempted believe there is none like him.
1 Kin. 18.20. I, even I only, am left alone, and they seek my life, Ps. 22.4.
Our fathers trusted is thee, they trusted in thee, and were delivered, verse. 6.
But I am no body: But I am a worm and no man, Lam. 1.12. O passers by, hear
behold, and see if there be any sorrow, like unto my sorrow! etc. 1 Cor. 4.9.
We are made a theator, a spectacle to men and Angels: The temptation must put
on the face of Hell to drive at this, to cause the child of God put himself
out of the Calendar and society of Gods children: hence, that ( no there was
never a soul since the world was, like me, I am my alone. 1. Christ once, first
or last, must be no Christ, 1. The non-answering of Christ is an answer.
and God not God to the tempted, Has he forgotten to be gracious? Psalm. 77. A
forgetting God, a changed God is not God; stick by this principle, Yet he is
Christ, and my Christ too. 2. Its said, he answered her not a word: but its not
said, he heard not one word: these two differ much: Christ often hears when
he does not answer, his not answering is an Answer, and speaks this, pray on,
go on, and cry) for the Lord holds his door fast bolted, not to keep out, but
that you may knock and knock: prayer is to God, worship: to us, often, its but
a servant upon mere necessity sent on a business: The father will cause his
child say over again, what he once heard him say, because he delights to
hear him speak: so God hears and lays by him an answer for Ephraim, Jer.
31.18. I have heard Ephraim bemoaning himself; but Ephraim heard not, knew not
that God told all Ephraims prayer over again behind his back: 3. No answer
from Christ is Hell to a Believer: Jacob is stronger in the morning, when he
has prayed a whole night, then at bedtime, Genesis 32.26. The Angel said, Let me
go, for the day breaks: And he said, I will not let thee go, till thou bless
me. Then in the dawning he has prayed harder, and used his arms with greater
violence then before, by this hunger grows fatter, sense stronger; its here,
Eat and be hungry, pray and desire more strongly to pray. Reasons of the Lords
no^ hearing prayer.
3. Reasons of Gods not hearing prayer are; 1. Superstitious and false worship,
Isa. 16.12. Moab wearied of his high places, comes to his Sanctuary to pray,
but prevails not. Wildfire God hears not sinners, Let his prayer be sin,
Psalm. 109.7. Yea the prayers of Britain are not heard, nor their Solemn Fasts
accepted; for iniquity has separated between God and us, Es. 59.2. 3. God
Psalm. 66.18. Job 35.15. 4. God hears not Psalm. 18.41. 5. He hears bloody
men, Es. 1.15. Now for the Saints, sense makes non answering a merciful
judgment, its here as in riches: he is rich who thinks himself rich, and
desires no more: So not to be answered is a plague: but to find you are not
answered, and be sad for it, has much of Christ: The Saints are heavier,
because God answers not, then because the mercy is denied. How t^ know that
our prayers are answered.


Quest. How shall we know we are answered? Answ, Hannah knew it by peace after
prayer: 2. Paul knew it, by receiving new supply to bear the want of that he
sought in prayer; he is answered that is more heavenly after prayer. Romans 8.23,
26, 27. compared with Rev. 8.3. 4. We are heard and answered of God, We are
heard when we are not heard: praying in Faith is always heard even when the
particular that we ask, is denied.
when we are not heard and answered of God. I pray for a temporal favor;
victory to Gods people in this battle, they lose the day: Yet I am heard and
answered, because I prayed for that victory, not under the notion of victory,
but as linked with mercy to the Church and the honor of Christ: So the formal
object of my prayers was a spiritual mercy to the Church, and the honor of
Jesus Christ. Now the Lord by the loss of the day, has shown mercy on his
people in humbling them, and glorifieth his Son, in preserving a fallen people:
So he hears that which is spiritual in my prayers; he is not to hear the
errors of them. Christ puts not dross in his Censure of Gold. 5. We are
heard Psalm. 6. v. 4. compared with v. 9. Ps. 55.2. Attend unto me, and hear me,
Faith in a prayer asks and answers it self.
v. 19. God shall hear and afflict them, Ps. 57.1. Be merciful unto me O God,
etc. v. 3. He shall send from Heaven, and save me from the reproach of him that
would swallow me up, Psalm. 59. 1. Deliver me from mine enemies, O my God. 2.
Deliver me from the workers of iniquity, v. 10. The God of mercy shall prevent
me, The light of saving Faith, and the Prophetical light of the Prophets not
different in nature and space.
God shall let me see my desire upon mine enemies, Psalm. 60.1. O God thou have
cast us off, thou have scattered us, etc. But in the end, verse, 12. Through God
we shall do valiantly. The prophesying of Faith is not dead with the Prophets.
Faith sees afar off as yet; to see things that God shall do, either by
Himself, or by Angels, is an act of prophecy, and differs not in nature from
the prophetical light of the Prophets: now the light of Faith sees as yet the
same, to wit, that Christ shall raise the dead, and send his Angels to gather
in his Wheat into his barn; especially hope of glory is Prophetical. 6.
Patience to wait on, while the vision speak, is an answer. 7. Some letters
require no answer, but are mere expressions of the desires of the friend; the
general Prayers of the Saints, that the Lord would gather in his elect, that
Christ would come and marry the Bride, and consummate the Nuptials, do refer to
a real answer; when our Husband the King shall come in person at his second
appearance.

1. Use. You take it hard, 1. Use*
that you are not answered, The dearest not admitted into God at the first
knock.
and that Christ's door is not opened at your first knock: David must knock, Ps.
22. 2. O my God I cry by day, and thou hear not, and in the night season I
am not silent. The Lords Church, Lam. 3.8. And when I cry and shout, he shuteth
out my prayer. Sweet Jesus the Heir of all, prayed with tears and strong
cries, once, O my father, again, O my father, and the third time, O my father,
ere he was heard. Wait on, dye praying, faint not.

2. Use.
2. Use. Its good to have the heart stored with sweet principles of Christ, when
he hears not at the first. Its Christ, he will answer. Its but Christ's
outside that is unkind.

SERMON XII. And his Disciples came and besought him, saying Send her away, etc.
IN the Disciples we see little tenderness, no more, but send her away, she
troubles us with crying* forsooth they were sore slain, that their dainty ears
were pained with the crying of a poor woman. Why? they say not, Dear master,
her little daughter is tormented with the Devil, and thou her Savior answerest
her not one word; she cannot but break her heart: we pray thee Master, heal her
daughter: Doct. Natural men, or Christ's Disciples, in so far as t^er^ is flesh
in them, understands not the mystery of sorrow, and fervor of affection in
the Saints, crying to God in disertion, Natural men, and the renewed in so far
as there remains in them flesh are ignoran^ of the mystery of an afflicted
spirit.
and not heard. 1. Natural men jeer at Christ deserted, Psalm 22.8. He trusted
in the Lord, let him deliver him. Heavy was the spirit of the weeping Church, a
captive woman at the rivers of Babylon; yet see they mock them; Sing us one of
the songs of Sion. 2. Even the Saints in so far as they are unrenewed, are
strangers to inward conflicts of souls praying, and not answered of God, the
fainting and swooning Church, Cant. 5.6, 7. is pained; O dear watch men, saw
you my Husband? Heavy was her spirit, but what then? v. 7. The watchmen, that
went about the City found me, they smote me, they; in stead of binding up her
wounds, they returned her buffets, and pulled her hair down about her ears. And
the daughters of Jerusalem say to the sick sighing Church pained for the want
of her Lord, v. 9. What is thy beloved more then another beloved, etc. Whereof
is thy Christ made, of Gold? or is thy beloved more precious then all beloveds
in the world? Troubled Hannah grieved in spirit, to Eli, is a drunken woman.
The Angels find Mary Magdalen weeping, they leave her weeping, they give her a
doctrinall comfort; Woman why weepest thou, he is not here, he is risen again.
1. If a string in the conscience be broken, the Apostles that were with
Magdalen cannot tie a knot on it again; If there be a rent in the heart, so as
the two sides of the soul of the woman rent asunder, she poor woman still
weepeth; O why speak you, O Angels to comfort me: they have taken away my
Lord. Angels, what are you to me? And indeed they cannot sew up the woman's
rented heart. This is the Lords Prerogative, Peace of conscience is a work of
Creation
Esa. 57.19. I create the fruit of the lips, peace; I know no Creator but one,
and I know no Peace-Creator but one; Peace of conscience is Grace, Grace is
made of pure nothing, and not made of nature: Pastors may speak of peace, but
God speaks peace to his people, Ps. 85.8. 2. There be Spirit of the Lord on
him above his fellows, and must be sent with a special Commission to apply the
sweet hands, the soft merciful fingers of the Mediator, with the art of
Heaven, Esa. 61.1. That I (says he) (...), should as a Chyrurgian bind up with
splints and bands the broken in heart, and comfort the mourners in Sion. There
must 3. be some immediate action of Omnipotency, Saul, in Job, c. 16.13. His
Archers compass me round about: that is, no less then the soul is like a man,
beset by enemies round about, so as there is no help in the creature, but he
must die in the midst of them, Job 6.4. The terrors of God do set themselves in
array against me: only the Lord of Hoasts, by an immediate action, raises
these soldiers, the terrors of God, he only can calm them.

What wonder then that Ministers, the Word, Comforts, Promises, Angels,
Prophets, 1. Use.
Apostles cannot bind up a broken heart, friends cannot, A Reason why its so
hard to convince deserted ones of the comforts of the Spirit, and to bind them
up.
while a good word come from God; Its easy for us on the shore to cry to those
tossed in the sea between death and life, Sail thus and thus; its nothing to
speak good words to the sick, yet Angels have not skill of experience in this;
the afflicted in mind are like infants that cannot tell their disease, they
apprehend Hell, and its real hell to them. Many Ministers are but Horse
physicians in this disease; wine and music are vain remedies, there is need of
a Creator of peace; she is frantic (say they) and its but a fit of a natural
melancholy and distraction.

The Disciples are Physicians of no value to a soul crying, and not heard of
Christ. 2. Use.
Oh Moses is a meek man, David a sweet singer, Christ sweete^ to the diserted
then all the world
Job and his experience profitable; the Apostles Gods Instruments, the Virgin
Mary is full of grace, the glorified desire the Church to be delivered, but
they are all nothing to Jesus Christ; there is more in a piece of a corner of
Christ's heart (to speak so) then in Millions of worlds of Angels, and created
comforts, when the conscience has gotten a back-throw with the hand of the
Almighty.

ver. 24
24. But he answered and said, I am not sent but for the lost sheep of the house
of Israel.

In this answer two things are to be observed; 1. The temptation coming from
Christ, denying he had any thing to do with this woman, I am not sent for her.
2. The matter of the temptation, containing Christ's 1. sending: 2. to whom, To
the house of Israel: 3. Under what notion, The sheep of the house of Israel: 4.
what sort of sheep, The lost sheep. In the temptation consider, 1. who
tempts; 2. the nature of the temptation; for the former, Its Christ who
tempts. Hence these Positions;

1 Posit How God tempeth.
1. Pos. God tempeth no man to sin, Jam. 1.13. Let no man say, when he is
tempted, I am tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted, neither tempts he
any. 14. But every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust: God
does try, rather then tempt. 1. God cannot command sin. 2. He cannot actuate
the crooked faculties to sin, as he that spurreth a Horse, puts the horse to
actual motion: But the dislocated leg of the horse puts in act the
halting power of the horse. 3. He cannot infuse sinful habits, which are as
weights of Iron and Lead, to incline the soul to sin. 4. He cannot approve sin.
Satan never tempts, but upon practical knowledge, either that the wheels may
run down the mount, as he tempted Eve, Difference between God trying men, and
Satan, the world and sin tempting men
and upon that false persuasion tempted Christ to sin; or then he knows sin
has oyled the wheels and inclinations, and so casts in Firebrarnds, knowing
that there is powder and firewood within us in our concupisence; he should not
offer to be a Father to the brood of Hell, if he knew not that a seed and
mother were within us: except Christ by grace cast water on our l^sts, and
cool the furnace, we conceive flames easily.

2. Pos. Neither Devils, nor men, 2 Pos. A creature cannot put another creature
to act sin, upon an intention to try his fellow creature.
nor our heart may, without sin, tempt or try the creature by putting it to do
that which may prove sin, upon any intention to try, whether that creature
shall obey God or not: Had Abraham coo^manded Isaac to kill Jacob his son, to
try whither Isaac loved God, or no, it had been a sinful tempting of him. A
creature cannot put his fellow-creatur upon the margin and border of death
(such as all sin is) to try if the creature has a good head that cannot be
giddy. God may try duties by events, He is the Potter, we the Clay: but clay is
limited to try events upon clay by duties only; and not by events duties.

3. Pos. Wanton and vain reason would say, Why did the wise Lord create such a
Tree of Knowledge, the tasting whereof, 3 Pos.
was the second death by Law, and that in Eves eye? Why did not God fortify
the first besieged Castle, Eves will and mind with grace, that the day should
not have been the Devils? But, O vain man, is the potter holden to make a
vessel of earth, In creatures actions and commandments, we must 1. know, Quis
who commands 2. Quid, what he comands. 3 Quare upon vhat Reason he
commands But for Gods actions and commandments, its enough. Quis, who does
it, who commands it. If Jehovah, I am silent, and must obey.
as strong as a vessel of Iron, or Brass, that though it fall by no fault of
the maker it shall not be broken? We may say to superiors of clay, yea to
Angels, Who art thou that command? And beside we may say, What do thou?
and Why do thou? and, What command thou another Gospel, or no? And we may
take their will with a reserve; But we may know of God, Quis, who he is, that
he is Jehovah. But we are not to inquire, quid and cur, Lord, Why do thou
this? or, Lord, What is it that thou command? The Agent here warrants the
action, and all its motives; God infuseth wisdom and goodness in all his
ways, because they are his ways; goodness is a stranger to what Angels and
men do, except there be a safer Law for their doing, then their person. God
must have absolute obedience, though he seeks no blind obedience; men's
actions must be warranted, not only from the wisdom of the doer, but also from
the nature of the deed; Gods actions have all, and abundance of goodness in
them, from the Lord. Its enough to me what I suffer (I mean it ought to be
enough) if ten Hells for one sin, if the absolute former of all things do it:
we love to put law on God: whereas to examine men's commandments is religion,
we take them upon trust: and to examine Gods ways is arrogance: yet we must
judge God. We see in permitting sin in bloods, in confusion, in the fall of
Adam, more fairness, beauty, and glory in Christ Jesus, and his new Heaven,
then we can see of blackness, of Hell, of sin in Devils, and in sin: possibly
it should have been lawful to the Creature, and to Angels to permit sin, so
they could and would from thence raise a Gospel, an heaven of Free Grace. Now
for temptations from God, we are to consider that they are all reason, all
wisdom, all goodness.

1. Pos. Christ says to the Disciples of her (it had been some comfort, 1. Pos.
if he had given her self but one word) I am not sent for this woman nor for
any of her blood, and kindred: she is a Gentile, I am sent primarily for Jews.
Hence Christ may in words, and to the apprehension of weak ones, say, I am not
thy Savior, thou art not any of my redeemed ones. Christ may give rough
answers, when he has a good mind; he put a hard word upon the Nobleman, Joh.
4. that came to him for his dying son: Ye (and all your nation) will not
believe, except you see signs and wonders. Never any man saw and apprehended
harder things of God then Jeremiah, chap. 15. verse. 18. Will thou be altogether
to me as a liar, and as waters that fail?

2. Posit. 2. Pos,
How often does the promises of the Gospel lie at a distance to us, 4 Doubts
of the tempted.
and we have four doubts touching them; 1. They are not mine. In dispensation
God deals otherwise with me, so David, Psalm. 22.4. Our fathers trusted in
thee, they trusted in thee, and thou deliveredst them; and why should he not
deliver thee also? v. 6. alas, its not so: But I am a worm and no man, so Esa.
49.13. Sing O Heavens, be joyful O Earth, and break forth into singing, O
Mountains. What is the matter, that the Skies and Stars are bidden sing Psalms?
for God has comforted his people, and will have mercy upon his afflicted. Yea,
but no mercy for me, v. 14. But Sion said, the Lord has forsaken me, and my
God has forgotten me; whoever find mercy, Gods dispensation 2 For
unworthiness and sin, I am incapable of mercy; the forlorn son dare not
believe his father will make him a son in his house: why? there is all his
reason, Luke 15.18, 19. Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and in thy sight,
and am no more worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of thy hired
servants, such was Peter's reasoning; Lord depart from me, for I am a sinful
man. 3. I know not how the promises shall be made good to me, but Joseph had a
word, that the Sun, Moon, and eleven Stars should honor him, but how that
could be performed he saw not; when he was sold as a slave, and that was far
from honor, yet was he to believe his dream should be fulfilled: and so
Abraham did adheare to the Promise, when God commands the Son of Promise to
be killed, Heb. 11.19. accounting that God was able to raise him up, even from
the dead. 4. I see not the time of the fulfilling the promise yet, Hab. 2.3.
Though the Vision tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come, and not
tarry. We are to remember God can trial his promise, in our seeming, through
Hell, and the Devils black hands, (as he led Christ through Death, the Curse,
and Hell) and yet fulfill them; when Christ is under a stone, and buried, the
Gospel seems to be buried.

3. Posit. Christ is on both sides, 3. Pos.
he holds up, and throws down, in one and the same act; he denies the
woman to be his, and is on her side to grace her, to believe that he is hers.
Christ puts his child away, and he desires that his child should not be
put away from him; he is for Jacob in his wrestling, and as if he were against
him, says, Let me alone. Christ here does both hold, and draw; oppose, and
defend at once.

I am not sent] He does not here deny the interests of the Gentiles in the
Messiah, but his meaning is, I am not first and principally sent; 2. in the
flesh, and personally as man for the Gentiles, to preach the Gospel to them,
and to work Miracles for them, but principally as the Minister of Circumcision,
to the Jews; therefore Mat. 10. he forbids his Disciples to go to the
Samaritanes, but rather to preach to the house of Israel. First then a word of
Christ's sending, which includes these three: 1. Designation. 2. Qualification.
3. Special Commission.


1* The Designation of Christ to his office.
1. The Designation was an act of Divine and voluntary dispensation, according
to which the second Person of the Trinity, the Son of God, not the Father, not
the Holy Ghost, was designed, and set apart to take on him our nature, place,
and the Office of the Mediator to redeem us, in his own person: the Son was
fittest to be the first, and original samplar of sons, the Son by natural
generation was the most apt Person to be the perfect mould and pattern of all
the sons by the adoption of grace, How the Son is most fit to be our Mediator.
Gal. 4.4. the substantial power of God is in the holy ghost, the personal
rise and fountain of all the excellencies of God, was in the Father: and so
though there was no unfitness in either to be our King, Priest, and Prophet:
yet the love, grace, mercy, righteousness of God and his infinite wisdom
dwells in the Son: O what a bargain of love that (to borrow the word) the lot
of matchless love, and free grace fell upon the Son: Son, my only begotten
Son, thou must go down, Simil.
empty thy self, and leave heaven, and go and bring up the fallen sons out of
Hell* Mankind like a precious Ring of Glory fell off the Finger of God, being
his Image; and was broken; the Son must stoop down, though it pain his back, to
lift up the broken Jewel, and mend and restore it again, and set it as a seal
on the heart of God: This was the rise of the Covenant from Eternity; that
Christ gave his word as the prime Son, that all the derived sons should put
their hands and hearts to the Pen, and sign and subscribe the Covenant of
Grace; the Writs, Evidences, and Charters of our salvation were concluded, and
passed the sign and seal of the Blessed Trinity, in Heaven from Eternity: The
Gospel is not a yesterdayes fable, its an old counsel of infinite wisdom.

2. The Son was qualified: 2. The qualification of Christ.
1. With a Passive aptitude (to speak so) to be a man, that he might suffer:
2. He was graced with all active indowments, to be a Mediator; The groundwork
of all was the grace of Union, the Godhead dwelling bodily in him: 2. The sea
of infused graces above all his fellows: to say nothing of what he learned by
experience, being a Son put to School (...) he learned his lesson of obedience,
with many stripes, though an innocent child, Heb. 7. v. 8. Hence he came
loaded with Grace and blessings for all the cursed sons.

3. All was nothing, 3 Christ's Commission.
except this Ambassador of Heaven had also had a Commission for us: but he
brought two Writs, two Books from Heaven: 1. He came as a flying Angel with the
everlasting Gospel, to preach to the Nations: 2. The book of life also; in the
former, were three acts of Law: So Christ is our Savior both by nature, and by
a Positive Law: Christ and Grace is Law: 1. Because of his place and birth,
being our goel and neer^st kins man, he was more kind then any other here to
redeem the sold inheritance: Its not properly grace that we are born, its an
ast of free grace, that Christ was born
CHRIST'S nature in the womb was grace, its nothing but nature, and that bad
enough, for us to be born: Christ's mothers womb was Grace: It was grace that
the Son should be conceived, and born, and by this he had law to us: 2. Christ's
act of dying, was a special Law: Ioh. 10.18. This commandment received I of
my Father, that I should lay down my life: 3. By his death and Resurrection, he
is made a Prince by Law, and has Law and authority to forgive sins, Acts 5.31.
Mat. 9.6. And power to give life eternal, Ioh. 17.2. And rule all by a new Law
in his new Kingdom, Mat. 28.8. Our heaven now is by Law, and a special
Commission: But the Gospel is a General: he brought all Gods secrets from
Heaven, and in his special Commission, Christ has (as it were) private
Instructions, Save such and such persons, not any other, not all Israel, but
the lost sheep: Not the Goats; thers's a great mystery, how there be no double
dealing in the Gospel, and two contrary wills in GOD.

1. Use.
1. He offers in the Gospel life to all so they believe, and God minds to
work Faith, Gods hidden decree and his revealed will opened.
and intends to bestow life on a few only; like a Kings Son coming to a
Prison of condemned men, with offered Pardons to all, upon condition they
accept of them; but yet he singleth out some, and persuades them to lay hold
on the Fathers Grace; and by the head takes them out, leaves all the rest to
justice: Yet is this no greater mystery then this, Many are called, but few are
chosen: so Christ's sending with his Commission, comes under a twofold notion;
one is, in the intention of the Euangel; A twofold intention in the offer of
the promises*
the other is, in the intention of him who proposes the Evangel to men: I mean
Gods intention to give Faith and effectual Grace. The former is nothing but
Gods moral complacency of Grace, revealing an obligation, that all are to
believe if they would be saved; and upon their own peril be it, if they refuse
Christ. This is the heart and mind of Christ to persons, revealing two; 1.
Men's duty. 2. Gods Grace to give life Eternal to believers; but the latter is
not a moral will in God only, but a real physical will (to speak so)
according to the which Christ effectually, strongly lays bands of love, cords
of sweet enforcing Grace, to persuade the Soul to take Jesus Christ. Christ
comes to the mind under a higher apprehension, with his rainy and wet hair,
knocking, and again knocking, to show his face in such soul redeeming beauty
and excellency; as the soul must be taken Captive, subdued and overcome with
the love of Christ: as the Spouse is so wrought on with the Beauty, Grace,
Riches, Indowments of excellency, words of love of such an husband, that she is
forced to say, I have no power, neither heart nor hand to refuse you. Now the
former notion of the Gospel is enough to lay on the obligation of believing on
all; so as though the Gospel reveal not Gods purpose of Election (that is only
and formally revealed in, and by Gods efficacious working of Faith, called the
inward calling) yet it says this to all, You are all to believe no less then
if there were not any Reprobated persons amongst you: If therefore any
dispairing ones, as Cain, yea, and many weak ones refuse to believe on this
ground, ( Why shoald I believe the Gospel has excepted me, it belongs not to
me, I am a Reprobate) they are deluded* for the Gospel formally reveals, How
and who are to believe the Decree of Reprobation concerning themselves
neither the Lords decree of Election, nor Reprobation; the embracing of the
Gospel, and the final rejection thereof, can speak to both these: but that is
neither the Gospel voice, nor the Gospel spirit, that reveals any such bad
tidings. Its true, Satan may speak so, but Christ comes once with good tidings
to all, Elect and Reprobate: men do hereby buy a Plea against Christ, and force
a quarrel upon him: the believer breaks first with Christ, before ever
Christ breaks with him: bad tidings are too soon true: I doubt if Reprobation
be so far forth revealed to any, even to those that sin against the Holy Ghost,
as they are to believe their own impossibility to be saved. For though a man
knew himself to be over score and past all remedy, he is obliged to believe the
power of infinite mercy, to save him, and to hang by that thread in humility
and adherence to Christ.

2. If Christ be sent for lost Israel, and say in the Gospel, Who will go with
me? And say to thee, My Father the King sent me his own son, to bring thee up
to his house: Why? But thou should go: When old Jacob saw the Chariots and
Messengers that Prince Joseph his own son, yet living, had sent to fetch him,
His heart failed for joy: See thou the Chariot of Pharaoh paved with love:
make then for the journey: the home we have here, is a taking lover: Why? But
thou may say, I cannot stay here, the King has sent for me. Its a
priviledging mercy that Christ is sent to the Jews first. Privileges of the
Jews 9. reckned here.


SERMON XIII.
OF Israel]. It was then a privileged mercy that Christ was sen^ to the Jews;
1. The Jew is the elder Brother, and the Native heir of Christ: Christ of their
blood and house, Romans 1.2, 3. Romans 9.3. They were Christ's first Bride. Alas,
they killed their husband: there is a born Jew in Heaven, in soul and body: its
sweet to have any relation to Christ. 2. The Catholic Covenant of Grace made
with the great Sister the Church Universal, was first laid down in pawn in
their hand; they put their hand first to the contract, in subscribing the
marriage contract, Ier. 2.3. Israel was holy to the Lord, and the first fruits
of his increase: O sweet! the fallen race of mankind was Christ's corn-field,
and his wheat: The Jews were the first sheaf of the field, Deuteronomy. 7.6. They got
Christ's young love and (to speak so) the first Church way. 3. Christ in the
Jews flesh, (yet not excluding Ruth, Rahab, and other Gentiles of the
Blood-Royall) acted the whole Gospel; a born Jew Redeemed the lost world,
offered a sacrifice to God for sinners, a born Jew is heir of all things, is
exalted, a Prince to guide and rule all, and shall judge Men and Angels: 4. The
Lord in the flesh was first offered to them, they had the first Gospel- love,
Matthew. 10.5, 6. Act. 13.46. 5. The Oracles of God was committed to them, Romans
3.1. Romans 9.4. The Testator Christ, his written will was in their keeping: 6.
God was their first Crowned King. He gave Ethiopia, and Egypt and Zeba a ransom
for them and was their Lawgiver: 7. Every Col. 2.11. When all the world was
without Christ: 8. Their Its my land; Christ was their Sovereign Landlord,
and they the great Kings Freeholders: 9 The Lord never dwelt in a house made
with hands, in a Temple as amongst Jesus Christ, Ioh. 2.19.

1. Let us pray our Elder sister home to Christ, Cant. 8. They said, 1. Use.
We have a little sister, and she has no breasts, what shall we do for our
sister in the day that she shall be spoken for? Now we have a greater sister:
What shall we the Gentiles do for her? There Is a day, When ten men shall take
hold, out of all Nations, of the skirt of a Jew, saying, we will go with you;
we have heard that God is with you, Zach. 8.21.

2. It is the happiness of our Land, The honor and privilege of Britain.
that we have a threefold relation to Christ, I mean these two Nations, that
we have avowed the Lord by a National Testimony, and the Nations are the
public Martyrs and witnesses of Christ, in that they are made a field of
blood, for no other quarrel, but because they desire to stand for Christ
Truth, against Antichrist: sure in the intention of Papists now in Arms
against us, there is no cause of War but this only. 2. That we have sworn that
the Lord shall be our God, in a Solemn Covenant. 3. That we are honored to
build the Temple of the Lord, and reform Religion. O that we could see our debt
and be thankful.

3. The Jews had the morning market of Christ, and they would not pay the rent
of the Vineyard to the Lord thereof: we have the after noon of Christ, and know
we what a mercy it is, that our beloved feeds amongst the Lillies, till the
day break, and the shadows fly away, and that the voice of the Turtle is heard
in our Land? God for our abuse of the Gospel has sent amongst us the bloody
Pursevants, and Officers of his wrath, men skillful to destroy; God is now in
three Kingdoms, arresting the Carcases of men, we are owing much to God, he
will now have husbands, and sons from us, and legs, and arms of wounded and
slain men from us, for that rent we owe to the Lord of the vineyard, for our
contempt of the Gospel. Why the Redeemed are called the Sheep of Christ.
Sheep] first a word of Sheep, then of lost sheep: I take no other reasons why
the redeemed of the Lord are called sheep, then are obvious in Scripture. 1.
The sheep are passive creatures, and can do little for themselves, so can
believers in the work of their salvation: as

1 Reas.
1. They have not of themselves more knowledge of the saving way then sheep, and
so cannot walk but as they are taught and led, How passive the redeemed are in
the way to Heaven.
Psalm. 1^9.33. Teach me O Lord, Psalm. 25.5. lead me in thy truth. Like a blind
man holding out his hand to his guide, so they, Psalm. 5.8. Lord lead me in thy
righteousness. 2. Its not common Hos. 11.1. When Ephraim was a child, I loved
him. 3. I taught Ephraim also to go, taking them by their arms; but Ephraim
like a child knew not his leader: But they know not) says the Lord) that I
healed, them. 3. Leading may suppose some willingness, but we must be drawn,
Ioh. 6.44. No man can come to me, except tht father draw him, Cant. 1.4. Draw
me, we will run after thee. 4. There is Who is this, that comes up from the
wilderness, leaning upon her beloved. 5. Luke 15.5. when the good shepherd
has found the lost sheep, He lays it on his shoulders with joy, Esa. 4^.3.
Hearken to me O house of Jacob, and all the remnant of the house of Israel,
which are born, (by me) from the belly and carried from the gray hairs: so
also, Deuteronomy. 32.11. God bears them on Eagles wings. Grace, grace is a noble
Guide and Tutor.

2. The life of sheep is the most dependent life in the world, 2. Rea. The
Saints are most dependent creatures.
no such dependent Creatures as sheep; all their happiness is the goodness,
care and wisdom of their shepherd: Wolves, Lions, Leopards need none to watch
over them: Briers and Thorns grow there alone, the Vine Tree, the noble Vine
is a tender thing, and must be supported, Esa, 40.11. Christ must bear the weak
Lambs in his bosom: the Shepherds bosom and his legs are the legs of the weak
Lamb: even the habit of Grace is a creature, and no independent thing, and so
in esse; in conserv^ri, in its creation, in its preservation, it depends on
Christ: Grace is as the newborn Bird, its life is the heat and warmness of
the body and wings of the Damme, its like a Chariot, though it have four
wheels, yet it moves only as drawn by the strength of Horses without it, its
a Plough of timber only, that without Iron and Steel breaks up no earth. The
new Seed of God acts as acted by God: hence repenting Ephraim, Ier. 31.18.
Turn thou me, and I shall be turned; renewed David is often at this, Quicken
me, quicken me: the swooning Church, Cant. 2. Stay me with flagons, and comfort
me with apples.

3. Rea. How know we Scripture to be the Word of God by a supernatural
instinct.
3. Sheep are docile creatures, John 10.27. My sheep hear my voice, I know them,
and they follow me There is a Controversy with Papists, how we know Scripture
to be the Word of God: there is two things here considerable, one within, and
another without. How knows the Lamb its mother amongst a thousand of the
Flock? Natural instinct teaches it. From what Teacher or Art is it, that the
Swallow builds its clay House and Nest, and every Be knows its own cell
and waxen House: so the instinct of Grace knows the voice of the Beloved
amongst many voices, Cant. 2.8. and this discerning power is in the Subject.
There is another power in the Object, of many thousand Millions of men, since
the Creation, not one, in figure and shape, is altogether like another, some
visible difference there i^: amongst many voices, no voice like man's tongue:
amongst Millions of diverse Tongues of men, every voice has an audable
difference printed on it, by which its discerned from all other. To the new
Creature, there is in Christ's Word some character, some found of Heaven, that
is in no voice in the world, but in his only, in Christ represented to a
believers eye of Faith: there is a shape, and a stamp of Divine Majesty, no
man knows it, but the believer: and in Heaven and Earth, Christ has not a
Marrow like himself. Suppose there were an hundred counterfeit Moons, or
fancied Suns in the Heaven, a natural eye can discern the true Moon, and the
natural Sun from them all: the eye knows white not to be black, nor green.
Christ offered to the eye of faith, stampeth on faiths eye, speces, little
Images of Christ, that the soul dare go to Death, and to Hell with it: this,
this only was Christ, and none other but he only.

4. Sheep are simple, 4. Rea. Fancy leads not the Saints but faith.
fancy leads them much, therefore they are straying creatures, Isa. 53.6.
Psalm. 119. verse. 176. 1 Pet. 2.25. there is nothing of the notion of death, or
of another life in the fancy of Sheep, a mouth-full of green Grass carries
the sheep on upon a Pit: and the mouth and teeth of Lions and Wolves. Fancy is
often the guide of weak Believers, rather then Faith; little care we by nature,
what we shall be in the mixed Generation. Fancy and Nature cannot out-see time,
nor see over, or beyond death: fair green-like hopes of gain are to us hopes
of real good: we think we see two Moons in one heaven, there is a way
good-seeming that deceives us: but black death is the night lodging of it.
Alas, we are journying, and know not our night Innes, and where we shall lodge,
when the Sun is going down, poor soul where shall you be all night?

Rise, Reign Ruin of Antino. error, 51 page 10. is, etc. 52.
1. If Believers be such dependent creatures, what do Libertines and Antinomians
teach us: That the soul need not go out to Christ, for fresh supply, but it is
acted by the Spirit inhabiting and dwelling in us: also, that it is the way of
the Law, not of the Gospel, that we act in the strength of Christ: both these
are against the Gospel: The Saints need fresh supply of grace from Christ,
though they have a habit and stock of grace within them, proved by six reasons.
1. We are commanded to pray, even the sons who in faith calls God, Our
Father which is in Heaven, lead us not into temptation, which God does no other
way then by giving us new supply of Grace to actual resistance: and Christ will
have us to pray, Lord increase our faith, the virgins in love with Christ, pray
Draw, us. Paul prays, that the God of peace would sanctify the Thessalonians
wholly, 1 The. 5.23. and for this he boweth his knee, that the believing
Ephesians may be strengthened according to the riches of his glory, with might
by his Spirit in the inner man, that Christ may dwell in their hearts by faith,
and that with all the Saints they may be able to comprehend the transcendent
Love of God in Christ, Ephesians. 3.15, 16, 17, 18, 19. and that Author, Heb. 13.20,
21. That the God of peace may make the Saints perfect in every good work to do
his will, working in them, that which is well pleasing in his sight. 2. Its
against Christ's intercession, whose it is to keep the faith of the Saints from
failing, Luke 22.32. and who finisheth our faith, Heb. 12.2. confirms us to
the end, 1 Cor. 1.8. advocateth for new grace, 1 John 2.1, 2. appears in the
presence of God for us, Heb. 9.24. 3. This cannot stand with the promise of
perseverance, made in the Covenant of Grace, Ier. 32.40, 41. Es. 59.21.24.
Ezech. 36.27. Ioh. 6.39, 40. Ioh. 4.13, 14. Nor 4. with the faith of persuasion
of perseverance, Romans 8.38, 39. Jude v. 24.25. Psalm. 6. 2 Timothy 4.18. and 5.
This must infer either that the regenerate do not, and cannot sin by not
believing and persevering in faith, and perfecting holiness in the fear of
God, (which is blasphemy) or that the Saints may finally fall from Grace, or
that the use of grace, and willing and doing in the Saints is not of, or from
confirming and assisting grace. 6. This puts our stock of Grace in our own
hand, as if Christ did literally only reveal to us the way to Heaven, and
leave it to our own free will to guide well or ill.

And so we are to thank Christ for beginning in the spirit, 1. Use*
and to thank our selves that we go on, Grace and glory but one continued
thread.
and grow in grace, or end not in the flesh; Nay but Christ's dispensation, in
whose grace we are strong, Ephesians. 6.10. and can do all things* Phil. 4.13. is
nothing but one continuate act of Free* grace, or a long cord or chain of
dependency on Christ; yea, Grace is glory on the wheels; Its glory like wheat
in the blade, in the way, in the fl^x and tendency to the ear and Harvest,
depending on the continued aspect of the Summer Sun of Righteousness; In our
progress to heaven we are to have these considerations.
the new creature is the iron in the fire, heaven in the moulding and framing,
and under the hammer and tools of Christ, and a Rose in the opening before it
cast out its leaves, and in this we are to have these considerations.

1. Faith is leasurely to look to Christ, in bringing his work out of the mould
and taking the new ship off the stocks, 1. Consideration.
as a perfected vessel: We conceive erroneously that Faith only eyeth Christ
as pardoning; Faith both active and passive.
and that it has no eye, no activity and influence on our own gracious acts
wrought in us by Christ; but Faith is an agent, as it is a patient, and joyneth
with Christ and with Free Will to an active purifying of the heart: It
believes Heaven, and works Heaven.

2. We often go on imagining that we are in a way of backsliding, 2 Consider
Desertion has ^eall advancing in the way to Heaven, in ^1. particu-
deserted souls not conscious of the reflect acts of believing, and longing for
Christ think themselves Apostates, when they are advancing in their way* In
great waterworks, where there be a great multitude of wheels, the standing of
some five or six, is the advancing of the work in other twenty, or forty
wheels: In desertion some wheels are at a stand, and move not; as often acts of
feeling, joy, self-delight in the actual beholding of Christ, are at a stand;
and then its thus: I said, I am cast out of his sight, yet other wheels are
moving, as 1. Humble and base thoughts of himself. 2. Broad and large thoughts
of Christ, and his grace. 3. Hunger and longing for Christ. 4. Self diffidence
is much. 5. Care and love-sicknesse (Saw you him whom my soul loves) is
vehement. 6. Sense of sin, and of wants and spiritual poverty increases now.
7. Sense of the misery of the combat, is much more then before: O miserable
man that I am, etc. 8. Believing under hope, and against hope, is strongest
now. 9. There Is more tenderness and humble fear now then before. 10. A
stronger resolution to entertain Christ more kindly, when he shall return again
in his fullness of presence. 11. Sorrow, that remembering he said, My head is
full of dew, and my locks with the drops of the night, Cant. 5.6. Yet the
sleeping soul kept him at the door.

We are to adore that Dispensation who will have us not stepping one foot to
Heaven, 3 Consider.
but upon Grace and upon Graces charges; he could make Saints to be sinlesse
Angels: But what haste? We should then, not yet being habituated with glory,
nor confirmed in Heaven, think little of Christ.

If we be so dependent on Christ, we have not ended with all Law directions, 2
Use.
We are not freed from law directions.
the Law stands us yet in good use; I mean, when Christ has made us and the
Law friends, and has removed the curse, and made the Believer say, O how love
I thy Law?

Obj. Can you (says M. Town) separate the directing or commanding power of the
Law, Obj. 1. Actual condemnation may be separated from the Law.
from the condemning power of the Law? can the Law speak to any but to those
who are under the Law? Is it Law at all, if it condemn not? Ans. Actual
condemnation may well be separated from the Law: as a Lion is a Lion, and yet
being chained, cannot actually devour. To condemn may well be removed from the
Law, it could not condemn Adam before sin entered in the world; it cannot
condemn the Holy, Elect, and sinlesse Angels; yet it had, and has a
commanding and obliging power to command and direct both; to condemn is
accidental to the Law, as the state of sin is accidental to man. 2. The Law
may speak by way of direction to Believers, but cannot speak to them by way of
actual condemnation, because Christ has removed the curse.

Obj. 2. Holiness and walking in the way of holiness contributeth not one jot
to Salvation, Obj. 2. How works of holiness conduce to Salvation.
as causes, or as the way thereto, Christ has done that perfectly. Ans. I pray
you consider three things here; 1. The Will of Gad to save; yea, and to
justify the ungodly. 2. Ius, the Law right to righteousness and salvation. 3.
Actual salvation; Three things herein to be distinguished.
Christ's merits are neither cause, nor motive, nor condition moving God to
will, to choose, or ordain persons for glory, this is an act of eternal
election to glory, which is not from Christ's merits: nor does any external
work or condition, either good or evil in Jacob, or Esau, or in the surety
Christ, move God to such an act of free liberty. Libertines are ignorant in so
speaking; yea, faith is no condition, cause, or motive of such a will. 2.
Christ's merits, not faith, not holiness in us, must be the cause of our
Law-right to righteousness and glory: Christ, his alone gave the price of
Redemption for us, no Garments were rolled in blood for a patent and right to
Heaven, but his only: his alone trod the Wine Press of Gods Wrath; in those
two notions, works of holiness have no footing in the work. But 3. as touching
actual salvation, the way to it is holiness, without which none can see God.
Its expressly commanded, Be ye holy, as I am holy, 1 Pet. 1.19, 20. and Romans
6.21. But being now made free from sin, and become servants to God, ye have
your fruit into holiness, and the end life everlasting, 2 Pet. 1.10. If ye do
these things ye shall never fall, for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you
abundantly, unto the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
Rev. 2.7. To him that overcomes I will give to eat of the Tree of life, which
is in the midst of the Paradise of God, Rev. 3.21. To him that overcomes will I
grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down
with my father on his Throne. They answer, overcoming is by faith. But I reply;
Faith to Libertines is but a believing that Christ has overcome in their
person and place, for faith is no more to them a condition or way to salvation
then good works: for Faith (say they) is not Christ; Christ only is the way to
Heaven, but this were a vain promise, if overcoming were not: 1. A duty
required of us in time, upon the performance whereof, we have an entrance made
to life eternal. 2. If overcoming be but only believing, and so an act of the
soul only; those to whom the promise is made, are to do no more but believe
Christ has overcome the persecuting world for them, and yield, and in
profession deny the Faith, and accept of conditions of life, and so be foiled,
and yet claim right to the promise, contrary to the intent of Christ, Rev.
2.13. who commends Pergamus for not denying the Faith. Now in all this, as
the walking in the way to a fair Palace to dwell in it, in honor and
happiness, cannot be the price, the ransom; the sum given to buy right to
that place, and to the honor and happiness thereof, so neither can our
walking in the way to glory be the price of glory.

Obj. 3. Obj. 3.
But we are saved by Christ's merits before we can do any good works then good
works comes not to perfect and make up salvation.

Ans. So are we in regard of right of purchase, saved before we believe; yet
that hinders not, but faith is a way to salvation* 2. This concludes that
good works are no cause, or way, or mean of obtaining the right (jus) of
purchase to Redemption, which we yield, but not that we are actually saved
without walking in the way, called the way of holiness which the unclean shall
not pass over, Esa. 35.8.

Obj. 4. We are to do good works from the principle of the love of Christ
constraining us, Obj. 4. We are to perform good works both from the principle
of love and Law.
not from the Law commanding, or directing us.

Ans. 1. These are no way contrary, the Regenerate from both Principles are to
walk in love and holiness as Christ did; the Law directing is not abolished
by Grace, or by love to Christ, and this is no other then the reasoning of old
Libertines; Paul said, Romans 7.6. Now we are delivered from the Law. O then said
Libertines; We may sin, and fleshly walking shall not prejudge salvation, nor
condemn us, v. 7. What shall we say then? Is the Law sin? God forbid, and Romans
5.20. Where sin abounded, grace did much more abound: Then said the Libertine,
chap. 6.1. What shall we then say? Shall we continue in sin that grace may
abound. 2. God forbid, then the Law commands and directs not to sin; and
Christ and Grace being friends, speak with the same mouth, God forbid that we
sin; we are not so freed from the commanding power of the Law, as that we sin
not: when we do what is contrary to Gods law, we are so far under the Law, as
not to sin, because the rule of Law is removed: nay, the Law backs a man while
he come to Christ, and to glory; and Christ backs the Law, and says, the Law
forbids you sin, I say Amen. Grace says, sin not: and Christ also lays
new bands of love and obligation to thankfulness on us, not to sin, but
removes not the ancient bounds: Grace and condemnation are opposite but not
Grace and the commanding power of the Law.

Obj. 5. The Law is a letter of death and bondage, Obj. 5. Of the letter both
of Law and Gospel, diverse errors of Libertines touching the point.
and can never convert the soul, only the Gospel does that, for in the Gospel,
Grace is given to obey what is commanded: Therefore your Law-preachers lead men
from the foundation Christ. Ans. 1. The Letter of Law without the spirit of
Christ, cannot convert any, nor can the Letter of the Gospel, or
Gospel-threatnings without the spirit of Grace convert any: both Law and Gospel
separated from the spirit are alike in this; and neither Law nor Gospel
according to this reasoning should be preached. Antinomians do in down right
terms teach this: for they say, 1. 39.
That the due searching and knowledge of the Scriptures, Rise and rai^^^er.
is not a safe and sure way of searching and finding Christ. The Word says the
contrary, Psalm. 19.7, 8, 9. Act. 10.43. Romans 3.21. Joh. 5.39. Luke 1. 70.71. 2.
er. 33.
To do any thing by virtue of a commandment, is a Law way, not Gospel
obe^dience. Contrary to Psalm. 119.6.43, 44. v. 11. 2 Pet. 1.19, 20. 2 Timothy
3.16. 3. er. 74.
All verbal Covenants, and the word written is but a Covenant of Works, and
takes men off from Christ: And er. 7
the whole letter of the Scripture holds forth a Covenant of works. Er. 61.
All Doctrines, Revelations, and spirits are to be tried by Christ, rather then
by the Word. Those that go from the Sun must at length walk in darkness.
Anabaptists of old said, the Covenant of Grace was written in the inward parts,
and in the heart, and therefore there was no need of word or ministry; But
when Satan knocks, his knock is dumb and speechless* he brings not the
Word, and speaks not according to the Law and Testimony; The Scriptures are
not to be condemned because they profit nothing without the teaching of the
spirit
Because he is a dumb Devil: Christ brings the word with him. To all these,
we can say no other, then that they condemn the Scriptures and the Preaching of
the word; Because nothing can avail us to Salvation without the spirit. This is
1. to condemn the wisdom of our Lord, who has appointed that Faith should come
by hearing, and that the things that are written, are written, That we in
believing, might have Eternal life, Ioh. 20.31. 2. Its to fetter the free
operation of the spirit, whose wind blows when he lists, to the preaching
of the word, 3. Yea

Obj. 6. But repentance in the New Testament, Obj. 6. Hen. Den Doctor of Ioh.
Baptists pa. 46, 47. Repentance is different from Faith, the contrary whereof
Libertines teach.
is nothing else but the change of the mind, and to be of another mind then to
seek Righteousness by the works of the law; even to seek it in Christ alone;
and mortification is but the apprehension of sin slain by Christ, and so
Repentance is a part of Faith, though Repentance in the Old Testament, was to
bewail sin and so sake it. Ans. But this is to dally with Christ, all
mortification and dominion over our lusts that fights against mercy and
justice, and the duties of the second Table, must be, by this means, an act of
Faith, and the New light of Christ in the mind, believing our Righteousness to
be in Christ: And so an act of Internal worship belonging to the first Table;
then as the Scripture says, The sinner is justified by Faith, apprehending
Christ's Righteousness; so might we well say, that we are justified by Repentance
and by mortification. 2. That Repentance lays hold on Christ's Righteousness.
3. That as to believe only without works does justify and save; so to repent
only (that is to change the mind and apprehend Righteousness not in works,
but in the Christ) without all holiness and forsaking of sin should save us:
But this is to acquit men from all duties of the second Table; yea, and of all
the first Table, loving of God, Praying, Praising, hearing, etc. except only we
are to believe: This is clear the way of the old Gnostics, who placed all
holiness in mere knowledge and apprehension of Gods will, without love or
obedience. 2. Repentance is sorrow according to God, Repentance the same in the
Old and New Testament.
1 Cor. 7.9.10. Jam. 4.9. And eschewing evil and doing good, 1 Pet. 3.11. And
the Crucifying of the old man, and the lusts thereof, as Fornication,
Uncleanness, Inordinate affection, evil Concupiscence, Covetousness, Col. 3.
5. And these are commanded in the New Testament, as the very lesson of the
Grace of God, Tit. 2.11. Its true in the Old Testament, the People were under
Tutors and bondage; but that was in regard of the carnal commandment of
Ceremonies, the cognizance of our bloody demerit held forth in bloody
sacrifices. 2. In regard, less of Christ and the sweetness of the Gospel was
then known, and the Law chased harder the guilty to Christ. But 1. Servile
obedience through apprehension of legal terrors, was never commanded in the
spiritual Law of God to the Jews, more then to us. 2. The Jews were not
justified by the works of the Law more then we; but by Faith in Christ as well
as we, Act. 15.11. Act. 10.42.43. Heb. 11. 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3. Yea, we are
justified as David, and Abraham were, Rom^ 4.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, Yea, the Jews
seeking of Righteousness by the works of the Law, is a stumbling at the stone
laid in Zion, Romans 9.31.32, 33. Yea, its blasphemy to say, Repentance in the
Old Testament was a sorrow for sin, and a forsaking of it; as if under the New
Testament we were Licensed to sin, and turn Grace into wantonness.

SERMON XIV.
In what sense Christ came to save the lost.
LOst sheep] Lost, is either understood of the common condition of all men, and
so because all are the Hieres of wrath, Ephesians. 2. All have sinned, and comes
short of the glory of God, Romans 3.23. and so are lost: But the Scripture
intituleth men by that which they are in their own esteem, as Mat. 9.13. I am
not come to call the righteous, but sinners to Repentance: this may seem to
hold forth that there be some sinners, and some not sinners, but righteous,
whereas none are righteous that sins not, Romans 3.10. But God gives to men
the title which they give themselves, and so lost here, is such as are lost in
their own esteem; for Christ's intention in coming in the flesh, and dying is
to seek and to save the lost, Luke 19.10 In this sense, Mat. 9.13. and 1 Timothy
1.15. Christ came to save sinners, otherwise, all the house of Israel are lost,
Jer. 50.6. My people have been lost sheep, Ezekiel. 3.4. Neither have ye sought
that which was lost: Nor is this to be meant of the lost considered, as
redemption is purchased, in this notion, Christ died for his enemies, Romans
5.10. the just for the unjust, 1 Pet. 3.18. and so for the lost: But we are
here lead to this, Those whom Christ immediately converteth are first lost.
that these at whose salvation Christ has a special aim, and whom he
actu^ally converteth are first sinners, And lost in their own eyes, as is
clear, Mat. 9.13. 1 Timothy 1.15. Luke 19.10. It is one thing to be lost, and a
sinner, and another thing to be self-lost, as many are laden who are not
weary, and yet none are w^ary, but they be laden. 1. All that Christ
converteth are self-sinners too, but Christ converteth not all sinners. Hence
Christ actually calls and s^veth but those who are such and so prepared; A
two fold preparation before converted.
now there is a preparation of order, and a preparation of deserving: I cannot
say, there are preparations in the converted* by way of deserving. Christ
calls not sinners because, or for, that they are sinners in their own sense,
For he has mercy on whom he will. 2. Nor are their preparations in the
converted to which conversion is promised as a free reward of grace, which may
be called moral preparations, there is no such promise in the word as this:
Whosoever are wearied and lost in their own eyes, they shall be converted: yea
3. Its hard to affirm that all who are prepared with these preparations of
order are infallibly converted; its like Judas, Cain, reputed themselves
sinners, and had some law-work in their heart, and yet were never converted.
But Gods ordinary way, is to bring men into Christ being first self lost, and
self-condemned, and that upon these grounds that proves Gods way of working to
be successive: 1. Because conversion is a rational work, Conversion is done by
succession of foregoing preparations proved by four Reasons. Reas. 1
and the Gospel is a moral instrument of conversion, therefore Christ here
opens a vein ere he give Physic; he first cutteth and then cures, for
though in the moment of formal conversion, men be patients, and can neither
prevent Christ, nor cooperate with Christ, yet the whole work about conversion
is not done in a moment; for men are not converted as the Lillies grow, which
do not labor nor spin; there be some pangs in the new birth; nor are men
converted as Simon carried Christ's cross, altogether against their will; they
do hear and read the word freely: nor are men converted beside their knowledge,
as Cajaphas prophesied: nor are we to think with Enthusiasts, that God does all
with one immediate rapt, as the Sun in its rise inlighteneth the air. The
Gospel works morally as does the Law; Reasons work not in a moment, as fire
flaughts in the air: Christ puts souls to weigh the bargain, to consider the
field and the pearl, and then buy it: 2. Christ's saving and calling the lost,
is a new creation as well as a generation: A child is not born in one day;
saving Grace is not Physic that works the cure while the sick man is
sleeping: Christ casts the metal in the fire ere he form the Vessel of
mercy; he must cast down old work, ere he lay the new foundation: 3. Conversion
is a Gospel blessing, 3. Rea.
and so must be wrought in a way suitable to the scope of the Gospel: Now the
special intent of the Gospel is to bring men to put a high and rich price upon
Christ, and this is one Gospel-offer: What think thou of so excellent a one
as Christ? What would thou part with? What would thou do or suffer for
Christ? Now men cannot prize Christ, who have not found the terrors of the Law:
So Paul finding himself the chief of sinners, and in that case saved, 1 Timothy
1.15. Must hug and embrace Christ, and burst out in a Psalm, v. 17. Now to the
King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honor and glory
for ever, and ever: Amen. A sight of the Gallows, of the Ax, raises in the
condemned man's heart, high thoghts of the Grace of a Pardoning Prince; to be a
Tenant of Free Grace is so sweet a free-holding that it must put a high Rate on
Free Grace. 4. The Clay-organs and faculties of the soul working by them, 4.
Rea.
cannot bear the too great violence of Legal terrors; for in reviving the
Spirit, Isa. 57.16. If he should let out all his wrath, the souls should fail
that he has made: Nor can they bear that God let out all his strength of love
in one moment; rough or violent dealing should break Crystal Glasses: Christ
should break the needle, when he sows a heart to himself, if he should put to
all his strength; too swift motion of wheels may break the Mill; Christ must
drive softly for a sight of the fourth part of the fire of Hell, and a sight of
one chamber or one window of heaven is enough at once.

1. Its not enough to be fitted for the Physic, Sense of poverty fitteth for
Christ.
and not for the Physician: The weary and laden are fit to be eased, but not
fitted for Christ the Physician* except they come to him and believe: Faith is
a thing very suitable for Christ: Ho, every one that thirsts, ^ome ye to the
waters, and he that has no money, come buy and eat, Isa. 55.1. It is true, in
regard of all good deserving, moving God to have mercy on one, rather then
another: Jerusalem and all converted are dying in their blood, and no eye
pitying them, Ez. 16.6, 8. And therefore are none discouraged to come because
of their wretched estate; that is to say, we cannot come, we have no money: But
Christ inviteth these which have no money, and though Christ seem to exclude
the woman from mercy, yet Christ in wisdom holds forth the promise here in
that latitude of Free Grace; while as he says, he came for the lost sheep;
that there is room for the woman, and all believing Gentiles to come in, and
lay hold on the Covenant; Sense of wretchedness and unbelief represents
Christ as too narrow, and contracteth and abridgeth the Promises, as if there
were no place for thee, because thou art thus and thus sinful.

Obj. 1. The King puts forth a general Proclamation to all Thieves: Crisp.
Ser. 7. page 208 209, 210. seq.
Oh (says one) but he may mean others but not me; Why? he means Thieves in
general, he accepts none: why should thou say not me, Christ belongs to
sinners as sinners, he receives sinners as sinners, Sinners as sinners, are
not fit to receive Christ.
yea he ascended on high to give gifts to the rebellious, therefore there is no
qualification required in men, that believes in Christ, no nor does unbelief
debar a man from Christ, it only excludes him from the experimental knowledge
that Christ is his. Ans. 1. Its true, the Gospel excepteth no man from Pardon,
and all that hears the Gospel are to be wearied and laden, and to receive
Christ by faith, as if God intended to save them: But the Promises of the
Gospel are not simply Universal; as if God intended and purposed, that all and
every one should be actually redeemed and saved in Christ, as Arminians teach,
and so God accepts in his own hidden Decree, not a few, though he reveal not
in the Gospel who they are, yet he reveals in the Gospel the general, that
Many are called, but few are chosen: How Christ belongs to sinners, under the
notion of sinners.
And I grant there is no ground for any one man not to believe upon this ground,
because some are reprobated from Eternity, and it may be I am one of those, for
the contrary is as sure Logic; many are chosen to life Eternal, and it may be
that I am one of those. 2. It is most untrue, that Christ belongs to siners
as siners, for then Christ should belong to all unbelievers, how obstinate so
ever, even to those that sin against the Holy Ghost. Nay, Christ belongs only
to sinners elected to glory, as elected to glory in regard of Gods gracious
purpose, and he belongs only to believing sinners as believing, in regard of
actual Union with Christ, Ephesians. 3.17. Gal. 2.20. 3. Its false, that sinners as
sinners does receive Christ, for so Judas and all sinners should receive
Christ: Now the Scripture shows that Believers only receive him, Joh. 1.12.
Gal. 2.20. Ephesians. 3.17. 4. Its false that sinners as sinners believe in Christ.
This way of Libertines is a broad way for Sorcerers, Thieves, Murderers,
Paricides, Idolaters, remaining in that damnable state to believe; whereas
sinners as such, sinners thus and thus qualified, are to believe; that is
humbled, wearied, and self-condemned sinners only are to believe, and come to
Christ. Its true, all sinners are obliged to believe; but to believe after the
order of Free Grace; that is, that they be first self-lost and sick, and then
be saved by the Physician.

I cannot but here mention some damnable errors of Libertines, Rise and Reign,
etc. error, 33.
contrary to this Truth of Christ; as this, That the spirit acts most in the
Saints, when they endeavor least. 1. It may be by accident and through our
abuse, who confide in our endeavors and works, How the Spirit acts most in the
Sts. when they endeavor least.
that Grace and the spirit will not flatter merits, which are too natural to
us; that God let a sweating wrestler who has spent nights in Prayer, and is
careful in all means, and abundant in the work of the Lord: See and
understand, that Free Grace, not our endeavors, leads us on to Heaven: Better
it is I be conscious to my self that I am Christ's debtor, not debtor to my
self. 2. That we see self to be wretched, and that self loves to share and to
divide the glory with Free Grace. 3. That Christ reserveth the flowing of his
tide, and the blowing of his wind to his own Free grace, Ioh. 3.8. And that
Grace in its filling the sails is not in the Sea-mans power. But this error is
the Daughter of another more damnable: that is, Error 43 The marrow of
Libertinisme, to neglect sanctification, and wallow in fleshly lusts.
That the activitie and efficacy of Christ's death, is to kill all activitie of
Graces in his members, that Christ may be all in all. This I take to be the
marrow of fleshly Libertinisme, that not only the Regenerate cannot sin; but
they ought to sin that Grace may abound; and that Christ died for this end,
that we should live in sin, the contrary of which is said, 1 Ioh. 3.8. That
Christ died that he might destroy the works of the Devil, that is sin. Now the
not stirring up of the Grace of Christ in us, is a grievous sin, 1 Timothy 4.14. 1
Cor. 15.10. Yea he, 1 Pet. 2.24. Bear our sins on the Tree that being dead to
sins, should live unto righteousness, Romans 6.4. That we should walk in newnes
of life, Christ's death makes us active in duties of holiness.
And Gal. 1.4. Christ gave himself for us, that he might deliver us from this
present evil world, according to the will of God and our Father. And 1 Pet. 1
18. We are not redeemed from our vain conversation received by tradition from
our fathers, by any corruptible thing, etc. This makes good that which is the
up-shot of all the Antinomian-Doctrine, that Christ is so our sanctification,
that there is neither Law nor Gospel which requires of us that we be holy.
Hence their fifth Error; Unsavory speeches, Er. 5.
Here is a great stir about graces, and looking to hearts, but give me Christ,
I seek not for graces, nor promises, nor sanctification, tell me not of
meditation and duties, but tell me of Christ. So Christ has not only suffered
for us all that he should suffer, so as its sacrilege to add to his
sufferings our own; and the like sacrilege it is for us to be holy, and to
add any of our active holiness to his active obedience. So Master Town
says, All our obedience as its the work of the Spirit, Town Ans. to D.
Tailor, page 23.
its passive, and truly called the fruit of the spirit, Gal. 5.22. and so its
an entire work, and undefiled, every way correspondent to the mind of the
efficient, and Author, which is the Law and Rule he works by: Rise p. 7
but as it is actively our obedience, so its very imperfect, and polluted: yea,
simply considered, its a menstruous cloth and dung; Unsavory speeches, Er. ^.
p. 19.
and their 36. Error, is, All the activity of a believer is to act to sin; so
we can do nothing but sin, and we are to do nothing, nay, not obliged to pray,
but when the Spirit moves us, and that is the work of the Spirit: we are in it
mere Patients: so Er. 4. says, How Christ keeps us from sin.
If Christ will let me sin, let him look to it, upon his honor be it. Indeed,
it stands upon the honor of him who has promised to keep us spotless until
the day of Christ, and Christ is so an engaged Advocate to intercede for the
Saints, when they sin, that the redeemed of the Lord fall not away, but be
presented spotless before the Lord in the day of Christ: But what is all this
to annull, 1. All action of grace, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present world: Tit. 1.11. 3. To make an opposition between Christ Ioh.
1.16. Tit. 1.14. 1 John 3.8.

Obj. If the actions of grace be all turned upon this axle-tree of Gods
gracious will, what can I do, when I am indisposed to do good? Ans. If this be
a rational question, then is no man condemned, because he believes not in the
only begotten Son of God, contrary to Ioh. 3.18, 36. For Reprobates are finally
indisposed to believe. 2. Indisposition is our sin that we should be humbled
for, and Ink water cannot wash a blacked cloth, sin excuses not sin.

SERMON XV. 25. Then came she and worshipped him; saying, 8. Necessary duties
required of a believer under desolution.
Lord help me]
CHrist had denied her to be His, but she will not deny but Christ is hers; See
how a Believer is to carry himself toward Christ deserting, frowning. Christ
first answered her not one word: 2. He gave an Answer, but to the Disciples,
not to the woman; O dreadful, Christ refuses to give her one word, that may go
between her, and Hell, and despair: 3. The Answer that he gives, is sadder and
heavier then no Answer; its as much, As woman, I have nothing to do with thee;
I quit my part of thee; Yet she is patient: 2. She believes: 3. She waits on
a better answer: 4. She continues in praying: 5. Her love is not abetted, she
comes and adoreth: 6* Acknowledges her own misery: Lord help me; And puts
Christ as God in his own room to be adored: 7. She takes Christ aright up, and
sees the temptation to be a temptation: 8. She runs to Christ; she came
nearer to him, and runs not from him; she claims to Christ, though Christ
had cast her off.

1. Patience.
1. Patient submission to God under desertion is sweet: What though I saw no
reason why I cry and shout, and God answers not: 1. His comforts and his
answers are his own free-graces; he may do with his own, what he thinks good,
and grace is no debt: Hear O Lord for thy own sake, Dan. 9.19. 2. Infinite
Sovereignty may lay silence upon all hearts; good Hezekiah, Isa. 38.15. What
shall I say? he has spoken unto me, and himself has done it: It is an act of
heaven, I bear it with silence.

2. She believes, Isa. 50.11. There Is a high and noble Commandment laid upon
the sad spirit: He that walks in darkness, and sees no light, let him trust
in the name of the Lord* and stay upon his God: 2. Fill the field with faith,
double or frequent acts of Faith, Psalm. 22.1. My God, my God; why have thou
forsaken me? Two faiths, are a double breast-work against the Forts of Hell.

3. In the greatest extremity believe, 2. Faith
even as David in the borders of Hell, Psalm. 23.4 Yea though I walk through the
valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil; its a Litote, I will
believe good: its a cold and a dark shadow to walk at deaths right side, Job
13.15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him: See Steven dying and
believing both at once, Christ's very dead corpse and his grave in a sort
believing, Ps. 16.9. My flesh also shall rest in hope: How sweet to take Faiths
back-band, subscribed by Gods own hand into the cold grave with thee, as Christ
did, verse. 10. Thou will not leave my soul in grave: 4. Faith says, sense is a
Lier* Fancy, sense, the flesh will say, Job 16.13. His Archers compassed me
round about, he cleaves my reins asunder, and does not spare, and pours out
my gall on the ground: but Faith says, ver. 19. I have a friend in Heaven:
Also now my witness is in heaven, Job 19.11. Sense makes a lie of God: He
has also kindled his wrath against me, and takes me for his enemy: No, Job,
thou art the friend of God: see how his Faith comes above the water, ver. 25.
I know that my friend by blood, or my Redeemer lives, 3. Hope which
prophecieth glad things at midnight
etc. 3. She waits on in hope, and took not the first nor second answer: Hope
is long breath't, and at midnight proph^sieth good of God, Mic. 7.9. Though I
fall, I shall rise again, Jonah 2.4. Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight,
yet I will look toward thy holy Temple: There Is a seed of heaven in hope, Job
13. When God did hide his face from him, ver. 24. Yet ver. 16. He also shall be
my salvation: There is a negative, and over-clouded hope in the soul at the
saddest time; the believer dares not say Christ will never come again: if he
say it, its in hot blood, and in haste, and he will take his word again, Isa.
8.17.

4. She continues in praying: She cried, Lord, 4. Prayer.
Son of David, have mercy on me: she has no Answer; she cries again, while the
Disciples are troubled with her shouts: she gets a worse answer then no
answer, yet she comes and prays; we know the holy wilfulness of Jacob, Genesis
32.26. I will not let thee go till thou bless me: rain calmeth the stormy
wind, to vent out words in a sad time, is the way of Gods children, Psalm. 88.7.
Thy wrath lies hard upon me: 9. My eye mourns by reason of my affliction:
And what then? Lord I have called daily upon thee, I have stretched out my
hands to thee, Psalm. 22.2. Christ in the borders of Hell prayed, and prayed
again, and died praying.

5. She has still love to Christ, and is not put from the duty of adoring, 1
Pet. 1.8. 5. Love to God.
Whom having not seen, yet ye love: The deserted soul sees little, there must
be love to Christ, where there is 1. Faith in the dark; Faith is with child of
Love: 2. Where the believer is willing, that his pain, and his hell, may be
matter of praising of God, Ps. 77.13. Who is so great a God as our God: The
Church was then deserted, as the Psalm. clears.

6. She puts Christ in his Chair of State, and adoreth him: the deserted
soul says, 6. Acquiting of God and exalting of him.
be what I will, he is Jehovah the Lord; confession is good in saddest
desertion, Job 7.20. I have sinned, what shall I do to thee, O preserver of
man? Lam. 1.17. The seed of Jacob is in a hard case before God, and under
wrath, v. 12, 13, 14. Yet v. 16. The Lord is righteous for I have sinned: This
makes the soul charitable of God, how sad so ever the dispensation be.

7. She sees it is a trial, 7 A sight of the temptation as a temptation.
as is clear by her instant persuing after Christ, after many repulses: Its
great mercy that God comes not behind backs, and strikes not in the dark,
Psalm. 77.10. And I said, this is my infirmity; he gathers his scattered
thoughts, and takes himself in the temptation: Its mercy 1. To see the
temptation in the face; some lie under a dumb and a deaf temptation, that
wants all the five senses: Cain is murdered in the dark at midnight with the
temptation, and he knows not what it means: 2. Gods immediate hand is more
to be looked at, then any other temptation: 3. Hence the conscience is timorous
and traverseth its ways under the Trial; when a night Traveller dare not
trust the ground he walks on, he is in a sad condition; he is under two
evils, and has neither comfort nor confidence, Isa. 50. He that walks in
darkness, and has no light (but some glimmering of star light, or half moon
under the earth, and knows not the ground he walks in) Let him trust in the
name of the Lord.

8. She runs not away from Christ under desertion: 8. Running into Christ.
But 1. She comes to him, its a question what deserted souls shall do in that
case: See 2. that you run not from Christ; it was a desertion that Saul was
under, and a sad one we read of, but he makes ^^^fession of his condition to
the Devil, a sad word, 1 Samuel 28.15. I am sore distressed, there^s a heavy and
lamentable reason given, why the Philistines make War against me: Why? That is
not much, they make War always against the people of God; Nay, but here is the
marrow and the soul of all vengeance, God is departed from me: Why? Foolish
man, What avails it thee to tell the Devil God is departed from thee; Judas
was under a total desertion; he went not to Christ, but to the murderers of
Christ to open his wound: I have sinned, Fool, say that to the Savior of
sinners, the Church deserted, Cant. 1. and 5. betaketh her self to Christ, and
searches him out, Saw ye him whom my soul loves? Its a bad token, when men
conceiving themselves to be in calamity, makes lies amd policy their refuge.

Obj. But it is a greater sin to go to Christ, being in a state of sin: To run
from Christ in desertion is two deaths; to flee in to him, though unprepared,
at worst is but one death and a little one.
What have I to do to go to him whom I have offended so highly? Ans. To run
from Christ under desertion, is two deaths. 1. Desertion is one, and if real,
the saddest hell out of hell. 2. To flee from Christ and life is another death;
now to come to him, though he should kill thee for thy presumption, is but one
death, and a little one in comparison of the other, and one little death is
rather to be chosen, then two great deaths. 2. Consider how living a death it
is to be killed doing a duty, and aiming to flee in to Christ; better die by
Christ's own hand (if so it must be) as by another: and better be buried, and
lie dead at his feet, as to run away from him in a heavy desertion: if the
believer must die, its better his grave to be made under the Throne, and under
the feet of Jesus Christ, as to die in a state of strangeness, and alienation
from Christ, not daring to come nigh him: all the deserted ones that we read of
did flee in to himself, Psalm. 34. Psalm. 88. Psalm. 39. Job 13.15. Isa. 38. 2.
Its good to claim him as thy God, though he should deny thee, and creep into
him, though he should throw thee out of his sight: Better kiss the sword that
kills thee, and be slain with his own hand, as cast away thy confidence.

25. But she came and worshipped.] An heavier temptation cannot befall a soul
tender of Christ's love, Its a blessed mark when a temptation chaceth not a soul
from a duty in 3. cases illustrated.
then to cry to God, and not be answered, and to cry and receive a flat and
downright renouncing of the poor supplicant; yet this does not thrust her from
a duty, she comes and worshippeth, and prays. Its a blessed mark when a
temptation thrusts not off a soul from a duty: and 1. when the danger and sad
trial is seen, its good to go on. Christ knew before, he should suffer, and
when they would apprehend him, yet he went to the garden to spend a piece of
the night in prayer. It was told Paul by Agabus, if he went to Jerusalem the
Jews should bind him, and deliver him to the Gentiles; it was his duty to go,
thither he professes he will go, Act. 21.13. What mean ye to weep, and break
my heart, I am ready not only to be bound, but to die for the name of Jesus:
dying could not thrust him from a duty. Esther ran the hazard of death to go in
to the King: yet conscience of a duty calling, she goes on in faith; If I
perish, I perish. 2. In Paul, with an iron chain upon his body, preaches
Christ before Agrippa and his enemies, and preaching Christ was the crime: Paul
and Silas with bloody soldiers must sing Psalms in the stocks. 3.
Indefinitely, after the trial, and when the temptation is on, yet the Saints
go on, Psalm. 44 All this is come on us, there is the temptation: the duty, Yet
we have not forgotten thee, neither dealt falsely in thy Covenant, Ps. 119.23.
Princes did speak against me, there is a temptation: yet here is a duty: But
thy servant did meditate on thy Statutes, verse. 81. My soul faints for thy
salvation, but I hope in thy Word, verse. 110. The wicked have laid a snare for
me, yet I erred not from thy Precepts, ver. 157. Many are my persecuters, and
mine enemies, yet do I not decline from thy Testimonies, Psalm. 109.3. They
fought against me without cause, verse. 4. For my love they were my adversaries,
but I gave my self to prayer.

1. Its a sign of a sweet humbled servant, who can take a buffet, 1. To go on
in duties under a temptation speaks thre^ good signs*
and yet go about his Masters service; and when a soul can pass through fire
and water to be at a duty; for then the conscience of the duty has more
prevailing power to act obedience, then the salt and bitterness of the
temptation has force to subdue and vanquish the Spirit; its like Grace has
the day, and better of Corruption. 2. It argues a soul well watched and kept
from the incursion of a house sin, and a homebred corruption: for the
temptation sets on the nearest corruption, as fire kindles the nearest
powder, and dry timber; and so goes along, Ps. 18.18. They prevented me in the
day of my calamity: verse. 23. I was upright before him, and I kept my self from
mine iniquity. The Devil has a friend within us; now there be degrees of
friends, some nearer of blood then other some, the man's own predominant is the
dearer friend to Satan, then any other sin; if pride be the predominant, its so
Satan his firstborn, he agents his business by pride. 3. So it may argue,
that the soul steeled and fortified with grace, takes occasion from the
sinfulness of the temptation, and the edge of it, to be more zealous and
active in duties. David scoffed at by Michol, said, I Will be more vile yet: so
Psalm. 22.7. All that see me laugh me to scorn, they shoot out the lip, they
shake the head: 8. He trusted in the Lord, etc. See here a heavy temptation,
but his faith diggeth deeper, to the first experience of Gods goodness: verse.
9. But thou art he that took me out of the womb, etc. As the Church mocked with
this, Sing us one of the songs of Zion, Psalm. 137. raises an higher esteem of
Zion, because Z^ons songs are scoffed at: Verse. 5. Let them mock Zion as they
list. But if I forget Zion, then verse. 6. I pray God my tongue may cleave to
the roof of my mouth: So the Thief hearing Christ blasphemed, and railed on by
his fellow, does take more boldness to extol him as a King; Lord, remember
me, when thou come to thy Kingdom: Grace appears the more gracious and
active that it has an adversary; contraries in nature, as fire and water, put
forth their greatest strength, when they actually conflict together.

Use 1. Antinomians turn grace in a temptation, and then cast off all duties, 1
Use.
as Christ has pardoned all sin, his righteousness imputed, is mine: what do
you speak to me of Law-duties? The way that cries down duties and
sanctification, is not the way of grace; grace is an innocent thing, and will
not take men off from duties, grace destroys not obedience: Christ has made
faith a friend to the Law; the death of Christ destroys not graces activity
in duties: Its true, grace trusted in, becomes our self, not grace; and self
cannot storm heaven, and take Christ by violence; grace, though near of kindred
to Christ, as it is received in us, is but a creature, and so may be made an
Idol, when we trust in it, and seek not Christ first, and before created
grace: but believing and doing are bloud-friends, Joh. 11.26.

Use 2. This would be heeded, 2 Use.
that in difficulties and straits, we keep from wicked ways, and being
tempted, that we strive to come near the forerunners way: it was peculiar to
Christ to be angry, and not to sin: to be like us, in all points tempted like
as we are, yet without sin, Heb. 4.14. with this difference, Christ was
tempted, but cannot sin: the Saints tempted, but dare not sin. The Law of God
honeyed with the love of Christ, has a Majesty and power to keep from sin: So
Christ made under the Law for us, Isa. 53.7. was oppressed, he was afflicted,
(oppression will make a sinful man mad) but it could not work upon Christ: He
was oppressed, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a Lamb to the
slaughter: So all Christ's followers did, they are tempted, but grace puts a
power of tenderness on them. Joseph tempted, says, Genesis 39.9. How can I do
this great wickedness, and sin against God. David is reproached by Shimei, but
he dares not avenge himself. Job heavily, as any man, tempted. yet Job 1.22. In
all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly. I deny not, but the
temptation does sometime obtain half a consent: Nabal tempted David, so that
he resolved to be avenged. 2. It will leave a bleck and a crook behind it in
some, for their whole life: Peter shall be all his life known to be one that
once forsware his Lord. But this is fearful, when men both creat temptations,
by defending a bad cause, (as holy men may have an unholy cause) and then can
find no way to carry it out, but by crooked policy, and calumnies. We are now
pursued by Malignants with an unjust war: to embrace peace upon any
dishonorable terms to Christ, is to desert a duty for fear of a temptation:
On the other side, to refuse an offer of peace, because many innocent persons
have been killed, is also a yielding to a temptation; for by war we kill many
more innocent ones, and its against the Lords counsel, Psalm. 34.14. Seek peace:
that is, as much as we are not to be patients only, but agents, even when we
are wronged, in seeking peace. But what if peace flee from me? I confess, that
is a temptation, then says the Lord, follow after it; the word (...) Daresh,
is (...) Heb. 12.14. the Syrocha^d: is, run after peace: compel peace, and
force it, as men follow an enemy, Romans 14.19. (...) Let us pursue after things
of peace.

Use 3. See the sweet use of faith under a sad temptation; 3. Use.
faith traffiqueth with Christ and heaven in the dark, upon plain trust and
credit, without seeing any surety or pawn, Joh. 20.29. Blessed are they that
have not seen, and yet have believed: And the reason is, because faith is
sinewed and boned with spiritual courage; so as to keep a barred city against
hell, yea, and to stand under impossibilities; and here is a weak woman, though
not as a woman, yet as a believer, standing out against him, who is, Isa, 9.6.
The mighty God, the father of ages, the Prince of peace. Faith only stands
out, and overcomes the sword, the world, and all afflictions, 1 John 5.4. This
is our victory, whereby one man overcomes the great and vast world.

SERMON XVI.
Verse. 26. Mat. 15*
But he answered, and said, it is not meet to take the childrens bread, and to
cast it to whelps.

27. And she said, Truth Lord, yet the whelps eat of the crumbs that fall from
the Masters Table.

28. And Jesus answered, and said unto her, O woman, great is thy faith, be it
unto thee even as thou will: and her daughter was made whole from that very
hour.

30. Mark 7,
And when she came to her house, she found the devil gone out, and her daughter
laid upon the bed.


THe dispute between Christ and the woman goes on: Christ brings a strong
reason, verse. 26. why he should not heal he^ daughter; because she, and all her
nation, not being in Covenant with God, as are the Jews the Church of God, are
but dogs, and profane, and unworthy of Christ, which is the bread ordained for
the children.

National sins may occur to the consciences of the child of God in his
approach to God.
When Christ humbles, he may put us in remembrance of our nation, and national
sins, Isa. 51.1. Look to the Rock whence ye were hewn, and to the hole of the
pit whence ye were dug -- I alone called Abraham, he was an Idolater, Hos.
9.10. I found Israel like grapes in the wilderness, they should have been wild
grapes rotten in the wilderness, had I not put them in my basket, Ezekiel. 16.2.
Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her abomination. How? Make them know the
stock they came of. 3. And say, thus says the Lord unto Jerusalem, Thy birth,
and thy nativity, is of the land of Canaan; thy father was an Amorite, and thy
mother a Hittite. When the Jews was to offer the first fruits to the Lord, Deu.
26.5. And thou shall speak, and say before the Lord thy God, A Syrian ready to
perish was my father, and went down to Egypt to sojourn there. Thus the
forgetting of what we are by nature, adds to our guiltiness, Eze. 16.22. And
in all thine abominations, and thy whoredoms, thou have not remembered the days
of thy youth, when thou wast naked, and bare, (and wast) polluted in thy blood:
So the Ephesians must be told how unfit they were by nature for Christ; being
the very workhouse, and shop of the Devil, in which he wrought, Ephesians. 2.1, 2,
3. National sins has influence in their guilt and contagion on believers: 1.
When they mourn not for them, Gods displeasure should be our sorrow: 2. When
they stand not in the gap to turn away wrath, Ez. 22.30. There were, Isa. 59.
Godly men that departed from ill, v. 15. But Gods quarrel was, that there was
no intercessor: in Fasting, believers, though pardoned, may have on them a
burden of the sins of three nations, and be involved in that same wrath with
them: National repentance is required of every one, no less then personal
Repentance: who sorrows for the blood of Malignants and Rebels? for their
oaths, mocking, scoffing, Massing; The sins of the Land, Idolatry,
Superstitious days, vain Ceremonies, etc. have influence on a believers
conscience in his approach to God. But we are here to consider, that Christ
does two great and contrary works at once: 1. He humbles the believing woman,
in reproaching her as a profane Dog, unworthy of the childrens bread, that the
Will may be more broken for believing: And 2. He tries and tempts her, to
see if she can, by reproaches be taken off from Christ. A broken will is a
broken heart; for will is the iron sinew in the heart; decourt merit and
conceit of any good in thy self, but the uncleanness of a dog: And 2. break
will, that that proud thing may fall in two pieces at Christ's feet: And 3.
Believe, stick by thy point, that though a Dog, yet thou art one of Christ's
Dogs, and then all is well: The best way to break the will; is 1. to offer
Hell, and the coals of everlasting burning to it; yea, and when the soul is
humbled, to humble it more: Christ knew, that this woman was lying in the dust,
but he will have her below the dust when he tries her with such a humbling
temptation; Many think the troubled conscience should not be further humbled:
They say, (There is nothing for such a soul but the honey and sweetness of
consolations in the Gospel) Nay, but often that which troubles them, is
subtle, and invisible pride; he will not believe for want of self-worthinesse:
Oh I dare not rest on Christ, nor apply the Promises, because of my sinful
unworthiness: Now if this be humility, its the proudest humility in the world,
A subtle humble pride, the disease of weak ones who dare not apply the
promises. Sense of free grace humbles exceedingly.
for the soul thus troubled, says, I am not good enough, nor rich enough for
Christ and his fine gold: and the truth is, he is not a good enough Papist to
give a ransom of self-worth, for that great ransom of blood, which cannot be
bought: but though thou should buy Christ, the Father will not sell him:
Christ is disposed to a sinner, as a f^ee gift, not as a wage or a hire: There
is a difference between down-casting, and saving-humiliation; down casting may
exceed measure in the too much apprehension of the Law-curses, and may be
conjoined with much pride, and self-love: But right and saving humiliation,
conjoined with Faith, cannot over pass bounds; it arises often from the sense
of grace, rather then from the Law; God gives grace to the humble, and he
gives humility to the gracious, under the sense of rich grace, 1 Timothy 1.15.
Ephesians. 3.8. Tit. 3.3, 4, 5. 2 Timothy 1.9. Nothing humbles us more then an opinion
of the power and excellency of grace: Grace known and apprehended in its worth,
lays down proud nature on the earth, 1 Cor. 15.9.10. Christ's Grace was
Christ's Accomt-book to Paul; But by the grace of God, I am that I am: A
borrowed garment, though of silk, will make a wise man humble; many sins
pardoned made much love to Christ, and much humility in the woman, Luke 7.44.
And made her lay head and hair, yea, and heart also, under the soles of Christ's
feet; no doubt she thought basely of her self, and her hair, remembering that
grace put these feet to a sad and tiresome journey, to come in the world to
seek the lost, and to be pierced with nails for her: There Is courtesy in free
grace, being the marrow and flower of unhired love, to kill high thoughts of a
self destroying sinner.

Observe also, that not to dare to come to Christ, and believe and pray,
because of unworthiness, such as is in Dogs that are without the new City,
Rev. 22.15. Is but a very temptation: And Christ under the notion of tempting
and trying, offers that to the woman, that she was too daring and bold, being
a Dog, to presume to ask for the childrens bread; hence have we to consider how
far the conscience of sin ought to stand in our way toward Christ; hence
these considerations: 1. Conscience of sin is to humble any, that is, to make
out for Christ, Act. 9. ( Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?) Spoken by
Christ, brought Paul down off his high horse, How far forth conscience of
wretchedness can hinder any to come to Christ, and how it is a temptation.
and laid his soul on the dust, Romans 3.19. Now we know that what things soever
the Law says, it says to them who are under the Law; that every mouth may be
stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God: Its a speech taken
from a malefactor Arraigned and pannelled upon his head: When the judge
Objecteth, What say you? this and this Treason is witnessed against you: Alas,
the poor man stands speechless, and dumb, his mouth is stopped, Ezekiel. 16.63.
That thou may remember (thy old shame) and be confounded, and never open thy
mouth any more, because of thy shame: Christ then has the sinners neck under
his Axe: What justice and Law may do, that Christ may do: The Captive taken in
war, may be killed, by the Law of Wars, if he refuse to submit: 2. No sin is
unpardonable Treason, but the sin against the holy Ghost, and final
impenitence: The Gospel is a Treaty of Peace, between parties in war, none are
excepted but these two: 3. But what then, if a soul come to this; I have either
sinned against the holy Ghost, or certainly am upon the borders of it; because
Christ knocked long, and a year ago, or a long time from this, I remember of
his farewell rap: When Christ knocking, took his last goodnight with this
word; he that is filthy, let him be filthy still; and said he would never come
again: I grant, an ill conscience can speak prophecy, Exodus 10.28, 29. So
Pharaoh did Prophecy, and Cain also, Genesis 4.13, 14. But 2. I can yield that
there be some farewell knockings of Christ, after which Christ is never seen or
heard at the door of some men's hearts, Acts 13.46. Paul speaks so to the
Jews: But seeing you put (the Gospel) from you, and judge your selves unworthy
of everlasting life, lo we turn to the Gentiles: The like is Christ's language
to them, Joh. 8.21. Then said Jesus to them, I go my way, and ye shall seek me,
and shall die in your sins; whether I go, ye cannot come. I doubt if any can
sin the sin against the holy Ghost, and the sinner only and no other complain
of it; that sin breaks out in prodigious Acts of wickedness* as blood and
persecution: Though it were true, that you were upon the borders of Hell, yet
the Gospel, though it except you from actual mercy, yet not from the duty of
believing and coming to Christ; and though such think, and imagine that they
believe Christ is able to save and redeem them, only they doubt of his will;
yet the truth is, the doubt of unbelief is more of the power of mercy and
infinite Grace in Christ, then of his will; and my reason is, that whosoever
believes, Joh. 3.33. has set to his seal that God is true, and 1 Ioh. 5.10.
He that believes not God, has made him a Liar, because he believes not the
record that God gave of his Son: Now it is not Gods Testimony, nor any
Gospel Truth, that such as sin against the holy Ghost shall be pardoned; yea,
the contrary is said, Mat. 12.31, 32. Yet these that sin against the holy Ghost
are condemned, for unbelief, as all other unbelievers are, Ioh. 3.18, 36. Then
such as fall in this sin, though they say, Who ever doubts if God will save
him, doubts also if he can save.
Infinite mercy can pardon them, but infinite mercy will not pardon them;
should not belly God, by unbelieving these truths, for they are Gospel Truths;
then must the unbelief of those that sin against the Holy Ghost put a lie upon
some Gospel Truth, and this can be only on the power of infinite mercy; and so
they must say, Christ cannot save, though he would, for there is a power of
Christ in mercy, no less then a will. If F. Spira go for a despairing
Reprobate (which I dare not aver) yet when he said, he believed Christ was
able to save him, but he doubted of his will; he must not be so understood, as
if it were so indeed: Unbelievers know not all the mysterious turnings of lying
and self deceiving unbelief. Unbelief may lie to men of it self, when it dare
belie the worth of that soul-redeeming ransom of Christ's blood; if he that
sins against the holy Ghost, could believe the power of infinite mercy, he
should also believe the will and inclination of infinite mercy, for the power
of mercy is the very power of a merciful will. I shall not then be afraid that
soul is lost, which has high and capacious apprehensions of the worth, value,
dignity and power of that dear ransom, and of infinite mercy. Its faith to
believe this Gospel Truth, which is, Heb. 7.25. That Christ is able to save to
the utmost all those that come to him: if I believe soundly what free grace can
do, I believe also soundly what free grace will do. Its true, Christ can save
many, whom he never will save; but the faith of the power of mercy, and of his
will to save, is of a far other consideration. 4. It must then be the
prevailing of a temptation, not to dare to come to Christ, because I am a dog,
and unworthy. 1. Because sin is no porter put to watch the door of Christ's
house of free grace, Sin keeps not the door of Christ to hold out sinners.
mercy keeps the keys; sin may object my evil deserving, but it cannot
object Christ's rich deserving. 2. That which makes me unworthy, and
graceless, and unfit to be saved, may make Christ worthy, and gracious to
save; my sin may be Christ's rich grace. Though sin makes me unworthy of
Christ* yet it makes me a fit passive object for the Physician Christ to work
on; and makes not Christ unworthy to save. If I feel sin, it then says, Thou
art the very person by name that Christ seeks. Therefore is the sense of sin
required as a condition in all that comes to Christ, whether it be before
conversion, or after conversion, when acts of faith are renewed.

Obj. But we find by experience, that true poverty of spirit, Rise, reign and
ruin of Antino. error 17. page 4.
and sense of sinful wretchedness, does kill and destroy any sight of guilt
and wickedness in my self; if I rightly see Christ, I shall not also see any
unworthiness in my self. Answ. This experience is not warranted by the word of
truth. These may well consist together: 1. That felt and apprehended
wretchedness of a sinner, may stand with a sight of Christ's riches of grace,
is as evident, as the felt pain of the sting of the fiery Scorpion, Sense of my
own sinful condition and a sight of the Excellency of Christ and his grace may
stand together.
may stand with looking up to the brazen Serpent, and being saved: yea, when
the poor man, Mark 9.24. said, Lord, I believe, help my unbeleefe; he both was
sensible of faith, and unbeleefe. 2. Yea, the converted may well see grace and
holiness in himself, (else how shall he be thankful to Christ the giver) and
also see Christ, and believe his righteousness? for holy walking comes under
a threefold consideration: 1. As a duty. 2. As a mean ordained of God that we
should walk in, Ephesians. 2.10. 3. As a promise, Holy walking may be felt by the
believer in himself, and Christ's excellency also. Holiness considered 1. as a
Duty. 2. As a mean. 3. As a promise.
or a thing promised in the new Covenant: and in this threefold consideration,
we may know how far we may build our peace upon any duties, as upon evidences
of our state of grace; 1. as holy walking is a duty coming from us, its no
ground of true peace, believers often seek in themselves what they should seek
in Christ; this is natural merit; often we argue from the measure of obedience
to deny grace altogether; this is a false way, especially its a false way of
logic, to argue Negatively, from want of such and such a measure of obedience,
to deny you are in Christ; how we may argue Affirmatively, we shall hear
hereafter. 2. The duty is Christ's mean, not enjoined in a strict Law-way, but
in a Gospel-way, as the commandment is oiled with a Gospel Spirit of love: Law
and love are not contrary, as Antinomians do imagine; Christ has united, not
only persons, but also graces and virtues. This way the duty is a mean, and a
way, not to the right of salvation, but to the actual possession of it; and as
it is, or stands stated before us in the letter of the Gospel, in a Moral
commanding, or a Doctrinall, or directing way, without the efficacy of grace,
it can be nothing but a Doctrinall-mean, no more then the Law-way is; for all
Gospel-precepts without grace, are as little available to us, as the Law: But
in the third Notion, holy walking as performed by that efficacious grace
promised in the Covenant of grace; is an Argument on which we may build our
peace, not as a cause, or a merit-deserving peace, but as a grace threeded upon
the free promise of God: August. DEUS coronat innobis non nostra merita, sed
sua dona.

How we collect peace in our spiritual state by holy walking.


so the Saints have builded upon their sincere walking, as on a fruit of the
Covenant of Grace promised to us, Jer. 31.33. Jer. 32. for so duties speak the
mercies promised in the Covenant, 38. And I will give them one heart, and one
way, that they may fear me for ever: See Ezech. 36.27. Isa. 54.13. Upon this
ground Ezekiah pleads with God, when he heard the sentence of death, Isa.
38.3. Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in
truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight:
And David puts his faith upon this, as a gracious fruit of grace promised in
the Covenant of Grace: So David pleads, and in faith, Psalm. 86.2. Preserve my
soul; here is a prayer in faith, and upon what ground, for I am holy. Now this
would seem Pharisaicall, and merit-like, if holiness did not relate to the
free promise of the Covenant of Grace, in which God has promised, and tied
himself by Covenant, to make his own children holy; and also is resolved upon a
proposition of the covenant of grace. God has both promised to cause his
covenanted ones walk before him in truth, as did Ezekiah, as we have it, Ezekiel.
36.27. and he has promised to save and deliver the upright in heart: as is
clear, Ps. 50.23. Ps. 34.15. 1 Pet. 3.12. Ps. 145.18, 19. So all the peace we
can collect, for our comfort, from holy walking is resolved on a promise of
free grace, and the duty as performed by the grace of the covenant, may and
does lead us to the promise, and so no wise from Christ but to Christ. Holy
walking, is a faithful witness: and a true witness may lead any accused man
to Law-right: holiness may lead me to the promise, and that is good Law-right:
if we cannot gather any assurance of our spiritual estate from holy duties in
us, such as are universal obedience, sincerity in keeping closse to Christ,
and love to the Saints, because they may deceive us, and may be in Hypocrites,
as Doctor Crispe says, then may faith also deceive us, for there be as many
kinds of false faiths, as there be of counterfeit loves to the Saints: and
there is somewhat of Christ peculiar to the regenerate in their love,
obedience, and sincerity, which they may discern to be a saving Character, and
badge of Christ, no less then in faith: 2. But here is the mystery, neither
faith, nor any thing inherent in us, can yield us certainty that we are in
Christ, or any peace with God, in regard all grace, all evidences of our good
estate is without us in Christ, inherent holiness and duties are but fancies;
When we then refuse the comforts of God, and Peace from holy walking, as its
thread, and linked to the Promise, we refuse Christ; especially, under
desertion, we bid Christ look away from us; and there is a wilfulness of
unbelieving sorrow, so that Rachel will not be comforted: But when we refuse
Christ's comforts, we refuse himself; she who refuses to accept of a Bracelet,
or of a Gold-ring from him who s^iteth her in marriage, she refuses both his
love, and himself, in that she refuses his love-token.

Christ a great householder.

The Privileges of the children of the house.


Observe also, that Christ brings himself in, as a great House-holder in the
Gospel: in his house there be diverse children, servants, Dogs, and the house is
broad, and open to all that comes: There Is bread in our Fathers house for all:
What bread? A great Marriage Supper: here is a Kings Son Married, Matthew. 22.
Luke 14 and many excellent dainties, and all dainties is Christ the marrow of
the Gospel that bread of life, John 6.48. I am that bread of life: he was the
wheat, Ioh. 12.24. That dies and rotteth in the earth, and then takes life,
and brings forth fruit: he is the wheat that suffered the Winter Frosts and
storms, rain and winds, and went through the milstones of Gods wrath, and was
bruised for our iniquities, Isa. 53.5. For it pleased the Lord to bruise him:
ver. 10. (...) Dakeo, is Contundere, Christ the bread of life.
to grind us in a Mortar, or Mill: and he went through the Oven and Fiery
furnace of the anger of God, before he could be bread for the Kings table and
the children. 2. Every bread is not the bread of children: Christ is not a
loaf, nor a Feast, for the man that wants his wedding garment: such a friend
was never invited to the banquet, Matthew. 22.11.12. and of those that loathes
Christ, and loves their lusts better then him, Christ says, Luke 14.24 None
of these men that were bidden shall taste of my supper: The children are parts
of the house, and are more then children, heirs, even joint heirs with the
eldest heir Christ, Communion between the children and the first heir, Christ
in five particulars.
Romans 8.17. 1. Because Christ and the younger heirs divides Heaven (to speak
so) between them, and 1. the spirit that raised Christ from the dead, Romans
8.11. dwells in them: 2. They have one GOD, and one Father CHRIST, and we are
Fathers Children, Joh. 20.17. Go to my brethren, and say to them, I ascend unto
my Father, and your Father, and to my God and: 3. We must be together in one
place, all the children must be in one house together, Ioh. 17.24. Ioh. 14.3.
And if I go (its not an if) of doubting) And prepare a place for you, I will
come again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be
also, Joh. 12.26. And where I am, there shall also my servant 4. On
Resurrection, Ioh. 14.19. Because I live, ye shall live also, 1 Cor. 15.23.
Every believer is raised in Christ, but in order, Every man in his own order,
Christ first, as the first fruits: 5. One Heaven and one Kingdom: Luke 22.29.
Rev. 3.21. 2. There be great odds between the spirit or mind of an heir, The
Spirit of an heir and of a servant different.
or a son, and a servant: the heir will do much for the birthright, take his
life from him, ere you take his Heritage from him: Esaws face dried, he weeped
no more, when his father blessed him with the dew of Heaven, and the fatness
of the earth: a servant will not contend to be an heir: 3. Joh. 8.35. The
servant abides not in the house for ever, but the Son abides ever: The sons
reward is all hope; as some courtiers attend Princes upon hopes; servants have
hand-payment, and present wages, every Professor try his spirit, and nature,
if the spirit bend toward the inheritance and Heavenward its right: see who
looks to the last year of Nonage and minority, and has not an eye and heart
on time: theirs a latent hope in all troubles in sons, as in a Kings heir in a
far Country where he is not known, not honored as one of a Princes blood,
but neglected, injured: yea, in want and necessity, yet when he casts his eye
upon his over-sea hope, it comes home to his heart with ease, One day I shall
be a King, in honor, and wealth: 2. Try the free and ingenuous spirit of a son
toward the Father, there is not a nature or an instinct in the servant, nor such
an inward principle toward the lord of the house, as in a son; blood and nature
is strong and prevalent, blood-bonds, nature-relations are mighty, Mark 7.27.
But Jesus said unto her, let the children first be filled: Christ denied not,
but the woman and the Gentiles have a right to the bread of Christ's house, only
Grace must keep an order; let the Jews first have the loaf broken to them, and
then let the Gentiles have the by-board, or the second Table of Christ; hence
observe Christ's wise attempterating of the temptation in these particulars: 1.
That temptations are measured by grans and scruples to the Saints; there is a
seed of comfort and hope in Christ's glowning and frownings; he would say,
There Is a seed of hope and comfort in the hardest desertions of the Saints.
when the children are filled with bread first, then you that are dogs shall
also have your portion of the childrens bread; there is a kiss and bowels of
compassion under the lap of that covering and cloak of wrath, with which he is
covered, for in wrath he remembers mercy, and moderateth Fury is not in me, Is.
27.4. 2. Gospel trials and temptations are for a merciful end, that Paul may
not be puffed up, or as he says, 2 Cor. 12.7. (...) Lest I should be like a
Meteor, lifted up in the air above measure, 2 Corinthians. 1.9. But we had the
sentence of death in our selves (as condemned malefactors) that we should not
trust in our selves: 3. God will not have them above our Cor. 10 13. Its good
that we know Christ breweth or mixeth our cup; he can Sugar the salt and bitter
wine with mercy, there is no desertion of the Saints that we read of, but
there is as much of Christ in it, as gives it some taste and smell of heaven:
Heaven is stamped upon the hell of the Saints, life is written on their death;
their grave and dead corpse are hot, and does breath out life, and glory, their
ashes and dust smell of immortality and resurrection to life: Even when Christ
is gone from the Church, he leaves a pawn or a pledge behind him, as
love-sicknesse for the want of him, Cant. 3. and 5. When Christ is nothing but
an empty grave, and he himself is away yet weeping for the want of him, without
care of Angels or Apostles, when the beloved himself is gone is somewhat of
Christ; yea, he sends before a Messenger to tell that the King himself is
coming, as in a great summer drouth, little drops goes before the great
shower, to make good report that the earth shall be refreshed; 1. longings for
him: 2. waiting after him: 3. Christ in you seeking after Christ are Messengers
of heaven sent before to dress and adorn the lodging for the Prince, who is
on his journey coming to thee.

SERMON XVII. 27. And she says truth, Lord, Grace makes quicknes and wittines
heavenly reasoning.
yet the whelps eat of the crumbs that fall from the Masters table.
OBserve 1. The woman's witty answer by retortion in great quickness by
concession of the conclusion, and granting she was a Dog, she borrows the
Argument, and takes it from Christ's mouth to prove her question: She Argues
from the temptation: Let me be a Dog, so I be a Dog under Christ's feet at his
Table: The Spirit of the Lord shall make him of an excellent faculty of smelling.
Forerius his breathing or smelling of things shall be in the fear of the Lord.
Wisedoms Scholars are not fools: Grace is a witty and understanding Spirit,
ripe and sharp; so its said of Christ, Isa. 11.3. (...) Vatablus: Odorari facit
illum Forerius respirare ejus erit in timore Domini. Grace has a sagacity to
smell things excellently; so Prove. 1.4 The wisdom of God in the Proverbs gives
subtilty to the simple; Vatablus ductilibus calliditatem, (...) Petaim, a Rad.
(...) Aquila, (...) such as may easily be milked, and flattered, and persuaded:
in young ones, reason sleeps, affection rules all: and (...) Gnarma, the 70.
(...) quickness in all things: and the other word, (...) rendered Discretion,
its Thoughtfulness: grace furnishes the soul with quick, sharp, deep
thoughts, to know a Devil, and an Angel; Heaven, and hell; and that stolen
waters are not sweet, Heb. 5.14. They have (...) their spiritual senses are as
wrestlers experienced, or as learned Scholars in Universities, acquainted with
the knowledge of good and ill. 2. Faith is thus pregnant, as to draw saving
conclusions from hard principles, and to exstract the spirit of the promises.
Christ came to save sinners: then says Paul, to save me: for 1 Timothy 1.15. I am
the chief of these sinners, and though a temptations language be the language
of hell and unbelief; as thus, Thou art a sinner, a lost and a condemned one,
and therefore have nothing to do with Christ: Faith argues the language of
Heaven, and the Gospel from this: I am a sinner, and a lost one, but one of
Christ's sinners, and one of Christ's lost ones, and for that same very cause, I
belong to Christ.

3. Faith contradicts Christ temp^ing but humbly and modestly.
3. Faith does here contradict the temptation, and modestly refute Christ, if
Christ say, Thou art a transgressor from the womb: Ans. I confess Lord, But
Christ died for transgressors: 2. If he say, Thou art under a curse: Ans. With
a distinction, Its too true Lord: So I am by nature, But Christ was made a
curse for me: 3. If he say, Thou have holden me at the door: I confess Lord it
is so; But if Christ say, I came not for thee, thou art a Dog, to such
belongs not Christ the bread of children: you may then Answer, O Lord, with
all reverence to thy holy Majesty: Its not so, I am thine, thou did come for
me, the bread belongs to me: When a sinner dare not dispute his actions with
Christ, yet he may dispute his estate: The Saints may dispute their state with
Christ, when they dare not dispute their actions.
The state of Sonship is not sin, and therefore we must adhere to this, as
Christ did, when he was tempted; If thou be the Son of God, etc. He refused to
yield that, if then Christ himself should say, Thou art a Reprobate, expound it
as a temptation; far more if Satan, if conscience, if the world say it: you are
not to acknowledge these to be Heralds sent to proclaim Gods secrets; Job
would not believe his friends in this: Then to be tempted, to deny your
sonship and claim in Christ may be your temptation, not your sin; injections
of coals to try, may come immediately from God, as well as from Satan: 2. It is
good (say Antinomians) To lay the Saints under a Covenant of works, Er. 66.
We are to ac^^p^ submissively of a wakened conscienc but not to seek a
storming conscienc
because it does this good, to make us make sure our evidences, that Christ is
ours: yea some desire a wakened conscience, that the terrors of God may chase
them to Christ: But 1. that is a murmuring at Gods dispensation: Let Christ
tutour me as he thinks good, he has seven eyes I have but one, and that too
dim: 2. We are not to make sad, whom God has not made sad, Eze. 13.22. Nor
to make a lie of Grace: Nor

Truth Lord, the Dogs] Behold where humility sits: 1. Christ cannot put
humility lower, Luke 15.19. I am not worthy to be called thy son: True humility
and its way in seven particulars.
O great Paul* What is less then nothing, and less then the least of all?
Ephesians. 3.8. Unto me who am less then the least of all Saints, is this grace
given, 1 Timothy 1.13. I was a persecuter, a blasphemer: Christ cannot put
humility lower.
1 Cor. 15.9. I am the least of the Apostles; humility is no daring grace, it
dare scarce seek to be a door keeper in heaven; it sets it self in hell: 2.
Though humility be well born, and of sweet Jesus, who is lowly and meek: Yet
Christ, and Christ only is humilities freehold: The humble soul knows no
Landlord but Christ, Humility knows no Landlord, but Christ and free grace.
and is only Graces humble Tenant: there is none to him but the Lord Jesus with
his rich ransom of blood, 1 Timothy 1.16, 17. So there is much humility in heaven:
if it were possible that tears could be in heaven* the humble Saints that are
there should not see Christ reach out a Crown to set on their head, but they
should weep and hold away their head; yea, the glorified are ashamed to bear a
crown of glory on their head, when they look Christ on the face, and so cannot
but cast down their crowns before the Throne, Rev. 4.10. 3. All the Saints
Christ as any, Matthew. 8.8, 9. I am not worthy that thou should come under my
roof, but speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed; yea, we gather
from Jobs pleading, chap. 14. that humble Saints think not themselves only
below grace and mercy, but also below the glory of justice and wrath, Job 14.2.
Humilty as it extolleth Christ so it thinks the party not only below grace
and merey, but also below the justice and wrath of God.
Man flees also as a shadow and continues not: 3. And do thou open thine
eyes upon such a one, and bring me unto judgment with thee? 4. Who can
bring a clean thing, out of an unclean one? Not one: he would say, I am not
only frail by condition of nature being a shadow of clay, v. 1, 2. But also by
birth, sinful and unclean, by reason of sin original: I am therefore a party
unworthy of the anger of God; as a Beggar is not worthy of the wrath of the
Emperor, or a worm of the indignation of an Angel: 4. Any man is nearer God
then the humble soul, in his own eyes, Psalm. 22.24. Our fathers trusted in
thee, etc. Humility puts all men above it self.
6. I am a worm Because humility is a soul smoothed, and lying level with it
self, no higher then God has set it, Ps. 131.1. I do not exercise my self in
great matters, or in things too high for me: The proud soul has feathers
broader then his nest: 5. The humble soul is a door-neighbor to Grace: None so
capable of Grace as the humble man*
Christ is near a casten-down Zion; to give him beauty for ashes, the garments
of praise for the spirit of heaviness, Isa. 61.3. Christ has a Napkin for the
wet face of a humbled sinner. Christ the Surgeon of souls has a wheel to
set in joint the broken heart, Isa. 61.1. There Is a Saviors hand in heaven to
wheel in an ill-boned soul on earth, Ps. 51.8. O what consolation: Christ does
both seek and save the self-lost soul, Luke 19.10. The Lamb one of the lowliest
and meekest creatures has a bed beside the heart, and in the bosom of Christ,
Isa. 40.11. He shall carry the Lambs in his bosom; yea, he shall deliver the
needy when he cries, the poor also, and him that has no helper, Ps. 72.12.
The Lord gives more grace, he resists the proud, and gives grace to the
humble, Jam. 4.6. 6. The humble cannot complain of Gods dispensation, The
humble man cannot complain of Gods dispensation.
1 Samuel 15.26. Humble David, But, if the Lord say, I have no delight in thee,
behold here am I, let him do to me, as seems good to him: That I am not
fettered with the Prince of darkness, is the debt of grace on me: Many ^ich
(...) conferred on the humble soul.
for Tophet, put it up in Christ's count, and strike sail to Christ, and stoop
to him. 7. Yet is the hope of the humble green at the root, it shall not be as
a broken tree, Ps. 9.18. God shall save the humble, Job 22.29. And hear his
desire, Psa. 10.17. 3. Revive * Isa. 57.15. 4. Beautify him with salvation,
Honor him, Prove. 15.33. Satisfy him, Psalm. 22.26. 7. Guide him i^ judgment,
Ps. 25.9. 8. Increase his joy, Isa. 29.19. 9. Bless him, Mat. 5.5. and give
him a sure Cor. 15.10. Not I, but the grace of God in me, 1 Cor. 4. I have
written that ye be not puffed up for one against another: 7. For who makes to
differ from another? And what have thou that thou did not receive? 1 Cor.
1.27, 28, 29. Then because thou art little in thine own eyes, put not thy self
out of graces writing, for God puts thee in: Grace is mercy given for
nothing, and the promise is made to the humble: In the judgment of sense, How
we are to esteem every man better then our self in the judgment of sense, not
of charity always, far less of verity.
every one is to esteem another better then himself, Phil. 2.3. Peter is to
have a deeper sense of his own sinful condition, then of the sinful condition
of Judas the Traitor; Though Peter being graced of God, owe more charity to
himself then to Judas; when Judas is a known Traitor, yet should not humility
decline to that extreme, as to weaken Faith, and to say, because I am unworthy
of pardon, therefore its presumption to believe pardon of sins.

Beware of Pride, the Elephants neck and knees that cannot bow, God must break:
God knows the proud afar off, 3. Use. Pride hateful to God.
Psalm. 138.6. the word (...) Gavoah is the high man, the Scripture word, Iam.
4.6. is (...) the proud man is an appearance, not a real thing, and an
appearance more then enough: the Phrase imports two: 1. Its borrowed from
men, who see things near hand, before they see things afar off, and so more of
their eyes is fixed on that which is near hand, and so its more delighted in;
we see things a far off with less delight to the sense. Lorinus, Quasi in
transitu videre, and with contempt. The humble man lies near Gods eye, the
proud man is further from his eye, and seen in the by, and with contempt by
God. 2. A man sees his enemy a far off, and loves not to come near to him;
God has an old quarrel against pride, as one of the oldest enemies born in
heaven, in the breast of the fallen Angels, and thrown out of heaven, and it
seeks to be up at its own element, and country, where it was born, as proud
men are climbing and aspiring creatures: But God a far off, resists the
proud, and denies grace, or any thing of heaven, to the proud Pharisee. When
God first sees a proud man, he says, Behold my enemy: the lowly man is
Christ's friend.

4. Though the woman be a dog in her own eyes, 4. Use. Graces lowliness in
taking notice of sinners.
and so a sinner; See, O sinner, rich mercy, that Christ should admit of dogs
to his Kingdom: O Grace, that Christ should black his fair hands (to speak so)
in washing foul and defiled dogs: How unworthy sinners, and so foul sinners,
that they should be under Christ's table, and eat his bread within the Kings
house: What a motion of free mercy, that Christ should lay his fair, spotless
and chaste love upon so black, defiled and whorish souls? O what a favor, that
Christ makes the Leopard and Ethiopian white for heaven? These two go
together, Rev. 1. 5. Who has loved us, and washed us: Humble sinners have high
thoughts of free grace; stand not afar off, come near, be washed, for
fr^e-grace is not proud, when grace refuses not dogs; salvation must be a
flour planted without hands, that grows only out of the heart of Christ. Take
humble thoughts of your selves, and noble and high thoughts of excellent Jesus
to heaven with you: A curse upon the creatures proud merits, if you make price
with Christ, and compound with everlasting grace, you shame the glory of the
Ransom-payer. Its no shame to die in Christ's debt, all the Angels the Cedars of
heaven are below Christ; Angels and Saints shall be Christ's debtors for
eternity of ages, and so long as God is God, sinners shall be in graces
compt-book.

The truly humble is the most thankful soul that is, 5. Use.
unthankfulness is one of the sins of the age we live in: it flows from 1.
Contemning and despising Gods instruments: The valor of Jeph^ah is no mercy to
Israel, because the Elders hate and despise a bastard, Judge. 11.1, 2, 6. The
curing of Naamans leprosy is not looked on as a mercy: Why? washing in Jordan
must do it, and there be better Rivers in his own land, in Damascus: Not only
God, but all his instruments, that he works by, must be eye-sweet to us, and
carry God and omnipotency on their foreheads, else the mercy is no mercy to us.
2. Mercies cease to be mercies when they are smoaked and blacked with our
apprehensions; David, 2 Samuel c. 18. and 19. receives a great victory and is
established on his Throne, which had been reeling and staggering of late, but
there is one sad circumstance in that victory, his dear son Absalom was killed,
and the mercy no mercy in David's apprehension; Would God I had died for
Absalom: so a little cross can wash away the sense of a great mercy: The want
of a draught of cold water, strangles the thankful memory of Gods wonders done
for his peoples deliverance out of Egypt, and his dividing the Red Sea. What a
price would the godly in England have put on the removal of that which indeed
was but a Masse-book, and the burdensome Ceremonies, within these few years?
But because this mercy is not molded and shapen according to the opinion of
many, with such and such a Reformation, and Church Government, I am afraid
there is fretting in too many, in stead of the return of praise: and hating of
these, for whom they did someties pray; God grant that the sufferings of the
Land, and this unnatural bloodshed may be near an end: except the Land be
further humbled, I fear the end of evils is not yet come. This is a directing
of the Spirit of the Lord, to teach God how to shape and floor his mercies
toward us. Is it not fitting there be water in our wine, and a thorn in our
Rose? Shall God draw the lineaments and proportion of his favors after the
measure of my foot? Shall the Almighty be instructed to regulate his ways of
supernatural providence, according to the frame of our apprehensions? O, he is
a wise Lord, and wonderful in counsel: Every mercy cannot be overlaid with
Saphires and precious stones, nor must all our deliverances drop sweet
smelling-Myrrhe. God knows when, and how to level and smooth all his
favors, and remove all their knots, in a sweet proportion, to the main and
principal end, the salvation of his own: There is a crook in our best desires,
and a rule cannot admit of a crook, even in relation to the creature, far less
to him who does all things after the counsel of his own will.

Truly Lord, the Dogs] See and consider this woman, whose faith was great, as
Christ says, and so was justified: she confesses, Doct. A justified soul is
to confess sin and to be sorry for it.

Confession of sins made by the justified proves to be a duty.


and esteems her self a Dog, and so an unworthy and profane person.

Doct. A justified believer is to confess his sins, to have a sense and sorrow
for them, though they be pardoned. The word is clear for both confession, and
sorrow for sin: though Antinomians make it a work of the flesh in the justified
person, either to confess sin, or to sorrow for it, or to crave pardon for it:
For confession there is commandment, practice, promise, Number. 5.6. Speak unto
the children of Israel, when a man or a woman shall commit any sin that men
commit to do a trespass against the Lord, and that person be guilty. Then they
shall confess their sin, that they have done: This is not a duty of the
unconverted only, but tying all the children of Israel, men and women, Jam.
5.16. Confess your faults one to another: Now its not confession to men only,
as if they were sins only before men, which the justified person commits,
and not sins in the Court of heaven before God, as Libertines teach therefore
it is added, Confess -- and pray one for another, that ye may be healed, for
the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much. Then justified
persons are to pray for pardon of sins confessed. I take it to be a precept,
that as many as say, Our Father, to God in prayer, should also say, Forgive us
our sins as we forgive them that sin against us; and so pardon of sins, by a
justified person, and a son of God, is to be asked when we pray for Daily
bread, and the coming of Christ's Kingdom, Hos. 14.2. Take with you words, and
turn to the Lord, say unto him, Take away all iniquity: This must be a
confession, that a people turned to the Lord are in their iniquities.

Ezra confessed and weeped, Neh. 9.1, 2. And the seed of Israel separated
themselves from all strangers, and stood and confessed their sins, and the
iniquity of their fathers. Dan. 9.4. I prayed unto the Lord, and made my
confession. So David, 2 Samuel 12.13. I have sinned against the Lord. Isa. 64.5.
the Church confesses, Thou art wroth, for we have sinned -- 6. But we are all
as an unclean thing. Isa. 59.12. For our transgressions are multiplied before
thee, and our sins testify against us, Job 7.20. I have sinned against thee, O
preserver of man. Psalm. 40.12. My sins are more in number then the hairs of my
head. Jer. 14.7. Our iniquities testify against us -- our backslidings are
many. Its a vain shift to say, The Church prays and confesses in name of the
wicked party, not in name of the justified ones; for as many as were afflicted,
confesses their sins, for the which the hand of God was upon them; now Gods
hand was upon all: Daniel and Jeremiah, were carried away captive: yea, the
whole seed of Jacob, Isa. 42.24, 25. Isa. 64.5, 6, 7. and Jeremiah, Lament.
1.16. in name of the whole captive Church, says, The Lord is righteous, for I
have sinned. 3. There is a promise made to these Who so confesses and
forsakes their sins, shall have mercy. Ps. 32.3. When I kept silence, (and
confessed not) my bones waxed old, etc. Verse. 5. I said I will confess my
transgression unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. And
this is not an old Testament-spirit only, for the same promise is, 1 John 1.8,
9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive, Lev. 26.40. If
they shall confess their iniquity, 42. Then will I remember my covenant with
Jacob. 3. Not to confess, is holden forth as a guiltiness. Jer. 2.35. Yet
thou said, Because I am innocent, surely his anger shall turn from me,
behold, I will plead with thee, because thou say, I have not sinned: Its a
token of impenitencie, Jer. 8.6. No man repented him of his wickedness,
saying, what have I done?

2. Mourning for sin warranted to those who are pardoned.
2. Ephraim, Gods dear child, is brought in, as commended of God, and the Lord
tells over again Ephraims prayers and sorrowing for sin, Ier. 31.18. I have
surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself, etc. We have a precept for it in the
New Testament, Iam. 4.9. Be afflicted and mourn and weep: Let your laughter be
10. Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up. Now
there is better reason to mourn for sin, because they did lust, war, and were
contentious, then because there was afflictions on them. Nature will cause any
cry, when punishment is on them; but not nature, but Grace, not the flesh, but
the spirit causes men sorrow for sin as sin, Lev. 26.41. If then their
uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they then accept of the punishment of
their iniquity, 42. Then I will remember my Covenant with Jacob. 2. To mourn
for sin is a grace And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of Grace and supplication, and they shall
look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn as one mourns for
his only begotten son. 3. Those for whom the consolations of Christ are
ordained, are the mourners in Zion; But the consolations of Christ, are not for
legal mourners, and such as are weary and laden for sin, and yet never comes
to Christ, nor believes: If we are not to mourn for sin, because pardoned the
pardoned sin being no sin, neither are we to eschew the committing of sin,
because it is also no sin before it be committed, being pardoned (as Libertines
teach) from eternity.
there is no promise made to such mourners as Cain and Judas were. Can we say
that God promises Grace and mercy to any acts of the flesh, or of unbelief? 4.
Its a mark of a conscience in a right frame, to be affected with the sense of
the least sin as David was one in whose conscience there remained the character
of a stripe, when he but cut the lap of Saul's Robe, 1 Sa. 24.5. And when wicked
men sin, their conscience is past feeling, Ephesians. 4.19. And seared with an hot
iron, 1 Timothy 4.2. It is not an argument of Faith, apprehending sin pardoned,
not to mourn for sin and confess it; for if this be a good argument, that if
we being justified, cannot but out of unbelief, sorrow for a sin that before
God is no sin, as it is, Jer. 50.20. Fully removed and taken away, Joh. 1.29.
Mic. 7.19. Cast in the depths of the Sea, (as Libertines argue) for then (say
they) we were both to believe, that that sin remains and makes the justified
person liable to Eternal wrath, and so to sorrow for it, as sin before God; and
also to believe that it is taken away, and makes the person not liable to
Eternal wrath, which are contradictory. If this (I say) were a good Argument,
then were we not to eschew evil, and to be averse to the acting of sin, before
it be committed; for by the Doctrine of Antino. All sins, even ere they be
committed, yea from Eternity (say some) are as fully taken away and pardoned,
as after they be committed, and as when we do now believe and repent; For if we
were to have a will averse to the acting of sin, before it be committed, it
must be upon this ground, that it is sin before God, and not taken away by
Christ's death, else we should not abstain from it as sin; but this is a false
ground to Antinomians, and inconsistent with the object of faith, which is to
believe this truth, that all sins past, present, and to come, are equally
removed, pardoned, yea, and in Christ taken away, as if they never had been:
and so sorrow for sin committed, being an act of the sanctified will displeased
with sin, if it be unlawful, the will of the justified person is not to be
displeased with it, ere it be committed; but by the contrary, if he is not to
be displeased with sin committed, but rather to will its commission; not to
sorrow for it, because he believes its pardoned, and in Gods Court its no sin
to him, being in Christ; by the same ground, ere it be committed, in Gods Court
its no sin; and so, neither can he be displeased with it, ere it be committed,
but may also will it, and believe its pardoned, and he ought to have no act of
remorse, nor reluctance of conscience, which is Gods Solicitour, before the
committing of it: For how is it not equally an act of the flesh and unbeleef to
fear sin to be committed as not pardoned in Christ, as to fear sin already
committed as not pardoned? 2. If it be a lie and an act of unbeleef for any
justified person to say, ( Lord I have sinned) O God, thou know my
foolishness, and my sins are not hid from thee) as justified David says,
Psalm. 69.5. in regard all his sins are pardoned, and the man in faith, contrary
to the sense of his weak flesh, is to believe that they are all taken away.
Upon the same pretended ground of faith, he is to say, (Lord, I shall never
sin, though I am to commit adultery, and to murder innocent Uriah to morrow,
yet thou, O God, neither to morrow, nor at any time, do see my foolishness
and sins) because the sins to come are equally removed, and taken away in the
free justification of grace, as the sins already past. Master Eaton says, To
hold, Honey comb of justification. 371
that when GOD has justified both us and our works, God yet sees us in the
imperfection of our sanctification, is another evident mark of an hypocrite,
that was never yet truly humbled for the imperfection of his sanctification --
But these imperfections of our sanctification are left in us to our sense and
feeling, that they may be healed in our justification: And he brings, page
375. diverse Reasons to prove, That we are not both righteous in the sight of
God, and yet sinners in our selves. Dec. 5. sess.
Let me answer, That Antinomians in this join hands with the Council of Trent,
who curse us Protestants, because we say, The guilt of original sin is taken
away in Baptism, but that sin, and that which is essentially sin, dwells in
us, while we are here, as the sad complaints of justified Saints do testify,
as Chemnitius observes: Chemnitius exa. Con. Tri^ page 94.

Libertines conspire with Papists in the Doctrine of justification.


yea, Andradius says, as Antinomians do, that we put blasphemy upon Christ his
merits and grace, as if he could not in a moment wash us perfectly from all
sin: And what Arguments Papists in this Point use, the same does Eaton and
Antinomians use also; yea, but justified Job says, cap. 9.30. If I wash my
self with snow-water, and make my hands never so clean; 31. Yet shall thou
plunge me in the ditch, and mine own clothes shall abhorr^ me. Job 40.4 Behold,
I am vile, what shall I answer thee? This Job after he was by Gods pen declared
an upright man, says of his own ways, in his sufferings: And David, a
justified man, faith, Psalm. 143.2. Enter not in judgment with thy servant, for
in thy sight shall no flesh be justified; yet Job and David were no hypocrites.

SERMON XVIII.
NAy, give me leave to say, that Antinomians make justification and free grace
their Commonplace of Divinity, as if they only had seen the visions of the
Almighty, and no other, but they are utterly ignorant thereof; for they
confound and mix what the Word distinguishes, How sins are removed in
justification, and how not.
because justification is only a removal of sin by a Law way, so that in Law
it cannot actually condemn, Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to them that are
in Christ Jesus, (...), he says not, (...), nothing that deserves
condemnation; Nihil condemnabile: So that in Law, all obligation to external
punishment, called Reatus personae, the guiltiness of the sinner is removed,
and he shall never be condemned for sin, because Christ did bear that guilt for
him; hence we say, in this regard its blasphemy to say, that tears of sinners
do wash away sin, that sorrow for sin, and fasting, pacifieth, or removes Gods
wrath; for my part I never used such Popish and unsavory speeches. Papists do,
and we must distinguish between the lax Rhetoric, and the strict Divinity of
fathers. But 2. Justification is not an abolition of sin in its real essence,
and Physical indwelling. Justified Paul sigheth and cries, Romans 7.14. I am
carnal, sold under sin. 18. I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells
no good. 24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
this death: Now if the sense of the corrupt flesh make these complaints in Job,
David, Paul, and if sinful flesh opposite to faith, apprehending the just
contrary in Christ who justifies the sinner, That there remains that which
is formally sin in the justified, and that sin dwells in the regenerated is
proved by 5. Arguments
dwell not in us; Then 1. David, Job, Paul, did lie in these confessions; for
to speak contrary to the language of justifying faith, must be a lie. 2. They
were not really carnal, and sold under sin, but only according to the sinful
doubting and apprehension of the flesh: Paul's crying out of the body of sin,
was an irrational, fleshly, and hypocritical complaint. 3. We are not to grow
in the grace of sanctification, and abstinence from yielding to the motions of
the flesh, because if there be no sinful imperfections in our sanctification,
we are not to grow in grace really, but only in Ps. 69.5. Ps. 139.1, 2, 3. Yet
John says, even of himself, and of those who have an Advocate in heaven, 1
Ioh. 2.1. That if we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, and the truth is
not in us, 1 John 1.8. Now he cannot speak of men as considered in the state of
nature and unjustified, because to answer a doubt of weak consciences who said;
oh if we have sin, then are we eternally lost and condemned: he answers, 1.
the justified are to confess, v. 9. and God is faithful to forgive: 2. He
answers, 1 John 2.1. If we sin, we have an advocate with the Father. 5. It
must inevitably follow that Christ commanding these who have a Father in heaven
to pray ( forgive us our sins) commands them daily to pray out of a fleshly
doubting, not from the Spirit of Faith; I had rather say with Scripture, that
all the justified Saints must take down their Top-Sail, and go to heaven
halting, and that they carry their bolts and fetters of indwelling (...)
through the field of Free Grace, even to the gates of glory, Christ daily
washing and renewing Pardons, and we daily defiling, to the end that grace may
be grace.

6. Yea, the Scripture is most clear, Sin dwelling in us after we are
justified.
that the fairest face that is now shining in glory, was once even in the
Kingdom of Grace, and in the state of justification; blacked with sin, and
sin-burnt by reason of sin dwelling in them, 1 Kin. 8.46. For there is no man
that sins not. This is a black put on the faces of all men dwelling on the
earth, amongst which you must reckon justified, and pardoned souls, Eccles. 7.
v. 20. For there is not a just man upon earth, thr^ does good, and sins not:
Then there is a Thorn in our fairest Rose, David's Sun shines not so bright, but
there is a cloud going over it; in every justified man's good he does, in every
sacrifice he offers, there is some dung; The sun has looked on him; Augustine
had the same controversy, but on another ground with Julian, who also of old,
conceited that justified souls were free of inherent sin, as Libertins now
teach, but Augustine says always, That sin dwells in the regenerate, but it
is not imputed, and concupiscence after Baptism is removed: Non ut non sit, sed
ut non imputetur: Not that it is not, but that in the Court of justice it is
not reckoned on our score: by which it is more then evident that justification
is not such an abolition of sin, in its ro^^ and essence, as shall be in the
state of glory, ^hen root and branch shall be abolished, A two fold removal of
sin, one Moral or Legal in justification, another Physical in our
sanctification.
and not only shall justification free us, as it does in this life from all
Law-guilt, and obligation to wrath, which is but Actus Secundus, the second Act
of sin, the effect, not the essence of sin, but also sanctification being
perfected, all indwelling of sin shall be removed; sin in the justified has
but house-room, and stays within the walls as a Captive, an Underling, a
servant, it has not the keys of the house to command all, nor the Scepter to
rule: All the keys are upon Christ's shoulder, far less has it a Law-power to
condemn, therefore says Augustine ^xcellently, Cont. Julian, lib. 6. c. 5.
Sanat vit^atum a reatu statim, ab infirmitate paulatim: God heals the sinner
from his guiltiness (its a Law word, and a Law cure) presently, but from his
infirmity by degrees, by little and little, and Gregory, Moral. lib. 29. c. 2.
Quid in hac vita omnes, qui veritatem sequimur, nisi aurora sumus? aurora enim
noctem praeteriisse nunciat, nec tamen diei claritatem illa satis ostendit, sed
dum illam pellit, and hanc suscipit, lucem tenebris per mixtam tenet, sic nos
quedam jam quae lucis sunt agimus, and tamen in quibusdam adhuc tenebrarum
reliquiis non caremus: The holiest in this life, is but the dawning of the
morning, we are half night, half day, Prove. 20. v. 19. Who can say I have made
my heart pure, I am clean from sin? (...) Who can say I have a clean heart, and
not lie? Libertines can say it, in a higher manner then Papists, who
acknowledge that venialls, little sins, and motes are in us always in this
life, but it may be this is the Old Testament-Spirit that speaks, as they
say; but the Apostle, Romans 3. applies the Psalm 14. that stops all mouths
of the world, as so many guilty malefactors at the high bar of heaven, and he
proves that no flesh, not David nor the holiest on earth can be justified by
works, either done by the strength of nature, or by the help of grace: now if
there be no indwelling sin in the justified person, we answer not Papists and
Pelagians, who say, That we are justified by works done by the help and aid of
Grace after regeneration, but not by the works that we perform by the strength
of nature; for if there be no indwelling sin in the regenerated; all their good
works must be perfect and sinlesse, and can draw no contagion from an impure
heart, because if there be no indwelling sin, and no imperfect sanctification
in us (as Master Eaton says, its hypocrisy so to think or say) how can an
impure heart defile these works, that are done by the aid of Grace? for that
which is not, has no operations at all; if there be no contagious fountain,
and no indwelling sin, but root and branch be removed in justification, then
such a fountain cannot defile the actions, Jam. 3.2. In many things we offend
all (...), a Metaphor from travelers walking on stony or slippery ground, Romans
7.24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? If this was but the flesh and unbelief that made this complaint, then
the combat between the flesh and the Spirit, shall come from the flesh; now the
conflict of two contraries, such as are the flesh and the Spirit, is not from
the one more then the other, but equally from both; the conflict between fire
and water, is neither from the fire only, nor from the water only, but from
both, yoking together; yea, certain it is, that the flesh cannot, and does not
complain of its own motions against the spirit, sin cannot complain of sin, its
the renewed part that complains of the stirrings and motions of the unrenewed
part: Satan is not divided against Satan, nor sin against sin; Its true, the
sins of the Justified are said to be sought, and not found, Jer. 50.20. And our
transgressions are said to be blotted out, and blotted out as a thick cloud,
and to be remembered no more, Isa. 43.25. Is. 44.22. Psalm. 51.1. And to be
subdued, and cast in the depths of the Sea, Mic. 7.19. and we washed, Rev. 1.5.
Psa. 51.2. And made whiter then the snow: 7. And Christ's Church is so
undefiled, so fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, Cant. 5.2. c. 6.10. That
Christ himself gives a testimony of her, Cant. 4.7. Thou art all fair my love,
there is no spot in thee; all which are true in a Law-sense, and in Legal and
Moral Freedom from sin, in regard the sins of the justified and washed in
Christ's blood, shall no more be charged upon them to their condemnation, then
if they had never committed any sins at all, and as if their sins were no sins
to witness against them in judgment, they being clothed with Christ's white
and spotless righteousness; for they are in their actual guilt, as touching
the Law-sting and power, as no sins, no debts, but oblitrated in the Book of
Gods account, and as a blotted out cloud, which is no cloud, in which regard
they must be white and fair whom Christ washes: I profess it is sweet to be
dipped in the new fountain opened to the house of David, and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness, and under the sweet and fair hand of
the Mediator, that he might wash us; I know he should not be ashamed of his
labor, but should make fair and white work. But in regard of the inherent
root, essence, and formal being of sin, the saints are not freed and delivered
from sin, but these same sins, though broken in their dominion to command as
Tyrants, and removed and taken away, The difference between the removal of sin
in justification, and its removal in sanctification.
Quod actualem reatum eternae mortis. in their Law demerite and guilt, yet do
remain and dwell in the Saints, while they are here in this life; and these two
removals of sin differ much, the former is a Law-removall of sin, not the
removal of the essence and being of sin, the other removal is a Physical
removal in root and branch; and therefore done by degrees according to the
measure of begun sanctification, and shall never be perfect in this life, while
that habit of sanctification which is contrary to sin Physically considered,
shall be introduced, and the person perfected in glory: whereas the former
removal is so perfect, as the person is made spot-lesse and whiter then snow:
which two removals of sin, may be thus illustrated, there is a man defiled with
leprosy in his body, this is a Physical contagion, the same man is condemned
to die for a high point of treason against the State and Prince, this is a
Law-contagion: The Physician cures him of his Leprosy by a Physical
expulsion of the disease but by degrees, and by little and little, and makes
at length his skin as the skin of a young child. The Prince and State sends
to him a free pardon of his Treason, Simile
and he is at once perfectly acquitted from his guilt, but the Princes Pardon
does not Physically, and really expel out of his person the shame, the
inherent blot and infamy of his foul and treacherous disloyalty that he
committed against Prince and State, so as this pardon should transubstantiate
and change him by a Physical transmutation in a person as innocent and
blameless, as any the most loyal subject of the Kingdom, the pardon puts
only upon him a Law-change, and a Moral immunity and freedom from a shameful
death; and Christ's pardon in like manner does remove a Law-obligation to
eternal death, so as there is no condemnation to the man, but it removes not
the inherent and Physical blot, nor the real obliquity between his foul sin,
and the spiritual Law of God; nor does it make him perfectly sinlesse and holy
as if he had never sinned, as Antinomians dream; Simile
so the justification of the Saints is like the free acquitting of a broken
man, that has borrowed thousands, and is unable to pay, the cancelling of his
Bill, freeth him in Law, from paying the sums, but does in no case make him a
man that never borrowed money; nor does it free him from that inherent blot of
unjustice, in regard of which he is a broken man, who has wasted his
neighbors goods; but perfected sanctification expels sin in his essence,
being root and branch in its dominion, Lordly power indwelling, so that it is
no more: and this is like the expelling of night-darknesse out of the whole
body of the Air, by the presence of the Sun diffusing its beams and light, from
East to West, and North and South: I grant the habit of sanctification
perfected in glory does not make it a false proposition, that such a pardoned
and washed Saint never sinned, for Factum infectum, fieri non potest: What is
done can never be undone; that were a speaking contradiction, but it puts
the man in that State that he is as free of the indwelling of the body of sin,
and perfectly holy, as the body of the Air at Noonday is free of darkness,
and qualified with inherent light; now Antinomians cannot endure (especially
Master Eaton their chief leader) that we say that sanctification is unperfect
in this life, or that the indwelling of sin can consist with free justification
and remission of sins in Christ's blood: But let us turn our eyes a little
toward the wisdom of Gods free dispensation, to scan the reasons why our Lord
will have justified Saints to go halting to heaven.

1. He can at our first conversion make us Glorified and perfected Saints; but
its his wisdom to take a time and succession to perfect his Saints, Seven
reasons, why sin dwells in the godly after they are justified by Grace.
he took about thirty and three years on earth for the work of our Redemption,
and would for three days lodge in the grave, as it were a neighbor to our
Father corruption, and the worm our brother and sister, Job. 17.14 ( Though he
saw no corruption, Psalm. 16.10. He has been dressing up the high Palace of
Glory, his Fathers house, these sixteen hundred years, if he be pleased to take
months and years to the work of the applying of purchased Redemption; whereas
he might and could have done it in one instant, as he created light out of
darkness with one word; we are to be silent, his wisdom in so doing is
sufficient for us, the second heaven, and the new light in the redeemed soul is
done by continuing acts of omnipotency, the first heaven was sooner made; shall
it seem hard to us, that our midnight, and our full noon-day-light of grace are
not existant in one instant together? We are to wait on in patience, and not to
fret that we cannot at our first conversion pray out of us the indwelling body
of sin, and sigh out the weight and sin that does so hardly beset us, Heb.
12.1. God is wise who will have our day to break and dawn by degrees, and our
shadows to flee away; and our Sun to arise to Noon-day-light, through length of
time, if a creature, yea, the most excellent of created Angels should but sit
at the helm of this great world to Rule and Govern all things but for forty
and eight hours, the Sun should not rise in due time, the walls and covering of
the great building of the world should fall, the Globe of the world, and of the
whole earth should reele to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, all should
go to confusion; and so if we had a world of Grace of our own carving, and had
it in our wise choice to go from the first moment of our New Birth to heaven,
without sin, we should lose our selves by the way, and take on new debt, that
should require the new and fresh crucifying of the Lord of Glory: we should be
no better Tutors, Governors, and Lords to our selves, then Adam and the Angels
that fell: The weight of a Saints Heaven and Hell upon his own clay-shoulders
is a Heaven put to a great hazard, or rather to a remediless loss: I shall
easily grant that its sure that my heaven be upon Christ's shoulders.

2. Grace works suitably to the nature of Citizen of Heaven; yea, the
repeated sense and frequent experiences of Grace in the ups and downs in the
way, the falls and risings again of the Traveller, the Revolutions and changes
of the spiritual condition, the new Moon, the darkened Moon, the full Moon in
the spirits ebbing and flowing, raises in the heart of Saints, in their way to
the Country a rank smell of that fairest Rose and Lilly of Sharon, Jesus
Christ, the delight of men, and Angels; that as Travelers at night talk of
their foul way and of the praises of their Guide; and Battle being ended,
Soldiers number their wounds, extol the valor, skill, and courage of their
Leader and Captain; so the Glorified Soldiers may take loads of experiences of
Free Grace to Heaven with them, and there speak of their way and their country,
and of the praises of him, who has Redeemed them out of all Nations, Tongues,
and Languages: The half drowned man shakes his head, and dries his garments
before the Sun in the Shore with joy and comfort: The impressions of the
kisses of the face of him that sits on the Throne, are the deeper, that the
frequent experiences of Grace have been many; much dirty and dangerous way, and
the lively and hearty welcome of Glory suiteth well together.

3. As there is much; yea, an exceeding weight of Glory in heaven, so its
convenient that the forgive us our sins, it is in the wisdom of God fitting,
that as Glory in heaven is one continued act of happiness for all eternity, so
the Grace that makes the old and sinful man a new creature, should be one
continued act of Grace; and as many streams and rivers are one water, and one
spring in the fountain, and many lines one, in the center; and thousands of
generations of men, are but one man, in the first father Adam; so multiplied
acts of Grace in the Saints, from the first moment of their conversion, to the
period, and first hour of their glorification are but one fountain Grace in
God, revealed in the Mediator, Christ: and there can be no reason why our first
conversion should be free Grace, and the perseverance of the Saints in Grace,
and all their steps in the way should not also be grace: Grace is not only
singly in the Saints, but Grace and peace must be multiplied on them.

Jesus Christ, every day, upon occasion of new committed sins, 1 John 2.1, 2.
and the golden Altar that has been hot these 1600. years, Rev. 8.3, 4. with
the fresh prayers of the Saints, must have a daily use, so long as Christ is in
the Office of the great, true, and exalted high Priest, now passed into the
holy of Holiest; and better it is that Christ act Grace again and again, in
heaven, as we sin again and again, on earth, then that the act of our high
Priests intercession had been all but one act on the Cross, and the way to
heaven was made long, and falls there must be in the way, to the end that I
might lodge many nights and months by the way, with my guide Christ, and my
expenses and charges in the way might be Free Grace.



of his working, now its most suitable for flowers and roses, that must be
transplanted to grow up in the high garden beside the tree of life, and to
blossom out glory for all eternity, that they grow for a time in the land of
Grace, that they may take kindly with the soil: so the lower and higher gardens
of Glory and Grace differ not in nature, what grows in the one, can well grow
in the other; they cannot suit with the happiness of that land, except they
have experienced the holiness of continued Grace in this land, and Christ
makes storms of sin to blow upon his young heirs for their Winter, God keeping
life at the root, that they may be fitter for an eternally green flourishing
Summer of Glory; and when Christ consecrated himself through many afflictions,
that he might be an heir suitable for Glory, he being brought through fire and
water, hot and cold, and many changes to heaven, and so came to eternal
happiness through many years continued holiness; it was not fit that Christ,
who was to make heirs like his rule and samplar, should bring them to glory
with a leap and a step, from a justified condition, to a glorified estate,
without an intervening progress in sanctification and holiness; Christ
understands well the fundamental Laws of the higher City, the new Jerusalem;
the frame of the government of that kingdom, is that none be received as free
Citizens of Glory, but such as have served Apprentices, Minors, little
children, under Tutors to Grace, and the way of holiness; he is of too short
standing, who comes hot and smoking out from his lusts, a justified sinner, to
step immediately into Glory, and so here is a stranger welcomed to heaven from
hell; a child of Satan, playing at the Devils fire side yesterday, or the last
hour, now this day, this same very hour, must be enrolled amongst those who
walks with the Lamb, in white: Some Soldiers, I grant, are advanced to be
high Commanders, Per saltum, by a leap; but its for some piece of rare service
to the Prince and State: and its like, the repenting Thief, in few hours space,
had been in three several Kingdoms, in the state of Nature, the Kingdom of
Darkness, and the Kingdom of Grace, and that day with Christ in Paradise. But
this is (I conceive) rare: and give me leave to say, Princes at their
Coronation do some extraordinary acts of Grace, by privilege of the new Crown,
that they may hansell the new Throne with acts of Mercy: Christ was now in an
act of pure, unmixed Grace actually and formally redeeming the lost world, on
the Cross, and was now this day crowned by his Mother the Church, and
installed King-Redeemer of Saints, and therefore would hansell Paradise with a
sinner, by a privilege of matchless Grace; there is but one example of it in
all the Scripture.

7. The way to heaven is sweeter, that it should be here, Nulla dies sine
Linea, that every day and hour that we sin (as every hour we contract new debt)
Christ's free Grace might have its daily flux, the fountain opened to the house
of David daily running, renewed forgiveness going along with this day, our
daily bread: hence these noble acts of Grace. 1. Every sin, the least omission
by Law, is hell, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal. 3.10. two sins, must be two hells; seven
sins, seven hells; then multiplied sins, to the number of the hairs of David's
head, Psalm. 40.12. and not sins only, but innumerable iniquities must cause the
account of Christ's free Grace to swell and arise to a deliverance from two,
from seven, from innumerable hells. O Grace every day, every hour! So then the
Rebel brought nine times a day, twenty times a day, for the space of forty
years, by his Princes Grace from under the ax: how fair and sweet are the
multiplied pardons, and reprivals of Grace, to speak so? Here is multitudes of
multiplied redemptions, here is plenteous redemption: I defile every hour,
Christ washes; I fall, Grace raises me; I come this day, this morning, under
the reverence of Justice, Grace pardons me; and so along, while Grace put me
into heaven: The Lambs Book of life contains not only the names of those who
are ordained for that blessed end of eternal life, but also the means leading
to the end; then here are written all the sins, al^ ^he pardons of free Grace
since the first Adam sinned: O, but the Book of life must be a huge Volume! O,
how large, and broad, and long must the Accounts of the Grace of Christ be? 2,
We are not saved, completely, because justified; but Romans 8.23. We are
expectants of the Divinity of immediate vision, and groan within our selves,
waiting for the Adoption, the Redemption of our body: v. 24. and are saved by
hope. In regard of Title, we are saved completely: but in another sense we are
but Lords and Kings in Title only; we are far from the Lands, Rents, Crown, and
our fathers house, and so are not saved while our feet stand within the streets
of the new Jerusalem. 3. In this consideration, we sigh in our fetters and
bolts, and sin remains in us, for our exercise and humiliation, that we may
have an habitual engagement to Jesus Christ and his Grace; that soul loves
much, to whom much is forgiven; Obj. 1. How sins past present, and to come, are
pardoned in justifica. Ass. 1. D. Abb. in Tho^. Diatriben. de intercis.
justif. c. 4. p. 92.
and especially, when in sense and frequent experiences, much and multiplied
backslidings are forgiven.

Obj. 1. But justification is one indivisible act of Grace, pardoning all sins,
past, present, and to come, and is not a successive and continued act, in
progress always, such as is sanctification; for we are but once justified. I
answer by these following Assertions:

Asser. 1. There is a double Notion of justification, as D. Abbot teaches us:
There is a universal, and prop^^^y so called, justification: There is a
partial and unproperly so called, justification: or give me leave to say:
There is a justification of the person, of the estate; or a justification
repeated, or rather a reiterated remission: I doubt if it be called a
justification. There is a twofold consideration of justification, but not two
justifications, far less are there not many.
The former justification does include: 1. The Act of Atonement, made by Christ
on the Cross, for all the sins of all the Elect of God, past, present and to
come: this Act is not tied to believing, nor are we properly justified in
regard of this Act. But, 2. There is a justification formal, of which Paul
speaks, Romans 3. and 4. and Gal. 3, 4, and 5. Chapters, which goes along in
order of cause, time, and a required condition of apprehending Christ's
righteousness: and this justification of the person, while he believes, is
but once done, and that when the believer does first lay hold on Christ and
righteousness, imputed in his blood. There is, 3. A remission, and taking away
of sin: Now according to these are we to consider of doing away sin, in a
threefold Notion: for though justification essentially include remission and
pardon of sin, Ass. 2. Sins in three diverse respects are taken away, according
to the Scriptures*
yet every remission does not include justification, properly so called.

Asser. 2. This threefold taking away of sins, I clear from the Scripture: 1.
Christ takes away our sins on the Cross, causatively, and by way of merit,
while as he suffers for our sins on the Cross: So, Joh. 1.29. Behold the
Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. 1 Cor. 5.21. He was made
sin for us. Col. 2.14. Christ blotted out the handwriting of Ordinances, that
was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing
it to the Cross. 1 Pet. 2.24. Who, his own self bare our sins on the tree.
Isa. 53.10. He made his soul an offering for sin. This Atonement of blood was
typified in Aaaron, who Lev. 16.20, 21. was to lay both his hands on the head
of the Live-goat, and to confess the sins of the people, and did translate
them off from the people; so as the Goat was to bear upon him all their
iniquities, unto a land not inhabited, v. 22. Now this was the paying of a
ransom for us, and a legal translation of the eternal punishment of our
sins; but it is not justification, nor ever called justification: there is a
sort of imputation of sin to Christ here, and a sum paid for me: but, with
leave, Christ's satisfaction performed on the Cross for sin, is not formal
justification.
no formal imputation, no forinsecall, and no personal Law-reckoning to me,
who am not yet born, far less cited before a Tribunal, and absolved from sin:
when Christ had completely paid this sum, Christ was justified Legally, as a
public person, and all his seed fundamentally, meritoriously, causatively, but
not in their persons.

There is a second removal of sin, and that is when the believer is justified
by faith: Paul, Romans 4.6. Even as David (says he) also describes the
blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes righteousness without works:
7. (saying) Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered: 8. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no sin: This is the
blessedness of a man born, living, believing: Now we say unproperly, the heirs
of a King not born are blessed; Non entis nulla sunt accidentia. So if Christ's
removal of sins on the Cross, were justification, all Christ's seed, and we
believers of the Gentiles, who were not then born, when Christ died, should be
blessed, and justified before we be born. Now in this which is formally the
justification of the believing sinner, the believers person is accepted,
reconciled, justified, and really translated by a Law-change, from one state to
another. There is a change in justification.
I mean not, that there is a Physical infusion of a new habit of
sanctification, and an expulsion of an old habit, as Papists teach, confounding
regeneration, or sanctification, with justification. But there is a real
change of the state of the person, 1 Cor. 6.11. And such were some of you; but
ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified etc. then they were
sometime not justified. 2. There is here a real removal of all sins, and a
pardon and relaxation from the eternal punishment of all sins; as well of sins
to come, and not yet committed, as of sins past, present, and already
committed; so as sins not yet committed, shall no more involve the believer in
the punishment of eternal wrath then sins past, or present. Yet 3. the sins
not committed, though virtually pardoned, How sins not committed are remitted
and pardoned.
(with correction and submission) are not formally pardoned: that which is not
sin at all, but only in a naked potency it must be pardoned only in that notion
that it is a sin, and not first formally remitted, and then afterward
committed; yet it is paid for, and the person freed from all actual
condemnation for it: but with all, conditionally, and virtually, so he believe
in Christ, and renew his repentance, which graces God shall infallibly give
him, because the calling and gifts of God are without repentance: And of this
third removal of sin, is that Petition that Christ has taught justified
persons to ask of God: Forgive us our sins, as we forgive them that sin against
us: And Nathan says to David, 2 Samuel 12.13. The Lord also has put away thy
sin, thou shall not die. David, before he contracted this horrible guilt of
murder and adultery, was a man according to Gods own heart, and so his person
was justified; this way God daily takes away sin, Romans 1.17. For therein is
the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith, as it is written, the
just shall live by faith: Now the life of faith justifying, is not one single
act of faith, such as is at ou^ first personal, relative and universal
absolution; but the believer lives by renewed and often repeated acts of
faith; such as is, To walk from faith to faith: The least faith, even the
Minimum quod sic, does justify, but the Gospel requires a growth in faith. In
this sense remission is a continued and one prorogated act of free grace, from
our first moment of believing, to the day of putting the crown on our head.

If any object that I am contrary to my self, in that I sometimes did write,
that justification is a plenary Pardon in one indivisible act of all sins,
past, present, and to come, and therefore sin cannot be oftener then once
Pardoned: If I should answer that the knowledge we have, especially in so
supernatural a mystery, is but the twilight or the day-Stars glimmering of
sinful men, it might suffice, but I judge that I speak nothing contrary to
that.

Asser. 3. For two formal justifications of a Believer I utterly deny, Ass. 3.
There is but one justification of a believer.
which is that which Arminians press not a little; yea, and the justification
of the person, and his acceptance in Gods favor is but one act: I never fall
from that acceptance once being in Court and Grace. I illustrate it thus:
There Is a Catholic Pardon in a Statute of Parliament, Simile
for Grace to all Traitors, and that for Treasons past, and also to come, upon
condition, that after new Treasons committed, they address themselves to the
Public Register of the State, and cause insert their names in the blank of
that Act of Grace Printed, and in the keeping of some Officer of State; now
though any one be Pardoned at his first lapse fully, if he fail again, and
again, and yet perform the condition prescribed in Law; we cannot say, he has
obtained twenty, a hundred; yea, as many several pardons of Grace, as he has
failed against King and State, its but one public Act of Grace made use of
several times: so here in the Gospel there is a written Act of the Grace of
God in Jesus Christ; Remission to all under the Treason of sin against the
Royal Crown and glory of the most High, the Supreme Lawgiver, and that to
the acceptance of the person of the Traitor in full favor, when he shall have
in his conscience the transumpt or transcript of it at first, and also for
Grace and Pardon of all after-slips and sins against the glory of the Redemer
(so he sin not against the only flower of the Prerogative-Royall, the operation
of the Holy Ghost in a special manner) upon condition he walk from Faith to
Faith, Obj. 2. There Is a difference between pardon of sin in the ^ustification
of the person, and in the repeated sense of the pardon of sins after committed.
and renew his address to Christ the great Lord of the Rolls, who keeps the
Book of life; now I cannot see here many Pardons of Grace, but only the double
Extract or Copy of the first Act of Free Grace.

Obj. 2. But the sins pardoned to the Justified person after the first
justification of his person, were never pardoned before, and they are now
pardoned, therefore there must be two justifications: Ans. They were virtually
pardoned, and so, as he shall never come to condemnation for any sins past, or
to come, but the man now stands Justus in curia, justified in the Court,
whereas before his first believing, God looked at him as a judge does at a
guilty person, whose person he absolveth from all punishment, because his
surety has given a ransom for him, and he holds forth that ransom to the
Judge, but the man in all his after faults is so far forth a sinner, as that
which he has done, though he be a justified David, displeases the Lord, 2 Samuel 11.27. And in so far is he pardoned; but God now looks on him, as a
Father on an offending Son; and this Son does not hold forth a new ransom to
God, but only renew the former: nor does it infer a new acceptance of his
person, that he had not before: 3. Nor place in God any new love of free
complacency and good will, but only a further manifestation thereof, and a
greater measure of the love of benevolence: 4. It is the same Act of Free Grace
that God puts forth in pardoning his son now fallen in sin, and in accepting
his person at first. 2. Its the same ransom of Christ's atonement of his dear
blood, that his Faith lays hold on now, as before. 3. The pardon of this sin
committed by a justified son, is not the freeing of him from the eternal
punishment of this sin, as if he had been under eternal wrath for it before;
for at his first believing, when his person was accepted, he was fully and
freely pardoned and freed from all the obligation to eternal wrath, that all
or any of his sins past, present, or to come might subject him unto, but it is
the renewing of the certainty of the sufficiency of Christ's ransom, as applied
to take away that sin in particular, and that by a renewed Act of Faith; now
the renewed apprehension of the Grace of God in the same ransom of blood for
righteousness in Christ, as applied to this new guiltiness, makes not a new
forinsecall and Law-act, but does only apply the Lords first Act of Grace to
this particular sin; Justifying says is some other thing then the sense of
justification passed, for I may know that I am justified by works of Grace as
by witness yet I am not justified by works.
nor do I mean that Faith for Remission of sins committed after a soul is in
the state of justification is nothing else but a mere reflect Act, by which we
apprehend, and know the first acceptance of a sinner to righteousness; for it
is a direct Act, apprehending the former grace of a sufficient ransom, as
applied to this new contracted guiltiness; for the sinner is condemned for
unbelief, Joh. 3.18, 36. And because he believes not, he is liable to the
wrath of God; now he is not condemned, because he does not to his own sense
know, feel and apply the Remission of sins and satisfaction purchased in
Christ's blood for him, because then he should be condemned, because he does not
believe a lie, for there was never any such Remission purchased for him; he is
condemned, not for want of sense and actual knowledge of any such pardon, but
for want of confiding on Christ, as on him who has made a sufficient atonement
for all that believes, and so justifying Faith is some other thing then the
sense of purchased Pardon of sins.

Object. 3. Then may I, Ob. 3.
with the like boldness believe the Remission of these sins that I am to
commit; and so sin boldly, because I am persuaded they cannot prevail to
condemn me eternally, as I may with boldness believe the Remission of sins
already committed.

Ans. There is a boldness of faith: And 2. a sinful boldness: In regard of
boldness of faith, I am to believe the sufficiency of that unvaluable ransom,
that it cannot be more or less, nor intended or remitted, but does lie under
the eye of justice; and equally accepted of God as able to remove the eternal
guilt of all sins, past, present, as also of those to come; but it were sinful
boldness to commit sin, because Christ has paid for it, its a motive to the
contrary, not to live to our selves, but to him that died for us, because
Christ bare our sins on his own body, on the Tree, 1 Pet. 3.24. 1 Pet. 1.18.
Gal. 1.4. Romans 6.1, 2, 3, 4. 1 Pet. 4.1, 2. For though I be persuaded there is
no fear of eternal wrath in sins to be committed, for my faith believes
freedom from that, in regard of all sins; there be other stronger motives to
eschew sin, then fear of Hell, even fear of violating infinite love and mercy;
there is a more prevailing, and efficacious power in apprehended love to keep
from sin (it being saving grace) then in fear of Hell, which of it self is no
grace: 2. Fear of punishment of sin as sin, is to keep from sin, How fear of
Hell o^ the reward of life eternal has influence in our not sinning and holy
walking Obje.
though it be not fear of eternal punishent; the eternity of punishment is no
ways essential to punishment: Libertines close remove this motive, who will
have no sin as sin in Gods Court, punished in the believer: Its not punished in
Order to satisfaction of justice, but it follows not that its not punishable
as sin.

Obj. It is mercenary and peculiar to hirelings to abstain from sin for fear of
stripes, or to serve God Intuitu mercedis, for hope of reward. Ans. To abstain
from sin, for fear of punishment, as the only and greatest evil (whereas the
ill of sin is far greater, and so more to be feared) is mercenary: indeed, we
teach that no man should upon that fear abstain from sin: 2. To serve God for
hope of Heaven, as a created good to our selves, separated in the intention
from God himself and holiness, is peculiar to hirelings, but not to serve God
simply for heaven, Moses did it, Heb. 11.25, 26. Its Christ's Argument in
stirring up his Disciples to suffer for righteousness, Matthew. 5.12. For great
is your reward i^ Heaven, And its no less mercenary which Libertins teach that
to serve God for actual hire, in hand already purchased; to wit, for
deliverance from Hell, and a purchased Redemption, then what we teach, that we
may serve God for hope of good to come, if the intention in both be not steeled
with grace, and free of selfinesse.

SERMON XIX.
Obj. But the Gospel from the Law of love, not the Law it self, Obj. Den
Doctrine of John Baptist. p. 43.
forbid^eth the believer to sin, neither teach we (say they) that the Gospel
makes sin to be no sin, but it only makes it to be no more my sin, but
Christ's, and counted on his score, who was wounded for my iniquities, and was
my surety, and therefore his payment is my payment, so as we have no more
conscience of sins.

Ans. Its true, the Gospel speaks no contradictions, and makes not sin to be
no sin, Christ is so made the sinner in suffering for sin, as there remains
no sin in the, sinner once pardoned as Antinomians teach.

Crispe, Ser. vol. 2. Ser. 3. p. 91 92 93.


or David's adultery not to be a violation of the seventh Commandment: indeed,
it makes Peter's denial of Christ not to be Peter's sin, in a legal and
forinsecall way, but that Peter believing in Christ, who justifies the
ungodly, shall not be condemned for that, nor for any other sin, that, and all
his other sins with that, are counted upon Christ's score. But the denial of
Christ, in another relation, is the sin of Peter only; to wit, according to the
Physical inherencie of it, in that it proceeded from Peter's lust, and body of
sin dwelling in him, and not any way from Christ Jesus, and in that its against
Christ's express commandment, who charged Peter to confess his Lord and
Master.

But Antinomians, and by name D. Crisp, teach us, that not only the guilt of
sin, but sin it self, really, and inherently, was laid upon Christ, in regard
Christ was not by way of sup^position only, or imagination counted the sinner,
but made sin: And 2. In regard, not only the guilt of sin, but sin it self was
laid upon Christ, for says D. Crispe, the guilt of sin an^ sin it self are all
one. Genesis 42.21. When Josep^ brethren were accused for Spies, they say, we ar^
guilty concerning our brother, in that we sa^ the anguish of his soul, when he
besought us and we would not hear. Reuben expounds the mea^ning, verse. 22.
Did not I say to you, sin not against the lad? But you would not hearken unto
me, and therefore, behold, we are guilty. What is that? We did sin against the
child. To be guilty therefore, and to commit a sin, is all one, they are but
two words expressing the same thing. 2. Suppose a malefactor be asked, Guilty,
or no^ guilty? He answers, Not guilty: What does he mean? He means, he has not
done the fact that was laid to his charge. When the Jurie is asked, Guilty, or
not guilty? The Jury says Guilty. What do they mean? Do they mean any thing in
respect of punishment? No: The Jury has nothing to do with that, but only in
matter of Fact; that is, whether the fact be done or not done -- It had been
extreme unjustice to punish Christ, if sin had not been on him, and if he had
been at his Araignment complete and absolutely innocent, even as if a Judge
should hang a man, though there were nothing found against him. -- Man is a
broken debtor, and Christ a surety: Ser. 4 p. 108, 109
God is content to take Christ's ^^ngle bond, and looks for no other
play master ^ut Christ: sin was really translated upon Christ, ^lse it was false
that the Lord laid on him the ^niquities of us all; yea, by this transaction of
^in, Christ does now become, or did become, when ^ur sins were laid on him, as
really and truly ^he person that had all these sins, as those men who did
commit them really and truly had themselves -- So Christ was made sin it self,
we are made righteousness in him, this is no imagination: But as we are
actual and real sinners in Adam, so here is a real act, God does really
pass over sin upon Christ, still keeping this fast, that Christ acted no sin;
so that in respect of the act, not one sin of the believer is Christ's: but in
respect of transaction, in respect of passing of accounts from one head to
another, in respect of that, there is reality of making of Christ to be sin, --
If a Judge will think such a man to be a malefactor, and by reason of his
thoughts that he is a malefactor, he will actually hang this man; Is there any
justice in such an act? If God will but suppose Christ to have sin upon him,
and knows that he has it not, but others have the sins upon them: and upon
this supposition will execute Christ: What will you call this? Isa. 53. He shall
bear the sins of many: Does a man bear a thing on him in a way of supposition?
Or, where there is bearing, is there not real weight? The Lamb of God takes
away the sins of the world, Joh. 1.29. Can it sink in a reasonable person, that
a thing should be taken a^way, and yet be left behind? It is a flat
contradiction: if a man be to receive money at such ^ place, and he does take
this money away wit^ him, is the money left in the place where it was* when he
has taken it away? Although I ha^^ searched the Scripture as narrowly as
possibly I may, yet this I find, that throughout the whole Scripture, there is
not one Scripture tha^ speaks of imputing our sins to Christ: but still the
holy Ghost speaks of sin not imputed to us, and of righteousness imputed to
us.

Let me answer: That in all this you shall find Grace turned unto wantonness,
in all this man^ Sermons there is not one word to stir up to the duties of
sanctification and holiness, but there i^ much in these words, and several
other passages of his two little Volumes of Sermons, to depresse, and cry down
holiness and walking with God. I shall therefore say a little on this, and
deliver truth shortly in these positions:

Sin so laid on Christ, as that it leaves not off to be our sin.
Posit. 1. No believers sin is so counted upon Christ's score, as that it
leaves off to be the believers sin, according to its Physical and real
indwelling: Its true* it is Christ's sin by Law-imputation, and legal
obligation to satisfactory punishment, and only laid upon Christ in that
Notion: yet its so the believers sin, as he is to mourn for this very thing,
that Christ was pierced, and crucified, to remove the guilt, and the obligation
to satisfactory punishment. Zac. 12.10. And they shall look upon me whom they
have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only son.
Yea, its so the believers sin, even when he believes that his original
corruption is pardoned, yet it dwells in him, having the complete essence and
being of sin; so as if he should say, he had no sin, and nothing in him
contrary to the holy Law of God; he should deceive himself, and the truth
should not be in him, 1 John 1.8. Yea, let him be a Paul, Not under the Law,
but being dead to the Law, Romans 7.6. as touching all actual obligation, to
eternal death: yet in regard of the real essence of sin, and proper
contrariety that sin has to Gods righteous Law, he cries out, ver. 14. For we
know that the Law is spiritual, but I am carnal, and sold under sin, 17. Now
it is no more I, (sanctified and pardoned I, who am in Christ, Romans 8.1. dead
to the Law, Romans 7.6. freed from condemnation) that do sin, but sin that
dwells in me. If there were no sinful I (to speak so) and no corrupt self in
Paul, which breaks out into sin, and this indwelling sin were as really in
its essence, and its being removed, and taken close out of Paul, as money taken
really out of a place, is no more left in that place, then if it had never been
there: surely, then justified Saints were as clean as these, who are up before
the Throne, clothed in white: and when Paul says, It is no more I that do sin,
but sin that dwells in me: he should speak contradictions, and say, It is no
more I that do sin, but it is I that do sin: there should be in justified Paul,
No Law in his members, warring against the Law of his mind: as he says, Romans
7.23. No body of death leading him captive to the Law of sin, verse. 2^. and
making him wretched, verse. 24. No flesh lusting against the spirit, hindering
the regenerated to do the good that they would: as Paul speaks, Gal. 5.17.
There should be no members on earth to be crucified, as it is, Col. 3.5. No old
man to be put off, no corruption, no deceitful lusts in us to be abated; as
we are charged, Ephesians. 4.22, 23. No fleshly lusts in us, which warreth against
the soul: as, 1 Pet. 2.11. No weight, no sin that does so easily beset us, to
be laid aside by the regenerated and justified, who are to run their race with
patience, contrary to the Spirit of God, speaking the contrary, Heb. 12.1, 2.
Yea, there shall be no original sin remaining in the justified person which
can be named sin, nothing in them lusting against the spirit, nothing to be
mortified, crucified, resisted, nothing to ^e work for the grace of God,
nothing to be a field and plat of ground to be labored on by the spirit, by
faith, nothing to be the seed and rise of humiliation, the sinner may go to
heaven, and be nothing in Christ's debt, to help him against indwelling sin, for
that ghuest is so taken away, as money that was in a place, and is every penny
really removed to another place: yea, its a flat contradiction (say
Antinomians) to be a pardoned soul, and yet to have sin dwelling in the soul.

Positi. 2. The guilt of sin, and sin it self, are not one and the same thing,
Pos. 2. The guilt of sin, and sin in it self, are not one and the same thing.
but far different things; that I may prove the point, let the terms be
considered. There be two things in sin very considerable: 1. Macula, the blot,
defilement, and blackness of sin; which, I conceive, is nothing but the
absence and privation of that moral^ rectitude, the want of that whiteness,
innocence, and righteousness which the holy and clean Law of the Lord
requires to be in the actions, inclinations and powers of the soul of a
reasonable creature. An inherent sinful blot in sin and the debt and guilt of
sin.
2. There is the guilt of sin; that is somewhat which issues from this blot
and blackness of sin; according to which the person is liable and obnoxious to
eternal punishment: this is the debt of sin, the Law-obligation to
satisfaction passive for sin; just as there be two things in debt, so these two
are in sin: for when a man borrows money, and profusely and lavishly spends
it, this is unjustice against his brother, in matter of his goods, and a breach
of the eighth Commandment: Again, this breach in relation to policy to the
Magistrate, and the Law of the land, puts this broken man under another
relation, that he is formally a debtor, and so it is just, that he either pay
the money, or suffer for this act of unjustice, and satisfy the Law of the
fifth Commandment: which is, that he satisfy the Law, and the Magistrate, the
public Father, tutor of a wronged and oppressed brother. Now here be two
things in debt: 2. things in debt, as in sin.
1. An unjust thing; a hurting of our brother in his goods: this is a blot, and
a thing privatively contrary to justice. 2. A just thing, a guilt, a just debt,
according to which it is most just, that the broken man either pay or suffer:
Now these two, as all contraries do, Faciunt numerum, they make a number; as
just and unjust must be two things, and two contrary things: I know there be
cavils, and subtilties of Schoolmen, touching the blot, or Macula peccati, and
Reatus, the guilt of sin; but this is the naked truth which I have declared.
Some say the blot of sin is that uncleanness of sin which is washed away by
the blood of the Lord Jesus, and this is nothing but the very guilt of sin,
which is wholly removed in Justification. But I easily answer: The blot of sin
has diverse relations, and these contrary one to another: As, 1. There is the
blot of sin in relation to the holy Law, as it is a privation of the rectitude
and holiness that the spiritual Law requires; and it is formally sin, and
not the guilt of sin; in which consideration, as nothing removes blindness,
The blot of sin 2. ways considered,
but seeing eyes; or deafnes^e, but hearing ears; so nothing, formally removes
sin, but only the perfect habit of accomplished sanctification; and so the blot
of sin, Macula, is not that which is formally removed in justification, but
only in perfected sanctification. 2. The blot of sin in relation to God, as
offended and injured, puts on the habit of guilt, and so it is washed away
in the Fountain opened to the house of David, and formally removed in
justification, but now it is not formally considered as sin, but according to
that which is accidental in sin; to wit, obligation to punishment, which may
be, and is removed from sin, the true essence and nature of sin being saved
whole and entire: Hence sin has diverse considerations: 1. As sin is contrary
to the righteousness and holiness of the Law, it is formally sin, and this
essential form, and life of sin remains in us while we live sin being in an
act of dying, or a passion rather to be crucified, and in the way to its grave
and perfect destruction, which shall be, when Glory shall grow up out of the
stalk of Grace, and sanctification shall be perfected; for Grace is the bud,
Glory the fruit; Grace the Spring and Summer, Glory the Harvest. 2. As sin is a
blackness contrary to the innocence that the Law requires, and as it blotteth
and defiles the soul, it is a Macula, a spot, a filthy and deformed thing,
abasing the creature, making the creature black, crooked, defiled, like the
skin of the Ethiopian, or spotted like the Leopard, Jer. 13.23. 3. As sin is a
blot that makes the creature unpure, unclean, and contrary and hateful to
God, so it is a blot and unclean thing to God, and that two ways: 1. As it is
contrary to Gods holy Law, its formally sin, as is before said: 2. As it
offends and injureth God in his honor and glory of supreme Authority, to
command what is just and holy, it is an offense, and a provocation, Isa. 3.8.
Psalm. 78.17. A displeasing of God, 1 Cor. 10.5. 2 Samuel 11.27. A grieving of him
and his spirit, Ephesians. 4.30. Genesis 6.6. Psalm. 95.10. A tempting of God, Psalm.
77.18. Psalm. 95.9. Act. 15.10. A wearying of the Lord and a making him to
serve, Isa. 43.24. Isa. 7.15. A loading of the Lord, Isa. 1.24. A pressing of
the Lord, as a Cart is pressed under a heavy load of sheaves, Amos 2.13. and so
is punished with everlasting punishment: A twofold guilt in sin one of the
fault* and intrisecall another of the punishment and extrinsecall
Hence there is a twofold guilt, one Fundamental, potentiall, reatus culpae;
the guilt of sin as sin, this is all one with sin* being the very essence,
soul, and formal being of sin, and this guilt of sin you cannot remove from
sin, so as sin shall remain sin, take this away, and you take away sin it self:
But this is removed in sanctification as perfected, not in justification, as
all the Arguments of Doctor Crispe go along in their strength to prove that the
guilt of sin, Reatus culpae, the fundamental guilt of sin, and sin it self are
all one: so we shall yield all to him, but with no gain to his bad cause: (...)
For Joseph's brethren say, Genesis 42.22. Truly we sinned, Vere peccantes, nos
super fratrem nostrum; or were guilty against our brother: This is nothing, but
we trespassed against our brother; this is not spoken so much of guilt, as of
sin it self: and the Malefactor, saying, he is not guilty, means of
fundamental guilt, or the guilt of sin, and that he has not committed the
crime charged upon him. But there is another guilt in sin, called Reatus
poenae, reatus personae, reatus actualis, Reasons why sin and the guilt of sin
cannot be the same.
the guilt or obligation to punishment, the actual guilt, or actual
obligation of the person, who has sinned to punishment; and this guilt is a
thing far different from sin it self, and is separable from sin, and may be,
and is removed from sin without the destruction of the essence of sin, and is
fully removed in justification: Now that this guilt is different from sin: I
prove, 1. Because, that which our blessed Surety took upon as he bare our sins
in his own body on the Tree, 1 Pet. 2.24. And was wounded for our
transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities, and did bear on him the
chastisement of our Peace, Isa. 53.5. And died for our offenses, Romans 4.25.
Romans 5.6. And this punishment Christ could not have born except by Law he had
obliged himself as our surety to pay our debts, Heb. 10.4.5. 6.7.8. and 7.22.
Now that in all his life and sufferings he did no violence, committed no sin,
nor touched any contagion of sin in his own person is evident, because he was
holy* harmless, undefiled, and separated from sinners, Heb. 7.26. Heb. 4.15.
Isa. 53.9. The Proposition is sure, for if Christ was so made sin, and punished
for sin, and liable to suffer for sin, and yet had not any sinful or
blameworthy, guilt on him, then that guilt of the person by which any is
liable to punishment for sin, is some other thing then sin, and the
blameworthy guilt that is in sin; forasmuch, as they are really separated* the
one being in Christ and the other not being in him, nay nor could it be in him.

(reatus culpae) a sin-guilt, has transgressed a Law; for all evil of
punishment, is a daughter which lay in the womb of the evil of sin; and the
guilt of the latter ill of punishment must flow from the former; to wit, from
the ill of sin; so, to be guilty, or obliged to eternal punishment, is a
fruit, and result or consequent of the fundamental and intrinsecall guilt of
sin. 3. An unjust and sinful deviation from the holy will of God revealed in
his Law, and hateful to, and punishable by God, cannot be one and the same
thing with that which is just, and agreeable to the just and holy will of God;
but sin it self, in its formal being, is a deviation from the holy will of God
revealed in his Law; sin being defined by John, A transgression of the Law, and
is hateful to, and punishable by the Lord: But the guilt of sin, of which we
now speak, is nothing but the demerit, and actual obligation to eternal
punishment, and is no unjust thing, no transgression of Gods will revealed in
his Law: yea, the demerit of sin is a most just thing, and the actual
obligation to punishment is most just, and holy, and agreeable to Gods just
will, and obligation to punishment can neither be punishable, nor hateful to
God; yea, it is just with God that the sinner be under Law-obligation, to eat
the fruits of the tree of his own planting, to have his teeth set on edge with
the sour grapes that he eat himself. 4. He that borrows money, and profusely
and lavishly spends it, is in that a transgressor against the eighth
Commandment, he commits an act of unjustice against his brother; now this
act of unjustice cannot formally or intrinsecally be the sin or sinful guilt
of the innocent surety; no Law of God, or man can make actions evil and
sinful, that are Physically, inherently, intrinsecally, really the unjust
actions of the doer, the formal sin, or intrinsecall and fundamental sinful
guilt of another man, who in that action is innocent, and is not a member, an
hand or a foot of the man that committed that fault, which I speak for; the
sons of Adam, who intrinsecally sinned in Adam, and by Gods Supreme will were
made a part of Adam: yet the surety is formally made a debtor, and by Law
obliged to pay the debt, and its an act of justice that he pay the debt, his
promise to the creditour makes him a debtor, but his promise to the creditour
puts no act of injustice in lavishly spending his neighbors goods on him,
for in that he is innocent, and cannot be charged morally, as a faulty and a
broken bankrupt, the fruit and effect of the broken man's unjustice does only
lie upon him, in regard of his promise. There be three brethren born of the
same parents, Adam, John, Thomas; suppose we then that the Law of the city or
kingdom is so, that one brother may die for his brother, John murdereth Thomas
traitorously, under trust; by Law then John ought to die; the elder brother
Adam, out of love, interposeth himself to the Judge to die for his younger
brother John; in this case Adam by Law ought to die, and he is in Law reputed
and counted the murderer, but truly, not morally, not intrinsecally, for he
can be reproached formally, with no act of treacherous dealing, as if under
trust he had stabbed his brother, for he did no such act; if shame by accident
accompany his public laying down of his life, its morally no reproach, no
intrinsecall blot to him; yea, that Adam dies for John the murderer, it is
through his own free consent an act of extreme love, in relation to the judge
it is a most just act, and in Law only, in imputation and legal account, he is
the murderer. But poor soul he never thought, nor acted any treachery or
cruelty against his brother.

3. Hence this Position: Christ was made sin, 3. Pos.
or imputed the sinner, and died for us sinners: The second Adam, the first
begotten amongst many brethren suffered for his younger brethren, and so, by
free consenting to be our Surety and die for us, Psalm. 40.6, 7, 8. Heb. 10.5,
6, 7. Joh. 10.17, 18. Joh. 14.31. Matthew 26.46. Mark 14.42. Ioh. 18.7, 8. He was
made by Law account, sin for us, as the sinner, Ioh. 15.13. 2 Cor. 5.21. to die
for us. Romans 4.25. And the Lord said upon him the iniquities of us all, Isa.
53.6. 1 Pet. 2.24, 25. But I judge it blasphemy to say: By this transaction of
sin upon Christ, Christ does now become, or did become, when our sins were laid
on him, as really and truly the person that did all these sins, as these men
who did commit them really, and truly had these sins on themselves: Christ not
intrinsecally the sinner.
For the Elect Believers i^ Christ were intrinsecally, formally, inherently
adulterers, murderers, disobedient, serving diverse lusts. Tit. 3.3. Dead in
sins and trespasses, by nature the children of wrath. Ephesians. 2.1. And in their
own persons acted all these Acts of wickedness, so as sin does formally
denominate them sinners; as whiteness in snow, in milk, in the wall
denominateth all these white: But Christ never is, never was intrinsecally,
formally, inherently the Adulterer, a disobedient person, nor is sin personally
in Christ, to denominate him as really and intrinsecally a sinner as David,
Isaiah, Peter, Paul for whom he died, for He did never violence, neither was
there any deceit in his mouth, Isa. 53.9. There was no fundamental guilt, nor
any bad deserving in him: How then was he a sinner, or made sin for us? I
answer, by mere imputation, and Law-account, and no other way: But the
Libertine says, it were the greatest unjustice in the world to punish Christ,
If sin had not been on him really; If he had been at his Arraignment complete
and absolutely Innocent; and if only in Imagination, and by a lying
supposition, which wants all reality in the thing, God should put Christ to
death for these sins, that he knows Christ to be free of; this were, as if a
Judge should hang a Malefactor, whom in conscience he knew to be free from all
sin, and could find nothing against him. But I answer, Law-imputation is a most
real thing, and no imagion, nor any lying supposition, Imputation of sin no
imagination nor lie.
as a mam that is surety for his broken brother who has wasted the creditors
goods, is truly su^ety and really the debtor, and his obligation to pay for
his broken friend is real, and most just upon two grounds: 1. That he gave
faith and promise, and Writ and Seal, that his friend failing, he should pay:
2. The Creditor accepted him as a real Law-debtor and Play Master in that case,
and yet the surety in his person did neither borrow the money, nor lavishly
wast it, and he has in his person neither conscience nor guilt of unjustice
toward his brother, and in regard of personal contagion of sinful guilt,
Christ was completely and absolutely innocent in his Arraignment, as one that
neither acted sin, nor could be the formal subject of sin, in whom the blot of
it was intrinsecally, or really inherent: But in regard that Christ was willing
to strike hands with God, and to plight his faith and soul in pawn, and did
willingly sign with his hand, an act of cautionary as our surety, Psa. 40. v.
6, 7, 8. Heb. 10 3 4.5.6.7, 8.9.10. And the Lord accepted him as Surety, and
laid our sins on him, Isa. 56.6. 2 Cor. 5.21. Joh. 3.19. Romans 3.2. He was made
sin, that is, he was made a debtor, and a Law-paymaster so constituted by his
own and his Fathers will; so that God did no act of unjustice in punishing
Christ nor was he in law absolutely innocent, but nocent and guilty* that is to
say, in regard of his Law place, or Law-condition, he was by imputation liable
and obnoxious to actual satisfaction and punishment for our sins; yet he was
Debtor factus, non intrinsece, debtor legaliter, non personaliter, debtor
ratione conditionis and officii, non ratione personae, A sinner, a debtor by
imputation, a debtor by Law, by place, by office, and served himself Heir to
our sins, and the miseries following sin; Now he was not in imagination, and in
a false and a lying supposition, made sin, imputation is not a lie; But as
Truly and Really, a Real Law-deed, as Judah offered himself Surety for
Benjamin, and was in Law, and really a Bondsman to Joseph, and might have so
been dealt with as a real slave, if he had plighted himself in stead of
Benjamin; and the Surety by the words of his own mouth, and by his Covenant and
Promise is really and truly ensnared, as a true and real debtor in Law; as a
Roe is really in the hand of the Hunter; and a Bird in the Fowlers Net, being
once caught and in hands, Prove. 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. He is no debtor by
imagination, he is not supposed to be what he is not indeed by the Law of God
and nature and all Laws, Promissum cadit in reale debitum, A man's promise
fetches him within the Law-compasse of a real debtor: So Christ was under
Bail and a Law. Act of Surety by his own Act, his own word of Promise and
Covenant: Thou have given me a body, I have taken the debts and sins of my poor
brethren on me; crave me Lord, as only paymaster, Lo here am I, to do thy will,
Psalm. 40.6, 7, 8. Heb. 10.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Ioh. 10.18. Now there are but these
two in sin, 1. The Act committed against the Law of God: 2. The debt and
obligation to punishment is clear; and though Doctor Crispe deny that sin was
imputed to Christ at least; he cannot see, or read it in all the Scripture, yet
he grants the thing it self: But I prove both the one and the other: And 1.
That Christ committed and did no Act, nor deed against Law, for which he should
be Reasons proving that Christ was not intrinsecally and formally the sinner.
because that holy thing Jesus being God-man could not sin, nor did he ever any
violence or deceit, Isa. 53.9. Heb. 4.15. and chap. 8. ver. 26.2. The inherent
vitiositie, and sinful blot of sin, which follows upon the Physical Act of
sin, being once done and committed by David, Peter, and all the Elect of God,
cannot come out by a real transmigration, and true and Physical Idem numero
accidens non migrat e subjecto in subjectum: No Law in the world* no Covenant,
no transaction imaginable can effectuate this, that the real wickedness once
committed by David should really and truly remove out of him, and go in, and
reside in, and denominate the man Christ a wicked person; its an everlasting
contradiction, That the treacherous murdering of innocent Vriah, should remove
out of him into the son of David, Jesus Christ, and denominate him the
murderer of Vriah, so as the same murder can be said to be committed by David
only, and not by David only, but by the man Christ: It must then be a lie, a
dream, and palpable untruth to make Jesus Christ intrinsecally the sinner, and
murderer; Judge then if this Doctrine be of God, which Dr. Crispe right down
has asserted to the world in Print, Ser. 3. Vol. 2. page 84. God made Christ a
transgressor -- No transgressor in the world, was such a transgressor as Christ
was, page 88. You will never have quietness of Spirit in respect of sin, till
you have received this principle, That it is iniquity it self, that the Lord
has laid on Christ: Now when I say with the Prophet, It is iniquity it self
that the Lord has laid on Christ, I mean as the Prophet does, it is the fault
or the transgression it self; and to speak more fully, that erring, and
straying like sheep: that very erring, and straying, and transgressing is
passed off from thee, and laid upon Christ: To speak it more plainly, Have thou
been an Idolater? Have thou been a blasphemer? Have thou been a despiser of
Gods word, and a trampler upon him? Have thou been a prophaner of his Name and
Ordinances? Have thou been a murderer, an adulterer, a thief, a Liar, a
drunkard? Reckon up what thou can against thy self: if thou have part in the
Lord Christ, all these transgressions of thine, become actually the
transgressions of Christ, and so cease to be thine, and thou ceasest to be a
transgressour from that time they were laid upon Christ, to the last hour of
thy life -- Mark it well, Christ himself is not so completely Righteous, but we
are as Righteous as he was, nor we so completely sinful, but Christ became,
being made sin, as completely sinful as we: Nay more, the Righteousness that
Christ has with the Father, we are the same Righteousness, for we are made
the Righteousness of God: that very sinfulness that we were, Christ is made
that very sinfulnes before God. Ans. 1. No Scripture calls Christ the Thief,
the Murderer, the Adulterer, the Idolater, God avert from pious hearts, such
blasphemies; he may by a figure be called sin, and be said to be made sin for
us: but that is by mere imputation: as if you would say, The surety is the
broken and riotous waster: all that have com, mon sense know this to be a
figurative and unproper speech, that is, he is in Law liable to pay the debts
of the broken waster; and the Law-guilt, and Law-obligation, that was in the
broken man is transferred on him by his own promise: But no man in his right
wits can say, that the broken man is as intrinsecally just, as sober a manager
of his goods, as free from all intrinsecall fault and sin of unjustice and
breach of the eighth Commandment, as the innocent surety; no sober wit can
say, that the unjustice and injury done by the broken man to his brother, and
against the eighth Commandment, Thou shall not steal, Is nothing formally, but
the very just and real deed that the surety has taken upon him; and that the
surety is as guilty with the same very fault and sin of wastry, that is
inherent in the broken bankrupt, as the bankrupt himself; and it is as great
blasphemy to say Christ is as guilty, and as inherently faulty, and no less a
transgressour of the sixth and seventh Commandment, by killing Vriah, and
deflouring Bathsheba, then ever David was, and that David was as free from the
inherent Fundamental guilt of these sins from Eternity (for Libertines will
needs have our sins from Eternity to lie on Christ, and our persons before all
time justified) as Christ himself is. 1. God made Christ sin, God made not
David to murder Vriah: Then Christ must be one way a sinner, David another
way, the one by imputation, the other by real inherency. 2. David was
intrinsecally a transgressour of a Law: Christ not so. 3. David was washed and
pardoned in the blood of Christ, Christ not so: What righteousness of Christ is
made ours.
Then David's Righteousness is but borrowed, and Christ's Righteousness his
own: 2. There is an essential Righteousness that Christ has with the Father,
and it is communicable neither to men nor Angel, no more then God can
communicate with the creature any other of his essential attributes, such as
are infinite Justice, infinite Mercy, infinite Grace, Holiness, Goodness,
Omnipotency, Eternity, Immensity. It is only the cautionary, the surety
R^ghteousnesse of Christ God that is made ours, The believer how Righteous as
Christ, how not.
and that we are as completely righteous as Christ, is Divinity not borrowed
from the Fountain of the holy Scriptures; But the man's own dream, for the
broken debtor is never so righteous as the surety, except in this sense, he is
aeque, but not aequaliter, he is righteous as the surety who has paid the sum
for him, in regard that the Creditor can no more in Law, charge him with the
sum, then he can in Law, charge the surety, who has completely paid it; so are
we in Christ freed from the guilt of eternal wrath, in that the Lord can no
more in Law charge sin to actual condemnation on the Believer, then he can put
Christ to death again, or give a new ransom for us, but this is but formally a
righteousness, in regard of freedom from the punishment of sin: But as I have
said, the surety is more righteous simply, in regard the Surety never broke
faith to the Creditor; the broken debtor has broken to him: 2. The Surety
never injured the Creditor by unjustice done against the eighth Commandment,
but the broken man has failed in this: But I would be resolved what truth can
be in those, Prove. 20.9. Who can say I have made my heart clean? Job. 14.5. Who
can bring a clean thing out of an un clean? No not one, Eccl. 7.20. There is
not a just man upon earth, that does good and sins not, Joh. 1.8. If we say
we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us: If we be
completely as righteous as Christ; and if, as Crispe divines, all the Idolatry,
Thefts, murders of the Redeemed: Become actually the transgressions of
Christ^, and so cease to be the transgressions of the sinners, from that time
they were laid upon Christ to the hour of their death: Can he determine the
time when persecuting Saul's blasphemies, and bloody outrages to the Saints were
laid upon Christ? I conceive he will say from Eternity, they were laid upon
Christ, and ere he believed; certainly this was an untruth then: Saul made
havoc of the Church, even when he did make havoc of the Church, and ere he
believed; for if Saul persecuting, and all the Elect unconverted, yet
disobedient, and boiling in their lusts, be as righteous as Christ all their
life; It is most false that ever they were dead in sin, or some times
disobedient: If it be said, The Elect considered in themselves and in nature
are sinners, but considered as men in Christ, they are as righteous as Christ:
it helps not, for we must not dream of, and fancy considerations, that has
no reality and truth in them; for all now born since our Lord died, I am
persuaded, by the Doctrine of Antinomians, were never, nor can they be real
and true objects of this consideration; For from that time that their sins were
laid upon Christ to the last hour of their life, they are as righteous as
Christ, and so washed and justified; Now their sins were laid upon Christ, as
some Libertines say, from eternity, as others, from that day that he died on
the Cross: 2. Sins taken away by Christ's blood, says Dr. Crispe, are no sins
of the Saints: Christ did take them away, and bear their weight, even in the
fault and sin it self, and not the guilt only, and not by supposition or mere
imputation only, and that from eternity: But when Antinomians confess, that
Christ acted no sin, so that in respect of the Act (the sinful act against the
Law of God must be here understood) not one sin of the Believers is Christ's,
but only in respect of passing accounts from one head to another: This is all
the truth we here plead for; because the Act (or somewhat answerable to that)
done against the Spiritual Law of God is sin it self, and essentially sin; if
this was never upon Christ, then sin it self was never upon Christ: now there
is no other thing remaining in sin but the debt, guilt or obligation of sin
that can be laid on Christ, and the truth is, the Scripture expounds the
laying our sins upon Christ, to be nothing but God punishing Christ for our
sins, as Isa. 5 3.4. The cause and formal reason, why Christ did bear our
griefs, and carry our sorrows is ver. 6. Because the Lord laid on him the
iniquity of us all, and is so expounded, 1 Pet. 2. Whereas it is said, ver. 21.
that Christ suffered for us, and an objection is removed, verse. 22. Why should
he suffer? Did he sin? the Apostle answers by concession of the Antecedent,
and by denying the consequence, verse. 22. He did no sin (personally) neither
was guile found in his mouth: But it follows not that he should not suffer
legally, and for others the punishment due to them; so his sufferings is
expounded, v. 24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the Tree:
Now how did Christ bear our sins? On the Tree; that is, by suffering, and Gal.
3. Paul evidently distinguishes between two sorts of persons that are cursed;
the sinners that abide not in all that is written in the Law to do them, v. 10.
These are intrinsecally, and in their person cursed, as being sinners in their
person; and so the intrinsecall objects of divine hatred, and a curse and
abominable to God. Yea, but Christ was also cursed* But how? Not intrinsecally;
God is never said to hate his Son Christ, nor to abhor him, as he does sin
which personally resideth in the man who acts sin in his own person:
Therefore the Lords forsaking of Christ his Son, is not an intrinsecall
detesting, or a moral abhorring of Christ; but an extrinsecall, a penal, or a
judicial suspending of the beams and rays (as Cyrill says) or the
overclouding of his favor, in the comfortable shining on the soul of his own
sin: and it is not said that Christ was cursed, but only, verse. 13. (...), He
was made a curse for us, that is, the fruits and effects of Gods curse, the
punishment due to sinners, even that satisfactory, and penal curse and
punishment, which infinite Justice requires, was laid upon Christ, while as he
died upon the Cross, and suffered the effects of Gods wrath upon his soul for
our sins: Then he must be the sinner, only by Imputation, except Antinomians
show to us, how a person is made sin, or accounted the sinner? And yet is
neither a sinner by inherent and personal acting of sin: nor yet by
Law-imputation: And truly, its bad Divinity for Dr. Crispe to say, as we are
actual and real sinners in Adam, so here God passes really sin over upon
Christ, for we sinned intrinsecally in Adam, as parts, as members, as being in
his loins, and we are thence, by nature the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. But it
is blasphemy to say, that our blessed Savior sinned intrinsecally in us, as
part or member of the Redeemed, or that he is a son of Gods wrath for sin
intrinsecally inherent in him, as it is in us.

Farther, Christ's bearing of our iniquities is an obvious Hebraisme, and all
one with the bearing, not of the intrinsecall and fundamental guilt of sin;
but of the extrinsecall guilt, or debt and punishment of sin: So, Exodus 28.38.
A Mitre shall be on Aarons forehead, that Aaron may bear the iniquity of the
holy things, Heb. (...), Venasa signifies to carry, or as the 70. turn it,
(...), Aaron shall take away, or, bear the punishment of the violation of the
holy things: Moses says to Aarons sons, Lev. 10.17. God has given you the sin
offering, to bear the iniquity of the congregation.

(...), Aaron and his sons did bear the sins of the people as types of
Christ, not by an intrinsecall guilt put on them, but by mere imputation, Lev.
16.22. And the Goat shall bear upon him all the iniquities of the children of
Israel unto a Land not inhabited. The Priest prayed that the sins, that is, the
punishment of the sins of the people might be laid on the Goat, Numb. 18.1.
Aaron and his sons are to bear the iniquity of the Sanctuary, that is, the
punishment of their iniquity, in that they were punished, if any of the
Sanctuary polluted the holy things of God, Lev. 5.1. The witness who sees and
hears a swearing, and does not utter it, he shall bear his iniquity; that is,
says Vatablus, and all the interpreters, The punishment of his iniquity,
Ezech. 18.19. Yet say ye Why does not the Son bear the iniquity of the Father,
ver. 20. The soul that sins shall die, the son shall not bear the iniquity
of the father? Ezech. 23.35. Because thou have forgotten me -- bear thou also
thy lewdness and thy whoredom: In the same very sense, Christ, Heb. 9.28. was
once offered to bear the sins of many, 1 Pet. 2.24. He did bear our sins on his
body on the Tree, Isa. 53.12. He did bear the sins of many; he did bear heavy
punishment, death and the wrath of God, for the sins of many: the word (...)
Sabal, is to bear a burden as a Porter, v. 6. The Lord laid the iniquity of us
all on him. Heb. (...) Hifgang, The word signifies to fall on any with
violence, and to kill him; as Gideon fell on the Princes of Midian, and ver. 7.
He was oppressed, he was afflicted, yet opened he not his mouth. (...) Niggas
its not in the Hebrew. (...) Niggash, per (...) Adductus oblatus. Arias Mont.
reads it (...) Niggas, with the point on the left side of (...) not (...). So
Cyrillus, and it is, he was exacted, or payment of violence sought of him:
Pagnan, multatus, Christ was put to a fine, condemned to pay an amercement, or
forfeit, or Christ was pursued as play master and surety for us: The Father
pursued Christ's band, that he should now at the appointed day, tell down the
sum, the great ransom-money of his life for sinners who were broken men.
Justice gave in a broad and large claim against Jesus Christ, in which were
written all the sins of the elect; And Christ opened not his mouth, but was
dumb as a Lamb, led to the shambles, and his silence was as much, as Lord, I
grant, I yield to all the accounts in this sad claim: you will not confess
your guiltiness, O sinners in Christ! Nor take with riots, murders, oaths,
and all your sins: But the surety Christ was craved, and all your accounts
demanded of him, and he confessed debt, and granted all, v. 12. He was numbered:
So (...) Minna, he was reputed, and written up in the count amongst thieves:
this was mere imputation, he was not a wicked man indeed: And consider how; v.
3. He is called, despised and rejected of men, Christ in himself and
intrinsecally was the glory, the flower, the Prince of men, even at his lowest,
he must then be abased below all men, in regard of imputation, and that penal
degrading of Christ; so as it is said of him, he was (...) Chadal ishim, which
is, as Vatablus expounds it, so contemptible a man, that men would not admit
him in company of men, Aria. Mont. desiit viris; others expound it, Cessatio
virorum: Jerome novissimus virorum. Sanctius says, he was not numbered amongst
men, he was so despised, that he was the lowest among the lowest of men, or the
minimum quod sic of men, as it is, Ps. 22.6. A worm, no man, no body, not in
the class or rank of men: He was in himself, the mighty God, the Prince of
peace, more then above men and Angels, the chief of the kindred of men, the
fairest among the sons of men, even at his lowest; but in regard of his low
condition, he was made the offscouring or the dross or refuse of all men, as
if not a Christianed creature. When our Divines say, Christ took our place, and
we have his condition, How Christ is to our place.
Christ was made us, and made the sinner; It is true, only in a legal sense,
as we say, the advocate is the client, or the guilty man; Because the advocate
bears his name and person, and what the accused man could in Law say before
the Judge in his own defense, that the advocate says for him; the advocate
says, I cannot in Law die for this crime, for such Reasons: So the surety in
Law or in a legal substitution, is the broken man: the surety says, The debt
is mine, all the wants, all the poverty, all the debts and burdens of my broken
friend, be on me, and the rich surety having paid all, can say, I have paid
all, I am in Law free, my friend and surety has done all, and paid all for me;
and that is as good in foro, in the Court of justice, as if I had paid in my
own person all; for the truth is, there be not two debts and two bonds, and two
sums, nor two debtors, the broken man, and the Surety are in Law but one
person, one party adebted, which of them pay, it is all one to Law and justice:
it is all one sum they owe: The Believer in Christ is put in Christ's Law-place,
and Christ by Law is put in his place; Christ made Surety, says: I am the
sinner, O justice, all my broken friends wants, all their debts be upon me, my
life for their life, my soul for my brethrens souls, my glory, my heaven for my
kinsmens glory and heaven: The Laws bloody Band was the curse of God upon the
sinner, upon the debtor: Christ changed bands and obligations with us, and
puts out our name, and puts in his own name in the bloody Band; and where
the Law reads, the curse of God upon the debtor: Christ is Assigned to this
Band, and the Gospel reads it, the curse of God upon the rich Surety, Gal.
3.13. Hear then the boldness of Faith: Now then there is no condemnation to
those that are in Jesus Christ: What challenges Satan or conscience can make
against the Believer (for justice being put to silence by Christ, makes none)
hear an answer: I was condemned, I was judged, I was crucified for sin, when my
Surety Christ was condemned, judged and crucified for my sins: and what would
you have more of a man then his life? it was a man's life and soul, my life that
my surety offered up to God for sin, and I have paid all, because my surety
has paid all. And the truth is, it is not two debts, one that the believer
owes to Gods justice, and another that Christ paid: But the debt that Christ
paid is our very debt and sins which he did bear on his own body on the tree,
1 Pet. 2.24. But though it be true in a legal sense, that the surety is the
broken man; yet it is true, only in regard of the Law punishment, or Malum
poenae, the ill of punishment, that is laid upon him: For I take Dr Crisps
words from his own pen; Suppose (says he) a Malefactor should be asked,
Guilty, or not guilty? He answers, Not guilty. What does he mean? He means
he has not done the Fact that was laid to his charge: Then not to do the Fact
of sin, to Dr. Crispe, is not to be guilty: Now I assume, But Jesus Christ did
never any sinful fact, as he also confesses, then Christ was punished for
sin, and yet was never guilty of sin, this must be the greatest unjustice in
the world to punish a man for sin, altogether free of the guilt of sin; except
Antinomians distinguish with us, between sinful guilt, and penal guilt,
called Reatus culpae, and Reatus poenae, or Reatus personae, seu potentialis,
and Reatus formalis, seu actualis, they shall never expede themselves.

Now though it be true, that in Law the Debtor and the Surety be both one
Legal person, How the Debtor and the Surety be one in Law, and not
intrinsecally one.
yet intrinsecally they are not one, the broken Debtor as such may be an unjust
man, and the Surety a faithful and just man; so that the surety, as a
satisfying Surety, removes only the punishment due to the Debtor for his
unjustice; but he removes not formally unjustice, except he be such a Surety
as Christ, who can both pay the debt, and so remove the ill of punishment, and
also infuse holiness, and sanctify and remove the evil of sin; hence in
justification formally, Christ only takes away the punishment of everlasting
fire, and eternal condemnation due to sin; but he removes not sin it self;
sin it self is removed in sanctification, and by degrees; justification takes
the sting out of the Serpent, but does not formally kill the Serpent; the
Serpent is killed by another act of Grace, by infused and perfected
sanctification; justification is a forinsecall and a Legal Act, and removes
the power of the Law, which involveth the sinner in a curse: Now the strength
or the Legal sting of sin is the Law, 1 Cor. 15.56. So we may judge how false
this divinity is, which Dr. Crispe asserteth: You will never (says he) have
quietness of spirit in respect of sin, till you have received this
principle, that it is not the guilt of Iniquity only, but Iniquity it self
that the Lord laid on Christ; For it is true, quietness and Peace of Faith
with God flows from justification, Romans 5.1. And the assurance that Christ
has pardoned sin, and has removed the penal guilt, the punishment of
Eternal condemnation from sin, but that the conscience should be quiet; that
is, that it should not have also a care to believe that Christ will sanctify
thoroughly, and perfect his good work in us, is most false; for though a soul be
justified and freed from the guilt of Eternal punishment, and so the spirit is
no more to be afraid and disquieted for Eternal wrath and Hell, which should
never have been feared as the greatest evil, in regard that sin as sin is more
to be feared then Hell as Hell; yet there be two other acts of disquietnesse of
spirit laudable and commendable, even in the Saints after they are justified;
and the guilt of ^ternall punishment removed; as, 1. The believer is to have a
holy Anxiety and care of spirit (I do not call it a troubled conscience) to
improve his faith in believing that Christ will perfect what he has begun. 2.
He is to be grieved that sin dwells in him, and to groan and cry as a
captive in fetters, out of the sense of his wretched estate, as Paul does, Romans
7.23, 24. Antinomians will have the justified to be so quiet in spirit, as if
Christ had removed sin in root and branch, buds and stump; whereas only the
Eternal punishment and fear of Eternal condemnation is removed in
justification: But there is a worse thing remaining in sin after this, and more
to be feared, and a more real and rational ground of disquietnesse of spirit;
and that is the fundamental, intrinsecall, and sinful guilt of sin, which
Christ never took on him, and is not removed in justification; but only in the
graduall and successive perfection of sanctification, and so being justified, I
am to be secure and to enjoy a sound Peace, and quietness of spirit, A
perplexed conscienc is lawfully consistent with a justified sinners condition
in freedom from Eternal wrath: But yet am I to be disquieted, grieved, yea,
to sorrow that such a Ghuest as sin lodges in me, and with me; even as an
ingenuous and honest hearted debtor, is to rejoice and be glad in the goodness
and grace of his gracious surety who has paid his debt, and never to fear
that the Law or Justice can go against him to Arrest and imprison him, for that
debt which is now completely paid by his surety: But if the surety gave his
back-bond to pay him service of love, and service of sorrow, and remorse for
his unjustice and sinful lavishing of his Neighbors goods, which did
necessitate his loving surety to hurt himself, and be at a great loss for him*
he owes to his surety the debt of love, and disquietnesse of spirit, in so far,
as the blot of his wastry, and the shame of his riotous youth, lies on him all
his days: Antinomians conceive, that there ought to be no disquietnesse of
spirit, no remorse, no trouble of mind, but that which has its rise and
spring from sins apprehended as not pardoned, and from the fear of Eternal
punishment, to be inflicted for these sins: and it is true, that such a
troubled and perplexed soul which is once in the state of justification, is but
the issue and brood of unbelief, and arises from the flesh prevailing over the
spirit in such sorrow: yea, or if confession of sin arise from this spring of
servile and slavish fear, it is not a work of Faith, except that a conditional
fear of Eternal wrath; A conditional fear of wrath eternal in the justified.
If a David fallen in Adultery and treacherous murder, or a Peter overtaken
with a denying of his Savior before men, shall not renew his Repentance and
Faith in CHRIST, is required in all the justified for the perfecting of their
salvation, and final perseverance: But there is another remorse and sorrow
according to God, required in all the justified; and it is this, that though
they are not to fear condemation with a legal fear, so as to distrust God, An
absolute fear of Eternal wrath, not required in the justified; yet sorrow,
grief and trouble of mind for the indwelling of sin is required.
and be afraid of Eternal wrath; yet he who is ransomed by Christ, though he
can never recompense the Free Grace, nor pay a satisfactory ransom for so
great and rich a love, he is under a back-bond, or a re-obligation of love,
service, and obedience to him that ransomed him: And this Law of love and
thankfulness is not, as Libert^^es, and others conceive, a Positive and simply
supernatural Gospel-obligation; for the Law of both nature and Nations,
require that the Captive be thankful to the ransom payer: I grant that the
particular Commandments are Positive and supernatural; so the justified is
obliged by this back-Bond, and Gospel re-obligation to confess sin dwelling in
him, to groan, and sigh and sorrow under it, to be troubled and grieved in
spirit, for sin as sin dwelling in his members, and rebelling against the Law
of his mind; and keeping him in bondage, to walk humbly, and softly all his
days; by reason of the running Issue of sin, and to strive by all means to walk
worthy of Christ; and this in the general is the Law of Nature, from which
Christ has in no sort exempted us, Matthew. 7.12. 1 Cor. 11.14. Ephesians. 5.28, 29.
Now as a man having fallen from a high place upon a Rock, and has broken bones
of Thighs and Legs though he be cured and can walk abroad, yet all his days he
halt^th in his walking; or like one that is cured of an extreme Fever,
Tertian, at such and such seasons, some fits of the disease recurreth: yet is
he not to doubt of the fidelity and love of the Surgeon and Physician, who
have really cured him, in so far as he is in capacity in this life to be cured,
and therefore as he is to walk warily, and with circumspection all his days,
caring for his crazed body, so is he to be thankful to those who recovered
him, and may be sad and heavy now and then; that by his own folly and temerity,
he hurt his body: for even sins pardoned, as concerning their eternal guilt,
by our Sovereign Physician Christ in justification, lay a law on us to serve
our Physician Christ in these Positive Commandments of obedience, love, sorrow,
softness of spirit, with a care to sin no more, though we must needs halt, and
slip all our days, yet not so to sorrow, as to call in doubt the reality of
Pardoning Grace.

How the conscience is freed from sin, to wit from the Law obligation to actual
condemnation, but not from incurring the displeasur of God by breach of a Law,
if the believer shall sin.
SERMON XX.
YEa, the Law from the highest bended love, even from love with all the whole
soul, and all its strength, Matthew. 22. forbids all sin, no less then the
Gospel of love, which Gospel does spiritualize the Law to the believer, but not
abolish it: the Gospel adds a new argument of Gospel-love, because Christ
has died for me, therefore I Will keep the same Law of God, I was under before,
only now I fear no^ actual condemnation which is accidental to the Law, for
Christ and the confirmed Angels keep the Law, as a rule of life, yet without
any fear of actual condemnation; Nor does the Gospel more make David's adultery,
not to be against the seventh Commandment to David, then it makes the
Israelites spoiling of the Egyptians of their Earings and Jewels, to be no
breach of the eight Commandment: The Grace of Christ does Privilege the
Believer from condemnation, which condemnation is a mere accident, which does
go and come without hurting the essence of the Law, and its commanding and
eternal Morall-directing power: The Law says ( do and live) there is no
exception of this, its the will of God eternal; as God is eternal, and
obliges us in Heaven, and for ever, Rev. 22.5. But this ( if you do not, you
shall die) has a large exception; Christ my son shall die for you, and this
(if you keep not the Law, you are condemned) to the believer is abolished, and
when we are Romans 7. said to be freed from our first husband, as the woman is
freed by Law from her dead husband, and may without sin marry another, and we
not under the Law, the word (Law) is taken only for the Law, as given to the
sinner: Now the Law should have been Law, though sin had never been, and is Law
to the Elect Angels who never sinned, and that is only the Law, under the
notion of that sad office of eternal condemnation; the Law could never have
been Law, except it had promised eternal life to those who do the Law: but it
both is, and should have been Law to believers in Jesus Christ, to the Elect
Angels, and yet it does not, it cannot actually condemn them.

But that the Gospel makes Adultery to be no sin to Believers, is a
blasphemous Assertion: Then commit Adultery, murder, whore, steel; O Believer!
these are not sins to thee, but Christ's sins, not thine: O turn nor the grace
of God into wantonness: The Believer has no conscience of sins: that is, he
in conscience is not to fear everlasting condemnation, that is most true,
because Christ has delivered him from that wrath to come, Romans 8.1. Ioh. 5.24.
Faith of eternal life by Jesus Christ cannot consist with fear of eternal
condemnation, for then with a legal, and an Evangelick Faith, one person
should be obliged to believe things contradictory, and yet both Faiths oblige
us to give credence and assent: But that the Believer has no conscience of
sin, that is, that he is to believe there is nothing in him that is sin, is to
believe a lie, 1 John 1.8, 9, That he is to confess no sin, and to be grieved
in conscience for no sin, and to sorrow for no sin; that he is to be wearied
and laden with no sin, that he is to groan under the burden of no sin, as
failing against the love of him that gave a ransom for him; this is a
blasphemous dedolencie of conscience, yea, of a conscience past feeling.
Beloved in the Lord, The Gospel forbids sorrow, fear, and Agony of
conscience in a Believer, apprehending eternal wrath, such a one once truly
believing in Christ as the Savior of sinners, and his Savior, and now
believing the contrary, must believe that his Lord is really changed, that he
has forgotten to be merciful, that he has falsified, and altered his his
Covenant, Oath and Promise: this were to make God a Liar; But the Gospel
forbids not, but commands that the justified person sorrow for sin; yea,
it commands carfulness to forbear clearing of the offender, as being in
Christ, and desiring to flee to Christ; indignation against himself, in not
forgiving himself, fear of offending love and Law in Christ, vehement desire to
have peace confirmed, zeal for God, revenge to afflict the soul, 2 Cor.
7.10.11. And in this sense its blasphemy to say that the Gospel takes away all
conscience of sin: Believers humbled for sin, are to be taken off all
Law-thoughts, and fear of eternal condemnation, and all thoughts that sorrow
is a Penance and satisfactory to offended justice; as we are ready to conceit
of our Evangelick rejoicing and holiest works: But they are to sorrow for
offended love; for the body of sin breaking out in scandals, I may then have
peace with God, in the assurance of remission and removal of eternal wrath;
and yet not have peace with my own conscience: 1. Because I may be persuaded
that God in Christ has forgiven me; yet am I not to forgive my self: 2. I am
to believe that in Christ I am delivered from eternal wra^h, and justified in
Christ; and yet to sorrow that I have sinned against Christ's love: 3. I may
have peace, sense of peace, and Pardon in Christ, and yea a necessary
disquietnesse, sorrow, and tears, that I should have been so unthankful to so
lovely a Redeemer: so Christ does commend the woman's tears, as a sign of love,
and of the sense of many sins pardoned, Luke 7.44. I may believe the remission
of these same very sins, which I am to confess, and for which I am to be
sorrowful.
Thou gave me no water for my feet: But she has washed my feet with tears:
yet many sins were forgiven her, v. 47. Hence, I may 1. Believe the Remission
of that sin, for which I am to sorrow, and for the Remission of which I am to
pray, and which I am to confess: Nathan said to David, thy sin is pardoned:
yet the Spirit of God after that both confessed, sorrowed, prayed for pardon in
David: 2. We may comfort those that mourn for sin, from assurance of Pardon,
and yet exhort them to be humbled and afflicted in spirit, and to confess,
sorrow, and pray for Pardon; so Antinomians rejoicing evermore after
justification, without sorrow, remorse, down-casting for sin at all, is but
fleshly wantonness: I may have and ought to have a disquieted spirit, and no
peace with my self, and yet peace with God, even as the Sea after a storm, and
when the winds are gone and the Air is calmed, has yet a raging and great
motion, by reason of wind enclosed in the bowels of the Sea, and after the cool
of a mighty Fever, yet are the humors in the body stirred and distempered.

But we are hence led to find out resolution for diverse cases of consciences
after justification. Eight cases of conscience resolved from the former
doctrine.
1. Many dare not question their state of justification, and so are freed from
the storms of apprehended wrath, arising from the guilt of sin: yet there is
another storm, within the bowels of the Sea, arising from the indwelling of the
body of guilt, the storm before justification is less free, less ingenuous,
more servile, as looking to that Eternal wrath, hanging over the soul for
unpardoned sin: this is more free, and is a peaceable, a gracious, and heavenly
storm raised, not for sin unpardoned, and the Eternal punishment thereof: but
for sin as sin, as indwelling, not for the penal guilt and the sting of Hell
in sin, but for the sinful guilt and the wounding of Christ. 2. Its unpossible
this latter storm can be in the soul, till the sentence of justification be
pronounced; as none can have the moved bowels of a son, for the offense of a
Father, till he be a son.

2. Another case is, that many have an absolute, loose, and laxe peace and
calmnesse, great confidence of deliverance from Eternal wrath; and so of a
supposed pardon, whose peace is convinced to be but a base outside, and mere
paintry and fairding because there is in them no storm for sin as sin, and for
the over-motions of boiling lusts; no tenderness to walk spiritually. A Faith
that eats out the bottom and bowels of conscience, of declining sin and
walking with God: is the justification of the Antinomians, of the old
Gnostics, of the natural men: all our professors are cured, none or few are
healed.

3. Full assurance that Christ has delivered Paul from condemnation: yea, so
full and real, as produces thanksgiving and triumphing in Christ, Romans 7.25.
Romans 8.1, 2. may, and does consist with complaints and outcryes of a wretched
condition, for the indwelling of the body of sin, Romans 7.14, 15, 16.23, 24.
Then the justified that are whole, not sick, not pained, are yet in their sins,
and not justified, what ever Antinomians say on the contrary.

4. The flesh in the justified cannot complain of indwelling sin; but the flesh
mixed with some life of Christ, may raise a false Alaram of sins not pardoned,
which are really pardoned; some false grief may and often has its rise from a
false and imaginary ground, as a sanctified soul may praise God through
occasion of a lying report of the victory of the Church of God, when there is
no such matter; a sanctified child may spiritually mourn for the supposed death
of his Father, or that he has offended his Father according to the flesh, when
his Father is neither dead, nor offended at all: So gracious affections, as
gracious, may work spiritually upon supposed and false grounds when there is no
cause; as that the soul has grieved his heavenly Father, and that he is
displeased, when it is not so.

5. Sin indwelling is a greater evil, then the feared evil of ten hells; and
therefore there is more cause of sorrow for sin, confession, disquietnesse of
spirit, after justification then before; because sin the only true object of
fear and disquietnesse of spirit, is both a ghuest dwelling in the soul, and is
more really and distinctly apprehended as a spiritual evil, after the light of
faith has shown us the sinfulness of sin, then ever it was discovered to be
before.

6. I doubt, if justified souls are to be refuted in their complaints and fears
for the indwelling of sin, providing, they fear not eternal wrath, which fear
is contrary to faith; and so they fear not, and sorrow not, for that God has
changed the Court, and the wind of his love turned in the contrary air, and he
has forgotten to be merciful.

7. Faith charge us to believe that Grace shall at length finally subdue sin,
and as boatmen labor with oars to promove their course in sailing, even when
the wind, sails and tide are doing somewhat to promove the course; so does
faith, which purifieth the heart, set the soul on work to perfect holiness in
the fear of God, and believes also, that God shall work both to will and to do.

Its not then good Physic for many exercised in conscience, especially after
their first conversion, to apply only the honey and sweetness of consolations
of the Gospel, as if there were not any need of humiliation and sorrow for sin:
Yet it is to be cleared, How we are to-sorrow for pardoned sins.
that 1. Sorrow for sin is no satisfaction for sin; for the pride of merit is
crafty, and can creep in at a small hole. We think there is no repentance where
there be no tears, and God of purpose withholdeth tears, as knowing when water
goes out, wind comes in. 2. They are tenderly to be bound up, and comforted,
in whom sin rises up with a witness. O what pity, and humble on-looking
should be here? For a hell of pain in the body is nothing, wheels, racks,
whips, hot irons, breaking of bones is nothing; but half a hell in the spirit,
is a whole hell. The upper hell, the grave, to Ezekiah is like to swallow him
up, when dipped in the lower hell, and covered with the apprehension of wrath.
O sweet Jesus! what a mercy that thou swallowed up all hels to believers, and
calmed the sea of hell.

Use. If in Justification, sins be blotted out, cast in the depths of the Sea,
Use. 1. To be justified is a state of happiness most desirable.
and removed, as if they never had been, the state of Justification must be a
condition of sound blessedness, the most desirable life in the world, To.
4.6. Even as David also describes the blessedness of the man, unto whom God
imputes righteousness without works. 7. Blessed are they whose iniquities are
forgiven, and whose sins are covered. For consider 1. What an Act of Grace it
is in a Prince to take a condemned malefactor from under the ax, the rack, the
wheel, and so many hours torture, before he end his miserable life. Or, 2.
Suppose he were condemned to be tortured leisurely, Simile
and his life continued and prorogated, that bones, sinues, lights, joints
might be pained for twenty or thirty years; so much of his flesh cut off every
day, such a bone broken, and by Art the bone cured again, and the flesh
restored, that he might for thirty years space, every day be dying, and yet
never die. Or, 3. Imagine a man could be kept alive in torment in this case,
from sleep, ease, food, clothing, 500. years, or a 1000. years, and boiling all
the time in a cauldron full of melted lead; and say the soul could dwell in a
body under the rack, the wheel, the lashes and scourges of Scorpions, and whips
of iron, the man bleeding, crying, in the act of dying for pain, gnawing his
tongue, for ten hundred years; now suppose a mighty Prince, by an act of free
grace, could and would deliver this man from all this pain and torture, and
give him a life in perfect health, in ten hundred Paradises of joy, pleasure,
worldly happiness, and a day all the thousand years without a night, a summer
all this time, without cloud, storm, winter, all the honor, acclamations,
love, and service of a world of men and Angels, cloth this man with all the
most complete delights, perfections, and virtues of mind and body, set him ten
thousand degrees of elevation, to the top of all imaginable happiness, above
Solomon in his highest Royalty, or Adam in his first innocence, or Angels in
their most transcendent glory and happiness. Yea, 4. In our conception we may
extend the former misery and pain, and all this happiness to the length of ten
thousand years, this should be thought incomparably the highest act of grace
and love, that any creature could extend to his fellow creature: And yet all
this were but a shadow of Grace, in comparison of the love and rich Grace of
God in Christ, in the justification of a sinner. 2. Consider, we are freed from
the guilt of sin in justification: Now this is the eternal debt of sin, that
remains after sin, To be justified is a state of solid felicity, in regard of
the eternal debt of sin.
that none can wash away but Christ, and that this remains after sin is
acted. 2. That it remains for eternity. 3. That it is a misery we are only
in justification delivered from, is clear in Scripture: 1. Because sin is a
debt: After the borrowed money is spent and gone, somewhat in Law and justice
remains, and this is debt or obligation to make payment to the Creditour. 2.
So the Scripture speaks, Jer. 2.22. For though thou wash thee with Nitre, and
take thee much soap, yet thy iniquity is marked before me. Borith, is an herb
that Fullers use for washing and purging, yet is sin such a Leopard-spot, that
no Art, no industry of of the creature can remove it, Jer. 17.1. The sin of
Judah is written with a pen of iron, and the point of a diamond, it is graven
upon the table of their heart, and the horns of your Altars. There is writ
remaining after sin is acted. 2. Writ written with a pen of iron, and diamond,
to endure for eternity. 3. Not written only, but ingraved, and indented upon
the conscience, 1 Samuel 24.5. When David rent the rob of Saul, his heart smote
him, so that it left a hole, or the mark of the stripe behind it; as when a
burning iron is put on the face of an evill-doer, it leaves behind it a
brand, or a stigma. 2. This is terrible, that this brand is eternal; as the
Prophet prays, Psalm. 109.14. Let the iniquities of his fathers be remembered
with the Lord: and let not the sin of his mother be botted out. 15. Let them be
before the Lord continually. O dreadful! The sins of wicked men shall stand up
in heaven before the justice of God, so long as God shall live, and that is for
ever and ever: So the Lord swears, By the excellency of Jacob; That is, by
himself, Amos 8.7. Surely, I will never forget any of their works, Joh. 10.8.
All that ever came before me, all that came not in by me, the Door, and the
Way, they are (...), Thieves and Robbers. The false Prophets, many of them were
dead, yet being dead (says Christ) this day, they are, in regard of guilt,
Thieves and Robbers. To this day, above sixteen hundred years the Jews are
guilty murderers; though their fathers who slew the Lord of glory, be dead:
This day Cain is a murderer, Judas a traitor, and shall be so long as GOD
shall live, and be GOD: Now without shedding of Christ's blood, there is no
remission of sins, Heb. 9.22. To be delivered from eternal debt, and entitled
to an eternal Kingdom, is a life most desirable, and makes the sinner to
stand in the books of Christ, as the eternally engaged debtor of Grace. Young
Heirs, know your blessedness aright: sinners under eternal debt; you laugh,
sport, rejoice: and you are firebrands of wrath: you go singing, and shaking,
and tinckling your bolts and fetters of black and unmixed vengeance: Alas, how
can you sleep? How can you laugh and sing?

Eat the crumbs.] The dogs desire but the least, The smalest and worst things of
Christ are incomparably above the most excellent things on earth.
and (to speak so) the refuse of Christ. Doct. The meanest, and worst things of
Christ (to speak so) are incomparably to be desired above all things. 1. Any
thing of Christ is desirable; but to lay hold on the skirt of a Jew, Zac.
10.23. Because Christ that is with him is good. Yea, the dust of Zion is a
thing that the servants of God take pleasure in, Psalm. 102.14. The dust and
stones of Zion, are not like the earth; and the mules of the holy grave, as
Papists fondly dream, and are but earth; but because the Lord Christ dwells
there, therefore are they desirable. The people carried their old harps to
Babylon with them, and Joseph's bones must be carried out of Egypt to Canaan:
Why Canaan was Christ's land, his dwelling: Why, but we are to love the ground
that Christ's feet treads on. This I say not, that I judge it holy earth, that
is Popish superstition; but that such is Christ's excellency, that any thing
that has the poorest relation to him, is desirable for him. 2. A poor woman,
Luke 7. Christ, and kiss them: Another woman, Matthew. 9.21. If I may but touch
the border of his garment, I shall be whole. Mary Magdalen sought but to have
her arms filled with his dead body, Joh. 20.15. She says, weeping, to the
Gardener, as she supposed; Sir, if thou have born him hence, tell me where thou
have laid him, and I will take him away. To Joseph of Arimathea, his bloody
winding sheet, and his dead, and ho^ed, and torn body in his arms, are sweet.
Christ's Clay is Silver, and his Brass Gold. 3. Christ's ^harpest rebukes are
sweet oil; the wounds smites with the rod of his ^outh, are with child of
comforts, he rebuked ^ot the Serpent, as not minding salvation to Sa^an, but
rebuked Evah, intending the promised ^^od for her. O what sweetness of love is
that ^^pression? Jer. 31.20. For since I spoke against Ephraim, I do earnestly
remember him, I will (...) have mercy on him, says the Lord. Then rebuking of
Ephraim, which is called; speaking against him is dipped in mercy, Hos. 11.7. My
people are bent to backsliding; this is a rebuke sharp enough: yet he chides
himself friends with the people, v. 8. How shall I give thee up; O Ephraim,
mine heart is turned within me. Here is kissing, and love wrapped about rebuks^
so Jer. 3.1. Thou have played the harlot with many lovers; but see mercy: Yet
return to 4. His black and sour Cross is sweet and honied with comfort, his
dead Body a bundle of myrrh, Cant. 1.13. The smell of which is strong, and
fragrant, and sweateth out precious gum rejoicing in tribulations, Romans 5.3.
Count it joy, all joy, when ye fall in diverse temptations, Jam. 1.2. The Eagles
smell heaven in the cross, and Christ in it, Gal. 6.14. Yea, the refuse and
the worst of Christ's cross, the shame and the reproaches of Christ, are
sweeter and choicer to Moses, then the Treasures, Riches, yea, then the
Kingdom of Egypt, and the glory of it, Heb. 11. ver. 26, 27. yea, the shame
and blushing on Christ's fair face, Heb. 12.2. which he suffered under the
Cross, is fairer then Rubies, and Gold, and has the color of the Heaven of
Heavens. Nebuchadnezzar has more pain and torment in persecuting, Dan. 4.19.
then the three children had in being persecuted: There Is pain and fury in
active persecution: He was full of fury, and the form of his visage changed;
but there is joy unspeakable and glorious in passive persecution. Christ's
sanctified cross droppeth honey, 1 Pet. 1.6. 5. Christ's glownings and sad
desertions, Psalm. 30.7. Thou turnedst away thy face, and I was troubled, (...)
Niuhal, I was troubled like a withered flower that loses sap and vigor: So,
Exodus 15.15. The Dukes of Edom, (...) Niuhaln, were amazed; yet at that time
David prayed, cried, and was heard, ver. 8, 9, 10. The sweetest communion that
Christ seeks of us on earth is prayer, Cant. 2.14. and Cant. 5. Desertion is
death it self, and a death to the soul. 6. I opened to my beloved, and my
beloved had withdrawn himself and was gone; And what was the Churches case? My
soul went forth from me. The Arabic* My soul departed, I died, So is death
described by the like phrase, Genesis 35.18. Rachels soul was in departing, for
she died: And when men are stricken with sudden fear, the heart is said to go
out: So, Genesis 42.28. The soul of Joseph's brethren departed, that is, they were
extremely amazed, When they found their money in their sacks. The like was the
case of the Church when CHRIST departed, she died for sorrow, the soul departed
from the soul, because her Lord and beloved was gone: Yet even that death, that
soul-hell in the want of Christ was a Heaven, it was a sweet and comfortable
season, then has she a commuion with him, in a most heavenly manner. 1. Asking
at the watchmen for him. 2. In binding sad charges on the Daughters of
Jerusalem, to commend her to God by prayer. 3. Then was she sick of Love for
him. 4. Then fell she out in that large Love rapture, in a most heavenly praise
of him, in all his virtues, My welbeloved is white and ruddy, and the chief
amongst ten thousand, etc. Here then the Hell, that Christ throws the Saints
in, in their Desertions, is their heaven. 6. The meanest and lowest relation
with Christ, John Baptist places an honor, in unloosing the Latchets of his
shoes, and thinks to bear his shoes is more honor then he deserves, Joh.
1.27. David a great Prophet appointed to be a King: O if I might be so near the
Lord, as to be a doorkeeper in his house, Ps. 84.10. He puts a happiness
on the Sparrow, and the Swallow, that may build their nests beside the Lords
Altar: Then the fragments and crumbs that his dogs eats, must be the dainties
of heaven, What must Christ himself be in excellency when the worst things of
Christ are so desirable.
and Christ's water the wine of heaven. Now if any the lowest thing of Christ,
the Morsel of his dogs be desirable; how sweet must himself be, if the
parings of his bread be sweet? What must the great loaf Christ himself be?
Christ himself is so taking a Lover, he has a face that would ravish love out
of Devils, so they had Grace to see his beauty; he could lead captive all
hearts in hell, with the lovelines of his countenance, which is white and
ruddy, and pleasant as Lebanon, if they had eyes to behold him. O he himself is
an unknown Lover; he has neither brim nor bottom, his Gospel is the
unsearchable riches of Christ; his Gospel is but a creature; How unsearchable
must he himself be? The wise man, Prove. 30.4. puts a riddle upon all the
wisest on the earth, Solomon and all: What is his name? We know neither name
nor thing, Isa. 53.8. Who shall preach his generation? O what a mercy ^ that he
will give sinners leave to love him? Or honor us so much that we may lay our
black and spotted love, on so lovely and fair a Savior? That such an infinite
and desirable love as Christ's Love, should come (to borrow that expression)
within the sides of thy love and heart, is a wonder; Alas, its a narrow circle
and not capacious to contain him and his love, that passes knowledge, Ephesians.
3.19. (...). It over passes and transcendeth far the narrow comprehension of
created knowledge either of men or Angels. To seek Grace is desirable; but
suppose any person were a Mass, and nothing but composed of pure Grace, and
yet want Christ himself, he should be but a broken lamed creature; put a soul
in heaven, and let him be hated of Christ (if that were possible) Heaven should
be Hell. Imagine devils were standing with their black chains of darkness,
even up in the Heaven of Heavens, and the Plague of being hated of Christ on
their soul, and that they could see him that sits on the Throne, and
somewhat of the Rays and Beams of that fullness of God that is in Christ; yet
should Devils still be Devils, they wanting Christ the heaven of Angels and
glorified men. What a flower? What a Rose of love and light must CHRIST be, The
excellency of Christ farther illustrated
who fills with smell, light, beauty, the four sides, East and West, South
and North of the Heaven of Heavens, and his glory? Suppose in the hour of our
last farewell to time, all creatures void of Reason, Heavens, Stars, Light,
Air, Earth, Sea, dry Land, Birds, Fishes, Beasts, were in a capacity to love
us, and they with Men and Angels, should let out upon us the fullness; yea, the
Sea of all their love (as its a sweet thing to be lovely and desirable to
many) yet this were nothing to him who is, Cant. 5.16. All desires, or all
loves: So Vatablus rendereth it, Christus est totus desideria: He is a Mass of
love, and love it self; lovely in the womb, the ancient of days became young
for me; lovely in the Cross, even when despised and numbered with thieves;
lovely in the grave, lovely at the right hand of God, lovely in his second
appearance in glory: yea, all desirable, Cant. 6.10. his countenance white and
ruddy, 11. his head, a golden head; his headship and government desirable; his
locks bushie and black; his counsels deep, various, unsearchable; his eyes as
Doves, chaste, pure, and can behold no iniquity; his cheeks, or two sides of
his face, as a bed of spice, and sweet smelling flowers: his face manly, comely
as Lebanon: his lips like Lillies, dropping sweet smelling Myrrh: his Gospel
smells of heaven: his hands pure, his works holy, fair, as Gold-rings set
with Beril: his belly, or breast and bowels, as bright Yvory overlaid with
Saphires: that is, his breast and belly, that contains his bowels, his heart
and affections, are as Yvory, bright and glorious: and Yvory overlaid, covered
and adorned with Saphires, that are precious stones of a sea-blue, and heavenly
color, because his bowels and inward affections are full of love, tenderness
of mercy, and the compassion of his heart, most heavenly: his legs are pillars
of marble, set upon sockets of fine gold: his ways and government like
marble-pillars, upright, white, pure, and set on gold, solid, firm, stable,
that Christ cannot slip or fall: his Scepter a Scepter of righteousness, and
his Kingdom eternal, and cannot be shaken: his countenance as the mountain
Lebanon, his person eminent, goodly, high, great, tall, fruitful as Cedars:
his mouth most sweet, his words and testimonies as honey, or the honey comb:
yea, ^ll creatures are weak, and Christ strong: all ^^se, he precious: all
empty, he full: all black, ^e fair: all foolish and vain, he wise, and the ^^ly
Counselor, deep in his counsels and ways. The special Evangelick sin that we
are guilty of, The high esteem of Christ in four grounds.
is unbelief, Joh. 16.9. and this flows from a low estimation that we have of
Christ, and therefore these considerations are to be weighed in our estimation
of Christ.

the Magicians of Chaldea, and Philosophers, who know wonders, hidden things,
and causes of things, and yet are not wise, but fools, Romans 1.21. and vain in
their imaginations, because there is a great defect in their estimative
faculty, in the choice of a God, ver. 22.23. the practical mind is blinded,
and they choose darkness for light, evil for good, a creature for their God.
By faith, Moses, when he was come to age, Heb. 11.25.
refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter; and chose, rather to suffer
affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season. And how is his faith made faith? And how is it evident, that he was not
a raw, ignorant and foolish child when he made the choice? But a man ripe,
come to years, and so as wise as he was old: It is proved, because his
estimative faculty was right, v. 26. Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater
riches then the treasures of Egypt. He is a wise man, who makes a wise choice,
and for thi^ cause Esau is called, Heb. 12.26. (...), a profane man, from (...)
confudit, he had not wise^dom to put a difference between the excellency of the
birthright, and a morsel of meat; so Ezech. 22.8. (...), is to confound Gods
Sabbath with another day: A profane wicked man has not wisdom to esteem God
and Christ above the creature, but confounds the one with the other.

2. Our esteem of Christ is to be pure, chaste, God, the Redeemer, and
Mediator; its a chaste love, and a chaste esteem, if the wife choose to love
her husband, because he is her husband, as the sense esteems white to be
white under the notion of such a color. The operation of every faculty is most
pure, and kindly, when it is carried toward its object, according to its
formal reason, without any mixture of other respects, extraneous and
by-reasons, are more whorish, less con-naturall, not so chaste; there is some
wax in our honey, and this we should take heed unto; the elective power is a
tender piece of the soul.

3. Estimation produces love, even the love of Christ; and love is a great
Favorite, and is and the love of Christ is of the same bigness and quantity
with Grace, for Grace and Love keep proportion one with another.

4. He who duly esteems Christ, is a Esau. What is pottage to Christ? He
overbiddeth Judas: What is silver to Christ? Phil. 3.8
Yea, (...), all things is the greatest count can be cast up; for it includes
all prices, all sums, it takes in heaven, as its a created thing: Then, all
things, the vast and huge Globle and Cirle of the capacious world, and all
excellencies within its bosom or belly; nations, all nations; Angels, all
Angels; Gold, all Gold; Jewels, all Jewels: Honor and delights, all honor,
all delights, and every all beside, lies before Christ, as feathers, dung,
shadows, nothing: To wash a sinner, is the eminency of love, and the highest
esteem of him; But, O what a mercy, that Christ should defile his precious,
sinlesse, Royal, and Princely blood, by dipping in such a loathsome, foul, and
deformed creature as a sinner is, Rev. 1.5.

Dogs eat the crumbs.] Here be degrees of persons, and things, in our Fathers
house: Children, and dogs: yet dogs which the Lord of the house owneth: here is
a high table, and bread: and a by-board, or an after-table, and crumbs for dogs:
here be persons of honor, Kings sons clothed in Scarlet, and sitting with the
King at dinner, when his Spikenard sends forth a smell; and here be some
under the table, at the feet of Christ, waiting to receive the little drops of
the great honeycomb of rich grace, that falls from him: Follow Christ, and
grace shall fall from him; his steps drop fatness, especially in his Palace, 1 John 2.12.13.14. There be in our Lords house little children, babes; there be
in it also experienced ancient Fathers (for Grace has gray hairs for wisdom,
not for weakness:) there be strong men also: Christ was once a little stone,
but he grew a great mountain that filled the whole earth: yea, and the heaven
too: Christ is a growing child: In Christ's lower firmament, there be stars of
the first and second magnitude: and in his house, vessels of great, and of
small quantity, cups and flagons, Isa. 22.24. yet all are fastened upon the
Golden-nail, Jesus Christ. 2. All are in the way, the plants all growing, but
one is a grain of mustard seed, and a rose not broken out to the flower, and
another is a great tree: its morning, and but the glimmering of the rays of
the day star in one, and its high Sun, perfect day, near the noonday with
another: Strong father Abraham, mighty in believing, was once a babe on the
breasts, that could neither creep, nor stand, nor walk. The love of Christ in
its first rise, is a drop of dew that came out of the womb of the morning, the
mother in one night brought forth an host, an innumerable millions of such
babes, and covered the face of the earth with them. But this drop of dew
grows to a Sea that swells up above hell and the grave, Cant. 8.6, 7. It is
more then all the floods and seas of the earth, and floateth up to the Heaven
of Heavens, and up, and in, it must be upon Christ, 1 Pet. 1.8. Ye see not
Christ, yet ye love him. It overfloweth Christ and takes him, and ravisheth
his heart: It is a strong chain that binds Christ, when the grave, sin,
death, devils, could not bind him, Can. 4.9. Act. 2.24. 3. Christ's way of
administration, is a growing way, his Kingdom is not a standing, nor a sitting,
nor a sleeping Kingdom: But its walking, and posting. Thy Kingdom come. An
increasing Kingdom, a growing peace, Isa. 9.7. Of the increase of his
Government and peace (there shall be) no end: In regard of duration even in
heaven, there shall be a growing of his Kingdom: There Is not yesterday, and to
morrow, and the next year in heaven: yet there is a negative increase, glory and
peace shall ascend in continuance and never come to an height: the Sun never
decline, the long day of Christ's glory and peace shall never end. Christ is
saying even now, Father, I must have all my children up with me, that where I
am, there they may be also: And therefore the head draws up to him now a
finger, then a toe: now an arm, then a leg: he has been these sixteen hundred
years since his Ascension, drawing up by death, whole Churches, the Saints at
Corinth, at Rom^, at Philippi: The seven Candlesticks, and the seven Stars of
Asia, are long ago up above Orion, and the seven Stars: and are now shining up
before the Throne: This consecrated Captain of our Salvation, will not sleep
till his Fathers house be filled, till all the numerous offspring, and the
Generations of the first born, be up under on roof with their Father. Heaven is
a growing Family, the Lord of the house has been gathering his flocks into the
fair fields of the Land of Praises, ever since the first Abel died; and all
down along, the believers were gathered to their Fathers.

1. Use is, that we despise not the day of small things; Gods beginning of great
works is small. What could be said of a poor woman's throwing of a stool at the
man who did first read the new Service Book in Edinburgh? It was not looked at
as any eminent passage of Divine Providence; yet it grew till it came up to
Armies of men, the shaking of three Kingdoms, the sound of the Trumpet, the
voice of the Alarm, the lifting up of the Lords Standart, destruction upon
destruction, garments rolled in blood, and goes on in strength, that the
vengeance of the Lord, and the vengeance of his Temple, may pursue the Land of
Graven Images, and awake the Kings of the Earth to rise in Battle against the
great Whore Babylon, that the Jews may return to their Messiah, and Israel, and
Judah ask the way to Zio^, with their faces thitherward, weeping as they go:
that the Forces of the Gentiles, and the Kingdoms of the world, may become the
Kingdoms of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ. And this act of a despised woman*
was one of the first steps of Omnipotency; God then began to open the mouth of
the Vial of his wrath, to let out a little drop of vengeance upon the seat of
the Beast, and ever since the right arm of the Lord awaking, has been in
action, and in a growing Battle against all that Worshipped the Beast, and
received his mark on their right hand, and their forehead; and who knows but
Christ is in an act of conquering, to create a new thing on the earth, and
subdue the people to himself. Omnipotency can derive a Sea, a world of noble
and glorious works from as small a Fountain as a straw, a ram-horn, yea, Jawbone
of a dead Ass. God can put forth omnipotency in all its flowers and golden
branches of over-powering and incomparable excellencies, upon mere Nothing, the
wind is an empty unsolid thing, the Sea a fluid and soft, and ebbing creature;
yet the wind is Gods chariot, he rides on it, and the Sea his walk, his paths
are in the great waters.

2. Use. A crum that falls from Christ's Table, has in it the nature of
bread, some weak ones complain, O I have not the heart of God like David, nor
the strong faith of Abraham to offer my son to death for Christ, nor the
burning fire of the zeal of Moses, to wish my name may be razed out of the Book
of life, that the Lord may be glorified; nor the high esteem of Christ, to
judge all but loss and dung for Jesus Christ, as Paul did. But what if Christ
set the whole loaf before the children, is it not well? If thou lie but under
Christ's feet, to have the crumbs of mercy that slippeth through the fingers of
Christ? The lowest room in heaven, even behind the door is heaven. 1. There Is
a minimum quod sic, the lowest measure, or grain of saving Grace, and its
saving Grace; a drop of dew is water, no less then the great Globe and Sphere
of the whole element of water is water, a glimmering of morn-dawning light is
light, and of the same nature with the noon-light, that is in the great body of
the Sun, the motion of a child newly formed in the belly, is an act of life;
no less then the walking and breathing of a man of thirty years of age in his
flower and highest vigor of life; the first stirrings of the new birth, are
the workings and operations of the holy Ghost, and the love of God even now
shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost, shall remain the same in nature,
with us in heaven, 1 Cor. 13.8, 9, 10. 2. Christ does own the bruised reed, and
the smoking flax, so far forth, as not to crush the one, nor to quench the
other, and can with tender cautelousnesse of compassion, stoop, and with his
arm go between the lamb on the margin and brink of Hell, as to save it from
falling down headlong over the brow of the Mountain; he, Ps. 147.3, Heals the
broken in heart, and as a Chyrurgion (so Vatablus expounds it) binds up
their wounds, and puts the broken bones in their native place again; and
whereas young ones are easily affrighted, yea, and distracted with fear, when
sudden cries and hideous War-shouts surpriseth them; Christ affrighteth not
weak consciences with shouts, to put poor tender souls out of their wits, with
the shouts of Armies of the terrors of Hell in the conscience: yea, Isa. 42.2.
The meek Lord Jesus shall not cry, nor lift up (a shout) nor cause his voice be
heard in the street. O what bowels! What stirrings, and boylings, and
wrestlings of a pained heart touched with sorrow, are in Christ Jesus? When he
saw the people scattered as sheep having no sheapherd, (...) He was bowelled in
heart, Math 9.36.
his bowels were moved with compassion for them. O how sweet! That thy sinful
weakness should be sorrow and pain to the bowels and heart of Jesus Christ: so
as infirmity is your sin, and Christ's pity and compassion: can the Father see
the child sweat, wrestle under an over-load while his back be near broken, and
he cry, I am gone, and his bowels not be moved to pity, and his hands not
stretched out to help? Were not the bowels and heart of that Mother made of a
piece of the nether Millstone, had she not sucked the Milk and breasts of a
Tiger, and seemed rather to be the Whelp of a Lion, then a woman, who should
see her young child drowned and wrestling with the water, and crying for her
help, and yet she should not stir, nor be moved in heart, nor run to help? This
is but a shadow of the compassion that is in that heart dwelling in a body
personally united to the blessed Godhead in Jesus Christ. We should have tender
hearts toward weak ones; considering, 1. That Christ cannot disinherit a son
for weakness. 2. Love is not broken with a straw, or a little infirmity. 3.
All the vessels of Christ's house, are not of one size. 4. Some men's infirmities
are as transparant Crystal, easily seen through; others have infirmities
under their garments. 5. We shall see many in heaven, whom we judged to be
cast-awayes, while they lived with us on earth. 6. Many go to Heaven with you,
and you hear not the sound of their feet in their journey.

SERMON XXI. Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O Woman, great is thy
Faith, etc. The prevalency of instant Prayer, in 8. acts put forth upon God.

THis is the last passage of the Text, containing a commendation of the Woman,
given to her by Christ in her face. 2. An answer according to her desire. 3.
The effect of her praying with instancy and pressing importunity of Faith: The
Devil is cast out of her Daughter.

Christ acknowledges here: That Instancy of praying in Faith, will overcome
God, and Satan and all the saddest Temptations that can befall the Child of
God. Hence observe what acts of efficacious power instant and earnest prayer
puts forth upon God, and how the clay-creature does work upon, and prevail
with the great Potter and former of all things.

1. Prayer is a Messenger and a swift and Psalm. 5.3. David sent away this post
early in the morning, with morning wings: My voice shall thou hear in the
morning: The post is himself, for the word is, (...) I will address my person
as in battle array, Job 33.5. Set thy self in order before me, (and) stand up,
says Elihu to Job. Or, I will address my words, Job 32.14. Now he has not
directed his words against me: the Seventy render it (...), and David sent
himself to Heaven, not only as a post, but (as the word (...) A^sappeh
sounds) I will look up, or, epsy, as one that keeps watch and ward,
waiting for an answer from God, as the word is, Habbak 2.1. and Psalm. 18.6. In
my distress I called upon the Lord, -- and my cry came before him, even into
his ears.

2. Prayer puts a challenge upon God, for wait on, Isa. 63.18. Our
Adversaries have trodden down thy Sanctuary, 19. We are thine, thou never barest
rule over them, they were not called by thy Name, Lam. 2.20. Behold, O Lord,
and consider, to whom thou have done this, Isa. 63.17. O Lord, why have thou
made us to err from thy ways? And hardened out heart from thy fear? Return
for thy servants sake, the Tribes of thine inheritance. Hence is there an holy
chiding with God, Psalm. 22.2. O my God, I ^ry in the day time, and thou hear
not, and in the night season, and am not silent: Psalm. 13.1. How long will thou
forget me, (O Lord) for ever? How long will thou hide thy face from me?

3. It puts God to great straights, and suffering Jer. 31. When God hears
Ephraim bemoaning himself in Prayer: it puts God to a sort of pinch and
condolency, ver. 20. Is Ephraim my dear son? Is he my pleasant Child? For
since I ^ake against him, I do earnestly remember him ^ill, therefore my bowels
are troubled for him. (...) Isaac an earthly Father moved, and his heart ^ent
and torn with the weeping and tears of Esa^ his son, so as he must confer some
blessing upon him; far more must the bowels of our father infinite in mercy be
turned within him, at the weeping and tears of a praying and crying Church.

4. When God seems to sleep, in regard that his work and the wheels of his
providence are at a stand, prayer awaketh God, and puts him on action, Psalm.
7.6. Arise O Lord in thine anger, lift up thy self because of the rage of mine
enemies; awake for the judgment thou have commanded, Psalm. 44.23. Awake, Why
sleep thou O Lord? Arise, cast us not off for ever. Both the words (...)
Gnurah, and (...) Hakitsa, signifies to awake out of sleep: So prayer puts
God on noble acts of omnipotency, as to bow the Heavens and come down, Isa.
64.1. To shake, and put on work all creatures in Heaven and Earth, for the
saving of one poor man, Psalm. 18. As when the sick child cries for pain, all
the sons and servants, yea, the Father of the house and Mother, are set on
work, and put to business for his health. Hence when David prayed, Psalm 18.
verse. 6, 7. The earth shook, the foundations of the Hills were moved, for the
Lord was wrath, smoke and fiery coals went out of his mouth, he bowed the
Heavens and came down, he rode upon a Cherub, and did fly upon the wings of
the wind. So it did put the LORD to divide the Red Sea, to break the Prison
doors and Iron chains to deliver Peter, Paul and Silas.

Thy Kingdom come) hold forth, and that last prayer of the Church, Rev. 22.
which the Spirit and the Bride utters; Even so come Lord Jesus, is a hastening
of that glorious Marriage day, when the Bride, the Lambs wife, shall be married
on Jesus Christ and a ripening of the glory of God, and of Christ the King and
head Mystical of his body the Church. The Glory of infinite Justice, and saving
Grace in the Redemption of men, is like a fair Rose, but enclosed within its
green leaves in this life: But when Christ shall appear, this Rose shall be
opened and cast out in breadth, its fair and beautiful leaves to be seen and
smelled openly by men and Angels. In very deed, this prayer (Even so, come Lord
Jesus) is summons for the last Judgment, for the full manifestation of the
highest glory of Christ in the final and consummate illustration of
Free Grace, and mercy in the complete Redemption of all the Prisoners of hope,
only for the Declaration of the supreme Judges Glory, who shall then do
execution on Satan, his Angels, Antichrist, and all slaves of hell; so that
though prayer made not the world; yet it may unmake it, and set up a new Heaven
and a new earth.

6. Prayer is a binding of God, that he cannot depart, and lays chains on his
hands, and builds Isa. 64.7. And there is none that calls upon thy Name,
and stirs up himself to take hold of thee. (...) There is none to lay hands
on thee, Ezec. 22.30. And I sought for a man amongst them that should make up
the hedge, and stand in the gap (or in the rupture made by war) before me for
the Land, that I should not destroy it, but I found none. If a Moses or a
Samuel should intercede by prayer that the Lord would spare the Land, his
prayer should be an hedge or a wall to stand in the way of Justice, to hinder
the Lord to destroy his people.

(...).
as, 1. Isa. 62.6, 7. The faithful watchmen pray and cry to God so hard, that
they give the Lord no rest, no silence, while he establish Jerusalem. 2.
Praying is a sort of striving with the Lord, Romans 15.30. I beseech you, --
strive with me, in prayers to God for me. 3. Jacob by prayer wrestled with the
Lord; and the Lord, as if he had been straightned, says, Genesis 32. (...) Send
me away, dismiss me. And Jacob said, I will not dismiss thee till thou bless
me: Which is well expounded by Hosea, chap. 12.4. Jacob had a Princely power
over the Angel, and prevailed, he wept, and made supplication to him, (...) Is
a Prince, or as many render it, Rectus fuit cum Deo, or, Directus fuit, vel
prosperum successum habuit, Which may note either a Princedome in prayer over
God, which is the true reason of the name Israel; or as others think, he stood
right up, and his prayer did not bow nor was broken, when a Temptation lay on
him as heavy as a Millstone, even when the Lord said he would depart from him,
yet he prevailed under that weight: So, Exodus 32.10. When Moses was praying for
the people: The Lord said to Moses, Let me alone, that I may destroy them. The
Chalde translate it, Ex. 32* 10.
Leave off thy prayer before me. All which tends to this, That Prayer is a
Prince, and a mighty wrestling prevailing King, that has strong bones, and
strong arms to be victorious with God. We know the Parable of the Widow, Luke
18. Who by importunity obtained of the unjust Judge, that he should avenge her
of her Adversary. The scope of which Parable is, that prayers without fainting,
puts such a labor and a trouble upon God, that he must hear and answer the
desires of his Children: So does the Lord resemble himself to a master of a
Family gone to bed with his Children, who yet being wearied by the knocking of
his Neighbor, cannot choose but rise in the night, and lend him bread to
strangers come to his house.

8. Some also say that prayer commands God, as Isa. 45.11. Ask me of things
to come concerning my sons, and concerning the work of my hand command ye me:
which place though it may well bear another interpretation, yet is this not
beside the scope of the Text; for sure it is, that God has laid a sort of Law
on himself in regard of his binding promise, to hear the Prayers of his
children: And that he comes down from the Throne of his Sovereignty to submit
himself to his own promise of hearing Prayers, Psalm. 34.15. Psalm. 65.2. Psalm.
145.18.19. Mat. 7.7.8. Joh. 14.13.14.

Use 1. If Prayer prevail over God and Christ, even to the overcoming of the
Devil: then much more will a praying people prevail over Hell, and Malignants;
it were wisdom then for Malignants to yield and strike Sail to these, who can
by Prayer set Omnipotency on work, and engage the strength of Israel against
them. Amalek had omnipotency against them, and a harder party then spears, and
bows, and Armed men; in that praying Moses was against them: The third Psalm
was a strong piece against Absalom and Ahitophel, and all that conspired
against David: Christ's Prayers for the perfecting of his own Body, and
gathering in his firstborn, include i^ them a Curse upon all those that hinder
the gathering in of his flock: Woe to the enemies then against whom our
Intercessor prays curses: The Prayers of Christ against his enemies, shall
blast them and their Counsels, and all their War undertakings.

Use 2. Some are discouraged, they can neither fight for Christ, nor do any
thing to promote this Cause, as wanting strength of body, and means: Nay, but
if thou can pray thou do set the whole wheels of Omnipotency on work, for
the building of the Lords house, in which regard the Prayer of a sick and poor
man shall do more in War for the Cause of God, then twenty thousand men: It was
not Ahasuerus, nor the grace that Esther found in the eyes of the King, that
saved the whole Church of the Jews from destruction, but the Prayers of Esther
and her maids. Its true, an Angel brought Peter out of Prison, Act. 12. But what
stirred that wheel in Heaven, verse. 5. Here Is the Cause, Prayer was made
without ceasing to God for Peter by the Church: Quod est causa causae est etiam
causa causati: Prayer, Prayer can put a reeling and tottering on King and
Court, Pope, Prelate, and Babylon; we are to pray the King of the bottomless
pit, the man of sin, the graven Images of Apostate Rome out of the world:
Prayer can yoke all the swords in Europe against the Whore: every one who has
the Spirit of Adoption, though poor and rejected of men, by prayer have
powerful influence on all the Nations of the earth, on all Europe, on the ends
of the earth, on the hearts of the Jews, on Turks and Indians: Prayer can
reach as far as Omnipotency, accompanied by the wise decree of our Lord: And
the poorest Girl or Maid that can pray, does lend a strong lift to heighten
the footstool of Christ's Royal Throne; children and poor Maids by Prayer, may
put the Crown on Christ's head, and hold up his Throne, and may store and
increase heaven by praying, Thy Kingdom come, and enlarge Hell, and fill the
pits with the dead bodies of Christ's enemies, and may by prayer bind Kings in
Fetters, chain up and confine Devils, subdue Kingdoms.

Great is thy Faith] For the clearing of these words; we are to consider three
points: 1. What Faith is: 2. What a great Faith is: 3. Why he says thy Faith,
appropriating it to the woman. Five things to betreated on concerning Faith.
Now of Faith, I shall speak, 1. A word of preparations for Faith: 2. Of the
grounds and necessary motives to Faith: 3. Of the Ingredients of Faith: 4. Of
the sinners warrants to believe: 5. Of diverse sorts of false, and ill rooted
Faiths.

1. There be some preparations which go before Faith: 1. There is a preparation
going before faith
1. Faith is a seed of heaven, it is not sown by the good husbandman in
unplowed, and in Fallow ground, Christ sows not amongst thorns? we are
builded on the Faith, stones are hewn, rubbish removed before one stone be
laid: 2. Every act of Grace in God, is an act of Omnipotency, and so requires
not time or succession; God might have set up the frame of the world in all its
fullness, with less then one thought, or act of his will put forth by
Omnipotency: yet did our Lord subject the acts of creating the first world to
the rule of time, and to a circle of evening and morning, nights and days, so
does the Lord set up a new world of Faith, in a soul void of Faith by degrees:
There Is a time when there is neither perfect night, nor perfect day: but the
twilight of the morning, and God not withstanding created the morning no less
then the noon day Sun? There Is a half Summer, and a half Spring in the close of
the Spring which God made. The Embrio, or birth not yet animated, is neither
seed only, nor a man-child only; so is a Convert in his first framing, neither
perfectly untamed corruption, because there is a crack and a throw in the iron
sinew of the neck; nor is he a through child of light, but as we say, in the
dead-throw, in the place of breaking forth of children, as Hosea speaks: A
child with his head come forth of the womb and no more, and so half born only;
so is the Convert while he is in the making, not taken off Christ's wheels; half
in the borders of hell, and looking a far off at the Suburbs of Heaven, not far
from the Kingdom of Heaven.

But 2. This bridge over the water between the kingdom of darkness, There Is no
necessary and intrinsecall connection between preparations going before faith
and faith.
and the state of saving Grace, has no necessary connection with that Kingdom
of the Son of Gods love, but such as it has from the sole and mere decree of
the free Election of Grace, and therefore many Reprobates may enter the Bridge,
and never go along to the other Bank of the River: God breaks the Bridge,
this being the very division and parting of these two unsearchable ways of
Election and Reprobation, yet so as the sin in cutting the bridge is the guilt
of the Reprobate man: As many births die in the breaking forth out of the womb,
diverse Roses in the Bud are blasted and never see harvest, through the fault of
the seed, not of the Sun.

Affections going before conversion and following after defer specificality.
3. Its true, the new creation and life of God, is vertually Seminaliter in
these preparations, as the seed is a tree in hope, the blossom an apple, the
foundation a Palace in its beginning; so half a desire in the Non-converted is
love sickness for Christ in the seed, legal humiliation is in hope Evangelick
Repentance and mortification: But as the seed and the growing tree differ not
gradually only, but in nature and specifically; as a thing without life is not
of that same nature and essence with a creature that has a vegetative life and
grows, so the preparatory good affections of desire, hunger sorrow,
humiliation going before conversion, differ specifically from those renewed
affections which follow after: The former being acts of Grace, but not of
saving grace, which goes along with the decree of Election of Grace, and of
like Latitude with it, the latter being the native and connaturall fruits of
the Spirit, of which the Apostle speaks, Gal. 5.22.23. In which regard no man
is morally and in regard of a divine promise such as this ( Do this, and this,
and God shall bestow on you the Grace of conversion) fitter and in a nearer
disposition to conversion then another. All are alike unfit for conversion.
1. Because, we read not of any such promise in the Gospel. 2. Because, amongst
things void of life, all are equally void of life, and there is here no degrees
of more or less life, no intention, no remission or flacking of the degrees of
life; for even as an Ape or an Horse, are as equally no men, as stones and dead
earth are no men, though an Ape or an Horse have life common to them with men,
which stones and earth have not; yet they are equally as destitute of reason
and an intellectual life which is the only life of a man as a man, as stones
and earth are. So Saul only humbled by the terrors of the Law, and sick of
half raw desires of Christ, is no less yet a creature void of the life of God,
then when he was in the highest pitch of obstinacy, spitting out blood and
murders on the face of that Lord Jesus whom he persecuted; and in this regard,
conversion is no less pure Grace every way free to Saul humbled, and so having
only half a thirst and desire of Christ, then if he were yet in the fever of
his highest blasphemy, thirsting after the blood of the Saints.

4. Yet are the Saints thus prepared and humbled, but not converted Materially,
Physically, Some nearer conversion then others are
or as it were passively nearer Christ, and in relation to Gods Eternal
Election of Grace, who makes this a step relative to his Eternal love, they
are under the reach of Christ's love, and at the Elbow of the right arm of the
Father, who draws souls to the son, Joh. 6.44. And in the Gospel-bounds and
fields or lists of Free Grace, as the height and rage of a fever, is near a
cool and a return to health, and yet most contrary to health, and the utmost
flowing of the sea, when its at the remotest score of the coast, is a
disposition to an ebbing, though most contrary to a low ebb; so are the
humbled souls, who have some lame and mained estimative power of light, to put
half a price on Christ, and finds apprehended sin, the mouth, throat, and out
entry of hell in that case most contrary to Christ. A fish within that circle
of the water that the net casts, is no less living in its own element of
water, then if it were in the bosom of the Ocean, some hundredth miles distant
from fisher or net, yet is it in a near disposition to be catched.

For grounds of Faith to lead us on to believing: Three grounds and motives of
believing
Consider, 1. two words, Col. 1.27. spoken of the object of Faith. 1. Its
named, The riches of the glory of this mystery amongst the Gentiles. 2. Which
is (says Paul) Christ in you the hope of glory. Now Faith leads us to a
Mystery that none knows, but such as are the intimate friends of Christ, and
are put upon all Christ's secret Cabinet-Counsels. 2. Glory is so taking a
lover, that it will deprive a natural man of his sleep; but the Glory of a
Kingdom revealed in the Gospel, is the flower, marrow and spirits of all glory
imaginable. 3. What is riches of glory? Glory and Christ the hope of glory,
strong motives to believe
Ephesians. 3.8. That I should preach, (...), the gold mine of the riches of the
glory of Christ, so deep that none can find them out, and so large, that when
they are found out, Men and Angels shall not find their bottom. O what
foldings and turnings, and inextricable windings or glory are lapped up in
Christ? Yea. Treasures, all Treasures, are in him, Col. 2.3. So it is called, 2
Cor. 4.17. (...), a weight of glory. But 2. a weight Eternal, a weight aged,
and full of ages of glory. 3. An exceeding great weight, and not that only. But
4. a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, no Orator in the Greek
Tongue, has any so superlative expression, (...). Do but weigh how weighty
precious Jesus Christ is, how heavy and how massy and ponderous the Crown is,
and what millions of Diamonds, Rubies, Saphires, and precious Stones do shine,
and cast out rays and beams of pure and unmixed Glory out of his Crown? What
smiles and kisses breathing out Glory, on thy now sinful face, shall come out
of Christ. Now the light of Faith even as a lantern or a day star, in a cloudy
dawning, leads thee up to this. 2. Christ in you the hope of glory. How in
them? By Faith, Ephesians. 3.17. Christ the hope of glory, is Christ the glory hoped
for, by a figure; that is, Faith puts Christ and Heaven in you by hope: So
in the believer there is Christ, the Lamb, the Throne, the glorified Angels,
and sinlesse and blessed Musicians, that stand in a circle about the Throne,
praising him that lives for ever. All these are in the believer by Faith, and
in him is Heaven, the Tree of Life, the higher Paradise, the river of water of
life; unto all these Faith intituleth the Soul, and they be all nothing to
Christ the hope of Glory: Even the only begotten Son and Heir of a King, is
called the hope of his house, the only hope of his house, but in regard the
Heirs of mortal Kings are mortal, the house is weak, and stands but upon
one foot, when he has but one mortal Heir: Now its the infinite perfection of
God, that he can have but one Son who is infinite, and the same Eternal and
Immortal God with the Father, and that he cannot die. So Christ stands the
only hope of the house of Heaven; a King by hope, the King of hope; and all
hope of the Captives and Sons of hope; and all the Glory of his Fathers house
hangs upon him. Christ has all the Heirs upon his shoulder, and Faith
investeth the believer to all this power and Glory. 2. Faiths object the marrow
of Gods attributs to speak so.
2. Faith must be so much the more precious, that it lays hold for its
possession on God, and on the Garland, Marrow, (if any comparison here can
stand) and Flower of all Gods attributes, the Righteousness of Christ. 2. The
Free Grace of God, the most taking, heart-ravishing attribute in God, and most
suitable to our sinful condition. 3. The high and deep love of God, and love
which dwells in, and with, the noble and excellent blood that satisfies
infinite Justice; There is no such Glory by any act of obedience tendered to
God by Adam in his innocent condition; or by Angels which never sinned. 3.
There is as great a necessity of Faith, as of Life; Faith a Catholic Grace
required in our actions natural and civil, as well as spiritual.
for the justified man must live by faith: There Is no Grace so Catholic, it
being of necessity interwoven in all our actions, as they fall under moral
consideration; not only in supernatural actions, but also in all our natural
and civil actions, in so far as they must be spiritualized in relation to Gods
honor, 1 Cor. 10.31. So as Joshuah, Baruch, Sampson, David, did fight Battles,
kill men, subdue Kingdoms by Faith, Heb. 11.32, 33. So must the Soldier now
fight, by that same Faith, and so are the Saints, to eat, drink, sleep,
journey, buy, sell, by Faith: We are not to put on Faith as a Cloak, or an
upper Garment when we go to the streets, Fields, or Church, and then lay it
aside in the house, at Table, or in bed: yea, the renewed man is not to eat and
sleep, because the light of reason and the Law of nature teaches him so to do,
or the convenience of a calling; for then all those actions shall be resolved
in the same principles and formal reason of moral performance of them, in the
believer, as in the Carnal man, in whom a natural spirit is stirsman; and
then we do but in these actions, Walk in the light of our own fire, and the
sparks that we our selves have kindled, and shall not see to go to bed, but lie
down in sorrow, Isaiah 50.11. But we are to set Faith as the Plummet and line
to Regulate these actions to do them. 1. Because he who has bought us with a
price, commands us by the light of nature. 2. And the light of Faith is to
moderate us in eating, drinking, sleeping, according to Christian sobriety, in
the measure of the action. 3. Faith teaches us not to eat, that we may eat, or
for an natural or civil end. Grace hightneth the natural intention, to a
supernatural end, and to do all these for God and his service 1 Cor. 10.31.
And whatsoever we do (though but civil service as servants to earthly masters
in a civil calling, in trading in arts) we are to do all as to the Lord, not
unto men, Col. 3.23. Then Christ acting and moving by the light of Faith, is
the formal reason and principle in which lastly and formally ( ultimate) all
our actions are resolved. 2. Look of how much worth and price thy soul is; of
as great necessity is Faith, except thou would look for the Gospel-vengeance,
the day or the ages of Eternal vengeance at Christ's appearance, 2 These. 1.8.
Isa. 61.2. Ioh. 3.18.36. chap. 8.24. But if it be so that Faith is required in
all that I do, the business of Salvation (may some say) is hard and difficill
work: Where shall I have Faith for every stirring of my foot? I Answer, as all
our actions, except where Imagination is Principle of the act, must be
deliberate, and so the actions of a rational man, so must they be moral; now
there is no morality in a man, who is a citizen of the Church, but the morality
of faith, Christianity is a toilsome and operous work.
for its a duty laid upon every one within the visible Church that all his
actions moral be watered and lustered with Faith: And the truth is, the work of
our salvation being compared to sailing, Heb. 6.19. and to fighting, 2 Timothy
4.7. 2 Timothy 2.3, 4. Its very like a ship, which requires many hands and much
attentive carefulness in the owner and sailors: Now the Mast is hurt, then
somewhat wanting in the Deck, now the Helm is faulty, then the Cords are to be
repaired, or the Anchor is broken, or she takes in under-water, or the Sail is
torn, or the motion slow: There Is charges to the owner, and much work to all
hands, and how many things are required to a huge body of an Army? So many
thousand men must be liable to so many thousand wants: Some are sick, some
wounded, some a dying, some hungry, some naked, some fall off the Army, and are
catched by the enemy, some be faint, some too bold, and precipitate, yea,
Armor, Houses, Bread, Drink Fire, Tents, Physicians Workmen, Mattocks Spades,
Bridges, Lathers, Horses, Engines of War, Art and Skill* Medicine, Council*
Courage, Intelligence, and a thousand things of this kind are requisite; And
seldom is an Army, but there be some one inconvenient or other in this needy
and cumbersome huge body. And when is the business of Salvation not at a
stand, one way or other? Is there not either on piece or other, the shield of
Faith, or the Anchor of Hope, or the Brestplate of righteousness, or some the
like, broken or faulty? Is not our guide, who has seven eyes, ten times a day
cumbered with us? Must not Christ soader our broken Weapons? Sow our torn
sails? Repair one breach or other in us? In a thousand the like, Faith is to
improve the Free Grace, the omnipotence, the unchangeable love of Christ, to
promove his own work, and to work in us to will, and to do, according to his
good pleasure, Phil. 2.13.

Now for the ingredients of Faith: 1. There be in us, 3. The ingredients of
Faith 6. in number.
2 Cor. 10.5. (...) Great Forts raised against the light of Faith. These
natural discourses in the mind, that are great works and heights, strong holds
builded against Christ. The prime faculty reason, the discoursive power (...)
that thinks she has wit enough against Christ, and to keep the man out of
all danger of eternal salvation, over toppeth and out-groweth all
Gospel Truths, Christ must overpower carnal, fate, rank, and heady soldiers,
called thoughts, every thought, (...) and so kill some that will not be taken,
and led captive other thoughts to the obedience of Faith. Reason is a
predominant bone in it self: The carnal mind neither will, no^ can keep rank
as an obedient soldier, under the Law of God, Romans 8.7. Its much for fine,
silken, and golden reason to say to Christ, Lord, Prove, 30.2. There Is more of a
beast in me, then of a man, I have not the understanding of a man. The learned,
the schoolmen seldom believe; except gray haired wit turn a child, and go to
school again to learn from Christ the new art of believing; for there was never
an act of unbeleef in any, but it grew out of this proud and rank stalk of a
lofty wit; Therefore Christ breaks out a new window in the soul, and brings in
a new sun, that flesh and blood never saw, nor heard of before, Mat. 16.17. 2.
Faith has low and creeping affections to the creature; But when the affections
are big with child of the creature, as, 1. They are strained and swelled in
their acts, Faith is no faith but a delusion, the rich man speaks with all
his heart, and with good will of his full barns, and its clear, he had neither
Faith nor Hope toward eternity, Luke 12. v. 19.20. For every word being (as we
say) of the length of a cubit, a foot and a half, Luke 12.18. He casts forth
words of pulling down, building greater houses, and scraping in all; his goods
are, (...), my goods, all my births and bowels, and all my good things; For he
had no other good things, and there is no apostrophe in the words, he speaks
them with their full sound, and we speak with good will these things that we
tell to our soul. Faith has but half words and half affections ^^^ching the
world, half acts or broken acts in (...) affections, closing with the creature,
smell (...) a Faith with child of ^^ernity; to make the excellency of the
creature a matter of mere opinion, to reckon the worlds witchcrafts of lust,
gain, glory, but uncertain and topic arguments to conclude a Godhead and a
golden heaven in the creature, is the height of the wisdom of Faith: So Paul,
Gal. 2.20. I am crucified with Christ. O then (may some say) Paul, you are a
dead man: He says no. Nevertheless I live, but I live the life of Faith, For
Christ lives in me. All his motions toward the creature were half dead, like
the vital motions of a crucified man half out of the world, and his acts of
Faith were lively and vital, and high tuned, like the highest note in the
music song. Faith cannot break and violently rent in sunder the two sides of
the affections, with too violent and intense acts of love, joy, fear, desire,
sorrow, as these are terminated upon the creature: Its true, Faith clippeth
nothing from the outmost and most superlative pitch of the love of God, of
desire, fear, sorrow, joy, as they act upon God; but adds wind to the sails
in that flux of the souls way toward God. Faith turns all our acts which are
terminated on the creature, to half acts.
But Faith moderateth and lesseneth all these in relation to the creature, so
the Faith which has its direct aspect toward eternity, and looks on the
shortness of sliding away time, and the trans^ent wheeling away o^ the poor
figure of this world, 1 Cor. 7. v. 29.31 turns all these acts into but half a
face on the creature, and into leasurely and leaden motions or to half
non-acts, as if made up of heavenl^ contradictions, v. 29, 30, 31. Having
wives, having no wives: Weeping, no weeping; Rejoicing, no rejoicing; Buying,
no possessing; Using the world, not using the world. When the Saints throng
through the press and crowd of the creatures (for the world is a bushie and
rank wood) thorns take hold of their garments, and retard them in their way:
Faith loses their garments, and riddeth them of such thornie friends, as are
too kind to them in their journey: who diggeth for Iron and Tin in the earth
with mattocks of Gold? What wise man would make a Web of cloth of gold, a net
to catch fish? Expenses should over-grow gains: There Is much of the metal of
heaven in the soul: Faith would forbid us to wear out the threads of this
immortal spirit, such as are love, joy, fear, sorrow, upon pieces of
corruptible clay? Alas, is it Faiths light that sets men a work, to make the
soul a golden-needle, and the precious powers and affections thereof, threads of
silver to sow together pieces of sackcloth, and old rotten rags? What better, I
pray you, is the finest of the web in the whole systeme of creation? Certainly
the heavens must be a thread of better wool then the clay-earth, yet if you
should break your immortal spirit, and bend all the acts to the highest extent
of your affections, to conquer thousands of Acres of ground in the Heavens, and
entitle your soul to that inheritance, as to your only patrimony without
Christ; Faiths daylight should discover to you, that this finest part of that
web of Creation, with which you desire to cloth your precious soul, is but base
wool and rotten thread, and though beautiful and well dyed to the eye; yet,
Psalm. 102.26. The heavens, even all of them shall wax old like a garment: And
the wisdom of Faith knows a shop where there is a more excellent suit of
clothes for the soul, 2 Cor. 5.1, 2. And a more precious piece of the Heaven to
dwell in, even a House which is from Heaven, with which you shall be clothed:
When life shall eat up death and mortality.

2. The creatures are below the affections of the believer, and his affections
conquer them, as having the vantage of the mount above all the creatures. So
Paul makes an elegant contrariety, Phil. 3.19, 20. Between those, whose heart,
senses, mind, finds neither smell, taste, nor wisdom, but in earthly
things; (for (...) to mind things of the earth, imports all these) and those
who by Faith look to Heaven and dwell there: And the temporaries heart is below
the world, and the creatures are up in the mount above him. So, Mat. 13. v.
7.22. The thorns or cares of riches have the fore-start of the earth, and sap
above Faith, or the good seed: For the seed was cast in the earth, when the
thorns had been there before, and had the vantage of the season, and the soil
both. The first love is often strongest. The Martyrs, Heb. 11.35. had poor and
weak thoughts of this life, and would not accept and welcome life and
deliverance from death; but had strong acts of Faith and love toward a better
resurrection. Its a souls strong Faith that brings him to nil admirari; and
to wonder at nothing. Never to love much, nor fear much, nor sorrow much, nor
joy much, nor weep much, nor laugh much, nor hope much, nor despair much, when
the creature is the object of all these acts; there is nothing great, not the
worlds All things (or their (...) to him who is possessed with that
Righteousness which is of God, by Faith, Phil. 3.8, 9. Men that talks with
good will, and all their heart, of their learning, books, of their own Acts,
good Works, Wisdom, Court, Honor, valor in War, Flocks, Lands, Gold, Moneys,
Children, Friends, Travels, are to Examine, If Faith be not a chaste thing, and
that acts of whoredom with the creature and of believing in Christ, are scarce
consistent. Let your affections move toward the creature, without sound of feet.

3. There must be self-forsaking in believing. 1. An affirming, and an (ay) to
grace, is a negation and denial to it self, 1 Cor. 15.10. I labored more
abundantly then they all; Yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me: To
deny that you are Christ's, or that you have any grace, (if Christ have any
thing of his in you) is not self-denial, but grace denial, and God-deniall,
deny the work of the spirit, and deny himself. Its a saying of humility, Cant.
1.5. I am black, and of Faith, but comely as the tents of Kedar, as the
curtains of Solomon. And Cant. 5.1. I slept, but my heart waked. Its Faith to
hold fast your state of adoption: Lord, I am thine. 2. When our self makes a
suit to self, and puts in a bill to the flesh. O pity thy self. Rejoice, O
young man in thy youth. Its self-renouncing to deny this request to the flesh:
And Faith only can give an answer to self-declining the cross. He that denies
me before men, him will I deny before my Father and his holy Angels (says
Christ.) And another answer Faith gives, Romans 8.12. I am not debtor to thee, O
flesh. I owe thee nothing. And its Faiths word of answer, Eccles. 11.9. But
know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee unto judgment. 3.
Faith puts the soul in that condition, that self may be plucked from self,
without great violence, as an apple full of the tree, and of harvest-sap, is
with a small motion plucked off the stalk, Act. 21.13. I am ready (...), I have
my self in readiness, not only to be bound, but also to dye at Jerusalem for
the name of the Lord Jesus. Certainly Faith saw here more in Jesus of
excellency and sweetness, then there could be of bitterness in bonds and death
to self.

4. There Is a denial of the creature, and a bill of defiance sent to all the
lovers of the world, when Ephraim is brought to this act of believing, Hos.
14.3. For in thee the Fatherless finds mercy. Then its said, Ashur shall not
save us: We will not ride upon horses. That creature that we trust on, we ride
upon it, as Israel did upon the horses of Assyria and Egypt. But in this
regard, Faith dismounteth the believer, and abaseth him to walk on foot. All
the creatures are ships to the believer without a bottom: They are empty and
weak: David forbids us to ride on a Prince, Psalm. 146.3, 4. For that horse
shall faint, and fall to clay. God allows Scotland to help England, but will
not have the souls of his children in England to ride upon an Army of another
Nation, and to trust in them for salvation. To make fire, is not so proper to
fire, To give light, not so kindly to the Sun, as salvation is Gods only due,
and therefore let England in this walk on foot, and trust in the Lord.

5. The fifth ingredient also in Faith, is, that its bottomed upon the sense
and pain of a lost condition. Poverty is the nearest capacity of believing.
This is Faiths method, Be condemned, and be saved. Be hanged, and be pardoned.
Be sick, and be healed, Mat. 9.13. Jam. 4.7, 8. Mat. 11.28. Luke 19.10. Faith
is a floor of Christ's only planting, yet it grows out of no soil, but out of
the margin and bank of the lake of fire and brimstone, in regard there be none
so fit for Christ and Heaven, as those who are self-sick, and self-condemned to
Hell. This is a foundation to Christ, that because the man is broken, and has
not bread; therefore he must be sold, and Christ must buy him, and take him
home to his fireside, and clothe him, and feed him. The chased man, pursued
upon death and life, who has not a way for life, but one nick of a rock; if he
miss that, he is a dead man, had he a hundred lives. So is the believer
pursued for blood, there is but one City of refuge in Heaven, or out of Heaven;
this is only, only Jesus Christ the great rock. And it is true, its in a manner
forced Faith, and forced love cast upon Christ upon a great venture; yet we may
make necessity here the greatest virtue, or the highest grace, and that is to
come to Christ. Satan does but ride upon the weakness of many, proving, that
they are not worthy of Christ, which is the way of a Sophist, to prove an
evident truth that cannot be denied. But there is no greater vantage can be had
against Sin and Satan then this; because I am unworthy of Christ, and out of
measure sinful, and I find it is so, ( Satan and conscience teaching me that
truth, to bring me on a false conclusion) therefore ought I, therefore must I
come to Christ unworthy as I am. For free grace is moved from within it self
from Gods good will, only without any motion or action from sin, to put it self
forth upon the sinner; to the end, that sin being exceeding sinful, Grace may
be abundantly Grace; and no thanks to Satan for suggesting a true principle (
Thou art unworthy of Christ) to promove a false conclusion, ( Therefore thou
art not to come to Christ) for the contrary arguing is, Gospel-logick. Satan's
reasoning should be good, if there were no way but the law to give life. But
because there is a Savior, a Gospel, and a new and living way to Heaven: The
contrary arguing is, the sinners life and happiness.

6. The sixth Ingredient in Faith is, Faith has five notes of difference in
closing with the promise.
that the sinner can lay hold on the Promise. 1. Not simply, but with relation
to the precept; for presumptuous souls plunge in their foul souls in fair and
precious promises, and this is the Faith of Antinomians, for the promise is not
holden forth to sinners as sinners, but as to such sinners, for we make Faith
to be an act of a sinner humbled, wearied, laden, poor, self-condemned; now
these be not all sinners, but only some kind of sinners. Antinomians make
faith an act of a lofty Pharisee, of one vilde person, applying with an
immediate touch, immediato contactu, his hot boiling, and smoking lusts to
Christ's wounds, blood, merits, without any conscience of a precedent
Commandment, that the person thus believing, should be humbled, wearied,
laden, grieved for sin. I confess this is hasty hot work, and makes Faith a
stride, or one single step; but its a wanton, fleshly, and a presumptuous
immediate work to lay hold on the promises of mercy and be saved: This is the
absolute and loose Faith, that Papists and Arminians slandereth our Doctrine
withal, because we reject all foregoing merits, good works, congruous
dispositions, preparations moving God to convert this man, because he has such
preparations; and to reject and to leave another man to his own hardness of
heart, because he has no such payment in hand, by which he may redeem and buy
conversion, and the grace of Effectual calling; especially, they building all
upon a Babel of their own brick and clay, that free will in all acts of
obedience before or after conversion, is absolutely indifferent to do, or not
do; to obey, or not obey; to choose Heaven and life, hell or death, as it
pleases, as being free and loosed from all Praedetermination, and foregoing
motion, acting or bowing of the will, coming either from Gods natural or his
efficacious or supernatural Providence. And so the Papist and Arminian on the
one extremity, inthroneth nature, and extolleth proud merit, and abaseth Christ
and Free Grace: The Familist, Libertine, and Antinomian, on a contrary
extremity and opposition, turn man into a block, and make him a mere patient in
the way to Heaven; and under pretense of exalting Christ and Free Grace, set up
the flesh, liberty, license, looseness on the throne, and make the way to
heaven on the other extremity as broad, as to comply with all presumptuous
proud fleshly men, walking after their lusts, and yet (as they dream) believing
in Christ. 2. The soul sees Christ in all his beauty, excellency, treasures of
Free Grace lapped up with the curtain of many precious promises; now the
natural man knowing the literal meaning and sense of the promises, sees in
them but words of gold, and things a far off; and in truth, takes heaven to be
a beautiful and golden fancy; and the Gospel-promises, a shower of precious
Rubies, Saphirs, Diamonds, fallen out of the clouds only in a night dream; and
therefore jeers and scoffs at the day of judgment and at heaven and hell, 2
Pet. 3.1, 2, 3. For can every capacity smell and taste the unsearchable riches
of Christ, the fullness of God in the womb of the promises, by meditating on
them, and sending them, in their sweetness and heavenly excellency, down to
the affections to embrace them? No, it cannot be, that words and sounds, and
syllables, can so work upon a natural spirit: If you show not to a buyer
precious and rare commodities, and bring them not before the sun, he shall
never be taken so with things hidden in your coffers, as to be in love with
them, and to sell all he has and buy them; Preachers cannot, nay, its not in
their power to make the natural spirit see the beauty of Christ; Paul Preaches
it, but the Gospel is hidden from the blinded man, 2 Cor. 4.3. If I cannot
Communicate light, far less can I infuse love in the soul of a lost man. 3.
Literal knowledge Christ, is not in the power of natural men; but laying down
this ground, that a Pharisee lend eyes and ears to Christ and his miracles;
Literal knowledge works as a natural agent.
The light of the Gospel works as a natural agent; for make open windows in
a house, whether the indweller will or he will not, the fun shall dart in day
light upon the house, Joh. 7.28. Then cried Jesus in the Temple, as he taught,
saying, Ye both know me, and ye know whence I am. And there is a covering upon
the spiritual senses and faculties of the soul of natural men, that though
eyes, and ears, and mind, and soul be opened; yet its as unpossible for the
natural spirit, or the Preacher to remove that covering, as to remove a
Mountain, it being as heavy as a Mountain: And therefore there be three bad
signs in a natural spirit: 1. His light, which is but literal, is a burden
to him, it but vexes him to know Christ, and if a beam of light fall in on the
apple of the eye of a natural conscience, its a throne between the bone and the
flesh, the man shall not sleep, and yet he is not sick. I doubt if either
Achitophel, or Judas wakened with their light could sleep. 2. Though a promise
should dispute and argue Christ in at the door of the natural man's soul, as the
Gospel by way of arguing may do much, Ioh. 7.28. Ioh. 12.37. Heb. 11.1. The
word of the Gospel being a rational, convincing Syllogism, as Christ says,
Ioh. 15.24. But now they have both seen, and hated both me and my Father. Yet
men may see the principles and the conclusion, and hate and practically suspend
the assent from the conclusion. 3. Conversion is feared as a great danger by
natural men, lest Faelix and Agrippa were both upon the wheels, I cannot say
that Conversion formally was begun; yet materially it was, the one trembled,
and so was afraid, and fled, and did put Paul away till another time; then he
saw the danger of Grace, Act. 24. verse. 25, 26. The other says, he was half a
Christian; (but it was the poorest half) and he arose and went aside, Act.
26.28.30.31. The natural spirit may be convinced by the promises, and have the
pap in his mouth, but dare not milk out the sap and sweetness of the promises,
Matthew. 13.15. Their eyes they have closed, lest at any time they should see
with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should understand with their
heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them. So is it* Isa. 6.10. In
which words conversion is feared as an evil, as is clear: So one wretch said,
he was once in danger to be catched, when a Puritan Preacher (as he said) was
Preaching with Divine power and evidence of the spirit of God. 4 The true
believers soul has influence on the promises, to act upon them, to draw
comfort out of them, Ps. 119.92. Unless thy Law had been my delight, I should
have perished in mine affliction, ver. 81. My soul faints for thy Salvation:
(But) I hope in thy word, And there is a reciprocation of Actions here; the word
acts upon the soul again, Psalm. 119.50. This is my comfort in my affliction,
for thy word has quickened me. A dead Faith is like a dead hand, a living hand
may lay hold on a dead hand: but there is no reciprocation of actions here, the
dead hand cannot lay hold on the living hand: so the living wife may kiss, and
embrace the dead husband, but there can come no reciprocal act of life from
the dead husband to her, nor can he kiss and embrace her: The promise may act
upon the natural spirit, to move and affect him, but he can put forth no
vital act upon the promise to embrace it, or lay hold upon the promise: But
the promise acts upon the Believer to quicken him, and he again puts forth
an act of life to embrace the promise, and puts forth on it, some act of
vital heat, to adhere and cleave to, and with warmness of heart to love it;
and here the case is as when the living hand lays hold on the living hand,
they warm one another mutually, according to that which Paul says, Phil. 3.12.
But I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which also I am
apprehended of Christ Jesus: Here be two living things, Christ, and believing
Paul acting mutually one upon another, there is a heart and a life upon each
side.

5. Faith under fainting and great straits can Psalm. 119.49. afflicted David
says, Remember the word unto thy servant, upon which thou have caused me to
hope, and the Church, Ier. 14.21. Do not abhor us for thy names sake, do not
disgrace the throne of thy glory: remember, break not thy Covenant with us; and
the Lord commands that this challenge be put on him, Isa. 43.26. Put me in
remembrance, let us plead together; then he gives faith leave to plead on the
contrary with God; natural spirits faint, and cannot so far own the promise,
as to plead with God by their right and just claim to the promise: Now the
fourth point concerning faith, is what grounds and Warrants the sinner has to
believe.

4. Its an ordinary challenge made by Satan, The 4. point concerning faith to
wit the warants of believing.
conscience, and the Arminian, since Christ died not for all and every one of
mankind; and all are not chosen to life eternal, but only those, on whom the
Lord is pleased, according to the free decree of Election to confer the grace
of believing. What warrant can the unworthy sinner have to believe, and to own
the merits of Christ? For he knows nothing of the Election, or Reprobation
that are hidden in Gods eternal mind: for Answer,

The warrants and claim of a sinner why he should believe.
1. Its no presumption in me to believe in Christ before I know whither I be
chosen to salvation or not, for nothing can hinder me in this case to believe,
save only presumption as the adversaries say, but it is not presumption,
because presumption is when the soul is lifted up, and Towred like an high
building, as the word is, Hab. 2.4. And therefore the lifted up man, (...)
Gnophel, is he that hides himself in a high Castle; Gnuphela femininum est
intextu, est enallage generum.
as every unbelieving presumptuous soul has his own Castle, the unbeliever
has either one Ophel, or high Tower or other, either the King, friends, riches
or his own wisdom, for his God on which he rests, beside the God that the
Scripture recommendeth to us as our only rock and soul confidence: All men on
earth live, and do all moral actions, even when they go on in a wicked life,
as slaves of Hell, to work all uncleanness with greediness, upon some ground
of faith, though a most false and counterfeit Faith, that they shall prosper by
evil doing, and that sin shall make them happy, so Psalm 10.3. The wicked man,
(...) Praises the wicked man, then he must believe that wickedness makes men
praise worthy, and this belief is but presumptuous confiding, and resting on a
Tower of his own building: Now to believe in Christ, though the decree of
Election be not revealed to me, is no presumption; for I am not obliged, before
I believe, to know that I am elected to Glory: It being one of Gods secrets not
revealed in the Word, but made manifest to me, After I believe, and am sealed
unto the day of Redemption: and therefore in a humble resting on Christ, though
the soul know not his Election, which is not revealed in the word in that
condition there can be no Pride nor presumption; for he is self wise, and
presumptuous, who intrudeth into those things that he has not seen, Col. 2.18.
knows not that which God has revealed, and so which he ought to know; now
the believer ought not to know, that he is elected to glory; he yet being an
unbeleever, so his knowledge cannot deviate from a rule which does not oblige
to conformity therewith as with a Rule; the Pourtract of Caesar does not err
from the samplar, because it is not like a Bull or a Horse, because neither a
Bull nor a Horse is the due samplar.

2. To warrant an unworthy humble sinner to believe there is no need of a
positive Warrant, (thou art elected to glory, therefore believe) the word is
near thee in thy mouth; yea there is a commandment laid upon the humbled
sinner ( Come O weary and laden sinner to Christ, and be eased) Now when the
wind blows sweetly and fair upon an humbled siner, who is elected to glory,
there goes the Spirit of the Gospel along with this Commandment; and the word
of Commandment, and the spirit united in one, acts and works so upon the
soul, that the humbled sinner cannot be deluded and led on a rock of
presumption; for this spirit joyneth and closes with his spirit, and he as one
of Christ's sheep, knows this to be the voice of Christ. I grant when the same
command of faith comes to the ears of a Reprobate, he may upon a false ground
believe, or rather presume: he neither being rightly humbled, and fitted for
Christ, nor can the Reprobate know and discern the wind of the spirit,
breathing with the command, and acting upon his spirit, because that wind
neither can, nor does breath upon any Reprobate, and there is no need of any
positive Warrant to ascertain a child of God to believe, beside the commandment
of Faith in lived and quickened with the spirit going along with it, for that
command so quickened does put such a real stamp of an evident testimony, that
he has claim to Christ, on whom the spirit and the command does so act, that
he seeks no more any other evidence to prove his claim to Christ, then the
Lamb needs any evidence to prove, that of ten hundred sheep, this only that
offers to it her paps and milk must be its dam or mother, and none of the
rest of the flock: But how do I know that it is the spirit that goes along
with the Commandment of believing? It may be a delusion. Ans. Beside that, a
deluding spirit for the most part, does not go every way along with the word:
If this spirit keep Gods order, to work upon the humbled and self-dispairing
sinner, who is willing to receive Christ upon his own condition, it is not like
to a deluding spirit; for if the word of commandment to believe, and the spirit
agree in one, it cannot be a delusion, phancie leads no man to Faith. 2. When
objects of life work upon life, they cannot deceive, especially all the senses,
Hearing, Seeing, Tasting, Feeling, Smelling: the excellency and sweetness of
Christ, going along with the word, cannot be delusion; a man may imagine that
he sees and hears, and yet his senses may be deceived: but that all the
senses, especially all the spiritual senses, and that a man imagines that he
lives a natural life and is dead, is rare.

3. Faith can stand upon one foot, even on a general word; hence this is a
Gospel word in Turn to the Lord for he is merciful, Jer. 3.12. Joel 2.13. Jon.
4.2. And because a general promise received with heart-adherence and
confidence gives glory to God: and if it be holden forth to an humbled soul
who is now within the lists and bounds of Grace, and for any thing that the
person thus laden with sin knows on the contrary (for the secrets of Election
and Reprobation belongs to the Lord) Christ minds and intends to him
Salvation, therefore he is to believe.

4. This would be considered, that unbelief breaks with Christ first, before
Christ break with the unbeliever; and the Elect of God finds no more, nor any
higher favor in the kind of external means, to open the Lambs Book of life,
which is sealed and closed with Gods own hand, then the Commandment of
believing. Now when our Lord makes offer of the Kingdom of sons to slaves, and
casts his Jewel of Christ offered in the Gospel in the lap and bosom of a
Bastard, what ever be the Lords secret Decree and purpose in so doing; The
Bastard is to take God at his word, and to catch the opportunity of Gods love
in so far, and if he do it not, the Gospel-offer to the Reprobate being a
treaty of peace, then the treaty breaks off first upon his side; for Christ
comes within a mile of mercy to meet the sinner, and the sinner comes not the
fourth part of a mile, yea, not half a step of love and thankful obedience to
meet Christ, and so Christ kills the unbeliever with the sweetness of the
preventing courtesy of offered mercy.

O (says he) I fear Christ only offers himself to me, but he minds no
salvation to me? Ans. Is not this to raise an evil report and slander on the
Holy One of Israel? For Christ's offer is really an offer, and in so far, its
real love, though it cannot infer the love of Election to glory; yet the
total denial of this offer, opens up the black seal of Reprobation to
heathens without the Church; and therefore its love to thee, if thou be humbled
for sin. 2. And have half an eye to the unsearchable riches of Gospel mercy. 3.
And be self-condemned. 4. And have half a desire of Christ; thou may expound
love by love, and lay hold on the promise and be saved: An error of humble
love to Christ is no error.

That which is next, The fifth point of false Faith. and the use of all. Grace
essential to Faith.

Diverse sorts of people who cannot have Faith.


is a word of the Essential principle of true Faith, and that is a
proportionable measure of grace, Phil. 1.29. required in Faith: men naturally
imagine that faith is a work of nature; hence that speech of a multitude of
Atheists (I believe all my days, I believe night and day) But they never
believe at all, who think and say, they believe always. The Jews asserted
that they believed Moses always, and so oppose themselves to the man
altogether, born in sin, Joh. 9. ver. 28, 29. compared with v. 34. But Christ
told them, they neither believed the Messiah, nor Moses, chap. 5. the soul to
believe; they are not in an ill case who wrestle with unbelief, and find the
heart and take it, in the ways of doubting and terrors, as feeling that
believing is a motion up the mount, and somewhat violent; facill and
connaturall acts cannot be supernatural acts of Faith: Its no bad sign to
complain of a low ebb Sea, and of neither Moon light, nor star light. 2. Its
unpossible they can submit to give Joh. 5.44. Little Faith there is in Kings
Courts, Faith dwells not in a high Matthew. 13.22. A Carnal man's Faith must be
true to its own principles, and must lie level with externalls, so as Court,
ease, the world and its sweet adjuncts, are a measuring line to a rotten rooted
Faith, neither longer nor broader then time, it goes not one span length
within the lists of Eternity. 4. Fancy cannot Gospel knowledge of Christ,
cannot believe; but must do as the Traveller, who unaware sets his foot on a
Serpent in the way, and suddenly starteth backward, six steps for one, (...)
Joh. 6.66. So do they that fancy all the Gospel to be a carnal or a Moral
discourse. 5. Those cannot have Mat. 13.19. with daily treading and walking on
them. A stony Faith, or a Faith that grows out of a stone, cannot be a saving
Faith: There^s a heart that is a daily walk, in which the Devil (as it were)
aireth himself. 6. If Christ have given the last knock at the door, and all
in-passages be closed Ephesians. 4.19. 2 Timothy 4.2. The heart is like a dried up arm
in some, all the oil in the bones are spent. 7. Loose walking with greediness,
argues that hell has taken Hell in the hands and tongue as in the out-wheels,
must argue hell and unbelief in the heart and the in-wheels. 1. Loose believers
go to Heaven by Hell for a man if such an one go to Heaven, who lives
profanely, and says, he has a good heart within: 2. The going in ways of
blood, Extortion, Covetous, Idolatry, Glory. Grace leads no man to the East,
with his face and motion close to the West. 3. This way of Heaven of
happiness. 8. Faith over-looketh time, Heb. 11.10. Abraham looked for another
City. Faith in Moses was great with child of heaven, v. 25 He had an eye to
the recompense of reward. Eternity of Glory, is the birth of Faith. Oh! we look
not to the declining of our sun, its high afternoon, of our piece of day,
eleven hours is gone, and the twelfth hour is on the wheels, and I see not my
own gray hairs; Its upon the margin and borders of night, and I know not where
to lodge. We are like the man, swimming through broad waters, and he knows
not what is before him, he swimmeth through deeper and deeper parts of the
river, and at length, a cramp and a stitch comes on arms and legs, and he
sinketh to the bottom and drowns: We swim through days, weeks, months, years,
winters, and are daily deeper in time; while at length death bereave us of
strength of legs and arms, and we sin^ over head and ears in Eternity. Oh!
Who like the sleepy man, is loosing his clothes, and putting off the garments
of darkness, and would gladly sleep with Christ? Men are close buttoned, and
like day-men, when its dark night. Its fearful to ly down with our day
clothes, Job 20.11. Sin is a sad winding sheet: Oh! what believer faith, I
would have a suit of clothes for the high Court and Thron to be an Essay, to
see how a suit of glory would become me? Thus much for Faith.

SERMON XXII.
NOw a word of a strong and great Faith, and withal of a weak and fainting
Faith. A great Faith. Ingredients of a strong Faith. 1. Strong Praying.
For the most I go not from the Text, to find out the ingredients of a great
Faith. 1. A strong, praying, and a crying a Faith, is a great Faith. So must
Christ's Faith have been, who prayed with strong cries and tears: Strong Faith
makes sore sides, in praying as this woman prayed with good will; there is an
efficacious desire to be rid of a sinful temptation, as Paul prayed thrice to
be freed of the prick in the flesh. Their Faith is weak, who dare not pray
against some Idol sins: Or, 2. If they pray, its but gently, with a wish, not
to be heard.

2. The woman's crying, her instant pleading in Faith, yea 1. Above the
Disciples care for her; 2. Instant pleading
yea, above Christ's seeming glowmes, who denied her to be his, who reproached
her as a dog, argues great grace, great humility with strong adherence, and so
great faith.

2. For Faith ^aileth sometimes with a strong Strength of grace, required in
believing.
The fairer and more clear sight that Faith has of Christ, the stronger are
the acts of Faith, it cannot be denied but Faith has a good, and an ill day:
because grace is various, its no strong proof that its not grace.

Pismire could not suit with a Horse or an Eliphant, there is need of a strong
winged soul to believe, especially against hope.

4. To believe Christ, when midnight speaks John 14.12. But especially when
Christ is absent, its with the soul, as with a clock, in which the wheels are
broken, the passes or weights are fallen down.

Obj. 1.
Obj. 1. But I aim and endeavor to believe, but can do nothing, and without his
grace my violence to heaven is without fruit. Ans. 1. Its true, the
Semipelagians halfing of the work of believing, and the glory of it between co
operating grace and will, as if nature could divide the spoil with the grace of
Christ, is damnable pride; but its Gods way to half the work between Christ
within, in regard of the habit of grace, and Christ without, in regard of the
assisting grace of God, Luke 15.20. While he was yet a great way off, his
father saw him, and ran and fell on his neck, and kissed him; Christ rewards
grace with grace.
Christ rewards not natures aims with grace, nor does he make gifts the work,
and grace the hire, or natures labor the race, and grace the Garland: but he
rewards grace with grace, and that of mere grace, Joh. 15.3. He has in his
Decree and Promise marshalled such and such acts of grace to stand beside
others, and that by Covenant; and therefore believe, that you may believe;
pray, that you may pray.

Obj. 2. But who can act saving grace, Obj. 2.
without the blowing of saving grace; I can no more do it, then I can command
the West wind to blow when I list. Ans. I grant all, nor do I speak this to
insinuate, that Free Will sits at the helm, or that Grace sleeps, and Will
waketh, the contrary is an evident truth: yet give me leave to say, there is ods
between blowing of the wind, and making ready the sails: Though Seamen cannot
make wind, nor is it their fault to want wind, yet can they prepare the Sails,
and hoise them up to welcome the wind; we cannot create the breathings of the
spirit, yet are we to miss these breathings; and this is a fitting of the
Sails, and we are to join with the spirits breathings. Christ binds up the
winds in his garment, so as if one look of faith, How grace begins all
super^naturall works.
or half a spiritual groan should ransom me from hell, I have it not in
stock* therefore has God ordered such a dispensation, that in all stirrings of
grace, the first spring, Principium motus, the fountain-rise of calling Jesus
Lord, shall be up in Heaven at the right hand of the Father, and the far end
of any gracious thought, is as far above me as the heart of Christ, who is in
the Heaven of Heavens, is above the earth, though ye think nothing of it; and
better Christ be my Steward, and that the Gospel be at the end of all acts of
grace, as that Christ be Free wills debtor: More reason Christ be Creditor then
debtor to his Redeemed ones: 2. I know the child of God may be so far forth
lazy, as that its his fault that the wind blows not; if we speak of a
moral cause. 3. Its his part to join with the working of assisting grace,
Col. 1.29. Whereunto I also labor, (...) striving according to his working,
which works in me mightily. The Lord has by free promise, laid holy bands on
himself, to give predeterminating grace to his own children to persevere to the
end, and to prevent Apostasy and heinous sins inconsistent with saving faith, 1
Cor. 1.8. Jude v. 24. Ier. 32.39, 40, 41. Isa. 54.10. Isa. 59.21.22. Luke
2^.32. 1 Ioh. 2.1.2. Yet so as he has reserved a liberty to himself, to
cooperate with them in particular acts as it shall be their sin not his
withdrawing of Grace that makes them guilty, to the end we may know we are in
Graces debt, in all good and supernatural Acts, so 2 Chronicles. 32.31 Ezechiah was
tried of God in the business of the King of Babylons Ambassadors; that the
King might see that he could not walk to heaven on clay legs, or by his own
strength, and the reason is clear; God cannot make a Promise of contributing
this bowing and predeterminating Grace, but in a way suitable to Free Grace.
For God cannot change Grace unto natural debt, it remaining grace, for so it
should be Grace and no Grace, which is a contradiction: 2. The Lord has
reserved liberty to himself in this promise, that in this or this particular
Act (the omission whereof may consist with perseverance in Grace) he may
contribute his influence of Grace, or not contribute it; so David has not
actual Grace at his will and nod, to eschew adultery, and murder as he
pleases: Four reasons why Grace in the work of faith must begin, and so
begin, as we are guilty in not following.
nor Peter to decline an evil hour, when he shall be tempted to forswear his
Savior Christ; nor has Heman in his hand, Psalm. 88. nor the deserted Church
power, Psalm. 77. to pray and believe, and rejoice in the salvation of God at
the disposition of Free Will: But the key is up in the hands of the Kingly
Intercessor, At the right hand of the Father that must open the heart; its far
to fetch, as far as the Heaven of heavens, to make wind and sailing to
Christ-ward; therefore, 3. Seasons of Acts of Grace to believe, to walk in any
warmness of love to Christ and his members, are fruits of Royal Liberty and
Free Grace; who has the key of the house of wine, to stay the soul with the
Flaggons and Apples of love? Certainly, it is the King himself that takes the
Spouse into His banqueting House, Cant 2.4. And yet so as the omission of all
supernatural duties; yea, our laziness in the manner of doing, our failings
and sins are imputed to our selves, and not to the not blowing of the wind of
the holy spirit, nor to the want of the efficacious motion of the spirit, as
Libertines teach, with Arminians; For we so sin through the want of the motions
of efficacious Grace, as through the want of a Physical, not of a moral
cause, and so as we are most willing to want that influence, and so are guilty
before the Lord: God has reasons strong and convincing, why he works thus;
1. It sets not Grace to work by engagement; the spirit of the living
creatures is within every wheel of Christ, that it must move from an inward
principle; the motion of saving Grace, is Christ's heart wheeled about by it
self, and by no foreign cause without it self: Love works as Love without
bud or bribe from Men or Angels. Grace is both wages and work, the race and the
gold to it self. 2. God delights to have men and Angels his debtors. Grace
holds an open and a free Inn, with all the dainties that Christ can make, to
all comers and goers, for nothing but thanks and heartily welcome: Grace makes
no gain of my work. The sweating of Angels, and of the Thousand Thousands that
sing up the glory of Christ before the high Throne, is no income to Christ's
Rent: Grace should not be Grace, if it could Traffic, or buy, or sell with a
creature. Angels and men stand in the Books of Free Grace for Millions of
borrowed sums. Christ's blood and deep love may be praised, but never
recompensed: Christ's love has filled this world and the new Paradise with
debtors; and Angels can neither read, nor sum, nor cast up the Accounts of
Free Grace. 3. Grace to the saints and on the saints but Glory is on them, not
to them.
3. That we cannot be masters of one good act, without his preventing Grace
evidenceth what nature is, and makes Grace both my staff and my convey in at
Heavens Gates; Nature and Free Will must stoop and do homage to CHRIST. There Is
a Glory active, and a Glory passive, as there is also Grace active and passive,
Free Will is active under Grace, and passive also, and therefore Grace and
Mercy, is to the Saints, and upon the Saints; Nature emptieth its lamp upon the
golden pipe, the rich Grace of the Mediator, and Free Will moves and runs,
but not but as moved, driven, and breathed upon by Free Grace: But as
concerning Glory, it has a more eminent and noble relation; Glory shall be on
the Saints as a garment, as a Crown, for they shall be glorified: But no Glory
to the Saints, but only, only to the Lamb, to the flower of the Glory of Glory,
Jesus the Celebrious, Eminent, most high and adored Prince of the Kings of the
earth; and therefore there is room and place left for sin and shame to Free Will
in the business of praedeterminating grace, that nature can but sigh and sin,
and Grace sing and be spotless and innocent: Christ so draws, as we sin in
not being drawn; Christ so takes and allureth, that it is our guilt that we
are not taken and overcome with the smell of the Kings Ointments: So is sin the
field out of which springs the Rose, the flower of free and unhired Grace:
sin must go with us, as near to heaven as to the threshold of the gates, that
the sinner may halt and crook* when he moves his foot on the threshold stone
of Glory; that so pardoning Grace may enter the new City with us. 4. The Lord
will have us take to heaven with us, a Book of the Psalms and Praises of
Grace, that in that land we may extol and advance Free Grace, and may hold the
Book in our hand all the way, and sigh and weep, and sing, and adore the
Savior of Free Grace, and may take Graces bill in our hand into Heaven with
us: O how sweet to be Graces drowned and over burdened Debtor? Its good here to
borrow much, and profess inability for Eternity, to pay, that heaven may be a
house full of broken men, who have borrowed Millions from Christ, but can never
repay more, then to read and sing the praises of Graces free. bill; and say,
Glory, Glory to the Lamb, How there is a promise of bowing and paaedeterminating
grace made to supernatural acts; yet God reserveth his own liberty. 1. How. 2.
When. 3. In what measure he does co-operat
that sits on the Throne for evermore: praising for ever in heaven, must be
in liew of paying debt. 1. God is not behind nor wanting to the gracious soul,
for there is a promise of Grace here. 2. There is an intercession at hand, and
that more mighty now then at Christ's first ascension, and shall be more mighty
when all Israel shall be converted. There is a stirring required in a gracious
spirit, but with sense of natures weakness, so as he is to arise, and be
doing, and the Lord shall be with him, and he is so to blow upon the coals, as
if he could do his alone, though not without the Faith of Dependence upon an
immediate acting from Heaven.

Object. 3. But then Adam yet sinlesse was to believe weakness and sin in
himself, before he sinned. Ans. Not so, but he was to have that which by
Analogy answers to sense of sin, that is a sinlesse consciousness and
solicitude, Obj. 3.
that if God should withdraw his stirring and predeterminating influence of
corroborating him to will and to do, (you may call it Grace) he should fall,
and that legs in Paradise without actual assistance, could not actu secundo,
bear the bulk and weight of Adams connaturall and constant walking with God,
that Adam might know, before he was a debtor to justice, that he had need of
mercy, or the free goodness of a surety, such as Jesus Christ, to prevent
debt, no l^sse then to pay debt, even as Angels are debtors to Christ their
head, Grace to Angels, necessary to prevent possible sins.
for Redemption from all possible sins, no less then we are (though the
degrees of altitude of Grace varieth much) the obliged underlings of such a
bountiful Landlord, for Repemption from actual misery.

3. Not to be broken with a temptation.
3. That is a great Faith, that is not broken with a Temptation. But 1. takes
strength from a Temptation; as some run more swiftly after a fall, that they
may recompense their loss of time; and that is great Faith that argues from a
Temptation, as this woman does. 2. That is Jobs great Faith, chap. 2.3. That he
still holds fast his integrity: the word (...) Hazak, is to hold with
strength and power, He keeps fast and with violence his innocence: and Faith
makes him stronger then he was; the word is used, Psalm. 147.13, For making
stronger the Bars of Ports. And its Jobs praise, chap. 1.22. In all this Job
sinned not, nor charged God with folly. 3. Its a strong faith in this Woman,
that, in a manner, Conquers Omnipotency by believing; yea, Satan, Winds, Fire
from Heaven, Wife, Sabeans, yea, apprehended wrath cannot prevail with Job, to
subdue his Faith; in all he stands by this, Job 15.13* Though the Lord should
slay me, I Will trust in him; Its great Faith to be at holding and drawing with
God; and yet believe and pray, Hos 12.3. Genesis 32.26. And not let the Lord
alone, nor give him any rest, Isa. 62.6, 7. till he answer as suppose thy
prayers were never heard, and the Acts of believing were but Darts thrown at
Heaven and the Throne without any effect; yet because Prayer and believing are
acts of honoring God, though they never benefit thee; it argues strong grace,
and so great Faith, that it can be said, there be ten years, twenty years of
reiterated Acts of Faith, and prayers of such a man lying up before the Throne,
yea, in Christ the high Priests bosom; Let God make of my faith what he will,
yet am I to believe: continued believing is Christ's due, though it should never
be to me gain of comfort or success: that is a weak man who is thrown down on
his back with a blast of wind, or made to stagger with the cast of a straw, or
a feather: The temporary faith is in this seen to be soft, that its broken with
persecution; When the sun rises anon, (...) Mat. 13.21. He is offended and
withers quickly: some spirit of soft clay for a scrat with a Pin on his
credit, casts away all his confidence, dispaireth, and hangs himself as
Achitophel: such a Temptation would not once draw blood of a strong believer:
Strawes and Feathers and Flax do quickly take fire, and are made ashes in a
moment, but not so gold, there is bones and metal in strong Faith: so the
Martyrs Faith, that could not be broken with torments, is proved to be a great
Faith, Heb. 11.35, (...) Their bodies were racked out as a drum, and beaten to
death after racking, and they would not accept a deliverance: Why? Faith looked
to a better resurrection: He who sweateth, pants up the brow of the mount
after Christ, and carries death on his back, must have this strong faith, that
Christ is worthy of tortures: a strong faith can bear Hell on its shoulders,
the Grave, and the sorrows of death, and not crack, nor be broken, Psalm. 18.4,
5, 6. Psalm. 116.3, 4.

4. Faith staying on God without light of comfort, strong.
4. That Faith is argued to be strong that has no light of comfort, but walks
in darkness upon the Margin and borders of a hundred deaths, and yet stays
upon the Lord, Isa. 50.11. So this woman had no comfort, nor ground of sense of
comfort from Christ, except rough answers, and reproaches, yet she believes,
and so must be strong in the Faith, Psalm. 3.6. David's Faith stands straight
without a crook, when ten thousand deaths are round about him, and Psa. 23.4.
He fears no ill when he walks in the cold and dark valley of the shadow of
black death: Heman, Psalm. 88.7. Thy wrath lies hard on me, thou have afflicted
me with all thy waves; Then in his sense, God could do no more to drown him,
not waves, but all waves; all Gods waves was on him, and above him, yet ver. 9.
Lord, I have called daily upon thee: then he believed daily: Hezekiahs comforts
are at a hard pinch, Isa. 39.14. Mine eyes fail, with looking upward, O Lord, I
am opressed; yet praying argues believing, Lord undertake for me: We must
think Christ's sense of comforts was ebb, and low when he wept, cried, Heb.
5.7. and was forsaken of God; yet then his faith is doubled, as the Cable of an
Anchor is doubled, when the storm is more then ordinary, My God, my God: David
chideth his cast down soul, when there is no glimpse of comfort with strong
Faith, Psalm. 42.11. Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him. In swimming
well, the less natural helps to hold up the chin and head, the greater wave,
if the swimmer be carried strongly through, as it were in despite of the
stream, there is the more art: Art may counter-value strength, and sometime
wisdom is better then strength: The less comfort, if yet you believe at
midnight, when the spirit is overwhelmed, the more is the art of believing:
when an inward principle is weak, we help it with externalls: The fewer
externals that faith needs, the stronger it is within.
That the child must be alured with rewards, as with Apples, a Penny or the
like, it is because his sight and desire of the beauty and excellency of
learning and Arts, is but weak or nothing at all: sense and comforts are
external Subsidies and helps to Faith; and these that cannot believe, but upon
feelings, and sense of the sweetness of comforts, are hence argued to have weak
and broken inclinations and principles of Faith: the more freeness and
ingenuity of spirit that is in believing, the more strength of faith, for that
is most connaturall that has least need of hire: you need not give hire,
reward, or buds to the Mothers affection to work upon her, and cause her to
love her Child: love can hardly be hired, nature is stronger then rewards or
any externals: Comforts are but the hire of serving of God, and the results of
believing in a sad condition. There be some cautions here that are
considerable. 1. God leads some strong ones to heaven, whose affections are
soft as David's were, Ps. 35.13. and 119.25.28.136.53. Ps. 6.6. And yet Faith is
strong, Ps. 22.1. God possibly immediately working upon the assenting, or
believing faculty, leaving the affections to their own native disposition. 2.
God uses some privileged dispensations, so as a strong Believer shall doubt
upon no good ground, Ps. 116.11. God so disposing, that grace may appear to be
grace, and the man but flesh. 3. Softness of affection, and light of comfort,
may by accident concur with strong acts of believing: for with these, in many,
there is little light, much Faith, and they should without these apples given
to children, strongly believe, and God to confirm his own of mere indulgence
sweetneth affections.

Comforts are externals to Faith.
But if God give comforts, ordinarily its a sort of indulgence of grace, or the
grace of grace. Its true, rejoicing falls under a Gospel-commandement, Phil.
4.4. yet so, as God has not tied the sweet of the comfort of believing to
believing, that you may know its strength of Faith that is the principle of
strong Faith, as intense and strong habits makes strong acts. God keeps some
in a sad condition all their life, who are experienced believers, and they
never feel the comfort of faith, while the splendour of glory glance on their
eyes; as one experienced believer kept under sadness and fear for eighteen
years, at length came to this, I enjoy and rejoice with joy unspeakable and
glorious; But he lived not long after. Another living in sadness all his life*
died with comforts admirable. And 3. let this be put as a case of Conscience,
why diverse believing and joying much in Gods Salvation all their life, yet die
in great conflicts, and to beholders with little expression of comfort and
feeling? As diverse of the Saints die. Certainly, God 1. Walks in liberty
here. 2. He would not have us to limit the breathings of the Holy Ghost, to
jump with our hour of dying. 3. We may make an Idol of a begun heaven, as if
it were more excellent then Christ: To conclude, little evidence, much
adherence, speaks a strong Faith.

SERMON XXIII.
THe Woman had no aparent evidences of believing; yet did she hang by one
single thread of the word, of the mercies of the Son of David. Antonaclasis,
(...) The more that the word of promise has influence in believing, and the
less of convincing reason and appearances, The more of the word and the less
of reason the stronger Faith is.
the greater Faith, Romans 4. Abraham had a promise of a Son in whom the Nations
of the world should be blessed: But 1. there was no appearance of this in
nature. Abraham and Sarah at this time were between them: two hundred years old
lacking one, and so no natural hope of a child. 2. He had but one promise for
his Faith; we have twenty, an hundred, yet Romans 4.18. He against hope, believed
in hope. Its an elegant figure having a form of a contradiction, there was no
hope, yet he had hope, 2. ver. 19. Not being weak in the Faith: then he was
strong in the Faith, and gave glory to God, as it is, ver. 20.3. He staggered
not through unbeleef, (...) then its an Argument of a weak Faith, to dispute
according to the principles of natural Logic with God, to go on upon Gods
naked word without reasoning is a strong Faith, especially when the course of
Providence says the contrary. The word of promise is the mother and seed of
faith, 1 Pet. 1.23. the more of the seed, the more of the birth: Wine that is
separated from the mother does sooner corrupt: that is strongest Faith that
has most of its seed and mother, that is, of the word of promise in it.
Abraham had nothing on earth to sustain his Faith in killing his son, but only
a naked Commandment of God, all other things were contrary to the Fact; yet is
Faith strongest, when it stands on its own bases and legs, and that is the
word of Omnipotency, the word of Promise; other pillars of Faith are rotten and
sandy foundations; Inspirations beside and without the word, are the natural
Faiths unwritten traditions: Every thing is strongest on its own pillars that
God and Nature has appointed for it: The earth hangs by God and Natures
statute in the mids of the Air, if the earth were up in the Orb or Sphere of
the Moon, it should not be so sure as it is now: And if the Sea, fountains, and
floods were up in the clouds, they should not be so free from perishing, as
they now are: Faith is seated most firmly on a word of him, who is able to
perform what he has said* Wicked men are seeking good in bloods, in wars, in
the destruction of the Church, of the Reformation and Covenant of God; yet
their actions are not seated on a word of promise; but on a threatening that
destruction shall come on them as a whirlwind, therefore is not the wicked
man's bread sure, when the child of God has bread, sleep, peace, immunity from
the sword (in so far as the sword is a curse) and that by the Covenant of
promise. This woman had one Gospel-word, mercy from the Messiah, David's son.

6. That is a strong Faith which can forgo much for Christ, and the hope of
Heaven. 6 A faith that can forego much for Christ, i^ a strong faith.
Moses was strong in the Faith in this, who refused the Treasures of Egypt,
the Honor of a Princedome, and to be called, The son of Pharaohs Daughter,
Heb. 11.26. For he had an eye (...) an Eagles look, and eye to heaven, to the
recompense of reward. Abraham forgoeth country and inheritances for God, Heb.
11.9. By Faith he Sojourned in the Land of Promise, as in a strange Country,
dwelling in Tabernacles. 1. He sojourned: 2. He played the Pilgrim: 3. He
dwelt not in Castles and Cities, though the land was his by promise, and his
grand son Jacob disposed of it in his Testament, Genes. 49.10. For he looked
for a City which has foundations: (to the strong faith, all Cities are
bottomless except Heaven) Whose maker and builder is God: Now this Woman's
Faith is great in this; she looked for a Temporary deliverance from Satan's
power to her daughter, under the notion of one of the sure mercies of David,
and that by Faith which inheriteth all the Promises: not to see beyond time and
death, nor to see the gold at the races end faints the traveller, a sight of
the fair city is as a draught of wine to the fainting traveller; it adds legs
and strength to him; heaven is down-ground, when Faith sees it, it is (when
sight fails us) toylesome and up the mount: When Steven in a near distance
heard the music of heaven, 7. Its a strong faith to pray and believe, when God
seems to forbid praying.
his countenance did shine, he did leap to be at it: I see Heaven open and
Jesus, etc.

7. Its great Faith to pray, and persevere, and watch unto praying, as this
woman did, when Christ seems to forbid to pray; as he both reproached this
woman in her praying, as if it had been but the crying of a Dog, and said he
was not sent for her: When the promise and Christ seem to look away from you,
and to refuse you, yea, to forbid you to believe; then to believe is great
Faith, actions in nature going on in strength, when contrary actions does
countermand them, must be carried with prevailing strength: Its strength of
nature that the Palmtree grows under great weights, its prevalency of nature
that mighty Rivers when they swell over banks does break over all oppositions:
Satan has a Commission to burn and slay; a strong Faith quenches all his
fiery darts, Ephesians. 6.16. Let me alone, (says the Lord to Jacob, Genesis
32.25.26.) Pray no more; Jacobs strong faith does meet with this commandment:
thus, I will not let thee alone, I must pray on till thou bless me: strong
Faith beats down misapprehensions of promises, or of Christ, and lays hold
on Christ under his mask of wrath, Lam. 3.9. And covered with a cloud.

8. Great boldness in the Faith, 8. Great boldness argues great faith.
argues great Faith; there be three things in Faith, in this Notion. 1. An
agony, and a wrestling of Faith, Col. 1.29. which is a heavenly violence in
believing. 2. To be carried with a great measure of persuasion and Plerophory,
with full and hoised up sails in believing, Col. 2.2. There Is a rich assurance
of Faith. 2. Not that only, but in abstracto, there is the riches of assurance.
3. There Is all riches of assurance. 4. All riches of the full assurance of
Faith: So strong prevailing light produces a strong Faith; Alas, its but
twilight of evidence that we have. 3. To be bold, and to put on a heavenly
stoutnesse, and daring, in venturing with familiarity into the throne of Grace,
is a strong Faith, Heb. 10.22. and Heb. 4.16. We are to come with liberty, and
holy boldness to the Throne, as children to their father, so the Church with
heavenly famlliarity, and the daring of Grace and Faith prays, Cant. 1.1. Let
him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth: John's leaning on Christ's bosom is
not familiarity of love only, but of Faith also; In whom we have boldness and
access with confidence by Faith, Ephesians. 3.12. Faith dare go into the Throne, and
Heb. 10.19. To the holy of holies; Faith blusheth not.

9 To rejoice in tribulation is a strong Faith.
9. That which leads a man with Paul and Silas to sing Psalms in the stocks,
in Prison, and in scourges, that is a strong Faith; Job is hence known to be
strong in the Faith, because being made a most miserable man in regard of heavy
afflictions, he could bless God: A strong Faith prophecieth glad tidings out
of the fire, out at the window of the Prison, and rejoices in bonds, Mic.
7.8.9. Isa. 52, 1, 2. and 54.1, 2, 3, 4. To glory in tribulation is an Argument
of one justified by Faith, Romans 5.1, 2, 3. And the greater gloriation of
Christ's chains and cross, is a stronger reason to conclude a strong Faith.

10. To wait in patience for God all the day long, 10. To wait on with long
patience is an Argument of a strong faith.
is an Argument of great Faith, Isa. 28.16. He that believes shall not make
have; he shall not be confounded with shame (so the 70. traslateth it, and Paul
after them, Romans 9.33.) As those that flees from the enemy out of hastiness,
procured by base fear, which is a shame: I dare not say that the 70. reads
(...) festinet insted of (...) confundatur: but it proves believing and a
valorous keeping the field without flying, and so continued waiting on God, to
be of kin to believing; and the longer the thread of hope be, though it were
seventy years long, as Hab. 2.1.2. or though it were as long as a cable going
between the earth and the heaven, up within the vail, Heb. 6.19. the stronger
the faith must be; unbelief not being chained to Christ leapeth over board at
first, as the wicked King said in the ^^st of unbelief, 2 King. 6.33. What
should I wait any longer on the Lord? Faith is a grace for win^er to give God
leisure to bring Summer in his own season; the reasons of our weakness be two.
(...). We see Israel and their dough on their shoulders wearied and tired,
lately come out of the (...)-Furnace, wandering without one foot of ^eritage,
forty years in the wilderness, and four hundred years in Egypt, Act. 7.6.
This ^^keth like poverty, to believe the other my^^ery in the other side or
Page of Providence, (...) Glory of dividing the Red Sea, and of giving seven
mighty Nations to his people, and their buildings, lands, vineyards, Gardens,
is a strong Faith. 2. The furnace is a thing void of reason and art, and so
knows little, that by it the Goldsmith makes an excellent and comely vessel
of Gold: Its great Faith to believe, that God by crooked instruments, and fire
and sword shall refine a Church and erect a glorious building, and these
Malignant instruments are as ignorant of the Art of divine Providence, as coals
and fuel are of the Art and intention of the Goldsmiths, Mic. 4.12. Isa. 10.5,
6, 7. The Ax and the Saw knows nothing of Art, nor the Sword any thing of
Justice. Prelates. Papists, Malignants in the three Kingdoms, understand
nothing of Gods deep counsel upon themselves, in that God by a fire of their
kindling, is burning themselves, and taking away the Tin and Brass, and
reprobate metal, and refining the Spouse of Christ* they serve a great
service, but know not the master of the work.

11. An humble Faith is a strong Faith.
11. An humble Faith, such as was in this woman is a great Faith: the more sins
that are pardoned, as it infers the more love to Christ Luke 7.47. So the
unworthier a soul is in it self to believe pardon in Christ, argues the
greater Faith; it must be a greater Faith, to believe the pardon of ten
thousand talents, then to believ^ the forgiveness of five hundred pence:
Christ esteems it the greatest faith in Israel, tha^ the Centurion abaseth
himself, as one unworthy to come under one roof with him, and that he exalts
Christ in his omnipotency to believe that he can command all diseases, at his
nod, Math. 8.8, 9, 10.

12. A strong desire of a communion with Christ is an Argument of a strong
Faith, 12. A strong desire of a communion argues a strong Faith.
Rev. 22.20. Surely I come (...). Quickly, faith answers with a hearty
desire: Amen, even so, Come Lord Jesus, and 2 Pet. 3.12. These two are
conjoined, the one is a word of Faith, (...) Looking for: the other a word of
earnest desire, (...) Hastening after (Stepha. votis accelerantes) the coming of
the day of the Lord. Faith desires an union with Christ, and a marriage union:
The reason is, strong Faith comes from strong love, and strong love, and
strong coals of desiring to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, Phil. 1.23.
Burns in at Heavens door; love-sicknesse for glory goes as high as the
lowest step of the Throne that the Lamb Christ sits on; and its faith and
love together, that desires Christ to mend his pace, and says, Cant. 8.14.
Make haste, my beloved, and be as a Roe or a young Heart upon the mountains of
spices. The fervor of love challenges time, and the slow-moving wheels of
years and months, and reckons an hour for a day, and a day for a year, Psalm.
101.2. O when will thou come to me? So hope deferred is a childbirth pain, and
a sickness of the soul, Prove. 13. 12. Faith with love cannot endure a morrow*
Faith puts Christ to posting, and leaping over mountains, and skipping over
hills, Cant* 2.8. And adds wings to him, to flee more quickly. Yet is there a
caution here most considerable; Faith both walks leisurely and with leaden
feet, and moves swiftly with Eagles wings: Faith, in regard of love and desire
of union with God, is swift, and has strong motions for an Union; Yea, a
love-sicknesse to be at the top of the mount to be satiated with a feast of
Christ's enjoyed face; but in regard of a wise assurance that Gods time is
fittest, it makes no haste: So to wait on, and to haste may stand together, 2
Pet. 3.10.

Strength of working by love, argues a strong Faith.
13. Faith effectual by, or with child of love and good works is a strong
Faith, 1 These. 1.3. Remembering your work of Faith, Philem. v. 6. Faith
effectual. There be bones in a strong Faith: yea, sap and life. How many
Thousands of Apples be there vertually in a Tree that bears fruit, for thirty
or forty years together? So its said of Stephen, That he was full of faith and
power, Act. 6.8. And Barnabas, Act 11.24. Full of the Holy Ghost, and of Faith.
What is then a small Faith, or a weak Faith, is easily known. Rise, Reign, and
ruin of Antinomians, Er. 32. page 6.
1. A Faith void of all doubting is not a weak Faith: Nor yet the strong Faith.
Antinomians err many ways in this point. 1. After the revelation of the
spirit, neither Devil nor sin can make the soul to doubt (say they:) Yea, A
great Faith is not free of boubtings.
but the spirit of revelation was in Jeremiah, who doubted when he complained,
Chap. 15. v. 18. to God of God, Will thou be to me altogether as a liar, and as
waters that fail? Chap. 20.7, 8, 9. v. 14.15.16. Job doubted c. 13. v. 14. when
he said, Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and hold me for thine enemy? And
Asaph, Ps. 73.13. Heman, Ps. 88.13, 14, 15. And the Church, 77. Psalm. Yet all
these were sealed by the spirit unto the day of redemption. Declar.
Remonstra^t. Exerrore, abreptione, aut obnubilatione mentis.
2. This is like the foul error of the Arminians, who, with Socinians, hold
that as there be three degrees of believers, 1. Some babes. 2. Some aged, so
there is a third sort of truly perfect ones, who do not sin from the root of
concupiscence, the combat between the flesh and the spirit now ceasing, only
they sin through inadvertence or some error, or over-clouding of their light,
as Adam and the Angels sinned, there being no inward principle of corruption in
them: Hence some Liber^ines say, These that are in Christ can no more sin, and
not walk with God, then the sun can leave off to give light, or fire to cast
heat, or a fountain to send out streams, in regard that the spirit acts them
to walk with God by such a necessary impulsion that destroys all freedom of
will; and if they sin, they are not to be blamed, because the spirit moves
them not to abstinence from sin, and to holy walking. But Paul, a chosen
vessel, and a strong believer, Romans 7.14, 15, 16, 17, etc. Complains of the
in-dwelling of sin, of his carnality, and the fleshes lusting against the
spirit, and of his captivity under sin, which must argue his imperfect Faith,
liable to the distemper of sinful doubtings. Rise, Reign, and ruin Er. 20.
page 4.
It is also a great error to say, that to call in question, whether God be my
Father after, or upon the commission of some heinous sins, as murder, incest,
etc. Does prove a man to be in the covenant of works. Now there be sundry sorts
of doubtings opposite to Faith. Diverse sorts of doubting opposite to Faith.
In the renewed: There Is 1. A natural doubting; and as all Popery is natural
and carnal: so this strangeness of affection by which men are unkind to
Christ, and never persuaded of Gods favor in Jesus Christ, argues the party
to be under the law, and not in Christ. This doubting may, and does in carnal
men consist with presumption, and a moral false persuasion that natural men
have all of them, while their conscience be wakened; that they shall be saved.
Why? I am not a Murderer, a Sorcerer, etc. Why? Or how can God throw me into
Hell? So its made up of real lies and contradictions: Yet they have no divine
certainty of Salvation. For ask a natural man, Have you a full assurance of
salvation, as you say, that you always believe and doubt not? he shall be
there at a stand, and answer; Who can have a full assurance? But I hope well, I
believe well night and day. And so doubt Papists also, and they have a lie in
their right hand, it cannot stand with Gods mercy or justice; since I am not
this and this, to throw me into hell. So is unbelief a lie, Esa. 57.11. And of
whom have thou been afraid and feared, that thou have lied and have not
remembered me? 2. There Is an occasional doubting that rises by starts upon
wicked men out of an evil conscience of sin, but it vanishes as a cloud: as
in Pharaohs confession, I and my people have sinned. This argues a law-spirit,
rising and falling a sleep again. 3. There Is a final doubting of despair, like
the Cain, Genesis 4.13.14. In Saul, 1 Samuel 28.15, 16. All these conclude men under
the law, and the curse of it. But there is 4. A doubting in the believers, which
though a sin, yet (if I might have Some doubting a sin, and a bad thing in it
self yet Per accidens, and Ratione subjecti good sign and argues Grace in the
party.
and so opposite to grace and godliness, but a gracious sin, Ratione subjecti,
in regard of the person and adjuncts, it being a neighbor to saving Grace; and
no reprobate can be capable of this sin, no more then Pagans, or flagitious and
extremely wicked men can be capable of the sin against the Holy Ghost. So
beggars are remotest from high and personal treason, because they have never
that honor to come near the Kings Person. So David's bones, not Saul's bones
were broken, Ps. 51.10. Humbled bones. (For a humbled heart is called (...)
Nidcheh.) Broken* and bruised with a fear of Gods wrath for sin. And the
converted souls moisture is turned to the drought of summer, Psalm. 32.3, 4. And
his bones waxen old with roaring all the day, God withholding the joy of his
salvation. This doubting befalls never any reprobate under the law or
covenant of works, and so though it be an ill thing, yet its a good sign, as
out-breakings of boils in the body, are in themselves, diseases, infirmities,
distempers and contrary to perfect health; yet they are often good signs and
arguments of strength of life, and much vital heat and healthinesse of
constitution. That affections of the child of God, under incest, murder, or
other heinous sins be stirred, that sorrow be wakened and rise, when our Father
is offended, and when our Lord frowneth and stands behind the wall, and goes
away, is lawful; yea it speaks tenderness of love, softness of heart, but
that they be so far wakened as to doubt, and fear that the Lord be changed,
that he has forgotten to be merciful, that is sinful doubting, but does no
ways conclude, that the person is under the Covenant of Works; but the
contrary rather, that Grace sits and bordereth with this doubting. And so
that the person is under Grace, not under the Law. Even where Faith is strong,
it is not ever in the same temper. Health most vigorou^ will vary in its
degrees and decrease at times of (...) and yet be strong and have much of life
in it. Take the strong and experienced Christians life in its whole continued
frame, and for the most part he has the better of all temptations; but take
him in a certain stage, or nick of providence when he is not himself, and he is
below his ordinary strength, even in that wherein he excels. If a gracious
temper of meekness like Christ was not the predominant element of grace in
Moses, yet it was in a great measure in him, he bearing the name with him, who
best knows names, and things, of the meekest man in the earth: Yet in that
which was his flour, he proved weaker then himself, and spoke unadvisedly with
his lips. Our highest Graces may meet with an ill hour. Job by the testimony of
the Holy Ghost is patient, Ye have heard of the patience of Job. And, Chap. 3.
We have heard of the cursing passion of Job also. Believing is like sailing,
which is not always equal, Diverse sorts of weak faith.
often strength of wind will blow the ship twenty miles backward. 2. The
smallest measure of Faith. The minimum quod sic, is sincere adherence to
Christ. Not that negative adherence simply, Negative adherence to Christ not
sufficient to saving Faith.
by which some one may say, I dare not for a world quit my part in Christ, or
give up with him. Natural spirits may have a natural tenderness, by which
they dare not quit Christ, and give up with him. Yet there is no saving faith in
natural spirits, but there is in the believer some positive adherence under, or
with the negative, by which there is a power of love and kindness, making the
soul to cleave to Christ: There may be great weakness with this, and great
failings, and yet faith unfeigned. We have need of much charity to these that
are weak in Faith. A reed, a broken reed may grow; and Christ will not break
it. A buried believer is a believer; if Christ have a near relation of blood to
a piece of blew clay, and the dead corpse of a believer; seeing in his flesh
there is the seed and hope of a resurrection, as the seed and hope of harvest is
in rotting, and dying grains of Wheat, sown in the cold earth, as is clear,
Psalm. 16.9. 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44. Much more the relation of mercy remains in
Christ, toward the wrestling, deserted, and self dead believer. Now this
smallest measure of Faith, may consist, 1. With much ignorance of God, as it
was with the believing Disciples, who continued with Christ in his temptations,
confessed him, believed and adhered to him, when many went back, and departed
from him, Luke 22.28, 29. Mat. 16.16, 17. Joh. 6.66, 67, 68, 69. And yet were
ignorant of great points of Faith, as of his death, Mat. 16.21.22. Of his
resurrection, Joh. 20.9. 2. So there be great faintings and doubtings, when a
storm arises, and the soul is a sinking, Mat. 8. v. 25, 26, 27. Mat. 14.3. Yet
a little Faith is Faith. As touching a fainting Faith, its not always a weak
Faith that faints; strong and healthy bodies may have fevers, and deliquies.
For the causes of fainting are, 1. The want of the influence of mercy, and of
stirring or exciting Grace causes fainting, 2 Cor. 4.1. As we are mercied,
(...), we faint not; we degenerate not. It is in the bosom of Christ, and
lies about the bowels of our merciful high Priest that keeps from fainting:
If our Intercessor pray not, we faint, Luke 22.32. I have prayed that thy
Faith, (...) may not be ecclipsed. The moon is in a certain death, and soon in
an eclipse; So is Faith under fainting. 2. Fear of wrath may cause distraction
and hanging of mind, and uncertainty, where there is strong Faith, Ps.
88.14.15. Compared with v. 8, 9. As apprehensions report of God, so are we
affected in believing. Yet may it be collected from Mat. 10.19. In that hour it
shall be given you, that Christ holds the head of a fainting believer. 3. The
dependence of Faith will faint, when Christ withdraws love, though he inflict
no anger. The ingenuity of Grace gathers fear from a cloud, though there be
no storm. 3. A soul dead in himself, and that cannot put out Faith in acts, for
want of light and comfort, is a weak Faith. A tree in winter is a living tree.
There may be life where there is little stirring or motion. 4. That Faith that
seemed smallest to the man himself, is sometime in it self greatest. 1. In sad
desertions there is most of Faith, and least of sense of Faith, Psalm. 22.1. 2. A
suffering Faith may be small to the sufferer. Many of the Martyrs in their own
sense were in a dead and unbelieving condition: A suffering Faith a strong
Faith.
Yet Christ is more commended for a suffering-faith then any, Heb. 12.1, 2, 3.
In that he did run, endure the cross for the glory that was before him. He saw
heaven. And his Faith went through Hell, to be at Heaven. There is a high
commendation put on the suffering Faith of these who were tried with hands,
imprisonment, sawn asunder, mocked, slain with the sword, Heb. 11.37, 38. Of
whom the world was not worthy; This is not put upon the active and doing Faith,
which is put upon the passive Faith, nor is so much said of these, who by Faith
pulled down the walls of Jericho, of Gideon, Baruch, Sampson, and such as by
Faith subdued Kingdoms. The reason is, suffering is a loss of being, and
welbeing: These who by doing give away their evil being, for Christ, and
crucify their lusts for him, are dear to him: but such as die for Christ, they
give away both being, and welbeing. Moses, and Paul, who in a manner were
content to go to hell, with believing that Gods glory in saving the people of
God was to be prefered to their eternal being, and well-being, behoved to have
great Faith. 3. The Faith, Faith weak in regard of intension may be strong in
regard of extension.
that is weak, in regard of intension of degrees, may be a great faith in
regard of extension: the Children of God, whose life is the walk of Faith, 2
Cor. 5.7. May have but a small measure of Faith: Yet its a constant and well
breathed Faith, good at the long race, that carries a soul through: In, 1. His
natural capacity to believe God will feed him: And, 2. In his civil
relations, as a father, son, servant, magistrate. 3. In his spiritual
condition, in the duties of the first table; in all which capacities we are to
walk by Faith. Yea to eat, drink, sleep, to laugh, to weep, as concerning the
ordering of all these Heavenward by Faith. All the Saints that go to Heaven
believing, and ordering all these conditions by Faith, have not always a
Faith, as great as Abraham, as Moses. Weak legs carry some through the earth
many thousand miles; A sorry and small vessel in comparison of others, may
sail about the Globe of the whole earth. The wings of a Sparrow or a Dove can
carry these little birds, through as much Sea and Land, as the wings of an
Eagle does carry the Eagle. The lowest ebb of a fainting Faith.
But ere I go from this point, I crave leave to add somewhat of the least and
smallest measure of Faith. 2. Of the condition of the child of God under it.
Touching the former, I only say, There is a degree of fire, and a coal so
small, that less cannot be, the thing remaining, Fire having the nature,
essence, and properties of fire. And when any is in a deliquium or swoun, the
man has life, but it is kept in narrow bounds, there is breathing only. 2.
Some vital heat. 3. Some internal motion in the heart and vital and animal
spirits, but no more to prove life almost then the man is a dead corpse, yet
somewhat there is to difference him from dead clay: For friends will not bury a
sounding man willingly and knowingly. So at the lowest condition of the weakest
Faith that the believer is in, some fire and coal of love and Faith there is,
and some smoking, though little fire, and possibly we cannot give it a name.
Yet if the just live by Faith, there must be some measure of Faith. 2. Some
smoking of love to Christ. 3. Some discerning of an ill condition. No man on
earth in a sleep has a reflect act to know that he sleeps, no dead corpse
knows it self to be dead. Never sleeping man could say, nay, not Adam in his
first sleep, when God formed the woman out of a rib of his side: Now I am
sleeping. No man naturally dead can say, Now am I dead, and I lie amongst the
worms and corruption. Death makes no report of death: but the believer can say
at his lowest condition, Cant. 5.1. I sleep but my heart waketh; and he who
says, Psalm. 119. Lord quicken me, must say, Lord, I am dead; yet to say, Lord
quicken me, and to feel and know deadness, are acts of the life of Grace. A
Saint in this condition may love Christ through half a dream, and half
sleeping, half waking, retain honorable thoughts of Christ, Job 13.15. Job
19.25, 26, 27. Some have said in hell they should love Christ. This truth is in
it, that in such a pain and sad condition of suffering as the damned are in,
(sin, despair, or Gods hating of them excepted) Saints can believe and love
Christ, Psalm. 22.1. at least desire to have leave to love Christ, for the evil
of sin may, the evil of punishment cannot quench the love of Christ, which
is stronger then death, then hell, Cant. 8.6, 7. The soul at the lowest
condition is like the man who has engaged his lands for so great a sum, as may
be a Just price to buy the land, and so in effect he has sold the land, but
with a reversion, he keeps the reversion, and so by Law within such a time he
may redeem his morgaged inheritance. The weakest of believers at his lowest
ebb, keeps the reversion of Christ: He may by some grievous sin, be under
such a terrible desertion, as to put the inheritance of Heaven to a too great
hazard of being lost; and in appearance and in his own sense, and in the sense
of many, all is gone; yet then to say nothing of the invisible chain of Gods
unchangeable decree of Election, which the strongest arms of Devils and Hell
cannot break; there is fire under the embers, What of Christ remains, in the
lowest ebb of a fainting Faith.
sap and life in the root of the Oak tree: God says of the bud of this Vine
tree, though the man neither see nor hear it, destroy it not, for there is a
blessing in it.

As touching the second. The Question may be, What remains for him in this
condition, to know his condition, or what can he do? I answer, 1. When Christ
has left his bed and is gone, he is to keep warm the seat that Christ was in;
I do not say that the Church, Cant. 5.6. was at the lowest ebb; yet a
desertion there was and a sad one: But in this condition, she opens her heart
to Christ, I rose up to open to my beloved. 2. verse. 5. There be some droppings
of Myrrh from her hands, some sense of Christ. 3. I called him, but he
answered me not; there remains a faculty of praying. 4. A love-sicknesse:
hence it is evident in the lowest and ebbest condition of a fainting faith,
there is something answerable to this, and this is to love the smell of Christ
that he has left behind him, when he himself is gone; it is to desire to
behold with love and longing the print of his feet, the chair of love that he
sat in: hence though you feel no work of sanctification, his seat is kept by
some spiritual meditations; as to consider, what a kind of love it is, that
Christ has bestowed on sinners, for that he loved his own before he died for
them, his love being the cause why he died for them; and still after, the
purchased Redemption, he loves them, and intercedeth for them up at the right
hand of God; and this is as much as to say, Christ has loved you, and
repents not of his love: love made him die for you, and if it were to do
again, he would die over again for you, Romans 8.33, 34. 1 Timothy 3.16. And suppose
we that there were need that CHRIST should die twice, or four times, or an
hundred or millions of times, and that he had ten thousand millions of lives,
and that our sins should have required that he should first die for one
believer, and then die again the second time for another, and then the third
time for another: and so that he must for every several Elect person, have
died a several death; Love, love should have put him upon all these deaths
willingly: and therefore if the believer had ten loves, as many loves in one as
there be Elected men and Angels, all had been too little for Christ; and when
the believer has been serving and praising up in the highest Temple as many
millions of ages of years, (or a tract of Eternity answerable to that duration
of ages) as the number of the sand on all the coasts in earth, of all the stars
in Heaven, of all the flowers, herbs, plants, leaves of trees that has been,
or shall be from the Creation of God, to the taking down of the workmanship of
Heaven and earth; yet shall he be as much in Christ's debt for this infinite love
when that time is ended, as when he first opened his mouth in the first
breathing out of praises in the state of glory. 2 He may turn over in his mind
all the promises, and the literal revolution of them in the mind, though it
be but a deed or act of the understanding and memory, may cast fire on the
affections in which there resideth a habit of grace; though there be no fire in
the bellows, yet blowing with the bellows, may waken up and kindle fire in the
hearth where there is little: The habit of grace is often as sparks of fire on
the hearth under the ashes, and may be kindled up and made a fire. 3. When
Faith is weakest, and the soul under a winter and a dead eclipse; its fit to
keep the heart in a passive frame of receiving of him again as to sorrow for
sin, and to put to door unrepented sins; as when the King goes abroad, sweep
the Chamber for his return. Missing of Christ, longing for his return,
inquisition for him, Watchmen, saw ye him? Love-sicknesse for him, puts the
soul in a sweet passive capacity to receive him again, Cant. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
4. When the Church is in bed sleeping, yet she is charged to open, Cant. 5.2.
to weep at the noise of Christ's knock; when you cannot rise is somewhat, a
prisoner may stir his legs and cause the iron fetters tinckle, though he cannot
get out; there is some strength when we are bidden, Heb. 12.12. Lift up the
hands that hang down, and the feeble knees: Motion will make fire. 5.
Especially Christ sleeps least, when his child is in a high fever: Love
watches then most at the bed side.

SERMON XXIV.
THY Faith] Faith is so Christ's, as the fountain and the cause, that it is ours
as agents moved and acted by Christ. Rise and Reign, Er. 25.
Hence its a foul error to say, that there is no inherent Rightoousness in the
Saints, and no graces in the souls of believers, but in Christ only: There Is
water, even the spirit powered on the dry ground, Isa. 44.3. A stock of grace is
within the regenerate.
Gods spirit put within us, Eze. 36.26, 27. The spirit of grace and of
supplication powered on the house of David, Zach. 12.10. A well within the
saints springing up to life everlasting, Our grace is not all, and wholly in
Christ, subjectively, though it be all from Christ effectively. Rise and
Reign, Er. 1.
Joh. 4.14. The Father and the Son, through the operation of Grace, take up
house in them, Jo. 14.23. Such a new stock and plant of Heaven set in them, as
they have the Anointing dwelling in them, 1 John 2.27. The seed of God abiding
in them, 1 John 3.9. Unfeigned faith dwelling in Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.5. Grace in
them as fire under ashes, 2 Timothy 1.6. And a new Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. An
inward man, 2 Cor. 4.16. Col. 1.27. Christ in you the hope of glory: Nor are
the faculties of the soul and the workings thereof, in our conversion
destroyed, as some say, as if the Holy Ghost should come in stead of these; for
Christ takes down old work, and makes a new building for himself, but the
stones are ours, the soul remaining in its powers and operations, the
understanding and will remain, but opened, Luke 24.45. Joh. 21.18. Ephesians.
1.17.18. Ephesians. 4.23.24. The powers of the soul remain whole in conversion.
Christ removes the rubbish, and the frowardness, and over-goldeth our
stones, its our matter, and his workmanship. Hence we are agents, Grace
teaches no man to be lazy, for because all the moral actions of the renewed
are commanded of God; if we by Grace were no agents in these, but mere
Patients, and Christ and the Holy Ghost the only immediate agents, in the
omitting of believing, praying, praising, hearing, in not doing all our
natural and civil actions for God, and in a spiritual way; yea, and in our
forbearing to murder, whore, blaspheme, etc. (for by the Grace of Christ the
Saints abstain from sin) we should not sin, all these wicked acts were to be
imputed to the Grace of Christ and the Holy Ghost, which is blasphemy, and a
flat turning of the Grace of God into wantonness: Now we are by Grace to be
agents to purge our selves, 1 John 3.3. to run with enlarged hearts in Gods
way, Psalm. 119.32. to stir up, and blow upon Grace under ashes, 2 Timothy 1.6. To
walk in Christ as we have received him, Col. 2.6. To keep our selves in the
love of God, Jud. 21.

Use. We are to be careful of the stock, not to hurt or wast the stock of
Grace, he who is spending on his stock, ere it be long shall have nothing; cast
not water upon your own coal to quench the spirit or to grieve it. See what
grows out of your stock? What income and crop of the fruits of the spirit shall
return to Christ? The Lord demands of every child of God, what, and where is
the stock, and where is the rent of Heaven? It is the virtue of the Merchant to
increase the stock, and in all losses to strive to keep it whole. There is a
wasting of the habit of Grace, which is a dangerous thing, Ephesians. 4.30. There is
a ^adding of the spirit, and a rubbing off of some letters or Characters of the
broad Seal of the spirit which is forbidden; even as break some spaikes or
Ax-tree of the wheels of a great work, and the mill or the horologue is at
stand and can work nothing; beware that no wards of the Conscience be broken,
for fear that the key of David that opens the heart, fit them not, or suit
not with the lock: David brake a ward and a sprint of the new heart by his
Adultery and bloodshed, and therefore no Artificer but one only in Heaven,
could put the lock in frame again, Psa. 51.10. The new creation is like a
curious horologe made of Crystal glass, it must be warily and tenderly
handled; the frame of the workmanship of the holy Ghost dwelling in us, 2 Timothy
1.14. must be kept from the least craze or throw in all the wheels and turnings
thereof, yea the least mote must not rest on it. Quest. What must be done to
keep in good temper the new Creation? Ans. 1. Beware to go to bed and sleep
with a bone broken or disjointed in the inner man: Its good to be disquieted in
spirit, as if there were an aching in the bones, after some g^^at sin not
repented nor bewailed: when Peter by denying his Lord, had rotted a bone or a
joint of the new man in himself, he rested not well that night, he went out and
wept bitterly, Mat. 26.57. Jeremiah made a rash and passionate vow to speak no
more in the name of the Lord; but he could not sleep with that coal of fire in
his bones, Jer. 20.9. 2. Put the keeping of the new Creature off your hand;
make it a pawn committed to Christ's keeping, 2 Timothy 1.12. let him answer for
it; be not you under the burden of it your self. The habit of Grace and the man
put under lock and key to Christ, is in sure keeping, consider what comes of
him, Jude ver. 24. This is a broken world, there be many loose-handed devils
going abroad through the earth: there be robbers lying await in the way to
heaven, to take the crown from us, Rev. 3.11. The believer who has a stock of
Grace, must be at holding and drawing with men and devils. Commit the keeping
of your souls to the faithful Creator: but be not you idle, do it in
well-doing, 1 Pet. 4.19. 3. Deal kindly with Christ when you have him, break
not with Christ if you would keep the habit of Grace safe, do nothing against
your state; grieving of the Holy Ghost, is unworthy of the condition of a
redeemed one; your place cannot consist with walking after the flesh: The Camp
you are in cannot well bear compliance with the flesh; You have put on the Lord
Jesus, To. 13. v. 14. You cannot lay in for, or victual such a Castle as the
flesh, for some exercise a providence, and lay in provision for the flesh. 4.
To be doing good keeps the habit of Grace in exercise, and in life also; for
Grace is of the nature of life, and life is preserved by motion, and the
frequent operations of life; yea, with this difference the natural life may be
worn out and consumed away with too frequent and violent labor and toil: This
life is increased by assiduous walking with God, for Ioh. 15.2. Every branch
that bears fruit in Christ: My Father (says he) purges it, that it may
bring forth more fruit.

Be it unto thee as thou wilt] Christ cannot long dissemble (to speak so) and
keep up his love; he tried this woman hardly; The tenderness of Christ's
affection and the strength thereof toward sinners.
now he praises her in her face; Great is thy faith, and grants her desire
to the full; if there was such a brotherly and natural compassion in Joseph,
Genesis 43.30. Joseph's bowels yerned they were hot, and Genesis 45.1. Joseph could
not refrain himself, Vatablus notes that the Hebrew word is, He could not do
violence to himself; His love was like a hot Furnace, and it was like to make a
captive of him, and to overcome him; now the man Christ has the same heart,
and bowels of a man, and I conceive as Christ was a man void of sin so the acts
of natural virtues, as to pity the afflicted were stronger in him then in us,
Christ strong in moral acts, and strongly moderate in acts natural; the
contrary of which is in natural men.
sin blunteth natural faculties, especially such as inclines to acts laudable
and good, such as are love, compassion to the miserable, and sin boweth, or
rather breaks natural acts that are indifferent in their nature, and farther
removed from mortality, and makes them intense above nature, sin being a
violent thing, so in natural men, there is little power in carnal reason over
acts of generation, hunger, thirst, sleep, and such as have their rise from the
sensitive soul: Christ having strength of sinless reason natural far above,
Adam was strong in the acts of the former kind, and moderat in the other;
especially being a high Priest that marches us in natural passions, Heb.
4.15. Even in a Sympathy, and having these same passions that we have, He
weeped over Jerusalem, Luke 19. When they were crying Hosanna to him; and
occasion of joy furnished to him, yet ver. 41.42 He wept over the City and
spoke words of compassion; but broken and imprisoned with sighing and sorrow: O
if thou knew, even thou, etc. Now what compassion must be in him, when his
affection had such an edge? Joseph is nothing to him, he having taken a man's
heart to go along with the Saints to heaven, sighing, weeping, mourning,
Tempted in all these, as we are, but without sin, Heb. 4.15. Now though there
be no passions, as there is no infirmities in God; yet the flower, the blossom,
the excellency of all these are infinitely in God, (...)
he strikes and tries, and yet pittieth, Judge. 10. Israel cries to the Lord
in their bondage, Arrias Monta. in Margin and angustiis affecta.

Vatabl. and abreviata est anima ejus.


he gives them a hard answer, Go to the Gods (says he) that ye have chosen,
and let them deliver you; they still are in bondage, and weep upon him, v. 16.
The Lords soul was grieved, Heb. Cut short for the misery of Israel, so Jer.
31. Two evils befall Ephraim, one is, Gods correcting hand; another is,
bemoaning and sorrow for sin, both are trials, but how does God express himself
toward Ephraim? v. 20. Is Ephraim my dear son? Is he a son of consolations? so
the Hebrew, Is he my dainty child? for since I spoke against him I do
earnestly remember him still, therefore my bowels are troubled for him: Observe
the income of Gods consolations, after sad and heavy trials, Isa. 54.11. O thou
afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted, behold I will lay thy stones
with fair colors, and thy foundation with Saphires, Isa. 40.1. Comfort ye,
comfort ye, my people says our God: 2. Speak to the heart of Jerusalem, and
cry to her that her warfare is accomplished: There is a violence of heavenly
passion in Christ's love, it will come out at length; tempted ones wait on, you
shall see Christ as Christ in the end of the day; Christ is well worthy a days
weeping, and a days waiting on; compassion strangled and enclosed in Christ
must break out, it eases Christ's mind that his bowels of mercy finds a
vent; pity kept within Gods bowels (to speak so) paineth him, it must come
out, Hos. 11.8. Mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled
together. O how rude and inhumane has sin made our nature! His love who died
for us, brake Heaven and rent the two sides of the Firmament (as it were)
asunder; our Lord descended, and was made a man in all things like us, except
sin. But O the first, nay, the doubled summons of Christ's love are not obeyed.
Love cries, we are deaf; Christ's love hunteth no other prey but our heart, and
he cannot have it. After Christ has tempted a soul, he must put it in his
heart; its an ease and comfort to Christ, to ease and comfort the tempted: he
is now trying Britain, and giving his Bride a cup of blood and tears to drink;
But who knows what bowels, what turnings of heart, what motions of compassion
are in the man Christ now in Heaven? Those who shall live to see the Lord take
his Bride in his arms and embrace her after these many temptations, that now
your eyes sees, shall subscribe to the truth of this, and those who find
Christ's love-embracements, after Desertions know this. Should we suppose that
there were in Christ but this one attribute of tender compassion toward his own
tempted ones, it should make him altogether lovely to us: Christ's motion of
tender mercy as it were natural.
for the motion of tender mercy in Christ, upon the supposition of Free-love
that he died for his own, is natural, he having taken a man's heart to Heaven
with him, and borrowed nature from us as our compassionate High Priest, he
cannot but pity; mercy acts as a natural agent in him. Now suppose we that
the mother were eternal, and her child eternal, but eternally weak;
compassion should eternally flow from the mother to the child; suppose a fair
rose to grow eternally, and the Summer Sun to shine near it eternally, and life
and sap to keep it vigorous eternally, it should cast out a sweet smell, and
offer its beauty to the eyes and senses eternally. In Jesus Christ the heart
and tender bowels of the sweetest, mildest, and most compassionate nature of
man, that God can possibly form, has met with eternal and infinite mercy in
God Christ, and to say nothing that mercy in Christ man has been putting forth
the sweet smelling acts of love, without tiring, summer, and winter, night and
day, these sixteen hundred years, and that even now while you read this, he is
casting out acts of love and mercy; an eternal High Priest could do no other
thing for ever, but compassionate his own redeemed flesh. Mercy chooses a lover
freely, Jacob, not Esau; this man, not that man; the fool, not the wise man;
the beggar, not the Prince: the servant, not the master: but having once made
choice, it works necessarily and eternally. Christ's love has no vacation, no
cessation: but when he tempts, smites, afflicts, tries, Love and tender
mercy works in the dark. Joseph's bowels were upon action, and busy when his
Brethren saw no such thing, even when he was accusing them as spies, and
dealing roughly with them. When the sword of the Lord, drunken, swelled, and
fatted with blood, is now raging in the three Kingdoms: mercy in our High
Priest and his bowels are rouled within him, though we cannot see Christ's inner
side. It is like the place, Hebrews 4.15. is but an allusive Exposition of the
rolled and moved bowels of GOD, Jeremiah 31.20. CHRIST is, Mercy works in
secret under a bloody dispensation.
as it were in Heaven burning and flaming in a passion of compassion toward his
weak ones: he is not only touched, but pained with our infirmities, so the word
does bear; we shall not do well to make the tempted condition that either the
Church or a soul is in, the rule of Gods love: Gods fiery dispensation in Zion,
or in a soul, in the burning bush, speaks not always wrath, make not false
Commentaries on Christ's tempting dispensation: Hell is accidental to the love
of Christ, and cannot change it. Suppose Christ's tender mercy were in the midst
of the flames of Hell; yet there mercy should be mercy, and work as mercy, and
not belie it self; never a rod of God upon any elect child of God (save upon
Christ only) did speak satisfactory vengeance for sin. Quest. Why? is not
Christ now red in his apparel, and his garments dyed and dipped in blood, and
has he not put on vengeance as a garment in the three Kingdoms? Ans. Yes, and
for the provocations of England, their unrepented Idolatry, superstition,
vanity, pride, security, unthankfulness to God, who has broken the rod of the
oppressor, and delivered them from pressures of conscience under Episcopacy, a
Masse-service, and burdensome ceremonies, and for the sins of the King, Queen,
Court, Prelates, and Prophets, the persecuting and killing the witnesses of
Christ in Queen Mary's days, Judgments on the kingdoms, except they repent.
and in the late Prelates time, and the present unjustice, careless, and
remiss minding Religion, and their laboring to spoil the Kingdom of Christ
of that power that Christ has given to his people of Church Discipline, and
translating it to their Parliament, to make Church Discipline
Parliament-discipline, confounding so the two kingdoms; their tolerating of
blasphemous sects; some denying the Godhead of Christ, some his Kingly Office
to sanctify, govern his people; some his Priestly, some his Prophetical
Office, and many other sins of Prophets, and people not repented of; and most
of these sins, and many others, and especially the breach of the Covenant in
Scotland; these two Kingdoms are to fear heavy judgments, and that their
calamity is not yet at an end: But rather one woe is passed, but another comes,
Except these lands be humbled, and lie in the dust before the Lord: Yet in all
this, the dispensation of God, though bloody, is but the Lord saying, as of
old, so now to Britain, Isa. 1.25. And I will turn my hand upon thee, and
purely purge away thy dross, and take away all thy tin. 26. And I will restore
thy Judges as at the first, and thy counselors as at the beginning; afterward
thou shall be called the city of righteousness, the faithful city: 27. Zion
shall be redeemed with judgment, and her converts with righteousness: 2. A
rough dispensation of Christ cannot abide long rough to the Saints, A rough
dispensation consistent with tenderness of love in our Lord.
he must answer and ease the pain of the woman's broken spirit; its a nights
pain to Christ to cause the tears run down the cheeks of his Church all the
night, he cannot but bring a day light of joy before the Suns ordinary time to
rise, Ps. 30.5. Christ smites and weepeth for compassion both at once: Tender
mercy in Christ moves as much, if not more within then without: The mothers
bowels are as much on work within, when the child is but upon her breasts, and
he is not capable to know a mother, as a mother, and love as love as ever; when
the deserted is but new and hot come out of the second womb, and a babe born
over again, yet in a spiritual Fever, he is as much as ever in the bowels of
Christ, though he be not in that case capable of the sense and actual
apprehension of Christ as Christ, and of the sense of Christ's love as his love,
Ier. 31.20. Since the time that I sufficiently talked with him in correcting
him, or since the time of my sufficiency of speaking against him, in remembering
him, I do remember him. I spoke much in mine anger against him, and half
against my will; I did chide him and scourge him, but my moved bowels, the
stirrings of a compassionating heart, did contradict (in a manner) my rough
correcting: my heart came out of me with every rough word, and stroke: The Sun
and nature works long and many years under earth, in the generation of Gold
and Silver ere we see gold and silver: God and his servant nature did us a
pleasure and a great favor in that kind, in secret, down in the bowels of the
earth, to make unseen and concealed provision for our purses, this secret love
to us acted down in the dark is no love to us, while we find it, and see it,
yet is nature in a mystery under a vail, sweating under earth to bring forth
for us Metals, Trees, Herbs, Flowers, corn for our service, but we see no
harvest at that time: Christ's bowels are sweating and as much laboring in
childe-birth pain of compassion and love, and tender mercy toward us when we
are in an Ague, and a fit of desertion, as at any time; but we are loved of
Christ, and pitied, and we know no such thing: All Christ's answers and words
to this woman till now, were but interpretations and Proclamations of wrath,
and rejecting of her, as not one of the lost sheep of the house of Israel, a
Dog under the Table, not a child of the house; love came never above ground
till now; yet did Christ's affection and love yern upon her all the time.

Out of all this we collect: Christ may love persons, and yet his dispensation
may be so rough, as that to their sense there is no ground of being assured
that Christ loves them, til he shall be pleased to manifest it: Hence we may
gather these Propositions considerable for the Times.

1. Propos. Gods free and unhired love is the cause of our Redemption,
Vocation, Pro. 1. Free love goes before our Redemption.
Sanctification, and eternal salvation; he loved us in our blood, and while we
were polluted in our blood, Ezech. 16.6.8. When we were the lost world, Joh.
3.16. ungodly, Romans 5.6. Enemies, ver. 10. He quickened us, called us, when dead
in sins, Ephesians. 2.1. Without works, 2 Timothy 1.9. The bil of Grace is Christ's
welcome and pay nothing.

Den. Ser Grace, mercy, p. 33.34. Pro. 2. Confess of the Belgic Armi. Christ
loves the persons of the Elect and hates their sins
2. Our Divines say God loves the persons of the Elect, but hates their sins,
M. Den offends at this, and so does the Arminians with the same reason, if
God hate the works of iniquity he cannot but hate the persons, and workers of
iniquity also: Its true, the Lord hates so the persons of the Elect for their
sins; as he takes vengeance of their sins on their Surety Christ, but this
consists with the Lords loving of their persons to eternal salvation: The
truth is, Gods affection ad intra of hatred and displeasure, never so passes
on the persons of the Elect, as on the persons of the Reprobate; he had
thoughts of love and peace in secret, from eternity, to his own Elect, he did
frame a Heaven, a Savior for them, before all time.

3. Propos. Our Divines do rightly teach, that there is a twofold love in God;
Pro. 3.
Amor benevolentiae, A love of well willing, which he did bear to them before
the world was, A twofold love in God, one of good will to the person, another of
compla^ency to his own image in the person Ib. p. 35.
and it is called the love of Election: Of this love, Romans 9.13. Paul speaks,
I have loved Jacob and hated Esau: this is fountain love, the wel-head of all
our salvation: There is another love called Amor complacentiae, A love of
complacency, a love of justification (so M. Den terms it) which
presupposes faith: Without which its unpossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. of
this Christ speaks, Joh. 14.21. He that loves me shall be loved of my
Father, and I will love him, and will manifest my self to him, ver. 23. If a
man love me, he will keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we will
come unto him, and make our abode with him; so Christ the wisdom of God says,
I love them that love me, Pro. 8.17. And so Christ speaks of his love to his
redeemed and sanctified Spouse, Can. 4.9. Thou have ravished my heart my
sister, my Spouse; thou have ravished my heart with one of thy eyes, with one
chain of thy neck: Holiness and the image of God is the object of this love, not
the cause nor any hire: it is not so properly love as the other. God rather
loves persons, desiring well and good to them, then things. Mr. Den is not
content with this distinction; and why: The love of Election, and the love of
Justification (says he) are not diverse loves, or diverse degrees of love, but
diverse manifestations of one and the same infinite love; as when a Father has
conveyed an Inheritance to his son, here is no new love from the Father to the
son, Obj. i. No new love in God.
but a new manifestation of that love wherewith the Father loved the son
before. Answ. Men should not take on them to refute they know not what; not any
Protestant Divines ever taught, that there is a new love in God, or any new
degree of love in God, that was not in him before: Arminians indeed tell us of
new love, new desires, and of ebbing and flowing; love and hatred succeeding
one to another in Gods mind, these Vorstian blasphemies we disclaim; it is
indeed, one and the same simple and holy will of God, by which he loved Peter
and John from eternity, and choosed them to salvation, and by which he so
loves them in time, as of Free Grace he bestows on them Faith, Holiness,
Pardon in Christ, and follows these with his love; and the former is called
his love of good will to their person, ere they do good or ill: the latter his
love of complacency to their State, and the Lords new workman-ship in them, as
with the same love the husband chooses such a one for his wife, and loves her
being now his married Spouse.

Obj. 2. Men like those whom they love, and so does God. Obj. 2. Den, page 36.
Ans. We grant all; these terms of Gods good loving, and good-liking, are
chosen of Divines to express the thing. God loves and likes Jacob not Esau,
from eternity, ere he believe or do good: but he does not so love and like
Jacob from eternity, to bestow Faith and the Image of the second Adam on him,
while in time he hear the Word and be humbled for sin, and the truth is, the
love of complacency is not a new act of Gods will that arises in God in time,
but the declaration of Gods love of good will in this effect, that God is
pleased to bestow faith and his beauty of holiness which makes the soul
lovely to God, and it is rather the effect of eternal love, then love. And God
has a love of complacency toward the persons of the Elect, and love of good
will (though not of choosing good will toward them) for their holiness, Cant.
4.9.

Obj. 3. It is absurd that God should love the Elect with infinite love to
choose them to salvation, Obj. 3. Page 37.
as touching their persons, and withal to hate them with an infinite batred,
as workers of iniquity. Answ. It were absurd I grant, if Gods hatred to the
Elect as sinners, were any immanent affection in God opposite to his love, by
which he should be averse to their persons. But Gods hatred to the Elect,
because they are sinners, is nothing but his displicency against sin (not
against the person) so as he is to inflict satisfactory punishment on the
surety Christ for their sin. A Father may so love his Prodigal Son, as to
retain a purpose to make him Inheritor of a Kingdom (if he had a Crown for
himself) and to pay his debts, and yet both hate and punish his profuse and
lavish wasting of his goods.

Mr. Den would teach us how love and hatred toward sinners does consist.
Den. Sermon. Grace, mercy, and peace Page 38,
The Law (says he) and the Gospel speak diverse things, the one being the
manifestation of Gods Justice, tells us what we are by nature; the other, the
manifestation of Gods mercy, tells us what we are by Gods mercy in Jesus
Christ. The Law curses and condemns the sinner, The Gospel blesses and
justifies the ungodly. Ans. What is this else? But that which Mr Den and
other Antinomians condemn in us? How can one and the same unchangeable God
curse condemn, and so hate sinners, as to punish them eternally, and yet
bless, justify, and love to eternal salvation their persons, except they
teach the same very thing which we do? For the Law and the Gospel are no more
contrary one to another, then love to the persons of the Elect, and hatred and
revenging justice to their sins: Page 38, 39.
Mr. Den would further clear the point thus; What ever wrath the Law speeketh
it is to the sinner under the Law, although the elect are sinners in the
judgment of the Law, sense, reason, yea oftentimes conscience, yet having their
sins translated into the Son of God (in whom they are elected) they are
righteous in Christ the Mediator. Ans. The Law speaks wrath in regard of its
reign and dominion to death to the elect not yet converted, What it is to be
under the Law.
and to the reprobate without exception of persons: but it cannot speak wrath
to the believer though he be one that daily sins, and is under the Law: that
is, under the rule of the Law: now to be under the Law to Paul, Romans 6. and 7.
is to be under the damnation of the Law: in which regard believers are not
under the Law, but under the sweet reign of pardoning grace, yet are they under
the Law as a Tutor, a guide, a rule: and that the rule and reign of the Law are
different is evident, 1. because the ruling power of the Law is an essential
ingredient of the Law, without the which the Law is not the Law: the reign or
damnation of the Law agrees to the Law by accident, in so far as man is a
sinner, which is a state accidental to the law. 2. The Law is a rule, and has
a proper guidance and tutory over the confirmed Angels, and should have had
over man if he had never sinned, but the Law can have no reign to death over
the confirmed Angels, and man in that case, as the Iayler has no power over
the man, who was never an evil doer. 1. We are sinners in the judgment of Law,
both sin dwelling in us, and 2. the guilt of the Law lying on us to
condemnation: But being once in Christ, and justified, we remain sinners, as
touching the indwelling blot, but we are not sinners, as we are justified in
Christ, as touching the Law-obligation to eternal condemnation, from which we
are fully freed. But the justified and redeemed of Christ remain as formally
and inherently sinners, as Milk is formally white, a Raven black: Justification
removes not the indwelling of sin, and so in regard of sense, reason, and
conscience, we are sinners to our dying day, but not condemned sinners. M.
Den objecteth; We pray daily, forgive us our sins, then we are not righteous
in Christ; he answers, that Protestants say, Page 44.
we beg greater certainty and assurance of forgiveness; but not content with
this answer, he adds, When we pray for forgiveness, we magnify his grace,
who has freely given us forgiveness, it were not folly to a condemned person,
having receied a pardon, and being assured of it, to fall down and say, Pardon
me my Lord the King. Ans. What Protestant Divines say in this, we acknowledge;
but if we seek only a fuller certainty of forgiveness in this Petition, and
not also the application of the general pardon, as appropriated to the sins we
daily fall in; I see no other thing we seek, but a greater measure of faith to
lay hold on remission: I should ask a warrant of Scripture to prove that
forgiveness of sin signifies assurance of the pardon of sin. 2. That to seek
forgivenes daily is, to glorify and magnify him from whom we once received
forgiveness, is not to purpose, for that is a general in all Petitions that
we put up to God, no less then in this. 3. If a pardoned malefactor having
assurance he were pardoned, should fall down and beg pardon of the King, and
not rather tender him thanks and blessings, for a received pardon; I should
believe he called in question the Kings favor; but should he every day, when
he eats bread, beg pardon from the King, as we beg daily forgiveness, he
might be charged with more then ordinary folly. Pap. 45, 46. Page 54.
M. Den; God loves us in blood (says he) and pollution, as well before
conversion, as after conversion: and though faith procure not Gods love and
favor, yet it serves us for other uses, that we may be sealed by believing,
Ephesians. 1.13. and may thereby know the love of God. It is said, he that believes
not is damned, not because his believing does alter or change his estate before
God, but because God has promised, that he will not only give us remission,
but also faith for our consolation, and so faith becomes a note, and a mark of
life everlasting, as final infidelity is of eternal condemnation. Ans. 1. It
is true God loves the elect before conversion equally, as after conversion, in
regard of that free love of election, that moved him to give his Son to death
for them, Joh. 3.16. and to call them effectually, 2 Timothy 1.9. Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3,
4. Tit. 3.3, 4.

4. Propos. It is a palpable untruth, Pro. 4.
that the elect by believing in Christ, and being translated from death to life
in their conversion to God, are equally loved of God, before conversion as
after conversion, if we speak of Gods love of complacency, for though the
inward affection and love of God, as it is an immanent and indwelling act in
God, be eternal, and have not its rise in time, and be not like the love of
man to man, which is like the Sea ebbing and flowing; or the Moon, How God
loves us before time and how he now loves us in time.
which admits of a cloudy and dark visage, and of an enlighted and full
condition, yet as the same love of God is terminated upon sinful men, or
rather that which is called, the love of complacency, which is indeed the
effect of Gods love; it is not every way one and the same after conversion and
before; as it is the same fountain and spring that runs in its streams
toward the South, which by Art and industry of men may be made to run toward
the North, the change is in the streams, not in the fountain, yet we say the
fountain now runs not Southward, as it did before, but Northward: also give
me leave to doubt, if these same very visible Sun beams, that did fall upon
Adam and Eve, does this Summer fall upon us, yet I doubt not but the same Sun
that did shine the first six hours of the Creation, on the Garden of Paradise,
shines upon all our gardens and orchards that now are. So Gods love is one and
the same toward the elect before time, and while they are wallowing in the
state of sinful and depraved nature; and now when they are changed in the
spirits of their mind. But it may well be said that God loves his Church, as
washed, as fair, and spotless, Cant. 4.7. and that he does now say of her,
Cant. 4.10. How fair is thy love, my sister, my Spouse! how much better is thy
love then wine, and the smell of thine ointments then all spices? whereas the
Lord said before of her, Eze. 16.3. Thy birth and thy nativity is of the Land
of Canaan, thy father was an Amorite, thy mother an Hittite. 4. As for thy
nativity, in the day that thou wast born, thy Naevell was not cut, neither wast
thou washed in water to supple thee: thou wast not salted at all, nor swadled
at all -- 6. And when I possed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thy blood: I
said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood, live: and all this the Lord might
speak to the same Church yet unconverted; and at that time the Lord could not
utter that expression of love, to say to a bloody and polluted Church as he
does, Can. 4.7. Thou art all fair, my love, there is not a spot in thee; now
could it be said, that the Father and the son loves such a Church, as such as
loves the Father, and keeps the words of the Son, as it is, Ioh. 14.21.23.
what the Church was not fair, not spotless; but filthy, polluted, not washed,
not justified as yet; and though it be true, that faith procure not Gods love
and favor (it is a calumny that ever Protestant Divine taught any such thing)
for the work of Gods eternal love in election to Glory, or his hatred in
reprobation, is not the yesterday or the daies-birth of our faith, or our
unbelief, yet that believing, or our effectual conversion makes no alteration
or change in our state before God, is a gross untruth; Faith and conversion
makes indeed, No change of any state in the ancient of days, in the strength
of Israel, who cannot lie or repent, and puts not God from the State of a
Reprobating or hating, or a not loving and choosing God, whereas before he was
such, who did love and choose us to salvation, (the Lord is our witness) we
asserted the contrary doctrine of Free Grace against Arminians and Papists.

5. Prop. Our believing and conversion to God does alter and change our state
before God: By faith and conversion to God, our state is truly before God
changed.
1. Church that was in a polluted, filthy, and miserable condition Ezekiel. 16.3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Is now in Christ's heart as a seal, Cant. 8.6. so fair, as her
beauty ravisheth the heart of Christ; now Christ names Hos. 1.10. It comes to
pass, That in the place, where it was said to them, ye are not my people,
there it shall be said unto them, ye are the sons of the living God, 1 Pet.
2.10. Which in time past, were not a people, but are now the people of God,
which had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy: 3. The words of
Scripture, that imports a real change, does prove the same, as Col. 1.12.
Who has made us meet, or sufficiently qualified us, to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light. Christ is a qualified work* man, and
changes Hell, and the most untoward Timber of Hell, in Heaven and in a Vessel
of glory: Its a vain thing, to dream that Christ has no other esteem and
warmness of heart to us when we are dead in sins and trespasses, and Posting
as in a horse race after the Devil, who rides, and acts and breaths in the
children of disobedience, and when he has raised and quickened us for his great
love, and placed us in Heaven with Christ, Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3, 4. And made us Kings
and Priests unto God: Then the state of Hell and Death, should be the very
state of Grace and Heaven before God: A new creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. Light in the
Lord, Ephesians. 5.8. partakers of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. Renewed in the
spirit of the mind, Ephesians. 4.23. Such as are begotten again, unto a lively hope,
by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the Dead, 1 Pet. 1.3. Born again not
of corruptible seed, 1 Pet. 1.23. Kings and Priests unto God, Rev. 1.5. A
generation of Kings and Priests unto God, 1 Pet. 2.9. Must be in their state,
some other thing then old creatures, then darkness, then unrenewed,
uncircumcised old men, slaves of sin, persecutors, blasphemers, injurious
persons: The Lord speaks of a change great enough, Is. 43.4. Since thou wast
precious in my sight; thou have been honorable, and I have loved thee, etc.
Were the children of wrath from Eternity Honorable? No, were they more
precious and honorable actually before God from eterernity, then the rest of
the Nations? No, the contrary is evident, Ez. 16.3. Deu. 7.7, 8. Ps. 147.19, 20
Deu. 26.5. Certainly, if Faith or conversion to God (a special part of which is
Faith) does not alter the state of Believers before God, then are they
Believers, and actually converted before God, and so justified from eternity?
When were they then sinners? Never, Their sins were just no sins from Eternity,
and blotted away as a cloud, as a thick cloud, as it is Isa. 44.22. And that
from Eternity, and from Eternity sought and not found, because pardoned, Jerem.
5.20. no more remembered, Isaiah 43.25. now they were justified from Eternity,
and ere they believe in him that justifies the ungodly, no other ways then in
Gods decree and eternal purpose; but the truth is, this is the principle,
false and rotten pillar of all Libertinisme, which I evert thus; and they shall
never be able to answer it, if faith be so far forth a manifestation of our
justification before God, because justification was in the sight of God
actually done from eternity, before all time; then are we never ungodly and
actually sinners before God: For it is unpossible (say Antinomians) that God
can both hate us, as ungodly, and love us as justified in Christ; and it is
vain, and non sense (say they) that God loved the persons from eternity and
hated the sins, or that he loved the elect with the love of election, or love
of good* will, and did not also love them with the love of justification (this
is their term not mine) or with the love of complacency, and his good liking to
faith in them. Then (say I) from eternity the justified were never ungodly,
never sinners, never the heirs of wrath, never such as served diverse lusts, To
be justified by faith is not barely to come to the knowledge that we are
justified before we believe, or from eternity. Sermon. of grace, mercy and peace
pa. 33, 34.
and were disobedient, polluted in their own blood, which is downright
contrary to the word of truth. 2. Observe the Principle of Antinomians: We are
not justified by faith (say the) How then? Because we are justified from
eternity, only we are said by Paul to be justified by faith, in that by faith
we come to the knowledge and assurance of the state of election, and of
justification, and Gods Act of not imputing sin to us, which Acts were possed
upon us from eternity, and before the children had done good or evil, Romans
9.13. And observe the words of Mr. Hen. Den to this purpose: I do believe
(says he) sin to be of that hideous nature, and the justice of God so perfect,
that be cannot but hate the person, unto whom be imputes, and upon whom be
charge sin, if so be the person charged cannot give full, perfect, and
present satisfaction; and yet will I not say, that the Son of God, upon whom
all our iniquities were charged, was at any time, Filius Odii, a son of hatred
(for the Father was eternally well-pleased with him) the reason is, that our
sins were no sooner charged upon him, but that he had given full and perfect
satisfaction, being the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, Rev.
13.8. Answ. If God cannot but hate the person upon whom he charge sin, either
God never charged our sins upon Christ: contrary to Scripture, Isa. 53.6. 1
Pet. 2.23, 24. 2 Cor. 5.21. or then he hated Christ, which no sound Divine dare
say: Justification not eternal.
The payment and satisfaction which Christ made, cannot hinder Christ to hate
sin, and so the person upon whom sin is (as Antinomians teach, while as they
refuse this distinction) no more then the satisfaction that Christ made for
sin, can hinder it self, or hinder Christ to die for sin; for if God should
hate Christ, it should be satisfactory hatred, and penal. 2. I much wonder, if
God from eternity charged sin upon his Son Christ (for the place he cites,
Rev. 13.8. and the judgment of Antinomians so expounding it, evinceth this to
be his meaning) how Christ from eternity could give full, perfect, and present
satisfaction to prevent the hatred of his Father, is not imaginable: indeed,
when Christ gave satisfaction, I believe that it was full and perfect: but that
Christ from eternity gave present satisfaction, and that to make us actually
justified from all Eternity, is a Point no head can conceive, except Herod,
Pilate, Jews and Gentiles, the Traitor Judas, and all who were wicked Actors
in killing of Christ, be men uncreated, who had existence and being, and sinned
from eternity; this lies fairly for the eternal world of Aristotle; then
surely faith does not bring us to the knowledge, only of our state of
justification, as passed, and done from eternity, as if election to glory, and
the love of God therein, and justification, and that love, as manifested by
faith, were two coeternal twins, both at once begotten from eternity. Sure I
am, we are justified by faith; but sure I am, we are not elected and chosen to
life eternal by faith: And if to be justified by faith, be as our Masters
(though ignorantly) teach, nothing but this, that we come to the knowledge of
our justification by faith, as by a sign, even as the day star makes not the
Sun to rise, it being only a sign that the Sun shall rise, and that
justification is as old a child of free-love as election to life. Then say I,
Paul might have taken the like pains to prove these Propositions: We are chosen
to glory before the world was, by faith, and not by the good works of the Law:
and this (men are reprobated from eternity by final unbeleef.) For sure it is,
that we come to the knowledge of our election to glory by believing; not to
say, that Paul's large dispute with justiciaries, was not whether we know, and
apprehend our own justification by the works of the Law, or by faith in Christ.
3. If Antinomians say, That Christ was slain for our sins from eternity, not
that Christ is the Lamb slain for our sins from eternity) be, that he is we
believe, then the world was created from eternity. Now in the Antinomian sense,
as we are justified by faith, that is, we come to know that we were in Gods
mind actually justified; Then it may be said, The world was created by faith:
For Heb. 11.2. Through faith we understood that the world was created; and God
laid our sins upon Christ by faith: and Christ died for us, and bare our sins,
on his own body, on the tree, by faith: For, by faith, we come to know that God
made the world; but because the knowledge and apprehension of the creation (may
some say) is not a point serving for peace of conscience, and Christian
consolation, which yet is false, (every point of saving faith is apt to breed
peace and consolation) yet certainly we came to know and apprehend that God
laid our sins upon Christ by faith, Isa. 53.6. and that Christ died for us, and
bare our sins on his own body on the tree by faith, and by faith only, to our
peace and consolation; and so, if justification by faith be nothing but the
manifestation of Gods love to us in imputing our sins to Christ, and have no
subordinat organicall act in our justification, but we be justified before we
believe, and that from eternity, upon the very same ground, God created the
world by faith, Christ died for our sins by faith. 5. Yea, in this sense the
world must be created from eternity, and all things which fell out in time fell
out in eternity, because as Christ was the Lamb slain from eternity, in Gods
eternal purpose, so were all things, and the world created from eternity in
Gods purpose and decree, but things that only have being in the decree of God,
are not simply, nor have they any being at all; and therefore our free
justification from eternity had no being, but only was to be, and actually is,
when God gives us faith to lay hold on the remission of our sins.

Nor is it enough to say, That faith is only given for our joy and consolation,
Faith is not only given for our joy and consolation, also for our
justification, but in our own soul, and before God.
and not for the alteration and change of our state; that of unjustified we may
be justified: For this lays down these false grounds: 1. The believer is so
^n every moment of time to rejoice, as he is never to sorrow for sin, nor to
confess sin, because ^ins were pardoned from all eternity; but so, neither
after a soul believe, nor before he believe, is he to confess sins, or mourn
for them; because both after and before, yea from eterni^y, sins are not at
all, but removed in Christ. 2. It ^ayeth down this ground, that we are
justified no more by faith, then by the works done, by the saving grace of God
after regeneration, and that Paul in the Epistle to the Romans and Galatians,
does contend with justiciaries, ^ow these who were from eternity justified,
shall come to know and apprehend, for their ^wn peace, joy, and consolation,
that they were ^ustified, and elected to glory; whether men ^ay know this by
faith in Christ, or by the works of the Law. But 1. this is not the state of
the question between Paul and the Justiciaries: For Romans 3. Paul concludes
strongly, we are really and indeed changed from a state of sin, unto a state of
justification, even before God; not because by keeping the Law we know we are
justified, but because all have sinned, and are come short of the glory of God,
and so are inherently wicked, abominable, doers of ill, and condemned
therefore, before God, from David's testimony, Psalm. 14. Psalm. 53. This Argument
concludes real and intrinsecall condemnation, v. 19. not the knowledge of
condemnation, nor the knowledge that we are not justified by the works of the
Law, Romans 4.2. Paul proves, that we are justified as David and Abraham was:
Now they are not said to be justified by faith, because they come by faith to
the knowledge of their justification: for Abraham's righteousness, and the
blessedness of the justified man opposed to the curse of the Law, from which
we are freed in justification, Gal. 3.10, 11, 12, 13. is the real fruit of
justification, and of believing in him that justifies the ungodly, Romans 4.1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. But this blessedness, and freedom from the curse of
the Law, is not any fruit or effect, or consequent of our knowledge and
apprehension of our justification in Christ: as if we were, before we believe,
blessed and freed from the curse of the Law, because ever the Elect before they
believe are under the curse, and are not blessed: 1. Because they are, before
they believe, the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.2. Ergo, They are under the curse:
2. Because Paul and the Elect, before they be under grace and belief, were
under the Law, and so under wrath, Romans 6.14, 15, 16, 17. Romans 7.4. Wherefore
my brethren, ye also are become dead to the Law, by the body of Christ, that ye
should be married to another. 5. For when we were in the flesh, the motions of
sins, which were by the Law, did work in our members, to bring forth fruit unto
death: 6. But now we are delivered from the Law, that being dead wherein we
were held, we should serve in newness of spirit, and not in the oldnesse of
the Letter: Hence it is clear that there was a time in which Paul and the Elect
at Rome were servants of sin, Romans 6.20, 21. Under the lusts and motions of
sin, which work in their Members to bring forth fruit, that is sins to death
eternal, To. 7.5. Ergo, They were then under the curse of the Law, and so far
from blessedness, and the servants of sin, Romans 6.20. and persons in the
flesh: But the case is changed, they are now not the servants of sin, but
servants of righteousness, Romans 6.22. Married to a new husband Jesus Christ,
Romans 7.4. Whence came this change of two contrary states; yea, and before God
contrary? (for before God, it cannot be one state to be servants of sin, under
the Law, and servants of God, and under Grace:) Certainly from Faith on our
part, or some other grace in us; at least there must be something of grace, by
which the alteration from a cursed estate, to a blessed estate is made; then
faith is not a naked manifestation of the blessedness of justification, to the
which we was entitled before we believed, for before we believed, we was in a
cursed estate: This also may be added, that if Faith be but a Declaration or
manifestation, that we are justified before we believe; Paul had no reason to
deny that we are justified; that is, that we know to our comfort, by works of
holiness that we are justified, for works of sanctification are evident
witnesses that we are in Christ, and are justified, 2 Cor. 5.17. 1 John 3.14. 1 John 2.3. Jam. 2.24.25. 2 Pet. 1.10. 3. It lays down this false ground, that
grace is nothing in us, but a mere comfortable sense, and apprehension of
Free-love, and Grace is conceived to be only and wholly in Christ, so that
there is no inherent grace in the Believer, by which he is differenced from an
unbeliever, sanctification and duties flowing from the habit of grace, are
nothing but dreams of Legal men; Christ justifying the sinner is all and some
in the Elect: strict and precise walking, conduce nothing to salvation: To
think that it can do any thing in order to salvation is to worship (says Mr.
Den) an angry deity. 2. To satisfy justice with our works, fasting, tears,
duties. Therefore our

6. Pro.
6. Propos. Is, that it is a vain distinction of Master Den, There Is no ground
for two reconciliations in Scripture, one of man's reconciliation to God,
another of Gods reconciliation to man.
who would have a reconciliation of God to man, and of man to God. 1. Because
we read that man is reconciled to God, Romans 5.10. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20. Col.
1.20, 21. Ephesians. 2.16. Man is the enemy, whereas in Adam he was a friend, and in
Christ the second Adam he is made a friend: but that God is reconciled to man
or changed toward his own Elect from an enemy and a God that hates their
persons into a friend and lover of them, I never read, if at any time God be
said to be comforted toward his people, or eased, these are borrowed speeches:
2. Love of Election; yea, the love that puts God on work to Redeem, Call,
Justify, Sanctify the Elect is no love bought with hire; yea, the price of
Redemption, which Christ gave for sinners, cannot buy eternal love; blood, and
the blood of God shed cannot woodset ancient love, all the sins of Devils, of
men cannot forfeit it, make sins, floods and seas, and ten thousand worlds of
rivers, they cannot quench that eternal coal and flame in the breast of so free
a Lover as God, in a word, Christ's merits no cause, but an effect of Gods
eternal love of Election. What reconciliation is properly.
the shed blood of Christ is an ^ffect, not a cause of infinite love. 3. What
^hen, does reconciliation place any new thing in God? No, Does it turn him from
an Hater to a Lover? No, Reconciliation active on the Lords ^art, is a change
of his outward dispensation, not ^f his inward affections: Fury is not in me,
he ^ith himself, Isa. 27.4. He cannot wax hot and ^^ry in the Acts of his
spotless and holy will; Reconciliation turns not the heart, but the hand of
the Lord, upon the little ones, as he speaks, so that he cannot deal with or
punish his elect, as otherways he would do: The Lords justice may be satisfied,
his love cannot be budded, or hired, and the effect of justice, the inflicting
of infinite wrath is diverted, as a River that runs East has been made to
run West, and an issue of blood in one member of the body, has been diverted
to run at another channel: justice was to run through the Elect of God, in the
due and legal punishing of the sinner (which yet is extraneous to the just and
eternal will of God) but infinite wise mercy, caused that River to run in
another vein, through the soul of Jesus Christ.

7. Propos. Joy of the holy Ghost is a fruit of the Kingdom of Grace, Pro. 7.
Romans 14.17. But not that joy spoken of, Ser. 2. Recon of man to God, pa. 16.
Joy of the holy Ghost without all sorrow, is no fruit of the Kingdom of God.
Rev. 21.4. and Is. 35.10. Which excludes all tears, death, sorrow, crying,
all sighing, as Mr. Den dreameth, so as joy can no more be separated from the
Subjects of that kingdom then light from the Sun, heat from the fire, or ebbing
and flowing can be stopped in waters (as he says) far less is it true, that
actual love and obedience does inseparably follow this condition, except we
were made Angels when we are once justified; nor is the Kingdom of God spoken
of, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. And the seeing of God, Heb. 12.14. The Kingdom, or state of
Grace or the seeing of God in a vision of Faith, here in this life (but of the
Kingdom of glory, and of the vision of God in the other life) as M. Den
expounds it, that he may elude all necessity, Sermon. 1. Reconcil. page 85, 86,
87.
of holiness, but that which flows from no obligation of any Law or
Commandment of God: But which is in our power of love to perform, or not
perform: if we perform it not, its no transgression of any Law of God.

1. M. Den himself grants. page 84. The seeing of GOD, Heb. 12.14. and the
Kingdom of GOD, 1 Cor. 6. and Joh. 3.3. not meant of the kingdom of Grace.
God is not like some nigardly man, who will not bid us welcome to his house,
unless we bring our cost with us: Nor is holiness required of us without
Faith, and before we believe and enter Citizens of the kingdom of Grace: Nay,
by this interpretation, 1 Cor. 6. We must be Justified and washed before we can
inherit this Kingdom, v. 9, 10.11. But we are not to be washed and justified
before we inherit the Kingdom of Grace, and before we believe; for so we should
be justified and washed before we be justified and washed, and the like I say
of the Kingdom of God, John 3.3. Pro. 8. How all acts of blood and rough
dealing in Christ toward his people, become mercy and tender compassion.
For it should follow that a man must be born again, ere he be born again, if
he must be born again, ere he enter a subject of the Kingdom of Grace: Nay, not
any such condition can go before man's reconciliation to God.

Propos. 8. Christ can love dearly and tempt ^oughly both at once: 1. His love
consists ^ot in a taking his Church into his bosom, and (...) continual,
and never interrupted laying of her ^etween his breasts; yea, tempting flows
from the love of God, nor is it any act of Justice; yea, to take vengeance on
the inventions of his people (satisfying Justice he cannot exerce toward his
Elect; yet a punishing and correcting Justice, he may, and does put forth on
them) but it has its rise from love; all the wheels of Gods dispensation sweet
or sower, are rolled upon this Axle ttee of Free-love, the bowels of Christ,
act, move, and breath all dispensations to the Saints, through no other Pipe
and Channel, but free and tender compassion, so as mercy is an immediate Actor;
when the Lord is wasting his Church with bloody wars: And (which is wonderful)
mercy is Christ's armor-bearer, and Mercy immediately kills, even when death
climbeth in at the windows, and enters into the house of the believer, either
in a pestilence known to come from no creature, or second cause; or in the
raging sword, when the carcasses of men fall as dung in the open field, and as
the handful after the harvest men, and there be none to bury them, Jer. 9.21,
22. 2. Tempting mercy is wise mercy, it were not atempting mercy, if we saw all
the secrets of love, and the reasons why the Lord builds Zion with blood;
even the Elect, and beloved of God, though they be in Christ's court they are
not always upon his counsel, Joh. 13.7. Many are within the walls of the
Palace, that are not in the Kings Parlour, and taken into his house of wine.
The love of Christ has its own mysteries, and unknown secrets, as why one
Saint is led to heaven, and to men's eye, The Candlestick of the Almighty
shines on his Tabernacle, and he washes his steps in oil: he is rich, holy,
prosperous; and another, no less dear to Christ, never laugheth while he be
within the gates of heaven, but eats the bread of sorrow all his days, his
face never dries while he be in glory, is a secret of heaven. The love of
Christ is often veiled and covered, and we know not what he means; but he
hastes to show mercy.

Use. This should make us very charitable of Christ when he frowneth, and
covers himself with a cloud, and very inclinable to pardon (if I may so
speak) rough and bloody dispensations in Christ: He loves, and he bloodeth,
scourges, and gives his own child a cup of gall and wormwood: Could we in
silence believe its Christ with two garments on him at once, Christ clothed
with love, wrapped in the unseen mystery of tenderness of compassion, and yet
his upper garment is vengeance, and rolled in blood, we should kiss the edge
of Christ's bloody sword; so we are to believe: for Isa. 63.1. Christ at one
time travelleth in the greatness of his strength, and speaks in
rigteousnesse, and is mighty to save: and at the same time his upper garment is
blood: It is true, it is the blood of his enemies: but it is often the blood of
the children of his own house and Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 9.6. 1 Pet. 4.17. And what
more concerns us then to keep our first love to Christ? When he multiplieth
our widows in the three Kingdoms, as the sand of the sea, and brings against
the mother of the young men, a spoiler at noonday, Jer. 15.8. This woman
stayed on her watchtower, and now the vision speaks mercy to her: Say they
were injuries that Christ inflicteth (which is a blasphemous impossibility) yet
it is Christ, it is the Lord, let him do what seems good to you: The
absolute liberty of the Potter closes the mouth of the clay-vessell if it
could speak, Romans 9. That unbelief has no reason to stomach and dispute
against hells fire coming from him, who has absolute dominion over us: As
Devils, and wicked men burn in hell with eternal fretting against God for
their pain, so, if it were possible, that the Elect and Regenerate were thrown
into hell, they are to have eternal charity, and love to the holy and just
Lord, and to believe his eternal love.

SERMON XXV.
Omnipotency has influence: 1. On Satan. 2 On diseases. 3. Stark Death. 4. On
life it self.
BE it unto thee as thou will.] (...) It^ a word of Omnipotency, to create
Being its spoken of Satan, and to Satan, Mark 9 25. Luke 4.35. 2. None can
speak to Leprosy, bu^ Christ, Mat. 8.3. Luke 4.39. Be thou clean. 3^ Christ
can speak to stark death, Joh. 11.43. an^ Joh. 5.28. Jesus cried with a loud
voice, Laza^rus, come forth. 4. He can speak to life, In ab^stracto, Ezekiel.
37.9. Come from the four Winds, (...) breath, and breathe upon these slain, 5.
On Mother-nothing. 6. On all creatures etc.
that they may live. 5. God can speak to Mother-nothing, as if Nothing had ears
and reason, and could hear, Romans 4.17. He calls things that are not, as
though they were: He did but nod upon Nothing, and out of Nothing there
compeared before him, The great Host of heaven and earth, and all things in
them, Psa. 33.9. 6. There is a Language of Providence by which every Being, as
Being, has a power-obedientiall to hear what God says, and do it, Ion. 2.10.
The Lord spoke to the Fish, and it vomited out Jonah on the dry land. Mar.
4.39. And he arose, and rebuked the wind, (...) and said unto the sea, Peace,
be still; and the wind ceased, and there was a great calm: What wise man can
boast the Sea? What ears has the senseless and ^ifelesse waters? Yet they hear
Christ's language, they speak, Yonder stands our Creator boa^ting us, and
therefore we will obey, Isa. 50.2. Hear himself speak: Behold, at my rebuke, I
dry up the Sea, Psa. 114. There is a question put upon the creatures, that they
can well answer: ver. 5. What aileth thee, O thou Sea, that thou fleddest? Thou
Jordan that thou wast driven backward? verse. 6. What ailed you, ye mountains,
that ye skip^ed like Rams, and ye little hills like Lambs? Good reason says
the Spirit: verse. 7. Tremble thou ^arth, at the presence of the Lord:
Obedientiall power in the creature, what it is
at the presence of the God of Jacob: This obedientiall power is not any
quality created in the creature different from their being, for God may use any
creature to infinite effects of omnipotency, and so there should be infinite
created qualities in every finite creature. 2. This obedientiall power was in
that Mother-nothing, out of which, God by an omnipotent act of creation,
extracted all the hosts of creatures that now are; and its in that other
Mother-nothing, yet objected to omnipotency, according to which God may create
infinite more worlds then now are, so it please him; its then nothing, but a
non-repugnancy, to hear and obey God in these particulars: Ezekiel. 16.6. I said
to thee, when thou wast in thy blood, live: This Mandate of omnipotent grace is
spoken to Jerusalem, as hardened, and cold dead in sin, Ephesians. 5, 14. Wherefore
he says, Awake, thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall
give thee light: This is a Commandment of omnipotency, given out of sinful
rebellion: If Omnipotence say, See ye blind: hear, ye deaf: Grace is a King
over sin, and omnipotency a mighty Conqueror: Rebellion cannot stand before the
grace of God, could we resign Rebellious and dead hearts to God, he should
change them, though we be most unable to master them: Meer-nothing is a servant
to omnipotency: he sends his mandate, or statute of heaven, to meer-nothing,
and Darkness, as the Sergeant and Pursevant of GOD, must send out Light, by
virtue of a creating Mandate, 2 Cor. 4.6. 3. Every creature is under the awe of
Omnipotency, and God says, Do not ebb and flow: and the sea is dried up at
his rebuke, Psalm. 77.16. The waters saw thee, O God, the Waters saw thee, they
were afraid: So says he: Winds, blow not: Seas, rage not: fire, burn not:
Lions, devor not: Sun, move not: Clouds, rain not: Devils, hurt not: Waters,
overwhelm not: Sword, destroy not: and they all obey. 4. There is a power
obedientiall, in creatures to be instruments that can be elevated above, Peter
walk in the Sea; yea, devils and men crossing Gods Moral will, fulfill his
eternal Counsel; according to that, Ps. 119.91. All are thy servants, Hell,
Devils, Gavaliers, Malignants, Papists are Gods servants: 5. By this power,
where as nature must have time and hours to work, yet nature follows Peter's
mother in Law in an instant. 6. By this power creatures creep into nothing,
when God commands them so to do: God the house of Heaven and earth, (...) are
all dissolved; all the old Tenants of the world, the Heavens which have sitten
in Gods house 5000 years, at the first warning of their Almighty Landlord must
remove and retire into nothing, if God so command them.

1. Use. Omnipotency is (as it were) a servant to Faith.
Use 1. It is comfort, to the believer all things are possible; Faith has
omnipotency at its service, the sword and wars are gone, the enemies of the
Lord broken, the Temple built, Babylon plagued at the nod of Faith, Devils
cannot stand, when Christ's Mandate charge them to fall.

2. Use.
Use 2. It is but little that we can do, let us have Hosts of men, we cannot
have the victory: Let man be swift, yet the Race is not to the swift; let him
be strong, Yet the battle is not to the strong; let him be wise and learned,
Neither is bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, Eccles.
9.11. 1. The word of the Almighty is his deed also, Psalm. 33.9. He spoke, and
it was done, he commanded, and it stood fast; (...) For he himself spoke, and
it was: The Lords word gives being to things, by the contrary; men's deeds are
nothing but words; so the lives, being, and actions of the Kings of Israel and
Judah, are called Dibre hajamim, (...)
words of days: They are the acts and deeds of men living and dying, and
compassed with days; for the deeds and acts of men are but words, they live
and speak a little on earth and die, their acts are of as little worth, and
reality as the airing out, and breathing forth of words: The greatest Prince
makes a sound for a time, as one that speaks words, and then he is gone, and
lies silent in the grave; Solomon did many acts, but they are called words
only, 1 Kin. 11.41. And the rest of the acts of Solomon; Hebrew, (...)
The rest of the words of Solomon, Are written in the Books of the Acts;
Hebrew, Of the words of Solomon, 2 Kin. 21.25. And the rest of the words which
Amon did, are written in the Book of the words of the days of the Kings of
Judah. We use not properly to do, or act words, but to speak words; (...)
but the holy Language makes man and all his noble acts but words, and would
express that he is a creature of no great action, and can say more, then he
can do: Strong and mighty man is but a creature of words, he is a speaking body
of clay, and can do but little. We boast much that this, and this we shall do,
God has a lock and a chain of Iron on all the creatures; Armies are not to be
feared, the Lord smites the horse and the rider, and makes war to cease unto
the end of the earth, he breaks the bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder; he
burns the Chariot in the fire, Psalm. 46.9. Be not afraid of clay, Esaias 51.12.

Use 3. If the Lords word create the being of things, 3. Use. We worship a
Dependent God
then are we to conceive of him as of an Independent Sovereign; we forget
this, and worship a Dependent God: If I suffer the people to go to worship at
Jerusalem (says Jeroboam) I shall lose both life and Kingdom; God had promised
the contrary to establish him and his Kingdom, so he would do what is right in
the sight of the Lord, 1 Kin. 11.37, 38. But he believed that God in the
fulfilling of his promise must depend upon the Calves set up at Dan and Bethel:
So the Jews will have God in the preserving of their Kingdom and place, Joh.
11.48. to depend upon the sinful murdering of the Lord of Glory; yea, we
imagine that God cannot carry on the work of Reformation, except we comply with
some sort of Antichristian Prelate: The King thinks he cannot be a Monarch
except he have a Prerogative to play the Tyrant, and his Throne must fall,
except the Antichrist and blood, and unlawful peace with the bloody Irish
murderers, and destroying of the Lords Redeemed flock in both Kingdoms, be the
bloody Pillars of his Throne and Royal power: So God cannot save us, if
France, Denmark, Spain and Ireland come against these Kingdoms; we are so
wasted, except we make a Peace dishonorable to Jesus Christ and his
prerogative Royal; all this is to place God in a state of Dependency, we are
too wickedly careful how God shall acquit himself in his office of Governing
the world; ere you or I were born, the Lord governed the world, and his Church
without a miscarry (the Churches Heaven cannot be marred in Christ's hand) and
when we are rotten in the dust, he shall carry on all in righteousness and
wisdom, but we take it ill, if we cannot have a providence as fair and
eye-sweet, as white Paper, though indeed there be not one spot in Gods ways;
so Martha, Joh. 11.21. Lord if thou had been here, my brother had not died.
But Christ-God in preserving lives, depends not on his own bodily presence
here or there: Another complains God has forgotten me, he is not my God.
Why? Because I walk in darkness and have no light, nor any sense of his love. It
is the black and dead hour of midnight with me. So the Church argues, Isa.
49.14.15. Psalm. 77. v. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. But his unchangeable love depends
not on the ebbing and flowing of your transient and up and down sense: in this,
you worship a dependent God. There is no rule without God to regulate him, or
yet to straighten him in his walking; we are not to misplace God, for though
the God of Hosts has purposed to stain (...) Lechallel, to cast a blot on, and
profane the pride of all glory, Isa. 23.9. and suffer Parliaments, Assemblies,
Armies, Counsels of War, Statse-men, the Godly, the Princes, Judges, Pastors,
men of Wisdom, Learning, Eloquence, parts, to miscarry in this great service
against Babylon: it is to cry down the creatures garland, and the rose of their
eminency, that when all spots of Sacrilege and Idol-confidence in men are
washed off the work, the Lord only may be exalted. It is our wisdom to suffer
God to be wise for us: yea, Antinomians will have Christ no independent
Redeemer, but to them his grace shall not be perfect in pardoning, except all
sin in root and branch be removed from the justified, and they made as sinless
as Adam before his fall, and the Elect Angels: Yea, how many connexions of
Providence do we spin and twist out of our own head? As how happy had we been,
if the King had remained with the Parl. to countenance it? Yea, but rather how
unhappy, for our Reformation had been as an untimely birth, if so it had been:
How blessed should I have been says another, if I had been rich and learned?
Yea, rather you should have dishonored God in that condition. The Catholic
and mother sin is, God must be dependent, we independent.

4. Use. We have need of of the devil and other temptations for our humiliation
4. Use. All of us have need of a Devil, one or other, to exercise and humble
us: but we go wrong to work when we think to make good our party against the
devil by our own strength. This woman yoked Christ and the devil together, and
would not yoke with him her alone, and the success is blessed: we go to
dispute with temptations our selves by reason, you shall not dispute Satan to
hell with all your Logic, nor can Policy, and State-wit calm the Prince of
the bottomless pit, who is let loose now in these three Kingdoms to kill with
the sword: The Horseman upon the Red and bloody Horse, and his footman Death
are posting through the Kingdoms, more wrestling by prayer, the putting of
Satan in Christ's gripes, Isai. 57.19.
by faith effectual by love, and sincere humiliation should create peace, for
peace is a work of Creation: there is but one only can create, I mean God, by,
or at the exercise of these graces should create peace: we lie bleeding and
dying under our lusts, because Christ was not entrusted with mortification: if
we gave in a bill of complaint against our devils, as this woman did, Christ
should loose Satan's works and help us.

Be it unto thee] Faith obtains the most excellent favors, refined mercies,
Immediate mercies, the sweetest mercies.
and these are immediate favors, acts of immediate Omnipotency: Christ sent an
immediate Post to the Devil, though in a remote place, (its an act of immediate
creation) and Satan must be gone, no creature here interveneth; Its Christ's
(...), his Omnipotent ( be it so) that does the turn; its not Faith, its not a
good Angel, expelling an evil one, nor one Devil beating another, nor the
Disciples helping the woman, though they also did cast out Devils. The more
immediate mercies be, the more love-expressions of God in them; the first
roses, the first trees and plants that Gods own immediate art produced, and in
which nature could not share, are the perfectest creatures, the rest of the
creatures after the fall, come not near in goodness and beauty to Gods first
samplar, which are (as it were) the first Essays of Omnipotency: the greatest
mercies are most immediate, these be sweet favors that come (as it were) hot
and new, immediately from God himself: See it in all the excellent things that
God gives us, especial in these four. 1. In Christ: 2. Grace: 3. Glory: 4.
Comfort. Christ is Gods highest love gift: Now Christ the mediator, was given
without any Medium, or any intervening Mediator. God out of the mere bottom of
Free love gives Christ: The Lord Christ was not given by so much as request,
or counsel of Men or Angels: Christ, Heb. 1.3. by himself purged our sins, 1 Timothy 2.6. He gave himself a ransom for all; 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bare
our sins, in his own body on the tree: he satisfied and paid in his own
person: It was not a deputed work. God the Lord of life in proper person
Redeemed us: Christ's love to us was not deputy love, he loved us not by a
Vicar: Christ is given freely, as a Redeemer is more essentially a gift of Free
grace (to speak so) then the grace of faith which is given to those who hear
and are humbled for sin. And Christ given to die for sinners, is a more
immediate and pure gift of Grace then remission of sins and eternal life, which
are given to us upon condition of Faith, whereas a Redeemer is given to die for
us without any condition, thought, desire, any sweating or endeavor in man or
Angel. 2. So is Grace given out of Grace, saving Grace is made out of nothing,
not out of the potency of the matter. The new heart is a creation, and as its
Grace, is framed without tools, agents, art, or service; Grace issues
immediately out of Christ's heart, he has no hire, no payment for it:
non-payment, no money is Graces hire, 3. And Heaven is given, not by art, not
by merit, not for sweating; But how? Luke 12.32. Its the Fathers will. And Rev.
21.4. God shall wipe all tears from their eyes. Its the sweeter, that no napkin
but his own immediate hand shall wipe my sinful face.

In heaven the vision of him that sits upon the Throne is immediate, the
mirror or looking-glass of Word and Sacraments; being removed, there is, 1
Cor. 13.12. But a vision of God, face to face, Rev. 21.22. And I saw no Temple
therein: If any should ask tidings, and say John what saw thou in that new
City, was there any Temple, any Priest, any Prophets, any Candlesticks there?
He should answer, O you know not what you speak: I saw no temple there; I saw a
more glorious sight then all the temples of the earth; I saw the Lamb the King,
in the midst of them; I saw Christ the fountain of Heaven, and though ye should
know Moses, David, Paul, in glory, you shall be so taken with beholding the
face of the Lamb for evermore in an immediate vision, The Lords action on us in
glory immediate.
that you find no ^easure to look over your shoulder to Moses or any other: For
the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb are the Temple of it; it must be sweeter,
when the sweet immediate hand of Jesus Christ shall pluk the soul-delighting
Roses of the high Garden, and hold them to your senses, with an immediate
touch, so as you shall see, behold, smell and touch his hand with the rose, and
when he shall put immediately in your mouth, the Apples of the Tree of life,
and the King himself shall make himself (as it were) your Cup Bearer, for there
shall be neither need of Pastor, Prophet, or of any Christian brother, but only
Christ himself, to hold to your head A Cup of the water of life, Rev. 22.1, 2.
And he showed me a pure River of water of life, clear as Crystal, proceeding
out of the Throne of God and of the Lamb; be showed me, which He? The Lord God
Almighty and the Lamb, c. 2^ 22. He that talked with me, who had a golden reed
to measure the City, v. 15. and v. 10. He who carried me away in the spirit to
a great and high mountain, and showed me the great City, the holy Jerusalem
descending out of Heaven from God; no created Angel could show to John, The
Bride the Lambs Wife; and what is that? He showed me; He made me see; Is that
but a naked cast of the eye, or a speculation? No, it is more, He himself who
only reveals all the secrets of God, And measures the Temple with a golden
Reed; He only gave me a drink of the water of life immediately; for to see in
the holy language, is to enjoy, Heb. 12.14. Rev. 22.4. Jer. 17.6. Psalm. 34.12.
Job 19.26. And then he showed me, must be this in good sense, He, He the
increated King himself made me, or caused me to enjoy; Messengers carry
Love Letters now, there is no need of Love Letters between the Lord Jesus, and
the Bride the Lambs wife in this condition: certain it is, a draught of such
water at the Wel-head must be sweetest: Then immediate comforts in a heavy
condition must be sweetest also; as in heavy desertions, Word, Ministry,
Pastors, Prayer, and Ordinances cannot raise up the Spirit: What does the Lord
else speak in this? No less then that mediation of means is but mediation of
means; and Christ is Christ, means in a soul sickness: yea, Apostles, Angels,
Watchmen fail: Immediate comforts in a sad condition sweetest.
But Christ himself with his immediate action fails not, Cant. 3.1.2.3. verse.
4. Joh. 20.8.9.10.11.12.13.14.15.16.17. Christ himself immediately by himself
will do in a moment, that which all means, all Ordinances, all sweatings, all
endeavors cannot do: I do not now cry down means, and extol immediate
inspirations; the latter I deny not in some cases, but I only compare means and
Christ; and is not this an experience of some who are brought to the Margin, and
black borders of Hell and dispairing, all Creature comforts having failed them,
and they having received the Sentence of the second death: yet Christ comes
with an immediate glimpse, like a fire flaught in the air, which lets the
lost and bewildered Traveller in an extreme dark night see a lodging at hand,
whereas otherwise he should have fallen in a pit and lost himself? and in a
moment, in the twinkling of an eye, the Lord having rebuked the winds and the
stormy Tempests in the soul: there is a calm, and peace, Ps. 31.22. Jona 2.4.
Christ is speedy, and swift as a Roe, his leap is but a stride over a whole
mountain at once, over many mountains and hills, Can. 2.8. Especially in his
immediats, when he co^forts by himself; he then makes no use of a deputy-Sun
to shine, or of borrowed light, the Sun himself rises with his own immediate
salvation, and his own immediate wings; and we see it was Christ's immediate
love, yea, comfort, because immediate carries with it the heat and smell of
Christ's own hand, it has the immediate warmness of Christ's bosom-consolation,
Immediate mercies partake of immediate sweetness from Christ the fountain.
it was an act of tender mercy that came hot and smoking from the heart of
Christ, the immediate coal of love smelling of the perfume of the hearth it
came last from, and that was heaven, and the bowels of Christ; waters carried
from a precious fountain in a vessel many hundred miles, are not so sweet as at
the well head, because they are separated from the fountain, they lose much of
their virtue; sometimes, it is so long since the Rose was plucked, that the
color and smell which it had, while it grew on its own stalk, is quite gone:
Look how inferior Art (which is but medicine for sick nature) is to nature in
its beauty and strength, (as painted Physic can neither purge nor cure) so far
are all means and Ordinances (being but the deputies of Christ) below Christ
himself. What is Paul? What is Apollo? Put all the Prophets, all the Apostles,
all the Patriarchs, all the chiefest of Saints in one floor, I confess they
should cast forth an excellent smell, like the utter borders of the garden of
the high Paradise, but all their excellency should be mediate excellency, and
but somewhat of Christ, but alas, as low, as very nothing to Christ, as the
smallest drop of dew that sense can apprehend, to ten thousand worlds of seas,
fountains and floods: We defraud our spirits of much sweetness, because we go
no further in our desires then to creature-excellency, we rest on mediate
comforts, because mediate; painted things do work but objectively; only a
painted meadow casts no smell, a painted tree brings forth no Apples; the
comforts and sweetness of the creatures have somewhat of paintry in them in
comparison of Jesus Christ; all reality and truth of excellency is in him: and
we know God marreth the borrowed influence of means. Armies, Parliaments,
Learning, and all miscarry; Therefore there was never a Reformation, nor a
great work wrought on earth, but Omnipotency put forth many immediate Acts in
it: The Lord would not be beholding to Moses, he himself divided the red Sea;
he would not engage himself to fountains and vine trees, but he gave them water
out of the Rock; he would not borrow from the earth, and sowing, reaping, and
plowing, bread, for his peoples food, he would give them the bread of Angels
from heaven immediately: he would have no Engines at the taking of Jericho, the
blowing of Rams horns was a sign, not a cause, God immediately cast down the
walls; he would not have a sword drawn, nor a drop of blood shed in the peoples
return from Babylon, but the Lord puts an immediate impulsion upon the
Spirit of Cyrus, (...)
as if he had been in a dead sleep, and he being awaked by God only, sends
the people away, and the Temple must be builded again: But how? Neither by
King, nor Parliament, nor Armies, for Zach. 4.6. Not by might, nor by power,
but by my Spirit, says the Lord: When Babylon is to be destroyed (as the work
is even now on the wheels in Britain) Rev. 18.21. A mighty Angel took up the
great millstone, and threw it in the sea; though it be a Vision by comparison,
yet it holds forth an immediate work of God in the ruin of Babylon; and
Angels power their vials on the Sea, God immediate in his most glorious works,
and must be so in this great work now on the wheels, in these 3 Kingdoms.
on the Sun, on the River Euphrates, to make for the destruction of Babylon,
and in delivering of Lot Angels did work: God himself spoke to Noah for making
an Ark; although Angels be creatures, yet the Lords action by them is more
immediate, then when he works by natural causes; when the Judges scourge and
imprison the Apostles, no man will speak for them, the immediate power of God
does it, the chains fall off legs and arms, immediate providence is a key also
to open the prison doors, and they are saved: There is a bloody war at the
taking of the Ark, and thirty thousand footmen of Israel killed, 1 Samuel 4.10,
11. But there is not a sword drawn when its rescued: The Ark comes home, its
alone Gods immediate providence drives and acts upon two milk kine to bring
it home again, 1 Samuel 6.12, 13, 14. Who knows but when our strength of two
Kingdoms has failed us, the Lord shall make Kine to bring home his Kingdom and
Reformation to our doors? were it possible that creatures could work salvation
for us, and freedom from the sword, and sure peace in Scotland, England and
Ireland, without God, or any subordination to him, let it be a deliverance from
the creature only, it should be no deliverance, but a curse; that which makes
salvation to be salvation, is, that God has a finger of power, and an
influence of Free Grace in it: O but this puts the luster, sweetness and
smell of Heaven on it, that it is the salvation of the Lord, Ex. 14.13. In
regard of irresistible efficacy, and success under causes, though chained to
the influence of God, are but Idoll-causes, they lie as Ciphers, and do
nothing, no more then a lame arm can master a sword: The Lord works all our
works for us; and he is daily marring, and shall further mar our Armies,
Parliaments, Counsels, undertakings, to the end that more of Christ may appear
in these wars, then in other wars; some immediate power must close and crown
this glorious work in Britain, God must be his alone, and appear his alone, and
only Jehovah must be visible in the Mount, to the end that bleeding England,
long afflicted Scotland, and wasted Ireland, may with one shout cry, Not unto
us, O Lord Not unto us, but unto thy name be the glory, This discovers the
deceit of our confidence, The deceitfulness of our confidence, when God and
the creature are joined in one work
for when the Lord and the creature works together for our good, Asa, though
his heart was perfect, possibly sees not whether he trust on the Lord, or on
the Physician; and yet the Scripture says, When he was diseased in his feet,
there was a worse disease about his heart: for because he sought to the
physicians, he is blamed: yet to seek to Physicians is lawful, but the spirit
of God blames his seeking to the Physicians: and says, 2 Chronicles. 16.12. He
sought not the Lord in his sickness; and the reason is given (...) Because he
was in the Physicians: So the Hebrew reads it, (...)
he is said, not to seek the Lord, not because he sought to the Physicians, for
that had not been a sin, but because he was wholly, the whole man, soul and all
in, or on the Physicians, (...) his care, pains and heart, was all on the
Physicians; so also the Greek express great care and diligence by the like
Phrase, Arias Monta. Qu^a in medicis
1 Timothy 4.15. (...) Give thy self to these things. Seldom do we seek to God
and trust in him, when God and the creature are yoked together in a work that
we are much bent upon, as in Wars, in a Reformation, yea, in a journey that the
spirit is intent upon, but in trusting on God we interpose a folding and a ply
of the creature between our soul confidence and the Lord, just as a pillow is
put between the man's shoulder and a pressing burden, for fear the burden crush
a bone; we are afraid we give God too much to do, or more then he is able to
bear: When we sail, we seem to betrust our selves to the Lord and the Sea; but
the truth is, often we trust more to the strong Ship, then to the Sea or the
Lord. Our confidence shifteth it self from under the Lord, on upon the creature
and the Arm of flesh, so we walk often in the strength of the Lord, as some
walk upon Ice, they walk softly and timorously upon it, fearing it should break
under them, they put no faith upon cracking and weak Ice: we are not daring and
venturous in casting our selves and our burdens on the Lord.

So in judgments, David's choice fell upon the Pestilence rather then the
Sword, Why? Gods hand is sweeter and softer then the devils, then the
Malignants hard hand: Samuel is one of the best children, because he is given
of God, and is a child of many prayers. Isaac the joyful child, Why? No
thanks to nature, or to Sarahs dead womb for him, he is the son of an immediate
promise, Free Grace is rather Isaacs Father and Mother then Abraham and Sarah;
in ordinances a man speaks, but if Christ himself would speak, O his
Spikenard! O his own Perfume! O his own lips drop honey! O his own Lebanon-like
countenance! Alas, we think Christ is not Christ, except the King help him;
Religion is not Religion, except worldly throns bear it up; the Gospel is a
very immediate thing: the Lilly amongst the thorns, is Christ's Lilly; the
Church stands more immediately by Christ then any worldly thing does. God makes
the earth to bud and bring forth her fruits: but the Son, the soil, the season
of the year, and nature, are his under-servants; God waters the earth but by
clouds. Kings are indigent and very mediat and dependent creatures: they need
Armies, Multitudes, Navies, Prelates, Babylon, Ireland, France, Spain, Denmark,
Holland, Moneys, Friends, Parliaments; But Grace and the Gospel are more
immediate, and less needy: The Gospel can live without all these.

SERMON XXVI.
BE it unto thee as thou wilt] We see what power Christ has over the devils:
Christ's power over Devils.
Christ sent him invisible summons, Let Satan be gone, and he must be gone. It
is a proper work of Christ to oppose Satan, Heb. 2.14, He took part of flesh
and blood, (...), that he might make Satan unprofitable and idle, and
fruitless, as the word is used, Luke 13.7. Why does this fruitless tree keep
the ground saplesse and barren? So is the word taken, to make a thing of no
effect, Romans 3.3. Things that make sport to children, as nuts, feathers,
toys, are called, things of infants to be put away, 1 Cor. 13.11. So has
Christ taken bones, and sap, and strength from the devil, and made him as
fruitless, as the feathers that serves to sport children, 1 Ioh. 3.8. For
this purpose the Son of God was manifested, (...) that he might dissolve the
works of the Devil: The word in Scripture, is ascribed to the casting down of a
house, Ioh. 2.19. To the breaking of a ship, Act. 27.41. To the loosing any out
of chains, Act. 22.30. The Truth is, Satan's works of sin and Hell in the which
he had involved the Redeemed world, was a prison house, and a castle of
strength, and a strong war-ship, and many strong chains of sin and misery.
Christ was manifested to break down and dissolve the house, to break his
warship, and to set the captives at liberty, Isa. 61.1.2. Ioh. 14.30. And now
comes the Prince of this world, and has nothing in me, he had much in Christ
he had all his Redeemed ones by reason of sin; but Christ took all from him:
Since Christ came in the play, and was master of the fields, Satan never did
prosper: And consider how easily Christ does it, with a mere word, Let it be;
how was this, Christ sent an immediate mandate of Dominion, he has an
immediate operation upon these invisible spirits of darkness; it is no matter
how Christ do it, so it be done: Christ-God is a spirit and how a spirit acts
upon a spirit, is to be believed, rather then searched: But Christ has these
relations to Satan. 1. As God Christ in four relations dominion over devils.
and thus Satan is the workmanship of God as he is a spirit; so what ever
partaketh of being, is the adequate and consummate effect of omnipotency, I
mean being either possible or actual, and so the motions of Angels from place
to place, and of Devils must be under a chain of Omnipotency, as all other
things, motions, and actions of the creature are: Let Satan go whether he
please, Christ traceth him. 2. Christ has the relation of a Judge to Satan,
Iud. ^. 6. Whether so ever the Devil go, Christ has a keeper at his back. 3.
Christ has a relation of a conqueror Col. 2.15. He cannot be loosed from under
Christ, either by ransom, or change of prisoner with prisoner. 4. Christ as
the heir of all things, bears up all by his mighty word, Heb. 1.2, 3. And is
he in whom all things consist, Col. 1.17. And so by reason that the world by a
new gift of Redemption, is subjected to Jesus Christ, There is a special and
particular Providence of Christ upon Satan: it concerns the Redeemed not a
little, that Christ keep a strong and watchful guard upon the black camp out
of which he has Redeemed us, and that the seven eyes that are before the
Throne take special notice of Hell, who come in, and come out, for there is
deep counsel there against us: In this consideration Christ numbers all the
footsteps of Devils: Satan has not a general warrant to tempt the Saints, but
to every new act against Job, chap. 1.12. and Job 2, 6. against Peter, ere he
can put him upon one single blast, to cast him but once through his sieve, Luke
22.31. yea, against one sow, or a bristle of a sow, Mat. 8.31, 32. He must have
a new signed Commission, Christ's general pass, that Satan be suffered as any
other subject to pass through Christ's bounds and Kingdom, is not enough.

Use. Its much for our faith and comfort, that our Mediator is a God of Gods,
a God above the God of this world a Prince more mighty then the Prince of the
Air, who rules in the children of disobedience: Yea, now we have a greater
Victory over Satan, then we know: Satan is so totally routed, put off the
fields, and Christ so strong, that the weakest of Saints is stronger then the
world, and the spirit Satan that dwells in the world. Christ's strength of
faith is stronger then Adams strength of innocence, 1 John 2.13, 14. 1 John
5.5. The weakest measure of saving Grace, is stronger then the highest measure
of malice in all hell: When Satan Tempts you, fear him not, resist him in the
Faith: but be watchful, for he has a Pass from Christ, else he could not
come so far as the Court of Guard, to dally with the senses to hold out an
Apple to Eve; a world of Kingdoms and glory to Christ: Satan has a Warrant to
bid, when he cannot buy; his Pass will bear him to go to the more inner works
then the senses, even to the chamber of the fancy, to send a Trumpeter to the
understanding: 1. Yea, Satan goes no where without a Pass.
to work mediatly upon the will and the heart of a Judas and to act, but in a
way of distance, upon David to number the people; but a counterfeit Pass with
a false subscription cannot permit Satan to go on in real motions against the
will; the chain holds him back, there is a restraining link that all the
powers in Hell cannot break: A Moral tie and link of the Law of nature in the
breast of Devils, Satan can and does daily break, Because he sinned from the
beginning: but the other link of real acting against the dominion of
Providence is unpossible to the strongest of Devils, or of Creatures. 2. We our
selves may put in execution, a conditional Pass of the Devil, for certain it
is, Satan could but knock at Eves door, and play the Orator or Sophist to
delude mind and affections, but he could not make the Kings keys (as we say)
and violently break up the door, We often sign Satan's conditional pass.
or force the will, but upon condition that Eve should consent to eat forbidden
fruit, by necessity of divine justice, she must turn the first and oldest Devil
in the flesh that ever was, to tempt Adam to sin, and to eat; and therefore if
we be not careful to resist, we may sign the Devils Pass of Providence, with
our Moral consent; yield once to Satan's first demand of the Treaty, and you
shall see, you are ensnared by a necessity of Gods spotless justice, who
punishes sin by sin, because you go one mile with the Devil to go with him
two miles.

Use 2. If Christ at a nod have such a dominion over Devils, we are under
Satan's power in being tempted, more then we need: Certain it is, we improve not
Christ's power of dominion over Satan to the utmost; Christ can save, Heb. 7.25.
(...) to the utmost, then he can sanctify to the utmost, for Christ is a
Savior not only by merit, but also by efficacy, as our Divines hold against
Socinians and Arminians, and therefore he should give actual strength against
temptations; if we should not so carelessly improve that power Christ has over
Satan: I do not mean as Arminians do, that free will, by order of nature
begins, first, to resist Satan, and then Gods grace follows, as a
hand-maide, but I intend this, that because Peter is self-strong: and his flesh
says to Christ, that Christ is mistaken, and looks beside the spirit of
prophecy, for Mat. 26.35. He says, Though I should die with thee, yet will I
not deny thee: Belike if he had been diffident of his own strength, and watched
and trusted in the strength of an intercessor, he should not have been
deserted, so as to deny his Lord; we put not Christ to it, to put forth his
omnipotency in every act, to save us, that we yield not; I deny not, but there
is a necessity in regard of Gods wise providence that the Saints must sin, and
that they be passive vessels to carry the luster, and hold forth the rays and
beams of pardoning Grace: Yet certain it is, there be hypotheticall connexions
of supernatural Providence in Gods eternal Decree, never put forth in action,
because of our laziness: ( As if God shall suffer Job to be tempted, and he by
grace sin not, as Job 1.22. The Lord shall also strengthen him when he is
tempted the second time, not to sin) and (if Abraham be tempted to effer up his
only Son for God, and if he yield obedience, God shall surely bless him with
the blessing of sanctification promised in the Covenant) as is clear Genesis
22.16.17. Heb. 6.12.13.14. For we see these connexions some times put forth in
Asts: But other connexions are not put forth in Acts, Math. 11.21. Luke* 16.31.
1 Samuel 23.12. Such as these (if David be tempted by Satan, he shall not resist,
but shall number the people) (if Peter be tempted he shall not stand out in
confessing his Master.) Certain it is, that as we come short of these comforts
of a communion with God which we might enjoy, by our loose walking; so upon the
same reason we fall short of many victories over Satan which we might have if
we should improve the dominion and Kingly power of Christ over that restles
spirit.

As thou wilt] As thou desire: God makes, of his free dispensation, a
sanctified will and affection in prayer, the measure of his gifts to us; a word
then 1. Of a sanctified will and affections: 2. How these are ^he measure of
Gods goodness toward us in these Positions.

Posit. 1. A renewed will is a renewed man.
The soul is never renewed while the will be renewed: for the will is the heart
of the heart, and the new heart is the new man, Ezekiel. 36.26. Deuteronomy. 30.6. For
the heart is the King and Sovereign of obedience, Deuteronomy. 30.19.

Posit. 2. All sanctified affections are threded upon the will; saving Grace
can lodge no where but in the center of the heart, and that is the renewed will,
presupposing new light in the mind; Grace takes this first Castle.

Posit. 3. Hence how many grains of sanctified will, as many grains of new
obedience, so love is the fire of our obedience, and willingness the fa^ of
obedience, which is set on fire by love.

Posit. 4. A civil will is not a sanctified will, A civil will is not a
sanctified will.
in some men the will is more Moral, less raging, then, the motions of it
being less tumultuous, as in some carnal spirits the wheels go with less
noise; all rivers make not alike action and stirring on their Banks, The
yielding of the soul to God, and to his light a special note of a renewed will.
but that takes nothing from either their nature or deepnesse, or occasional
over-swelling.

Posit. 5. The special mark of a sanctified will, is, that its a broken thing,
as it were fallen, in the midst, in two pieces, and yielding to God and saving
light, there was a sea of grace and saving light in Christ, no created will
stooped to the light of a revealed Decree in such a submissive measure, in a
Hell of fear, sorrow and anguish for an evil of punishment, more then any
creature was able to bear, as he did; Nevertheless, not my will, but thy will be
done: Far more in other things of less pain should we suffer, especially in
these, the will is to stoop: 1. In opposing our lusts, as we would testify that
the proudest piece in us, the will, has felt the influence of Christ's death on
it: That we no longer should live the rest of our time, to the lusts of men, 1
Pet. 4.2. But to the will of God, 1 Pet. 2.24. Romans 6.6. The dominion of will is
the dominion of sin. 2. In that the soul speaks out of the dust, and is put
to silence before God, and sits alone, as Melancholicks do, Lam. 3.28, 29. A
tamed man is broken in his will, in which the Pride of opposing God consists:
Then Isa. 11.6. The wolf dwells with the Lamb. 3. The subordination of the
will to God is a great sign of a subdued spirit; nothing affects
Independency more then the vain will, Psalm. 37.7. Rest on the Lord, Heb. Be
silent toward the Lord; Vatablus, Be quiet, Repine not as disobedient, neither
answer again, Isa. 61.1. Christ is sent to bind up those that are broken in
will or heart: the Hebrew will include both, Prove. 15.31. He that hearkeneth to
reproof, gets a heart, possesses his, heart, so Vatablus, The meek spirit
which in obedience submits to rebukes, (...)
possesses his heart, and possesses his own will; now the contrary must be
in the undaunted man, his will and heart must have dominion over him, and his
will must possess him; as Prove. 17.18. (...)
The unconverted man is a man wanting a heart and a will: a will not broken to
God is as good as no will, and no heart at all, the broken heart is the heart
to God, and the broken will the will.

Posit. 6. The affections in their naturals being corrupt, grace only makes
them pure, Affections sanctified especially desires.
and when they are purest they are strongest; its most of the Element of the
earth; that is, all earth, and wants all mixture of other Elements, that is
most fire, that has least of earth in it; that is finest gold that has in it
least of other metals, least dross, least oar: When affections are most
steeled with Grace, The less mixture in the affections, the stronger are their
operations.
they have the least mixture in them; love having much of Grace, has least of
lust; zeal with much grace, has least of the wildfire of carnal wrath, and
these are known by the swiftness of their motion toward their kindly objects;
the more of earth in the body, the swifter is the motion downward toward the
earth; fire works most as fire when it carries up in the Air, nothing but it
self, or fiery sparks like it self, but when it ascends and carries up with
it, houses, mountains and great loads of earth, the motion is the slower: Grace
being essential to gracious affections, they run and move kindly, and swiftly,
therefore is supernatural love, strong as death, hard as the grave: In the
Martyrs it was stronger then burning quick, then the wheels, racks, and the
most exquisite torments; and Christ's love was stronger then Hell: of all loves,
that is the strongest that brings sickness, swooning and death: Gracious love
produces love sickness, Cant. 2.5. Swooning, Cant. 5.6. the Martyrs have died
to enjoy him, and refused to accept of life: because of the love of a Union
with him, Heb. 11.37. How many deserted souls come to this I die, if I enjoy
not Christ.

Posit. 7. Its good that the affections be balanced and laden with Heavenly
and spiritual lights: Lower vaults and under houses, send up smoke to the fair
pictures that are in the higher houses: lusts dominion over light, makes a
misty and unbelieving mind: so when the light is carnal, and nothing but
worldly policy, its like the highest house, which if ruinous and rainy, sends
down rain and continual droppings on the lower house. Mind and affections
vitiate and corrupt one another. Mind and affections do mutually and
reciprocally vitiate one another.
Grace in either, contributes much to the spirituality of the actions one of
another: so the mockers of eternity and judgment, are ignorant, because they
will be ignorant, 2 Pet. 3.5. And Elies sons will be abhominably lustful in
their affections, because they know not the Lord, and are ignorant of God, 1 Samuel 2.12. Matthew hears and sees Jesus, and he follows him, Matthew. 9.9.
The more that Mary Magdalen follows and loves, the more she knows and
sees the excellency of Christ, Joh. 20. ver. 1.11.12.13.14. compared with ver.
17, 18.

Posit. 8. When the desires are natural, Desires spiritual, seek natural
things spiritually, desires carnal, seek spiritual things naturally
then Heavenly objects are desired and sorrowed for in a natural way. Balaam
desires to die the death of the righteous: but Esau weepeth for the blessing in
a carnal way: when the desires are spiritual, earthly objects are desired in
a spiritual way: Even bread as it savoureth of Christ, Math. 6.9. compared
with ver. 11.12. And so the woman seeks deliverance to her Daughter,
spiritually and with a great Faith.

Posit. 9. The believer says, if the creature will go along with me to my
Fathers house, welcome: if not, What then? There I must lodge, though Gold
refuse to go with me.

See how God in a manner resigneth his own freedom in giving, God submits in
a manner his liberality of Grace, to the measure of a sanctified will.
and transferreth this honor on the woman's desire: God keeps pace with a
sanctified will in satisfying; when the will keeps pace with God in acting,
longing and desiring. 1. He puts Heaven upon the choice of a sanctified
heart, Deu. 30.19. Choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live, Rev.
22.17. Whosoever will, let him take of the waters of life freely, Isa. 55.1.
Ho, every one that thirsts come ye 2. Heaven is put upon the quality of the
will, and what it desires, Joh. 4.10. If asked of him, and he should have given
thee water of Life, Rev. 21.6. I will give unto him that thirsts, of the
Fountain of the water of life freely. There Is an edge upon the word Fountain,
for the Fountain and first spring of the water of life is above the streams;
and this is promised to him that has a heavenly and spiritual thirst for
Christ. 3. God puts himself and the If thou cryest after knowledge, and
liftest up thy voice for understanding, 4. If thou seek her as silver, and
searchest for her as for hid treasures, 5. Then shall thou understand the fear
of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God. There be four words here to
express the bensill of the will and desire; we are to cry for wisdom, (...)
Our affections in their acts and comprehension, are far below spiritual
objects, Christ, heaven* etc. about which they act.
the Chalde reads the other part of the ver. if thou call understanding thy
mother; that the cry spoken in the former part, may be such a high cry as
children use when they weep and cry after their Mother: The other word is, To
give the voice to wisdom: The other two words do note sweating, digging in the
bowels of the earth, casting up much earth to find a treasure of silver or
gold, Ps. 81.10. Open thy mouth wide and I will fill it: Vatablus, Seek what
thou will, and I will grant it. Its a doubt if any man by enlarged desires, can
put Gods giving goodness to the utmost extent. 4. God makes his fullness in
giving, far beyond our narrowness in seeking, Ephesians. 3.20. He is able to do
(this is as much as he is willing to do, Romans 11.23. Jud. v. 24.) exceeding
abundantly above all that we ask, or think, according to the power that works
in us: This is considerable, that when Christ shall put the Crown of
incomparable glory on the head of the glorified soul there shall be thousand
millions of more Diamonds, Rubies, and Jewels of glory on that Diadem, then ever
your thoughts or imaginations, could reach, and more weight of sweetness,
delight, joy, and glory in a sight of God, then the seeing eye, the hearing
ear, yea the vast understanding and heart, which can multiply and add to
former thoughts can be able to fathom 1 Cor. 2.9. When ye seek and ask Christ
from the Father, you know not his weight and worth, when you shall enjoy Christ
immediately up at the well head, this shall much fill the soul with admiration, I
believed to see much in Christ, having some twilight and afternoon, or
Moonlight glances of him down in the earth: But O blind I, narrow I could never
have Faith, opinion, thought, or imagination to fathom the thousand thousand
part of the worth, and incomparable excellency I now see in him. More in
Christ and heaven then our faith in this life can reach.
You may over-think, and over-praise Paradise, Rome, Naples, the Isles where
there be two Summers in one year, but you cannot over-think, or in your
thoughts reach Christ, and the invisible things of God; only glorified
thoughts, not thoughts graced only are comprehensive, in any due measure of
God, of heaven. The glorified soul shall be a far wider and more capacious
circle, the Diameter of it in length, many thousand cubits larger in mind,
thoughts, glorified reason, will, heart, desires, love, joy, reverence, etc,
then it is now: We would in seeking, asking, praying, in adoring God in Christ,
enlarge our own desires, heart, will, and affections, broad and deep, that we
may take in more of Christ: broad prayers flow from broad desires, narrow
prayers from niggard and narrow hearts; we may collect the bigness of a ship
from the proportion and quantity of its bottom, in its new framing: If the
bottom draw but to the proportion of a small vessel, which can endure no more
but a pair of oars, the vessel cannot be five hundred Tun, or be able to bear
60. pieces of Ordnance: Prayer bottomed on deep and broad hunger, and extreme
pain of love-sicknesse for Christ, and great pinching poverty of spirit, must
be in proportion wide and deep: O but our vessels are narrow, and our
affections ebb and low, the balance that weighs Christ weak, it is as if we
should labor to cast three or four great Mountains in a scale of a Merchants
ordinary balance: we are proportioned in our spiritual capacities but for
drops of grace. Christ is disposed to give grace as a river; its too little to
seek corn, wine, and oil, from God, he is more willing to give great things,
then small things, to ask a feather, a penny from a mighty Prince, when he
says, Ask what thou will, to the half of my Kingdom, and it shall be granted to
thee, is the undervaluing of the greatness of his Royal magnificence. Ask what
ye will (says Christ) of my Father in my name, and it shall be granted. Men's
desires run upon removal of the Sword, Peace, Protection, Plenty, Traffiquing,
peaceable Seas, Liberties of Parliament, Subjects, Peers, Cities: Little are
men's desires improved in seeking Christ to dwell in the land, and that the
Temple of the Lord be builded: all these suits are below both the goodness of
the Lord, and spiritual capacity of sanctified affections. And God gives to
Carnal men, that which their soul lusts after; but in his wrath.

SERMON XXVII.
Mar. 7.30. And when she was come to her house, she found the Devil gone out,
and her daughter laid upon the bed.


BEcause I have to an end, and shall not now refute the dream of Papists from
this collecting the lawfulness of their bastard confirmation, and of
confirming children, by the unhallowed blessing of the Prelate; only observe
the case of the child; Mark says, (...) Cast, in a violent manner, in a bed:
for this is not to be a bed of rest and security, as some Papists collect, but
to express how violent Satan is in his last farewell, as when he is to be cast
out, Mark 9.20. When the possessed child is brought to Jesus, and when he saw
him, straightway the spirit tare him, and he fell on the ground and wallowed
foaming: The Devil and the unclean spirits are not thrown out of a person, or
Land, but they must rage and foam: 1. The Lord says, Zach. 13.2. I will cut
off the names of Idols out of the land, 1. Satan not cast out of a Land, or
person, but by violence both to Satan and the party
and they shall be no more remembered; and I will cause the prophets, and the
unclean spirits to pass out of the land; But this cannot be done but with
great violence, verse. 3. The father and the mother shall thrust through with a
sword the false Prophet, even their own son ere he be put out of the land: The
Devil will not be removed without blood, sweating and great violence; when the
unclean spirits of men given to curious Arts, and the Idol Diana is preached
down in Ephesus, Acts 19.18. That whole great City was full of wrath, and they
cry out, Great is Diana of the Ephesians: 19. And the whole City was filled
with confusion: When Christ comes to the Crown and the Throne; Jews and
Gentiles, the Kings and Rulers of the earth, Herod and Pilate with the
Gentiles, and the people of Israel are gathered together, Act. 4.25, 26, 27.
The word, Psalm. 2.1. (...) Rageshu, it is to make a great tumult, as a furious
multitude gathered together, that makes a noise as the noise of a troubled
sea; therefore some, not without reason, say the sons of Zebedeus are called
(...) Benairegesci, Sons of Thunder, Luke, Acts 2. uses the word after the 70.
(...): Which Budeus expounds of fierce and wild horse; and certainly Christ
is Crowned upon Mount Zion with garments rolled in blood, this is a spoiling
of, and a triumphing over principalities and powers, Christ dyed the black
Cross with red blood, when he performed this noble act of Redemption, Col.
2.14, 15. So when Christ enters in any soul to dwell, there he must first
bind the Devil* And then spoil his house, Mat 12.29. What wonder is it, that
multitudes of heresies and sects, and many blasphemous and false ways arise
now, when the Lord is to build up Sion: Satan, when Christ is to sail, and his
Kingdom a coming Kingdom (as we pray) raises up storms and winds in the broad
Lake of Brimstone to drown the Church of God: Christ has not fair weather when
he goes to Sea, Mat. 8.23, 24. Yet his journey is lawful: When Christ is upon
Acts of his Priesthood, and stands at the great high Altar with his Censer of
gold, to offer up the prayers of the Saints to God, he casts fire with the
same Censer down upon the earth, and there be then Thundrings, Lightnings, and
Earthquakes; and hence follows terrible judgments upon the earth, as hail,
fire mingled with blood, and a mountain burning with fire, and the third part
of the Sea becomes blood, and a clear burning star, like a Lamp, called
Wormwood, making the third part of the Waters bitter, does fall from Heaven,
which is as much as when Christ is upon Acts of mercy toward his people;
pestilent Heresies of the Popish Clergy and others, darkneth the third part of
the Sun and Moon; that is, of the light of the Gospel, Rev. 8.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Even as when our Lord Jesus stands to intercede for the
people, and to pray for fallen Jerusalem, which is as a firebrand plukt out of
the fire: Satan stands at his right hand, his working hand to hinder him,
Zach. 2.1.2.3. 2. This resolves to many their state; 2.
Many are free of the Devil: I thank God (says one) I know not Satan, nor any
of his works: I have peace; Satan did never tare me, nor cause me to fall to
the earth, nor does he torment me: 1. False peace known.
But this is a fearful condition: 1. It is an Argument of a false peace: When
the strong man is within, the house is in peace: not to be tempted of the
Devil, is the greatest temptation out of Hell; and if there be any choice of
Devils, a raging and a roaring Devil is better then the calm and sleeping
Devil: A roaring and a raging Devil is better then a calm and sleeping Devil.
when the Devil is within, he sleeps and is silent, and the house or soul he
is in, is silent, and there is a Covenant with death and Hell, Isa. 28.15. Now
Hell keeps true to a natural man for a time, Cessation of Arms between the
soul and Satan is security for a time, but its not peace: The Devils war is
better then the Devils peace; Carnal hypocrisy is a dumb and silent thing,
but its terrible to be carried to Hell without any noise of feet: The wheels of
Satan's chariot are oiled with carnal rest, and they go without rattling and
noise; the Devil carries few to hell with shouting, and crying, suspect dumb
holiness; when the Dog is kept out of doors, he howles to be in again; the
Covenant of Satan to Eve (sin and you shall not die) stands with all men by
nature, till Jesus Christ break peace between us and Satan. 2. Contraries
meeting, such as hot and dry fire, 2.
and cold and moist water, they conflict one with another, and where Satan
finds a sanctified heart, he tempts with much importunity, as at one time,
Christ finds three mighty temptations, and he departs from him only,
(...), for a little time: Luke 4.13.
Where there is most of God and of Christ, there there is strong injections and
Firebrarnds cast in at the windows, as some of much faith has bin tempted to
doubt; Is there a Diety that rules all, and where is he? We see him not;
Another is often assaulted with this, Is there a heaven for Saints? Is there a
Hell for Devils and wicked men: we never spoke with a Messenger come from any
of these two Countries: A third is troubled with this: Such a business I have
expede, whether God will or not: The flower of the soul, the high lamp of the
light of the mind is frequently darkened with foggy and misty spirits, coming up
from the bottomless pit, and darkning any beams and irradiations of light
that comes from the sun of righteousness: Faith is more assaulted then any
other grace: Satan shakes other graces; but this is winnowed between Heaven
and Earth, Luke 22.31, 32. Satan's first Arrow shot at Christ, labors to put
a terrible ( if) upon his light: If thou be the Son of God. It is as much, as
if God be God, if the Son of God be the Son of God: It is not the evidence and
certainty of fundamentals, nor the strength of Grace that priviledgeth souls
from Satan's shafts; strength of saving light, puts the Saints often under
the Gunshot of Satan, that he may find a shot of them; there is only
Law-surety against temptations up in Heaven, when you are over score out of
time, within eternities lists never while then. 3.
3. Not to be troubled thus, argues a house not watched, the gates are open
night and day, as the gates of Hell, that want key and lock; and the soul so
secure, as the person sees not what Devils come in, what go out: but the watch
set by Gods fear, examineth all Messengers that comes in, all motions, all
suggestions, all Angels, white and black, all rises, falls, ebbings and
flowings of love, joy, desire, fear, sorrow, come under search, and scrutinie,
Whence come ye, from Heaven or Hell? Its time of War with the Saints in this
life: And then all Cities keep watch, and strangers without a Pass are
examined, searched and tried, what correspondence they have with the enemy. 4.
Gods way of hardening and blinding, as its mystrious, so its silent and
invisible.
4. Gods way of hardening by Satan is often mysterious, silent, dumb and
speaks not, Joh. 9.39. For judgment I come into this world: But what a
judgment? such as walks in the dark, and kills in a midnight sleep, That
they that see may be made blind: this judgment speaks not. O terrible, God
has put out the man's two eyes; but how, or when, he cannot tell; the nerves
and eye-strings of the man's soul are broken, but there was not a crack nor any
noise heard, when God snapped them in two pieces. Christ came when the man was
sleeping, and his Sergeant the Devil with him, and put his hand on his heart
and gave the lock, the sprents, and wards of the heart a throw and a crook and
all the keys in heaven and earth cannot shut or open his heart, and this was
done without noise or pain, the man was never put to his bed for the business;
the conveyance of the business was spiritual, but invisible: O sleeping
world, awake out of your rotten and false peace: Oh, the Lord binds men, and
they cry not: And the Devil binds many, and they cry not; Pharaoh knew not
when his heart was hardened, the conscience saw it not, even as a stone grows
in the bladder without our sense of it: the business was transacted without
one cry, or any witness: Carnal Hellish security is dumbe-born: Let my child
sleep (says the Devil) and awake him not, till the heat of the Furnace of
Hell melt away his false Peace: Why? but men may be deluded, having no bands in
there death, as they lived deluded? Wrath and justice are moving to many souls
sleeping in death, without noise of feet, the sword of God is crying to souls
without any voice; the wheels of the fiery chariots of Gods indignation are
moving over slain men in Scotland and England without the rattling or prancing
of the horses: O pity, a Tempest, a Devil comes and steals away the man's
soul, and his conscience out of him in the night, and he knows not: CHRIST
says, Silence, waken him not, while he be over ears in the Lake; and Satan
says, Waken him not while I be sure of him; a dumb judgment is twice a
judgment.

FINIS.

