A Full DISCOVERY OF BEES.

Treating of The Nature, Government, Generation and Preservation
of the BE.

With the Experiments and Improvements, arising from the keeping them in
transparent Boxes, instead of Straw-hives.

Also proper Directions (to all such as keep Bees) as well to prevent their
robbing in Straw-hives, as their killing in the Colonies.

The Second EDITION, By Moses Rusden, an Apothecary; Bee-Master to the King's
most excellent Majesty.

-- Si quid novesti rectius istis
Candidus, imperti: Si non, his were mecum
Published by His Majesty's especial Command, and approved by the Royal Society
at Gresham Coll.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Million, Living in St. Pauls-Chain, Stationer. 1685.

HONI DROIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

Henry Millton: delin pro Authore Mose Rusder



TO THE KING'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
May it please your Majesty.
I Am very conscious that such as presume to make Dedications to your Majesty
ought to treat of Subjects lofty and learned, and with a Pen eloquent and
subtle. But although the Subject of this small Offering be mean and the Style
be Humble. Yet, it speaks knowingly and by experience, of Kings, and
Chieftains; of War, and Peace; of Obedience and Subjection, of Government and
Discipline, of Ingenuity and Labor, and the good effects arising from them:
and shows how necessary they are, even in this little well formed Commonwealth
of the Bees; whose Being, and Prosperity depend upon their Prince, and common
Parent. Fathers being the first Rulers, Lawgivers and Monarchs, before Families
did swell into a larger kingdom Since therefore Nature will herein be made
appear to be the Favourer and Founder of Monarchy; and that such ingenious,
laborious and profitable Creatures do voluntarily and constantly betake
themselves to that Government, I do most humbly be seech your Majesty's
gracious Patronage and Protection, whilst I demonstrate and vindicate this
Truth, by the perpetual practice of the Bees: Which may happily have some
influece upon such as look with a malicious Eye upon Kingly Government, as
being the effect of necessity and force, and not of a natural inclination, and
of choice; I make it my prayer that all your Majesty's Subjects may be as loyal
to your Majesty, as conformable to your laws, and as beneficial to the Public,
as these little People are to their Sovereign, to their customs, and their
republic, in which they mosl examplarily labor and obey. And I humbly implore
your Majesty to accept graciously this grain of Incence offered with much
devotion by

Your Majesty's Most Loyal and most Obedient Subject and Servant Moses Rusden.

TO THE ROYAL SOCIETY AT Gresham College.
ALthough the lowness of my Condition, and my Fortunes has not permitted me to
prosecute Studies deep or difficult; and that I know my self too well, to
affect or aim at the being in the form of Philosophers or Politicians: yet I
may perhaps without presumption pretend something to both, though afar off, and
at a mannerly distance, without the censure of vanity. Whilst I entertain my
self and others with the humblest Subject that can well admit so many and so
useful Observations as have from thence arisen to me, and men of the greatest
Consideration.

The wise man directs to the Pismire mire for instruction; I have the advantage
of proposing a president much more exemplary, and more deserving our imitation;
for, this better inspired Insect, the Be; being it self untaught, gives us
variety of Lessons not unworthy, in many things, of Princes and of Statesmen,
of good Subjects, and such as would grow rich, and prosper. And, even the most
eminent Philosophers, that pry with the most penetrating Eyes and Imaginations
into the secrets of Nature, have with much study and amazement contemplated the
Bees, whom they have found to be as Busy, Forcible, Curious, and Remarkable as
in any of her greater works, which attract more of our admiration, and enquiry,
my design is not to dispute peremptorily, with Aristotle, Pliny, or other my
learned Masters, who have elaborately considered and discoursed of the nature
of Bees, and their faculties; although I may upon new and plain discoveries
sometimes deviate from them. Nor shall I with Virgil, describe with Fancy, and
fine invention these little people, which are indeed worthy to be celebrated by
so excellent a Poet: My business, by the good helps I have had, is to show
Nature, and Truth naked, and unadorned, with Metaphors or suppositions; for I
would be considered only as a Traveller who has carefully, studiously, and
faithfully visited and examined other Nations, to bring home to public use,
and information, the observations he has made, of their living and subsisting,
their Laws and Government, their Arts and Manufactures, and the strengths, and
policies by which they preserve themselves upon all occasions, I have
therefore with much sincerity laid before you what I have collected from
Authors of the highest degree, as well as more modern writers, and what my Eye
has seen, my experience proved, and certain my knowledge can, and has
demonstrated, and will therefore hope that you (who are the greatest Judges I
can appeal to, where Art or Nature are concerned) will find reason, upon
farther examination, to recommend as things useful, true, or strongly probable
at least, the farther Discoveries I have made; or have brought to a clearer
light what has been more obscurely, or uncertainly guessed at, or treated on
by others, whilst I manifestly show how Bees may be best understood, enjoied,
and preserved alive, to the benefit of cruel and ungrateful Mankind, who
hitherto, like the worst of Robbers, has spoiled them at once of their lives
and treasures. And although they seem indeed but as it were so many Flies
playing in the Sun, or among the Flowers of the Field. Yet, if we shall
vouchsafe to consider them, as we do our selves making boast of our Reason
(which as it is abused by us, is as much our condemnation, as our Prerogative)
and of our greater Bulks, and Dominion man has above these minute Creatures;
it may be well confessed that the Divine Providence has not in any part of its
high and misterious operations called for our wonder more than in the
contrivance, the council, and the signal assistance, it imparts to these little
Societies of Bees, who as well as the proudest, or the greatest Giants of the
Creation may brag that Est Deus in Nobis; and who by that Divine and
Extraordinary impulsion (without out experience, or instructions derived from
their short lived Ancestors, whom they could never know) do evidently, and as
it were by a well applied Rule, and by an instinct less erroneous than that
Reason it self which oftentimes misguides us; and by laws more steady and
inviolable than those of the Medes and Persians, subsist, and govern, with
Prudence, Foresight, Courage, Economy, Fidelity, Regard to Interest, and all
those Offices and Virtues, which mankind has at any time arrived to for the
preservation of it self, and of Humane Society. And the more to assimulate them
to mankind, we shall discern as in an Epitome, the Vices, and the Passions, the
Envy, the Robberies, and the Murders, which the ambitious, the Idle and the
Depraved do practice upon the Earth. And, we shall now find their qualities,
and their works, better discovered, and demonstrated, by the transparant Hives
first showed to us by Dr. Wilkins, late Bishop of Chester, a most Eminent
Member of your Society, which have since received several variations and
improvements by one Geddie, and since by my self, with such informations and
instructions, as I have found necessary for the rendering them more
practicable, and useful. So that every person may either gather Honey, or
pleasant Observations; from these intelligent Creatures; who deserve well from
all, especially from those who may pretend to Virtue and Knowledge, among whom
you are Princes. And I therefore.

Your most devoted. M. R.

THE PREEACE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
BEes are of such strange natures, and liable to so many accidents, that unless
a man be very wary and circumspect, he shall reap but little profit or
advantage by them. Which is the cause, that there are so many proverbs relating
to Bees. For as a man having lost his right way in a Forest or Wood, meets with
many ways or paths, but seldom hits upon the right; so most of those who have
written any thing now extant concerning Bees, (not knowing the right way and
manner of their Government and Breeding) have run into many errors and by paths
of ignorance, seldom (yet sometimes) hitting right concerning some things of
their nature in general, which uncertainty in most writers, has caused many
false proverbial sayings relating to them, viz. That Bees are lucky to some
persons, and will thrive with them; but unlucky to others and will not thrive
with them. That they must be bought with Gold, or Corn, or else must be given,
or found; otherwise (forsooth) they can by no means be supposed to thrive. And
that they are unlucky to be carried by water, and must be removed southward and
many other such like ridiculous stories, not worthy the mentioning. When the
true and only reason why Bees thrive not with every man alike, is either the
want of judgment or care, or both, in those who look after them; as appears
by this proverbial instance, that when the owners of the Bees dies, then the
Bees also (as if they had a Sympathy with their owners) will die soon after;
which I have known, seemingly verified, by some ancient persons who kept Bees,
had skill, and looked well after them whilst they lived, but they dying, the
greater part of their Bees within one year after have died also, which happened
not because the owners died, but because the skill and care of the Bees died
with those owners.

The consideration of this great disadvantage to my country; and that Bees may
thrive with all those who are ingeniously concerned as to profit and pleasure
by them, induced me to publish this treatise, of the Natures, Government, and
Generation of Bees, and the right way of ordering them in Colonies; that my
countrymen by this discovery may know not only the causes of their Bees
miscarrying to their own loss, but also how to prevent, as well the
miscarriages of Bees, as the cruelly exercised upon them, by killing them when
their Honey is taken away: Yet so many accidents attend them, and so much
difference is in their strength one Stock from another, and in the soil near
which they stand, and in the places they stand in, besides the uncertainty of
the weather in England; that almost no general rules can be set down for
directions, but may in some sort, and at some times and places, admit of some
exceptions and small alterations; therefore circumspection must be used, until
experience shows you how to order Bees rightly.

The cause of my following this method of keeping Bees in Colonies, at first
was my love to the Bees themselves, and the hatred of that cruelty exercised on
those poor industrious creatures, (so wisely providing for their own future
livelihood,) which is so like the method of the Devil, that paies his most
industrious servants with the greatest ruin: And finding by my own experience,
though others in some places miscarried, that the causes were their
mismanagement, and mistakes, by reason their Box-Hives and their Be Houses
were not made by any pattern, or else by some false pattern, and not through
any defect in the Art its self: And also finding my Bees in several countries
to thrive very well, and answer my expectations in their profit, something of
which I shall mention in the last chapter of this Book. I therefore thought it
necessary, and a duty, which I owe to my Country, to discover to all that
delight in Bees, those experiences which I have obtained in so delightful and
profitable a method.

And in order thereunto, for the encouragement and instruction of all those who
shall desire it, I shall be ready whilst I live to impart unto them any
directions needful from time to time, when thy come or send to me. And if any
Person of Quality or Gentleman desire it, I shall be ready to come to their
Houses, to assist and direct them in this method of improving Bees.

And I doubt not but with the due observance of the directions this Book will
afford, and some small attendance, any man may receive, not only good profit
from them, (without the destruction of such industrious servants,) but also
much delight and pleasure in beholding from time to time their curious works.

This I thought good to premise to the candid Reader, whose profit and delight
is by this Book intended; which if he reap, let him give God the glory, in
beholding his wonderful works in these so small and admirable creatures, and
pass a favorable interpretation upon the endeavors of.

His Countries hearty well willer Moses Rusden.
From my House; near the sign of the Kings-Arms in the Bowling Ally, in
Westminster, near the Abbey, July, the 18th.
Advertisement.
THat his Majesty has given and granted by letters patents under the great
Seal of England to John Gedde, and his partners, the full and sole power,
privilege, and authority, of using, practicing, exercising, and enjoying the
new art and indention for the improvement of Bees, during the space of fourteen
years, according to the stature made in that behalf; barring and e^^luding all
others whatsoever from making, using, practicing, counterfeiting, imitating, or
resembling, the same, without the special license, and consent of the said John
Gedde and his partners, first had and obtained, under the penalties in the said
statute contained.

All persons that desire to set up this method may be pleased to take notice,
that they may be furnished with Box-Hives, and Colonies ready made,
instructions, and licenses, and the sight of several Bee-Houses, and Colonies
improved in this way, by the Author, an Apothecary, at his House in the
Bowling-ally aforesaid, who is authorized and empowered by the said John Gedde,
and his partners, to give forth licenses, etc.

And if any Person of Honor or Gentleman shall think amiss of my Assertions in
this Book, or any of them, I offer my self to prove the same, by clear argument
in answer to objections if desired, or by operation, if they will be at the
cost.

THE CONTENTS of this Book.
The several Sections, and the Chapters in each Section.
SECT. I. Of the Natures and Properties of Bees.
CHap. 1. Of a Colony of Bees. page 1 Chap. 2. Of the King-Bee. page 2 Chap. 3.
Of the common Honey-Bee. page 5 Chap. 4. Of the Drone-Bee. page 7 Chap. 5. Of
their Properties in general. page 8 Chap. 6. Of their Art, Wisdom and
Foresight. page 9 Chap. 7. Of their Industry, Valor and Loyalty. page 10 Chap.
8. Of the five Senses in Bees. page 12
SECT. II. Of the Government of Bees.
Chap. 1. Of their Government in general p. 16 Chap. 2. Of the Bees Necessity
of a King. p. 18 Chap. 3. Of their Government in particular. p. 21 Chap. 4. Of
the Bees Obedience to their King. p. 22 Chap. 5. Of the Bees Loyalty to their
King. p. 28 Chap. 6. Of the Bees Valor, Justice, Manner of Fight, and places.
p. 31
SECT. III. Of the Generation of Bees.
Chap. 1. Of their Breeding in general. p. 35 Chap. 2. Of their Generation in
particular. p. 42 Chap. 3. Of the Manner of the Generation of the King Be. p.
54 Chap. 4. Of the Manner of the Generation of the Honey-Bees. p. 55 Chap. 5.
Of the Manner of the Generation of the Drone-Bee. p. 56. Chap. 6. First
Question, what is Generative matter, etc. Answered. p. 58 Chap. 7. The second
Question, how comes it to pass that the King-Bee is the Sire of all the rest,
etc? Answered. p. 61 Chap. 8. The third Question: Will not Bees increase to too
great numbers, if they have room enough, etc? Answered. p. 63 Chap. 9. The
fourth Question: How shall a man know which is right Virgin-Honey, etc?
Answered. p. 64 Chap. 10. Of a stock of Bees, and how to order them in
Straw-hives. p. 67
SECT. IV. Of the right way of ordering the Colonies.
Chap. 1. Some general things by way of advise to be observed by all those who
already have, or intend to keep Bees in Colonies. p. 75 Chap. 2. The
Description of a Bee-house. p. 77 Chap. 3. The Description of the Boxes, and
Box-hives. p. 80 Chap. 4. The Method of Ordering the Bees and Colonies. p. 82
Chap. 5. How to Order the Bee-house. p. 84 Chap. 6. What Bees to furnish the
House with for Colonies. p. 87 Chap. 7. How to furnish the house with Bees. p.
88 Chap. 8. When to furnish the house with Bees. p. 89 Chap. 9. How to order a
Swarm to furnish a Colony. p. 91 Chap. 10. When to put the first Box-hive under
the Straw-hive. p. 94 Chap. 11. How to put the first Box under the the
Straw-hive. p. 96 Chap. 12. How, and when to put under the second Box whilst
the Straw-hive is on. p. 97 Chap. 13. How, and when to raise a single Box, or
put under the second Box, when the Straw-hive is off. p. 99 Chap. 14. How, and
when to set under the third Box; which makes a perfect Colony. p. 101 Chap. 15.
How to take off the upper most Hive whether it be a Box-hive, or a Straw-hive,
p. 102. Chap. 16. How to get the Bees out of the uppermost Hive taken off, and
how to put them to the Colony again. p. 112 Chap. 17. How to order the Colony
after the uppermost Hive is taken off, and when, it is not taken off. p. 118
Chap. 18. How the Colonies may swarm. p. 120 Chap. 19. Concerning the Robbing
of Bees, and how to prevent it. p. 121 Chap. 20. Of the Diseases of Bees, and
the Remedies. p. 131 Chap. 21. Of the profit of Bees kept in Colonies beyond
what is in Straw-hives. p. 135
Monarchy founded in Nature, and proved, by this History of Bees, etc.
Section 1.
Of the Natures and Properties of Bees.

CHAP. I.
Of a Colony of Bees.

A Colony of Bees is properly a Swarm coming forth of a Stock; which Stock
being full, has not room to contain those great numbers of Young which are
produced in the Spring, and consequently they go forth in a Swarm, and so live
by themselves, separate from the Stock, whereby they become another Kingdom.

Now the keeping Bees in Box-hives, I call by the name of Colonies, to
distinguish them from those kept only in Straw-hives; because all those young
broods which are bred in the Spring, have room made fit for them, by the
addition of another Box-hive, whereby they continue their labors without
intermission, by working in those additional Box-hives, instead of swarming; so
that thereby all the labors of all the Bees, as well young as old, are united
in one Colony.

Every Colony, Swarm, or Stock of Bees, consists of several Bees, all of one
genus, which for distinction may be divided into three several sorts of Bees,
viz. a King-Bee, a common Honey-Bee, and a Drone-Bee; which may be compared to
three sorts of Dogs for their different shape; thus: the King-Bee to a most
stately Buck Gray hound; the common Be to a little fierce Bull-Dogg; and the
Drone-Bee to a great Mastiff-Dogg; of which in their order.

CHAP. II.
Of the King-Bee.

THE Royal Race of King-Bees, being natural Kings; one of them equals the value
and worth of all the rest: therefore as the most worthy, I shall here describe
the hierarchy of bees Rex

Duces

Plebs

Fuci

King-Bee, as the first sort of Bees.

The King is a fair and stately Be, having a majestic gate and aspect, being
almost an Inch in length, somewhat longer than a Drone, yet not so big save
only in the upper part of his third division; he is almost as long again as a
common Honey-Bee; his tongue is but half the length of a common Honey-Bee's,
and his fangs are shorter than theirs are; for they with their long tongues
gather Honey, and with their fangs, wax, etc. which nature seems in part to
have denied him, as having no need to use either (as they do) being to be
maintained as other Princes are.

His wings are of the size of the common Bees, which seem very short, because
of the length of his body; for they scarce reach to the middle of his nether
part, his legs are longer and stronger than the common Bees: his hinder, or
nether part, is longer almost by half than his foreparts; and his end, or tail,
more peaked than any other Bees, in the point of which peaked end is his sting,
and under his sting is his place for the evacuation of excrement.

His color is a brighter brown than any other Bee's, until he is above a year
old, and then he grows blacker: his belly is of a sad yellow, deeper than gold:
his nether part has four partitions separated by lines going over cross his
belly, which lines are of a golden color, being of a brighter yellow than the
rest of his belly is: his thighs, or hinder legs, are near the color of his
belly: moreover, some of them have a spot on their forehead while young, which
soon wears away.

The King-Bee has a sting, which though not so large nor so long, yet is more
acute than the sting of any common Be, and he has also a better command of it
than they have; for when he uses his sting, he does not leave it behind him,
as they do, but he uses it seldom, being armed with Majesty, his Subjects
valor, and willing obedience. I have had about twenty King-Bees in my hands
this last year, and could provoke but two of them to put forth their stings,
unless they were hurt.

Also the Male among Wasps, which some call the Mother-Wasp, stings more
venemously than the common Wasp does.

Concerning the King-Bees, I think it will not be amiss here to recite what
Pliny has written of them in his Natural History, lib. 11. cap. 16. Omnibus
forma semper egregia, and duplo quam cerer is major, pennae breviores, crura
recta, ingessus celsior, in front macula quodam diademare candicans: multum
etiam nitore a vulgo differunt: That is, they are all of a more excellent form,
and greater by half than the rest, shorter wings, straight thighs, statelier in
their gate, a certain spot in their forehead, in the shape of a Crown, and they
differ much from the vulgar Bees in point of their brightness. The King-Bee
commands and orders all, as I shall show, when I come to the Government of Bees.

There is of this sort one in every Colony or, Stock of Bees, and but one from
the end of July, or beginning of August, until the April ensuing, and then
young Princes are bred, and kept all the Summer in order to swarm, and supply
the place of the old King in case of mortality.

CHAP. III.
Of the common Honey-Bee.

THE second sort of Bees are the common Honey Bees, which I thus describe. The
common Honey-Bee is a flying Insect, having four wings, and six legs; in shape
oblong and little, in color brown, having three partitions on his belly, with
silver-coloured lines going cross; his eyes are oblong and covered with a Horny
membrane, or tunicle, of a shining black like jet, and immovable, being placed
on the, outside of his cheeks, or rather are instead of cheeks; he has two
horns pliable and bending, with two joints, one close to his forehead, the
other in the middle; he has two fangs in fashion of a pair of pincers, which
hang not one over another, but sidewaies one against another; his tongue is so
long, that his mouth contains it not, and he doubles it, and puts it between
his fangs, under his chin and neck; his tongue is divided into three parts,
whereof the two outmost are as a case for the third, which is longest, and most
used; his tail is somewhat sharp, within which is his sting fast joined to his
entrails, under which he has a place for the evacuation of excrement, which he
does most commonly flying, and that is the cause (if cloths in drying are
spread on the ground near them, in the Spring when they first fly abroad, or in
a fair Sun-shiny day in Winter) they do stain the cloths with their excrement.

The common Bees being divided into bands, have their several Leaders and
Officers, which, according to their Kings orders, do their work by turns, some
watching, others killing their Drones, whilst others are cleansing their Hive,
and others abroad; all working for the benefit of the whole; and thus they all
work as long as they live, and the older they grow, the blacker they are; so
that by their color you may distinguish, which Bees are a year or two old,
from those which are younger, as well as by their ragged wings.

The Bees have all their parts for several uses; their eyes to see, their horns
to feel, being guided by their touching, especially in the dark Hive; their two
fangs in manner of pincers, being their strongest parts to gather generative
matter from vegetables, which they fasten on their thighs, or hinder legs as
they gather it; (by generative matter, I mean, an organizable or animable
matter extracted by the Honey-Bees from Trees, Plants, Flowers, etc. and by
them put into their proper Cells or Matrixes, which being there duly mixed and
invigorated with the sperm of the King-Bee (in which sperm I conceive the
plastic power and energy for production of young Bees does reside) has such
an alimentary quality as is adapted by Nature to supply nourishment to the
grubs in order to their augmentation, as the white and yolk of the Egg is to
the cicutricula for the production of a Chick by the gentle and mild heat of
the Hens incubation. Also with their fangs they bite and kill their Drones;
with their legs they crawl; with their wings they fly; and with their stings
they defend themselves from, and offend, their strongest enemies.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Drone Be.

THE third sort of Bees are the Drones, which are the largest Bees in an Hive,
having eyes, head, wings, body and legs all proportionable to their magnitude,
and two moveable wreathed horns growing out together between their eyes, but
extending like a fork; their tails are obtuse and large at the end; their
color brown; they have neither stings nor fangs, which is the reason they are
so easily beaten and killed by the Honey-Bees, having no weapons offensive or
defensive.

They are of such use in the Hive for hatching the young brood in the Summer
time, especially when honey-dews fall, that no Colony or Stock can well thrive
without them; for they are as Servants or Nurses under the Honey-Bees, to help
has up the young brood, whilst the other are broad at their labors; as I
shall further show when I come to the generation of Bees; and their bodies
being large, they cover the more room with the smaller numbers.

CHAP. V.
Of their Properties in general.

TO speak something of their Properties, Bees are creatures full of wonders,
being not altogether tame, nor absolutely wild, but between both, yet
indocible, for most they do is by instinct; and although there do not appear
those outward organs of the senses which other Animals have; neither is seen in
their heads that inward principal part, the brain, which is the fountain and
seat of the internal senses, viz. common sense, phantasy, and memory? yet have
they the senses themselves both outward and inward, which their subtle and
active spirits do excite and quicker; so that as the Honey in the Honeycomb,
excells all other things in sweetness, so do the Bees themselves excel all
other creatures (in things relating to themselves) in Art, Wisdom, or
Foresight, Industry, Valor and Loyalty, having also the perfect use of the
five external senses, as seeing, hearing, feeling, smelling and tasting: their
excellency in one thing or other, is showed in almost every part of this Book;
yet here, in the next Chapters, I shall give you a taste of my reasons and
experience, that these excellencies are in them, and that they exercise them.

CHAP. VI.
Of their Art, Wisdom, or Foresight.

AS for their Art: a Be, the first day of his flying abroad is an exquisite
Chemist, extracting from herbs and flowers, and other things, honey, wax,
generative matter, and what else they want: to do the least part of which would
require time in men to study and practice.

Their Art appears further in their excellent Architecture, which is by the
framing of their several Combs, and hexagonical Cells, so mathematically exact,
that the bottom of each Cell of one side, has its foundation upon three lines
of three Cells on the other side, meeting all in one angle right in the middle
of the opposite bottom, by which the strength as well as the beauty of the same
if much augmented.

As for their Wisdom and Foresight; a sure testimony of it is, that it is
natural for all those Bees that are bred in Summer, so to foresee and know that
a Winter will come, as wisely to consider it, and therefore do they so
earnestly provide for subsistence before it does come; which we can hardly
learn our children in thirty years, if then.

Also their foresight of a storm approaching, makes them hasten home, although
but half laden, to secure their own lives.

CHAP. VII.
Of their Industry, Valor and Loyalty.

AS for their admirable Industry, that appears by the indefatigable pains they
take for the good of the Commonwealth; none of them for age desiring a Writ of
Ease, but being all volunteers in all the sorts of their labors, some of them
I think it not improper to mention; for, besides their gathering of honey, wax,
and generative matter, and building their combs, they have several other
businesses, viz. where occasion is, some breaking down pieces of rotten combs
for repairs, others carrying out their dead, others haling out abortives,
others cleansing out filth, others being upon the guard to keep off Robbers and
Strangers, in this form; placing themselves in five or six files, eight or ten
deep upon the floor of the Hive, so that all the Bees pass between them,
whereby no stranger can pass them but is seized on, and brought to condign
punishment; others of them submitting themselves into the use of bridges and
ladders for the rest to pass from place to place upon, where there wants a
convenience in the Hive; thus; single Bees ^inking themselves to one another
the length of six or seven inches, and enduring for a considerable time in this
form, the abundant trampling of passengers.

As for their Valor; therein they surpass all creatures, I shall here mention
but one instance: for a single Be near his Hive, if a man do but affront him,
shall pursue him, though he were in the midst of an Army, and not leave him for
all the terrors of gunshot, though whole vollies were discharged against him,
and though he be stricken down to the ground several times, yet he shall not
quit his pursuit, till killed or disabled.

As for their Loyalty; no distaste from their Prince, or hardship endured, can
make them quit their Love and Loyalty to him, as I shall further make it appear
in treating of their Government.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the five Senses in Bees.

AS for their use of the five exterior Senses: That they see, I think none
doubts, because they take notice of their new dwelling, by flying about it; and
going remote from home, at their return they can hit the little hole of their
entrance.

Their Hearing also is as perfect as any other Sense; for they hear the voice
of their King-Bee upon all occasions, and the several signal notes for
preparing to swarm, otherwise what means the ringing of pans to stop a Swarm
from flying away? but to confound their hearing of their Leaders voices and
notes.

Also by their several notes and hummings, the Bees give notice to one another
when their King is absent, and when he returns again: insomuch that when I have
kept their King some space of time from them, though the numbers of half a
swarm were abroad in search after him, yet upon hearing that joy which the Bees
at the door expressed by their notes when I put their King to them again, all
those Bees flying about in search after their King, immediately returned home
at once, to the admiration of many beholders; for I have done it oftentimes, in
several places.

Their Feeling is very subtle; for, in the dark Hive they are guided by their
little weak horns, and at their touch of them against any thing they will give
back; but if some doubt and will not believe that Bees feel, I counsel them to
put their hands into an Hive full of Bees, and so they may be feelingly
resolved of their doubt whether Bees feel or not, for (if I mistake not) the
Bees will feel their bands to sting them; but put a dead thing among them,
though they feel it, yet will they not sting it.

Their Smelling is very quick, even to a proverb; for if one Be is killed near
the Hive, the others are by the scent of him crushed, made so angry, as to seek
revenge; and this I have often experienced; so that when I have accidentally
killed a Be, I have been forced to go away until the scent was over, to avoid
the anger of the rest.

They scent an Honey-dew presently, which draws them almost all out of the Hive
to follow their work, which they do whilst it lasts, with greater
earnestness, than men work in the time of Harvest.

Also by this sense only, they know robbing Bees in their Hives, and
distinguish their friends from their foes, when great numbers are fighting
together.

Their Tasting must needs appear, when we consider that they could not
otherwise distinguish different Tastes: for nothing so much delights their
curious pallats as the most luscious things.

To conclude this Section: All these exce^lencies and more, are in them, which
might be made more evident by abler persons, (...) in studying of Nature, they
would also stud^ the Natures of these little, yet wonderfu^ creatures: However,
you will find in thi^ Book, here and there as occasion offers further proofs
of what I have written.

The Be excelling in many qualities, verify some proverbs of him as follows.

As Profitable Laborious Loyal Swift Nimble Quick of Scent Neat
as a Be.

These wonderful parts and properties o^ this little creature, are so many
evident proof^ of the Infinite Wisdom and Power of the Creator, as was well
observed by Du Barta^ in his Works on the Creation of the fifth day; thus:

For, if old times admired Callicrates
For Ivory Emmets, and Myrmecides
For framing of a rigged Ship so small,
That with his wings a Be could hide it all:
Admire we then the All-wise Omnipotence,
Which does within so narrow space dispense
So stiff a Sting, so stout and valiant heart,
So loud a Voice, so prudent Wit and Art:
Their well ruled State, my soul so much admires,
That durst I loose the reins of my desire,
I gladly could digress from my design
To sing a while, their sacred Discipline:
Of which Discipline I am next to discourse,

Section 2.
Of the Government of Bees.

CHAP. I.
Of their Government in general.

THE Bees enjoy a peaceable and quiet State, under one Monarch; so that every
Colony and Stock of Bees is, within its self a particular Kingdom, having one
only King to whom they all yield obedience, maintenance, and defense: For when
they have no King, they pine away and die: and under two or more Kings, they
will not be; for (as if they knew by instinct) that they cannot serve and obey
two Kings at once (as no man can serve two Masters) so they will neither work,
nor breed, nor be quiet, until all the rest (when by accession of two or three
Swarms together, more Kings are among them) are deposed, by that King who sits
on the Throne: for, as was well observed by Mr. Butler, page 5. of his Book of
Bees, The Bees abhor as well Polyarchy as Anarchy, God having showed in them
unto men, an exprese pattern of A perfect Monarchy the most natural and
absolute form of Government.

The Egyptians, by the Hieroglyphick of a Be, signified a King. Without
doubt, they could not fitly resemble the Majesty of a King so well by any other
creature, as by the King of the Bees, who is a natural King; and set apart by
Nature her self for that very end. For, those we call the Kings of Beasts, and
Fowls: The Lion, and the Eagle, have no Subjects but what are in rebellion,
because they do not protect, but devour them. But the King-Bee, though the most
absolute Monarch, yet is attended with all the Love and Loyalty imaginable from
his people, because he devoureth none, but is a cherisher of, and benefactor to
all.

Also his place of abode makes the Court; for, where he is, whether within or
without the Hive, such a retinue of Bees always attends him, as may be
supposed to wait on him. But in all exigencies and disturbances they have
greater recourse to him than ordinary, stocking about him as well to defend him
in case of danger, as to receive his orders, as Soldiers and Officers to their
King, or General.

CHAP. II.
Of the Bees necessity of a King.

THat Bees must of necessity live under a King is apparent: for without a King
they will either die, or yield to their enemies the robbers.

They pine away and die; because they cannot breed, as I shall show when I come
to the generation of Bees. And they will in few days yield to the robbers for
want of a King to order their battles, for instances thus: both in swarms, and
stocks.

A Swarm, though settled and hived, yet if their King Be happens to miscarry
and so not come to them (as it sometimes falls out) then having no King they
will never stay in the Hive, but go all out, and return home again: and
sometimes they return home again without settling any where (that is) as often as
they miss their King so soon; which is the chief, if not the only cause that
Swarms so often return home again after they are swarmed.

A Stock or Colony, when their King dies, or happens by any accident to be
lost, unless there be a successor in the Hive of the Royal issue of King-Bees,
the whole Stock or Kingdom will certainly perish, either by pining away if
dead, and losing themselves in searching after him if lost, or else by yielding
to the robbers.

That they pine away and lose themselves, those who keep Bees do sometimes
experience: when they find a rich stock well filled with honey, abandoned by the
Bees, so that scarce one is left in the hive, though in the fall it was left
full of Bees; which happens no other way but by the loss of their King: for
otherwise the Bees never leave that store; which to obtain they have bestowed
so great labor and diligence, for if they had died with cold, the Bees would
have remained still in the hive, though dead, and in the same form and place
they kept when alive.

That they yield to the robbers appears thus: if after the loss of their King
they do not all within a while lose themselves, yet in their languishing
condition, as soon as the robbers come in great numbers to attach them, they
will easily yield both themselves and substance to them, the consequence of
which will be, that they will help the robbers in carrying away their own
substance to their livss, and so live with them, under their King, this,
occasioned Virgil in his Georgicks lib. 4. to write of them as follows.

Praeterea, Regem non sic aegyptus, et ingens
Lydia, nec populi parthorum, aut medus Hydaspes
Observant: Rege incolumi men's omnibus una est,
Amisso, rupere fidem: construct aque mella
Diripuere ipsae: et crates solvere favorum,
Ille operum custor, illum admirantur: et omnes
Circumstant fremitu denso, stipantque frequentes,
Et saepe attollunt humeris, et corpora bello
Objectant, pulchramque petunt per vulnera mortem.
Which for some satisfaction to those who understand not the Latin Tongue,
there being many such who keep Bees, I have thus translated.

Not Egypt, Lydia, nor Hydaspes pay,
Nor Parths, such worship to their Kings as they:
The King b'ing safe, in all things they agree,
But he b'ing lost, they seem to mutinee,
In which themselves do bring by this confusion,
Their food and fabrics to a dissolution,
Him, being their preserver, all admire,
And strongly guard his person; then retire
To bear him on their shoulders, and in wars
Their bodies they expose, not fearing scars,
Only their King to save, they always do
In his defense, their sweetest lives forego.
Under this Monarch each Subject has a public spirit, for each works,
watches, and fights, for the good of their King and commonwealth, and
without any private respect, sharing equally in all their accommodations; and
though they freely act in all their undertakings, yet they do all in
subordination to their King, and with reference to the public.

CHAP. II.
Of their Government in particular.

THeir Government is in the person of the King, from whom all the Bees
protempore, i. e. for the present time receive their orders, as well the
Captains and Officers among them, as the commonalty.

His Government is severe, just, and absolute, severe, like that of the Grand
Seignior toward the race of the blood Royal, for, as soon as swarming time is
fully past, all the younger Princes being kept in their private places which
are usually near those pavillions in which they are bred, being in the lower
parts of the Hive, are expelled or executed by the Kings orders then sitting in
his Throne; the reason of which severity is the same with that of the aforesaid
Grand Seignior, lest some of the Royal Issue expecting to reign (and swarming
being prevented by the approaching winter) dispaires of having Government, and
so usurp the Throne of the rightful King.

And as nature seeks self preservation, so knowing that otherwise they must die
at home, sometimes three or four Princes do go out in a second swarm, each of
the younger being thereby in hopes not only to escape with life but also to get
a Kingdom, and then he of them, who first can get into the Throne of the new
Kingdom, preserves his own life, with the death of all the rest.

His Government is just; because he oppresses none; the consequence of which
is, unity throughout the whole Kingdom.

His Government is absolute, because his orders are never disputed but obeyed,
as well in swarming, and executing their Drones, and young Princes, as in
watching, and working; as follows.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the Obedience of Bees to their King.

THE willing and cheerful obedience of Bees to their King and his orders, is
manifest, because without him they work not, and because they can have no
orders without a governor, and no governor but a King, therefore it must of
necessity follow that they do obey his orders when they work or do any thing in
the Hive: for unless they had orders for each several work they do, how could
they distinguish their several works without confusion? viz. Some killing their
Drones only, some burying their dead, others cleansing filth others only on
their guard, and others hatching the young brood, whilst others are abroad at
work, some gathering matter for generation, others fetching in water, whilst
others are gathering wax or honey: what else can this exact order in all their
actions, and that they do not all the same works together, argue? but their
absolute obedience, each band following his own appointed work till it be
finished, and not intermedling with the work of another band, but only in
disturbances by noise or otherwise, or access of strange Bees in great numbers,
and in case of Hony-dews, for then they leave off all other employments to
fetch in honey: that being the general work to which all the other tend, their
own instinct also joining with their Kings general orders in that work: for in
an Hony-dew Bees neither rob one another, nor fight, nor swarm, nor kill their
Drones, nor watch, nor do any other work but fetch in honey, and lay it up
hastily in the Hive to be presently gone again for more, and not so much as
staying to stop up their Cells where they put their honey, until afterward: and
thus it is only at such a time, and so long as the Hony-dews are falling; and
until the Sun by shining hot dries it* from off the leaf of the Oak-tree, and
other places whence they take it.

Bees never swarm but by the order and consent of the King; and when they
swarm, it is in obedience to him, as Mr. Butler also testifies, page 3. of his
Feminine Monarchy, speaking of their Ruler as a Queen, in these words; If by
her voice, she bid them go, they swarm.

The Causes of Swarms are different; the Reason of the second Swarms are not
the same with those of the first Swarms, as I shall show in this Chapter; for
the Bees lack not room when the second Swarms go forth. The reasons of the
first Swarms are the same with theirs who plant themselves in any newfound
place, and settle there, without intention of removing thence again to their
old habitations. The chiefest Cause is lack of room, the other are but the
circumstances as the consent and order of the King; good weather, a prospect of
plenty to come, and fitness: which fitness is when the Hive is quite filled
with Bees, and they have store of riches, and a King-Bee ready without all
these circumstances, Bees seldom swarm though they do want room but all these
circumstances conjoyning with lack of room, is the certain cause of first
Swarms; but where they have room, as in Colonies duly raised, the Bees never
swarm, but in case of distaste, by accident, disturbance, or mismanagement,
which is very rare.

The Causes why Bees swarm not when fitted, and wanting room, as in some strong
Stocks, is, because being full and rich, the King will neither leave his
Kingdom, not part with his People, lest he should be thereby impoverisht; and
then the Bees make Combs where they lie out. And Colonies although strong,
rich, and full, yet having room added to them, the Bees continue their working
without idleness or intermission as long as Hony-gathering lasts.

Although many times two or three Kings go out in a second Swarm for the reason
before mentioned in the last Chapter; yet I never knew but one to go forth with
the first Swarm, and then the old King generally goes forth himself with them,
because having a prospect of a more rich, pleasant, and flourishing Kingdom, he
leaves his decaying and unpleasant Kingdom (by reason of the stoping and
noisomness in the old Combs) to his Successors: and with him the greater number
of the Bees will go, and that is the cause that Bees so often overswarm
themselves, and leave the old Stock thereby so lean, that sometimes they die
for want of numbers to keep them warm in Winter, or else for want of food in
the Spring, or at best are two Summers after before they recover themselves to
be in good case again.

Mr. Butler (the most judicious Writer of Bees in his time) page 70. and 75. of
his Book, supposes that the first Swarm went forth at the will of the Commons,
because he very rarely heard those musical notes of the King-Bees answering one
another (which are well known to be the certain signs of a second Swarm to come
forth; for the young Prince is expelled, if the King gives not his consent by
answering his petition in three or four days) till after the first Swarm was
gone forth: and when the first Swarm returned home again, he could as seldom
hear those musical notes in order to their second going forth, though he could
constantly hear them before the second Swarm did come forth: which supposition
of his appears to be against later experience. For the King orders at once what
the Bees readily execute in obedience thereunto, and so he has no need to give
his consent or orders for another King to go forth when he intends to go
himself.

And if the King-Bee which first goes forth, through Age, and want of flying
well, or the like, happens to miscarry, and with his Attendants perishes for
want of coming to the place where the Swarm is settled, then the Swarm finding
themselves without a King, return home again to their relinquisht Prince, as
sometimes it happens, viz. as often as Bees return home again after they are
swarmed and settled (for sometimes the Bees miss their King before they settle,
and then they return home again without settling at all) but when it happens
thus, then that Prince who is King by the loss or death of his Sire, takes his
own choice, whether he will go himself, or send his younger Brother, and when
he will not go himself, whether the Bees shall swarm again or not: so that it
appears by this, that Bees swarm not their first Swarm, but according to the
orders of their King as well as their second Swarm, which all experienced
Bee-Masters know is not without his consent and orders.

The reason why first Swarms will not go forth but in very good weather, is
because the King goes when he pleases: and second Swarms go forth at the time
appointed in any indifferent weather, because their King goes forth at the
will of his King or Sire; who often grants leave, being propitious to the Royal
Lineage; which indulgence of the King to the Royal Lineage, is the only cause
why Bees swarm when they have room enough, as in second Swarms (except only the
cases of disturbance and distaste) of which indulgence there is little occasion
of use in first Swarms.

Bees often provide themselves of an habitation before they swarm, viz. as often
as they fly quite away from their owners without settling, for they have not
reason to know that their owners will give them an house, and so settle to be
put thereinto: but when they are not before provided, it is because the quick
and often flights of young (especially in wet weather) suddenly fill the Hive,
whereby they lack room, and then they are as suddenly forced out by the present
orders of the King, and so they settle to take time to look out for a place, in
which juncture of time comes the owner and furnishes them, before their Scouts
return: and if the King be with them, and the Hive dressed, they will stay in the
Hive given them; otherwise they are discontented, and will not stay therein.

Sometimes also they settle in order to fly all away at once, being before
provided of an house, and then they will not easily stay in the Hive given
them, unless it be very well dressed.

CHAP. V.
Of the Bees Loyalty to their King.

THat Bees naturally abhor Rebellion and Treason, I doubt not, because I never
knew, or heard of any disturbance in an Hive of Bees within themselves, and
when other Bees come within the Hive, their fighting with them show their
Loyalty to their own King, because none of the Bees will take part with the
Invaders; but all fight to the last against them to preserve their own
Sovereign in safety.

The Bees Loyalty to their Sovereign wonderfully appears by their excessive
love to, and industrious care of his person: for without him they value not
their own lives, as you may observe by a Swarm though settled and hived, yet if
without their King, how discontented the Bees will be, and will not stay in the
Hive by any means that can be used, but return home again, whilst others of
them that attend him, though but an handful some distance from the Swarm
(perhaps) fallen on the ground, where they encompass him about, yet there, that
handful will live and die with him, rather than forsake him; if he cannot reach
the Swarm, which happens as often as the Swarm cannot find him to come to him;
for, it is for want of him they do return home again after they are settled or
hived.

And you may observe by a Stock or Colony when by any Accident or Mismanagement
the King happens to be lost, they presently miss him, and then many of them fly
abroad in search after him whilst the rest languish at home; and if the others
return not in a while, many of them also go out in search after him, and thus
they give not over searching for him, till either they find him or lose
themselves dying in their search. Of which I shall here relate one example for
the satisfaction of all Persons who read this, which example is thus: About the
end of August, 1678. within one week before his Majesty went to Windsor, at his
Majesty's own Bee-hause in the Royal Garden in St. James's Park. Which House I
had erected the Spring before. The Kings Majesty and some Persons of Honor
being then present, I took the uppermost Hive off of a Colony, and having taken
the Bees out of the Hive from the Honey and Combs, I took also the King-Bee
which was in the uppermost Hive at that time, being late in the year, I kept
him some time, and put all the Common Bees to their fellows that were at home
in the lower parts of the Colony (with their store of Honey which is left for
their Winter-store) the Bees presently went home crouding one another, as Sheep
into a fold without taking wing, and when they were all within, the first work
they did (as is their custom) was upon this disturbance to see if their King
were safe, and among them; (whom I still kept from them) and missing their
King, presently some fly abroad to seek him, some crept, and others ran up and
down, as men in a tumult, or like unto persons distracted: then I put their
King into the Colony to them, and in the space of two minutes, which was as
soon as possibly they could know throughout the Colony that their King was come
home, the Bees did presently by their actions and voices proclaim it at the
door, upon which, all those that were abroad, and flying about in search after
their King (which were almost half the numbers of a second Swarm) immediately
returned home, where they all together seemed to make a cheerful noise among
them, to the admiration of all that were present.

I have also done the like, and had the same effect with several Colonies,
where I have come too late in the year; but although I can do it my self at any
time of the year with safety to the King Be and Colony, yet my advise to young
Practitioners in this Art is to do it whilst the Drones are in the Hive, and
the King-Bee in the middle Box, as I shall further show in its proper place in
taxing off the uppermost Box.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Bees Valor, Justice, Manner of Fight, and Places.

THeir Valor exceeds all creatures, fearing no enemy, how great soever though
never so terrible, especially near their Hive, and in defense of their King,
for nothing but death can quell them, because they will never yield.

The Bees are very just to one another, and not the least injury is offered
among them, within their own Kingdom; but the Bees of several Stocks and
Colonies are not so, for being so many particular Kingdoms, each of them are
concerned only for their own Kingdoms welfare; which together with their
jealousy of being robbed, is the only cause why they kill any strange Bees
that through mistakes come into their neighbors Kingdom, but sometimes they
will not kill one that comes so when he is alone, and well laden, but suffer
him to go but again, because they know that such come not with intention to rob
and steal.

When Bees fight with Bees the King orders the battle (except in small
skirmishes when those only fight which are appointed to watch) and walks up and
down animating them with his voice, and like a General rallying his scattered
troops, and when he leads them on, they are so sensible of his worth that they
unanimously expose themselves to death it self to save him harmless, and in
their fighting they bite one another with their fangs, sometimes by their wings,
sometimes under their wings, and sometimes by their legs, for they seldom use
their stings one against another in their fighting, never unless much provoked,
and not able otherwise to right themselves; as when they oppose men, cattle, or
fowls, because they know that it is death to themselves, as Virgil mentions,
Georg. lib. 4.

-- animamque in vulnere ponit. The Common Bees in their fighting with one
another, neither give nor take quarter, neither is there any cessation of
hostility among them, until one side or the other be Victor by the total
destruction of the weaker party, unless when two Swarms come, or are put
together before they are settled in their new habitation, then sometimes they
proclaim a general silence; and then if one of their Kings has his residence
in the place of his Throne, the other is expelled or slain; but when both the
Kings are alike in their places of command, then the Bees fight it out.

Another occasion of their cessation of hostility, is when they are disturbed
by Art, which is by spurting with the mouth so much strong Hony-liquor, or Ale
among them, that they may smell all alike; the reason of which is, because they
distinguish one another by the sense of smelling, and by disturbing them thus
artificially you may put any Bees together at any time, and prevent their
fighting.

The King-Bee's Throne is in the top of the Hive, to which he always hastens
when any disturbance happens, and thither to him repair the Hony-Bees (as may
be supposed) for orders and directions, especially in case of a fight.

The Bees in the Hive lodge not in the cells of the Combs, they serving only to
breed in, and to lay up their stores of Honey, only the Pavillions in which
their Kings are bred they never put any Honey into, the Bees (unless in Summer
when they fill their Hive) creep all together close between the Combs where
they make one entire globulous body near the upper parts of the Hive. The
common residence of the King-bee is in the center or middle of this globulous
body, except, in case of disturbance, and then he hastens to his Throne.

To conclude this Section you see that Bees (creatures without reason) have not
only prudence and foresight, joined with art and industry, but perfect order
and discipline in their government, being naturally loyal, va^iant, and
magnanimous, and abhorring as well rebellion and treason, as cowardice and
^oth, all which plainly show that nature in Bees laying down such a pattern
should not only be imitated, but surpassed by men, lest they should be reproved
by these unreasonable creatures, as too many are, who have not only reason, but
the light of the Scriptures to guide them in the exercise of those virtues so
plainly seen in the Bees.

Section 3.
Of the Generation of Bees.

CHAP. I.
Of their Breeding in general.

THE Bees begin their breeding of young sooner or later, according to their
strength and numbers, for the greater their numbers are, the greater is their
heat, and by how much their heat is greater, by so much the sooner do they
expedite their young brood to fly; but all Bees begin to breed as soon as they
are able to fly abroad, and the Trees and Flowers begin to bud, which is
commonly about the beginning of March: they breed all the Summer time, and
leave off breeding as soon as the time of Honey gathering is fully past, which
is commonly in August; and then they ^atch up only what young are in the Cells:
the reason of their breeding thus constantly, is for propagation and
continuance of their kind, and that they may have the greater numbers when
Hony-dews fall: for we see those Stocks or Colonyes which have the greatest
numbers of Bees are always the richest.

Concerning the manner of the generation of Bees, several Authors have written
variously of them as follows.

Aristotle, Pliny and Virgil call the Ruler of the Bees by no other name than
(...), and Rex, i. e. King.

Aristotle concludes; Aristot. de histor. anim. l. 5. c. 2.
coeunt mas and femina est, Those creatures conceive by copulation, where there
be males and females.

And again; Idem de histor. anim. l. 5. c. 1.
they that are bred of the same sort, or kind, if there be among them male and
female, e coitu generantur, they are bred by copulation.

Cardanus denies that the Bees lay Eggs. Candan de subtle. l. 11.


Aristotle argues, Aristot. de generat. l. 3. c. 10.
that Bees engender no together because there be but few young in their Cells,
and they not quickly hatched; but other Insects that are procreated by
copulation engender long and hatch quickly: And whereas Aristotle relates it as
an Opinion of others, that Bees breed by copulation, and that the Drones are
males, Sealig. comment. in Arist. de anim. l. 5. c. 19.
and the Honey-Bee this, says Scalige^, is false, for the Bees indeed are
females, but the Kings are the males.

Muffet in Theat. Insect, l. 1. c. 3.
Mr. Muffet also acknowledges no males among the Bees but the Kings.

Mr. Remnant in his History of Bees says, that the matter in which they blow
or breed, is something that they gather off the Flowers or Plants, and bring
home, and put into the holes or cells of the Combs, which they mix finely with
a little water, and then blow in it a little thing as big as a Fly-blote.

I conceive the matter he means is that organizable matter I spoke of page 6.
and by the little thing I conceive he means the sperme which the King-Bee
injects into each matrix to that matter.

Mr. Butler in his feminine Monarchy concludes that the Drones are males, and
that the Ruler, and the Honey-Bees are all females, withal page 54. asserting
that the Bees use not copulation; but conceive in a secret unknown way by the
Drones.

Mr. Purchase also in his Theater of insects asserts the Drones to be males, and
the Honey-Bees females; but how the Honey-Bees receive a prolifick virtue from
the Drones he discusses, denying that they use copulation and citing Albertus
magnus libr. 26. as saying that Bees use not copulation, yet granting the
Drones to be males, and the Honey-Bees females. Then he further says that the
Honey-Bees may have a masculine virtue from the Drones otherwise than by
copulation; instancing in the Eele and other Fishes that produce their young
without copulation; but I think he was besides the mark in his instance,
because those creatures produced in the watery region cannot be examples of
those produced in the airy region, besides the Fishes spawne receives prolifick
virtue from the males.

Some others grant the King-Bee to be the parent of all the Bees, but yet
suppose him to be a female, and that the sperme which he ejects are Eggs, and
that that part of his body whence he does eject it, is her matrix.

Having thus laid down the opinions of several Authors, and finding by my
experience that there have been diverse mistakes by several concerning the sexes
of the Bees, and their manner of breeding, (diverse of them in their writing
also concluding, non tamen satis adhu^ explorata quae eveniant habemus, that
is, we have not as yet sufficient experience what may happen) I shall therefore
conclude their mistakes under three heads, viz.

First; that the Drones are males, and the only males among Bees. Secondly;
that the Honey-Bees as females (though without copulation, yet) do conceive by
the Drones. Thirdly; that the Ruler of the Bees is a female.
I shall therefore here lay down the reasons why I differ from their notions,
and in the next Chapter lay down my assertions, and endeavor to prove them.

First; Its not probable that the Drones should be males because there are none
eight whole months together, so that of necessity the Honey Bees must be
pregnant above eight months together, when we see the Bees finish each several
Brood in less than thirty days time in the Spring, and sooner in the summer
time, for in all the cold winter season all men (that keep Bees) know that
there are none young in the Cells.

Secondly; If the Honey-Bees as females did conceive by the Drones, they then
must of necessity conceive for three or four births before hand; for we see
that the Bees breed no Drones until the second brood is fled, and commonly not
until the third Brood is fled. So that I conclude, that it is no more probable
that Bees should go eight or nine months pregnant with a treble conception (of
which also they must be delivered before the Drones have any being) than for a
Mare to conceive three Colts at once and be delivered of each Colt three Months
time one after the other.

Thirdly, If the Ruler of the Bees were a Female, she could not breed any Young
without influence from the Drone, any more than the other Bees could; nor lay
prolifick Eggs, but by influence from some Male, and none could ever yet assign
any Mate for him.

Fourthly, Were the King-Bee a Female, this absurdity would follow, viz. that
she must conceive without a Male, and have of her self ab initio, Eggs of an
active quality and power for production of young Bees, which experience tells
is not possible, for his sperm (though at first ejection thereof it has some
form, as also has a drop of liquor falling down, yet it) dissolveth with the
heat of ones hand, which no Egg of any Infect does; for though the Eggs of
Insects have not a perfect shell, yet have they a certain skin enclosing every
distinct Egg, not easily frangible by a gentle touch, but this Sperme of its
self dissolveth, whereby it is mixed with the animable matter to which the
King-Bee injects it, into each matrix: in which matrix, the Egg is formed for
the production of each Be.

Fifthly; I differ from their notions of them, because this Sperme is generated
naturally in the body of the King-Bee, as is the Sperme in a Cock, or in the
male Silkworm.

But Sixthly and Lastly; I differ from their opinions because the Bees do never
copulate, and therefore there is no need of the Drones for that purpose; for
the Bees do breed their young without copulation according as Virgil in his
Georgicks libr. 4. writ of them as follows.

Illum adeo placuisse apibus mirabere morem,
Quod nec concubitu indulgent, nec corpora segnes
In venerem solvunt; aut faetus nixibus edunt:
Verum ipsae foliis natos, et suavibus herbis
Ore legunt: ipsae regem parvosque Quirites
Sufficient, aulasque et cerea regna refigunt.
Which I have thus translated.

It is a wonder worth our observation
That Bees breed young, not using copulation,
Nor spend themselves in Ven'ry: but without use
Of birth: from Herbs and Leaves their young produce
For; with their fangs, their progeny they take
And Princes too, with Courts and Kingdoms make.
And if the Bees do breed without copulation (as a most all writers do agree
because it was never yet seen by any man) then I see no ground to believe there
can be any conception, and without conception I think there can be no
parturition or bringing forth either of young or Eggs that be prolifick, and in
the body of the common Honey Be I could never yet find any thing like Eggs or
Sperme, nor any other as ever I read or heard of. But for any Female to
conceive without copulation, it can be no otherwise but by the wind, as Aesops
Babylonian Mares (in the Fable) conceived by the Horses that were in Egypt the
same time. Or as a pair of Breeches lying upon a Bed got the maid with child.

CHAP. II.
Of the Generation of Bees in particular.

THE assertions which I lay down concerning the manner of the generation of
Bees are three.

First; That the King-Bee is a Male, and the only Male in every Colony and Hive
of Bees. Secondly; That the common Honey-Bees are the Females, but not by
virtue of any copulation or conception, but because they supply the place and
Office of the Female. Thirdly; That the Drones are neither Males nor Females,
but servants under the Honey-Bees, produced by nature to supply the absence of
the honey-Bees for a time.
To prove these three assertions, I shall lay down three reasons and then
proceed to show my experiences concerning the breeding of Bees.

The first reason is, because it is the property of the Male, and of the Male
alone, to eject Sperme; And the King-Bee only has Sperme, and does eject it;
and therefore, he, and only he, is the Male among the Bees. The second reason
is, because it is the property of the Female to prepare the matrix, and to
administer augmentation to the Sperme so as to bring forth, or hatch up; and
because the Honey-Bees prepare the matrixes by building the Combs, and
administer augmentation to the Sperme, by gathering of animable matter, and by
putting it into the matrix, so as to hatch up the young Brood by lying close
about it, and keeping it in a constant heat: therefore they (though not by
copulation nor conception, yet) are the Females. The third reason is, because
as nature never produces any creature in its whole kind without parts and
instruments to perform the end for which it was produced, so likewise nature
produces no creature in its whole kind with such parts for which no end is by
nature designed, and consequently the Drone being produced without parts or
instruments for the production of Bees either as male or female, therefore he
is properly neither male nor female but a redundancy of nature.
But more fully to prove my assertions, I shall enlarge upon each of my reasons
in showing my experiences, and afterward answer somes questions.

As for my first Reason, that the King-Bee has Sperm, and does eject it, any
man by dissection in Summertime or Autumn, may find that he has Sperm in his
Body; and whereas no Bee-master can averr, that ever he saw any other Be eject
Sperm, yet I do affirm, and can bring testimony, that the King-Bee does eject
Sperm in this manner, viz. just at that part of his body, where he is only yet
the full length of a common hony-Bee, he opens his body, and bending his tail
(wherein his sting is) ejects one seed at a time, which seed is white, and as
small as a white thread, and somewhat bigger at each end than in the middle, and
not half a quarter of an inch in length; when he has ejected one seed, he
shuts his body again by reverting his tail and sting into their usual form
again, by which reverse action his part where he opens his body is shut close
again with a joint (in like manner as do the joints in the tail of a Lobster)
whereby he retains and ejects, his sperm at his pleasure. This will further
appear by this example following, being matter of fact. In August last, in my
own garden in the Bowling-Ally in Westminster, I took the King-Bee out of an
Hive, and there was present with me Doctor Hobart a Physician, and several
others: This King-Bee I kept in my hand about half a quarter of an hour, and
then looking on him, we all plainly saw where, and in what manner he did open
and shut his body, ejecting his seeds one by one; as abovesaid. The Doctor and
my self, and the rest who were present, did perfectly see and know, that that
which this King-Bee did eject, was sperm by its color and substance, because
after a small space of time it dissolved from its form by the heat of my hand,
and that it was not his excrement; for excrement is thin and yellow, and
evacuated at another place some distance from whence this was ejected, viz.
just under his sting; and that it was not Eggs, but sperm, because it had no
skin to keep it in the form it was ejected in, as we see the Egg has within
the shell, as also has the nit of a fly-blow, and a Silkworms Egg. Upon sight
of this the Doctor presently affirmed, that if there were but one such Be in
the Hive, he must of necessity be the Sire of all the rest: The King-Bee when
he did eject this sperm, walked, and every step he took he stood still, opened
his body, ejected one seed and shut his body again, then took another step,
stood still again, opened his body, ejected one seed, and shut his body again,
and thus he did six times ejecting six seeds presently one after another, as he
walked on my hand, every step he took being the length of the distance of a
Bees Cell; so that each seed, as they lay on my hand in length, did scarcely
touch one another, thereby answering the distances of the several Cells in the
Comb. Then I kept him about half an hour longer, and he did the same again,
opening and shutting his body in the like manner, walking on my hand, until he
had ejected about twelve times, and yet to our observation as vigorous and
strong as at the first; after which I put him into his Hive again.

Now as no female can produce young, without influence from the male, so an
whole Hive of Bees, with many Drones among them cannot breed any young if there
be not a King-Bee with them; because when they have no King-Bee, they have no
male among them; which I have often seen, and helped them with a King-Bee from
another poor stock, with whom they have done very well, which otherwise must
have perished in a short time, for want of posterity, because they could not
propagate their kind for want of a male: But, for further satisfaction, that
Bees breed not (because they cannot breed) young without a King-Bee, I shall
here relate the following example which several Gentlemen, who were eye
witnesses of the same, will testify.

A Gentleman who now lives in Westminster, to whom with some others I gave a
visit about the latter end of the Summer in 1677, and walking into his Garden,
I looked on his Bees, and perceived the languishing condition of one of his
Colonies by the not working of the Bees; and I told the Gentleman, that the
Colony, through some mismanagement, or accident was deprived of his King-Bee,
the consequence of which would be, that they would pine away, and die, or yield
to the robbers, for they could not have a supply of young Bees by breeding,
although they had Drones among them, because their King-Bee, the only male, was
wanting; then to satisfy him that they did not breed, I turned up the Colony,
and showed him their breeding places, where we all saw that all the Combs were
dry and empty, except above where their honey was; some of which I did break to
let them see that it was Honey, and not young Bees in those Cells stopped up,
for there was not one Grub in all the Cells: then, to satisfy them further I
showed them the inside of another Colony, which had his King-Bee, and there
they saw store of Grubs in the Combs in the breeding place. I then told the
Gentleman, I could yet save this Colony, by putting to them another King-Bee,
which I did thus:

He assigned me a Straw Hive, out of which I took most of the Combs with most
of the Bees, and in the crown or top of the Hive, I took the King-Bee, and
produced him to their view, after which I immediately carried him to the
Colony, and about a score of Bees with him, and put them together into the
mouth of the Colony, whereupon a greater company of Bees from the Colony fell
upon them, and in a minute killed all the company of Bees, except the King-Bee:
and although the Gentlemen thought he could not have escaped death in the
crowd, yet they saw clearly that when the Colony-Bees came to him, they Sopt,
and as soon as all the rest were killed, and carried away, they came to him
with all imaginable respect, and conducted him up into the Colony, which we
through the glasses saw, and there owned him for their King; the success of
which was that immediately they fell to their labor and breeding, and bringing
home of generative matter, which before they did not, insomuch that they soon
had a Brood of young in their Combs. Upon which the Gentleman perceiving that I
was so exact in finding out the King-Bee, desired me to bring him another
King-Bee out of some Hive out of the Country, which I did, and upon the 28th.
of Aug. 1677. presented him to the King's Majesty with about a score in His
company for distinction, among which His Majesty immediately discerned him,
wonderfully different from the other Bees, according to the description of
Bee-Masters.

Also though an whole Hive of Bees cannot breed without a King-Bee, yet I have
good reason to believe that it is more than probable that one King-Bee alone
(if he could outlive a winter) might breed Bees without the help of the common
Bees; and I am the more confirmed in this opinion, because we see the likest
insect the male-wasp, that he makes his own Comb in his nest, and breeds all
his young alone, lying in the midst of six or seven Cells, without the help of
the common Wasps, until some are hatched, and then the Wasps breed faster, by
having more heat among them; the male Wasp breeding thus alone, is the cause
why we see so few of them abroad until the Summer be almost ended; for the
common sort of Wasps do all dye every Winter, but the male-wasps fly away and
are not killed, as are the male-Bees, because they fly away, and so are not in
a capacity of undermining that government which of it self must be shortly
extinct, nature its self so wisely ordering the destruction of those vermin:
for every male thus flying away, lives in some obscure place (being of a
stronger constitution than Bees are) until the next spring, and then every one
that lives so long, makes a several nest where he can find a place. The
King-Bee has no need thus to breed alone, and take such pains to gather
generative matter out of vegetables for the production of Bees, because he has
a multitude 'of Subjects, that do it at his command; and it is evident, that
the great numbers and heat of the Bees much helps them to breed so fast in the
Spring, that they have such multitudes before the Honey-Dews come; for we see
in very poor stocks, and casts sometimes but an handful of Bees in all left,
and yet they live and breed (having their King with them) but so slowly and so
few for want of heat, that though they escape the robbers, yet cannot recover
themselves to gather enough whilst Summer lasts, to keep them in the Winter
following.

As for my second reason, that the Honey Bees are not females by copulation or
conception, but by supplying the place and office of the female.

Besides, what is above said concerning the similitude of the male-Wasp
supplying himself in the feminine office, I thus make it appear: if they did
copulate with the King Be (which is the only male) then of necessity they must
(as other Insects do,) receive his sperm into their bodies, and so consequently
lay prolifick Eggs (as the Silkworm does) into their several Cells: which they
do not, as I could ever yet find or hear of any that ever did; therefore I
conclude that it is not so.

But further, that place which receives Sperm, and retains it in order to
propagation, is a matrix: and the several matrixes where into the King-Bee
injects his sperm, none can deny but that they are all prepared and built by
the Hony-Bees which are these:

Each of those particular oblong pavillions at the Edges of the combs is a
matrix for the production of the Royal Race of each King-Bee, because it
receives and retains his sperm to that end: and each Cell in every ordinary
Comb is a matrix to receive and retain his sperm for the production of each
common Hony-Bee; and each Cell in the Drone-Comb (which Cells are larger and
deeper than the Hony-Bees Cells are) is a matrix to receive and retain his seed
for the production of each Drone-Bee.

Now, that which administers augmentation to sperm, so as to hatch up, or bring
forth, may easily be supposed to be in the female; or that it is her part and
office to do it. The materia formabilis, or corporaell part of the young Be,
is, that generative matter so plentifully brought in by the Hony-Bees on their
thighs, and by them put into the Cells into which the sperm of the King-Bee is
injected, and they supply the place and office of the semale further by duly
commixing the forementioned generative matter with the sperm, according to the
several sorts of Bees to be generated, whether a King-Bee, a common Hony-Bee,
or a Drone-Bee, which being duly mixed in the Cell, and covered, resembles an
Egg in the effect, though not altogether in the form, the sperm of the King-Bee
and the generative matter collected by the Hony-Bees being therein united in
order to production, by their constant heat administered to it, each Be is
produced.

As for my third reason, that the Drone has neither parts nor instruments for
generation either as male or female. As male, I never yet could find any sperm
in a Drone by defection, as I have found in a King-Bee; and whereas some
suppose the Drone to have testicles because he has an obtuse tail; it is not
so; for that part of him which they suppose to be testicles, is only the fleshy
membranous substance of his obtuse form and tail; but seeing Bees never use
copulation, I know no reason why they should suppose that nature produced
testicles in the Drone for no use; for males they cannot be, because the Bees
cannot breed when they have Drones among them, if the King-Bee is wanting. As
female, the Drone never works, because he has no fangs, and so is incapable of
doing the part of a female; for the Hony-Bees do most of their works for
breeding with their fangs, for with them they gather nutritious or augmentative
matter fit for generation of foetus: and with them likewise, they commix the
aforesaid matter in the matrix of the Cell, with those active principles
contained in the sperm of the King-Bee.

Thus their fangs are their instruments with which they in a great measure
supply the pare and office of the female; the Drone therefore cannot be a
female, because as all men may plainly see he has no fangs wherewith to work;
but the most certain reason why the Drone is neither male nor female, is,
because two or three, and sometimes, four generations of Bees are bred in many
stocks before any Drones appear to be among them, which were impossible if the
Drones were males or females.

Moreover, I have known several stocks of Bees to have bred and increased until
Midsummer, without having any Drones among them.

Also the use and nature of the Drone show that he is not necessary either as
male, or female being produced by nature only for an help in a time of
necessity; as I shall now show,

The Drones when come to maturity, serve for no purpose but to lie at home
close to the combs where the young brood is (their form being by nature
produced such, for the same end) to help to hatch up the young brood as a Capon
hatcheth the Eggs of an Hen by sitting on them; for what the Country woman does
by art (in pulling off the feathers from the Capons breast) to make him sit on
the Eggs; the same is done by nature among the Bees in producing the Drones in
such a form, and at such a time, as they have most need of them to sit close
and help to hatch the young ones, which the Honey Bees need them not for, but
can do it themselves until the time that Hony-gathering comes; and therefore
the Bees breed not their Drones so early in the spring, but as near as they
can, just before Hony-Dews fall; because they would have the use of them at, as
little charge of feeding them as they can, which use of them is, while. he
Hony-Bees are at their labors abroad in gathering Honey; for, as the Bees by
instinct foresee a succeding winter, and provide for it; so do they foresee the
evil consequence that would attend their excessive industry under the
temptation of Hony-Dews, which would certainly draw them out to such a degree
as their young brood might perish at home for want of a suitable heat, were it
not that nature had provided such a sort of Bees as are lazy, and shaped fit to
lie at home, and in the others absence to hatch their young ones, and when they
had served that turn, then to dye.

For, their natures are such, that they cannot endure the coldness of the
season in September, but dye then of themselves, if spared so long by the
Hony-Bees, but they are generally killed in July, and August, viz. a little
before their own time of dying (because Hony-gathering being past, the Bees
have no more need of them) to save that stored provision which those useless
eaters would consume in that short time.

Also the Bees will not only be without Drones as long as they can; but when
Hony-gathering comes late (to save their store) they pull them out of the Cells
before they are ripe, whilst they are white; this they do whilst some are among
them, lest they should suddenly want them: sometimes also they pull them out in
like manner whilst Honey gathering lasts, to fill those Cells wherein they were
with Honey: the reason of all is, because the Bees are thrifty, and know that
they have them as vassals to serve their present need of them; an example, of
which you may easily try, by killing a Drone in crushing him at the mouth of
any Hive, and the Hony-Bees will not be angry; but kill an Hony-Bee in the like
manner and place, then presently the other Bees scenting it, will show their
anger by seeking revenge on you.

CHAP. III.
The Manner of the Generation of the King-Bee.

THose oblong pavillions, before mentioned on the edges of the Combs, are each
matrix; and the common Hony-Bees extract from some particular Vegetables a
peculiar and select animable matter, which they put into those matrixes, to
which the King-Bee injects his sperm, and as soon as that is done, the cavity
is filled up with more of the same matter, and duly mixed by the common Bees,
who cover it over with wax. That select matter which fills up the vacuity of
the matrix, being both nourishment and augmentation to the sperm of the
King-Bee, as the meat in an Egg is to the Cocks tread, which produces a Chick
with the warmth of the Hens sitting; so in like manner this being kept in a
constant heat by the warmth of the Bees lying close about it, in process of
time produces a King-Bee, with his form and lineaments, which as soon as it
comes to its vigor and perfection, opens his own way out.

CHAP. IV.
The Manner of the Generation of the Honey-Bees.

THE common Honey-Bees are thus produced: The matrixes are each particular Cell
in the common Honeycomb, among which the King-Bee walks from one Cell to
another, and as he walks, he injecteth one seed into each Cell, in the manner
as I have before described; beginning close under the Honey which is toward the
upper parts of the Hive, and so going on downwards in rows as low as the
globulous body of the Bees does reach, and from side to side in the same
largness of circumference as the globulous body of the Bees does reach, and the
King-Bees sperm being thus injected into each Cell after the Hony-Bees have
first put in some generative matter, by degrees as he injects his seed one by
one, so by degrees the Hony-Bees fill up those Cells one after another; and
when the matrix or Cell is thus filled up with this generative matter, the
Hony-Bees (by instinct) mix the aforesaid matter with his sperm, also using
water withal for the more convenient moisture and due mixture of it; then this
being finished, they cover over each Cell with wax: the generative matter
collected and lodged in the Cells by the Hony-Bees being designed by nature for
nutrition to, and augmentation of, the sperm of the King-Bee, as is recited by
the Egg; and those matrixes being kept in a constant heat by the Bees, in
process of time converts that sperm and matter so mixed, first into a maggot,
with its full magnitude, which soon converts into an Hony-Bee, which opens its
own way out; for the matrix being stopped close up, and covered with wax at the
first mixture of the sperm, and the aforesaid generative matter, that waxen
cover is not opened until the Be it self opens its own way out.

CHAP. V.
The Manner of the Generation of the Drone-Bees.

ONE vulgar Error concerning the Generation of the Drone-Bee is, that a common
Hony-Bee when he loses his sting, then degenerates into a Drone: which if so,
would be a contradiction in nature; because it is not possible for any creature
by the loss of its entrails to grow bigger, but dye; for with his sting an
Hony-Bee loses his entrails also. And, experience plainly shows, that the
Drones are bred in their Hive, and in their full magnitude; Thus,

The Drones are generated with the sperm of the King-Bee, and the forementioned
animable matter brought in by the common Hony-Bees after the very same manner
as the Hony-Bees are, but with a different animable or generative matter, and
in a different matrix, there being in every Hive one or more Drone Combs made
by the Hony-Bees with larger and deeper Cells for that very purpose, each Cell
being composed exactly proportionable to the full magnitude of a Drone-Bee,
which may be easily experienced by any one in observing the differences of the
Combs in any Hive; but that the Drones are bred in their full magnitude is best
seen in May, or June, by taking part of the Drone-Comb out of an Hive of Bees,
for then any one may plainly see the Drone to be as large, having the exact
form and parts of a Drone-Bee whilst he is white, before he comes to full
maturity, as he has afterward when ripe and fled: being bred without fangs as
well as without a sting; the Drones when come to maturity, thrust off their
waxen covers with their heads.

CHAP. VI.
The first Question answered.

Quest. WHat mean you by generative, animable, or organizable matter?

Ans. By generative, organizable, or animable matter, so often mentioned, I
mean that peculiar and selected matter which being of diverse sorts, is by every
colony and stock of Bees so plentifully carried into the Hive, all the spring
and Summer time, which matter the Bees fasten on their thighs for convenience
of carriage, and they gather it with their fangs off of almost all sorts of
vegetables: as trees, plants, Flowers, etc. which generative matter by the
plastic power, and active quality residing in the sperm of the King-Bee is
made use of for the augmentation of the several parts of the Faetus.

Many persons when they see the Bees laden with this generative matter, think
it to be wax, and others think it to be Be Bread, or food for the Bees to eat,
although it is neither the one nor the other, but only that matter which makes
the corporeal part of each Be; and whether the Hony-Bees gather it as it is,
or whether in their gathering and mixing of it they add any feminine virtue to
it or not, I will not certainly determine; but this I know, that this
generative matter thus by them collected and put into the Cells, and also duly
mixed with the sperm of the King-Bee and stopped up, produces each Be, and
the same generative matter without the sperm of the King Be therewith duly
mixed, produces not a Be, which is plainly proved, by so much of that
generative matter stopping up several Cells in diverse Combs in many Hives, but
especially old stocks into which Cells the King-Bee happened to miss injecting
his sperm; for in case of the want of the King-Bee's sperm among this
generative matter, as when he misseth a Cell, or injecteth twice in the next,
this matter, though in the Cell and stopped, yet never animates, but abides
still stopping up those Cells whereinto it is put, which matter so inanimated;
and stopping up the Cells, is called by some Sandarack, by others Bee-bread.

This generative matter (whether it abides stopping up the Cells, or whether it
is animated, having the sperm of the King-Bee mixed with it, or not) that it is
not Bee-bread I conclude, because Bees that can fly eat not of it, for I have
seen much of it among the Combs of such stocks as have dyed through
overswarming themselves; the Bees of which stocks would not have been starved
for want of food if they could have eaten this matter. Also when a stock is
robbed, you may find this generative matter in some of the Cells, which the
robbers would carry away as well as the Honey, if it were food.

Also, the young Bees in embryo, and afterward when they are Maggots, cannot
possibly feed of it any otherwise than the Chick in an Egg does, for they are
always kept close stopped up with their waxen cover from the time of the first
mixture of this generative matter with the King-Bee's sperm, until the Be
opens his own way out, which any man who lists may experience by taking a
Comb out of an Hive of Bees in the spring when first the Bees begin to breed.

The reason why there is so much of this matter stopping up the Cells in the
Combs (especially in old stocks) is because the King-Bee sometimes misseth
injecting his sperm into every matrix or Cell as he walks, and so this
generative matter for want of his sperm (though ordered by the Hony-Bees, yet)
never animates but abides in the matrix or Cell, because the Bees cannot get it
out.

That this generative matter is not wax, the color distinguishes; for wax is
pure and white, when the Bees gather it, otherwise by washing and cleansing it
only, we could not make yellow wax, so white as we see our white wax is though
made of yellow wax; but to make white wax yellow, or any other color, it
cannot be done, but by addition of somewhat else to it, except by age; for it
is the age of the Combs, together with the contiguity of the generative matter,
and the heat of the Bees that changes the color of the wax in the Hive, and
turns it from white to yellow, and sometimes reddish, and almost blackish.

But this generative matter, when the Bees gather it, is of all colors,
according to the several colors of the vegetables, from which the Bees gather
it; as orange, reddish, yellow, sad colors, and the like.

Also any man may easily convince himself that it is not wax by taking a little
of it off the Bees thigh, and holding it to the fire; for the wax will then
melt, but the generative matter will crumble or grow hard with the heat; and
further, we see that all old stocks gather of this matter plentifully, when
their Hives were quite filled with Combs some years before, so that they can
dispose of no more wax in the Hive than what covers the Cells of the Combs; and
swarms carry in very little or none of this matter until after their Combs are
built, and they begin to breed young.

CHAP. VII.
The Second Question answered.

Quest. HOW comes it to pass, if the King-Bee is a Male, and the only Male in
every Colony and Hive of Bees, that he by his only Sperm produces not only
King-Bees like himself (which may easily be granted) but also common Honey-Bees
with stings, and Drones without stings, both Different sorts, and neither of
them like himself, nor like one another?

Answ. First; his seed being the Principle of life; in it is that ens sine quo
non of all the Bees, or thus; in that Sperme lies that virtue without which no
Be can be bred, and that it produces those several sorts of Bees, it is from
the maternal part of the Bees, which is the greater in quantity as is both the
yelk and the white of the Egg to the Cocks tread, which alterative virtue lies
in the several sorts of generative matter by instinct gathered from those
several sorts of vegetables from which they gather it, which being by the Bees
duly gathered and mixed, have such virtue as to conduce to the end of the
several forms and distinct natures of each Be; and generative quality of the
matter, not losing, but rather increasing its virtue by their gathering of it,
and afterward by their due mixing of it, and constant heat administered to it.

I answer, Secondly, That those several sorts of Bees are produced from the
King-Bee's Sperme only, by reason of that instinct given to the Honey-Bees to
prepare different Matrixes to receive and retain his Sperme, and different
sorts of generative matter to commix with his Sperme, which produces those
several sorts of Bees: as we see by this example following, viz. That an
Hee-Ass (by the help of different matrixes) begets a Mule and an Ass; so also
one sort of Dogs meeting with various receptacles, do beget abundance of Dogs
of another and different sort from themselves.

CHAP. VIII.
The Third Question answered.

Quest. IF Bees have room enough, and are not killed, as in Colonies, will they
not increase to such prodigious numbers, that there will be too many?

Answ. That it is not possible to have too great numbers of Honey-Bees in a
Colony (if there happen to be too many Drones, they may be easily killed, by
lessening the room, for then the Honey-Bees will kill them) because the
King-Bee can lay his sperm but in such a circumference, and therefore the Bees
in Straw-Hives are so straightened for lack of room, because the King-Bee must
have room to lay his sperm, and thence wanting room to lay Honey in; for a
remedy they are forced to swarm, and so dis-joyn their labors, which are
united in the Colony; and for this cause, Bees kept in Colonies are always
stronger, and more in numbers than those kept in Straw-Hives, and yet are not
too many; for the more Bees always produce the more Honey; and I have often
seen, that three pecks of Bees in one Hive have gathered more Honey in one year,
than a bushel of Bees has in two Hives.

CHAP. IX.
The fourth Question Answered.

Quest. WHich is right Virgin-Honey? for if we suppose that swarms and casts
only do produce Virgin Honey, then stocks and colonyes (which must needs be old
because they dye not) will yield none.

Ans. The ignorance of many Country people not knowing which is right
Virgin-Hony, and which is not, is the cause that there is so little right to be
had; for they generally think that all the Honey which comes from a swarm and
cast, is Virgin-Hony; and that there is none in Stocks, when the truth is not
so; for a young Stock has Virgin-Hony as well as course Honey; and the Honey in
a swarm or cast is often made as course as some in Stocks for want of due
separation, because they also may have course Honey as well as fine.

To know which is right Virgin-Honey, you must consider that the generative
matter and sperm duly mixed in each particular matrix or Cell, produces a Be,
and every Be that is bred leaves a little drossy substance, sticking to the
wax in the Cell from whence he came, which makes the Cell foul; and the more
Bees are bred in a Cell, the more filth is contracted in that Cell, until in
time some combs will be quite black; this filth infecting the Honey (afterward
put into such Cells, and abiding therein) with dross. Another cause of course
Honey is, when this generative matter is put into any Cell, and the King Be
happens to miss, injecting his sperm thereinto, then that Cell abides so stopped;
and for want of his sperm among the generative matter, it never animates, nor
is converted to any form, but abides still, stopping up the Cell; and this
matter (called by some Be bread) being among the Honey, is not easily
separated; and this generative matter so stopping up some Cells, togeher with
the young grubs carelessly suffered among the Honey, makes most of it so course
as it is. For when Hony-gathering is plentiful, the Bees fill those Cells
first which are empty and uppermost, and so they come down lower and lower with
their Brood and Honey, as fast as the young Bees empty their Cells by opening
their way out, in order to their flying abroad, and so leave that generative
matter among their Honey above, because it growing hard they cannot easily get
it out.

Now as those are Virgins in nature which never knew male, or brought forth
young, so those only are right Virgin Cells among the Combs in which never any
Be was bred, nor any sperm injected by the King-Bee, nor any generative matter
laid and put in by the Honey-Bees, and consequently that Honey which is put
into those Virgin Cells, and kept separated from the other Honey in those foul
Cells where Bees have been bred, is right Virgin Honey and no other.

And if this Virgin Honey be not separated, cut off, and divided from the other
part of the Comb wherein Bees have been bred, but suffered to run out
altogether, then the common Honey in those Cells wherein Bees have been bred,
makes the true Virgin-Honey courser; for, swarms and casts breed young Bees as
well as old stocks; so that for want of this care in separation, the Honey
taken from a swarm may be sometimes as course as some in stocks.

And herein the keeping of Bees in Colonies has much the advantage of the old
method in straw-Hives; because the Combs never wax old, and the Virgin-Honey is
easier seen and separated from the other; besides, the Bees delighting in
cleanliness, are not-offended with their Combs, as it often happens in the old
method by reason of that quantity of generative matter stopping up many Cells
in old stocks; for it is only the age of the Combs which makes a stock of Bees
old, and not the age of the Bees themselves; the Bees in a swarm being as old
as the Bees in a stock that has stood ten years together; the reason is,
because the old Bees go forth in a swarm for directions, and the young Bees
stay behind for strength and defense; besides, the Bees breed and die apace,
and so succeed one another; but the age of the Bees themselves is no damage to
the stock, because they work as long as they live, though it be three or four
years, and never leave off working as long as they are able to fly; and for one
Be that dies with age, six will die by accidents of bad weather. A Colonie
honeycomb the breed of Bees

Common Honey

Virgin Honey

need never be above two years old if they stand but in an indifferent place. I
my self have several Colonies to be seen by any that desire it, not far from
London, which have stood above four years, from which I have yearly taken off
Honey, and yet the Combs now are of the same age as a this years swarm in May
viz. now just three months old.

CHAP. X.
Of a Stock Bees and how to Order then in Straw-Hives.

A Stock of Bees is a company of Bees consisting of three sorts before
described, viz. A King-Bee, great numbers of common Hony-Bees, and some
Drone-Bees: being called a Stock of Bees because they are a company congregated
within themselves, and subsisting upon their own Stock, having gotten by their
own labor and industry a competent measure of food to maintain them the whole
Winter and (while they can gather none) until the next Summer, and also a
competent number of Bees to preserve themselves and keep one another warm in
cold weather. For, as I take it, every industrious man may be said to live on
his Stock while he cannot exercise his function, and thereby is forced to ^ive
upon his acquired Stock six Months together or until the return of a better
season.

Thus a swarm in May, or June is called a Stock at Michaelmas. And thus every
company of Bees, though in a Tree or cieling of an House, may be called a Stock
of Bees; but the ordinary Hives or Houses in which Bees are preserved and
attended, are made or Straw, from whence the Country man and such as content
themselves with what is easy and cheap, do gather the profit they look for from
the labor of the Bees. I do therefore to such, give only the instructions
following; which contain all that can be well directed in the use of
Straw-Hives; and I shall afterward show the difference between those usual
receptacles of Bees, and the Houses and Boxes which have been lately invented
and improved under the name of Colonies; which do not only raise a greater
convenience and benefit to the Master, but give him the pleasure and the
entertainment of seeing the Bees work, and in what condition his Colonies are
from time to time.

The instructions for the ordering of Bees in Straw-Hives I shall briefly show
according to the several seasons of the Year, beginning in February, and ending
with October, because all the Winter from October to February, they are best
stopped close up, except only a mouth passage for air; observing in general,
that according as the Spring is forward or late, so sooner or later are the
Bees to be ordered; remembering also all the Year long to keep the Hive close
stopped up so that the Bees may have no passage out or into their Hive any
where but at the Mouth only. The best stopping for them is Mortar or Lome,
mixed and tempered with ashes, and ashes sprinkled round over it, and on the
top of the Hive, especially under the hackle or straw cover.

In February as soon as the weather and spring permits, let your Bees have
their winter mouth cleared so as the Bees may not be obstructed in flying out
and in; for in this month the strong stocks will begin to work.

In March open the mouth of your Straw-Hives a little according to the quantity
of Bees in each Hive, and in the evenings once or twice in the month list them
off from the stool or place whereon they stand, and make clean the stool or
floor of their Hive, by sweeping away what filth may be there contracted in the
winter. In this month also begin to feed where need is.

In April, open their passage wider according to their strength, and in the
evening two or three times this month, according as you find your Bees in
strength (for weak stocks require more attendance and care to look after them
than strong stock.) Turn up the Hive and look into it, and cut away all those
Combs which are dry or crumbling, or have any filth resembling small cobwebs in
them; and if you have any old stocks that thrive not well, cut ^way their black
Combs in the middle part of their Hive near half way from the bottom of their
Hive. For the keeping the Bees thus clean and free from dust and vermin, as
moths Maggots etc. does very much encourage them, and ease them of much labor,
especially in the spring, until their Hives are filled with Bees. Also continue
to feed such poor stocks as have need.

In May and June let your Bees have door room enough that they may not be two
much crowded. Also attend and expect your Bees to swarm.

Concerning the swarming of Bees I have already treated in the second Section;
therefore shall be here very brief. You may in part know when your Bees will
swarm, which is soon after they are filled with Bees, and fitted. But the
sooner to enable them to be filled and fitted, and consequently to swarm, I
advise to keep them with as great numbers of Bees as you can; in order to which
I advise you to use no Hives that hold less than three pecks: The best size is
something above. Also I advise casts and second swarms to be all put back again
to their own Hives from whence they came, for seldom any of them come to good
unless two or three of them are united. And besides they do more hurt and
damage to the stock out of which they came, than they themselves are worth when
kept. And if they rise two or three times, put them as often back again to
their old Hive on the same manner as the Bees are put to their Colonyes when
taken off, which I shall describe in the 16th chapter ensuing. And if you take
their King Be from amongst them (which then may be done as in the same 16th
Chapter ensueing is showed) they will not then be so apt to rise again. The
reason why I advise second swarms to be thus put back again, is because the
stock will then be much the better in the next Spring, because it will be both
stronger in Bees, and richer than it could possibly have been if the second
Swarm had been kept from it, and consequently be the sooner filled with Bees,
and fitted to swarm the next year, by this means also you may avoid the having
any poor Stocks, unless only in very bad years, or when they over-swarm
themselves.

When your Bees are swarmed, Hive them into an Hive so dressed as I shall
direct in the 9th. Chapter ensuing, and set them the same night where you
intend they shall stand.

In July, narrow their passage, and poize them to know their state, and
likewise beware of robbers, especially after the middle of the month.

In August, make their passage narrower, as I shall direct in the 19th Chapter
of the next Section concerning robbing. Likewise take up all such as you find
either very heavy, or very light; I mean such as are very full of Honey and
have but few Bees, and such as have not probably a sufficient quantity of Honey
to subsist ontill the next Summer.

Concerning the robbing of Bees, which is chiefly in this Month, I shall treat
of it in a Chapter by its self, viz. the 19th. Chapter ensuing.

In September is the best time to feed such Bees as you intend to keep, and
think that they have not a sufficient store of their own.

This month also, and the next are very good times to remove Bees.

In October look well to their winter quarters, that cold, wet, and vermin,
offend not, nor destroy them. As for their stopping up, I refer you to the 19th
Chapter ensuing, and as for their diseases, or accidents, I refer you to the
20th Chapter ensuing.

The differences of keeping the Bees in straw-Hives and Colonies, are
negatively; not in any change in the natures of the Bees themselves, nor in
their government: but affirmatively.

First, In their breeding as to the form; which I shall show in the 15th.
Chapter ensuing.

Secondly; In their strength, because of their greater numbers; and.

Thirdly; In their riches, by reason of their union.

Fourthly; Both in their strength and riches, because none of the Bees are
killed.

Fifthly; In their profit, which is really more than double, (at I shall prove
in the last Chapter of this Book) by reason of their being well ordered; as
this Book directs.

Sixthly; In their safety, (as I shall show in the 20th. and 21th. Chapters of
the next Section) because they are better preserved from their enemies, and
occasions of their

Lastly; In the goodness as well as in the quantity of Honey taken from them,
being almost all Virgin-Honey.

All which, with the continued advantage of yearly profit, without the cruel
destruction of so good servants, and without further expense, and without
continual attendance all the time of swarming, will quickly recompense the
charges of setting them up in Colonies.

But more clearly to evince the verity of what I have herein asserted, as well
concerning the profit and advantage of the Colonies, as the goodness of the
Honey, I shall (as long as I live) every year keep by me some of my box-Hives,
which I yearly take off my Colonies, to be seen by any that shall desire it,
that will but take the pains to come to my dwelling house, being an
Apothecary's shop in the Bowling-Ally in Westminster (as is before mentioned in
the preface.) The time I shall keep those Colonies (so taken off every year) to
be seen, will be two whole months, viz. from the first day of August, until the
last day of September; for the Honey will not keep good much longer because of
some grubs in the Hive.

Also I intend constantly to keep by me some store of right fine Virgin-Honey
wherewith to furnish any who are so exact and curious as to have the right and
best so separated from the course-Honey, as it ought to be, because whoever
sends to me for it may not be disappointed, but have that which is true and
right.

To conclude this section; I intend also to have all the month of September
right Virgin-Honey in the Combs of the same sort of that Comb which I presented
to His Majesty at Dinner in White Hall in October last, which was eight Inches
long, and five Inches broad, to furnish any who desire to see such curious
works, or taste such pleasant food which is the true Nectar, and rightly called
heavenly food, because it comes from Heaven in an Honey-Dew, though the heathen
report it to be the food of the Gods, because Jupiter being fed by Bees, must
needs eat Honey: which he liked so well, that afterward the Bees were made the
Muses Birds.

Section 4.
Of Ordering the Colonies.

CHAP. I.
Some general things, by way of Advice, to be observed by all those who already
have, or intend to keep Bees in Colonies.

I. THat Bees are indocible creatures, and therefore their own natures must be
observed and followed so that they may be lead (as they are in this method) to
improve their industrious labors double to their owners advantage; therefore
they who keep Bees thus should be very exact in observing the following
directions in this Book, which are written upon large experience.

II. That they set their Bees in the Bee-house to furnish their houses with
Colonies as soon in the spring as they can; for by how much the sooner in the
Spring they are put into the house, by so much the better the Bees will be
acquainted with their new station. Therefore, next to the Spring, the best time
to furnish your Bee-house with good stocks, is in the fall, and then they will
be the more ready against the next Spring. And if the Spring be far spent. I
advise to furnish your house with early and large swarms as I shall show in
this Book.

III That although Bees do not swarm in this method, yet if any man has a mind
to have an increase, he may let them swarm (for the Colony as well as a
Straw-Hive will swarm if you forbear to raise them) which must be when you
intend to forbear taking off an upper-box that year, as I shall show in the
18th Chapter of this Section,

IV. That whosoever sets up this method, do first see a Bee-house made
according to the pattern of His Majesty's Bee-house in the Royal Garden: which
is so exactly made according to the natures of the Bees, as to guide the Bees
without any hindrance into their Hives; otherwise there may easily happen
mistakes in the manner thereof, especially in the front doors; and the ledg at
the bottom, as some have found to their own loss. And whereas there are several
Bee-houses in diverse County's made according to that exact form, I shall direct
those that come or send to me where they may see them.

V. That they have examples of those Hives I have last made, and had good
experience in; otherwise mistakes may happen and hazard the thriving of their
Colonyes; because many Hives formerly made, have not been made right, but
disadvantagious to the Bees in their working diverse ways, which disadvantages
are all removed and amended in those Hives I now use and advise others to, An
whole Colony

A Box Projected.

A Single Colony

being so much better than those formerly made, and differing from them in six
or seven places of the Hive; as in the passages our of one Hive into another,
in the little door on the side which is better left out, and in the sliding
shutter, and in the creases at the top and bottom of the Hive, in the windows,
in the entrance of the Bees into and out of the Hive, and in the height of
them. All these mistakes about the form of the Hives have happened, because
most of them were made by false patterns of such who were not experienced in
the use of them. And for remedy thereof I keep constantly some by me, ready
made and fixed, to furnish any who desire them, at my house aforesaid (in the
preface) in the Bowling ally in Westminster.

CHAP. II.
The Description of a Bee-House.

BEfore we come to order the Colonies of Bees that so we may enjoy the Fruits
of their labors without killing the Bees themselves; I think it best to give a
general description of the Bee-houe, of the boxes or Box hives, and of the
method of ordering the Bees and Colonies. I shall describe only an house for
four Colonies of Bees which is the most convenient, by which according to the
several dimensions and proportions a workman may contrive an house for two or
three or six, or eight, The house for four Colonies is thus.

The length from outside to outside ten foot, the breadth from outside to
outside two foot and a half: The house may be made with any boards, and you may
make it with small posts in the corners.

Let the floor be made strong, close, and even. And the house made to stand so
strong that the wind blow it not down; a good way to make it stand fast is to
fasten four sparrs to the four corner feet of the house, having driven them
first a pretty way into the ground.

Let the floor be a foot or better from the ground.

The distance from the floor to the plates four foot.

The front doors three foot and an half high, with a board over to reach to the
plates, under which board the doors may shut close, and an upright in the
middle for the two front doors to shut close against in a ravet.

Let there be a ledge one inch and quarter thick, and two inches broad to be
nailed fast down under the front doors, with a ravet in it for the doors to
shut over. Underneath through this ledge are to be cut, at equal distances,
four holes, half an inch high, and five inches long, for the Bees to go in and
out under the doors through those cut holes into the box-hive, and not into
the house. For the mouth of the box-hive is to stand close to, and answer that
hole or entrance so cut in the ledg, and let the bottom of the front doors be
even to shut close in the ravet made in the upper part of the ledge.

You may let the floor reach four inches without the front doors, for the Bees
to alight and rest upon, and plain it sloping from the ledg to the edg, that
the rain may fall off on the ground.

Let the back doors be as high as the roof will well suffer them, but as large
as to take out a Colony when need is.

The house may be covered with any thing to keep out wet; the best way is to
make the roof so that the rain may not drop off on the Bees comeing home. If
you make it with rafters for the rain to fall both waves, then nail a ledge
sloping upon the front to carry the water so that it may fall at the ends of
the house.

Make your house so close and tire that it may very well keep out cold, wett,
and vermin. And let the front stand as near as you can to the South, or a very
little bending to the West, and place it so that you may open the back doors
with ease.

The house thus made and placed has this happy advantage, that it keeps the
Bees warm in the dead of winter, so that the most violent frosts do not destroy
the Bees; especially if you cover the boxes in the house with loose Straw or
hay. And in the spring by reason of the front doors standing always to the
South Sun, they receive all the impressions of the warmth of that Sun, and it
keeps off the fierce March winds (which are commonly North and East) from
dissipating the impressions of the aforesaid heat of the Sun in the house, like
a Melon-glass. As also it keeps in the natural heat of the Bees, which affects
the house with warmness, which heat, together with the impressions of the Sun
upon the foredoors, is so preserved by the closeness of the house, that after a
cold frosty night in march or April, open but a backdoor, and put in your
head, and you shall find it warm as a Stove, and consequently by its continual
heat hastens the hatch of the young brood of Bees. And in Summer, by opening
the back-doors there comes in a fresh Air that dissipates the excessive heat in
the house; and consequently all results in this, that the house keeps them
warm, when the weather is too cold, and keeps them cool, when the weather is
too hot.

CHAP. III.
The Description of the Boxes, or Box-Hives.

THE Boxes, or Box-Hives may be made with any boards, but firr is best, because
it being spongy, receives and sucks up the breath of the Bees in the cold
weather, which breath is not sucked up by Oaken Hives, and then it abides on
the inside in cold weather, and so affects the Hive with coldness, which may be
avoided by making the Hives with deal or firr boards.

The form is octagon or eight square, which being near to roundness, is much
better than to have them four square, because the Bees lying in a globulous
body in the center of the Hive, are thereby the nearer to the circumference in
this form as well as in round Hives, but in four square Hives they would be
more remote from the corners, and the consequence would be that the Honey in
the corners would candy and thereby become useless for the Bees in the Spring,
which in this form is avoided by their propinquity to it, whose natural heat
keeps the Honey from being candied or curdled, in the Hive.

The height of the Hives is ten inches from the top to the bottom on the out
side, and sixteen inches over from outside to outside with a sliding shutter to
run easily in a grove in the middle of the top, backwards over the back window;
this shutter is to cover an hole five inches square in the middle of the top of
the Hive, also in the Hive are two large glass windows, one before, the other
beh^nd, with doors to cover the glasses. And two handles, on each side one, for
lifting them up; a small passage a little above half an inch high under the
glass window in the front, for the Bees to go in and out at, as at a door:
also a frame in the inside made fast with four ^pins for the Bees to fasten
their combs upon. But I advise all persons to refrain making of them without a
true pattern, especially whilst they may have them at the Authors house
(mentioned in the preface) at as reasonable rates as any where else (except
their carriage) or at least they may be informed by him where such Hives are,
as be made right.

CHAP. IV.
The Method of Ordering the Bees and Colonies.

THE Box-Hive being placed in the house with the sliding shutter open, and a
good stock of Bees placed on the top: this sliding shutter is left open for a
line of comunication, because the Bees have no other passage but through the
Box to go out and in at the bottom, and that they may fill the said box as part
of their Hive without swarming, which when they have performed in a great
measure, another Box is to be put under them with the shutter open, and when
that is pretty well filled according to the manner and season hereafter
mentioned, to shut the sliding shutter that is next under the upper Hive or box
and so take off the uppermost at the time hereafter mentioned, and never after
to use any Straw-Hive again; and when the lower Box of the two that are left,
is so full as to endanger swarming, then put a third under; and according to
following directions take off the uppermost, so that thus you have a
circulation by three Boxes, of a perpetual vacuity to prevent swarming, and a
perpetual taking away of Honey without the Bees destruction, for what Bees may
be in the upper box when taken away, will, when discharged repair to the mouth
of the Colony from whence they were taken (being their old passage) and so are
preserved. Some few persons disaffected to any invention found out in the age
they live in, have cast some blots on this method because some who kept
colonies suffered them to miscarry through mismanagement, and mistakes in the
forms of the Bee-House and boxes, which mistakes are mentioned in the first
Chapter of this fourth Section and may be avoided chiefly by the boxes being
made right, and wholly by the house with the ledge made right, for the guiding
the Bees into their Hives: And the mismanagement may be avoided by a careful
following the directions this Book will afford; for many persons who have
already taken my directions which follow, and were careful to observe them,
whose houses and Box-Hives were right made, their Colonies did, and still do
thrive to admiration, as has already appeared, and will further appear by the
great increase of Honey which they yield every year: which any Gentleman may
see, that will but take the pains to come to my house, any time from the
beginning of August until Michaelmas; for all that time I intend every year to
keep some of those Box-Hives which I yearly take off my colonies to be seen (as
I mentioned page 53. of this book) that by the sight of them, all persons
willing may be fully satisfied not only of the profit in this method beyond
what can be in the old method of Straw-Hives, but also of the admirable
workmanship of the Bees which is very delightful to behold.

CHAP. V.
How to order the Bee-house.

AN house is absolutely necessary in this Art, without which it is in vain to
begin with the method of colonies; for the sun shining on the Box-Hives has
more influence, and causes greater heat in the inside than it does shining on
a Straw-Hive, because the Straw-Hive is more porous. However Straw-Hives are
not so fit for colonies, because in time, they will yield one way or other, so
that the combs which cannot be so strongly fixed in Straw-Hives as Box-Hives,
will become pliable and bending, so as in the taking off the Upper-Hive^ they
may be thrust together; and if so, the King-Bees as well as any other Bees, in
either of the Hives may soon be bruised or crushed to death. Therefore are the
Hives made with whole Deal, and for the cause aforesaid, viz. the suns
influence, the foredoors must be so kept shut as the following directions do
show.

But if some will be so frugal, an house may be made from a wall like a
penthouse without any back doors; the greatest detriment will be, that their
owners cannot so well see to inspect their Bees behind, if the house be made
from a wall, then let there be doors at the ends as well as before which will
supply the want of them behind in a great measure, being to be opened as the
back doors of another house are, and let the roof come further over; so far as
the rain that falls may not fall upon the board where the Bees alight, and let
the floor be so much broader than the other that a man may walk behind the
Colonies, the better to inspect the Bees, and to drive the sliding shutter
home, when their Honey is to be taken. You may let the floor be four or sive
foot broad from the wall to the outside of the front-doors, this house will be
as well thatched as tyled, the front-doors must be made just as those in the
house before described.

In ordering the Bee-House remember constantly to keep the fore-doors shut as
well in Smmmer as in winter, and as well in the day time as in the night; for
they must be always kept close shut, except only at such times and whilst you
inspect vour Bees, or put Boxes under, or take away a Box, or clean the house,
but no longer at any time than needs must, especially whilst the Bees are at
their work.

For, if the fore-doors are left constantly open in the Summer, the Sun shining
hot upon them will melt their Combs and make the Bees mislike their Hives and
swarm, or make their Combs only in the back parts of their Hives: And if the
fore-doors be kept shut at some times only, and at other times left open, the
Bees will not readily find their way, which will very much hinder their
working, and also cause the Bees of several Colonies meeting so near home to
fight and kill one another. All which are prevented by keeping the fore-doors
always shut close, except only as above excepted.

the Also back doors in the heat of the day in hot weather are to be opened to
let in the cool Air, which will refresh the Bees, and at other times keep them
also shut, except at any time for inspection. By these means you keep off the
Scorching heat in Summer, and the violent cold in winter, and in the spring,
the heat of the Sun shining on the fore-doors together with the steam and
warmth of the Colonies in so close an house, excedingly hastens their breeding,
as glasses ripens melons.

CHAP. VI.
What Bees to furnish the House withal for Colonies.

TO furnish the Bee-house with Colonies; take the best Bees you can get, that
is such as are in very good case, which are best known by the weight of them,
and by the great numbers of Bees, and the fullness of the Hive with them: there
is little other difference among stocks of Bees. If you put light stocks into
the house, they will not be fit to be set up upon a Box-hive in one whole
year, and if so, you had as good not put them into the houses; besides, such
are in danger to be robbed by reason of their paucity of Bees, therefore put
into your Bee-house only heavy stocks, and such as are also full of Bees; for
such stocks only, are fit to make Colonies, and will not deceive your
expectation in their working into the Box-hives when they are raised and put on
them, according to following directions.

CHAP. VII.
How to furnish the House with Bees.

HAving provided good Bees, put them into your house, with the old mouth of the
Hive against the place where the Bees entrance is into the house; and if you
know not which is the mouth of the Hive, then look into it, and place the edges
of the Combs North and South, and place the Hive so close as to touch the ledge
where their entrance is to be, then stop up the Hive with Lome close round
about, except their passage but especially the sides of their passage, so that
no Bees may go out into the house, or any other way out or into the Hive but
through that hole cut under the ledge of the front door, which is always to be
the mouth of the Colony: You must place the Straw hive thus into the house upon
the floor without any Box-Hive under it, because the Bees must be well
acquainted with their way into and out of their Hive before they are to be
raised up, and set upon a Box-Hive, for, whilst the Bees are weak, or feeble
for want of numbers, and until the Straw-hive be full of Bees, the setting
them up upon a Box hive not only gives them much unnecessary labor, but also
exposes them to robbing, besides, many of the Bees will lose themselves because
unacquainted with their new station.

CHAP. VIII.
When to furnish the House with Bees.

THE times when these Stocks are to be thus placed into the Bee-house, are in
the Spring and fall: the best and fittest times are in the Spring till April
if the year be forward, and until the end of April when the year is backward;
and in the fall from the beginning of September, until the end of November, if
it be not frosty or snowy weather: the winter is indifferent, when the weather
is neither frosty nor Snowy; but in May, June, or July, if Bees are removed,
their working is hindered to great loss, because most of the Bees will resort
to the place from whence they were brought. And if Bees are removed in August,
especially in the beginning of the month they will be in very great danger of
being robbed; and although I can remove them my self in May or June, or any
time before they have swarmed, with very little or no damage to them by taking
a little more time to do it in: yet, unless you have so much Judgment in Bees
as to hinder their resort to the place from whence they were brought, I advise
not to remove a Stock after the middle of April at the latest into the
Bee-House, lest you thereby not only endamage them in their working, but also
endanger the loss of many Bees which will make them feeble, so that to prevent
your Bees from miscarrying, I advise if you have them not ready to be put into
the house before the middle of April, then to wait for a good swarm in May
(near London) or June (further off in the Country) and so furnish your house
with a swarm hived into a Box-Hive, and if a good swarm be not to be had
according to the directions in the next Chapter, then wait until the end of
August for a good Stock, which I advise you to place into your house in the
fall according to the directions given before, and let it stand so alone all
the winter without any Box Hive; for a good strong Stock placed into the house
at any time in the fall after August is expired, or early in the spring before
the Bees work apace, is better to furnish a Colony withal than a swarm,
because such a Stock will fill one Box-Hive the first year, and if it be a very
good Stock, and a very good Honey year, you may have a second Box put under, and
the Straw-Hive taken off the same year, as I have had some.

CHAP. IX.
How to order a Swarm to furnish a Colony.

THE Box-Hive whereinto you intend to put a good swarm, is to be thus prepared;
first take out the pins that fasten the frame in the Box, then take the frame
out, always observing to put it in again the same way, otherwise it may not
fit the Box again; then fasten the sliding shutter on the top to cover the hole
close, then dress the Hive and the frame by rubbing them with herbs, as
fennell-tops, bean-tops, or elm leaves or any sweet herbs: rub them all about
in like manner as Straw-Hives use to be dressed: but of all the ways to make
the Bees best pleased with their Hives, I and others have found that an hogg
musling in an Hive has been the best way of dressing it, which may be done by
throwing in a few handsfull of peace, and let an hogg eat them out, I think I
need not direct you to take heed that the hogg break not the glass windows,
therefore a trencher or board put before the glasses may be a good way to save
them: having dressed the Hive put in the frame again, dress the Box-hive thus:
the same day that you have a good swarm to put in it, it will be best done a
little before you Hive the Bees: if you dress not your Box-Hive, the Bees will
not so willingly stay therein, because they have been used to Hives of another
form, and nature: and for want of thus ordering the Hive, sometimes the Bees
will all fly out again. Get as large and as early a swarm as you can, and
having your Box-Hive ready prepared as above, shake them into the Box. The
swarm being shaken thus into the Box, set it on a sheet with the top uppermost
upon the ground, tilting up one side a little, and cover the Box all over from
the Sun as well the sides as the top, except only where it is tilted up for the
Bees to go in, and if any Bees fly to the place where before they settled then
shake them into an empty Straw-Hive, and so bring them to the Box-hive, and
knock the Bees all out of the Straw hive upon some part of the sheet just at
the place tilted up for them to go into the box-hive, and when they are all in
the hive, toward the evening, place the hive into your Bee-house with the
mouth of the Box hive close to the ledg where the hole is cut for their
entrance, so that not a Be can get out, or into the Hive but only through that
entrance under the ledg of the front door of the house; and be sure to keep the
front doors close shut, especially the next day, and afterward for a week or
two, not so much as to open them to inspect the Colony, unless before Sun
rising or after Sun setting. This way to put good early swarms into your house
may be as well as a good Stock, provided you be sure to put them into the
Bee-house the same night that they are swarmed, or at lest the very next
morning an hour before the Sun rises, otherwise you will find they will be
much worse than a good Stock, and as bad as a midling Stock that would not have
swarmed in the old method that year.

The reason why a swarm must be placed so soon into the Bee-house, and the
foredoors so shut, is, because the very next morning after they are swarmed,
the Bees do little else but learn to know their new habitation and the way to
it, which they do thus: A Be coming out of the Hive into the Sunshine wipes
his eyes with his foreleggs, then takes his flight not above three inches from
the mouth of the Hive, and there flies three times round; then he flies further
off and flies thrice round again; and afterward a pretty distance off, and
fetches a large circumference three or four times, all this while taking
notice, first, of the mouth of the Hive he came out, then of the places about
it, and at last of the places about the house and garden where the house
stands, after which, he flies straight away directly where his scent leads
him, to gather what he wants; thus also every particular Be takes notice of
his Station, when he first comes abroad, and is newly out of his Cell.
Therefore for a mark or sign for the Bees, the better to know when they are at
home, and to find their way, it may be convenient, and a good direction for
them to paint or color the Bee-house doors with several colors about and
just over the mouth of each several Colony, as one red, another blew, or green
or yellow, or any distinct Colors. When your swarm is thus put into the house,
let it stand so until the next spring to be raised as is herein showed in the
13th Chapter of this Section.

CHAP. X:
When to put the first Box-Hive under the Straw-Hive.

YOur Straw-Hive being placed in the house according to the directions given
before, let it stand so in the house, until they have a tendency to swarm,
that is, until the Hive is filled with Bees, which will be according to the
forwardness or backwardness of the spring, and the strength and goodness of the
Bees themselves, and the fruitfulness of the soil near them, which will be
sometimes in April, commonly in the beginning of May: now, as soon as you
perceive the Straw-Hive to be filled with Bees, and not before, is the time
when it is fit to be raised, and set upon the first Box-Hive.

The reason why the Straw-Hives must be left so in the house, some time before
they are placed upon any Box-Hive is, because the Bees, if not acquainted with
their new station, will lose themselves, and if they are presently set upon an
empty Box-Hive, then that disadvantage is not only the greater by hindering
their work, but also they are thereby the more exposed to robbers: for when
they are within the Box Hive they cannot presently know that they are at home,
being unacquainted as well there, as without the Hive and house, for when the
Bees are well acquainted with their way, and mouth of their Hive on the outside
of the house, then if the Straw-Hive should be raised on a Box Hive, the
disadvantage would be so much the less, though they were not full of Bees.

The reason why the Straw-Hives must not be set on the first Box-Hives until
the time that they are filled with Bees, is because till then the Bees are not
ready to come down out of the Straw Hive, and therefore it will hinder their
work, for if the Bees are not ready to come down into the Box-Hive with their
work as soon as they are placed thereon then they will have double labor to
carry their generative matter and Honey through that empty Box-Hive, and not
only so, but they will be in danger to be robbed because the Bees will be at so
great a distance from the mouth of their Hive, and the robbing Bees will have
thereby an opportunity in that vacuity to hide and rest themselves from the
pursuit of the true Bees until they smell somewhat like unto them by their
continuance sometime there, whereby they have then an opportunity to steal
Honey; all which disadvantages are easily prevented, by letting the Straw-Hive
stand so long as until the Bees fill the Hive to the bottom, and then to set
the first Box-Hive under them, as follows.

CHAP. XI.
How to set the first Box under the Straw-Hive.

WHen your Bees are in such readiness, as fit to be raised, then having the Box
Hive ready dressed as is showed in the ninth Chapter of this Section, and
observing to draw back the sliding shutter on the top to leave the hole open;
in the dusk of the evening lift up the Straw-Hive and make clean the bottom
where the lome or stopping of the Hive has daubed the floor, then set the
Box-Hive down upon the floor with the mouth of it so close to the entrance
under the ledge of the fore-door that no Be may go out on either side, or
crawle-about it, or into the house, then set the straw-Hive down upon the
Box-Hive, and place the old mouth of the straw-Hive over the mouth of the
Box-Hive, so that the edges of the combs may stand North and South, and then
stop up very close the mouth of the Straw-Hive, and round about the bottom of
it, do it so close that not a Be may any way get out of the Straw-Hive but
through the hole where the sliding shutter is, into the Box-Hive, and let the
Box-Hive stand so close and even to the floor, and to the ledge under the front
door, that not a Be may get out abroad, or about the house, but what goes
through that entrance under the ledge which then is, and must at all times be,
the only mouth of the Colony for the Bees to pass in and out at. For if you
leave any holes or avenues open whereby any Bees can get out and in to either
Hive except only their passage under the ledge, it not only causes some Bees to
be lost, but also endangers robbing.

CHAP. XII.
How, and when to put under the second Box, whilst the Straw-hive is on.

WHen the first Box, which is under the Straw-Hive comes to be so far wrought
down (in the strength of swarming time) that the combs and Bees fill up two
thirds of the Box, then is the Colony to be raised, which state of your Bees
will be thus commonly in June, but sooner or later according as the year is
forward or backward; but when it is thus, which may be seen through the glass
windows, then (unless it be late in the year when swarming time is pretty well
over) proceed to raise up that Box with the Hive upon it, and set under the
second Box (the sliding shutter being open) as close to the ledge and floor as
you can, and in the very same place exactly, that the other Box stood in
before, and set your Colony very even upon that empty Box, and then stop close
up that which was their old entrance under the forewindow of the upperbox,
which will be open by being raised and set upon another Box: and so cause all
the Bees to go out and in to their Colony through the nethermost Box, and so
under the ledge of the door, being the old place of their entrance into the
Colony. Great care and inspection must be used in the heat of swarming time, to
look when the box-Hive is near full, and this second Box to be set under,
because the Bees hatch great numbers of young together, and so will sometimes
fill it suddenly and then swarm, unless you put this second Box under before
the other is quite filled: and if you put this second Box under too soon, that
is, before the Bees breed young in the Box-Hive, then you cause the Bees to
have double labor, and so you will thereby lose the benefit of taking off the
uppermost Hive that year.

CHAP. XIII.
How, and when to raise a single Box, or put under the second Box, when the
Straw-hive is off.

WHen you have your Colony set up with a swarm in a Box without any Straw-Hive,
my direction was to let it stand so until the next Spring; now this having
stood all the Winter until the Spring, is in the same manner to be ordered as
if a Straw-Hive had been taken off the last year, and afterward the undermost
or nethermost Box also taken away to prevent robbing according to the
directions herein after showed in the 17th Chapter: for then is left only that
single Box-Hive which was the middle Hive, in the Summer before, whether a Box
Hive or a Straw-Hive had been taken off, as to the ordering the Colony that
matters not. Thus you see a Colony, may be in a single Box all the winter
though of three sorts; as first, a swarm Hived in a Box-Hive; secondly, the
relict of a good stock when the Straw-Hive is taken off; and thirdly the relict
of a good Colony that has had several Hives taken off; these three sorts of
Colonies being Commonly, Bonus, Melior, and Optimus: for the longer Bees are
used to be in Colonies, the more certain they are of thriving; but which sort
of Colonies it is of the three, it matters not as to the ordering of them but
only in the time; for if in a single Box they are all to be ordered alike,
which is like to the raising of a Straw-Hive as is before showed in the 10th
and 11th Chapters of this Section, to which I refer you: but in short, for the
plainer understanding of Country people who keep Bees, it is thus: In the
spring when the Bees begin to work apace, toward the beginning of May inspect
your Bees through the glass windows; do this now and then, until there be
occasion to raise them, to know the time when, let it be as soon as you see the
Box within, full with Bees, and if it be a last years swarm when the Box is
filled within three inches of the bottom round about the edges of the Hive, for
in the middle they will be always near the bottom. When the single Box is thus
full with Bees, then lift it up, and set under the second box thus; place the
additionall Box with the sliding shutter open (whether it be quite empty, or if
there be Combs in it) just in the very same place exactly as the other stood,
especially the entrance, and then set the Colony over it, as even as you can,
and presently stop the old place of their entrance which will then be open, I
mean the passage under the fore-window of the raised Box, do it so well that no
Bees may get out, but only through the additional Box, and so under the ledge
of the door of the Bee-house, being the old place of the Bees entering into
their Colony.

CHAP. XIV.
How, and when to set under the third Box; which makes a perfect Colony.

IN setting under the third Box-Hive you are to observe the same directions as
to the time when, and the manner how, as are before mentioned (and therefore
needless here to repeat) in the 12th Chapter of this Section, concerning
setting under the second Box when the Straw-Hive is on: for the case is all one
as to putting under the third Hive, whether a Straw Hive or a Box-Hive is
uppermost; which is by lifting them up both together, and placing them even
upon this third Box with its sliding shutter open, and standing in the very
same place, as the second did, before it was so lifted up, and stopping up
close the open mouth of the middle Box, which open mouth will then be over the
window of the third and lowest box.

CHAP. XV.
How to take off the uppermost Hive, whether it be a Box-hive, or a Straw-hive.

HAving brought the method thus, to I perfect Colony, with three Hives, whether
all three Box-Hives or the uppermost of them a Straw-Hive, although the manner
to take them off, and the directions to be observed therein, are all one, and
the same, yet the Bees themselves are more unwilling to leave the Straw-Hive
than a Box-Hive when it is uppermost, because whilst they have any Straw-Hive
(being used to such) they breed in it after their old manner when they lacked
room, that is, with a larger circumference about (in proportion) then they do
in Box-Hives where they have room enough, and therefore a Colony cannot be said
to be well settled until it has stood one year after the first uppermost Box
Hive is taken off, when also a Straw-Hive has been taken off before: and then
it is past danger of miscarrying if you order them rightly, according to the
directions of this Book, and you may take a Box Hive off every year, if it he a
good year and your Bees standing but in an indifferent good place; except your
ground be overstocked with too great numbers of Colonies.

I shall now proceed to take them off, in which are to be observed four
general heads, which for more plainness I think best to set down in the form
of several Chapters, because they must be all very well considered before the
Hive is to be taken off.

The first General Head to be observed before you take of the uppermost Hive.
Whether a Box-Hive or a Straw-Hive to be taken off, consider first the state
of the Bees, which is to see that there be sufficient maintenance, and Store of
Honey left in the middle Box, for the subsistence of all the Bees, that they
may have enough in the spring, and always so much as to spare some (if need
were) when Honey-gathering begins again; now to know this, observe, whether the
middle Hive be full of Honey or not, which you may see through the glass
windows before, or behind; and if the Combs reach to the bottom, so as to fill
that middle Box-Hive, and the Combs against either or both windows be stopped
up white, then you may proceed to take off the uppermost whether it be a
Straw-Hive or a Box-Hive, and otherwise not, whatsoever Combs or Bees more or
less are in the lower and nethermost Box. However, you may take off a
Straw-hive in June, before Honey-gathering is past, though you see not the
Honey at the windows of the middle Box, if there be any Combs in the nethermost
Box, but not after the 10th of July.

The second General Head to he observed before you take off the uppermost Hive.
THE time and season of the year is very warily to be observed and understood
because of the King-Bee; Therefore I advise to take them off at such a time of
the year, wherein the time is past in which they are usually disposed to swarm,
which in some years is sooner, and in some years later; the most usual time
about twenty miles from London is in the beginning of July, and further off
from London later in the year; but for one general observation, where the
harvest is earliest ripe, their the Bees are soonest fitted to have there Hives
taken off; for, we see that the harvest is ripe sooner, near London, than
further off, sometimes two or three weeks according to the several distances of
the places from London. For if you take the upper Hive off in the heat of
swarming time, you thereby provoke them to swarm, and if you take the upper
Hive off after the King Bees are reduced to one, you thereby endanger the loss
of that one King-Bee. And if that one King-Bee by any absurdity committed
happen to be lost or killed, then the certain destruction and loss of the whole
Colony will unavoidably follow, unless helped to mother King from another
stock. To avoid which, and for the preservation of the King-Bee, take the upper
Hive off before they are reduced to one; and to know when that is, take notice
when the Bees kill their Drones, for then also do they kill all the superfluous
young King-Bees, and sometimes sooner, because all is done by the order of that
King which raigns, and this is done before the King retires into his winter
quarters, and therefore take off your upper-Hive the first day as near as you
can that you see the Bees do but begin to beat away their Drones, and expel
them to the lower parts of the Hive, as you may see them (sometimes) lie, an
handful or two together in an heap upon the floor of the house, or upon the
top of the lower Box, which is instead of a floor to the middle Box, then is
the time for you to take off your upper-Box, although the Bees as yet do not
kill their Drones.

But not to leave you in the dark when I come to describe the manner of taking
the Upper-Hive off, then you shall know how to preserve the King Be, although
there is but one left in the Colony, without which it were impossible for this
Art to obtain its perfection; for those who keep Bees in diverse places cannot
be just at the time with them all, especially if they keep many, unless they
made it their only business; therefore I shall discover how the Colony may be
preserved safe, though the time of the year be so far past that all the
King-Bees are reduced to one; yet I conclude that the time above described is
the best, because I find it most agreeable to the nature of the Bees.

The third General head to be observed before you take of the uppermost Hive.
BEsides the time and season of the year, the time of the day also when you
take off the Upper-Hive, is to be observed, which I advise to be about three or
four a clock in the afternoon; for if it be done in the morning or in the
evening when all the Bees are at home, there are then also greater numbers in
the upper-Hive as well as in the other, and the sewer Bees are in the
upper-Hive, the better it is to be taken off; besides, the Bees that come out
of the upper-Hive (except in the day time) may be lost; but the chiefest cause
why I advise it to be done about three or four of the clock in the afternoon
is, because it is the most convenient time to put the Bees home again to their
Colony, when they are taken out of the upper-Hive, especially when there are
great numbers, and when it is done so late in the year that there is but one
King-Bee left, and he also is in that upper-Hive to be taken off, as it
generally falls out when a Straw-Hive is uppermost if it be not done in July,
or before.

The fourth general head to be observed before you take off the upper-Hive.
THE fourth head is most material, which is the manner how to take off the
upper Hive, which if duly observed, will certainly preserve the King-Bee,
although there is but one left in all the Colony (if you should happen to stay
so long, before you take it off as until all the young King-Bees are slain)
which to do you must take notice where he is, and in which Hive of the three he
abides, at that instant wherein you intend to take off the upper-Hive. To know
which, take the two directions or observations following, concerning the
natures and breed of the Bees. The first direction or observ^^ion concerning
the natures of the Bees themselves, thus: by natural instinct all King-Bees
whatsoever in all Colonies and Straw-Hives, upon any noise or disturbance in,
or about the Hive, do ascend upwards, and to as high a place of the Hive as
possibly they can, because the crown or top of the Hive is their throne and
place of command, and chiefest power; (for if you put two or three King-Bees
into a swarm, that same King-Bee which obtains the highest place in the Hive,
causes the other to be expelled) this is certain: for as a General upon an
alarm repairs to the head quarters of his army, where the Colonels and Captains
meet him to know his orders; so to the King-Bee then in the uppermost part of
the Hive, do repair the chiefest force of the Honey-Bees, as it were coming for
orders, but at the same time the cowardly Drones sneak into the lower corners
of the Hive. And therefore upon this consideration, although the King-Bee is in
the middle Box, yet upon the least noise by talking, or or otherwise in your
approaching to the Colony, he hastens up into the upper-Box, and also the
strongest Bees with him press up immediately thither also. This I think is
caution enough for you to make no noise, so much as by talking or speaking,
until the sliding shutter is driven close home.

The second direction or observation is, concerning the places of their
breeding, or in which parts of the Hive the Bees do breed their young, about
and among which the King-Bee is always conversant (except in case of alarm and
disturbance) which is thus; the brood of young Bees in the Colonies, when they
occupy three Boxes, reaches from the lower third part of the uppermost, down
quire through the middle Box, and a little way into the lowest Box, and that in
the lowest Box is more or less according to the richness of the Colony: if very
well to past, then there is the less brood in the upper-Box, and the more in
the lowest, but the middle Box is always full, I mean in the middle or central
part of the Hive (for their Honey is in the circumference) from the hole at the
top where the sliding shutter is, reaching down to the bottom where it meets
the hole and shutter in the top of the lowest Box. The length of their young
brood is commonly fifteen inches, the thickness five inches, and (being round)
the compass or circumference of it is fifteen inches; it is seldom bigger or
lesser, or longer than I have described it: much like to a Tobacco-roll
standing upright of that length and bigness, and all the other parts of the
Hives round about this breeding place is filled with Honey according to their
store.

The Colony being in this condition, and seeing the King Be is the only male
without whom they cannot breed (as before I have proved) then consequently he
must be sometimes in the upper, and sometimes in the lower, but generally in
the middle Box where their Brood is most.

Having considered these observations, to know where the King-Bee is, must be
by comparing the upper with the lower Box; for if the middle Box be full, and
the lower Box has Combs in it, then observe, as far as the brood of young is
supposed to be in the under or nethermost Box, so far below the middle or
central part of the uppermost Box-Hive is the uppermost part of the same Brood
of young, the Boxes being ten inches high, and still remembering to except the
case of disturbance by noise or motion, you may more than probably conjecture,
where the King-Bee is: he being generally in or about the middle of that Brood
of young all the while any Bees are to be bred. Therefore the upper Hive should
be taken off before breeding is past.

In order to take off the upper-Hive, get all your instruments in a readiness:
which are, a fit instrument of Wood or Iron to drive the sliding shutter in the
top of the middle Box close and home with an hatcheth or hammer. A little Lome
or Mortar in case there need any to stop the hole that the Bees may not ascend
up out of the middle Box if the shuter be not driven close and home; a knife to
cut the Combs away where the shutter is, if need be, to make it go home; a
linen cloth about two or three foot broad, and about five foot long; a little
stick or two about half a yard long, and as big as a broom-stick, and an empty
Hive, a Straw-Hive, when you take a Straw Hive off, and a Box Hive when you
take a Box-Hive off; having all these in readiness, proceed to take off the
upper-Hive in this manner. Without any noise by speaking or bustling, about
three or four of the clock in the afternoon approach your Colony at the back
door of your house, and the first thing you do, with an heavy hammer or hatchet
drive close home the shutter that is next under that Hive you intend to take
off; do this first to prevent the ascending up of the King-Bee and as soon as
this is done which must be very dexterously, then as nimbly as you can lift up
the uppermost Hive, and see if the sliding shutter be so close that not a Be
can get up out of the middle Box, and if the Combs hinder, cut them away with
your knife, and if not yet close enough, stop it with Lome or mortar, then set
the uppermost Hive on as it was before, only tilted up a little, about an inch
or two with a stick, or any thing, and let it stand thus about an hour; all
this time not opening the fore door at all; and whilst you are at your work,
take care that you move not the lowest Box from the ledge under the front-door,
lest the Bees get into the house that way: then shut the back-doors to make it
dark in the Bee-House for that hour, in which time you may guess whether the
King-Bee is in the upper-Hive which you took off or in the middle Hive, being
the uppermost of those two you left unmoved in their places. For, if the
King-Bee is in the upper-Hive thus separated, the Bees in that Hive will be
quiet without any murmuring noise; but if the King-Bee is not in the upper-Hive
so separated, then the Bees will murmur, and many of them will be creeping
away: so if the King-Bee is in the middle Hive, being the uppermost of those
two left still in their places, then the Bees in those two Hives will be quiet,
and follow their work, and make no discontented murmuring noise; and
consequently if he be not in the middle Hive, the Bees there will be very
unquiet, and discontented.

The reason why I direct to leave the house dark for an hour, is because the
Bees in the uppermost-Hive being thus displaced and disturbed, will seek for
their King, and whether they find him or not, being in the dark, they will fill
themselves with their own Honey, and in that time they will be the better
prepared to leave their Hive afterward. When the hour is expired, then your
next work is to take the uppermost Hive quite off, and carry it away to get out
the Bees that are therein; for there will be some, more or less, according to
your dexterity in doing your work in shutting the shutter close; but many or
few, the way to get them out is thus.

CHAP. XVI.
How to get he Bees out of the uppermost Hive takes off, and how to put them
to their Colony again.

HAving an empty Hive ready, as before directed, carry your Hive taken off the
Colony four or five yards distance from the Bee-house, to take the Bees out of
it there, rather than close to the Bee-house, lest you disturb the other Bees:
place your Box-Hive on a joynt-stool with the legs upwards, and place the Box
Hive thereon with the top downwards, and if it be a Straw-Hive place it in a
bucket or pail with the top downwards, let either of them stand, or be held
fast, and to set turned up that you may see all the combs, then having the full
Hive so placed, whelm or cover it hollow over with your prepared empty Hive so
that all the Bees may creep up there into, then make or cause the Bees to
ascend up into the upper Hive thus: strike only the under Hive which was taken
off the Colony with the stick before spoken of to be ready, beating that Hive
lightly; for, with the little shaking of the blows, and constant noise of
knocking, which must be done by going round as a Cooper when he drives an hoop
on a tub; and if it be a box-Hive knock it in like manner sometimes underneath,
the better to drive the Bees up, then within one hour or thereabouts if you
still keep beating the Hive, the Bees will all ascend up into the upper empty
Hive by degrees crawling up, and in their ascending you will hear their humming
noise greater or lesser according to their numbers, and all, except perhaps a
few Drones, and here and there a straggling Be, will be ascended up into the
empty Hive: but if there be any crevise whereby any Bees can creep out betwixt
the Hives, then stop them close in by tying the linen cloth (before directed
to be gotten ready) close round about, for if any Bees can creep out any where
whilst you knock the under Hive, with your stick, then the rest will not easily
ascend, which cloth will seldom be wanted for this use when the Straw-Hive is
gone because the Box-Hives are even, and so the Bees cannot creep out betwixt
them, but at the mouths of them which must then be stopped. But observe in your
driving up the Bees in this manner that you neither shake nor strike the upper
empty Hive, but only the under full Hive, which was taken off the Colony, for
in so doing you will cause the Bees already ascended to fall down again, and so
cause your self double labor.

Having thus gotten the Bees into the upper empty Hive; although it should so
happen that through negligence or want of time you have tarryed until so late
a time of the year as until all the King Bees are reduced to but one and that
one King-Bee should also be in the uppermost Hive when taken off the Colony,
yet will he be gone up into this empty upper-Hive with the other Bees, being
driven on this manner.

When the Bees are thus in the empty Hive, then take off the linen cloth tied
round the Hives, and so take them from off their full Box or Hive, and
immediately send your Honey within doors for your use, that other Bees by the
smell of it may nor be brought to it, and as quickly as you can spread the
linen cloth before the mouth of the Colony from whence you took the Hive off,
and with two nails fasten one end of the cloth smoothly before and on both
sides of the Bees alighting place before the Bee-House, and so close, that the
Bees may creep off the cloth into their own Colony at the mouth, and let the
cloth hang down smooth and sloping to, and upon the ground its whole length
from the mouth of the colony, still remembering all the time from the beginning
of your work, not to open the fore doors of the Bee-House, but keep them close
shut. Then at once with a smart blow on the outside of the Hive knock all the
Bees out of the empty Hive upon the cloth where it is sloping, and if all the
Bees are not clean knocked out of the Hive, then give it a violent knock by
striking the edges of the Hive upon the cloth where it lies on firm ground to
get the Bees clean out upon the cloth, then you will see that all the Bees will
crowd up like sheep into a fold, and without taking wing, creep up to the mouth
of their own Colony, and so in unto their fellows rejoicing that they are at
home, and the King-Bee also if he be among them, for this is the only time of
seeing the King-Bee; therefore do it in the day time, and not late in the
evening, for then also the Bees that get loose may find their way to their own
home. And if this be done as I have directed so that all the Bees may be at
home being gone up off the cloth into the Colony, and the cloth taken away,
about two hours before Sun setting, then you may certainly know whether the
King-Bee is among them or not if you did not see him upon the cloth (as
sometimes you may) among the other Bees; for in one quarter of an hour after
the Bees are all at home, if the King-Bee is with them, then the Bees will be
still and quiet, and keep in their Colony without running up and down about the
mouth or murmuring noise; but on the contrary, if the King Be is not among
them; then the Bees will run to and fro about the mouth of the Colony as if
they were distracted, and in the Colony they will have a constant murmuring
noise; and many of them will fly abroad and about in search for him, which if
they then do, you may be sure their King is not among them.

Then if it be so, look well into the Hive taken off and carried within doors,
perhaps he may be there, as sometimes he is, if it be a straw-Hive taken off,
and an old stock when your Colony was first furnished with him: but I never
found it so when I took off a Box-Hive, and very seldom when I took off a
Straw-Hive, and then I observed that the Combs in such Straw-Hives were very
old, but when it is so, for remedy take your Combs out of the Hive carefully by
degrees though you break them, and lay them out in pans, and near the top or
crown of the Straw-Hive you may find the King-Bee among the Combs, then take
him, and carry him to his Colony patting him in at the mouth, and in two
minutes you will see a wonderful change in the actions of the Bees, changing
their mournings to rejoycings, the consequence of which will be, that the Bees
will cheerfully follow their labors as before you took their Honey away.

Thus you have your uppermost Hive with Honey taken safely off your Colony
without the destruction or killing of the Bees themselves, who will labor to
requite your pity to them in sparing their lives by working the more vigorously
for you the next Summer in order to spare you some more of the fruits of their
labors in way of thankfulness in the like manner, if the unkindness of the
year do not hinder their earnest industry: for those Bees whose lives are
spared having passed the accidental and personal miscarriages of the Summer
past, and passing the winter in rest, will vigorously, and early in the spring
begin their working again.

But here I give you to know that by my own experience and others, when the
uppermost Hive is a Box-Hive, then the King-Bee is more certainly in the
middle-Box, and therefore the Bees are more willing to part with, and go out of
a Box Hive when taken off than a Straw-Hive. The King-Bee also when they are
rid of the Straw-Hive and reduced only to the way of Colonies, is preserved
with less trouble, and more certainty, especially if you take them at the time
and season before directed; for as one among five or six is more probable to
escape when danger comes than one alone is, and it being always safer to
prevent than overcome dangers ( Venienti occurite morbo, that is, meet a
disease coming) so it is best not to delay too long, although you have a
remedy, and know how to preserve your Colony.

Having reduced your Colony in the house to two Hives only, by the taking off
the uppermost, observe afterward for two or three days whether the Bees work
or not, for if they carry in generative matter, you may be sure that the
King-Bee is in safety, for without him they cannot breed, and without him they
will not work.

Also if they kill their Drones after the upper-Hive is taken off you may be
sure their King is safe, because they kill their Drones by his orders, for if
he be not among them to give those orders they kill them not. But if you should
by observing find that your Colony works not, nor kills their Drones, and so
doubt their King to be lost, then you may furnish your Colony with a King-Bee
from some poor stock or cast to be taken up, which time is then coming on, and
near: and if thus you put to them a King-Bee when yet their own King-Bee is
safe, then that King so put to them will be expelled by the Bees, otherwise
they will receive him for their King.

CHAP XVII.
How to order the Colony after the upper Hive is taken off: or if you take not
the upper Hive off.

WHen your Colony is reduced to two Boxes, or Box Hives only (the Straw-Hive
being once gone, is never after to be used again) then proceed to order them as
follows; at the beginning or toward the middle of August according as the
year is good or bad for robbing, and forward or backward: inspect your Colony,
and observe what numbers of Bees are in the lowest Box, and whether they
continue therein or not, for as the weather grows colder and colder, the Bees
will ascend upwards into the upper-Hive of the Colony and lie closer and closer
together, and as soon as you find by looking in at the windows, that almost all
the Bees are gone up out of the under Box, so as to lodge in the upper Box,
then although that under Box be half full with Combs, or whether there be any
Combs in it or not, yet if there be almost no Bees in it (besides a few that
watch) in the evenings and in the mornings then take it away from under the
Colony and set the upper Box on the floor again, and in taking the Colony off
the under Box, if the Combs that were in the passage break so that they hang
down lower than the other parts of the Combs in the Colony (as sometimes they
do) then cut them off even with a knife because they should not be bruised and
bended when the Box stands on the floor, and after those Combs are cut off even
with the rest, set the Colony down on the floor in the single Box, withal
remember to open their mouth that they may have breath and passage out and in
under and through the ledge of the house door, to which ledge they must be set
close. But if any store of Bees besides those that watch do still remain in the
under Box, in the cold mornings and evenings, then let it stand under until the
Bees are almost all gone up, unless you suspect robbers: for if robbers should
trouble the Colony, then he must be set down the sooner in his single Box.

For, the setting the Colony thus low with a single Box is not only a sure
defense against the cold and robbers; but also in the Spring following they
will the sooner fill that single Box with Bees, and be the sooner ready to be
raised again according to my directions before given in the 13th. Chapter of
this Section.

That lower Box which you take from under your Colony, you may reserve clean,
and dry all the winter with the Combs in it, to set the same again under your
Colony in the Spring when you raise him again, you may also let all the Combs
abide in it, if they are sweet and clean, and free from Spiders, and webs,
except the Drone-Combs, which I advise you to cut quite away with a knife. You
may know the Drone-Combs which are seldom above two, by the bigness of the Comb
and the largeness and depth of the Cells, from the other Cells of the Hony-Bees
Combs.

When you have three Boxes one over another, or if the uppermost Hive of your
Colony is a Straw-Hive, and there is not sufficient maintenance in the middle
Box, so that you are not to take off the uppermost that year, as I mentioned in
the first general head in the 15th. Chapter of this fourth Section, then in
such case remember to take away the nethermost Box-Hive in like manner as above
and so leave the two uppermost Hives all the Winter, as you do the single
Box-Hive in the Bee-House when the uppermost is taken off.

CHAP. XVIII.
How the Colonies may Swarm.

HAving ordered your Colonies thus; either left all the winter in a single Box,
or with two Hives, you have your choice when spring comes whether you will have
an increase by swarming or not, for if you intend in the Spring to have your
Colonies swarm, then forbear to raise them up by putting under a second Box,
then you need not doubt of a swarm; but after the second Box is set under them
perhaps they will swarm by your forbearing to put a third Box under them, and
if so then you have your end answered; but that year in which you let your,
Colony swarm you must not expect to take off the uppermost Hive, and when you
intend to have no swarm then raise the Colony according to the formentioned
directions, and then you will have your profit by taking Honey.

Many Colonies according to the year, and place they stand in will be so strong
as not to spare their nethermost Box in the fall, after their uppermost is
taken off according to the time and manner before directed, then let such a
Colony stand to swarm.

When the Colony is reduced to Boxes only, so that you have your Colony
occupying three Boxes in the Summer and yet have not (as sometimes it will fall
out in some places) sufficient maintenance for the Bees in the middle Box, so
that no Box is to be taken off, which happens commonly in very bad years, then
having taken away the nethermost Box in the fall, as is directed in the
foregoing Chapter, let such a Colony thus with two Boxes stand the next Summer
to swarm, for then you will have a large swarm, fit to furnish a Colony
withal, and perhaps to be raised upon another Box the same year.

CHAP. XIX.
Concerning the robbing of Bees: and how to prevent it.

MAny persons are of such a bad disposition, as to speak evil of those things
whereof they are ignorant as appears by a false, jealous, and envious report
which many who keep Bees only in Straw-Hives have raised in some Countries,
which report is this, That where Bees are kept in Colonies no other Bees near
them will thrive, because say they, Bees kept in Colonies will rob and spoil
all other Bees that are kept near them, and that they will and do, so rob and
spoil them, is, because they are necessitated to do it for their livelihood;
their Honey being taken away, and the Bees not killed.

To answer these jealous-headed persons, if reason would satisfy them; the
Bees in Colonies are so far from being necessitated to rob or steal from others
by reason of want, that they have commonly left in them, after the upper-Hive
is taken off, more Honey than a strong stock kept in a Straw-Hive has though
he has not swarmed; Therefore let such know, that when the Honey is taken from
the Colony, the upper-Box only is taken from them, and at the same time there
is such store of Honey left in the two lower Boxes as is sufficient to maintain
all the Bees; for if there were not Honey enough left for their maintenance and
to spare, then either the Colony would dye, or become poor thereby, so that
their owner would have the greatest loss, however they could not be in want
until robbing time were past.

But it is rather their own poor stocks, and poor swarms, kept in Straw-Hives
that are in the greatest likelihood of robbing and stealing out of necessity;
for they are forced to take and kill such although they have but a few
spoonfulls of Honey in them, or else they leave such to rob and steal, or be
Starved in the Winter. What else can be the reason, that there is the greatest
robbing among Bees in very bad years for Honeygathering? but because all stocks
and swarms are generally so poor that scarce any, stocks or swarms can live
until the next summer, except only those stocks which have not swarmed in the
Summer preceding, as it happens in many places after some wet Summers; (for I
have known an aged skillful Be master that had 60 stalls, and swarms of Bees,
in such a year take up 20 of them, only for to have their Honey to feed the
other 40 withal) insomuch that Bees in many places being sensible of their own
poverty, have been led into Brew-houses by the sweet smell of the wort, where
many Bees have Drowned themselves; for I have known in several Country Towns
where Bees have been kept, some persons (whom I could name if need were) that
have been brewing in the beginning of August, have been forced to strain their
wort from the Bees drowned therein. And in such years there is generally the
greatest robbing among the Bees.

All Bees whatsoever (I mean Honey Bees) whether kept in Straw Hives, or in
Colonies, are of such natures (for the keeping of Bees in Colonies does not
change their natures) as to be sensible of their present poor state, as well as
of the succeding Winter, and they have such knowledge as to be capable of
despair in such cases, and then if Honey is not to be had abroad for gathering,
they will get it any way, if it be to be had in any place, by right or by
wrong, to maintain themselves in the Winter; which makes them, if the weather
will permit, go abroad to pilser from, and rob other Bees; and therefore in the
fall chiefly each stock or Kingdom of Bees is so providentially careful of
their own welfare, that they keep good watch and ward at home, according to
their several abilities, and kill every strange Be that they can catch.

For as soon as the Summer is so far spent, that Honey-gathering is past, then
comes the time of robbing among the Bees, and then those Bees disposed to rob
others, fly from one stock to another, and from one Colony to another,
attempting to get in and steal Honey, though in danger of their lives thereby;
and thus some Bees do every year, more or less, according to the goodness or
badness of the year for plentifulness of Honey; for in very bad years they rob
one another very much, but in good years they rob very little, so that scarce
any Bees have been robbed, when the year has yielded much Honey; which shows
that Bees knowing their poverty and lack of food, and also their strength,
which consists in great numbers (for if they have but few Bees, they are not so
able to sight, as to overcome and rob another stock) do grow desperate;
otherwise they would not so much endanger their own lives as we see they do,
in attempting to rob others, when they find that they have not a competent
maintenance at home. Also all that keep Bees know, that in good years there are
very few or no robberies committed among their Bees: The cause of which I judge
to be, because the Bees know when they have sufficient to maintain them until
the next Summer, and then they are not so desperate as to endanger the loss of
their own lives, to get more with so much difficulty, danger, and injustice,

From which premises I conclude, that rich stocks and Colonies well ordered,
and well to pass, seldom, or never, rob others; but those only that are strong
in Bees, having great numbers, and little food, or scarce enough to maintain
them, do grow desperate from the sense of it, and so make it their work to go
about to steal and rob from others: and those stocks or Colonies that have few
Bees, are in most danger of being robbed. For the robbing Bees will go abroad
whilst warm weather permits, and going from one stock to another, and from one
Colony to another, will endeavor in very small parties to get in and pilfer,
and where they find easy entrance, and small resistance, and can but carry away
at three or four times, only so many bellies full of stolen Honey, then they
will be sure to come again and bring more of their fellows; and then if they
get in, though but a fourth number of them escape to return home again laden
with Honey to their fellows, yet they are sure to return again and come with
forces greater and greater until they overcome the Stock or Colony, out of
which at first only two or three Bees had escaped with a little stolen Honey:
and when they are overcome the true Bees will help the robbers to carry away
their own Honey to their Hives: according to Virgil Georg. lib. 4.

-- Constructaque mella
Diripuere ipsae: et crates solvere favorem.
To prevent all kinds of robbing among your Bees take notice of the times of
the year for robbing, as follows.

All the Summer whilst honey is plenty, and to be had abroad for gathering,
then the Bees are just and honest, and will not rob others, so that if the next
Colony or Hive were full of Honey, and no Bees in it, they would not go to take
it, unless they were showed the way, or some Bees should find it to be so by
chance by going into the Hive through a mistake, or the Combs broken so as to
make the Honey in them smell stronger than usual.

In the Winter the Bees are so soon chilled with cold, that they cannot go
abroad, therefore robbing times are only Spring and Fall.

In the Spring Bees are not strong as in the Fall, therefore robbing is most,
and more strongly carried on in the Fall, than in the Spring: besides, most of
those Stocks which would have robbed others in the fall, are themselves dead
and starved for want of food before the Spring is so far come on as to rob.

Take notice also that a vacuum or empty space between the body of the Bees and
the mouth of the Hive in robbing time, is a great temptation to the robbers as
it were inviting them to come by the advantage they have of hiding themselves
for some space of time in that vacuum, and by abiding there they begin to smell
like the true Bees, whereby they avoid the pursuit of, and are not so soon
found out by the true Bees; thus the robbers have the greater opportunity to
pilfer; and when once a few robbing Bees have gotten their booty, viz. A belly
full of Honey and escape to their own Hives with it, then that Colony or Stock
out of which the robbers did but pilfer, is in very great danger of being
robbed.

To prevent this kind of robbing, I have ordered the lower Box of the Colony to
be taken away, in the manner described before in the 17th. Chapter of this
Section.

Another cause of robbing is when there be diverse passages out and into the
Colony or Hive, or if any Bees can get out and in under the Box or Hive by
reason of the unevenness of the floor, or through any other place besides the
common single mouth; these passages much endanger robbing, because the robbing
Bees and Spies by them get access into the Hive or Colony unespied by those
that watch.

To prevent this kind of robbing I have in my directions in diverse places
ordered all avenues and holes about the Hive or Colony where a Be can get out
or in, to be always close stopped up, except only their mouth passage.

Another great cause of robbing is a large entrance into the Colony at the
mouth in robbing time, which is a great disadvantage to the Colony, and so also
to a Stock, because then is required the greater numbers of Bees to defend it,
whereby the Colony Bees are wearied and tired out with much watching; also you
may observe that the robbing Bees will be sooner abroad in the morning about
their evil intentions then commonly other Bees go abroad at that time of the
year, and coming to a Colony or Hive so early in a morning, they easily get by
the guard, if the passage be not so narrow that a sentinel might guard it.

You may know robbing time when it begins by the approaching of several Bees
that attempt to go into a Colony or Hive of Bees, but dare not, flying, and
hovering about the mouth of it, and making many offers to get in, until for
their boldness, some are caught by the Bees of the Colony, and suffer Death for
it, and others by the example of their fellows sufferings fly away to the next
Hive or Colony to try their fortunes there also, where if they meet with a
strong guard they retire, and come no more. Thus in some years almost every
Stock and Colony is tried by the robbing Bees.

To prevent this and all other kinds of robbings as well as other absurdities
in ordering your Bees, besides what has been already hinted, the last and
chiefest help to prevent robbing is duly to keep the door or passage of your
Bees shut or stopped up, all the year according to the season; for the causes why
so many Stocks of Bees, and Colonies are robbed in bad years, next to the
poverty and strength of the robbing Bees is, the neglect of stopping them up
soon enough in the fall, according as I have known many who would not stop up
their Bees (because they thought the Bees did still gather Honey) thereby to
prevent the coming of robbers to them, until they saw their Bees infested with
the robbers: which was much like to him that shut the Stable door, as soon as
the horse was stolen out; for when once the Bees are much troubled with the
robbers: if thy die not, nor are robbed, yet they are much weakened by them.

The best way therefore is to stop them up thus: as soon as honey gathering is
past (which is sooner or later according to the year) which any man may know by
the Bees beginning to beat their Drones away, and by the Bees leaving to work
apace, then although in July, yet narrow their passage to half an inch or an
inch according to the strength of your Bees: and in the beginning of August
norrow their passage to half an inch square, and let it stand so until the
cold weather, and then make it somewhat less according to the strength of your
Bees: for the Bees must always have some air, then leave them so all the
winter, and in February open the passage again to half an inch square till
March is almost out, and then, or sooner if the year be forward and your Bees
strong, make their passage an inch in length, and so let it stand until the
end of April, or thereabouts, and then according to the strength of your Bees
you may make their passage wider and wider to its full length, that the Bees
work might not be hindered, and as soon as swarming time is fully past narrow
their passage a little, until Honey gathering is fully past, and the Bees
begin to leave working apace again then make their passage an inch again, and
so on, to half and inch, etc.

Observe in general that some years are much more forward than others, and in
some places the spring is two or three weeks forwarder than it is in other
places; therefore some discretion must be used as to the time certain when to
stop up, and open the passages of your Bees, for we see that spring and harvest
are generally sooner near London than further off.

But if you perceive your Colonies or Straw-Hives, at any time infested, and
visited by the robbers, with greater numbers than three or four, or with more
than the true Bees can very well conquer and punish, your only way is,
immediately to stop their passage up close with pieces of Tobacco-pipes, or
with a Comb, or any thing through which the Bees may have air, and not be
smothered: and at night; after Sunsetting, open the passage again, and so let
out all the Bees that will go out; for no Bees but robbers will then fly away:
and when the Bees are still and quiet within, and the robbers all gone, which
will be in a quarter of an hour, then stop them up close again, as before, so
that not a Be can get out nor in, and keep it so close stopped for three days,
and afterward open it a little only at noon, to give the Bees liberty for
about four hours only in a day, because of their danger; and when one Hive or
Colony is so stopped up, look well to the next Hive or Colony that stands by him,
to stop him up closer than ordinary, or quite close in like manner: for the
robbers will vigorously assault all those stocks or Colonies which stand near
to such as they are prevented to rob.

CHAP. XX.
Of the diseases of Bees, and their remedies.

THE only disease which I yet know incident to Bees (which I can properly term
a disease) is a lask or flux, which we may see by their evacuating their
excrement thinner than usual, with which the Bees grow weak, and soon dye,
which happens most in warm winter weather, and early in the spring, when they
fly abroad; the cause of which is, because they can have no vegetables whereof
they can gather physical food to help themselves. The remedy of this disease is
to give the Bees some salt and Honey mixed with meal and water, or salt and
Honey mixed alone, and so let the Bees eat thereof, it will help them; and
these things also will prevent the disease, being given before.

But there are several other occasions of their ruin, as fighting, cold and
hunger, want of air, and the loss of their King-Bee, besides various accidents
happening to single Bees abroad at their works, by winds and rain, by which
they are often beaten down, and then soon chilled and killed, especially in bad
weather in the Spring, and are often met with by their enemies, as Birds on the
Trees, and Poultry, etc. The best remedies of these occasions of ruin to the
Bees, I shall here lay down in order.

Their sighting is prevented by the House right made, as in Chap. the 2d. of
this Section, and by keeping the doors duly shut as in C^^p. the 5th. of this
Section, and by having their passage kept duly stopped up, according to to the
directions in the foregoing Chap. concer^ing robbing.

Their cold and hunger is prevented, by keeping the house close, and by putting
a little Straw on them in the very cold weather, and by leaving them food
sufficient, according to the directions in the 15th. Chap of this Section, and
feeding them, if you have not lest them food enough; for having great numbers
of Bees, and it proving bad weather in the Spring, they may soon come to want,
and for remedy when it is thus, draw back the sliding shutter on the top, and
put in some Honey mixed with a little Salt, and you will then wonder to see
what great encouragement the Bees will receive thereby, and how briskly they
will work after it, and if good weather succeeds, want no more; I shall speak
something more of their cold and hunger in the next Chapter.

Their want of air in the Hive, besides the danger of smothering them,
occasions the Combs where there is any moisture to grow moldy, and breed
vermin, unless just where their globulous body is, and consequently makes them
loathsome to the Bees, as well in Summer as in Winter; the remedy of which is
to give them some air at all times according to the season

Concerning the loss of their King-Bee I have sufficiently treated in the 2d.
Chapter of the 2d. Section, the remedy of which is to supply them with another;
but to prevent his loss observe the directions in the 15th. and 19th, Chapters
of this section.

Those various accidents that befall single Bees, can no ways by art be
remedied, therefore your best course is to preserve your Colonies with as great
numbers of Bees as is possible, for then the whole Colony will be the better
able to bear those particular losses.

The Bees in Colonies are better preserved from several of their enemies than
they can be in Straw-Hives, as from mice, birds, moths, etc: from mice thus:
whereas mice breed under the hackle, and gnaw an hole sometimes into an Hive of
Bees, they cannot eat, through a wooden Box Hive, nor so easily enter in at
the mouth, though not stopped at all, as they sometimes do into the Straw-Hives
though stopped, if the some be not very well mixed, or covered with ashes: From
birds thus, whereas diverse sorts of birds as sparrowes, titmice, and others, do
often come to the mouth of a straw-Hive, and peck at it, whereby they cause the
Bees to come out in cold weather and so eat them one by one as they come forth:
Those birds cannot come to the Box Hive to peck at it, when the house doors are
duly kept shut, and though they peek at the door, yet the Bees within the Hive
by reason of the distance are not (at that time of the year) disturbed, and
consequently are not enticed out by that noise the birds make in pecking.

Moths generally harbor and are bred in hackles, of which there is no occasion
in this method of Colonies, and though sometimes a sort of Maggots or Worms
which turn to Moths, are bred among the Combs in some weak Stocks, yet I never
knew any in a strong Stock or Colony.

And Spiders, Emmets, Snails, and other Vermin which usually annoy the Bees in
Straw-Hives, are by the house, and Box-Hives well ordered, in this method much
better kept off from being any trouble or annoyance to the Bees.

Any man that keeps Bees, and considers this method of ordering the Bees in
Colonies, may reap some advantage, in knowing the better how to order them in
Straw-Hives, until such time as he can attain to get an house and Box-Hives
(right made) and Colonies; for the Bees natures are not changed, but their
industry is much improved in this method of Colonies; as I shall now show.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the Profit of Bees kept in Colonies, beyond what Profit can be reaped, from
Bees kept only in Straw-Hives.

WHosoever with diligence shall observe and follow the directions in this Book,
he will find that he shall rarely miss his desired end both of delight and
profit.

Delight; in seeing their curious works, and great industry, and in observing
their admirable natures etc.

Profit; by the well thriving of his Bees, as many who have already taken my
directions, have since experienced in having their expectations answered
without the lossof their Bees, and are willing to testify the same if need were.

As to the profit of Bees kept in Colonies I shall speak the less, because I
can prove it in fact (as I have done in diverse places already) therefore I
shall only let you know that being kept in Colonies and well ordered (for
without ordering them right you must not expect it) Bees do and will yield more
than double the profit (when settled Colonies) than they are able to do, when
kept in Straw-Hives; for besides the justice of the thing, to save those
creatures alive (who spend their whole life in earnest endeavors for the good
of their keepers by that mercy showed to the Bees themselves) their
preservation only, more than balances the peradventure of a swarm the next
Summer, because the Colony left is so much better than a Stock of Bees.

And passing over that small advantage which is betwixt the constant attendance
which Straw-Hives require in having one to watch when they will Swarm almost
all the Summer, and the small attendance that Colonies require, being now and
then to look upon them.

The benefit of keeping them in Colonies if ordered right, according as I have
directed in this Book, will show its self in the certainty of their
preservation against two of the chiefest and most considerable occasions of the
destruction of Bees, viz. cold and hunger, for whereas being kept in
Straw-Hives they are subject to cold for want of numbers to keep them warm in
Winter; and hunger for want of food to maintain them whereby they become
desperate, and turn robbers, and if they fail of robbing others, are starved
themselves; now in this method of Colonies, they are wholly delivered from
those two occasions of their ruin, from cold; because the Bees are all left,
and so have their full numbers, whereby they keep one another the warmer in
cold weather, and in the Spring; what else can be the reason that the Bees in
Russia, Poland, New England etc. (where the weather is so extreme cold in
Winter) do live and thrive better than in England? but because they are in
greater numbers, and lying in a round form and close body, keep out the cold
from them, and the cause why they increase more and faster (in the spring and
Summer in those Countries than in England (and consequently thrive better) is
because both spring and Summer in those places are more serene and constant
than with us.

From hunger; because they have food sufficient left them, and to spare, in the
middle Box; if the owners themselves will but duly observe the directions in
the 15th. Chapter of this section.

Besides what I have mentioned, the profit appears to be more than double both
by reason and experience, thus: As three cords united by twisting together in
one, are stronger than each cord alone is, and as three or four sticks bound
close together are not so soon broken as each single stick alone is; so in a
Colony the strength of a stock, a swarm and a cast are united together, whereby
the Colony has the strength of all; which strength consists in numbers, and
being united they have more then a double advantage in working and gathering
Honey, for whereas the strength of a stock is divided by sparing a swarm, their
interests (by their interest I mean their growing strength by the Brood of
young, as well as riches and present strength) do thereby become different and
separate, whilst the Colony Bees being undivided in their interests losing no
time, do follow and improve that their advantage by natural industry. which
advantage of Colonies has appeared to be treble in Honey-Dews by this example
following, which I can bring testimony of, to any that desire it, by those who
saw it, upon the 21. day of June 1677, a Colony was weighed whose weight was
just 55 pounds, and the same Colony was weighed again upon the 28. day of the
same June, and then the weight of the Colony was 85 pounds, so that in those
seven days the Colony gathered 30. pounds of Honey, which we saw by the white
plaistering upon the Combs at all the windows, and in the same space of time a
stock or swarm seldom can add above five or six pounds weight to themselves.

The reason of which great advantage to the Colony is their being united,
because at such a time the Colony having but one Brood of young-Bees, can spare
all to work except their Drones which then keep their young Brood warm; but the
stock and swarm having each of them a young Brood at home when the harvest of
Honey-Dews come, they being separate, cannot spare half so many laborers in
proportion as the Colony can and does.

A stock cannot spare his proportion because most go away with the swarm, and
the swarm though he has a competent strength, yet many times has not Combs in
readiness to put their Honey in, and when he has some Combs they are presently
so filled with the young Brood (which must be kept in a constant heat by the
Bees) that they also cannot spare a proportion in number comparable to the
Colony.

Moreover in bad weather the Colony Bees are not forced to go abroad as
oftentimes swarms are through want of Combs, etc. which I have known to that
degree in wet weather, that a swarm has lost above half the number of his Bees.

Further, to show that the profit of keeping Bees in Colonies is more than
double the profit, of keeping them in Straw-Hives, only I shall now demonstrate
by comparison, thus: If the Honey taken from a Colony in one year be more in
quantity than the Honey taken from a stock and a swarm: and if the Colony left
be as good and better than the Box taken off; then I doubt not but any man will
grant with me the profit to be more than double, because there is as much or
more left then taken, and as much taken as a stock and swarm can make: for they
being killed, there is an end of their profit, which profit is more than
countervalued by the Box taken off the Colony: but the Colony left yields so
much every year, and that is much better than the present profit; therefore the
Colony left is better than the Box taken off.

That the Colony Box taken off contains more in quantity than the Honey taken
from a stock and a swarm, is thus computed. If a Box taken off a Colonoy weighs
56 pounds (as the least of all I ever yet took off weighed so much) and the
weight of a stock be 28 pounds (most of them weighing much less) and the weight
of a swarm be 28. pounds which is rarely exceeded (for a stock that has not
swarmed seldom exceeds 40 pounds) these compared are equal: the Colony Box
being the same in weight, as are both stock and swarm, some may think that the
fine Honey in a swarm may be better than the Colony Honey: but when they come
to compute the dross, they will find that the Colony exceeds at least a fourth
or fifth part thus: the stock and swarm both weighing 56 pound, and the Colony
Box weighing the same weight; there will be of good Honey at least one fifth
part more, produced out of the Box than out of both the Straw-Hives, by reason
of dross: for, the stock and the swarm have two Broods of young; but the Colony
has but one, which also is (the greater part of it in the middle Box, so that
that part of the Colonies Brood of young which is in the Box taken off is not
so large, as is the least of the Broods of young either in the stock or swarm:
bsides, there is more virgin Honey in one Colony than in three Straw-Hives
(though two of them swarms) because the Colony having room enough does not put
his honey into those Cells, where they use to breed young as the Bees are
forced to do in all Straw-Hives for lack of room, and so their Honey is courser.

Moreover if the swarm be left standing to balance the worth of the Colony left
(which by much odds it cannot do) then the stock taken up will weigh much less
than half the weight of the Colony taken off, besides the goodness of the Honey
in the Colony above that in the Straw-Hive.

But to satisfy all persons that a Box-Hive taken off a Colony is so much as I
have mentioned will appear by that which I presented to his Majesty in
White Hall upon the 28th. of August 1677, which weighed above 64 pounds, and
almost all was Honey, because the Bees with their Brood of young; were gone down
into the lower Boxes, so that there was more in quantity of Honey from that Box
than three very good stocks that have swarmed will yield when the Bees are
killed: that Colony with diverse others in the same Bee-House being in very good
case every year to yield the same profit, as I have by experience sound, having
since that time viz. The last year, taken off my Honey again, and expect to do
the same again at the end of this Summer, and so onwards every year.

And therefore; to evince the continual profit of Colonies, I intend every year
to keep one or more of my Box-Hives which I yearly take off my Colonies the
space of seven or eight weeks (for much longer it will not keep good, because
of the young grubs in it) to be seen by any that will take but so much pains as
to come to my house (as is mentiored page 73. of this Book) in the Bowlingally
at Westminster.

I have this year already taken off my Colonies, and have reserved two to be
seen as above: the one weighing 61 pound, the other above 57 pound. Therefore
if any man shall take other methods of ordering their Colonies, and neglect
this: if they miscarry, let them not be so injurious as to blame the Art.

Whatsoever persons of Quality or Gentlemen desire to, see the delightful
working of the Bees in the Colonies, and to set them up: for their further
encouragement and instruction (besides the furnishing them with Box-Hives right
made, and licenses, and the example of some Bee-Houses as I mentioned in the
advertisement in the beginning of this Book) I shall be ready whilst I live to
impart unto them, any experiences, or needful directions from time to time when
they send to me, or I come to their houses, though 50 or 60 Miles from London,
if they desire it, to direct them in setting up, and ordering their Colonies in
this way of improving Bees, and taking their Honey without killing them.

To conclude, Whatsoever Gentlemen, or Bee-Master, who shall peruse this
history of Bees, and shall yet remain doubtful (or be of another Judgment
besides, or contrary to what I have herein asserted) concerning any thing
herein contained, or any thing else concerning the natures of Bees, or the
practices of Bees whether kept in the old method of Strawhives, or in this new
and more excellent method of Colonies (being more excellent, not only because
more just, and more merciful, but also because it is a more delightful and
more profitable method of keeping Bees) or concerning any other projects about
them; I shall be ready and willing at any time to resolve and satisfy them,
and to communicate any other of my experiments concerning Bees unto them if
they have recourse to me by letters, or otherwise, at my dwelling mentioned in
the preface. But because no man can be perfect: and there is no art yet so
perfectly known to any of the Sons of men, but may admit of further
improvements; therefore I account not my self infallible in this, yet shall but
hope for further and better improvements of Bees: I shall therefore conclude
with the words mentioned in the Title: -- Si quid novisti rectius istis
Candidus imperti: si non, his utere mecum.
If any man, knows any thing, more true than I impart,
Let him disclose it; otherwise, improve with me this Art.


FINIS.

