THE COVENANT OF LIFE OPENED: Or, A TREATISE of the COVENANT OF GRACE,
Containing something of And especially of
The nature of the Covenant of Works, The Sovereignty of GOD, The extent of the
death of CHRIST, The nature and properties of the Covenant of Grace: The
Covenant of Suretyship or Redemption between the LORD and the Son JESUS CHRIST,
Infants right to JESUS CHRIST, and the Seal of Baptism:


With some Practical Questions and Observations.

By SAMUEL RUTHERFURD, Professor of Divinity in the University of S. Andrews.

ZECH. 6.12. And speak unto him, saying* Thus speaks the LORD of Hosts,
saying, Behold the Man whose Name is the BRANCH, and he shall grow out of his
place, and He shall build the Temple of the LORD.

13. Even He shall build the Temple of the LORD, and He shall bear the glory,
and shall sit and rule upon His Throne, etc.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Andro Anderson, for Robert Broun, and are to be sold at
his Shop, at the Sign of the Sun, ANNO 1655.

CHRISTIAN READER,
MAny have written, to the edifying of the Godly, of this excellent Subject:
Its not much I can do in this, but have added some thoughts to what is said,
intending a more Practical way of the last Points* in another Treatise, to
wit, of the application of Covenant-Promises, and of the influences of the
Spirit under the Covenant of Grace* of which, especially of the latter of these
two, few have practically written: And it is of much concernment, to make ou^
the Union of our Duty and the breathings of the LORD, and what can be done
under deadness, to either fetch the wind, or to be put in a spiritual
condition, that the soul ^ay ly fair for the receiving of the influences of
GOD. I desire in this to speak for Truth, not either for or against persons of
whom I am silent, concealing the names of any Contradicent, judging Truth so
much the more desirable, when it may possibly be had with peace, and as little
blowing or stirring of the fire of contradiction as can be. What is here said
in a way of Disputing, the Moderate Reader, who is not taken with that way, may
pass by and read what is practical. The Author has been (lest Truth should
suffer by him) a little darkened, as report bears, with the name, I know not
what, of a Protester, as one who has deserted the Government and Discipline of
the Church of GOD in SCOTLAND; But my humble thoughts are the same they were
before: though I can add nothing to the Truth. I look on these men the world
so names Protesters, Schismatics, Separatists, as sinful men who stand in
need of a Savior, and as such as desire to fear GOD and love His Name, and
would gladly have our practice and walk come a little more near to the Rule of
the Gospel, and that our Land might mourn for all the abominations committed
therein, which I desire to be spoken without any reflection upon any of the
Godly in the Land, who, in that point, are of another Judgment. It is my
desire to the LORD, that he would let us hear experienced by the reality of
that: Thus says the LORD, Isa. 65.8.
As the new wine is found in the cluster, and one says, Destroy it not, for a
blessing is in it: so will I do for my servants sake, that I may not destroy
them all. The LORD JESUS be with your Spirit.

Yours in the Lord Jesus S. R.

Contents of the I. PART.
CHAP. I. and II.
THe four particulars of the Treatise. page 1. Propositions touching ADAMS
state. p. 1, 2. ADAM was predestinate to life eternal in Christ, and how. page
2.
CHAP. III.
What is the intent and sense of the threatening, Genesis 2.17. and Genesis 3.20. Dust
thou art, etc. p. 3, 4, 5. Threatenings of the Law reveal what the Lawgiver may
jure inflict, by justice and Law deserving, not what shall come to pass. p. 4.
Except it be both a threatening and a Prophecy. p. 5. What is carnal security.
ibid. What Adam was to believe in that threatening. p. 5, 6. How the promises
and the threatenings differ in this. p. 7. How Law threatenings to the Elect are
Evangelick. p. 8.
CHAP. IV.
The Elect before Conversion bear no part of the Law-curse, nor is the
Law-curse divided between them and Christ. p. 10.11. Faith is too near to be
made a cause of satisfaction for sin by all who hold that Christ gave a
satisfactory ransom for all and every one of mankind. p. 11. Accepting or not
accepting satisfaction is* before faith, and so believing or not believing can
be no ground of the sufficiency of the price paid for the Reprobate, or of
the laying of the sins of all upon Christ. p. 11, 12, 13* God may accept the
satisfaction of Christ without any condition required on our part. p. 13.
CHAP. V.
God intended a Law-dispensation, but for a time. 2. Adam how he was ordained
for a Law life. 3. How predestinate to Glory, how not. 4. That the heathens
have no more universal grace then Devils. 5. No ground for such grace. p. 13,
14, 15.
CHAP. VI.
It was condiscension in the Lord to enter in Covenant with man. 2. Tempt^tions
in fearing we are not chosen, discovered. 3. Beings and not-beings are debtors
to God. 4. Self denial required in sinlesse nature, as in sinful. 5. Man
considered three ways. How faith lays hold upon conditional promises, and
temptations of unbelief thereabout. p 16, 17. O^ the Covenant of nature. p. 18,
19, 20.
CHAP. VII.
Its not written in the heart of man by nature, that God should promise life
Eternal to man, upon condition of obedience. 2. The debt of justice cannot ty
God. 3. God punishes not sin, by necessity of nature. 4. Nor defends he his
own declarative Glory by necessity of nature. 5. Nothing can be given to God
All sufficient. 6. No meriting of the creature. 7. We are to have humble
thoughts of Free Grace. 8. Low thoughts of our selves. 9. Promises make no
strict justice between the Lord and us. p. 20* 21. God falls in no sort from
his natural dominion, though he impose not penal Laws upon the reasonable
creature. p. 25, 26. God loves his essential Glory by necessity of nature, but
not his declarative Glory, by any such necessity p. 28, 29* 30. In every
Covenant there is some out goings of Grace. p. 35. The passage 1 Chronicles. 29.11,
12. cleared, and why none can give to God* p. 37, 38. Our vain boasting of
self, my, and such proud pronoumes. p. 39, 40. How excellent to obey. p. 45.
Sanctified reason is not soft. p. 45, 46. How near are we to justification by
Works, and to be sick of love for proud (I.) p. 46, 47.
CHAP. VIII.
What place death has in the Covenant. 2. What Reprobates and the damned are
to do. p. 47, 48. What Adam was to do in the intervall between the fall and the
publishing of the Gospel. p. 48. How the Lord is Adams God. p. 49. What life is
promised in the Covenant of Works. p. 47, 48. Wilfulness of unbelief, Some
doubts are to be left to GOD only to solve. p 48, 49. How the Lord is the God
of Adam. p. 49. No promise of influences is made to Adam. p. 49.
CHAP. IX.
What life is promised in the Covenant of Works. p. 49, 50 Whether or no did
Adam and all the Reprobates in him lose all right to the creatures. p. 50, 51.
A threefold right. 1. Natural. 2. Providentiall. 3. Spiritual. What right
Reprobates and unbelievers have to the living, ^a^ing* etc. p. 53, 54. What way
God is ours. p. 55, 56. A furniture of Grace, and a want of Christ. p 56.
CHAP. X.
The Arminians ground that God was in a manner compelled to appoint the New
Covenant. p. 56, 57. The natural antecedent love of God a dream. p 57.
CHAP. XI.
The threefold Covenant of some considered. p. 57, 58. And of the Arminians, p.
64* considered, and rejected. The Law as propounded to Israel was the very
Covenant of Grace, p. 60, 61, 62. and the Covenant in the Old one with that of
the New Covenant, but differenced ^n some accidents. p. 63* 64.
CHAP. XII.
Self-searching to know under what Covenant We are, a spiritual condition, and
why? p 65, 6^. The threatenings under the New Testament more spiritual. p 67,
68. What it is to be under the Law. ibid. The combat between the flesh and the
Spirit, and the combat in natural men differenced. p 68. Compelled
convictions argue a Law Spirit. ibid. Its easier to be sound in the faith, then
to be Godly. p. 69. Of the legal terrors. ibid. Of literal and legal
convictions and these of the Gospel. p. 70. Marks of such as are under the Law.
p. 70, 71. A sweetness in the hardest command, because holy. ib. An heaven in
duties. p. 71. A new nature stands for a command. ibid.
CHAP. XIII.
Covenanting external, visible, professed, conditional, and Covenanting
internal, invisible, real, absolute, and how they differ. p. 72, 73, 74.
Infants are within the Covenant. p. 73, 74 75, 76. And to be baptized, and
invested with Covenant privileges. p. 76* 77, 78, 79. Its false that none are
in Covenant under the New Testament but converts. ib. The Covenant made with
Abraham and us, the same. p. 80* 81. Nor is that Covenant a civil Covenant. p.
81, 82. The New Testament Kingdom is spiritual, though there be seals in it
and external worship. p. 82, 83. Of federall holiness. ibid. External Church
privileges of the Covenant are given to Nations and societies. p. 83, 84. Its
not the Physical but the Moral root that is the first subject of the Covenant
conditional, and external. p 84, 85. The formal ground of right to Baptism.
p. 85, 86. The places Acts 8.37. Mark 16.16. opened, and are nothing for, but
much against Anabaptists. p. 85, 86. The text, Acts 2.39. opened, is strong for
Infant baptism. p. 86, 87. A conditional Covenant is properly a Covenant,
though it be not ever a fulfilled Covenant. p 90* 91. No means are proved, by
Law, or Gospel, to save infants by the opposers of infant Baptism. p 91, 92.
Two diverse considerations of the Covenant, one in abstracto as a simple way of
saving sinners, and so all in the Visible Church are in the Covenant; another
in concreto, as it contains the Lords will of pleasure, and as it is acted upon
the heart, and so the Elect are only in Covenant. p 94. The new heart is only
commanded to some, and to others it is both commanded and promised. p 95.
CHAP. XIV.
The place Genesis 17. opened. p. 95. Circumcision and Baptism compared. p 95 96
97. What blessings and privileges must infants want, if they be without the
Covenant. p 98, 99 100. The place Mark 10.15, 16. Luke 18. Math. 19. Of such is
the Kingdom of heaven, opened. p. 100.101.102. What blessing Christ bestowed
upon the infants, whom he took in his arms. p. 102, 103, 104. A Covenanted
seed is promised to be added to the Church of the Jews. 104.105 Considerable
differences between external and internal Covenanting. 107.108 The place Romans
11.6. If the root be holy, so are the branches. 110.111. By the holy Root
cannot be meant the predestinate to Glory only. 113, 114. But visible
Professors, fathers and children. p. 115, 116. The children are in Covenant not
by birth, but by such a birth. p. 116, 117. Covenant holiness is not the
complete and adequat cause of real ingrafting in Christ. p. 116, 117, 118
CHAP. XV.
Other considerable differences between external and internal Covenanting. p.
118, 119. There is no universal Grace subjective or objective given to all,
Romans 10.18. Psalm. 19.3. p. 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124. Nor power of believing
given to all. p. 124, 125, 126.
CHAP. XVI.
The judgment of men esteeming such visible Covenanters to be real converts
before they can be admitted, makes all Egypt, Assyria, the Kingdoms of the
world, all Judea Baptized, to be real converts in the judgment of John
Baptist, Paul and the Apostles. p. 129, 130 The invisible Church is the first
subject of the promises of special note, etc. p. 131, 132 Hypocrites have no
warrant to challenge the seals from any command of God, as M. Thom. Hooker
says. p. 132
CHAP. XVII.
Who are Hypocrites. p. 133, 134 What Hypocrisy is. p. 135 Parties in the
Covenant of Grace as acted upon in heart. p. 137 The Word and the Spirit. p.
138 Of God speaking himself. ib. Prophesies that now are differ from Scripture
Prophesies, and how. p. 139 Revelations made to the Godly, when they are in
much nearness to GOD p. 140, 141 Marks of a spiritual disposition. p. 142,
143, 144, 145. To do a duty as a duty, and not as delightful is a spiritual
disposition. p. 144 Not as successful, but as a duty. p. 145
CHAP. XVIII.
The nature, characters, properties of the new heart and the new spirit of
Covenanters. p. 145, 146. The heart, the man. p 146 The good heart. ib. How
rare a piece the heart is. p. 147 Of the reigning evils of the heart. ib. Why
we are more shamed of lying then of pride. p. 149 The concurrence of the Word
to the act of infusion of a new heart a mystery. p. 149, 150 The Atheism and
impossible lies of the heart. p. 150, 151 The signs of the new heart. p. 151,
152
CHAP XIX.
The place of Evangelick Works in the Covenant. 2. Possession of glory and
right to glory different. 3. A twofold right to glory. 4. We are not justified
by Works. 5. The place of declarative justification by Works, Jam. 2.
discussed. 6. Faith and Works different. 7. Possession of life and right to
life cleared. 8. Faith and final believing both commanded in the Law. Final
unbeleef not the sin forbidden in the Gospel only. 9. How life is promised to
our Works Evangelick, p. 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, and seq. Our mistakes of God,
p 15^, 152 The faith that James speaks of is not true faith, p ^60 The acts of
saving faith, p. 16^ 162 James must speak of two sorts of faiths, p. 162, 163
The Arminian Argument to prove that James speaks of declared justification,
answered, p. 165, 166 How faith (...) only justifies, p^ 170, 171 The Socinian
and Arminian faith, and Papists formed faith includes new obedience and
repentance, p 172, 173 Contrar^ to the Scripture which differenceth between
faith and new obedience, p. 174, 175, 176 Right to life eternal and possession
of life eternal differ in their nature and causes, p. 176, 177 The nec^ssity of
Works, p. 177, 178 Possession of life and right to life differ, p 178, 179, 180
And contrare obj^ctions removed, ib.
CHAP. XX.
Whether or not suffered Christ for any sin against the Gospel only, such as
final unbeleef, which is conceived to be the only sin against the Gospel. That
Christ died not for all without exception. The unwarrantablenesse of that
Doctrine, how the Law commands justifying faith and repentance, how not, p.
181, 182, etc. Sins against the Gospel are also sins against the Law, p. 188*
189
CHAP XXI.
Whether the Lord Mediator as Mediator command the same good Works in the
Covenant of Grace which are commanded in the Covenant of Works, p. 192, 193
Christ lays one way Evangelick commands upon the Elect, and another way upon
the Reprobate, p. 198 How the Reprobate are still under the Covenant of Works,
how not, p. 192
CHAP. XXII.
No promise of perseverance to Adam, p. 194.195 Nor any promise to him of
influences of Grace, p. 195, 196 4. Classes of obediences considerably compared
among themselves* p. 196.197, 198 Christ's obedience most perfect, most of his
own. p. 196 Most undue or least of debt coming from God man, and so most
meritorious p. 197 Angels obedience. 2. Of their own, but not so as Christ's of
his own, and so less meritorious, p. 198 3. The obedience of Adam more of his
own, then that of Angels, yet less obedience, ibid. 4. Gospel-obedience has
least of the nature of obedience, p. 198, 199
CHAP. XXIII.
The Law of Works r^quired not simply doing, but doing to the end, p. ^00.208
CHAP. XXIV.
Whether faith as true, or faith as continuing to the end, be the condition of
the Covenant of Grace, p. 201, 202. Faith which endures to the end, but not
quatenus as it indures to the end is the condition of the Covenant of Grace, p.
201, 202 Faith in the first lively acts saves and justifies, p. 202, 203
CHAP. XXV.
Whether is Christ's righteousness imputed and made ours, because we believe
and apprehend it ours, or do we believe, because it is ours, because we
believe, p. 206, 207 Faith presupposes three unions. 1. Natural. 2. Legal.
3. Federal, and makes a fourth, p. 208, 209 There be four or five sundry
Adversaries against whom the holy Ghost in Scripture contends in the point of
justification, p. 210, 211 The dominion of the Law, p. 211.212 What is meant by
the oldnesse of the letter, p. 213 How we are freed therefrom, ib. A threefold
bondage of the Law, ib. Of the dignity of the Gospel above the La^ p. 213, 214
CHAP. XXVI.
Of the perpetuity of the Covenant of Grace, and the considerable differences
between it and the Covenant of Works, p. 214, 215, 216, 217. How it continues
with these that are asleep in the Lord, Mat. 22. Exodus 3.6. p. 216 Of the
graciousnesse thereof, p. 216, 217
CHAP. XXVII.
Of Law-fear and Gospel-fear, p. 217, 218. Of the Law-fear of falling away, and
the Gospel faith of persevering, p. 218, 219 Why feelings of sin seldom wants
unbelief, and should have the faith of a paid ransom, p. 221, 222
CHAP. XXVIII.
Christ died not to blot out all sense of sin, but rather to quicken a godly
sense thereof, p. 221, 222, 223
Contents of the II. Part.
CHAP. I.
Christ's room in both Covenants, p. 225 Of Christ's active and passive
obedience, how they concur as one satisfaction, p. 229, 230
CHAP. II.
WHerein stands our right to Christ, and the satisfaction made for us by
Christ? 2. Faith is not the cause of our right. 3. Christ's incarnation and
dying are not favors me^ited by Christ. 4. How Adams sin and Christ's
righteousness are ours, p. 230, 238.
CHAP. III.
How Christ suffered for us in our room and place. 2. He died not for all and
every one. 4. How many ways Christ may be said to die in our stead. 4. The
Lords so dying for all makes not all saveable in Christ, nor the Gospel
preachable to all Nations. 5. Christ died in the stead of the elect, p. 236,
237, 238, 239. Though we did not substitute him in our place, p. 249 250 The
differences between Chr^sts dying and the punishment due to the Elect, p. 250,
251, 252 The legal oneness between Christ and us, p. 251 To die (...) and
(...) for us, is to die in our stead, in all eminent languages, p. 253 Christ
died not for sins and in the stead of sins, as he died for sinners, p. 256
CHAP. IV.
How we are in Christ dying, and crucified in him. 2. A twofold crucifying of
us with Christ. 3. A discourse of mortification. 4. The actings of the
mortified. 5. That we are to be mortified in our affections, p. 257, 258, 259.
Though we die personally yet we died in Christ legally, p. 259 We are not to
desire a Law-wakening, p. 259, ^60 What mortification is, p. 261 The influence
of Christ's death on mortification, p. 262 Four sorts of actings in
mortification, p. 265, 266 We must be mortified to all sort of created things,
p. 268, 269 270.271 Forbidden desires. p 270.271
CHAP. V.
The Covenant of Suretyship or of Redemption between God and the Mediator
Christ. 2. Christ is not a mere witness, but the Author of the Covenant. 3.
The Socinian way of W^rks cannot quiet the conscience. 4. Christ is upon both
sides of the Covenant. 5. Justice mediates not. 6. Reasons of the entrance of
sin.
CHAP. VI.
That there is a Covenant of Suretyship between JEHOVAH and the Son, is proven
by 11. Arguments, p. 290, 291, 292. Christ calling to the Lord his God proves
this. 291.292 (2) Christ is a Servant, Messenger, Shepherd, not by nature, but
free compact and agreement. p. 292 (3. Ar.) Christ offered his service freely.
p. 293 (4. Arg.) There is giving and taking between God and Christ. p. 293.294
(5. Arg.) Christ received the seals whither he needed seals, or not. p. 29^.296
(6) Christ with the Father dispensed with the Law. p. 296 (7. Ar.) Rich
promises that speak a Covenant made to Christ. p. ^96 8. Ar. The Prophesies of
Christ, and the promises of, and to him. p. 298 9. Ar. Ask of me* Ps. 2. 10.
Arg. The work and wages of Christ prove it. p. 299 And, O how low a wager, and
how high a design. p. 300 11. Arg. Christ is admitted by an oath and the use
of it against Apostacy of Believers. p. 300.301.302
CHAP. VII.
The Covenant of Redemption is explained in three eternal acts. 1. Designation
of one. 2. Decree and destination. 3. Delectation in the work. p. 302, 303. The
attributes of God declared herein. p. 304.305 The Fathers eternal delighting
in the Son, 309 307 The strength of Gods love to man. p. 306.307.308
CHAP. VIII.
The differences between the Covenant of Suretyship made with Christ, and the
Covenant of Reconciliation made with sinners. 2. The conjunction of the
Covenants. 3. How the promises are made to the Seed. The place, Gal. 3.16.
opened. 4. Christ suffered and acted ever as a public head, p. 308, 309, 310.
CHAP. IX.
The 13. Argument from the necessity of Gods call. 2. Of Typical sprinkling of
the blood of the Covenant, and of the Testament. The place, Heb. 13.20. opened.
Of the place, Heb. 7.22. the act of Suretyship, the assurance of our state, p.
316, 317, 318. How the promises are made to Christ, p. 317 The peculiar nature
of Christ's Testament as such a Testament, p 318, 319 Of the Suretyship of
Christ. p. 323, 324 Punishment suffered by the Surety can remove punishment
from the guilty man but cannot remove formally the inheren^ guilt, and how this
was done by Christ. p. 323, 324 Christ's undertaking for all. p. 326.327 Of the
place, Prove 8.22, 23, 24, etc. p. 306, 307, 308, 327 Arminius yields a Covenant
between the Father and the Son, p. 327, 328 And how, for Jehovah cannot promise
a seed to Christ as a reward of his work by their way, having no Sovereign
power over the will, p. 328, 329, 330 Of such as are his seed. O^ the Covenant
of the Lord with David, p. 836, 837 Ps. 89. opened, ibid. p. 338 339. Mic. 5.2.
p 339
CHAP. X.
Christ procures the Gospel to be Preached to Reprobates, but undertakes not
for them. A necessary distinction of the Covenant as Preached according to the
approving will of God, and as acted upon the heart according to the decree of
God. The place, Jer. 31, Heb. 8. This is my Covenant, opened, p. 339, 340, 341,
342. The distinction of the approving will of God and of his will of pleasure, p.
342.343 Antinonians confound the efficient cause of the obedience and the
objective cause or the rule of the Word, p. 345, 346 The purpose and scope of
the Holy Ghost is not, Heb. 8. and Jer. 31. to speak or treat of the Covenant
of Grace as Preache^ in the (...) but as acted upon the heart, that so Christ
may be advance^ as a more spiritual and effectual teacher and Priest, then
Moses, Aaron, etc. p. 346, 347, 348 Which two are confounded by Antinom^ans.
CHAP. XI.
Of the promises made to Christ in the Covenant of Mediation, p. 349, 350. A
twofold justification of Christ, p. 349 Christ had a promise of influences,
Adam had none at all, p. 350, 351 Our mistake touching comforts and duties, p.
351 Christ's satisfaction, p. 351, 352 We may flee to the Covenant, because of
Christ, p. 352, 353 Rods are booked in the Covenant o^ Works, Deuteronomy. 28. and in
the Covenant of Grace to both the Covenanters, Psalm. 89.30; 31, etc. p. 353
CHAP. XII.
The condition and properties of the Covenant of Redemption. p. 355, 356. No
such condition is required of Christ, as of Adam, p. 356 The paying of the
price of blood and dying is the formal condition of the Covenant of Redemption
upon the part of Christ, p. 356, 357 The holy qualifications of Christ in the
Covenant of Suretyship, p. 357, 358 These qualifications how to be followed by
us, p. 354 Christ's Grace of headship what force it may have upon us, p. 360*
361 The properties of the Covenant of Suretyship. 1. Freedom. 2. Graciousnesse.
3. Eternity, p. 361, 362, 363 The exposition of that place, 1 Cor. 15.28. p.
3^3, 364 Christ even after the universal judgment, a mediatorie Head, King
and Lord, p. 366, 367, 368
Errata.
Page 2. lin. ^9. read Immortality. p. 15. l. 19. r. no-beings. p. 17. l. 29.
r. no-beings. p. 2 r. l. 1, 2. r. God therefore. p. 22. l. 31. r. God it. p.
28. l. 26. r. Isa. 42. p. 39. l. 10. r. abiding. Life* p. 43. l. 24. r. (...).
p. 51. l. 27. r. is in the substance. p. 53. l. 2. r. no grinding of. p. 55. l.
16. r. floor. p. 70. l. ^. r. literally. p. 92. l. 10, 11. r. decreed. p. 96.
l. 5. r. ground. p. 103. l. 13. r. as symbolick. p. 104. l. 36. r. that the. p.
134. l. 14. r. but cannot. p. 136. l. 21. r. here. p. 140. l. 13. r. seated no
discursive. p. 141. l. 33. r. gnawing. p. 160. l. 26. r Menochius. p. 166. l.
26. in man. r. spectasset. p. 168 l. 17. r. it is not only. p. 169. l. 29. r.
head. p. 186. l. 33. r. Gal. 14. p. 195. l. 1. r. thereof. p. 201. l. 20. r.
partaker. p. 206. l. 11. r. have it so. p. 218. l. 29. r steep, for sharp. p.
221. l. 11. r. not only not quarrel. p. 239 l. 15. r. depends not upon. p. 249
l. 1. r. Arminius. p. 251. l. 29. r. acceptance. p. 269. l. 26. r. arts. p. ^.
l. 3. r. who are not dead to opinions. p. 282. l. 14. gave thee. p. 299. l. 29.
r. in his hand. p. 309. l. 36. dele Joh. 8. p. 314. l. 24. r. are. p. 316. l.
10. r. he that said. p. 333. l* 18. r. agrees to be. p. 344. l. 15* r. and will
have.

THE COVENANT OF LIFE OPENED.
CHAP. I. What is to be spoken of the COVENANT of LIFE, shall be reduced to
these Heads.
1. The nature and differences of the Covenant of Works, and that of Grace. 2.
The Mediator of the Covenant of Life. 3. The application of Covenant-Promises.
4. Of Covenant-Influences of Grace under the Gospel.
Of the latter, especially of the last, not much has been spoken by any in a
practical way.

CHAP. II. Propositions touching ADAMS Covenant-state.
THe Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.47. The first man is of the earth, earthie, the second
man is the Lord from Heaven, speaking of the two eminently public persons* the
noble heads of great Families; makes the condition of the first Adam to be
animal and earthly, The first and second Adam.
and that of the second Adam to be spiritual and Heavenly. And without doubt,
to be born of the house and seed of the second Adam, John 1.12, 13. must darken
the glory of the first birth, so as there is no great ground to boast of the
skin and empty luster of Nobility and good blood; Nobility and self empty
things.
Although when the creature called ( I) and ( self) do creep in to lodge in a
poor feeble piece of clay, that clay so lustred must be some God.

The flower and choicest of Adam his Paradise-state, is an earthly Genesis 2.9,
16. sleeping, 21, his being placed in a Garden, to dress it, 8, 16, 17, his
marriage, 23, The first Adam earthly, we have more in the second.
24. his Lordship over birds, beasts, fishes, Genesis 1.28. But in the second
Adam, besides all these, we are gifted with a life of more worth then many
acres of Vineyards. They declare therefore that there is much of the first Adam
in them, little of the second; Who would conquesse again the many lands, that
our first father Adam sold, and join house to house, and lay field to field,
till there be no place, and disinherit all others, as if they were bastard
heirs, and themselves the only righteous heirs of Adam, that they may be placed
alone in the midst of the earth, Isa. 5.8. And the more spiritual any be, the
more are they above the nothing world.

Adam, Mortality and immortality how due to Adam.
since it is not naturally due to a body of earth, to claim life for ever.
Though immortality be due to whole Adam consisting of soul and body and endued
with the image of God. For the soul cannot die.

How life was due to Adam.
as Adam was a comprehensor or one who is supposed now to have run well, and
won the Gold, and the Crown, such a life was due to Adam, not by nature, but by
promise.

Adam in his first state was not predestinate to a law glory, and to influences
of God to carry him on to persevere: Nor could he bless God, that he was
chosen before the foundation of the world to be Law- holy, Adam was
predestined to life, and how.
as Ephesians. 1.3. What? Was not then Adam predestined to life eternal, through
Jesus Christ? He was: But not as a public person representing all his sons,
but as another single person, as Abraham, or Jacob: for Gospel predestination
is not of the nature, but of this or that person: Therefore were we not
predestinat to life eternal in him, but in Christ, Romans 8.29, 30.

Adam fell from the state of Law-life both totally and finally, but not from
the state of Gospel election to glory. For the Lord ^ad in the Law-dispensation
a love design, to set up a Theater and stage of free grace; The Law a
transient Court for a time.
And that the way of works should be a time-dispensation, like a summer house
to be demolished again: As if the Lord had an aim that works and nature should
be a transient, but no standing Court for righteousness: Hence it is now the
relics of an old standing Court, and the Law, is a day of assyse, for
condemning of malefactors, who will acknowledge no Tribunal of grace, but only
of works: And it is a just Court to terrify robbers, to awe borderers and
loose men, but to believers it is now a Court for a far other end.

CHAP. III. What is the intent and sense of the threatening, Genesis 2.17. In the
day thou eats, thou shall die. And Genesis 3.20. Dust thou art, etc.
WE must distinguish between the intent of the threatner, and the intent and
sense of the threatening.

Law-threatnings may be well exponed, by the execution of them, upon persons,
against whom they are denounced: As, 1 King. 11.30. compared with 1 King.
12.15, 16. Ten Tribes are taken from David's house according to the Word of the
Lord. Because therefore the threatening of death was executed upon Christ, 1
Pet. 3.18. Gal. 3.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. then must the threatening, Genesis 2.17.
Deuteronomy. 27.26. have been intended against the Man Christ, and because believers
die, as all do, Heb. 9.27. the threatening must have been intended against them
also, The death threatened, Genes. 2.17. was according to the intent of the
Threatner, partly legal, partly Evangelick.
for that they sinned in Adam, and because it is out of question that the
reprobate die the first and second death, the threatening must also have been
intended against them. And therefore, in the intent of the threatner, the
threatening was mixed, partly Legal, partly Evangelick; According to the
respective persons, that the Lord had in his eye: He had therefore in his heart
both Law and Gospel. It is therefore to no purpose to ask what kind of death,
and whether purely legal, which the Lord threatened to Adam: For the Question
supposes that the Covenant of Works was to stand, and that the Lord was to
deny a Savior to fallen man. But we may say what death the Lord actually
inflicts, that death he intended to inflict, nor did the Lord decree to inflict
a merely legal death personal first and second, upon Adam and all his race.

Obj. Adam was to believe he should certainly die; For so was the threatening,
Genesis 2.17. if he should sin, or then we must say, that Adam was to believe he
should not actually die, the latter cannot be said, for then he was to believe
the contradicent of the Lords true threatening; which was the lie of the
Serpent, Genesis 3. Ans. What threatenings are, and what sorts there be of them.
He was to believe neither of the twain according to the event, for there are
two sort of threatenings, some pure and only threatenings, which reveal to us,
what God may, in Law, do, but not what he has decreed and intended, actu
secundo and quoad eventum, to do, and bring to pass; These threatenings contain
some condition, either expressed in other Scripture, or then reserved in the
mind of the Lord. 1. Because the Lord so threatened Adam, as he remained free
and absolute either to inflict the punishment, or to provide an Evangelick
remedy, even as Solomon, 1 King. 2.37. says to Shimei (in the day thou passest
over the brook Kidron, thou shall surely die) that is, thou shall be guilty of
death, reus mortis: Threatenings that are pure threatenings in law show what the
Lawgiver may jure inflict, but not what he shall actually do, and what shall
come to pass.
Yet it cannot be denied, but Solomon reserved his own Kingly power, either to
pardon Shimei, or to soften, or change the sentence. 2. The words of the Law do
reveal, what the Magistrate may do, jure, and what the guilty deserves by the
Law, but do not ^eveal the intention and absolute decree of the Lawgiver, and
what punishment actually, and quoad eventum shall be inflicted upon the guilty,
and what shall come to pass as a thing decreed of the Lord: So, Genesis 9.6. the
Murderer shall die by the Sword of the Magistrate, and Exodus 22.18, 19, 20.
the Witch, the man that lies with a beast, he that sacrifices to a strange god,
shall die the death jure, merito, and by Law-deserving, but it follows not,
but such as commit these abominations, do live, as is clear in the Kings of
Assyria, Chaldaea, and many of Israel, who were not put to death, but lived
quoad eventum, though contrary to the Word of God. 3. The express Precepts of
the Decalogue, Thou shall have no other gods before me, etc. Thou shall not
kill, Thou shall not steal, etc. do show what in Law we ought not to do, but
not what actually shall come to pass: For there be not a few who do actually,
and quoad eventum, worship strange gods, kill, and steal. Threatenings that are
both threatenings and also Prophesies, reveal both the deserving of the
transgressor, and the event.
But there are other threatenings which are both threatenings, and also
Prophesies, and these reveal both the Law and the fact, and what the Lawgiver
may, jure, and, in Law, inflict, and what shall actually come to pass upon the
transgressors, if they continue in impenitency, Romans 2.1.2, 3, Romans 1.18. 1
Cor. 6.9, 10.

Obj. Then in all threatenings and promises we are not to believe, that though
we sin, we shall actually and quoad eventum die, and though we obey and
believe, we are not to believe that GOD shall fulfill his promise, and that
our salvation shall come to pass, only we are to believe jure, that we deserve
to die, and that we shall have eternal life, jure promissionis, but not
actually and according to the event. Answ. Something is to be said of the
threatenings, then of the promises: As* touching the sense, we are to believe.
In the threatenings conditional as (yet forty days and Nineveh shall be
destroyed) and ( in that day thou eats thou shall surely die, in thy person and
all thine the first and second death) we are not to believe the event, nor is
it carnal security, not to believe such an event, What is carnal security in
believing legal threatenings what not.
we are only to have a godly fear and to tremble, at the dreadfu^l deserving of
such threatenings legal, as always are to be exponed and believed by all within
the Visible Church, with an Evangelick exception of repentance. If therefore
Adam did believe that he and all his should in their own persons actually
suffer the first and second death, and that irrecoverably, he had no warrant,
for any such belief, and the like may be said of Nineveh. For when the Lord
said, in the day that thou eats thou shall die, the first and second death,
thou and all thy children personally; His meaning was, except I provide an
Evangelick remedy and a Savior. Godly fear trembles more at the darkning of
the glory of the Lord in a broken Law, then at the event of inflicted wrath,
were it even Hells fire.

Obj. Adam was to believe no such exception. Answ. True. Because it was not
revealed, nor was he to believe the contrary that he should irrecoverably and
eternally perish, because that was not revealed: But the threatening of the Law
does not deny the Evangelick remedy, as it neither does affirm it.

What Adam was to believe in the threatening, what the lying Serpent would have
him to believe.
Obj. Then was Adam to believe, it was true which the Serpent said, ye shall not
surely die, and quoad eventum, but ye shall be as Gods living and knowing good
and evil.

Ans. Neither does that follow, for in the meaning of the liar, it was not
true, that they should not die, either by deserving (for Satan brangles the
equity and righteousness of the Law and threatening) or actually and in the
event, for both were false and neither revealed, and faith is not to go beyond
what is revealed of God. And Satan disputed against both the equity of the
threatening, as if it had been unjust, in Law, and against the event, as a
fiction and a thing that should not come to pass in the event, which indeed
did not come to pass: but not according to the Serpents lying and false
principles.

Obj. Was then Adam to despair and to believe nothing of a Savior. Ans. He was
not obliged to despair, but to rely, by virtue of the first Commandment of
the Decalogue, upon God infinitely powerful, merciful, gracious, and wise to
save, for that was revealed and written in his heart, and that is far from
despairing: But in the intervall between the fall and the Lords publishing the
blessed Gospel, and news of the seed to come, he was so to trust in God for
possible deliverance in general (as the Law of Nature requires) but he was to
believe nothing of unrevealed particulars, far less of the mystery of the
Gospel, which was kept secret, since the world began, Romans 16.25.

Obj. Then may also the damned in Hell, who are not loosed from their
obligation to the Law of Nature, The damned in hell not loosed from the first
Command are not obliged to despair, and yet are not to believe actual
deliverance.
and the first Command, be obliged to rely on an infinite and Almighty God, for
their deliverance, for they are not obliged to despair, nor is there an
obligation to any sin.

Ans. There is not the like reason, for though the damned be not loosed from
the Law of Nature, but are to rely upon God in his whole al-sufficiency, yet
with exception of his revealed Justice and Truth: Now he hes expressly revealed,
that their worm never dies, and their fire never goes out. And to believe
that, is not to despair. Obj. What are then such Heathens to believe as
touching that threatening, who never heard of the Gospel? What heathens are to
believe.

The Covenant of Works is not contrair to the Gospel.

How the Gospel may be deduced from the Law, if an act of the free will, grace
and infinite wisdom of GOD be added to make good the assumption.

How the promises are to be believed, and how in them, we are to believe both
the equity and event of the promises, if the condition be performed, and how
the difference must be made between them and the threatenings


Ans. They are under the Law of Nature, and to believe that sin deserves wrath,
according to the infiniteness of the Majesty, against whom it is committed, and
to obey the Law of Nature, and read the Book of the Creation carefully: But and
if the news and rumor of a Savior come to their ears, their sin cannot but be
Evangelick, in not pursuing the reality and truth of such a sovereign remedy.
Yet it is not to be thought, that though the Gospel be come to all Nations,
Romans 16.26. that that is to be meant. 1. Of every Generation of all Nations.
Or, 2. of the individual persons, either young, or come to age, of every
Nation under Heaven, experience and Scripture speaks against both.

Obj. But is not the Covenant of Grace contrary to the Law and Covenant of
Works? Answ. A diversity there is, but contrary wills in the holy Lord cannot
be asserted. Yea the Gospel may be proven out of the Law, and from the first
Commandment of the Decalogue, if any act of the Lords free will and infinite
wisdom shall be added to prove the Assumption. So,

If the first Command teach that God is infinitely wise, merciful, gracious,
just, and able to save, then, if so it please him, he shall save;

But the first Command teaches the former: And the Gospel revealing the
unsearchable riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3.8. expressly says so much. Ergo.

As to the promises, they contain not only the jus, equity and goodness of the
thing promised, but also that the Lord shall actually perform, yea and intends
to perform, what he has promised upon condition that we perform the required
condition. And in this the promises differ not a little from these threatenings,
that are only threatenings, of what God may do in Law, but not from these
threatenings which are both threatenings and also Prophetical predictions of
what shall come to pass, therefore must we here difference betwixt
threatenings, and such and such threatenings.

The promises are considered as they are Preached and anunciated to all within
the Visible Church, and as they are made in the intention of God with the Elect
and Sons of the promise: The same way the threatenings admit of a twofold
consideration. The promises to the Elect as intended of God, The promises as
annunciated, and as made.

The Gospel promises to the Reprobate are legal, and how.


reveal that both the Lord minds to give the blessing promised, and the
condition that is grace to perform the condition, and so they are promises
Evangelick both in the matter, and in the intention of the Lord: But as
proponed to the reprobate, who are always from their birth to their death
under a Covenant of Works, really as touching the LORDS holy Decree, they are
materially Evangelick promises, but formally and in the Lords intention legal,
as every dispensation to them is legal, forasmuch as the Lord has decreed to
deny the grace, by which they may or can fulfill the condition of the promise,
which is proper to the Law, as it is peculiar to the Gospel, that the Lord both
gives the mercy promised and also the grace to fulfill the condition of the
promise.

The threatenings to believers, especially such as are legal (if you believers
fall away, The Law-threatnings to the Elect are Evangelick, and how.
ye shall eternally perish) are to believers, though materially legal,
peremptory, and admit no exception, yet they are formally and in the Lords
intention directed to them upon an Evangelick intention, nor do they say that
the Lord intends and decrees that they shall eternally perish, for he has
predestinate them to the contrary, to wit, to grace and glory, Ephesians. 1.4. Nor
that he wills that they should believe either their eternal damnation, or
their final and total falling away, which inevitably leads thereunto. For
they, knowing that they are in Christ, 2 Cor. 13.5. Romans 8.16, 17. and freed
from condemnation, Romans 8.1. are to believe the contraire of the former, to
wit, life eternal, John 4.24. 1 These. 5.9. John 3.16. and the contraire of the
latter, to wit, the promise of perseverance made to them, Jer. 32.39, 40. Isa.
59.21. John 10.27, 28. John 17.20, 21. 1 Pet. 1.3, 4, 5. Mat. 16.16, 17, 19.
Therefore these threatenings are not to be believed by the regenerate, as
certainly to come to pass in their persons, but only as Law-motives to press
them to work out their salvation in fear and trembling, and to cleave so much
the closser to Christ, as the condition of such as are under the Law is
apprehended to be dreadful. But reprobats and unbeleevers are not to believe
that God decrees and intends to them the thing promised, and grace to perform
the condition, but only to believe their obligation to fiduciall relying upon,
and Gospel-faith in God, revealed in the Mediator; and that if they continue in
a way of opposing Christ, they not only deserve by Law (which Law-deserving
also believers are to apprehend) to be broken, but actually and quoad eventum
shall eternally perish. Believers are to believe the Decree of God to save
them, though they hear the threatenings, for its revealed. But the Reprobate are
to believe only the sense and Law-deserving and event of the threatening, if
they repent not, but are to believe no decree to save them.

CHAP. IV. The Elect non-converted are not under Law-wrath. 2. Faith is no
cause of satisfaction. 3. Christ can not have satisfied for the sins of the
Reprobate.
WHether the Elect unconverted be under wrath is a doubt to many. It is true,
they are servants of sin, Romans 6.17. Blind, and under the power of Satan as
Reprobats are, Acts 26.18. By nature children of wrath, even as others, Ephesians.
2.3. Ans. Their sins committed before their Conversion, The elect non-converted
how they are not under Law-wrath.
are according to the Covenant of Works, such as deserve everlasting
condemnation, and they are jure and in relation to that Covenant, heirs of
wrath, as well as others. 2. But we must distinguish between a state of
election and everlasting, though unseen love, that they are under, as touching
their persons: and a state of a sinful way that they are born in, and walk in
as others do, until they be converted. As to the former state, it is true
which is said, Ier. 31.3. I have loved thee with an everlasting love. See also,
Romans 9.12, 13. Ephesians. 1.4. so that God never hates their persons. 3. The
punishment of their sins and the wrath they are under is two ways considered.
1. Materially in the bulk, and so they are under Law-stroaks and Law-wrath,
that is Law-punishment, as others are, Ephesians. 2.3. and so the other places are to
be taken. 2. The wrath is to be considered formally, and so it is denied that
the punishment of the non-converted elect, because of their sinful way is any
part of the Law-vengeance or curse which Christ did bear for their other sins
committed by them after conversion. 1. Because when Christ says, John 5.4. The
believer has passed from death, as it is a curse, and shall never come to
judgment and condemnation, he cannot mean that they have half passed from the
curse, and half not. 2. Believers are delivered, in Christ, from the victory,
sting, power of sin, curse of the Law, and every curse, that is in affliction,
and from condemnation not in part only, but in whole: Else their triumph were
but in part, contrair to, 1 Cor. 15.54, 55, 56. The Elect non-converted bear no
part of the Law-curse, but CHRIST bare all.
Hos. 13.14. Isa. 25.8. Nor should they be washen from all their sins and the
spots thereof in his blood, if they might wash themselves from any spot, by
bearing a part of the Law-curse in themselves, contrair to Can. 4.7. Jer.
50.20. Joh. 1.28. 1 John 1.8. Romans 8.1. 3. What ever Christ was made for the
redeemed ones, that he was made fully for them, in part, and in whole, for he
is their perfect Savior. But Gal. 3.13. He is made a curse for us, and able to
save to the outmost all that come to him. Heb. 7.25. Therefore the half or a
part of satisfactory vengeance, cannot be upon us, and the other half on
Christ, for this is to make men and Martyrs joint satisfiers of justice with
Christ, by their own blood and sufferings, to prevent the scaddings of
purgatory; For though we teach against Antinomians, that the Godly are punished
for sins according to Justice, yet that is Evangelick, not law-justice, for
they bear not one dram weight of satisfactory wrath and curse jointly with
Christ, Antinomians say that sin, root and branch is taken away in
Justification, so that there is no sin nor punishment for sin in the justified
man. 4. The believers are blessed through Jesus Christ, Gal, 3.10, 13. Psalm.
32.1, 2. Romans 4.6: Psalm. 2.12. Psalm. 119.1. Their afflictions and death
blessed, precious in the eyes of the Lord, not qualified with any Law-curse,
Job 5.17. Psalm. 94.12. Mat. 5.6. Luke 6.22. 1 Pet. 1.6. 1 Pet. 4.13. Psalm.
21.3, 4, 5, 6. Psalm. 34.17, 18, 19. Rev. 14.13. Psalm. 116.15. Psalm. 72.14.
Psalm. 37.37. and they are asleep in Christ, die in the Lord, 1 These. 4.14, 16.
Nor can Antinomians and Socinians say this is under the New Testament,
Remission of sins and life eternal under the Old Testament.
for dying Jacob says* Genesis 49.18. Lord I have waited for thy salvation, Isa.
57.1, 2. When the righteous man is taken away, he shall enter into peace, the
Lord is the God of Abraham, Isaak* and Jacob, when their bodies are rotten.
Exodus 3.6. Mat. 22.32. (5.) This comes too near the opinion of these, who make
faith a cause of satisfaction for sin, as they must teach who hold that Christ
paid a ransom, on the cross, for the sins of all and every one. For that
which added, Faith is made a cause of satisfaction for sin by all who hold that
CHRIST gave a satisfactorie ransom for all and every one, Elect and Reprobate
makes satisfaction to be counted and formally reckoned as satisfaction, in
order to the expiation of the man's sins, so that by no justice he can suffer
for them, and which being removed* makes the paid satisfaction and ransom,
though never taken back again by the payer, no more a satisfaction for that
man, nor for Devils: Is too near to the nature and to being a part of the
satisfaction. If one pay a sum that fully exhausts the debt of such a broken
man, upon condition the broken man say Amen to the paying thereof, otherwise it
shall be as not paid, he must take up the sum again, if the broken man
refuse to say Amen to it, for if he take it not up again, but it be paid and
fully satisfy for, and exhaust the debt, the man's debt is paid, and the
Creditor in justice cannot exact one farthing from the broken man. Now nothing
given to the Justice of God by way of satisfaction for the sins of unbeleevers,
was ever repeated or taken back again by Christ. Nay but, say they, the ransom
was not paid at all for Judas, but only, upon condition that he believe: but
he never believed, and therefore it was never paid for Judas. Answ. This is
that we say, Conditional payment made for the sins of Judas, is no payment at
all
that Christ gave no real ransom at all, for the sins of Judas by way of
satisfaction. But they say that there is as well a ransom paid for all the
sins of Judas (final unbeleef excepted) to free him, in justice from eternal
strokes, as for all the sins of Peter to free him, only it is not accepted of
by the Creditor, because Judas, by faith, assented not unto the bargain: But
assenting or not assenting, accepting, or not accepting, Accepting or not
accepting, assenting or not assenting to the payment, are not causes of the
sufficiency of the payment made to justice.
that are posterior to the payment, are nothing up or down to the compleatnesse
and perfection of the satisfaction made for the exhausting of Justice, for
Justice receives not two satisfactions or ransomes for Judas, one upon the
Cross from Christ, another in Hell, from Judas, yea and it must follow, that
real payment was made to Justice for all the sins of Judas, upon the Cross,
and that he suffers for none of them, in Hell, but for only final unbeleef,
which is no sin against the Covenant of Works and the Justice thereof, but only
and formally against the Covenant of Grace, so that as yet satisfying of Divine
Justice for sins, must be halfed and parted between Christ, and Judas, which
the Scripture teaches not. Also the Father either accepts the ransom of
Christ, because it is intrinsecally, and of it self sufficiently satisfactory:
or because Judas does believe it is so; The latter cannot be said, for
believing adds nothing to the intrinsecall sufficiency of the satisfaction, as
not believing diminishes nothing from the sufficiency thereof; Yea and so the
Fathers formal reason of accepting of the satisfaction of Christ* must be
terminated upon our poor act of believing, whereas the formal ground of the
acceptance thereof is the intrinsecall excellency and worth of the Sacrifice,
being an offering of a sweet smelling savor to God, The formal reason why God
accepts of CHRIST'S satisfaction is the intrinsecal sufficiency of it, and why
he accepts it for Peter, not for another is the free election of grace.

How the satisfaction of Christ is refuseable, how not.

Faith a condition of applying the satisfaction only


Ephesians. 5.2. And because he offered the ransom of the blood of God-man, of the
Prince of life, Act. 20.28. 1 Cor. 2.8. and offered himself to God, Ephesians. 5.25,
26. Heb. 9.14. Mat. 20.28. 1 Timothy 2.6. Rev. 1.5. nor is there any sufficiency
in his death from the worth of believing. And the reason why he accepts it for
Peter, not for another, is the election of grace.

It is true the blood is a price refuseable, but it is this way refuseable,
because the Lord might have followed a Law-way with Adam, and all his sons, and
have denied to give his Son a Ransom for us, but it is not refuseable, because
of any insufficiency in the Ransom. Now faith is to satisfaction as the
approximation of, and the laying on of dry fuel to the fire, which is only a
condition of burning, but the fire is the formal cause of burning. Yea if we
speak properly faith is not so much as a condition without the which offended
Justice is not satisfied, nor is it a condition, by any Scripture of the world,
without the which God laid not our iniquities on Christ, for whether we believe
or not, God laid our iniquities upon him, and made him sin for us, Isa. 53.6. 2
Cor. 5.21. Therefore, by necessity of Justice, he must accept that Ransom
intrinsecally so sufficient, which did restore more glory to God, then the sins
of all, for whom Christ died, took from him. Nor is it imaginable to say that
any act of obedience or believing, can perfect the satisfaction of Christ, and
make it sufficient, yea, or causatively make it ours. For God, by no necessity
of Justice, but of his own free pleasure, requires faith as a condition of our
actual reconciliation; for beside, that he might have required any other act
of obedience, as love, he might have accepted the Ransom without inquiring any
act of obedience, on our part, as the Lord bestowed a calm Sea and deliverance
from shipwreck, upon the Idolatrous Seamen, upon the very act of casting Jonah
in the Sea, without the intervention of any saving faith on their part; God may
accept the satisfaction of Christ without any condition required on our part.
As a gracious Prince may send a pardon to free a condemned Malefactor from
death, and may command that it be valid in Law for him, without the man's
knowledge, and far more without his acceptance thereof, upon his knees,
especially since by a special paction between the Father and the Son, he
restored abundantly more Glory to God by suffering for all, for whom he died,
then they took from God by their sins, and that restitution was made to Justice
without the interveening of any act of the creatures obedience. But the truth
is, it is much to be doubted whether they, who hold such a satisfaction to be
given of God, for the sins of all, Elect and Reprobate, but so as it shall not
be valid in Law, nor effectual to quiet Justice, but they must all suffer
eternal vengeance, and perform personal satisfaction, in Hell, to Justice,
except there interveen an act of obedience of the creature, to make it
effectual, do really and sincerely acknowledge, against Socinians, a real
satisfaction and compensation made to offended Justice by Christ: For how is it
real, and not rather scenicall and formal, which may and should be null and
in vain, if the creature make it not real, by believing. And especially, if
God out of his grace which is absolutely free, work in us the condition of
believing. Can God give his Son as a Ransom for us, upon condition that we
believe, if he himself absolutely work the condition in us? They will not admit
this.

CHAP. V. God intended a Law-dispensation but for a time. 2. Adam, how he was
ordained for a Law-life. 3. How predestined to Glory in Christ, how not. 4.
That the Heathens have no more Universal Grace then Devils. 5. No ground for
such grace.
IT is apparent that God intended not a Law-dispensation in Paradise to stand
for ever. For 1. nothing is spoken of Adam, after the fall, but of his
procreating of children, of the Patriarchs, of Adams dying and of his actings
before the fall, the place of Paradise being scarce well known, which says the
Lord had a farther design to lay aside the transient Law-dispensation and to
set up Christ. 2. The Lord, of purpose, gave a positive Law, forbidding eating
of such a Tree, added a threatening thereunto particularly, suffered the Serpent
to tempt, and forsaw what frail nature would do, that he might deal with man,
in a dispensation of free grace.

Obj. Did not God ordain that Adam should have life and righteousness, The
conditional decree of Adams living, if he should do the Law, was not
predestination to eternal glory.

How Adam was chosen to glory in Christ, how not.


if he should continue in obedience. Ans. That was a decree conditional of
things, ( the man that does these things shall live) and shows the equity and
holiness of the Law, but it was not a decree of persons, by which God
predestined Adam to a Law-glory, as the end, and to Law-obedience as the
effectual means leading to that end.

Q. Was not Adam chosen? Ans. Adam, according to the Lords design, finaliter
and objective was created in the state of predestination to glory, and grace in
Christ as touching his person, but according to his inherent condition, he was
created in a legal dispensation, which was a gracious inlet to Christ; And
according to his Law-state as he represented all mankind, he was Created as a
lubrick and frail Coppie of weak nature.

Many who are such as are not chosen are Created and live under a Covenant of
Works, having only some concomitant favors of the Gospel, as the Preaching
thereof. 2. Common grace, inward warnings. 3. Protections of providence and
forbearance, in regard they are mixed with the Elect. The heathen have not
universal Grace.
The heathen cannot be said to have any inward calling to Grace and Glory,
because there be some remanents of the Image of God left in them, which no more
can be called universal Grace, then the same sparkles that are left in Devils
can be called Gospel Grace, for they believe, There is one God and confess the
Son of God, Jam. 2.19. Luke 4.34. Mark 1.24. Only if this be called Grace, that
the nature of man is so capable of Gospel mercy, and the nature of the fallen
Angels morallie not so. 2. The offer is made to them of Christ, not so to
Devils, we shall not contend. Reason may seem to say that all should have a
share of Gospel Grace, but it may be replied to reason, why should it seem to
be a part of the goodness and bounty of God to will and desire all and every
one to be saved, and not to institute such a dispensation, as all and every one
should actuallie be saved? 2. How should that stand, ( he has mercy on whom he
will) if free will of the creature absolutely dispose of Salvation and
damnation? 3. How is it that the Calling, Adoption, The high and deep
Sovereignty of God is against universal Grace.
and the offer of mercy is restricted to few, and was confined to the Jews only
of old? But we are more ready to call the Lord to a reckoning, for his
dispensation of Grace to others, then to use our own, as becomes us. 2. We
cannot judge aright of God and of his goodness, except he be God our very way.
3. It is a matter of no small difficulty to make right use of the Lords
freedom of Grace, and for clay humbly to adore Soveraigntie, and not to
stumble at the highness of his ways, who, in these points, has ways and
thoughts above ours, as the heavens are above the earth, Isa. 55.

CHAP. VI. It was condescension in the Lord to enter in Covenant with man. 2.
Temptations in fearing we are not chosen, discovered. 3. Beings and not beings
are debtors to God. 4. Self denial required in sinlesse nature, as in sinful.
5. Man considered three ways.
WHither was God under an obligation, to make a Covenant with man?

Hardly can any maintain the dominion and Soveraigntie of God, and also assert
an obligation, on the Lords part, of working upon the creature: The Lord is
debtor to neither person nor things. Gods Covenanting with us, is a gracious
condiscension.
He as Lord commands, but it is condescension that he commands Covenant-wayes,
with promise of a reward to the obeyer. The Leviathan in strength is far above
Job, he cannot command him. Job 14.4. Will he make Berith a Covenant with thee,
will thou take him for a servant for ever? That is, the Leviathan will not
engadge as a servant to obey Job as his master. A Covenant speaks something of
giving, and taking, work, and reward, and mutual engagements, betwixt parties,
though there be something in the Covenant between God and man, that is, not in
the Covenants of men. The rational creatures owe suitable, that is, rational
obedience to the Creator, but God is under no obligation to give life,
especially so excellent a life as a communion with God, in glory, yet he does
it. What a God must he be, who will come down and put himself in a lovely and
gaining capacity to be a Covenanting debtour to our feeble obedience, whereas
he ows nothing, and to make heaven and glory so sure to us, that the heavens
should sooner break and melt, like snow before the Sun, then his promise can
fail.

Obj. True, but faith is fixed upon the new Covenant-promise, if I believe.
Ans. Yea, but faith here is to believe, that the condition it self is promised,
as well as the reward.

Obj. The condition of a new heart and of faith is promised, but not to all,
not to me, but to some few chosen only. Ans. There be here a number of errors.
The errors in temptations which we create from surmises that we are not chosen
to life eternal.
1. Unbelief foments proud merit, that we are to believe as much of God
promised, as there is conceived, to be worth in self, and in me to fulfill the
condition; But true faith, contrare to self-unworthinesse, relyes upon the
Truth of God, the excellency of Christ, and the absoluteness of the promise.
2. Satan like a Sophist draws the dispute to the weakest conclusion from the
strongest, to wit, from the promise of God, that is surer then heaven to the
state, against which there is a greater number of Topic Arguments, then there
can be against the promise of God. As 1. What am I? 2. Am I chosen or not? So
Satan to Christ, if thou be the Son of God, command these stones to be made
bread, in point of believing its better that faith expatiate in viewing God,
Christ, the Ransom of the blood of God-Man, the depth of free grace, Better
faith view God and Christ, as self.

Unbelief quarrels at God, and but pretends self sinfulness.


then upon self, and the state: in point of repenting and humble down-casting,
we would read self, and our own estate. 3. Its Satan and the unbeleeving heart
that would have our faiths greatness rising from selfs holiness, and
goodness. Whereas the greatest faith that Christ finds, Mat. 8.10. looks away
from self, v. 8. I am not worthy -- and dwells much upon the Omnipotency of
Christ in commanding diseases, as a Centurian his Soldiers. 4. When unbelief
quarrels the Lord as untrue and weak, who faints and wearies, and one that is
not the Creator of the ends of the earth, it alleges only and pretends
self-guiltinesse to justify unbelief: Yet Isa* 40.28. though God be reproached
as weak, we seem to resolve all in this; our own unworthiness, but we cannot
get our faith stately enough; and the truth is here, we quarrel with God and
his decrees, under pretense of this, what if he have not chosen me? and I have
no right to Covenant-mercies, except I take a Law-way to earne them, by
fulfilling the condition. 5. When we believe a conditional promise ( if I
believe, How to believe conditional promises.
I am saved) faith relyes not fiducially upon the (if I believe) or upon the
condition, Its a weak pillar to a sinner to stay his unquiet heart upon, to
wit, his own believing, but faith rests upon the connection ( if thou believe
thou shall be saved) and it stays upon the connection, as made sure by the
Lord, who of grace gives the condition of believing, and of grace the reward
conditioned, so that faith binds all the weight upon God only, even in
conditional Gospel-promises. 1. Man is to be considered as a creature. 2. As
such a creature, to wit, endued with reason and the Image of God, in either
considerations, especially in the former all that are created, are obliged to
do and suffer the will of God* though they never sinned. Its not enough to say,
that Sun, Moon, Trees, Herbs, Vines, Earth, Beasts, Birds, and Fishes, cannot
suffer the ill of punishment, which is relative to the break of a Law, for the
whole Creation is subject to vanity for our sins, Romans 8.20, 21. The Servant is
smitten and sickened, for the Masters sake, and God may take from them what he
gave them, their lives without sense of pain and dollour, for all beings, yea
defects and privations are debtors to the glory declarative of God, Prove. 16.4.
Romans 11.36. yea and no beings are under this debt. God can serve himself of
nothing, yea, that there are not created, Locusts, Caterpillars, more numerous,
then that all the fruits of the earth can be food to them, Beings and not
beings are debtors to the glory of God.
Preach the Glory of the Lords goodness to man, and what are never to be, no
less then all things, that have futurition, or shall come to pass either
absolutely or conditionally, are under the positive decree of God, else we
should not owe thanks to the Lord for many evils that never fall out, that the
Lord turns away violent death, violence of men, and wild beasts, and many
possible mischiefs, contrair to Deuteronomy. 28.11, 12. Lev. 26.6. Psalm. 34.20, Psalm.
91.5, 6, 7, 8. All not beings are under the positive decree of God
And all these beings or no beings owe themselves to God to hold forth the
glory of goodness, wisdom, mercy, justice, etc. suppone there had never been
sin: Far more now, who wants matter of meditation, or can write a book of all
the pains, a^kings, convulsions, pests, diseases that the Lord decreed to hold
off? so that every bone, joint, lith, hair, member, should write a Psalm Book
of praises, Psalm. 35.10. All my bones shall say, Lord, Who is like unto thee?
Nor can any man write his debts of this kind. But we are little affected with
the negatives of mercies, except we read them upon others, and little then
also; Self-pain Preaches little to us, far more* the borrowed experience of
fallen Angels, of Sodom, of the old world, etc. leaves small impression upon
stony spirits. 2. Complain not, that you have not that share of grace, another
has, if ye (you think) had it, you would be as useful to glorify God, as
they, but ye know not your self; swell not against him, that thou have no
grace, O vessel of wrath, thou owes that bit clay, and all thy wants to
glorify his Justice. 3. My sickness, my pain, my bands owe themselves to God,
and are debtors to his glory, I, and every one of men should say, O that my
pain might praise him, and my hell, and flamings of everlasting fire, Our pains
and sufferings are debtors to the glory of God.
might be an everlasting Psalm of the Glory of his Justice; That my sorrow
could sing the Glory of so High a Lord; But we love rather that he wanted his
praise, so we wanted our pain. 3. God has made a sort of natural Covenant
with night and day, Jer. 31.35. For all are his servants, Psalm. 119.91. that
they should be faithful to their own natural ends to act for him, There is
more self-denial in the lifeless and unreasonable creatures in their Covenant
of nature, the^ in man.
Ier. 5.22. Ier. 31.37. Psalm. 104.1, 2, 3.4. and they are more faithful to
their ends then men. Isa. 1.3. Ier. 8.7. The ox and the ass being more
knowing to their owner, and the swallow and the cran being more discerning of
their times, then men are. 2. They so keep their line, that there is more
self-denial in their actings, then in man's way: as if fire were not fire, and
nature in it denied, the fire devours not the three Children, Dan. 3.27, 28 The
Sun stands still, the Moon moves not, Josh. 10.12, 13. The hungry Lions eat not
Daniel, chapter 6.22. When the Lord gives a counter-command to them, and that is a
clause in the Covenant, that the Lord entered with them, that they act or no
act, as he shall be pleased to speak to them, John 2.10. Isa. 50.2. Mat. 8.16.
It is a most humbling Theme, that an ass is more in denying nature, and the
cran and the fire, then man, yea then a renewed man in some cases. 4. But if man
be considered, as such a man, endued with the Image of God, and withal the
Covenant be considered as such a Covenant, as is expressed in the
Ten-Commandements, in which one of seven is a Sabbath to the Lord, it will be
found that many positives Moral are in the Covenant of Works, that are not in
natural Covenants.

5. So man must come under a threefold consideration.

1. As a creature. 2. As a reasonable creature. 3. As such a creature
reasonable, endued with the image of God.
In the first consideration, A threefold consideration of man in reference to a
Covenant.
man comes under the Covenant natural, common to all creatures; So is Peter's
body carried above in the water as iron swims.

2. As a reasonable creature, he owes himself to God, to obey so far as the Law
written in the heart carries him, to love God, trust in him, fear him. But this
can hardly bear the name of a Covenant, except it be so called, in a large
sense, nor is there any promise of life, as a reward of the work of obedience
here.

3. But man being considered as endued with the Image of God, so the Holy God
made with him a Covenant of life, The Covenant natural, and the Covenant in
its positives of diverse considerations.
with Commandments, though positive and Moral, yet not deduced from the Law
of Nature, in the strictest sense, as to observe such a Sabbath, the seventh
from the Creation, the not eating of the forbidden tree, and with a promise of
such a life. And therefore though Divines, as our solid and eminent Rollock,
call it a Covenant natural, as it is contradistinguished from the
supernatural Covenant of Grace, and there is good reason so to call it; Yet
when it is considered in the positives thereof, it is from the free will of
God, and though it be connaturall to man, created according to the Image of
God, yet the Covenant came so from the Lords wisdom and free will, as he might
have casten it in a new and far other frame: And it cannot be denied, though it
be most suitable to man's entire nature to love God, yet to love him so and so,
by obeying the command of not eating the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge, and
some other Commands, is not so connaturall, but God might have commanded the
contrair, without any thing done contrair to man's nature. Yet from this it
follows, no more that these are two Covenants, then that there be two
Covenants of Grace, Because faith in God, and the Moral Law in an Evangelick
way are therein commanded, and also some duties touching the seals by a
positive Law are therein contained.

CHAP. VII. Its not written in the heart of man by nature, that GOD should
promise life eternal to man, upon condition of obedience. 2. And that the debt
of Justice can not tie GOD. 3. GOD punishes not sin, by necessity of nature.
4. Nor defends he his own declarative Glory by that necessity. 5. Nothing can
be given to GOD All-sufficient. 6. No meriting of the creature. 7. We should
have humble thoughts of Free Grace. 8. How low thoughts of our selves. 9.
Promises make no strict justice between GOD and us.
SUre, it is not repugnant to the yet innocent and entire nature of man, God
neither by necessity of nature, either rewards obedience, or punishes (...).
to know, that God may reward all such as seek and serve him, but that he must
reward obedience either in the general, or so and so, is neither written in
man's heart, nor has it any truth: For it were nothing against justice, or
bounty, or any attribute of God, not to reward his creature, which is obliged
to serve him, and though there be a sort of quietness of conscience, which is
the natural result of obedience in Adam, and of all men, yet it cannot
infer, that there is an intrinsecall connection, ex natura rei, between our
obedience and a reward to be given of God. Therefore, nor will it be a good
inference, because there is disquietnesse in the conscience, after sin, and
that it is natural to a sinner to apprehend a revenging power pursuing sin
committed, that therefore it is natural an^ essential to the Lord, to pursue
sin with punishment in general. For a natural conscience may, and does know,
that God does freely create the world, and that he might not have created it,
that he does good freely to his creatures, and that he is not a debtor to his
creatures; Will it follow by any Logic, that God creates the world by any
natural obligation? A natural conscience may and does know that GOD does good
freely to his creature, but it follows not that God does good to his creature
for that by necessity of nature.
And because by force of a natural conscience, all know that God is good and
bount^full to his creatures, in giving* and doing good to them, we cannot
therefore infer that actual beneficence is so essential to the infinite
Majesty, as he should not be God, if he did not extend that goodness to them.
Common sense will say no more follows, but goodness and bounty intrinsecall
are essential to God, and these attributes are essential to him, and were
from eternity in him, and are his good and bountiful nature; Though not either
man, Angel, or any thing else had been created, to which he does actually
extend his goodness. Ergo, this actual extension of goodness is not
essential to God, so neither is the actual punishing of sin essential to
God, but free, though Adam apprehended God would punish his eating of the
forbidden tree; Yet if he apprehended that he should not be God, if he did not
punish it, his apprehension was erroneous. And this only follows that there is
an intrinsecall and internal Justice in God, natural and essential in God,
but so that the outgoings of his Justice, the egressions are most free, and
that is said by some without all reason, because the apprehensions we have
naturally of God that he punishes sin, Vniversales apprehensiones, nequaquam
sunt eorum quae Deo vel adesse vel abesse possunt pro liberrima voluntate.
Universal apprehensions, therefore they are not apprehensions of such things
as may be, or not be in God, according to his free pleasure, if the
apprehensions of Gods doing good to Angels, to men, to all his creatures
freely, be in all by nature, and cannot be rooted out, and be universal, then
these apprehensions cannot be of such things as are in God, according to his
most free will, and may be in the Almighty or not be in him.

But the conclusion has neither reason nor sense; for there are universal
apprehensions in all men, and they cannot be rooted out, that God does good to
Angels, men, and creatures freely: Ergo; by this Logic the doing of good
freely to Angels, men, and creatures is not a thing that is in God according to
his free will, and may be in the Almighty or not in him. Then the so doing must
be in God essentially. 2. Then must God not be God, if he do not good freely to
them. 3. Then must God not be God, except he create men, Angels, and creatures.
4. But since he is God everlasting, he must from everlasting have created men,
Angels, and the creatures, and from everlasting he must punish sin; Life may be
considered. 1. As life. 2. As such an excellent life, to wit, a communion with
God.

In the former consideration, life is either considered as the end, or secondly
as a free reward. Communion with GOD in Glory, is a reward not due by nature,
but by the free gift of GOD, to the most perfect law-obedience.
In the former respect. To live an intellectual life in obeying God, was to
Adam so created a connaturall end, as to burn, is to fire, and to give light,
to the Sun. And God may put the respect of a reward upon any obedientiall
end. But that Adam should have such an eminent life, for the reward of his
obedience as a communion with God, which is far above his obedience, is the
free donation of God: nor is there any necessary connection between Adams
perfect obedience, and so high and eminent a life, nor can this Covenant, as
touching such a promise, be written in his heart. God then never loved to make
any Covenant, yea even that of Works, without some acts and outgoings of
grace, and the hyre was grace, how is he not to be served, who loves to hyre
and allure us to be happy?

Arminius says, the reward of keeping the Covenant of Works, cannot be
spiritual, Arminius in Colla. cum Francis Junio, ad propos. ^2. page 547.
nor can the punishment be spiritual, because you teach (says he) that the
obedience is natural. Ans. It follows not, for the reward is spiritual, yea
and supernatural from the free promise of God: It was, that God should
recompense our natural obedience, coming from connaturall principles, with so
eminent a Crown as communion with God Creator, in a life of glory. And this
came from no innate proportion between a natural work and supernatural
reward; Otherwise we must say, first that there is such an intrinsecall
connection ex natura rei between Adams work and so high wages, as that glorious
communion was, as the Lord could not but in justice, so have rewarded his
obedience, except he would be unjust, but there is nothing in the creature,
that can conclude, limite, or determine, his will (...) wisdom, who is
infinite. 2. It had been nothing against justice, if the Lord had followed
Adams obedience, with no reward at all; For man as a creature, owes himself to
God, Anselmus de redemptione certe Domine, quia me fecisti debeo amori tuo
meipsum totum, imo tantum debeo amori tuo plus quam me ipsum. Quantum tu es
major me, pro quo dedisti teipsum and cui promittis teipsum.

Anselm. Monolog. 40. quid enim summa bonitas retribuet ama^ti and desideranti
se nisi seipsum.


and as sweetly and pithily Anselme says, as a redeemed one I owe my self and
more then my self to thee, because thou gave thy self who art so far more
then my self, for me, and thou promises thy self to me. Now God, who is more
and greater then Adam, promised himself, to be enjoyed by Adam, if he should
continue in obedience. For what can the highest goodness (says he) give to
one that loves it, but it self?

3. If God, of justice, give Adam life, Adam might compel God to pay, what he
owes him, else he should be unjust: But the creature can lay no necessity on
the Creator, either to work without himself, nor can he cause him to will. No
merit can wone God, for he is greater nor our work. Bradward. de causa Dei lib.
1. c. 39. p. 343 lit. E.
4. The proper work of merit (says great Bradwardine) and of him that works
must go before the wages, in time, or in order of nature. And if the worker
receive its operation, and working for wadge from God first, and by his virtue
and help continue in operation and working, he cannot condignely merit at the
hand of God, but is rather more in Gods debt, after his working, then before
his working, because he bountifully receives more good from God, then before,
especially, because he gives nothing proper of his own to God, but gives to God
his own good; But no man first acts for God, for God is the first actor and
mover in every action, It is not just, that God should reward Adams obedience,
with life, before God made it just.
and motion. As that says, Who gave first to the Lord, and it shall be
recompensed him?

5. If this was yesterday just, that life eternal is due to Adam for his work
before God made it just and due, then from Eternity and before any decree of
God it was just and due; Certainly, God, upon the same reason, was debtour, to
make such a Covenant, that was just, before he made it just. And this is no
Covenant of God, for God, not making the justice of the Covenant, and the ju^t
connection between work and wadge, he cannot be the Author of the Covenant: But
neither is Adam the Author of the justice, nor of the just Covenant: Upon the
same ground, it was then an everlasting justice without and before God from
Eternity. Non datur justum prius primo justo.

6. If God did more for Adam, then he can recompense God for it, Man can never
come from under an obligation to his Creator and Redeemer.
as the Father has done to the Son, then he could not merit at the hand of
God: But God did more to Adam in giving to him being, faculties, mind, will,
affections, power, habites, his blessed Image, then Adam can never be in a
condition, in which he can recompense God, or give him more annual and usurie,
in his acting of obedience, then the stock was he received in proportion. As
the Son can never give the Father, in recompense, so much or the captive
ransomed from death, can never give to his ransom payer, who bought him so
much, as the one and the other shall no more be under an obligation, and debt
of love and service to father and ransomer* then to a stranger that they never
knew: Nor could Adam thus be freed of God, so as he should be owing nothing to
him. If any say, God may freely forgive all this obligation and debt: To which
Bradwardine Answers well: 1. The forgiving of the debt, when the debtor has
nothing to pay is a greater debt taken on. 2. God (says he) may forgive so in
regard of actual obligation, that he is not oblidged ad aliquid faciendum sub
poena peccati, to do any thing under the pain or punishment of sin, as the
hireling is obleiged to work, when he has made a Covenant to work, and so we
are not oblidged to do, as much as we can for God. But in regard of habitual
obligation, God cannot forgive the debt, that the reasonable creature owes to
God, for so he might dispense with this, that the reasonable creature owe no
obedience to God, suppose he should command it, which is impossible.

They seem therefore, with eyes of flesh, to look upon God, who say that God
by necessity of justice must punish sin, yea that the most High cannot be God,
except he punish sin, and that he should not be God, if all his Laws imposed
upon men, were only promissorie and void of all threatenings.

What? could not God have said, God falls in no sort from his natural dominion,
though he punish not sin by necessity of nature.
eat not of the tree of knowledge, for if ye eat not, your obedience shall be
rewarded with life eternal, and no more? might he not have laid aside all
threatening? What Scripture or reason teaches to say, that God, if he create a
reasonable creature, and under a moral dependencie, which it has and must
have of God, then must God, by necessity of nature, punish the sinner, yea so
as, if he punish not, he should not be God, nor just, but must fall from his
natural dominion, except he make penal laws, and so he should not be God,
except he say to Adam (if thou eat thou shall die) or (shall be punished for
eating) but this is not proven by one word, except this, the reasonable
creature is not, nor cannot be subject to God Creator, except God punish the
sinner; But that is denied: Adam should have had a Moral dependence upon God,
and God should have been God, and essentially just, if sin had never come into
the World, and if God had kept Adam under a Moral Law, as he did the Elect
Angels, who never felt or knew the fruit of a Moral Law broken and
transgressed. And God, if he imposed any penal Law upon the Elect Angels as
penal (which shall be an hard work to prove) yet had a natural dominion over
the Elect Angels, God should have a perfect dominion over man, though he had
imposed no penal, but only rewarding or remunerative laws, upon him.
and suppose no Law, but only a rewarding and remunerative Law, had been over
their heads, should God be no God, in that case? and if any deny, that God has
a perfect dominion over the Elect Angels, he is not worthy to be refuted. 2.
Show me, in all the Old or New Testament, any penal Law of active obedienc^ as
penal, imposed upon the man Christ, or where is it written, If the Man Christ
sin, he shall eternally die? I tremble at such expressions: Is the Lord
therefore not the Lord, and has the Lord fallen from his natural dominion
over his Son, the Man Christ? Or (3) will any man deny, but the Lord might
justly have laid upon all men and upon the Elect Angels a Law only
remunerative, not penal at all, a Law only with the promise of a reward, and
void of all threatening of death, first or second, or any other punishment, and
yet he should have been the Lord, and had a natural dominion over Angels, the
Man Christ, and all mankind?

(3) Suppose the Lord had never imposed the Law penal forbidding the sin
against the Holy Ghost, upon the Elect believers, nor any other penal Law, The
Lords dominion over man, is without Scripture or reason, restricted to penal
Laws.
but by virtue of the most sufficient ransom of the Blood of God paid for
man, he had made them now after the fall* as the confirmed Angels, and holy as
the Man Christ, and brought them so to glory, should he not have been God in
that case, and should he have lost his natural dominion over men in that case?
4. The dominion of God over men is not only in one particular, of penal Laws,
it is in remunerative Laws also, in giving predeterminating influences to obey
and persevere in obedience, Si enim lex talis non seratur necessario, possibile
esset ut vel Deus jure suo naturali and Dominio in creaturas caderet, and sic
non esset DEVS, vel stabilito isto jure, creaturam ci non esse subditam. Quod
implicat contradictionem -- nam intercisa obedientia (quod fieri potuit and
factum est) dependentia (moralis creaturae rationalis a Deo) illa nullo modo
continuari potest, nisi per poenam (...).
in not leading into temptation, in hyring and alluring us to serve God, in
terrifying men with examples of the Lords Judgments on others, he spared not
the Angels, etc. 2 Pet. 2.4. Jud. 6. and therefore, to say, that God falls from
his natural dominion over man, and leaves off to be God, except he impose
penal Laws upon men, is first an error in Logic, a negatione speciei ad
negationem generis, nulla est consequentia: If God have not a dominion over
man, in one particular of penal Laws, he falls from his whole dominion
natural, in other things: It is an undue inference. 2. It cannot be but too
darring to tie the blessed Godhead, and his essential dominion over man, to
only making of penal Laws: it smells of Scripturelesse boldness with the most
High, and limits the Holy One, that he cannot be God, except he be God in our
way: And says, he has no way to preserve his glory, but by creating a Hell:
And therefore let that stand as an unproven position, since it has no
probation; The reason that is given is as weak as the weak conclusion; Though
water may bear up water, yet it cannot support the earth. For 1. it says, if
man be created a reasonable creature under a Law, he may sin, intercidi potuit
obedientia, and he may be created under a Law, with perfect moral dependence
upon God Creator, as the Elect Angels and the Man Christ, and yet never sin,
and yet God falls not from his dominion, and leaves not off to be God. (2.)
This looks somewhat the Arminian way, that man cannot be under the subjection
of, properly so called, Moral obedience, except his will be indifferent as
Adams was, to stand or fall, to run to Heaven or Hell, which indeed says, that
the most perfect obedience of Christ, who was obedient to the death, Phil. 2.8.
and delighted to do the will of God, Psalm. 40.8. John 4.34. is no proper
obedience, that is, perfect obedience is not proper obedience. And that
obedience of Elect Angels the samplar of our obedience, Mat. 6.10. Isa. 6.2, 3.
Psalm. 103.20. is not proper obedience. 3. Whereas it is said, if man sin, his
moral dependency cannot stand, except God punish him, but so not only God
shall not be God, nor have dominion over man, except he impose a penal Law
upon man, but he shall not be God except he actually punish man, or his surety
Christ. Jam ver^ egressus necessarios constituentes, non negamus Deum tamen eam
libere exercere.
But the same pen says that the outgoings of justice are free, that is to
say, it is free to God to punish sin; and yet he falls from his natural
dominion over man, and leaves off to be God, if he punish not sin. But we do
deny that God falls from his natural dominion over man, though he never impose
a penal Law upon him, and never punish, and desire that this may be proven,
nor is it imaginable, how God by necessity of nature, must punish sin; And yet,
in the way, measure, and degree of punishment, and in the time when, he can use
moderation. Its not feazable, without a contradiction, to say God punishes
sin, by necessity of nature, and yet in the way, measure, and time of
punishing, he is free.
Which is as good as to say, the fire must, by necessity of nature, burn, the
Sun cast light; But the fire has free will to burn when it pleases, and at
this time, and not at this time; and the Sun must shine, by necessity of
nature, but it is free to shine at ten hours of the day, and not at twelve, and
it may shine as bright as the Sun, or as dim as the Moon. Or God the Father
loves himself, but it is free to him to love himself to day, not to morrow, and
to love himself so much, not so much. And so he may say, God is so merciful
and just to day, as he may be no merciful, no just, to morrow; and God is
infinitely merciful and just, and yet he is less merciful and more merciful
essentially according to his good pleasure, which are speaking contradictions.
Yea this is that which misjudging Suarez says, that the creature may do a
real injury to God, Suarez in opusc. de justit. Dei, Sect. 2. (...). 9. fig.
352.
and take away from God jus Dei ad gloriam, his right to glory, but the truth
is, the creature by sin darkeneth or overcloudeth his declarative glory, but
can take away no essential glory, nor any real right or real good from God,
so Elihu, Job 39.6. If thou sinnest, what do thou against him? If thy
transgressions be multiplied, what do thou to him? To take his declarative
glory from God, is no lose to him, no more then it is lose to the Sun, that ye
hinder it to shine upon the wall, when yet ye take no light from the Sun, for
it shines upon an interposed body. Job 35.8. Thy wickedness may hurt a man as
thou art, and thy righteousness may profit the Son of man. It is needful
(say some) that God preserve his own glory safe, but if sin be without
infliction of punishment, it is impossible that he can defend his ow^ glory.
Ergo, of necessity he must punish sin. The proposition is out of controversy,
for all confess that God must preserve his own glory, (...) by necessity of
nature he must do so; quoniam seipsum non potest non amare. Because he cannot
but love himself, and he has said, my glory will I not give to another.

God loves and defends by necessity of nature his essential, but not his
declarative glory.
To this is answered, the glory internal, eternal, and essential to God, the
Lord must defend and love as he loves himself, by nec^ssity of nature; and if
any say that the egressions and outgoings of God to defend and love his own
essential Glory, and his own holy Nature, so as he may use moderation in the
degrees and time of these, and he may love himself and his own essential
glory, more or less, and touching the time, he may delay to love himself, and
he may love himself and his own essential glory to morrow, not to day, As the
Author says, the outgoings of revenging justice are moderated in punishing;
he speaks wonders and things unworthy of God. The place, Isa. 42. speaks not of
this glory, for no idol, no creature, God loves and defends the glory of his
pardoning mercy, no less then the glory of his revenging justice, and if he
love the one, by necessity of nature, he must also love the other.
can more take away from the Almighty this essential glory of God, nor his
blessed Nature can cease to be, but there is a glory declarative of pardoning
mercy, as well, as of revenging justice; It must be a carnal conception and a
new dream, that God by necessity of nature, loves himself as clothed with
revenging justice, or as just, and his own glory of revenging justice, but that
God loves himself as merciful and ready to forgive, or his own glory of
pardoning mercy freely, and by no necessity of nature: Which the Author must
say, for the place, Isa. 45. should otherwise bear this sense, my glory of
revenging justice only, I will not give to Idol gods and creatures. But the
place of Isa. chapter 42.8. should not conclude, but they might ascribe the glory
of salvation and merciful deliverances and victories over Judah, the Temple,
the Sanctuary to their idol gods, the contrair whereof is intended by the
Prophet; But if the Lord, by necessity of nature, The place, Isa. 42.18. I will
not give my glory to another, vindicated.
love his declarative glory, as he loves himself, then he must love glory of
one attribute, as well as of another, and so as his Nature, not freedom or
sovereignty puts him to it, to defend the glory of justice, when man sins; Yea
so as he cannot be God and essentially just, except he vindicat his glory of
justice; Yea so he must love the glory of saving and pardoning mercy, as
himself, for the one glory is no less essential to God (if it be essential
at all) then the other. And by this means, God, by necessity of nature, to
preserve safe the glory of saving mercy, must send his Son, and by the like
necessity, by which he loves himself, he must redeem man; Now the Lord does not
love himself, of free grace, for he every way, for the infinite excellency of
his Nature is love-worthy, and there is no interveening of freedom, or free
grace, or sovereignty in the Lords loving of himself and his own essential
glory. There is a declarative glory, which is not essential to God, of which
the Scripture, Prove. 16.4. The Lord made all things for himself, The Scripture
speaks for the most part, of the Lords declarative glory.
that is, for his glory, to be declared. Ephesians. 1.6. He has chosen us to the
praise of the glory of his grace, v. 11. In Christ we have obtained an
inheritance. 1^. That we should be to the praise of his glory. Romans 11.36. All
things are to him, to his glory. Isa. 43.21. This people have I formed for my
self, they shall show forth my praise. All these are to be understood not of
the essential glory of God, but of the declarative glory of God, that shines
ad extra. God by necessity of nature, should procure his declarative glory,
and so by that necessity, create the world, redeem man, if by that necessity,
he should love and defend his declarative Glory.
And this glory is not essential to God as so declared, for he was infinitely
glorious from eternity, and should eternally be essentially glorious, though
neither world, nor man, nor Angel, had been created. And the meaning of that,
Isai. 42.8. is mistaken, the length of the Heaven, toto Coelo. It is not this,
as I love my self, so by necessity of nature I will, and desire that my glory
due to me, as God, be not given to idol gods, and creatures. 1. What by
necessity of nature God wills, that certainly, and by necessity of nature is
and existeth, as he loves himself, and his Son by necessity of nature, and
begets his Son by necessity of nature, so also by necessity of nature God is
loved, and the Son of God is loved, and the Son is by necessity of nature,
begotten of the Father. But it is most untrue, that by necessity of nature,
the Glory of God is not transferred to Idol gods and creatures; The Scriptures
cry the contrare. When ever Idolatry is committed, Isa. 40. and 41. Isa. 46.
Romans 1. Acts 17. his Glory declarative is given, most sinfully to another
against his approving will. 2. What ever sin God forbids, he forbids the
existence of it, by his approving will, not by necessity of nature, for if God
essentially and by nature willed that sin and Idolatry should never be, he
would efficaciouslie hinder it; But what God wills by his commanding will, we
see he does not efficaciouslie hinder the existence thereof: For then sin and
Idolatry should not be at all, nor have any existence, which is contrare to
Scripture and experience; And surely, if God love his declarative Glory
essentially as himself, he must essentially no less love to keep this glory,
when Angels and men do obey him, and to hinder the taking away of this Glory by
sin, then to revenge the taking away of this glory by punishment, for every sin
against a positive Law, to eat of the tree of knowledge, or for the Jews to eat
swines flesh, before Christ abolished such Laws, as well as sins against the
Law of nature, are contrare to the Glory of God, God must by necessity of
nature hinder the existe^ce of sin, and by the same necessity seek his
legislative Glory, if he love it, as he loves himself by necessity of nature.
and so contrare to that essential love that God has to his Glory, and to the
Glory of the Lord, the Lawgiver himself, Ergo, by necessity of nature,
because he cannot but love himself. he should preserve his legislative Glory,
(it is as properly and essentiallie the Glory of God, which he requires of us,
in doing his will, as the Glory of suffering punishment for sin committed, is
his Glory) therefore, by necessity of nature, because God cannot but love
himself, he should essentially hinder sin: And if God absolve the guilty,
where is the Glory of his justice? True, it should be lost, so when God suffers
the Angels to fall, and Adam to sin, where is the Glory of his legislative
Majesty? it is lost so far. God is oblidged to defend the Glory of his Justice:
say and prove that he is oblidged by necessity of nature to defend the Glory
of his Justice, more then by the same necessity he must defend his legislative
Glory. 3. God must defend all his Glory with the same necessity, except the
Scripture make some exception of some Glory which he must preserve, as dearer
to him then some other Glory, which is unwarrantable to say, and if God must,
by necessity of nature, and as God, because naturally he loves himself and his
own Glory, defend his own Glory, then, by necessity of nature he must defend
the Glory of all his Attributes, of Holiness, Graciousnesse, Greatn^sse,
Omnipotency, Eternity, Infinite knowledge, etc. that the Glory of not one of
these be taken from him by sin: And because the Lord makes, and works all,
that he does without himself, in the creature, for his own Glory. Prove. 16.4.
Rev. 4.11. Romans 11.36. in all that he does, he must by necessity of nature
love his own Glory, quoniam seipsum non potest non amare, because he loves
himself. Ergo, by this ground the Lord does nothing freely without himself, and
so the Lord makes not the rain to fall, the tree to bud, the sea to ebb, the
wind to blow, the fowls to flee, the fishes to swim, for the declaration of the
Glory of his goodness, or his power, or his mercy, his holiness, with any
freedom, but all these he must do for Glory to himself by necessity of
nature, which Glory he loves as himself, for his Glory in all he does without,
he loves by necessity of nature, as he loves himself says the Author. And
therefore as he cannot preserve the Glory of his Justice, but by punishing sin,
and that by necessity of nature, so he cannot preserve the Glory of the rest
of all his Attributes (which Glory also he loves as himself) but by doing all
without himself in like manner by necessity of nature, which utterly destroys
the liberty and freedom of God in all his works of Providence and Creation,
and so God shall be a natural agent in all his works without himself, God
might never have intended his glory declarative because if so it had pleased
him, he might never have made the world.
not a free agent in Creating and Redeeming. 4. The Scripture says, he works
all things according to the counsel of his will, for his Glory, and therefore
he intends not his own declarative Glory as he loves himself: For by necessity
of nature he loves himself, and cannot but love himself. But he might, if so it
had pleased him, never have intended to show forth his own Glory, and does not
show it forth by necessity of nature as he loves himself. Yea he might never
have created the world, never have acted without himself: For he was sufficient
within himself and stood in need of no declarative Glory: Genesis 17.1. Acts
17.25. 5. Yea if by necessity of Justice, God cannot but punish sin,
especially this justice shall carry him to follow the Law of Works without any
Gospel moderation, which is that the same person that sins, and the same soul,
Ezekiel. 18. and no other, If God punish sin, by necessity of justice, he must
punish Adam and all his sons in their persons, and by necessity of justice,
deny them a Savior.
should die for sin: for all these. Thou shall destroy all the workers of
iniquity. Thou art of purer eyes then that thou can behold iniquity, and the
like, are expressions of a pure legal proceeding in the Lord, against such as
are out of Christ, under the Law, not under the Gospel, to wit, the workers of
iniquity whom the Lord in justice shall punish in their person, not in their
surety. And if there be such a connection objective ex natura rei, between sin
and punishment, it must be between punishment and the very person and none
other, but the same that sinned: For among men this is justice. Noxa sequitur
caput, so that by necessity of nature, God shall not be God, nor essentially
just, if he punish not eternally Adam and all mankind in their own persons,
and so by necessity of justice, he cannot punish Christ; And it cannot be
denied but there is a dispensation of free Grace, and that it is no act of
Justice but of Grace, that God make Christ sin, i. e. a sacrifice for sin for
us, 2 Cor. 5.21. And that the Lord laid upon him the iniquities of us all, Isa.
53.6. and made him our surety. Nor let any man object, how could God make
Christ a propitiation for sin to declare his righteousness? Or how could such
justice, by that action be debarred? since justice did not exact such an
action: If without violation of justice it might have been omitted, if God
should have been infinitely just from Eternity, if he had done no such thing?
Shall a Prince get himself glory in the name of justice, by doing that which,
by his absolute Soveraignety, he may leave undone without hurt of justice. The
necessity of declaring the righteousness of God in either punishing the
sinner Adam, or the surety Christ, makes not God to punish, by necessity of
nature.
It is Answered, this is to measure God by mortal men: Shall an earthly father
freely for no real good to himself beget hundreds of children, when he needs
not, and yet he foresees the largest number of them shall perish eternally, and
the eldest must die and be made a curse, to save the rest. The Lord punished
Christ for us to declare the glory of his Justice in punishing sin in his own
Son, who was the sinner by imputation, for out of the depth of infinite
wisdom, the Lord freely imposes a law upon his creatures: He might have
imposed no such law under such a punishment. By no necessity of nature did the
Lord threaten death, for the eating the fruit of that tree, prove, that God
should not have been God, except he had threatened death for the eating of that
fruit, and except he had punished that eating with death, either to be
inflicted upon the eater or his surety. Quid haeres? Prove that by the Word of
God, it is sin to eat, when God forbids; but the Lords soul hates sin. True,
but does the Lords soul hate sin naturally, as he loves himself and by
necessity of his essential justice as contradistinguished from his
immutabilitie, and his truth and faithfulness, according to which attributes,
he decreed and said, that the soul that sins shall die, and ( he that eats
shall die) and he cannot change, nor alter, what he has decreed, and cannot
but be true in his threatenings. But the Question is, whether (laying aside the
respect of Gods unchangeablenesse and truth) there be such a connection
internal, between eating and dying, or between eating forbidden of God, and
punishment, as God cannot be equally and essentially just, nor can he be God,
except he punish forbidden eating; for sure eating of that fruit, is not of its
nature, sin, but it is sin, from the only forbidding will of God, for the Lord
had been no less essentially just, had he commanded Adam to eat of the Tree of
Knowledge. Ergo, it is punished from the forbidding will of God, for say that
to be punishable or to be punished be essential to sin, if eating of such
fruit be sin from the forbidding will of God, the essence thereof must be from
the same forbidding will, then must it follow that God hates not all sin, by
necessity of nature; And that he hates such eating only conditionally, if he
forbid it; but (...) from his mere free will, did forbid it. So the Question
shall not be, whether God in justice, punished Christ, and made him a
propitiation to declare his justice, but what the relative justice ad extra is,
by which God punishes sin, and whether God should leave off to be God
(hallowed be his high Name) if he should not make first penal Laws to threaten
all sin with punishment. 2. Whether he should not be God, if he should not
punish all sin, even the eating of the forbidden tree. The glory of God, and
the manifestation of his glory to Angels and Men, are much different.
3. What can be said that is more weak and watrie, to enervat the glory of free
Grace, then to confound the Glory of Gods Justice in giving Christ to die for
sinners, and this glory as manifested and declared: For sure the manifestation
of that glory is a work of free Grace, and most free, if God do any thing
freely, he must freely, and by no necessity of Justice, Mercy, Omnipotency,
Patience, Grace, etc. manifest the glory of all these to men and Angels,
Declared glory and fundamental glory are different.
and these attributes and the internal splendour, beauty, or (to speak so) the
fundamental glory of all the attributes of God is essential to God, and his
very Nature. And they deny the Lord, who teach that any attributes or such
glory are in God freely or contingently (if I durst so speak) for then might we
say, these may go and come, ebb and flow in the Lord, and he should be God,
though Mercy, Omnipotency, Gloriousness, Graciousnesse, were now and then
wanting in him, as he punishes not alway^, and yet he is eternally just, he
saves not always, and yet he is eternally mighty to save, and abundant in
compassions. but as to the manifestation of Power, Mercy, Justice, that is
freely in God: He sent his Son, and gave his Son to death for us, out of love,
John 3.16. But it is against common sense, to infer, Ergo, God sent his Son, by
necessity of love, and mercy, and free Grace. So that he should not have been
infinitely loving, merciful, gracious, if he had never sent him. And it is as
poor Logic to say, because of grace and free-love he sent his Son, and so
might not have sent him, as to say he loved where there was no need, Qualis
enim amor iste esse potest, quem in ea re, qua nihil opus fuit, DEVS ostendit?
and it is in vain to show the glory of Justice (says the Author) when God can
take away sin, out of free-pleasure, and why should he expose his Son to shame,
death, and a curse, whereas he might have taken away sin freely, because it is
his pleasure? This is the very thing that Socinians say, there is no need of
blood, and satisfaction by blood, if God out of his absolute Sovereignty can
take sin away without blood, and so there was no need of real satisfaction;
The freedom of punishing sin is objected by Socinus, as contrair to the
necessity of real satisfaction.
This is against the Holy Ghost, and we may hear it. All the Scriptures cries
that out of free grace the Lord sent his Son, and delivered him to death; By
the grace of God He tasted death for every man, Heb. 2.9. Shall we infer there
was then no necessity that he should die? It is safest to say the only wise God
decreed that sin should be. 2. That the glory of his Justice should appear in
taking away sin, not in our way, but in the way of God, to wit, in a way of
justice, of mercy, of free grace, in incomparable love, of mighty power; and in
all these so acts the Lord as he should not leave off to be the Lord, but acts
most freely, though he had not taken that course. But far be it from the godly
not to adore him in this, as the admirable way beyond the thoughts of men and
Angels.

It were safest to draw holy practices by way of use from this. Grace and the
measure of it is to be humbly looked on.


In all pactions between the Lord and man, even in a Law-Conant there is some
out-breakings of Grace. Its true, there was no Gospel Grace, that is a fruit of
Christ's merit in this Covenant. But yet if grace be taken for undeserved
goodness: There are these respects of grace. 1. That God might have given to
Adam something inferior to the glorious Image of God, that consists in true
righteousness, knowledge of God, and holiness, Gen 1.26. Ephesians. 4.24. Col.
3.10. It was a rich enough stock, this holy Image to be so badly guided. And
who looks spiritually to their receipts? Its either too much of grace and
holiness that another has, and too little that I have, so arises virtuall
sighing and grudging at the dispensation. Or 2. a swelling that it is so much,
as if it were not receiving. I am holier then thou, Isa. 65.5. a miskenning of
him that makes me to differ, 1 Cor. 4.7. A blecking of others, Luke 18.11. A
secret quarrelling at God as too strick and hard in his reckoning, Mat. 25.24.
And what pride is this, because I am a mere patient under gifted holiness, to
usurp it as mine own? As if a horse should kick and fling, because he wears a
borrowed sadle of silk for a day.

2. Being and dominion over the creatures is of undeserved goodness. Who looks
to a borrowed body and a borrowed soul, Being, life, and self* are undeserved
favors.
yea and to self, and to that which is called I, as to a thing that is freely
gifted? So that though thou be in an high opinion of self, self is self, and
what it is, from God. And when thou rides, whence is it that I am the rider,
and the wearied horse the carrier, but from God? 3. The Covenant of Works it
self, that God out of Sovereignty does not command, is undeserved
condescending; that God bargains for hire, do this and live, whereas he may
bide a Sovereign Lawgiver and charge and command us, is overcoming goodness.
Law is honeyed with love, and hire; it is mercy that for our penny of
obedience, It is mercy that GOD rewards our obedience.
so rich a wadge as communion with God is given. 4. The influences to acts of
obedience, come under a twofold consideration. 1. As congruous and suitable
concurrences of God to Adams acts of obedience: And so they were free gifts to
Adam not promised, as we shall hear in the New Covenant. 2. As such influences
by which the standing Elect Angels (who were under this Covenant as well as
Adam) were differenced from the Angels that fell, An admirable sovereignty in
the standing of Angels and in the fall of man.
and were confirmed that they should not fall, in this latter respect. Absolute
Sovereignty shines in Adams fall, so if a Sparrow cannot stir its wing without
God, Mat. 10.29. nor a hair fall from our head, ver. 30. far less could Adam
fall, and all his, without a singular providence; And far less could Adam go
on and act without influences from God. And if strong Adam and upright, created
in holiness, could not then stand his alone; Shall our clay legs now under the
fall bear us up? What Godly trembling is required in us? Gifts and habits of
saving grace cannot keep creatures on foot.
5. The gift of Prophecy, Genesis 2.23. seems to be freely given, besides the
Image of God, and Adams knowledge, Genesis 2.19. of every living creature,
according to their nature may be proven, but it appears to be natural, and he
is a lamentable example to us of abusing the Image of God, and good gifts; But
no habit without the continued actings of God can keep us in a course of
obedience: There is no ground to make habits of grace our confidence. 3. There
can be no giving and taking between the creature and the Creator. Elihu pleads
well for him, Job 35.7. If thou be righteous what gives thou to him? Or what
receives he of thy hand, v. 1. Thy wickedness may hurt a man, as thou art,
and thy righteousness may profit the Son of man. The humbling thoughts that
God needs not men, nor their service, nor any creature, should take us up.
Job 22.2. Can a man be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be
profitable to himself? Is it pleasure to the Almighty that thou art righteous?
Or is it a gain to him that thou make thy ways perfect? So Eliphaz. And
David, Psalm. 16.2. My goodness extends not to thee. Acts 17.25. Neither is
the Lord worshipped with men's hands, nor with their spirits: as if he needed
any thing, seeing he gives to all life and breath and all things. What then is
the glory of the creatures obedience to him? It is some shining of the
excellency of God upon men and Angels, from the works of God, and our obedience
to him. But suppose there were no creature to pay the rent of this glory to
him, is the Lord a loser therefore? Has he need of our songs of glory? Or that
creatures should be Heralds of his praise? Or needs he the workmanship or
structure of Heaven, Sun and Moon to be a Printed Book to spell and sound his
glory? If he need not the Book (as he needs nothing created. (...)
Who says I am the Lord All-sufficient) he needs not one letter, nor any sense
of the Contents of the Chapters of that Book. There is a secret carnal notion
of God in us, when we act and suffer for God, that brings a false peace, Secret
in us after actings of Grace.
and some calmes of mind, we have pleased him once, and beside that peace, a
scumme and a froath smoakes up unsensible in the heart, we are profitable to
God, it would be the worse with him, if he wanted our prayers and service: but
had the Lord any missing of Heaven and of Angels and Men, in these infinite and
innumerable ages of duration, that went before any created being? When he was
upon these infinite and self-delighting thoughts, solacing himself in that
infinite substantial fairness and love his Son Christ, Prove. 8.89.30. No
creature can give to God
(2.) You can give nothing to God Creator of all, but it must be either an
uncreated Godhead, but he who perfectly possesses himself, will not thank you
for that, or your gift most be a created thing: But how wide is his universal
dominion? can you give to one that, of which he was absolute Lord before? all
the Roses are his, all the Vineyards, all the Mountains, he is the owner of the
South and the North, of the East and the West, and infinite millions of
possible Worlds, beyond what Angels and all Angels can number, for eternity of
ages, are in the bosom of his vaste Omnipotency; He can create them if he
will.

And what ye give to another, it was out of his dominion, but all things are in
his dominion, for who spoiled him of what he had? David blessed the Lord, when
the people gave for the Temple, excusing himself and the people, that they took
on them to give to the great Lord-giver: 1 Chro. 29.11. Thine, O Lord, Reasons
why none can give to GOD from that excellent passage of David, 1 Chro. 29.1^ 12.
is the greatness, and the power and the glory, and the victory, and the
majesty, for all that is in the heaven and in the earth is thine, thine is the
Kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as head above all. verse. 12. Both riches
and honor come of thee, and thou reignest, and in thy hand it is to make
great, and to give strength unto all. 14. But who am I, and what is my people,
that we should be able, so willingly, to offer after this sort? for all things
come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee. Hence, none can give to Gd.
1. Because he is JEHOVAH the Eternal God, then he gives all and nothing can be
given to him. 2. Because of the greatness and infiniteness of God. Giving is
an adding to him, to whom we give. But nothing can be added to him, for thine
is the greatness, the power, and the majesty. 3. Nothing can be given to him
who is universal and full Lord and Possessour of heaven and earth, and all
things therein, for all that is in the heaven etc* are thine. 4. Nothing can be
given to him, who is so Lord, that he is exalted as Head, Prince and King,
above all created Kings, and their dominions over their own. 5. But all the
goods of the Subjects are the Princes, or the Commonwealths. The Jurists
distinguish as the Schoolman Theod. Smising, Tom. 1. de Deo, tractat. 3. disp.
4. q. 5. fig. 65. a twofold jus, What dominion the state or community has
over private men.
jus altum and jus bassum: The Prince and Commonwealth, have a sort of eminent
right to the goods of the Subjects, to dispose of them for the public good, as
they may demolish a castle belonging to a private man in the frontiers of the
enemies land, because it hurts the country, and may be better made use of by
enemies against them for the country; And they may compel him to sell it, but
this hinders not, but every Subject has a dominion and right to his own goods,
to use them at his pleasure, which the Prince cannot do. Ahab the King has no
right nor dominion over the vineyard of Naboth to compel him to sell it or
give it against his will to his Prince; For the earthly Prince, nay the man
himself, the just Proprietor before men cannot bear that, so as it may be said
of God, verse. 12* both riches and honor come of thee, and thou reignest over
all: For God created the being of gold and of every thing, that we can give to
God, which no earthly Prince can do.

6. Nothing can be given to him, in whose hand is power and might, and to make
great and to give strength: For 1. Riches and things we give are of him. 2.
Power, might and strength to give, either Physical, to bear a burden to his
house: Or, 2 Moral, a willing mind and heart to give is in his hand: Or, 3. A
mixed power, the being of the act of giving is his. v. 7. Of thine own we give
thee. Can we give to any that which is his own already? Can ye give to a
Crowned King over such a Kingdom his own Crown? Can ye give to the righteous
owner of his own lands, his own Garden, and his own vineyard, in gift? but
every being created is the Lords.

8. Says David, v. 15. We are strangers before thee, and sojourners as all our
fathers were: And that says, the Lord is the only Heritor, and we but Tennents
at will, and strangers both fathers and sons, though for five hundredth or a
thousand years fathers and sons have lineally and in heritage before men
possessed such lands: yet before thee (says he) we and our fathers have but
Tennent-right, and are strangers from thee. And what can a mere stranger to
life and being give to the just Heritor and Lord of life and being?

9. And our days (says David) on the earth are as a shadow, and there is none
abiding life, and being is a shadow of being, and God is the only first
excellent being: and suppose we should give life and being to and for him, it
is but a borrowed shadow that we give him; And we are not lords of our own
being, we have not absolute right over our selves to give our selves to him. If
Do^g will not give himself to God, and act for God, Psalm. 51.2. Such as refuse
to give self for God, shall be plucked out of their place.
God shall take thee away and pluck thee out of thy dwelling place, and root
thee out of the land of the living. Job 27.21. the east wind of God carries
him away, and as a storm hurleth him out of his place. Ye shall bestow life and
being worse then upon God. God shall make mortar of thee, O fool! who makes a
god of borrowed I, great I and poor Nothing-self: Nay if there be a Pronoun in
thee O let it be this: Oh if my separation from Christ and the blotting ^f my
name out of the Book of Life, and my heaven might be a foot^tool to heighten
the glory, the high glory of the Lord in the salva^ion of many. The unity of
such as boast of the proud pronouns, my, and self.
2. This Pronoun self and mine is a proud usurper against God. Was he not an
Atheist or a churl, and his name folly, who said, 1 Samuel 25.11. and breathed
out so many my's? Shall I take my bread and my waters, and my flesh which I
killed for my hearers, and give it to men whom I know not whence they be? And
he was as mad a fool who thus speaks, Isa. 10.13. By the strength of my hand
have I done it, and by my wisdom, for I am ^rudent: and I removed the bounds of
the people -- 14. And my hand has found as a nest the riches of the people,
and as one gathers ^ggs that are left, so have I gathered all the earth, and
there was ^one that moved the wing, or opened the mouth, or peeped. This (...)
the fool-axe boasting against him that heweth with it. And another fool said:
Make an agreement with me by a present, and come out to me, Isa. 36.16. And
this mad-nothing is above God, chap. 37.10. Let not thy God in whom thou
trustest deceive thee. The Tyrant of Egypt, the great Dragon that lies in the
midst of the river said, My river is mine own, and I have made it for my self,
Ezekiel. 29.3. God made the Sea and all the Rivers. There be three Pronouns in the
mouth of another proud Monarch, Dan. 4.30. And the King spoke and said, Is not
this great Babylon that I have built for the house of the Kingdom, by the might
of my power and the honor of my Majesty? So soon as there falls from the great
Lord of being a chip or shadow of created being, especially where being is
rational and under a Law, there follows and results (the Lord withdrawing) a
proud supposed I and a vain conceit of self, Created sinlesse self, is to be
denied.
and a dream of Godhead comes in with borrowed being; And therefore created
sinlesse self is to be denied. Adam denied not himself and thought in his sick
imagination he should be like God knowing good and evil, Genesis 3. Christ the
more excellent Adam pleased not that noble self, Romans 15.3. (...). He denied
himself as man, as a gracious mere man, to be God or more then a man. And this
self-denial is in elect Angels, who blush and are sinlesly ash^med of self,
and cover their faces with wings before shining Infiniteness of Glory, and
proclaim him thrice Holy, holy, holy, Isa. 6.2, 3. And who knows not we own
grace as our own? my prayers, my faith, my holiness, my tears, as if grace had
a relish from self, not from God: but Paul, 1 Cor. 15.10. Not I, but the grace
of God (not my grace in me) that was with me, (...).

4. But is there no paction between GOD and the creature? Surely we must say
that the covenant between GOD and Adam is of another nature, yea and promises
also, then these that are between man and man; The Covenant between God and man
is of a far other nature, then the Covenant between man and man.
for there is proper giving and taking betwixt the creature. 2. The proper
covenants between man and man require that both parties be free and independent
one of another, there may interveen a jus, a right and a debt upon the
promissor to him to whom the promise is made. Omne promissum ex ore fideli
cadit in debitum. Jurists say there is no proper binding Covenants between the
father and the son, the lord and the servant; for the son and the servant are
not lords of themselves nor sui juris. The father by no paction can remove the
foundation of the debt of nature that the son owes to the father: for
impossible it is, but if such a man be son to such a man, but he owe to his
father as to an instrument, quod sit and vivat, being and living, and the son
can not satisfy by paying the father for that sum, and the father can not
cancel the band nor give him an acquittance. Far less can any recompense the
Lord for life and being. The fallen Angels and damned in hell and all wicked
men are in the Lords Compt-book everlasting debtors to him for being. But God
who is more then a Father (to whom men are but painted fathers) may thus far
loose the bond, as he may command the son to sacrifice the father, as well as
once he commanded the father Abraham to offer up his son to God. But God cannot
resign his right that he has over the creature to a creature, because he
cannot leave off to be Creator, and so cannot lay aside or make over
Creator-right, jus Creatoris, to any. God cannot quite or part with
Creator-right and universal dominion over all things that may be given, and
therefore nothing can be given to him.
2. Say that a creature had a jus or right over the Creator, it is either an
uncreated right or a created right, so to pursue God by Law, as to cause him do
him justice; it cannot be an uncreated right; for that were near to blasphemy:
For no created head can bear the royal Crown of the King of Ages. If it be a
created right, this created right must be under the dominion of him who is
universal Lord of all: then may the Lord make use of it at his pleasure; then
may not the man make use of it at his pleasure: for an absolute dominion of one
and the same thing cannot be in the hands of two absolute Lords, who may have
contradictory desires concerning the same thing: such as the holy Lord and
sinful men often are. Let us correct the bold pleadings and the daring charges
that our vain hearts put upon the Lord: Why do thou strive against him (says
Elihu, Job 33.13.) for he gives not account of any of his matters? Men dare
say, when they are under the vengeance of ordinary sufferings, The ways of the
Lord are not equal, Ezekiel. 33.10. If our transgressions and our sins be upon us,
and we pine away in them, how shall we then live? But upon whom should sins and
transgressions and the punishment thereof be, We are not to strive with the
gracious Lord.
if not upon the carcases of the Authors? Will ye raise letters to summond him?
Where is the judge? Where is the Tribunal? But he promised so and so; But this
is not the Question of strict justice: that says something against the
veracity and faithfulness of God, but nothing against the justice. But neither
does a promise as a promise raise a plea of unjustice against the holy and
glorious Lord, suppose he should not fulfill his promise. For 1. A paction by
promise creats no equality of justice between thing and thing, between wage and
work: otherwise he that is called to the Vineyard, and labors from the third
hour, has a just plea: for he should have more wages then a penny, which he
gets who labors but one hour. The Covenant, but not the proportion betwixt
works and wage is the Lords rule in rewarding our labor, nor should we be
gainers, if the Lord should so deal with us.
But the Lord makes not the equality or proportion between much laboring for
many hours, and the quantity and degree of the wage his r^le. But the Lord
pleads the free Covenant for his standing rule. Mat. 20.13. Friend, I do thee
no worng: did thou not agree with me for a penny? And verse. 15. Is it not
lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? Hence read our sickly queroulus
nature. 1. Naturally we argue from much working, and would conclude God, much
running, long swea^ing, and pains in keeping the Covenant of Works should bind
God, except he be unjust, to give me as many ounces and pound weights of Glory
everlasting, as I have fasted moments, and told over prayers upon beads, and
uttered sighs: Wherefore have we fasted and thou sees^ not? We work and keep
the Covenant of Works, but God pays us not our wage. Though it be a doubt to
me, if the Covenant of Works had stooden, and Adam and all his had fulfilled it
perfectly; if the Lord should weigh in an even balance, by ounce weights, our
poor labor, and great reward of Glory, for had he entered such a market, the
loss had been ours; we could not have obtained life eternal that way, for our
stock of time-working should have dried up. There is a commutative and a
distributive justice, between God and us, the former has no place in the
absolute Lord.
The virtue of justice stands in the equality of that which is given and
received. Now there is a twofold equality, one rei ad rem between thing and
thing, ane Arithmetic justice, so many ounces of natural actings, and the
same number of ounces of grace and glory: This commutative justice is not in
God, as the soundest and learned School men teach. There is another justice
of proportion duarum rerum ad duas alias res, of two things proportionally
answering to two things, distributive justice is this, and it keeps a
Geometrical proportion, Augustine with Scripture says, God is become our
debtor not by receiving any thing from us, August. sermon. 16. de verb. Apostol*
debtor nobis factus est Deus, non aliquid accipiendo, sed quod e^ placuit
promittendo.
but by promising what he pleases.

2. It follows from the Parable, that Gods bargaining with us depends not upon
the equality between thing and thing, the work and the wage; But upon his own
free pleasure of disposing of his own: And it is the froathinesse of our nature
to judge the penny of Glory, that we get by laboring to be our own, whereas
after the promise, and after we have fulfilled the condition, it is not ours,
but Gods, and he calls it his own, and it is to be disposed on by the Lords
free grace. Friend, may not I do with mine own, what I please? Mat. 20.15.
Glory is not our own after we have wrought for it.
2. No promise as a promise can give us a proper right, by way of strict
justice, to plead with God. 1. A promise of grace is a free promise, and no man
can say, because God promises the new heart to most undeserving men, that are
of a stony heart, and do profane his holy name, amongst the Gentiles, that
therefore it is just by condignitie of the thing, A promise as a promise can
give us no right of strict justice to any reward.
that a new heart should be given to them, that are foolish, disobedient, and
serving diverse lusts. The farrest that hard faced Jesuits go in this, is to
tell us of the poor penny of the merit of congruity, for the right weight of
the sum and thousands of saving grace which Papists have refused as ashamed
thereof.

3. If a promise as a promise should make an equality between one thing and
another, and so lay a band of strict commutative justice upon God, then should
every promise do the like, quod convenit (...) convenit (...), but that cannot
be said: For then if God should promise glory of ten thousand millions of
degrees above the glory that Angels and men now enjoy, for speaking one good
word, that should be a free promise, but that promise should not make an
equality between so hudge and rich a reward of glory, and so hungry and poor a
work as the speaking of a good word, so as God should fail of justice, if he
should deny a reward so great, for so small a work: For the denying thereof
should be against the veracitie and faithfulness of God, if he should not
fulfill his promise, but he should not fail against strict justice either in
not rewarding the work with a condign reward, or in not giving to the man that
spoke the good word his own. For there is no just equality between work and
wage here. Nor can ever so feckless a work, or all the works of men and Angels,
make the glory of life everlasting our own. For glory remains ever the proper
gift of God, and under his dominion.

4. A promise is, by order of time or nature, latter and posterior to the good
thing promised, as words of truth are latter to things, and things have the
same valor and worth, before and after the promise, A promise being posterior
to things promised, cannot alter the worth or value of things.
yea if one promise to give for a plot of ground, a sum of money of value,
five hundred times above the worth of that plot of ground, that promise can not
make the unequal and unjust price to be a just and equal price. Even so the
promise of God to give eternal life to the obedience of Adam can make no
equality of strict justice between the reward and the wage; For the reward
promised for the wages is equal and just before the promise, and ex natura
rei; and so must lay bands on the Lord, so as he cannot do contrair unto it,
which is against all reason.

And who gave first to the Lord, and it shall be recompensed to him, None gave
first to the Lord, men or Angels.
and he that gave first to him, man or Angel, must give his own (or then it is
no giving) which he received not from God, either created being, or gift, or
work (for any uncreated gift none can give to him) as is said. 2. What is given
is amongst the all things that are of him, as the efficient, and to him, as the
last end, and through him, as the conserver of all, and so can be no gift to
him, Rom 11.36.

And what God of free goodness, decrees to do, that he may decree not to do;
and things falling under his decree, are not necessary, he cannot decree that
man should be a reasonable creature* for it involves a contradiction to be a
man, and not to be a reasonable creature. But no shadow of contradiction there
is for the Lord to forbid to eat; and to forbid to eat under a punishment: And
the not created world (it being from eternity nothing and a non ens) could not
have any jus or right to plead that God would stand to what he decreed, God was
no debtor ^o Justice to give being to the world.
and give being and create a world, for if the Lord should not give being to
it, and create what he had decreed from eternity to create, he should fail
against his own unchangeable Nature, but should do no unjustice to an uncreated
world, except we say God should be unjust, if he had not created the world* For
being of justice is due to the world, and God refuses to pay the debt of being
to the uncreated world, Non entis nulla sunt accidentia.
which is nonsense. And upon the same ground, if he should annihilat the world
or take away life from living things, he should be unjust; It is safer
therefore to say that God owes the creature nothing, but we are his debtors,
for service and praises, while we have any being.

4. Use. If God, of his free will, so placed Adam to reward his obedience: We
think hard to serve God for wages, We should not take ill to obey and serve
God, who has so noble servants.
and to be placed in a condition of obedience. Evah, and we with her, sucking
the same milk, thirst after such lawless Independency to be from ( Genesis 3.5,
6.) under God; Whereas Adam and Angel-courtiers that have wings to obey, and
the Noble and High Heir who learned obedience through the things he suffered
were in this condition, and Christ a King in the shape of a Servant was
obedient to death, to the death of the Cross, Phil. 2. Hence, to weary of
submitting to God, speaks much unnatural pride, yea will not be under God. 2.
There is little of Christ in such, for it was life to Christ and meat and
drink, Psalm. 40.8. Heb. 10.8. John 4.34. Act. 10.38. to obey, and it is the
Angels life, Jsa. 6.2, 3. Psalm. 103.20. Rev. 4.8. and they are near him, who
both at once serve and Reign, Rev, 22.3, 5. much delight to obey, speak much
of God in the heart. Tire not of your Master; examine more, The beasts and
lifeless creatures shall depon in judgment against us who break Covenant with
God*
untowardnesse to pray, to confer, to give, etc. if it be not a cause of
deadness and be not a way of backsliding.

5. Use. If creatures keep their Covenant-naturall with God, shall not the ox,
the cran, Isa. 1.3. Jer. 8.7. the ass, 2 Pet. 2.16. who never had a design of
rebellion, depon against us in Judgment? Ah! what an unnatural policy, the
first evil wit of him that sinned from the beginning, John 8.44. and whom we
follow at the heels, it is to please our own wit, in Covenant breaking. Such as
are sick of love for their own wily time-serving custom; Our soft nature is
too soon broken with poor rewards, and too little moved with great things.
If all natural men in their death bed damn not this folly, ask them and
they shall speak.

6. Use. If God Covenant with us for hyre, when his absoluteness may bear him
to command, how sinfully soft are our spirits, and weak is reason, that is
broken with a straw, when an apple conquers Evahs eye and heart? Talents of
Silver, and a wedge of Gold Achan, and Gehazi; A drink of water, if not at
hand, in time of thirst, make the people murmr against God; the more
sanctified, defecat and spiritual reason be, the farther it is above that
which crusheth Balaam and Judas; The first heavens motion, the primum mobile,
which draws all the rest, must be the most excellent, and the moving power must
be most spiritual; its neither heaviness which is in stones or clay, nor
lightness in the air and fire, but a more heavenly force, which throws about
that body, so the motions of sanctified reason which is sweyed and driven by no
Argument, but from eternity, communion with God, a Kingdom above time, must be
most spiritual. The dog is moved with a bone, the ox with hay.

7. If no law and poor obedience of ours can buy a communion with God, let us
examine the peace that flows from obedience; Its purer and more solid peace,
Justification by works is our own element, Christ and his righteousness
strangers to us.
that flows from Justification, and more immediately removes the war between
God and us, Romans 5. 1. and comes by a purer and nearer emanation from God and
from the ransom of Redemption that is in Christ, then that which flows from
created acts of inherent holiness. (2.) Our first Adams Element is
Justification by works, in which we love to live and die. The Law is an
home-born Idol in us: Our apprehensions of our own actings are lively and
vigorous, the 3000. Acts 2.37. Saul, Acts 9.6. and the Jayler, Acts 16.30. ask
what we shall do? (...). But it is not the law word of working, Romans 4.2, 4,
5, 6. Romans 3.20* 28. Its much to be dead to the Law, and to Law-righteousnesse:
Gal. 2.19, 20. I live not, but Christ lives in me. Christ (2.) is a stranger to
us, and comes from without, gifted righteousness comes from heaven. Grace only
makes us willing debtors to grace. The pride of self, will neither beg nor
borrow from, nor be debtor to a Crucified Savior, when it despises him until
the roof of the house fall. 3. Seldom do these two concur, deadness to
works of grace, Seldom deadness to works, and lively activity in works is one.
and lively activity in the doing of them. Paul attained to both (but every man
is not Paul) 1 Cor. 15.9, 10. I labored more abundantly then they all. But
fearing and trembling at at that ( I) (...), he strikes sail to Christ, yet not
I, but the grace of God in me. This pride Paul notes in the Jews, they stouped
not, nor bowed (as inferiors to their Master, King, or Lord, or Father and
Husband, Romans 10.3. (...).
so the word) to the righteousness of God. When ( I) (self) or nature meets
with working, yea with grace often, there follows some loftiness, except it
be humbled and mortified ( I) which can weep and say. Lord what am I?

CHAP. VIII. What place death has in the Covenant. 2. What such as Cain and
Judas are to do in their desperate state. 3. And why the LORD is no where
called the GOD of Adam.
Q. WHat room has death in the Covenant?

A. Death has room in the broken Covenant of Works, as the Pursevant and
Sergeant of revenging justice. Hence deaths reign, [ I must die whether I will
or not] Unwillingnesse to die and bondage through fear of death is the
Law-sting in death, from which Christ has delivered us, Heb. 2.15. The room of
death in the two Covenants. The change that Christ has made in death.
Original sin and death came and entered the world by the Covenant of Works. The
Covenant of Grace made not death, but found it in the world, Christ made of an
old enemy death a new servant: its now the Kings ferry-boat to carry the
children over the water. Its a suitable condition to a spiritual state to die
being sent for, not legally summoned, and to die, because I desire to be
dissolved, Ph. 1.23. not because I must. And better it is to summon our selves
then to be summoned. Though we love heaven too much as a place of pleasure,
rather then a place of holiness, yet most men would wish a better causey to it
then to sleep through the cold grave or a dark hole in the earth.

Q. What room has life in the Covenant? Ans. The Administration of the
Law-Covenant is first habitual holiness of works, and then a crown. The
Administration of grace is first faith and a title to Christ our life and hope
of glory, and then habitual holiness, begun here and perfected hereafter. The
Gospel-life is both a reward and a duty of praising and loving eternally in
place of all the ten Commands, yea of Law and Gospel. The Law-life (for ought
that is revealed) is a reward to be purchased by our legal obedience.

Q. If Adam in the intervall betwixt his fall and the publishing of the blessed
Seed, was not to despair, but to rely upon God as mighty to save; What should
such as Judas or Cain do?

A. The conscience of Cain and of despairers, being no authentic Bible nor
Judge, What Judas and Cain in their despairing mood, are to do.
which can carry the controversy between them and God, so long as they are in
the way, or are viators, the Gospel treaty betwixt them and Christ yet standing
and not broken off upon the part of Christ, they are to cherrish and hold up
the Treaty, and (as it were) to force speech out of Christ, and to pursue the
news of an offered salvation. 2. There is no Spirit of God that suggests to
them despair, and bids them write themselves in the black roll of Reprobates,
for though they believe hell, as the Devils happily believe there is a God, yet
they blow the coals of that hellish furnace, and kindle a fire before night. 3.
They being under the Law of Nature, are to rely on infinite mercy able to save.
Their witty darkness of unbeleef says they believe, but they hate mercy in
the general toward others, as to themselves. 2. For a doubting child of God,
because the light of evidence (which to them, in that case is dim) comes
nearer to the natural light of reason, What weak doubters are to do.
then to spiritual light, therefore faith must be set on work to act as faith,
and faith acts most strongly when reason is weakest. Natural causes work more
strongly under opposition, the fire burns most vehemently in winter frost, When
faith acts most strongly.
and the internal heat of the body is most mighty for concoction, when the
coldness of the air is most piercing without, faith sees God most piercingly at
midnight in Job, when rottenness and deadness speaks the contrair, Job 19. I
know surely (so the word, Exodus 8.1. Psalm. 31.8. that my Redeemer lives. Isa.
50.10. He that walks in darkness, and has no light (of evidence) let him
trust on the Name of the Lord, and let him stay himself upon his God, Romans
4.19, 20. (2.) There is a piece of unseen wilfulness in unbeleef, VVilfulness
in unbeleef.
and two refusalls in it, as we see in Thomas, Joh. 20.25. as there is a mass
of sanctified will required in sincere faith, Romans 10.9, 10. Mark. 9.24. and so
resistance must be made to that blind impulsion of will in unbeleef, (...).
by which we please our selves in doubling our doubting. (3.) Should the
commanding of killing the Son, Genesis 22.2. seem to contradict the whole Gospel
of the promised Seed, Genesis 15.4. yet knowing both to come from God, We are to
obey, and leave supposed contradictions to God in time of darkness.
Abraham did well to leave the supposed contradiction to be solved by God, and
believe both as we are to believe food, in no food, and in famine.

Q. Where was there a word that God was Adams God? Ans. Not directly. For 1.
that Covenant was like Letters of the King raised to such a day, and the date
being expired, the Letters cease to be in force. 2. Adam was to win and
purchase (as it were) God to be his God, by consumate obedience. God never said
that he would be Adams God by giving him influences to obey, Why it is not
said, that God was the God of Adam.
and to obey to the end, all influences granted to Adam, to will and to do,
were granted to him. 1. By God Creator, not by the grace of a Redeemer, as in
the Covenant of Grace, to walk, Ezekiel. 36.27. to love, Deuteronomy. 30.6. to persevere,
Jer. 32.39, 40. 2. These influences were free gifts, but not promised. 3. They
seem to be ordinis naturalis, natural, though they did bow and previously
inclince the will, but not so in the New Testament, for the whole Covenant is
called by the promise of the giving of a new heart, Heb. 8.10. Isa. 54.9.13.
Jer. 31.31, 32, 33. Ezekiel. 11.19, 20. Hos. 2.18, 19. And therefore better it is
that God be Lord of my heart, and it be his, then that I be lord of it, Better
our hearts be the Lords then our own.
and my heart be mine own heart, the less of our heart be upon our heart, the
more upon God, the better. Ah! we cannot skill to guide a heart. 3. The
threatening of death to Adam, if he should sin, Genesis 2.17. may infer a Covenant
of life, and that God should be Adams God, if he should obey.

CHAP. IX. What life is promised in the Covenant of Works. 2. Whether all we,
especially the Reprobate, by the fall, lost all right to the creatures. 3. How
the Lord is our God.
Q. WHat is meaned by life promised in the Covenant of Works! What a life was
promised to Adam.
A. 1. Not a life in Christ and the fruit of the merit of blood, as our life is
in the New Covenant, Joh. 10.11. Joh. 3.16. For Adam was not Mediator of
reconciliation here, he was a sort of public Law-head in whom he was to stand
or fall, if any please to call him so a Mediator (...) but it is a Law-life
happily a communion in glory. 2. But the life he lived, and the creatures for
his service seems not to belong to this life, for the creatures were given to
Adam, he not working for them. Yet I should not oppose, if any say that earthly
blessings were given to Adam, as a reward of an actual obedience, as they are
given to such as keep the Law, Deuteronomy. 28. But sure our gain in Christ of such a
life, bought by so noble a Ransom as the Blood of God-man, is not little. Its
rawnesse and greenness of wit, to value it so low as we do. Children see not
what a hireing and taking apple Heaven is.

Q. Whether or no did Adam and all the Reprobats in his loins, by sin, Of our
^ight to the creatures.
loss right to the creatures?

A. There is a threefold right.

1. Natural. 2. Providentiall. 3. Spiritual.
A natural right may be conceived two ways. 1. Absolutely, A threefold
right, natural, providentiall, spiritual.
so creature, and man not created, can have no jus or claim to being or life,
the Creators free gift is our best Charter to life and being. 2. This right may
be conceived, conditionally, as if God create the Sun, a power to give light is
congruous, and debita naturae Solis suitable to the nature of the Sun, nor can
the creature plead for this, as debt: but if the Lord give being, to enjoy this
being can not be sin, There is no law to have being and living, and so no sin
in having it.
because there is no law and command to nothing to receive or not to receive
being and life from the Creator: And where there is no Law, there is no
transgression. And therefore to have being and life cannot be in it self a sin.

2. Providentiall right is but a continuating of life and being, until the
same power that gave it, shall remove it, by way of punishment; What a
providentiall right (...).
For God as Creator, of his Sovereignty, gives being and life, and the
comfortable use of the creatures; but as a Judge ordinarily for sin he removes
it, though he, I deny not, out of his Sovereignty, may, and possibly does,
annihilate the meat that the Angels in assumed bodies, and which the Man
Christ, after the Resurrection, did eat.

3. The spiritual right is that new supernatural Title, which the Elect
believers have, in order to a supernatural end, and all these being made
theirs, to promove their salvation, 1 Cor. 3.21. All things are yours. Rev.
21.7. What a spiritual right is, and how excellent.
He that overcomes shall inherit all things, by Covenant-right, so: he adds,
And I will be his God, and he shall be my Son, Psalm. 37 10. A drink of cold
water, by this Charter, is better then a Kings Crown, and has refreshed some
more then all the choice wine the earth yields. The love of the Giver is better
then wine, Cant. 1.2. and here the Charter is, by many thousands, more precious
then the Land. For nature common to all is over-gilded with Free Grace. And the
natural life and being, and the material heavens we shall enjoy, are blessed
in another manner to the glorified, then these they now enjoy, 1 Cor. 15.40,
41, 42, 43, etc. 2 Pet. 3.13. Rev. 21.1. Isa. 65.17. and they shall be above
the heavens that are, when the mystical body shall be perfected, yea, and the
dust into which the bodies of the Saints are resolved, keeps a spiritual
Covenant relation to God in Christ: As Exodus 3.6. Mat. 22.32. Joh. 6.39. Romans
8.21, 22, 23. for no joint or part of the body, but it must share of Covenant
glory. We look little to any thing but to have and enjoy the dead lump and body
of Gold, dead lands without Christ. See Hos. 2.18.22. Ezekiel. 34.25.27. Ezekiel.
36.29. Lev. 26.6. Psalm. 37.9, 11, 29. 1 Timothy 4.8. Heb. 13.5, 6. Math. 6.25, 26.
Psalm. 34.10. O fair inheritance. 4. As to the second (which is the main
controversy) to enjoy life and being, is the substance of the act, no sin. Men
contraveen a Law to be so and so born, to wit, in sin, for its forbidden by a
Law: But to be born and live, is no sin, To live and to enjoy the creatures is
not in it self sin.
but by order of nature, before Original sin. Nor is it forbidden more to man
to be born and live, then its forbidden to beasts, nor to eat, sleep, wake,
then to them: So neither is it commanded by a Law to die, but it is commanded
and commended to die well, to fall asleep in Christ, 1 These. 4.14.16. to be
faithful to the death, Acts 7.60. Rev. 2.10. Rev. 14.13. (2.) The Elect who
are born heirs of wrath, as others, Ephesians. 2.3. And all the Reprobate should kill
themselves, or be killed, from the birth, if to live and eat were sin, in it
self. But only the Lord of life and death, and his Minister, the Magistrate
has power to take away life and being, no man can be his own burrio. But if it
were sin in it self to live, they ought to expire and restore an usurped life,
which they possess, mala fide, to the owner the Lord, as a thief is oblidged
to restore stolen goods (3.) The dominion of Reprobats over the creatures, is
a part of the good Image of God, Genesis 1.26, 27. and they breath, live, ride,
sail, and are no more then the Elect to lay these aside, then they are to lay
aside the natural knowledge of God, by which they are to glorify God as God,
Romans 1.19, 20, 21. Romans 2.14, 15. Act. 14.16, 17. Now the Reprobates have not
utterly lost the Image of God, as to know there is a God, to honor their
parents, to hurt no man.

4. This opinion looks the rather like a fancy, that it is a temptation in
weak ones, under a sad desertion, Satan riding upon their Melancholy (a
complexion not sanctified, useful to Satan, and if sanctified, Their
temptation, who think they should not eat, nor pray.
a seat of mortification and humble walking) for they judge it sin to eat, and
drink, and sleep, they having no right thereunto, but so they have no right to
live, and are oblidged to kill themselves, and upon the same ground, it was sin
to Adam to speak, to answer God, to breath, to hear the news of the blessed
seed, which all are acts of life, and so acts of sin, and upon the same ground,
that they cannot perform these without sin, they should not pray, for in
praying, they cannot but take the Name of God in vain. For we are not to
abstain from a duty, because of the sinfulness, which adheres to the duty, by
reason of our corruption, for in Christ the sinfulness is pardoned, and the
duty accepted.

5. It necessarily must follow, if it be sin to eat, because the non-converted
have no right spiritual in Christ, to bread, the converted may spoil by their
grounds, If the non-converted, have no right to any thing, then we may spoil
and deprive them of life and all they have.
all the non-converted, of their goods, houses, gold, gardens, vineyards,
lands, and upon the same ground, for the crime of non-regeneration, they must
also deprive them of their lives, and kill them; For they have alike right,
that is, no right (these men being Judges) to either life or goods. And so,
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, must be meant of the converted
neighbor: but with fire and sword all other neighbors may be killed and
spoiled, and so there should be no stealing, no oppressing, no crushing of the
widow, the stranger, the fatherless, the weaker; not grind the faces of the
poor, though their Redeemer be strong, contrair to the Scripture, Prove. 23.11.
Jer. 50.33, 34. Psalm. 94.5, 6, 7, 8. Psalm. 14.4. Exo. 22.26, 27. Isa. 3.12, 13,
14, 15. Mic. 2.3. and so it were lawful to take Crowns, Kingdoms,
inheritances, lands, dignity, and honor, from all the unregenerate Princes,
powers, and rulers on earth, to cut off with the sword all the heathen Nations
who as yet know not Christ, and it were lawful for the regenerate sons and
brethren to kill and spoil Father, Mother, Brethren, Sisters, Kings,
Potentates, Contrymen* strangers, Orphans, exiled, captives, prisoners,
sick, weak, imprisoned, all infants that are by nature the heirs of wrath, upon
this ground, the converted ones judge all non-converts to be void of all due
right to life* or goods, and so in these men, the societies, Churches of Christ
must cease.

Obj. These who enjoy that of which they deserve to be deprived, have no due
right to that of which they deserve to be deprived; but are usurpers, and so
sin. But all the non-regenerated are such, or, they who use that to which they
have no right, do sin in the act of using it.

Ans. 1. They who enjoy that of which they deserve to be deprived, they sin,
and have no due right to use it; Is not universally true. They who enjoy that
which they may and ought by their own private power, restore, such as ill
conquished goods. How true it is, that these who enjoy that, of which they
deserve to be deprived, they have no right to that and sin in using i^.
They sin in using that, true, Prove. 3.27. Exodus 22.26, 27. Luke 19.8. Its a
sin to withhold the raiment though laid in pawnd, which should cover the poor
man's skin in the night, and they have no right to enjoy that.

But they who enjoy that, what ever it be, of which by sin, they deserve to be
deprived, they have no due right to that, it is denied: For if it be life,
being, eating, sleeping, and such things, as only can be taken away, by a
judicial power, and by God the Lord of life and death, and cannot be taken
away by themselves, (for it is lawful for no man to punish himself and take
away his own life) nor by any other, except for capital crimes, they have due
providentiall right to keep and enjoy all such things until the same power
that gave them remove them, nor do they sin in using them. Living in the devils
and damned and Reprobate is no usurping of life.
And it is most dangerous to say, that Devils and the damned in Hell who
dishonor the Majesty of God by their living and being, and so by sin, deserve
to be annihilated and deprived of their being, do sin, in that they live and
are not annihilated, and that all the Elect before their conversion, sin in
that they injo^ being and life. A judge sentenceth a man to die for killing his
father within 24. hours, but by invincible providence he is rescued out of the
hand of the Magistrate, Simile.
and lives diverse years after, the sentenced man sins not before God nor
against the law of the land, in that he lives, nor can he be called an usurper
and unjust, malae fidei, possessour of his life: For the sentence was not that
he should take away his life with his own hand, but that it should be taken
away by the judicial hand and executioner of the Magistrate. Nor is this
Providentiall right, a right of mere permission but of positive donation and
free-gift, for then we might by the same reason, say that Reprobate men have a
right of mere permission to keep and enjoy the knowledge of these, that God is:
Superiors, Parents are to be honored: the whole is more then the part; The
Reprobate and non-converted, in the Visible Church, want all spiritual right
by faith in Christ to life and the creatures, and they sin in the manner of
living, eating, etc.
Yea they have the same natural and providentiall right by nature that other
sinners have to the one as to the other. 2. These who enjoy that, of which they
deserve to be deprived, they sin in the act of using, as touching the substance
of the act of living, being, eating, drinking: That is most false. These who
enjoy that, of which they deserve to be deprived, they, in modo, in the way,
manner, and end of living, eating, etc. do sin: It is true: and such have not
spiritual and supernatural right in Christ (which they ought to have, if they
be in the Visible Church and hearers of the Gospel) to life, being and the
creatures, and they sin in not believing, Romans 14. not eating for the Glory of
God, 1 Cor. 10.31. Natural men care not if they have and enjoy things so they
have them: They have being, so have earth, stones, etc. they live, so do trees
and herbs, they have health, so have beasts and birds, they swallow up many
years, so do Ravens, and Hearts and other beasts, a long lump, How woeful to have
a lump of life and time and no right to life.
many thousand yairds and miles of life are sought, diu sunt, non diu vivunt.
But who lives for God, who sleeps, who wakes, who eats for God and his Glory?
and they who make themselves their last end, Idolatrously put self in the room
of God, who only is the last end of all, Romans 11.36. Rev. 4.11. Prove. 16.4. and
as good make self the first Author of Heaven and Earth and Creator as the last
end. Ye who eat and drink, who pays your reckoning? Christ? Or are you
usurpers? Have you any Charter? Or do ye rob the Lord?

Q. What way is God ours?

A. By Covenant, Ezekiel. 34.24. Genes. 17.7. Jere. 32.38. Zech. 13.9. But he is
not ours as if we had some gifted right and dominion over him, as we have over
the creatures. 2. Nor is he ours as we are his, the clay has no sovereignty
over the Potter. Nor 3. is God simply as God ours, but God as it were coming
down in Christ to us Covenant-wayes as God incarnate, How God is our^*
to make out his goodness, grace, mercy to and for us. 4. Its true God
incarnate, Christ, is principally Gods, 1 Cor. 3.21. not ours. He is all for
God, he is Immanuel, our Immanuel in order to save us, and so is more ours then
the God of Angels.

2. God is the fluier of the Saints desire, more to them then all heaven in the
length and breadth thereof, God to the Saints and to the Man CHRIST a heaven.
and all the inhabitants thereof, Psalm. 73.25. Isa. 63.16. more then all the
Angels and Saints, 1 These. 4.16. (2.) There is no hell to Christ but afar off
God, Psalm. 22.1. Math. 27.45. no heaven but the glory he had with the father,
John 17.5. (3.) There is nothing more like a spiritual disposition then when
the Spouse, Cant. 3. has soul-love to Christ: I sought him whom my soul loved.
(2.) She has an ardent desire after him, I sought him but I found him not. 3.
There could not be such diligent search after she found him, if there had not
been strong faith. There may be a train of graces, and yet unquietness for the
want of Christ.
4. And her conference with the watchmen, Saw ye him whom my soul loves?
says, She enjoyed Ordinances and means, yet there may be (which is to be
observed) a furniture of grace and a want of Christ, I went a little further, I
found him whom my soul loves, Cant. 5. There is 1. a waking heart. 2. A
discerning of the Beloved, and a telling over again of his words, Open to me,
my sister, etc. 3. A stirring of Christ's hand upon the keyhole of the heart.
4. A moving of the bowels for him. 5. A seeking of him and a praying, but no
finding nor answer. 6. A love-sicknesse for him, and yet a missing of himself,
I sought him but I found him not. So compare Cant. 1.1, 4. with Cant. 2, 3, 4.
with v. 6, 8. and other places, it will be clear a Godhead can only quiet the
spirit, and that its a question whether we know the field where the Pearl is,
and the Rubies, Saphirs, precious stones that are hid here, which do in worth
exceed the capapacity of Angels and Saints.

Therefore should his glory be the last end and stirrer of us in all our
actings, A spiritual soul acts in God,
and grace the only efficient in all, and so much of God (if he be ours by
Covenant) as our ways, intentions may smell of him. But there is much of the
creature, of self, of gain, of empty glory, in our spiritual actings. God
weighs not down the creature nor heaven and union with Christ: as Exodus 32.32.
Romans 9.3. (2.) Its a spiritual soul that misseth God, rather then the train of
all the graces of faith, And misses God rather then any created saving grace.
love, hope, d^si^e of and joying in him. And know he is away though heaven
were in the heart, and can discern when the Ordinances are empty. 3. It engages
all we are, hands, knees, body, Exo. 20.5. Psalm. 44.20. 1 Cor. 6.19. self to be
for God, and to live wholly in him, not in our selves. 4. We are not to believe
in believing, nor to be sick of love with the love of Christ, nor to make a god
of faith or love. Its a spiritual condition to have grace and to miss Christ.

CHAP. X.
Cotvin. cont. Molin. c. 8.. 7. Primo foedere per inobedientiam primi hominis
rupto, cessabat etiam obligatio ad eam obedientiam lege praescriptam. Ibid. c.
9.. 5. Remonstr. in Scrip Synod. Dored. 4. ^a. 145.
Q. WHat are the false grounds of the Lords making the Covenant of Grace?

A. There are two bastard grounds devised by Arminians. 1. Because the Covenant
of Works cannot oblidge both to active and passive obedience, but to one of
them only (say they) and the Covenant of Works was so rigid, that God could not
follow it out, and cast infants in hell for a sin which is theirs, only by
imputation, and was pardoned to the first man that committed it. Therefore he
was necessitated to make a Covenant of Grace with all mankind, none excepted.
But the Covenant of Works is broken, and can now be a way of Justification and
salvation to none, but yet it oblidges all. And sin cannot make us lawless,
for the spiritual Law is of an eternal obligation. 2. They that never heard
of Christ, perish by the Law, and not by the Covenant of Grace of which they
never heard, The Law and the ^^rst Covenant is holy, and oblidgeth all to
acti^^ obedience always.
and the Gospel is written in the heart of none. 3. The first Covenant was holy
and spiritual, and God should unjustly threaten death upon infants, if they be
not guilty of eternal condemnation, as Arminius, disp. pub. 7. th. 16.3. and
the Scripture says, infants are guilty of this sin, Ephesians. 2.3. Romans 5. Psalm.
51.5. Job 14.4. As also Christ must not have died for the sins of Infants, if
there be no sin in them, they need not the ransom of Christ's Blood. The other
bastard ground is, There is sin in Infants.
the natural antecedent desire and love of God to have all saved, moved him
(say they) to make this Covenant of Grace with all. But this makes away
free grace, and changes God as the blind Talmud, The natural antecedent love
of GOD, which is fancied to be the ground of the Covenant of Grace, is as what
the Jews in the Talmud, and the Alcaron say of God. Doctrine. fidei Judai^.
(...). 5. trac. 8. ib ord. 1. disp. 7. Alcar. c. 43.
which says God has a secret place in which he afflicts himself, because he
burnt the Temple, and delivered the Jews to captivity. As also, the Lord
remembering the captivity of the Jews, and their desolation, he powers out two
tears every day in the Sea or Ocean, and for grief, smites his breasts with
both his hands. And the Alcoran says, that God and the Angels wish well to
Mahomet, but cannot free him from death. So made the Heathen their Jupiter to
deplore the destinies which he could not amend. And what is this, but to say,
God has passionate desires to have all, Elect, and Reprobat, Men, and Angels,
to obey and be eternally saved, but he cannot help the matter; and therefore
must upon the same account, be sorrowful and mourn that he cannot get all
saved, which destroys the power of grace and restrains the outgoings of
free-love.

CHAP. XI. The threefold Covenant considered. 2. The Law pressed upon Israel
was not a Covenant of Works, but a darker dispensation of Grace. 3. The
threefold Covenant of Arminians refuted. 4. Diverse considerations of the Law
and the Gospel.
THere be who hold that there be three Covenants. 1. The Covenant of nature.
1. A Covenant of Nature, whereby God as Creator required perfect obedience
from Adam in Paradise, with promise of life, and threatening of death.

2. Of Grace.
2. The Covenant of Grace, whereby he promises life and forgiveness in Christ's
Blood to believers.

3. The subservient Covenant and the differences between it and the Covenant of
nature, which hold not.
3. A subservient Covenant, made 1. With Israel, not wit^ Adam, and all
mankind. 2. For a time with Israel, not for ever, as the natural Covenant. 3.
In Mount Sinai, not in Paradise. 4. To terrify and keep in bondage (the other
from an inward principle required, obedience.) 5. To restrain Israel from
outward sins, to prove the people, that the fear of God might be before their
eyes, that they should not sin. So they expound Exo. 20.20. the other Covenant
was to restrain from all sin. Yea and so was that on Mount Sinai, to do all
that are written in the Book of the Law, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Deuteronomy. 28.1, 2, 3, 4. etc.
to that same end, to love God with all the heart, and with all the soul, Deuteronomy.
10.12. Deuteronomy. 5.1, 2, 3. Deuteronomy. 6.1, 2, 3. Deuteronomy. 5.29. Deuteronomy. 6.5. With all the
heart, with all the soul, with all the might, which is expounded by Christ,
Mat. 22.37. Luke 10.27. in as full a hight of perfection as ever was required
of Adam. 6. It was written to Israel in Tables of stone: The natural Covenant
was written in the heart; so was there a circumcised heart promised to Israel,
Deuteronomy. 30.6. though sparingly. 7. It was (say they) given by the Mediator Moses,
as that of nature was without a Mediator. Yea, Moses was the Typical Mediator
of the young Covenant of Grace.

The differences between the subservient Covenant, and that of Grace.

The differences between the Covenant subservient (as they call it) and that of
grace are ^ull.
1. In the subservient, God only approves righteousness and condemns sin; in
that of Grace he pardons and renues. Ans. Acts 15.11. We believe through the
Grace of the Lord Jesus, we shall be saved even as they under that Covenant.
Acts 10.43. To him gave all the Prophets witness, that through his Name,
whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of sins. Abraham and David
were justified, in that sin was not imputed to them, not by works, Romans 4.1, 2,
3, -- 6, 7, 8, 9, etc. Genesis 15.6. Psalm. 32.1.2.5. I said I will confess my
transgression, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Isa. 4325. I, even I
am he that blots out thy transgressions for my own sake, Righteousness and
forgiveness under that subservient Covenant.
and I will not remember thy sins. So David was a man according to the heart of
God, So Asa, Josiah, Jehoshaphat, Samuel, Baruch, Gedeon, Daniel, the Prophets,
under that subservient Covenant (except they be under a fourth Covenant) were
renewed, justified, saved by faith, Heb. 11. as under a Covenant of Grace.

2. The former was, do and live, this was, believe and live. Ans. Doing and
living was but a shuting them up under the Law, that they might flee to Christ
in whom they believed; else the fathers must be saved and justified by works
contrair to Romans 2. Romans 4. Heb. 11.

3. In antiquity, the former came in as added 430. years after the promise of
grace, Gal. 3.17.

Ans. True, but he speaks of the Covenant in Sinai, according to the strict Law
part, which could not save, and so its different. But that proves not two
Covenants.

4. In the former is compulsion and the Spirit of bondage, in this heart
inclining freedom and the Spirit of Adoption. Ans. Yet the differences are
accidental, there was a legal awing of the hearts, as if they had been
Servants, yet Heirs and Sons they were, Gal. 4.1, 2. The whole Book of the
Proverbs spoke to the Godly as to Adopted Sons. They were believers, Heb. 11.
Romans 4. Acts 10.43. and so Sons as touching a spiritual state, John 1.11, 12.
In regard of Oeconomie, it was somewhat more rigid and legal, they were
restrained as servants; Yet it was the Covenant of Grace, by which believing
Jews were justified and saved, Acts 15. v. 11. Acts 10.43.

5. In the former man is dead, in this man is humbled for sin? Answ. Legally
dead, except they would flee to Christ, and legally condemned, but there was
true humiliation for sins under that Covenant: As David, Josiah, Hezekiah, and
all believers then, as now, were pardoned and justified.

6. In the former there are commands, not strength, but here there be promises
and grace given? Ans. The full abundance of grace and of a new heart, was
reserved until now. And the Law could not make perfect nor give pardon, in the
blood of beasts; as touching that legal dispensation: But both grace, the
Spirit, pardon, righteousness and life were received and believed; by looking
on Christ to come.

7. In the former, Canaan was promised, in this, Heaven. Ans. Canaan is
promised only but sacramentally, and that was a poedagogicall promise for the
infancy of that Church, but a type which was then in that Covenant, and is not
now, make not two Covenants, one then, and another now? Except ye say, there
was then a Lamb in the Passover, which was a Type of Christ to come, and there
is now no such Type, because the body is come, and Christ the true High Priest
offered himself. Therefore there are two Christ's, one then to come, another now
who has come already. The Lords dispensation with Israel is often called a
Covenant, now it must either be a Covenant of Works, or of Grace, or a third
Covenant.

But the truth is, the Law as pressed upon Israel was not a Covenant of Works.

1. The Law as the Law or as a Covenant of Works is made with perfect men who
need no mercy; But this Covenant is made with sinners, with an express preface
of mercy: I am the Lord thy God that brought thee out of the land of Egypt,
etc. It is made with stiff-necked Israel, The Law as proponed to Israel was the
very Covenant of Grace.
Deuteronomy. 29. Deuteronomy. 30. c. 31. c. 32. and that is called a Covenant from the end
and object, as motions are denominate from their end: for the end of the Lords
pressing the Law upon them was to bring them under a blessed necessity to seek
salvation in their true City of Refuge Christ Jesus, who redeemed them out of
the spiritual bondage of sin. 2. It was the Covenant made with Abraham, which
was a Covenant of Grace: and though it be called, The Covenant made at Horeb,
was the same which God made with Abraham.
Deuteronomy. 29.1* a Covenant beside that which was made in Horeb: Because 1. Renewed
again after their breach. 2. Repeated a little before the death of Moses, Deuteronomy.
31.28.29.30. (3.) Because there were some additions of special blessings,
cursings, Ceremonial Commands, that were not in the formerly proposed
Covenant, Exodus 20. yet the same it was in substance, to love the Lord with all
the heart, Deuteronomy. 2.10, 12, 13, 14. The same with that of Abraham, Deuteronomy. 8.18.
That he may establish his Covenant, which he swear unto thy fathers, as it is
this day, When he is to deliver them out of Egypt, Exodus 2.24. And God heard
their groaning, and remembered his Covenant with Abraham and Isaak and Jacob. So
the Lord expones it in his appearing to Moses, Exodus 3.6. Jer. 31.32. Not
according to the Covenant which I made with their fathers, in the day that I
took them by the hand, to bring them out of the Land of Egypt. Now that was
the Covenant which God made with Abraham, of which Circumcision was a seal,
Genesis 17. not of a temporary Canaan only, but of heart Circumcision, Col. 2.11.
For the Lord expres^y tells th^^, when he took them by the hand as his married
people, to bring them out of the Land of Egypt, and out of the house of
bondage, Exodus 20. He meant no other Covenant then he made with Abraham, of
believing, Genesis 15. and of walking before him and being perfect, Genesis 17.1, 2.
which is somewhat more legal, as Moses* and the Lord himself expones it, Exodus
2.24. Exodus 3.6. Exodus 20.1, 2. And he shows them, Lev. 26. if in their
enemies land they repent and shall come out and meet the rod, and their
uncircumcised hearts shall willingly accept of the punishment of their
iniquity: 42. Then (says the Lord) I will remember my Covenant with Jacob, and
also my Covenant with Isaac, and also my Covenant with Abraham will I remember,
Beside there are not here three Covenants, but one, there is no word of the
subservient Covenant with Israel in Sinai. Except that when he mentions the
one, he excludes not the other. For to walk before the Lord required in
Abraham's Covenant Genesis 17.1. is to walk in all the ways of the Lord, to fear
and love him, Deuteronomy. 10.12, 13. and Samuel, 1 Samuel 12.22. Joshua, Josh. 24.22,
23, 24, 25. And Mary, Luke 1.55. And Zachary, ver. 70, 72, 73. refer to the
Covenant made with Abraham, and Deuteronomy. 6. the Covenant at Horeb, the Lord made
with Abraham to give Canaan to his seed, ver. 10. Deuteronomy. 7.12. If thou hearken
to these judgments to do them, it shall come to pass that the Lord thy God
will keep unto thee the Covenant of mercy that he swear unto thy fathers, etc.

3. This Covenant has the promise of a circumcised heart, Deuteronomy. 30.6. and of
the word of faith that is near in the mouth, and of the righteousness of faith
clearly differenced from the righteousness of the Law by doing. For so Paul,
Romans 10.5, 6, 7, etc. expones, Moses, Deuteronomy. 30.11, 12, 13, 14.

4. The Covenant of Works taught nothing of the way of expiation of sin by
blood typifying the Ransom of blood that Christ was to pay for our sins, as
this Covenant, all along had sacrifices and blood to confirm it. Exodus 24.8.
And Moses took the blood and sprinkled it on the people, and said, behold this
is the Blood of the Covenant which the Lord has made with you, concerning all
these words. Now the words were the ten Commandments. See Heb. 9. v. 18, 19,
20, 21, 22, 23, 24. (5.) This Covenant is made with Israel only, Exodus 20.
Deuteronomy. 5. c. 6. Deuteronomy. 6.5, 6, 7.12. The Covenant of Works is made with all
mankind. (6.) No people under the Law can be justified and saved thereby, nor
have their sins pardoned, Romans 3.9, 10, 11. -- 19, 20. Romans 4.1, 2, 3, 4. Romans
9. Romans 10. Psalm. 130 3. Psalm. 143.2. Gal. 3.1, 2, 3. -- 10, 11, 12, 13. But in
this Covenant, Abraham, David, Genesis 15. Psalm. 32. Romans 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9. And the Jews by faith, have remission of sins and salvation, as also the
Gentiles have, Acts 10.43. Acts 15.11. (7.) The Lord minds to lay aside the Law
as inconsistent with the Covenant of Grace, Gal. 3.18. If the inheritance be by
the Law, then it is not by promise, but God gave it to Abraham by promise: For
to live by this Covenant, is a life of promises, all being here promised, The
new Covenant a life of promises:
both faith the condition, and perseverance therein, and a new heart,
righteousness, pardon, and life. A man that has his estate in papers and in
good words that are transient things, may seem a poor man, but to live by
promises here is the rich life of the heirs of hope, this is strong consolation
under deadness, absence, faith working underground in the dark, Gal. 3.21. If
there had been a Law which could have given life, verily righteousness should
have been by the Law.

How God commands what.
Though he commanded them to do the Law, it was not that they should live
thereby, and though he commanded us the same, it is another command, as it
were, it is not so much now that we obey from the Authority of God Lawgiver
under pain of damnation (though that be not laid aside, but urged in a Gospel
intention upon heirs) as from the love of God, Grace-giver; as also there is an
intrinsecall amaenitie in Christ drawing, and obedience now becomes
connaturall, free, delightful. Let these consider, to whom the yoke of
obedience is a torment and a man-mill.

8. The Passover and Circumcision, Genesis 17.7. all along were seals of the
Covenant, as Baptism one with Circumcision in substance, Col. 2.11. is the seal
of the same Covenant, The Law as the Law required no Circumcision, no sacrifice
nor any Type representing Christ.
Acts 2.39, 40, 41. Now the Law required no Circumcision, no shedding of blood,
no Repentance, no new heart, but eternal condemnation followed the least
breach thereof. Paul says indeed, Gal. 5.3. If ye be Circumcised (as the false
Apostles would have, that thereby you may be justified and saved) you are
debtors to keep the whole Law perfectly, as the only way to life, and by no
other Covenant can you be justified and saved, now Abraham was not circumcised
that way, circumcision did bind Abraham to keep the Law, as a Ceremony and
Seal of the Covenant of Grace commanded of God. But the Law as a Covenant of
Works does command no Ceremony, no Sacrifice, no Type of Christ Mediator at
all.

Its true that first Covenant had Moses for its mediator, but as he was a Type
of Christ, The first Covenant had the Mediator Christ as this has, but veiled
in the one, revealed in the other.

How the first Covenant is faulty.


so Christ yesterday and the day was the real Mediator, but veiled. The New
Covenant has better promises, Heb. 8.6. Heb. 7.22. its a better Covenant, Heb.
7.22. has a better real, not a Typical surety, a better Priest who offered
himself through the eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.14. a better Sacrifice, because of
the plainness, John 16.29. 2 Cor. 3.18. because the real promises are made
out to us, because of a larger measure of Grace, 2 Cor. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. And the
first Covenant is faulty, Heb. 8.7. not because there was no Salvation by it,
the contrare is Heb. 11. but that is comparatively spoken: because the blood of
beasts therein could not take away sins, Heb. 10.1, 2, 3, 4. because
forgiveness of sins is promised darkly in the first Covenant, but plainly in
the other, because Grace is promised sparingly in the former, but here
abundantly, the Law being written in the heart, John 7.39. Esa. 54.13.

And it is true, Gal. 4.22, 23, 24, etc. they seem to be made contrare
Covenants: But Paul speaks, Gal. 3. of the Law as relative to that people, and
so it pressed them to Christ, and keeps them as young Heirs under nonage. How
Paul speaks of the Covenant, Gal, 3. and how Gal. 4.
2. He speaks of the Law absolutely, as contradistinguished from the Gospel,
Gal. 4.21. so it is a Covenant of Works begetting children to bondage: 2. Who
come short of righteousness and the inheritance, and shall not be saved. 3.
Who are casten out of the Kingdom of Grace. 4. Who persecute the Godly the
Sons of promise, so is the Law as it was in Adams days, and is now to all the
Reprobate; so the Godly are not under the Law and the Covenant of Works. The
Covenant urged upon Believers is to prove them, when they stand afar off and
tremble, Exodus 20.20. Fear not (says Moses) God is come to prove you (not to
damn you) and therefore Calvine solidely observes that Paul, Calvin. Instit.
l. 11. ^. XI. Sect. 7, 8.
2 Cor. 3. speaks with less respect of the Law then the Prophets do, for their
cause, who out of a vain affectation of the Law-Ceremonies, gave too much to
the Law and darkened the Gospel, and says the one was 1. Literal. 2. Written
in stone. 3. A Sermon of death and wrath. 4. To be done away and less
glorious, whereas the Gospel is Spiritual. 2. Written on the heart. 3. The
Ministry of life. 4. And glorious: and praises put upon the Law, agree not to
it of its own nature, but as it was used by the Lord to prove them, Exodus
29.20. and chase them to Christ.

The Arminians also (especially Episopius) make three Covenants. Epist. par. 3.
disp. 12.
1. One with Abraham, in which he requires sincere worship and putting away
strange gods: Beside 2. Faith and Universal obedience, and promised Canaan to
his seed and Spiritual blessings darkly. 2. One in Mount Sinai in these three
Laws Moral, Ceremonial and Judicial, The Arminians three Covenants, dis. 14.
with a promise of Temporal good things, but to no sinners promise of life
Eternal. 3. A Covenant of Grace, with a promise of pardon and life to all that
believe and repent, to all mankind, but he denies 1. All infused habits,
contrare to Isa. 44.1, 2, 3. Isa. 59.20, 21. Zach 12.10. Joh. 4.14. Joh. 7.37.
John 16.7, 8. 1 John 3.9. he says that 2. all commands are easy by Grace. 3.
That the promise of earthly things in their abundance is abolished, in that we
are called to patient suffering. 4. That there is no threatening in this
Covenant, but that of Hell fire. But the Covenant made with Abraham is that of
Grace made with all the Seed, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Deuteronomy. 7.5, 6, 7, 12. Lev. 26.40, 41.
and made with all Believers, who are Abraham's children, Gal. 3.13, 14, 18, 19.
Romans 4.1, 2, 3, 4. Luke 19.9. yea with the whole race of man without exception.
(2.) The second Covenant which promises only blessings is made rather with
beasts, that well fed, then with men, contrare to Psalm. 73.25. Isa. 57.1.2, 3.
Psalm. 37.37. and it must build some Chalmer in hell, where the fathers were
before Christ, a dream unknown to Scripture. The third Covenant makes the
Covenant of Grace a Covenant of Works, and holds out life and pardon, upon
condition that freewill repent and believe and stand on its own feet, for there
is neither faith, nor a new heart nor repentance promised contrare to Deuteronomy.
30.6. Ezekiel. 11.19, 20. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. Isa. 59.19* 20, 21. Isa. 44.1, 2, 3, 4,
5. Zech. 12.10.

CHAP. XII. 1. All are to try under what Covenant they are. 2. Threatenings
under the New Testament are more spiritual 3. Desertions under both are
compared. 4. Considerable differences of such as are under the Covenant of
Works, and such as are under the Covenant of Grace. 5. Of legal terrors. 6. Of
convictions compelled, free, legal, etc.
Quest. 1. WHether should not all try under what Covenant they are.

Answ. Self-searching is a reflect act upon the state (and such acts are more
spiritual, then direct acts) and therefore it should be the work of all, to
try, under what reign they are, whether of the first or second Adam. And
where^s Angels cover their faces and their feet with wings, Self searching
necessary.
Isa. 6. before God and are full of eyes, as without, so also within R^v. 4.8.
We may hence learn, such come nearest to the nature of these pure and heavenly
Spirits, who have eyes within to see what they are, and their blackness of
face and feet, when they compare themselves either with the Holy God, or his
Holy Law. 2. The Carnal man is a beast, Psalm 49.20. and beasts have no reflect
acts upon their own beastly state. Reflect ^cts are more spiritual then direct
acts.
3. The more of a spiritual life is in any the more stirring in communing with
their own heart, the Law makes, the more of life that is in the worm when
tramped on, the more stirring it makes: deadness and stupiditie in not being
versed and well read and skilled in our selves and our own heart, argues little
of the Spirit, and estrangement to a spiritual Covenant, nor can any lay hold
on the Covenant of Grace in a night dream.

Quest. Whether are there rarer threatenings of Temporal evils under the New
Covenant, then under the Old?

Answ. It cannot be denied, except the threatenings of the Sword, Famine
Pestilence on Jerusalem, and the desolation upon the Jews, Math. 23. Math. 24.
but in place of all the diseases of Egypt, Threatenings under the New Testament
more spiritual, then under the Old.
Levit. 26. and the long Roll of dreadful judgments and curses temporal,
Deuteronomy. 28. denounced against the transgressors of the former Covenant, Christ
and the Apostles are more sparing in denouncing temporal plagues in the New
Testament. Christ says the worm never dies, the fire never goes out, the
Hypocrite is to be bound hand and foot and cansten into utter darkness, Math.
22.12. and the Holy Ghost such shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, 1
Cor. 6 9. Ephesians. 5.5. the Apostate is near a curse, his end burning, Heb. 8.6. he
is to look for judgment and fiery indignation, Heb. 10.27. to some is reserved
the blackness of darkness for ever, Jude 7. the lake that burns with fire
and brimstone, which is the second death, Rev. 21.8. Because 1. Temporal
blessings and curses are more legal, and more easily believed, when the light
was dimmer then now, when light is larger, convictions stronger, and men are
more ap^ to believe Everlasting wrath. Desertions under the Old and New
Testament compared.
2. Its a more Gospel way to bear in the threatening of Everlasting wrath then
of Temporal rods. 3. Desertions and trials under the Law were more legal and
sharp and sad upon David, Ezekiah, Job, Jeremiah, Heman. Psalm. 6. Psalm. 38.
Psalm. 77. Psalm. 102. Psalm. 88. Isa. 38. Jer. 20. But it is to be thought, that
in regard the day now has dawne, the Gospel desertions coeteris paribus for
the abundance of light, are more sharp nearer to despair, see 2 Cor. 1.8. We
were pressed out of measure above strength, in so much that we despaired even
of life, having received the sentence of death. Its a doubt if Paul should be
so pressed by a sentence of temporary death. Though there be a larger measure
of faith, to bear up the soul under the New Testament: but it would appear
there is more of hell now then under that dispensation, and that the Gospel
despair of Judas and of these that cry for mountains and hills, to cover them,
Luke 23.29, 30. is more intolerable under the Gospel. The Saint are stronger
to suffer under the New Testament then under the Old.
(4.) There is a more numerous company of these who have not loved their lives
to the death, and the Martyrs that suffered more exquisite torments for
Christ, under the persecuting Emperors and reign of Antichrist, then ever
before; the constraining love of Christ, which is stronger then death or hell
has so swallowed up all temporary sufferings, the Spirit has such influence
on the flesh. (5.) When the world seeks wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. and Rabbis of the
Jews and learning and arts abound all the world over, A larger number of
Godly, of the rude and unlearned, th^n of the wise and learned according to the
flesh.
as the profound Philosophers of the Gentiles, the wonders of nature prove, yet
not many wise are called, 1 Cor. 3.21, 26, 27. and unlettered and ignorant,
are, in number, for Godly spiritual knowledge, far beyond the Godly learned;
and make that true, Esa. 11.9. The earth shall be filled with the knowledge of
the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea, and Isa. 30.26. And the light of the
Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun shall be as the
light of seven days, so has the Lord darkened carnal learning, though of it
self the good gift of God, with the shining of spiritual wi^edome in the fools
of the world, for so are they judged, 1 Cor. 1.27.

Q. 3. What are the special differences of one under the Covenant of Works,
and of one under the Covenant of Grace? Its a Law-state to be under the
dominion of sin, the nature of this dominion.
Answ 1. The dominion and kingly power of sin, to condemn and judge to eternal
wrath, and also to command against all shadow of reason, such crying sins, 1
Cor. 6.9, 10. Romans 1.29, 30. Gal. 5.20, 21. Ephesians. 4.17, 18, 19. Col 3.5. 1 Timothy
1.9. Rev. 21.8. Rev. 22.15, 16. without exception makes an universal slave;
for as far as the lusts of sin go, as far goes the dominion of sin, and this is
to be under the Law, Romans 6.14. (2.) There is subjection to the Law when men
are agents in resigning and giving themselves over, or offer themselves as
sacrifices at the altar, or servants that tender their service to their
masters, Romans 6.16. to sin, which has strength from the Law to condemn, 1
Cor. 15.56. and to be a captive is not intended, but comes on by occasional
force, Romans 7. such are patients as it were. But 3. Then they are sins
servants, when there is a Law of sin and a Covenant, as there is between a
master and a servant, And 2. full consent, and men give themselves, and
willingly commit and deliver themselves (the word spoken of Christ's
willingness to offer himself for us, Ephesians. 5.25. and to God the Judge, 1. Pet.
2.23.) to commit filthiness (...) in abundance, The difference between the
wrestling and protesting of a natural conscience against the flesh, and
between the flesh and the Spirit.
with greediness, Esa. 9.19. when the renewed part enters not a spiritual
protestation on the contrare, see Romans 7.19. the carnal protestation entered
by natural reason is not the protestation of the renewed will and affections
against the will and affections, but will against will makes a division of the
practical act, and division weakens, the half is less then the whole,
especially when half and half are contrare, half fire and half water makes the
burning less, half light, half darkness makes twylight, its not perfect day
light, yea and it not only lesseneth, but weakneth, yea and alters the kind of
the moral act, no reason can admit that when a merchand casts his goods in the
sea for fear of shipwrake, that he does an act of prodigality or wastrie: It
wants delight and full consent. Herod's killing of John Baptist, though he did
it with sorrow, yet was no compelled nor divided action between renewed
affection and unrenued affection. And so it was no protestation in favor of
the Law of God, for he was not grieved, because murdering of the man of God
was against the honor of God, but because not murdering of him was against
his supposed credit, he should appear before men perjured, and to kill was a
torment of conscience, it was then a protestation in favor of his own credit
and conscience natural. Hence the formal objects of action and action, show
the clear difference between the combat between sense and reason, or between a
natural conscience and the flesh, (for a natural conscience cannot plead for,
and protest in favor of the spiritual Law of God) and the combat between the
flesh and the Sprit. 2. The second special difference is in the Law
convictions and the Gospel convictions, Compelled convictions argue a
Law-Spirit,
convictions under the Gospel, are stronger and more solid, for they have more
of sanctified reason: 2. Will. 3. Inclination of heart and affection: A
believer accuses himself and joines actively with the Spirit to convince
himself, and hightens his own guiltiness, Psalm. 51.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Dan. 9.5,
6, 7, 8, 9, 20. but a Law conviction comes upon Devils and they tremble, John
2.19. and upon such as are under the Law, and are unsent for, by resultance
from a natural conscience, as heat from fire, light from the Sun: Compelled
convictions speak a Law-state.

2. It is easier to be found and Orthodox, then to be Godly, It is easier to be
found then to be Godly.
Satan in a manner foundly believes there is one God, Jam. 2.19. and that
Christ is the Son of God, Luke 4.34. and so does the carnal Jew teach that it
is not lawful to steal, to commit adultery, Romans 2.21, 22. But in the Old and
New Testament, Devils never accuse themselves of sin, but tempt to it, and
challenge the Law and God. Genesis 3.4, 5. of unjustice, never themselves; Devils
are most properly under the Covenant of Works, and by no command is the Gospel
Preached to them, and next to them are such as are found in the letter of the
Gospel, but never convinced of sin: Such are most under the Law, as have least
Law-work and Law-condemnation upon their Spirits, these that are under the Law
most, as touching their state, are most under the letter, least under the
Spirit, as touching any penal awaking. Legal terrors convert none.
To be under Law-bondage is, a more punishment to Devils and men under a Law
state, for legal terrors are upon Devils, Math. 8.29. Jam. 2.19. and Cain Genesis
4.14. punishment as such neither makes, nor denominateth any gracious, it is
but accidental to prepare any for Christ, Legal terrors may be mistaken and
conceived to be the child birth of Regeneration
many tormented with the Law have believed such a case to be the pain of the
second birth, when it was but a mere Law-feaver, and have returned to their
vomit and become more loose and profane. 1. Because the Law as the Law can
convert none. 2. Wrestling with Law-bondage without any Gospel Grace is but a
contradicting of God, and his justice; and God recompenceth opposing and
blaspheming of him in hell, with more sinful looseness. 3. Law-light under
legal terrors shines more clearly, and the guiltiness in not making use of
rods of that nature is so much the more grievous. Ye that have been scadded and
burnt in this furnace, and are come back from hell, are taught by sense to
believe there is a hell, and though hell torment can convert no man, yet it
renders men more unexcusable: Humbling, wakning, and sanctifying Law-bondage is
more then a work of the Law when it brings forth confessing, praying,
believing, humble submitting to God, in Job, David, H^zekiah, Heman, and what a
Physician is Christ who can heal us with burning and coals of hell.

Literal and legal conviction on the mind, and Gospel conviction on the
affection.
3. A man under a Law-work may give a legal and dead assent, to both the truth
and goodness of the promises liberally conceived, as temporaries do, and
Simon Magus wonders, but Saul, Acts 9. the Jailer trembles, Acts 16. but that
is in regard of the conviction not of the mind only, but of the conviction of
affection and the yielding to what shall I do? But Foelix trimbleth, but only
in regard of literal conviction on the mind, but neither he nor Magus comes to
what shall I do? they differ as the burning light of a fire, which both casts
light and with it shi^ing heat also, and the light that precious stones cast in
the night, which is both little and has no heat. Fyrie and piercing
convictions are good, there is a dead conviction of the letter that does not
profit.

Natural and supernatural convictions, the danger of the latter, if they be
fiery, and not tempered with grace.
4. There is a strong Law-conviction that vengeance follows the scaddings of
Sodomie, and the killing of parents, because natural instinct kindles and
fires the soul with Law-apprehensions, when the mind has engraven sharpness
to discern undeniable principles, but the conscience is more dull in
apprehending that spiritual vengeance follows such spiritual sins as
unbelief, because until there be some supernatural revelation, we are dead to
the Gospel truths, and Gospel sins, but when a common Grace hightens the soul
to a supernatural assent, that Christ is a Teacher sent of God, Joh. 7.28.
Joh. 3.2. the conviction is more strong: But because it is more supernatural,
and in stead of kindly affection of love which it wants, it is mixed with
hatred and anger and so degeners into fiery indignation against the Holy
Ghost, as Joh. 15.24. compared with Math. 12.15, 26.31. clears. 5. Conviction
which is no more but conviction, ^are conviction is no Godly principle.
is no godly principle, nor makes any heart change, yea it goes dangerously on
to wonder and despise, except it send down coals of fire to the affections. 6.
He who is under the Covenant of Grace finds a threefold sweetness in
obedience. A sweetness in the hardest command, because it is the holy will of
God, in a child under grace.
1. An inbred sweetness in the command. 2. In the strength by which he acts.
3. An inbred sweetness in a communion with God. No man is any other way under
the Law, then under a yoke, what is only written seems the oldnesse of the
letter, Romans 7. and is dead of it self, and lays on a burden, but gives no
back to bear. He that is under Grace finds sweetness of delight in a positive
Law though the thing commanded be as hard to flesh and blood as to be
crucified, Joh. 10.18. yet it obtains a sweetness of holiness from Gods will,
Psalm. 40.8. I delight to do thy will, O God, (even to be made a curse and
crucified) Thy Law is within my heart, and he would but fulfill all
righteousness, even that which seems to be the outside of the Gospel, to be
sprinkled with water, Math. 3.15. and this Christ would do as under the
Covenant of Grace.

2. The stirrings and breathings of the Spirit makes the work sweet, hearing
brings burning of heart, Luke 24.32. willing gladness, A sweetness of communion
with God an abundant hire for a duty to a child under Grace.
Acts 2.41. and some sweetness of stirred bowels comes from the Lords putting
in his hand through the Keyhole of the door of the heart, Cant. 5.4. where as
to an natural man under the Law, to lift up a Prayer is to carry a millstone on
his back, every syllabe of a word is a stone weight which he cannot bear. 3.
Were there no more in praying, but a communion with God, how sweet is it? when
Christ prays, the fashion of his countenance is changed, Luke 9.29. There is
a heaven in the bosom of Prayer, though there were never a granting of the
suit, sure there is a sin in making heaven a hire, and in making duty a
relative thing, a horse for a journey, a ship for a voyage to fetch home gold,
where as there is heaven in praising God before the Throne, such as is both
work and wages, and so in spiritual duties here.

7. Suppose there were no letter of a command, because there is suteablenesse
between the Law engraven in the heart, and the spiritual matter commanded, a
child of Grace under Grace sets about duties, How an inward principle of a new
nature stands (as it were) for a command, and yet the Word and Spirit must not
be sep^r^ted.
so that (in a manner) there is no need to say to David, Get thee to Jerusalem
and to the house of God, for he says, Psalm. 122.1. I was glad when they said,
let us go to the house of the Lord. As there needs no command that the Father
love the child, nor is there need to exhort the Sea to ebb and flow, or the
Sun to shine: nor are many arguments useful to press the mother to give suck
to the child, nature stands for a Law here, the strength of the engraven Law in
the heart, overpowreth the letter. So the new nature, the indwelling anointing,
as a new instinct puts the child of Grace to act. But here we are to bewar,
that we separate not the Word and the Spirit, the Father of Spirits loves to
work with his own tools, and sow with his own seed the Word of God, these three
agree in one 1. The Spirit acting. 2. The habit of Grace acted upon by the
Spirit, who blows away the ashes, and 3. The word of exhortation: nor do we
extol dead letters and livelesse forms, as Libertines say, for we take in
with the letter the quickening sense and convincing meaning of the Word, and its
considerable that the Spirit draws sweetly after him, the nature, faculties of
will, mind and affections, and they need no other allurement but the Word, the
Spirit, and the new nature: But when they barbarously slew their children and
made them pass through the fire, they must put out of their ears and hearts
the crying and howling of the murdered Babies, with the noise of the beatting
of drums; nature serves the Devil often weeping, and Satan deadenes nature,
Grace so mortifies as the consent of delegation goes alone, Psalm. 1.2. Psalm.
119.72.97.

CHAP. XIII. There are two sorts of Covenanting, on external, professed,
visible, conditional, another internal, real, absolute and the differences
betwixt them. 2. Infants externally in Covenant under the New Testament 3. Some
Questions touching infants.
PErsons are two ways in Covenant with God, externally by Visible profession,
and conditionally, not in reference to the Covenant, but to the thing promised
in Covenant, which none obtains, but such as fulfill the condition of the
Covenant: For consent of parties, promise and restipulation whether express,
by word of mouth, Deuteronomy. 5.27. We will hear and do, Josh. 24.24. And the people
said unto Joshua, the Lord our God will we serve and his voice will we obey. Or
yet tacit and implicit by profession. I will be thy God, and the God of thy
seed, makes parties in Covenant. The keeping or breaking of the Covenant, must
then be extrinsecall to ones being confederate with God. And 2. Infants born of
Covenanted Parents are in Covenant with God, because they are born of such
Parents, as are in Covenant with God, Genesis 17.7. I will be a God to thy seed
after thee.

(2.) The Covenant choice on Gods part is extended to the seed, The s^ed and
Infants of Covenanting parents are in Covenant with God under both Old and New
Testament.
Deuteronomy. 4.37. And because he loved thy Fathers, therefore he choice their seed
after them. Deuteronomy. 10.15. Only the Lord had a delight in thy Fathers, to love
them, (and) he choice their seed after them, (even you (Fathers and Children)
above all people, (as it is) this day. And the Covenant choice of seed is
extended to the seed in the New Testament. Act. 2.39. For to you, and to your
children is the promise made. He speaks in the very terms and words of the
Covenant, Genesis 17.7. (...), every one of you be baptized, he says not every
one of you, old and young, Parents and Children, repent. For that command of
Repentance is given only personally to them who moved the Question, What shall
we do, Men and Brethren? 37. For we are under great wrath, and crucified the
Lord of Glory. The Answer is, you aged, Repent. 39. True. But ah, we prayed,
his blood be upon us and our Children. He Answers to that, every one of you be
baptized. Why, The promise of the Covenant must be made to infants* Acts 2.39.
else the sense of the words cannot stand.
that must be every one of you who are commanded to repent? No. It must be
every one of you to whom the promise is made, but the promise is made (...).
Observe the very two Pronouns that are, Genesis 17.7. Deu. 4.37. Deuteronomy. 10.15. to
thee and thy seed. To you and your seed, and children. Now the Answer had been
most impertinent, if he had mentioned their children, except in order to their
Baptism, and their being in Covenant. For 1. their Children crucified not the
Lord Jesus; Nay by Anabaptists grounds, their Children not being visibly in
Covenant with their Parents, and not capable of actual hearing the Word, of
actual mourning for, and repenting of their sins, as Zech. 12.10. Mat. 3.8, 9,
10. they were not concerned either in the evil of their Parents, who crucified
the Lord of Glory, nor in the good of their Repentance more then stones. So
that ( every one of you be baptized, Infants in Covenant under the New
Testament.
for the promise is to you and to your Children) should be impertinent, and
also false; for Covenant promises are no more made to Children, then to stones,
say the opposites of Infant Baptism. Yea also, as the Lord in the Old
Testament, calls Israel his people. My people old and young. Saul shall be
Captain of my people. David shall feed my people, old and young, and shall
punish with the sword the murdering of Infants. 2. Because he choice (with a
Covenant choice) the Jews and their seed, Deuteronomy. 4.37. Deuteronomy. 10.15. Genesis 17.7.
then he must be the God of their seed. But he choiseth with a Covenant choice,
and calling all the Nations, Isa. 2.2, 3. All the kindreds of the earth under
the New Testament, Psalm. 22.27. All Egypt and Assyria under the New Testament.
Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my hand, Isa. 19.29. All
the Kingdoms of the world are the Lords, and his Sons, and he reigns in them,
by his Word and Gospel, as the seventh Angel sounds, Revel. 11.15. Old and
young of Nations under the New Test. are in Covenant externally, as Israel was.
All the Gentiles are his, Isa. 60.1, 2, 3, 4. Mal. 1.11. All the ends of the
earth, and the heathen, Psalm. 2.8, 9. Psalm. 72.7, 8, 9, 10. Now if they be not
his by visible and externally professed Covenant, they must be the Lords
Kingdoms only, because some in these Kingdoms. 1. Are come to age. 2. Profess
the truth. 3. Give a signification that they are converted and chosen, and so
baptized. But so infants and all the rest of these Kingdoms who fixedly, in a
Church, hear the Word, profess they are followers, and by so doing are
witnesses against themselves that they have chosen the Lord to be their God,
and have consented to the Covenant, as Joshua says, Josh, 24.22. must be under
the New Testament cut off from the Covevant, and a place must be shown where
God has now under the New Testament, broken the staves of beauty and bands,
and has laid this curse upon all the Infants of Egypt, Assyria, of all the
Kingdoms of the earth, that the Lord is now no God to them, and feeds them no
more, and therefore that which dies, let it die, and that which is cut off, let
it be cut off, as it is, Zech. 11.9. And the like must be said of all that are
come to age, and not baptized, or as good as not baptized. And Covenant
promises are not to the Children of Believers, contrair to Acts 2.39. nor to
the aged, until they be converted visibly and Baptized; This then has never
yet been fulfilled, that the Gentiles and Heathen are become the Lords people.
Sure, it is (2.) and was a mercy for the seed to be in Covenant, Exodus 20.6. I
am the Lord showing mercies unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my
Commandments. Psalm. 89.28. My mercy will I keep with David and his seed. What
mercy? My Covenant shall stand fast with him. Hence they are called the sure
mercies of David. Isa. 55. The Lord following the seed of the Godly with real
mercies (so that it cannot be called the favor of a ceremony and instituted or
positive privilege belonging only to the Jews) as that his seed is blessed,
Psalm. 37.26. Psalm. 112.2. This mercy must be taken away either in mercy or in
wrath: but that a real mercy of a blessing should be taken away in mercy,
except a spiritual mercy of saving grace in Christ were given in place
thereof, cannot be said, far less has it any truth that a real mercy can be
removed in wrath from Infants in Jesus Christ, in whom the Nations are blessed.
And we see, Deuteronomy. 28. the blessing of an observed Covenant, and the curses of a
broken Covenant are extended to the fruit of the body to the sons and the
daughters, v. 418.32. Job 21.19. Job 29.14. Job 18.15, 16, 17. And that this is
not a New Testament dispensation, who can say? And that outward positive
favors are bestowed on Infants, is clear. (1.) That Christ laid his hands on
them and blessed them, making them a fixed copy of the indwellers of his
Kingdom. (2) The promises of the Covenant are made to them, Act. 2.39. (3.)
They are clean and holy by Covenant holiness, 1 Cor. 7.14. which cannot be
meant of being born of the marriage bed. For Paul, Romans 11.16. says the same
of the Jews, root and branches, Fathers and Children: And no man dreamed that
Paul, Romans 11. intends to prove that the Jews shall be insert in again, because
they are free of bastardie Father and sons. Now Infants understand no more any
of rhese to be blessed by the laying on of the hands of Christ, and to be such
as have title to the promises, Acts 2.39. and to be Covenant-wise holy, 1 Cor.
7. then they understand Baptism. (4.) The same Covenant made with Abraham is
made with the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 6.16. I will be their God, and they shall be
my people. Which is Prophesied of the Gentiles under the New Testament, Ezekiel
11.17, 18, 19, 20. Ezekiel 34.23, 24, 25. Jer. 31, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36. Jer.
32.36, 37, 38, 39, 40. Zech. 13.9. Hos. 1.10, 11. 1 Pet. 2.9, 10. And it is
made to the Gentiles with an eke of a new heart, and a larger extent of the
Covenant under the New Test. for which cause it is called a better Covenant,
has better promises, Heb. 7.22. Heb. 8.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Now that were a
strange eke and excellency of the New Testament Covenant above the Old, to
forfeit, without farther process, all Infants under the New Testament of all
Covenant-right, which was due to them of old under the Covenant which the Lord
calls faulty: Egypt shall be my people, except their 1. Infants. 2. And except
their aged, and their non-Saints. (5.) Infants in the former Covenant had right
by birth to the means of salvation, to be taught and Catechized in the Law of
the Lord, because born of Covenanting Parents within the Visible Church, and so
had title to Covenant-calling, and GODS Covenant-choising, Mat. 22.4. as is
clear, Genesis 18.19. I know Abraham will command his Children and his household
after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, Exodus 20.10. Deuteronomy. 6, 6, 7.
And thou shall teach them diligently unto thy Children, Exodus 12* 26, 27. Ps.
78.4, 5, 6. Now if Infants be without the Covenant as the Infants of Pagans,
then they have no more Covenant-right to the hearing of the Gospel, and a
treaty with Christ, and Covenant, then Pagans have. Its not enough to say
their Fathers owe that much natural compassion to their souls, as to teach
them, it being a Parents duty; Yea, but what warrant has a Father as a Father
to make offer of a Covenant of Grace in the Name of GOD to one Pagan more then
to another, since all are equally without the Covenant, if there be a
Covenant-call warranted to them, where is the Fathers command to propone and
ingadge the Covenanters consent, if the Children be Pagans? but as they have a
right by birth to the call, they being born where the call sounds, they must
have some visible right to the Covenant it self, more then other Pagans. Its
but of small weight to say that, Romans 9. Paul expounds that in the New
Testament, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, only of the spiritual
seed, such as Jacob, who was predestined to Glory, not of those that are
carnally descended of Abraham, otherwise it should follow, that these that are
in the Covenant, might believe that they should be saved, though void of Faith
and Repentance. The place, Romans 9.6. vindicated from the unsound gloss of
opposers of Infant Baptism.
Answ. The purpose of the Apostle, Romans 9. is to Answer a sad Objection: if the
Jews be cast off, and rejected of God, as Paul, by his extreme desire to have
them saved, insinuates, then the Word of God takes no effect, and his calling
and choising of them for his people, takes no effect, v. 6. He Answers, it is
not failed, though the body of Israel be rejected. For there are two kinds of
Israelits, some only carnal and born according to the flesh: Others sons of
promise, and chosen of God. Now the word of promise takes effect in the latter
sort, to wit, in the chosen, and in the sons of promise, for they are not cast
off of God, and so the Word of God takes effect, v. 6. (2.) But the truth is,
if there be none Covenanted with God, but the chosen under the New Testament,
then there is no such thing as an external and visible Covenanting with God,
under the New Testament, then must all the Nations, Isa. 2.1, 2. Kingdoms of
the World, Rev. 11.15. all Egypt, Assyria, Isa. 19.25. all the Gentiles, Isa.
60. be internally Covenanted and sons of promise, and predestined to life?
And that, 2 Cor. 6.16. I will be your God, and ye shall be my people, under the
New Testament, must infer, that all in Covenant under Christ must be
spiritually in Covenant, and the Visible Church of Corinth, and of all the
Kingdoms of the world, Rev. 11.15. must be the invisible and chosen Church,
and as many as are called, must be chosen, contrair to Mat. 22.14. Hence.
Children must have from their being born of believing Parents, under the N.
Test. some Covenant privileges
Q. 1. Have Infants now under Christ no privilege nor Covenant Grace external
by their birth and descent from believing Parents? Ans. Sure they have. For
Acts 2.39. the promise is to you and to your children. Either to all children
or to some, the Text makes no exception. If it be said to all conditionally, if
they believe, not absolutely? Ans. That must be an internal covenanting proper
to the elect, and the promise is not made to the aged but conditionally, so
they believe. And yet the promise shall be made to Infants and Children, but
not while they come to age. 2. To be cut off and casten out of Covenant is a
dreadful Judgment, Zecha. 11.9. Hos. 2.3, 4, 5. Romans 11.20. well, because of
unbeleef they are broken off. Then because the Jews believe in Christ already
comed, all their children, for no fault, but for the belief of their Parents,
must be cut off* (3.) Whereas Paul makes it a misery that the Ephesians, 2.12.
were strangers from the Covenants of promise, ^aving no hope and without God,
without Christ. And Peter, that the Gentiles were no people, 1 Pet. 2. then
that misery lies upon the Infants of Christians and all within the Visible
Church, until they be converted and baptized, and the Gospel is no favor to
them, that they are within the net, and in the office house of Grace the
Visible Church, where the word is Preached to children, who are to be taught,
Genesis 18.19. Deuteronomy. 6.7. Exodus 12.26, 27. Psalm. 78.1, 2, 3* 4.5, 6, 7. 2 Timothy
3.15. and the Lord reckons it among the favors, that he bestows not on every
Nation, but only on his own Covenanted Israel, that the Word of the Gospel to
gather them and their Children, Math. 23.37. 2 Timothy 3.15. Psalm. 78.1, 2, 3, 4,
5. and his Statutes and his Judgments are declared and Preached to them, Psalm.
147.19, 20. Deuteronomy. 5.1, 2, 3, 4. c. 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7. Psalm. 81.4. and that the
Oracles of God, and the promises are committed to them, Romans 3.1, 2. Romans 9.4.
the promises and the giving of the Law, and the Covenants and the service of
God. And that this is a special blessing in the New Testament to old and young
is clear from Acts 13. when Paul turns from the blaspheming Jews to the
Gentiles. It is a Covenant mercy to fathers and children that the Word of the
Covenant is preached to them.
47. I have set thee to be a light to the Gentiles, that thou should be for
salvation to the end of the earth. Now this Covenant salvation is, Isa. 49.6. I
will give thee to restore the preserved of Israel. -- 8. I will give thee for a
Covenant to the people to establish the earth. -- 9. That thou may say to
the prisoners go forth, etc. Now if it be said, it was indeed a singular
privilege to the Jews, but what places of the New Testament make it a Covenant
privilege to the Gentiles and their seed, if the Word of the Covenant Preached
to the aged under the New Testament, can the same ways, by accident, be
Preached and promises come to the ears of the unbaptised Children, now growing
to be capable of hearing the Gospel, Acts 2.39. 2 Timothy 3.15. as to Pagans, and
such as are no less stranges to the Covenant, and void of all right by the
Covenant made with their Parents, then Indians and their children who worship
Satan? Paul not without a command Preaches the Word of the Covenant to the
discerning Gentiles, Acts 13.47. from Isa. 49.6, 9, 10. must not the fathers
have command to speak the Gospel to their children? Or does not the warrant
that Parents and Pastors have to take within the Covenant the fathers, warrant
them to preach the same Covenant to the children? where as, otherwise the
Apostles should have said, we have no warrant to offer the Covenant to any or
to Preach Christ a given Covenant to any: But 1. To such as are come to age. 2.
Such as are Converts. 3. To such as can give signification by confession, that
they are not only visible but also invisible and chosen confederates, and they
should have said all children are now by Christ excluded as profane Gentiles
and heathen from the Covenant of Grace, because there can be none (say
Anabaptists) but real Believers under the New Testament in Covenant with God.

Yea but the New Testament offers Christ a Covenant, in the preached promises,
alike to fathers and sons. Math. 4.16. The people (fathers and sons) that sat
in darkness saw great light, etc. Math. 19.43. Therefore I say unto you, the
Kingdom of God shall be taken from you and given to a nation bringing forth
the froots thereof. And is it not a punishment to be deprived of the Kingdom?
If the Kingdom of God come where the Preached Covenant is, Math. 3.2. Math.
12.28. and the Bridegroom among them, and so cause of joy, Math. 9.15. and the
Golden Candlesticks be there and the Son of God walking in the midst of the
Golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1.20. c. 2.1. sure this is much to children. If it be
said, it is very nothing, for children understand nothing of this. What then is
meant by the Prophecy of the incoming of the Gentiles, Psalm. 87.3. Glorious
things are spoken of thee, O city of God. It is a mercy to be born in Zion.
4. I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon to them that know me; behold
Phylistia and Tire, with Aethiopia, that man was born there. 5. And of Zion i^
shall be said, this and that man was born in her. 6. The Lord shall count, when
he writes up the people, that this man was born there. And Christ Prophesying
of the desolation extends the judgment of a despised Covenant to the children
and the house, Math. 23.37.38. Luke 19.44. Luke 22.24. how should there be
under the New Testament Covenant wrath, for the fathers Covenant breaking
derived to the children, if in their fathers the sucking children brake not the
Covenant, then they have been in Covenant with their parents, especially since
a Visible Covenanting, by borrowed allusions to altars, speaking the language
of Canaan, offering incense, swearing by the Lord, is spoken of Egypt and of
five, that is, of many cities of Egypt, and of all the Gentiles, Esa. 19.18,
19, 20. 21. Mal. 1.18. and Covenant blessings shall be derived from fathers to
children. The Lord shall say, 25. Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the
work of my hands, and Israel mine inheritance. It must be a narrow blessing of
Covenanted Egypt, Assyria, Israel, if it be a blessing of these come to age. 2.
Professing the faith. 3. And baptized. How can the Lord say, blessed be Egypt,
and though the whole seed be visibly in Covenant, old and young, yet it
follows not that therefore every promise that is absolute, that is, that of a
new heart is made to all and every one within the Visible Covenant: for it is
promised, Deuteronomy. 30.6. to the Jews, and was given to them and undenyably the
visible body of the Jews and their seed were the chosen and externally Adopted
and Covenanted people of God, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12, 13. Deuteronomy. 7.6. Deuteronomy. 10.19.
and the Lord calls them those whom he delivered out of Egypt, his people, Exodus
3.7. I have seen the affliction of my people* Ezekiel. 37.12. O my people, I will
open your graves, as many as Saul and David did feed, whether they have a new
heart or not, the Lord calls them his people, 1 Samuel 9.16.2. 2 Samuel 7.8. See
Psalm. 50.7. Hear O my people, Psalm. 81.13. Jer. 9.26. and so the Church of
Corinth, 2 Cor. 16. is called his people, and the Kingdoms of the world the
Lords Kingdoms in Covenant, Rev. 11.15. and there were many of them
uncircumcised in heart, Jer. 9.26. Isa. 1.10. Amos 9.7. and with many of them*
God was not well pleased, 1 Cor. 10.5. and so it is most false that none are in
Covenant under the New Testament, but only Believers; For Judas, Demas, Simon
Magus, and all the externally called (for they cannot be baptized but as in
Covenant with God) Math. 22.10. are by their profession in Covenant externally,
as the Jews profession says they accepted of, and consented unto the Covenant
of Grace, for 1 Cor. 10.7. Be not ye Idolaters, as some of them, commit not
fornication, tempt not Christ, murmur not, as some of them, v. 8.9. th^se and
the like say we are the same way in Covenant as they were and our Visible
Church, now, and the Visible Church then are of the same constitution.

Q. And may we not say, that the same Covenant of Grace, we are under, is the
same in nature and substance with that Covenant made with Abraham? Ans. The
same Christ was their Mediator, as ours, Heb. 13.8. their Rock and our Rock,
Christ. 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Ioh. 8.56.

(2.) We are justified as Abraham, and David. Rom, 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Genesis 15.6.
Ps. 32.1, 2.

3. They were saved by Grace, the Gentiles as well as they, Acts 15.11. by
faith, Acts 10.43. Heb. 11.1, 2, 3, 4.13. etc.

4. There is no more reason to say, it was a civil Covenant made with Abraham,
There is no ground to say that the Covenant made with Abraham, and with u^
under the N. Test. are different Covenants
because it distinguished Abraham's seed from other Nations, and an earthly
Covenant, because Canaan was promised to them, not to us, then to say there be
two Covenants of Works, one made to Adam, with a promise of an earthly
Paradise, and another Covenant of Works to the Jews, with an earthly Canaan;
And a third to these who in the Gospel time are under a Covenant of Works. Yea
upon the same account, the Covenant of Grace made, Psalm. 89. 2 Samuel 7. with
David, having a Throne promised to him, should be yet another Covenant
different from the other two; And since a Covenant here is a way of obtaining
salvation upon condition of obedience, John Baptist should be under another
Covenant of Grace* then the Apostles: For to their faith is promised the
working of miracles, Mark 16.16, 17, 18. But John wrought no miracles, and many
thousands of believers work no miracles, and they must be under a third
Covenant: For though Canaan was promised to Abraham's seed, there is no reason
to call it an earthly Covenant, or another different covenant, for to all
believers the blessings of their land are promised, Ezekiel* 36.25, 26, 30, 31.
Jer. 31.31. compared with 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43. Mat. 6.33. Luke 12.31. 1 Timothy
4.8. Heb. 13.5, 6. 5. What if we say the Covenant made with Abraham, Exodus 3.
proves by our Saviors reasoning, Man. 22.31, 32, 33. that Infants shall not
rise again and be in Angel-state and saved, To children no
Covenant-resurrection nor any Covenant-salvation can be given or promised, if
they be not in Covenant.
otherwise if Infants and all believers in the Saduces time be not under the
same Covenant with Abraham, no Infants shall have a Covenant-Resurrection, nor
a Covenant-Salvation; Or then there is some other salvation for Infants that
are saved, to wit, some Pagan heaven without the Covenant, and without Christ,
and if Infants be Pagans without the Covenant, either none of them are saved
and chosen to life. Contrair to Christ, Mat. 18.2, 3, 4. Mark 10.13, 14, 15,
16. and the Anabaptists grant. Or there is a salvation 1 without a Covenant,
and so without the New and Old Testament. 2. Without the Name of Jesus and the
Blood of the Covenant: Contrair to Acts 4.12. 1 John 1.8. Rev. 1.5. (3.) they
shall be saved without the Visible Church, the way that Pagans are saved.

Q 3. Are they not saved all of them? Is not this enough? But because the
Kingdom of Christ is spiritual, the Element of water can do them no good,
except they believe?

Ans. If his Kingdom be not spiritual, because his wisdom has appointed
external signs, then no promise (which is but good words) shall be made to
Children, contrair to Acts 2.39. for they can do them no good until they
believe. The New Test. Kingdom of CHRIST is spiritual, though there be in it
external signs and seals.
2. Then should there be no Preaching of the Gospel to all Nations, as Mat.
28.20. for impossible it is that all Nations can be profited by the Gospel. 3.
The doubt suppones that it is legal servilitie and Jewish to be under the
Gospel Preached and the dispensation of signs and seals, even to the aged,
such as are Baptism, the Supper, rebukes, censures. 4. To be a visible member,
and visibly in Covenant, and to be baptized, except all be sound believers,
must be Jewish Now certain, it is a new Testament Ordinance that Ministers
Preach and baptize all nations, though the greatest part believe not.

Q. 4. If faith sanctify as faith, then an unbeleeving whore might be
sanctified by a believing fornicator: How faith does sanctify the unbelieving
wife to the believing husband.
For faith will do its formal work in every subject?

Answ. Paul never meant that faith does sanctify in every subject, but in
subjecto capaci. Faith sanctifies not incest and sin, they are not capable to
be separated to a holy use: If fire as fire burn, then might all the water in
the Ocean be dried up with the least sparkle of fire. If prayer as prayer
obtain all things, shall it obtain that the sacrificing of your son to God,
shall be accepted of him as holy and lawful worship? Mr. Baxter says
excellently upon this subject. A thing must be first lawful, before it be
sanctified; Mr. Rich. Baxter, plain Scripture proof for Infant Baptism. 4 Arg.
on ^ Cor. 7. p. ^8, 99.
God sanctifies not sin in, or to any. See the Argument 1 Cor. 7. learnedly
and solidely vindicated by him, so as the dispute is at an end now.

Q. 5. What holiness is it that is called federal, or Covenant holiness which
is in Infants?

Ans. It is not so much personal holiness (though it may so be called,
because the person is a Church member, Of federall holiness.
separated from the world to God) as holiness of the seed, Society, Family, or
Nation, which is derived from father to son, as if the father be a free man of
such a City, that privilege is so personal, as it is by the Law hereditarie
freedom derived from father to son, if the father have jus ad media salutis
right to the means of salvation, so has the son. Hence this was first
domestical, God made the Covenant with Abraham and his family: I will be thy
God, and the God of thy seed, Genesis 17. it was extended to him, not as a father
only, but as to the head of the family; the children of Servants born in
Abraham's family were to be circumcised and to be instructed as having right to
the means of salvation. Genesis 17.12. He that is eight days old shall be
circumcised among you, every man-child in your Generations (so it is
Generation-holinesse) he that is born in the house, or bought with money of any
stranger, that is not of thy seed. So God shows clearly that in Abraham he
chosed the Nation and the house, Genesis 18.19. I know Abraham, that he will
command his children (that is too narrow a Church Visible) and his household
after him, that they shall keep the way of the Lord. 2. Afterward he choosed
the Nation to be a peculiar people holy to himself, The Covenant external is
made with a society or visible Church that out of them God may gather heirs of
glory.
Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7. but not with another new distinct Covenant, but in the same
Covenant. 8. But because the Lord loved you, and would keep the oath that he
had sworn to your fathers, to wit, to Abraham. Deuteronomy. 10.15. He chose their seed
after them, even you, above all people, not above all houses. Amos 3.2. You
only have I known of all the families of the earth. So the external Church
Covenant and Church right to the means of grace is given to a society and made
with Nations under the New Testament, Isa. 2.1, 2, 3. Psalm. 2.8, 9. Psalm.
22.27. Psalm. 87.2, 3, 4. Rev. 11.15. Matthew. 28.19, 20. And not any are baptized
in the New Testament, (except the Eunuch, and Saul, Acts 8.39.) who were
baptized firstly, but they were baptized as public men representing a seed;
also, societies are baptized. All Judea, Mat. 3.3. All the land of Judea, Mark
1.5. All the multitude, all the people, Luke 4.7.21. Sure the fathers were so
Christianed and Baptized as their children had right to the same seal. So Joh.
3.22, 23, 26. Cornelius his house and all with him were baptized, Acts 10.33*
47. Three thousand at once, Acts 2.39, 40, 41. The Jayler and his house, Acts
16.33. servants and friends. The household of Stephanas, 1 Cor. 1.16. was
Baptized. And this 3. is holden forth as the Church, What federal holiness is.
as the household of Narcissus which are in the Lord, Romans 16.11. Aquila and
Priscilla, and all the Church at their house. v. 5. The Church at the house of
Philemon, Phil. v. 2. which teaches that the Covenant holiness is of
societies and houses under the New Testament as in Abraham's house, and as
Abraham's house was Circumcised, so are whole houses under the New Testament
Baptized. 4. Paul aptly calls it the holiness of the lump, or Nation, and the
first fruits, root-holinesse, the holiness of the root and the branches. Of
the Olive Tree and the branches, Romans 11.16, 17. (5.) The special intent of
God in sending the word of the Covenant must evidence this; he sends not the
Gospel unto, and for the cause of one man, to bring him in, but to gather a
Church and his elect ones, by a visibly and audibly Preached Covenant to a
society, to a City; to Samaria. Acts 8. To the Gentiles, Acts 13. To all
Nations, Mat. 28.19, 20. that they and their children may have right to
salvation and to the means thereof, and to the Covenant, and therefore we are
not curiously to inquire whether the faith of the father be real or not, if the
Gospel be come to the Nation, to the House, to the Society. The Lord in one
Abraham, in one Cornelius, in one Jayler, (whom he effectually converts as far
as we can gather from the Scriptures) choises the race, house, society, nation,
and gives them a Covenant-holinesse, the man's being born where the call of God
is, does the turn, as much as the faith of the Parent. For by the root is not
necessarily meant the Physical root the father. For Abraham was not the
Physical root and father, The being born where the Gospel sounds, of that
nation and race, is the ground of Covenant-holines as well as the faith of the
nearest parents
nor Cornelius of all the servants and friends in the house. But if a friend be
in the house, or society, and profess the Gospel, he and his obtain right to
Baptism and the means of salvation. But as touching real holiness, it is not
derived from a believing father, to make the son a believer, Scripture and
experience say the contrair. Nor 2. is internal and effectual confederacy
with God, that, by which one is a son of promise, Romans 9. and predestinate to
life, a national favor. For 1. no man is chosen to life in his father,
because the father is chosen: A chosen father may have a reprobate son. 2.
Election to life is not of nations or houses or societies, but of single
persons. It is not said, before the nation had done good or evil, I chosed
this nation all and whole, not this, but I loved this man, not this man.

Q. What is the formal reason and ground that any has right to Baptism?

Ans. If we speak of a passive right, if the Eunuch believe, Act. 8. and if
such have received the Spirit, Acts 10. they may receive baptism, The Eunuch
moves not the Question whether Philip should sin in baptizing him or not. The
Eunuch was troubled to make sure his own, not Philips Conversion. The faith
required of these to be baptized, Act. 8.37. Mar. 16.16 is real saving faith,
not visible only.
They who bring that Argument, (...) Acts 8. and that, Mark 16. to prove that
only such should be baptized, who believe actually and are come to age: They
prove that the Church sins, if they baptize any, but such as are
predestined to life and really believe. For the faith that Philip asked for,
was real, with all the heart, not as the faith of Simon Magus* And the faith,
Mark 16.15. is real saving faith, that brings salvation; he that believes is
saved. 2. It can not be visible faith only, for that is in Simon Magus, he does
visibly so believe and is baptized. Yet upon that faith he was not saved, being
in the gall of bitterness (3.) He that believes not, is damned. The meaning
must be, he that believes not savingly is damned: Or then he that believes not
visibly, as Magus, and Judas, is damned, but this is most false, for Peter
believes not as Judas, and yet he is not damned: Or then the meaning must be,
he that believes both really, savingly, and also professedly and visibly, is
saved. And that is true, but it concludes that none are to be baptized, but
both real and visible believers. 4. If it be true that none are to be baptized
but Covenanted ones, as Acts 2.39. And if none be Covenanted ones under the New
Testament, but real believers and such as are predestined to life, as our
Anabaptists teach from Romans 9. then must the Church without warrant of the Word
baptize Magus, Demas, Judas. (5.) Then must also all Judea, all the Generations
of vipers baptized have been both real and visible believers, for they were all
baptized, Mat. 3.3, 4. Mark 1.5. Luke 1.7.21. Let Independents consider this,
and what D. Fuilk, and Mr. Cartwright, Paraeus, Calvin, Beza; and our Divines
speak on these places against the auricular confession of all the huge
multitude. (6.) It is a wonder that any man should dream that the Eunuch made a
case of conscience, Acts 8. whether it was lawful to Philip to baptize, and
not whether he himself did believe and could worthily receive the seal, Act.
8.36. here is water (says he) (...). (7.) So none can warrantably baptize any
but persons dying in faith, and its not certain these have the faith that is,
Acts 8.37. Mar. 16.16. But for the formal warrant of such as baptize: The
formal ground of baptizing.
neither are the aged as the aged, nor Infants as Infants to be baptized; for
so all the aged and all Infants even of Pagans are to be baptized. Nor 2. are
all in Covenant, to be baptized: For such as are only really and invisibly in
Covenant, and do make no profession of Christ at all, are not warrantably by
the Church to be baptized. Only these whether old or young that are, tali modo
visibili federati, such as professedly and visibly in Covenant, and called,
Acts 2.39. are warrantably baptized. Hence they must be so in Covenant, as they
be called by the word of the Covenant, for they cannot be baptized against
their will, Luke 7.29.30.

Q. What warrant is there, Act. 2.39. for Infant Baptism?

Ans. I shall not contend for the actual baptizing of them at that instant.
But every one of you be baptized (...) father and sons. Why? the promise is to
you and to your children, break the Text into an hundred pieces, and blood it
as men please, the Genuine Thesis which cannot be neglected, is, These to whom
the promise of the Covenant does belong, these should be baptized, (...) But
the promise of the Covenant is to you and to your children. Ergo, you and your
children should be baptized. The assumption is the express words of Peter and
the Proposition is Peter's. These to whom the promise is made should be baptized.

But the promise is made to children, Act. 2.


Every one of you be baptized, (...) for to you is the promise of the Covenant.
Calvin, Bullinger, Brentius, Gualther clear it. 2. Who they are, who are in the
nearest capacity to be baptized, he explaines, when he shows, that the
Covenant promise is made to these who are far off, to the Gentiles, whom the
Lord shall call, then all that are under the call and offer of Christ in the
Preached Gospel, as Prove. 9.1, 2, 3, 4. Math. 22 bid them come to the wedding,
Luke 14.16, 17, 18. etc. are externally in Covenant, and such to whom the
Covenant is made, and should be baptized, its presumed they give some professed
consent to the call and do not right down deny to come, else they should be
baptized against their will. 3. Calvine shows Acts 2.39. that the Anabaptists
in his time, said, the promise was made to Believers only, but the Text says,
it is made to you and to your children, to infants, to the children of the
Prophets and of the Covenant made with the fathers, Acts 3.25. Now what ground
do Anabaptists give that all infants believe, or that some believe, since to
them, their children were as Pagans without Christ, without the Covenant? if to
the children when they come to age and shall believe? but what need to add,
and to your believing Children? for these are not children but men of age,
their fathers and they both being believers. Now Peter sets down two ranks, the
aged who heard the word with gladness, and were pricked in heart, v. 37.41.
and the children, and to both the promise is made, and what ground is their to
exclude sucking children? for the word, Acts 2.39. is Math. 2.18. 1 Cor. 7.14.
where sure the word is taken for sucking children of whose actual faith the
Scripture speaks not. 2. The promise is to you and to your children, can have
no other sense then, The sense of the words, the promise is to you and to your
children.
the promise and word of the Covenant is preached to you and to your children
in you* and this is to be externally in Covenant, both under the Old and New
Testament. If it have another sense it must be this, the Lord has internally
Covenanted with you the 3000. who have heard the word and with your children,
and you are the spiritual seed, and sons of promise, predestinate to life
eternal: as Romans 9. they expone the seed in Covenant: But 1. Were all the
3000. Ananias and Saphi^a and their children the spiritual and chosen seed?
for he commands all, whom he exhorts to repent, to be baptized: And 2. Now to
Simon Magus and Demas, and numbers of such, Peter could not have said, the
promise is made to you and to your children; if it be only made to real and
actual believers, as they say, Peter therefore must own them all whom he
exhorts to repent, as the chosen seed. But if the former sense be intended (as
how can it be denied?) to wit, the word of the Covenant is preached to you, an
offer of Christ is made in the preached Gospel to you. Then it cannot be
denied, but the promise is to all the Reprobate in the Visible Church whether
they believe or not, for Christ is preached and promises of the Covenant are
preached to Simon Magus, to Judas and all the Hypocrites who stumble at the
Word, to all the Pharisees, as is clear, If all be really believers that are in
Covenant with God, under the New Testament* all the Kingdoms of the world,
which are the Lords and Christ's, Rev. 11.15. must be believers and internally
in Covenant with God.
Math. 13.20, 21, 22, 23. Acts 13.44, 45. Acts 18.5, 6. Math. 21.43. 1 Pet.
2.7, 8. (3.) The promise, I will be your God, and ye shall be my people, must
be one way expounded in the Old Testament, to wit, you are externally only in
Covenant with God. But in the New Testament, it must have this meaning, I will
be your God, 2 Cor. 6.16. that is, you are all predestinate to life, and the
sons, by promise, and the spiritual seed, to whom I say, I will be your God:
But so it may well be said, there were no internal Covenanters in the Old
Testament, and there be none but only internal Covenanters in the New
Testament, so that when the Lord says, Rev. 11.15. The Kingdoms of the earth
are mine, and my sons. He must say, the Kingdoms, Egypt, Assyria, Tyrus,
Ethiopia, etc. are chosen and the spiritual seed, and these Covenanted Nations
and the Kingdoms of the Gentiles are all internally and effectually called,
and there are no Visible Churches in the New Test. but only all invisible and
saved. 4. If these words, The promise is to you, and to your children, be
limited, to as many as the Lord shall effectually call, either fathers or
children. But Mr. Stev. Marshel judiciouslie observes; How these words, and to
your chil^dren are not limited.
there is no more a Covenant-favour holden forth to their children, then to the
children of Pagans; for the children of Pagans, if God effectually call them,
have the promises made to them. 5. Its clear that external Covenant-holinesse,
is to these men ceremonial holiness now out of date; and then external
calling the only means of internal and effectual calling, Math. 22.14. 1 Cor.
1.18.23, 24. Luke 15.1, 2. and the fixed Church-hearing of the Preached Gospel
is a ceremony. 2. That God should be the God of Infants of the seed of the
Jews, External Covenanting and the blessing of the Gospel Preached to the
Nation, is but a Ceremony to the opposers of Infant baptism, contrair to all
ancient Prophesies, Isa. c. 2. c 19 Jer. 23. Isa 11* etc.
a mercy to fathers and sons coming from free love, Deuteronomy. 10.15. Genesis 17.7.
Deuteronomy. 7.6.7.8. and Prophesied as a mercy to the Gentiles by all the Prophets
was a ceremony removed now in Christ. Yea 3. external Covenanting, and
adopting, and choising of Israel is no mercy, except that a Pedagogie of the
Law is a mercy for a time. 4. The promise is to you and to your children, must
be in a contradictorie way expounded, to wit, the promise is no more made to
your children so long as they are Infants, then to Devils. Yea fathers and
children not believing, though chosen to life, are excommunicated from Visible
adoption, calling, hearing the Gospel promises, for there is no Covenanting now
under the New Testament, but only internal Covenanting of the elect. 5. Young
Timothy and children of believing Parents, and all the aged within the Visible
Church, If there be no Covenanting under the N. T. but that of real believers,
there can be no Covenant obligation upon the non-converted to hear, to believe
the Gospel, to receive the seals.
have no right to hear the Preached Gospel, before they believe and be the holy
seed, more then Pagans. Yea 6. they can have no command of God, to hear the
Gospel, nor any Covenant or Gospel warrant, until they be believers, for if
there were no promise made to hearing and considering the word, if they shall
believe, while as yet they believe not, and until they be effectually called,
there can be no command, and no Law, to hear the Gospel and the Covenant-offer
made in Christ. It shall then be no more sin for unconverted persons to turn
away their ears from the Law, and not to hear the Gospel. 7. It were nonsense
to say to men under the externally proposed Covenant, repent, hear the Gospel,
use the means, receive the seals, and yet you have no right to hear, nor have
we any warrant to baptize you, until ye believe; for there is no promise made
to you, nor to your seed and children, until first you believe. And it must
say there was no threatening to Adam, Genesis 2.17. before he sinned, and no
promise to Adam nor to any now, do this and live, until Adam first sinned, and
first obeyed the Covenant; and so, if John Covenant to labor in Peter's
Vineyard, and Peter promise to him four pence, so he work twelve hours,
otherwise he shall not pay him four pence, though John accept of the Covenant,
and work but one hour, whereas his Covenant is to work for twelve hours, then
no man can say to John (work, for there is a promise made of four pence to you)
the other might deny; no such promise was made to me, except I work twelve
hours. It were, sure, unfaithful dealing to John to say so. For the four pence
ought not, by this Covenant, to be given to him, except he work twelve hours:
but he cannot, without palpable falsehood, say, I have broken no Covenant, in
not working twelve hours: For though I consented to the Covenant, and began to
work an hour, yet the promise was not to me simply, but to me as working twelve
hours; A conditional Covenant has the complete essence and nature of a
Covenant, and they are truly in Covenant that are under it.
but there is neither face nor faith in this Answer: For the fulfilling of the
Covenant is only to give four pence to John, if he work twelve hours; But the
promise and Covenant was made to him, and he has foully broken. Yea a
conditional Covenant agreed unto and accepted, is a Covenant, if we shall (as
in reason we ought) distinguish between a Covenant, in its essence and nature,
and a Covenant broken or fulfilled, a Covenant or threatening, is a Covenant and
threatening oblidging Adam, if it shall be agreed unto, by silence, as Adam
accepted the threatening, Genesis 2.17. by silence, and Professors within the
Visible Church, by their professing of the Doctrine of the Gospel or Covenant
of Grace, their receiving of the seals and professed hearing of the Word, are
under the Covenant of Grace, and engadge themselves to obey commands, promises,
threatenings, and therefore promises are as properly made to them, Acts 2.39. as
commands, and threatenings, exhortations, invitations, and Gospel requests are
made to them. But tho the Anabaptists ignorantly confound the promise, and the
thing promised; the Covenant, and benefits Covenanted. The promise is to you,
and so are the commands, and threatenings, whether ye believe or not, the
command is to you, and lays an obligation on you, whether ye obey or obey not,
and the threatenings are to you, whether ye transgress, or transgress not. It
is true, indeed, the promise, that is, the blessing promised, righteousness
and eternal life is not given to you, until ye first believe. Object. Is not
the promise made the same way to the aged as to the children, and the same
thing required of both: The promise is to you and to your children. But the
promise is made to the aged only, if they actually believe. Ergo, the promise
is made to the children only, if they actually believe, and so not to Infants.
Answ. Neither proposition nor assumption can bear weight. For the proposition,
when God says, I will be thy God O Abraham, and the God of thy seed. Is it
needful that God require the same conditions, that is actual believing, that
he may save Father Abraham, and also actual believing from hearing the word of
the Covenant Preached from all Infants born of Abraham and dying in Infancy, or
then all these Infants so dying must be eternally damned? Nay. We believe many
Infants (we reserve to the Holy and Glorious Lord his liberty of election and
reprobation, Romans 9.11, 12.) among the Jews were saved by the Covenant of
Grace, though they died Infants. And this we condemn in Anabaptists, that they
show no revealed way of God of saving Infants of believing Parents dying in
Infancy, more then of saving Pagans and their Infants, Anabaptists provide no
s^lvation by Law or Gospel, or by JESUS CHRIST, for the saving of Infants born
of believing parents, more then for saving of Pagans and their Infants.
for to them both are alike without the Covenant of Grace and without Christ;
and therefore believing Parents have no word of faith or of the Gospel to pray
for the salvation of their Children dying in Infancy, for such prayers have
neither warrant in the Covenant of Works, nor in the Covenant of Grace, by
their way. And yet that we are to pray, is to be gathered from Genesis 19.^8. 2 Samuel, 12.16. Job 1.5. Mark 10.16. Psalm. 28.9. and if we pray for their
salvation, they must be saved by either Law or Gospel. Its not enough, to say
that we may pray for savages that never heard of the Gospel, nor of the
Covenant of Grace, that they may be saved. For seeing there is no name under
Heaven by which men may be saved, but by the Name of Jesus, Acts 4.12. Joh.
14.6. There is no other warrant of praying for such, then that God would send
them the Gospel; and since Christ prayed for Infants and blessed them, which is
a praying for them, Genesis 48.15, 16. Deuteronomy. 33.1.6, 7, 8. etc. Ephesians. 1.2. Gal.
1.3. 1 Cor. 1.3. 1 Timothy 1.2. 2 Timothy 1.3. See Mar. 10.16* he must own them as
blessed in Christ in whom all the Nations of the earth are blessed* and so
Covenanted with God in Christ.

2. It is false that the promise is made only to the aged, upon condition of
actual believing. Its false that the promise is made to infants and to the
aged only upon condition of believing.
1. It is made to their children expressly in the Text, and for the way of their
believing, we leave it to the Lord. Nor is it true, that the promise is made to
the aged, upon condition of believing. The promise is made to them absolutely,
whether they believe or not. But the blessing of the promise and Covenant of
Grace is given and bestowed only conditionally, if they believe. The promise is
absolutely made: its called conditional from the thing conditionally given.

Obj. But is not this an approven distinction, that persons are within the
Covenant, either externally, professedly, visibly, or internally, really, or
according to the intention of God? Ergo, such as are externally within the
Covenant, are not really and indeed within the Covenant of Grace.

Ans. The Adverbe ( really) relates to the real fruit of the fulfilled
Covenant, and so such as are only externally within the Covenant, How visible
professors are really within the Covenant, and not really within it.
are not really within the Covenant, for God never directed, nor intended to
bestow the blessing Covenanted, nor grace to perform the condition of the
Covenant upon them? But they are really Covenanted and engadged by their
consented profession to fulfill the Covenant. And as the commands and
threatenings of the Covenant of Grace lay on a real obligation, upon such as
are only externally in Covenant, either to obey or suffer, so the promise of
the Covenant imposes an engagement and obligation upon such to believe the
promise, but some times, we say the promises of the Covenant of Grace are not
really made to the Reprobate within the Visible Church, because God intends and
decrees to, and for them, neither the blessing promised, nor the saving grace
to fulfill the condition or to believe. And therefore these words are
figurative, Heb. 8.10. This is the Covenant that I will make with the house of
Israel, I will write my Law in their minds, etc. that is, this is the special
and principal Covenanted blessing, I will give them a new heart: which must
not be called a simple prediction, though a prediction it is, but it is also a
real promise made absolutely to the elect, which the Lord fulfills in them: And
this is called the Covenant. Because 1. they are no better then non-Covenanters
upon whom the Lord bestows not this part and blessing of the Covenant. 2. The
truth is, the promise of a new heart is not made to the Visible Church, which
is only Visible: but to the Elect and Invisible Church. And if Anabaptists
shall expone these words, Acts 2.39. The promise of a new heart is made to you
and to your children, upon condition that you and your children believe, which
they cannot do until first they have a new heart, its as good as Peter had
said, God promises to you and to your children grace to believe, and a new
heart to obey him, upon condition that you first believe. And that is, The new
heart is not promised to all, who ought to repent and to be baptized.
Gods promise to you to believe upon condition that ye believe, which is
ridiculous, and therefore we cannot say that this promise of a new heart is
made to all that are commanded to believe and repent and be baptized. For Elect
and Reprobate and all are under these commands, if they be members of the
Visible Church: But the promise of a new heart is not made to all within the
Visible Church.

Quest. How then? Must the promise of a new heart be here excluded? And shall
nothing be meant in the Word, What is promised, Act. 2.39. whether a new heart
be therein promised, or excluded.
but a promise of forgiveness and life is made to you and your Children.

Ans. I should judge it hard, to say, that were the only promise here made, the
promise of a new heart is made to you all, therefore repent and be baptized.
The Antecedent is not true. 2. Therefore because Peter speaks unto, and of a
mixed multitude, Fathers, Children, Elect and Reprobate, who must first
understand, the promise of life and forgiveness is made to you. Ergo, all come
to age, repent and be baptized. And because the promise is made to your
children, therefore let them be baptized. And 3. the promise of new heart is
not to be excluded, because there were in the company to whom, and of whom the
Apostle Peter speaks, many Elect, in whom the old Prophecy, Jer. 31. Ezekiel. 11.
was to be fulfilled; For he says, The promise is made to as many as the Lord
shall call; to the Gentiles, it were a sense too narrow, to exclude that
promise, and therefore, as the great promise, I will be thy God, and the God of
thy seed (which chiefly is meant, Acts 2.39.) requires not the same condition
in fathers and infants, nor the same condition in fathers, wives, hewers of
wood, Officers and Commanders, little ones, and such as were not born, Deu. 29.
with whom the Covenant is made. For the same faith in fath is and in infants,
and faith working in the same duties cannot be required of husbands, wives,
Magistrates, and hewers of wood) so neither is the promise made the same way to
fathers, children, Jews near hand, and Gentiles far off, to Elect and
Reprobate.

Q. How can the promise of the Covenant, to write the Law in the heart, be made
absolutely, and not to the Reprobate, but to the Elect only? For the Elect are
only these to whom that promise is made, and yet the Reprobate are really in
the Covenant of Grace, and the promise is made to them, as has been said.

Answ. It is no inconvenient that the Reprobate in the Visible Church, Mercies
of the Covenant, are not alike and the same way promised to the Parents in
covenant, to wit. Elect and Reprobate.
be so under the Covenant of Grace, as some promises are made to them, and some
mercies promised to them conditionally, and some reserved special promises of
a new heart, and of perseverance belong not to them. For all the promises
belong not the same way, to the parties visibly and externally, and to the
parties internally and personally in Covenant with God. So the Lord promises
life and forgiveness shall be given to these who are externally in the
Covenant, providing they believe, but the Lord promises not a new heart and
grace to believe, to these that are only externally in Covenant. And yet he
promises both to the Elect.

Hence the Covenant must be considered two ways, in abstracto and formally, The
Covenant of Grace is considered two ways, in abstracto, and in conc^^to.
in the letter as a simple way of saving sinners, so they believe, so all
within the Visible Church are in the Covenant of Grace, and so it contains only
the will of precept. 2. In the concret, as the Lord caries on the Covenant in
such and such a way, commensurably with the decrees of Election and
Reprobation; As the Lord not only promises, but acts and ingraves the Law in
the heart, commensurably with his decree of Election, so the Elect only are
under the Covenant of Grace. The word tells of no condition or work, The new
heart is promised to such special Covenanters, not to Covenanters in general,
and as Covenanters.
or act to be performed by any, which if he do he shall have a new heart: and
therefore the promise of the engraven Law in the heart, is not a simple promise
made to the Covenanters as Covenanters, for so it should be a promise to all
visible Covenanters (for visible Covenanters are essentially Covenanters) but
it is both a promise and a prediction, yea a real execution or an efficacious
way of fulfilling the decree of Election to such and such chosen, and specially
loved of God Covenanters.

2. A new heart has a twofold consideration, one as a duty commanded. 2. As a
blessing promised, as to the former, Ezech. 18.31. make you a new heart and a
new spirit, Jer. 4.4. Circumcise your heart to the Lord, take away the foreskin
of your heart, ye men of Judah, The new heart is considered as a duty
commanded. And 2. as a blessing freely promised.
Ephesians. 4.23. be renewed in the Spirit of your mind, Ephesians. 4.14. Awake thou that
sleeps and rise from the dead, these are either bare commands, without any
Gospel strength given to obey, and so they are legal commands in the letter
oboblidging all visible Covenanters to obedience, and so, all Letter all Law,
no Gospel strength to perform speaks poor unmixed Law. In this case, God
repeats and craves back again from broken men a sound heart, which they
sinfully lost in Adam, and may justly seek heart conformity to his holy Law
from all men. Or then these commands are backed with Gospel strength to obey,
and so they are both commands and blessings promised, as Jer. 31.33. This my
Covenant (a Covenant and something more) shall be -- I will put my Law in
their inward parts, The Reprobate are not in the Covenant of Grace as touching
some special promise.
and write it in their hearts -- 34. Ezech. 11.19. Ezech. 36.26. Heb. 8.6, 10,
11.12. so the more strength promised the more Gospel. Neither is there any
inconvenience, to say that the Reprobate visible Covenanters are not thus, as
touching the special promises of a new heart and perseverance of the Saints,
really in the Covenant of Grace.

Q. Who are they, who are to believe God shall give them a new heart Ans. No
man is positively to believe it while God work it in him, for no man is to
believe that he is predestined to Glory, while he first have the effects
thereof in him, the hid Manna, the white Stone, the new Name. But no man is to
despare or to create fatal inferences that he is Reprobate, since God begins
kindly with him with a Gospel call.

CHAP. XIIII. Considerations of the Arguments from Genesis 17. Mark 10.15, 16.
Luke 18. Math. 19. Romans 11. for Infant Baptism.
IF God be the God of Abraham and of his seed, Genesis 17. therefore every male
child shall be entered in the Covenant, by the initiall seal of Circumcision,
and so women also who eat the Passover, which the uncircumcised might not do:
and Peter was sent to the Circumcision, that is, to all the Jews men and women,
and so the women is some way in the men, and they might be circumcised in them
upon the same gound, because the same promise is made to fathers and to
children, How the Lords Argument for Circumcision fits us for Baptism.
must infants be baptized, Acts 2.39. 1. This is the Lords own Argument, Genesis
17.7. there were multitudes of differences between Circumcision and Baptism as
we grant, but in the substance nature and Theological essence, and in the
formal effects they are the same. We grant that Christ revealed in Types,
Sacrifices, to come, darkly offered may differ from Christ as clearly offered
Preached without these already abolished shaddows and who is now come. Yet he
is the same Savior to them who believed in him then and now, Act. 10.43. Act.
15.11. And we 2. argue not simply from the letter of the Covenant. I am your
God. Ergo, be baptized, for one might reply. I am your God. Ergo, offer such
beasts to me, it shall not follow, But I am your God, and the God of your seed
offering to you the same Christ and righteousness that was offered to Abraham
in the same Covenant: Ergo, all of you be baptized who are under the same
Covenant. For,

1. Circumcision of the flesh was a seal of the Circumcision of the heart
promised in the Covenant of Grace, Deuteronomy. 30.6. and of the cutting of the
foreskin thereof, Jer. 4.4. Jer. 9.26. Ezech. 36.26, 27. and baptism is the
same, Col. 2.11, 12. Tit. 3.5.

2. Circumcision is a seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11. so is
baptism, as 1 Pet. 3.21. Romans 4.24.

3. Circumcision is a seal of the Covenant, and by a metonymie called the
Covenant of God in the flesh, Genesis 17.7, 13. so is baptism a solemn installing
of all Samaria, Acts 8. in the Christian Covenant, and so Acts 2.39.

4. Circumcision is a solemn way of instituting any in the Church of Israel,
so we are by one Spirit baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12.12, 13.

1. The command of Circumcising is as large as Covenanting, but that is with
Abrabam the father, and his seed, Acts 2.39. make the command of being
Baptized, (...) every one of you be Baptized, as large as the promise of the
Christian Covenant, and call: For the promise is to you and to your children,
and to as many as the Lord shall call.

2. The command supposes that all the Circumcised, the males of eight days old
understand not the promise of the Covenant, the nature, use, signification, and
end of the seal, A comparing of the command of Circumcision, and of the command
of baptism in three.
and the command to be baptized, supposes that the children to whom the
Covenant promise is made do not understand the same as touching baptism and
the Covenant promise, Acts 2.39.

3. If the positive command be general that all these in Covenant should be
marked with the initiatorie seal of the Covenant: As Genesis 17.7, 8. I am thy
God, and the God of thy seed: Therefore old and young be Circumcised, then
there was no other command in particular, to baptize old or young, but the
institution of Baptism in place of Circumcision needful. As touching the
application of it to persons, old or young, except the ground of external
Covenanting stand as warranting to administrate the seal to all, so Covenanted;
Yea, and if there be a positive command and warrant in the New Testament to
tender the Seal of Baptism to none but to the aged, that can give an account of
their faith, and do actually believe; then should there be an express command
in the New Testament concerning Baptism as concerning the Lords Supper* that
every one before they be Baptized, If actual faith be required in all to be
baptized, there should be a command of self-examining in the N. T. of all before
they be baptized.
try and examine themselves whether they savingly believe or not, before they
be Baptized, otherwise they receive their own damnation, as in the Lords
Supper, for self judging and self examination, if actual believing and being
internally in Covenant, as these in whose heart and inward part the Law of
Grace must be engraven, be the necessary condition required in all these to
whom the Church can warrantably tender Baptism as the seal of the Covenant: And
we require a positive command in the New Testament, see that ye Baptize none
though they profess they be in Covenant, except such as can try and examine
whether they savingly believe or not: and here Anabaptists must flee to the
consequences of the Word and reasons drawn from the Covenant of Grace, as well
as we, and an express command they cannot flee unto, nor is it in Old or New
Testament: It should not move us, that Infants understand neither command nor
seal, nor Covenant, for the Argument is against the Holy Ghost, and they are
oblidged to answer it; for Infants are as ignorant of the promises the special
mysteries of the Gospel, as of Precepts of the Gospel. And yet the promises of
the Covenant of Grace are expressly to Infants of the New Testaments Acts 2.39.
promise, (...), The Gospel promise made to Abraham, Gal. 3.16. The Gospel and
promise of righteousness of the Spirit of Life, Gal. 3.17, 18, 22, 29.23.28.
Gal. 6.2. Romans 4.13.16.20. Romans 9.8. 1 Timothy 4.8. Heb. 4.1. Heb. 6.12.15. Heb.
8.6. Heb. 9.14. 1 John 5.1. is made (...) to your children of the New
Testament, to your Infants, if they believe (say they) 1. Can Infants actually
believe? 2. Is not the promise so made to Turks, if they believe?

But it were an easier way to Anabaptists to say, infants under the New
Testament are externally in Covenant, where as Parents believe, and members of
the Church are followed with Covenant mercy, only because they understand not,
and the administration is more spiritual under the New Testament, and faith
more urged, God requires not the dipping of Infants in Rivers (a ceremony more
onerous, How many wicked absurdities must follow the excluding of Infants from
the Covenant of Grace.
more, truly, in women with child, virgins, diseased persons, in winter, in
cold countries, against the word, the second Command, the third, the fourth,
the sixth, the seventh, then that it needs to be refuted) it being only a
ceremony which they may well want. But now Infants of believers are casten out,
for no fault, of the Covenant of Grace.

(2.) From Covenant mercy to the thousand Generation. Contrair to Genesis 17.7.
Exodus 20.5.

(3.) From Covenant-prayers and Church-prayers: Contrair to 1 Samuel 12. Ps.
28.9. Ps. 67.1, 2. Ps. 103 4, 5.

(4.) From the blessing of the Lords Covenant-presence, who dwells in the
Nation, in the Kingdom, Ps. 135.21. Ps. 132.13, 14. Rev. 11.15. Isa. 19.25.
Isa. 2.1, 2, 3. 2 Cor. 6.16. I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and be
their God, and they shall be my people. 18. And I will be a father to you, and
ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord God Almighty. Though this be
spoken to* all the Covenanted people of God, yet are Infants casten out of the
bosom of a Covenant Father and God?

(5.) Infants are debarred from Covenant-calling and gathering in under the
wings of Christ: Contrair to Matthew. 28.19, 20. Matthew. 23.37. Psalm. 147.19, 20.
and excluded from Gods Covenant-choise: Contrair to Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7, 8, 9, 13, 14.
Deuteronomy. 10.15. and left being heirs of wrath, a prey to Satan.

(6.) They are Excommunicated from Covenant-blessings earthly, and the
Tabernacle-protection promised in the Old and New Testament: Contrair to Deuteronomy.
28.4. Lev. 26.6, 7, 8, 9. Psalm. 37.18.22.25, 26. Psalm. 92.10. Psalm. 112.1, 2,
3. Ezech. 34.24, 25, 26. Ezech. 36.29.35, 36, 37. Ezech. 8.7, 8. And in the New
Testament, Matthew. 6.27, 28.33. 1 Timothy 4.8. Heb. 13.5, 6. which were nothing if
our Heavenly Father provide bread, protection, safety, dwelling in the land,
and our houses, to the fathers, but the children had no charter but to beggary,
to the sword, to be devoured by wild beasts and the diseases of Egypt: And the
Infants have nothing from the Covenant but what Infants of Amaleck, and
Babylon, 1 Samuel 15.1, 2. Ps. 137.5. and of Sodom have, Genesis 19.

(7.) They are members of Satan, of the Kingdom of the Prince of darkness, not
members of Christ's Body, since there be but two Kings, two Gods, Satan, 2 Cor.
4.4. Ephesians. 2* 1, 2. Ephesians. 6.12. Matthew. 12.29. and Christ the King and Head of his
body. And it is known that Infants within the Visible Church, suffer incursions
of Devils, dreadful diseases, death; and being without the Covenant, as
Pagans; these evils must either be acts of revenging justice, and preparatorie
to the judgment of eternal fire, or blessed in Christ: But if the former,
they are damned, if the latter, what blessing is there without Christ?

(8.) Being without the Covenant. Remonstrant Scrip. Synod ar. 1. p. 2. These.
9, 10.
1. Infants cannot be chosen and predestinate in Christ to salvation, as Ephesians.
1.4. Romans 9.11. nor given to Christ to be saved Covenant-wayes, as John 17.2.
John 6.39. nor loved from eternity, nor in time, as Arminians teach, and so
must be carried in Christ to Heaven or Hell, or rather to a mid place, without
God or providence, or decrees, Infants not predestinate to life in CHRIST, not
redeemed in CHRIST
or foreknowledge, or counsel of God. 2. They being without the
Gospel Covenant, cannot be redeemed by Jesus Christ his Blood, but some other
way: Contrair to Acts 4.12. 3. If Infants be born without sin, as Anabaptists
teach, they die, and go either to Heaven, and so Christ took not on him their
nature, Infants neither capable of heaven or hell by this way.
and is not their Savior: or they go to everlasting torment, and yet never
sinned, which is repugnant to Divine Justice: Or to some third place of which
the Scripture speaks not. And yet the word says, Rev. 20.12. that the dead
small and great shall stand before God, and shall be judged. And the Scripture
says Infants are capable of punishment, and of being cut off, and the Parents
punished in them, and they bear Covenant-wrath in their Parents: As is clear in
the seed of Jeroboam, Infants saved without Christ, not capable of Grace, of
remission, justification
of Achab, of others, Ezod. 20.5. Genesis 17.14. 4. Neither remission of sins,
Justification, nor life eternal, nor Sonship, nor Adoption in Christ's
suffering death, and in the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, can belong to
Infants if they be without the Covenant.

9. Nor can children be capable of being blessed of Christ, or of his laying on
of hands. As Mark 10. if they be not under the N. Test. capable of
Covenant-grace: And it is to be minded, that Covenanting Parents, Luke 18.

1. Such as came to him to be cured of their diseases, and believed him to be
the Messiah, the Son of David, as the blind call him, Mat. 20. and the woman of
Canaan, Mat. 15. Luk 18.15. (...) brought to him little Children, as Mat. 8.16.
Mat. 9.2. Luke 4.40. they brought the sick.

2. The children were not diseased, nor possessed: And the Parents being
desirous they might be blessed, as the event proved, it is clear they were not
children of heathen, but members of the Visible Church.

Of the children brought to Christ.
3. (...) Of such is the Kingdom of God, Luke 18.16. we cannot think that his
meaning is of such as such, is the Kingdom of God, as if all Infants of Jew
and Heathen, belonged as subjects to the Visible Church, for then the Infants
of all Heathen should be Covenanted members of the Visible Church, and yet
their Parents are without the Visible Church, and when they grow to age, they
should without any scandal be Excommunicate, which were monstrous, nor can
the Invisible Kingdom of God be of such, as if all Infants, Of infants as
infants, the Kingdom of God is not.
because Infants were saved. Nor,

4. Can the taking of them be a mere Emblem that such were blessed, for so,
beside that Doves and Lambs, for meekness are capable of being taken in the
arms of Christ and blessed, Christ bids them, in all times coming, be suffered
to come, and not forbidden. v. 16. which says he desired the whole spece of
Infants of the Visible Church to be brought to him. Nor does Christ make acts
of Emblems ordinary, but he will have children at all time to come to him:
forbid them not; He once cursed the fig tree, that was an Emblem: and did but
once wash his Disciples feet, and that was an Emblem. And,

5. He could not mean, that only Infants predestinate to glory, should be
suffered to come: For he says indifferently (...) suffer little children to
come: Now he should then have given marks to discern predestinate children and
suffer them. (2.) And receive them only as Disciples, in my Name, Mar. 6.36,
37. (3.) He should have laid his hands upon some Infants, as predestinate to
glory, and forbidden others to come. And the Parents should have known what
children are predestinate to life, and should come, and what not.

6. The Text evidences that the Disciples had a prejudice and a carnal one, at
infants, thinking, they understood nothing of Christ and of the Kingdom of
Grace. The Disciples (...) rebuked these that brought them: as Anabaptists do.
And Christ rebukes them and instates infants of believing Parents as members of
the Visible Church.

7. Nor was it extraordinary, when Christ said suffer little Children to come,
but he would have the spece instated members of such a Kingdom. Ergo, some of
the kind must be saved and examples must be verified (says Mr. Cobbet
judiciously) in some particulars.

8. Of such is the Kingdom of God, of such in Covenant relation is the
Kingdom of God, of such subjects. For if Christ's reason be, of such for
humility, meekness, want of malice, and invy, as 1 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3. Math. 18.
Psalm. 131.1, 2* is the Kingdom of God: he must mean by the Kingdom of God,
the Kingdom of Glory and the triumphing Church, this sense is refused by
Anabaptists. 2. The Infants of Pagans and of all men, by nature, within and
without the Church are as well marked resemblances of converts, as they. And we
must say that Christ would have taken in his arms, and blessed all the Pagan
Infants, and when they grow to age they should be for no fault, but for age
only, Excommunicate from the blessing, for Pagan Infants as well resemble
humility and harmlessenesse (if only the personal qualifications of converts,
and heart-converts, not the Covenant and Church-holinesse of visible
Professors, Hyeronymus increpant* non quia nollent iis salvatoris and manu and
voce benedici: sed quod non dum habentes plenissimam fidem putarent eum in
similitudinem aliorum hominum importunitate lassari.
be here meant) as Infants within the Visible Church.

9. There was no other design and purpose in Christ, in that emphatick
expression, forbid them not to come (...) Math. 19.14. (...) Luke 18.16. to me
their Savior, as well as the Savior of the aged, but to hold forth the common
interest of the whole spece of infants ((...)) within the Visible Church, their
Covenant interest in Christ, for there is no imaginable reason, but the conceit
of want of understanding (the prejudice of Anabaptists only) why the Disciples
should have aimed to debar them or any poor sinners from access to the Savior
of sinners.

10 Christ took them in his arms, laid his hands on them, blessed them. Now
this was a personal real favor bestowed upon infants, had infants been mere
symbolick and doctrinall resemblances of the humility of real converts, and
the young ones as much without the Covenant as Pagans, Chryso. Hom. discipuli
expellebant pueros causa dignitatis Christi.
and as incapable of Covenant grace and Covenant seals, because void of actual
faith now under the new Gospel administration, as horses or beasts, let the
opposites of their Baptism show what sort of blessing it was, that Christ
bestowed upon them, if it be not: 1. Of more value then Jacobs blessing of
Ephraim and Manasseh, Christ's taking in his arms the children and blessing
them, did not act mere resemblances and Emblems. The efficacy of Christ's
blessing the children.
or at least as real, and certain, Christ the Lord from heaven must as
Sovereign, who had power to curse the fig tree and it withered, by his
Sovereign power have blessed, in them, the whole race of infants in the
Visible Church, and declared them Covenanted Church members under the New
Testament in this eminent act of blessing the children and in commanding that
all such might have free access to him as King, since the young ones were
Subjects of the Kingdom of God, as well as the aged, and expressly forbids,
that in time to come, they be hindered to come to him, Mark 10.14. Luke 18.16.
Math. 19.14. and three Evangelists are three sufficient witnesses. (2.) Christ
the Lord is the Supreme and Sovereign Lord of blessing and cursing: for in him
all the Nations of the earth, and with them, young ones a considerable part of
the Covenanted Nations, must be blessed. (3.) If Isaac blessed Jacob, and he
must be blessed, Genesis ^7.29.33. and Jacob blessed the twelve Tribes, Genesis
49.28. and Moses the man of God blessed Israel, before his death, Deuteronomy. 33.1,
2. etc. with Covenant blessings, and they were really blessed, Christ must as
really with Covenant blessings, have, in this, blessed the whole race of
infants of Covenanting parents, except Anabaptists say that it was some
complementall salutation, for the fashion that Christ bestowed upon infants,
when the Evangelists say, he blessed them, They came that he should pray for
them.
Math. 19.13. (...) Mark 10.16. (...) 4. by the gloss of the Adversaries.
Christ blessed them symbolick and doctrinall resemblances of the humility and
docility of real converts, and they were blessed as mere signs, as the
Elements in the Sacraments are blessed, or as new made crucifixes are blessed
and dedicated to divine worship, Christ's blessing of the children not as when
the elements are consecrate.
as resemblances of Christ crucified; and as Popish Images are symbolicallie
blessed, a strange devise are rather a strong delusion. 4. If Christ prayed for
infants as Matthew says the mothers or parents sought that of him, Math. 19
13. his prayers must be grounded upon the word of the Covenant, and what could
he seek for infants peace in these, but Covenant mercies and salvation: for
Christ was not to work a miracle upon them, and he satisfied the desires of
these, who brought them on their arms, and therefore could not go on their
feet nor give a confession of their faith, they were born as the man sick of
the palsy, Math. 9.2. (5.) Now as Christ is always hard in his prays, His
blessing either a Law blessing, or a blessing of the Covenant of Grace.
Joh. 11.42. so his blessing he bestowed upon them (though Anabaptists will
have them without Christ and the Covenant and under the curse of God) must
either be a blessing of the Covenant of Grace, or of the Covenant of Works, for
a third sort of blessing the Scripture knows not: Moses takes all blessings up
in these two. Deuteronomy. 27.12, 15, 16. Deuteronomy. 28.2, 3, 15, 16. Deuteronomy 30.19. I set
before you life and death, blessing and cursing, and so does Paul, Gal. 3.10,
13, 14. Heb. 6.7, 8, 14, 15. But Christ could not bestow the Law blessing of
Works upon these infants, for they had not fulfilled the Law in their persons,
nor can infants or any flesh be justified by the Law, Romans 3.20. therefore must
Christ have bestowed upon them the blessing of the Covenant of Grace, Gal.
3.14. Heb. 6.14. let it be the blessing of remission and life, or real right
to the Kingdom of God, it is a blessing of the Covenant. 6. The faith of the
parents that brought them is holden forth, Math. 19.13. Then were little
children brought unto him, that he might lay his hands on them and pray: then
had they faith in Christ, that his praying and blessing should be availeable to
infants, its a conjecture that they came with a may be, or as Mr. Cobbet well
says, a faith grounded upon a possibility of Election separated from the
Covenant, that is secret, and the Covenant revealed, and so this, not election
abstracted from that, can be the ground of faith, Deuteronomy. 29.29. and when Christ
says, Math. 18.4, 10. that little ones Angels behold the face of his Father,
and the Holy Ghost says, Heb. 1.13. that Angels are Minstring Spirits, (...).
For these that shall by heritage or lot enjoy salvation. Its clear infants have
their share of salvation, and by Covenant it must be. As also the blessed seed
is promised to Adam before he have a child, and to his seed: To Seth, Japhet,
Isaac, Jacob, Abraham, when Cainan, Cham, Ishmael, Esau, Abraham's Idolatrous
house, to David, when his brethren are refused, and to these as heads of
Generations, when contrare Generations, and the houses of Cainan, Cham,
Ishmael, are rejected: Hence the house of Israel, the seed of Israel, the seed
of Jacob, and there shall be added to the Gentiles, Isa. 49. who shall bring in
to the Church their sons and their daughters upon their shoulders, A Covenanted
seed is prophesied to be added to the Jews under the New Testament.
22. Isa. 54.1. Sing O barren -- for more are the children of the desolate then
of the married wife says the Lord, Isa. 60.4. Lift up thine eyes round about,
and see, all they gather themselves about, they shall come to thee: thy sons
shall come from far, and thy sons shall be nourished at thy side. Israel
marying and Israel according to the flesh is the holy seed, Neh. 7.61. Neh.
9.2. the holy seed have mingled with the heathen. 1 Chronicles. 16.13. O ye seed of
Israel his servants, ye children of Jacob whom he has chosen, be mindful of
his Covenant. And this holiness by external Covenanting is extended to the
Gentiles, 1 Cor. 7.14. But now are your children holy; and its holiness the
Jews to be called in, Romans 11.16. If the first fruit be holy, the lump is also
holy: and if the root be holy (...) also the branches. So it is prophesied,
Isa. 61.9. Their seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and their offspring
among the people: All that see them shall acknowledge them, that they are the
seed that the Lord has blessed. 6. But ye shall be named the Priests of the
Lord, (holy by Covenant as was Aarons house, because in Covenant visibly with
God) men shall call you the Ministers of our God: Ye shall eat the riches of
the Gentiles; and in their glory shall ye boast your selves, Isa. 62.2. Thou
shall be called by a new name, which the mouth of the Lord has named. v. 12.
And they shall call them the holy people, the Redeemed of the Lord: And thou
shall be called, Sought out, A City not forsaken. Isa. 65.22. As the days of a
tree, are the days of my people: and mine Elect (by calling) shall long enjoy
the work of their hands. Sure he Prophesies of a visibly Covenanted people
under the New Testament: For he adds, v. 23. They shall not labor in vain, nor
bring forth in trouble: for they are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and
their offspring with them. Now to any Godly Reader, there is here. 1. ^
Prophecy to be fulfilled of the Gentiles brought in, as is clear, Isai. 6^.1,
2* 3, 4. Christ, Luke 4. applies that Text to himself. And 9. Their seed shall
be known among the Gentiles. Isa. 62.2. There is Covenanted visible seed
prophesied to be under the N. T.
The Gentiles shall see thy Righteousness. And for Chapter 65.1, 2, 3, 4. Paul
expounds it of the in-coming of the Gentiles, Romans 9.24.26. Romans 10.20. Ephesians.
2.12.13. Romans 15.20. (2.) He speaks of a Visible Church and of their seed,
known among the Gentiles, all that see them shall acknowledge them, that they
are the seed which the Lord has blessed, Isa. 5^.9. But they did not see the
white Stone (the seal of their election) and a new Name which none can read but
he that receives it, Rev. ^.1^. And they see them a seed and offspring of the
Covenanted people of God. Isa. 62.12. They shall call them the holy people:
then they must judge them a Visible Church. But a Church of such as are
predestinate to glory, they cannot see them to be. (3.) Isai. 55. They are a
Visible Church. 21. They shall build houses and inhabit them -- 22. They shall
not build and another inhabit, They shall not plant and another eat. And the
reason is, 23 -- ] Because they are (they shall be, its a Prophecy under the
New Testament) the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their offspring with
them. Jer. 23.22. As the Host of Heaven cannot be numbered, neither the sand of
the sea measured, so will I multiply the seed of David. What seed? The visible
seed: And the Levits that Minister unto me, will I multiply: He alludes to the
promise made to Abraham, Calv. in loc. Haec promissio Abrahae data ad totum
populi corpus spectabat.
of multiplying his seed, Genesis 13.15. Genesis 15.5. Genesis 2.17. And this promise
made to Abraham (says Calvin) belongs to them all, and he would have them not
to doubt of the restitution of the people to their own Land. Now the people and
Levits, and house of David were never so multiplied in the Jews, after the
deliverance from Babylon, and therefore must be extended to the New Testament.
And if God establish David's seed for ever, Psalm. 89.4. And the seed of his
people shall possess the gates of their enemies, Genesis 24.60. And if he power
his Spirit upon the seed of Jacob, Isai. 44.3. and Circumcise the heart of the
seed of his people, Deuteronomy. 30.6. and put his words in the mouth of the seed of
his people, and their seeds seed for ever, Isai. 59.21. And the seed of the
righteous be blessed on earth, Psalm. 37.26. not simply because they are a seed
(for the whole seed of man should be blessed, The Covenant promise is
prophesied to belong to such a certain seed
if so) but because they are the seed of his servants, Psalm. 69.36. of the
Jews, Esther 6.13. the Children of his Servants, Psalm. 102.28. See Jer. 31.35,
35, 37. Isa. 6.13. because the seed of Abraham, and in the Covenant made with
Abraham, Exodus 2.24. 2 Kings 13.23. Psalm. 105.8, 9. Psalm. 111.5, 9. Genesis 17.2,
7, 9. Lev. 26.42, 45. Ezekiel. 16.60. Luke 1.72. Exodus 6.4. Deuteronomy. 8.18, etc. Then
must the Covenant be established under the New Testament with the Visible seed;
and if there were an abridging and contracting of this favor to the Elect
only, it would have been showed, and the Charter of reservation and exception
must have been penned in the Old or New Testament. If there be not a Covenanted
seed under the New Test. the children of believers under the New Test. must be
a cursed seed
2. Otherwise the seed of all Gentiles called in to Christ by the Preached
Gospel, must be visibly cursed of God, cut off from the people of God,
separated from the Lord, from the Congregation of his people, not to the tenth
Generation only as the Ammonite, the Moabite, the Bastard, Deuteronomy. 23.1, 2, 3.
and Excommunicated out of the Camp as unclean, nor should Christians marry or
Covenant with them: As Deuteronomy. 23.14. Lev. 13.43, 44, 45, 46. Deuteronomy. 7.1, 2, 3.
Exodus 34.15, 16. 1 King. 11.2. Ezra 9.2, 12. Nehem. 13.23. Judge. 3.6, 7. Judge.
4.2. 3. Except there be some middle between a cursed and a blessed seed, a seed
in the Church, and in Covenant, and the seed of the Serpent, of Heathen,
without the Covenant. 2. A middle between the Kingdom of darkness, of Satan,
and the Kingdom of God of his dear Son: Contrair to Ephesians. 2.2, 3, 4. Acts 26.18.
Col. 1.13, 14. 1 Pet. 2.9, 10. Ephesians. 5.8. which is unknown to Scripture. Yea the
Covenant is made to Christ and his seed, Gal. 3.16. and the same blessings of
Abraham, comes on us Gentiles, Gal. 3.13, 14. But he and all his seed were
blessed and in grace by the external call of the Covenant. Ezekiel. 16.1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Deuteronomy. 7, 7, 8. Romans 10.25. Its a state of common grace to be
within the Visible Church.
I will call them my people that were not my people, and her beloved which was
not beloved. And this external calling is of Grace and so Grace, no merit, as
well as predestination to life is grace, or for grace. For whosoever are
called, not because Elect, but because freely loved of such a God and without
merit called, Father and Son, they are in a state of grace^ But so are all
within the Visible Church. If any object, by Christ's coming all the Nations
old and young are not become the Nations of the Lord and of his Christ, but
only true Believers, even by our Doctrine.

Answ. They are become the Kingdoms of the Lord, not only because they are
truly converted, but because they are the chosen of God in the Office-house of
Christ, and Christ reigns over them by the Scepter of his Word whom he is to
convert. And external Covenanting with God is of it self free Grace and a
singular favor bestowed of God, Psalm. 147.19, 20. Deuteronomy. 5.1, 2. Mat. 21.42,
43. Luke 14.16.21.

2. It is free Grace that God will have hypocrites and real infidels to beget
children to him that are internally in Covenant with him; Its grace that
Reprobats are isntrumental to the in-coming to the world and to the Visible
Church of the heirs of glory.
and fills up the number of the Elect by Reprobate Parents who are
isntrumental to the in-coming in the world, and into the Visible Church, of
many Heirs of Glory: and in so doing there is a Church right communicated from
Reprobate Parents to their Children, that are Heirs of Glory.

3. External Covenanting goes before internal Covenanting, as the means
before the end, and the cause before the effect: For faith comes by hearing of
a sent Preacher, Romans 10.14. and the Preaching of the Gospel is a saving means
of begeting a new heart and of a new spirit: Hence 1. All must be first
externally in Covenant, before they can be internally and really in Covenant.
2. God is a God simply to some, and no more but a God to them in regard of
outward Church privileges, as the Word, Seals, Protection, Peace, Hedge of
Discipline, his planting and watering by a Ministry. But he is, to speak so,
more then a God to others, Hos. 2.19. I will betroth thee unto me for ever, yea
I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness, God is a God in truth to some,
and how to others.
in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercy. Now the Lord is joined to
backsliding Israel, in an external marriage Covenant: But Jer. 3.14. not in
righteousness, in loving kindness and mercy, in reference to the rotten
party. In regard of which he says, v. 2. Plead with your mother, plead: for
she is not my wife, neither am I her husband. Zech. 8.7. Thus says the Lord, I
will save my people from the East Country, and from the West Country. 8. And
I will bring them, and they shall dwell in the midst of Jerusalem, and they
shall be my people, and I will be their God, in truth and in righteousness.
Then he is not to all a God in truth and righteousness, fulfilling the first
and substantial promise of ingraving the Law in the heart, not that he keeps
not Covenant even to external confederat^, to wit, the conditional Covenant,
for if they should believe they should be saved; but he promised not a new
heart, and faith to them. 3. Because he is a God external to the Elect, and
that of free Grace, therefore he is a God in truth and righteousness, to
ingrave his Law in their heart. But external confederation is not the adequate
cause, for then he should give a new heart to all, with whom he externally
Covenants, but the adequate cause is confederation external tali modo, out of
his discriminating love and free grace he is a God to some. The cause why we
believe, is because God is thus and thus, in Covenant with us.
4. He is a God to his Elect that he may ingrave his Law in their heart and
inward parts; so that the promising to be a God tali modo, is the cause, and
the ingraving of a new heart is the effect. Jer. 31.33. Jer. 32.38. And they
shall be my people, and I will be their God. That is the cause. 39. I will give
them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever; for the good of
them and of their children after them. See the same order, Ezech. 11.19, 20.
though the words ly not in that order there and here. And Heb. 8.10.5. God is
not then a God to any, because they have a clean heart, and the Law engraven
therein, for then they should be in Covenant, before they be in Covenant; And
so this is true (because he is our God in truth and righteousness, therefore
we believe) but this is not true ( because we believe, therefore he is our God)
except we argue from the effect to the cause.

But to return: Calvine on Matthew* 19.14. We hence gather that the grace of
Christ is extended to Infant age, Calvin. unde Colligimus ad hanc quoque
aetatem extendi ejus gratiam. Quid vero il^is precatus est nisi ut reciperentur
inter Dei filios?
for whole mankind had perished. Beza, Infants are also comprehended in the
free Covenant. Pareus, its unlawful to ^^barre these from baptism and the
Church, whom Christ ^^ds come to him, etc. Obj. But Christ commands not they be
baptized. Answ. Nor does Christ in this place command the Parents to bring them
up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord: Nor speak the Evangelists of any
Parentall duty; shall we from that conclude, it was not Christ's mind that the
Parents take care of the fourth and fifth Command? Pareus says, it was neither
time nor place. Mat. 28.19. he bids baptize all. 3. He who prayed for them,
blessed them, laid his hands upon them, invited them to bring Infants to him
(of all which Infants were as incapable, Beza, Ipsi quoque Infantes in gratuito
Dei foedere comprehenduntur.
as of the use and ends of Baptism and of actual confession of sin and of
believing) judged they ought be Baptized. 4. Its never to be found where any
are Baptized, but the Head of the Family is Baptized: And when we read that
houses were Baptized, 1 Cor. 1.16. Acts 16.33. There is no more ground to say
Infants are not Baptized, then to say when the Lord says to Abraham, Genesis
12.2. I will bless thee, The Covenant blessing of the house, is the Covenant
blessing of the seed.
and make thy name great. And 22.17. in blessing I will bless thee. And when
the Lord says, Isai. 19.25. blessed be Egypt my people; he should mean, he
would bless Abraham, not his seed, and that he minds to bless the aged of
Egypt, and of Assyria, but not their seed and infants, because they understand
no^ what a blessing of God means; and yet the fruit of the womb and the seed
are said to be blessed, Psalm. 37.26. Deuteronomy. 7.13. and God so entreated to bless
Israel, and to bless David's house, Psalm. 28.9. Psalm. 67.1* Deuteronomy. 26.16. 2 Samuel
7.29. the meaning should not be that God would bless the young Infants and
Children in Israel and in David's house: And when Jacob is said to provide for
his own house, Genesis 30.30. And the believer to provide for his Family, 1 Timothy
5.8. the meaning should be that they should provide for the aged of the house,
who understood what provision is, but should not provide for the young ones,
who can not know what it is to be hungry to morrow. To say young ones are not
capable of Baptism, is to beg the Question. For (1.) all Israel were Baptized
in the Sea and in the Cloud, old and young, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. (2.) All Israel old
and young are capable of the blessing Covenanted, Psalm. 28.9. Psalm. 67.1, ^.
and so of the seal: Anabaptists grant (as they must) if Infants be in Covenant,
they ought to receive the Seal of the Covenant. Lastly, how is it that by
baptized houses, must be meant only these come to age who can actually believe?

The Jews, Romans 11.16. are holy root and branch, first fruit and lump, fathers
and children, and the Jews shall be brought in again. Why? The Generation to
come in is holy, for the Covenant made with their fathers. Well say
Anabaptists, but notwithstanding of the federall holiness you talk of, The
place, Romans 11.16. if the root be holy, so is the branches, opened.
Romans 11.16. that gives not right to the casten off to be Baptized, and
admitted to Church privileges; for the casten off are no Church, and have no
Church privilege, your federall holiness then must be a dream?

Ans. But these to come in, and to be re-ingrafted are holy, intentionally, The
Jews to be born are intentionally holy in the root and when they are born, they
shall be actually holy.
in the decree of God, because of their beloved fathers, and when God shall
call them, the same Covenant made with Abraham gives them right; and these
branches not in being, and the unborn Generation are only intentionally holy by
this federall holiness, and they shall be actually holy, when they shall be
born, but it follows not, but the present Generation not broken off through
unbeleef, as Paul and others called by the name of election, Romans 11.7. have
right, because of their fathers. For God has not cast off his people, whom he
has fore-known For I am an Israelite (says Paul, v. 1, 2.) of the seed of
Abraham, and there are thousands of Jews now hid* as in Elias his time, who
bowed not their knee to Baal; but the body of them, the great bulk is fallen
away and cut off. Hence the Jews are holy federally* and not holy, beloved of
the fathers federally, and not beloved federally, holy and keep Church right to
Baptism, and Ordinances, in regard of the founder and invisible part: And not
holy federally nor having any Church right to Baptism, in regard of the
wilfully broken off body, that crucified Christ and stand to their fathers
bloody deed, these have no more Church-part nor portion to Ordinances, then
Simon Magus, Acts 8. notwithstanding of their carnal descent from Abraham.

And when God made the Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17. and renewed the same,
Deuteronomy. 29. he made it with these who were not there standing, v. 14, 15. not
with you only, etc, but virtually, radically with us Gentiles, who were not
then born, as touching the substantialls, for Priesthood, Law-service, Types,
Sacrifices, The same Covenant in the substantialls, is in the Old and New Test.
Circumcision, yea Baptism, the Lords Supper, Pastors, Teachers, Elders to
rule, Deacons, were all accidents, to the substance of the Covenant, to wit, to
believe in Christ and to obtain righteousness and life by Christ: As the same
way to the same City has other hedges, way-marks, bridges, this year which it
had not 500. years ago. And look as a father that knows he shall beget so
many hundredth sons who shall all be Kings, and have the same royal
inheritance, writes a Charter intituling them all, before they be born, to the
same inheritance: They have all virtuall and radical right, ere they be born,
with the first heir; And when they are born, he makes not another Covenant with
them. So Deuteronomy. 29.14, 15. he says not, He shall make another Covenant with
these when they shall be born: but I make a Covenant with you, and with these
that are not here, not born. Hence by way of excellency he calls it the
Covenant, the Covenant of the Lord, Jer. 2^.9. Deuteronomy. 4.23. Josh 23.11. My
Covenant, says the Lord, Genesis 17.7, 9, 10. Exodus 19.5. Psalm. 50.16. His
Covenant, Psalm. 105.8. He remembered his Covenant for ever, Psalm. 111.5. He will
remember his Covenant for ever, 5.9. His Covenant with Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, 2 King. 13.23. When Hazael King of Syria oppressed Israel, in their
saddest afflictions, Levit. 26.42, 43. The Scripture is called the Book of the
Covenant, Exodus 24.7. 2 King. 23.4. 2 Chronicles. 34.30, 21. The Question is easily
determined, it can be the Book of no Covenant, but of that made with Abraham,
the oath unto Jacob, The one Covenant of Grace is called the Covenant of the
Lord, by way of excellency in the Old and New Test.
1 Chronicles. 16.16, 17. Psalm. 105.9. Jer. 11.5. Dan. 9.11. Luke 1.73. Heb. 6.15,
17. and to the fathers, the everlasting Covenant, Genesis 9.16. Genesis 17.9, 13.
which relates to Adam also, Levit. 24.8. 2 Samuel 23.5. made unto David, 1 Chro.
16.17. Psalm. 105.10. Isa. 61.8. Heb. 13.20. which cannot be, if there be so
many Covenants, as some speak of: the new Covenant, and the better Covenant,
Heb. 8.8, 13. Heb 12.20* Jer. 3.81. Heb. 7.21. which newness and excellency is
all expounded of the Mediator now God, the Word made Flesh, Heb. 7. c. 8. c. 9.

And we would remember that Romans 11. Paul proves 1. God has not casten off the
Jews wholly. A short opening of To. 11. to v. 17
1. Arg. Because I Paul am a Jew, and he has not casten me off: Ergo in one
the Covenant may stand. 2. From his unchangeablenesse, God has foreknown them.
3. From the example of the Church in the days of Elias. By way of
p^^occupation, it is true many are fallen off: but as then seven thousand were
in Israel who bowed not their knee to Baal, so now; Because the election of
grace does not fall now, or then. Then says he, not of works. He reconceals
that he says with what before, by a preoccupation: And have all the Jews
fallen short of righteousness? and he answers, All are not fallen short. The
election, that is, the elected have obtained righteousness, the rest not. 2.
To make way to exhort the Gentiles to walk worthy of the place and room of the
Jews* He speaks some more of the doctrine of Reprobation, as he spoke, Chapter 9.
of eternal predestination, and of 2. The casting out of the Jews, and of their
blinding and hardening. They have fallen in Gods decree, not that they may
utterly fall. 2. That the Gentiles may be provoked by their fall.

Hence by diverse Arguments he proves that the Jews shall be brought in again
to Christ 1. From four ends of the Jews fall, v. 11. (2.) To provoke them to
come in, v. 11. (3.) That some may be saved. 4. For the riches of the worlds
salvation. Whence the magnifying of Paul's Ministry, v. 13, 14. 2. Arg. From the
great fruit; If their fall be the riches of the world, their incoming again
must be the resurrection from the grave of the buried unbeleeving world, v. 15.

3. Arg. They must be brought in. These who are holy separated from the world,
for the Covenant-call of God, must be brought in again: But so is Israel. The
Assumption he proves by p^rts. 1. The mass and root of Israel is holy, the
Fathers were the Covenanted visible stock, line, root, as all the Old Testament
says: then the posterity, the first fruits, the branches partly born, partly
to be born, must be holy Covenant-wayes: The tree, root and branches are holy
and of the same nature; Therefore the branches have right to Christ, to the
Covenant, to Baptism and the seals. Hence Anabaptists, without all reason, say
that he speaks not of federall and external holiness, but of real, internal
and true holiness, only of the invisible body predestin^ted to life: for
though invisible holiness cannot be excluded, except we exclude the holiness
of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, who were without doubt a part of the root: yet he
must be taken to speak of that holiness of the Covenant and Church, as made
visible and of the visible collective body of the Jews, not of only real and
invisible holiness. 1. Because this was true in the days of Elias, By the
holy root cannot be meant the predestinate to glory only.
If the root be holy the branches are holy; And it is a New Testament-Truth of
perpeall verity, If the Fathers be holy so must the Sons. The Fathers have
Church-right to Circumcision, to Baptism, to the Passover, and to the Lords
Supper, so have the Children: but it is most false of the invisible mystical
body and root only, and of real and internal holiness; For neither in Old or
New Testament is it true, If the Fathers be predestined to life, justified
and sanctified and saved, so must the Children be. Ishmael, Esau, Absalom, and
all the world of Hypocrit^^ called from their profaneness Sodom and Gomorah,
Isai. 1.10. uncircumcised in heart, as Egypt, Moab and Ammon, Jerem. 9.26. as
the Philistines, Amos 9.7. Then should that (2.) Distinction of Jews in the
heart, and inward, and of Jews in the flesh, Romans 2.28. and of the children of
the flesh, that are not of the spiritual seed, and of the children of the
promise, Romans 9.7, 8. and of the persecuting children of the bond woman not
justified by faith, and of the children of the promise, Gal. 4.23, 24, etc.
fall to the ground. Yea 3. If by the root and the lump be understood only
Believers and chosen to life, the whole Israel, which is as the sand of the
sea, should be saved, whereas the Word of God says, a remnant only shall be
saved, (...) LXX. Te^la. A part taken out shall be saved, Romans 9.27. Isai.
10.22, 23. Hos. 1.10. 4. By the branches must be meant all the visible body of
the Jews, old and young. Now if Anabaptists give us a Visible Church of the
Jews of all real believers, even the branches and Infants, (which shall
hardly be proven by the Scripture) these infants at least being visible
Believers may lawfully be baptized, being both internally and visible, and
externally in Covenant. For this Scripture is expressly expounded by them of
real and inherent holiness, and so Infants must be real Believers and in
Covenant. Ergo they must be baptized: What can be replied is not imaginable:
but they have not actual faith, and possibly that is not known to the Church.
But this Scripture says that the branches and root both are holy. 2. It shall
be new Divinity, that none are to be baptized but such as are under the actual
^^^rcise of their faith, a thing that cannot be discerned by the Church, in
these that are come to age. 5. Here shall also be this new Divinity, that
predestination to life and glory must be propagated and derived from the lump
to the first fruits, from the root and parents to the branches and children.

5. Its against the whole current of the Text, that Paul spoke abstractly of
the only invisible body really sanctified, and not of the visible body. For 1.
The body invisible is an elect seed that cannot fall away; But the body that
here he speaks of are such, of which a part are hardened and blinded, Paul, Romans
11. speaks of a visible, not an invisible body.
and under the spirit of slumber, and a part elect and chosen. 7. The election
have obtained, the rest are hardened, and of such a body, compared with the body
in the time of Elias, of which multitudes fell away, slew the Prophets, dug
down the Altars, and a good number were believers, that bowed not their knee to
Baal, and so is the body now, says Paul, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. (...), which is a mixed
body. 3. He speaks of the body that is fallen and stumbled, v. 11. and these
whom he preaches unto, to provoke them to a holy emulation, to come in to
Christ, by the incoming of the Gentiles, v. 13, 14. which is sure a visible
body, and which shall be ingraffed in again, v. 23. which includes a visible
body of diverse generations. 4. Yea he must speak of a National election and
external calling, as Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8, 9. Deuteronomy. 10.15. Psalm. 132.13. Isai. 41.2.
Not of a personal election of some certain persons who fell, were blinded,
rejected fully and totally in their persons, and received in and ingraffed as
sound believers again* for the Scripture speaks of no such boating in and out,
but of a huge numerous body of which some fell, some stand and includes diverse
generations. 5. The collective visible body of Jews and Gentiles are such as
Paul preaches unto, v. 13, 14. such as are ingraffed in in the room of the
Jews, and ingraffed into the Olive of the visible Body, and partake of the
fatness of Ordinances, Baptism* Co^enant-comforts, promises. Infants of the
Jews are cut off with the root, and shall be reingraffed with the root.
Now if any say that this proves not that Infants are ingraffed, then must they
say that Infants of the Jews before Christ partaked of no fatness of the
Covenant, Circumcision, Blessings, Presence, Protection. 2. That they were not
broken off with their fathers, and so that they now stand. 3. That the Infants
of the Jews are not holy branches, as the root is holy, as (...)* and that none
but the fathers shall be ingraffed in, and only 4. The aged and the baptized
actual believers of the Gentiles are the ingraffed ones, not their Infants,
they are all Heathen and Pagans, as well as the casten off Jews. 5. That the
Jews ingraffing in again shall be to their great hurt, so as God was long ago
their God, but shall no more in time coming be their God, then of the Pagans
and the lately cut off fathers: Nor can the Adversaries say that Jewish Infants
were broken off through unbelief* because they are capable neither of belief
nor of unbelief to them. Then they remain in the Olive tree, members of the
Church as before, and God must be still their God, when the fathers are cut
off, verse. 17. And again, when the fathers shall be reingraffed and they made
Christians, the Infants shall be out of Christ, and have no more Covenant-right
or Church-right to Baptism, then the Infants of Egyptians and Philistines had
to Circumcision.

Obj. Shall not, by this means, all the Infants of all the Gentiles be
ingrafted in, and baptized?

Answ. The Text warrants us to say it only of the Children of the ingrafted and
called Gentiles, that they have right to baptism.

Obj. This Text is spoken of these that have hereditary Covenant-right, from
their natural Father Abraham. We Gentiles have not that natural relation to
Abraham, The seed are in Covenant, not by birth as birth, but by such a birth,
so and so graciously privileged.
nor are we his natural sons, nor branches?

Answ. Its false, that the Jews by birth as birth, had hereditary right to
Church Priviledges, they had right by such a birth from Abraham taken in out of
free-love to Covenant fellowship with God, and his children are natural, that
is, kindly. 2. First branches and sprigs, before us Gentiles, to believing
Abraham, but we believing are made Abraham's by proportion, and are secondary
and so wild branches. 2. Abraham is not the Physical, but a Moral root. For
the Covenant was made with Abraham, not as a believing Father, but as a
believing Head of Children, of Servants, and strangers under him, as the
Covenant is laid as an Heavenly depositum, upon Zacheus, in relation not to his
children only, but to his house, Luke 19. For when he is made a son of
Abraham, salvation, that is, the Covenant of Life comes to him and to his
house: and so to Cornelius, Acts 10. and to the Jayler, Acts 16. and to their
houses, and the same way I distinguish seeds.

Q. How can the Jews that are come in, be federaly holy for their fathers?
Since now it is about fifteen hundredth years since their father^ were broken
off from Church and Covenant: May not all the world Jews and Gentiles be
federally holy branches, by the same reason, because the Covenant was made
with, and Preached unto Adam a believing root and father in Paradise? So it
would appear once in the Covenant of Grace; and all the seed to the coming of
CHRIST, are federally holy, as well as they. Answ. This is as great a
difficulty to the Adversaries (and insuperable) as to us, for the Jews unborn
by their way, are no more holy in their branches and offspring then Turks and
Indians, and their children, until they grow to age and actually believe, and
so are the Infants of Americans, and such as worship the Sun, or Satan, that
way holy. And so the branches of the Jews have no holiness from the root, nor
are they beloved for the fathers, as verse. 28.2. All the Jews leave not off to
be members of the Invisible Church; For Paul says Romans 11.25. blindness in
part is happened to Israel (...) to a part of Israel: For howbeit the visible
mass and body of the Jews rejected Christ and wrath ^e come upon them to the
outmost, 1 These. 2.16. yet that is not said universally of all the Jews, 14.
(...). Yea Paul wrote to the Jews the Epistle to the Hebrews. James to the
twelve Tribes scattered abroad, Jam. 1.1. and Peter, 1 Pet. 1.1. and John to
the Jews: I judge, not in a visible body, and these are not broken off the
Olive, and do, though not in a Visible Church way, derive Covenant right to the
branches that shall be ingrafted in. But many Nations descended of Adam have
universally rejected Christ, and know not the Name of Christ the blessed seed.

Q. May we not say that the root is Christ as mystical Head, from whom we
partake of the s^ppe of grace and life and fatness.

Answ. The intent of Paul is to prove that the Jews cut off, because of their
unbeleef, shall be ingrafted in again, in the Lords own time, because of the
holiness of the Covenant, that was in the root and in the first fruits
Abraham, Covenant-holinesse external is not the adequat and complete cause of
ingraffing really in Christ.
Isaac and Jacob. It is true, their Covenant-holiness is not the adequat cause,
why they shall be ingrafted in really into Christ, for so all the carnal
children, who had this relative holiness must be really ingrafted in Christ,
but it is with the Lords free love, both the cause of their personal, and of
their Church ingrafting, and the continued deriving of that relative holiness
being a continued free favor in its kind, is the Lords love in the same kind
to root and branches, otherwise it should not bear truth, which, is said v. 28.
which expores this, ver. 28. that they are beloved for the fathers, not as if
they were predestinate to life, because Abraham was so chosen, but because of
the Fathers Covenant-holinesse, which was holiness from Christ not as root and
head, through influence of saving grace, but as a politic head which yet is,
what we say. For because Christ is holy as root, head and Redeemer, the Jews
once his Church Visible and to be so again, the branches are not really holy by
faith, because all of them were not in Christ: But if all Jews and Gentiles,
and also Infants who are Jews and Gentiles and parts of the body be baptized
into the visible body, so are Infants. See more of this in Mr. Cotton, Mr.
Black, Mr. Cobbet, Mr. Rich. Baxter, who have closed the dispute learnedly.

CHAP. XV. The differences of external and internal Covenanting. 2. No
Universal Grace, Romans 10.18. Psalm. 19.3. nor in Scripture. 3. Nor power of
believing to all given by Christ.
HEnce, the clear differences betwixt the external visible and National
Covenanting of the people of old, Considerable differences between external
and internal Covenanters.
when they were brought out of the Land of Egypt; And the internal and
personal (though it may be visible also) Covenanting with God.

1. This under the New Testament is a new Covenant, and all the old shadows are
abolished* The former is the old.

2. This is with the house of Israel and Judah chosen persons, and so personal
with single men. You shall not give a Nation, Kingdom, or Land, with which the
Covenant internally is so made, as if all and every one, without exceptions,
must know the Lord savingly (what may be the converted Jews case, whether the
whole body of them, all and every one shall be visible, real, and personal
Covenanters, as the place, Romans 11.26. seems to say, I cannot determine) and
all and every one be saved; for then must all the visible house of Israel be
saved, and not the chosen only.

3. The visible external Covenant was broken, Jer. 31.32. The other personal
and internal is never broken.

4. The promise of a new heart is really fulfilled, in all the persons and
single branches of the house of Judah, so that all and every one are taught of
God, none excepted, Jer. 31.33, 34. Isa. 54.13. Joh. 6.45. not so in the
visible external Covenant, if it be but external: not any is taught of God,
but all are taught of men.

5. The real personal Covenant is everlasting, like that Covenant with the
Moon and Stars; 2. The night and the day; 3. Of the motion of the Sea, Jer.
31.35, 36, 37. There is perseverance absolutely promised, Jer. 32.40. I will
make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, to
do them good. Its sure in Gods part, for he changes not. Nay, but we change
and turn away from God, he obviats that: I will put my fear in their hearts,
that they shall not depart from me. Personal Covenanters cannot fall away: but
National, conditional, and visible Covenanters may.
So Isai. 54.10. Isa. 59.21. but all such as Nationally, visibly only, and in
profession only, are in Covenant, may fall away.

6. Jer. 31.^^. Behold (...) day (...) come says the Lord, that the City shall
be built to the (...), etc. There is a promise of spiritual right in Christ
made to the blessings of this life, to these that are personal Covenanters; As
Jer. 32.4^. Ezekiel. 11.17, 18, 19. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 33. Ezekiel. 37.24,
25, 26. Ezekiel. 34.23, 24, 25, 26, 27. which promise, though not rep^^ted in the
New Testament, when the Prophesies of (...) cited, Heb. 8.8. Heb. 10.16, 17.
but of purpose (...), because the promise of temporal blessings, is not so
express (...)* Yet* in other places of the New Testamant, it is clear that we
have bread by Covenant-promise, Matthew. 19* 20. 1 Timothy ^.8. Heb. 13.^* 6. 1 Pet.
3.10, 11, 12. which (...) only (...) Covenant externally, etc. These six
differences are clear, Jer. 31.33, etc. so that it is evident that all and
every one of the Visible Church are not really and personally confederates, so
that though the Lord say to both: I will be their God, and they shall be my
people, yet not one and the same way.

Hence there is no ground at all, nor truth in what Arminians say, The Covenant
of grace is not made with all and every one of mankind.
that the Cov^^ant of Grace is made with all and every one of mankind, as was
the Covenant of Works. For this must be true, that in Paradise, the Covenant of
Grace was made with Adam, and all his seed: But a Covenant so universal ought
to be proclaimed to all the (...), but thus was not: For the Lord published and
made it to Abraham and his seed, and the Lord choised Israel above all the
people on earth, Psalm. 147.19* 20.
Deuteronomy. 5.1, 2, 3. Deuteronomy. 7.6. Deuteronomy. 10.15. and showed his judgments and
statutes to them and not to other Nations: And therefore there can be no
subjejective revealing of Christ, by universal grace, given to Heathen and all
others, and by an objective revealing of Christ in the works of Creation, the
heaven and earth, night and day, as some teach, citing the Ps. 29.1, 2.

For so 1. God choised Americans, Indians, and all the wild Savages to be his
people, as well as he choised the Jews: and if the sound of the Gospel went out
to the ends of the earth, that is, to all and every one, There is no universal
revealing of CHRIST to Americans and to all mankind; which is either
subjective, by a power or universal grace given to all, or which is objective,
by the light of nature, in the works of Creation pointing out Christ as the
place Psalm. 19 4. mistaken is cited.
as they expound, Psalm. 19.3, 4. Romans 10.18. then it must be the purpose of
David and Paul, that the Doctrine of the Covenant of Grace, and of Christ
crucified, by whose alone name men are saved, and by whom only (...) come to
the Father, Acts 4.1^. John 14.6. is written in the Firmament, which must
declare the glory of God manifested in the flesh, day unto day, and must preach
Christ crucified to all Nations, who see the Sun rise and go down; ^or sure
that sound, Psalm. 19.4. goes through all the earth. Sure Paul must give a dark
interpretation, Romans 10. of that Psalm, (...). 2. If the hearing, Romans 10.18.
(but I say have they not heard?) be the hearing of God Creator, his sounding
(...) in the Firmament, Night, Day and Sun, as it is Psalm. (...)* by all that
see the Sun, and also the hearing of the joyful sound of Christ Preached in
the Gospel, written and objectively (...) in Sun and Moon, Night and Day, as
Amyrald and his do expound it; Then may all that see the Sun call upon the name
of the Lord revealed in Christ, and believe in Christ (for of their belief
Moses speaks, Deuteronomy. 30.14. and Paul, Romans 10.9, ^^*) and all have the benefit
of the Preached Gospel, and sent Prophets* whose feet are beautiful upon the
mountains, publishing (...) of peace, verse. 15. as Nah. 1.15. Isai. 52.7. and
^ll that see the Sun are the same way saved by Jesus Christ, that Jews and
Gentiles are, who hear the Gospel. But Paul strangely crosses this, How shall
they call upon him (as God reveal^^ i^ Christ) in whom they believe not? (...)
How shall they (...) him of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear
without a Preacher? And how shall they preach except they be (...)? Now if the
sound of the Preached Gospel be to be heard in the Firmament, Sun rising and
going down (as Amyrald and some Libertines do say, whom I heard Preach the same
thing at London) Paul might receive an easy and a short answer: The Gospel of
Christ crucified written on the Firmament Sun and night and day, The place,
Psalm 1^.4. vindicated
is as lawful an Ordinance, and a book upon which Americans, and all that see
the same, may read the glad tidings of salvation, and so may call upon, and
believe in God, and win and earn, by (...) industry, and hearing of the
Gospel by sent Preachers, as the Preached Word of God, and therefore Paul
cannot deny but faith comes by hearing of some other Preacher then a
Gospel-Preacher or one that is sent; for Paul, Romans 1.16, 17, 18, 19. and
David, Psalm. 19.1, 2, 3. -- v. 7, 8, 9. distinguish the two Books.

There is not such an Objection dreamed as Amyrald imagines of Romans 10.18. If
God will have mercy on the Gentiles, how is it that they have not heard the
Gospel? For the Lord has not declared his mind to them. He answers: God did
not so keep up his good will to the Gentiles in former times, but by the
Ministry of the Heavens, ac veluti voce providentiae, and as it were by the
preaching of the Word of Providence he spoke to them: which things should be
spoken to no purpose by Paul, if they be understood of a revelation of God as
Creator only, and not as Redeemer: for what has that revelation to do with the
Gospel? Therefore Calvine (says he) speaks of the revelation by the
creatures preparatory to the Gospel. It is true there is an Objection in these
words, v. 18. But I say have they not heard? A learned Countryman, Charles
Fermin: Carol. Fermaeus in Analys ad Romanos, c. 10. p. 205.
But the Israelites (says he) have not heard the Gospel? Then if faith be from
hearing, and saving calling upon God be from faith, then believing Israelites
shall be of the number of them that call upon the name of the Lord, and shall
be saved. He not only yields that the Israelites have heard, but he confirms it
from Psalm. 19. Yea their sound, etc. It is an argument a minore, The true
Exposition of the place Psalm. 19 4. by our Interpreters.
from the less to the more, The whole world has heard of God, either by the
preaching of the creatures from the beginning, or by the Apostles in the
revealed Gospel, far more then the Jews to whom the Oracles of God were
committed, and to whom first the Gospel must be preached, have heard: And
therefore not all that hear do believe (though faith come by hearing) nor do
all call upon God and are saved. So Pet. Martyr: so Calvin, P. Martyr. in loc.
Deus, ut inquit Psalm^s, voluit notitiam suam naturalem per creaturas coelestes
publicari in universum orbem: Ergo and Euangelium curavit identidem evulgari.
Quomodo igitur potestis dicere, vos Judaei, non audivisse? -- Ra^io a pari, vel
a minores Si haec minus digne, an altera long salubrior and utilior non
publicatur?
Hyperius, Faius. It Is not strange that the Gospel is preached to the Gentiles:
for God spoke to them by the knowledge of the creature. Pareus observes that
Paul cites not the place, Psalm. 19. and says not, As it is written, but
alludes to it only.

Spanhemius. If it be well said that the sound of the heavens is gone to the
end of the world, Spanhemius in Sectio. 35
that may be said truly of the Preaching of the Gospel. Junius to that sense.
But 1. the place says not that God called with a will, Amyrald p. 1426, 1427.
to save the Gentiles: The Scripture says, he winked at them, and called them
not, Acts 14.16. But now God commands all men every where to repent, Acts
17.30. and he revealed not his Testimonies to them. Junius, par. 18.
Now was not the same Gospel-book in the Pages of the works of Creation, as
legible to the Gentiles before, as after the coming of Christ in the flesh? Nor
can the Gospel which never came to the ears of many Indians and millions of
people, it being to them a non ens, and an un-heard of Doctrine, explain the
book of Creation; as the thing that shadows out Christ, as the New Testament
clears the Types of the Old: Nor does the Scripture any where tell us, what
work of Creation or Providence, expresses Christ's dying for our sins, rising
for our righteousness: Nor does the Scripture tell us of an Emblem, in
nature, of God Incarnate, of the Man Christ in glory pleading at the right hand
of God for us; I have mercy on whom I will, Is a Gospel Truth in the Old and
New Test. of perpetual verity.
And no doubt, the Lords natural desires of saving all, calling and inviting
all to Repentance* of Christ's dying for all, his natural willingness that all
and every one should obey, do not ebb and wax and decrease, as the Sea and
Moon do, and therefore his taking such a course with all the Gentiles, that no
word of the Covenant comes to their ears, so that then at that time, they were
without Christ, being aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers
from the Covenant of promise, (...). Exo. 33.19.
having no hope, and without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. And in time past were
no people (in Covenant) and had not obtained mercy, 1 Pet. 2.9, 10. and were
far off, Acts 2.39. must evince, that the sense of the Gospel was not written
in Sun and Moon; and the book of Creation is not the Gospel; and therefore he
has been showing that the Gentiles were not in Covenant before the
Incarnation, (...)
and since no word of the Gospel comes to millions now, they are yet not in
Covenant. And this is a Gospel Truth now, that stands after the Incarnation, as
before, Romans 9.18. He has therefore mercy upon whom he will, and hardens whom
he will. And he said it in the Old Testament, Exodus 33.19. and repeateth it to
us, Romans 9.15. I will have mercy upon whom I will have mercy, and I will have
compassion upon whom I will have compassion. And if any man say that he has
the like antecedent natural good will, to save eternally all these whom he
calls and moves finally to obey, and the greatest part of mankind whom he so
moves and calls as he knows they shall never obey, whereas he can move all
finally to obey, without straining their natural liberty: He speaks things
that cannot consist with both the wisdom and liberty of God.

And if amongst these to whom the word of the Covenant comes, If the Covenant
be made with Heathens, they must be the chosen people of God as well as Israel.
some are externally only, and never saved, Matthew. 22.14. Romans 9.6, 7. Others
internally personally and really in Covenant and saved; why but some may be
neither ways in Covenant, if they never heard the word of the Covenant, and if
the Heathen and Americans were under the Covenant of Grace Preached to them in
that sound, that goes to the end of the world. Why, but Moab, Ammon, and
Assyrians, Philistines, Chaldeans, Persians, are the Israel of God, his chosen
people, his Sion, and must not the principal promise of the Covenant be made
to them? and are we not to believe that God will write his Law in the hearts of
Cain, Pharaoh, Saul, Doeg, Ahab, Judas, Magus, and of Moabites, Ammonites,
Egyptians, and of all and every one of mankind, if they be in Covenant with
him? Contrair to Psa. 147.19, 20. Hos. 8.12. Exo. 20.1.

Neither can it be said, that all mankind have received a subjective power to
believe and receive Christ holden forth in the Gospel to us, Printed to be read
and heard in the book of Creation, called the objective Gospel, If such a power
of believing be given to all. 1. All must be renewed by grace.
as Adam had power to fulfill the first Covenant, for Adam had the Image of God
concreated in his soul by which he was able to fulfill the Law, then must they
give us a Scripture to prove that all Adams sons are converted, and restored to
the Image of God, born over again, for by no other power but by a new heart,
and the actings of God, can men believe the Gospel objective, or come to
Christ, and do good works Evangelicall by which they are justified, and if it
be a remote power that may grow, Job. 6.44, 45.
it is not the like power which Adam had to keep the Law. 2 CHRIST died in vain
2. This power is either natural, or supernatural: Natural it cannot be, for
then flesh and blood might believe, and the wisdom of the flesh might be
subject to the Law of God, which the Scripture denies, Mat. 16.16, 17. Romans
8.7. 2. There should be no need that Christ die, except only to satisfy for
our breach of the Law, not to purchase new grace to us by his merits, and such
a power should be no grace of Christ. If it be a supernatural grace merited by
Christ, then have Pagans, and all the Heathen that supernatural inherent grace
to believe in the Son of God, and yet the object thereof, the Gospel is not
revealed to them, which is an incongruous dispensation not warranted by the
Scripture, that the Lord should give a supernatural power, to believe they
know not what. 2. A supernatural power to believe is saving grace, and a power
to love Christ, and can saving grace be in Pagans or in any, and they know not
of it? 3. Yea sins of Pagans, for which they are condemned, must be the
Gospel-sins, for they cannot be Law-sins, for if all mankind be under the
Covenant of grace, there can none at all be under the Law: For there can be
none under the Covenant of Works, and also under the Covenant of Grace, for
they are contrair dispensations, and contrair ways of salvation. He who is
under the Law is not under Grace, and he who is under Grace, is married to
Christ, as to another Husband, Romans 7.4. and not under the Law.

3. Grace saving must be ineffectuall and in vain.
3. Saving grace is not in vain, but effectual, 1 Corinthians. 15.10. 1 Timothy 1.14.
And we are saved by the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 15.11. and no
greater mercy can be wished to any, then the grace of our Lord Jesus, Romans
16.20. 2 Cor. 13.14. Rev. 22.21. by which we are called, justified and
glorified. If it be said that this grace is not that effectual saving grace,
bestowed upon the Elect, but a general remote gracious power, by which we may
acquire the saving grace proper to the Elect. But so 1. that grace saving
proper to the Elect by this means is in the power of all Pagans, and all must
be gifted with a power to purchase that grace proper to the Elect: That must be
strange conquishing, we must all be made our own efficacious Redeemers, and
Christ is a Savior by merit, not by efficacy; For if this saving grace be
infused, it is either infused, we doing nothing to which they cannot stand: 4
The nature of saving grace, the ends and uses of the dying of CHRIST, must be
destroyed.
Or then it is acquired, and so we make the general grace saving and proper to
the Elect, which everteth the nature of saving grace, and makes it the purchase
of works. And they must say that Christ has merited a general ineffectuall
power to some, and that he dyed to merit a special saving grace to others. Let
us have a warrant for this, that Christ both died equally to save all, and yet
with two contrary intentions, to purchase a power of believing which should be
effectual to some to save them, and ineffectuall to others. If it be said that
Christ dyed to merit the same general power to all, but some make it
ineffectuall, some not; This says thus. 1. That Christ's death might have it is
fruit and effect, though all perish. 2. That Christ dyed to merit a far off,
lubrick and possible venture of heaven, such as was the case of the first Adam.
3. Christ dyed not to purchase a new heart more to one then to another, whereas
1 Pet. 1.18, 19. the blood the Lord shed is to Redeem us from our vain
conversation, Christ's blood was shed, to buy us from our vain conversation, as
well as from wrath, and this suits not with Pagans state.
in a natural state as well as to save us from the wrath to come; Then must
Christ have died to buy Pagans from Paganism and Idolatry: and that either
absolutely, and then why should multitudes so die in their sins? If
conditionally, what can be the condition going before conversion, to wit, that
we should be delivered from our vain conversation, so we be willing, before our
conversion, to be delivered from our vain conversation. And shall not the
Question recur concerning that condition? In a word they will have Christ's
death to buy Heaven, but not to buy faith, without which Heaven is impossible.
Yea he no more bought to men a grace sweetly and strongly inclining the will to
believe, then he bought such a grace to the damned devils. Remonstr. in Decla.
c. 17. these. 1. Deus statuit hujusmodi potentiam confer homi^i peccatori
perquam idoneus and aptus redderetur ad id ^^ne praestandum quod ab^^o in
Euangelio postulatur.

Remonstr. in Synod. Dordrac. Art. 2. p. 327. Mediate vel immedia^e DEVM omnes
vocare.


He purposed to give to all Pagans a power by which they should be made fit to
perform all that the Gospel requires, and be fit to be made partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints, Col. 1. And yet Paul gives thanks to God for that
bestowed on the Colossians, and God must by this call all men to Christ, either
mediately or immediately. And say that God is prepared ever to give more and
more as we use the former well, Corvinus contra Molin. cap. 31. sect. 15. Deum
sempersecundum se para^um esse ad eandem uberiorem gratiam promovendam in iis
qui parciore recte utuntur.
and that all by sufficient grace (says Corvinus) are disposed to conversion,
but that sufficiency is not habitual grace, but actual assistance conveying
the Preached Word, which is to bring all to free-wills power, rejecting all
infused power, and to make an influence of grace, which is in the power of free
will to use or not to use, and to stand in two. 1. In a measure of heavenly
Doctrine. 2. In the stirring upon the heart; Whence 1. Grace habitual so is
denied; then the will needs no healing. 2. Grace universal is limited to the
Word Preached, then it is not universal; For Pagans hear not the Word
Preached. 3. There is no other help given to free will in every act, but 1.
Information by the Word, that was the grace of Pelagius. 2. Some influence of
God in every act: But that adds not new strength to the will. Free Will does
all.
Shortly they say, Any man may know, understand and believe the Gospel, if the
object be sufficiently proposed and revealed. And so the natural man can no
more know and receive the things of the Gospel, Corv. cont. Moli. cap. 3^.
sect. ^. Quicquid de sufficientia (gratiae) dicimus, monemus assistentiae
spiritus nobis tribui: minime vero habitualem gratiam quae omnibus communis sit
a nobis statui. Sect. 29. Non est potentia infusa.

Cap. 32. Secundum Concilia and Patres intelligimus tale gratiae adjutorium,
quod ad singulos actus detur, cujus auxilio nititur, and ad singula adjuvetur
liberum arbitrium.


then he can understand the Metaphysics, the Acromaticks of Aristotle: for
these he cannot receive, but judges them folly; And so we are the same way
blind, dead, stony-hearted to believe the Gospel, as we are to know and believe
the mysteries of Aristotle's Philosophy.

Lastly, this power of believing and coming to Christ cannot be in all men,
since the Scripture says of all men (even these within the Visible Church not
excepted) that until the light of the Gospel savingly enlighten them, they sit
in darkness and in the shadow of death, Isa. 9.1. Math. 4.15, 16. And (...) No
man can come to Christ without the Fathers drawing, and God teaching the heart,
Joh. 6.44, 45. The natural man, (...), cannot understand the things of God,
but judges them foolishness. 1 Cor. 2.14. His wisdom cannot be subject to
the Law of God. Romans 8.7. He cannot ((...)) call the Lord, Jesus, except by the
Spirit of Jesus, 1 Cor. 12.3. He is a withered branch being out of Christ, and
can do nothing, Joh. 15.3.4. It shall be clear to any, that the Holy Ghost
denies any such power, as they affirm. It reckons not much to tell that
Jesuits, Martmez. de Ripul. de Ente supernat. Lib. 1. Dis. 20. N. 57.

Suarez, lib. 1. de necessi. gratiae c. 4. per totum.

Curiel in 12 q 109. Art. 2. N. 1.

Duvallius, Tract. de necess. gratiae, Q 1. Art. 2 Molina de Concor. Q. 14*
Art. 13. Disp. 9. per totum.

Did. Ruiz. Tom. de volinider. Tom. de Praed^fini. Vasquez 12. Disp. 138.
Bellar. De great. and libe. arbit. Lib. 6. c. 13. and per totum. Gamachaeus in
12 Q. 85. Cap. 1. and seq. Estius Lib. 2. Did. 41. Sect. 1. Sect. 2. and seq.
Tolet. Com. ^n Joan. 6. in Romans 14. Pirer. in Romans 8. and Romans 14. Remonst. in
Scriptis Synod. Art. 4. p. 158, 159.


as Martmez de Ripul. Swarez, Alphonsus Curiel, Duvallius, Lod. Molma, Did.
Ruiz, Vasquez, Bellarmine, Phili. Samachaeus, Sorbonicus, Gulie. Estius,
Dominica, Toletus Cardinalis, Pirerius, Salmeron, teach that, without saving
grace, men may, and can first know moral truths, shining virtues, as heathens,
be free of sin, as touching these virtues in their due circumstances. 2. Keep
the Commandments and Law of Nature. 3. Dispose themselves for, and obtain the
grace of Conversion by their own industry. 4. Be victo^rious over this or that
weighty temptation singly taken. 5. That there is no intrinsecall hurt of
free will, that it is wounded a little, because of the darkness of the mind,
and langour of nature, but not dead to actions supernatural. 6. That we may
love God as the Author of nature, and Creator sincerely; And Arminians teach
that we may without the Spirit of God know all truth, quantum sufficit ad
salutem, sufficiently to salvation, and so may will, love, and believe without
the infused supernatural habit or grace, so their Apology.

And the Socinian Catechism, c. 6. page 212. and Socinus himself, Praelect.
Theol. Cap. 4. Fol. 15, 16. Et de officio hominis Christi: Cap. 5. Smalcius on
Joh. 1. Hom. 3. Give to us manwhole, sound, sinlesse, as he came from the first
Adam. 2. That man can do all that Cod commands him with little help of God. 3.
Its an error (says Smalcius) that a man has no strength in spiritual
things, Smalcius con Fran^z. Disp. 8. Graviter halucinatur Fran^zius, dum ait,
Hominem non renatum nihil posse in spiritualibus, nempe in sensu interno, in
verbum divinum, in conversione ad Deum, in fide in illum. Catech. Raccov. c. 6.
Nonne a^ credendum Euangelio Sp. Sancti interiore dono opus est? Nullo modo:
Neque in Scripturis legimus cuiquam id donum conferri nisi credenti.
there is no need of the inward gift of the Spirit of God to believe (says the
Raccovian Catechism) for we read not that such a gift in Scripture is bestowed
upon any but upon believers: such as are born of Adam (says Socinus) are all
born in the same condition, S^ci. Prael.0 Theol. c. 4 fol. 14. Qui ex Adamo
nascuntur ^adem conditi one omnes nascuntur, nihilque ei ademptum, quod
naturaliter haberet vel habiturus esset.
and nothing is taken from such a man, which he naturally has or was to have.
Ostorodius Justi. Relig. Christ. cap. 21. Praedicatio sola Euangelij potest
hominem absque interna Spiritus illuminatione, and operatione a peccatis
convertere. The only Preaching of the Gospel without the inward illumination by
the Holy Spirit, and his working is able to convert a man from sin. All which
is Printed and taught, and many other abominable errors to us.

To this Objection against universal grace (as I judge unanswerable) Corvinus
Answers, that all the places of Scripture brought to prove man's inability to
believe in Christ, and to worship him, conclude well that a man has not
strength of himself without Christ and his grace; Corvinus contra Molin. cap.
34. Sect. 3. page 619.
but this is but to cloud the truth, and to mock the reader, for if all and
every man (even the Infants of Pagans) be in Covenant through Christ, and be
made able by a gifted grace common to all, within, and without the Church, by
which they are able by degrees to do all that the Gospel requires, what avails
it to discourage them, and to tell, they are not masters of a good thought,
without grace; for they are no less masters of good thoughts and good words,
and of good actions then Adam was; for they are not hearers of the Gospel by
nature, but as gifted with universal grace, they are hearers, and before their
conversion, and before they receive the Spirit of Regeneration, can please God,
and prepare themselves for Regeneration: Yea there is no animal and natural
Pagan de facto existing in the world (by their way) who cannot receive the
things of God, and cannot come to Christ, except he be drawn, for all Pagans
and others are drawn, and by this it might have been said, Adam as wanting
supernatural grace, and as a natural man (for the Image of God was
supernatural grace to Adam, as Arminius and Corvinus teach) so, was not able
to think a good thought, as 2 Cor. 3.5. nor able to receive the things of God,
as the natural man, 1 Cor. 2.14. and Adam so was also dead in trespasses and
sins, and must come to Christ the same way, to wit, drawn by the grace
super-added to nature, as we fallen sinners do.

CHAP. XVI. Cases from the former Doctrine. 1. The differences betwixt such as
are externally, visibly, and conditionally, and such as are internally and
personally in Covenant with God. 2. Gods esteem, not men's, make Nations Visible
Churches. 3 The first and prime subject of special Church-priviledge. 4. Gods
command to receive seals, Mr. Hooker Survey, of Discipline, Part. 1. Cap. 3.
Page 36, 37, 38.
no warrant to all members to challenge them.
Q. 1. IF multitudes and people externally Covenanted with God, though not
internally, whom the Lord calls his people and chosen by him, There is no place
of Scripture or warrant in the word that Nations and societies shall not be the
Covenanted people of God and Visible Churches, since God so esteems them in
multitudes of places of holy Scripture, except men judge them first invisible
and real saints or converts
Deuteronomy. 7.6. Deuteronomy. 10.15. be the rightly constitute and Visible Church, as Mr.
Thomas Hooker grants, then Kingdoms must be his Visible Church. Answ. No
doubt, Egypt, Assyria, all Nations, all the ends of the world, all the Kingdoms
of this world, are Prophesied to be the Kingdoms and Covenanted people of God,
and the Lord challenges them as his* ( Isa. 19.25. blessed be Egypt my people)
Isa. 2.1, 2, 3. Psalm. 22.27. Rev. 11.15. Psalm. 96. Psalm 97. Psalm. 98. Isal.
42.10. Isai. 49.7, 8.20, 21. Cant. 8.8. -- Act. 13.46, 47. Rom 15.8, 9, 10, 11,
12. must be the visible Covenanted Churches of God, to whom the seals of the
Covenant are due; But that none in Egypt, Assyria, of all the called Gentiles,
though visibly and professedly in Covenant, and affirmed by the mouth of the
Lord to be his people, the Sister of the Jewish Church, and his Kingdoms, are
members of the Visible Church, or has right to membership and seals, except
men judge them to be real converts, sound believers, and so internally called
and chosen, is to prefer the judgment of men, to the Word of God. And since
he says that Kingdoms, fathers, children, are his in Covenant, and chosen to
be his people, in regard the Lord calls them by his Word, as he did Israel,
Deuteronomy. 7.6. Deuteronomy. 10.15. Psalm, 147.19, 20. they must be all Visible Churches in
Gods esteem; except he say they are not Visible Churches, except men also
esteem and judge them not only externally, but really and internally justified
and effectually called. 2. These we are to judge in Covenant visibly, whom the
Lord so calls, and to these the seals do belong Ecclesiastically, though we see
not signs of their inward conversion; Except we say that our judgment is
surer then the Lords; But the Lord calls Nations, the Gentiles so, and so must
Paul and Church Members judge all the Kingdoms, and all the Gentiles real
converts; Else the seals are not due to them. 3. If we must judge them all
really redeemed and sanctified, Surv. Part. 1. Cap. 3. p. 39* 40.
who are fed by Pastors, as Mr. Hooker teaches from Acts 20.28. feed the
flock, then are we to esteem all the fathers who were baptized unto Moses in
the Cloud, and in the Sea, and did eat the same spiritual meat, and did all
drink of the same spiritual Rock Christ, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4. to be really
redeemed, real believers, and the whole world to be really redeemed, and yet
the world is not the Church, yet they were Idolaters, murmurers, visibly known
to be such; And John Baptist was oblidged to esteem the multitudes, all Judea
who were baptized of him, Mark 1.5. Luke 3.7. Matthew. 3.2, 3, 4. really
sanctified and redeemed, yea and since there be Prophesies under the Messiah,
that all the Kingdoms of the world, Rev. 1^.15. Egypt, Assyria, Isa. 19.25.
all Nations, Isa. 2.2. all the Gentiles, Isa. 60. shall be the confederate
people of God, Tho. Hook. argues from confederacy with God to prove that we
are to judge all visible professors to be justified internally called, and
they are no Church Members except they be so in our esteem.
we must believe that all these Kingdoms are visible Saints, chosen to life as
the Corinthians and Ephesians were, 1 Cor. 1.1. Ephesians. 1.4. So argues M^. Thomas
Hooker from confederacy. 4. Let one word in Old or New Testament be given of a
Judicature giving judicially sentence on earth of a number that professedly are
hearers, that so many are to be admitted as due members of the Church, because
conceived of men to be regenerated, and so many rejected, because conceived to
be non-converts; or what word of Christ there is that does regulate the
judicial sentence, as touching the time how long the Churchmember has been
so. 2. What motives or inducements led Simon Magus, and the generation of
vipers, the multitude and all the people baptized, Luke 3.7. compared with Luk*
3.2 Matthew. 3.5, 6. Mark 1.5. (for as many as went out to be baptized were
baptized, but all Jerusalem, and all Judea went out, Mat. 3.5, 6. and were
baptized, says Mark 1.5.) what motives I say, led and induced them to join?
For they joined but for a season, Joh. 5.35. Matthew. 21.32. and what rule of the
word there is to regulate us in judging of these motives? 3. What outward marks
the word gives of outward regeneration, and consequently of predestination to
glory, Justification, Effectual Calling, made visible, which we must see in
others, before Pastors can feed them as Pastors, for the word is in all the
like a perfect rule.

Quest. 2. What is the first principal and only proper subject of the promises
of special note, in the Mediator, The Invisible and mystical body of Christ
and Church, is the only first principal and proper subject of the promises,
and privileges of special note given in the Mediator Christ.
of the promise of a new heart, of the styles, properties and privileges of
special note; That is, to be called the body of CHRIST, the Anointed ones, and
such as shall never fall away, Jer. 32.39, 40. Jer. 31.35, 36. Answ. Only the
Invisible and Mystical body of Christ, for a promise of a new heart, of the
Law engraven in the inward parts, of the anointing, Jer. 31.33. Isa. 54.13.
Heb. 8.10. of perseverance, Jer. 31.35, 36. Isa. 54.10. Isa. 59.20.21. Jer.
32.39, 40. Joh. 10.27, 28, 29. are promises of special note in the Mediator;
And if any say that the Visible Church as such, as visible, whereof Simon Magus
is a member, is the first principal subject of these promises or of
privileges of special note in the Mediator, they must join (it may be
mistakenly) with Arminians. Mr. Thomas Hooker did not so ingenuously as need
were, refute this Thesis of mine, as he ought to have done, Mr. Hooker, Sur^ of
the sum of Church Discipline, Part. 1 C. 3. p. 35, 36, 37.
but framed an other of his own, and refuted it, to wit, which is not owned by
me. The Invisible Church is not the prime and only subject of the seals, that
is, of the external seals. I grant all the external seals is not a privilege
of special note in the Mediator, for it is a privilege of Ishmael, Magus, and
of all profane Hypocrites. And it is not to be said that Hypocrites and
graceless men, Ishmael, and Esau, have a command of God to receive the seals,
Mr. Ruther fur^. Due right of Presbyteries P. 1* C. 9. Sect. 9. page 35, 36 37

The command of God is not the b^st, nor any warrant at all, as grave Mr.
Hooker says, why graceless men should challenge the seals.


and a warrant from his Word to require them, as that pious and grave man Mr.
Thom. Hooker says in his Survey, Part. 1. Cap. 3. page 41, 42. For (says he)
there can be no better right then Gods command to injoin, and his Word to
warrant us to challenge any privilege. The command of God is a good warrant to
the Church and Ministers to confer the seals to Ishmael, Simon Magus, Judas,
though no Word of God warrant us judicially to sentence them to be regenerate,
before the Ministers can confer the seals, as Mr. Hooker and his teach* but
that the command of God is a good right and warrant to Esau, and Simon Magus,
to require and to challenge the seals is not written in the Scripture, with the
good leave of that pious man, no more nor usurpers have warrant to challenge
that to which they have no right, or a robber has warrant to require the purse
of an innocent traveller. Can the sorcerer Magus say, there can be no better
right then I have to challenge Baptism and the Lords Supper? Why? I have the
command of God. Nay but an answer is soon returned to the witch: The Church of
Samaria has Gods warrant to confer the seals, so long as the witches skill
fails him not to act fairly the part of the painted professor, but the
conditional command of an externally Preached Covenant, is not the best right,
nay, no right at all for him to challenge the seals, except he come believing
and discerning the Lords Body, and mourning for sin, and fulfill the condition:
Indeed if the Lord had commanded Magus and all the visible members, with an
absolute command, Come and receive the seals whether ye profess, know Christ,
or believe and repent, or not; that command should warrant all to challenge,
but I trust Mr. Hooker will not stand to such a command. There is an active
right in the Church to confer the seals, when there is no passive right in many
visible members either to receive or to challenge the seals.
And therefore distinguish betwixt jus activum, ane active right in the Church
to confer the seals, and jus passivum, a passive right in Magus to challenge:
The latter requires that Magus have right as a believer, and in foro Dei, both
to the seal and interest in Christ, by the grant of Adversaries; Else he has
no right, no command of God to challenge the seals. And therefore we must
distinguish betwixt the Covenant of Grace, qua factum and initum, and qua
annunciatum, the Covenant, I say, as made with some, and yet Preached to all.
And whereas Mr. Hooker says, 38, 39. page that he cannot see how the will of
purpose, and the will of revealed command, do not contain apparent
contradictions. This Godly man hated Arminians, when he saw them in daylight. I
cannot now insist to answer him and Papists and Arminians who object the very
same thing. It is clear they differ much, but they are not contradicent, more
then the decree of God, and the moral obligation of men are contrair.
Hypocrites and such, are only visible members and no more, and have no true and
internal right and interest in the seals according to the inward grace
signified or the promises of a new heart, which are absolute and made to the
Elect and believers, who are the only principal prime and proper subject of
such promises of special note in the Mediator.

Quest. 3. What be these principal real Covenanters to whom only, the new
heart is absolutely promised, and how are they known.

CHAP. XVI. 1. Of the hypocrisy, of formal Covenanters. 2. Self-deceit. 3.
The new Spirit. 4. Revelations and Prophecies. 5. Marks of a Spiritual
disposition.
Answ. THis touches the differences of the old and stony heart in such as are
externally only in Covenant with God, and are Hypocrites: And the new and soft
heart of such as are internal, real, and absolute Covenanters: Hence these
propositions.

1. An Hypocrite is he who in the stage represents a King, What an Hypocrite is.
when he is none, a beggar, an old man, a husband, when he is really no such
thing, Luke 20.20. They sent out spies, faining themselves to be just men: To
the Hebrews they are (...) faciales, facemen, men of the face and vizard and
(...) colorati, dyed men, rid men, dipped, baptized, from the root (...) to
dye, dip, wash, baptize, Jer. 12.9. mine heritage is to me as an speckled bird,
or a pyed bird, and has casten off my simple liverie, and so is a bird of many
sundry colors: The Hypocrite is dyed and watered with a hew and color of
godliness. Coneph notes hypocrisy, Isa. 32.6. from (...) simulavit,
fraudulenter egit. The noune (...) Chald. (...) a dissembler, an Hypocrite, who
is sometimes just, sometimes wicked, the root by a Metaphore is to pollute, and
defile, Psalm. 106. the land was defiled with bloods: Hence the Hypocrite is all
things, and all men, and nothing, and no man but himself.

Hypocrisy is considered in it self, and so it is opposed to sincerity. Or in
relation to these graces and duties which it fenzies, and so it is opposed to
all the true virtues which it lyingly and feinzedly represents, as painting is
opposed to realitie in nature, being a counterfeiting of nature, and it is
opposed to things that are painted, so a living man, and a growing rose, things
obvious to the eyes of sense are most easily painted as colors lineaments, as
a man's body, but things that fall under the understanding only, as the soul,
and under the sense of smelling and touching, are hardly pictured. Ye may paint
the man, the roses, the color, figure, and the fires red flaming, but he
cannot paint the soul, the smell of the rose, Its hard to counterfite graces
and things not obvious to the sense of seeing.
or the heat of the fire: It is hard to counterfite spiritual graces, as love
of Christ, sincere believing intending of the Glory of God, Its hard to get a
coat, or put painture on spiritual graces, and the more ye counterfite the
Spirit, the more Divell-like is the forgerie, for he changes himself into an
Angel of light. There is some use for painted men, for they serve for ornament,
but there is no use for faith but resting upon Christ, nor for love, but to
cleave to God, and please him and our neighbor: In all duties we counterfite
but the outward bulk of graces and actions, and would seem to do what we do
not: If the color of graces and godliness be desirable, it self is more
desirable, but to imitate only the externalls of the Covenant of Grace to keep
a room in the Church, is to put a lie and mock upon the Lord, and to reproach
him with dimnesse of sight: And such as hate Christ and the Godly in their
heart, Many hate hypocri^es, and so doing are hypocrites themselves
and first cloth them with the coat of hypocrites, liars, Samaritanes,
seditious men, they much more hate Godliness, he that would have the picture
of the man stobbed or hanged, would much more have the living man in person
stobbed or hanged.

Hypocrisy is a resembling of a moral good for vain glory: Its not
hypocrisy to suppress tears in Prayer, What is not hypocrisy.
least the man seem to seek himself, nor for a father to seem to be angry at
his child or servant when he is not angry, nor to put on deafness at
reproaches, Psalm. 38.12. They speak mischievous things, 13. But I as a deaf man
heard not: It was prudencie, not hypocrisy in Saul to hold his peace and
misken when the sons of Beliall despised him, it being the beginning of his
reign, 1 Samuel 10.27. Nor is it hypocrisy in a Magistrate or Joseph to put on
an other person to his brethren, though if the ground be unbelief, it is not
lawful for David to feinzie himself mad: Nor for Ammon to counterfite
sickness, or to put a lie upon providence: And yet it is not hypocrisy for
Solomon to seem to divide in two the living child with a sword, or for the
men of Israel to fly before the men of Ai. A lawful end and a right end and
motive, contributes goodness to actions that are not intrinsecally evil.

There is a natural hypocrisy in all, every man in both sides of the Sun is a
liar, he that said he would wish that he might dwell in the land beyond the
dawning of the morning, where they are all sincere, wished to dwell where there
are no men; for wherever men are, there are hypocrites and hypocrisy. There
is an acquired hypocrisy in all, less or more, and an habit thereof in not a
few.

According to men's ways so are men white and painted Hypocrites; Herod
professes to worship Christ and minds to kill him, Math. 2. And Absalom
covers treason and rebellion against his father and prince, with the whiteness
of a vow at Hebron, what better is the whore and what more devoute to say,
Prove. 7.14. I have peace offerings with me, to day have I paid my vows? under
the vail of zeal (they think it) service to God to kill the Apostles, Joh. 16.

But the worst of Hypocrites is he who makes himself a Hypocrite, not before
God only, and before men, but whitens and paints himself before himself, and
deceives himself, 1 John 1.8. It is strange a man has such a power over
himself, as to persuade himself that he has no sin, not only in point of
faith, as such as deny any original sin in themselves or others; as many
seducers now do, Socinians, Arminians, diverse Anabaptists* and such as say,
the Law may be fulfilled by Grace, we are justified by Works: It is possible to
be free of sin in this life and to be perfect, What is the power of self-deceit.
so as they cannot sin: But also practically a man's heart may deceive his
heart, and may persuade himself that he is Godly and Religious, Jam. 1.26. and
that his ways are right, Prove. 14.12. and may say within his heart, and so
think not only, I am holier then thou, and yet not be so much as ceremonially
holy, but remain in the graves and eat swines flesh, Isa. 65.45. but I say I
am rich (and which is above admiration) I have need of nothing, Rev. 3.17. that
I have no need of forgiveness, of saving Grace, of the Redeemer Christ, of
Salvation. And this is so much the more dangerous, that the prejudice and
blindness of self-love, does more strongly persuade self-godlinesse then any
godliness of the world, and begets a more strongly radicated and fixed habit
of believing self-godlinesse, then Ministers the godliest of them, and
Professors, and Angels, and the Lord immediately speaking (so long as the
revelation is literal) Numb. 22.12, 24, 28. and Christ Preaching in his
Person, Math. 8.9, 14. Math. 21.43, 44, 45. Luke 16.13, 14. Ioh. 10.24, 25, 26,
27, 28, 29, 30, 31. and the Apostles, Acts 24.25, 26. Acts 26.2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
etc. 24. can be able to root out, for they can fence and ward off, and can let
out blows at all that ye can say, and carry this habit of a false opinion of
self-holinesse to Eternity with them, and stand to what conceited lamps they
hear on earth, did glister withal; and plead against the Lord in his face,
that the sentence of condemnation is unjust, Matthew. 25.44. and that they
deserve for their profession to be admitted in to the Bride-groomes chamber,
Math. 7.22. Matthew. 25.11. Luke 13.25. and all such fairded Professors, are
externally only in Covenant with God. And therefore these are sad marks, when
first ye hid your lusts and nourish them, and feed upon the East wind of some
created last end, and have not God for your last end, Luke 12.19. Psalm. 49.11.
Psalm. 4.6. Ier. 22.17. 2. When ye know not that ye are poor, miserable, blind,
naked, Rev. 3.17. Math. 9.11, 12* 13. Luke 15.2. Luke 19.7. and ye were never
in Christ's hospital, and are whole and need no Physic. 3. Ye loath Christ but
knows it not, Luke 7.44.45. ye love Christ as a supposed Prophet, and loath him
as a Redeemer. One may deadly hate Christ, and not know it. 4. Ye cannot
compare the two states together, the state of nature and the state of Grace, as
1 Timothy 1.13. ye idolize your own choice, to bear down Achabs Idolatry, but
choose not the will of God to oppose Ieroboams Idolatry. 5. Ye want Christ,
and ye were not born with Christ in the heart. 2. Yea ye are eternally lost
without him, and know neither the one nor the other.

Quest. 4. Whether or not are believers the parties of the Covenant of Grace.
Ans. These are parties to whom the Covenant-promise is made, not these who
already have the benefit promised in the Covenant, but believers must have a
new heart, and consequently faith already, therefore they cannot be parties
with whom the Covenant is made. Believers are properly parties of the new
Covenant, but not as believers, as chosen of God to life.
As because the Image of God is not promised to Adam in the Covenant of Works,
but presupposed to be in him by order of nature, before God make with him the
Covenant of Works, else he could not be able to keep that Covenant, which we
cannot say, for God created him right and holy, Genesis 1.26, 27. Eccles. 7.29.
Ephesians. 4.24. Col. 3.10. Therefore Adam in his pure naturalls, as not yet endued
with the Image of God, cannot be the party with whom the Covenant of Works is
made, for then the Image of God* must either be a reward, which Adam by his
pure naturalls and strength thereof must purchase by working, which the
Scripture and nature of the Covenant cannot admit, or then the Image of God
must be promised to Adam in the Covenant of Works, which is no less absurd.
And if faith be promised in the Gospel, the Covenant of Grace must be made with
some Israel and Judah as predestined to life eternal and yet wanting a new
heart: For God cannot Covenant^ways promise a new heart to such as have it, but
to such^ as have a stony heart and believe not, Ezekiel. 36.26. Deuteronomy. 30.6. Ezekiel*
11.19. nor can he promise faith to such as have faith this way.

Quest. 5. Who are these that have the new heart, and so are personally and
really within the Covenant of grace. Ans. Because the new spirit is given, when
the new heart is given, Ezekiel. 36.27. Ezekiel. 18.31. Make you a new heart and a
new spirit, and many in our times boast of the spirit, it shall be fit to speak
of the new spirit, and who are spiritual.

Hence these Questions of the new spirit.

Quest. 1. What is the seed of the new spirit?

Ans. The word of the Gospel, therefore before Adam could have the
Gospel Spirit, the Lord must reveal the Doctrine of the Gospel, The Word and
the Spirit.
the seed of the woman must tread down the head of the serpent, Genesis 3. So the
word and the spirit are promised together, Isa. 59.21. Isa. 30.21. Thy teachers
shall not be removed, and thine ears shall hear (this is the inward teaching) a
voice behind thee, saying, this is the way, walk ye in it. Isa. 51.16, 17. Mat.
28.20. Go teach, that is the word: Lo I am with you to the end of the world,
that is the Spirit to make it effectual, by my Spirit, Joh. 14.16, 17.

The first revelation of the Gospel and the first principles, cannot be tried
by any former Doctrine or rule.
Object. But Adam when he heard first the Doctrine of the blessed seed, could
not try the Doctrine or speaker, by any new Doctrine.

Ans. The first Doctrine can be tried by no other rule, because it was the
first rule it self, nor can these principalls written in the heart naturally (
That God is) (God is just, holy) etc. be tried by any other truths, because
they are first truths; As the sense of seeing cannot try whether the Sun be the
Sun by the light of some other Sun, that is before this Sun, which is more
lightsome. For there is not another Sun before this, the Gospel it self has
God shining in it, to these who are enlightened, as Adam was, a Rubbie does
speak that is a Rubbie.

Obj. How then should Adam know what God spoke to him and not to another, are
we not to try all spirits that speak?

The immediate word, and the most immediate fountain-word, and the trying of
both.
Ans. There is a word immediately spoken by the Prophets, and Apostles, that is
to be tried, partly by the first Preaching the Lord made in Paradise, partly by
the effects, that it converteth the soul, Psalm. 19.7. and smells of that same
Majesty, and the divine power of another life, which is in the first Sermon,
Genesis 3.15* this is Verbum Dei immediatum. But when God himself speaks in his
own person to Adam, to Abraham, Genesis 22. to Moses* Isaiah, the Apostles, that
is Verbum Dei immediatissimum, the fountain-word; neither word nor speaker is
to be tried. The Patriarchs and Prophets are never bidden try the visions of
God, for when God speaks them himself, he makes it evident that it is he* and
only he who speaks, and we read not of any in this deceived, Angels or men
cannot counterfeit God.

Obj. There have, after the Canon of the Scripture is closed, been some men,
who have Prophesied facts to come, that fell out as they foretold, just as
Isaiah, Elias, and other Prophets, then something is to be believed, that is
not written, and such may have the Spirit, and yet no word of Scripture goes
along with it.

Ans. 1. Such men may have (I confess) a Prophetical spirit, but first, they
were eminently holy and sound in the faith, The differences betwixt the
Prophesies that now are, and Scripturall Prophesies
and taught that the Catholic Church should believe nothing, nor practice
nothing, but what is warranted by the Word. Such as boast of Spirit or
Prophecy, and reject the word, are therefore not to be believed.

2. What these men of God foretold, is a particular fact concerning a man, what
death he should die, or a Nation, or a particular, such a man shall be
eternally saved, but no dogma fidei, nor any truth that lays bands on the
Catholic Church to believe that to the end of the world, as all Scripturall
truths do, and a doubt it is, if we are to believe these, in the individual
circumstances of fact, sub periculo peccati, upon hazard of sinning against
God, we may, I judge, without sin suspend belief, and yield charity to the
speaker.

3. If any object, the Prophets did foretell particular facts concerning the
death of Ahab, the birth of Josiah, which concerned particular persons: I, but
they so were the matters of fact (as the crucifying of Christ was a matter of
fact) as also they did by the intent of the Holy Ghost contain Historical,
Moral and dogmatically divine Instructions, so that the whole Catholic Church
must believe them, with certainty of divine faith, The difference between
revelations, of what is truth, and what is lawful or not lawful, and
revelations of facts, what shall come to pass, and what not.
they being written and spoken for our Instruction, and they sin who believe
not.

Quest. 2. What are we to judge of these truths revealed to Professors, when
they are in much nearness to God, and the Lord is pleased to shine upon them
in some fullness of manifestation of himself to their souls, especially in
particular facts? Answ. There is a wide difference betwixt revelations, which
speak what is lawful or unlawful, agreeable unto or repugnant to the Word;
And what is good in jure, and what in facto, shall come to pass or not come to
pass, what ever is given to revelations of the former sort, is taken from the
Scripture, whose peculiar perfection it is to show what is good and just, what
not; Therefore to say that revelations now do guide us in disobeying higher
Powers or killing men, etc. is a wronging of the Word, especially of the first,
second and sixth Commands. As to the other, God may and does lead his own,
especially when they are near glory, under fewest prejudices touching time and
eternity, to speak what shall be, but it is not our rule. It Is an Argument of
naught, Such a thing was mightily born in upon my spirit as lawful and as
certainly to come to pass, when I was most near to GOD in a full manifestation
of himself: therefore such a way is right, Nearness to God in fullness of
manifestatio^ of himself, is no surely concludent rule that such a thing is
truth or lawful.
or such a way shall come to pass; For not to say 1. that this is a wronging
of the perfection of Scripture, and 2. That there is a bastard Logic in the
affections where God and nature has seated discursive power; And we often
prophecy, because we love, not because we see the visions of God. 3. Peter
might, the same way, reason, I saw the glory of heaven at the transfiguration,
and the Peers of the higher house, Moses and Elias, and this was then mightily
born in upon my spirit, It is good for us to be here, let us build three
Tabernacles: therefore this is true, It is good for us to be here: But the
Conclusion is a dream; who should preach the Gospel as witnesses and suffer for
it, Peter, at the transfiguration, and John, Reve. 19. cap. 22. when they were
most near to God did reel and stumble and err.
and write Canonick Scripture, if these Disciples should be for ever there? And
if they should be separated from the whole glorified body, and make up a Church
eternally glorified in that Mount, of only six persons: And the word says,
Peter being drunk with glory, Mark 9.6. (...) knew not what he said, and the
Disciples were sleeping, not prophesying, Luke 9.32. which says they were in
heaven, but clothed with bodies of sin, and not led by Scripture Light (as
that good Prophecy of Peter was contrair to the Gospel of suffering and dying,
that Christ prophesied was abiding himself, and all his, Math. 16.21, 22.) we
should reel and sin: for there may be no connection between the present
nearness to God and the thing suggested in the spirit; and they cohere by
accident. So one in prayer is near God in respect of sweetness of access, and
yet the individual favor which ye pray for conditionally, The deceit in
liberty of praying.
never granted; Ye may be saved, and God more glorified in the sufficiency of
his grace, without granting it to you, as is clear 2 Cor. 12.9. Sorrow and
desire can suggest such an answer to the fasting of Israel, as they may say and
think, they shall be victorious now over the children of Benjamin, and yet they
are deceived. Its good to keep the eye single, for rottenness in the mind
putrifies the soul.
The heart would be silent and let God speak here. The sight may be dazzled in
nearness to God, and we take our marks by the Moon; And the liberty of praying
is terminated upon the fiduciall acts, and we think it is fastened upon the
particular thing we seek: And here the Antecedent is true, as heaven, and the
Consequence folly and darkness. So John, Rev. 19. and cap. 22. sees Heaven
opened, and behold a white horse and him who sat on him, and he heard the
voice of many, saying, Halelujah, and saw the pure river of water of life, the
tree of life, the Throne, and Him that sat thereupon, etc. But he did not
rightly infer that he might therefore fall down and worship a created Angel.
All which says they vainly boast of the Spirit who reject the light of
Scripture, which is a surer day star then the light of glory, for our
direction. The light of glory is for our perfection of happiness, in seeing
and enjoying the last end, but not for our instruction in leading to the end,
and the means. The Candlelight, and Sun-light in the City comes not without
the City to direct us in the way, the lights and torches in Jerusalem and the
new City serve not to guide the way to these Cities.

2. The spiritual man judges all things, but by the word. In one particular,
Samuel, in another, Tertullian, dottes upon Montanus, some of the prime
fathers, otherwise Godly, are blacked with Platoes purgatory, and some of them
with invocation of Saints, yet speaking to them doubtingly (...), say; (...).
the spirit may be, where some particular errors are, but if the judgment be
rotten and unsound in the matters of God, rottenness in the one side of the
Apple creeps through the whole, and so does corruption from the mind sink down
to the heart. A godly heretic I cannot know. Pain, grief, and aikings in
spiritual motions speaks that the Spirit is there where such are.


3. Any bone or hurt member in walking, actually pains and breeds aiking, if
there be a piercing and a graving conviction, in a Christian motion, that
untowardnesse and opposition from the flesh, pains the spirit and new man, and
hinders the stirrings of the Spirit, it says the Spirit is there, as water
cast upon fire speaks there is fire, Romans 7.15, 16, 23, 24. It were good to
try the untowardnesse to spiritual duties, and several kinds of delight,
whether it be borrowed delight from the literal facility of the gift, from
gain and glory, adhereing to the office and calling, or from the inbred
sweetness in honoring God, crooking and pain in walking is a token of
life-walking.

4. Its a spiritual disposition in the Church, Cant. 2. in a particular soul,
To observe so the ways of God in the soul, as ye may be able to give a
particular account of al Christ's motions, his going, his coming, and the
actings of his Spirit: speak a most spiritual disposition.
to know and be able to give an exact account of all the motions, goings and
comings of Christ, where he lies as a bundle of myrrh all the night, even
betwixt the breasts, Cant. 1.13. when the King brings you into his house of new
wine, Cant. 1.4. Cant. 2.4. when he speaks, Cant. 2.8, 10. -- My beloved spoke
and said to me, arise, my love, my fair one, and come away, when he knocks,
know ye his knock, to tell over again his words, open to me my sister, etc.
where he is. Cant. 2.8. Behold he comes leaping upon the mountains, skipping
upon the hills, where he is in his dispensation to his Ancient Church? Cant.
2.9. Behold he stands behind our wall, he looks forth at the windows. 16.
He feeds among the Lillies: when, and how he imbraceth, Cant. 2.6. His left
hand is under my head, his right hand does embrace me: when he withdrawes,
Cant. 5.6. and is not to be found, I sought him, but I found him not, I called
him, but he answered me not. Cant. 5.6. Cant. 3.1, 2. how hard he is to be
found, and how easy he is to be found, Cant. 3.1, 2.3, 4. what spiritual
stirrings he makes in the heart, Cant. 5* 4. My beloved put in his hand by the
keyhole. For (1.) this speaks much soul-love to be where he is. Cant. 1.7.
(2.) To be able to write a spiritual Chronicle and History of all Christ's
stirrings toward your soul, says ye have letters daily, and good intelligence
of the affairs of the Spirit, and of the Kings Court, and that he writes to
you, as Cant. 5.1. I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse; I have
gathered my myrrh with my spice, I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey, I
have drunk my wine with my milk: Then will Christ write a letter to spiritual
ones, and (as it were, with reverence to his Holiness) give a sort of account
where he is, what he does, what thoughts he has to us: O! how few know this?

5. Godly missing of Christ must be a gracious disposition, Cant. 5.6. I opened
to my beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself, Cant. 3.1. I sought him
but I found him not, verse. 2. I sought him but I found him not. Such as are
pleased with a bare literal missing and are not also in a holy manner anxious
and are not

6. Restless in rising and going through the City, in the streets and the
broad ways, seeking and asking, saw ye him whom my soul loves? Cant. 3.1, 2,
3. are not so spiritual, as is required. Cant. 5.6. My beloved had withdrawn
himself, and was gone, my soul failed when he spoke, remembering his speeches,
when he knocked. v. 2. There may be some too longsome security under sad
falls, when he is not soon missed, 2 Samuel 11.1, 2, 3. Psalm. 26.15. Yea a
spiritual soul having regard to all the Commandments misseth the spirits
acting in all the ways in eating, Pro. 3.6. Act. 27.35. 1 Cor. 10.31. Job 1.5.

7. Frequent convictions (which are the connaturall actings of the Spirit) Joh.
16.9. and of the most spiritual sins, Convictions for most spiritual sins
speak much spiritualnes
as of unbeleef, and Gospel-ignorance, Joh. 16.9. prove a spiritual state: as
flaming prove fire to be fire. Unbeleef is more contrair to the Spirit, then
carnal sins, being most contrary to the flower and bloomings of the Spirit in
his sweetest operations, and most against the Mediator-love of Christ. For as
by the fall, Christ has a new Office to redeem us, As Christ-Man has a new
office to redeem, so has the spirit a new office to comfort, neither of which
should have been useful, if man had not sinned.
Matthew. 1.21. 1 Timothy 1.15. Luke 19.10. Isa. 61.1, 2. Isa. 44.6, 9. So the
Spirit has a new Office, which he should not have had, if man had not sinned,
to apply the blood of sprinkling as a sort of Mediatory intercession, to dippe
us in the fountain of his blood. John 16.14. He shall receive of mine, and show
it unto you. Joh. 14.16. to be the Comforter, Joh. 14.16. the Leader, Joh.
16.13. the Witness, Joh. 15.26. Romans 8.15, 16. The Spirit in his Office cannot
step one foot with the unbeleever. Hence much tenderness and smiting of heart
where the Spirit, 1 Samuel 24.5. is. Yea conscience to weep as one over his
mothers grave, for his enemies, Ps. 35.13, 14. and strict doubling of faith in
greatest deeps: In which Christ proves himself to be more then a believing man,
Mat. 26.39. Luke 22.42, 44. for no man that is only man can both drink hell and
believe heaven at once. 8. In duties there be these. 1. The end. 2. The delight
in them. 3. The success. As to the first, the less of the creature and self,
and the more of God in the end, so much the more denied and spiritual is the
doer, when purely for God (...) we do, The Spirit as the Spirit acts us to do
all for God, as God.
1 Cor. 10.13. Col. 3.23. we are sick for God, and in health for God, and wake
to him, Psalm. 119.62, 147, 148. and sleep to him, Psalm. 16.7. Psalm. 139.18.
live to him, 1 Pet. 2.23. live and die to him and to Christ, Romans 14.7.8. and
pray to him, even when we speak to God, Eccles. 5.1, 2. and preach to prepare a
Bride to him, 2 Cor. 1.14. 2 Cor. 4.25. we may be not speaking to God, or for
God and his honor, 1 Cor. 11.2. 1 Thessalonians. 2.19, 20. How miserable and carnal
to do all for the creature, the flesh, Romans 13.14. Jer. 22.15. Isa. 5.8. for
self, Dan. 4.30. Heb. 2.5, 6. and this speaks much of the Spirit when the man
is sick and hungry, for the exalting of God, and the will is so capaciously
wide in this, that he would his eternal glory were a footstool for the
highting of his glory, Exodus 32.31. Romans 9.3. the will is a most spiritual and
capacious faculty, and O! what acceptable service when the man's will looks
right toward an infinite Majesty, as thirsting for and panting after this: O!
if all beings, millions of Worlds, Angels and men, and all created beings,
Heaven, Earth, Sun, Moon, Stars, Clouds, Air, Seas, Floods, Beasts, Birds,
Fishes, and all the drops of Rain and Hail, Snow, Dew, so many Worlds of
Angels would sing his praises? What wonder then, he accept the will for the
deed? And what is to be thought of the will averse from God, and which hates
him, and wishes that God were not? How contrair to a Spiritual disposition is
this?

2. For delight, it is a spiritual disposition, to go about the duty as duty,
ut bonum honestum, and not upon this formal account, because it delights us;
Except the delight be in the Law of the Lord, night and day, as it glorifieth
him. 2. It Is spiritualnesse, when abstractedly from private consolation we go
about the duty for God, Its spiritualnesse of disposition to do our duty for
the dutey, not for the pleasantnes of the duty.
and can rest upon suffering and burning quick as it is duty, though the
sufferer should be deserted all the while; We often feed our selves with the
bonum secundum, the pleasantness in the duty, which is our sin, except the
sweetness of the holiness of the duty be our delight, and the beauty of
pleasing God allure us, but feeling being away, we find how hard it is, to
delight our selves in the Lord. 3. We do duties too often, for the success,
not for the duty: We pray, the Lord hears not, we weary: we rebuke men, they
care not, and we weary* Sucesse and not duty, self-delight and not the
honoring of God, Its spiritualnes to do duty for the duty, not for the
success of the duty
which should be all our delight, take us up. I pray and weep for my enemies
(Ah! if it could be done) says David, they are worse, Psalm. 35.13* but my
prayer returned to my bosom, that is, the sweet* peace of God, which is the
fruit of the duty of praying came to my soul, and cheered me. We consider not
that the promise of peace, and consolation is made to the duty it self, Psalm.
119.165. Psalm. 19.11. Prove. 3.21, 22, 23, 24, 25. not to success of the duty,
and we consider not that we are to be quieted in the duty, and to be armed
with patience, against the temptation of the duty. Often it inrages Pharisees
against CHRIST and the Apostles, yet the Spirit bids them Preach. Therefore
whether success in praying, and the suggar of delight in duties hire us, or
not; We are to know that though Abraham's offering of Isaac to God had neither
in it the one nor the other, nor our Saviors offering himself to God, for the
sins of the world; If reason weigh the one and the other, yet because both
were performed upon the motive of the love of God commanding, both was most
spiritual obedience, Gospel-love enclosed in the letter of the command,
renders the obedience spiritual.
especially, because the duty is both work and wage, and the more of the Word
of God is in the obedience; I mean not the letter only, but the word including
the love. 2. The authority of the Commander. 3. The beauty apprehended to be,
and* the peace in obedience; the more spiritual is the obedience: The letter
only may show you duty, your obligation, and the penalty of disobeying, and
all these three in a literal way, and yet upon that account, the obedience is
not spiritual, but Gospel-love added to the Laws-letter makes spiritual
obedience.

CHAP. XVIII. The new heart of Covenanters, the Nature, Characters, Properties
thereof, hitherto of the new Spirit.
Quest. 6. WHen are we to judge, that we have a new heart? And when do we know
that it is not the old heart?

Ans. 1 Propos. As Physically, so also Morally, the heart is the man, The heart
is the man.
the good heart, the good man, the evil heart, the evil man, and God weights
men by the weight, not of the tongue, of the hands* of the outward man, but by
the weight of the heart: Asa his heart was perfect, 2 Chronicles. 15.17. the heart
of Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 17.3. was perefect. And Psalm. 78.37. their heart was
not right: the froward heart is the froward man, Pro. 3.32. There is a heart
with in a heart, and a man within a man speaking and acting.
For there is a man speaking within a man, and a heart within a heart acting,
as if it were a man made up of soul and body. Thou have said in thy heart, I
will ascend up to Heaven, so the King of Babylon, Isa. 14.13. So the heart acts
Heaven or Hell within the man, Psalm. 14.1. Luke 12.19. they have a heart (...)
busied in the College, studying and reading covetousness, 2 Pet. 2.14.

2. Propos. When the Lord tryes the man, he tryes the heart and the reins,
Prove. 15.11. Hell and the heart both are naked before him. God only tries the
heart* Aug. Confess 10. cap. 27. intus tu ^r^s, and ego for as
Prove. 17.3. Theodoret. God acts the noon-day-Sun meridionaliter in every
heart: The man himself is without, and God within, Jer. 17.9* Man searches not
his own heart and reins, for there be plottings and inclinations to evil in
the heart, which the heart knows not, 2 King. 8.12, 13. Peter has a better
heart then all men in the books of his own heart, Matthew. 26.33. but its not so
indeed.

3. Propos. The washen heart that lodges not vain thoughts, Jer. 4.14. purged
from dead works, by the blood of Christ (above all the blood of bullocks and
goats) Heb. 9.14. purified by faith, Act. 15.14. is the good heart. What the
good heart is, and how it is made good.
It is a better heart according to the heart of God, 1 King. 15.5. that turns
not aside, 1 Samuel 13.14. of Gods seeking out and finding, then the first heart
created of God, Ephesians. 4.24. Col. 3.10. And ah! we seek a good Ruler, a good
Physician, when we are sick, a good house to dwell in, 1. Creation of a better
heart then the first, is a piece of the rarest of the Lords works.
and (which is strange) a good horse, but not to have a good heart.

4. Propos. The excellent acts of God, in a manner (with glory to his
Highness) to mind his first work, to create a better heart then the first
which he created, says, that there is great need of a good heart, Psalm. 51.10.
of a new heart, Ezekiel. 36.26. Its beyond all admiration, to create so ra^e a
piece as the Sun out of no thing, and a beautiful Lilly out of mire and dirt,
out of common clay to bring forth Saphirs, Carbuncles, and in liew of a stony
heart (for grace is not educed out of the potencie of any created thing) to
create a new heart, which God loves to dwell in, rather then in heaven, the
high and holy place, Isai. 57.15. which so ravisheth the heart of Christ, Cant.
4.7, 9. and is of more price with God, then gold, or any corruptible thing,
even a meek and quiet spirit, 1 Ptt. 3.3, 4. is the rarest piece of the works
of God.

Its an excellent act of God to keep the vessel in a spiritual season, as
David prays, 1 Chronicles. 29.18. To make room for Christ dwelling by faith, and
for love to comprehend love, Ephesians. 3.17, 18. and who puts such a thing in the
heart, Ezra 7.27. when a sparkle of fire from flint falls on water or green
timber, there is no fireing from thence. But when actual influences fall upon
an heavenly habit, as the Lord can cast in a coal, or a lump and flood of love,
Cant. 2.5, 6. Luke 24.32. Cant. 6.12. there are most heavenly actings of the
soul.

3. He bows and inclines the heart to the Lords testimonies, and to cleave to
him without declining, Jer. 32.39, 40. Ps. 119.39. Cant. 1.4. Ps. 141.4.

4. We are to beware of 1. the reigning evils of the heart, of a rotten and
unsound heart, 1 Timothy 6.5. Psalm. 119.82. 2. Of an unsavory stinking heart,
that smells of hell and the second death, The diverse sorts of evil hearts, we
are to beware of.
of all sort of unrighteousness and malice, like a green opened grave, Psalm.
5.9. 3. Of an uncured heart, that never came through the hands of the Physician
( Prove. 14.13. A sound heart is the life of the flesh.) Of an unsound,
unsavory and a rotten heart, Ephesians. 4.29. compared with verse. 23. from whence
issue rotten words, (...)
borrowed from rotten and worm-eaten trees which speak an uncured heart.
Mederi, curare mitigare dolorem. Hos. 11.5. I Will heal him.


5. We are to look to deadness of heart in all the branches of it. As (1.)
sullenness and dumpish sadness, in refusing comforts, and being full of
unbeleeving heaviness, in David, Psalm. 69.20. Psalm. 42.11. whereas we are
always to rejoice, Psalm. 119.52. Phil. 4.4. (2.) Fainting at the greatness of
the affliction, Isa. 20.3. Joh. 14.1. whence comes withering of heart, Psalm.
102.4. Psalm. 27.13. (3.) An overwhelmed and unbeleeving sowning heart, Psalm.
61.2. Psalm. 142.3. Psalm. 143.3, 4. (4.) Deadness in going about the service of
God, Psalm. 119.37. Quicken me in thy way, of this else where. (5.) Narrowness
to take in God, opposed to an enlarged and wide heart, Psalm. 119.32. Psalm.
81.10. and straitening of heart, when the soul is so hampered, that he cannot
speak, Psalm. 77.4. unbeleef clipps the wings of the Spirit, and lays on
fetters, which may come from the wicked company, and may be laid on by our
selves, Psalm. 39.1, 2. (6.) There is an Atheist heart to hate the existence of
God, of Christ, of a Gospel, Jam. 2.19. Matthew. 8.29. Compared with Psalm. 14.1.
Ephesians. 2.12. Some believers are near to say, I take my leave of Christ, I Will pray
no more, for it is in vain. Jer. 20.9. Ps. 73.13, 14. but it is not a fixed
resolution: of this else where.

7. There is an evil heart of unbeleef to depart from the Living God, Heb.
3.12.

Prove. 6.18. (...) to delve, to plow inde, (...) he that works either on iron
of timber.
8. A heart that devises, ploweth, or delveth wicked imaginations, Prove. 6.18.
As Prove. 3.29. Plow not evil against thy neighbor. Hos. 10.13. You have
plowed iniquity, such plots are forged against the people of God, Matthew. 27.1.
Nah. 1.11.

9. A proud heart (1.) resisted of God. (2.) Farrest from the lowly and meek
heart of Christ, Matthew. 11.29. Phil. 2.5, 6, 7, (3.) Most near to Satan's heart,
1 Timothy 3.6.

Q. Why are we more ashamed of an unclean lustful heart, then of a proud
heart? Ans. A proud heart is deeper guiltiness, and nearer to Satan's nature;
Why we are more ashamed of uncleannes and falsehood, the^ of pride.
And pride and unbeleef are sins more reproachful to God, and incroach more
upon his Throne, but there is more flesh in us then Spirit, and we think that
there is more of a beast in uncleanness.

Quest. But we are more ashamed of lying, falsehood, and stealing, then of
pride? Ans. There Is more of being ashamed before men, it being a carnal sort
of passion, then of being ashamed before God, and falsehood and lying to men are
fleshly evils against common honesty, but pride is a more Angel-sin, or a more
God-like sin, a spiritual sin, and pride is a sort of heart-heresie, by which
we judge but blindly, we have reason to ascend and climb aloft to Gods room,
Genesis 3.5, 6. Isai. 14.13. because of knowledge, parts, power.

10. There is deceitfulness and self-deceiving in the heart, Isa. 44.20. the
Idolater feeds on ashes, a deceived heart has turned him aside, that he cannot
deliver his soul, nor say, is there not a lie in my right hand, Obadiah 3. The
heart is the greatest liar on earth, to say and gainsay.

11. There is a wicked fearfulness in the heart to do evil, Jude 12. feeding
themselves without fear, 3 Sam. 1.14. was thou not afraid (says David to the
Amalekite) to put out thine hand to destroy the Lords Anointed? Its a godly
fear to tremble always, at feasting, speaking, hearing, sleeping, company,
Prove. 28.14. 1 Pet. 1.17. Phil. 2.13. Job 1.5. And in all there ly snares
within, and without the house.

12. There is a wicked flintinesse of heart, we shall have peace, Characters of
sinful stonines^e of heart against God
though we both hear cursing and walk loosly, Deuteronomy. 29.19. we are fallen, but
Ephraims stout heart (2.) will rise whether God will, or not, Isa. 9.9. And
(3.) the King of Assyria's stout heart will be as strong as God, Isa. 10.12,
13. And (4.) its wicked stoutnesse to say godly mourning before the Lord is in
vain, Mal. 3.13, 14. (5.) Its wicked stoutnesse to rest upon your own
righteousness and refuse to treat with God, Isa. 46.12, 13. (6.) And vain
stoutnesse to darre God in his own quarters and fight him, Exodus 14.8.23. Exodus
23.8* 13. Isai. 36.10, 11, 36, 37. if it were in his own seas as Pharaoh and
the Egyptians would do.

13. There is a wicked hardening of the heart, when men make the Lord his word
and mighty works the contrair party, Exodus 5.1, 2, 3. Exodus 7.10, 13, 16, 20,
23. Exod^ 8.5, 6, 7, 15, 17, 18, 19. Isai. 6.9, 10. Zech. 7.8, 9, 11, 12. Ezekiel.
2.3, 4. Ezekiel. 3.7, 8. Mat. 13.13, 14, 15. Act. 13.44, 45, 46. and oppose God in
his word and works.

14. There is a sinful dullness upon the heart, by which men are as weaned
childen, line upon line, line upon line, Of the moral concurrence ^f the word
to the act of infusion of a new heart
can do them no good, Isai. 29.9, 10, 11. Here it is to be observed that we
cannot Preach Omnipotency, nor persuade a world to be created, nor a new heart
to be infused, nor can we Preach to a Wolf to become a meek Lamb, nor threaten
the Sun to rise at midnight, we but speak words about the new birth, the
husbandman but breaks the earth with his plough, but God makes the corn to
grow, and he only, Job 9.20.
not that the word is not the instrument of conversion of souls, Romans 1.16.
Romans 10.14. but how to the act of infusion of a new heart the word concurres as
a moral and suasory instrument, Pro 28.18
is above my capacity. (...)


To be made narrow, to be pressed in body or mind, to afflict, to vex, Genesis
32.7. straitening was on Jacob by a Metalepsis it is to frame by pressing or
keeping straight as Potters frame a vessel. Hence (...) jots^r a potter, Eze.
11.13.
15. There is a froward heart, Pro. 17.20. that perverteth and is crafty (...)
to pervert.

16. A wicked heart, Pro. 26.23. set on evil, Eccl. 8.11.17. foolishness is
bound to the heart, Pro. 22.15. a dissembling heart, when seven abominations
are in it, Pro. 26* 25. (1.) We take no^ heed to the imaginations, and are not
grieved for the constitution of the heart, for actual sins make original sin
to swell, as two floods running into one makes a hudge River. (2.) We take not
heed to the young births of the heart, with the concurrence of the mind, fancy
and imagination, there are multitudes of forgeries, clay-pots, and imaginations
framed, as a potter devises vessels of earth of many quantities, figures,
shapes, great, small, narrow, wide, round, cornered, for the word is a potters
word, Genesis 6.5. 1 Chr. 28.9. with all keeping keep thy heart, Prove. 4.23. the
word is to keep as the keepers of the walls, Cant. 3.5. as sheepheards, for its
in danger to be stolen away, Hos. 4.11. 2 Samuel 17.6. Hos. 7.11. Ephraim is
like a silly dove without heart, but we take no heed to the entry, to see what
goes in, what comes out. (1.) What if there be no God? Psalm. 14.1. (2.) What if
God see not? Ezekiel. 9.9. (3.) What if man perish as the beasts? Eccl. 3.19. It
may be there is no heaven, The (...) and unreasonable imaginations of the heart
and the atheism thereof.
nor hell. (4.) What if there be no Christ, nor Gospel, but only questions of
words? Such clay-pots were framed by Gallio, and Festus, Act. 18.14, 15. Act.
25.11, 19. Hence come imaginations of things impossible, Isa. 14.13. I Will
ascend to heaven, says Babylon, I will set my nest among the stars. Oba. 4.
Tyrus says, I am god, I sit in the seat of God. And new-wild-fire flights
which are indeed old heresies, are of this kind; A heart delighted with God is
the workhouse of CHRIST.
such are dreamers, who see seven lean kine eat seven fat kine, in re, its a
lie. (5.) A new heart is the Office-house of Christ, and a heart delighting in
Gods ways is a new heart, where the Law is imprinted and engraven in the
heart, Isa. 51.7. Hearken ye people in whose heart is my Law. Psalm. 40.8. I
delight to do thy will, O God, thy Law is within my heart. Its true there is a
new delight in the heart, but not a delight of the new heart, Isa. 58.2. Joh.
5.35. for a delight in the Gospel as a good thing, not as a good Gospel, a
delighting in Christ as a Prophet that feeds them, not in Christ as a Redeemer,
Joh. 6.26. that saves them, is not a new heart.

2. The new heart is a heart universal, wholly for God as God, there is an
inteernesse in it, A whole and enteer heart. Half a sincere faith is no faith.
when the whole spirit and soul and body is kept blameless, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. 1
Pet. 1.18. (...) in holy conversations and godlinesses, 2 Pet. 3.11. Half a
globe, though exquisitely plained, or half a cart wheell, is not a globe nor a
cart wheell. External things may be divided, one may be an hearing Professor,
and a drunken Professor, and a praising, a singing Professor in public, and
not a praying nor a believing Professor in private, spiritual duties, cannot
be divided: half a faith, half a love, is no faith, no love, saving grace is an
essence that consists in indivisibili, and cannot be parted.

3. A new heart is a fixed and established heart by Grace, it is a new state,
not a new transient flash, a new heart, Deuteronomy. 5.27. A fixed heart.
All that the Lord our God will speak unto thee, we will hear, but the Lord
says, verse 19. D. Pr^^^on*
O! that there were such a heart in them, but it is not in them.

4. 1 Samuel 10.9. God gave Saul an other heart, Some new heart or new spirit is
an old heart.
then a changed heart is not a new heart, a new spirit or a new gift in Jehu is
not a new heart; It Is not newness that makes the heart new, but Gods new
ingraving, Jer. 31.33.

5. A heart kept with all keeping is a new heart, Prove. 4.23. both the words
note exact diligence in keeping as watchmen and sheepherds with all keeping, at
all times, Cant. 3 3. Cant. 5.7. A well kept heart is a new heart
Psalm. 119.119. some pull their hearts to pray and hear, but not while the
sabbath, or under a storm of conscience: and the heart is a word in some
company, not at other times and in other company*

6. The heart is new, where the affections are all faith (as it were) and all
sanctified, reason and zeal is a lump of angry reason, and fear a mass of
shining reverence; and love only soul sickness and pure adherence to God, New
affections what they are.
the instinct of faith wholly on God, as the last and only end. (2.) The heart
is new when the affections are equivocally, or at least, at the second hand set
upon the creature, but as nothing can be seen, but what either is* color, or
affected with color, so nothing is fixedly sought after, but God, he only
feared and served, Mat. 4.10. Deuteronomy. 10.20. only desired, Psalm. 73.25. only
loved, Deuteronomy. 10.12. Cant. 3.2, 3. the soul sick of love for only only Christ,
Cant. 2.5. Cant. 5.8. he only trusted in, Jer. 17.5, 7. Psalm. 62.5. (1.)
Nothing is all good and all desirable but God, and God in Christ, Mat. 19.17.
Cant. 5.16. the shadow of the Sun in the fountain is not the real Sun: the
stirrings of the pulse of the affections toward the shadowed good of the
creature, should be lent, and like the beating of the pulse of a dying man,
with a godly contradiction, loving and not loving, joying and not joying, 1
Cor. 7.29, 30. mourning and not mourning.

CHAP. XIX. 1. The place of Evangelick works in the New Covenant. 2. Possession
of glory and right to glory considerably different. 3. A twofold right to life.
4. We are not justified by Works. 5. The place of declarative justification by
Works, Jam. 2. discussed. 6. Faith and Works different. 7. Possession of life
and right to life cleared. 8. Faith and final believing both commanded in the
Law, final unbelief not the sin forbidden in the Gospel only. 9. How life is
promised to works Evangelick.
It Is a grave and weighty Question to rid marches between the two Covenants in
their conditions, the one requiring the obedience of Works, the other Faith:
It Is not to be said that for fifeteen hundred years no man did doubt of the
necessity of good Works, The necessity of Works by the Law of faith, an old
question in the Church.
Paul propones the objections of the Antinomians, Shall we sin and continue in
sin, that Grace may abound? Romans 6.1. this they spoke through the occasion of
what he taught, chap. 5. some have said they are hurtful, because we abuse
them, some arbitrarie and indifferent,, because they are not necessary to
justification. O! Our mistakes of Works, of Grace, of Word, of God, and of the
works of God.
what pronnesse in us to suck out of the doctrine of free Grace poison, how
kindly to desire there were no Law against treason, because the Prince pardons;
All sin is virtually Atheism, to wish the existence of a Law, and so of a just
holy and unchangeable God were not, and we can hardly believe this. And 2. what
rising of heart and carnal reason is there against the first acts of
providence, why, and what necessity was there to make a Law to forbid the
eating of an Aple, God foreseeing that thence should come the ruin and
endless damnation of all. It had been good God had never created such a Tree.
2. That the eating thereof had never been forbidden. 3. That it had never had
such a name, as the the tree of knowledge, for it deceived Evah. 4. That God
had not given free will to Adam. 5. That he had given him confirming grace in
the first moment of Creation. But,

Observe 1. Satan started first the dispute concerning the equity of the Law,
and that we are Disciples of and appr^ntises to Satan, when we toss and rackot
arguments in our carnal heart-Logick against the holy Law of God, Genesis 3.2.
and make the heart a ferrie boat to carry messengers and divellish thoughts
hither and yonder, in questioning the goodness of the Law, and the acts of
providence, and therefore it is speaking Grace, to close with the sweetness
not only of the Law written in the heart, Its grace to close with all sorts of
comma^ds.
and these inbred principles of honesty and truth, to hurt none, to obey God,
(for Satan raised not the first dispute about these) but with all the
judgments and testimonies of God, as David, Psalm. 119.127, 128. verse. 86. All
thy commandments are faithful, 1 Samuel 12.7. Stand still that I may reason
with you of all the righteous acts of the Lord. Its a mind like Christ's that
has an heart prejudice at no one command, by an other, and is sweetly friended
with all that God commands, Math. 3.15. It becomes us to fulfill all
rightenesse, and O! how sweet to have no heart quarrel, but a sweet stouping
of soul unto, and an adoring of God in all providence, and acts or decrees he
has concluded or done in time or from Eternity. These draw deep in the decree
of Reprobation, God had an hateful design against me. 2. The Gospel is an
untrue and fabulous dispensation. What a spirit is Galaenus who reproacheth
Moses because he teaches not that God works ever and by necessity Galaenus de
usupartuum.
of nature, Alphonsus decimus rex Castellae. Melius ordinatiusque singula
conderentur.

Pamphlet printed an. 1647. p. 31.


what is most good for the creature. And that Prince who said, that if he had
been Counselor to God in the time of the Creation, many things should have
been created ordinatius and melius, in a better order and state, then they
were. Let the man be remembered who called the Gospel a fable, and the spirits
who reproach the Scripture as inkie wisdom. 1. A bare dead form bare flesh,
etc. and weak ones under desertion, who feed upon reports and lying news from
Satan, God hated me before time, and carries on a design of eternal ruin to
me, therefore I have no right to hear, to pray, to eat, to sleep. 2. Yet the
necessity of good works is asserted by Luther, the Augustine Confess. and Apol.
Arti. 20. docent nostri, Luther, Gal. 5. In libello de votis Monasti. Chemn.
Loc. Com. de bonis oper. cap. 1. qu 3. page 21, 22. Confess. August. and Apol
art. 20.

Docent nostri, quod necesse sit bona opera facere, non ut confidamus per ea
gratiam mer^ri sed propter voluntatem De^, lib. 6. Concor. p. 666.

Some necessary distinctions touching the necessity of Evangelick works.


etc. Evangelick works are necessary, not to merit, but by the will and
commandment of God: Calvin calls them inferior causes of the possession of
our salvation. The dispute began upon occasion of the book called Interim Anno
-- M.DLXVIII. and in Colloquie at Altenburge, Melanthone and the Divines of
Wittenberge assented to the necessity of good works, but the followers of
Flaccius Illyricus dissented: The Authors of the book of Concord condemn these
of Flaccius their way, and deny a necessity of efficiency in works to deserve
salvation, but yield a necessity of their presence, that the work of salvation
be not hindered.

3. These distinctions are necessary. 1. There is a jus and right to Gospel
life eternal. And 2. there is actual possession of life eternal.

2. There is a twofold jus, One by the purchase of merit, and the paid ransom
of blood; There is a right secundary by promise, every promise gives a right
in a manner: but its unproper.

3. There is promise of life formally federall. 2. There is a promis^ of life
consequenter federall.

4. There is an order of things, one going before the other as the Antecedent
and the Consequent, and in order of cause and effect.

5. Law-obedience does much differ from Gospel-obedience, as Law-commands from
Gospel-commands.

6. GOD sent his Son to justify persons, but not to justify works, not to
make inherent obedience perfect or our righteousness before God.

Asser. 1. If the new Covenant be considered strictly and formally in its
essence, Faith though weak justifies.
he that believes whether his faith be weak or strong is justified and saved,
Joh, 3.18, 36. Joh. 5.24. Act. 15.9, 10, 11. Romans 3.16. Romans 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Romans 5.1. for faith justifies as lively faith, and not as great or small:
Otherwise none should be justified and saved but the strong believer, whereas
Christ died for the weak in the faith, Romans 14.

Hence Mr. Sibs excellently. Bruised Reed, page 107, 108.
Know that in the Covenant of Grace God requires the truth of Grace, not any
certain measure, and a spark of fire is as well fire as the whole element
thereof, we must look to Grace in the sparkle as well as the whole flame, all
have not the like strong, yet the like precious faith, whereby they lay hold
and put on the perfect righteousness of Christ, a weak hand may receive a rich
Jewel, a few grapes will show that the plant is a vine not a thorn: There is
a room in heaven for thee who judges thy self; for the number of lambs, and
babes weak in the faith in this Kingdom* do far exceed the number of the
strong and aged in Christ; for the Scripture names the whole flock, little
ones, babes, his sheep, they are not a flock of fathers and strong ones.

Asser. 2. There is a right to life by promise, The right faith gives to life,
it justifies not as Law-obedience.
he that believes shall be saved. Promissio facit jus, and creat debitum:
Godliness has the promise of this life, and of that which is to come; And
because a promise as a promise cannot create an equality betwixt the work and
the wages, as is proven, this is an unproper right, and not proper debt, and
takes not away the nature of a free gift: This is no consequence at all, The
fulfilling of the condition of the Covenant of grace, cannon justify, as the
fulfilling of the condition of the Covenant of Works should have justified.
the performing of the condition of the Covenant of Works does justify Adam by
Law-works, so as he is no sinner, has fulfilled the Law, has right to life
eternal; Ergo, to believe to the end, and fulfill to the end, and fulfill the
condition of the Covenant of Grace does justify the believer, by Evangelick
works, make him no sinner, but a perfect fulfiller of the Covenant of Grace,
and one who has due right by working to life eternal. Certainly then, 1.
doing Evangelick gives us as good right to eternal life, without the price and
ransom of blood, as doing legal gives to the same life. 2. When we sin and
fall in atrocious offenses, Adulteries, Paricide, Robbing, we have as good
right to Justification by works, and life eternal by Evangelick works, suppose
he be a robber all his life, as was the repenting thief, as Adam, suppose he
had perfectly fulfilled the Law. Now though believing be the condition of the
Covenant of Grace, it is of a far other nature then perfect doing, to the
end, and constant fulfilling of the whole Law, in thought, word, and deed with
all the heart, and the soul and mind, and all the strength. For there is no sin
here, and so no place for punishing justice, or wrath, none can so believe, but
he sins and so deserves everlasting wrath. If it be said, that by the Covenant
of Works he does deserve it, but not by the Covenant of Grace, for Christ has
merited to him life eternal. Ans. 1. We speak now of the right that a Believer
has by Evangelick works to justification and life, as contradistinguished from
the merits of Christ, this opinion says that a man is justified by Evangelick
doing, because God has made the like promise, and the like jus and right by
promise, to doing Evangelick, that he made to Law-doing, if Christ's merits be
added to qualify Evangelick works, to add to them the worth that they have,
then Christ's merits must give life eternal by way of merit, or a virtue of
meriting condignly to our Evangelick doing, as Papists say, and so Christ has
made us saviors and redeemers of our selves, and this is a right to life ex
condigno more then Adams most perfect Law-obedience had. 2. The Covenant of
Grace commanding faith, does by this opinion command all that the Law of Works
does, but in an Evangelick way, that they be done sincerely: Ergo, it must
forbid all sin which the Law forbids; But the Law forbids not only unbelief,
final unbelief, but all the works of the flesh: Also Christ must come (...) to
louse and dissolve the Law, which he denies, Math. 5. for if the Covenant of
Grace condemn nothing but final unbelief, The right of redemp^ion is not
ours, by Evangelick doing, as the place, Rev. 22.14 mistaken, is exponed by
some*
Christ in this Covenant must dissolve the Law; but Christ says, he that
breaks or teaches men to break these is the least of the Kingdom of God.

But there is an other jus and right to life eternal, by which Christ dying
has satisfied the Law, expiated our sins, restored as much and more glory to
God by passive obedience, by his sufferings, as we had taken glory from God by
our evil doing, and so merited to us life eternal. If any say abusing that
place, Rev. 22. 14. that we obtain this (...) and right to the Tree of Life,
and to Christ our life and everlasting glory (which is our only right, the only
Charter of blood) by keeping the Commandments Evangelically; he must say that
we first may keep the Commandments Evangelically before we have right to life,
to Christ, and so before we believe. 2. That we merit Christ's right or merit
by doing, and that by Evangelick works, we buy right to Christ and Christ's
merits, and so Christ has not merited to us a jus and right and title to life
everlasting by dying, and grace and a gracious right to do his Commandments by
his death, but that we, by doing his Commandments, do earne and sweat for a
right to Heaven, which is to say, that we by doing, merit and deserve the
price of Redemption, and that we merit Christ to our selves, by doing, By
Christ dying, we obtain right to life and to Christ, not by works.
whereas it is he and he alone, that has merited to us Grace and Glory, and
all title to Heaven. Not to say that a Charter of life from such a noble
Superior as Christ by the purchase of blood, and of such blood, the blood of
God, Act. 20.28. is some better then to have eternal liveliehood and freehold
from our duty and lubrick best works, which are polluted with sin, and by
which, though we were Evangelically conscious to our selves of nothing, yet
should we not be therefore justified, 1 Cor. 4.4. for the righteousness in
which is David's blessedness before Christ, and Abraham's before the Law, and
ours under the Gospel, is in forgiving of iniquity, covering of sin, not
imputing of sin, Romans 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. But in all the Scripture our sins
are never said to be pardoned and not imputed to us, by our own most Evangelick
doing, for we are justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is
in Christ Jesus, Romans 3.24. not by the Redemption that is in us, and are washen
from our sins in his Blood, Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14. Mat. 26.28. Rev. 1.5. and
sufferings, not by our Evangelick doings, and if such a case could stand, the
Martyrs, sure, might well be justified by their own blood, and since no
pardoning, wash^ng, Law-satisfying virtue, can be in faith, works, or our
Evangelick deservings, they can not justify us nor keep and occupy the Chair
of Christ. And the fault were the less, Via ad regnum, non causa regna^^i.
if our works were only called the way to the kingdom, not the cause of
reigning, but they are called perfect, both in their nature, and conform to
the rule, and also in order to the end, to justify us before God, and to save
us. And if so, all in Christ may say, we have no sin, contrary to Scripture,
Jam. 3.2. 1 King. 8.46. Eccles. 7.20. Prove. 20.9. Jam. 2.10. Yea though he that
is guilty in one offends in all, yet in the sight of God, all flesh shall be
justified, this way, Psalm. 143.2. There cannot be a perfection in our faith and
Evangelick works in order to the Gospel, more then to the Law, to justify us.
Nor can it be said that such works are perfectly conform to the Gospel,
because the doers believing in the lowest degree fulfills the condition of the
Gospel. But where it is said that the Gospel commands only faith in the lowest
degree; Then the Centurions faith, the faith of the woman of Canaan, and the
greatest faith shall not be required in the Law. For the condition of the
Covenant of Grace cannot (say they) be required in the Covenant of Works, and
it is not required in the Gospel under the pain of sinning against the Covenant
of Grace, and of damnation, for then all who have not faith in the highest
degree should be damned, and violate and break the Covenant of Grace, contrary
to the whole Gospel, which says that these who have weak faith are justified
and saved, and so the greatest faith shall be will worship and a work of
supererogation. And because this way says that all and every one of mankind
are under the Covenant of Grace, then 1. there shall be none living under the
Law. 2. no Law, but only to believe in CHRIST, shall lay an obligation on any,
Jews, Christians, under pain of wrath.

And if James be to prove that we are justified by works, and yet mean, that
both faith and works concur as causes, though faith more principally, If faith
and works concur jointly as causes of our justification, neither can James deny
truly that we are justified by faith, nor Paul that we are justified by works.
how can Paul deny that we are justified by works, If Peter and John jointly
work a miracle and heal the creeple man, suppose the influence of John in the
miracle be more, yet it is not to be denied, that Peter wrought the miracle.
Nor does the Scripture say that we are more principally justified by faith, and
less principally justified by works, but the places alleged for salvation by
works (if works have a causative influence) specially Matthew. 25. speaks more
for the pre-eminence of works. Nor does the Scripture insinuate any thing of
the first and second Justification, or of growing in Justification, in having
our sins not imputed to us to our very day of death; and the Question must be,
Romans 4. whether Abraham was justified by works done before circumcision, or
not, Romans 4. when as faith was not reckoned to Abraham, when he was in
uncircumcision, and the blessedness of righteousness by faith comes both
upon circumcision and uncircumcision, verse. 9. and he had faith and
righteousness and was in Christ and regenerated, when he was justified. Though
some taught Justification by the works of the ceremonial Law, yet Paul Gal.
3.10. states the Question of works agreeable to the Moral Law, that are
absolutely perfect, and must be done by Grace. And Paul might justly in the
Epistles to the Romans and Galatians have excepted himself, David, Abraham, and
all the regenerate, for they are justified by giving alms to the poor, Mat.
25. as was Rachab, by receiving and lodging the spies. English Divines Annot.
on Jam. 2.
The English Divines say, How could the Scripture conclude from Abraham's being
justified by works, whence he offered his Son Isaac, unless by works here we
understand a working faith, the Apostle must mean the same by works, verse. 21.
that he means by faith, 23. for he cannot say verse. 23. the Scripture was
fulfilled (in Abraham's being justified in the work of offering his son, v. 21.)
which says, Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for
righteousness: Except it must be meant, that the work of offering his son
Isaac was counted to him for righteousness. Now the letter of the Text
expressly verse. 23. says that believing God was counted to Abraham for
righteousness, Believing and faith, Jam. c. 2. v. 21, 23. must be believing
and working faith.
then the work of offering his Son must either be the believing declared by
offering his son, and faith working by that act of offering, or if they be two
sundry things, he must then say this in effect, Abraham was justified by the
work of sacrificing, verse. 2^. causatively before God, Ergo, the Scripture is
fulfilled, verse. 23. and Abraham is justified by believing causatively before
God, verse. 23. which we cannot ascribe to the Apostle, according to their mind
who make faith and works the two collateral and joint causes of Justification
before God: as if one would say Peter wrought the miracle. Ergo, the Scripture
is fulfilled that John wrought the miracle. So Abraham was justified by works,
verse. 21. Ergo, Abraham was justified by faith, 23. 2. The faith which James
debarres from Justification must be the faith, Iam. 2. by which Paul strongly
proves, Romans 3. c. 4. we are justified without works. If faith and works
concur as collateral causes in our Justification before God, as the Papists
contend; but the faith which James excludes from Justification, is no faith at
all. But only (1.) fair words to the hungry and naked, The faith which Jam.
excludes from justification is not the faith that Paul speaks of, Romans 3. Gal.
3. but a bastard faith only. See Cartwright, see D. Fuilk against the Jesuits
of Rhems, Jam. 2.
and giving them supply for no necessity either of hunger or nakedness, and
which cannot save, and so is no faith, and so can have no saving influence with
works to justify and save, but such is the faith which James excludes (...) v.
14, v. 15. the faith of Paul, saves, Romans 4. Romans 5. purifies the heart, Acts
15.9. (2.) A dead faith is no saving and living faith, no more then a dead
corpse is a living man, v. 17. (3.) A faith that cannot be shown to others in
good works, as this v. 18. is no faith, for it has no motions of life. (4.) A
faith of the same nature, with the faith of the Devils, who believe and
tremble, v. 19. (5.) A faith which a vain empty professor imagines to be a
living faith, when it is dead, without works, as this v. 20. can have no joint
influence of life to justify and save with good works; all which saving
influences contrair to this, saving faith has.

2. It is to be observed that James makes mention of two sorts of faiths,
Stapleton de sola fide justificante, l. 8. c. 9. haec autem fides sieve
charitate mortua est.
chapter 2. which the Adversary confounds. 1. All alongs, v. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,
19, 20. he gives vive characters of a dead painted faith, which is in (...) in
the vain empty boaster, ver. 20. 2. He shows us of a lively faith of Abraham,
which wrought with his Works, now it is a lewd error to make Abraham's faith,
and the faith of believing Rahab of the same nature with the faith of the vain
empty Hypocrite, who is faith is nothing but fair words, and with the faith of
Devils. So the Papists, Lorinus, Estius, Jam. 2. seu ficta and hypocritica, 1 Timothy 1. quantum ad perfectae justitiae vitam and veritatem, non autem quantum
ad s^ips^m sibique propriam virtutem, etc.

Lorin. Commen in Jac. 2.26. (Sicut enim corpus) non fit comparatio cum homine
mortuo; (...) cum corpore, nam homo mortuus non potest proprie vocari homo; sed
corpus mortuum est propric^^t^pus. Quo etiam pacto fides sieve operibus, est
vere fides, litet mortua -- Nec sa^is placet (...) addit (Caj^tan in Comment.)
fidem sine operibus mortuam, quoniam opera sunt concomitantia (...).

Estius Com* non comparat Apostolus fidem mortuam cum homine mortuo, sed ^um
corpore mort^^, sicut ergo corpus mortuum est vere and proprie corpus, ita
fides mortua vere and proprie fides est.


Stapleton, Mavochius, Bellarmine make it an Hypocritical and dead faith, and
lively faith as Abraham's was, a vital receiving of Christ and a believing the
Lord, so as believing is counted for righteousness, to differ not in nature
and essence from the faith of the Devils, whereas in the faith of sound
Believers there is a Godly submitting and leading captive of the understanding
to the obedience of Christ, because it is the Lord that speaks, and so a
receiving of the Word as the Word of God, 2 Cor. 10.5. 1 These. 2.13. Math.
22.32. which is not in the faith of Devils. (3.) There is in it a receiving of
Christ, Joh. 1.11. a fiduciall resting of the heart upon God in Christ. And the
word (...) is to confide, to betake himself to a lu^king place, where one may
be safe from a storm, Psalm. 2.12. Psalm. 11.1. Psalm. 31.2. Deuteronomy. 32.37. Psalm.
118.9. Judge. 9.15. come and (...) under my shadow. And this is
contradistinguished from the Devils and Hypocrites who cannot seek their
lodging nor a hiding place against wrath in the Lord.

2. It is to lean and rest the body, Expressions of a lively faith.
2 Samuel 1.6. Saul leaned upon his spear, and by a Metaphore it is to cast the
burden upon the Lord, Isa. 50.10. Psalm. 55.22. hence the word that notes a
staff, (...) Inniti, herere, recumbere est corporis, 2 King. 5.18. and 7.2.
The Lord answered upon whose hand the King leaned* Genesis 1^.4. lean down under
the tree. 2 Chro. 14.11. (...) cried to the Lord, help us, help us, for we
(...) upon thee.

(...) aspexit cum delectationes cum (...) est inniti, recumbere. (...) silere
tacere, Ezekiel. 27.17. Ps 131.2.

(...) In Kal. (...) est, (...), amore (...) and bitumine ^njunctis. Shimler in
Lexico.


2 Samuel 22.18. Isa. 3. the Lord has broken the stay and the staff of bread,
Isa. 30.1. and this is to be done often, when there is no present duty to be
done, nor any work required of us, but only a fiduciall relying upon the Lord
alone, as at the Red Sea Moses and the people were to lean upon JEHOVAH only,
not to act, which cannot be said of the faith of Devils and Hypocrites. (3.) It
is to look with delight and confidence, Isa. 17.7. as oppressed servants, Psalm.
123*1, 2. (4.) There is a word that notes to be silent, not to speak, not to
move, Josh. 10.12, 1^. the Sun was silent, it moved not: It notes a Godly
submission that the soul dar not speak against God, Psalm. 37.7. rest in the
Lord, file Jehov^: LXX. sub ditus esto Domino, Psalm. 62.6. whence faith
teaches us to submit and hold our peace and lay the mouth in the dust, as a
spirit dantoned of God, Lev. 10.3. Job 1.21. Lam. 3* 28. Ezekiel. 16.6^. which is
far from Hypocrites. (^.) To believe is to cleave to God, from a root that
signifies to adhere as things glewed together with pick or glue, Psalm. 63* ^.
Josh. 23.8. Deuteronomy. 11.22. so we become one Spirit with the Lord, (...) Firmiter
initi unde sumitur pro securum esse, ^o quod con^fidentiam sequatur securitas
oppo^nitur dubitationi. Est inaliquo spes omnes sic re^ponere, ut secure
quies^at animus adversus omnia pericula and res ardu^s suscipere audeat.
2 Cor. 3. (6.) It is a word of near adherence (...) to lean firmly upon any
with hope of security, 2 King. 18.5. have thou leaned upon this reed? Hos.
10.13. Psalm. 13.6. Psalm. 31.7. Deuteronomy. 12.10. Thou shall dwell safely,
confidently, it places the soul under the Rock of Omnipotency. (7.) It is to
roll thy self upon God, and is borrowed from heavy bodies, Josh. 10.18. Roll
great stones to the mouth of the cave, Genes. 29.3. Psalm. 22.9. he trusted in
the Lord, rolling himself on the Lord. Prove. 16.3. commit thy works unto the
Lord, and thy thoughts shall be established. Cartwright says it is a
Metaphore from men who, being oppressed with a burden, transfer it off
themselves upon one who is mightier and stronger: it is excellent when the
heart rolls all its cares upon the Lord, and disburdens it self upon him. (8.)
There is a word that notes to lean, to stay or stablish, to strengthen, Isa.
48.2. 2 Chronicles. 32.8. the people rested themselves upon the word of Ezekiah,
Cant. 2.5. stay me with flagons, Psalm. 71.6. I have leaned upon thee from the
womb, and it notes to draw near, Ezekiel. 24.2. so it is to strengthen and make
strong the heart that is trembling and shaking if it be not stayed upon God.
(...) A summo ad imum de^olvit.
And shall all these excellencies of faith, be in the faith of Devils and
Hypocrites? and therefore it is most absurd to make the faith of Abraham all
one in nature with the faith of Devils and Hypocrites, (...) Innixus
conjunctus, vicinus fuit, confirmavit, sta^ilivit.

Saving faith notes far other lively acts then can be in the faith of
hypocrites.


and to make the difference only in having Works, and no Works, as if there
were the same heart leaning, soul rolling, and cleaving to the Lord by faith in
Abraham, and in Hypocrites and Devils who tremble.

3. That Scripture, Abraham believed and it was counted to him for
righteousness: Is not Genesis 22. when he did justify himself by the work of
sacrificing Isaac: But it is Genesis 15.6. when the son of promise Isaac, a type
of Christ is promised to him: at which time there was no work at all required
of Abraham, but only believing the promise, for what should Abraham act or do
to further the fulfilling of that promise, for he believed that Gospel* promise
in the mean time, with a faith lively, and having with it as a concomitant a
resolution to walk before God and be perfect, (...) then the Text shall say,
Genesis 15.6. Abraham resolved to be fruitful in good works, when he heard the
promise, and that resolution of good works was counted to him for
righteousness which is most violent.

4. Who so are justified causally and in the sight of God by Works, as James
says, to him works are counted as the forma^^ cause, for so James from
Scripture, ver. 23. Abraham, (...), believed God and it was counted to him for
righteo^^nesse. Which says, by that faith he was declared or by that (...)
was justified, which was imputed to him for righteousn^^^e. But his believing
or his faith living and working like the ^ody quickened with the Spirit, was
counted to him for righte^^snesse. Now except it be yielded that James speaks
of two ^aiths, one dead and empty, ascribed to the hypocrite, ver. ^^, 15, 16.
another lively and working, ascribed to Abraham* ^er. 23. and except this be
denied, that Abraham was (...), ver. 23. not by that same faith; It must follow
that A^^ahams empty believing, ver. 23. was that which was count^ ^o him for
righteousness, Genesis 15.6. but James cannot be so ^^derstood, but when he
says, the Scripture Genesis 15.6. (...) ^ulfilled; for his faith in believing the
promised seed, Ge^ ^. he shows that Abraham was justified by faith without
(...), as Paul, Romans 4. and when he says he was justified (...) ^orks in
offering his son, as Genesis 22. he says he was (...) ^^^lared just, or not
justified by the empty and idle faith of (...) hypocrites; but by a faith that
did prove it self to be lively. So that James proves that we are not justified
by a dead faith that neither has, nor can have good works. As his Adversaries
said, and Paul proves, Romans 4. that we are not justified and saved by works,
that is by our own inherent perfect righteousness, because, Romans 3. all have
sinned, Jew and Gentile. Because Abraham then should boast as a perfect man,
free of sin, and he needed no Redeemer, the Law of works should save him, and
so he needed not remission of sins, nor the non-imputation of iniquity. But
there is a mids between these, and James says that is to be justified by
faith, by a metonymie of the effect, by faith made known to be lively, not to
the world only, but to their own conscience, for if James should mean that we
are justified by works properly as counted to us for righteousness, he could
not say, verse. 21. Abraham was justified by works, when he offered his son,
verse. 22. he cannot infer, verse. 2^. thou sees that his faith wrought with his
works: What faith? He had spoken of works, verse. 21. not one word of Abraham's
^aith, yet he says, because Abraham was justif^^d, that is declared to be
really, before God, to his own conscienc^ and others justified, his faith did
work in a lively way as real in an^ by his works, and you see that Abraham's
faith, Genesis 15.6. was perfect^^ by works, Genesis 22. when he offered his son. Now
it was not (...) as touching the nature of it, and the act of justifying, for
(...)* Romans 4. cites Genesis 15.6. to prove that Abraham was justified by (...)
faith in believing the promise of the blessed seed, some 25. year^ as others
reckon 30. years before he sacrificed Isaac, Genesis 22.^ that it must follow that
Abraham was not justified by works* no^ his (...) perfect in its lively
operations until he offered his son Isaac: ^hen the contrair of this, the
Scripture tells us, for by faith he (...) his Country, C. 12. By faith
believing the promise he was (...) Romans 4. many year^ before: Therefore these
words, see thou (...) faith, must mean that his faith came out to view by his
works.

But the^e be learned and godly Protestants who (...) that James must speak of
^ustification real and before God, and (...) declared Justification before men
only? Answ. Its true, (...) to name them. But these are subordinate: James
speaks not (...) a faith only declared, nor of a justification only declared
to the world: But of a declared Justification that is real before God. 2. That
is declared to the man himself, and to the world. And that James speaks of a
Justification before God, James speaks of real justification before God, but
under the notion as declared and manifested to men and to the conscience of the
so justified
the Text says: Because he says, ver. 14. What can that faith profit? Which
is empty, he must mean, what can it profit before God, to save and justify?
As the word, 1 Cor. 13.3. if I have not love (...), it profits me nothing
before God. 2. Can that faith (it is not well translated leaving out the
particle in the new Translation, can faith save him?) save him? Then he must
speak also of real faith, and so real salvation and so of justification
before God. 3. The examples of the Justification of Abraham, of Rahab, which
were real, must say something to the same purpose. 2. That he speaks of real
Justification to the man's own conscience as well as to the world if clear in
the Text also. For James speaks to the conscience and privitie of the man who
says that he is justified, and has faith, verse. 18. (...). 19. (...), thou
have faith, thou believes, the Devils also believe, he would have the hypocrite
to discuss his own conscience, and solidely to know, whether his Faith and
Justification be real or not; And James wakens all visible professors in this
Epistle (as John also does) to try his Religion whether it be true and solid,
or vain: by Chap. 1. being a doer of the Word, and not a hearer only, 23* 24.
by visiting the fatherless, verse. 27. by loving and respecting the poor that
are Godly, as well as the rich, Chapter 2. by trying his faith whether it be dead
or lively, by bridling the tongue, Chapter 3.

And therefore the Arminians and others do but lose their labor, who say James
does not speak here of Justification declared to the world, Remonste^ Apol. c.
10^ fol. 13 col. 2. Jacobum de justificationis declaratione non loqui docent
verb^ ipsa. Quis enim adeo v^ cors est qui cum Apostolo contendere voluerit, an
homo declaretur justus ex fide, fides enim quatenus fiducia est and distincta
ab operibus pietatis, non est nisi in cord^ hom^^is. Theologia enim eorum non
patitur credere hoc verum esse -- nam ne de operibus ipsis constare potest an
sint bona opera: non enim possunt esse bona nisi ex fide fi^^t, ex fide enim
fieri non modo non potest alteri declarari, sed ne illi ipsi, id constare
potest, qui ea facit. Quia reprobus illa eadem opera praestare potest.
because the world cannot judge infallibly whether our works by which we are
declared to be justified, are sincere or not. For 1. we say that James does
speak of Justification declared to the world, for he speaks of real
Justification before God but as declared, not to the world only, but to the
conscience also of the doer. 2. Because the world can not infallibly judge of
our Justification and works, therefore they cannot judge at all. Its a loose
consequence: For we may declare our selves to our own conscience and to others
by our good works, that we are before God justified. Otherwise because men
connot see our good works, nor the principles from which they proceed, whether
from saving faith or not, nor the ends for which they are, whether for the
glory of God, or not, men should not glorify our heavenly Father: Contrair to
Matthew. 5.16. nor should the Gentiles glorify God in the day of visitation: As 1
Pet. 2.12. because they cannot infallibly (...) whether they be good works or
not and done in faith and for Go^: Nor is Abraham declared to be justified
because of a secret heart-^^tention to offer his son to God in the court of men
(but in the co^^t of his own conscience he may) yet his journeying to the place
where he was to sacrifice his son, his building an Altar, his laying on wood,
his binding his son and stretching out his hand to kill him, may well declare
him to be a justified man to the world and to men. Trelcatius, the Professors
of Leyden, Calvine, Beza, Paraeus, yea a Papist Cajetan has said well to this
point. Not to add that Scripture shall never admit, Trelcatius senior de
Justifica 1. Class. Arg. 373. Paulus, per quod homines credentes justificantur
coram DEO, docet. J^cobus* quo modo justificari cognoscantur. 2. Paulus, fide
vera solum nos justificaris Jacobus, quanam sit vera illa fides, ab effectis,
probat. 3. Paulus huic verae fidei tribuit justificationem sine operibus ut
causis justificationis* J^cobus fidei fictae detrahit hanc vim, and contra
veram probat ab effectis veris, 4. Paulus negat bona opera praecedere
justificandum: Jacobus dicit ea justificatum sequi. 5. Paulus a causis
justificationis ad effecta discendit, quibus detrahit coram Deo vim
justificandi, ut in solidum id tribuat Dei gratiae and Christi merito.

Calvin. Instituti li. 111. c. 17. n. 11. Iucidunt in duplicem Paragolismum:
Alterum in justificationis, alterum in fidei vocabulo. -- Tu credis (inquit)
quod Deus est, sane si nihil en ista fide continetur, nisi ut credatur Deum
esse, jam nihil mirum est si non justificet. -- nec vero dum hec adimitur
quicquam derogari putamus fidei Christiana. -- N. 12. Justificari ^ Paulo
dicimur, cum obliterata justitiae nostrae memoria justi reputamur* eo si
expectasset Jacobus praepostere ci^asset. Illud ex Mose, Credidit Abraham Deo.
-- Si absurdum est effectum sua causa prior^m esse, aut falso testatur Moses eo
loco, imputatum fuisse Abrahae fidem in justitiam, aut ex ea quam in Isaac
offerendo praestitit obedientia, justitiam non fuit (...) nondum concepto
Ismaele, qui jam adoleverat, antequam nasceretur Isaac, fide sua (...) fuit
Abraham.

We are not Evangelically justified by Works.

Professores Leyden. in Synosi Pur. Theolo. Dis. de Justific. and in Cens^^a
Confessio. Remonstrant. c. 10. page 145. Apud Paulum nomen Justificationis
sumitur pr^ ipso justificandi actu, qui solius DEI est tanquam causae
efficientis principalis, fidei tanquam causae instrumentalis. Apud Jacobum pro
fidei professione fides sumitur.


that Abraham's and Rahabs sins were pardoned, their iniquities not imputed, and
they delivered from cond^mnation, by the works of offering Isaac, receiving the
spies, fighting the Lords battles, suffering persecution of Saul. For James, if
he say any thing for this cause, that good works are the formal cause of our
righteousness, our merits, and in the very place of the satisfaction of the
blood shed by Christ, we shall so be formal causes not of the declaratory act
of justifying (for that may be thought to be the Lord our Justifiers act) yet
of our own Justification, and so should we fight and run for the Crown of
inherent righteousness of works, as well as for the Crown of Life. And what
Scripture is there for that? 3. A man shall be as just and sinlesse, as he may
say, I have no sin, I am just: And in order to the Covenant of Grace, which
forbids no sin (as some for this way do teach) but final unbeleef, he no more
needs forgiveness of sins and the blood of sprinkling, nor pardoning grace,
then the Elect Angels, or Adam in the state of innocence, and to that, Prove.
20.9. as to that, Eccles. 7.20. 1 Ioh. 1. Who can say I have made my heart
clean, I am pure from my sin? The man Evangelically justified can say, I have
made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin. 4. No^ needs such a man pray,
forgive me my sins, as I forgive, etc. for he is justified from all Law-sins,
who is inherently holy and Evangelically just: And so the Gospel is a new Law
which does not forbid all sins that the Law forbids, and the man is not under
sin, though he sin against the love of Christ. According to that, if ye
love me keep my Commandments, Joh. 14.15. so he once, ere he die, believe. For
the Law (say the Authors) forbids not unbeleef, nor any Evangelick
unthankfulness against the Law of a ransome-payer, which yet, I judge the Law
of Nature and Nations condemns: The Covenant of Grace forbids no sin, but
final unbeleef, and the believer can not be guilty of that except he fall away.

5. And it may justly be asked, C^jetanus in Jacob. c. 2 v. 23. Adver^e,
prudens Lector* quod Jacobus non sentit fidem absque operibus mortuam esse
(quoniam constat nos justificari per fidem absque operibus ut pare^ in
infantibus* etc.) sed sentit fidem si^e operibus hoc est ^enuentem operari esse
mortuam* and impleta est (Scriptura) quoad executionem maximi operis, ad quod
parat^ erat fides Abrahae, -- uterque v^rum dicit: Paulus quidem quod non
factis ceremonialibus aut judicialibus secundum se, sed fidei gratia
justificamur. Jacobus autem quod non fide sterili, sed fide^ foecunda operibus
justificamur.

What a faith James, Chap. 2. speaks of.


whether the believer Evangelically justified, who needs no grace of pardon of
Redemption from sin in order to the Covenant of Grace, needs the grace of
renovation to keep him to believe, for he needs no pardon for the weakness of
his final believing, for the smallest weak faith is a fulfilling of the
Covenant of Grace. To these add, if James mean by (...), faith alone, v. 24.
by which he says we are not justified, (...), no other then the dead faith,
ver. 20. and the faith which cannot save, the faith of fair words to the hungry
and naked, when the vain man gives him nothing necessary for his body, 16. the
faith without works, 17. the faith that cannot be shown to men, 18. such a
faith as devils, 19. and vain hypocrites boast of, 20. then sure the conclusion
is for us, and agreeable to the scope of James, v. 24. (...), ye see then a man
is justified before men and to himself, and so really declared before God,
justified and saved by works as the fruits of saving faith, (...), and not by
faith only which is dead and without works. For 1. he cannot exclude saving and
lively faith: David Pareus, Com in Jacobum c. 2. Absurd enim diceret fidem, v.
21 cooperatam fuisse operibus (nisi opera senechdochice su^cret, per metonymam
effecti pro ipsa fide operibus conspicua) 1. Juberet videre, quod non erat and
quod non dixerat: Quia fidei nullam mentionem fecerat: potius diceret, vides
opera fuisse cooperata etc. 2. Absurd etiam diceret, ver. 22. Credidit Abraham
Deo Scripturam opere impletionis filii impl^^^m fuisse Scriptura enim de fide
and Justificatione Abrahami impleri non poterat, nisi per fidem justifica^tem,
cujus in historia oblationis nulla habetur mentio* imo sibi contradic^ret, ver.
20. ^x operibus, and ver. 22. ex fide Abrahamum justificatum asserens. 3.
Absurd etiam ex Scriptura Credi^^* Abraham Deo inferret, ver. 24. videtis ex
operibus justificari hominem* Potius (...) contrarium inferendum erat. Videtis
ex fide justificari hominem, ^on ex fide, etc* (...) Jaco. Arminius disput.
priva. 8. ^h. 7. Justificatio apud Jacobum pro (...) and declaratione
Justificationis, quae fide fii and operibus, sed alia ratione quam ^a qua
fides* (...)* and justitiam a DEO propositam apprehendit quae certe fide and
operibus non apprehenditur, sed apprehensa declaratur -- fides non accipitur eo
modo quo apud. Paulum, pro assensu nempe fiduciali, sed pro fidei confessione
and professione quomodo fides sumpta se habet ut oper^ nempe ut (...) bonis
operibus jun^^a declaret and manifeste^ hominem justificatum, and sic
justificat, etc.

Catech. Ruccov. c 9. de Prophet munere, l. C. page 193.


For that believing God is counted to Abraham for righteousness, says James*
ver. 23. for then the conclusion should contradict the premises, and he should
say, Abraham was justified by sound and lively believing. Ergo, we are not
justified by only sound and lively believing. 2. The Adversaries, Socinians,
and Arminians, who by this Text, say we are justified by works, know no
Gospel-faith, by which we are justified, but faith including essentially new
obedience, the crucifying of the old man, the walking in the Spirit, and
repentance; as else where I cite. Therefore when James says we are not
justified by faith only, he must mean a naked dead assent: as in the former
verses; We are not justified; and that is it which we say: James denies not but
says that Abraham believed, Genesis 15.

6. (It is only believing but lively and not dead, not a naked assent, which
was counted to him for righteousness) and Genesis 15. Romans 4. he was thereby
justified; and therefore Paul and James are well reconciled. And the faith here
excluded must be a dead faith, not a lively faith and a true faith, as the body
without the soul is a true body and has the nature of a true body, though it
be no living body. So (say they) the faith that James excludes is a true faith,
when as it is evident, it is no more true faith then the faith of Devils and
Hypocrites. 3. It is false by the Papists way and Arminians also, that we are
not justified by faith only, which is a true and general assent to the Word of
God, James can hardly be understood to speak of the Popish second Justification
by works.
for they teach that in the first Justification, we are justified by faith only
without works, as Paul proves, but in the second Justification when a man of
just is made more just (say they) he is justified by works; as says James, c.
2. Now by this they are forced to say, James speaks not of the first
Justification, but of the second, but beside that the Scripture knows not two
Justifications, James must deny that the unconverted hypocrites, and Rahab the
harlot were justified by only faith, as Paul says, and it were most
incongruous to teach unconverted ones who never knew the first Justification,
how they were not justified in the second Justification. And if James be
speaking of the nature and causes of the same Justification before God only,
with Paul and not of the effects thereof, it were false that James says (with
reverence to the holy Lord) that we are not justified by faith (...) without
works, for Paul says it, and proves it strongly from the Scripture, and never
insinuates that we are justified in a second Justification by works. And sure
he should not have denied all the Jews, all the Gentiles, all the world, Romans 3
9, 19, 29, 30. David a man according to Gods heart, and much in communion with
God, when he penned the 32. Psalm, and Abraham a believer and effectually
called, Genesis 12. and justified, when he, Genesis 15.6. believed the promise of the
seed, Romans 4. to be justified by works in their second, or their Evangelick
Justification.

Yea when James says we are not justified (...) only, he must mean fidem
solitariam, a faith solitary which has no works conveying it, as man sees not
with eyes that are solitary and plucked out of the heart, and separated from
hearing, smelling, and the senses, though faith, if true and properly so called
(as they say this is) must justify as the eye sees only (...), and the e^re
only, not the eye, hears, now this faith has a causative influence in
Justification as well as works (if it be proper and true faith, as they say it
is, as the body without the spirit has the nature of a body) and so James had
no more ground for him to say, ye see then that we are not justified by faith
only, then to say, ye see then that we are not justified by works only. For
works separated from faith are no less dead works and cannot justify, 1 Cor.
13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Then faith separated from works, and really pulled from them,
as in an hypocrite, is a true faith. Obj. When James says that a man is
justified by works, not by faith only, he makes faith and works concomitant in
that procurement of Justification, and in that kind of causality, for he says
not, as he is commonly interpreted (not by faith which is alone) but by faith
only (...). Ans. He is not more commonly, nor soundly and truly interpreted,
he is not justified by faith which is alone, fide solitaria, by dead faith. For
sola fide justificamur. Faith has the only virtue of justifying as an
instrument, and so is the Adverbe (...) Solum taken, Matthew. 5.47. If ye salute
your brethren (...) only, what do ye more then Publicans? Where (...) notes
duties only natural excluding these which only converts in a spiritual way
can do, Matthew. 8*8. Only say the word, What (...) only Jam. 2. notes.
(...) it clearly says that a mandat of Omnipotency only in CHRIST could heal
the sick servant; but yet that Omnipotency is not really separated from
justice, wisdom, mercy, Matthew. 9.21. (...) If I only touch him, I shall be
whole. But the act of touching was conjoined with the act of hearing: Who has
touched me? Yet the act of hearing had no causative influence in the drawing
virtue out of Christ, but only the act of touching did extract the virtue, as
Christ says, Luke 8.50. Mar. 5.36. Fear not, (...), only believe, says Christ
to the Ruler; can it be said, but this excludes works as touching the
apprehending of the power and mercy of Christ in raising the dead Damosel. And
yet that believing was not solitary, but conjoined with love, reverence,
submission, 35. So Luke 8.50. Mat. 21.19. And Act. 3.16. The faith that is by
Christ has given this creeple perfect soundness. Heb. 11.30. By faith the
walls of Jericho fell. It were strange to say (by Peter's and John's good works
and holiness, the creeple man was made whole) and (by good works the walls of
Jericho fell) and yet there were good works, love, mercifulness, courage in
the Priests who compassed the walls of Jericho, and in Peter and John. Add to
these that by good works we must more and more justify and pardon our own
sins, and must more and more buy a right to the Tree of Life, as they teach,
citing Rev. 22.14. and more merit, ex pacto Euangelico, life eternal: and so
our works and merits must be joint causes with the blood of Christ, and the
Martyrs blood and Christ's blood must have parallel and collateral influence with
Christ's blood to buy right to the Tree of Life; Yea and Paul already justified,
even in the progress of that which is called his Evangelick Justification,
Phil. 3. would be in another condition, 9. That I may be found in him not
having mine own righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through
the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith. And why
should Arminians and Socinians deny it to be Paul's own. For 1. it is inherent
righteousness. 2. It is not infused as Papists say, but acquired as they
teach. Cateche. Raccov. c. 9. page 194.
3. It came (say they) from Paul's own free will indifferent to will or nill.

But how is the Scripture fulfilled in Abraham's believing, Iam. 2.23.

Ans. The Apostle spoke often of faith (...) and believing, v. 14. twice, v.
17. once, v. 18. thrice, v. 19. twice, v. 20. once, v. 22. twice, that is nine
times, thereof Emphatically, v. 23. by way of excellency the Scripture was then
fulfilled* Abraham (...), believed, and it was counted to him for
righteousness, as its written, Genesis ^5.6. before God and man and to his own
conscience, when he offered his son Isaac upon the altar. That was real,
visible and conspicuous believing and righteousness, to deny himself so far
for God: For James is much for Religion made known to a man's self, and to men,
and has far other Adversaries in the other extremity then Paul had, even the
old Gnostics, who, in opposition to the Jews and Pharisees, laid aside the
Law, doing of the Law, Jam. 1.22, 23. all works, c. 2.14. all conscience of
bridling the tongue, c. 13.1, 2. of peaceable and mortified living, c. 4. c. 5.
and thought it godliness to hear the word in the Assemblies, chapter 2.1, 2, 3.
without love to the Brethren, and to keep in their head a room, empty faith,
and professed fair, and gave good words, but no garments to the naked, v. 14,
15. And James had good cause to treat of a visible and declared faith, but yet
not merely declared, but which was real and can save, 14. and of justification
such, as that of Abraham and Rachab, as was sen^sible and real and not in a
bare profession: For James speaks of a profiting and saving faith, Iam. 2.14.
What does it profit, etc. Can faith save him? Another devise is here alleged,
of a formed faith animated with charity and that justifies (say Papists) and an
unformed faith void of charity, and that, say they, does not justify: Socinus,
tract. de justific. p. 58. Meminisse debemus fidem hanc qua scilicet
justificamur, esse obedientia^. Socin. de Chris. Servat, p. 3. c. 2. In
Christum ^redere nihil aliud est quam ad ipsius Christi normam and praescriptum
obedientem, praebere. Cateche. Raccovien. de prophetico, I. C. munere, c. 9.
page 193 Ergo tu obedientiam sub fide comprehendis? Sic est Jac. 2. ut fidem
Abrahae ex operibus consumma^am* p. 194. they expone that. Vt penitentiam
agamus; non secundum carnem ambulemus, -- null^^ peccati habitum contrahamus,
omnium vero virtutum Christianarum habitus comparemus. Remonstr. Armini.
Confess. c. 10. th. 2. Vtique necesse est fidei praescriptum non alio modo hic
(quatenus justificat) consideretur, quam qu^tenus proprietate sua naturali
obedientiam fidei includit: Hac ratione considerata fides totam hominis
conversionem Euangelio praescriptam suo ambitu continet, Remon. Apologia fol.
113, 114. Edward Poppius. August. Porta. fol. 28.
And the same way, but in other expressions, Arminians and Socinians teach,
that to believe and do good works, and to repent and walk in all the
Commandments of Jesus Christ, is to believe, or complete formed and Evangelick
faith. But we distinguish them as the Scripture. Its true, Romans 4.9. faith is
said to be imputed to Abraham for righteousness, and so v. 3. v. 5. but it is
not meant of the act or work of believing, that was counted for Abraham's
formal righteousness, there should so no room be left to the satisfaction of
Christ, reckoned to be ours: if all the righteousness of God, Romans 10.3. 1
Corin. 5.21. Phili. 3.9. should be turned over in an act of believing, mixed
with much doubting and in our sinful obedience; And the Socinians have more
reason for them to say, there is no necessity of any real satisfaction of
blood paid for us, then the Arminians and Papists: For if our righteousness
and inherent obedience may be of grace esteemed formal righteousness before
God, by a free Evangelick paction and an act of Gods free will: the Lord might
have esteemed the eating of an aple, or any act of obedience, our formal
righteousness, and so Christ dyed in vain, to become our righteousness, where
an act of a sinful man, or a deed of the Law, even the Law of faith is
sufficient. What needs the shedding of the blood of God? Frustra fit per plura,
quod aeque been potest fieri per pauciora. There Is no need of real
satisfaction.

2. Faith imputed does well bear the sense of the object that faith lays hold
on, as our righteousness, Romans 3.21. Now the righteousnsse of God without the
Law is manifested. What righteousness of God? ver. 22. Even the righteousness
of God through faith of Jesus Christ unto all. Now if the righteousness of God
is manifested without one Law, to wit, of works, why not without another Law,
of faith and of inherent Gospel-righteousnesse? And what need that Christ
should die, if the act of believing should be that precious righteousness of
God, and that according to the Law of faith? This by the way. As hope is put
for the object hoped for? As Romans 8.24. Hope that is seen is not hope, that is,
the thing possessed, the salvation which we have in present possession, is not
hoped for. Col. 1.5. For the hops sake laid up in heaven, that is, the thing
hoped for. For the grace of hope is not laid up in heaven. ver. 27. Christ in
you the hope of glory. So faith here put for the thing believed; so says the
Martyr, my love is crucified, that is, Christ my loved or believed one is
crucified: So by faith in his name is this man made whole. It were strange to
say, by faith, and repentance, and mortification is this man made whole. And it
must be said, if so be that faith includes repentance. Now Peter denies, Acts
3.12. this, why marvail ye, as if we by our power and holiness had made this
man to walk? Its not our holiness, but Jesus Christ has done it, even God,
the God of Abraham, etc. ver. 13. has done it: And yet, ver. 16. faith in his
Name has made him strong: That is, faith or believing in his Name, that is, in
his Power, Authority, Godhead, has made him strong. Ergo, faith is put for
the thing or righteousness believed: So Heb. 11. By faith the walls of Jericho
fell, that is, by love the soul and form of faith, say Papists, and by
repentance and new obedience, which is all one with faith, say Socinians, the
walls of Jericho fell. So by faith they subdued Kingdoms, stopped the mouths
of Lions. What influence real or physical had faith in slaying men, Faith is
pu^ for the obj^ct of faith.
in refraining the hungry Lions to eat Daniel? None at all: But thus the mighty
God believed in by these men, subdued Kingdoms, stopped the mouths of Lions;
if it be replied there is not alike reason of justifying faith, which is dead
as touching the influence and causality to justify, as there is of the faith
of miracles in these points; it is replied, there is every way the same reason:
For as Abraham's dead faith, if it had been dead could no more have justified
and saved him, then the hypocrites dead faith can save and justify him, as
James says, 2.14, 15, 16, etc. So could not these worthies recorded, Heb. 11.
have casten down the walls of Jericho, subdued Kingdoms, stopped the mouths of
Lions by faith, if that faith had been as dead in its nature, as the faith of
the vain Gnostick and Hypocrite, who says to the brother o^ sister naked,
depart in peace, be thou warmed and filled, and yet gives him not these things
that are needful to the body, Jam. 2.15, 16. And this we must say, except we
admit that the fancied faith of the Hypocrite can remove mountains, nor is it
place to dispute whether Reprobates as Judas have saving faith in working
miracles, it is sure their faith of miracles cannot be a Hypocritical faith
such as is, James 2.14, 15, 16. (3.) The Scripture differenceth between faith
and love, and faith and repentance. As 1. we are not once said to be justified
by faith, but are never said to be justified by love, repentance, alms deeds.
Its easy with an active ingine to labor to prove how faith includes love: And
so does hope and love include many other works and gifts of the Spirit, The
Scripture and sound reason distinguish between faith and new obedience.
but the Holy Ghost distinguishes them. As (2.) by faith as from a saving
principle, Abraham sojourned in the Land, by faith Noah builded an Ark, Jacob
blessed the sons of Joseph, Moses would not be called the Son of Pharaohs
daughter, yet to build an Ark is not to believe in God; we pray in faith, hear
in faith, yet these are not the same.

(3.) Mar. 1.15. Repent and believe, Act. 20.21. Testifying repentance toward
God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus, Heb. 6.1. Not laying the foundation of
repentance from dead works, and faith toward God, 1 Timothy 1.5. Love and a good
conscience and faith unfeigned, Phil. 5. Love and faith, 1 These. 1.3. We thank
God, remembering your work of faith, and labor of love, Heb. 6.10. Labor of
love. 11. The full assurance of hope. 12. Faith and patience. We believe in
Christ: but do we repent in Christ? 4. Faith is a leaning on God, Isa. 10.20.
Isa. 26.3. Isa. 50.10. love is not so. Faith is a coming to God by way of
affiance, Ioh. 5.40. Matthew. 11.28. Ioh. 6.37. a receiving of Christ, Ioh. 1.11.
an eating of his flesh, and drinking of his blood, Ioh. 6.54, 55, 56. not any
of these can be said of love, of repentance, of new obedience.

(4.) If to believe in Christ as Lord and Lawgiver be formally (for
effectively and practically we may with that Learned and Pious D. Prestoun say
it is) a consenting to Christ's Dominion and Government over us to obey him
(though to consent at the Corronation and to swear an oath of loyalty to a
King be widely different from obeying his Laws) as unbeleef is a rebellion
against his Government, Luke 19.17. then well may Adam, in the Covenant of
Works, be said to be justified and saved by faith; To give our selves to Jesus
Christ to be ruled and commanded by him as Lord and King, is not formally to
believe in him.
for if to believe in God Redeemer, be to give our selves to obey him as Lord
Redeemer, and if this surrendering be the obedience of works by which we are
justified and saved and perfectly righteous before God, upon the same reason to
believe in God Lawgiver and Creator in the Covenant of Works, and for Adam to
surrender himself Covenant ways, by a legal faith shall be the Law obedience
of works by which Adam is justified and saved, and so he is saved by Law-faith,
as we are by Gospel-faith.

And this is to be remembered, that for one to give himself to Christ as his
Lord to be governed and commanded, and to be willing to obey him is neither
formally faith (though it may be conjoined with believing) nor obedience, but
an intention or purpose to obey. And 1. shall we then be justified by works,
that is, by a purpose and intention to work? 2. There are in us May resolutions
and purposes like May blossoms, that wither before Harvest, as some are
willing but not obedient, Isa. 1.19. One says he will go work in his fathers
Vineyard, it may be he purposes to work, but yet he works not, Mat. 21.30. nor
is a practic^ll purpose of heart to obey either obedience or faith formally.

5. If to be justified by faith in Christ as not only Jesus who saves, but as
Lord who commands, then we are justified by love, for we are to love him not as
Jesus only, but also as Lord, 1 Cor. 16.22. Ephesians. 6.24. especially since all the
works of the Law come under the command of love, Matthew. 22.3.7. Luke 7.27. Deu.
6.5. Romans 13.8.

(6.) All these, thy faith has saved thee, Matthew. 9. Luke 7. only believe,
must be of this truth, thy good works has saved thee: only do good works. And
it is strange that Paul says, Ephesians. 2.8. By grace ye are saved through faith,
and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. 9. Not of works, lest any
man should boast. Nor could Paul make an opposition between grace and works (as
in Romans 11.6.) if the grace of believing and good works were one in the New
Testament, for so we should be saved by works, and not by works. And Paul by an
(...), takes that away. Yea but we are saved, that is, justified and delivered
from obligation to wrath by the works of free grace. He answers, nay, but
neither are we saved or justified by these works of grace as by means or
causes. See the Learned Commenter, D. Trochrigge, on Ephesians. ^.8, 9.
For we are first saved and justified before we can do good works, for good
works are the fruits of free grace, since v. 10. we are his workmanship created
in Christ Jesus (and so justified and saved in Christ Jesus) to good works,
that we should walk in them. Yea and Paul undenyably removes this doubt, 1
Cor. 4.4. I know nothing by my self (that is, by his grace I am free of such
sins as bring condemnation, and so he must abound in works of grace) (...),
yet thereby (and notwithstanding of all my inherent holiness by works of
grace) I am not justified. (7.) There should be no ground of gloriation and
boasting more then this, by the Socinian and Arminian way, if we should be
justified by works which come from free will not determined by any grace either
habitual or actual which is merited by the death of Christ, but do proceed
from pure free will which separateth the believer from the non-beleever: Then
might we glory and boast that we are not in the debt of Christ or of his grace
for that which is our formal righteousness before GOD, and so no flesh can
say they are justified by grace, but that we are justified by nature the same
way that Adam should have been justified without being beholden to CHRIST or to
his death. Right or jus to life eternal, and possession of, or the way to life
eternal, are much different.


Asser. 3. There are not properly the same causes of the possession of Life
Eternal, and of the righteousness of Life Eternal: The ransom of Christ's
blood is only the cause of the right. For jus or right to Life Eternal is a
legal and a moral thing, e^s morale, and has a moral cause, as a man has
right to such a City being the Lord and owner thereof by birth, or money* or
conquesse, or by gift or grant of a Prince or of the Citizens themselves, but
possession and enjoying the houses and rents of the City is a Physical thing,
ens Physicum, and has a Physical cause, as eating, drinking, lodging,
sleeping, wearing of clothes to defend the body from the cold. So the legal
right a man has to the bread and lodging he has in an Innes, but the
Physical causes, are hunger, appetite, bodily necessities so require and his
pleasure to make use of such necessities. Hence the eating, drinking, Christ's
blood is the right of merit to life eternal, good works the way and means by
which we come to the possession thereof.

Calvinus Instr. l. 3. c. 15. n. 21. Respo. ad 1. Arg. Istis nihil obstat quo
minus opera Dominus tanquam causas inferiores amplectatur. Sed unde id? Nempe
quos su^ misericordia aeternae vitae haereditati destinavit, eos ordinaria sua
dispensatione per bona opera inducit in ejus possessionem. Quod in ordine
dispensationis praecedit, posterioris causam nominat.


may be Physically good, and the right, jus legale, very bad, he may have no
right to the bread, when he comes to it only by spoil and rapine. So the legal
right, jus legale to life eternal is the ransom of blood that Christ paid,
our Goel, our friend and kinsman, to make the inheritance ours; but that great
(I may say) almost Apostolic light, Mr. John Calvin says good works, are, as
it were, the inferior causes of the possession of life. So simple possession
is one thing, and qu^ jure aut titulo, but by what Law-right he possesses, is
another thing.

But 1. Good works are necessary, necessitate praecepti, by the command of God
and promise, 1 These. 4.4. 1 Cor. 6.20. Ephesians. 2.10. Matthew. 28.20. and where it is
said, 1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness is profitable to all things, having the promise of
the life that now is, and of that which is to come. (...) the promise is
opposed to the Law. And that is a strong Argument, Gal. 3.18. (...) If the
inheritance be of the Law, it is no more of promise, but God gave it to Abraham
by promise, Covenant-promise: What is that to the Galatians and to us Gentiles?
Much every way. For three notable points are therein. 1. The heavenly
inheritance promised to the seed, to Christ and his, ver. 16. not a p^or
earthly Canaan, as Socini^ns and Papists say, were promised to Abraham and his
seed, except they say that an earthly Canaan was promised to Christ. 2. That
Covenant-promise of an heavenly inheritance made to Abraham, the same is made
to the believing Galatians, the Gentiles and their seed, else Paul says
nothing for the Doctrine of Justification by faith to the Gentiles, contrair to
the purpose of the Apostle. 3. There is an inheritance by Covenant-promise a
promise of eternal life made not to works as the price that buys the right:
for, sure, then Christ must have dyed in vain. 3. Works are not necessary
simply, The necessity of good works.
necessitate medii: for then we must exclude all Infants; But the necessity of
a Precept infers a necessity of means ordinary to all capable of a Command,
that they do good, and sow to the Spirit, that they may reap of the Spirit life
everlasting, Gal. 6.8. (3.) They are necessary for the glory of God, Math.
5.16. 1 Pet. 3.1, 2. 1 Pet. 2.12. (4.) They are necessary by the law of
gratitude, which is common both to the Covenant of Works and of Grace, as we
are debtors to God for being, so to God-incarnate as ransoned ones for
everlasting life* 1 Cor. 6.20. Luke 1.75. 1 Pet. 1.18. and eternal well-being.

But such as will have our works the formal cause of our justification, they
put them in the chair of Christ's merit, and they must be meritorious as Adams
legal obedience should have been: yea, but not, but by and of gracious
estimation, God so esteeming them, say they. True: but, as is proven, neither
was Adams obedience meritorious, but by Gods estimation: Yea and Calvine gives
a power of meriting ex pacto to our works. But our works of grace are dyed and
washen in Christ's blood, and justified that they may justify us. The Scripture
speaks of justifying of persons, not of works.
But the Scripture speaks nothing of justifying of works, or not imputing sin
to our works. Antinomians dream of a freeing of both the person and works of a
justified man from Law-obligation, and that is a way indeed to justify works
of murder and adultery in David or any justified man from being sins against
the Law of God: But because our works of grace have an intrins^call power of
meriting and justifying communicated to them by the merits of Christ, they must
be far more our formal righteousness before God, then Adams righteousness
was his justification and life before God. And if our works of grace have no
power of merit or worth communicated to them from Christ's death, then must it
follow, though Christ had never dyed, our works may have the same gracious
esteem of God, the same power of meriting, of justifying and saving they now
have. Yea, and since Christ has redeemed us from our vain conversation, 1 Pet.
1.18. by his blood: Why but, as he has redeemed us from hell, How we are
redeemed from our vain conversation.
and purchased salvation to us, by giving us grace by our own good works after
conversion to redeem and justify and save our selves, so he has redeemed us
from our vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1.18. by giving us grace to do such works,
before we be redeemed from our vain conversation, and before we be converted,
as we may merit our conversion and Redemption from our vain conversation? If
it be said, he absolutely and without any condition that is required, on our
part, by his blood redeems all, whom he has given his Son Christ to die for,
from their vain conversation. 1. All mankind without exception (for by their
way he has died for them all) must be redeemed from their vain conversation
and converted: Nothing can be more false. 2. The Gospel to no purpose, and the
Gospel-Commands shall in vain crave obedience, or so much as the duty of
hearing the Gospel, from such as are not yet redeemed from their vain
conversation, or not yet converted: For that Redemption is promised to them
^bsolutely, without any condition required of them, says this way.

Obj. If works have a causative influence on the possession of glory, as
working on wages, and fighting on victory, Objections against the distinction
of right to life, and possession of life, removed.
then must they have influence on just possession also: For possession, except
it be just, is no possession, but usurpation.

Answ. Possession is essentially the enjoying of any thing pleasant, gainful,
yea or honest, whether the title be just or unjust. The Title is accidental to
the Possession.

Obj. 2. He that possesses the Crown, The title or right is accidental to the
nature of possession
possesses the Diamonds and precious stones and the worth of the Crown;
Therefore he that possesses life, possesses the right and title to it.

Answ. True: but hence it follows not but possession and right to what we
possess do differ in their nature. Nor do we properly possess the right of
possession: for the right or title is modus rei, non res, the manner of and the
due or the undue way of the possession thereof.

Obj. 3. Possession of life, and due right to life, ar both from Christ but
diverse ways.
Is not possession of eternal life from Christ, as well as the title or right
to the Crown from Him?

Ans. True, both are from Christ, but not the same way. Possession of the
Crown is the enjoying thereof, and is from free grace, and we, as willing and
sanctified agents, make use thereof: But Christ alone bought with his blood the
title and right to it. And when he gave his life for the rightful and due
possession of glory to us, we did contribute nothing either request or help to
procure the title, and the grace to enter in to the possession by faith is the
fruits also of free grace. Nor can it be denied but our good works, by which we
enter into possession of the Crown, are also the fruit of Christ's death: but
yet not so as there is any meritorious or federall power of deserving the
possession communicate to our works; Only they are made by Christ's death the
oblidged way to the possession of life.

Obj. 4. How then is there a promise of the life to come made to Godliness, 1 Timothy 4.8?

Answ. That promise is neither a promise of the Covenant of Works, for by the
deeds of the Law no flesh can be saved: Nor is it a federall promise of the
Covenant of Grace, strictly so called, except any would say that it is called a
promise especially for faith, which is special Godliness, How the promise is
made to godliness.
and the acknowledging of the truth, which is according to godliness, Tit.
1.1. and so a promise made to the Godly in so far as he is in Christ by faith,
and in Christ is the promise of life, 2 Timothy 1.1. Nor 3. is the promise of a
title and right, which is made to Christ our Ransone payer, made to our
Godliness, as if it did buy our right to life eternal, or were the price
thereof. 4. Life is promised to Believers who work, not because they work: And
5. the Lord in these only shows the order of bringing men to glory, not the
causes of the right and title to glory, except we say the mowing of the first
quarter of the Meadow is the cause of the mowing of the second, because it
makes way to the mowing of the second, and the mowing of the second quarter is
a cause of the mowing of the third, and so forth, until all be mown. As,
because God gives grace to work, to run, to use means, therefore he gives, of
free grace, the crown of life in the possession thereof.

Obj. Adams Law-obedience should only have so, and by this way been the cause
or way to the possession?

Ans. Not so, if Adam had perfected his obedience, he should have claimed life
by right of sinlesse, federall merit, ex pacto, without suiting of it by any
title of grace merited by CHRIST, not so we. Its true believers are called
(...), worthy, Rev. 3. but that is legally in Christ the Head, not that the
meritorious worth of Christ goes out of himself and renders our works
intrinsecally meritorious.

CHAP. XX. Whether or not suffered Christ for any sin against the Gospel only,
such as unbeleef final, which is conceived to be the only sin against the
Gospel. That Christ died not for all without exception. The unwarrantablenesse
of that Doctrine, how the Law commands justifying faith and repentance, how not.
IT may appear that Christ suffered not for any sin which is only against the
Gospel, such as final unbeleef: If any sins be considered in any other respect
as against the Gospel only, then Christ was not to suffer for any such sin so
considered, for where no death is threatened, none is explicitly due, and
where it is not so due to the sinner, nor should have been execute upon him,
there it could not have been due to Christ nor executed upon him, For the
Gospel threateneth not death to any sin, but final unbeleef and rebellion (and
for that Christ never died) therefore Christ died not for any sin as against
the Gospel, nor suffered that which is no where threatened. But this is most
doubtsome and cannot well stand. Its true that Christ suffered not for final
unbeleef, it being the proper sin of some reprobates, to wit, of such as hear
the Gospel, Joh. 8.21, 24. 2 These. 1.7, 8. But it seems against all Scripture
that Christ should die for these, for whose sins he dies not: And so that 1.
Christ should half and part the sins of the Reprobate, and the Scripture, I
judge shall not admit that Christ bare in his own body, on the tree, some sins
of the Reprobate, to wit, all their sins against the Law, absolutely, or
conditionally, and he that bears not either absolutely, or conditionally their
other sins against the Gospel, to wit, Christ suffers not for some sins of
reprobates, and not for others.
their final unbeleef and rebellion, for Christ was wounded and bruised for
the transgressions and iniquities of these for whom he died; He must then have
been wounded for some of their transgressions, and not wounded for other of
their transgressions. And so the sins of the Reprobates, are divided between
Christ's satisfaction upon the Cross, and their own satisfaction in Hell: But
he suffered (one may say) conditionally only for the Reprobates sins against
the Law upon the Cross, if they believe, not otherwise? Ans. The same real
satisfaction conditionally that he performed on the Cross, for the Elect, the
same (say the Authors) he performed for the Reprobate, conditionally, if either
believe, but because the one believes, it is accepted for payment for them, and
the other believes not, it is not accepted for them.

2. As there is a satisfaction performed for some sins, not for all, not for
final unbeleef, that sin then must be in the same case with the sin of the
fallen Angels, there is no sacrifice for it, nor is Christ's death applicable by
divine ordination to purge men from final unbeleef more then to purge Devils
from any sins they commit. 3. The same incorruptible price of the blood of the
Lamb that is given to ransom all from wrath, Matthew. 20.28. 1 Timothy 2.6.
conditionally, is given to buy all, for whom Christ died, from their vain
conversation, CHRIST cannot buy all from their vain conversation
conditionally, for the condition cannot be shown in Scriptur
also, 1 Pet. 1.18. that is to merit faith to them conditionally. Show us the
condition of the one more then the other. If a condition cannot be shown,
Christ must have paid the price of blood upon the Cross, for some upon
intention, for others upon another unlike intention. 4. If Christ died for all,
not because they did will and believe, but that they might will and believe;
and if Jesus suffered without the Camp, that he might sanctify the people by
his own blood, Heb. 13.12. Heb. 10.10. That he might wash them from their sins,
and make them Kings and Priests to God, Rev. 1.5, 6. That they might offer up
themselves holy living sacrifices to him, Rom 12.1. upon a great design of
love, to cleanse them with the washing of water by the Word, and present them a
glorious Church without spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.26, 27. If he gave himself for
them, that they should live to righteousness, being dead to sins, 1 Pet. 2.24.
That they might be delivered from the present evil world, Gal. 1.4. If Christ
gave himself for these, for whom he dyed, For whom Christ died, for their
unbelief and final vain conversation he died also.
that he might redeem them from all iniquity, and might purify them to himself
a peculiar people, zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14. Then did he die to redeem
all men from iniquity, even from final unbelief the great iniquity, and from
the vain conversation of final unbelief, and that they might be dead to sins,
especially the sin of final unbelief: Except it be said that Christ gave a
price to buy faith to all Reprobate and Elect, and to redeem them from final
unbelief, if all would be willing. But to commit to their free will the
efficacy of Redemption, which Prosper says, Pr^sper Carmi. de ingrat. c. 13.
Ergo hominis valida arbitrio divina voluntas. aut etiam invalida est, etc.
makes the will of God valide and effectual, and unvalide and weak, according
as the will of man: which Davenantius, Bishop of Salisburie (if that opus
posthumum have been written by him in his riper years, and revised by himself)
justly censures as the boil of Pelagian Doctrine, which Faustus Rhegiensis did
covertly teach: The Lord (says he) redeems such as are willing, being a
rewarder of their good or evil wills. Now hardly can these eschew this
Pelagianisme who teach, that the death of Christ is an universal salve
applicable, Joan. Davenantius* Episc. Salisburien. Dis^sert. de morte Christi.
Impres. 1650. c. 1. pa. 6. Hoc enim est illud uleus doctrine Pelagianae, quo^
Faustus Rhegiensis hisce verborum integ^^mentis conatur oc^ultare volentes
De^us red^^i^, (...)

Christ's death is not a remedy applicable by the Gospel Covenant, to all and
every one of mankind, so they actually believe.


by the decree of God, to save all and every one of mankind, Christian and
Pagan, so they actually believe: For it cannot be said, that Christ has died
to make all mankind saveable, upon condition of actual faith to receive
Christ preached: for so Infants, to whom Christ preached is in no tolerable
sense applicable, that way, by any ordination of God, if they actually believe,
shall be no parts of the world, and they must be excluded from Baptism. And it
cannot be said that this argument shall militate against us: for we do not
defend such a conditional applicabilitie of Christ upon condition of faith
actual in preached Christ even to infants in the Visible Church, yet we teach
they are in Covenant with God, and so God has his decree of election to Glory
and Redemption in Christ, among infants as among aged professors. 2. There is
a providentiall, and to many thousands of Pagans, who never heard, nor could
hear of Christ, an invincible impediment, and so Christ is not applicable by
Gods decree to them, upon condition of actual believing, Romans 10.14. How shall
they believe in him of whom they have not heard? It seems to me physically
impossible, that there is such a thing as the Indians worship Satan under such
a name and in such rites, if I never heard of the Indians, or of their God, or
their worship: So neither can they worship Christ in a Gospel-way, who never
heard of him. Its impossible to believe a non ens, Christ offered in the Gospel
is very nothing and so not applicable to thousands by any decree of God. 3.
This is not written in Scripture. God has decreed that Christ be Preached and
life be offered actually to all and every one of all and every Nation under
Heaven, and this opinion says that Christ died and satisfied offended Justice
for the sins of all and every one of all and every Nation under heaven, except
for final unb^leef. The Antecedent is clear by Scripture and experience. God
fulfills his decrees irresistibly: But he never sent the Preached Gospel to as
many as these Authors say he died for. This is false, that God has decreed
that Christ in the preached Gospel, and salvation may be offered to all and
every one, old and young, of all and every nation in all generations, upon
condition of actual believing
Nor can they themselves teach any such thing: Nor is this true, God has
decreed that Christ in the Preached Gospel and salvation may be offered to all
and every one, old and young, of all and every Nation, in all Generations, upon
condition of actual believing. And yet for all these, without exception,
Christ died, say they. For not to say, God never decreed that such may be
offered to infants of Pagans, for whom they say Christ died. To make a thing
that physically is possible, the object of a decree of God, we must say that
God has decreed to give the gift of tongues to all Professors and Pastors to
speak to all and every Nation in their own Language, and to make an offer of
Christ: For there be ma^y Nations, who never heard of Christ, and understand
not writing or any of the commonest Latin and Greek, and there is not any such
decree revealed in the word, and we can not but know such gifts of Tongues are
not bestowed on men, and without this it is physically impossible to
communicate the Gospel. It shall not help to say that Christians should travel
to all Countries and learn their Tongues, that so they may communicate the
Gospel; and it is their sin they do not so. And therefore God has decreed that
the Gospel may be offered and Christ applicable. Ans. 1. What shall become of
the aged, and of multitudes, for whom Christ died, who must die in Paganism,
before Christians can be so mixed and learn the Tongues of all Nations under
Heaven? 2. Did ever the Apostles to whom the Lord gave the gift of the tongues,
go to this Nation and not to this, but by the call of the Spirit, to Macedonia,
not to Bythinia, Act. 16? Is there no call of God now required for spreading of
the Gospel? Some Nations would kill them, some would persecute Christians to
death and not receive them: in the mean time, many for whom Christ died,
perish. 3. Show from Scripture that it is the duty of Christians to mix
themselves with all Nations, and to learn their Language, and that they sin in
not doing so. Nor let it be said, into what N^tion soever I come, I may say, if
thou believe in Christ thou shall be saved. Ans. 1. You can not say that,
except you P^each the Gospel to them. For they are not oblidged to believe upon
one sentence, and if you Preach the Gospel to the Nation, God ^^th some chosen
ones there, and it is no more a Pagan Nation. (...) Yo^ are to say to any one
by your way (thou art oblidged ^o believe that Christ satisfied for all thy
sins, and for the sins of the whole world) but that is a lie which you teach
Pagans as a principle of the Gospel. 3. Its false that I may say and Preach
truly such a thing to every Nation, and all in it. 4. Nor is it physically
possible that Christians can so speak to all and every old and young. Also all
is indeed referred to the free will* except the Authors say that God does
insuperably determine the will of the Elect to believe, and the places speak of
the ^fficacious redemption of the Elect only: That there be two intentions in
God in dying for all without exception, has no warrant in scripture
But so God had two intentions in Christ's dying, one general to render all
mankind saveable; another special, actually to save the Elect. But 1. who can
believe multiplied intentions in God of half redemption from wrath, and of
whole redemption from both vain conversation and ^^ath upon their bare word,
when the Scripture says Christ in suffe^ing without the Camp* suffered for the
world of Jew and Gentiles, that he might sanctify them he died for? 2. What
warrant to separate these two conjoined by God, to wit, that CHRIST should bear
on the Cross the sins of reprobate, and not intend that they should die to
sin, and be redeemed, but not from all iniquity: be loved and washen, and not
made Kings and Priests to God? That Christ should be wounded for the
transgressions of many, and yet the chastisement of his peace not be upon them?
3. The dying for all and every one cannot be conditional, in so far as the
condition is referred to dying, to wit, if they believe; for so believing must
go before dying, either really, which is manifestly false: for multitudes for
whom Christ dyed had neith^r being nor believing, when he dyed for them; The
dying for all and every one cannot be co^ditional.
Or in the prescience of God, and that destroys their principles: for so
Christ cannot have died for all and every one, foreseeing that all and every
one would believe: for he never foresaw that the Reprobate should believe. Then
must the condition of dying or Redeeming, or of paying the ransone of His blood
(these being all one) be referred to Gods accepting of Christ's death for so
many or for all, if they should believe. And the same way the Argument is as
formerly: For God accepts the paid ransom for all and every one, if they
all really believe, or if they all and every one be foreseen of God* to believe
before the Lords accepting of them. Both are false, as is evid^^t, (...) they
say in the issue what we say, and contradict themselves, to wit, that
believers, and only believers, are these for whom Christ died. We before said,
the promises are conditionally to all within the Visible Church, but so as the
condition relates only to the benefit promised, The promises are so made to
all within the Visible Church as all are in Covenant conditional.
we shall have remission and life, if we believe, but not otherwise: But now
the Covenant-promise, which is accepted of, and assented unto by Professors, in
their very profession in themselves or their p^^^nts, is absolutely made to all
within the Visible Church, and they are Covenant-wayes ingadged and say, and
profess they are the Lords people, and they take him, and no other, for th^^r
God, whether they obey and believe, or no: for a people, not right in heart,
may bind themselves in Covenant with God, De^^. 29.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. compared
with 21, 22, 23. Deuteronomy. 31.27. J^sh. 24.22. compared with Judge. 2.12, 13. So God
absolutely intends to save all for whom Christ dies, and by his death intends
to give a price to redeem them from hell and from unbelief, or their vain
conversation, 1 Pet. 1.18. from all iniquity, Tit. 2.14. from this present
evil world, Gal. 1.14. Ergo, from final unbeleef the greatest iniquity of a
present evil world. But here the case widely varies, upon no condition, that
we can read in holy Scripture, gave Christ a price, a ransom of blood to
redeem men from unbeleef and from all iniquity, this price must be absolutely
given, and grace purchased to all whose sins Christ did ^ear in the Cross that
they may bele^ve, that they may be sanctified, Heb. 13.12. 1 Pet. 2.24. 2.
Sins of Thomas, refusing to believe the resurrection of Christ, The unbeleef
of justified persons is against the Covenant of Grace, and diverse other sins
beside final unbelief, are the causes of condemnation.
and of Peter denying the Lord before men, and the Gospel-sinnes of believers,
after they are justified, and are enlightened, must be sins against the
Covenant of Grace, as well as against the Law. And the denying of Christ before
men has a sad threatening of everlasting death, Matthew. 10.32. Mar. 8.38.
annexed to it, if they repent not. And shall these within the Visible Church,
who receive not Christ, be in a harder condition then Sodom and Gomorrah,
Matthew. 10.14, 15. if no sins against the Gospel be punished with eternal death
but only unbelief? Yea the Scripture says such as live in the Visible Church
and are in Covenant with God, not only for final unbelief are condemned, but
because they are unrighteous, fornicators, idolaters, adulterers, 1 Cor. 6.9.
whoremongers, unclean, covetous persons, Ephesians. 5.5, 6. murderers, sorcerers,
dogs, liers, Rev. 21.8. Rev. 22.15. for all their ungodly deeds and hard
sp^eches, Jude v. 15. 2 Pet. 2.17. for all disobedience, 1 Cor. 4.5. Matthew.
12.36, 37. they are everlastingly punished. And if Christ have suffered on the
Cross for all the sins of the Reprobate, how are they judged and condemned
for these sins, as the Scripture says? And what Scripture says they are
condemned for the guilt of only unbelief: or that Pagans are condemned for
Gospel-unbelief, where as Sodom, Gomorrah, Mat. 10.15. the men of Niniveh, Mat.
12.41. Tyrus and Sidon, Mat. 11.21. and such as have sinned without the Law,
Romans 2.12, 13, 14 15. are freed of Gospel-guiltinesse, and condemned for sins
against the Law, and yet this same way says that there is a Gospel Covenant
made with all, even thousands of Pagans who never heard of a Gospel, never
ingadged themselves by any profession to take the Lord for their God in Christ,
yet Christ bare their sins on the Tree, and made his blood applicable to them
by a Gospel Covenant, if they shall believe. Whence they must all break the
Covenant of Grace, of which many of them never heard, and be condemned for no
sins but the last act of Sodomy, gluttony, parricide, for the Gospel
threatteneth not death to any sin but to final unbelief, say they. There are
not any sins committed against the Gospel, All sins against the Gospel, even
final unbeleefe, are also against the Law and against God Redeemer, Immanuel.
but they are also sins against the Law: because God incarnate and Immanuel
is God, and leaves not off to be God consubstantiall with the Father, because
he assumes the nature of man. Then as the first Command oblidgeth Abraham to
sacrifice his son Isaac, when God shall reveal that Command, and Moses and the
people are by that first Command to believe their deliverance out of Egypt, and
so if the fir^^ Command oblidge us to believe and obey all Commands and
Promises and Threatenings of God, revealed and to be revealed, because the Lord
is God, then must Christ God Redeemer and Immanuel be believed by this Command,
and so final unbelief and final despising of Christ God Redeemer is as
directly against the first Command (and so not a sin only threatened and
forbidden in the Gospel) as simple unbelief and simple despising of Christ God
Redeemer; For the believing and final believing, and unbelief and unbelief,
continuing to the end, differ in the accident of duration, not in nature and
essence, As a Rose that grows for a month only, and a Rose of the same nature
that grows and flourishes for three months. Otherwise Christ could not have
pronounced Peter blessed, (...) Mat. 16.17. in the present, Dicique beatus ante
obitum nemo supremaque funera debet.
for believing in the present: for he should not have been blessed to the end:
as Solon said of his blessed man, And this cannot but subvert our faith, crush
the peace, hope, consolation of weak Believers, to whom undoubtedly the promise
of perseverance i^ ^bsolutely made, Jer. 31.31, 35. Jer. 32.39, 40. Isai.
54.10. Isai. 59.20, 21. Joh. 4.14. Joh. 10.27, 28.

2. If there be as formal a transgression of the first Command in final
unbelief, as in unbelief simply considered, and in the other sins of Judas and
other Apostates. Why but as Christ bare in his body the sins of unbelief and
satisfied for them, he must so also bear the sins of final rebellion and
unbelief? And shall we believe that Christ paid a satisfactory ransone of
blood upon the cross for the yesterdayes unbelief of Judas, and not for the
days unbelief?

If it be said, No man can break the Gospel Covenant, for it is an everlasting
Covenant. Ans. Its an everlasting Covenant, but yet all who sin against the
commanding love and authority of our Immanuel, especially they so professing to
be his, do truly break the Covenant: but they so break it, as it leaves not off
to be the Covenant of life both to the breakers, if they repent and believe,
and to others: for so is the nature of this Covenant, How the Covenant of Grace
is everlasting and yet broken by men.
and so it is everlasting, but the Covenant of Works if once broken, ceases to
be a Covenant of life for ever, because the nature of it is, to admit of no
repentance at all. Obj. Does not the Law command the sinner offending God to
mourn and be humbled, and confess? Ans. It does. But it injoines not
repentance as a way of life, with a promise of life to the repenter, as the Law
or as a Covenant of Works commands to its native and proper Covenanters
obedience and every single act of obedience as a way to obtain the reward of a
Law-life, The Law commands repentance but not with a promise of life, or as a
way to life.
nor does the Law as a Covenant of Works command justifying faith and reliance
upon God Redeemer, or Immanuel: but rather as the Law of Nature, or as the Law
of thankfulness to a Ransoning and Redeeming God, the Law does this. Though in
a special Covenant way the Gospel command faith in Christ.

Obj. But final unbeleef as against God Redeemer and so considered is the only
breach of the Covenant of Grace: He that believes not is condemned, as the man
that rejects the only remedy of sin.

Ans. The only breach of the Covenant of Grace, is too narrow to be the adequat
cause of damnation, for many Pagans who never heard of Christ and are under no
Covenant, How final unbeleef is the only cause of condemnation and to whom,
and how not.
but that of Works, are condemned not for not believing in him of whom they
never heard, Romans 10.14. nor for breach of the Covenant of Grace, but for
breach of the Covenant of Works. 2. Unbelief may be called the nearest cause of
damnation to such as (...) within the Visible Church, as the wilful refusing
of medicine which only and infallibly would heal the sick man of such a
disease, is the cause of his death, but is the Moral cause. For the disease it
self is the Physical cause, or the material cause of the man's death. And
without doubt, uncleanness, covetousness, sorcerie, lying, idolatry, etc.
and many the like sins, beside unbeleef, are, 1 Cor. 6.9. Ephesians. 5.5, 6. Rev.
21.8. Rev. 22.15. Jud. 6.7, 8. 2 Pet. 2.17.10, 11, 12, 13, 2 These. 2.9, 10. 1
Pet. 4.3, 4. 2 Pet. 2.2, 3, 4, 5. the causes of the damnation of many visible
professors, where as this way says Christ did satisfy upon the Cross for
all th^se sins, and the damned of visible professors suffer in hell only for
final unbeleef. And it seems unjust that both Christ and they should suffer
satisfactory punishment for these same sins done against the Law: And as
strange that Ch^^st should die for any, and not die for their sins, since the
Scripture uses the word of dying for sins, Romans 4.25 delivered from our
sins, Christ is a p^opitiation for our sins, and (the same way) not for
ours only, but for the sins of the whole world; For whom Christ died, he died
for their sins, and for all their sins.
he died for sinners, Heb. 2.17. that he might make reconciliation for the
sins of the people: that is, for the sinful people, or sinners, Heb. 9.28.
so Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many: That is to bear the sins
of the sinful many that he died for, Heb. 10.12. But this man after he had
offered one sacrifice for sin, sat down on the right hand of God: that is,
after he had offered a sacrifice for sinners. 1 Pet. 3.18. Christ once suffered
for sin, that is, for sinners, 1 Cor. 15.3. I delivered unto you how Christ
died for our sins, that is, for the persons of us sinners. 1 John 3.5. He was
manifested to take away our sins. 1 John 4.10. Herein is love -- that he sent
his Son to be a propitiation for our sins. Rev. 1.5. To him that loved us,
and washed us from our sins -- be glory. Gal. 1.4. He gave himself for our
sins. Now it must not be asserted, but proven that in all these places where
he is said to be a propitiation for the sins of the world; and has taken away
our sins* speaking (as these Authors say) of the whole Visible Church, and
not of the elect only that Christ has died and by his death has taken away
some sins, and has suffered for some sins, and not for all sins, not for
the final unbeleef of sinners, if it be said, that we cannot teach that Christ
suffered for final unbeleef, we grant it: But then we say that Christ suffered
not for final unbeleevers and for the other sins of final unbeleevers, since
suffering for sins and for persons that are sinners, to bring them to God, 1
Pet. 3.18. are conjoined. And God was in Christ reconciling the world to
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, 2 Cor. 5.19. Therefore there
must be a pardoned and a justified world, and so a truly blessed world, as
Paul and David teach, Psalm. 3^.1, 2. Romans 4. and so a loved, John. 3.16. and
chosen world followed with the separating love of God to man which saves some
foolish ones and serving diverse lusts, and saves not others; and so there must
be a love and mercy of predestination, amor (...), not common to all the world;
as is clear, Tit. 3.3, 4, 5. Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3, There is a world reconciled to
whom God imputes no sin, and therefore all the world of Pagans and Infidels
cann^t be such as Christ died for, and whose final unbelief he sati^fied for.
4, 5. We seek a warrant of Gods not imputing to this loved world their
trespasses against the Law, and of his imputing to the same world the
trespasses of rebellion and final unbelief: And how Christ's blood, shed for
persons, both reconciles them to God, and leaves them in wrath, imputes not
their trespasses to them, and makes them blessed, as David says, Ps. 32.1. and
imputes their final unbelief to them, and leaves them under a curse: Nor shall
it help the matter to say that final unbelief may be considered as both against
the Law, and as only forbidden in the Gospel. And in the former respect Christ
has suffered for it, not in the latter. For if the (...), the contrariety
between final unbelief and the first Command, as it is a rebellion against God
manifested in the flesh, be satisfied for by Christ on the cross; How can it
condemn the person, as sure it does? Joh. 3.18, 36. Joh. 8.21, 24. It cannot be
said that Christ died for final unbeleef, so we believe.

2. What special (...) and repugnancie to the Law of God is there in final
unbelief, that is not a repugnancie to the Covenant of Works and Grace both?
And what repugnancie to the Covenant of Grace which is not also contrair to the
Law? This I grant (which I desire the Reader carefully to observe) the Law and
the Covenant of Grace do not one and the same way command faith, The Law and
the Covenant of Grace do not, one and the same way command faith and forbid
unbeleef.
and forbid unbelief. I speak now of the Covenant of Works and of the Covenant
of Grace as they are two Covenants specifically and formally different.

For 1. the Law as the Law commands 1. Faith in the superlative degree, as it
does all acts of obedience, and so does it Gospel repentance. Because the Law
commands all obedience most exact and perfect, and condemns faith in the
positive degree, though sincere and lively, as sinfully deficient. The Gospel
does only require sincere faith, and condemns not for the want of the degrees
of faith most perfect, though the Law of thankfulness to the Ransone-payer
(which Law is common to both Covenants) require that we believe in the highest
degree, because Christ has expressed to us the greatest love, Joh. 3.16, Joh.
15.13.

2. The Law as the Law requires faith not final only, but faith in Immanuel
for ever, and that we be born with the Image of God that we believe at all
times, under the pain of damnation. But, the Covenant of Grace, because it
admits of repentance, and holds forth the meekness, forb^arance, and
longa^i^itie of Christ, is satisfied with faith at any time, or what hour of
the day they shall be brought in.

3. The Law requires faith, with the promise of Law-life: The Covenant of Grace
requires faith, promises grace to believe, with promise of a Gospel-life.

4. The Law requires not faith in Christ with sinners Covenant-ways as a work
to be legally rewarded, for it finding all sinners, and all by nature,
Covenant-breakers, cannot indent with them that have broken the Covenant, to
promise life to them by tennor of the Covenant, which now cease to be a
Covenant of life, and cannot but condemn, and is now rendered impossible to
j^stifie and save, How the reprobate are under the Covenant of Works.
by reason of the weakness of the flesh, Romans 8.3. All the reprobate then are
this way under the Covenant of Works, that they are (as it were) possible
Covenanters liable to suffer the vengeance of a broken Covenant, but not
formally active Covenanters as Adam was. But if Christ suffer for final
unbeleef, as it is against the Law as the Law, how is it charged upon
reprobates as a sin against the Gospel only? Since no wrong done to God
Red^emer can be any thing but a sin against God, and a ^reach of the first
Command. I deny not but final unbeleef has an aggravation that it is the
nearest bar and iron gate between the sinner and the only Savior of sinners,
but yet the putting of such a bar is a sin against the Law. Neither can it be
said that only final unbeleef is the only meritorious cause of damnation to
such as hear the Gospel. For beside final unbelief there is also a contrariety
betwixt the murders, Sodomies, etc. of professors and the Law for which they
suffer in hell eternally, Rev. 21.8. c. 18.7.

Quest. Whether does the Lord Mediator as Mediator, command the same good works
in the Covenant of Grace which are commanded in the Covenant of Works?

CHAP. XXI.
Ans. ACcording to the matter of the thing commanded, qu^ad rem mandatam, he
commands the same, and charges upon all and every one the moral duty even as
Mediator, for he cannot loose the least of these Commandments, but simply they
are not the same, quoad modum mandandi. It shall not be needful to dispute
whether they be commands differing in nature: For not only does the Mediator
command obedience upon his interposed Authority as Lawgiver and Creator, but
also as Lord Redeemer upon the motive of Gospel-constraining love. In which
notion he calls love the keeping of his Commandments (if they love him, Joh.
14.) the new Commandment of love.

Q. 2. Does the Lord Mediator, in the Covenant of Grace, command the same good
works to all, the same way?

Ans. Romans 3.19. The Lord, in the Law, must speak one way to these that are
under the Law, that is, under the jurisdiction and condemning power of the Law:
and a far other way to these that are not under the Law.

CHRIST speaks to reprobats in the Visible Church, even when the matter of the
command is Evangelick, Christ one way lays Eva^gelick commands upon the Elect,
and another way on the Reprobate.
as to non-confederates of grace in a Law way, and in a Law intention. For he
cannot bid them obey upon any other ground then legislative authority, not upon
the ground of Redemption-love bestowed on them, or that he died out of love to
save all and every one: For we disclaim that ground; or because he died out of
a special design to save them as his chosen ones. For there is no ground for
that until we believe* But they are to obey upon the ground of
Redemption-love, so they first believe and fiducially rely upon Christ the
Savior of all. But he commands Law-obedience to his chosen even as Mediator.
(1.) Upon a Gospel intention to chase them to Christ, Gal. 3.23. (2.) When they
are come to b^dge them in, with Law-threatning to adhere, in a Godly fear, more
closely to Christ. But the Lord commands no believer to believe hell in the
event to be their reward, but to believe perseverance and life, but hell in the
deserving. Hence that, 1 Timothy 1.9. The Law (...), is not made for the righteous
(to condemn them: as if God thereby opened up to them their doom) but for the
lawless, etc. to let them be damned and see their damnation.

CHAP. XXII. The differences in the promise of the Covenants.
Quest. WHat is the special difference of the promise of the two Covenants?

Ans. It is known that only life eternal is promised in the Law, if a right to
the things of this life was promised to Adam, it is like he behoved to complete
his course of obedience, and merit a right legal to the herbs and fruit of the
earth, beside the right he had by gift of Creation, ex dono Creatoris, non jure
operum.

But 2. There was no promise made to Adam of perseverance, and so no promise
made to him of influences to work in Adam to will and to do; so the influences
by which he obeyed was, purum donum Creatoris, a mere gift of the Creator, not
a gift of either the grace of Christ, or a promised grace, though in a large
sense, it may be called a grace, or donum gratis datum: For God gave that
influence upon no obligation. Now that it was not a grace promised is evident
by Adams fall: for God, who is true, fulfills his promises. 2. Augustine and
our Divines teach, Dedit Deus posse ut vellet, non velle ut posset, a power to
stand, but not the gift of actual perseverance. If any say that the Lord
promised to Adam perseverance conditionally (which in one sense is true, in
another false) if he pleased, in that he gave to him all necessaries required
for actual standing. Ans. 1. This is to teach that perseverance was promised
the same way, in the Covenant of Works, that Arminius says it is promised in
the Covenant of Grace, and that the free will was absolute lord of standing and
falling, and to deny God to be the nearest cause of our standing and
persevering in either, the one or the other, and to bid us first and last
sacrifice to our own free will. 2. Willing perseverance actual cannot be
promised conditionally: Conditional perseverance was not promised to Adam.
for the question should be, Upon what condition does the Lord promise to work
in Adam actual perseverance, if he should be willing to persevere? But the
question shall remain, whether that willingness to persevere, since it is the
greatest part, if not whole perseverance, be promised or not; If it be not
promised, the contrair whereof they hold, if it be promised conditionally, the
question shall recur, what shall be the condition, and another condition then
the willingness of the will to persevere cannot be given, and so the argument
shall rise against it self, and the issue must be, God gave to Adam actual
perseverance, if he should be willing to persevere, that is, he gives to Adam
perseverance, if he give him perseverance; for willingness to persevere is
perseverance, or a very large part thereof.

3. But persevering grace and so influence of grace to persevere is promised in
the Covenant of Grace, Jer. 31.35. that they shall continue in Covenant, more
sure then the night and the day. Jer. 32.40. I will put my fear in their
hearts, The considerable differences betwixt the influences of God given to
Adam for his standing in obedience, and these influences given to us in the
second Adam
that they shall not depart from me. The meaning cannot be, I will give them a
power never to depart from me, if they will: For so nothing is more promised in
Christ to the second Adams heirs, then to Adam and the Angels that fell, for
the like, say they, was promised to them. And 2. If notwithstanding of that
fear both promised and put in the heart, and in the will, yet lubrick free will
may stand or fall and remain indifferent to either, then the sense shall be
thus, I will make an everlasting Covenant, I will put my fear in their heart,
by which they may either depart from me, and turn apostates, or not depart from
me, but persevere: But so the Covenant, made with Adam and the fallen Angels,
should be an everlasting Covenant, and yet it was broken. For the Image of God
of it self inclined Adam and the fallen Angels never to depart from God: For
sure, Adams fear, being a part of that Image, which sanctified his affections,
inclined him (but not undeclinably and immutably) not to depart from God, and
not to hearken to the lying Serpents suggestions. But it is not that new
Covenant-fear promised and given in the second ADAM, Ier. 32.39, 40.

4. That these influences were purchased by Christ's death is clear, because
they are the nearest causes of our actual believing and coming to Christ, of
faith and perseverance that are given freely, and repentance and faith are
given of Christ, Acts. 5.31. Zech. 12.10. 2 Timothy 2.25. Phil. 1.29. Ephesians. 2.1,
2, 3. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. Ephesians. 1.17, 18, 19, 20. John 6.44, 45.

5. So obedience to the Covenant of Works was Adams own. (2.) And came from his
concreated self (the Image of God that was his own) by a common influence, and
neither was the Image of God, nor the influences of God acts of free grace, or
the purchase of grace properly so called.

(2.) Adam had a Law-claim to the Crown without sin, if he had continued in
obedience, The obedience of Adam only a duty, not a promised benefit, our new
obedience is both a duty* and a promised benefit.
and did merit ex pacto life eternal, our new Covenant obedience in habitual
and actual performance is so a duty, that it is also promised and a benefit
merited to us by the death of Christ, whereas Adams obedience was purum
officium, non officium promissum, as our Gospel-obedience is.

6. Hence in obedience distinguish two. 1. The nature of obeence. 2. The worth
and excellency of obedience. The more the obedience be from our selves, the
more it partakes of the nature of obedience. Hence four kinds of obedience are
to be considered. 1. Christ's obedience was the most legal obedience, and also
the most perfect, Four kinds of obediences.
for he obeyed most of his own, of any, from his own will purely, Ioh. 10.18.
Mat. 26.^9, 42, 44. His own blood, Hebr. 9.14. Rev. 1.5. My blood, says he,
Matthew. 26.28. He gave his life a ransom, Matthew. 20.28. He gave himself a
ransom, 1 Timothy 2.6. By himself he purged our sins, Heb. 1.3. Gave himself for
his Church, Ephesians. 5.25. Offered himself, Heb. 9.14. And therefore the
satisfaction that he made was properly his own. Its true the life, flesh and
blood which he offered to God, as common to the three Persons, was equally the
life, flesh, blood of God by way of Creation and efficiency: For God as God
created His Manhood, and gave him a body, but that Manhood, in abstracto, was
not the offering, but all these, in concreto, and the self, including the value
and the dignity, was not the Fat^ers, not the Spirits, but most properly his
own, and the Sons only by way of personal termination and subsistence. The
excellency of the obedience of Jesus Christ how it was his own, properly
meritorious.
1. There are contradictory terms affirmed of this holy self the Son, and of
the Spirit and the Father. The Son was God incarnate. 2. The son offered
himself, his own life, his own blood to God for our sins. Neither the Father
nor the Spirit at all is God incarnate, neither Father nor Spirit offered his
own life, his own blood to God; Neither the Father nor the Spirit has (to
speak so) a personal or terminative dominion over the flesh and blood of
Christ. 2. Christ was in no sort oblidged to empty himself, and cannot be under
a jus or obligation to the Creator or the creature. Of free love and his own
will he became Medi^^^^ God Man, and being crea^ed man, and having said ( here
am I to do thy will) having stric^en hands with God as Surety of the Covenant,
none more oblidged, being holy and true; The obedience of CHRIST debtfull and
not d^btful in diverse respects.
And therefore though Christ-Man was most strictly tied to give the Father
obedience, yet he was not oblidged to give him such and such obedience, so
noble, so excellent, from a personal Union: for Christ God cannot properly
come under any obligation. Hence the obedience of Christ is most meritorious,
because maxim indebita, in regard of the Godhead most undebtfull, and yet
obedience most debtfull in regard of the Man Christ. 3. Most from his own will
personally considered, the affection, love, the bended will, highest delight to
obey, lay personally near to the heart and holy will of Christ God: With desire
have I desired to eat this Passover. He went foremost in the journey to
Jerusalem, when he was to suffer. Much of the internal propension of the will
makes much and (as it were) heightens and intends the nature of obedience, so
that Christ's and our obedience have scarce an univocall definition. 4. He gave
and restored more glory to offended justice, by such a noble, incomparably
excellent death, then Adam and all his Sons took of glory from God: Properly
so called satisfact^o^ is performed by Christ.
therefore against impure Socinus it is a most real satisfaction and
compensation, where glory by obeying and suffering is restored in liew of the
glory taken away. All that Socinians say, that God cannot be a loser, and needs
not glory, and nothing can be taken from him, and nothing can be given to him,
proves nothing but that it is not such a satisfaction as one creature performs
to another, nor is it a satisfaction that brings profit to God: For can a man
be profitable to the Almighty? Nor such a satisfaction as eases a disquieted
mind; Which proves not Christ to be a Savior painted in a mere copy to us,
and only a godly Martyr who saves only by preaching and witnessing, and not
by a most real and eminently clear satisfaction.

2. The Elect Angels next to Christ gave obedience in their Law course, but not
so properly of their own as Christ, for some discriminating and strengthening
grace they had from Christ Mediator their head, Angels obedience properly
obedience that ^s of grace and not their own.
Col. 2.10. that they should not fall, and something from the Election of
Grace, which do not necessarily agree to the Covenant of Works, which they
performed without sin, and the more extrinsecall help from grace, the less
merit, so far is grace from being, as Jesuits say, the essential requisite
of merit, that the work is less ours, and so the less meritorious, that it
has grace. Let not any say then Christ's obedience that came from the fullness
of the Spirit without measure (...), must so be less meritorious, Grace
diminishes of the nature of merite^ from the obedience.
which is absurd, for the reason why grace in Angels, and men who are mere
creatures diminishes the nature of merit, is, because grace is not their own,
nor their proper due, but supernatural or preternaturall, and so hurts the
nature of the merit, but to the meriting person Christ-God-Man nothing is
supernatural, nothing extrinsecall, nothing not his own: Grace is his own as
it were by a sort of personal dominion, not to say that the Man Christ as man
did not merit, yet as man he was born sinless and with the full Image of God.

3. Adam gave more faintly obedience, more indeed of his own, but it was less
obedience, Of Adams obedience how proper it was.
and less will in it, then the obedience of Angels, and had he continued, his
obedience had been proper obedience; but this is to be observed, none did ever,
actu secundo, and by the only help of simple nature attain Justification and
Salvation by the simple Covenant of Works, but men and evil Angels fell under
both, though that was a possible Covenant and holy and spiritual, yet God set
it up to be an inlet to pure Justice in the reprobate Angels, and so to free
grace in elect men.

Gospel-obedience has less of the nature of obedience, then Adams obedience.
4. The obedience of faith, or Gospel-obedience, in the fourth place, has less
of the nature of obedience, then that of Adam, or of the Elect Angels, or that
of Christ's. Its true we are called obedient Children, and they are called the
Commandments of Christ, and Christ has taken the Moral Law and made use of
it in an Evangelick way, yet we are more (as it were) patients, in obeying
Gospel-Commands, not that we are mere patients, as Libertines teach* for grace
makes us willing, but we have both supernatural habits and influences of grace
furnished to us from the Grace of Christ, who has merited both to us, and so
in Gospel-obedience we offer more of the Lords own, and less of our own,
because he both commands, and gives us grace to obey. The Law is made (as it
were) Gospel to elect believers and the Gospel Law to reprobates.
And so to the elect believer the Law is turned in Gospel, he by his Grace
fulfilling (as it were) the righteousness of the Law in us by begun new
obedience, Romans 8.4. and to the reprobate the Law remains the Law, and the
Gospel is turned in the Law, for all conditional promises to the Reprobate,
though in tea^ms Evangelick, yet are Law to them ( if Cain do well he shall be
saved) (if Judas believe he shall be saved) because God by Grace fulfills not
the promise in them. Obj. 1. Then shall Gospel-obedience be of less worth then
Law-obedience, which flows not from Grace, which Christ has merited by his
death? Ans. Its not denied, but it is obedience, so the Scripture, Heb. 5.9.
Romans 1.5. Romans 6.17. Romans 16.19. 2 Cor. 10.5. 1 Pet. 1 5. Act. 6.9. Act. 5.32,
37. But (2.) It has less of the nature of obedience, but more excellency. Who
would say Peter laboring in the Vineyard of John for wages, does properly
obey, if we suppon that Peter has from John, not only soul, will, body, arms,
and legs, but the inward infused principle of willingness, the habit and art
of dressing Vines, the nearest propension and determination of will to work, so
have we in the Gospel, but in the Law, though the Lord who gives being, does
also give his Image to Adam, and his influence to obey, yet the Image of God is
concreated, and Adams own, grace especially merited by Christ is supervenient
and a mere stranger to us, and the influence, though it did predetermine Adams
will, yet it is connaturall as it were, naturae debita, not merited by Christ's
death, and so we give more of our own, when we give the fruit of Creation which
God has bestowed on the Pismire and the Worm, then when we give the obedience
of Grace. 2. The obedience of Adam though rational and persuasive, there being
a lamp of light in the mind, yet came from the feared authority of the
Lawgiver under the pain of damnation, the Gospel-obedience is by the word,
Act. 2.37. is by way of persuasion: Obedience from Law and from love how
differenced
Christ says not, Peter, thou art afraid of hell, feed my Lambs, but, Peter,
loves thou me, feed my Lambs: For a Law-obeyer is not to believe life eternal
but in so far as he shall keep the Law perfectly, the Gospel obeyer so obeyes
as he believes deliverance from wrath and life eternal, but his believing is
not reckoned to him, (...), of Law-debt, but of love and Grace-debt: See Romans
4.4. Matthew. 6.12. these promises, 1 Timothy 4.8. Luke 12.31. Matthew. 19.29. are
exponed by the promises made to the overcomer, Rev. 2. Rev. 3. which is by
faith, 1 John 5.4, 5. 3. But it is most true, Gospel-obedience has these
excellencies. 1. It is a plant of a more noble Vine coming from the merit of
blood, yet is not our obedience comparable to Christ's; for a work of Law or
Gospel Grace has a necessary reference to no wages of its own nature, but only
by the interveening of the free pleasure of God. But Christ's obedience
intrinsecally from the excellent dignity of the person has a meriting virtue.
2. It works more eminently then nature: Gospel obedience from grace how
excellent and how far above civili^ty in its fairest luster.
It is a pillar to support sowning nature, and acts in more excellent subjects,
in CHRIST, in the Elect Angels, in the Redeemed ones and makes them stones of
another nature, and this is the handie-work of CHRIST, Isai. 54.11. I will lay
thy stones with fair colors, and lay thy foundations with Saphires. v. 12. I
will make thy windows of Agats, and thy gates of Carbuncles, and all thy
borders of pleasant stones: What do moral men that work on clay and make clay
pots all their life and know nothing of the actings of saving Grace. Fairest
civility is but roustie iron the basest of Metals: and they sweat and hammer
upon Law-works being strangers to Christ, and his gold. O! what a difference
between praying and hearing out of discretion, and by necessity of the office,
and praying in the Holy Ghost, and hearing in faith.

CHAP. XXIII.
Q. What sort of doing the Law requires?

The Scripture is clear, that consumate, and continued in doing to the end is
required by the Law. Tremellius and Trostius in Syria. Ver. Gal. 3. Qui non
fecerit omnia. (...)
Paul interpreting Moses, Deuteronomy. 26.27. Gal. 3.10. Cursed be every one, (...)*
who continues not in all that are written in the Law to do them. Deuteronomy. 26.27.
Cursed is he who shall not confirm. It is a word they use in inacting of Laws,
when we say, Be it statuted and ordained: the word in Piel is three times in
the Book of Esther, to ordain by a Law: Which clearly says that the Covenant
of Works was a work of justice and such a time God set to Adam, so as to the
end he was to run it out, Hyeron^* Maledictus qui non permanet.

LXX. (...). Chald. Para. Qui non permanserit. Syria. Versio. Maledictus qui
non per^^iceri^. Arab. Versio. Qui non confirmabit. B^za, Gal. 3.10. Qui non
firmarit* Magna vis Verbi Jakim. Pagn^. and Ari. Montanus, Qui non statuerit.


but how long he was a viator or traveller in his course of obedience no man
knows

CHAP. XXIII. Whether faith as lively and true, or faith as continuing to the
end, be the condition of the Covenant of Grace?
THese, who in all points* as in this, make this new Covenant a Covenant of
Works, contend that faith as enduring to the end, must be the condition of the
new Covenant. 1. Because the promise of the reward. 2. The reward is given to
him that endures to the end. And this faith (say they) is the adequat and
compleat-condition of the Covenant of Grace as full and consumate obedience to
the end in degrees and parts.

2. But faith as lively and sincere is the condition of the Covenant, the
nature and essence of this faith is to continue to the end, but continuance to
the end is an accident all condition of this only essential condition of the
Covenant, faith quae, which endures to the end, but not qua aut quatenus, as it
endures to the end is that which saves us and justifies us as the condition of
the Covenant. 1. Faith as lively units us to Christ and justifies whether it be
come to the full perfection or not. Otherwise 1. no man should be ingrafted in
Christ as br^nches in the Vine Tree, no man partakers of the Divine nature, no
man quickened, but he that dies in final believing: Where^s, Joh. 5.24. he
that believes before his final continu^nce to the end, (...), Faith as
lively, not as enduring to the end the condition of the new Covenant.
has passed from death to life and shall never come to condemnation. And in
this is the difference of the condition of the Covenant of Works, that Adam had
no right to life by one or two the most sincere acts and highest in measure,
except he continue, (...) (as the Law says, Deuteronomy. 26.27. Gal. 3.10.) to the
end, otherwise at the first act of obedience perfect in degrees and parts, God
behoved by Covenant (except the Lord should break the first Covenant himself,
before man sin, which is blasphemous) to have given him confirming grace and
the reward of life; but the condition of the Covenant of Grace is that, He that
believes, Joh. 3.36. (...), is not condemned, yea is freed from all
condemnation, Romans 8.1. and (...) has life being really un^ted as the member
to the head, as the branch to the tree, mystically, as the wife to the husband,
legally, as the debtor and the surety becomes one person in Law, the sum one
and not two. 1 John 5.11. And this is the witness that (...) he has given us
life eternal, and this is in the Son* 12. He that has the Son has life: He
that believes has the Son dwelling in his heart by faith, Ephesians. 3.17.

2. Faith, before it come to seed and full harvest brings solid peace and
comfort and saves: Faith in the first lively act saves and justifies.
So Christ to the blind man, Luke 18.42. thy faith (...), has saved thee, not
a bare miraculous faith, but that which apprehends remission of sins, as he
speaks to the woman who did wash his feet with tears, Luke 7.50. and to the
paralytick man, Mat. 9.2. seeing their faith, be of good cheer, go in peace,
thy sins are forgiven. If they be but forgiven conditionally, so they believe
to the end, whereas they may fall away. 1. What comfort and good cheer? 2. What
peace being justified by faith, Romans 5.1? 3. What glory in tribulation, Romans 5.
have they more then Judas the son of perdition? What Covenant of life and of
peace are we in? What difference between our Religion and the Religion of
Cicero, Seneca, and of all Pagans, if Christ furnish not to us solid unshaken
help and consolation? And what a trembling hope have they that they be, and are
to fear they shall be in the condition of Apostate Angels to morrw? What says
then Christ, Mat. 9.22. Mark 5.34. Mark 10.52. Luke 8.58. Luke 5.20, 24. Mark
5.34. Mark 9.24. yea and much more says the Holy Ghost of our case, even of
everlasting consolation, 2 Thessal. 2.16. strong consolation, Hebr. 6.18. all
comfort, 2 Cor. 1.4. lively hope, 1 Pet. 1.4. Heb. 6.18, 19. then Heathens can
say, Nay otherwise not so much, for they promise not so much. 3. Our lively
faith is to believe our perseverance in lively faith as promised to us, Jer.
32.39, 40. Isai. 54.10. Isai. 59.20, 21. Joh. 10.27, 28. Joh. 4.14. 1 Pet. 1.3,
4, 5. Joh. 11.26, 27. As we believe life eternal, and that purchased by the
merit of Christ's death, the one as well as the other, then faith as final
cannot be the condition; And who can think that God commands faith in God
Immanuel in the Covenant of Works? But faith in God Immanuel to the end is not
commanded in the Covenant of Works, but only in the Covenant of Grace. 4. Faith
justifies and saves as sincere, be it great or small: but if it justify not
and save not, but as it endures to the end, then no man is completely justified
and saved and united to Christ, until he die.

Since faith (as all other graces in a child of God) is imperfect and still
growing, 2 Pet. 3.18. and we are to pray, Lord increase our faith, none shall
be justified and saved, but he that has the greatest faith, if faith only,
which endures to the end, be the condition of the Covenant, and such a faith as
grows and indures to the end: For take one who for twenty years believes,
the first two years he being united to Christ, has right to Christ, Joh. 15.1,
2, 3, 4, 5. Joh. 17.21, 22. Joh. 14.16. Joh. 16.7, 8, 13. Joh. 4.14. Joh. 7.37,
38, 39. he shall not be judged, not condemned, has passed from death to life,
shall never die, Joh. 3.36. 1 John 5.11, 12. Joh. 4.24. Joh. 11.25, 26. then
should he die the end of the first year of his believing, by the Scripture, he
must be saved, else he must be damned, who yet died in true faith and yet never
fell away, which were strange: But by this opinion either the remnant sound
believing should be no condition of justification and salvation, because the
man is justified and saved without it, and the faith of one or two years gave
him right to Christ and saved him? Ergo the remnant faith is not a condition of
the Covenant, but a persevering by grace promised and a persevering in that
faith, as also by their way who make persevering faith the only condition of
the Covenant of Grace 1. Faith and works are confounded: whereas to be saved by
faith is to be saved before, and to be justified before we can do good works,
and the jus or title to righteousness and salvation, coming only from the
price and Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, is not more or less, and grows
not more then the worth of the ransone of the blood called the blood of God,
Acts 20.28. does grow, and it is to be justified by grace and by faith, and
then works come in as the fruit of our justification and salvation, How
boasting is excluded by grace.
Ephesians. 2. Ye are not saved by works, lest any man should boast, in a
righteousness of his own, coming from no merit of Christ, which buyeth
determinating grace, and indeclinably leads and bows the will; Otherwise we may
boast, that is, glory in the Lord, who works all-our works for us, Psalm.
34.2. Isa. 41.16. Isa. 26.12. The salvation and righteousness is the gift of
God. What then shall be the room of works? He answers, No room at all as causes
of justification and salvation, by an excellent antanaclasis, Boidius Comment.
Ephesians. 2.
as learned Trochrig: for he answers, We are his workmanship created in Christ
Jesus to good works, which God has before ordained that we should walk in
them. Then by grace we have the full right to righteousness and salvation by
the ransom of blood, which is Christ's. Papists and Arminians dare not bring in
Evangelick works or faith as an Evangelick work here, though they be too hold.
2. Being once made the creation of God in Christ, and having obtained right by
the blood of Christ to salvation, we walk by his grace in good works as leading
us to the possession of the purchased inheritance. 3. The Authors of this stand
for the Apostasy of the Saints, and they cannot eschew it who make this final
faith* that takes in in its essence good works as the soul of it or charity (as
Papists say) as the form of it, the only condition of the Covenant.

Quest. But is not life eternal given and promised only to faith which
continues to the end? Ans. Faith is considered two ways. In its nature. 2. In
its duration and* existence. As to the former, saving faith is of that nature
that it is apt to endure, it has a sort of immortality, so the promise in
titulo and jure, is made to that faith only which is of that nature that it
must endure to the end, and the promise of life and remission is not made to a
saving faith under the accident of enduring to the end, or for the years,
suppon thirty or forty years, or eight hundred years, or above, that Adam or
the Patriarchs lived in the state of believing, for a faith of some hours only
shall save the repenting thief as well as a faith of many years. And 2. life
eternal in the possession is promised and given only to the faith that
continues to the end, not because of the duration because a longer enduring
faith has merit, but that is by accident, in regard of the right to life and
because God has commanded persevering in faith, life is given only in
possession to such a faith as endures, but we cannot say that the accidental
endurance and existence of faith for so many years does save and justify, as
the living so many years makes a Child an heir to a great estate, for his being
born the eldest son, makes him his fathers heir.

CHAP. XXIV. What faith is required in the Gospel.
THere is a legal faith, a duty commanded, the object of which is twofold. 1.
Truths relating to the mind revealed and to be revealed. So Adam had a habit or
habitual power to believe the Law and the Gospel upon supposition, it should
be revealed. As a whole man believes skill in his Physician to prevent diseases
ere they come, and to remove them, when come. Its folly to say Adam stood in
need, before he fell, of a supernatural power to believe Evangelick truths, if
he believed God to be true, he had such a power as to believe all was true,
that God should reveal. 2. Adam had a faith of dependencie, to rely upon God in
all possible evils feared.

2. The promise of life is not made to Law-faith more then to Law-love, or
Law-fear, or Law-desire, more then to any other, How faith saves not according
to the dignity of its act.
but the promise is made to Evangelick-faith that lays hold on CHRIST as our
righteousness. But for obeying the Commands Adam was to live, Gal. 3.13. (...)
in them, by doing them, Ezekiel. 20.11. As Lavater, (...) Shindlerus notat in,
cum, propter. Calv. com. Ezekiel. 20.11. Nulla igitur est in eo absurdit^s si
homines vi^ant hoc est mereantur ex pacto vitam ^ternam: Sed ^i quis^legem
servat sequetur eum non opus habere Christi gratia.
there is no absurdity if it be said men shall live, that is merit by free
paction, life eternal: but then (says Calvine) if a man keep the Law, he
needs not the Grace of Christ. Obj. If faith be imputed, as it lays hold on
Christ's Righteousness, it must be the meritorious cause of Justification and
by its inherent dignity, for there is nothing more essential to faith, then
to lay hold on Christ's Righteousness. Ans. If faith were imputed as
righteousness according to the act of laying hold on Christ, it were true, but
the act of faith is not imputed, but that which faith lays hold on, it being
an instrument to wit, the Righteousness of Christ, it is not an act of
believing says a Jesuit. And though they say the works Evangelick are from the
habit of grace, so was Adam a patient, when God concreated his Image, and
habitual righteousness in him. But Arminians and Jesuits do not say, nor
darre not, that predeterminating Grace is from Christ's merits, Toletus, Romans
3. Adverte fidem non habere ex se officaciam ullam ut actus quidam, noster est,
remitten di and reconciliandi* sed virtutem totam procedere ex objecto ipso,
nempe, Christo cujus virtutem and meritum disposuit Deus per fidem in ipsum
applicare peccatori ad justificandum.

The Adversaries exclude not Law-boasting.


therefore yet the sinner may more boast then Adam, and say I have justified my
self by the acts of free will which is indifferent and from under all the
bowing and determining or swaying of the Grace of Christ, for the free will
should have so whether Christ had died or not died.

CHAP. XXV.
Q. WHether is Christ's Righteousness imputed and made ours, because we believe
and apprehend it ours; or do we believe, because it is ours first before we
believe?

A twofold imputatio^ of Christ, one legal, another Evangelick.
Ans. There is a twofold imputation, one legal, another which for Doctrines
cause we call application or real (though the legal imputation be also real;
but not to us as the former) the Lords act of laying the iniquity of us all
upon Christ, Isa. 53.6. and the Lords making him sin for us, that is a
sacrifice for sin, 2 Cor. 5.21. evinces necessarily the truth of this, the
former imputation. For 2 Cor. 5.21. God was in Christ reconciling the world to
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them. If it be expounded of actual
reconciliation of persons, it may say something, for the other imputation, but
the other imputation is clear, Romans 4.3. Abraham believed God, and it was
counted to him for righteousness, v. 7. Blessed is the man whose iniquities
are forgiven and whose sins are covered, v. 8. Blessed is the man to whom the
Lord imputes not sin, v. 9. Faith (that is, that which faith believed, as hope
is put for the thing hoped for, Col. 1.5. Romans 8.24. was imputed to Abraham for
righteousness, though Gomarus give another exposition, to wit, that by faith
or the act of believing we obtain this to be reputed righteous, and it suits
better with the Text. And as to the former imputation, God could not in justice
wound Christ for our transgressions, nor bruise him for our iniquities, nor
could the Lord break him, nor deliver him to the death for us all, except God
had both made him the sinner, that is, imputed and reckoned him the sinner in
Law (for intrinsecally and inherently he was not the sinner but holy,
harmless, etc.) and laid our debts upon him, Isa. 53.6. and except he had been
willing to have been counted the sinner, and had said ( thou have given me a
body, here am I, to do thy will, Psalm. 40.7. Heb. 10.6, 7.) this reckoning of
Christ to be the sinner is not only in the eternal decree, but also a laying
of our iniquities upon him in time, Isa. 53.6. or a dealing with him in Law in
punishing him as the sinner. And 2. by using the humane nature as an instrument
of our Redemption on the Cross. Antinomians take this imputing of our sins to
Christ, The mistake of Antinomians*
and reckoning Christ to be the sinner, to be the justifying of the sinner,
which is a gross mistake; for so without believing all that Christ died for
should be justified upon the Cross. But the Scripture is so far from ascribing
Justification to any but to a believer, that it says Abraham's faith was
imputed to him for righteousness. Now the faith of multitudes for whom Christ
died when he suffered on the Cross, is a very nothing: Many are not born, and
a nothing or a non ens cannot be counted for righteousness.

It is to be observed that payment made by the surety absolveth the debtor, so
as the Law, except it be the general Law of gratitude, requires no act of
love, of faith, of service from the debtor, nor does the Law of suretyship in
its essence and nature require that the Creditor, and sub eo titulo should pay
the homage of faith, Obedience to the surety.

Christ is by a special Law.


indeed when the Creditor is both the Creditor and the offended Party, and also
the supreme Lawgiver GOD, he may require of the captives the obedience of
faith. So would justice, which says, we should hurt none, give to every man
his own, press, that the debtor repay to the surety, so far as he is able to
make up his losses, but to pay the obedience of faith as a part of the ransom
due to offended Justice, is no Gospel-Law, nor any part thereof, nor can it
bea^ truth, except we deny the real satisfaction made by Christ, which both
Papists do weaken when they mix the merit of faith therewith, and Socinians
deny.

4. The satisfaction performed upon the Cross for sinners, though it be for a
certain particular number, determined of God, and quoad numerum numerantem, and
quoad numerum numeratum, both as touching the number, so many, not all and
every one, and such persons, by head, name, birth, etc. Yet it is not the
justifying of me, or John, or Paul, for I, nor no man can know that Christ's
satisfaction stands for you or me, by name and person, while first I or you
believe, because it is the hid Decree of God. 3. Nor is this legal imputation
beleevable, nor is it revealed, as ^t is terminated to single persons, to me or
to you, until by faith we apprehend it.

5^ But the imputation of application is that in which our justification
stands.

And the faith by which as by an instrument we are justified, presupposes
three unions, Faith presupposes three unions, and makes the fourth.
and makes a fourth union. It presupposes an union, 1. Natural. 2. Legal.
3. Federall.


1. Natural, that Christ and we are not only both mankind, for CHRIST and
Pharaoh, Judas the traitor and all the sons of perdition are one, specie and
natura, true men, but one in brotherhood. He assuming the nature of man with a
special eye to Abraham, Heb. 2.16. that is, to the elect and believers, for
with them he is bone of their bone, and is not ashamed to call them brethren,
Heb. 2.11, 12. Ps. 22.22.

2. It presuppones a Legal union between Christ and them, that God made the
debtor and the Surety one in Law, and the sum one in so far as he laid our
debts on Christ, Isa. 53.6. ^ Cor. 5.21.

3. It presuppones an union Federall, God making Christ our Surety, and he was
willing to be our Surery, and to assume not only our nature in a personal
union, but also our state, condition, and made our cause his cause, our sins
his sins, not to defend them, nor to say Amen to them, as if we might commit
them again, but to suffer the punishment due to them. And our faith makes a
fourth union betwixt Christ and us, whether natural, as between head and
members, the branches and the Vine Tree, or mystical, as that of the spouse
and beloved wife, or artificial, or mixed between the impe and the tree. Or 4.
Legal, between the Surety and the Debtor, the Advocate and the Client, or
rather an union above all, is hard to determine, for these are but all
comparisons, and this Christ prays for, Joh. 17.23. I in them, and thou in me,
that they may be made perfect in one.

6. Now to the Question, as the Law condemns not a man, but him who is first a
sinner, and an heir of wrath by nature in the first Adam, for the Law is
essentially just: So God justifies not a man, but the man who, by order of
nature, is first by faith in CHRIST, Romans 5.18. Therefore (...) by the offense
of one (judgment) came upon all men unto condemna^^^n, even so by the
righteousness of one the free gift came upon a^l men (in Christ, as the other
were in the first Adam) unto the justification of life: and so we must say,
that all, ere they be justified, and before God impute faith to them, that is,
Christ's believed righteousness to be theirs, must have faith and so believe,
and so be one with Christ. And this imputed righteousness is ours, because we
believe, and not until we first believe, and the other imputation goes before
faith: So the faith of Gods special mercy is two ways so called. 1. As it
leans upon and apprehends God in Christ, for the obtaining of mercy and
remission of sins, and imputed righteousness: So faith goes before
justification, and we believe that our sins may be pardoned, and that our sins
may not be imputed, and that we may be justified and freed from condemnation:
so by the act of believing, righteousness is imputed to us. And thus
justification and remission, i. e. relaxing of our persons from a state of
eternal condemnation, as is meant, Romans 8.1. are not the object of faith, but
the effect and fruit of faith. 2. The faith of special mercy to me is
considered as it apprehends and believes, We believe that Christ's
righteousness may be made ours, and because it is ours, we believe it to be ours
also.
or rather feelingly knows special mercy, imputation of Christ's
righteousness now given to me, and as Christ has paid a ransom for me, and
satisfied justice for me, and so imputed righteousness and justification are
the object of faith; Or rather the object of the sense of faith, which is most
carefully to be observed. To answer Bellarmines unsolide Argument, we either
believe remission of sins past, or to come, etc. But remission is liberation
from punishment eternal or temporal, but justificat^on is freedom from the
fundamental guilt-deserving punishment, and remission is a consequent thereof.

Q. Whether or not, is Justification taken one and the same way in the Old and
New Testament?

Ans. The Apostle is clear, Romans 4. where he proves both Jews and Gentiles are
justified as Abraham and David. But 2. Justification by Grace has not in
iisdem apicibus in the same points, the same adversaries. Four or five sort of
adversaries who caused various considerations of the question of justification
in the Old and in the New Test.
1. Moses and the Prophets contend most with Ceremonial hypocrites, who sought
righteousness much in Ceremonies, Washings, Sacrifices, New Moons, and also
their own inherent godliness, Deuteronomy. 5. Deuteronomy. 7. Deuteronomy. 10. Deuteronomy. 11. Isai.
1.10, 11, 12, etc. Mic. 6.6, 7, 8. Psalm. 50.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17, 18. Ps. 4.2, 3, 4, 5. 1 Samuel 15.22, 23. Isa. 66.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Jer.
7.1, 2, 3, -- 21, 22, 23.

2. Paul had other Adversaries, Romans chapter 3. chapter 4. chapter 5. chapter 9. chapter 10.
especially Antinomians, who drew the Doctrine of free Justification by Grace to
licencious loosnesse, then we may sin, if so and so, we be justified (said
they) then is the Law of none effect, Romans 6.1. But his chief Adversaries, on
the other extreme, were men that stood much for Justification by the works of
the Moral Law: And Paul, Romans 3. proves that all, Jews, Gentiles, David,
Abraham, could be justified neither by works of Nature nor of Grace, and casts
down the Jews righteousness by Law-doing, Romans 9. Romans 10.

3. There were a third Class of Adversaries to free Justification, Galatians,
seduced and false Apostles, who contended for Justificatication by Circumcision
and the necessity of keeping the Ceremonial Law, if they would be saved, Act.
15.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. Gal. 2. Gal. 3. Gal. 4. Gal. 5. chapter 6. Who mixed the Gospel
and Moses his Law, and Paul proves, Gal. 3. that we are not justified by the
works of the Moral Law, for that Law, Deuteronomy. 26.27. involves all that omit the
least duty of the Law, Gal. 3.10, 11, 12, 13. under a curse, and Christ was
made a curse for us. And Paul proves in the general, we are justified by
neither the works of the Moral, nor of the Ceremonial Law.

4. James had to do with another gang of loose livers, the Gnostics, who
contended for justification by a bare nominall faith without love or good
works. And James proves that we are justified before men and to our selves by
faith working by love, and not by a dead faith.

5. John contends much for real and speaking marks of justification and
conversion, against dead Professors void of love to the Brethren.

Q. 3. What is the dominion of the Law over a sinner?

A. It is the legal power to condemn all such as are under the Law, as a
Covenant of Works; as marriage is dissolved, if either of the parties be dead:
So Romans 7.4. Ye are dead to the Law through the body of Christ, and it is not
every commanding power that Paul, Romans 7. denies to the Law, but a Lordly
dominion, such as Lords of life and death have and exercises, Of the dominion
of the Law.
(...), and we are dead to the Law through the body of Christ, which
mortification or dying is not understood subjective, as if it were in us, but
legally and objectively in Christ, because Christ in his body on the tree did
bear our sins, 1 Pet. 2.24. and was made a curse for us, in our place, Gal.
3.13. For Christ (says Ambrose, Ambro^ Mori legi est vivere Deo, quia lex
dominatur peccatoribus cui ergo dimittuntur peccata is moritur legi, boc est
liberatur a Lege per corpus Christi, hoc consequimur beneficium (...) tradens
enim corpus suum Servator, mortem vicit and peccatum damnavi^.
clearing the place) giving his body as a Savior, overcame death and condemned
sin: Hence these two words, Romans 7.4. Wherefore ye also my brethren, are become
dead to the Law. Gal. 2.19, For I through the Law am dead to the Law, that I
might live unto God; As the death to the Law is legal, I am no more under
Law-condemnation then a dead man, so the living to God is a Law living to God
on a Law-absolution (as the absolved malefactor cleared of a capital crime
which might have cost him his head, lives, and so is set free) so there is
another most emphatick word which insinuats that Christ is dead to the Law, as
Paul was, for after Paul says, Gal. 2.19. I through the Law am dead to the
Law, he adds, v. 20. I am crucified with Christ legally, that is, as Christ was
crucified for sin by the sentence of the Law, so I am crucified with him. Romans
6.8. Now if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with
him, which is not only to be expounded of mortification and inherent newness
of life, but also of legal dying with Christ: For Christ died no death but
legal death, there is no inherent mortification or slaying of a body of sin in
him as in us, though from his death there also flow a^ merited and inherent
personal mortification in us, for it is added, v. 9. knowing that Christ being
raised from death dies no more, death has no more dominion over him, then
Christ, by Law, cannot die twice, so Christ being once crucified, the Law and
death, which had once dominion over him, has now no more dominion over him.
Then, first, as Christ died a Law-death and was under death, because under the
Law, so are we legally in him freed from the Laws dominion, and death following
thereupon. 2. As Christ defies the Laws dominion and death, Christ Mystical,
Christ and believers are freed from the law-dominion.
so do we. 3. As Christ cannot twice satisfy the Law by dying (for then the
first had not been sufficient) so neither can we ever be under Law-death and
Law-condemnation, for we was once in Christ legally condemned and crucified in
our Surety and so cannot suffer in our persons legal condemnation and legal
death. 4. As Christ is dead to the dominion of the Law and death having once
died and come out from under both, so are we dead and come legally out in him,
which answers the several tentations we can be under in Christ. Obj. But
then may we not sin, because we are freed from the dominion of the Law and
death? as Romans 6. he had said, ye are not under the Law, but under Grace, v.
15. What then? Shall we sin, because we are not under the Law, but under Grace?
God forbid, ver. 16, 17. He answers from an absurd, then we that are ransomed
by Christ, should not be our ransome-payers servants, but the servants of sin.
Now except the meaning had been, we are not under the Law, that is, the Laws
dominion and the Laws condemning power, there had been no place for such an
Objection, nay, nor any shadow; but the true Objection is, we are not under the
Law to be thereby condemned and eternally punished, therefore what is the
hazard of sin? We may sin at will, there is no fear of hell. Paul answers not
from that evil of servile fear that follows sin, but from the woeful
ingratitude to our ransome-payer. The Antinomian objectio^ charged upon is
answered by him.
O then we should not be under Christ and the directing light and rule of our
Lord Ransomer, if we sin at will, but still servants and slaves to sin and so
not redeemed, by which we gather that there is two things in the Law. 1. The
condemning power of it. 2. The directive commanding power: As to the former,
Christ by being condemned and suffering a cursed death for us, took that wholly
away. We are not then under the Law as condemning, yea neither as saving and
justifying, for then should we be married to the Law and under conjugall power
as wife and husband living together, which Paul refutes, Romans 2.1, 2, 3, 8.
(2.) There is a directive commanding power that CHRIST taks in hand, and
commands us to obey our Lord Ransomer, and we should sin against his love, if
we should live loosly, because we are freed from condemnation. There is a
twofold dominion of sin.
Hence also there is a twofold dominion of sin, one legal to condemn us
eternally, another (as it were) physical to keep us under the superlative
power of lusts, if Christ had not died, we had been under both.

Q. 4. What is meant by the oldnesse of the letter in which we are not to
serve? Romans 7.

A. He means the idle, fruitless, and bare knowledge of the Law in external
Discipline, that reigns in an unrenewed man, by which he remaining in nature
under the Law, foments an opinion pharisaicall (for he points at the false and
literal glosses of the Law given by Pharisees and refuted by Christ, The
oldnesse of the letter, and the newnes of the Spirit.
Mat. 5.) Of merit, external worship, ceremonies without any inward
heart-renovation, to which is opposed the newness of the spirit, or true new
Evangelick obedience and holiness wrought by the Spirit.

Object. Is not the letter of the Law a bondage, since we are freed in heaven
from the letter and from awing threatening?

Ans. To serve God is liberty, not bondage, Psalm. 119.45. Rev. 22.3. compared
with ver. 5. serving of God and reigning suit well together. See Luke 1.74, 75.
Joh. 8.34, 35, 36. Rom 6.16, 17. but there is a threefold bondage of the
letter. 1. Accidental, in regard of our corruption, the service is wearisome
to unrenued nature: This we are saved from in CHRIST, not fully in this life,
but it comes not from the Law which is spiritual. 2. A bondage to the dominion
of the condemning Law. 3. There is a bulk of Ordinances, hearing, reading,
praying, meditating, repenting, receiving of the seals, we are freed from the
one in this, and shall be freed from the other in the life to come.

Q. What is the dignity of the Gospel above the Law?

A. By the hearing of faith, that is, of the Gospel we receive the Spirit, Gal.
3. though the Law in the letter be also spiritual and lively and seek of us
the lost Image of GOD by way of commanding, yet there is no promise of the
Spirit, made in the Law neither gifts nor grace, and both are given by the
Preaching of the Gospel.

2. No miracles are wrought by the Law to confirm the Doctrine of the Law, No
gifts nor grace can be given by the Law.
for it is not new, nor is the gift of miracles given as a reward of
Law-obedience, miracles in genere causae finalis, are wrought to avenge Pharaoh
and the Egyptians Law-obedience; but the miracles are wrought by the Name of
Jesus, Act. 4. and for the confirming of the Gospel, and for the good of the
Church: See Gal. 3.1, 2, 3.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the property of the Covenant of Grace, the perpetuity thereof.
Quest. Wherein stands the eternity of the Covenant of Grace? And what other
properties there be of the Covenant?

How the Covenant of works is eternal.
Ans. The Law and Covenant of Works is a rule of everlasting righteousness,
and so may be called an everlasting righteousness containing precepts of the
Law of nature intrinsecally good, such as to know love, fear, trust in him as
the only true God: and in this sense it is an eternal Covenant.

But 1. it is not eternal in the positives of the second, and fourth, and
fifth Commands, the way of worship, the means, as Ceremonies, Sabbath,
Magistracy, and such like, which are not to continue in the life to come, How
the Covenant of works is not eternal
and so neither faith nor hope in God through Christ, 1 Cor. 13.13. Romans 8.24,
25. 2 Cor. 5.7. nor a Temple, nor Ordinances, nor the Kingdom of Christ as now
dispensed, are to be the binding rule for eternity to such as are confederats
of the Covenant of Grace, Rev. 21.22, 23. 1 Cor. 15.24. though more of the
smell and remnants of the Covenant of Grace, of the Lamb, of praises to him who
was slain, Rev. 5.9, 11, 14. be in the life to come, then of the Law-Covenant,
in regrad of our standing in a state of glory for evermore by the Mediator, to
keep the nature in an eternal union, for evermore, by the Lord Christ his
being clothed with our nature, glorified for ever, Rev. 3.21. Rev. 5. Rev. 7.
Rev. 20. Rev. 21. Chapter 22. And in that we shall be ever with Christ God-Man,
There is more of the Covenant of grace in the life to come then of the Covenant
of works.
Luke 23.42. Joh. 17.24. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2 Cor. 5.8. Phil. 1.23, 17. in an eternal
state of glory, though not in regard of an advocation and intercession for
fallen sinners. As 1 John 2.1, 2. or of praying that our faith fail not, when
winnowed, as Luke 22.31, 32. In a word there is a mediation of the triumphing
reign for the standing of the glorified nature, and a mediation for the
reconciling of, and interceeding for of sinners. The latter must cease when the
Kingdom is given up by the Son to the Father, 1 Cor. 15.24. The former is
eternal and shall never cease.

2. The Law as a possible and standing way of justifying and saving sinners is
not eternal, but is now ceased to all flesh, the Man Christ only excepted,
Other differences between the Covenant of Works, and that of Grace.
but the Covenant of Grace stands as the only way under heaven, by which
sinners may be saved, and after the Covenant of Grace there is no dispensation,
which Libertines and Familists call more spiritual without Ordinances and a
way as they speak of all spirit, of pure spirit.

3. The Covenant of Grace is eternal, in regard in it there is promised
actual grace, and continual influences of grace from the Head Christ, the
High Priest, to keep the confederats in obedience and in perseverence to the
end. And no such influences either for the habit of grace or for the
continuated acts thereof, are promised in the Covenant of Works, in regard Adam
a man, and poor men in him do undertake to obey. Whereas Christ-Man binds and
undertakes as head Covenanter and Surety for all the under confederats, and for
sinners in the Covenant of Grace. Which difference is much to be observed,
between the Covenant of Works and the Covenant of Grace: And for that cause the
Covenant of Works is, 1. more independent, and requires more of man's strength
and less grace then the other.

2. It stands more by precepts, less by promises, having only one promise of a
reward and hyre to the obeyer, and consists all of precepts, the other though
it want not precepts, especially, it is his command that we believe in the Son
of God, yet stands most by promises, and this Covenant gets the name of a
promise or the promise, Acts 2.39. Romans 8.9. compared with Acts 3.25. Genesis 12.3.

3. The Covenant of Works has more of hyre, more of man, of nature, of earning
and working, and more of man's Covenant, where he binds for himself, and the
other party for himself, without the mutual help of any of the confederate
parties.

4. The Covenant of Grace is, thus, also eternal, in that the buried and dead
parties Abraham, The perpetuity of the Covenant of Grace in the life to come.
Isaac and Jacob are still in the Covenant of Grace, and there remains a
Covenant-union between Christ and their rotten flesh sleeping in the dust,
which is not an union by faith, or by any actings obedientiall of dead men, as
is most evident, if we compare our Saviors words, Matthew. 22.32. with the Lord
speaking out of the Bush to Moses, Exodus 3.6. and God is not the God of the
dead, but of the living, no^ is the rising of the body promised in the Covenant
of Works, nor is there a standing Law-Covenant between the Lord and dead
Abraham requiring the condition of faith from buried men. Only there is a
warrant to say that the Covenant is everlasting* because it goes beyond time,
and stands with the dead in Christ, Matthew. 22.32. (2.) Because two great
promises of the Covenant, the rising of the body and life everlasting, are
fulfilled after time is ended, Joh. 6.38, 39. 1 Thessalonians. 4.14, 16, 17. and add
to this the public owning and confessing of the Saints before the Father and
the holy Angels; which is public remission and declared justification before
the world of Elect Men and Angels, Luke 12.8. Matthew. 10.32. (3.) Because after
all these, to walk among them as their God and dwell among them, Rev. 7.15, 16,
17. when they are clothed in white Robs, and are before the throne serving him
night and day, and that the Lord should be their God, Rev. 21.7. after they
have overcome all temptations, is fulfilled eternally in heaven. Now for God to
walk among a people and be their God is to be a Covenanting God to them, as is
evident from 2 Cor. 6.16. Lev. 26.11, 12. Jer. 32.38. Zech. 13.6.

2. The second and principle property of the Covenant is the graciousnesse and
freedom thereof, therefore is it made with sinners, without hire or price,
Every thing in this Covenant is free Grace.
and every article and lith of it is Grace. 1. The whole Gospel is the word of
Grace, Acts 20.32. Col. 1.6. the Bargain a p^ction of Grace, and the new
Covenant, Heb. 8.8. for Grace is a new thing, and nature an old thing, the
condition of the Covenant, to believe is a gift of grace, Phil. 1.29. the
mercies bestowed and promised are all of free grace, for we are justified by
his grace, Romans 3.24. freely, and are saved and called with a holy calling, not
according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, 2 Timothy 1.9.
For by grace (says Paul) are ye saved through faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. and the new creation is framed in us
of grace. But God who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved
us, even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us together with Christ,
Ephesians. 2.4, 5. and the new heart promised, Ezekiel. 36.26. is given upon this
account, v. 32. Not for your sakes do I this, says the Lord, be it known unto
you, be ashamed and confounded for your own ways, O house of Israel. We have
remission of sins freely of his grace, Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have redemption
through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his
grace, Col. 1.14. Perseverence is promised of free grace, Jer. 31.35. Jer.
32.39, 40. Isa. 54.10. as life eternal is the gift of God through Jesus Christ
our Lord, Romans 6.23. and every influence of grace is of free grace, Phil. 1.13.
Joh. 15.5. and CHRIST the Surety of the Covenant, of free grace and love, is
given, Joh. 3.16. to taste of death for every man, Heb. 2.9.

CHAP. XXVII. Of cases of Law-fear, and Gospel-faith: How a child of God fears
Law-threatnings.
FRom these properties flow diverse cases touching the stability of the Saints,
their perseverance, their temptations, their standing in grace.

1. If they cannot fall away, who are thus seated in the Covenant, is not free
will left to much loosnesse of security? Answ. Not at all: For a principle of
Godly fear is fixed in the heart, and so in free will, never to depart from
God, Jer. 32.39, 40. And where this Godly aw is, the heart is in a Godly
trembling and fear, and darre not be loose, wanton, and secure to fear nothing,
but fears always, Prove. 28.14. and fears and trembles at the Lord and his
goodness, Hos. 3.5. A Godly heart trembles more for fear of grace and the debt
of grace, then of justice and wrath; and fears sin more, as it is against the
bands of grace, and against Christ, and Gospel-love who can save, then as it is
against Law the Lawgiver, and him who eternally destroys. And so the aw of
heaven has a stronger impression then the terror and aw of hell.

Quest. 2. How can the fear of falling away, and the faith of perseverance
absolutely promised and absolutely given, consist together?

How fear of law-fear acts upon a believer.
Ans. The Law-fear of falling away, and the Gospel faith of persevering are not
consistent. The fear legal of the least sin is a fear of hell and of
eternal wrath to be irrecoverably inflicted, but because the person is under
grace, the believer cannot fear this fear, except the Law-fear be letten out
against him as a temptation, but it is not his oblidged duty so to fear.

2. The Law-fear upon a believer is conditional, and not absolute, as he fears
hell and falling away, jure, as his deserving, if God should enter in judgment
with him, and if he were not in CHRIST: But he is oblidged to a Gospel-faith
which lays hold on Christ, righteousness, and deliverance from condemnation,
and if Christ and interest in him be hid from him, and nothing on but Law-fear,
that is a trial, not a duty of Law-fear. So the faith of Joseph and Mary, that
Christ their Son shall be great shall sit* in the Thron. of DAVID his father and
shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, Luke 1.32, 33. did well consist
with that holy and obedientiall fear of fleeing into Egypt, for fear that Herod
should murder that hopeful young King in his cradle* Math. 2.
But there is a Godly* Law-fear, or a Gospel-Law-fear, which is a Godly horror
conditional for that which is never to be inflicted, but yet according to
deserving may be inflicted, and this is the terror of the Lord, which breeds
Gospel persuasion, 2 Cor. 5.11. and so may well stand with Gospel-faith and
assurance of deliverance from falling away and of being stablished and
confirmed to the end. As a child in the fathers arm threatened to be cast over
a sharp Rock in the Sea, may have horror and fear, and cry out for fear, and
yet believe so his fathers compassion as he will not throw him in the Sea,
because the threatening is ordained not to be exercised, but that the child may
so much the more thrust his arms about his fathers neck.

Quest. 3. What is the best victory over temptations from such fears?

Ans. As in all temptations, so here, What is to be done under tentations.
overcoming is attended with precious promises, which are to be read, Rev. c.
2.7.17.26, 27, 28. c. 3.5.12.21. Rev. 21.

For 1. Fevers of the Law that have no kindly cools, and relenting by the
promises of the Gospel, tend not to the strengthening of the life of God, but
only when they leave a standing self loathing, and loving of Christ.

2. It argues the strength of faith, after many, yea six foyles to stand; as
the Army that is broken six times, yet rallies and draws up again, is often at
the seventh time victorious.

3. Such as stand against a strong and mighty tentation, b^ing pressed out of
measure, above strength, as Paul was, 2 Cor. 1.8, 9. in so much (says he) that
we despaired even of life. But we had the sentence of death in our selves, do
prevail to the being taught of God, not to trust in our selves, but in God who
quickens the dead: For here there comes real strength from fighting: As he
who, by strength of nature, lives and convalesceth after a running boatch and
strong pestilence, goes through pest-houses and is never infected again. So the
worthies by faith who overcame strong temptations, Heb. 11. to the end, keep
the fields and prevail till death.

4. Godly fear of self-weaknesse and trembling at sin which may darken the
feelings of received mercies and sweet influences adds strength. Something of
that is here, 2 Cor. 12.10. when I am weak, then am I strong.

5. A fixed peace in assurance of deliverance from condemnation, and quietness
in believing pardon and righteousness in Christ, ought always to be, as
touching the state of Justification: for the questioning of this in a believer,
if Antinomians will yield to truth, is contrair to faith, and no warrantable
assurance. But 2. a fixed peace in David, immediately after bloodshed and
adultery, before believing of the remission of these particular sins be, What
way a fixed peace is in the children of GOD.
in the Lords order, renewed, is security, and not Godly peace. Psalm. 32.3.
While I keept silence, my bones waxed old, through my roaring all the day. 5. I
acknowledged -- and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Psalm. 51.1, 2, 3,
etc. prove this. But it may be said, does not this holy feeling of, and trouble
for the particular heinous guiltiness, brangle the fixed peace and the persons
faith and confidence that he is in a state of justification? Ans. Not at all: A
believer ought not to co^plain of a state of non justificatio^, but ought to
complain of a state of non sanctification
for the outcries of the child of God, Romans 7.24. under, not a finger, or an
arm, or a leg, but a body of sin: O wretched man, who shall deliver me from
the body of this death? are good, and much feeling of pain argues much life.
And such as in this regard say, I thank God, I was plagued and pained, but now
nothing ails me, I have peace, I am rich, I have need of nothing, Revel. 3.17.
I am all whole, must be in a dangerous case. Indeed the complaining of want of
justification and of the righteousness of God in a believer, and a raising of
the foundation, as Psalm. 31.22. Jonah 2.4. I am cast out of thy sight: are both
false and bastard-feelings, and hasty unbelief: for this is a reflection upon,
and a reproaching of the Office of the Healer of sinners* This is contrair to
faith, and the former is a complaining of the body of sin that can hardly be
sclandered; so a complaining of self, and the feeling of inherent corruption
weakens not, but strengthens faith. And complaining thus, and triumphing in a
believed* justification, do well consort in Paul, Romans 7.24. O wretched man,
etc. v. 25. I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord: and Romans 8.1. Then every
feeling of sin is not contrair to faith, as Mr. Town and other Antinomians
teach, some godly tender feeling foments faith.

Q. 6. How comes it to pass that seldom feeling of sin wants unbeleef?

Ans. Our looking, in a Legal, not in an Evangelick way, upon sin, Why feeling
of sin, seldom wants unbeleef.
does occasion unbelief: for looking to the sickness of the sinner is but
abused, when this use is made of it, that the question which Christ has
abundantly answered; Ah he has not, who satisfied and paid my ransom,
justified me also by the Redemption that is in him: but the strong body of sin
which leads me captive, Romans 7.23. does also lead, rather mislead me to doubt
whether the ransom was sufficiently paid, and I sufficiently and freely, by
his grace and the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, justified, as Romans 3.24.
And because the sinner feels the stirring and too vigorous acting of a body of
sin, which is his own work, he removes the foundation-stones laid by Christ,
and questions the well done work of Christ, and thrusts in his sickle into
Christ's harvest: which is upon the matter to say, Ah my sanctification is naught
or small: Therefore Christ's satisfaction is weak, so the man, Often when the
believer complains of his own sanctification, because of guiltines lately
acted, he also unbeleevingly co^plaines of Christ his performed satisfaction,
as if it were weak.
laying the burden upon the wrong back, will take and pull off the burden that
Christ in his own body did bear on the tree, as 1 Pet. 2.24. and wrestle under
his own body of sin himself, and he thinks he will do the business better
himself then Christ. This is that which Antinomians imput to us groundlesly,
but it is our sinful weakness so to be troubled at the indwelling of a body
of sin, as we doubt of and call in question the work of Justification and the
satisfaction of Christ. But there is good cause why the sinner quarrel with
himself and complain of a body of sin, and yet not only quarrel with Christ,
but exalt Christ, and by faith close with the absoluteness of his gifted
satisfaction and righteousness. And this is as easy by the Grace of God, as
we see the more that a gracious soul abases himself, as one carnal and sold
under sin, Romans 7.14. as one in whom there dwells no good, as touching the
flesh, v. 18. in whom sin dwells, v. 20. as one brought into captivity to the
Law of sin, and a wretched man, 24. so much the more does he exalt Christ the
only deliverer, Romans 7.25. Romans 8.1, 23, 33, 34, 35. and why should not our
blackness commend Christ's beauty, our deadness exalt his life, our sinful
wretchedness his glorious office in saving, and our emptiness and dryness
his fullness of the anointing who is all fullness?

CHAP. XXVIII. Christ died not to blot out the sense of sin, but rather to
quicken a Godly sense thereof.
THe more of Christ and his sufferings be apprehended, the more Godly sense of
sin, so far is Christ's death from bloting out all sense of sin: Christ by his
death removes not sense of sin.
For if sense of sin be all one with a simple reflecting knowledge, that we
once sinned, then the Godly in this life from grace, not from the stirring of
the Law, do both know and acknowledge what they were. 1 Timothy 1.13. I thank
Christ Jesus our Lord, etc. I was before a blasphemer, and a persecuter, and
injurious* but I obtained mercy. Tit. 3.3. We our selves were also sometimes
foolish, disobedient, etc. Yea the glorified cannot before the Throne sing the
glory of the Lamb slain and the price of Redemption paid, Rev. 5*12. to redeem
them from sin, but there must be even in glory, this sense of their debt,
though without heart break or sorrow. Then it cannot be a Doctrine of the
Gospel that paying of our debt, and the ransom, does score out of a gracious
memory the counts of a paid debt: The more I know what Christ has done, the
more I should kiss and embrace the gracious surety, and these kisses of Glory,
and that song, worthy is the Lamb, etc. say that grace and the faith of the
price paid do enlarge rather the holy memory and sense of sin, then obli^erate
it. Hence the translated out of sense of grace, cast back their eye to the pit,
the drudgerie of bondage they were once in, Ep^. 2.3, 4, 5. Tit. 3.3, 4, 5. 1 Timothy 1.13, 14. with loving and praising the riches of grace. And must it not be
good to read old counts, and weep for joy, and cast and dart up praises to him
who is at the right hand of the Father, and sorrow for old debts, and love much
him who freely pardons?

2. If sense of sin be taken for the unbelieving feeling of, and judging my
self cast out of his sight and condemned, whereas yet I am in Christ, and it is
God who justifies me, who is he shall condemn, Romans 8.33, 34. We shall agree
with Antinomians, this is indeed the hasty sense of unbeleef, Psalm. 31.22.
Jo^. 2.4. Hence let them be rebuked who say not that Christ in the Gospel, has
taken away this sense of sin. Yea many redeemed of the Lord, are weary and
laden, but they render themselves weary* and then sinfully complain that Christ
will not ease them. In which unconverted ones in the dead-throw are more to be
justified then they, the one being under a real burden, and the spirit of the
Law acting upon them, the other act the Law at their own hand, and will receive
the spirit of bondage to fear again, whether it be reason or not. He is the
less to be pitied, who casts himself with his own hand in prison.

3. There is a Gospel-sense of in-dwelling of sin bringing forth the mourning
of the dove, and tears that are so innocent as they wrong not Christ, or his
work of redeeming and justifying: Of this, Romans 7.24. Christ, sure, takes not
this away. Believers lodge a body of sin in them, as sighing patients and as
captives half against their will, at least their renewed will, CHRIST died not
to remove Gospel sense or any sense of sin flowing from a natural conscience
does contradict this guest, Romans 7.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, etc. 23, 24. It is
sinful doctrine to say that CHRIST takes away this sense of sin. For 1. this
is the very true tenderness and gracious smitings of heart under any
guiltiness: As 1 Samuel 24.5. 2 Samuel 24.10. David's heart smote him after he had
cut off the lap of Saul's garment, and numbered the people. 1 John 3.20. Job
27.6. And in some it is the natural conscience accusing and challenging after
sin is committed; now CHRIST came not to extirpate conscience, nor the power of
feeling and discerning the obligation to wrath, that the conscience
apprehends after sin is committed, nor the legal evil deserving of sin, nor
the contrariety between it and the Law. 2. Christ by his death gives repentance
and mourning for sin, Acts 5.31. Eze. 12.10, 11. (3.) Christ commends this,
Jer. 31.18. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself. 2 King. 22.19.
Because thine heart was tender -- and thou have weept before me, I have also
heard thee, says the Lord. Luke 7.44. She has washed my feet with tears. (4.)
If Christ by his death should remove this, he should bring on, by his death, a
heart passed feeling, and burnt with a hot iron, which is condemned, Ephesians. 4.19.
1 Timothy 4.2. (5.) It speaks a graceless rockinesse of heart to sin, and not
care for it, Act. 18.17, 18. Pro. 30.20.

Far less would the Lord have us to dream that a Christan is annihilated and
melted into God, where they leave off to know, will, desire, feel, act, or do
any thing but God is all and all in this life, and that, to the eye of faith,
though not to the eye of reason, all sense of sin is destroyed; this is a
destroying and overturning of all, of Law, Gospel, of all humble walking with
God, and removes all necessity of fearing, hoping, believing, praying, hearing,
and changes us over into blocks.

PART II. Of the Mediator of the Covenant.
CHAP. I.
Q. WHat room or place has Christ the Mediator in the Covenants?

A. The room of Christ in both Covenants.
He has place in the Covenant of Works as a satisfier for us. 2. As a doer and
an obedient fulfiller thereof in all points. And he is Mediator and Surety of
the Covenant of Grace.

2. The first Adam marres all, the second ADAM who makes all things new, mends
all. The first Adam marres all, the second ADAM mends all.
The first Adam was a public sort of stirresman, to whom was committed the
standing and falling of all mankind, and in reference to man, the standing of
Heaven, Earth, and Creatures in their perfection, and he spoiled all, put all
things a-reeling. The second ADAM received in his arms the whole Creation that
was a-falling for in him all things (...) stand fast, Col. 1.17. And he bears
up all by his mighty word, Heb. 1 3. He satisfied for our sins, and for our
breach of the Covenant of Works.

2. He is a full doer and fulfiller of the Covenant of Works most perfectly, by
doing. 1 John 3.7. He who does righteousness is righteous: As he who suffers
for the broken Law, fulfills the Law. Romans 6.7. He that is dead, (...) is
freed, justified from sin, in the obligation of it to punishment. So Paul,
verse. 8. If we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall live with him.
This dying is to believe that he died for us, at least it excludes not that.
And if we keep the Law, we are not oblidged to suffer: for the Law does not
oblidge man in absolute sense, both to perfect doing and to perfect suffering
copulatively, but to one of them. But if we be (legally) dead with Christ, How
the Law does oblidge to both doing and suffering.
(as his death so excellent does exhaust sins punishment and is a perfect
satisfaction therefore) we are freed or justified from sin, not to suffer or
satisfy by suffering for it, as Romans 8.3. For what the Law could not do, so
that it was weak (by accident, not of it self) through the flesh, God sending
his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the
flesh. (...) the righteousness of the Law, the passive righteousness in
suffering for the breach of the Law, might be fulfilled in us, 2 Cor. 5.2. And
Isai. 53.5. But he was wounded for our transgressions, etc. -- 6. The Lord laid
upon him the iniquity of us all. But though some suffer, as the reprobate do,
and suffer in this life the beginning of satisfactory judgment, yet are they
not loosed from active obedience to the Law as the Law, though they cannot,
having once sinned, be under the Law as a Covenant of Justification and life:
nor is any flesh under that Covenant now.

Q. What place has Christ's righteousness here?

Ans. Pareus with some others distinguish between the Righteousness of Christ's
person, which contains his essential Righteousness, The righteousness of
Christ's person and of his merit.
as God, the habitual and actual conformity of the Man Christ, and the
perfect holiness of the Man Christ. Such a High Priest became us, as is holy,
harmless, etc. Heb. 7.26. And, The righteousness of his merit, in the
satisfaction of his suffering, the satisfaction is the formal cause of our
Justification which is counted ours: this latter righteousness is acquired,
the former is essential.

Now the active obedience of Christ falls under a twofold consideration. 1. As
the Man Christ's perfect conformity to the Law of God, so as man he was oblidged
to do and suffer all that he did and suffered, Christ's active obedience, how it
is meritorious for us.
even to lay down his life for man. But had he been only man his righteousness
had neither* been by condignity meritorious, no^ yet satisfactory for us. But
2. The whole course of Christ's obedience from his birth to the grave, by doing
and suffering, is to be considered as the doing and suffering of so excellent a
person, his being born, his praying, preaching, dying, coming from a Person
God-Man. Now the Law required not praying, preaching of God-man, the blood of
God, or the dying of him who was God-Man. And so all these being both so
excellent, and then so undue, have respect of satisfaction to God. 2. The
active obedience of Christ and all that Christ did and suffered were performed
by him in his state of humiliation: In which he was poor, (...), 2 Cor. 8.9.
for us, so also by the same ground a weeping man, hungry, thirsty, weary for
us, made lower then the Angels by the suffering of death, Epist. David Parel*
de justi. chapter activa and passiv^, 186
Heb. 2.9. Humbled by partaking of flesh and blood, because of the children,
Heb. 2.14. Emptied himself for us, Ph. 2. This was, as Pareus well says,
perpetua quaedam passio and paena peccatorum nostrorum, fuit tota vita Christi:
All these have a respect of punishment and suffering. For since Christ was both
a viator and a comprehensor, and such a holy sinlesse person, he ought to have
had the actual possession of the Crown of Glory from the womb, and so should
have been free of weeping, hunger, thirst, weariness, groaning, sighing,
sadness, persecution, reproaches, etc. all which adhered to all his active
holiness, and therefore in that his actions were satisfactory passions. For
satisfaction is defined a voluntary restoring of the equivalent, and as good in
the place of what is taken away* and the good restored must be, Satisfactio est
redditi^ voluntaria equivalentis, alioquin indebiti, (...) alii ex propriis
bonis and non debitis.
1. Undue. 2. The proper good of the restorer, which agrees to the active and
passive obedience of Christ.

Obj. Then Christ's very weeping, and praying, being the weeping and praying of
God-Man, might have been a perfect satisfaction for our sins; for Christ was
God-Man in all his holy actions in the state of humiliation, as in his being
crucified, and in his suffering?

Ans. This does not follow: Because the punishment of the breach of the Law,
and not that only, but such a special punishment, by dying the first and
second death, according to the threatening of the Law, Genesis 2.17. In the day
that thou eatest thou shall surely die: was required in the Law, and except the
threatening of the Law be fulfilled, the Law is not fulfilled: And Paul, Gal.
3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for
us: for it is written, cursed be every o^e that hangs on a tree. Now Christ's
suffering the death of the cross the cursed death is that which makes him
under the Law. Ergo, No satisfaction could be at all except Christ had died*
because all the satisfaction of a surety might in Law have been refused, and
the Lord might have eternally punished Adam and all his, in a Law-way in their
persons, therefore there was need of a punishment agreed upon between God and
the Mediator by a special Covenant, and this punishment must be satisfactory to
the Law which required death Genesis 2.17. and so must Christ-God-man d^e.

The Scripture never speaks of Christ's dying, but it speaks of this
intrinsecall end, that they should die to sin and live to God, for whom Christ
died; now this end is not possible in Pagans who never hear, nor can hear the
Gospel, therefore Christ died not for Pagans.


there is a Law-righteousnesse in suffering death. So Gal. 4.4. God sent forth
his Son made of a woman, made under the Law. For what end? 5. To redeem them
that were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of sons. How are we
redeemed from under the Law? By blood, purchasing to us Justification. Romans
3.24. Being justified freely by his Grace, through the redemption that is in
Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his
blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins past: And
redemption from the curse of the Law, and remission is ever ascribed to the
blood of Christ dying, Romans 3.24, 25. Ye are bought with a price, (...) called
a ransom of Christ's blood, (...), Matthew. 20.28. 1 Timothy 2.6. Ephesians. 1.1.7. In
whom we have redemption in his blood, the forgiveness of sins. Col. 1.14. In
whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins. Romans
5.9. Being justified by his blood. 1 Pet. 1.18. Being redeemed by the blood of
the Lamb unspotted and undefided. 1 ^oh. 1.8. The blood of Jesus Christ purges
us from all sin. Rev. 5.9. And they sang a new song (to wit, the four Beasts
and the four and twenty Elders) -- for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to
God by thy blood. 1 Pet. 1.18. By his stripes (which he suffered in his death,
Isa. 5.3.) we are healed. Rev. 1.5. To him that has loved us, and washen us
from our sins in his blood. For though all Christ's actions of God-man from the
worth of the infinite person be meritorious, yet are they refuseable, yea a
satisfaction by Covenant, which was the death of God-Man must be also. 2. The
word also never speaks of Christ's dying for all, but it mentions Justification
in his blood, To. 3.24, 25. Romans 5.9. Yea the Scripture adds another end of
Christ's death, to wit, forgiveness, Col. 1.14. Ephesians. 1.7. intercession at the
right hand of GOD, 1 John 2.1. that we may receive the Adoption of sons, Gal.
4.5. To make us Kings and Priests to God, Rev. 1.16. dying to sin, living to
him, 1 Pet. 2.24. That he might bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3.18. The glorifying of
God in our bodies, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. Redeeming us from our vain conversation, 1
Pet. 1.18. From this present evil world, Gal. 1.4. Sanctifying the people,
Heb. 13.12. Heb. 10.8, 9, 10. All which the Lord must intend in Christ's death
to Pagans, old and young, to all and every one of mankind to whom the Gospel
could not come. And what authority have men to devise a redemption general,
universal, from hell, and not from sin? 2. For life eternal and not for the
giving of the Spirit, and for redemption from a vain conversation, and for
sanctifying of the people also? 3. A redemption in Christ's blood, but no
forgiveness of sins in his blood, not any non-imputation of sin, nor
reconciliation of the world, 2 Cor. 5.15; 18? 4. A dying of the just for the
unjust, but not to bring them to God; a redeeming of them, but not a redeeming
of them out of every Kindred and Tongue, and People and Nation (for these
People, Nations, and Tongues, were redeemed by this way, as well as they) and a
washing of them in his blood, but no making of them Kings and Priests to God, a
dying for all, but no living to him: These who teach that Christ died for all
and every one, and made a Covenant of Grace with all and every one, and sends
no more of the Gospel to al and every one, make the way of salvation more
impossible under the second, the^ under the first Adam,
contrair to 1 Pet. 1.18. Rev. 5.9. Rev. 1.5.5, 6. 2 Cor. 5.15? 5. Christ's
blood did something (and it is not any thing) to make all saveable, to pacify
Justice, satisfy the Law, to merit Heaven; but did nothing to soften the
heart, mortify and sanctify the will, mind, affections, to remove unbeleef,
to renew the mind. But it is sure the Lord had not intended to commit heaven
and hell any more to a sanctified will, but mutable and lubrick in Adam, but to
commit all to Christ, to a better Covenant, better promises, to a way of
free grace not of nature: Yet these men commit the salvation and damnation of
all and every one, to an unsanctified, corrupt, rebellious will, Genesis 6.5. Genesis
8.21. 1 Cor. 2.14. Joh. 6.44. Job 14 4. Psalm. 51.5. Jer. 17.9, 10, etc. (except
they say, Pagans and all mankind are regenerated, sanctified, justified) yea to
a worse Covenant then that Covenant of Works, to an universal Covenant of
Grace. That 1. never came to their ears. 2. By which they are in a worse
condition then Adam was, who had the Image of God in his soul, and a full power
to stand, and a clearly revealed Covenant: But all mankind for whom Christ is
supposed to die, are born heirs of wrath, but they are born in more misery in
the bondage of sin, of a blind heart, of a corrupt will, their chains heavier,
their furnace hoter in hell, helps fewer. And yet the absoluteness of
Sovereignty under the freedom of the Grace of Christ, by this way of
Vniversalists, shines no more now, nay not so much now as in Adams state, for
more is laid upon free will, and less help to heal the will, then was in the
Covenant of Works. And if all die in Adam, and the Second Adam die for all, he
must die to loose the works of Satan in all; Now if a weaker course be taken to
destroy Satan's kingdom now then in Adams state, and all be laid upon a weaker
will, Satan is stronger now then before: And if Christ do not purchase by his
death grace to bow indeclinably the will of all these for whom he dyed, to
cause them live to him, die to sin, to make them Kings and Priests to God, etc.
but leave their will in a more weak and wicked condition then it was under in
the first Covenant, Satan is in this stronger then the second ADAM. No more of
this here.

It is a question, the Threatening standing, Genesis 2.17. how the active
righteousness of Christ can be a cause meriting to us life, and satisfying the
Law, when there is no suffering for the breach of the Law which expressly
required death in the sinner: Not to say, that it seems too near to make
Christ's dying needless, if his active holiness do the business; Nay we
cannot so teach.

CHAP. II. Wherein stands our right to Christ and the satisfaction made for us
by Christ? 2. Faith is not the cause of our right. 3. Christ's incarnation and
dying are not favors merited by Christ. 4. How Adams sin and Christ's
righteousness are ours.
OUr right to CHRIST must be considered more accurately then ordinarily it is.
Whether it flows from 1. the merit of Christ: Or 2. from the grace of
predestination: Or 3. faith in Christ.

1. Conclusion. Grace is either objective, out of us as the free love of God
having mercy on whom he will; Or subjective merited by Christ to us and
bestowed upon us.

As touching our right to God as incarnate. 2. As dying for us. Christ's
incarnation and death cannot be a fruit of the Mediators death.
3. As his satisfaction is made ours, are of diverse considerations. For if God
out of free love sent his Son in the world, Joh. 3.16. and if he, out of
free grace that separateth the race of man from Angels, took upon him the
nature of man, to wit, of Abraham, and not the nature of Angels, Heb. 2.16.
Then sure by the merits of Christ's death it cannot come that God came in the
flesh to save sinners. For the effect cannot but come from the cause; but the
cause flows not from the effect, nor is the effect, to wit, Christ's
Incarnation and his dying, the cause of that love and free grace of God which
moved God to send his Son in the flesh, but posterior unto, and latter then
that love: for because he loved us, he sent his Son in the flesh to die for us.

2. This cannot then be true ( Christ by his dying for the Elect, merited and
deserved, that God should be made Man for us) for this should be true also ( by
the blood of Christ, and by the redemption that is in Christ, God sent his Son
in the flesh, and the Son took on him our nature, by the blood of the Covenant)
nor can this be true (Christ merited by his death, that he should die for us)
for so it should be true, that Christ by his blood shed his blood for us: Where
as because he loved his Church freely, he gave himself for her. Ephesians. 5.15. Who
loved me and gave himself for me, Gal. 2.20. Hence 1. though grace be the cause
of grace, as because he of grace ordained us to glory, therefore of grace he
calls, and because of free grace he calls, of free grace he carries on his
work, and gives of grace, perseverance and glory. Yet there is a fountain-grace
of election to glory, which has no cause nor merit, not the merit of Christ
for its cause; but is the cause of causes and of Christ's merits. As one fire
may produce another, but the element of fire was not produced by another
element of fire, but by God in creation. And one Vine Tree brings forth
another, but the first Vine Tree was created by the Lord only.

2. Conclus. Nor have we (to speak acurately) right to Christ's satisfaction nor
to his righteousness by faith. We have not properly right to Christ's
satisfaction by faith.
1. Because the Lords free grace in laying our sins on Christ, Isa. 53.6. and
his making him sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. does rather give the right to his
satisfaction. God would have Christ to stand for so many chosen of God upon the
Cross, and for no other. 1 Cor. 1.30. Ye are of him through Jesus Christ, who
is made (...) of God, to us, wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification,
and redemption. Nor is there any act of faith interveening by which Christ
became our surety and ransone-payer upon the Cross, and not the surety of
others.

2. It is ordinary to our Divines to say, by faith we do apply Christ and his
righteousness: but if we speak properly, application is possession and a
putting on of Christ and his righteousness. Now title or Law-right to an
inheritance, and possession of it, are different natures, and have different
causes: but faith gives not law-right to Christ and his righteousness not so
much as instrumentally. My receiving with my hand gold, my eating and drinking
the flesh and blood of Christ by faith, Joh. 6.53, 54, etc. does presuppone
some right to that gold: but no man can say that receiving of gold, and eating
of bread and putting on of garments, gives a man right to gold, bread or
garments. He that poss^sseth an inheritance has some right to the inheritance
by birth, buying, purchase or gift: the possession in its nature and causes may
be unjust, yet it is possession. Nor can it be shown what causative influence,
even isntrumental faith, has in our Law-right to Christ's satisfaction and
righteousness, except it were a meritorious cause of our right by way of
instrument, which can hardly be said.

CHRIST'S death cannot be applicable to the Reprobate, by faith, except faith be
merited to them by that death.

Davenantius, dissert. de morte Christi, page 49. Respectu mortis Christi
voluntas Dei aliter est comparata ad omnes and singulos, quam esset absque ea,
nam hoc ipso quod Christus passus est in natura humana, sine alio ullo medio
interveniente, hoc saltem apud Deum effectum, ut velit (...) homini* (Caino)
credenti and poenitenti reconciliari, peccata remittere, vitam aeternam
confer ^ -- toll respectum hunc mortis Christi -- promissionibus quoad
non-ele^tos nihil serii, nihil solidi aut very subesset -- illud certum
quemlibet hominem beneficio mortis Christi hoc juris sibi vendicare pos^e (
Ergo hoc jus est impetratum morte Christi etiam reprobis.)


3. We may ask how Christ so died for the Reprobate, as his death is a remedy
applicable to them by the ordination of God, so as they shall have life
eternal, if they believe. For 1. there is either a jus and a Law-right to
pardon and life eternal merited b^ Christ's death to the Reprobate, or no such
thing is merited. If neither be procured by Christ's merit, the Patrons of this
way shall say there is no serious offer made to them: yea there is a jus, a
title to life eternal and remission, which all the reprobate may challenge,
even a right to remission and life eternal, so they believe. Well then, it is
the same right conditional to life and pardon which is purchased to the Elect:
yea this must be purchased whether they believe or not. Then there is no more
in the kind of the Law-right to Redemption and life eternal and remission of
sins purchased to Peter, then to Judas or Cain; And therefore has Christ
bestowed as much tender love in dying for the Reprobate as in dying for his
friends. And Christ says there is no greater love then this, Joh. 15.13. As
for the efficacious intention of applying of Christ's death to Peter, when as
God had no such intention of applying it to Judas, that is an act of eternal
predestination, not a fruit of Christ's death, and as for the grace of
believing, it was purchased to all, Reprobate and Elect, only the Lord applies
not his death, and bestows not the grace of believing upon the Reprobate, but
for right to faith, to remission, to perseverance, to life eternal, this right
must be purchased, but faith it self is never bestowed upon them. But there is
a ransom of blood given for faith, and purchased by CHRIST'S merit: But CHRIST
is never called the Head of all men, Elect and Reprobate, but the Head of the
Body the Church, Ephesians. 1.22. Col. 1.18. And whereas the Head has merited faith
to the Reprobate, and that absolutely (for a condition is not possible) he
should bestow it absolutely, else there is no seriousness in the command of
believing. And since faith is no meritorious cause of right to remission and
life eternal, nor a cause in part, or in whole, of our complete and actual
reconciliation, it may well be said, that they all are completely reconciled,
pardoned, justified, washen in Christ's blood, when nothing is wanting, that
compleats the nature of remission and justification, for faith is only a
condition applying, not a cause buying, nor satisfying for us, and no cause
giving in part, or in whole, any new right.

3. Conclus. Should we, by faith, have right to the promise of a new heart, by
believing, We have not a new heart by believing.
we should have a new heart before we have a new heart, for none can believe
savingly any promise, and so neither can he believe that promise that God shall
give a new heart, until the habit of faith, which is a special part of the
new heart, be infused: For actual faith must flow from habitual faith.
Therefore right to that promise must be absolutely purchased by the death of
Christ to the elect before they believe.

Quest. How is it that not only, penally, but intrinsecally and formally we
sinned in Adam, and are inherenter sinners in him, but we are righteous in
Christ only imputative, and why should not Christ be named formally the sinner,
since he is made by imputation the sinner? As Adams sin is ours by imputation,
and we formally and inherently are sinners in Adam?

Ans. How we sinned in Adam is a point of greater difficulty: For this first
sin the tottering and reeling of the specific common nature in Adam is ours,
Adams sin is ours, not because Adam is our father by nature, but because he is
our father both by nature and by law
not because he is our father (...) by nature (though that be a ground of the
imputation also) but because he is such a father by Covenant, and Law, the Law
and Covenant of Works being laid in pawnd in his hand. There be three parts of
Original sin: A partaking of the first sin of Adam, we all sinned in him, Romans
5.12, 14, 15. (2.) The want of the Image of God, called the Glory of God, Romans
3.23. (3.) Concupiscence and a bentnesse of nature to sin, Romans 7.7, 14, 17,
18, 23, 24. As to the first, Adams sin is ours really and truly, not so much
because it is ours, Three parts of original sin.
as because it is imputed to be ours by God, who so contrived the Law of Works,
as it should be made with Adam, not as a single father, but with Adam as a
public person representing all man, and having our common nature as a father
both by nature and Law, which came from the mere free will of God.

1. Who might so have contrived the first Covenant of Works, that sin should
only have been Adams own sin, not the sin of his posterity. The free will of
God the ground of the Lords imputeing Adams sin to us.
For by no necessity of nature, which is antecedent to the free decree of God,
are all mankind legally in Adams loins, though naturally they be.

(2.) But children are as naturally in their nearest fathers loins, as we are
all in the loins of Adam, and all men are equally of that same specific
nature with their nearest Parents, as with their first Parents: Yet the sins of
the nearest Parents, by no necessity, are always charged upon the children,
but now all have sinned in Adam, Romans 5.12, 18.

(3.) Where a sin is inherently and personally, there is no need of imputation,
which is a free Act of God, had Christ been inherently and personally the
sinner, God needed not make him, or impute our sins to him: as Isai. 53.6, 2
Cor. 5.21. and if we had been intrinsecally sinners in Adam, his sin had been
ours as intrinsecally as it was Adams; and as Adam was not the first who sinned
by imputation, but personally and intrinsecally, so neither should Adams sin
have been our sin by imputation, but intrinsecally and personally, now the
Scripture says, Romans 5.19. By one man's disobedience, many were made sinners,
(...), then they were not intrinsecally sinners, before they were made, that
is, before they were reputed sinners in Adam, or before Adams sin was imputed
to them: as we are not intrinsecally righteous in Christ, before we be
justified, and made or reputed righteous in Christ: When therefore our Divines
say, we are as guilty of eating the forbidden fruit, as if our hands were
there and our teeth, and we did eat in him, The difference between the
imputation of Adams sin to us, and of the righteousness of Christ to us
the speech cannot be taken physically, personally (for we were not then born)
but morally and legally: but our nature was legally there. But when the Elect
does sin, Christ is not said to have been in our loins legally, but he was
made sin, he was punished so as if he had been the sinner; though there was in
Christ no formal guiltiness, no reatus culpae, but reatus paenae.

But we are deprived of the Image of God, and inclined to all sin, not by
imputation, as the young Lion and the young Serpent have not the bloody and the
stinging nature of the old Lion and the old Serpent by imputation, but by
natural and intrinsecall inherencie* Now our holy, harmless, and undefiled
High Priest has no sin in him by inherencie.

3. A legal satisfaction and paying of a sum, yea more then the debtor was
owing, Christ's imputed righteousness cannot remove inherent sin, or make us
such as never sinned.
can never take away a morally inherent guiltiness, nor inherently justify
and make innocent the sinner and make him one, who has never borrowed the
money and wasted it, or one who has never sinned in Adam, and who has never
sinned in his own person: Yea the Law of Works standing, as it is most
spiritual and holy; It is (...) impossible that he who has once broken the
Law, though he be made inherently most holy, and perfectly sanctified* can be
made righteous, which requires there shall never be one the least sin
committed, and what is done cannot be undone.

2. The suffering of another, as of the Man Christ, may well stand for what we
should have suffered, but cannot remove the inherent blot of sin, and remove
fundamental guiltiness. The paying a thousand Crowns for him who borrowed five
hundredth Crowns and spent them on harlotry and drunkenness, may free the
debtor from being in Law, liable to pay the five hundredth Crowns, but can never
free him from being an unjust borrower, and a profuse waster.

3. The two Covenants of Works and of Grace standing, its impossible that the
active obedience of Christ can make us actively and inherently righteous, or
restore to us our lost innocence.

CHAP. III. How Christ suffered for us in our room and place. 2. He died not
for all and every one. 3. How many ways Christ is said to die in our stead. 4.
The Lords so dying for all makes not all saveable, nor the Gospel Preachable to
all Nations. 5. Christ died in the stead of the Elect.
THe Lord Jesus has a room in each Covenant, of Works, and of Grace:
Davenantus de morte Christi, c. 4. page 48. Ex sola vi horum verborum: Christus
pro omnibus mortuus est non potest inferri Christum pro omnibus ita mortuum
esse ut absolute decreverit hac sua morte omnium salutem efficaciter and
insallibiliter operari: quia satis vere and proprie pro aliquo mori is dicatur
qui bono alterius procurando mo^itur, quamvis ille alter suo vitio nihil
commodi inde percipiat.

Christ cannot be said to die for all, if these all may eternally perish.


In the Covenant of Works as a sufferer for the breach of it. Its said by
Learned Davenantius, one is said truly and properly to die for another, who
dies to procure his good* though the other by his own fault, get no good of his
dying for him. But there is not such a Question as this, whether one may truly
and properly die for another, but whether Christ in the sense of the Holy Ghost
died vere and proprie, truly and properly, the just for the unjust, to procure
good to the unjust, and yet these unjust may eternally perish and reap no good
by Christ's dying, through their unbeleef? 2. Will it not follow that Christ 1.
died truly and properly for all, and yet, non obstante morte Christi,
notwithstanding of the Lords dying, all the world may eternally perish, as say
Arminians and Socinians. 3. It shall follow that the immediate, yet the
complete effect of Christ's death is not actual, but possible saving of all.
And Christ has vere and proprie, truly and properly died for them. Nor 4. is
it enough to say that Christ had a special intention in dying for the Elect to
give them faith, but he had no such intention in dying for the Reprobate. But
hence it follows that Christ as properly and truly died for the Reprobate as
for the Elect, as touching the nature and intention of his dying; and that he
offered as sufficient a ransom for the one as for the other, and that is a
mere possible ransom, but as concerning the intention to apply effectually, or
no effectual intention to apply the death, there is the difference. But 1. we
ask for Scripture, where it is said CHRIST dying as dying for the world, No
Scripture warranteth us to say that Christ died for all with one intention to
apply his death to the elect, and with another intention to apply no death at
all to the reprobate.
had these two contrair intentions. The Scripture says, Christ died to gather
his scattered children, Joh. 11.5. to bring to God, 1 Pet. 3.18. these for whom
he died, that they might have life, Joh. 10.11. live to God, 2 Cor. 5.15. die
to sin, 1 Pet. 2.24. be redeemed from their vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1.18. be
delivered from this present evil world, Gal. 1.4. Here is our effectual
intention; where is there a place for his dying with no effectual intention to
bring any to God? and yet he dyed for all good and evil, to make salvation
possible, say they. It is not enough to coin two intentions in Christ-God-Man
dying, and give us Scripture for one of them only, and bid us take the other on
trust. 2. Nor is it enough to say all these places speak of Christ's effectual
dying for his Elect only. For 1. it is not truly nor properly said that Christ
effectually died for the Elect only, for he effectually died for no man by this
way, because he died only to make salvation possible to all, so as they might
perish for ever, notwithstanding of his dying for them: So the efficacy of
dying is in Christ's intention, and application. Now efficacy of intention and
efficacy of application are both extrinsecall to his laying down his life. 2.
The place, 2 Cor. 5.15. cannot be expounded by them of only the effect: For it
speaks (as they expone it) of Christ dying for all that were dead, as v. 14.
and these they say are Elect and Reprobate. 3. Nothing is said, Christ
sustained not two persons upon the cross.
whether Christ on the Cross did sustain the person of all for whom he died,
Elect and Reprobate, and whether he sustained two persons ( for he was cut off,
but not for himself, Dan. 9.26.) one for the Reprobate, another for the Elect.
And whether he finished the transgression, and made an end of sins, as Daniel
says, 9.24. that is, of all sins and transgressions, Christ was not cut off to
put an end to all their transgressions for whom he died, by their way who teach
that he died for all without ex^ception.
final unbeleef and all others: For except he did that, he cannot finish the
transgression, make an end of sins, make reconciliation for iniquity, and bring
in everlasting righteousness, to these for whom he died; Except either he
bring in half a righteousness, or at least imperfect, and never make an end of
some sins and transgressions, because men will not have it so, and set bounds
to the infinite sufficiency of Christ: O^ because he puts an end of sin, and
brings in everlasting righteousness conditionally, and is gracious and
merciful as men will, and decrees to show mercy, not upon discriminating
rebellion, or upon unbeleef, which separateth a Reprobate from an Elect, if so
it seems good to men, and if man shall have mercy on whom he will, and harden
whom he will, or, which is all one, if man shall have mercy upon himself,
because he will, There is nothing purchased to the most part for who^ Christ
dies, but a pelagian power to apply which power all men have, suppone CHRIST
had never died, according to these who teach that CHRIST died for all and every
one.
or harden himself, because he will harden himself* Yet may it be disputable to
some, wheth^r grace by which one is effectually drawn to Christ, rather then
another, be the grace of predestination continuated and so before Christ's
death, or a fruit of Christ's death and so after. But it may well be s^id that
every created saving grace is a fruit of Christ's death, and that we receive the
habit of saving grace out of his fullness, and the saving habit infused
separateth an Elect from a Reprobate: For it is peculiar to Believers and the
Elect to be gifted with one heart, Ezekiel. 11.19. and a new heart in the habit,
Ezekiel. 36.26. and with the spirit (...) grace and supplication to believe and
mourn, Zech. 12.10. and the Spirit and blessing that is powered on the thirsty
ground, and the seed, Isai. 44.3. And so must we say, that the same habit as
actuated by the Lords Spirit, and as it makes one to believe, and draws him
effectually to the Son, actually and efficaciously, and draws not another, is a
fruit of Christ's death, but this way must glory be a fruit of the death of
Christ, but not habitual saving grace. 2. The death of Christ for all is as
common a means of salvation as the Preaching of the Gospel: And both must be
made effectual by efficacious grace, which is not the fruit of the merit of
Christ, by this way, and since grace to actually apply the death of Christ, is
not given to Pagans and millions for whom Christ died, as these Authors teach,
how unsufficient must the death of our Lord be? For it leaves faith as
impossible to the reprobates as if he had never died for them, for neither
habitual nor actual faith is purchased to them by this death: How many ways
it may be said Christ died in our room and stead.
Only the Pelagian application is left to them, which they should have had,
suppose Christ had never died for them.

2. It is to be considered, how many ways CHRIST may be said to give himself
(...) a ransom for us, or in our place.

1. Christ has sufficiently died for all in their room to redeem them. For,
pro (...), for men, The sufficiency of Christ's death depends upon the
i^finitness of his person, not upon the free decree of God
notes ever the decree and intention of Christ dying for men; but the
sufficiency and worth and intrinsecal dignity of Christ's death, depends not
upon the decree and intention of God for the worth of the death and the blood
of him who is God, Act. 20.28. 1 Cor. 2.8. and the Lord of Glory is infinite,
because of the infiniteness of the person, before and without the decree of
God. 2. Nor is it true that Christ's dying for all and every one (which is a
dream) makes salvation possible to all, so that the Covenant is Preachable to
all upon condition of believing, Act. 10.43. To him (Jesus Anointed who went
about doing good and so was man, v. 38) to him (who was slain in our nature,
Whether all believe and be saved* or none believe or be saved, its true that
whosoever believe shall be saved, but the truth of it depends not upon Christ's
dying for all and for every one.
not for all and every man, v. 39. to him) whom God raised up the third day, v.
40. To him gave all the Prophets witness (as it is, v. 43) that through his
Name, who ever believes in him shall have remission of sins.

2. And this would be considered (whosoever believes in Christ are justified and
saved) how it is universal? It is most true thus: There is a sure connection
between faith and life eternal, and the connection is decreed of God; or the
concatenation of the end and the means, or of the means and the end, faith and
salvation. And it is true: whether all believe or none at all believe, and
whether all or none at all be saved, as is this ( whosoever shall keep the Law
perfectly, shall be justified and saved by the works of the Law.) But 1. it
makes neither faith nor salvation possible to Pagans and Reprobates, nor
perfect obedience in doing the Law nor Justification or salvation by the works
of the law possible to any living man, But the Question is, whether the
connection of the former be made true by the decree and revealed will of God
promising life to the believer, by no means, but only by this, because Christ
died for all and every one. And so this should have been false (if all Pagans
and Reprobate and Elect believe they shall be saved) if Christ had died only
for the Elect. This must be proven either by Scripture, or by some solid reason
from Scripture; for it says this, Reprobats can not have life by believing in
Christ crucified for them: except it be true that Christ was crucified for
them, but none can be saved by believing that Christ died for them, except they
also believe that Christ rose from the dead, and ascended and inter^^eds in
Heaven for them. Then one might infer this could not be true, but false (if
Reprobats believe they shall be saved) except Christ have died, risen again,
ascended, and interceeds for all Reprobate and Elect. None are saved by
believing that Christ died for them, except they also believe that Christ rose
also, ascended, and intercee^ded for the^.
For true and saving faith the only condition of salvation, must lay hold on
the Resurrection, Ascension, and Intercession of Christ, as well as on his
dying for all. The reason why it cannot be true that Reprobats shall be saved,
if they believe, except Christ have died for them, is (^y this way) they cannot
believe that Christ has died for their sins, except it be true that he died
for their sins: Yea, I answer, they cannot believe that Christ rose again for
their righteousness, except it be true that Christ also rose for the
righteousness of the Reprobats; this latter they cannot say.

It is said by Christ's dying for all, God has now a condition^ll will of
saving all and every one, Elect and Reprobate, if they shall believe, which
conditional will was not in God, before Christ's dying for all. Yea without
Christ's dying for all, salvation upon condition of believing had been
impossible. But not to say that it is unworthy of the Holy Lord, that new wills
and new decrees should arise in him, upon any thing that falls out in time,
such as the crucifying of the Lord Jesus. Such Doctrine we condemn in Vorstius,
and in Arminians, as is well observed by D. Twisse, such a decree as this, that
God should say ( I decree, will, and intend remission and life purchased by the
death of Christ, to all Pagans that never hear the Gospel, to all Reprobats, so
they shall believe in Christ: And yet I never decree they shall believe nor
have grace to believe) says no more then there is a connection between faith as
the condition, and remission and life eternal as the thing promised; as when
God had decreed that Jerusalem should be burnt, and deny grace to obey; God
has no intention to save all, though he say all that believe shall be saved,
nor comes such an offer from CHRIST'S intention to die for all and every one.
Yet says Jeremiah from the Lord, Jer. 38.17. If thou will assuredly go forth
to the King of Babylons Princes, then thy soul shall live, and this City shall
not be burnt with fire, and thou shall live and thine house. And the Lord says
to Cain, Genesis 4.7. If thou do well (and shall savingly believe as Abel) thou
shall be accepted. Then was that connection decreed of God, it containing a most
just condition of life, and a condition to which Zedekiah and Cain were
oblidged, but that the death of Christ made the Lord to intend and decree
conditionally and in any terms either acceptance to life or remission to
Cain, as the end, and well doing as the means, or intended to purchase the
grace either of the one or the other, is not warranted by Scripture, for both
the one and the other, are the fruits of the merits of Christ; Show 1. how God
can will and decree such a thing to the Reprobate: for its as if a father would
say, I purpose to sell such a plot of ground to my son, so he pay me an
hundredth Crowns, When 1. the son, by no possiblity, has, or can have the
hundredth Crowns, but only from his father. 2. When the father of his free
pleasure has decreed never to give him the hundredth Crowns or the plot of
ground. 2. Show how faith is made possible by Christ's death, when it is not
purchased to the reprobate by Christ's death, it is not surely made physically
possible by Christ's death, if it be said that it is made possible morally,
rationally, and objectively to them, because there cannot be an offer of life
made to Reprobates and to all, upon condition of faith, except Christ have died
for the Reprobate, that is denied, and never proven: If one should come (say
they) to the Antipods or to such as never heard of Christ and Preach the
Gospel, he should not, before he Preach, look for any new establishing of the
conditional Covenant (who ever believes in Christ shall be justified and
saved) but should take it as granted, it was made with them before; therefore
by Christ's death the Gospel of it self is Preachable and may be Preached to all
Nations, quovis seculo, in any age, as it was to Job. Ans. If any come to the
Antipods and any Nation that never heard of Christ, having the gift of Tongues,
and Preach to such, or by his own industry acquire the gift of such Tongues,
One that has the Tongues, may preach the Gospel to the Nation he comes unto,
but that preachablnesse of the Gospel comes in in no sort, from the Lords
sending his Son to die for all and every one.
and by the strong hand of providence Preach the conditional Covenant, these
providence should be a command, and the setting up of a shining torch there
should prove these people (as to the elect among them) in Gods mind were a
Covenanted people no less then the Church of Samaria. And there were no need
to expect a new establishing of the conditional Gospel Covenant: But how is
that proven to be from this, because God sent his Son to die for all and every
one of these Antipods, and made the Gospel Covenant with all and every one of
them before: the Authors shall be ebb of Scripture here. And if these Antipods
should, all and every one, refuse the Gospel and kill the Preacher, and never
one either receive the Gospel, or propagate to any that may receive it; Then
such an Apostolic mission is not in Scripture, and the lawfulness of that
man's call to me is to be questioned: and I should judge, his own Spirit, not
God sent him. Nor is this true, that the Gospel is and was Preachable, and of
it self, may be preached to any age. Job lived before the giving of the Law,
and Melchisedeck, and they had the call of God to Preach to them to whom they
Preached. The Gospel is not preachable to all and every Nation, at all and
every age and difference of time.
2. It shall be denied that Jonah had sinned, if he had not preached to
Nineveh, except God had expressly commanded him to preach to Nineveh, otherwise
it had been the sin of Godly Prophets who lived with him in the time of Joash
King of Judah, 2 King. 14.25. and they had been guilty, as Jonah in not
Preaching to Nineveh. Yea all the Ministers and Apostles, and Prophets had
sinned in not Prophesying to the Phylistins, Syrians, Persians, Bythinia,
Samaria; whereas the Apostles, Matthew. 10.5. Act. 16.6. were forbidden to Preach
the Gospel to the Gentiles, to Asia: and it were strange to say Ezekiel sinned
in not preaching to a people of an unknown Language, whereas the Lord expressly
says he sent him not unto them, Ezekiel. 3.5, 6. and that, Romans 10.15. How shall
they Preach, except they be sent? is meant of the Apostles, and of all lawful
Pastors. And there may be running and no sending of God to Nations, Jer. 23.21.
and Psalm. 147.19, 20. when he denies, he declared his judgments and his
statutes to any Nation, by sent Prophets, as he did to Jacob, if the Gospel
then was of it self Preachable to all Nations, Prophets unsent might have
Preached these same judgments to other Nations, that were Preached to Jacob,
though not sent of God. But that place, Psalm. 147. and diverse others would say
he choised only Israel as his Covenanted people: As Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8, 9. Deuteronomy.
10.12, 13, 14, 15. Exodus 20.1, 2. Psalm. 78.5, 6. Amos 3.1, 2. Deuteronomy. 27.1, 2. to
them only he revealed the Covenant of Grace, then was it not a Covenant of its
own nature that might at any age, be Preached to all Nations. But what is then
revealed in these decrees? (if the Reprobate believe, they shall be saved) Ans.
Not Gods intention conditional or absolute to save them, or to give them faith
or grace merited by Christ's death, to believe, for then some good will and love
of election, the Lord should bear toward the election of such, and should
desire all the Reprobate to be saved, so they would believe, and yet by this
way, no more is there grace purchased to them, The conditional promise either
of life to all that shall keep the Law, or of salvation to all that believe in
Christ can infer no intention or good will ^n God to bestow the end and the
means upon either the one or the other, or any good will toward their persons.
by Christ, to believe, then there is grace purchased to them to perform
obedience to the Law: Now the Authors will not say that by Christ's dying for
all, there is a conditional will in Christ, or in the Father, to give life to
all who perfectly keep the Law: for this conditional will or means and end,
was in God before, and suppone Christ had never died for sinners. 2. This would
say that the Reprobate were to believe that Christ died to save them, having
purchased life to them, and to believe that he died not to save them all for
whom he died, because they are not to believe he died to purchase faith by his
death, or grace to believe, without which salvation is impossible: it cannot be
said that God absolutely intended to save them, whether they believe or not,
even while as there is such a decree in God, because he has decreed both the
end and the means, to wit, having ordained for them salvation, and having
ordained for them faith; nor is there any such decree in God, toward any but
the Elect only, therefore this conditional decree (if all and every one
believe, all and every one shall be saved) can infer no love of God through
Christ to the persons of all and every one to have them saved, more then this
can infer a love of saving all and every one, to be in God or to have been in
the Lord, before the fall of Angels, and men (if all and every one of Angels
and men shall perfectly, without sin to the end, keep the Law, then all Angels,
all men Elect and Reprobate shall be saved eternally.) Now no man found in
judgment, can say this conditional can infer that God had a good will to save
some Angels, not to save others: More then this (if all and every man believe
in Christ they shall be saved) can infer that God has a good will to save
Reprobate men, and not fallen Angels. In a word, no simple conditional
propositions can infer the desire or good will of God to the persons of men or
to have the things done, except God effectually work the condition: As this (if
all fulfill the Law perfectly, men and Angels, and all men shall be saved by
the Law) cannot infer that God has a good will to the persons of all Angels
and all men to justify and save them all, without exception, by the works of
the Law; the contrair whereof he decreed. For this connex proposition may stand
true with the salvation of all Angels, of all men, of no Angels, or no men,
according as the Lord shall be pleased of his good pleasure and free grace to
work, or not to work the condition of moving the will of Angels and men to keep
the Law. And therefore these connexions nihil ponunt absoluti, they place
nothing absolutely to persons, Conditional promises place nothing absolutely
in persons but only the connection of things, means and and, work, and reward,
but only to things, to wit, 1. that it is the duty and obligation of all
Angels and men to perform absolute obedience to the Law, as they would be
justified and saved by the Law, and its the duty of all men in the Visible
Church to believe in Christ. if they would be justified and saved in Christ. 2.
That there is a wise connection between means and end, obedience legal and
life, faith and life, according to the approving will of God, and yet neither
means nor end may ever come to pass or fall out, and neither means nor end may
ever be decreed of God to fall out: Yea God may decree absolutely that none of
the extremes shall exist as God decrees ( if Zedekiah shall yield to the King
of Babylon, Jerusalem shall not be burnt) and yet according to his decree or
will of purpose the Lord has decreed that the yielding of Zedekiah, and the
safety of the idolatrous City should not come to pass, but the contrair. So
God decrees, if Judas repent and believe, he shall be saved according to the
will of precept, and yet according to the Lords will of purpose, neither did
the Lord decree or intend the repenting and saving believing of Judas nor was
grace to believe and repent purchased by the death of Christ to Judas (by these
Authors) though they boast of the amplitude of Christ's death, nor did the Lord
by that will of purpose ever decree or intend the salvation of Judas.

Therefore, 3. this, that the death of Christ is of its own nature preachable
to all Nations, in every age, is not true: For the phrase is neither in
Scipture, in Old or New Testament, nor is the thing it self in Scripture: For
the meaning is, either GOD may send Apostles in any age to all the Nations of
the world, to Preach: If that be, by his extraordinary power, he may save all
the damned, If the Gospel of it self were Preach^ble at all times to all
Nations, it were the sin of the Prophets not to Preach to all Nations, whether
they can speak wi^h all Tongues or no. 2. And all Nations should be in a fit
c^pacity at all times to be the Church^s of Christ, and ^ll Nati^^s should be
Chu^ches in Covenant with God in Christ.
that way. That Preachablenesse is not the object of our faith: Nor is that
Preachablenesse a fruit of Christ's dying for all. If it be meant that God by
his ordinary power may send Apostles in any age to all Nations: How is that to
be said? Except we say God has decreed in his will of purpose to send
Preachers to all; That cannot be, except his decree be disappointed. O^ 3. If
it be his command and revealed will that the Gospel be Preached to all Nations,
every age, they grievously sin, who Preach not the Gospel to the Brasilians and
Antipods, whether they can speak in their Language or not. And if the Doctrine
of the Covenant of its own nature may so be Preached to all Nations, without
exception, in every difference of time, then must all the Nations of the earth,
in all differences of time, be in a capacity to be a Covenanted people of God,
the Church of Christ, the Vineyard of the Lord, his inheritance, the Spouse of
Christ, his Body, his Called, and Chosen flock. For to have the Doctrine of the
Covenant fixedly Preached to a Nation, and Christ offered to them, is to be the
planted Vineyard of the Lord, for to Preach to Macedonia, fixedly, they
willingly hearing, is indeed the Lords entering in Covenant with Macedonia, and
his choising them to be his confederate people, and the Lords planting a
Vineyard, and building a Wine Press in it, and setting up a Ministry therein;
and therefore the Lord was not in Covenant with them before. Indeed to Preach
the Word simply to scoffers who reject it, and that occasionally in the
passing, so as there is no sort of accepting of the Covenant nor any fixed
Ministry there, is not a renewing of the Covenant with them, nor does it
presuppose a Covenant before made with them. 2. It is against the wisdom of
God, that 1. there should be such a band of love the greatest love that ever
was, Joh. 15.13. lying upon all mankind, Brasilians, Americans, binding them to
thankful Gospel-obedience that Christ died for them, yet this obligation of
the greatest love is neither written in their heart, as the Law of nature, nor
is it ever revealed to them that they are under so much love by Covenant. 2.
How can the Lord say I choosed you, O Israel, among all the people of the
earth, and entered in Covenant with you and your seed only. For 1. there is no
need of a new establishing of the conditional Gospel Covenant, for it was
established with Israel, and with all the world before he choosed or called
them. 2. He cannot be said to enter in Covenant with them only. For all the
world ever was thus Covenanted with God. 3. All the world must be an invisible
Covenanted Church, and the fit matter to be a Church. For the Evangel may be
Preached est de se annunciabile, not to stones and to rocks, but to all
Nations, quovis seculo. 4. Since the Preaching of the Gospel to some Nations,
and not to others, is an act of the Sovereign pleasure, yea and of the free
grace of God to such as this Sun-light graciously does visit, by this way, the
sinful neglect of such as refuse to Preach shall be the cause of the perishing
of the elect, a dream.

Its false that Christ so died for us, that is, in our stead, as that in our
stead he fulfilled the Law, and performed all active obedience and passive by
doing and dying* that God can require of us.
2. CHRIST may be said to die for us, as if we had substituted him in our place,
in so rigid a sense, as if he had been made our surety to fulfill both the
preceptive and active, and also the satisfying and suffering part of the Law in
our room. This may please Antinomians, but a doubt it is, if it stand with the
truth: For then what ever we, yea all mortal men be (for Christ died for them
all, as many teach) most wicked, yet Christ's active and surety and cautionary
righteousness should be ours, and though we should never believe, yet Christ
who fulfilled the Law and preceptive as well as the threatening part, must have
believed for all that he died for, and what need we then in our persons either
believe or repent? Its true, we need not perform any active obedience, as a
part of active fulfilling of that Covenant of Works, which either must have
all, or no obedience. If it be said that alio titulo, upon another account of
thankfulness to our ransom-payer we owe active obedience: Yet all that CHRIST
died for, both actively and passively must be perfectly righteous and
justified, having paid the most perfect active and passive obedience that the
Law required, though we never believe, and Christ must have paid the active
part of justifying faith for us. And why, but we should be formally justified
in him without faith also? As also, God, not we, laid our sins upon Christ,
Isai. 53.6. 2 Cor. 5.21. and therefore we did commissionate and substitute
Christ to die in our room. How Socinians will have Christ to die for us.
Socinus, de Servatore* l. 2. c. 8. dictio (pro) causam finalem notat. Joan
Crellius, advers. Grotiam, par. 1. c. 5.

Cateche. R^ccovie. c. 8. page 183, 184. Loco and vice peccatorum nostrorum
mortuum esse, nihil deluti^^ qui dat and pendit (...) pro captis in fuga, aut
loco fugae id pendit.

Jac. Armin. Antiper edit. Bertianae page 676. Quod si statuamus talem
mediatioris rationem -- ut omnium electorum peccata actu ab ipsis abla^a and in
Christum transl^ta sint, qui poenam pro illis passus, illos actu ipso ^ poenis
liberaverit, tum obedientia ab illis postulata fuerit, qui illam praestitit,
and vitam aeternam illa praestatione non sibi, sed illis meruerit, non ^^cus
quam si ipsi Mediatorem nostro loco constituissemus and per eum DEO solvissemus
debita nostra, jam simul statuendum est secundum ipsum justitiae DEI and legis
rigorem electis deberi and immunitatem ^ pecca^is and vitam aeternam, eosque
ista bona ^ DEO postulare jure solutionis and emptionis, absque eo ut Deus
postulare ullo jure fidem in Christum and conversionem ad Deum possit.




Socinus, Crellius, the Raccovian Catechism, Arminius, contend that Christ died
for all finaliter, for to procure good and salvation to all, so they believe,
and yet through their own fault, they may happily never be saved: not that he
satisfied for us, but died for example as a Martyr (say Socinians) as Paul
suffered for the Church, so as we, believing in Christ as in the only chief
Martyr and witness, who as the only Author declared the Gospel, not as a
sufferer and ransom-payer who redeemed us from the Law, are saved. And as
Arminians, he died for our good, not that he died in our room and stead, so as
the sins of the Elect were actually taken off them and translated upon Christ,
so as we are actually freed from the punishment of sin, as if we had
substitute a Savior our selves, and paid our debt our selves to God; and so
according to the rigor of Justice, we might crave by the Law of buying and
selling deliverance from punishment, and life eternal from God. But this way
they will not have Christ to die in the place and room of any, but only for
their good, so as they may die eternally themselves for whom Christ died. Hence
1. It follows that Christ died for them but gave no ransom of blood for them
for whom he died. 2. Arminians will not have the sins and punishment
satisfactory to justice (for of such punishment we speak) actually upon Christ,
and translated off the sinner and laid upon Christ and believers actually freed
from satisfactory punishment: So that both believers and Christ must actually
bear the satisfactory punishment. Which indeed makes believers half redeemers
with Christ: against which we disputed before.

3. Arminians denies that we paid our debts to God, in Christ paying them for
us. So that the broken man cannot be said to have satisfied the debt in, and
through the surety who satisfied for him, which in all Law is unjust. And since
Arminians denies that we paid to Justice a ransom for sin, because our Surety
Christ paid for us, he must deny that Christ was wounded for our
transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities, or that the chastisement of our
peace was upon him: Contrair to Isai. 53.5. because we made him not our
Mediator and Surety, but God made him Mediator, and laid our iniquities upon
him, Isai. 53.6. But it is accidental in Law that the debtor substitute the
surety, One may in Law, be a real and true satisfying surety for another, though
the debtor neither request, nor Covenant with him to undertake, yea though he
know no, thing of the sureties willingness to undertake, and so Christ is our
surety.
or request him to take the place of surety upon him. But he is a real and a
most legal surety who not requested, of free grace becomes surety and pays the
very same sum in specie, in kind, that the debtor ought to pay; this reason
does prove he is both a surety and a gracious surety. As a Kings son who comes
in and lays down his head for a malefactor, truly and really dies and lays
down his life in the room and place of that malefactor, though there was no
Covenant nor paction between him and the Kings son, though neither the
malefactor, nor any friend in his name did request the Prince to become surety
and die for him. Reuben offers his two sons to Jacob as pawnds to be slain, if
he should not bring home Benjamin safe to the father: And had Jacob accepted of
the offer, Reubens two sons who knew not of the bargain, had been sureties for
Benjamin, Genesis 42.37. and Judah might have been Law-surety for Benjamin to
Jacob, though Benjamin requested him not to take any such place. The Lord the
Creditour and Christ the Cautioner did strike hands together: Christ put
himself in our room, as an hostage, pledge and surety to die for us, and paid
the first and second death, the sum that we was owing, according to a paction
between the Lord and Christ, and we requested not Christ to be surety, only by
believing, we thank him, and subscribe and say Amen to what is done. But in Law
we paid, in regard the same nature that suffered was ours, and accepted as
ours. But Arminians clearly refuse that Christ shall be an hostage and surety
for us, Arminius sides with Socinus.
because the offended party of his own furnished not one that died for him; and
so he strikes at the root of a real sacrifice that is satisfactory to God,
because one and the same cannot be both satisfied, and, de suo, of his own,
furnish a satisfying surety. For so as his own, Socinus says, one cannot be
both a satisfier and a person satisfied, and this is no satisfaction at all,
says Socinus. (4.) Our believing cannot effectuate this, that Christ has
actually born the satisfactory punishment due to us. Arminius says that Christ
has not, actu ipso, actually born that punishment: he must say he has born it
only potentially* potentia. Then its like when we believe, he bears that
punishment completely, but he cannot die nor suffer, but once; only he must
mean that Christ did actually bear our sins, but the satisfactory punishment is
not accepted as suffered in our name. But our believing hinders not, How we
satisfied justice in CHRIST'S dying, so that we cannot suffer eternally in hell,
if CHRIST suffered for us on the Cross without wrong to Divine justice.
but he has in genere causae moralis and meritoriae really as a meriting cause
deserved that God in justice cannot exact from us that same satisfactory
punishment that Christ has suffered for our sins, and its impossible that our
faith can add any meritorious power to Christ's death: and therefore though not
in our selves and physically, yet really, morally, legally in Christ,
deliverance from satisfactory punishment is due to us, we being in Christ
legally, and life eternal is due to us, being in Christ according to the
rigor of justice, and injuria irrogata Christo sponsori foret, wrong should be
done to Christ, and commutative justice, by which, ex condigno, by condignitie,
he has bought freedom from hell, and right to heaven, to these he died for, if
we should suffer eternal wrath, in our persons, whether we believe or believe
not; for believing is no part of the meriting cause of the satisfying ransom.
Yea Christ by right of buying and selling, and we in Christ our surety may
claim freedom from the second death, and right to everlasting life, so as God
should fail against commutative justice against Christ, and break (with
reverence and humble submission to his Glorious Majesty be it spoken) Covenant
to Christ, and he should buy with a price more then enough, his seed, and not
get his wages, if these he died for, die the second death, and come short of
glory eternal, if the Lord say to Christ, I promise to thee a seed, that they
shall be delivered from the second death, Christ dies not so in our room and
stead, as that we cannot in justice die the second death except there be a
breach of Covenant between the Lord and Christ.
and have life eternal, providing thou shall give me a price abundantly
sufficient to buy these, to wit, the life and blood of God-Man, and offer thy
self a sacrifice upon the Cross to offended Justice. If CHRIST shall do this
and pay the ransom, and Christ get no wages, no saved seed, but they perish
through the want of faith only: either must faith be a part of the ransom,
which none can say, or then the Lord shall not keep Covenant to Christ. (5.)
When Arminius says that the Lord can, nullo jure, by no Law, nor Justice crave
of us faith and conversion to God, if we have paid our debts, by rigor of
justice exactly to God in Christ who legally in our stead and place paid for
us, he supposes plainly that God requires faith and obedience of us as a part
of recompense made to offended Justice. And Armini^s says, God demands not of
us faith and repentance, by necessity of divine justice, for so he should fail
against justice (with all glory to him be it spoken) if he should exact these
from us.
that Christ's righteousness is ours, not as performed by him, but as imputed
to us by faith: So that faith comes in as a collateral price paid for us or a
part of the price, the very act and work of believing being counted ours, and
our righteousness before God: Yea but God by no necessity of hurt Justice
craves faith and repentance from us.

That CHRIST died not for our good only, but in our stead is proven, 1. Because
Christ in some other more legal way died for us then for Angels, for he died
for their good, that he might ^e made the Head of Angels, Col. 2.10. Phil. 2.7,
8, 9, 10, 11. Romans 10.9, 11. and he died for the good of the whole Creation
that he might make all things new, and restore the creatures to their
perfection, which by the sin of man they had lost, Romans 8.20, 21, 22, 2^. Acts
3.21. Rev. 21.5. but he died not as suffering punishment due to the Angels, and
the work of Creation in their stead, ^s wounded for their transgressions, as he
died for our transgressions, Isa. 53. Christ died not for our good only, but
also in our stead.
For the transgressions of us all, Elect and Reprobate as, they say, exponing
that all, Isa. 53.6. of all and every one of mankind, were upon him.

2. We deny not, but there be considerable differences between Christ's dying,
and the punishment of the Elect which they were to suffer. As,

1. Ours should have been eternal, because we could never out satisfy. But
the sufferings of Christ, There be considerable differences between Christ's
punishment and that punishment which was due to u^ eternally*
because of the dignity of his person God-Man, were perfectly satisfactory in a
short time.

2. He could not suffer the same pain in number, that we should have suffered,
for one and the same accident cannot be in different subjects, nor is the
surety to pay the very same sum numero, that the debtor borrowed.

3. The Lord could not but have punished the Elect with hating and aversion of
mind, they being intrinsecally and inherently sinners. He punished Christ, who
was not inherently, but only by imputation the sinner, with no hatred at all,
but with anger and desire of showing and exercising revenging justice, but
still loving him dearly, as his only Son. But upon this account, Christ must
stand in our room, and because of the five-fold oneness and Law-identity and
samenesse. For,

1. Though physically the surety and the debtor be two different men, yet in
Law they are one and the same person, A fivefold onenes and law identity and
samenes betwee^ Christ the surety, and sinners for whom he satisfied.
and one and the same legal party, and the same object of justice. Whosoever
pursues in Law the surety, does also pursue the debtor.

2. The debt and sum is one, not two debts, nor two ransoms, nor two
punishments, nor two lives to loss, but one.

3. It is one and the same solution and satisfaction, there can not in
Law-justice, come another reckoning, dying, and payment making after the surety
has paid.

4. There is one and the same acceptance upon the creditor his part, if he
accept of satisfaction in the payment made by the surety, he cannot but legally
accept of the debtor, and cannot pursue him in Law, but must look upon him as
no debtor. To justify him is another thing: It being a forinsecall transient
declaration of his righteousness who believes. I speak here of an acception of
satisfaction to hurt justice revenging sin, not of an acceptance of obedience.

5. Its one and the same legal effect, Christ justified in the Spirit, and
risen again, 1 Timothy 3.16. and we in him as in the mer^torious cause are legally
justified. Hence he who suffered the same satisfactory punishment, for the same
sins committed by us, which in Law we ought to have suffered eternally.

2. He suffered and died for us in our stead and place, especially when the
Creditor counts these sufferings, as if we had suffered: So Paul, Scripture and
arguments from Scripture prove that Christ died in our room and stead*
2 Cor. 5.14. If one be dead for all, then were all dead. And the Messiah was
cut off and died not for himself, Dan. 9.26. He did no violence, neither was
guile found in his mouth, Isa. 53.9. Joh. 8.46. Heb. 7.26. But he was wounded
for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed, Isa. 53.5. 1 Pet. 2.23,
24, 25. He was delivered for our offenses, The Lord laid on him the iniquity of
us all. He was cut out of the land of the living, for the transgression of my
people was he plagued, Isa. 53.8. He bare on his body our sins on the tree.

3. He who being made under the Law, paid that Law-debt of satisfaction, which
the Elect in their persons should have paid, and thereby freed them from the
Law-debt of satisfaction: He sustained the person of the Elect in his
suffering. But Christ being made under the Law, paid that Law-debt of
satisfaction, which the Elect in their persons should have paid. The
proposition is out of doubt, none denies the Minor, but that we should have
died eternally in our persons, if Christ had not died for us.

4. He who of purpose took on him our nature, the nature and seed of Abraham,
and the legal condition of a surety to suffer for us, he stood in our person
and room in suffering for us. But Christ took on him our nature, which is
common to believing Jews, and to such also who are casten off of God, Romans 9.3,
4. but not as common to them, but as the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2.16.

And 5. Gal. 3.10. For as many as are of the works of the Law, are under the
curse, If Christ was made the curse that was due in law to us, that blessing
not due to us might come upon us then he suffered in our place.
for it is written, cursed is every one who continues not in all things which
are written in the book of the Law to do them. 13. Christ has redeemed us from
the Law, being made a curse for us -- not to reconcile all and every one to
himself, or to obtain a potentiall and far off power of salvation. But, ver.
14. That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus
Christ, that we might receive the promise of the spirit through faith. Not that
we might believe or not believe, if we would, that is not the blessing of
Abraham, Act. 11.18. Act. 15.8, 9. Act. 5.31. Ph. 1.29. and for his great love
he died for us, the just for the unjust, to bring us to God.

6. And it is thus confirmed, Christ in dying is not looked on as a man; Nor 2.
simply as a single man dying; Nor 3. as a public Martyr or witness that all,
or none at all, if they so will, may get good of him, but by special paction,
if he shall lay down his life, and work his work, and suffer for our sins, that
which we should have suffered, he shall receive his wages and see his seed.

7. As also none who dies as a surety or pays as a surety, but he bears the
person of such as he pays for, who ever gives a ransom for another by way of
payment, and whosoever as a Priest offers a sacrifice for another, he
represents the person offended for whom he offers, so does the Advocate act the
person of the Client, the intercessour his person for whom he interceeds.

8. The phrase to die for another as a ransoner signifies to die in the stead
and person of another. Demosthenes, orat. (...) in liew of Ktesiphon. For
Archias, for Marcellus, Oration pro Ar^hia Poe^a Oration pro Marcello (...).
Demosthe. (...).

Isocrates, (...). Col. 1.24. (...). Homer. (...) 5. (...). Three for one
slain. (...). Rex. (...)* Il. 1.


he pleads, it is in Law as if Archias, as if Marcellus, or as if the parties
for which Cicero, and Demostenes do plead, were in persons pleading themselves.
Its true, Isocrates has (...), for in bonum, for the favor and good of any:
And ( for) (...) notes also to do or die for the good and profit of others,
Col. 1.24. I rejoice in my sufferings for you, that I may fill up the remnant
of the sufferings of Christ for his body. But if it cannot be denied, but for
Christ to die for his body is somewhat more then for Paul or any Martyr to die
for the body, then sure Christ's dying for his Church (as the more does include
the less) notes Christ's dying for the good of his Church, and somewhat more
then for the Churches profit: any may see Stephanus his Thesaurus.

(...) ( For) is often the same with (...), Paul, Romans 9. Rom 9.^. (...). (...)
(...).
I would wish to be separated from Christ, for my brethren; that was not that
they might be saved or not, it were contrair to his prayer. 2 Cor. 5.15. If
Christ died for all, then all were dead. The bread is my flesh which I will
give for the life of the world. The good shepherd gives his life for his
sheep. I lay down my life for my sheep. Greater love then this has no man,
that a man should give his life for his friends. It is expedient that one die
for the people, Joh. 11. Christ has died for the ungodly, Romans 5. in their
stead. For the just, Joh. 10.11. (...).
ver. 7. (...) for notes most frequently vice, loco, in the place and stead:
As also, (...) 2 Samuel 18.33. would God I had died for thee, Absalom. The LXX.
the Syriack version, and the Chalde paraphrase, Joh. 15.13 (...).
in thy stead, I would I had died, and thou remained alive. Genesis 22.13. A
sacrifice for Isaac, in stead of Isaac, Genesis 44.33. I shall remain pledge
(says Reuben) for the lad, Joh. 11.50. (...).
(...) in paund for the lad. Number. 3.12. I have taken the Levites for all the
first born, in stead of the first born. So LXX. (...).

Romans 5.6^ (...). v. 7. (...).
2. When a ransom is given for another in point of justice, Mar. 10.45. Christ
gives his life a ransom for many, Matthew. 20.28. He came to give his (dear
precious) life a ransom in stead of many, 1 Timothy 2.6. (...), a counter ransom
for all. Matthew. 5.38. Eye for eye, tooth for tooth. Exodus 21.24.23. Thou shall
give life for life. LXX. (...). 2 Samuel 18. Syria. versio Quis dabit me mori
loco tui? Chaldae. Paraph. Vellem quod mortuus essem, and tu mansisses ^odie
fili mi. Ge. 22.
Give that piece of money for thee and me, Mat. 17. Isa 43.4. I will give men
for thee, and people for thy life.

3. It is used thus, when a man is given in place of another, Pro. 11.8. The
righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked comes in his stead. Job
34.24. and he makes others to stand in their place, Heb. as before, Psalm.
45.16. in stead of fathers shall be sons. Job 16.4. Oh! if your soul were in my
souls stead.

4. It is when the son comes in the room and stead of the father, or one kills
another, which is a sad exchanging of one person for another, and though the
following King does not act in the person, or by the name and authority of him
who went before, yet there is one person changed, and another raigns in his
place and room. 1 Chronicles. 14.1. Abijah sleept, and Asa his son reigned in his
stead. LXX. (...) 1 King. 3.7. LXX. (...). Genesis 44.

LXX. (...). Mar. 10. (...). Mat. 20.28. (...). LXX. (...). 23. dabis (...)
LXX. (...). Daebis. (...) LXX. (...). Prove. 11.8. LXX. (...). Job 34.^4 Heb as
before. Ps. 45.16 LXX. (...). Job 16*4 LXX. (...) Mat 2.22. (...).


Thou have made thy servant to reign in the room of David my father. LXX.
(...). 2 Kin. 11.43. Rehoboam reigned in his stead, (...), Chal. Paraphrastes,
pro eo. 31. Abijah reigned in his stead, (...). 2 Kin. 1.17. Joram reigned in
his stead, LXX. (...). 1 Kin. 15.28. Baasha slew him and reigned, (...). 2 Kin.
8.15. He slew him, and Hazael reigned, (...). 2 Kin. 15.10. Shallum slew him,
and reigned in his stead, (...). ver. 14. Menahem slew him, and reigned, (...).
ver. 30. Hoshea smote him, and reigned, (...). So Esth. 2.4. Eccl. 4.15. 2 Samuel
17.25. Genesis 30.2. 1 King. 16.10. Zimri reigned, (...) Ezekiel. 16.32.

Joseph heard that Archelaus did reign in the room of Herod his father, Mat.
2.22. Tremellius, and Trostius both turn it, Trostius, Syria versio. (...) Loco
Herodis patris sui. (...).

Tremel. Trostius, vice piscis. (...). To* 12.17. (...). Sir. (...). Tremellius
Trostius, (...) pro multis, sed Mat. 2.22. vertunt loco. (...) pro, vel vice
omnis hominis. (...) loco seu vice vestri. (...) loco ^^ium suarunt. (...) vice
populi, 1 Timothy 2.6. (...) loco omnis hominis, 1 Pet. 2.11 (...) pro nobis, vice
nostri.


loco Herodis, Mat. 5.38. eye for eye: Its the same word (...) Mat. 17.27. give
it for me and thee. The same word, Luke 11.11. If his son ask a fish, for a
fish in stead of a fish. Tremellius and Trostius, in place of a fish, loco
piscis, he will not give him a serpent. Romans 12.17. neither render evil for
evil: So the same in both Languages is, 1 These. 5.15. (...), and 1 Pet. 3.19.
and 1 Cor. 11.16. Her hair is given her in stead of a covering. The same word
in the Syriack is, 1 Pet. 3.18. The Lord Christ died, the just for the unjust:
in stead of the unjust, Christ is, Gal. 3.13. made a curse for us, in our
stead. Matthew. 20.28. Syriack, that he might give his life a redemption for
many, (...) vice multorum. And the same is, Mar. 10.45. and Romans 5.6. in due
time Christ died for the wicked, (...). Syriack, (...) pro, vel vice
improborum. 8. While we was sinners Christ died for us. (...) in our place, 2
Cor. 5.15. If one died in place of all men, all were dead. Mark 14.24. This is
my blood of the New Testament which is shed (...) for many, loco multorum, Luke
22.20. This cup is the New Testament in my blood, which is shed in place of
you. Joh. 10.11. The good shepherd lays down his life for his sheep, in place
of his sheep: The same word, Joh. 11.50. Know ye not that it is expedient that
one man die in the place of the people, and that the whole people perish not.
Then the intrinsecall end of Christ's dying consists not with the perishing of
these for whom he died: for he died that the whole people should not perish. 1 Timothy 2.6. Who gave himself a redemption for every man. Tit. 2.14. Who gave his
soul in stead of us. Heb. 2.9. Who tasted death in the place of every man. 1
Pet. 2.21. ( In stead) or ( ^or) another cannot note always, for the profit
and good of another, but it must make nonsense.
Christ died in stead of us, 1 Pet. 4.1. Romans 9.3. I pray that I were separated
from Christ in stead of my brethren. The same word so constantly used can
hardly signify, for the good and profit either of things or persons: As Luke
11.11. will the father give the son a serpent in stead of a fish, for the good
and profit of a fish? 1 These. 5.15. See that none of you render evil for
evil, i. e. evil for the good and profit of evil? a wild sense, and it is
wilder in the case of persons, when it is said, the son raigns, (...), so often
by the Seventy Translators, in stead of his father, that must be for the good
and profit of the dead father. But nothing can be wilder, then to say Jehu
killed Ahabs seed, and Zimri slew his Master Elah, Hoshea slew the King, and he
reigned in his stead (as the Seventy say not once) that is, he reigned for the
good and profit of the King whom he slew, and so slaying of Kings, and rooting
out the race and posterity of Kings, Socinus de Servato. l. 2. c. 8. Cateches.
Raccoviens. c. 8. pa. 183, 184. The vain reason of Socinians, that Christ died
not in the place and room of sinners, because he died not in the place and room
of sins and transgressions; retorted and answered.
shall be their good and profit.

Socinus, and the Catechism of Raccovia, says, if to die for sinners be as
much as to die in the place and stead of sinners, then to die for sins must
be to die in the place and stead of sins. Ans. These and the like argue much
the vanity of Socinus, if this be retorted, as justly it may. Then as Christ's
dying for sinners, is for the good, profit, saving, believing, and confirming
of the faith, establishing the comfort of sinners, then by the like Christ's
dying for sins, must be to save sins from hell, to bring sins to God, that sins
should not live to themselves, and to establish the faith, the consolation of
sins; whereas Christ died not for sins as for sinners, that he might save sins,
but to dissolve the works of the devil, to take away sin, 1 John 3.9. Joh.
1.29. Christ dies one way for sins, and another way for sinners: The Physician
one way cures the disease that it may be rooted out, and be no more, and
another way the diseased person, that he may live and be in health.

CHAP. IV. Now we are i^ Christ dying, and crucified in him. 2. A twofold
crucifying of us with Christ. 3. A discourse of mortification. 4. The actings
of the mortified. 5. That we are to be mortified in our affections to every
thing that is not God, etc.
IT is objected, that we was not born, nor ha^ we any being, when Christ died,
then we died not in Christ, nor could we rise, ascend to heaven, nor sit in
heavenly places with him? Ans. But 1. in Physical actions there is required
the real existence of the worker. Not so in legal actions, for as we had no
being, who now believe, when Christ died, so our sins had no being; We legally
died and suffered for sin in Christ, although many of us for whom he died, were
not then born, and neither we nor our sins had any being.
How then could our sins, that were not, deserve punishment? Yet I desire to
believe that Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2.24. his own self bare our sins in his own
body on the tree. And that he was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised
for our iniquities, who now live, Isai. 53.5. and they cannot deny this, who
teach that CHRIST died for the sins of the world, none excepted. And the child
in the womb, when the father is absolved from treason is really and in Law
restored to his fathers inheritance: And the sucking child may be Crowned a
King, and take possession of a Kingdom, and take the oath of loyalty of the
subjects in the person of another, though physically he neither do, nor know
what is done, but sleep in the arms of the nurse. So we legally in CHRIST
satisfied, our nature in Christ was crucified, and we, though not born, did
satisfy and suffer satisfactory punishment in Christ. Heb. 1.3. Having by
himself purged our sins, he sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high.
Heb. 9.28. So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many. And in him we
were (legally) crucified, and dead to the Law: As Gal. 2.19. so as Christ once
being dead and crucified, the head and members, whole Mystical Christ is dead
to the Law, and Christ can die no more, for he cannot satisfy and pay the debt
twice: And so are we in him dead to hell, to wrath, to Law-vengeance. Satan
raises a discussed plea against the conscience, CHRIST wills not that we
answer plea's that he has answered, and that by unbeleef, we trouble our
selves with debt that he has paid.
thou art a sinner, and under the curse of the Law. There is no answer to that,
but by believing I was with Christ, crucified, and am dead to the Law and died
to death first and second. For Christ suffered mystical, Christ legally
satisfied, and so did I in him* (I speak not now of personal suffering with,
or for Christ) and therefore that is a plea of Satan's forging, and taken away.
And unjust summonds may be answered by non-compearance* and by the appeal of
faith to Christ who having paid the debt sits Judge upon his own debts, which
he himself paid, and therefore cannot suffer these for whom he died to suffer
for his proper debt, which once he paid. The husband cannot endure the wife to
be imprisoned for the debts which he made his own and fully satisfied.

Obj. 2. All men must die and return to dust, and so must sinners, as the Law
requires, therefore Christ died not for thee?

Ans. Socinus, and Crellius object the same, which Satan does. Socinus, de
Servato. l. 2. c. 8. Quomodo igitur vice and loco nostri Christus est mortuus,
si nos quoque perpetuo ^idem mortis generi expositi sumus? Crellius, adversus
Grotium, c. 9. par. 9.

How we die, though Christ have died for us.


For that death in the hew and color of Law-wrath is holden before a believer
now and then under doubting as a temptation. For we suffer not death such as
Christ suffered, to wit, for sin, watered and affected with the curse of the
Law; nor must we measure death from body or bulk of departing, but from the
salt, and worst of death, which is the curse, and that being removed, we never
die, Joh. 11.26. Joh. 5.24. no more look upon death in the Law, for there it
raigns, but in Christ, and in him death is dead and removed; the formal
demeriting power is removed, when the Law is satisfied: And a believer being
dead to the Law is dead to the curse and to the worst of death, as Christ is
dead* to it now.

Obj. 3. But the conscience of the believer, suppose there were no devil,
challenges him of sin, and therefore that he is under a curse?

Ans. The conscience may be the factor and deputy of Satan in that also, We
depose CHRIST (with reverence to his holiness) from his office of Mediator,
when we embark, having once believed in him, in a new plea with the Law.
for it is the deposing of Christ from his Office of Mediator in satisfying and
answering by his death all the demands of the Law, there is none but Christ,
when the Law demands blood and the torments of the second death, can plead any
thing on the contrair. Romans 3.19. We know that what things soever the Law
speaks, it speaks to these that are under the Law: but the Law speaks not then
to a believer, for he is under grace, and so is not in terms of treating or
parleying with the Law. Christ was crucified and the believer is legally
crucified with Christ, buried and risen again with Christ. 1. Then the Law is
not his judge, it spoke to Christ and condemned him and put him to death, when
he was under the Law, and condemned you in him, now you say, Christ is not
condemned and crucified, when ye enter in a new treaty with the Law to receive
a new sentence from it, and thus ye undo what Christ has perfectly done. 2.
To hearken to conscience componing and making another paction with the Law then
Christ has made, is to take the plea that Christ has embarked in, off his
hand; ye are to stand still and be silent, and believe that Christ's dying, and
your dying in him, is a closing of a satisfactory bargain with the Law. Christ
condemned sin in the flesh, by taking on his flesh the curse due to us for sin,
and for sin, that is, for sins cause, that it might be taken away, he sent his
Son to die, Romans 8.3. and judge and condemn sin. 3. This is to mistate a
question well debated and discussed by Christ; for he being the end and
perfection of the Law, has silenced, and satisfied the Law, We are not to act
of new a plea with the Law, being now in another kingdom and freed from the
Law.
and to what use can it serve to make a new plea and a bastard controversy
with a satisfied party, or to hearken to conscience which craves in the name of
mistaken Law well paid debts, and this is but Satan abusing the Law, and
feigning Letters of Caption in the name of the Law, to trouble the quieted
conscience of a believer. But its safest to say, I stand to what Christ has
done and suffered to fulfill the Law, and I believe I was crucified in him,
judged, and condemned legally in Christ: and what can you seek more of an
ill-doer? He is condemned, crucified, hanged on a tree, and so is justice
quieted. Some raise the devil and a storm in the soul and cannot calm it
again: It is not good to provoke, irritate, and waken a sleeping dog. There
is quietness and peace of believing what Christ has done as well done, and
comfortably to rest on his deed by faith. Hence a case of some, who, because
they are under deadness and security, desire a wakening of conscience, We are
not to desire a Law-wakening under Gospel-deadnesse.
and Satan has taught some to commit some heinous guiltiness, that they may
fall in the hand of justice, and so be wakened, and Satan gives them their
fill of it. Hence, we had rather take a Law-way which is not Gods way, as ly
under deadness; there may be a legal looking upon deadness, whereas it is a
Gospel-sin that we should be humbled for, and in which we should not please our
selves; but no man freed from the Law and brought out of prison, should be
willing or desirous to return to the dungeon again. We should let God guide us
under a fever, and not be our own Physicians, but be quiet at Christ's part, if
he be pleased to cure by contrairs, and to quicken me by deadening me, or to
make a soul humble by smiting with a spirit of pride: its good, we are to
submit.

Obj. How could we be in Christ as in our surety (for says Arminius) we did
not give nor appoint Christ to be our Cautioner or Surety?

Ans. Its evil arguing of Arminius or Satan, who would make the union either
natural or legal betwixt us and Christ, weak, We sinned in Ada^, though we
had neither being nor hand in making Adam either our natural or Law-head, so
may we be legally crucified with Christ our surety, though we had no hand in
appointing Christ to be our surety.
far off, general, and such as is betwixt Christ and Pagans and all the world:
But this reason is naught, for we sinners were not born and very nothing, when
God made the first Adam our father and head in Law as in nature, nor had we any
hand or action in substituting the first Adam in his place, and yet we sinned
in Adam, and his sin is ours, by divine imputation. But can any deny but Christ
on the Cross did act the cause of many believers not born? This is peculiar to
this dispensation, that the creditor, not the debtor, appoint both the
Law-head, and the Evangelick Surety. The Surety had from us a Cautionary,
sponsorie, and deputed nature, but no subscribed commission from us, it was in
the heart of the Creditor by grace efficacious to obtain our consent, and to
make a sort of legal marriage assuming our nature before we either knew our
husband, or gave consent to the marriage-Covenant. As the Advocat speaks in the
person of the Client absent and sleeping, and when the Client hears and sees
how his cause is promoved, he both assents unto, and renders thanks and praises
to the Advocat: and so the absent and far off Client not knowing any thing does
act in the Advocat. And how many answers does our Advocat in Heaven make for
sinners on earth in his pleadings, of which we know not in particular any
thing? Nor does Christ speak or plead for believers as a private man, nor appear
in his Name as it were, but in our person.

Neither is there a faining of a person here, or a borrowed and fained
redemption, there be these five here. All the requisits to a real satisfaction
are in Christ's dying for us.
1. A Redeemer Christ. 2. Persons redeemed, sinners. 3. A Lord from whom we are
redeemed, the Lord Jehovah, not simply, as God, he is the party from whom we
are redeemed, but God as the offended Lawgiver, who had us liable to eternal
punishment. 4. There was a price, the life and blood of God, which though not
profitable to God (for that is extrinsecall to satisfaction real) yet an
abundant compensation to justice for declarative glory taken from God which is
the nature of real satisfaction. 5. There is here a God just, true, holy,
unchangeable, to whom the price is paid. Nor does Christ sustain the person of
the enemy Satan from whom we are redeemed, for he is but the lictor who then
had no right to detain us, we are redeemed from evils of sin and punishment:
Nor does Christ in suffering sustain the person of God. Hence, from our being
crucified with Christ crucified, something is to be said in a practical way of
our mortification; for mortification flows originally from Christ's death, we
being crucified in him and with him, Gal. 2.20.

Q. What is mortification?

A. It is a deadning of the whole powers and inclinations of the soul in their
bentnesse and operations, What mortification is.
in order to things forbidden by the Law of God, or in things indifferent and
commanded. Hence, not the affections only, but the understanding and mind must
be deadned. And therefore this is no mortification until sin original be
subdued in its damnation by Christ's death, and in its dominion by the Spirit of
Sanctification. A tree is not withered while standing on its root, bulk and
branches are green and flourishing: Its much to know the withdrawing of sap and
life from the root and the vital parts of old Adam. The ebbing of a River is
not the drying up of it; the new birth only is mortification.

Q. 2. Since mortification comes only from Christ's death, what is the influence
of Christ's death herein?

Mortification comes from Christ's death as from a real cause and from a real
new principle procured by the death of Christ.
Ans. The influence is real, ad modum causae physicae, the merit of blood has
bought us from our vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1.18. Christ dying does merit by
blood the Spirit, and infused grace, which deadens the whole life of sin.
Evangelick Arguments from ten heavens, from ten Gospels working morally and in
a swasory way, cannot more work mortification then touching can make a real
change on a dead corpse; we was legally dead and crucified in Christ, and with
Christ, when he died, many not being born then: But in the infusing of the life
of God, Christ applies the real principle of mortification. Now the redemption
from a vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1.18. from the present evil world, Gal. 1.4.
is as real and proper a bargain, except we follow Socinus, as redemption from
the wrath to come. 2. Christ's death has an influence moral and swasorie to
work mortification: As 1 Pet. 1.16. Be holy. 17. Pass the time of your
sojourning in fear. For ye are bought with his blood from your vain
conversation. And 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. Christ has suffered in the flesh, therefore
be mortified to your lusts, and serve them not, as the Gentiles do: So Col.
3.1.5. But the action moral of the Gospel does not work upon the natural man:
Gospel arguments how and upon who^ they work.
for like works upon the like; carnal reason upon a carnal spirit; and
spiritual Arguments upon a renewed man; as an Argument from a painted feather
works upon a child, more then an Argument from an inheritance, which no doubt
will work upon a man come to age, and yet neither the one nor the other works
upon a renewed mind to remove him off Christ his rock. Hence it is, 3. that
Acts of Omnipotency are used as Moral Arguments: also, God works in you to
will and to do, therefore work out your salvation. And choosing, redeeming,
calling, justifying, quickening, converting, are brought in as causes in
Scripture, both real and moral; but they work morally on reason, where there
is an impression of faith and principle of life. The Gospel works on an
unrenewed man to persuade him almost to be a Christian: Ye may persuade a youth
to a course, When reason is green, adherence* to a course by persuasion is
unstable.
and get his word, consent, and write; but because reason is green and young,
he falls off it again, but a man of judgment shall stand to it: yet if he be
not renewed, reason is also green and raw before a spiritual temptation.

Quest. What are the actings of a mortified man? Four sorts of considerable
actings in one mortified.


Ans. No actings. 2. Slow actings and lent. 3. Actings indifferent. 4. Closing
with contrair providence, reproaches, work not on mortification to fire the
man. Psalm. 35.12. They speak mischievous things. 13. But I as a deaf man, heard
not. David feared to be the reproach of the foolish: Such a case, though from
God, would raise a cry in a child of this world. Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb, I
opened not my mouth, because thou did it. A mortified man is dead to the voice
of men-singers and women-singers, and musical instruments of all sorts,
Eccles. 2.8. and houses, gardens, 1. No actings are in the mortified at most
moving objects.
vineyards, orchards, great possessions, cattle, treasures, gold, silver, are
all as music to a dead man: and repenting Solomon now mortified, looks on them
as a wise man upon experienced vanity and vexation of spirit. Will he sing and
dance at a shadow? Except a mad man, none will do that. 2. If any thing,
without a child of God, work upon him, they move him not much: Psalm. 131.2.
Surely I have behaved and quieted my self, as a child that is weaned of his
mother, my soul is even as a weaned child. Acts 20.24. None of these things
move me: I make not much reckoning of bands. Peter, The motions of grace are
quiet and slow.
1 Pet. 4.12. will have the saints not to think burning quick, strange, graces
motions are quiet, slow, modest, there is not much fire in the spirit of a
weaned child: A mortified soul is as a sea that has no winds, nor low ebbings,
nor high spring tides. Grace stirs leasurely and lentely toward all things,
except to God: were there ten Paradices offered to it, it cries not, a dying
man's pulse beats weakly. Grace shouts at nothing, The actings of a mortified
man in order to all created things, are indifferent, not peremptory, not so
absolutely fixed but he can q^i^e them (...) Go^.
wonders at, and admires nothing; weeps slowly, laughs slowly, sings weakly,
eats slowly, drinks not wantonly, feasts, and yet trembles and fears, whether
it be the outward or the inward man. David says it well* Ps. 62.2. He only is
my Rock -- I shall not greatly be moved. The believers sings, and yet he is not
wanton; and weeps, and yet is not sad; dies, and yet lives; is fervent in the
cause of God, and yet stayed and composed in spirit. 3. The actings of
mortification are indifferent, not fixedly bent upon any thing but God, no not
upon the Ark and spiritual comforts. Weeping David, 2 Samuel 16.25. says to
Zadok* carry back the Ark of God into the City* (better I want my comfort, then
the Ark be taken) if I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring
me again and show me both it and his habitation. 26. But if he say, I have no
delight in thee, here am I, let him do to me as seems good unto him. O how
sweet, when for God, Moses can lay down his personal satisfaction in a share
of life eternal. What if he tramp upon my eternal Crown, I should lay it down
at his feet; and is not this mortification? Should he hide his face, for
eternity, from me, and I never see him in his manifestations, so his glory
shine in my everlasting sad desertion; there is required an indifferency to all
created things without; no peremptory and absolute fixednesse of the affection
to any good, God excepted, is good: the contrair of this is an ingadging of the
heart more then is right to any thing, give me children, or then I die, there
should be a contented living without children, if God so will: love the
creature, as if ye loved not, the Lord would have us hungring for the creature,
and yet not eagerly desiring, and thirsting, and yet have a lent and well
ordered appetite to drink: love the child, but let the heart cleave leasurely
to the child. Plowing, and no heart-labouring, buying and selling, and no
heart-ingadging to the bargain is best here. 1 Cor. 7. They that have wives
should be as if they had none. 30. And they that weep, as though they wept not;
and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they that buy, as
though they possessed not. In the acting of affections toward the things of
this life, as father, mother, husband, wife, children, houses, gain, beauty,
honor, and new bought farm, there would be a godly distance of the heart from
the thing ye do: Loving, and no loving; rejoicing, and no rejoicing; weeping,
and no weeping; speaks most mortification. We cannot do here, except sinfully
we over-doe, and the outgoings of the heart to the creature must be fiery,
which is childish, whereas mortification is a gracious well composed grave
temper of the aged in Christ. There is a fire-edge and a fervor or fever of
affections even to spiritual objects that are created at the first conversion,
Actings terminated on God may be fiery.
for mortification does not so soon begin as the new heart. As for God, love as
one that loves, desire and desire, and when he hides himself, weep as if you
weeped, so the weeping be terminated upon God, not upon his dispensations, to
quarrel at, and censure his ways, but let the outgoings of the heart to God,
and to Christ loved and longed for, be with fire, and full strength, Cant. 3.1,
2, 3, 4. Cant. 2.5. Ps. 42.1, 2, 3. Ps. 84.1, 2. Joh. 20.13. Luke 7.38. Rev.
1.17. 4. Its mortification to have a heart closing with all providence. Phil.
1.21. To me to live is Christ, and to die is gain: To live is good, to die is
good, Mortification sweetly closes with all providence.
because the Lord so wills, the Lords giving is to Job praising, and the Lords
taking away is to Job praising. Phil. 4.12. I know both how to be abased, and
how to abound: every where, and in all things I am instructed, both to be full
and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need. If I die, it is good; if I
live, it is good; if I be full, and rich, it is good; if I be hungry, and poor,
it is good; if David be on the Throne, it is good, and he sings Psalms; if he
be chased barefooted, and ashes on his head, by the ascent of Mount Olivet, it
is good; he also praises and sings Psalms, 2 Samuel 15.30. Ps. 3.1, 2, 3. If he
be at home in his house, it is good, he praises, Ps. 30. Ps. 101. If he be
banished in the wilderness, and chased from the house of God, its good, he
praises, Psalm. 42. Psalm. 63. Psalm. 84. Nothing falls wrong to a mortified soul.
The people cry Hosanna, Christ bids them rejoice, their King comes, Zech. 9.9.
The wicked spits on his face, and plucks off the hair, that is good, Isa. 50.6.
I gave them face and back to be doing their will. Heat to a gracious spirit is
good, cold is good, joy is good, sorrow is good, health is good, sickness is
good: Ezekiah gets a victory, the Assyrians are slain, that is good. Isaiah
prophecies that all that are in his house, and his treasures shall be spoiled,
and his children carried captive, good is the word of the Lord: Is spoil and
captivity and the sword good? Yea Ezekiah closes with it, Isai. 39.8. Grace
wonders at nothing, laughs at nothing, weeps at nothing but faintly, rejoices
at nothing wantonly; closes with all, says Amen to all: for Christ was
crucified for me, and I am crucified in, and with him.

Q. 3. What are the speces or sorts of mortifications, that we may know the
true mortification?

A. 1. Its hard to give the division of them logically: There is 1. a natural
mortification, there is no fire in the affections of sucking infants to Crowns,
Kingdoms, to treasures of Gold and Silver, that is not mortification,
Mortification or deadness merely natural, only because the Tools are broken
and the horse wearied, has nothing to do with the death of CHRIST
but virtually there is as much fire in a flint stone, though formally it be
cold, as may burn twenty Cities. Concupiscence driven away from the aged,
Eccles. 12. the hearth-stone is cold, and there is in it such a deadness to
lusts, not because of deadness of sin Original, it lives, as the souls of the
old men live, but because the tools are broken, the animal and vital spirits
are weakened, the man loves the journey, but the horse is crooked and laid by:
there is nothing of Christ's death here.

2. There is a compelled mortification, sickness and withered arms and legs,
and strong fetters in the prison, poverty and want, care for bread, and the
armed man poverty that has a sharp sword, necessity blunts the affections in
their second acts, the man has no mind of whooring: 2. Compelled mortification
is not from Christ's death.
And many drink water, who through Christ crucifying, are not mortified to wine
and strong drink. 1. There is often in this, an ignorance of CHRIST crucified,
and no faith. 2. A reluctance to divine dispensation, and no gracious
submission to God, which is in one crucified to the world.

3. There is a Philosophic mortification to the creatures which are seen by
the light of nature to be very nothing and most unsatisfactory to the natural
man: 3. Philosophic and bookish mortification not from Chrst crucified.
but there is no supernatural deadness in the heart wrought by the death of
Christ. Archimedis, and other great spirits, sick of love to know the nature,
motion, and influence of the stars, and pained with a speculative disease of
books, and to know much, do contemn and despise honor, gain, pleasure, the
three idols, of ambitious, of covetous and voluptuous men; but there is no
deadness, no bluntning of the operations of the soul toward the idol world,
flowing from the believed in crucified Lord of Glory, except you say that
Plato, and Aristotle, and such, were crucified with Christ: Learning works not
mortification.

4. There is a religious or a madly superstitious mortification. The Monks
(says Luther) dreamed that the world was crucified unto them, 4. Superstitious
and religious mortification, Luther Com. on Gal. 6* 14*
and they unto the world, when they entered unto their Monasteries, but by this
means Christ is crucified, not the world: Yea the world is delivered from
crucifying, and is the more quickened by that opinion of trust they had in
their own holiness and righteousness. Col. 2.23. In will worship, in
humility, and neglecting of the body; not in any honor to the satisfying of
the flesh. There is much vain and counterfeit mortification; and Papists have
as good warrant to sacrifice their lives to God, and to offer a bloody
sacrifice unto God, under the New Testament, as to shed their own blood in
whipping and scourging, and such bloody worship, has the ground of
mortification that Baals Priests had to lance themselves with knives to the
effusion of blood. And the same may be said of pilgrimages, of voluntary
poverty, in which (as Luther said) the world and all their lusts are quickened.

5. Not unlike to this is the Pharisees mortification, 5. Pharisa^cal
mortification.
in which they are not crucified with CHRIST, but alive and vigorously strong
to self-righteousnesse, to merits, to dead works.

6. There is a civil or moral mortification which has diverse branches. 6.
Civil mortification.
As 1. Senec^ teaches that nature is satisfied with water for drink, and a
^urse for a house, yet he was a covetous man himself. And shall Horatius Cocles
be a mortified man, because he defended the Romans against the three Curiatii
alone? Though the bloody Gallant killed his own sister? And was the state
mortified who pardoned him that bloody fact, for his gallant service? And
Decius father and son who suffered so much for their Country, and loved it
more then their own blood? And must Africanus Major, and Cato, who suffered for
the liberty of the public, and Diogenes, who lived on herbs, be mortified men
to the world? But what avails it to be dead to the bulk of a bit body of clay,
and yet be alive to vain glory? 2. There is an occasional deadness rising
from the sight of a father, a brother, a friend dead, not from the death of
Christ. An unbeleever dies with this word, I would not live for all the world,
and, we are like water spilt on the ground. The house is burnt, all spoiled,
treasures, and the stock, by land and sea-robbers, are plucked away; and riches
have wings. Hence, mortification transient for a time: but lusts fallen in a
sown, are not dead, they rise again and live. 3. There is another transient
mortification, as D. Preston observes, when the conscience is affrighted with
Judgment, D. Preston Sermon. 1. of mortification* p. 8 p. 9.
and some fire-flaught of restraining grace is up. 4. A good calm nature
naturally either dull and stupid, or some clement and meek disposition, and free
of the fire that often follows the complexion, and hampered in with teachers,
parents, company, education, learning, seems a mortified nature. But that is
true mortification, that flows from faith in a humbled crucified Savior, and
it is not to believe that Christ was mortified in our room and place, as
Saltmarsh and Antinomians would say. Faith in Christ crucified is our
mortification causatively, in radice, not formally.

Q. 4. To what things must we be crucified?

Answ. Gal. 6.14. To all things created, to the world; we condemn and despise
and hate the world, and the world does value us nothing.

1. Mortification to self.
1. There is a deadness to self which was in Christ our samplar of
mortification, To. 15.1. Let us not please our selves, but bear the infirmities
of others. 3. For even Christ pleased not himself. Self loved and adored, and
mortification do not consist, too much life in apprehension, and admiring self,
argues deadness of deadness and of mortification. Was not Christ a noble
self? Yet for the Lord, and his ransoned ones, Christ got above noble excellent
self. It is true, there is a renewed spiritual self, a new I in the Saints,
(...), Romans 7.17. Now it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me.
Gal. 2.20. It is not I that lives, but Christ lives in me. Mortification sets
us above new (...) renewed self, and regenerated and crucified I; it being a
created excellency that we are not to adore.

2. Mortification to will
2. Mortification requires a deadnes to the will, as in Christ, not my will, but
thy will be done: Much life in the will to created things, speaks little or no
mortification. Christ excelled in this, Joh. 5.30. I seek not mine own will*
but the will of him that sent me. O what court, and power, and life has our
will? And how soon the will is broken and dead, then is the man broken, dead
and crucified with Christ. Much will, much life of sin: See Joh. 5.40. Ye will
not come. Much will, much life, all will is no mortification.
Luke 19.14. We will not have this man to reign over us. See Mark 6.25. Mat.
1.19. Mark 15.15. Act. 24.27. Act. 25.9. Luke 10.29. Rev. 22.17. All will,
argues no mortification.

3. Mortification to life.
3. There is required deadness to our life, which was eminently in Christ, Mat.
20.28. 1 Timothy 2.6. Joh. 10.11. So Paul, Act. 20.24. Ye speak of bonds and
affliction, But none of thase things move me, neither count I my life dear to
my self, so that I may finish my course with joy. To be mortified to life, is
to hate the life, Luke 14.26. for Christ. And Revel. 12. they overcame:
mortification was their victory. v. 11. They overcame, for they loved not their
lives unto death: Love of life is the life of sin when its not loved in God.

4. We must be dead to wisdom, 4. Mortification to wisdom: there is a paper
sickness for ma^y books
and to all the gifts of the mind, for the wisdom of the world is foolrie,
and God has befooled it, when it comes in competition with the wisdom of the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 1.18, 19. except we be dead to it, we cannot glory in the Lord.
27, 28, 29. Compared with v. 31.

2. There must be a deadness to learning, to books, and book-vanity, Eccles.
12.12. There is no end of making many books, and much study is a weariness of
the flesh. Eccles. 1.17. 5. Mortification to learning and books. Ptolemaeus
Philadelphius King of Egypt gathered in the Bibliotheck of Alexandri^ 40000.
books. ad luxuriam non ad utilitatem, ait Livius, and they were all burnt.

Serenus Sammoni^^^ left in Testament to Gordianus junior three score and two
thousand books.

Petrarcha, Librorum larga copiae est operosa sed delectabilis sarcina, and
animi jucunda distractio -- libri quosdam ad scientiam, quosdam ad insaniam
deduxere, dum plus hauri^nt* quam digerunt: Vt stomachis* sic ingentis nausea
saepius nocuit, quam fames.


And I gave my heart to know wisdom, and to know madness and folly: I
perceived that this also is a vexation of spirit. 18. For in much wisdom is
much grief, and he that increases knowledge increases sorrow. Paul spoke more
with Tongues then they all, 1 Cor. 14.18. but he was dead to that gift, he had
rather have brought them nearer to Christ. 1 Cor. 4.10. We are fools, and
hardly we can away with that; but we are fools for Christ's sake, and for the
interest of Christ and the Gospel, let us so be counted. Its nearness to
Christ that maks us for him to be willing that what is most eminent in us be
trampled upon, even shining wisdom, sciences, acts, eloquence, knowledge
which puffs up. Yea there is (3.) required a deadness of the knowledge of
Gospel-mysteries, 1 Cor. 13.2. Paul was not rude in knowledge, but he was dead
to that, and would not glory in that. And (4.) they are not crucified with
Christ, not dead to opinions and sides, and to lead factions: I am of Paul, I
am of Apollo, was no honor to Paul in his own esteem, 1 Cor. 1. What? was Paul
crucified for you? or were ye baptized in the name of Paul? Who excells in
learning, who admires not his own, the birth of his own mind? If it were but to
hold there be ten new worlds in the Moon, and millions of worlds in the other
side of this world? My brethren, be not many masters. Ah! we are not dead to
the Chair, the Pulpit, every one loves to be counted and called Rabbi. The
blessed Man Christ confesses that he knows neither the day nor the hour of the
Son of Man's coming; yet there are who darre define the time of his coming, and
the day. The mind is a proud and haughty thing, and we are not dead to it; the
mind is not mortified to the mind, 1 Cor. 8.1, 2.

5. We are not dead to Mammon: O who is like Christ and refuses to be a rich
King, 6. Mortificatio^ to riches
Joh. 6? Paul, 2 Cor. 8, 9. For ye kn^w the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that though he was rich, yet for your sake he became poor: He had a greater
mind then that he could live to riches. Paul, Acts 20.33. says not I have
sought neither silver nor gold, as the Godly judge, Whose ox have I taken, 1 Samuel 12.3. but I have coveted no man's silver or gold, or apparel: The life of
lust to riches is in the trusting in it. Job 31.24. If I have made gold my
hope, or have said to the fine gold, thou art my confidence; Or, 25. have
rejoiced because my wealth was great. Its true, a beggar and an extreme poor
man that cannot have bread, is not troubled nor much tempted to seek a Kingdom
and the millions and tons of gold that many rich ones have; but yet there are
speculative desires and rolling waves and floods of wishes in the heart for
these: and because hunger and want of bread is his door enemy lying between him
and the hope of great riches, the man is neither mortified to the love of bread
nor to the millions of gold that the heart is sick after. And as there be
diverse kinds and speces of pests, and they are not all of one kind, yet all
contrair to the blood and the heat of life: So are there sundry kinds of
unmortified lusts about riches according to the sickness of the desire.

Obj. But is not the desire of food and raiment natural, how then is it
faulty? The simple desire of riches is not the sin.


Ans. The desire simply is natural, and the Ants and the Conies do desire. But
the desire 1. beyond measure. 2. With a sinful doubting that they shall not
have it, which reproacheth Omnipotency. 3. A desire wider then that of Ants and
Conies, of that which is more nor sufficient, which would destroy and not feed
but over-feed, is the faulty desire; as sickness desires drink more then
sufficient, not for health, but to feed the disease, it is the desire of the
disease rather then of the man diseased; and the forbidden desire is the sin.

Obj. 2. May not a child of God desire more then enough, how then is he
mortified?

Ans. If the desire of more then enough come from the habit of covetousness,
the man is not mortified to Mammon: all sinful habits in the child of God are
broken, and lessened, Whether acts of covetousness may consist with
mortification, and how.
and chased in to inclinations, or to the habit of Original corruption
slackened and by grace subdued; but in every child of God there is sin dwelling
and the flesh, Heb. 12.1. Romans 7.17, 18. 1 John 1.8, 10. Jam. 4.5. Gal. 5.17.
and the old man, which is put off by degrees, Ephesians. 4.24. Col. 3.5.10. which is
a habit of corruption not in full vigor, but sickening, decaying, and a dying
daily, but even a grown child of God from this broken and sick habit may,
temptation invading, and the Lord withdrawing his influence of grace, may break
out into gross acts of covetousness, adultery, murder, as is clear in David,
Lot, Peter, Asa, and that says that mortification is complete in none. And
there is too often a sort of sinful resurrection of the habit of sin and the
flesh, so that David seems not to be David, but an adulterer, a murderer: As
we see it is the same River that swells over its banks, that it was before, but
the overflowing is from without, from the clouds and from excessive rain, the
river also has a receptive capacity in it self to exceed its banks and
channel: So has a child of God from strong temptation from without, and broken
corruption from within, a more then his own ordinary quantity and swelling over
his channel; To teach us that our mortification is a work not of day, but of
our whole life. Neither would the wise Agur pray against riches, Prove. 30. if
temptations contrair to mortification did not follow them.

6. There is a necessity of deadness to honor, and to learn the noble and
excellent art of self-contempt, 7. Deadness to honor.
that the Spirit shall teach us that spiritual lesson to be willingly tramped
on, and the face spitted on, and the hair plucked off the cheeks, as our
Blessed Lord went out and in the way met with spitting and shame, Isai. 50.6.
Mat. 26.67. Mat. 27.26. O great word! Phil. 4.12. (...), I have learned to be
abased. 1 Cor. 4.12. Being reviled we bless, being persecuted we suffer, being
defamed we entreat, we are made as the filth of the world, and are as the
offscouring of all things unto this day. (...), the sweepings of the house:
Erasmus, the filth wiped off any thing. Valla, the filth that sticks to the
shoes. The Syriack has a word that notes the dung of the belly. As the
condemned man tumbled into the sea as a sacrifice to Neptune from a steep place
was called peripsema. Sis pro nobis peripsema.
So Budaeus thinks Paul alludes to heathen expiations. And when they reproached
me, David, Psalm. 38.13. But I was as a deaf man that hears not, as a dumb man
that opened not his mouth. The sense and discerning of heat and cold, of
railings, and applauses, would be dead: That is mortification, when the sense
of hearing is dead to sounds, to music, and to pleasant songs, these are not
delightful to a crucified or hanged man, when the life is out: Nor can all the
sweet smells, flowers, roses, precious ointments, affect the smelling of a
crucified man, nor all the fair and magnifick palaces, meadows, gardens,
rivers, mountains, hangings, painted pictures, work upon the sight or eyes of a
crucified man. When the heart is ravished with honor, as the man who said the
glory of Themistocles hindered him to sleep in the night, Plutarchus De
profectu virtutum lib. 11.5.237. Themistocles somnum sibi Miltiadis Tropheo
adimi, eoque se excitari electo. Plutarch. ib. page 239. Quid mihi nunciaturus
es, nisi Homerum revixisse?
as little mortified as Themistocles who said sleep was taken from him, and he
was raised out of his bed in the night by reason of the brave trophie and
renown of the victory of Miltiades, that renowned man of Athens, who, as is
known, with a 10000. Greeks, put to flight 60000. Persians. And Alexander the
Great, his heart must have been waking at the sound of honor, who, when a
messenger came running to him full of joy, said what should thou tell me, but
that Homer is living again? for he thirsted for nothing so much as honor: And
how soft and very nothing is the spirit that is broken with riches or honor
and pleasure? And often men judge themselves mortified, because they are dead,
it may be to riches, but alive to ambition and desire of honor. As
Nebuchadnezzar spared no charges for his gods, his pleasure, but he was alive
to honor, Dan. 4.30. Is not this great Babylon, that I have built for the
house of the Kingdom, by the might of my power, and the honor of my majesty?
Men may judge themselves mortified to honor, because they are deadned to
riches, and not be mortified.
Satan does often change Posthorses, and can seemingly deaden men to riches,
when they are not mortified, and yet the heart is strongly vigorous to honor.
When it was told Zeno that his ship, which he did trade withal, was broken:
Well done, Fortune, (says he) thou compells us to go within our cloak; he
meaned, To live upon the glory of virtue and learning, when riches are spent
and gone, was well done. But mortification, in the habit and root, is like the
works of nature. The Sun equally enlightens the whole Air from the East to the
West: Life comes in equally upon the whole Embryo and birth. Saving
mortification goes through the whole soul. Plutarch. de capienda ex hostibus
utilitate, l^bel. n. 3^. page 241. Zeno, cum nunciaretur navim ipsius qua
negotiabatur, fractam: Been facis, inquit* fortuna, quae nos intra palliolum
compellis.
Christ merited by his death deadness to honor as well as to riches; Though
in the actual subduing of lusts D. Preston does well observe that there is not
that labor required in subduing and mortifying all sins. For love of sin being
the dominion, life and castle of sin, the more love to the heart-idol and to
the right eye, the harder it is to be mortified. Some sins cleave to us as our
hair and nails, as a custom of some sinful words, these are sooner mortified;
and yet if mortification be not in the heart, these take life again, as hairs
and nails cutted and shaven grow again. The trees in Winter are not dead: but
there be master-devils and strongly rooted heart-darlings, pride,
covetousness, to which we are mortified, with a huge greater deal of pains and
wrestling, for they are to men as the eye and the right hand.

7. We are not soon dead to injuries. Our blessed Coppie in this excels:
Father, forgive them, All sins are not mortified with the like labor.
for they know not what they do. And Steven, Act. 7.60. Lord lay not this sin
to their charge, Colos. 3.13. Forgiving one another. Yea, but he wronged me,
and injuries have a strong impulsion upon our spirits. I cannot forget it. If
any man have a quarrel at any (says he) let it fall: even as Christ forgave
you, so do ye also. 8. Deadness to injuries.
Shall not Socrates witness against us, who answered his friends, willing him
to accuse before the Judge a vain youth who did smite him with his foot, If an
Ass lift his heels against me, shall I lift my heels against the Ass? and the
youth was so convinced that he hanged himself. And he said nothing to a
multitude of reproaches casten upon him in the Theater, but, I am vexed with
words in the Theater as in a great banquet. Plutarch. lib. de liberis
educandis, moral. 1. n. 15.20. page 17. A^ si me Asinus calce feriisset jussuri
eratis, ut contra eum calcem impingerem? Omnibus hoc ei exprobrantibus, and
calcitronem (adolescentem) appellantibus, suspendio vita se exuit. Nequaquam
aegre fero (inquit Socrates) nam in Theatro, veluti in magno convivio, verbis
vexor.
But natural reason mortifies men to injuries, as cold water allayes and for a
time softens the pain of the child's burnt finger, but the pain is the greater
when the water is removed; Or as want of money mortifies a man to drunkenness,
he drinks not excessively, not because the heart will not dare to sin, but
because he cannot. The Word backed with influences from the death of Christ
strongly mortifies to all sins.

9. Deadness to an office or a place of authority.
8. And the soul is not easily deadned to an office or place of a Prince, a
Ruler, a Master, a Prophet, a Teacher. Abishai, 2 Samuel 16.9. Why should this
dead dog curse my lord the King? Let me go over, I pray thee, and take off his
head. David stands not much upon cursing the lord the King. He is so
mortified to that style as he forgets it, and, v. 10. he says, Let him curse,
because the Lord has said unto him, Curse David. He says not, the Lord has
bidden him curse the lord King David. Answers thou the high Priest so? Its a
great word. Christ was the Messiah, that is a great office of King, Priest and
Prophet: but he was willing to forget his office, by way of taking much on him,
that he might fulfill his office by way of suffering. As Rulers and such as are
in place must so far be dead to their office and place, as they must be willing
to bear in their bosom the reproaches of all the mighty people, and to have
their footsteps, even as Rulers, reproached, Psalm. 89. v. 50, 51. Places and
office too often have an influence and strong enough on our unmortified hearts.
But there are some providentiall sufferings that befall Rulers, as Rulers,
against which they should be hardened, knowing that the Lord suffers in them.

10. Deadness to pleasure.
9. It should be our work to be deadned to pleasure. I have married a wife, and
therefore, (...), I can not come. This is the most lively lust. There is a
mortified eye, Job 31.1. I have made a covenant with mine eye, why then should
I look on a maid? Mortified eye-looks call for mortified heart-looks. Its an
old sin, Genesis 3.6. And when the woman saw the tree that it was good for food,
and that it was pleasant to the eyes, -- she did eat* Mortified Joseph saw sin
engraven on pleasure, Genesis 39.9. How then can I do this great wickedness, and
sin against God?

10. There must be a deadned heart to all the three, to the world, 11.
Deadness to all the world.
1 John 2.15. Love not the world, nor the things of the world. If any man love
the world, the love of the Father is not in him. 16. For all that is in the
world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life, is
not of the Father, but is of the world, Jam. 4.4. There is some life between
the friends of the world and the world, and James doubts not to call that
enimity with God, and the three great Idols of the world, gain, glory and
pleasure, cannot make any happy, which Heathens, Plutarch, Cicero, Seneca saw:
and therefore they pressed a contempt of the world. For strength is the glory
of the Elephant or the Bull rather then of man, and plucked away by age and
time; And beauty is no less uncertain, being made up of quantity and color,
and the Rose and the Lilly has more of it then man. Riches have wings, and
render not the owner happy: Nobility is a borrowed good, and the Parents glory
not ours: And honor is the opinion and esteem of men, and we yet cannot be
dead to nothings, to shadows, to emptiness and to vanity: and fair buildings
are well ordered dead stones.

11. They are not rightly mortified who are not deadned to creature comforts,
to father and mother, for they forsake, 12. Mortification to creature comforts
to multitude, friends, hosts, armies, chariots, horse, father, son, daughter,
husband, to city, to our mother-countrey, etc.
and the mother may forget the fruit of her own womb, but the Lord cannot
forget his own, Psalm. 27.10. Isa. 49.15. My friends, Job 19.19. 2. All my
friends, 3. All my inward (and dearest) friends, 4. Abhor me. Forsaking is
hard, but abhorring is most sad. Yea even in the Cause of God Paul is put to
this, 2 Timothy 4.16. At my first answer no man stood with me, but all men forsook
me. 2. So must the Church be dead to foreign forces, Hos. 14.3. Ashur shall
not save us, we will not ride upon horses, and the people must be dead and sit
still from help from Egypt, Isai. 30.7. For the Egyptians shall help in vain,
and to no purpose: therefore have I cried concerning this, Your strength is to
sit still. Sitting still is a ceasing from relying upon the Chariots and
strength of Egypt, as being dead to them: For thus says the Lord, the holy One
of Israel, in returning and rest shall ye be saved, in quietness and in
confidence shall be your strength: and ye would not. And 4. his people must
cease from man whose breath is in his nostrils: for wherein is he to be
accounted of? Isai. 2.22. and be dead to multitude: for, Psalm. 33.16. No King
is saved by an host, a mighty man is not delivered by much strength. 17. An
horse is a vain thing for safety. The help of the creature substitute in the
room of God, having the luster of blue and purple, or clothed in scarlet,
riding upon horses. Young men of desire, Ezekiel. 23.23. do easily dazzle our
eyes, and when we are not renewed in the spirit of our mind, unsanctified
hearts are weak in apprehending, and more weak in discerning of things. 5. So
must there be a deadning of the husband to the wife, Job. 19.17. to servants,
Job. 15.16. to sons, 2 Samuel 16. v. 11. of the mother to the daughter, of the
daughter in law to the mother in law, Mic. 7.6. to blood-friends.

12. All the godly and zealous Prophets said Amen to the word of the Lord, even
Christ with sighs and tears, to the extreme desolation and ruin of Jerusalem,
Luke 19.41. Math. 23.37, 38. and Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Isaiah, Micah, Hosea, etc.
to the plowing of Zion as a field, to the sword, captivity, to the laying wast
of the land without inhabitants, Isa. 5.9. Isa. 6.10, 11, 12. Jer. 9.1, 2, 3,
4. Jer. 16.1, 2, 3. etc. Mic. 3.12. Hos. 4.3. Hos. 5.6, 9, etc. There must be a
deadning to our Country and Mother Church, that the glory of justice may shine;
yea to our fathers grave, our own bed, our own fireside.

13. The Lord will have Isaiah and the godly dead to Laws and Government, to
vision and prophesying, when Judge and Prophet shall be taken away, Isa. 3.2.
and children shall be their Princes, and babes shall rule over them, v. 4. and
the vineyard broken, and the hedge spoiled. And he will have the godly dead to
King and Priest and Law, 2 Chronicles. 15.3. Now for a long season Israel had been
without the true GOD, and without a teaching Priest, and without law. Hos. 3.4.
Hos. 10.3. And now shall they say, We have no King, because we feared not the
Lord: what shall then a King do to us? Hence we must be mortified to every
thing created which the Lord may take from us.

14. And upon this account there is required a deadning of our hearts to
shipping and trading with diverse mighty Nations, as we see in the case of
Tire, Ezekiel. 27. of Babylon, Rev. 18.11* 12, 13. Jer. 51. so are we to be
mortified to fair houses, Isa. 5.8. stately cities, Isa. 14. to all the Cedars
of Lebanon, that are high and lifted up: to all the Oaks of Bashan, to all the
high mountains, to every high tower, to every fenced wall, to all the ships of
Tarshish, to all the fenced cities: for the day of the Lord may be upon these,
Esai. 2. to all fair Rivers, to Oxen, Horses, Chariots, fair acres of land, to
Vineyards, to Olive trees, Ezekiel. 29.4, 5. Isa. 50.2. Exo. 7.19. Deuteronomy. 28.31,
40, 41, 51. to seed time and harvest, Deuteronomy. 28.38. Hag. 1.6. to corn, wine,
oil, to cattle, increase of kine and flocks of sheep, Deuteronomy. 28.51, Amos 4.9.
to Wine-trees, to Fig Trees, to seasonable rains, grass and fruitful fields,
Joel 1.4, 5, 7, 10. Jer. 14.3, 4, 5, 6. to peace, safe down-lying and safe
rising, Lev. 26.36. for in all the hand of the Lords anger is stretched out.

15. The Lord would have us dead to valiant and to mighty men, to Captains,
Isa. 3.1, 3, 4. Yea he makes true, 13. A deadnes to Captains stoutnesse and
valor in war, to birth.
Ps. 76.5. The sto^t-hearted are spoiled, they have sleept their sleep, and
none of the men of might have found their hands. 6. At thy rebuke, O God of
Jacob, both the chariot and the horse are cast into a dead sleep: And therefore
he will have us dead to courage in war. Who brings on faintness and terror
upon the spirit, when the sound of a shaking leaf shall chase men, Levit.
26.36. And when the Lord sends a trembling of heart, and failing of eyes, and
sorrow of mind, Deuteronomy. 38.65?

16. We are called to be dead to honorable birth, blood, and noble Families,
when Princes are filled with contempt, and these that were clothed in scarlet,
embrace the dunghill, Lam. 5.12. Isa. 40.23, 20.

17. And we must be dead to the vigorousnesse of youth, when we read Eccl.
12.1, 2, 3, etc. And Barzillai his complaint, 14. A deadnes to youth, pastime,
play, laughter, to hunger, fullness.
2 Samuel 19.35. Can I taste what I eat? Can I hear any more the voice of singing
men and singing women? And why but this should make us dead to sports, pastime,
dicing, gaming, dancing, feasting, chambering, wantonness, to all plenty and
fullness, when God can remove the appetite, and give bread, or remove bread,
and give the appetite. So as the Lord leaves that doom on you, Lev. 26.26. And
when I have broken the staff of bread, ten women shall bake your bread in one
oven, and they shall deliver you your bread again by weight, and ye shall eat
and not be satisfied. So is Solomon dead to laughter, Eccles. 2.2. I said of
laughter it is mad.

15. A deadnes to Ordinances.
18. There is required a deadness to Ordinances, the Tabernacle is not God:
David may be banished from it. The Temple is a Type of Christ, yet it is burnt
with fire, and the Sanctuary profaned: And the Lord required a sort of
lentnesse or leasurlinesse of motion of the heart toward these, and will have
his people in their exile resting upon this, Ezekiel. 11.16. Therefore say, thus
says the Lord God, although I have cast them far off from the heathen, and
although I have scattered them among the countries, yet will I be to them as a
little Sanctuary in the countries where they shall come. And they who remained
still at Jerusalem reproached their poor captivated brethren, as hated of God,
and gloried in themselves as Citizens and Inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, v.
15. to the exiled brethren, Get you far from the Lord, unto us is this Land
given in possession. They were not mortified in looking upon the Holy Land and
City, but vainly gloried in it. And therefore there are two things in
Ordinances. There be two^things in Ordin^nces.
1. God that fills the Ordinances. 2. The external bulk of them.
Mortification to God and his presence in Ordinances, is not that we here
require, for the affections cannot be vigorous enough in following God. There
may be a limiting and binding of God to means, to the Temple, Sanctuary,
hearing, Seals, and a fleshly heat and liveliness to means, and bare and naked
Ordinances; and in both these there is so far required a deadness, as there
would be an holy submission to all these, when the Lord deprives us of
Ordinances, and a retiring in to the fountain, to the Lord himself, that he may
be all in all. So some cannot sleep except the Bible be under the head in the
night: Some tie their faith and comfort so to one man, if he be not their
Pastor nothing is right. But so much of CHRIST, or the substance of
Gospel-promises must be neglected, as means and instruments. and Ordinances are
Idolized: In a word, mortification calls for liveliness of affection to God in
Christ, and a holy deadness to all things that are not God.

19. There is necessary here a deadness to works, for there be these defects
in them. 1. They cannot save, Ephesians. 2. (2.) They were not crucified for you, let
them not have the place and Chair of Christ. 3. They cannot quiet the
conscience, because they cannot justify. Paul Preached from Jerusalem to
Illyricum, labored more abundantly then they all, was unrebukeable, was
conscious to himself of nothing, yet was he as dead to these as to very
nothing, 1 Cor. 4.4. and to loss and dung, Phil. 3.8. Hence must we be dead to
the idol of Godliness, for its not God.

20. And dead to Godly men, in point of confidence, we must not know the Man
Christ after the flesh, 2 Cor. 5.16. nor any mere man, to cry man up as God, (
every man is a liar) is contrair to Gospel-mortification.

21. It were good to pray much, and to be dead to prayer: One of the main
causes why we cry and pray much and are not heard, 16. Deadness to prayer.
Psalm. 22.2. Psalm. 69.1, 2, 3, is, because that which is proper to God the
hearer of prayer, to wit, confidence and hope, we give to prayer which is not
God. We pray to our own prayers and to our own wrestling often, rather then to
God: and we believe praying does the business and works the charm, as if
prayer were Omnipotency it self.

22. Nor are we dead to faith and hope, but we believe in faith and in
believing, and we hope in our own hoping in God. 17. To faith and hope we pray
to our own prayers.
But was faith crucified for you? How many fetch peace, pardon and
righteousness, not from Christ, but from their act of believing? Hence a case,
whether some may not fervently pray and believe strongly, and yet be
disappointed in the particular they pray for and believe they shall have?
Certain it may be, especially when we are dead to Omnipotency and alive to
praying and believing, and lay more weight on faith in God then on God, and on
praying to God then on God himself. What Antinomians say unjustly we give to
works, to wit, our peace with God, they and many unduely give to faith, not to
Christ.

23. We fail in being more alive to comforts then to God the comforter: the
infant may at once both suck the breasts, 18. Deadness to co^forts and feeling*
and also sleep. And is one flower more to be smelled then the whole Garden?
And shall feelings and raptures, and manifestations of God in his outgoings be
courted and over-courted by us beyond the God of all comforts? There is need
that the heart be deadened to sense, for feeling and sense is fiery and
idolatrous; and were sense more mortified at the outgoings of faith, hope,
love, it were good, for our faith should be the more lively and vigorous to lay
hold on God. How far we may be taken with feeling.
Q. Is it not lawful to be taken and feelingly delighted with the influences
of God? Ans. Sure, feeling of it self is not faulty, the fierinesse and
excessive fervor of feeling is faulty, especially when terminated upon created
actings of love, faith, joy, desire, hope, and not upon influences as coming
from the free Grace of God, otherwise, we are but sick and pained of love of
our own gracious actings, because they are our own; and this is the sickness
of selfishnesse. Ah! a Godhead, a Godhead is not known.

23. Nor must we be, in a too lively way, taken with our own stock, 19.
Deadness to the habit and stock of created grace.
nor trust in the habit of grace or the new heart: for grace in us is a created
rose that spreads fair and broad and smells well, but it is not God nor Christ,
that we may learn not to trust in our selves, (...), 2 Cor. 1.9. But why but we
may trust in our renewed selves now furnished with a stock and infused habits,
the excellent blossoms and blooms of heaven? Nay, not in our selves thus
fitted, but in God who raises the dead: for its not possible both to trust in
renewed self and in God: And Paul never meant that any that professes CHRIST,
is to lean upon sinful self or upon lost and condemned self. And sure it is as
selfy to be alive to infused habits, as to misken Christ, and think, being once
a convert, we can send our selves all the rest of the way to heaven without
Christ, we need not Christ for a Guide or a Tutor, its within us may save us.
And nothing can be more contrair to a living the noble and sure life of
continual dependencie by faith on the given Leader of the people, Jesus
Christ, then to trust on habits of grace, they are not Christ.

25. Ah! who is that mortified as to be dead to the created sweetness of joy,
20. Deadness to the sweetness of heaven.
and the right hand pleasures of God, and the formal beatitude of glory, and
alive to the only pure objective happiness of glory? And yet that is
mortification, to love and be sick and thirsty for heaven, not for the
pleasures of the Garden, and the Streets of Gold, and the Tree of Life, and the
River of Water of life, but for only only God, the heaven of heavens: And
therefore we cannot be alive to pure and the only abstracted and unmixed God
head, except we be thus dead to heaven.

26. There is a deadness to the letter of the promise: The promise (says M.
Ambrose) is but the Casket, 21. To the promises* M. Isaac Ambrose, prima,
media, ultima. life of faith, c. 9. Sect. 2. pa. 2^1.
and Christ the Jewel in it* the promise is but the field, Christ is the
Pearl hid in it. Christ removed, the promise is no promise, or but ^aplesse
signs.

27. We must also be dead to the rays, out-shinings and manifestations of God
to the soul here, and must transchange God in all presence and all love
embracements, and no more: but he dead to the house of wine, to the lif^ed up
banner of love, to love-kisses of Christ, to the love-banquets, and to the felt
lying, as the beloved, all the night between the breasts: 22. Deadness to the
outshinings of God, to take aright absence and presence.
for these nearest communions are not God himself. There is required a godly
hardness for receiving sparkles of hell and some draughts of sore trying
wrath, and the hell of his most wise and righteous frownings, and necessary
absence and night of hiding himself.

28. And should not the Church be dead to providence of fair weather, and
Court, or the blessing of a godly King David, Ezekiah, and mortified to
miraculous deliverances, 23. Deadnes to fair providence of court, Godly
Princes, miracles.
dividing of the red sea, defeat of enemies, to confirmation of the truth by
Martyrdom and sufferings to blood? He who is dead to himself and his body and
ease, and hardened against contradictions of sinners, against torment of body,
cold, imprisonment, sickness, death, and can in patience submit to all
providence, is crucified with Christ, if God give or withdraw, he is dead to
both.

28. All who are dead with Christ, are dead to all dead worship, 24. To
saplesse will worship.
saplesse ceremonies, and formal worship, Col. 2.20. Gal. 4.9. and are lively
in the serving of God, and fervent in spirit, serving the Lord: And rejoice in
Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh, Phil. 3.3. Romans 12.

CHAP. V. Of the Covenant of Redemption between God and the Mediator Christ. 2.
Christ is not a bare witness to confirm the Covenant, but the Author of the
Covenant. 3. The Socinian way of works cannot quiet the conscience. 4. Christ
is upon both sides of the Covenant. 5. Justice mediat^ not. 6. Reasons of the
entrance of sin.
ISai. 49.8. I will preserve thee (says the Lord to Christ) and give thee for
a Covenant of the people.

Q. 1. How is CHRIST given as a Covenant of the people* Is 49 6
Hence, the 1. Question: How is Christ said to be given as a Covenant of the
people?

Ans. As Isai. 49 6. he says, I have given thee for a light to the Gentiles,
that thou may be my salvation unto the end of the earth: that is, as Act.
13.46, 47. I have thee, O Christ, to be the Preached Light, and Guide of the
Gentiles, and the Preached Savior, declared and proclaimed by the Preaching of
Paul, Barnabas, and the Apostles, and Pastors. So I will give thee for the
Covenant, that is* the Preached surety and Mediator of the Covenant, Heb. 7.22.
Heb. 8.6. When the first Covenant was broken* he makes with us an everlasting
Covenant, even the sure mercies of David, Isai. 55.3. 2. I will give thee as
the only one who is the subject of the Gospel and Covenant of Grace: For to
Preach Christ and to Preach the Gospel and New Covenant are all one. 3. I have
given thee to be the confirmer of the promises, they are all yea, and Amen, in
thee, 2 Cor. 1.20. Gal. 3.16. And 4. by thy death thou confirms the Covenant,
and seals it with thy blood, Heb. 9.15, 16, 17, 22, 23, 24. Heb. 13.20.

Q. But Socinus denies that Christ is the purchaser or the obtainer by his
blood (as it were) of the New Covenant, Socinus de Servato. l. 2. c. 16.
for he did not by his death procure or merit pardon to us, he is only the
surety or Mediator of the Covenant. And Crellius and he say, the cause why the
confirming of the Covenant is ascribed to the death of Christ, is because as by
a slain beast and divided into two parts* Covenants of old were established, so
by the death of Christ the Covenant of Grace was solemnly confirmed and sealed?

Ans. Christ is so the Surety as Mediator, as he is also the Author of this
Covenant, as God, Exodus 3.6. It was he who said, Christ is not the co^firmer
only but the Author of the Covenant of grace.
I am the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. 1* Cor. 10.9. Let us not tempt
Christ, as some of them tempted him, and were destroyed of the Serpents. And
this is he who led them, and brought them out of Egypt, Numb. 21.6, 7. whom
they tempted in the wilderness, 5, 6, 7. And he ascribes to himself the
Covenant, Heb. 8.9. Not according to the Covenant that I made with their
fathers, etc. And it is clear, that the pardon of sin promised in the Covenant,
Jer. 31. Heb. 8. is never ascribed to the blood of Martyrs, but every where to
Christ's blood, Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14. Romans 3.25. Rev. 1.5. 1 John 1.8. Heb.
9.14.14, 15, 22. Heb. 10.16, 17, 18.

2. That he is the Surety also of the Covenant, is expressly said, Heb. 7.22.
and the Mediator thereof, Heb. 8. Nor can it be said that the death of the
Testator does properly give faith and authority to the Testament, The death of
the Testator how it confirms the Covenant.
for the authority and justice of the just or unjust will of the Testator,
adds unto, or diminishes from the authority of the Testament; for the
Testators will is the principal efficient cause of the Testament, the death of
the man is only a necessary condition, by which the right of the Testator to
these goods is transferred from him (who now being dead, needs them not) in to
friends, to whom they are left in Legacy; It is true that the death of the
Testator, to wit such a death of one who is more then a Testator or only man,
even God man, procu^es as a meritorious cause, life, remission, etc* but this
it does not as the death of a Testator and dying friend, but as such a so
excellent, so satisfactory a death, which no Martyrs death can do.

There is a far other thing in Christ's blood then power of sealing and
witnessing the truth which is in the Martyrs blood.


and so death is but an antecedent condition of the right to the goods. 3.
Christ's dying to bear witness to his own Gospel is only the secondary end of
his death, in so far as secondarily remission of sins is made known to us after
the principal end of his death, to wit, reconciliation, remission, pardon,
redemption, and life is purchased to us by way of merit: And sure the truth of
pardon and redemption is hugely more confirmed and sealed by the whole company
of the Martyrs, and made known to the sons of men, then by the death of one
single man, Mary's Son: Nor does the Scripture ever commend Christ's love to us
in sealing the Gospel with his blood as the only way to life, or making this
the most strong Argument to move us to believe in God, and obey Christ, because
Christ died for sinners, and rose again to make the Gospel true like, and
worthy to be believed, as the Martyrs do: but love shined in this, that in
dying we have redemption and forgiveness and life in his blood; And since
Godly and sound believing Martyrs died for this end, especially to glorify
God, and seal the truth, Joh. 21.19. Rev. 2.13. Mat. 10.32. Luke 12.8. Mar.
8.38. Luke 9.26. 2 Timothy 2.12. Rev. 12.^1. we must have most properly
forgiveness of sins in the blood of S^even, and Antipas, and the rest of the
Martyrs. And miracles do abundantly seal the truth of the Gospel; And so does
the holiness of profession, Joh. 20.32. Mar. 16.20. Joh. 5.35, 36. Matthew.
5.16. but never are we redeemed, justified, saved by Christ's and the Apostles
miracles and holy life, for any thing we read in Scripture; but we have life by
Christ's blood as by a ransom, a price to buy us.

Q. Hence, 1. case: May not the conscience be quiet by the way of Socinus* The
Socinian way quiets not the wa^ened conscience by ma^^ works, but by the blood
of Christ apprehended by faith, this is done*
which lays aside a ransom given to Justice?

Ans. The experience of the Godly man wakened in conscience says to this, when
he is chastened with pain in his bed, and the multitude of his bones with
strong pain, and the man's soul draws ^ear to the g^ave, and his life unto the
destroyers, and the man stands on need of an Interpreter, one among a thousand
to show unto man his righteousness, Job 33.19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Then God is
gracious to him, and says, deliver him from going down to the pit, I have
found him a ransom: He is not quiet while God say, my Prophet, deliver him
from hell and the pit, which he so much fears, for my offended Justice has
found a ransom in Christ, and I am (...) with him. Yea, and the conscience
must be purged from (...) works, by his blood who offered himself without spot
to God through the eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.14. Yea, and there is no remission
of sins without sheding of blood, v. 22. Not of Bulls or Goats, for the blood of
beasts leaves still conscience of sin, Heb. 10.1, 2. Then it must be the blood
of Christ, v. 5.10. who was crucified and made a curse for us, Gal. 3.10. such
a curse as we must have eternally, according to Divine Justice, suffered. Yea,
if works done by the exemplary grace of a Martyr, such a holy man as Christ,
who was never wounded for our transgressions, nor bruised for our iniquities,
then Christ died in vain, and there was no ransom of blood given for our sins,
only God of free will made an innocent man a curse, and would have him
crucified neither for his own sin, nor for ours; well then, may good works
without the blood of sinner or surety, take away sin: And the conscience
sprinkled with good works may well calm a guilty conscience, yea, and according
to the measure of good works is the measure of assurance of peace with God. Now
we see the most tender David, Job, Hezekiah, Heman, who walked most with God,
have not always most assurance of peace and righteousness with God, but most
dreadful doubtings of conscience, according as by faith they apprehend the
ransom of full satisfaction, or were dazzled and darkened in their
apprehension; yea sure, without the ransom of blood, of free will, all receive
a dry and unbloody pardon by doing the Commandments of Jesus Christ. The
Socinian faith which looks to an exemplary Martyr whom God of no justice, but
in vain, and for no cause, delivered to death, but of mere free pleasure,
whereas there might be, and is forgiveness without shedding of blood: contrair
to Heb. 9.22. Romans 3.24.25, etc. even good works done in imitation of Christ.

Q. 2. Another case is here: Is Christ on our side of the Covenant, and on the
Lords side? Christ is upon both the Lords side of the Covenant, and upon our
side, and the satisfaction i^ most (...)
This would seem no satisfying of justice. Ans. It is true the case would seem
no quieting of conscience. If 1. Christ-God were not the same offended God, who
out of sovereignty of free grace does condescend to make a Covenant of grace,
and so is upon Gods side. 2. If Christ were not a Person different from
offended God, as the Godhead is common to all the three, so in a voluntary and
admirable dispensation and Oeconomie the Kings Son, a Person different from the
Father, takes upon him our nature; And 3. having man's nature which offended,
and so being fit therein to satisfy wrath, and fit therein to merit, to
sanctify the people with his own blood, might well be upon our side: and
there is no scenick, no seeming, but a most real satisfaction here, in that
there is a most full and real compensation made to offended justice, and our
faith laying hold on this, the conscience is quieted. As I sinned in the first
Adam legally, so I satisfied in the second Adam. Obj. But justice says, The
same person that sinned, the same must suffer and satisfy, and no other.

Ans. Justice says so, but that part of justice by the graciousnesse and
mercifulness of the Just^God is, and may be dispensed withal: So as Justice
as Justice seeks payment, Justice as justice seeks satisfaction, but
Sovereignty of free grace, not justice, determines how, and who shall pay.
the Creditor as the Creditor seeks recompense and restitution: But by whom,
Justice determines not, whether payment and satisfaction be made by the same
very person who offended, or by a fit surety in the person and place of the
offender, as it determines not whether as much or far more be restored then was
taken away, so there be a compact and voluntary agreement between the satisfier
and the satisfied. Hence, Justice being 1. offended, is not (to speak so) the
interposing and the mediating attribute of God; but Sovereignty of Free Grace
and mercy interposeth. Justice is not the mediating and interposing attribute,
but free grace.
2. Justice may seek payment from the only offending party, and from no other,
from Adam and his posterity only; but Justice does not indispensably, and by
necessity of nature exact payment from the only offender and from no other. 3.
The conscience of the believer may with sweetness of admiration and peace rest
upon satisfied justice, and adore interposing grace, and be quickened from
looking unto, and loving interposing grace, to obey and take on the labor of
Gospel-love to run the ways of his Commandments. 4. It is not an act of Law,
nor of Justice, to give, or find out a satisfier, but an act of love, grace,
and infinite wisdom.

Q. 3. A third case is, how can the believer look upon life eternal as a gift,
if it be sold at so condign a price as Christ's blood?

Our glory was work and wadge to Christ, but of free grace to us, we bought it
not.
Ans. It is not fit to speak of this mystery, but with holy reverence, life
eternal is bought to us, and we are said to be bought with a price, 1 Cor.
6.19. 1 Pet. 1.18. 1 Timothy 2.6. Matthew. 20.28. Now it is unworthy of Christ, that
the fruit of his death should be only grace, not glory, and such a grace as is
lubrick, uncertain, renders us indifferent, but much weaker to believe or not
believe, that is, as Socinians say, to earne and win the wager of Glory by a
new Gospel-working, which is our righteousness, and merit to glory: For sure
Pagans are more sinfully weak in the Second ADAM who died for them, as Socinus
will, then mankind were in the first Adam. The Scripture says that Christ gave
himself for his Church, that he might present her a glorious Church, Ephesians. 5.
25.27. 1 These. 5.9. For God has not appointed us for wrath, but to obtain
salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ. 10. Who died for us. 2 Timothy 2.10. Therefore
I endure all things for the elects sake, that they also may obtain the
salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory. Jude 21. Looking for
the mercy of the Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. Rev. 5.9. Thou have
redeemed us to God by thy blood, etc. Act. 20.28. Feed the Church of God, which
he has purchased with his own blood. Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have redemption
through his blood. 11. In whom also we have obtained an inheritance. We are not
afraid to call eternal life a fruit of Christ's death, that is, of the merit of
his death: See Joh. 10.10, 11.28. Joh. 3.14, 15, 16.

Q. 4. A fourth case: Many stumble, some in that God permitted sin to enter,
which he might have hindered, knowing he should be thereby under a necessity
either to torment men in hell, or torment on earth his most innocent Son Christ?

Ans. Socinians, Arminians, yea Pagans, and all enemies to Christian Religion,
are burdened with the same seeming reason: For if God, or their gods may hinder
wickedness, and yet do not hinder it, they bring themselves, or the true God,
that they must be necessitated to torment the sinners.

2. There be reasons unanswerable, why if we yield (and it is a shame to deny)
that God is able to hinder sin to enter in the world, or that he is not
infinitely wise, Deep reasons in the depth of unsearchable wisdom, why the Lord
who can hinder sin to enter in the world, thought fit it should be
and so that he has not most weighty reasons why he suffers sin to be: As 1.
if sin come freely in the world without the will of God, either the Lords
dominion over sin must be none at all; or the creatures dominion of free will
must be dependent upon the dominion of grace and Sovereignty. 2. The outgoings
of free grace must eternally be hid, if sin had never been. As there had been
no field for the expressions and blossoms of eternal flourishing revenging
justice: As also, the creatures arms are short, and could not reach the
eminent degree of manifesting the glory of free grace and pardoning mercy, but
the Lord aimed at this. And 1. the relation of a Savior and a sinner, of the
Physician and the sick must be known; Now a Physician has not relation actual
to all sick, all the world over, but only to his own patients, his own sick
ones, who by Covenant, feeling their danger, None sick speaks no Savior, no
such Physitia^ as Christ
have laid the weight of life and death, of righteousness, of salvation over
upon that one only Savior, and live, diet, apply salves, medicine, only by the
direction of this Physician, and do receive medicine and recepts from no other.

2. Infinite wisdom made choice, beside other infinite possible ways, It is a
deep of wisdom that the same men that now are firewood eternally in the lake
of brimstone, might have been (if so it had pleased GOD) proclaimers of the
glory of his grace in heaven, and the now heirs of glory in their place.
of this only way of redeeming: and here glorious Sovereignty shines, he
wailles out, Judas, Magus, Pharaoh, to be firewood and coal to the River of
fire and brimstone, and made so many sinful pieces of sick, brittle clay,
overgilded with the habit of grace, of free righteousness, of glory, to be the
eternal harpers and proclaimers of the glory of his grace; whereas he might
have made these stones, and worms, for he created Angels and worms, and all out
of the Mother Nothing, by his good pleasure. And it must be a wonder of
unsearchable Sovereignty, that should not for eternity have been concealed,
such a number of Angels and men whom he set up in the heaven of heavens as
heirs of glory, to be everlasting Heralds and Trumpeters to sound out
experienced grace and mercy, might have been, if so it had pleased him, lumps
of everlasting vengeance in the eternal lack, and all that are condemned, and
suffer the vengeance of eternal fire* both devils and men are chips and pieces
of beings hewn out of the same rock (if so we may speak) of that huge and vast
Nothing, and might have been up before the Throne filling the Chairs and rooms
of the now heirs of glory, thou believer, might have been in the seat of Judas,
scorched in his furnace in hell, and Judas might have had thy Throne and thy
Crown up with him eternally who sits on the Throne, and with the Lamb.

3. He might have kept all the sons of men, and all the Angels, in a sinlesse
condition, God might have hol^en up the law^dispensation for ever, but then
there should have been no place for the Ark of glory. J. Chapter
to be courteours to proclaim the glory of Law-goodnesse, and of the never
broken Covenant of Works, but then there should never have been such a thing
known to the generations to come, as that Ark of glory, that huge and
boundless all fullness of the indwelling Godhead in the Man Christ. Sure, had
there been none sick, such a suffering Physician to heal us had never been,
none lost would have said there is no Savior, none dead in sin, would say,
there is no need of such a Lord and Prince of life, by whose swelling wounds we
are healed, Isa. 53.

4. Nor was it fit that this should never be known to Angels and men, that the
Lord honors so many redeemed sinners with a grant and license to love so high,
so precious a Redeemer, and as it were to mar and black his fairness and
desirable excellency with our feeble and sinfully weak love, he being so far
above our love or faith or praises.

5. The Gospel-wonders should not be an eternally sealed book to men and
Angels, as, Revel. 12.1. that wonder in heaven, The Gospel-wo^ders of grace
should not eternally have been bi^.
A woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her feet, and upon her head
a crown of twelve Stars, should be known. And what was showed to John was to be
shown to the Churches, Rev. 21.10. And he carried me away in the Spirit to a
great and high mountain, and showed me that great City, the holy Jerusalem
descending out of heaven from God. 11. Having the glory of God. I mean here the
wonders of grace, mercy, declared justice: as that the most High should empty
Himself and the Godhead be united to clay: that there should be such a high
Bridegroom, so low and sinful a Spouse: that death should conquer death: that
Nothings of clay should sing their debts, eternally cast down their crowns,
being made of sinners glorified Kings, and not be ashamed to cast down their
crowns before him that sits on the throne. Nor should the gifts and graces of
God be hidden, Romans 8.32. He that spared not his own Son, -- how should he not
with him, (...), give us all things, begrace to us all? How should he not make
heaven and earth free grace to us, and all a mass of grace to us? Ephesians. 1.6.
(...), He has begraced us all over in Christ. 1 Timothy 1.13. But I obtained
mercy, as dipped in a sea of mercy. Luke 1.28. Hail Virgin, (...), filled with
free grace. Let us forgive one another, Col. 3.13. as Christ begraced pardon to
us, (...). That we might know, 1 Cor. 2.12. (...), the things that are freely
given us. And what a debt must that be, the forgiving of ten thousand talents,
more then to forgive millions and tuns of gold? Whether of the two be most
excellent, Law-innocency, or Gospel-repentance.


Hence the Question, whether Law-innocency and never sinning* or
Gospel-repentance and rising again in Christ, be most excellent? It is
answered. 1. Simply to us: It is better and morally more excellent never to
fall, never to be sick, then to rise in Christ and be healed by such a
Physician. But sinning and falling being considered in relation to a more
universal good, there is more excellency in Gospel-rising then in
Law-standing: As, 1. There is more feeling deeper sense in the woman which did
wash Christ's feet with her tears, and wipe them with the hair of her head, then
in some who never so fell. And Christ may hold forth something of this, Luke
15.7. Likewise I say unto you (says Christ) there is more joy in heaven over
one sinner that repents, more then over ninety and nine just persons that
need no repentance. True it is our Saviors scope is not to compare repentance
and Law-innocency together, or to show that the Pharisees needed no repentance,
as if they were not in a lost condition: but to show what joy was in heaven
with the Lord the father of the forlorn son, and in the Angels, at the home
coming of repenting sinners. And is not a Jewel of ten thousand millions of
more worth then a Diamond that is not worth the eighth part of that sum?
Adams innocence and never sinning should have been by the common influences of
Law-love, and the same may be said of Angel-innocency. But Gospel-repentance is
the gift procured at a dearer rate, Christ was exalted a Prince to give
repentance, Acts 5.31. Neither should there be sense and such loving sense of
free grace in the forlorn son, had he never fled away from his father, and
never been so received with a welcome of grace which he believed, before he
felt it.

CHAP. VI. Q. 11. Whether there be any such thing as a Covenant of Suretyship
or Redemption between JEHOVAH and the Son of GOD? That there is such a
Covenant, is proven by 11. Arguments.
NO doubt, Christ God-Man is in Covenant with God, being a person designed from
eternity, Christ Man must be in Covenant with God.
with his own consent, and in time yielding thereunto, and yet he stands not in
that Covenant Relation that we stand in: as we shall hear.

1. Arg. What Argument does prove that there is a people in Covenant with God,
Arg. 1.
who call the Lord their God, as Zech. 13.9. Jer. 32.38. Isai, 25.9. the same
shall prove Christ to be in Covenant with God: As who can say, he is my God,
For the Covenant of redemption because Christ c^lls the LORD his God.
he must be in Covenant with God. As Jer. 31.33. I will be their God, and they
shall be my people, Ezekiel. 11.20. Ezekiel. 34.24, 25, 30. Now this is clearly said
of Christ, Psalm. 89.26. He shall cry unto me, thou art my Father, my God, and
the Rock of my salvation: The Son, the only begotten of the Father says, thou
art my God, Heb. 1.5. And again, I* will be to him a Father, and he shall be to
me a Son. It is expounded of Christ, but was first spoken of Solomon, the Type,
1 Samuel 7.14. My mercy, that is, my Covenant-mercy to the Son of David and his
seed, shall stand sure as the days of heaven, Psalm. 89.28, 29, 34, 35, 36. 1 Chronicles. 22.10. He shall build a house for my Name, he shall be my Son, and I
will be his father. Then follows the Covenant-promise: And I will establish the
Throne of his Kingdom over Israel for ever; which is expounded, Psalm. 89.28,
29, etc. of Christ, a Covenanted King as long as the Sun and the Moon indures,
34, 35, 36. and cannot agree to David, whose Kingdom is now gone. As also,
Christ flees to this Covenant in his extreme suffering, my God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? Psalm. 22.1. Mat. 27.46. So Psalm. 40. it is Christ who
says, v. 8. I delight to do thy will, O my God. And it is a Covenant
compellation, my God, and spoken by him, v. 6. Mine ears thou have opened, who
removes all sacrifices, and offers himself a sacrifice, Heb. 10.5. A body thou
have prepared me. So also, Ps. 45.7. Thou love righteousness and hate
wickedness: Therefore God, thy God (a Covenant word) has anointed thee with
the oil of gladness, above thy fellows. See glorified Christ glorying in this,
Rev. 3.12. Him that overcomes will I make a pillar in the house of my God, and
he shall go no more out: and I will write upon him the Name of my God (which
is) New Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven from ny God: Four times he
calls him his God. The Lord speaks in his Type, Psalm. 118.28. he who comes in
the Name of the Lord, and is made the head of the corner: Thou art my God, and
I will praise thee, thou art my God, I will exalt thee. Christ is a noble
example in this teaching us to ride at this ^nchor of hope, thou art my God by
Covenant. Mic. 5.4. Christ shall feed in the Name of the Lord his God, Isa.
55.4.

2. Arg. From the Lords calling of his Son to his Office.
2. Arg. Is taken from the Lords way of calling of Christ to his Office of
Mediator: So, he who is the Lords chosen, called, and sent servant, is either
ingadged in the service, by necessity of nature, so that God cannot choose, but
he must choose and call him, and he must, by the same necessity of nature, be
chosen and called to that service, or he is the Lords chosen and called servant
by free agreement and consent of the Lord who calls, and of the party called,
which is a Covenant between Master and Servant, the Lord and the sent
Ambassador who is sent, the Lord, the Messenger who comes with such news. Now
of Christ it is said, Isai. 42.1. Behold my servant whom I uphold, my chosen in
whom my soul delights. And of mere grace and free-love, both God sent him, and
he came, Joh. 3.16. 1 Timothy 1.15. for by no necessity of nature was Christ sent
to preach glad tidings to the meek, to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim
liberty to the captives, Isai. 61.1. to say to the prisoners go forth, Isai.
49.9. For Isai. 42.6. I the Lord have called thee (says he) in righteousness
-- 7. To open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and
them that sit in darkness out of the prisonhouse. Nor can we say, that any
thing, but the good will of the Lord did conclude or determine him to send: 1.
To save men, not Angels, Heb. 2.16. 2. Some men, not others; Joh. 15.13, 14. 3.
So ill deserving men, as lost ones, Luke 19.10. sinners, ^ Tim. 1.15. Romans
5.6.8. (3.) When the Lord speaks of the Covenant of grace, Ezekiel. 37.23. he
adds a word of this Covenant, I will cleanse them, so shall they be my people,
and I will be their God. 24. And David my servant (the son of David Christ, for
David was dead) shall be King over them, and they all shall have one Sheepherd.
Ezekiel. 34.23. I will set up one Sheepherd over them, and he shall feed them,
even my servant David, he shall feed them, and he shall be their Sheepherd. 24.
I the Lord will be their God. And Zecha. 13. JEHOVAH ownes Christ as this
Sheepherd, as one of his hireing. v. 7. Awake, O sword, against my Sheepherd.
Mal. 3.1. The Messenger of the Covenant, whom ye delight in, behold he shall
come, says the Lord of Hosts. Hence, this David is the Servant, Sheepherd, and
Messenger of the Lord, either by nature, which cannot be said, for the Man
Christ is by Nature his servant, but Christ-Mediatour, God-Man, is not so his
servant, or he is so by free consent, on the Lords part, who hires and sends
him, and on Christ's part, who graciously condescended to be hired, and
undertook for us; which all along must be understood of no servile reward.

3. Arg. Christ's voluntary yielding to the work, proves this, 3. Arg. Christ
his offering of his service to GOD proves this Covenant.
if Christ, God: Man willing to empty himself and take on him our nature, did
offer his service to God, saying, Sacrifice and burnt-offering thou did not
desire, Psalm. 40.6. Heb. 10.5. a body thou have prepared me. 7. Then said I,
lo I come (in the volume of the book it is written of me) to do thy will. And
if Christ-God-Man did willingly lay down his life of his own goodness, and no
man could take his life from him, against his will, Joh. 10, 11, 18. Joh.
18.5.8. Joh. 14.31. Luke 9.51. Then is Christ's free consent to be our surety
and Redeemer, to seek and to save us, clear, Matthew. 20.28. Luke 19.10. And if
it pleased the Lord to bruise him, Isa. 53.10. and of love to give him to the
death for us, Joh. 3.16. Romans 8.3.32. Matthew. 21.37. then the Lords consent that
he should be our Surety, Savior, and Redeemer, is no less evident. Now a
mutual agreement between JEHOVAH and the Son for one and the same undertaking
is a compact and Covenant, to have us saved.

4. Argument is, 4 Arg. The Fathers giving of the elect to Christ to be
redeemed, and the Son his willing receiving of the^ proves this Covenant.
from the agreed upon giving and taking between the Father and the Son, where
there is a free giving of some to the Son to be ransoned, and kept, upon the
Fathers part, and a most free closing of the Son to own and answer for the
given, and to lose none, but to raise them up at the last Day, There certainly
is a Covenant gone before, as Jacobs reckoning with Laban, Genesis 31.39. That
which was torn of beasts, I brought not unto thee: I bare the loss of it; of
my hand did thou require it, whether stolen by day, or stolen by night. 40.
(Thus) I was, in the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by night; and
my sleep departed from mine eyes. This evidently speaks a Covenant upon Labans
part, delivering his flock to Jacob, as to a servant and sheepherd, saying, I
contract with thee, I deliver my flock to thee, answer for them: make an
account to me of dead and living. And on Jacobs part, a taking burden Covenant
ways to take care of them; and a Covenant-yeelding, require thou at my hand
old and young, weak and strong of the flock: I bind my self to keep them. So
Christ has delivered and given to him of the Father, so many by head and name,
Joh. 17.2. As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give
eternal life to as many, (...) as thou have given him. 12. Those that thou
gave me, (...), I have kept, and none of them are lost. Joh. 6.37. All that
the Father has given me, shall come unto me, (...), and the comer to me, I
will in no wise cast out. 39. And this is the Fathers (Covenant-) will that
sent me, that every one which sees the Son and believes on him, may have
^^verlasting life, The persons being given of the Father to the Son speaks
strong consolation and its no consolation at all to depend upon free will.
and I will raise him up (by Covenant and Gospel-promise) at the last day. And
what speaks stronger consolation, then the Father gave me to the Son Christ
to be saved, and the Son undertook for me, has given a written band under his
hand to keep me? O what happiness! that I am not mine own keeper, but that
Christ has given it under his hand, and the Father and the Son have
Covenant-wise closed and stricken hands, the one having given, and the other
received me a-keeping. 2. My soul enter thou not into their secrets who lay all
peace, comfort, assurance of salvation upon their own Socinian faith, that is,
their indifferent relying upon the Savior Jesus and their own holiness,
watchfulness, obedience, love to God. Sure, the comfort, joy, peace, assurance
subjective that they have in their conscience, can be no stronger then the
objective and fundamental certitude of standing, persevering, overcoming,
flowing from free will* which is woefully free and indifferent to persevere and
stand, or not to persevere, not to stand, but to fall away. Its a stronger
consolation (and the strongest should be the Christians choice) that is founded
upon the Fathers giving, 5. Arg. Christ's receiving of the Seals of the Old and
New Covenant, proves that there is such a Covenant
and the Sons receiving of sinners; and the faith of salvation to me which
relies and leans upon Christ's undertaking for me, that I shall not be lost, nor
casten out, then upon my undertaking for my self.

The fifth Argument is from Christ's receiving the Seals, Who so receives in his
body the Seals of the Covenant of Grace, Circumcision, and Baptism, and yet
needs no putting off of the body of the sins of the flesh, by Circumcision, and
needs no forgiveness of sin, no regeneration, no burying with Christ in
Baptism, as Col. 2.11, 12. Romans 6.3, 4, 5. and eats the Passover, and needs
not that the Lamb of God take away his sins, as Joh. 1.29. since he is holy,
and without sin, he must be under the Covenant, and God must be his God, in
some other Covenant then sinners are, for these seals are proper to a
Covenanted people, strangers and Pagans might not receive them, but these in
Covenant only, Genesis 17.7. Exodus 12.48. Matthew. 28.20. Col. 2.11, 12. and Christ
must have received Seals for other uses and ends, then sinners received them,
to wit, to testify that he was the God of both Jews and Gentiles, and that he
was the undertaker for us, in a Covenant of suretyship for us, to perfect a
higher command then any mortal man was under, to wit, to lay down his life for
sinners, Joh. 10.18. and beside that, for our cause he was made under the Law,
to fulfill all righteousness, and so was Circumcised, Luke 2.21. Baptized,
Matthew. 3.13, 16, 17. did eat the Passover with the Disciples, Mat. 26.18* 19,
20. Mar. 14.18. Luke 22.13, 14. he* in coming under that state in which he
must, because a man, fulfill the Law, and be under even Gospel commands so far
as they were suitable to his holy Nature, testifies in obeying all commands
even of the Moral Law (and as the Son of God he was under no such obligation)
that he was under a special engagement, and compact to God, for the work of
Redemption. And we are taught to feel what imbred delight and sweetness of
peace is in duties; when Christ Covenants with God to come under the Law, and
under the hardest of commands, to lay down his life for sinners, because it was
a Law and command by Covenant, that has most of obedience which has most of a
Law.

Q. Was Christ such an one, as needed seals to his special Covenant with the
Father? Why Christ received the Seals.


Ans. He needed no seals at all to strengthen his faith of dependency, for
there was no sinful weakness in his faith, yet he was capable of growing,
Luke 2.52: For the Law requires not the like physical intention and
bendednesse of acts of obedience from the young, as from the aged. 2. In that
the receiving of the seals proves Christ to be Surety of the Covenant of Grace,
it makes good, that he was under the other Covenant, and to perform the
obedience due to the special command of dying, as to a command of Covenant.

6. Arg. God might have followed a Law-way with all flesh, and not have sent his
Son, and the Son might have refused to be sent (...) Ergo, by compact Christ
came
6. Argument, is from the Lords liberty: If God might in justice have
prosecuted the Covenant of Works, and Adam and his might justly have suffered
eternal death for sin (for the Law is holy and just, and the threatening Genesis
2.17. just) except the Lord had of grace made another Covenant, then must the
Lord send, or not send a Savior to suffer, and be a suffering Redeemer and
Surety as pleased him, or not pleased him; and if Christ may refuse to
undertake, or willingly agree, as pleased him, and Christ being
God^consubstantiall with the Father, might have stood to the Law-way of works:
For who, or what could have hindered him to follow a course of justice against
all men? then if both agreed to dispense with that Law-way to save man; Here is
Covenant-condiscension between JEHOVAH and the Son, of quieting Law, and
pitching on a mild Gospel-way.

7. Arg. All the promises how they are made to Christ.
7. Argument, from the promises made to Christ: He to whom the promises are
made, as to the seed, so as in him they are yea, and Amen, and he who is
eminently the chief heir of the promises, as engaged to make good the promises
on the Lords part, to give forgiveness, Jer. 31.34, Heb. 8.12. perseverance,
Jer. 32.39, 40. Isa. 54.10. Isa. 59.21. peace, Ezekiel. 34.25. Lev. 26.6.11, 12.
yea, and a new heart, Jer. 31.33. Ezekiel. 11.19. Heb. 8.10. life eternal, Joh.
10.28. and to make good the promises upon our part, by fulfilling the
condition, and giving habitual grace, Jer. 31.33. Ezekiel. 36.26. and actual
influences, Jer. 31.34. to know the Lord, Ier. 32.39, 40. Ezekiel 36.27. to, and
with him, God must strike a Covenant of suretyship, that he shall have the
anointing in its fullness, above his fellows, without measure, to make good all
these promises as Mediator; for it is not simply grace and life that the Lord
bestows upon his people, but grace out of the storehouse of the Mediator
God-Man. Now this must be given to Christ by promise, Gal. 3.16. Now to Abraham
and his seed were the promises made, he says not, and to seeds, as of many,
but as of one, and to thy seed, which is Christ: He cannot well mean mystical
Christ, that is, Christ and all his, for they are indeed many and numerous, as
Isai. 2.1, 2. Isai. 60.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Psalm. 22.27. compared with Rev. 5.11.
Rev. 7.9. for the promises are made to Christ-God-Man eminently, not formally:
For 2 Cor. 1.20. All the promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen. For
the promise is made to us for Christ, and through his grace, then the promise
is made first to him, and more eminently, and to us for him: Propter quod
unumquodque ^ale, id ipsum magis tale. 2. The promises are fulfilled and made
good, not because we fulfill the condition, but for Christ, in whom, and by
whose merit, both the grace promised, and the grace habitual and actual to
perform the condition, be it faith, repentance, humility, etc. is freely given
to us. 3. Christ is he who makes the Covenant and all the promises, Act. 7.32.
Who said to Moses, I am the God of thy fathers, the God of Abraham -- 34. I
bave seen, I have seen the affliction of my people which is in Egypt, and I
have heard their groaning, and am come down to deliver them: And now come, I
will send thee unto Egypt. And v. 35. Moses is made a Ruler and a deliverer by
the hands of the Angel that appeared to him in the bush. This is Christ, the
Angel, 38. of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1. Christ is he who made the promises and
the Covenant.
Whom they tempted, 1 Cor. 10.9. Of whom the Lord said, Exodus 23.21. Beware of
him, and obey his voice, and provoke him not: for he will not pardon your
transgressions, for my Name is upon him. And this Angel says, I am the God of
Abraham, the Omniscient God that sees the afflictions of his people. 3. Hears
their prayers. 4. Delivers them out of Egypt, Exodus 20.1, 2* and so the Author
of the Covenant, and of all the promises. It is much for weak believers that
God stands ingadged in Christ by Covenant with him to give us to believe, and
to believe to the end. CHRIST is an ingadged Surety for the standing of a weak
believer.
Has the Lord given himself Surety for the standing of a tottering believer?
Is there not ground to believe that Christ shall make good his undertaking?
Also, if all the promises be made to Christ who is the Author of the Covenant,
and upon condition that Christ do his part, and lay down his life; then sure
Christ is under a Covenant, to enjoy his reward, when he has done his work?
And to have a believing seed is Christ's reward, heaven and earth can make no
^urer binding for faith and salvation.

8. As the former Argument is from the promise made unto Christ, and fulfilled
to him, so this is from the Predictions, Prophecies and Promises of him, as he,
of whom such glorious promises are foretold, and may claim the thing promised,
by faith, he has some word of promise for suiting these things: which is a
Covenant, if he shall do what is required of him, and fulfill the Commandment,
8. Arg. From the promises concerning Christ.
Joh. 10.18.

But such Prophecies and Promises there be of CHRIST, Isa. 22.22. The key of
the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder: so he shall open and none
shall shut, and he shall shut and none shall open. 23. And I will fasten him as
a nail in a sure place; and he shall be for a glorious Throne to his fathers
house. 24. And they shall hang upon him all the glory of his fathers house, the
offspring and the issue, all vessels of small quantity: from the vessels of
cups, even to all the vessels of flagons. Zech. 3.8. For behold, I will bring
forth my servant the BRANCH. Zech. 6.12. Speak unto Joshua, saying, Thus
speaks the Lord of Hosts, saying, Behold the man whose Name is the BRANCH,
and he shall grow up out of his place, and he shall build the Temple of the
Lord: 13. Even he shall build the Temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the
glory, and shall sit and rule upon his Throne. Mic. 5.4. And he shall stand and
feed in the strength of the Lord, in the Majesty of the Name of the Lord his
God, and they shall abide: For now shall he be great unto the ends of the
earth. 5. And this man shall be the peace, when the Assyrian shall come into
our land. So Psalm. 72.7. In his days shall the righteous flourish, etc. Hence,
as Christ prayed in faith, Joh. 17.5. to be glorified with the glory he had
with the Father before the world was, because he finished the work, though he
was not yet crucified, but he had a mind fixed to suffer: So may Christ pray in
faith to Govern right, and to bear the glory, and to feed in the strength of
the Lord, and to have a conquished people, since he was to fulfill all the work
that was laid upon him: And this supposes a Covenant.

9 Arg. Christ is bidden ask a people from God and the Lord promises that he
will hear
Hence, Arg. 9. from the suite he bids his Son ask, which he will grant, Psalm.
2.8. Ask of me and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the
ends of the earth for thy possession. Psalm. 89.26. He shall cry unto me, thou
art my Father, my God, and the Rock of my salvation. 27. Also I will make him
my firstborn, higher then the Kings of the earth. 28. My mercy will I keep for
him for ever, etc. If God say to us, call upon me in the day of trouble, and I
will hear thee: This argues a Covenant that God shall hear, if we pray; Then it
says, if Christ the Mediator shall pray, he shall be heard and prospered with
success in his work.

10. Argument from the work of Christ, and the wages, 10. Arg. The relation of
Christ's working for wages, and the Lords paying him his wages, does prove this
Covenant.
which a Covenant calls for: Christ complains, Isa. 49.4. Then I said, I have
labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught, and in vain: there is
work. Shall he have nothing for his work? He adds, Yet surely my judgment is
with the Lord, and my work with my God. v. 6. He receives an answer of a full
reward for his work: And he said, it is a light thing, that thou should be
my servant, to raise up the Tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of
Israel: I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou may be
my salvation unto the end of the earth. Which words are cited true of Christ,
by Luke, Act. 13.47. when Christ is Preached to the Gentiles: And as one who
labored for us, so he craves his wages, though the Jews pay him unworthily.
Zech. 11.12. Then I said, if ye think good, give (me) my price, and if not,
forbear; pay me, or pay me not: Yet the Lord paid him. Phil. 2.7. He made
himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, -- and
became obedient to the death, the death of the cross. Here is work: follows
his wages, call it merit, or what else, its a reward and the end of his
suffering, which Christ both desired and intended, as the fruit of his labors.
v. 9. (...), Therefore God highly exalted him, and gave him a Name above every
name. Act. 5.21. Him has God exalted with his right hand* to be a Prince and
Savior. Isa. 53.10. When he shall make his soul an offering for sin (which was
work hard enough) he shall see his seed (which was his souls desired wages) he
shall prolong his days, the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in hand: 11. He
shall see of the travail of his soul, and be satisfied. 12. Therefore will I
divide him (a portion) with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with
strong: that is an ample reward. Follows his work* because he has powered out
his soul unto death, and he was numbered with the transgressors, and bare the
sins of many, and made intercession for the transgressors. Hence, his care to
finish the work of him that sent him, and to do his will, Joh. 4.34. Joh. 17.4.
Joh. 8.29. and as the Father loved, so he rewarded the obedience of his Son,
not by necessity of nature, but by a voluntary compact, but he loves his
obedience, Joh. 10.17. Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my
life, that I might take it again. Joh. 15.10. If ye keep my Commandments, ye
shall abide in my love, even as I have kept my Fathers Commandments, and abide
in his love. Nor can it be denied but a redeemed and saved people was much in
the heart of Christ, and much in his desire and intention. Joh. 10.10. I am
come, that they may have life, and have it more abundantly. And if, to finish
the work, especially of saving lost man, was his meat and drink, Joh. 4.34. and
he prayed for the ransoned ones, Joh. 17. to sanctify them: 17. That they
might he where he is, 24. There must be always in the heart of Christ a design
of love, in that he made redeemed ones his end, his work, his souls
satisfaction, Isa. 53.11. And O how worthless were we! that the desire of God
should be toward us: How far below the price that love put on us? Was man a
Crown and wager for God, for God, A design of love in the heart of Christ
toward low man, as his alme and end
for such a God to run for, to work for, and to win? Was there not a more fixed
seat in Angels, then in clay, for so high a love as the Love of God? Is there
room in so low a piece of created Nothing, for so high, and deep, so broad and
long a design, so high an aim, as nothing could be the last and the least
result of transcendent love, but great Immanuell, God with us? Reason might
say, a less price may buy poor man, a lower design may compass sinners. But
love said no less could do it: and this love is not capable of a mistake, in
buying, infinite love cannot err in designs of free-love.

11. Argument is from the Oath of God: Christ is made a High Priest, 11. Arg.
The Lords Oath ^o Christ when he is made Priest, and King provs this Covenant.
another way then other Priests: Heb. 7.21. For those Priests were made without
an oath: but this with an oath, by him that said to him, the Lord has sworn
and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of
Melchizedec, Psalm. 110.4. No man enters to an office by an oath to be
faithful, or to be for ever in such an administration, but he enters also to
the office by Covenant. And this oath is sworn by the Lord JEHOVAH, to Christ:
The Lord has sworn, -- thou art a Priest. Its a more excellent Priesthood
which is confirmed by an oath, then that of Aaron, which is confirmed by no
oath. Psalm. 89.35. Once have I sworn by my Holiness, that I will not lie unto
David, (...)
(the Messiah my Anointed, the son of David. (...)
) 36. His seed shall endure for ever. Act. 2.30. Therefore being a Prophet, and
knowing that God with an oath had sworn to him, that of the fruit of his loins
according to the flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit upon his Throne. 31. He
seeing this before spoke of the Resurrection. Psalm. 1^2.11. The Lord has sworn
in truth unto David, he will not turn from it, of the fruit of thy body will I
set upon thy Throne. 12. If thy children shall keep my Covenant, and my
Testimony that I shall teach them, their children also shall sit upon thy Throne
for evermore.

They shall sit so and so by Covenant blessed in Christ. And so the stability
and certainty of the decree and oath is not to make the children of David
secure, but watchful in their duty: But this is not a condition without the
which the Messiah should not reign, but without this he should not reign to
their comfort and everlasting good. But otherwise the truth of the Lords
Covenant-faithfulnesse depends not upon men's unbeleef, Romans 3.3. and for the
certainty of this promise and oath which made good Christ his reign which shall
not cease, see 2 Samuel 7.12. 1 King. 8.25. 2 Chronicles. 6.16. Luke 1.69. Genesis 21.17,
18* Hence there is no Covenant made with Christ that the Covenant of Works made
with Adam should stand for ever. 2. No oath in that Covenant. 3. No promise or
oath to give perseverance, and the Spirit and influences of grace for that
effect. And the oath of God, that Christ shall be King of my will to reign over
the heart, to give repentance as a Prince, CHRIST is a sworn Priest and
Intercessour for the hour of temptation
Acts 5.31. and that God has sworn him to be an eternal Priest who offered
himself a sacrifice to deliver me from the present evil world, Gal. 1.4. to
ransom me from my vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1.18. to bring me to God, 1 Pet.
1.18. that I should, being dead to sin, live to righteousness, 1 Pet. 2.24.
Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. Heb. 13.11, 12. Rev. 1.5, 6. is somewhat more comfortable
then the doctrine of Papists, Arminians, who say that any tempted Saint may be
a justified Saint to day, and an Apostate, a limme of Satan and a child of
perdition to morrow, as Judas was: as if Christ were not a sworn Advocate in
the nick and hour of temptation to help, in the act of winnowing: and had not
made promises of actual grace to actual temptations when they come, Luke
22.31. 1 John 2.1. Math. 10.19. And if Christ be sworn a King, Advocate, an
high Priest, to overcome the rockinesse and flinty and stony rebellion of will,
providing that will shall first yield and not play the King against Christ: for
any thing I see, the Covenant of grace is looser (the corruption of the
Covenanter being ten times stronger to evil then the will of Adam was) then
the Covenant of Works, and the Gospel an infinitely more plain path to a more
fiery hell then the Law. And it speaks much of free grace, that the everlasting
salvation of the Elect is in such a castle as the oath of the Omnipotent and
infinitely faithful Lord.

Lastly, the Argument is the more considerable that every Priesthood, even that
of Levi, is imposed by Covenant, Mal. 2.5. My Covenant was with him of life and
peace.

CHAP. VII. The Covenant of Redemption is explained in three eternal acts. 1.
Designation, decree or ordination, and delectation in the work. 2. Mercy and
peace, truth and righteousness are agreed in this Covenant. 3. The designed
sending of the Spirit cannot be a Covenant as this was. 4. The twelfth
Argument. 5. The thoughts of eternal love.
THe Covenant of Redemption is two ways considered. 1. As transacted in time
between Jehovah and Christ, in his actual discharge of his office of King,
Priest and Prophet. 2. As it is an eternal transaction and compact between
Jehovah and the second Person the Son of God, who gave personal consent that
he should be the Undertaker, and no other. And these three acts are
considerable in the Persons in this latter consideration: 1. Designation of
one. 2. Decree and destination. 3. Delectation in the work.


As to the first: There must have been a Person, either the Father, or the Son,
or the Spirit. 1. By God, from eternity set apart, separated, and designed: And
2. This person must have given an actual consent from eternity to the
designation: Now the person designed was the Son only, this lot eternally (to
speak so) fell upon only him who was, (...), the Lamb foreordained before the
foundation of the world, 1 Pet. 1.20. And because Christ-God equal with the
Father, does not begin to consent and agree to the designation in time, nor can
Christ-God will any thing in time, which he did not will, and consent unto,
from eternity; therefore he was present with the Father, and consented unto the
designation, and closed the bargain from eternity: upon which account, Christ
had the glory of a designed Savior with the Father, before the world was, and
prays that he may, God-Man, be glorified, as touching the manifestation of
that glory to Angels and men, with the glory that he had with the Father before
the world was, The most sweet providence of God in designing a Physician to us
before we be sick.
Joh. 17.5. and here is an eternally closed Covenant between JEHOVAH and the
Son, with the consent of parties. And who sees not our debt of love, for a
foresight and providence of pure grace? Behold a designed Physician before we
be sick, and Christ with his own consent, writing himself the repairer of the
breaches before the house fall, and the healer and binder up before the bones
be broken.

2. Christ is chosen and predestinate the head, the first born of the house,
and of the many brethren, and says Amen to the choice, and we are chosen in
him, as our head, and he was foreordained the Mediator, and the Lamb before
the foundation of the world was laid, to be slain for our sin. Hence, 2.
offended Justice by the breach of the Covenant of Works in all the three
Persons pleads that man should die, and that pleading is most just, and the Law
cannot be broken nor repealed. The soul that sins must die, Ezech. 18. the
threatening, Genesis 2.17. must be fulfilled. 2. Mercy pleads (not having a Throne
higher then justice, Armin. de Sacerdatio Chri. page 14, 15.
as Arminius says) that so many chosen ones may find mercy, and peace calls
for reconciliation to sinners.

3. Infinite wisdom also requires that justice and righteousness (under the
name of mercy we comprehend free and rich grace) may meet, and peace and
righteousness may kiss each other, Psa. 85.11. Hence all these Attributes of
glory must come forth, that a Throne may be set up and a Psalm may be sung,
Rev. 5.12. and the thousands of thousands may cry, Worthy is the Lamb that was
slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor,
and glory, and blessing. 13. And every creature which is in heaven (says John)
and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that
are in them, heard I saying, Blessing, honor, and glory, and power be unto Him
that sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. Hence 1.
there is no conflict between mercy and justice (as Arminius says) nor any
natural desire in God to have all Angels and men saved, which is hindered by
justice. Job says truly, c. 23. v. 13. He is of one (mind) and who can turn
him? (from this end which he intends, as if he could not compass it to another
end) and what his soul desires (in saving or destroying) even that he does. 14.
For he performs the thing that is decreed for me (and all creatures, and his
decrees are most free, Ephesians. 1.11.) and many such things, or many the like
things are with him. Therefore it pleased his most free, sovereign and absolute
Counsel to bring forth to Angels and men, The harmony of the Attributes of God
in the declaration of mercy, truth, justice, etc. is sweetly made out by this
Covenant.
to heaven and earth, to sea and to all creatures, the glory of justice, truth,
mercy, peace, grace, power, wisdom, Rev. 5.13. and in Christ the decreed and
appointed Mediator, the Lamb fo^e ordained, as Peter, 1 Pet. 1.20. to be slain,
and who agreed to the decree, and in an eternal compact took the burden upon
him, to fulfill that of Psalm. 85.10. Mercy and Truth are met together,
Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other. 11. Truth shall spring out of
the earth, and Righteousness shall look down from Heaven. So that in this
transaction, the Father and the Son and Spirit, let out to men for their
salvation the glory of all th^se Attributes.

Obj. Did not the Holy Ghost also from eternity, say Amen, and agree to be sent
by the Father and the Son, to lead the Saints in all truth, to sanctify, to
comfort them? And did not the Father and the Son from eternity decree to send
the Spirit? And did not the Spirit also consent to the decree before the world
was? And so shall there be also a Covenant between the Father and the Son
sending the Spirit, Joh. 14.26. Joh. 16.13, 14, 15. and the Spirit who is sent?

Ans. Every mutual agreement between the blessed Persons concerning their
actions without, cannot be called a Covenant, The sending of the Spirit, and
the Spirit his free consent to come, is not a proper Covenant.
nor need we contend about names. What if we say that there is some
Oeconomicall and dispensatory agreement of sending and being sent, yea even in
the Works of Creation, Redemption and Sanctification, though two things stand
in the way to hinder us to call such an agreement with the name of a voluntary
compact or Covenant? 1. It seems natural and not voluntary, that there is such
an admirable order of working as the Father creates by the Son, as by his
eternal wisdom, but yet a person, a suppositum, different from the Father,
and by the Spirit, as his mighty power: a third Person. 2. The Son is decreed
with his own consent to be the Person, to empty himself, to be in time clothed
with our nature, and to put on the state and legal condition of a
Covenant-Obeyer of God to the death, the death of the cross, and is made a
little lower then the Angels: and this may well be called a
Covenant-transaction, and a course of Covenant-obedience in the Mediator, which
condition the Holy Ghost comes not under. And what should man say when the
votes of the Three carries it, that our iniquities should be laid on the Son,
Isa. 53.6. and the Son should be sent, Gal. 4.4. and he from eternity should
step out. Lord, send me, here am I to do thy will. Joh. 3.13. No man (no
person) (...), has ascended up to heaven, Gods love in acting for man in time.
but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of man which is in heaven.
These votes of love fell not upon Angels, but upon man. And how should it break
my rockinesse that Christ spoke for me, undertook for me, took all my diseases
upon him, before I was, and before my disease had being? We reckon it great
favor, Such a man pleaded kindly and boldly for you in your absence, when you
was not to speak for your self. As its love to provide a rich inheritance for
the child not born, and to fight for the sleeping child that he may not be
killed: when we had neither being, action nor vote in Christ's undertaking. Obj.
Such as are chosen in Christ, such are foreseen believers, when they are
chosen. Ans. Justly learned and pious M. Bayn denies that: Paul Bayne Comm. on
Ephesians. 1. v. 4.
for God choised the noble royal Family, Christ the Head, and all the Branches
in Him. Love, eternal love begins at the head, descends to the offspring: But
not because they are in Christ by faith and actually are foreseen believers,
The Lord choosed us not in Christ, because he saw us in him by faith.
for that is all one. We were in Christ as the tree is in the seed, as all the
Rose trees and the Vine trees are in the first Rose tree and the first Vine
tree, created of God, virtually. For because God choosed us, therefore shall we
be in Christ by faith: yea and he choosed us and ordained us to be in Christ by
faith, when He gave us to the Son to be kept by him.

The third considerable act here, is an act of delectation, and the place is
observable, Prove. 8.22. The Lord, Chanani, possessed me: Its not Bara, created
me: Its not (...), as the LXX. have it, but as Aquila, (...), in the beginning
of his way: as Cartwright, The mutual delights of love between the Father and
the Son, in their thoughts of the Covenant-love to man.
before he had created any thing. 23. I was set up from everlasting.
Tremellius, inuncta fui, I was anointed. Aben Ezra, Electa fui, I was chosen.
The vulgar Latin, I was ordained, from the beginning, or ever the earth was.
24. When there were no depths, I was brought forth: when there were no
fountains abounding with waters. 25. Before the mountains were settled: before
the hills was I brought forth, etc. In all which the authority of Christ (says
Cartwright) is proven from his eternity, antiquity, immortality, etc. and all
this time He was with God, as is fully, v. 30. cleared: Then I was by him, as
one brought up with him. Ambros. hexa. l. 6. c. 16. Deus fecit Coelum, and non
lego quod requierit, fecit terram nec lego quod sic requieverit: fecit solemn,
lunam and stellas, nec ibi lego quod requieverit; lego quod fecit hominem, and
quod tunc requieverit.
Chald. Para. I was nourished up as a maid at his side. He will not want his
Son out of his eye: I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him. The
Hebr. (...) die, die, from day to day. Rabbi Solomon, annorum myriades, myriads
of years. The Father and the Son, from eternity, delighted one in another, and
were solacing themselves in the works without themselves: and the ratio
formalis (as it were) that which took up the love, delight and thoughts of God,
when as yet there was no world, no mountains, no depths, etc. is Christ as
Redeemer delighting himself with the sons of men, 31. I was with him, --
rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth: Heb. Sporting or playing with the
sons of men: both because of all his works, as Ambrose says, he most longed
for man, and made heaven and rested not, and made the earth and rested not, and
made the Sun, Moon and Stars, and rested not there: and made man, and then
rested, as having found the choicest piece of work he so much delighted in. So
the Father and the Son were taken, and (as it were) love, says Bernard,
triumphed over God* Bernard. Sermon. 64. in Cant. Quid violentius triumphat de
Deo.
and they sola^ed their heart in that great design of love, and from eternity
passed over that long and sweet age of myriads of ages, in the pleasant and
delighting thoughts of that boundless and bottomless Ocean of love, to wit,
God is to be made sick and to die a love for the sons of men. Love being above
and (in a manner) not stronger then the grave only, and then death and hell, but
some way (with reverence to his holiness) mightier then the most High, and
brought God down to sick clay: that you may (says Bernard) see, if you take
heed, joy sadned, faith feared, Bernard. hom. ^ Super missus est videas si
attendas (in Christo) tristari laetitiam, pavere fiduciam, salutem pa^i, vitam
mori, fortitudinem infirmari.
salvation suffering, life dying, strength weakened: and this wisdom was hid
up and kept secret since the world began, Romans 16.25. Hidden wisdom (in the
heart of the Lord from eternity) which God ordained before the world, unto our
glory, 1 Corinthians. 2.7. the like whereof the eye has not seen, nor the ear
heard, nor has entered in to the heart of man, v. 9. to conceive: So that this
mystery of the Covenant between Jehovah and the Son of God was (as it were
little enough to busy the thoughts of the infinite understanding of of the
highest Lord, God Father, Son and Spirit, as containing the unsearchable riches
of Christ, Ephesians. 3.8. Say there were millions and ten thousand millions of Globs
of new whole earths of all gold mines perfect and purest gold, The strength of
Gods love to man, which we too little value.
yet should they not all come near to the borders of this riches: and these all
were in before there was a Creation, and he lets out of this fullness to us,
and we are sinfully poor beside Christ's gold mines, and dry beside the rivers
of wine and milk: and dead, a thousand times, being under the flowings and
outlettings of life and of such a life.

Hence, the 12. Argument: If Christ the Son was designed, and foreordained
with the Father, the Spirit, and his own consent to be the person should pay
the ransom of satisfaction, and to be satisfied in his soul with the getting
and enjoying of the bought, and well paid for and ransoned, yea the
over-ransoned sons of men, who ravished love and heart of Father and Son,
before the mountains were brought, Prove. 8.22, 23, etc. 30, 31. forth, and when
as yet there were no depths, then was that bargain of love closed and
subscribed before witnesses from eternity. For could the heart of Christ be
cold and indifferent to undergo suretyship for the sons of men: Who warmed and
kindled a fire of Redeemers love in his heart from everlasting? Or was his
consent to the Covenant, but as late and young as since Adam fell, or Abraham
was called to leave his country and his fathers house, Genesis 3. Genesis 12? No
less everlasting love could save us.
Ah! its an older love then so: A yesterdayes love, time-mercy, a grace of the
age with the world could not have saved me. Nor were our Charters and Writtes
of Gospel Grace, first drawn up in Paradise: Nay, but copies and doubles of
them only were given to Adam in Paradise. The love of God is no younger then
God, and was never younger to sinners; and woe to us, if grace and mercy to
redeemed ones should wax old and weaker through age, and at length die and turn
in everlasting hatred. I desire to hold me fast by that, Jer. 31.3. I have
loved thee with an everlasting love. He meets (as Calvin well observes) with a
blasphemous temptation of Satan, that the people had in their mouth: Ho, the
Lord appeared to me of old; but that is a love from one year to another, and
its out of date now: the Covenant-love to Abraham is dead and away, and the
Lord is changed? No, I have loved thee, not for a year, or a summer: The
Covenant-love is older then thy poor short time-love. Obj. But I may leave off
to love God; and he loves me no longer then I love him? Ans. Where is then
everlasting love? and because he loves us we shall not leave off to love him.
Night and overclouding of the Sun, is not a perishing of the Sun out of the
world; his love quickens my fainting love.

CHAP. VIII. The differences between the Covenant of Suretyship or Redemption
made with Christ, and the Covenant of Reconciliation and of Grace made with
sinners. 2. The conjunction of the Covenants. 3. How the promises are made to
the Seed, that is, to Christ, the meaning of the place, Gal. 3.16. 4. Christ
acted and suffered always as a public head.
IT is not the same Covenant that is made with Christ and that which is made
with sinners. 1. They differ in the subject or the parties contracting. In this
of suretyship, There are different parties in Covenant of Redemption and
Reconciliation.
the Parties are Jehovah God as common to all the three on the one part: and on
the other the only Son of God the second Person undertaking the work of
Redemption. In the Covenant of Reconciliation the Parties are God the Father,
Son, and Spirit, out of free love pitying us and lost sinners who had broken
the Covenant of Works. 2. Hence the Covenant of Suretyship is the cause of the
stability and firmness of the Covenant of Grace. Its true, Psalm. 89.19. David
is meant, when he says, I have laid help upon one that is mighty, I have
exalted one chosen out of the people. Help laid upon Christ
20. I have found David my servant. For the grace of election made David mighty
in the Lord, and the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and made him mighty to
execute his office; But this is so to be understood (says Mollerus and others)
of David, as it is also to be referred to Christ, upon whom the strength of our
salvation is laid, and the strength laid Covenant-wayes upon Christ is the
cause why David and his seed stand sure in an everlasting Covenant of
reconciliation. The Covenant of Redemption most to be eyed.
Though the Covenants of Suretyship and of Reconciliation differ, yet must they
not be separated: but faith principally must be fixed upon the most binding
Covenant Relation between JEHOVAH and the Son of GOD. Eye Christ always in the
Covenant, else its but the sheath or scabbard of a Covenant, and a letter to us.

3. There be two parts (as it were) of the Covenant of Redemption. 1. A
Covenant of Designation. 2. Of actual Redemption. The former is eternal; for
the Lord does not begin in time to d^signe Covenant-wayes the Son to be the
Consenter to be our Surety: nor does the Son in time begin to consent. Two
parts of the Covenant of Redemption, one before time, another in time.
But the Covenant-consent in, 1. Designing of one Person the Son, and no other.
Of 2. Decreeing and fore-ordaining of Him. 3. Of mutual delighting in love and
in eternal thoughts in the sons of men to be redeemed, 1 Pet. 1.20. Prove.
30.31. Was closed and concluded in an ended bargain from everlasting: for the
Parties were coexistent and together, and rejoicing in one another: and in the
common work, to borrow that expression, thinking long till the day of marrying
of God and man, and until Immanuels day should dawn, Joh. 8. Abraham rejoiced
to see my day. But as touching the other part, the Man Christ, until he should
be Man and have a man's will, he could not in two wills close with the Covenant
of actual Redemption.

But the Covenant of Reconciliation is no more eternal, then the creation,
which is eternal in the Decree of God, as are all things that fall out in
time. But this Covenant was made in Paradise, How seasonable and timous the
Covenant of Reconciliation was, the Physic and the Physic^an came both in time
to the sickness.
though it was decreed from everlasting, yet it had no being as a Covenant, nor
could have any, so long as the Covenant of Works did stand. But it came in due
time, the physic and the Physician Christ the blessed seed, not few hours
after Adam was fallen, came to his sickbed, or rather to his deathbed:
Blessed be his love who redeemed us in our low condition, for Adam had no faith
to receive, nor hope of a Redeemer. Christ came, not sought for, not sent for,
not so much as desired by us: For how could we desire a thing impossible, to
our knowledge? Or could we thirst for a ransom of the blood of God unknown to
Angels or Men? This is preveening grace indeed.

4. Differ. The Covenants do differ in the matter, work and wages.
4. They differ in the subject, matter: The Covenant of Redemption is, 1. who
shall be the surety of Redemption to undertake for man? Here am I, says the
Son, thy fellow, Zech. 13.7. 2. What shall be his work? What shall be his wage?
He shall lay down his life, that shall be his work: he shall be obedient to his
Father to the death, even the death of the cross. And his wage shall be, He
shall see his seed, and God shall give him a name above every name. But no such
work is laid on us, nor such a reward to be expected by us in the Covenant of
Reconciliation. Only here life and forgiveness is promised to us upon
condition of believing in Christ: and fit it is that Christ be alone, none
under such a Commandment as He, 5. The Covenant of suretyship differs from
the Covenant of Reconc^liation in commands. 2. Promises. 3. And conditions
Joh. 10.18.

5. The Covenant of Redemption has different commands, 2. Promises: 3. And
conditions from the Covenant of Reconciliation. The Commands of the Covenant of
Suretyship are of two sorts: 1. Some common. 2. Some proper and peculiar. The
former is, that Christ fulfill all righteousness, Matthew. 3.15. obey the whole
Law, being made under the Law. Now the command of being under the Law, is two
ways considered. 1. As laid upon the Son of God, so it is no command, but a
voluntary desire: And so his consenting to take on our nature is a consenting
to empty himself, and to be under the Law, but no act of obedience, CHRIST'S
emptying himself was no act of obedience, but a most voluntary free act beyond
all obligation.
because he was under no commanding obligation to take on him ou^ nature. But
2. as it is laid upon him now God-Man, and the Word made flesh, he is under a
necessity to give perfect obedience, Heb. 10.5. Therefore coming into the
world: The Son being to enter into the world, and to take on our nature,
speaks to the Father, thus: Sacrifice and offerings thou desire not, as
expiations to take away sin, for they cannot expiate sin, A body thou have
framed to me, which is the only one sacrifice of the true Lamb of God which
takes away sin, Joh. 1.29. and that once for all: And there are not any
sacrifices ever to come after, Heb. 9.26, 28. And perfect obedience with all
the heart was tendered by Christ from a holy nature, he being full of the Holy
Ghost from his Mothers womb, so as none could accuse him of sin, Heb. 4.15.
Heb. 7.26. Joh. 8.46. and this obedience had influence in Christ's obedience. To
the 2. to wit, to that proper and peculiar command of suretyship that never man
was under, but only Christ. Joh. 10.18. This Commandment (to lay down my life
for sinners) received I (and I only) from my Father. Psalm. 40.6. Sacrifice and
offering thou did not desire, mine ears thou have opened, -- 8. I delight to
do thy will, O my God, yea thy Law is within my heart. Now thus we are not
either ways under the commands of the Covenant of Grace: Who in heaven and
earth but Christ, could have come under bail and an act of suretyship for us?

2. There were promises of an higher nature made to Christ in his Covenant,
then are made to us in our Covenant of reconciliation, to wit, dominion from
sea to sea: A Throne at the right hand of God is not made to Angels, Heb. 1.8,
13. nor to us; nor is there remission and pardon promised to him, as to us, of
this hereafter.

3. The condition of justifying faith, laying hold on him who justifies the
ungodly, is required of us in our Covenant: There is no such condition required
of Christ in his Covenant of suretyship. The faith of Christ is the faith of
dependency, but not as a condition of the Covenant of suretyship, but in
another account.

Q. But is it not hard, that Christ is in one Covenant, and believers in
another? Its not hard, when the Lord Christ's Covenant and our Covenant cannot
be separated, CHRIST'S Covenant helps our Covenant, and he has a place in our
Covenant.

How the promise is made unto Christ, Gal. 3. v. 16.


and when Christ's room in the Covenant of Redemption is to be the designed
person Covenanting, who undertakes for us, as the surety, witness, and Angel
or Messenger of the New Covenant, who makes sure our Writs, makes valid and
strong our Charters, Rights, and Evidences of our Inheritance.

Q. How is it that the promises are made to Christ, as to the seed, Gal. 3.16?

Ans. Our Divines, Beza, Piscator, Deodati, the English Divines in their
Annotations, expound the Seed Christ, of Christ Mystical, as the Church the
body, 1 Cor. 12.12. is called Christ. Judicious Pareus says, that the Apostle
expounds the Seed, not collectivelie of many, Da. Pareus, Comm. in Gala. 3.16*
Hoc semen (in quo benedicentur omnes Gentes) Aposto^lus interpretatus erat non
collective de multis vel omnibus Abraham^ posteris, sed individue de uno
Christo, ^ quo non ^am corporalis quam spiritualis benedicto, hoc est, justitia
and vita eterna in fideles difluit.
and of all the posterity of Abraham, but individuallie of one Christ, from
whom flows to the believers, not so much the corporal blessing, as the
spiritual, that is, righteousness and eternal life: And so says he, the
Apostle says, that this blessing or the inheritance is given to Abraham and
believers, not by the Law, that is by no merit in Abraham, but by the promise,
and by faith in Christ. Among Papists, Liranus; the promises are made to the
seed, scilicet, Christo, in quo impletae sunt and non in alio, ideo dicitur
semini in singulari numero, that is, to Christ in whom the promises are
fulfilled, and in none other; therefore it is said to the seed in the singular
number. So also, Cajetan: Semini autem ejus, tanquam and cui promissa sunt, and
in quo adimplenda erant promissa. Corn. a lapide: If the word seed, semen, were
taken collectively, the promise could not stand; for its sure all the Jews were
not blessed in the seed: Yea many of them (says Calvin) were a curse. Estius
says, the word seed, is a collective name, and notteth many; and has not in
the Hebrew the Plural Number. Augustine (says he) will have all Christians
following the faith of Abraham to be here noted, for they are that seed to
which the promise is made, whereas Christ is properly he in whom the promise is
to be fulfilled, and in whom all are one by faith, The promise, Gal. 3.16. is
not made to Christ mystical.
and all are reduced to the Singular Number.

There is no reason to expound the Seed Christ, of Mystical Christ and of his
Seed. 1. Because the Seed is he in whom the Nations are blessed, both Jews and
Gentiles, v. 14. And the Seed made a curse for us, v. 13. But this seed is only
Christ, not mystical Christ, head and members: for neither are we blessed in
Christ mystical, nor was Christ mystical the Church made a curse for us: Nor
did the Church mystical pay a price of satisfaction to offended justice for
us, v. 19. The word seed seems to have the same signification, v. 16. and v.
19. Consider then, v. 19. Wherefore then serves the Law? It was added because
of transgressions, until the seed come, to whom the promise was made. Now the
seed coming is Christ coming in the flesh to take on our nature. If the seed
were taken for Christ mystical, the Apostle must say, The Law was added
because of transgression, until the seed should come: that is, until Christ
mystical, his Church should come in the flesh, which is nonsense. 3. Whether
the promise be of Canaan, and of life eternal thereby holden forth; Or of
Christ to come of Abraham, in whom all flesh shall be blessed; or of
righteousness by faith, not by the works of the Law; Or of all these coming
under the name of the inheritance, the promise is made to many in number like
the Stars: For the Lamb and the hundredth forty and four thousands standing
with him on Mount Zion, and the thousands of thousands which none can number,
Rev. 7.9. are many, and may well be called seeds; And though they be all one in
Christ, yet the Apostle must speak too ambiguously, when he said, The promise
of righteousness and life is made to the seed, that is, to Christ head and
members: for the promise is so made to Christ, especially of life, pardon,
righteousness, as the blessings promised are fulfilled and given through, and
for Christ as the only meritorious cause, as all grant: which way the promises
are in no sense made to believers, who cannot come in as joint satisfiers with
Christ, and as joint meritorious procurers with Christ of the blessings
promised to us. 4. The promise is made to the seed coming in the flesh, and
assuming our nature in a personal union, v. 19. as is, by confession of all,
expounded. Now this restricts the promise to God incarnate, and must exclude
the members. 5. It runs most connaturally to the Text, and comfortably to us,
if neither Christ, Gal. 3.16. be understood as a private man, the Son of
Mary: nor yet as Christ mystical, as 1 Cor. 12.12. But as Christ, a public
person, and Head and Lord-Mediator. 1. He represents all the Elect: The Seed,
Christ, Gal. 3.16. is neither meant of Christ as a private person, nor of
CHRIST Mystical: but of Christ as a public person and Head, the second Adam.
and so the word seed is taken individually. He takes all the promises and the
weight of the whole Covenant of Grace and Covenant-promises off the Lords hand
as the second Adam representing all the Family and House: Behold I and the
children that God has given me. As the weight of the Covenant of Works, and of
the promises thereof, was upon the first Adam, as he should manage these
promises, so should it fare, ill or well, with all his seed. And so as Christ
having the Gospel and Covenant-promises committed to him, so should it be with
us: and this Tutor cannot miscarry, and so shall it be well with the Pupils and
Minors.

Were it no more but that, Joh. 14.19. Because I live, ye shall live also: ye
shall live by promise, the free promise of life eternal: its no small vantage.

2. The promises are laid down in Christ as in a public Lord Keeper. Christ is
that excellent Ark in which are the Tables of the Covenant, and the Book of the
Law and Covenant, Deuteronomy. 31.26. 1 King. 8.9. and as the first subject of the
promises he keeps them. Yea and Christ is the fountain and original cause of
all the promises: for he merited by his blood, remission, righteousness,
perseverance, eternal life, all grace, which the Lord makes ours by free
promise. 2. In Christ they are made and published to us: so they are dear
mercies to Christ: they stand Christ at a dear rate: they are ours freely for
no price or hire. 3. Hence nothing hinders, but the promises as made to Christ
the first Heir and Son of promise: for Christ is the chief and principal thing
promised, and other things that are freely given us (by promise) are given to
us, (...), with Christ, or after that he has given us Christ: and assignies,
and younger brethren come in under the first Heir. Our blood-relation to the
Family stands by Christ, interest to promises comes all this way. The Lords
method is, Get first Christ, then all the promises are yours: for they follow
him. And Christ well manages Covenant-promises, as they most tend to the good
of his own.

And this is specially to be considered that Christ, from the womb to the
grace, does act and suffer nothing but as a public person. For us he was born,
Isai. 9.6. For unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, Luke 2.11.
Rejoice (says the Angel) for unto you (not to us Angels, Christ always to be
looked on as a public person.
nay neither for himself) unto you is born a Savior. 2. Why? For whose sake
came he this journey to the earth? Luke says it was no private business of his
own, c. 19.10. He came to seek and to save that which was lost, and to save
(says Paul) sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15.

3. Why died he? He was made a curse, (...), for us, Gal 3.13. Sin for us, 2
Corin. 5.21. Died for his sheep, John 10.11. for his friends, Joh. 15.13* was
made poor for our sake, 2 Cor. 8.9. is our forerunner who is entered into
heaven, (...), for us, Heb. 6.20. We have a great high Priest, -- touched with
our infirmities, Heb. 4.14, 15. Who has entered into the heavens to appear in
the presence of God for us, (...). Christ's public Spirit, who breathed not for
himself, lived not for himself, died not for himself, nor ascended to heaven
for himself, nor enjoyes he heaven for himself, should show us the necessity we
have of Christ. The Physician is needful to the sick, the ransone to the
captive, bread to him that famisheth: but Christ is more necessary to the
sinner. We know not how many are in Christ's debt: for heaven, Angels, Sun and
Moon, seas and fountains, The right necess^^ie we are in to buy Christ.
men and all things subsist by him, Col. 1.17. Heb. 1.3. Yet most of men judge
fire and water more needful then Christ: and think, they no more need Christ
or Covenant Interest in him, then the cart needs the third wheel, or the great
Ocean a drop of dew: nor is it every necessity of Christ that we press. There
is a necessity of a Physician to a whole Pharisee: as a dead man stands in need
of life; But it is a literal necessity by which the whole (says Christ,
Matthew. 9.) needs not the Physician: but it is the sick, paining necessity, such
as this, I die a hundredth times, if I get not CHRIST. This takes away sleep in
the night, and brings a fixed aim to sell all and buy Him.

CHAP. IX. The 13. Argument, from the necessity of Gods call. 2. Of Typical
sprinkling of the blood of the Covenant, and of the Testament: The place, Heb.
13.20. the blood of the everlasting Covenant opened. Of the place, Heb. 7.22.
the act of suretyship, the assurance of our state.
AN Argument 13. is taken from the necessity of this Covenant of Redemption. 1.
From the call of God: Christ took not on him to be a Priest, nor did he glorify
himself to be made an High Priest, but that he said unto him, Heb. 5. Thou art
my Son, to day have I begotten thee: That is, I have ordained thee to have the
honorable calling of the High Priest. The Apostle also, Heb. 1. applies this
in part to the eternal generation of the Son: And Act. 13.33. the Apostle
applies this to Christ's rising from the dead, because in these two latter,
manifestly appears the God Head of the Son, in that he is true High Priest,
who, by offering himself has taken away our sins, He who took not on him to be
Priest and King, but upon the call of God must be made Priest and King by
Covenant.
which only God can do. In the other, Romans 1.4. He is declared to be the Son of
God with power, -- by the resurrection from the dead. He who took not upon him
to be High Priest while God called him, and neither took upon him to be King,
while God called him, and said, Psalm. 2.6. I have Anointed him my King, upon my
holy Hill of Zion, and willingly consented to the call of God, to be King and
Priest. He must be made Priest and King by Covenant between him and God: for
Priests and Kings were called by Covenant, Mal. 2. v. 5. 2 King. 11.17. 2 Samuel
5.3.

2. It is necessary that the promises that are our Writs and Charters* of
Heaven be in a surer hand then in our own, to wit, in the keeping of Christ:
For this is an absolute promise made to us, Ezekiel. 36.26. A new heart also will
I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the
stony heart out of your flesh. This promise is not formally made to Christ, yet
it is a special Covenant-promise, Jer. 31. Ezekiel. 11. Heb. 8. for there is no
stony heart in Christ, yet the promise is laid down in him, and made to him,
eminenter; for by the merit of his blood (for he sanctified the people with his
own blood, Heb. 13.12.) he sprinkles many Nations, Isai. 52.15. Some say, as
Calvin, Luther, Musculus, by the Preached Gospel: But it is clear, he alludeth
to the Law of sprinkling, Exodus 24.8. And Moses took the blood, and sprinkled
it on the people, and said, Behold the blood of the Covenant which the Lord
has made with you, concerning all these words. Now of that blood it is said,
Exodus 24.6. And Moses took half of the blood (of the oxen that the young men of
the children of Israel offered, v. 5.) and put it in basins, The sprinkling of
the Altar with blood
and half of the blood he sprinkled on the altar. 1. The half of the blood was
divided betwixt the altar and the people, to note. (say the English Divines)
the mutual stipulation of God (of Christ God the true Altar) to his people,
and his people to him, who were atoned and made one by the blood of Christ, v.
7. (2.) Moses took the book of the Covenant, and red it in the audience of the
people: Not the Book of the Covenant of the ten Commandments* for Moses had
not as yet brought the two Tables of Stone containing the ten Commandments,
down from the mountain. Then it was the Book of the Judicial Laws and
Promises, Heb. 9.19. For when Moses had spoken every Precept to all the people
according to the Law: he took the blood of calves and of goats, with water
(lest the blood should thicken and congeal* nor being mixed with water* notting
also some other mysteries, 1 John 5.6, 8.) and scarlet, wool and hysop, and
sprinkled both the Book and all the people. Its true there is no mention of
wool and hysop and scarlet, Exodus 24. but the Author to the Hebrews adds
nothing of his own to Moses: for there is a ground for these, Number. 19.6. and
Moses speaks not of the sprinkling of the Book, but the Book lying upon the
sprinkled Altar was also sprinkled with blood; for says the Holy Ghost, Heb.
9.22. Almost all things are by the Law purged with blood, and without shedding
of blood there is no forgiveness of sins. The sprinkling of the Book with
blood.
There was no guiltiness in the Book, but these written Laws and Ceremonies
were the handwriting of Ordinances which was against us, which was contrary to
us: which Christ by his bloody death behoved to blot out, take out of the way,
and nail to His Cross, Colos. 2.14.

But another Question rises, Exodus 24.6. What needed the sprinkling of the
people with one half of the blood, and the sprinkling of the Altar, that is
Christ the Mediator, with the other; For, 1. Neither the work of dying to
redeem man can be divided between Christ and the people: nor needed Christ, our
true Altar, forgiveness of sins. Ans. The typical sprinkling of the people is
expounded, Heb. 9.14. the purging of the conscience from dead works to serve
the living God, and to obey the Gospel, 1 Pet. 1.3. But the sprinkling of the
Altar Christ with the blood, is a far other thing: So the Holy Ghost, Heb. 9.
He who is constitute the Mediator of a Testament, How the Covenant i^ a
Testament.
his death must interveen to ratify and make valide, in Law* the Testament. v.
16, 17. That the friends of the Testator may have right to the goods that are
bequeathed to them in the Testament.

But Christ is the Mediator of the New Testament, v. 15. Ergo, etc. Now we are
to know that Christ's dying is considered; 1. As a paying of ransone for
captives, by which, in Law and by way of meri^e, the ranson of the blood of God
exceeds the worth of the bought captives, or the crime committed by the
captives; and so Christ's death meriteth to his friends ransoned righteousness,
life, pardon.

2. His dying is considered as a Testament of a dying friend. Now the living
friends, We have right to the goods bequeathed to us in a Testament not simply
as a Testament, but as such a Testament in which the death of the Testator in
the meritorious cause of the goods tested.
by virtue of a Testament as a Testament, have not ^us and right by buying and
selling to the goods tested. The essence and nature of a Testament is saved,
whether the goods that are bequeathed in legacy be the free gift of the
Testator, not bought with a price by him, or goods of the father of the friend,
to which the friend being a German-brother has as good right or the same
right, by birth, that the Testator has. How ever: the comparison holds in
this. Christ 1. has bequeathed to believers these goods. 2. The Testament is
no Testament, nor valide in Law, except the Testator be dead. No man can sue by
Law tested goods, if the Testator himself be living; Nor can we have right to a
new heart, forgiveness, perseverance, eternal life, to grace and glory,
except Christ our Testator had died. But because the Tested goods are more then
goods left to us in Testament; they are left to us by such a Testament as is
both a Testament and a death perfectly meritorious (this is superadded to the
nature of a Testament and beyond all Testaments) yea a death which is a price
to ransone us from the wrath to come; Therefore Christ so dying in our stead,
of justice meriteth that the friends should have these goods, though they
belong by mere grace and free promise, to the friends. Now this is a most clear
ground: Christ has a well purchased right by giving a condign price for the
goods and bles^sings promised in the Covenant of Grace to us: This right he
has by paying a price, laying down his life for us. This buying is not by
necessity of nature, of justice, but by a voluntary, free and uncompelled
agreement and Covenant, Joh. 10.18. Isai. 53.6. No man can exact upon him,
Psalm. 89.22. The Testament is confirmed by blood of some living creature slain.
(2.) If the Old Testament was confirmed by the blood of beasts, then must the
New Testament be confirmed by the blood of Christ prefigured in these. But the
Old Testament was so confirmed, Heb. 9. v. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Ergo, now
neither Testament nor Covenant was confirmed by blood simply, but by the blood
of a living creature slain.

3. Hence the making of a Covenant was by cutting a calf or a beast in twain,
and passing between the parts thereof, Livius, li. 1. Populus (inquit
Flecialis) Romanus prior non deficiet. Si prior defecit, publ^co consilio malo
dolo, Tu illo die Jupi^er, populum Romanum sic ferito, ut ego hunc porcum
feriam tanteque magis ferito, quanto magis potes pollesque. Id uhi dixit*
p^rcum, si^ice sa^oque percussit.
Jer. 34.18. and so they entered into a curse, Nehem. 10.29. devoted themselves
to destruction, wishing they might be cut (...) (which is a strange kind of
death, Math. 24.51.) if they should break the Covenant. Hence the Phrase of
striking a Covenant. So the Romans slew a sow: So the Romans and Albani made a
Covenant, as Livius. A Herald or Officer at Arms slew the beast and prayed a
curse on the people of Rome, that they might be the same way stricken, if they
should break the Covenant. Its like they had it from the Jews. So Christ died
to ratify and confirm the Covenant, Exodus 24.6. This is the blood of the
Covenant. Now the Covenant has no blood. This blood of slain beasts (for it is
a figurative speech) is a sign confirming the Covenant that believers shall
have remission of sins in that blood of Christ which is shaddowed forth by the
blood of these beasts. So Christ the great Shepherd of the flock, Heb. 13.20.
is said to be brought from the dead, (...), by the blood of the everlasting
Covenant. Ju^ius, the Article is understood: Or as the Hebrew Phrase, (...) is
put for (...), as Calvin and Piscator. The question may be, How did God b^ing
Christ again from the death by the blood of the everlasting Covenant, had the
blood of Christ any influence to bring himself back from the dead? Or did he,
by dying, merit his own resurrection?

Ans. Some read the word thus, and shun the Question, The God of peace who
brought again from the dead the great sheepherd of the sheep: Understanding,
(...), being the great sheepherd or feeder, by the blood of the everlasting
Covenant. So Beza, who maks these words, (...), to be referred to (...): So as
Christ's right to be Pastor is in, and by his blood and suffering. And* the
words, (...), so is not to be constructed with the particle, (...): But Beza
confesses, that he changed the situation of the words. But if Christ be made a
Pastor and feeder of the sheep by the blood of the eternal Covenant: then is
he called to be a Pastor by Covenant. And what influence has his death in his
Pastoral Office? Beza, in Amitaque ut hoc planius fieret, non dubitavi verborum
collocationem mutare
Is it by way of merit? Or did Christ merit to himself? Hardly, if not
curiously, can we say that, though I nothing doubt but Christ gave perfect
obedience as man to the Covenant of Works, and he did merit as man, jure
operum, life eternal, the way that Adam should have merited life eternal, so
he had never fallen. But the words naturally bear this sense, as Deodati
expounds them, that Christ is risen by virtue of his death: As it is well said,
the just surety has right and Law to come out of prison, by paying the sum,
and neither Justice nor Creditor can keep him in prison: solutus aere est
solutus carcere. Christ having satisfied our debt, and paid the ransom of his
blood to the death, and being dead, and under the dominion of death by justice,
Christ justified in his cause coms out of the prison of the grave, by paying of
the ransom of blood. Heb. 9.28.
is freed from either remaining in death, or dying any more; he is now
justified, not in his person, for Christ in person was habitually righteous,
and from the womb, Luke 1.35. (...), That holy thing Jesus was sinlesse, and so
never condemned, but justified in his cause and in his condition by Law for us,
and so appears, (...), the second time without sin unto salvation; the second
time without sin, has relation to the first time, without sin, that is, he
shall appear the second time no less without sin, and so justified in regard
of his condition in Law, then he was, when he was conceived by the Holy Ghost,
and so that eminently holy thing born of the Virgin Mary, Luke 1.35. that is,
as justified as if he had never been made sin, and never had been under the
Law-burden of our sins, as Isai. 53.6. And 1 Timothy 3.16. (...), He was justified
in the Spirit, declared to be just, and the innocent Son of God, by his
resurrection from the dead, Romans 1.4. so that in the Spirit, is, in the
eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.14. the Godhead: For he came from under that act and
band of Cautionrie and Suretyship without sin, that is, acquit from sin, which
he was made, and was laid upon him, 2 Cor. 5.21. Isai. 53.6.

4. We know, Heb. 7.22. Jesus, (...), He was made the Surety of a better
Covenant, as the LXX. ever translate it, of a better Testament.

Now here is a judicial and a Law-act of suretyship put upon Christ. 1. He was
made Surety, Christ is not a surety by nature, but is made a surety by a
Covenant-consent of Johovah, and by his own consent.
then he was not Surety by nature, but so made by a free transaction and
Covenant. For in Christ's coming under that act, when he was made Surety, there
be two things: 1. His eternal condiscending to take on him our nature, and to
empty himself and be a servant. 2. His agreeing and plighting of his faith and
truth to take on our condition in Law, that God should lay upon him the
iniquity of us all, Isa. 53.6. and that God should make him who knew no sin, to
be sin for us, (...), in our Law, place and room, 2 Cor. 5.21. not against his
Fathers will, nor yet without his own free consent. That is against all reason:
For that which God made Christ, that he was not by nature, but that God
willingly made him, and that he was willingly and by free Covenant made. But
God gave him a body, Heb. 7.5. and God made him sin, (...), 2 Cor. 5.11. So a
Surety is one that promises to satisfy for another, and comes from a Verb
which signifies to promise by striking of hands, Prove. 22.26. Be not thou among
them that strike hands, or, of them that are surety for debts. The Seventy,
give not thy self, (...), as a Surety. Aries Montan. Inter percutientes fide
jubendo. (...)
The Verb in the Hebrew is from a root that signifies to mix together: as the
owl light, when light and darkness after the Sunset are mixed together. And
by a Metaphor it notes suretyship and mixture of persons, as M. Legh: when one
is tied for another, and mixed with him in his place. As Christ put himself in
the bond and writ of blood that we were in: That Christ was made a surety in a
Capital crime to die for us, is suitable to the Law of nations.
We were in the Law-writ, Deuteronomy. 27.^6. under a curse, and Christ shifted the
believers out, and was made a curse by his own consent for us, Gal. 3.10. and
was written and acted in the Law-book the sinner, and answered all the demands
of Law and Justice, and put in our names in the Gospel. writ: And that from
everlasting, God was in Christ, (...), reconciling the world (of the elect) not
imputing their sins unto them, 2 Cor. 5.19. And in time we believing, are
written blessed and righteous in him, Gal. 3.13, 14. 2 Cor. 5.21. And what
could more be done by Christ, who substitute himself by Covenant in our place,
and put us in his place? Nor is this Suretyship just in debts only, but also
what ever Socinus, Crellius, and others say on the contrair, in Capital
punishments. For M. Thomas Goodwine, M* Thomas Goodwine, Support of faith from
Chapter Resur. ^. 111.
page 50. E^oritus did ((...)) willingly become a surety for Suephenus. Yea,
and in hostages and pledges in war, Plutarch says* that the Thessali^ns slew
two hundredth and fifty hostages. The Romans (says Livie) did the like to three
hundredth of the Volsti* and cast the Taratines over rocks, de (...) Tarp^i^:
and these were humane people. The children of Tyrants were killed with the
Tyrants, by some Cities of Greece, as Cice^o, and Halicarnaseus say. Curtius
says, that the Maced^nians put to death such as were near of blood to
traitors: Marcellinus says so much also of the Persians. The just Lord
punishing the sins of the fathers upon the children, How mercy calls by a
sort of need for a surety.
to the third and fourth generation, ^eacheth* that conjunction of blood (such
as was between Christ our Kinsman. (...) Job 19.25. and us) may well make it
most just, that Christ be punished for us, the Surety for the sinner, though
the sinner be under the hand of the Judge; for he is unable to satisfy
Justice, Justice suits not that the debtor repay to the surety any thing in
some cases.
and mercy says that there is no essential reason in Law-justice why the same
head which sinned and no other should suffer. But grace may interveen, so that
though God need no surety, yet tender mercy, or God decreeing to show mercy, in
some good sense, needs such a Surety as Christ.

Neither is it much that justice says that the Surety ought to have
satisfaction made to him and restitution by the broken debtor, because justice
gives his due to every man. See Andre. Essenius, in Triumpho Crucis, de
satisfact. Chri^sti, l. 2. Sect. 3. c. 1. page 468, 469, 500.
For 1. if the surety be more then a man, and have absolute sovereignty over
what he exp^nds, as Christ has over his own life, to lay it down, and take it
up again, Joh. 10.18. As of free grace he paid for us, so of free grace he
pleads not in Law that the broken man pay him back, and make restitution of his
losses: and this says demonstratively that God does neither punish, nor show
mercy, by necessity of justice. 2. When the surety has a band of relief, and
as it were, a back-band, that his soul shall not be left in grave, Psalm. 16.10.
but that he shall be victorious and more, he may give out, Socin. de Serva. l.
3. c. 3.
and look for nothing in again.

And the necessity of a surety to say, remove the scaffold, the guilty man
shall not die, pleads, that if the Lord shall be merciful to sinners, as he
decreed, then must Christ transact so with God, Vlpianus L. S. quis reum. D.
cust and exhib. reorum.

Vale. Maximus de Dionysior. Siculo tametsi debita tot sacrilegii^ supplicia
non exolvit, dedecore tamen filli poenas rependit, quas vivus effugerat.


as the everlasting outgoings of mercy, may be with the free consent (as it
were) of truth, and righteousness.

But it may be said, if Christ's dying for sinners remove as a satisfactory
punishment, the guilt and obligation to eternal wrath, what way is the real,
and as it were, the physical inherency and essence of sin removed? Ans. The
obligation to wrath is removed only in a legal way by suffering of punishment
due to sin, Punishment suffered by a Surety can remove punishment from the
guiltyman, but cannot remove formally the inherent guilt* and make him formally
and physically and inherently innocent, except the punishment of the Surety so
excellent procure, by way of merit, the expelling of sin, and the incoming of
inherent holiness in its room, as Heb. 10*10.
which Christ has done; But the essence real of sin is only removed, as every
other contrair is removed, by the expelling of sin out of its subject, and by
introducing the contrair form, to wit, inherent righteousness, and the perfect
habit of Sanctification and holiness. Now for this, Christ's dying and suffering
wrath due to us, suppose Christ should die a thousand thousand times for us,
his dying cannot as a satisfying cause, or as a punishment remove this. For 1.
a punishment suffered by our Surety can but exhaust and remove the punishment
due to the sinner for whom the suretyship is undertaken. But 2. Christ's dying
cannot as a punishment remove sin as sin, and as contrair to the holy Law, and
make us defiled wretches and servants of sin holy, as the paying of ten
thousand Crowns for a forlorn waster, cannot make him to be no waster, and a
man that has obeyed the Law; only it makes that in Law the payment cannot be
charged upon him. 3. Christ's transacting with God as our Surety is not only
then merely to remove eternal punishment, but to purchase by the merit of his
death the healing and sanctifying of our nature, Heb. 10.10. By the which will
we are sanctified by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all.
What will of GOD, Heb. 10.10. sanctifies us.
Then our Sanctification is procured to us by the will of God, not simply as
his commanding will: for then should all and every one whom the Lord commands
to be holy, 1 Pet. 1.16. be sanctified, which we see is not done: but by the
will of the Father, commanding Christ to die, Joh. 10.18. Joh. 14.31. and the
will of Christ offering himself once for a sacrifice for sin, is the will which
sanctifies us. So Pareus well says, it is the will with its correlate, for in
the willing passive obedience of Christ are we sanctified really by the merit
of his death, though this be wrought by degrees. 2. Since the Father consents
and wills that Christ die, and the Son willingly offers himself a sacrifie, the
number (as judicious and Godly M. Dickson has well observed on the place) and
these all, Mr. David Dickson, Exposit. of the Epistle to the Hebrews, cap. 10.
v. 10.
for whom Christ offered himself, were condescended upon betwixt the Father and
the Mediator. God knew those whom he gave to the Son, to be ransoned: and
Christ knew those whom he bought. And the necessity of this Covenant appears in
this, that the comfort cannot be solid, if a child of God never have any
assurance of his being gifted of the Father to the Son in particular. For two
things are clear here. 1. That the Lord knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2.19. and
that, if God gave some to the Son, as Joh. 17. then the Son received them in a
certain number. And if Christ bought them by Covenant, Solid comfort in knowing
these number of these gifted to the Son, and I am one of them.
he must know how many: As one who buys a flock, but he knows the quality and
number of the flock. 2. The knowledge sometime shall be this distinct, that I
was by name among them, who loved me, and gave himself for me. And as the
offering of every Priest is by way of Covenant and promise, so, if a sacrifice,
in the faith of the great sacrifice, be offered to God, then will God accept it
(here is a Covenant) so is the Body of Christ offered by the Covenanting-will,
Heb. 10.10. And any doubt that may, or does arise concerning your self by name:
1. It may as well be moved, in some respect, against the whole number, and no
wise man will say that the bargain betwixt the Father and the Son was so blind,
as the number was not agreed upon. For since all the bought are sinners, and so
inclined to sinful doubting of the bargain, that, which as a doubt is moved by
one, may be moved by all severally, and all severally denying themselves to be
the men for whom Christ bargained: By this sinful questioning of the
transaction, none at all were agreed upon.

2. Every doubting of Gods love to me once justified, and who have once fled to
Christ for refuge, is grounded upon sin and unworthiness; now none were given
by the Father to the Son from eternity upon respect of either faith, or
unbeleef, or holiness, or bad deserving: Its true, it is not known to me but
by believing, Sin is no cause why a justified one should doubt of his
justification
that I was given Covenant ways to the Son. But the Question is, if sin be any
ground why one justified should cashier himself out of the number of the gifted
ones to Christ, and committed to the Mediator. Its true, it should be mourned
for as a thing that does not a little hinder Sanctification in its progress,
but should not brangle Justification, nor the faith of our interest in Christ.
4. The necessity of this Covenant appears, in that salvation is taken off
free will, and the slippery yea, and no, of free will in the Covenant of Works,
and laid upon one that is mighty, upon David, to govern Israel as their King;
M. D. Dickson, Psa. 89.19.
but Psalm. 89.19. upon Christ (as excellently M. Dickson) in all respects more
eminently then David, a stronger help, mighty to save, appointed of the Father
in all cases, -- he is one of our kind, taken out of the people, Much of the
Lord his gracious will is in the Covenant of suretyship.
acquainted with our condition, etc. The less of the creatures will, and the
more of Gods will, if gracious, as here, be in a Covenant, the better: Because
the more grace and stability, even the sure mercies of David, that is, of
Christ, Is. 55.3* Eze. 34.23. Eze. 37.24. must be here.

5. The wellhead of salvation (for mere free will and good pleasure in God,
instituted this dispensation) must be here: And most eminent freedom of grace
made the bargain; so that the Magna Charta, the great Charter of the Gospel, I
will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, is here eminently, for mercy and
free-love began at the head man. For the Covenant of Grace (as notably M.
Dickson) is consolidated in Christ our head, M. D* Dickson, Ps. 89. v. 26.
and he has the first right as man to say unto the Father, that which is here
said, as Intercessour and Mediator for the Elect; he shall cry unto me, thou
art my Father, my God, and the Rock of my salvation. Christ the first heir of
the promises undertaks for all his*
As a father binds for his heirs and children: A King subscribes articles of
peace and seals them for the land and subjects: The Ambassador for the Prince
and State that sent him, makes answer. So Christ acts in the Covenant of
Redemption for his heirs, seed, subjects, people; and if the comparison* might
be made, More grace (if we may compare) in the Redeemers Covenant, then in ours.
Gospel-free-grace, as Covenant-mercy is more in the Covenant of Redemption,
then in the Covenant of Reconciliation, for principally they are here as waters
in the fountain. Hence, in this Covenant, is fountain-love, fountain-grace, all
the satisfaction that the Lord craves of sinners, begins at this spring, the
old and eternal design of love in the heart of God toward his Son, his
everlasting delight, the bosom darling and beloved of the Father, is the
designed Prince upon whose shoulder is the Government: Fountain-grace, and
fountain-mercy in this Covenant.
Here was mutual love-delight acted by the Father and Son, Prove. 8.31. My
delights were with the sons of men, even before the fountains of waters were
created, v. 24. O what everlasting outgoings and issuings of eternal love came
from the heart of the Father and the Son in their eternal Covenant-delights
toward the sons of men; here was the eternal marriage of the Lamb the Kings
eternal Son, and of the not as yet created Bride first written and sealed by
the King and his Son, and our not knowing of this, and Gods delighting in us,
when we little knew or dreamed of his eternal love, highness, his grace.
Should the heart of God be taken, and (to speak so) be sick of love for so many
Nothings, whom he was to make heirs? Far more being reconciled and justified we
need not fear we shall be saved.

Here in this Covenant were first drawn the lineaments and draughts of the
free and gracious interest of Jesus Christ to the sons of men: And who should
not wonder here at the purest fountain-grace that is in Jesus Christ, which did
set on work eternal wisdom to frame such an eternal peace of God
Covenanting with the Son of God, and love eternal hiring love eternal with
the reward (to speak so) of the certain hope of enjoying a soul-satisfying
seed, and a numerous offspring of Redeemed ones, if love should die and
triumph over justice, which was done by love.

6. There is here much of the eternal interest of JEHOVAH to the Son, and of
the essential love of God to his only begotten Son, Gods essential love to the
Son in this Covenant.
Prove. 8.24. When there was no depths, I was brought forth. -- 30. Then I was
by him as one brought up with him, and I was daily his delight, rejoicing
always before him. And they may that have been verified, Jer. 30.21. And their
noble One shall be of themselves, and their Governor shall proceed from the
midst of them, and I will cause him to draw near, and he shall approach unto
me: for who is this that engadged his heart to approach unto me, says the
Lord? The love eternal here in JEHOVAH loves and wonders that Christ his Son
lays hands upon his own heart to take upon him the Office of Redeemer and
Priest: and the Lords saying, Who is this? is a note of love and wonder, as
Psalm. 24.8.10. Isa. 63.1. Cant. 6.10. and that his heart closes with the
Covenant-designe.

Obj. But Arminius himself also teaches, Jac. Armi. orat. de Sacerdotio
Chrsti, page 16, 17. Postulavit Deus ut animam suam poneret hostiam pro
peccato, etc.
that there was ^ Covenant betwixt the Lord and Christ. God required of Christ
our Priest, that he would lay down his life for sin, give his flesh for the
life of the world, -- and he promised, if he should so do, he should see his
seed, and be an eternal high Priest after the order of Melchisedeck, and by
the exercise of his Priestly Office, he should be exalted to a royal dignity.
Christ our Priest closed with the condition, and said, Behold, here am I to do
thy will, etc. And Socinians, who hold him to be a divine Man only, will agree
that Christ was under an obedientiall Covenant to God. The Covenant between the
Lord and the Son, that Arminius teaches, is not the true Covenant of
redemption.


Ans. Arminians and others may yield to a Covenant between the Father and the
Son, but it is a far other thing then such as we hold: for Christ did close
with the condition of laying down his life for sinners.

But when Christ has ended his work, and paid the price of Redemption, laid
down his life for Pharaoh, Cain, for Egyptians, Syrians, Persians, Chaldeans,
and all in whom ever was the breath of life; yet cannot the Lord promise to
Christ that he shall have any seed, or one redeemed one, nor can the Lord
either promise or pay wages to Christ: For a promise, if sincere, is of things
that are in our power to do, even among men. Can a King promise that to morrow
he shall cause the wind for seventy days to come, blow out of the North-West?
Its not in his power. Now Arminians, Socinians, and all of that Family teach,
that God has no forceable antecedent dominion to bow and determine the
free will of any one man: The Lord cannot promise by the Arminian way that
Christ shall have a seed, because the Lord, by their way, has no dominion over
the free will of any man.
The Lord then no more can promise, nor give the reward of a seed to Christ,
for his work of laying down his life for man, then he can engage that the
Serpent (with reverence to our blessed Lord) shall see his seed. For when
Christ has wrought the same work, paid the same very ransone (as these
Sophists teach) for millions that perish, through their own free will,
eternally: What seed has he of them? Where is his wage? Were not all and every
one of mankind promised in the Arminian Covenant, to be the gifted seed of
Christ, upon condition that they should repent and believe? But Arminians deny
that God does promise faith, or that he is so Lord and Master of the free will
of any, as indeclineably and unsuperably he can make good his promise, and
cause them believe and persevere therein to the end, and that is it by which
they are his seed. Its but said in vain that God promises they shall be Christ's
gifted seed, providing they be willing to believe: that is but to say, the Lord
promises all shall be his seed, providing they shall be his seed: For willing
believing makes them his seed. 2. By this also the Lord promises what is in
men's power to perform, and it might fall out that all and every one should do
the like that multitudes do, who perish eternally, and so shall Christ do his
work, and enjoy no seed at all.

But the Covenant of suretyship which we teach, makes not the truth of God to
depend upon our faith, or our unbeleef; Yea the Lord promises that Christ
without all fail, shall undeclineably see his seed, yea, and shall be the
restorer of the Tribes of Jacob, and a light to the Gentiles, and the salvation
of God to the ends of the earth, Isa. 49.6. Isa. 54. He shall be King and Lord
of the Isles, Isa. 42.6, 7. Isa. 60.9. Psalm. 2.8, 9. A Prince and a sheepherd
over his people, Ezekiel. 34. Ezekiel. 37.24, 25. Psalm. 89.25. not upon condition
they be willing, over whom he is set, but to meet with the temptation. Ah! my
iron and rockie will shall still resist the Lord; and he shall be King of the
Nations, if the Nations shall determine their own will to submit to him, and
vote that he be Crowned King: Nay, but the Covenant-promise says, The Lord
King of the will.
he shall be King of thy will. This is a part of his reign, Psalm. 110.2. The
Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion: rule thou in the midst of
thine enemies. 3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, Deuteronomy. 30
6. Ezekiel. 11.19, 20. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. Jer. 31.31, 32, 33, 34, 35. Jer. 32.39,
40. Neither can there be confidence and faith in God through the sure mercies
of David, nor peace, nor solid consolation, nor warrant to pray for the Lords
gracious bowing of the will to be his seed, except it be believed, Covenanted,
that God shall be the God of his people, and their King, not over the element
of the sea only to rule it, and over the mountains, and the stones, and rocks,
but also over the particular wills, and the willing and nilling, choosing of
good, and refusing of evil in the men of the Isles. And how could the Son pray,
Father, give the inheritance of the Heathen to me, The Son cannot pray for the
heathen to be his inheritance by the Arminian Covenant betwix^ Christ and the
Father.
according to promise? Ask of me, and I will give thee, etc. Psalm. 2. If the
Father could answer nothing, but what Arminians and Socinians say he answers,
as also, the believer out of the fleshes weakness must dictat this return of
prayer. Son, with good will, I grant the Heathen, and the ends of the earth to
thee in heritage and possession, so they be willing to submit to thee: But,
what if they refuse to obey either me or thee? I did never Covenant with thee,
Son, to do more then I can, try thy strength, and force their free will, if
thou can; if they be willing, well, and good it is, there is a bargain: My
approving and commanding will is that they be thy seed, and thy willing people;
but my decree is not to Lord it over their will, that is a fundamental act of
Government, that all my subjects have liberty of conscience, to will or nill,
as they please. Nay, but the Covenant of Suretyship includes the sure mercies
of David, and the Lord gives band, word, and writ, and seal of blood, and the
Oath of God to the Son, Psalm. 110.4. Heb. 7.21. for the will. Isa. 53.4. Behold
I have given him for a witness of the people, a leader and commander to the
people. But what if they will neither lead nor drive? Yea the Lord promises
they shall not need to be driven* they shall be willing, and run. 5. Behold
thou shall call a Nation that thou know not, and Nations that knew not thee,
shall run unto thee, because of the Lord thy God, and of the Holy One of
Israel, for he has glorified thee. And a strong reason of this is given, the
Gentiles run; Whence comes this forwardness of the Gentiles who knew not God?
Because (says Isaiah) of Jehovah thy God (of Christ Mediator) in Covenant
with thee, Psalm. 22.1. Joh. 20.^0. because of thy God the Holy One of Israel:
the running (says Calvin) notteth the efficacy of the calling, and they run to
Christ, because of Jehovah, and the mighty power of God in the Man-Christ. ^*
Notes because (says Piscator.) And another reason, because he has glorified
thee, O Christ, he has declared thee to be the Son of God by thy rising from
the dead, ascension to heaven, given thee a Name above all names, Romans 1.4.
Phil. 2.7, 8, 9, 10. So Musculus, Piscator, Marlorat, Gualther, Diodati: So the
running of the Gentiles to Christ is the glorifying of Christ, and a part of
the reward; its Christ's glory that he has a seed that runs after him. Then:
And M. Dickson upon these words, Ps. 2. M. D. Dickson on Psalm. 2.
Ask of me, after Christ's resurrection and declaration of his formerly
overclouded Godhead, he should continue in the Offi^e of his Mediation and
Intercession, and by virtue of his paid ransone of Redemption call for the
enlargement of his purchased Redemption among the Gentiles, for this is the
Fathers compact with the Son, saying, ask of me, and I will give thee, the
Heathen; so that both by free Covenant, and by merit, Christ challenges a
seed: Christ both by free Covenant and by merit of condignity and justice may
challenge a seed, they are both promised to him, and he gave a due price for
them.
and it were unjustice in the Lord (with reverence and glory to his Holiness) to
deny to Christ that for which he has given a condign ransone and price: But he
has paid a condign Covenant^ransone of his own precious self, and offered
blood for h^s seed. Hence 1. though a weak believer cannot by merit suit a
bowed will and a circumcised heart from the Lord: Yet 1. may be suit it by the
band of the Covenant of Redemption between Jehovah and the Son: and a Redeemed
one may say, it was an Article of the Covenant of Redemption, that my stony
heart should be taken away, and a heart of flesh given to me, and faith has
influence to be supported that God articled Covenant-ways such a wretch as I
am, to Christ: and look, as the book of life, called, the Lambs Book of Life;
contains so many by name, head, and in all their individual properties, Jacob,
Paul, etc. that are written and enrolled for glory, so are all (and I by name)
in a Covenant Relation given of the Father to the Son, Joh. 17.3, 9.11. Joh.
6.39. and that is surer then heaven or the fixed ordinances of nature, Jer.
31.35, 36. Psalm. 89.37, 38. Happy such as can ride at this anchor: Though I
mean not that the decree of election and the roll of the Mediator to me, or
the gracious Surety^Covenant between Jehovah and the Son, as relating to me by
name, must be the nearest object of faith, or that always a believer does read
this roll; but his faith often is, and ought, and may be supported thereby.

2. Christ may suit, There is mercy* in the bill of our suits and merit and
justice in the bill of the suits of Christ for us.
by virtue of both the Surety Covenant and by the justice of God, his condign
merit to, me, a fixed will to run the way of his Commandments. Christ's
appearing with blood, Heb. 9. and his prayer as high Priest, Joh. 17. prove
that, in Christ's Bill for us, there is justice, the merit of blood, and that
his Advocation is, 1 John 2.1. grounded upon justice, and he stands there as
Jesus Christ, (...), the righteous without sin now imputed, not now made sin,
nor made a curse, but by order of strict justice justified and righteous, and
the act of Suretyship taken off, and as the handwriting against us is
cancelled upon the Cross, Col. 2. So the handwriting of oblidged punishment
due to Christ as our Surety is removed, and he now justified in the Spirit,
without sin, Heb. 9.28. Such a one as cannot die, Romans 6.9. Rev. 1.18. and
cannot die a death satisfactory for sin, Christ was delivered from the act of
suretyship.
because as believers cannot die the second death, Christ having died for them,
neither can Christ suffer the second death again, or be twice a curse, for once
he died for all. But our faith is so supported not a little in this, I darre
not put merit or justice in my suits to God, but I believe it is, and must be
in Christ's bill, and that bill is for me: mercy, and only mercy is in the
sinners bill, but the justice of a condign ransoner is in Christ's suits, and so
faith looks to Christ: As 1. having the first Covenant-right to heaven, as the
great Lord receiver of the promises. And then we have a second right in him* 2.
Faith looks to Christ as having more right to us, because he has the right of
justice, then we have to our selves; for its free-graces title which we have to
our selves, Christ has the first right of us by justice, and more right then
we have of our selves.
for we gave no ransone for our selves, and we gave no ransone for eternal
life: and therefore all the doubtings and acts of unbeleef in order to the
Surety of the Covenant, do resolve upon some apprehended breach between the
Father and the Son, that either the one or the other, or both have failed to
each other, and have broken the Articles of the Covenant, which is a
reproaching of both the Father and the Son: So that nothing is more necessary
then to believe firmly the Covenant-faithfulnesse of God. Our doubtings, being
once justified, reflect upon the Covenant of Suretyship.
3. What strong bands of believing and holy living have we from this Surety
Covenant? When 1. goodwill and freegrace is become the ingadger of the
faithfulness of God as he is true God, and with a Covenant-tye to keep sure
our salvation, as he will be true to his Son, and so to himself and to his own
Holy Nature, that we shall be saved, yea, and not that only, but by Office, as
King and High Priest, he has laid bands upon himself, and made it the duty of
his Office to save us: So that any good man thinks his office of a King, and a
Prophet, or a Priest, lays bands upon him to acquit himself faithfully in the
charge; So that Christ's sworn Office of High Priest lays bands upon him to
compassionate as a feeling head, Christ has laid bands by office upon himself
to compassionate us.
all his own, and to be touched with their infirmities: then must unbeleef in
these particulars say, we judge that Christ will not do his duty in his Office,
and that he shall break his faith of Suretyship, and fail under his band of
Suretyship. How needful then must the firm persuasion of complete
qualifications and fullness of anointing of Christ for the complete discharge
of his duty be? Its needful to believe the sufficiency of Christ to save.
O! believe him to be the faithful High Priest, who expiats and heals you in
all the measure, kinds, degrees, circumstances of time, place, of the
particular transgressions you are guilty of, Psalm. 103.3. Who forgiveth all
thine iniquities: who heals all thy diseases. And if a man judge himself
engaged to go about such duties as his surety and ransone-payer in his name
has promised, The believed Covenant has more influence on us then the
Law-faith can have.
far more are we to walk as the redeemed of the Lord, since there was an
eternal Covenant-undertaking between Jehovah and the Son of God, that we
should fulfill the undertaking. And sure it is, Law-faith or believing of
Law-threatnings cannot have such influence upon our spirits to cause us obey
the Law, as the motives of a concluded act of suretyship and closed compact
between the Father and the Son, that we shall obey him: And indeed it is a
meditation that morally and spiritually should obtain from us that we be holy
as he is holy, and strongly melt the rocky heart. When we remembered that
JEHOVAH, as a designed Surety, gave band for the heart of a sinner from
eternity, and enters himself Cautioner for our rebellious will, it should put
us to believe so much, and morally lay bands on our will.

Q. How are we to conceive of the act of Suretyship?

A. Jehovah from eternity decrees that the Son be the designed person who shall
take on our nature, The eternal undertakings of Jehovah and of Christ for us.
and lay down his life for sinners: The Lord promises he shall have a redeemed
seed for a reward.

In this offer Jehovah ingadges that we shall be Christ's seed, and so shall be,
by the immortal seed, born again, and shall believe and be gifted to Christ as
saved; here Jehovah undertakes that we shall believe.

2. Christ agrees to the designed person: It is written of me, and so decreed
of God from eternity, I delight to do thy will, I shall lay down my life for
these given to me: And here the other party, Jesus Christ coming by his own
consent to die, does also undertake, 1. In dying to ransone us from hell, and
merit life to us, and make us his purchase. So 2. he being a Savior by merit,
he by his death purchases the Spirit, and meriteth the new heart, and so
undertakes for us: in this regard, both parties undertake for us. And the
Spirit being the same very God with the Father and the Son, also is by his own
consent designed comforter and actor in his way by the anointing without
measure, that he puts on the Man Christ, and the grace given to his members:
But the only formal parties in the compact are the Lord Jehovah and the Son
party consenting before time, and his Manhood in time becoming one who embraces
the Covenant of Suretyship, and calls the Lord his God, Ps. 22.1. Joh. 20.17.
Rev. 3.12. Isa. 55.5.

Hence, if we employ faith, and hold out to the Lord the undertaking for us in
the Covenant, there is an answer framed to all our temptations from our own
frailty: This Covenant answers our tentations.
As Adam and the Angels fell, and how can we stand? But God said never of them,
as Psalm. 89.19. I have laid strength upon one that is mighty: and Christ was no
designed undertaker for Adam, nor was Adam to believe such a thing. Therefore
it is fit to observe, that not only the Head Christ and the body changes names,
as the body is called Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. and Christ called David, Isai.
53.3. Ezekiel. 34. Ezekiel. 37.14. David my servant shall be King over them. So also
many things in one Psalm are spoken of David, both in an Historical and
Typical truth, In one Psalm some things spoken only prophetically of Christ,
other things historically and typically both of David and others.
as Psalm. 22. But there are some things, Psalm. 16. so spoken of David, that
they are true only Typically of Christ, and spoken Prophetically, as David
says, Ps. 16.10. Thou will not leave my soul in grave, neither will suffer
thine Holy One to see corruption. And the Apostle Peter denies that this can be
exponed of David, for Acts 2.26, 27, 28, 29, 30. and Paul, Acts 13.34, 35. And
as concerning that God raised him from the dead, now no more to return to
corruption: he said on this wise, I will give you the sure mercies of David.
Wherefore he says also in another place, thou shall not suffer thine Holy One
to see corruption. 35. But David after he had served his own Generation, by the
will of God, fell on sleep, and was laid unto his fathers, and saw corruption.
And it is not to be doubted that the Prophecy, Psalm. 22. They divided my
garments, they pierced my hands and my feet, is only a Prophecy of Christ's
being crucified: Nor was ever David crucified. To say in another case David was
crucified, will not help: for it might be said in another case David saw no
corruption, for all believers are delivered from the dominion, curse, and sting
of death. Hence, it may well be said, that same Psalm. 89. must prove both the
Covenant of Suretyship, and the Covenant of Grace: v. 3. I have made a Covenant
with my chosen, I have sworn unto David my servant; thy seed will I establish
for ever, and build up thy Throne to all Generations. Though it be called
David's Throne here, Luke 1.32. yet we may freely speak of David's Throne as of
David's body, both saw corruption: there is an end of David's Throne temporal.
But sure the Scripture calls it the Throne of Christ, That which is caled
David's thron, is Christ's throne.
Heb. 1.8. But unto the Son he says, thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever.
Luke 1.33. And he shall reign over the house of Jacob, and of his Kingdom there
shall be no end. Dan. 7.14. And there was given him Dominion, and Glory, and a
Kingdom, that all Nations and Languages should serve him: His Dominion is an
everlasting Dominion which shall not pass away, and his Kingdom that which
shall not be destroyed. Isai. 9.7. Of the increase of his Government and peace
there shall be no end: upon the Throne of David and upon his Kingdom to order
it, and to establish it with judgment and with justice, from henceforth, even
for ever.

Obj. But this Covenant is made to, and with David, that Solomon, and one of
David's line, shall sit upon David's Throne, until the Messiah, the true beloved
shall be born, 2 Samuel 7.12, 13.

Ans. Its true, and although these of David's line sinned* yet by virtue of this
Covenant, for David's sake, God gave a Throne temporal to him, 1 King. 11.32,
34. 2 King. 8.19. 2 King. 19.34. But it is as true that this also, to wit,
Christ's everlasting Throne is here meant: I will build up thy Throne to all
generations, for David's Throne is not builded to all generations, nor can it be
said of David's Throne, which is said of this Throne* Heb. 1.8. But unto the
Son, he says, thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever. Therefore this oath and
promise is made to Christ as well as to David: except we say that an
everlasting Throne is mo^^ properly the Throne of David, then the Throne of
Christ.

2. 19. I have laid help upon one that is mighty, I have exalted one chosen out
of the people. 18. I have found David my servant. Most grave Divines (and it
may be they gathered it from v. 38, 39, etc.) think that the Psalm was composed
upon the occasion of the ten Tribes division from David's house, as composed by
Ethan, 1 King. 4.31. Others, that Ethan lived in the captivity of Babylon after
David's death: But the calamity seems greater then the division of the ten
Tribes. Philo refers it to the time of Jehoiakim. Ambrose makes the mighty to
be Christ: So Eusebius and Hieronimus expound the whole Psalm. And our Divines
say that the verity must be in Christ, for the help and deliverance of the new
afflicted and captive people (for the like of this publick^desolation, The
Covenant, Ps. 89 must in the maine he^ds agree to JESUS CHRIST.
as v. 38, 39, 40, etc. never befell David after he was King) can not be laid
on a dead man: And though he were now alive, the help of David's fallen glory,
v. 42, 43, 44, etc. must be the Messiah. Hence, the Covenant must be with him
whose Throne is built for ever, and shall not fall, v. 3, 4. and upon whom as
upon a mighty one is laid the help of his fallen Church: This is not David only
(though he be not excluded) but Christ principally.

3. With him the Covenant must be made, in his way, as with Surety, Head, and
Redeemer: upon whom the enemy shall not exact; whose enemies shall be plagued,
v. 22, 23. and, whose enemies shall be made his footstool, Ps. 110.1, 2. and
that is Christ, as well as David.

4. With him must the Covenant of Redemption be made in his way; of whom God
says, v. 25. I will set his hand also in the sea, and his right hand in the
rivers. The Chalde Paraphrase expounds his hand to be his power and command,
which is to Euphrates: as is promised, Exodus 23.31. Number. 34.3. but fulfilled in
David and Solomon, 1 King. 4.8. Solomon reigned from the sea of Sodom the red
sea, to the Mediterran sea, and west, and from Euphrates, to the utmost of
Canaan, North and South: but specially in Christ, who has all Nations,
Gentiles and Jews, for his own, Psalm. 2.8, 9. Psalm. 22.27. Psalm. 72.8, 9, 10,
11. Isai. 2.1, 2. Rev. 11.15. Christ Jesus, not David, Zech. 9.10. shall speak
peace to the Heathen, and his Dominion shall be even from sea to sea, and from
the river, even to the ends of the earth. The Angel and Creator of Angels, who
set his right foot upon the sea, and his left foot upon the earth, Rev. 10.2.
is this great Conqueror.

Athanas. Sermon. 4. contra Arianos.
5. With him this Covenant must stand, of whom the Lord, v. 26. says, He shall
cry unto me, Thou art my Father, my God, and the Rock of my salvation. 27. I
also will make him my firstborn, higher then the Kings of the earth. Now this
cannot well agree to David, Cyprian, l. 2. c. 1.
at least, most coldly (as Calvine says) should the Apostle reason and
conclude that Christ were above the Angels when he cites this place, Cyrillus
Hierosolymit. Catech. 7. and 12.
Heb. 1.4, 5. For unto which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee? And again, I will be to him a Father, and
he shall be to me a Son. August. de civit. de l. 17. c. 9.
In the literal sense, it is meant of Solomon, 2 Samuel 7.14. 1 Chronicles. 22.10.
and is meant here of David. Athanasius proves him hence to be God, the first
begotten of many Brethren. Cyprian, Hieronim. in Isa. 53.
Cyrillus, Augustine, Hieronimus, contend against the Jews, that this is
necessary to be understood of Christ, not of Solomon, not of David, who cannot
bear the Name of the Lords firstborn, but must be so named as the Type of him
who is the firstborn of every creature, etc. Col. 1.15.

6. So my mercy will I keep for him for evermore, and my Covenant shall stand
fast with him. ^9. His seed also will I make to endure for ever, and his Throne
as the days of Heaven. If the Covenant be made with him who has an eternal
seed, then sure, principally with Christ: Without whom (says Calvine, who
otherwise much loves to follow the letter of the word) this Prophecy has no
effect, for eternity is only in Christ, not in David. Calv. Com. in locum. Vnd^
sequitur non posse constare vaticimi hujus effectum, donec ad Christum ventum
fuerit in quo solo demum reperietur vera Aeternitas.


Ver. 30. If his children forsake my Law, etc. a pre-occupation, if an eternal
seed be promised to Christ, then although Christ and his Children sin, no
matter, the hazard is not great? He Answers, the danger is not to be despised;
I will visit the sons, of Solomon and others, 2 Samuel 7.14. with the rod of
men: 15. But my mercy (of the Covenant of Redemption, and of Reconciliation) I
will not take from him, as I took it from Saul. This is not spoken of Christ,
for he cannot sin, but of Christ's seed, his spiritual seed, and the business
is so contrived, as the seed of Christ and his children shall not sin
unpunished: but yet there is a difference between the sins of the reprobate
Saul, and such like, and of the spiritual seed of Christ. So he takes his
mercy, Covenant-mercy (but offered conditionally) utterly away from reprobats
when they sin, but takes not away Covenant-mercy from the seed of Christ: And
the reason is, from the nature of the Covenant, v. 34. My Covenant I will not
break* etc. If then the elect and chosen of Christ should fall away, God should
break and alter his Covenant: but impossible is the latter. Hence, 1. the
questioning of the stability of our state, being once internally in Covenant
with God, is a reproaching of God* and to make him a liar. v. 35. Once have I
sworn (says he) by my Holiness, that I will not lie unto David. Though (1.)
we seem to reproach our selves in questioning our state, being once in Christ,
yet the truth is, The justified man's question of his state re^ecteth upon God
and his truth.
the plea is against God, and his Truth and Holiness. (2.) Its easier to
believe general truths, then to believe particular truths, in which our selves
and our own actings are interested: So spiritual and wily a snare is
unbelief, that when we think we are unbelievly fearing our own treachery, we
are indeed charging treachery and falsehood upon the Holy Lord. (3.) In our
sinful plea's with our own state, Ah! I am casten out of his sight, Psalm.
31.22. Jona. 2.4. we are overturning the whole Gospel and Covenant of
Suretyship and Reconciliation, and we say, God lied to David, and to his Son
Christ: contrair to that, Psalm. 89.35. Once have I sworn by my Holiness, I
will not lie unto David. 36. His seed shall endure for ever, for the Lord once
justified thee. (4.) We shall find our selves so selfie in contraverting with
God in the matter of fact touching our selves: How selfie we are in the
unbeleeving challenging of our Justification.
am I in Christ? Or, am I an Apostate and fallen from Christ? That we are more
taken up with a hellish fretting for our falling in a state of condemnation,
then we are grieved for the injury of unbeleef in traducing the Holy Lord with
a lie. There is a taste here of Judas his fiery unbelief, for he complains
more, Mat. 27.4. I have sinned, in betraying the innocent blood, then that God
is dishonored, and Christ's love offended: The grief is more for the interest
of I, of self, that is entered in the borders of hell, then that his glory who
commands believing is overclouded. It were good in such a case to go about two
things: 1. Be less moved that self is under these apprehensions, lost and cast
away, then that the spotless glory of the Lord suffers: What matter of me, and
of self, in comparison of the dishonor done to God? What though I, and
millions like me, were tormented* if God were not offended. Now God, 1. who
has bought me. 2. Who has accepted a ransone for me. 3. Has justified me. 4.
Has witnessed all these, is contradicted in all these: and yet we complain
only, Ah I am fallen!

2. Leave the Question concerning your self, whether ye be cast away or no,
when you cannot come to a peaceable and quiet close about it, and dwell upon
the duty of fiduciall relying on Gods general Covenant to David's Son, Christ
his ingadging with him, and Christ his gracious accepting of the condition.

(5.) God swear to the Son of David for the seed, that is, for the whole race,
and gave them all to Christ, and gave you among them; and Christ closed with
the condition, though ye cannot come to application. Its good to feed the soul
upon the solatious thoughts, I cannot apply, but Christ whose egressions,
outgoings, When ye cannot apply, its good to feed the thoughts upon Christ's
apply^ng himself and the Covenant to you and to other single persons.
have been from of old, from everlasting, Mic. 5.2. did apply: For Christ's
everlasting outgoings are not only his eternal generations from the Father,
but the decrees, the sweet eternal flowings, emanations, and issuings of
Christ's holy thoughts of me, of all the individualls, by name, of the seed
given and received by Christ, his eternal acts of soul-delighting thoughts of
every redeemed son of man, Prove. 8.30, 31. Romans 9.11. Ephesians. 1.4. 1 Pet. 1, 2.
the eternal acts of love, and love-thoughts to Jacob, David, Peter, Mary, etc.
his acts of designing you (if ever you believed, and can rub and blow up
experiences under ashes, Romans 5.4. Ps. 77.6.) and the thousands that stand
before the Throne, from eternity, his actings of eternal love, appointing and
setting Chairs, Throns, Mansions, and dwelling places for (...) man, and this
man, are so many applications of Christ to you: Feed and feast upon these, by
believing the ancient Covenant, and you cannot but come to quietness of peace
in your apprehended estate.

CHAP. X. Christ procures the Gospel to be Preached to Reprobats, but
undertakes not for them. A necessary distinction of the Covenant as Preached
according to the approving will of God, and as acted upon the heart, according
to the decree of God: and the differences of the members. The place, Jer. 31.
Heb. 8. This is my Covenant, opened.
A Question it is, Christ undertaks that the Gospel shall be preached to the
elect for themselves, and to the reprobat only as mixed with the elect* for
other ends.
whether Christ undertakes in the bargain with JEHOVAH, for all visibly in
Covenant, for as is said before, these in the Visible Church and their children
that are baptized, Magus, Demas, and others are in Covenant thus, Act. 2.39.
Ans Christ undertakes in his bargain, only for the elect, and undertakes that
the Gospel shall be Preached to them; but because many hypocrites are mixed
with the Gentiles, and Christ is given a light to the Gentiles, Preached to a
visible multitude, as is foretold, Isa. 49.6. Isa. 55.4, 5. fulfilled, Act.
13.46, 47. Romans 15.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, etc. Therefore he procures to many
hypocrites, for whom, and for whose Redemption, he undertakes not, that the
Covenant shall be Preached by concomitancy, because they are mixed with the
elect, not as an undertaker for them, but for Church Discipline, Christian
Societies, and to render such unexcusable. Hence a necessary distinction of the
Covenant of Grace.

The necessary distinction of the Covenant* as preached to many, and as acted
upon the heart of the few chosen.
The New Covenant must be considered, 1. As Preached according to the approving
and commanding will of God. 2. As it is internally and effectually fulfilled in
the elect according to the decree and the Lords will of purpose.


There must of necessity, differences be holden forth between these two. For,
Antinomians, and legal Justitiaries miserably err in both extremities: The
former will have no New Covenant in the days of the Gospel, but that which is
made with the elect: The latter will have no New Covenant but such as is made
with the whole race of mankind, Pagans not excepted: So Socinians, Arminians,
Papists.

1. They differ in the parties contracters: The parties contracters in the
Covenant Preached, God and all within the visible Church, who hear the word of
the Gospel, are the parties contracters in the Covenant* Preached, but God and
the el^ct only are contracters of the Covenant, as acted upon the heart.
are God, and all within the Visible Church, whether Elect or Reprobate, and
their seed, they professing the Gospel, Mat. 28.19, 20. Act. 2.39, 40. Act.
3.25. Ye are the children of the Prophets, and of the Covenant which God made
to our fathers; etc. and they were not all the chosen of God: This is against
the Anabaptists also, and against these who will have the Gospel Covenant to be
made with all the world. But its a rich mercy that Professors are dwelling in
the workhouse of the Grace of God, within the Visible Church, they are at the
pool side, near the fountain, and dwell in Immanuels land where dwells Jehovah
in his beauty, and where are the Golden Candlesticks, and where there run
Rivers of Wine and Milk, such are Exspectants of Grace and Glory, to such the
Marriage Table is covered, eat if they will.

But the parties contracters of the Covenant in the latter respect are, Jer.
31. Heb. 8. only, the house of Judah, the taught of God, the people in whose
heart the Law is engraven; for as God teaches not all Nations his statutes,
nor sends the Gospel to them, Ps. 147.19, 20. Act. 16.

So neither is the promise of a new heart made to all within the Visible Chuch.

2. A great difference there is in regard of the Covenant of Suretyship or
Mediation, that Christ undertakes not for such as are only visible Covenanters,
and shall never believe: As he prays not for such, as High Priest, so he dies
not for them, nor came as a designed Covenanting Savior from eternity under an
act of Cautionry for them. How then comes the Gospel to them? The Gospel comes
from Christ as undertaker for the elect, and for their sake.
Ans. It comes to them, 1. Not from Christ as their Surety, since he prays not
for any Mediation of his own toward them: But 2. for the Elects sake: so Paul,
Act. 13.26. Men and brethren, children of the stock of Abraham, and who among
you fears God, to you, (...), is the word of salvation, to you and for your
cause, that ye may be saved, is the Gospel, sent. 2 Corin. 4.15. For all
things, our suffering, our dying, are, (...), for your sake. 2 Timothy 2.10.
Therefore I endure all things, (...), for the Elects sake, that they may also
obtain the salvation which is in Jesus Christ, with eternal glory. Hence there
is no salvation but that which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, the Author and
Cause, (...), and meriting Procurer of eternal salvation, Hebr. 5.9. Now,
though salvation be offered, yet the salvation that is in Christ Jesus, and
merited by the ransone and price of his blood, can be decreed and intended in
the Preached Gospel to none but to the elect, except they say that Christ did
undertake to lay down his life, and to save, by his death and blood by
Covenant-inga^gment, all the Reprobate within the visible Church, for whom he
refuses to pray, John 17.

But Christ undertook from eternity for the fulfilling of the Covenant of
Grace, and bestowing salvation upon them for whom he is Surety: for it is he
who makes the new Covenant, Jer. 31.31, 32, 33, 34. Heb. 8.10, 11.

3. There is a twofold consideration of Gods will: One is called his approving,
commanding, and forbidding will, The distinction of Gods will of approbation
what is good or evil in point of our duty, whether it come to pass or not,
and of his will of pleasure, what the Lord has decreed shall come to pass, or
not come to pass, whether good or evil, is of special consideration in this
point.
when God reveals to us what is our obligation and duty, and what is morally
good, and to be done, because he commands it, and what is morally evil, and to
be eschewed, because he forbids it. Now whether this good or evil shall come
to pass, or never come to pass, it is all one, as to the nature of the
approving will of God, for though the repenting of Cain, and saving faith of
the traitor Judas never came to pass, yet it is the duty of the one and the
other to repent and believe, and the Lord commands and approves their obedience
as good, though he never decreed by his good pleasure, that the obedience of
Cain and Judas should come to pass. But his will of pleasure, his discerning
will, or his counsel, purpose, or decree, is his pleasure, and appointment of
things, not as good and evil, or as agreeable unto, or repugnant, and contrair
to an equal and just command of God, but of things as they come to pass, or
shall never come to pass. Hence, in a premissive decree, God appointed the
crucifying of the Lord of Life, the not breaking of a bone of Christ, but he
did never will the crucifying of his Son, but forbids and hates it as execrable
murder; as touching his approving will: in a word, his commanding will is of
things lawful or unlawful, what we who are under a Law, ought to do, or not
to do* His will of pleasure is of things fixed and resolved upon, what he
purposes, good or evil, shall come to pass, or not come to pass: And by the
way we may make good use of the foul sins that fall out; for holy and clean
is that hand and counsel of the Lord, We are to adore the Lord in regard of
the beauty of his work* even when the foulest works fall out.
Act. 2.27, 28. which determined what Herod and Pilate should do: Yet did the
Jews with wicked hands slay and crucify him, Act. 2.23. And O what beauty of
wisdom and mercy do they see here, who make that foul work of the slayers of
Christ the subject matter of a fair Psalm? Rev. 5.12. The thousands before the
Throne, sing, worthy is the Lamb that was slain: But were they worthy who slew
him? was it a worthy fact in the murderers of the Lord of Glory? No: but
grudge not at the beauty of his work, who over rules all, but adore and praise.
Let us not wrestle with his holy dispensation, and say, Ah! What an untoward
Government of the world is it, that God should suffer Angels and Men to sin,
and overturn the whole fabric of Heaven and earth by sin? Nay, he has by
their fall brought in a more glorious order, When he that sits upon the
Throne, says, Behold I make all things new, Rev. 21.5. and its said, 2 Pet.
3.13. Nevertheless we, according to his promise, look for new Heavens and a
new earth, wherein dwells righteousness. We are to pray against the event of
the decree of God in some cases, and yet to submit unto the decree it self, and
to adore the Holy Lord therein.
Peter and the Disciples were to pray that they should not enter into
temptation, Mat. 26.41. and were oblidged not to be offended and scattered by
the sufferings of the Lord; but they were not to blame and grudgingly to judge
that holy decree Prophesied by Zechariah, and revealed to themselves, Zech.
13.7. Mat. 26.31. I will smite the Sheepherd, and the Sheep of the flock shall
be scattered abroad. His part is clean and holy, even when he throws the
wicked in hell, and they are oblidged to sing the Psalm of the glory of his
spotless Justice, and that eternally, as these who are before the Throne are
to hold up, for all ages, the new song of the glory of his mercy and free grace.

This ground being laid down, the Holy Ghost speaks of the New Covenant two
ways in Scripture*

1. According to the approving will of God, as it stands, of promises,
precepts, threatenings; and shows both what God does by promises, and what we
are oblidged to do in point of duty, Act. 2.39. The promise is to you and to
your children. Act. 3.25. Ye are the children of the Prophets, and of the
Covenant which God made with our fathers. 2 Cor. 6.17. Wherefore come out from
among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, -- And I will be a Father to
you, etc. This is the whole New Covenant, holding out our duty, ordaining those
that profess, to be baptized, received members of the Visible Church, the body
to be edified as a visibly Covenanted people: This excludes not, but includes
the Lords taking in members to the invisible and mystical body: which is to be
observed against Anabaptists and Antinomians.

The Lord speaks often of the Covenant of Grace not so much as Preached, The
Lord speaks of the Covenant, Jer. 31.31, 32. Jer. 32. Ezekiel. 11. Ezekiel. ch* 36.
Isai. 59. according to his decree, and what he works in our heart, and not
according to his will of command, and what we ought of duty to do.
qua foedus ennunciatum (though it so also must be Preached) but as fulfilled
by God, and acted in an effectual powerful way, upon the hearts of the elect
only, and that according to the Lords decree of election, and will of pleasure:
So speaks the Lord of the Covenant. Jer. 31.31, 32, 33. Jer. 32.37, 38, 39.
Ezekiel. 11.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27, etc. Isa. 59.20, 21. in a
pure Evangelick way, and in these places the Lord speaks of the Covenant, not
so much as it contains our duty, as principally it holds forth his Gospel
promise what he shall effectually do according to his decree and will of
pleasure overruling our corrupt will: which Papists, Arminians, and Socinians
utterly mistake, and will have it to be spoken of the Covenant as Preached
according to the Lords approving and commanding will, whereas there is not one
word of a command in these places, and therefore they say that these places
speak nothing for the efficacy and mighty power of God in converting sinners.
The mistake of Socinians and Arminians, touching the places, Jer. 31. Eze. 11,
etc.
2. The Anabaptists from these places say none are to be baptized, but such as
are so in Covenant, and as have these promises fulfilled in them, in whom the
Lord has wrought a new heart, and a new spirit; and that there is no external
Covenanting under the New Testament. But then the whole Gentiles, Isai. 55.4,
5. Isai. 11.10. Isai. 60.1, 2, 3, etc. all Nations, Crispe, Christ exalted,
Ser. 6 page 159.
Isai. 2.1, 2. all flesh, Isai. 40.5. Psalm. 65.2. all the Kindreds of the
earth, Psalm. 22.26, 27. the Kingdoms of the world, Rev. 11.15. should be all
chosen to life, taught of God, such as have the Law of God engraven in their
inward parts, as Jer. 31.33. Ezekiel. 36.26. which is most false. The mistake of
Antinomians as touching these places Jer. 31. Eze. 11. cap. 36.26. Isa. 59,
etc. For they own no Covenant of grace, but that (...) which (...) does all*
and we are mere patients.
Now there are undeniable Prophecies that the Gentiles from the rising of the
Sun, to the going, down thereof, Mal. 1.11. shall be, under the New Testament,
the people of God by Covenant, Isa. 19.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. Then
must the generality and mixed multitude of the Gentiles be some other way in
Covenant, then these of whom the Prophets s^eak, Isa. 5^*20, 21. Isa. 55.10.
Jer. 31.31. Ezekiel. 11.19. Ezekiel. 36.26.

3. The Antinomians do also own no Covenant of grace, but this wherein the new
heart is given, and the condition is both promised and given. And D. Crispe
says, All other Covenants of God besides this, run upon a stipulation, and the
promises run upon conditions altogether upon both sides. -- The New Covenant is
without any conditions whatsoever upon man's part: Man in tied to no condition
that he must perform, that if he do not perform, the Covenant is made void by
him.

Ans. Man is under a condition of believing, and tied to believe, so as the
wrath of God abides upon him, he shall not see life, nor be justified, if he
believe not, Joh. 3.18.36. Romans 10.6, 7, 8, 9* (2.) Man is tied to no condition
which he must (...), say which, he can perform without the grace of God. For
have he grace, or have he no grace (the Holy Lord (O if we could plead for him
and his High Sovereignty) is debtor to no man) he is so oblidged to believe as
he sins against the Preached Covenant and forefaults his salvation, if he
believe not* and so breaks the Covenant, but devils or men cannot make it^
void, he may make it of no effect to himself he being an heir of damnation, but
being a chosen vessel God shall work him to believe, and he makes it not void
to himself. If it be said, that the New Covenant is without, any conditions
whatsoever, upon man's pure: It says too much for the believers being under no
debt, no obligation of conscience to believe, or to any duty, but as the Spirit
their only Law leads them: And if the Spirit breath not upon them to forbear
adultery, paricide sodomie, or to believe, pray, praise, hear, mourn for sin,
as Peter, and David, they sin not, for sin is a transgression of the Law, And
when the Spirit breaths not, acts not, The Antinomians, confound the efficient
cause of obedience with the objective cause and rule of obedience in either Law
or Gospel, and free men from all duties when the actual influences of the
Spirit cease.
there is no Law: and this is most ^ilde. Where observe that ^. Antinomians and
Familists confound the efficient cause of our obedience, which is the Spirit of
Grace, and the objective cause, which is the holy rule of the command, promise,
or threatening. For though the Spirit be absent, and not given at all to men in
the state of nature, yet do they sin in committing of Sodomie, and in not
praying, for they are oblidged not to sin, and commanded in the first Command
to pray to a revealed God. I know Adam was not oblidged before he sinned to
pray to Jesus Christ Mediator, as Steven, Act. 7. prayed to him. The Spirit by
grace, does help us to obey the command and the Law, but the Spirit is not the
Law, nor rule of out obedience.

2. Not only will they have the Spirit^ to be all the believers Law and word,
and the letter of the command to lay on no obligation, but the Spirit as
actually breathing and giving actual influences must be the Law: For though
the natural conscience or habitual light say that the man should not commit
this wickedness, nor omit this duty, seeing present necessity of one starving
for want, of one drowning in a water crying for my help, is a call of God to
perform the duty. And if the Spirit give inward warning that I should do the
duty, yet if the Spirit actually breath not and contribute not his actual
influence, the man has no warrant of any command or Law to act without his
rule, since the Spirit acts not at all: and cannot so be guilty in the
committing of the most vile abomination; for where no Law is, no sin is.

M. Crispe page 160. brings this Argument, The Covenant is everlasting: if the
Covenant stand upon any conditions to be performed by man, it cannot be an
everlasting Covenant, except man were so confirmed in righteousness that he
should never fail in that which is his part, but he daily fails, and so daily
breaks the Covenant?

Ans. To the first act of believing, which is a performing of the condition of
the Covenant, The believer is confirmed so as he cannot but believe, and
believe to the end, being under the special promises made to the chosen,
although he have not the confirming grace of the elect Angels.
there is no other condition required then that, Ezekiel. 36.26. I will put in you
a heart of flesh. 27. I will put my Spirit in you, and cause you walk in my
statutes. Zech. 12.10. I will powr^ upon the house of David, the Spirit of
grace and supplication, and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced,
that is, they shall believe in me: That is a strong confirmation, to wit, a
promise that he will work the condition in us. And so is that, Joh. 6.37. All
that the Father gives unto me, shall come unto me (that is, believe in me) and
him that comes, I will in no wise cast out. 2. It is to question the
perseverance of the Saints to say, that God shall not confirm them into the day
of the Lord, as he promises, 1 Cor. 1.8. Phil. 1.6. 1 Pet. 1.4, 5. (3.) Our
daily doubtings of unbeleef will not prove that we so break the Covenant, as
our fails and daily slips of unbeleef should render the Covenant void, and
null, so as it should leave off to be an everlasting Covenant, for such
failings are indeed sins against the love of the Redeemer and Surety of the
Covenant, for his love should constrain us to believe at all times, The
doubtings and unbeleef of the justified renders not the Covenant of Grace null,
so as it should not be a possible way of life to them, as the least sin against
the Covenant of Works renders the Covenant null, so that it can never be a
possible way of salvation again to those that once sin.
and to hope to the end. Nor does the eternity of the Covenant depend upon our
believing, but upon his grace who gives us to believe: but its otherwise in
the Covenant of Works.

D. Crispe, page 162. in Jer. 31. Ezekiel. 36. Heb. 8. and other passages where
the Tenor of the Covenant is contained, there is no word of a tie, page 163,
164. there is not one word that God says to man, thou must do this. But God
takes all upon himself, and says he will do this: Yea, if faith were the
condition of the Covenant, the fault of the broken Covenant should be his who
works, not faith in us.

Ans. Here is the mistake of many who imagine that, The Lord speaks not Jer.
31. Heb. 8. of the whole Covenant of Grace as preached to all in the Visible
Church, as many suppose.
Jer. 31. Ezekiel. 36. Heb. 8. the Holy Ghost sets down the whole entire sum
and tenor of the new Covenant, which he does not. For 1. he speaks nothing of
the whole parties of the Preached Covenant, which is all within the Visible
Church: these he speaks of here, are only believers in whom he works a new
heart. 2. He speaks nothing of Covenant Commandments, nothing of Covenant
duties directly. 3. Nothing of the condition required of us. 2. He speaks not
of the Covenant under the reduplication as Preached, or as a treaty offered to
elect and reprobate, as Math. 2^.31, 32. Luke 1.72. Act. 2.39. and as every
where holden out as a visi^le Covenant made with Abraham and his seed in both
Old and New Testament, according to the approving will of God.

But he speaks only of the fulfilling of some special promises of the
Covenant, heart teaching, and the efficacy of the Covenant. 2. Only upon the
elect who shall persevere to the end, Jer. 31.35. Jer. 32.40. Isa. 59.20, 21.
(3.) Only according to the Lords decree and will of pleasure, not what we ought
to do, but what the Lord by his powerful grace will do in us. As 1. I will
ingrave my Law in their heart. 2. I will be their God. 3. They shall be my
people, to wit, effectually as gifted with a new heart, and such as shall never
be casten off, but shall persevere to the end, v. 35, 36, 37. Jer. 32.40.
otherwise by external calling all the carnal and stiffe-hearted Jews were his
people in Covenant, Isai. 1.3. Isa. 5.25. Ps. 81.8. Ps. 50.7. Deuteronomy. 7.7. as is
in every page almost of the Old Testament. (4.) They shall be taught of God,
31, 34. (5.) I will forgive their iniquity, v. 34. (6.) I will give them
perseverance, and never cast them off, v. 35, 36, 37. so that the Covenant is a
metonymie. This is my Covenant that I will make with them: that is, these are
effects, fruits, and blessings of the Covenant which I shall by my effectual
and mighty grace work in them.

The scope of the Epistle to the Hebrews is not to treat of the Covenant
Preached in his nature, parties, promises, precepts, conditions, but to treat
of the excellency of Christ above Angels, Moses, Priests, Sacrifices, and in
acting of the Covenant upon the heart of the elect, especially Christ excells
all.
4. The Apostle to the Hebrews has no purpose to expone the Covenant of Grace
made with Abraham, that Covenant (says he) they break* Yea it is contrair to
the scope of the Apostle to set down the Doctrine of the Covenant of Grace. He
purposes in the Epistle to the Hebrews to exalt Christ above the Angels. chapter 1*
above Moses, chapter 3. above all the Priests, the High Priest, and above all the
Sacrifices Bullocks, Lambs, Goats, etc. he through the eternal Spirit, once
offered himself to God. And chapter 8. he proves Christ to be a more excellent High
Priest, a Minister of a more excellent Tabernacle, and a more excellent
Ministry, Because he is Mediator of a better Covenant: he is a days-man who
lays his hands upon both parties at variance, both upon God and man, to bring
them together: See Job. 9.32, 33. that is, a Mediator of a Covenant* So that
here he says, Christ is ingadged to the Father in a more spiritual, and
heavenly Covenant. None could ingrave the Law of God in the heart but Christ:
one might say, was not the Law engraven in the heart of some, and their sins
pardoned? Were not Moses, Aaron, and many of the people of God, sanctified,
pardoned, and justified according to that Covenant? Ans. They were justified
and sanctified, but not by the letter of the Covenant of Grace, nor by
sacrifices, shadows, conditional promises, threattens, but by Christ, I the
Lord Redeemer will write my Law in their heart, etc. It is then contrair to the
Apostles scope; Heb. 8. to enter the discourse of the Doctrine of the literal
Law-Covenant, or the conditional Covenant of Grace, it strongly concludes his
point, to speak but of the half (though the choicest half) of the Covenant, as
fulfilled in the elect, and that exalts Christ and his Ministry, that he has a
Ministry upon the heart. Now it is a shame to lay the blame of our not
believing on Christ, be it a condition of the Covenant, or be it none: Christ
works all our works in us, and by this reason it must he his fault (hallowed be
his Name) that we sin at all, because he works not in us contrair acts of
obedience. But to whom is the Sovereign Lord debtor? And therefore this
Antinomian way must be refused.

CHAP. XI. Of the promises made to Christ in the Covenant of Mediation, not to
Christ-God, but to Christ God and Man the Mediator, and these of twelve sorts.
TO Christ-God promises of reward cannot be made, nor can Christ-God suffer,
but they are made to the Person God-Man, for the encouraging of the Man Christ,
and he incourages himself therewith, Isa. 50.7, 8. Christ-Man lived the life of
faith by depending upon God for the joy set before him, and therefore did run,
Heb. 1^. our life should be sweeter, should we fetch all our comforts and
actings from his influences by the faith of daily dependency. Faith here
promises to it self good, Isa. 26.12. Is. 30.31. Ps. 118.10, 11. Ps. 16.9, 10,
11.

If the kinds of promises made to Christ be asked for: Then 1. no such promise
as remission of sin can be made to him; Justification promised to Christ; and
that twofold*
but a twofold Justification must be promised to him. A Law-Justification, this
do and live: For the promise was made to the first Adam, to wit, that he should
be justified and live, if he give consumate and perfect obedience to the Law*
now this Christ did in all things. 2. There is a Justification of Christ from
the band of suretyship, he having completely satisfied for our debts, this was
due to him, and promised, 1 Timothy 3.16, Justified in the Spirit. Romans 1.4.
Declared to be the Son of God, by the resurrection from the dead: That was a
judicial declaration. Acts 2.24. Having loosed the pains of death, (...), as a
King by authority and judicially looses a prisoner from his fetters, having no
more to say against him. Christ judicially loosed from death, came out, and we
in him.
Psa. 105.20. The King sent and loosed him. Isa. 50.8. He is near that
justifies me, who is he that contends with me (in judgment?) Romans 6.9. Knowing
that Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more, death shall no more have
Lordship or Lordly dominion over him, (...). So the word, Luke 22.25. The Kings
of the Gentiles bear dominion over them. Romans 14.9. Death had some Kingly
dominion in Justice and by Law over him: But Christ by Law of satisfactory
payment, who was also the mighty Son of God, wrought himself out of the grips
and fetters of death: So in Christ death has lost Law-dominion over the
believer. It is against Justice and the just Covenant between Jehovah and
Christ, that we should be for ever among the worms and not at length be loosed
from the sting and victory of the grace: O death, thou shall, thou must let the
captives go free, 1 Cor. 15.55. Hos. 13. the prison must be a free Jayle, when
iron gates and fetters are broken. We have in Christ a good cause, the cause
and action of Law is win, and carried on our favors.

2. There is a promise of heavenly influences made to Christ, Isa. 50.4. A
promise of heavenly influences is made to Christ.
He wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the learned.
5. The Lord has opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious. Some great Divines
say, Christ had no sleepy nor closed ear: he must there speak of Isaiah. But so
there was no sinful dryness in Christ; Was He not therefore anointed? Isa.
42.1. I will put my Spirit upon him. Then all influences are promised also,
Isa. 11.2. The Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him: -- 3. And shall make him
of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord, and he shall not judge after the
sight of his eyes, etc. 2. Christ was assured he could not sin, Christ was
assured of influences.
and so of influences to duties, Joh. 5.30. Joh. 8.26, 27, 38, 50, 55. Joh.
10.38. though he wanted influences at a time, as touching consolation and the
felt fruition of God, being forsaken for a time, Psalm. 22.1. Luke 22.44. Math*
27.45. But Adam, Adam was not to believe he should have influences, nor yet to
believe his own reprobation.
as he was not to believe perseverance, nor yet sinfully to fear falling: so
neither was he to believe influences to all acts of obedience, they not being
promised to him. Yet was not Adam to believe his own reprobation; for it was
neither true nor a revealed truth. Then the only nearest way against deadness
and dryness, is to have recourse to the fountain and fullness of life that is
in Christ. Literal quickening of our selves, miskenning Christ, out of whose
fullness we receive, produces but literal fardinesse. 3. The special and
cardinal promise ( I will be his God, The great promise, I will be his God,
made to Christ.
Psalm. 89.26. and he shall cry to me, Thou art my Father, my God, and the rock
of my salvation.) is bound up with Christ in the Covenant of Suretyship, and is
the key and corner stone of the frame and building of the Covenant of Grace,
Joh. 20.17. Go to my Brethren, (says Christ to Magdalen) and say unto them, I
ascend unto my Father and to your Father, and to my God and your God. Its
comfortable talking that Christ says to us, I and you Believers are the
Children of the same Father, and have one Covenant Relation to one God: though,
as is said, Christ bear the relation of a Surety-Covenant to God, and we of a
Covenant of Mediation; and notwithstanding of the differences, yet it may be
said that Christ and Believers are in one writ, Christ and believers are in one
writ.
and one letter of acquittance discharges both from condemnation, Christ from
condemnation of punishment, us from condemnation of inherent guiltiness and
punishment. Blessed we to be unite to him every way, and to join our Amen and
consent to the Covenant: yea, and in regard of profession, we should sub^cribe
and write our names to it, Isa. 44.1, 2, 3. Our maimed and broken and half
consent proclaims an overly and cold Covenanting. Its true, parties are but
once married, once Covenanting by oath is as good as twenty: Wear to make
firmer our marriage-love with Christ.
but frequent and multiplied acts of marriage-love add a great deal of
firmness and of strength to the Marriage band, they are confirmations of our
first subscription. Renewed acts of faith to take Christ for Jesus and
Redeemer, and renewed acts of love, do more and more ingadge the heart to
Christ as Lord and King. Little conversing with Christ deadens marriage-love.
Rare visits and thin bring on worn out acquaintance. We are apt to complain he
visits us seldom: that is because we have not the childish hire of consolation
and feeling, we refuse to work, and yet we should look at comfort for the duty,
and not on the duty for the comfort, Our mistake touching comforts and duties.
when its a duty to our Father; And who looks upon the comfort both as a
comfort and a duty* 1 These. 4.18. Comfort one another with these words: and so
must they comfort themselves. Comfort is mainly for believing, Colos. 2.2. Heb.
6.18. and there is a feast and a fill of joy in believing, Romans 15.13. We seek
but a comfort and a joy of chearing and solacing our selves, and that is all.

4. There is promised to Christ a seed, Isa. 53.10. A seed is promised to
Christ, seed was much in the heart of Christ.
When thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed. Heb.
2.13. Behold I and the children that God has given me. Jacob by Covenant
served for Rachel: Christ also served, suffered and died of love for his
Spouse, Ephesians. 5.25, 26. Isa. 53. he shall be satisfied. A Redeemed seed was his
end, and we endure hard labor for a desired end, and we are sick till we get
the great end we aim at. Its true the honor of God was the special end, Joh.
12.28. c. 17.1. yet it was heart satisfaction to Christ to have all his
offspring and children with him, Joh. 17.24. How should Christ not be our end?
See if ye do all, and suffer all, to fetch this shore, Phil. 3.8, 9. Examine
comparative ends, by-ends, self ends. Its impossible a man can be ignorant of
his last and main end, so strong an impulsion it has upon his heart.

5. There Is not only a seed, but a rich conquest, the heathen promised, and
the ends of the earth, Psalm. 2.8, 9. Dominion from sea to sea* Zech. 9.10.
Psalm. 72.8. Dan. 7.14. and both this and the former satisfies Christ. There is
not a sight so desirable to the eye of Christ, as to see all his Redeemed ones
conquering and last in the fields, and fairly landed on the shore, passed
Gunshot and reach of all temptations. We satisfy our unbeleeving hearts too
much* Christ's and is satisfied by the Lord, therefore are we not to fear.
Ah! who can stand, temptations are so strong. But as JEHOVAH fully satisfies
Christ's soul, his hope, his aim and intended end in all the Articles of the
Covenant of Redemption: so fear not, JEHOVAH cannot break off the Treaty with
his Son, nor can Christ be left unsatisfied.

6. The Lord promises help to Christ against his enemies, Psalm. 89.21. With him
my hand shall be established, mine arm also shall strengthen him. There be many
against Christ, but he has a divine furniture of strength. Hence protection is
promised to him in the discharge of his Office, Isai. 49.2. In the shadow of
his hand has he hid me, and made me a polished sh^f^: in his quiver has he
hid me. The outlettings and manifestations of strength and furniture that is in
the ^ead redound^ to a seasonable supply of all his afflicted ones, Because
victory is promised to Christ in temptations, we may flee to the Covenant, as
Christ and the Saints have done.
that they shall not be overwhelmed.

7. Victory is promised to Christ over all his enemies: The Lord will not leave
his soul in grave, Psalm. ^6.10. Therefore (says the Lord speaking
Covenant-wayes, Isai. 53.12.) will I divide him a portion with the great, and
he shall divide the spoil with the strong: because he has poured out his soul
unto death. He shall triumph over principalities and powers, Col. 2.15. Luke
11.22. and shall make all his enemies his footstool, and subdue them, so that
he shall fill the pits with the dead bodies, Psalm. 110.1, 6. and plague all his
enemies, Genesis ^^.3. Psalm. 89.2^. I will beat down his foes before his face, and
plague them that hate him. It supports not a little our faith, that when we
tremble before temptations from Satan and the mighty of the world, the Lord
has written and Covenanted to Christ all his and our enemies destruction. Our
turning away our eye from the Covenant is the cause why we succumb; Christ,
under his sorest assault with hell and hels pursevants and officers, devils,
and the felt anger of a forsaking God, dowbles his grips on the Covenant, my
God, my God, Psalm. 22.1. Mat. 27. O my Father, Mat. 26. Psalm. 89.26. He shall
cry to me, my Father, my God. A Covenant is (as it were) more then a promise,
being a solemn promise in condiscension of mercy: So the Church, Psalm. 89.38,
39. and Jer. 14.21. and the afflicted people, Isa. 63.16. and Dan. ^.9.4, 5, 6.
Ezra. 9.6.10.15. Hezekiah in a day of rebuke, Isa. 37.16, 20. the slain Church,
Psalm. 79.9. Psalm. 80.1. flee to this shore in their storms, and the Lord
professes he will be broken, entreated, and holden by his Covenant, Lev. 26.41,
42.

8. There is a promise of glory, A promise of glory is made to Christ.
of a Name above all names made to Christ for his sufferings, Psalm. 16.9, 10,
11. Isa. 53.12. Act. 5.31. and to such as suffer with him, and overcome, Luke
22.29, 30. Rev. 3.21. Rev. 2.10. As also, he shall bear all the glory of his
Fathers house, Isa. 22. Zech. 7.13.

9. The Lord promises forbearing mercy to the children of Christ, if they sin,
he will correct them in measure, and in a Fatherly way give them repentance,
but not remove the Covenant-mercy. Rods in mercy are Covenanted to us.
So has the Lord Covenanted and articled in the writ with his Son, a rod to
children, to difference them from bastards, Heb. ^2. And ^e that has hi^ fire
in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem, writes this up as a Covenant-mercy, that
he will not suffer them to perish with the world. Hence, the rods of the wicked
stand booked in the Covenant of Works among the curses of the book of the Law,
Lev. ^6. Deuteronomy. 28.15, 16, 17, etc. our rods are Covenanted mercies in the
compact between the Lord and Christ, and written in the Gospel-book of the
Covenant of Grace.

10. All the promises of the Gospel, are first (as it were) promised to Christ;
the Gospel is put over in his hand. Jesus is the Angel, Rev. 10.1. ch^a^hed
with a Cloud, and a Rainbow on his head. v. 2. And has in his hand a little
book open; the Testament, and the book of all the promises to dispense them to
such as the Father has given to him, to give his Spirit to his own, to
interceed and advocate for them, to ratify and seal them with his blood.

11. There is promised to him an head-ship, and power of judgment, An headship
is promised to Christ.
over man and Angels, with an oath, that to him all knees shall bow, Romans
14.11. Isa. 45.23. Phil. 2.10. and that he shall add his seal to Gospel-hell
and vengeance inflicted upon the despisers of the Gospel, Luke 19.14. Mat.
26.64. The threatenings against Gospel unbeleef are put in the hands of Christ,
not as Redeemer and Surety, but as a refused Surety and King, whom unbelievers
will not have to reign over them.

12. Adam brake the whole frame of heaven and earth: and to the Second ADAM the
whole broken and marred lump of the Creation is promised, The creatures in the
Covenant of works are now broken out, when that Covenant is broken, but now in
Christ they are taken in again and restored as under-Covenanters.
that he may be the repairer of the waste places. Isa. 49.8. I will preserve
thee, and give thee for a Covenant of the people, to establish the earth, to
cause to inherit the desolat heritages. Ps. 72.16. Under the reign of the
Messiah, There shall be an handful of corn upon the top of the mountains, the
fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon. Jer. 31.12. Therefore shall they come
and sing in the height of Zion, and shall flow together for the goodness of
the Lord (Christ) for wheat, and for wine, and for oil, and for the young of
the flock, and of the herd.

1. The Lord made all things at the beginning very good, Genesis 1.31. Heaven,
Earth, Sun, Moon, Beasts, Birds, etc. being all made servants to man, were in a
manner fellow-Covenanters in their kind with man in the Covenant of Works: As a
King covenants with a great Family, his servants and dependers have the
benefit of the Kings Covenant-peace, all obeyed Adam without jarring: but when
Adam sinned, war between the Lord, and between the Master and the servants is
denounced, the earth is cursed for his sake, Genes. 3.17, 18. and Lions and
wild Beasts rise against him like loose borderers. But in the Covenant of
Grace, Hos. 2.18, 19, 20. the beasts of the field, the fowls of the heaven, the
Sun which shall not smite by day, nor the Moon by night, Ps. 121.6. are by the
Surety of the Covenant brought in a new league: yea the stones of the field,
Job 5.23. are compartners of the peace, and Christ the King takes off the
forefaultry upon all, and looses the arrestment of vanity that by sin was laid
upon the Creation, which was made sick like a woman traveling in birth, Romans
8.20, 21, 22. Hence are they blessed in Christ to the Saints, Deuteronomy. 28.4, 5.
Levit. 26.4, 5, 6. and the Angels come in under their Head Christ, Col. 2.10.
and serve the new restored heirs, Heb. 1.13. for their Heads sake.

2. God has appointed Christ the Heir of all things, and, Heb. 1.2. has given
a Charter to Christ and put in bread, garments, houses and all to the Believer
in Christ the first Heir: his great evidence is, 1 Cor. 3.21. All things are
yours.

3. He makes all things new, Rev. 21.5. This Christ mends the broken gold ring
which was broken by the first unattentive and rash Heir Adam; So that now
Heavens, Earth, Mountains, Isai. 49.13. sea, trees, fields, Psalm. 96.11, 12,
13. are commanded to sing a Gospel-Psalm of joy, because Christ the new King
and Restorer of all is come to the Throne: yea let the stoods clap their hands,
Psalm. 98.9. and he purposes to purge with fire the great Pesthouse infected
with sin and under bondage of corruption, Romans 8.21. 2 Pet. 3.10, 11. that he
may set up the new world in Gospel-beauty* the new heavens and the new earth, 2
Pet. 3.13. Isai. 65.17. Isai. 66.22. Rev. 21.1. Oh what a life to have a
cottage and a little yard of herbs in that new World, and how base to be but
Citizens of this World!

CHAP. XII. The condition and Properties of the Covenant of Redemption.
Q. WHat need is there of any condition to be performed by Christ, or of any
Covenant? Christ being Man, required that he should be under a Covenant.
Ans. The same Question may be of the need of an oath to Christ, Psalm. 110. The
Lord has sworn and will not repent, Thou art a Priest, etc. 2. The same
necessity, in regard of infinite wisdom that our Redeemer should be obedient
to the death of the Cross, Phil. 2.8. and be under the Law, Gal. 4.4. and keep
his Fathers Commandments, and abide in his love, Joh. 15.10. requires also a
Covenant of obedience upon the part of Christ-Man; for all men being born under
the Law and Covenant of Works, Christ-Man also must be under the same. And then
Christ the Mediator was to give obedience to a particular Commandment of
laying down his life for sinners, and this required an ingadgement by way of
Covenant, and so a condition of obedience to perform what this peculiar Law of
Suretyship required of him, to wit, to lay down his life.

3. Its not a condition of indifferency which is required of Christ, such as is
required of Adam, No such condition is required of Christ as of Adam or of us,
nor was he under any threatening, but had co^firming grace from the womb.
in which there is a hazard of failing and coming short of the reward. Adams
Covenant had both threatenings and promises, and so has our Covenant of
Reconciliation, though in another way: see Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32. But the
Covenant of Suretyship has promises most large that are made to Christ: but no
threatenings are laid before the Man-Christ that are to be read in the
Scripture. There was no hazard nor possibility, in regard of the Personal
Union, that Christ could sin: yea, in regard that Christ from the womb was both
a Traveller, a Viator and an enjoyer and Comprehensor, and had the Spirit above
measure from his birth, as Man he had gifted to him the confirming grace which
is now given to the Elect Angels in their Head Christ; And therefore there was
somewhat like a condition necessary, and as the members enter to glory through
obedience, so also the Covenanted Head, Luke 24.26. Ought not Christ to have
suffered these things, and to enter in to his glory?

The paying of the price of blood, and dying for man was the formal condition
of the Covenant of suretyship.
Q. 2. What was the special condition of the Covenant of Suretyship? Ans. The
Covenant being a bargain of buying a people to God, then the paid price and
ransone must be the duly formal condition. As for obedience to the Moral
Law, it was the condition of the Covenant of Works, to which the Man Christ, as
Man, was oblidged, that he might have right to Law-justification and life
eternal, jure and merito foederali operum, by the Law and federall merit (I
mean merit by paction and faithful Law-promise, not of condignitie) of the
Covenant of Works, that he might be saved.

Law-holinesse in Christ did not exclude grace.
But this Law-holinesse had influence in that most solemn act of obedience in
offering himself a sacrifice to death for our sins.

And the Law-holinesse of the Man Christ did not exclude supernatural grace as
the Law-holinesse of Adam: for it was the perfect conformity of Christ's nature,
his soul, understanding, will, affections, and all his actions internal and
external with the holy Law of God.

Hence the heart and inclinations of Christ stood ever right and stright to the
Law. He exercised no affection in puris naturalibus, his anger came not out in
pure natural anger and no more, The holy actings of Christ's affections.
but it came out in acts of zeal; Nor his joy in pure natural joy, though
sinlesse, but in joy of the Holy Ghost. And in the whole Man Christ was a
perfect mass, and, as it were, a complete body of all gracious qualifications.

Isai. 11. Christ's wisdom.
He received the Spirit of knowledge and was ignorant of nothing he ought to
know: Disputed with the Doctors being of twelve years old: The world knew not
his School or Teacher. Hence his wisdom and practical understanding of the
Law of God and practical conclusions, He had the Spirit of counsel, as the
greatest of Statesmen for Government, Isa. 52.13. Behold my Servant shall deal
prudently. And so, when we are in perplexities and know not what to do, Christ
his unda^toned boldness of faith.
he can lead the blind in a way they know not, Isai. 11.1, 2. He has the
Spirit of might and courage, an undantoned Spirit, yet conjoined with counsel,
no fool hardiness, but the resolute ventoriousnesse of faith, Isai. 42.4. He
shall not fail nor be discouraged: Heb. broken, till he have set judgment in
the earth. Our softness of unbeleef, at the blowing of a feather or stirring
of a leaf, brings on falling of Spirit and swooning. He has the boldness of
faith to believe victory before the battle, Isa. 50.9. Lo they all shall wax
old as a garment, the moth shall eat them up. He has hope from the womb, His
hope.
Psalm. 22.9. Thou art he that took me out of the womb, thou did make me hope
when I was in my mothers breasts. And for the joy set before him, he endured
the cross and despised the shame, Heb. 12.2.

And the Spirit of the fear of the Lord made him quick in understanding, that
is, the high and reverent apprehensions of God made him quick to smell or sent
(so the word imports) the snares and temptations in the work of Redemption
plotted by men and devils. So excelled he in righteousness, His holy sagacitie.
which as a girdle went about his loins, both in judging, His righteousness.
and in discharging the trust put upon him by the Lord who laid the key of
David and the Government upon his shoulder: his obedience to his Father, and
continuing in his love, Joh. 15.10. and thirsting to do the will of the Father,
Joh. 4.34. His zeal to his Fathers house should be a fair coppie for us to
follow. He was meekness it self, Isa. 53.7. 1 Pet. 2.23, 24. much in praying,
His meekness.
believing, rejoicing in spirit, Luke 6.12. Psalm. 16.9, 10, 11. tender to the
weak of the flock, Isa. 40.11. His tenderness to the weak.
He shall feed his flock like a sheepherd, he shall gather the lambs with his
arm, and carry them in his bosom, and he shall gently lead these that are with
young. Isa. 42.2. He shall not cry, nor lift up (a shout) nor cause his voice
to be heard in the street. 3. A bruised reed shall he not break, and the
smoking flax shall he not quench.

He was most compassionate to sinners, inviting them to come, Mat. 11.28, 29.
crying and shouting with a loud voice to the thirsty, His compassion to sinners.
Joh. 7.37. journeyed from heaven to seek and to save the lost, Luke 19.10.
came to serve them with his heart blood, Mat. 20.28. his bowels were turned
with compassion to perishing souls that wanted the feeding Pastors, Mat. 9.36.
He sighed deeply in his Spirit, at the perverse unbeleef of his deadly enemies
the Pharisees, Mar. 8.12. wept and shed tears at the foreseen destruction of
Jerusalem, Mat. 23.37. Luke 19.41, 42. and yet that City slew him. Loved as the
tender Physician, to be much in company with sick sinners, Mat. 9.11, 12. Luke
15.1, 2, 3. Luke 19.1, 2, 3, 9, 10. O what rejoicing! when he lays the lost
sheep on his shoulder, Luke 15.5. When, v. 20. he sees the home-coming sinner,
he ran, fell on his neck, and had compassion upon him, and kissed him, and made
a feast, and sang and danced for joy. There is no humility like his, His
humility.
to wash the feet of his servants: there is no patience like his, who, when he
was reviled, reviled not again* when he suffered, he threatened not, but
committed himself to him that judges righteously* His painful way of gaining
of souls.
1 Pet. 2.23. As a lamb dumb before the sh^arer, Isa. 53. How gaining of souls
was he, who preached in the Temple, in the Synagogues, in the Villages, in the
Ship, at the Sea side, at every Table he came to, at every Feast, at every
confluence of people, at every way side, and stood still and talked with a
woman, and wanted his dinner upon that occasion? And thought he dined well when
he gained to the Lord the soul of a woman, and of them of Samaria, His
faithful and free teaching.
who hated him and refused to lodge him? How faithful and free in rebuking the
Pharisees and Rulers, and in declaring the truth of the Gospel, that he was the
Son of God, though they attempted to stone him for his free Teaching? His
mortification.
None mortified to honor as he that refused to be a King, Joh. 6.15. and was
willing to be worse lodged then birds and foxes, Mat. 8.20. and being rich, for
our cause became poor* 2 Cor. 8.9. and endured the cross, despised the shame,
suffered the contradiction of sinners, Heb. 12. and did run and fainted not:
And was he not a pattern of love, who laid down his life for his friends, Joh.
15.10. even when we were enemies, Romans 5.10? A pattern of love.
He pleased not himself, Romans 15.3. honored his Father, Joh. 8. sought not his
own glory, v. 49.50. and says true, Job. 5.30. I seek not mine own will, but
the will of him that sent me. Joh. 8.29. Of obedience to God and to all to whom
obedience is due.
I do always these things that please him. He faithfully expounded the Law,
Mat. 5. refuted heresies, Mat. 22. glorified God with his miracles, he was
subject to his Parents, Luke 2.51. paid tribute to the Prince himself. Mat.
17.27. and taught others to obey lawful Governors, Mat. 22.21. would not
usurp the place of a Judge, Luke 12. v. 13, 14. and witnessed a good
confession before Pontius Pilate, 1 Timothy 6.13. and was for that cause born, and
for that end came he into the world, that he might bear witness unto the
truth, Joh. 18.37. none so self-denied, he pleased not himself, sought not his
own glory, nor his own ease, nor his own will, but submitted to the will of
God. Christ has all these qualifications as the grace of head-ship, to be
communicated to us, not as the grace of his person, to be personal and private
induements for himself only.


In all which, we are 1. to look upon Christ who went about do^ing good, Act.
10. as one who 1. was Covenant-wise designed of God and anointed with the Holy
Ghost and power to do what he did, and to be what he was, for our good: and its
much for the establishing of our faith, that Christ was all this for our
salvations sake, by counsel and Covenant. These gracious qualifications
Christ-God undertook to have for our good: and they were not given to Christ as
personal and proper for himself, but as head; for we may here distinguish the
grace of the person and the grace of head-ship, though they must not be
divided. But as the light and heat of the Sun is not (if we may so speak)
private or personal for the Sun it self, but for the earth, and all that live
and grow out of the earth that need the influences of the Sun and have eyes to
enjoy the light thereof. The water of the fountain is not for that hole or cave
of the earth from whence the fountain does issue, but it is very often to (...)
in strea^^ to be a river for the use of the whole land. All these excellencies
and graces are in Christ, not as his (to speak so) personal induements, but as
the public treasure, that we may receive of his fullness. We should think it a
strange exorbitancy in nature, if all the trees, flowers, herbs on earth,
should refuse to receive influences and growing from the Sun, and deny to be
oblidged to the Sun for light and heat: and our unwillingnesse to receive from
Christ the public grace that is made his by Covenant, when a public
con^ignation by compact is made for our good, proclaims our unbeleef and our
wicked estrangement from Christ, as if we had said, let Christ be gracious for
Christ, only I shall not be his debt^r. Nor is it from the natural connection
between head and members, or because simply Christ is man as we are, though the
humanity be ground thereof, nor is it because Christ simply is anointed with
the fullness of the Spirit, for he is head of the body, and Lord, General,
Captain of his people, no^ by nature only, not because of grace simply, but by
Covenant-purchase. Romans 14.9. (...), For this end Christ both died, and rose,
and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living. We too much
affect bastard graces, and (...) little the grace that is Christ, which has a
(...) desirablenesse to cause us follow the^^ graces because they lodge in God
Immanuel
There Is a Covenant between the Father and the Son that Christ should die, not
simply, but for, and in the name of the heirs of glory, such as are designed
friends (for his dying is a relative and a legal binding and buying by
Covenant of so many certain persons) and upon this he is made Head and Prince,
and exalted to give of his fullness, to give repentance and forgiveness of
sins to the house of Israel, Act. 5.30, 31. Ah! how do we love to be behold^^
to nature? to self? for Heathen and Pagan virtues by education, and moral
exercise, which is but wild corn? and we se^ not how unwilling we are to trade
with Christ, or to buy from him fine gold, yet it was given to him without
measure, as to the universal fountain and head, for all his. 2. All these are
in Christ, that he should be a living coppie which we must follow: And he is a
more lively example then the Gospel it self, for Christ is the acted Gospel.
And if ye look on Christ, loving, believing, hoping, praying, The graces in
Christ are more forceable paterns to us to follow, in some sense, then the
Scripture it self.
there comes more life and warmness from his actions, then from the word: when
we consider that as God would have the humane nature a chariot to convey to us
the fullness of merit by satisfaction, so must it be the mean of carrying to
us the fullness of grace by sanctification, and then, when God Covenants with
the Man Christ, that love, faith, hope, meekness, humility and (...) shall
live, speak and act in Christ out to us we are more strongly convinced to
follow the footsteps of so blessed a guide. Christ is a living glass in which
we see the beauty of grace. As also his meekness and humility is the meekness
and humility of God, and all these graces have a seat and lodging in our
Immanuel God with us, they have a drawing and an alluring desirablenes from the
Person the Lord Jehovah our King, the mighty God, the Father of ages, in whom
they reside.

The properties of the Covenant of Suretyship are, 1. Freedom. 1. The freedom
of the Covenant of suretyship.
2. Graciousnesse. 3. Eternity.

As to the first: Nothing could compel, nothing could hire Christ for eternity
to ingadge his Name in such a band, since he well knew what it should cost him,
how dear it should stand him, and saw what indignity, shame, pain, curse, and
all these conditions before him. And what could move the father, since he might
have followed the Law-course of Works?

2. The first draughts* of free grace and the Lords unsearchable riches appears
in the sure mercies of David* The grace in the Covenant of suretyship.
in an everlasting Covenant, Isa. 55.3. and Ps. 89.1. I will sing the mercies
of the Lord. -- 2. For I have said, mercy shall be built-up for ever: -- Why? v.
3. I have made a Cov^nant with my chosen, I have sworn unto David my servant.
4. Thy seed will I establish for ever, etc. The giving of the Covenant. 2. The
design of a Redeemer. 3. The sending. 4. Anointing. 5. The consenting of
Christ. 6. His coming. 7. Dying, are all acts of grace. God was no debtor to
the Man Christ, or to any of his kindred and blood-friends, more then he was to
David and his seed, but God would act grace in Christ and make him a samplar
and the first coppie of free grace to all his brethren, that they might share
with him therein. But though he made Christ also a coppie of his Justice, Romans
3.25. and spared not his Son, Romans 8.32. yet, Mal. 3.17. the lord deals not so
with us: And they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in that day when I
make up my Jewels, and I will spare them as a man spares his own son, that
serves him. And of Christ it is said, Ps. 72.13. He shall spare the poor and
needy. And, O what riches of grace and mercy, and plenteous Redemption has he
manifested to us? and therefore the more grace he shows to us, The more grace
that is shown to us, the more should we serve, not with a servile, but with a
godly fear.
the more freely and sonly should we serve him, with less hirednesse and
servile disposition: If we could love God and Christ with a heart abstracted
from heavens hire, at least the pleasure of it (for pleasure mak^ not any
conform to God, but holiness does) and the heart not legally fearing the
burning torment of hell it were good: for since Christ has freed us from the
Law-wrath, he takes it not well that we darre approach too near to the mount
burning with fire; nor does Christ allow our affections of fear and sorrow, and
sadness to act upon feared everlasting wrath, (we being justified by faith) any
other way, then in a Gospel-consideration, being casten down for our
Law-deserving, but so as we highly value our ranson-payer, and serve him with
godly fear, (...), which word, Heb. 12.28. must note a difference between the
fear and trembling and terror upon devils, The godly fear and the other fear
differenced
for the torment of hell, Mat. 8.29. Jam. 2.19. and the (...), the godly fear
of believers, Heb. 12.28. which is also given to Christ, Heb. 5.7. in whom
there was no fear of hell torment, and therefore the fear of him that can cast
both soul and body in hell (though it be another word, Mat. 10.28.) which
Christ commands, cannot be a servile fear legal, for hell such as is in devils
and men, but a godly fear, such as is consistent with the faith of deliverance
from the wrath to come: for Christ, Mat. 10.28. commands that fear, fear (says
he) to deny Christ before men: Why? fear him who can cast soul and body in
hell. And immediately, v. 31. Fear not therefore: the same word that is, v. 28.
then he must forbid a fear opposite to servile fear, and which stands with the
faith of sons who are to believe the care of a father, which is more toward his
children then toward sparrows, v. 29, 30. And that the word no^^eth a godly
fear, which is, Heb. 12. beside other Greek Authors* See Heb. 5.7. see Luk
2.25. Act. 2.5. Act. 8.2. Act. 23.10. and Heb. 11.7. Noah moved with fear,
(...), built and ark: sure the fear of everlasting torment in hell, moved not
Noah to build the ark, for by faith which is saving, he builded it, v. 7.

3. Eternity is a special property of the Covenant of suretyship: For 1. the
parties are eternal* Jehovah the Lord and the Son of God never began to agree
upon the designation of the Redeemer for that work, it was a bargain closed
from everlasting* Only the question is, when the Son shall render the Kingdom to
the Father, 1 Cor. 15. whether or not the Covenant shall then cea^e. For 1.
Christ shall then end his work of Redemption, and shall fully and finally have
purchased what his soul desires, and shall have received his wages, and enjoy
with his conquished bride an eternal sabbath. 2. He shall interceed no more for
sinners, for the sinning of his redeemed ones shall have an end.

2. The Son (says Camero) shall leave off to reign, In Respons. ad Quaestio.
quod attinet ad regnandi actum, according to the act of reigning, but as
touching the Kingdom it self, there shall be no end of the Kingdom.

But it may appear as there was a time when it was said of Christ, Phil. 2.7.
(...), He emptied himself, and took on him the form of a servant. So there is a
time opposite to that, v. 9. Therefore God has highly exalted him: which is
not fulfilled in his resurrection, ascension, and sitting only at the right
hand of God, The Son's being subject to the Father how it is to be expounded, 1
Cor. 15
but when all power, friends, and unfriends, and the Man Christ shall be subject
to the Lord, yea even the Son, not as God, for Christ-God is equal with the
Father* not as man, for so in the days of his flesh as man, he ever was, and
is, and shall be subject to God, but the Son shall be subject, as touching the
Office of a formal Mediator. 2. Another distinction is here needful, as
Augustine and Ambrose: Augustine, and Ambrose their mind touching Christ his
being subject to the Father.
he shall render the Kingdom to the Father, not that he shall leave off to
reign, but that he then shall declare that he raigns not of himself, but that he
has his power of reigning from the Father, and he shall profess this before
men and Angels, and so shall glorify the Father. Its not to be rejected that
Hilarious, lib. 1. de Trinit. 11. August. lib. 1. de Trinit. c. 8. he shall
render the elect back to God, as now saved* and present to the Father his
ransoned ones now perfected, so Ephesians. 5.27. 3. Taking the word of reigning, for
this, to excel in eminency of power above all, so Christ shall reign
eternally, but taking the word of reigning as it notes the exercise of royal
authority, so and so by gathering a Church, by the Preached word, fighting
against enemies, and overcoming them, to make them his footstool, until which
time he reigns, Christ his not exercising of some second acts of a Mediatory
Head and King after the last Judgeme^t* proves not but he is a Mediatory King
even then.
Ps. 110. And so it may be, and is said by some, he raigns, not after the day
of the universal Judgment: but these are but the second acts of a King, and
the not exercising of these acts proves not but Christ is a King, actu primo,
and essentially, for the exercise of such and such acts are often extrinsecall
to the office. But the question shall remain whether he be not for ever and
ever a Mediatory King, and does retain his headship over the Church; so as the
Angel say, Luke 1.33. He shall reign, (...), and of his Kingdom there shall be
no end. And as Dan. 7.14. Cameron, and others say, the meaning of that, that
his Kingdom shall have no end: is only, it shall not be destroyed by external
violence, as worldly Monarchies that are made away, and others rise in their
place, but that Kingdom (say they) may well^be called eternal, That Christ's
Kingdom is eternal only because it is not destroyed as worldly* Kingdom^ are
by external violence, ^s said by some.
though the King leave off to reign* when he leaves off to reign through no
weakness and want of power, but because he needs not raign^ there being no
need of laws, because the subjects are perfected, and there are no enemies to
be subdued, and the King has obtained that eternal end, a glorified people,
for which he was fighting.

But yet this seems not to satisfy, 1. Circumcision, and the Ceremonies; and
the Priesthood, Exo. 40.15. Lev. 16.29. the fast in the seventh month, shall
be a statute, (...), for ever. Lev. 6.18. All the mules of the sons of Aaron
shall eat the remainder of the meat offering, it shall be a statute for ever in
your generations: so Lev. 17.7. Lev. 7.34, 3^. Lev. 23.14. Number. 23.11, 23. yet
these Ordinances can hardly be called eternal, as the Kingdom of Christ is:
And yet they cease when the body is come, and they are not destroyed as humane
inventions, the hay and the stubble that are builded upon the foundation Christ.

2. These reasons prove that Christ shall not exercise such and such acts of
royalty upon such and such enemies, for they shall be no enemies: Illius
imperii princeps desiit regnare.
Yet we say not, as ^amero, that such a Prince leaves off to reign even as
Mediator. Christ's rendering of the Kingdom dispensatory or Oeconomick to the
Father may well be a rendering of an account of his subjects, and a presenting
of them to God perfected, Ephesians. 5.26, 27. without spot and wrinkle: Christ
having brought them out of danger, so as they need not Word, Sacraments, or a
Temple. And so* 1 Cor. 15.24. He shall put down all rule, all power, and
authority, all Magistracy and Government that now is in either Church or State*
and so says Par^us, the Son shall be subject to the Father* having subdued all
the rebels* as his Fathers Deputy, he shall return to his Father the Kingdom
now reduced to subjection and made peaceable, and lay down his Mediatorie
Commission, and so be subject to the Father, having ended the deputed and
delegated charge. And it is sure, the Son as Mediator is sent, and is a
Servant, an Angel, or Messenger of the Covenant, Mal. 3. and the laying down of
his written Commission is a sort of subjection, and God does not now actually
reign in such a Mediatory way as in the days of Christ's flesh: he did reign in
Christ, but now after the last Judgment, God is all in all, that is, not
because he is not now all in all, and is not the Lord of lords, and King of
kings, but because it does not so appear to be, many now rise against him and
contradict him* and persecuting his Mystical body, do persecute Christ. 2. He
shall be all in all by change of the Oeconomick Government, then the Father,
Son, and Spirit, shall immediately glorify the Church, Rev. 21.22. And I saw no
Temple therein, for the Lord God* Almighty and the Lamb is their Temple. 3. And
the City had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine, in it* for the
glory of God did inlighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof.

But that Christ shall leave off to be Mediatory King after the last Judgment,
I deny. For there is a twofold Mediation, one, Christ is ever, even after the
universal Judgment a Mediatory Head, King, and Lord.
of uniting sinners to God, and mediating between God and them. This shall
cease, and all the royal acts thereof, but these, with reverence, (...) second
operations and acts of royalty. There is another Mediation substantial, by
which our natures glorified, stand in a substantial union with God for ever*
for to what end shall Christ stand glorified in our nature in heaven, but to be
the substantial (...) between (...) and us, glorified for ever? If any say
that Christ-God-Man after that day is no Mediator of reconciliation, There is
a twofold Mediation
because there shall be no sin then: Its true* Nay, but even now in the
intervall between his ascension and second appearing to Judge the world, he
acts not as Mediator of reconciliation to expiate our sins, and to satisfy
for them, for only he did upon the cross by dying for us, so mediate. And we
will not say he is acting the part of a Priest formally by sacrificing for us
in heaven, Christ acts not as a sacrificing Priest for us in heaven.
as Socinians teach: for he can offer no expiatory sacrifice for us in heaven,
for he died but once, and that was on the earth only. Obj. But now he Advocats
for sinners, 1 John 2.1. therefore as now in heaven glorified, he is a
Mediator for sinners. Ans. True, he is a Mediator and Intercessour now,
applicatione, non expiatione, by applying his blood, but not by shedding of it:
And he is an Advocat, but called, (...), Jesus the Righteous, and an Advocat as
just and righteous, supposes a right and just cause, and that sufficient
satisfaction and payment is given to God for the sins of these for whom Christ
interceeds; the Advocation of Christ is not to plead that believers may sin,
How Christ appears for us now in heaven, as just, as well, as merciful
or their sins may be excused as no sins: But his intercession is to plead, 1.
that for his blood we may stand as accepted of God, and freed from
condemnation. 2. That the Spirit procured by the death of Christ, may be given
to us, that we may repent and believe. But again, after the last Judgment
Christ stands as Mediator, not to apply his death, nor to interceed for
sinners, when there shall be no sinners, but Christ eternally shall appear for
us as a paund of a perfect satisfaction once given, and as a pledge and hostage
of peace, and Christ's appearing for us for ever is an allusion to the
Ambassadors sent by foreign Princes, who standing in Court before the Prince
they are sent unto, are speaking tokens that the confederacy of peace stands,
and that no acts of hostility can be done by either of the States, and because
God is eternally and not by fits just, as if he were now angry at sin, and then
satisfied and pacified when the satisfaction is gone, Christ stands in our
nature our Mediatory Head and King, after the last Judgment.
therefore the Lord Christ stands in that Body and Nature in which he once
suffered, before God, for the acquiescing of Justice for ever in the once paid
ransone. As also, Christ remains the substantial and natural Head (though
nature be now glorified) of the Mystical glorified body for ever, and of these
members under the Covenant of Redemption eternally, though all be done and
performed in regard of the purchased redemption: yet we then glorified, once
brake the Law, and therefore cannot even then stand in our Law-righteousnesse,
but must stand in our Lord Jesus Christ's Righteousness, which garment shall
never cast the color nor luster.

2. That love to redeemed ones, and the soul-satisfaction of Christ in his seed
i^ eternal, Christ stands eternally well pleased and in love with his redeemed
ones.
looking back to the bargain he has once made as Mediator, he cannot leave
off to be satisfied in soul with what he has done, for that were a retracting
of his love, and a repenting of his royal and Princely tenderness, that as
King, he once did beat to his conquered subjects whom he has made his own for
ever.

3. The soul of God must be eternally well pleased with his Son eternally
God-Man, and he stands resting in his love, God stands eternally well pleased
with what Christ has done and suffered, and the once given Throne stands never
empty.
Zeph. 3.17. and delighting for ever in all his Sons actings and transactions
in the work of Redemption, if therefore God have once given to him, God^Man,
the Throne of David to reign over the house of Jacob, he must make empty that
Throne, if he shall leave off to reign. And the Angel, Luke 1. speaks of his
birth and conception. 31. Thou shall bring forth a son, and he shall be great,
and the Lord God shall give unto him the Throne of his Father David, and he
shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever: And he speaks of the eternity of
David's Throne over Jacobs house, so that* as he shall be a man (and he shall
never lay down our nature) so shall he be a King upon David's Throne for ever
and ever.

4. To triumph eternally over enemies, the devils, Malignant opposers of his
reign* sin, and hell is an act of a Mediatory King; when head and members do
both triumph* no less then it is a part of his royal Mediatory power to crush
them all, and make them his footstool, Psalm. 110. But Christ and the Armies of
heaven, Christ's Mediatory triumph is eternal.
when the Marriage-Supper of the Lamb shall come, shall ride upon white horses,
and triumph over enemies for ever, Rev. 19.7, 13, 14, 15. and the eternal
living of Christ in our nature with all his, is a triumphing over the grave,
and death* 1 Cor. 15. and who can prescribe a period and an end of that triumph?

5. The River of Water of Life showed to John, Rev. 22. proceeds out of the
Throne of God and of the Lamb; The Throne of the Lamb is eternal.
then has the slain Lamb a Throne for (...)* v. 3. And there shall be no more
curse there: the Law of Works as threatening a curse, shall no more be there,
Gal. 3.10, 11, 13, 14. Deuteronomy. 27.26. but the Gospel-blessing shall be there, and
the Throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it. v. 5. And they shall reign
for ever and ever.

6: If the glorified sit with the Lamb on a Throne, as he is set down with his
Father upon his (...) is* promised, Luke 22.29, 30. Rev. 3.21. If Christ's
Throne (...) removed, the Throne of the glorified cannot stand: And all alongs
where the state of the triumphing Church is d^scribed, the Lord Jesus keeps the
name of the Lamb, in reference to the Mediatory sacrifice of the Lamb of God
slain for the sins of the world, Joh. 1.29. as, Rev. 5. The Beasts and the
Elders stand round about the Throne, -- saying, Worthy is the Lamb that was
slain, to receive power and riches and wisdom, etc. Rev. 7.15. Therefore are
they before the Throne, and serve him night and day in his Temple, and he that
sits on the Throne shall dwell among them. -- They shall hunger no more, nor
thirst any more: -- 17. For the Lamb that is in the midst of them shall lead
them unto the living fountains of waters. Though this be expounded of the
Church Militant, Isa. 49.10. yet it has not its perfect accomplishment, but of
the Church before the Throne: for all tears are wipt from that Church only. And
whereas it is said, that Christ acts not as Mediator in heaven, its true, he
acts not as now he acts for sinners; but even then the Lamb, v. 17. is the
midst of them, and leads them, when they need neither Temple, nor Sun-light,
beside that, the Lord God Almighty is their Temple, Rev. 21. The Lamb is their
Temple, v. 22. And the Lamb is their light, v. 23. Now what sort of leading,
and what influences of worship and light comes from the Lamb is another
question. And it weighs much with me, that its impossible that the precious
Ark, God^Man, and the union personal can be dissolved.

7. Christ says, I will be a God to the ^vercomer, and he shall inherit all
things, Rev. 21. And if he be the God of Abraham, being dead, in regard of the
soul that lives, far more shall he be a God in an eternal Covenant with
Abraham, in soul and body glorified, though the acts of Christ's reigning* and
the actings of his Covenanted people must be suitable to a glorified state.
Come Lord Jesus.

FINIS.

