THE MUSES Looking-glass.

By T. R.

London, Printed Anno Dom. 1643.

THE Muses Looking-glass,
Actus 1.
Scen. 1.
Enter Bird a Feather-man, and Mrs Flowrdew, wife to a Haberdasher of small
Wares; the one having brought Feathers to the Playhouse; the other Pins and
Looking-glasses; two of the sanctified fraternity of Blackfriars. FLowrdew,
See brother how the wicked throng and crowd,
To works of Vanity! not a nook, or corner
In all this house of sin, this cave of filthynesse,
This den of spiritual thieves, but it is stufft,
Stuffed, and stufft full as is a cushion
With the lewd Reprobate.

Bird. Sister, were there not before Innes,
Yes, I will say Innes, for my zeal bids me
Say filthy Innes, enough to harbor such
As traveled to destruction the broad way;
But they build more and more, more shops of Satan.

Flowrd. Iniquity abounds, though pure zeal
Teach, preach, huffe, puff, and stnuffe at it, yet still,
Still it abounds. Had we seen a Church,
A new built Church erected North and South,
It had been something worth the wondering at.

Bird. Good works are done.


Flowrd I say no works are good,
Good works are merely Popish, and Apocryphal.

Bird. But th'bad abound, surround, yea and confound us.
No marvel now if Play Houses increase,
For they are all grown so obscene of late,
That one begets another.

Flowrd Flat fornication!
I wonder any body takes delight
To hear them prattle.

Bird. Nay, and I have heard
That in a -- Tragedy I think they call it,
They make no more of killing one another,
Then you sell pins.

Flowrd. Or you sell feathers brother,
But are they not hanged for it?

Bird Law grows partial,
And finds it but Chance-medly: And their Comedies
Will abuse you, or me, or any body;
We cannot put our moneys to increase
By lawful usury, nor break in quiet,
Nor put off our false wares, nor keep our wives
Finer then others, but our ghosts must walk
Upon their stages.

Flowrd. Is not this flat conjuring,
To make our ghosts to walk ere we be dead?

Bird. That's nothing Mistress Flowrdew, they will play
The knave, the fool, the devil, and all for money.

Flow. Impiety! O that men endued with reason
Should have no more grace in them?

Bird. Be there not other
Vocations as thriving, and more honest?
Baylies, Promooters, Iaylors, and Apparitors,
Beadles, and Martials men, the needful instruments
Of the Republique; but to make themselves
Such Monsters? for they are monsters, they are monsters,
Base, sinful, shameless, ugly, vile deformed
Pernicious monsters?

Flow. I have heard our Vicar
Call Play Houses the Colleges of transgression*
Wherein the seven deadly sins are studied.

Bird. Why then the City will in time be made
An university of iniquity.
We dwell by Blackfriars College, where I wonder
How that profane nest of pernicious Birds
Dare roost themselves there in the midst of us,
So many good and well disposed persons.
O Impudence?

Flow. It was a zealous prayer
I heard a brother make, concerning Play Houses,

Bird. For charity what is it?


Flow. That the Globe,
Wherein (quoth he) reigns a whole world of vice,
Had been consumed? The Phoenix burned to Ashes.
The Fortune whipped for a blind whore: Blackfriars
He wonders how it escaped demolishing
In The time of reformation: Lastly he wished
The Bull might cross the Thames to the Bear-Garden,
And there be soundly baited?

Bird. A ^ood prayer.


Flow. Indeed it something pricks my conscience*
I come to sell 'em Pins and Looking-glasses.

Bird. I have their custom too for all their Feathers*
It Is fit that we which are sincere Professors
Should gain by Infidels.

Scen. 2.
Enter Roscius a Player. Mr. Roscius we hav' brought the things you spoke for*


Rosc. Why it is well.


Flow. Pray Sir what serve they for?


Rosc We use them in our play.


Bird. Are you a player?


Rosc. I am Sir, what of that?


Bird. And is it lawful?
Good sister lets convert him. Will you use
So fond a calling?

Flow. And so impious?


Bird. So irreligious?


Flow. So unwarrantable?


Bird. Only to gain by vice?


Flow. To live by sin?


Rosc. My spleen is up: And live not you by sin*
Take away vanity and you both may break.
What serves your lawful trade of selling Pins,
But to joint gew-gaws, and to knit together
Gorgets, strips; neck-cloths, laces, ribbands, ruffs*
And many other such like toys as these,
To make the Baby Pride a pretty Puppet?
And you sweet Featherman, whose ware though light,
Oreweighs your conscience, what serves your trade
But to plume folly, to give pride her wings,
To deck vainglory? spoiling the Peacocks tail
TO adorn an Idiots Coxcomb: O dull ignorance!
How ill it is understood what we do mean
For good and honest! They abuse our Scene,
And say we live by vice: indeed it is true
As the Physicians by diseases do,
Only to cure them: They do live we see
Like Cooks by pamp'ring prodigality,
Which are our fond accusers. On the stage
We set an Usurer to tell this age
How ugly looks his soul: A prodigal
Is taught by us how far from liberal
His folly bears him: Boldly I dare say
There has been more by us in some one Play
Laugh't into wit and virtue, then has been
By twenty tedious Lectures drawn from sin,
And foppish humors; Hence the cause does rise
Men are not won by the ears so well as eyes.
First see what we present.

Flow* The sight is able
To unsanctifie our eyes, and make 'em carnal.

Rosc. Will you condemn without examination?


Bird. No sister, let us call up all our zeal,
And try the strength of this temptation:
Satan shall see we dare defy his Engines.

Flow. I am content.


Ros^. Then take your places here, I will come to you
And moralize the plot.

Flow. That moralizing
I do approve, it may be for instruction.

Scen. 3.
Enter a deformed fellow. DEfor. Roscius, I hear you have a new Play to day.


Rosc. We want not you to play Mephostopbolis.
A pretty natural vizard!

Defo^. What have you there?


Rosc. A Looking-glass, or two.


Defor. What things are they?
Pray let me see them. Heaven, what fights are here?
I'ave seen a Devil. Looking-glasses call you them?
There is no Bafiliske but a Looking-glass.

Ros^. It Is your own face you saw.


Defor. My own? thou lie:
I Would not be such a Monster for the world.

Rosc. Look in it now with me, what see thou now*


Defor. An Angel and a devil.


Rosc. Look on that
Thou caldst an Angel, mark it well, and tell me
Is it not like my face?

Defor. As were the same.


Rosc. Why so is that like thine. Do thou not see,
It Is not the glass but thy deformity
That makes this ugly shape; if they be fair
That view the Glass, such the reflections are.
This serves the body: The soul sees her face
In Comedy, and has no other glass.

Defor. Nay then farewell, for I had rather see
Hell then a Looking-glass or Comedy.

Exit Defor. Rosc And yet me thinks if'twere not for this Glass,
Wherein the form of man beholds his grace,
We could not find another way to see
How near our shapes approach Divinity.
Ladies, let they who will your glass deride,
And say it is an instrument of Pride:
I will commend you for it; there you see
If ye be fair, how truly fair ye be:
Where finding beauteous faces, I do know
You Will have the greater care to keep them so.
A heavenly vision in your beauty lies,
Which nature has denied to your own eyes;
Were it not pity you alone should be
Debarred of that others are blessed to fee?
Then take your glasses, and your selves enjoy
The benefit of your selves; it is no toy,
Though ignorance at slight esteem has set her,
That will preserve us good or make us better.
A Country slut, (for such she was, though here,
In The City may be some as well as there:)
Kept her hands clean, (for those being always seen
Had told her else how sluttish she had been)
But had her face as nasty as the stall
Of a fishmonger, or a usurers Hall
Daubed ore with dirt: One might have dared to say
She was a true piece of Prometheus clay,
Not yet informed: And then her unkemb'd hair
Dressed up with cobwebs, made her hag-like stare*
One day within her pail (for Country Lasses
(Fair Ladies) have no other Looking-glasses:)
She spied her ugliness, and fain she would
Have blushed if thorough so much dirt she could:
Ashamed, within that water, that I say
Which showed her filth, she washed her filth away.
So Comedies, as Poets do intend them,
Serve first to show our falts, and then to mend them*
Upon our stage two glasses often there be,
The Comic Mirror, and the Tragedy:
The Comic glass is full of merry strife,
The low reflection of a County life.
Grave Tragedy void of such homely sports
Is the sad glass of Cities and of Courts.
I Will show you both, Thalia come and bring
Thy Buskined sister, that of Blood does sing.

Scen. 4.
Comedy, Tragedy, Mime, Satyr. Comed WHy do you stop? go on.


T'rag. I charge him stay
My robe of state, Buskins, and Crown of gold
Claim a priority.

Com. Your Crown of Gold
Is but the wreath of wealth; it is mine of Laurel
Is virtues Diadem: This grew green and flourished
When nature pitying poor morality,
Hid thine within the bowels of the earth:
Men looking up to heaven found this that's mine,
Digging to find our hell they li't on thine.

Trag. I know you 'have tongue enough.


Com. Besides, my Birth^right
Gives me the first possession.

Trag. How, your Birthright?


Com. Yes sister, Birth right: and a Crown besides,
Put on before the Altar of Apollo
By his dear Priest Phenomoe, she that first
Full of her, God raged in Heroique numbers.

Trag. How came it then the Magistrate decreed
A public charge to ^urnish out my Chorus,
When you were fain ^t appear in rags and tatters,
And at your own expenses?

Come My reward
Came after, my defer is went before yours,

Trag Deserts? yes! what deserts* when like a gypsy
You took a poor and beggarly Pilgrimage
From village unto village; when I then
As a fit ceremony of Religion
In my full state con^ended at the Tomb
Of mighty ^heseus

Come I before that time
Did chaunt our Hymns in praise of great Apol^o,
The sheepherd's Deity, whom they reverence
Under the name of ^om^us, in remembrance
How with them once he kept Admetus sheep.
And 'cause you urge my poverty, what were you?
Till Sophocl^s laid guilt upon your Buskins
You had no ornaments, no robes of state,
No rich and glorious Scene; your first Benefactors
Who were they, but the reeling Priests of Bacchus:
For which a Goat gave you reward and name?

Trag But sis^er who were yours, I pray, but such
As chaunted forth religious, bawdy sonnets;
In honor of the fine chaste god Priapus?

Come. Let age alone, merit must plead out Title.


Trag. And have you then the forehead to contend?
I stalk in Princes Courts, great Kings, and Emperors
From their close cabinets, and Council Tables
Yield me the fatal matter of my Scene.

Com^. Inferior persons, and the lighter vanities,
(Of which this age I fear is grown too fruitful,)
Yield subjects various enough to move
Plentiful laughter.

Trag. Laughter! a fit object
For Poetry to aim at.

Com. Yes, Laughter is my object: it is a property
In man essential to his reason.

Trag. So;
But I move horror; and that frights the guilty
From his dear sins: he that sees Oedipus
Incestuous, shall behold him blind withal.
Who views Orestes as a Parricide,
Shall see him lashed with Furies too; The Ambitious
Shall fear Prometheus Vultur; Daring gluttony
Stand frighted at the sight of Tantalus:
And every family great in sins as blood
Shake at the memory of Pelops house.
Who will rely on Fortunes giddy smile
That has seen Priam acted on the stage?

Com. You move with fear, I work as much with shame*
A thing more powerful in a generous breast.
Who sees an eating Parafite abused;
A covetous Bawd laughed at; an ignorant Gull
Cheated; a glorious Soldier knocked, and baffled;
A crafty servant whipped; a niggard churl
Hoarding up dicing-monies for his son;
A spruce fantaftique Courtier, a mad roarer,
A jealous Tradesman, an overweening Lady,
Or corrupt Lawyer rightly personated.
But (if he have a blush) will blush, and shame
As well to act those follies as to own them.

Trag. The subject of my Scene is in the persons
Greater, as in the vices; Atheists, Tyrants,
O're-daring Favorites, Traitors, Parasites,
The Wolves and Cats of state, which in a language
High as the men, and loud as are their crimes
I thunder forth with terrou^ and amazement
Unto the ghastly wondering Audience.

Satyr. And as my Lady takes deserved place
Of thy light Mistress, so yield thou to me,
Fantastique Mime.

Mime. Fond Satyr why to thee?


Sat. As the attendant of the nobler Dame;
And of my selfmore worthy?

Mime. How! more worthy.


Sat. As one whose whip of steel can with a lash
Imprint the Characters of shame so deep,
Even in the brazen forehead of proud sin,
That not eternity shall wear it out.
When I but frowned in my Lucilius brow,
Each conscious cheek grew red, and a cold trembling
Freez'd the chill soul; while every guilty breast
Stood fearful of dissection, as afraid
To be anatomized by that skillful hand;
And have each artery, nerve, and vein of sin
By it laid open to the public scorn.
I have untruss'd the proudest; greatest tyrants
Have quaked below my powerful whip, half dead
With expectation of the smarting jerk,
Whose wound no salve can cure: each blow does leav^
A lasting scar, that with a poison eats
Into the marrow of their fames and lives;
The Eternal ulcer to their memories!
What can your Apish-fine gesticulations
My manlike-Monky Mime, vie down to this?

Mime. When men through sins were grown unlike the Gods,
Apes grew to be like men; therefore I think
My Apish imitation, Brother Be adle,
Does as good service to reform l^ad manners
As your proud whip, with all his ferks, and jerks.
The S^artans when they strov^ to express the loath-somenesse
Of Drunkenness to their child^en. brought a slave,
Some captive H^lo^, overcharged with wine
Reeling in thus; -- His eyes shot out with staring,
A fire in his nose, a burning redness
Blazing in either cheek, his hair upright,
His tongue and senses faltring, and his stomach
O'reburden'd ready to discharge her load
In each man's face he met. This made 'em see
And hate that sin of swine, and not of men.
Would I express a complementall youth,
That thinks himself a spruce and expert Courtier,
Bending his supple hammes, kissing his hands,
Honoring Shoostrings, scruing his writhed face
To several postures of affection,
Dancing an entertainment to his friend,
Who would not think it a ridiculous motion?
Yet such there be that very much please themselves
In such like Antique humors. To our own sins
We will be Moles, even to the grossest of 'em:
But in another life we can spy forth
The least of faults, with eyes as sharp as Eagles,
Or the E^idaurean serpent: Now in me,
Where self-love casts not her Egyptian mists,
They find this mis-becoming foppishnesse,
And afterward apply it to themselves:
This ( Satyr) is the use of Mimique Elves.

Trag. Sister let us lay this poor contention by,
And friendly live together, if ^ne womb
Could hold us both, why should we think this room
Too narrow to contain us? On this stage
We Will plead a trial; and in one year contend
Which shall do best: that past, she then that shall
By the most sacred and impartial judgment
Of our Apollo, best deserve the Bays,
Shall hold the entire possession of the place.

Come I were unworthy if I should
Appeal from his tribunal; Be it so:
I doubt not but his censure runs with me;
Never may any thing that is sad and tragical
Dare to approach his presence; let him be
So happy as to think no man is wretched,
Or that there is a thing called misery.

Trag. Such is my prayer, that he may only see,
Not be the subject of a Tragedy!
Sister, a truce till then; that vice may bleed,
Let us join whips together.

Come. It Is agreed.


Mime. Let it be your office to prepare
The Masque which we intended:

Mime. It Is my care.


Exeunt. Flowr. How did she say? a Mass? Brother fly hence*
^ly hence, Idolatry will overtake us.

Rosci. It was a Masque she spoke of, a rude Dance
Presented by the seven deadly sins.

Bird. Still it is a Mass, sister, away, I tell you
It is a Mass, a Mass of vile Idolatry.

Rosci It Is but a simple Dance, brought in to show
The native foulness and deformity
Of our dear sin, and what an ugly guest.
He entertains, admits him to his breast?

Song and Dance.
Say, in a Dance how shall we go,
That never could a measure know!
How shall we sing to please the Scene
That never yet could keep a mean?
Disorder is the Masque we bring,
And discords are the Tunes we sing.
No sound in our harsh ears can find a place
But highest Trebles, or the lowest Base.
Flow. See Brother, if men's hearts and consciences
Had not been seared, and cauterized, how could they
Affect these filthy harbingers of hell!
These Proctors of Beelzebub, Lucifers Hinch-boyes!

Rosc. I pray ye stir your selves within a while.

Exeune. Roscius Solus. And here, unless your favorable mildness
With hope of mercy do encourage us,
Our Author bids us end: he dares not ventur^
Neither what is past, nor that which is to come
Upon his Country, it is so weak, and impotent
It cannot stand a trial; nor dares hope
The benefit of his Clergy; But if rigor
Sit Judge, must of necessity be condemned
To Vulcan or the Sponge: All he can plead
Is a desire of Pardon; for he brings you
No plot at all, but a mere Olla Podrida,
A medly of ill placed, and worse penned humors.
His desire was in single Scenes to show
How Comedy presents each single vice
Ridiculous, whose number as their Character
He borrows from the man to whom he ows
All the poor skill he has, great Aristotle.
Now if you can endure to hear the rest,
You Are welcome; if you cannot, do but tell
Your meaning by some sign, and all farewell*
If you will stay resolve to pardon first;
Our Author will deserve it by offending.
Yet if he miss a Pardon, as in justice
You cannot grant it, though your mercy may,
Still he has this left for a comfort to him,
That he picks forth a subject of his Rhyme
May lose perchance his credit, not his time.

Exit. Finis Actus 1.
ACTVS 2.
SCENA 1.
Roscius. Bird. Flowrdew. Rosc. REceive your places. The first that we present
are the Extremes of a virtue necessary in our Conversation, called Comitas or
Courtesy, which, as all other virtues, has her deviations from the Mean. The
one Colax, that to seem over Courteous falls, into a servile flattery; the
other, (as fools fall into the contraries which they shumic) is Discolus, who
hating to be a slavish Parasite, grows into peevishness and impertinent
distaste.


Flow. I thought you taught two vices for one virtue.


Rosc. So does Philosophy, but the Actors enter*


Colax. Dyscolus. Colax. How far they sin against humanity
That use you thus! Believe me it is a symptom
Of Barbarism, and rudeness, so to vex
A gentle, modest nature as yours is.

Dysco. Why do thou vex me then?


Colax. I? Heaven defend!
My breeding has been better; I vex you!
You that I know so virtuous, just, and wife,
So pious and religious, so admired,
So loved of all?

Dys. Will thou not leave me then
Eternal torture? could your cruelty find
No back but mine that you thought broad enough
To bear the load of all these Epithites?
Pious? Religious? he takes me for a fool.
Virtuous? and just? Sir, did I ever cheat you,
Cozen, or gull you; that you call me just,
And virtuous? I am grown the common scoff
Of all the world; the scoff of all the world!

Colax. The world is grown too vile then.


Dysc. So art thou.
Heaven! I am turn' ridiculous!

Colax. You rediculous?
But it is an impious Age; There was a time,
(And pity it is so good a time had wings
To fly away,) when reverence was paid
To a gray head; 'twas held a sacrilege
Not expiable to deny respect
To one, Sir, of your years and gravity.

Dysc. My years and gravity! Why, how old am I?
I am not rotten yet, or grown so rank
As I should smell oth'grave* O times and manners!
Well Colax, well; go on: ye may abuse me,
Poor dust and ashes, worms meat; years and gravity:
He takes me for a Careasse! what see you
So crazy in me? I have half my teeth*
I see with spectacles, do I not? and can walk too
With the benefit of my staff, mark if I cannot! --
But you sir at your pleasure with years and gravity
Think me decrepit.

Colax. How? Decrepit sir!
I see young roses bud within your cheeks;
And a quick active blood run free and fresh
Thorough your veins.

Dysco. I am turned boy again!
A very stripling schoolboy! have I not
The Itch and kibes? am I not scabb'd and ma^gy
About the wrists and hams?

Colax. Still Dyscolus? --


Dysc. Dyscolus! and why Dyscolus? when were we
Grown so familiar? Dyscolus! by my name
Sure we are Pylades and Orestes! are we not?
Speak good Pylades.

Colax. Nay worthy Sir
Pardon my error, 'twas without intent
Of an offense. I Will find some other name
To call you by --

Dysc. What do you mean to call me?
Fool? Ass? or Knave? my name is not so bad
As that I am ashamed on it.

Colax. Still you take all worse than it was meant,
You are too jealous.

Dysco. Jealous? I have not cause for it, my wifes honest;
Do see my horns? Do? if thou do,
Write Cuckold in my forehead; do, write Cuckol^
With Aquafortis, do. Jealous! I am jealous;
Free of the Company! wife, I am jealous.

Col^x. I mean suspicious.


Dysc. How! suspicious?
For what? for treason, felony, or murder?
Carry me to the Justice: bind me over
For a suspicious person: hang me too
For a suspicious person! O, O, O,
Some courteous plague ceaze me, and free my soul
From this immortal torment! every thing
I meet with, is vexation, and this, this
Is the vexation of vexations,
The Hell of Hells, and Devil of all Devils.

Flow. For pity sake frer not the good old Gentlem^^


Disc. O! have I not yet torments great enough,
But you must add to my a^fliction?
E^ernall s^lence ceaze you!

Co^^^. Sir we strive
To please you, but you still misconstrue us.

Disc. I must be pl^as'd! a very babe, an infant!
I must be pleased! give me some pappe, or plums*
Buy me a rattle, or a hobbyhorse,
To s^^ll me, do! be pleased? would have me get
A Para^ite to be flattered?

Col How? a Parasite?
A cogging, slatt'ring, slavish Parasite?
Things ^ abhor and hate. It Is not the belly
Shall make my brains a captive. Flatterers!
Souls below reason will not stoop so low
As to give up their liberty; only flatterers
Move by another wheel. They have no passion^
Free to themselves. All their affections,
Qualities, humors, appetites, desires,
Nay wishes, vows and pray^rs, discourse and th^ughts
Are but another Bondsman. Let me tugg
At the Turks Galleys; be etern^lly
Damned to a Qu^r^y. In this state my mind
Is free: A flatterer has nor soul nor body;
What shall I say? -- No I applaud your temper,
That in a generous brav^nesse take distaste
At such whose servile nature strives to please you.
It Is royal in you Sir.

Dysc. Ha! what is that?


Colax. A feather stuck upon your cloak.


Dysc. A feather!
And what have you to do with my feath^rs?
Why should you hinder me from t^lling the world
I do not lie on flock-beds?

Colax. Pray be pleased.
I brusht it off for m^er re^p^ct I bare to you.

Dysc. Respect! a fine respect, Sir, is it not,
To make the world believe I nou^ish vermin?
O death, death, death, if that our graves hatch worms
Without tongues to torment us, let 'um have
What teeth they will. I meet not here an object
But adds to my affliction! Sure I am not
A man; I could not then be so rediculous*
My ears are ov^rgrown, I am an Ass;
It is my ears they gaze at. What strange Hearty,
^en^^re or Gorgon am I turned into?
What Circe wrought my M^t^morphosis?
^f I be a beast, she might have m^^e me Lion,
Or something not ridiculous! O (...),
^f I do branch like thee, it is my fortune!
^hy look they on me else? There is within
A glass they say, that has strange qualities in it;
That shall resolve me. I will in to se^
Whether or no, I man or monster be. Exit.

SCEN. 2.
To them Deilus. Aphobus. Bird. Who be these? They look like presumption, and
D^spai^e.


Rosc. And such they are. That is Aphobus, one th^^ out of an impious
confidence fears nothing. The other Dcilus, that from an Atheistical distrust,
shakes at the motion of a reed. These are the extr^ams of Fortitude, the Steers
an even course between overmuch daring, and overmuch fearing.


Flow. Why stays this reprobate Colax?


Rosc. Any vice*
Yields work for flattery.

Flow. A good Doctrine, mark it.


Deil^s. Is it possible? did you not fear it, say you
To me the mere relation is an ague.
Good Aphobus no more such terrible stories;
I would not for a world lie alone to night:
I shall have such strange dreams!

Apho. What can there be
That I should fear? The Gods? If they be good,
It Is sin to fear them; if not good, no Goods;
And then let them fear me. Or are they Devils
That must af^right me?

Deilus. Devils! where good Aphobus?
I thought there was some conjuring abroad,
It Is such a terrible wind! O here it is;
Now it is here again! O still, still, still.

Apho. What Is the matter?


Deilus. Still it follows me!
The thing in black, behind; soon as the Sun
But shines, it haunts me? Gentle spirit leave me!
Cannot you lay him Aphobus: what an ugly looks it has*
With eyes as big as fawcers, nostrils wider
Then Barbers basins!

Apho. It Is nothing Deilus
But your weak fancy, that from every object
Draws arguments of fear. This terrible black thing --

Deil. Where is it Aphobus;


Ppho. -- Is but your shadow Deilus.


Deil. And should we not fear shadows?

Apho. No! why should we?


Deil. Who knows but they come learing after us
To steal away the substance? Watch him Aphobus.

Apho. I nothing fear.


Colax. I do commend your valor,
That fixes your great soul fast as a Center,
Not to be moved with dangers; let slight cock-boats
Be shaken with a wave, while you stand firm
Like an undaunted rock, whose constant hardness
Rebeats the fury of the raging sea,
Dashing it into froth. Base fear does argue
A low degenerate soul.

Deil. Now I fear every thing.


Colax. It Is your discretion. Every thing has danger,
And therefore every thing is to be feared.
I do applaud this wisdom: It Is a symptom
Of wary providence. His too confident rashness
Argues a stupid ignorance in the soul,
A blind and senseless judgment; give me fear
To man the fort, it is such a circumspec^
And wary Sentinel --

Flowrd. Now shame rake thee for
A Luke warm formalist.

Colax. -- But daring valor
Incapable of danger sleeps securly,
And leaves an open entrance to his enemies.

D^il. What are they landed?


Apho. Who?


Deil. The enemies
That Colax talks of.

Apho. If they be I care not;
Though they be Giants all, and armed with thunder*

Deil. Why do you not fear thunder?


Apho. Thunder? no!
No more than squibs and crackers.

Deil. Squibs and crackers?
I hope there be none here! s'lid, squibs and crackers!
The mere Epitomies of the Gun powder Treason,
Faux in a lesser volume.

Apho. Let fools gaze
At bearded stars, it is all one to me
As if they h^d been shaved -- thus, thus would I
Out beard a Meteour, for I might as well
Name it a prodigy when my candle blazes.

Deil. Is there a Comet say you? Nay, I saw it,
It rea^h'd from Paul's to Charing, and portends
Some certain emminent danger to the inhabitants
Twixt those two places: I Will go get a lodging
Out of its influence.

Colax. Will that serve? -- I fear
It threatens general ruin to the Kingdom.

De^l. I Will to some other Country.


Colax. There Is danger to cross the Seas.


Deil. Is there no way, good Colax,
To cross the Sea by Land? O the situation!
The horrible situation of an Island!

Colax. You sir are far above such frivolous thoughts.
You fear not death.

Apho. Not I.


Col. Not sudden death.


Apho. No more than sudden sleeps: Sir I dare dye.


Deil. I dare not; Death to me is terrible:
I will not dye.

Apho. How can you Sir prevent it?


Deil. Why, I will kill my self.


Col. A valiant course;
And the right way to prevent death indeed.
Your spirit is true Roman! -- But yours greater
That fear not death, nor yet the manner o^ it,
Should heaven fall --

Apho. Why, then we should have Larks.


Deil. I shall never eat Larks again while I breath.


Col. Or should the earth yawn like a sepulcher,
And with an open throat swallow you quick?

Apho. T would save me the expenses of a grave.


Deil. I'had rather trouble my Executors by th'half^


Apho. Cannons to me are pot-guns.


Deil. Pot-guns to me
Are Cannons; the report will strike me dead.

Apho. R Rapier's but a bodkin.


Deil. And a bodkin,
It is a most dangerous weapon; since I read
Of Julius Caesar's death, I durst not venture
Into a Tailors shop ^or fe^r of bodkins.

Apho. O that the valiant Giants should again
Rebel against the Gods, and besiege Heaven,
So I might be their leader.

Col. Had Enc^ladu^
Been half so valiant, Jove had been his prisoner.

Apho. Why should we think there be such things as dangers?
Scylla, Charybdis, Python are but fables.
Medcas Bull, and Dragon very tales.
Sea Monsters, serpents, all Poetical figment^.
Nay Hell it self, and Achcron mere inventions,
Or were they true, as they are false, should I be
So timorous as to fear these Bug bear Harpyes,
Medusas, Centaeurs, Gorgons?

Deil. O good Aphobus,
Leave conjuring, or take me into th'circle.
What shall I do good Colax?

Col. Sir walk in,
There is, they say, a Looking-glass, a strange on^
Of admirable virtues, that will render you
Free from enchantments.

Deil. How! a Looking-glass?
Do think I can endure it? why there lies
A man within'^ in ambush to entrap m^.
I did but lift my hand up, and he presently
Caught at it,

Colax. 'Twas the shadow Sir of your self.
Trust me a mere reflection.

Deil. I will trust thee. Exit.


Apho. What Glass is that?


Colax. A trick to fright the Idiot
Out of his wits, a Gl^sse so full of d^ead,
Rendering unto the eye such horrid spectacle^
As would amaze even you. Sir I do thin^
Your optic nerves would shrink in the beholding:
This if your eye endure, I will confess you
The Prince of Eagles.

Apho. Look to it eyes, if ye refuse this sight,
My nayls shall damn you to eternal night. Exit.

Col. Seeing no hope of gain, I pack them hence,
It Is gold gives flattery all her eloquence.

SCENE. 3.
Acolastus. Anaisthetus. Rosci. Temperance is the mediocrity of enjoying
pleasures, when they are present, and a moderate desire of them being absent;
And these are the extremes of that virtue. Acolastus a voluptuous Epicure, that
out of an immoderate, and untamed desire seeks after all pleasures
promiscuously, without respect of honest or lawful. The other Anaisthetus a
mere Anchorite that delights in nothing, not in those legitimate recreations
allowed of by God and nature.


Acolast. O now for an eternity of eating!
Fool was he that wished but a Cranes short neck;
Give me one, nature, long as is a Caqle,
Or sounding-line, and all the way a palate
To taste my meat the longer. I would have
My se^ses feast together; Nature envied us
In giving single pleasures; let me have
My ears, eyes, palate, nose, and touch, at once
Enjoy their h^ppinesse; lay me in a bed
Made of a summers cloud; to my embraces
Give me a Venus hardly yet fifteen,
^resh, plump, and active; she that Mars enjoyed
Is grown too ^tale: And then at the same instant
My touch is pleased, I would delight my sight
With pictures of Diana, and her Nymphs,
Naked, and bathing, drawn by some Apelles;
By them some of our fairest Virgins stand;
That I may see whether it is Art or Nature
Which heightens most my blood and appetite.
Noe cease I here. Give me the seven Orbs
To charm my ears with their celestial lutes,
To which the Angels that do move those spears
Shall sing some amorous ditty; nor yet here
Fix I my bounds; The sun himself shall fire
The Phoenix nest to make me a perfume,
While I do eat the Bird, and eternally
Quaffe of eternal Nectar. These single, are
But torments, but together, O together!
Each is a Paradise. Having got such objects
To please the senses, give me senses too
Fit to receive those objects: Give me therefore
An Eagls eye, a bloud-hounds curious smell,
A Stages quick he^ring, let my feeling be
As subtle as the spiders, and my taste
Sharp as a Squirrils: Then I Will read the Alcoran,
And what delights that promises in future
I Will practice in the present.

Bird. Heathenish Glutton!


Flow. Base belly-God, licentious Libertine!


Anai. And I do think there is no pleasure at all
But in contemning pleasures; Happy Niobe
And blessed Daph^e, and all such as are
Turned stocks and sto^^s* would I were Laurel too,
Or marble, I, or any thing insensible.
It is a toil for me to eat or drink,
Only for natures satisfaction;
Would I could live without it. To my car
Music is but a mandrake. To my smell
Nard sents of rue, and wormwood; And I taste
Nectar with as much loathing, and distaste
As gall, or alloes, or my Doctors potion.
My eye can meet no object but I have it.

Acola. Come brother Stoique be not so melancholy.


Anai. Be not so foolish brother Epicure.


Aco. Come we will go and see a Comedy, that will raise
Thy heavy spirits up.

Anai. A Comedy?
Sure I delight much in those toys; I can
With as much patience hear the Mariners
Chide in a storm.

Aco. Then lets go drink a while.


Anai. It Is too much labor; Happy Tantalu^
That never drinks.

Aco. A little Venery
Shall recreate thy soul.

Ana. Yes like an itch,
For it is no better* I could wish an heir,
But that I cannot take the pains to get one.

Aco. Why, marry, if your conscience be so tender*
As not to do it otherwise; Then it is lawful.

Ana. True Matrimony's nothing else indeed
But fornication licensed, lawful Adultery.
O heavens! how all my senses are wide sluices
To let in discontent and miseries!
How happy are the moles that have no eyes!
How blessed the Adders that have no ears!
They never see nor hear ought that afflicts them.
But happier they that have no sense at all;
That neither see, nor hear, taste, smell, nor fe^l.
Any thing to torment them: souls were given
To torture bodies, man has reason too
To add unto the heap of his distractions.
I can see nothing without sense, and motion,
But I do wish my self transformed into it.

Col. Sir I commend this temperance; your armed soul
Is able to contemn these petty baits,
These flight temptations, which we tittle pleasures;
That are indeed but names; Heaven it self knows
No such like thing; the stars nor eat nor drink,
Nor lie with one another; and you imitate
Those glorious bodies, by which noble abstinence
You gain the names of moderate, chaste, and sober;
While this effeminate gets the infamous terms
Of Glutton, Drunkard, and Adulterer;
Pleasures, that are not man's, as man is man,
But as his nature sympathies with beasts.
You shall be the third Cato. This grave look
And rigid eye-brow will become a Censor.
But I will fit you with an object Sir,
My noble Anaisthetus, that will please you.
It is a Looking-glass, wherein at once
You may see all the dismal groves and caves,
The horrid vaults, dark cells, and barren deserts,
With what in hell it self can dismal be.

Anais. That is indeed a prospect fit for me. Exit.


Acol. He cannot see a stock or stone, but presently
He wishes to be turned to one of those.
I have another humor, I cannot see
A fat voluptuous low with full delight
Wallow in dirt, but I do wish my self
Transformed into that blessed Epicure.
Or when I view the hot salacious sparrow
Renew his pleasures with fresh appetite,
I wish my self that little bird of Love.

Colax. It shows you a man of a soft moving clay*
Not made of flint; Nature has been bountiful
To provide pleasures, and shall we be niggards
At plenteous boards? He Is a discourteous guest
That will observe a diet at a feast.
When nature thought the earth alone too little
To find us meat, and therefore stored the air
With winged creatures, not contented yet,
She made the water fruitful to delight us.
Nay I believe the other Element too
Does nurse some curious dainty for man's food;
If we would use the skill to each the Salamander*
Did she do this to have us eat with temperance?
Or when she gave so many different Odors
Of spices, unguents, and all sorts of flowers,
She cried not -- stop your noses: would she give us
So sweet a quire of winged Musicians
To have us dease? or when she placed us here,
Here in a Paradise, where such pleasing prospects,
So many ravishing colors entice the eye,
Was it to have us wink? when she bestowed
So powerful faces, such commanding beauties
On many glorious Nymphs, was it to say
Be chaste and continent? Not to enjoy
All pleasures, and at full, were to make nature
Guilty of that she never was guilty of,
A vanity in her works.

Acol. A Learned Lecture!
It Is fit such grave and solid arguments
Have their reward -- here -- half of my estate
T'invent a pleasure never tasted yet,
That I may be the first shall make it stale.

Col. Within Sir is a Glass, that by reflection
Does show the image of all sorts of pleasures
That ever yet were acted, more variety
Than Aretincs pictures.

Aco. He see the Jewel;
For though to do most moves my appetite,
I love to see, as well as act delight. Exit.

Bird. These are the things indeed the stage does teach,
Dear heart, what a foul sink of sins run here!

Flow. In sooth it is the common shore of lewdness.


SCEN. 4.
Asotus. Aneleutherus. Rosc. These are Aneleutherus an illiberall Niggardly
usurer, that will sell heaven to purchase ^arth. That his son Asotus a
profuse Prodigal, that will sell earth to buy Hell. The extremes of liberality
which prescribes a mediocrity in the getting and spending of Riches.


Aneleu. Com^ boy, go with me to the Scriveners, go.


Asot. I was in hope you would have said a Bawdy house.


Anel. Thence to the Exchange.


Asot. No, to the Tav^rn Father.


Anel. Be a good husband boy, follow my counsel.


Asot. Your counsel? No dad, take you mine,
And be a good f^llow -- shall we go and roar?
S'lid Father I shall never live to spend.
That you have got already -- Pox of Atturneys,
Merchants, and Scriveners, I would hear you talk
Of Drawers, Punks, and Panders.

Anel. Prodigal child I (...)
Thou do not know the sweets ^f getting wealth.

Asot. Nor you the pleasure that I fake in spending it,
To feed on Caveare, and eat Anchoveal

Anel. Asotus, my dear son, talk not to me
Of your Anchoves, or your Caveare.
No, feed on Widows, have each meal an Orphan
Served to your Table, or a glib^ery heir
With all his lands melted into a morgage.
The Gods themselve ^ feed not on such fine dainties,
Such fatting, thriving diet.

Asot. Trust me Sir,
I am ashamed la -- to call you Father,
Never trust me now. I Am come to be a Gentleman.
One of your havings, and thus cark and car^?
Come, I will send for a whole Coach or two
Of Bank-side Ladies, and we will ^^ Joviall!
Shall the world say you pine and pinch for nothing*
Well do your pleasure, keep me (...) of mon^es*
When you are dead, as dye I hopely (...) must,
He make a shift to spend one half at least
Ere you are coffined and the other half
Ere you are fully laid into your grave
Were not you better help away with some of it
But you will starve your self, that when you are (...)
One -- Have at all of mine may set it flying.
And I will have your Bones cut into Dice,
And make you guilty of the spending of it*
Or I will get a very handsome bowl
Made of your skull, to drink't away in healths.

Anel. That Is not the way to thrive! No, sit and brood
On thy estate, as y^^ it is not hatched
Into maturity.

Asot. Marry I will brood upon it,
And hatch it into chicken, capons, ^ens,
L^^ ^s, thrushes, quails, wood-cocks, ^nites, and phesants,
The best that can be got for love or money.
There is no life to drinking!

Anel. O yes, yes;
Exaction, usury, and oppression.
Twenty in the hundred is a very Nectar.
And will thou, wastful lad, spend in a supper
What I with sweat and labor, care and industry
Have been an age a scraping up together,
No, no Asotus, trust gray-head experience;
As I have been an Ox, a painful Ox,
A diligent, toyling, and laboriou^ Ox
To plow up Gold for thee; so I would have thee --

Asot. Be a fine silly Asle to keep it.


Anel. Be a good watchful Dragon to preserve it.


Colax. Sir, I over heard your wife instructions,
And wonder ^t the gravity of your counsel!
This wild uubridled boy is not yet grown.
Acquainted with the world; he has not felt
The weight of need, that want is vertu's clog;
Of what necessity respect and value
Wealth is, how base and how contemptible.
Poverty makes us. Liberality
In some circumstances may be allowed;
As when it has no end but honesty,
With a respect of person, quantity,
Quality, time, and place; but this profu^e,
Vain, injudicious spending speaks him Idiot:
And yet the best of liberality
Is to be liberal to our selves; and thus
Your wisdom is most liberal, and knows
^ow fond a thing it is for discreet men
To purchase with the loss of their estate
The name of one poo^e virtue, liberality,
And that too only from the mouth of beggars!
One of your judgment would not, I am sure,
Buy all the virtues at so dear a rate.
Nor are you, Sir, I dare presume, so fond
As for to weigh your gains by the strict scale
Of equity, and justice, names invented
To keep us beggars; I would counsel now
Your son to tread no steps but yours, for they
Will certainly direct him the broad way
That leads unto the place where Plenty dwells;
And she shall give him honor.

Anel. Your tongue is powerful:
Pray read this Lecture to my son; I go
To find my Scriv'ner who is gone, I hear,
To a strange Glass wherein all things appear. Exit

Aset. To see if it can show him his lost ears.
Now to your Lecture.

Col. And to such a one
As you will be a willing Pupil ^o,
Think you I meant all that I told your Father?
No, 'twas to blind the eyes of the old Huncks.
I love a man like you that can make much
Of his blessed Genius: Miracle of Charity!
That open hand becomes thee; Let thy Father
Scrape like the Dunghill cock the Dirt, and mire,
To find a precious Gemme for thee, the Chicken
Of the white Hen to wear. It is a wonder
How such a generous branch as you, could spring
From that old root of damned avarice!
For ^very widows house the father swallows,
The son should sp^w a Tavern. How are we
Richer then others not in having much,
But in bestowing;
And that shines glo^ious in you. The chuffs crowns
Imprisoned in his ^^usty chest methinks
J hear groan out, and ^ong till they be thin*
In hope to see the light again. Thou can not
Stand in a flood of Nectar up to the chin
And yet not dare to s^p it; nor can suffer
The Golden Apples dangle at thy lips,
But thou will taste the fruit. 'T is generous this.

Asot. Gramercy thou shall be Doctor of the Chair.
Here -- it is too li^^e, but t'tis all my store,
I Will in to pumpe my Dad, and fetch thee more. Exit.

Colax. How like you now my art? is 't not a subtle ones


Flow. Now out upon thee thou lewd reprobate!
Thou man of sin, and shame, that sowest cushions
Unto the elbowes of iniquity.

Colax. I do commend this zeal; you cannot be
Too fervent in a cause so full of goodness.
There is a general frost has ceased devotion.
And without such like ardent flames as these.
There is no hope to thaw it. The word, Puritan,
Tha^ I do glorify, and esteem reverend,
As the most sanctified, pure, and ^oly Sect
Of all Professors, is by the profane
Used for a name of infamy, a by word, a slander.
That I sooth Vice I do but flatter them,
As we give children plums to learn their prayers,
T^entice them to the truth, and by fair means
Work out their reformation.

Bird. It Is well done.
I hope heel become a brother, and make
A Separatist!

Flow. You shall have the devotions.
Of all the Elders. But this foppishnesse
Is wearisome; J could at our Saint An^^^^s,
Sleeping and all, sit twenty times as long.

Rosc. Go in with me to recreat your s^irits,
(As Music theirs) with some, refreshing song,
Whose patience our rude Scene has h^ld too long.

Exeunt. Finis Actus 2.
ACTS 3
SCEN. 1.
Roscius, Bird, Flowrdew. Bird. J will no more of this abomination.


Rose. The end crowns every action; stay till that.
Just Judge will not Be prejudicate,

Flow. Pray Sir continue still the moralizing


Rose. The next ^e present are the ^^treames of Magnificence, who teaches a
Decorum in great expenses, as Liberality in the lesser: One is Banausus, out of
a me^re ostentation vain-gloriously, exp^nsive; the other Micropre^es one in
glorious works extremely ^ase an^, ^enur^ous.


Banausus. Microprepes. Ban. Being borne not for our selves but for our friends,
(...) country a^^ ou^ glory; it is f^^
We do expre^^e the Majesty o^ our souls
In deeds of bou^^y and magni^^c^nce.

Micro. The world i^ ^ull of va^^^y; and fond fools
Pro^^se ^^emselves a name from building Churches,
Or any thing that ^ends to the Re-publique,
(...) the Re-priva^^ that I study for

Banau. First therefore for the fame of my Re-publique,
I Will imitate a brave Egyptian King,
And plant such store of onions, and of garlike,
As shall maintain^ so many thousand workmen,
To the building of a Pyramid at Saint Albons,
Upon whose to^ I Will set a hand of brass,
With a scrowle in it to show the way to L^nd^n
For th'benefit o^ Travelers.

Colax. Excellent,
It Is charity to direct the wandering Pilgrim.

Micro. I am Ch^rch-warden, and we are this year
To build our steeple up* now to save charges
^'le get a high crowned hat with five Low-bel^
To make a peale shall serve as well as ^ow.

Colax. It Is wisely cast,
And like a careful steward of the Church*
Of which the Steeple is no part, at least.
No necessary.

Bird. Verily it is true
They are but wicked Synagogues where those instr^ments
Of Superstition and Idolatry ring
Warning to sin, and chime all into the Devil.

Banau. And 'cause there be such swar^es of Heresies rising*
I Will have an Artist frame two wond^rous weatherco^h
Of Gold, to set on Paul's, and Gr^^tam Steeple,
To show to all the Kingdom what fashion next
The Wind of Humor ^ither meane^ to blow.

Micro. A Wicker Chair^, will fit them for a Pulpi^.


Colax. It is the Doctrine, Sir, that you respect.


Flow. Insooth I'have h^ard as wholesome instruction^
From a zealous wicker chair, as e're I did
From the carved Idol of wainscot.

Banau. Next, J intend to found an Hospital
For the decayed Pro^essors of the Suburbs,
With a College of Physicians too at Che^sy
Only to study the cure of the French Pox;
That so the sinners may acknowledge m^
Their only benefactor, and repent.

Colax. You have a care Sir of your countries, health


Micro. Then J well s^ll the lead to thatch ^he Chancell.


Ban. J have a rare device to set Dutch windmills
Upon New Market Heath, and Salisbury Plain^,
To draine the Fens.

Colax. The Fens Sir ^re not there.


Ban. But who knows but they may be?


Col. Very right:
You aim at the prevention of a danger.

Micr. A Porters frock shall s^rve me for a surplice.


Flow* ^ndeed a Frock i^ no^ so C^re^^nious.


^an. But the great work in which J me^n to glory,
Js in the raising a Cathedral Church:
It shall be at Hoggs-Nort^n, with a pair^
Of sta^ely Organs; more, then pity 'twere
^he Pigs should lose their skill for want of practice*

Bird. Organs fie on them for a Babylonian Bag-pipes*


Micro. Then for the painting, J be^thinke my self
That J have seen in Mother Red-caps Hall
In painted cloth the story of the Prodigal*

Col. And that will be for very good use and moral.
Sir, you are wise; what serve Egyptian Pyramids*
Ephesian Temples, Babylo^ian Towers,
Carian Colosses. Tr^ians waterworks,
Domitians Amphitheaters, the vain cost
Of ignorance and prodigality?
Rome flourished when her Capitol was thatched,
And all her gods dwelt but in Cottages;
Since Parian marble and Corynthian bras^e
Entered her gaudie Temple, soon she fell,
To superstition, and from thence to ruin,
You see that in our Churches glorious Statues,
Rich Copes, and other ornam^nts of state
Draw^ wandering eyes from their devo^ion.
Unto a wanton gazing, and that other
Rich edifices, and such gorgeous toys
Do more procl^ime our Countrie^ wealth then safety,
And serve but like so many gilded b^its
T'entice a foreign Foe to our invasion.
Go in, there is a Glass will show you, Sir,
What sweet simplicity our Grandsires used,
How in the age of Gold on Church was gilded.

Exit Micre. Banau. O I'have thought on it I will straight way build
A Free-schoole here in London, a free-Schoole
For the education of young Gentlemen
To study how to drink, and take Tobacco*
To swear, to roar, to dice, to d^^^, to quarrel:
Twill be the great Gymnasium of ^^e Realm,
The Frontifte^ium of great Bri^any
And for their better study, I will f^^nish them
With a large Library of Draper's books.

Col. 'Twill put down Bodli^s, and the Vatican.
Royal Banausus! how many Spheres fly you
Above the earthly dull Microp^epes
I hope to live to see you build a S^ewes
Shall out-brave Venice, to rep^ire old Tiburne
And make it Ced^^* This magnificent course
Does purchase you an immortali^e
In them you build your honor to remain
The'example and the wonder of posterity,
While other hide bound Churles do grutch themselves
The Charges of a Tomb.

Ban. But I Will have one
In which I Will lie embalmed with Myrrh and Cassia,
And richer unguents then the AEgytian Kings.
And all that this my precious Tomb may Furnish
The Land with Mummie.

Colax. Yonder is a Glass
Will show you plots and modells of all monuments
Formed the 'old way, you may invent a new,
'Twill make for your more glory.

Ban. Colax, true.


Rosc. These are the extremes of magnanimity Caunus, a fellow so highly
conceited of his own parts, that he thinks no honor above him; the other
Micropsychus, a base and low spirited fellow, that undervaluing his own
qualities dares not aspire to those dignities; that otherwise his merits are
capable of.


SCEN. 2.
Caunus. Micropsychus. Caun. I wonder that I hear no news from Court.


Colax. All hail unto the honorable Caunus.


Caun. The honorable Caunus? It Is decreed
I am a privy Counselor, our new honors
Cannot so alter us as that we can
Forget our Friends; walk with us our familiar.

Mic. It puzles me to think what worth I have,
That they should put so great an honor on me.

Colax. Sir, I do know and see, and so do all
That have not wilful blindness, what rare skill
Of wisdom, policy, judgment, and the rest
Of the state virtues sit within this breast,
As if it were their Parliament; but as yet
I am not, Sir, the happy Messenger
That tells you, you are called unto the Helm;
Or that the Rudder of great Britany
Is put into your hands, that you may steer
Our floating Delos till she be arrived
At the the blessed Port of happiness, and surnamed
The Fortunate Isle from you that are the fortunate.

Cau. It Is strange that I the best experienced
The skilfullest and the rarest of all Carpenters,
Should not be yet a Privy Council our!
Surely the State wants eyes, or has drunk Opium
And sleeps, but when it wakes it cannot choose
But meet the glorious beams of my deferes
Bright as the rising Sun, and say to England,
England, behold thy light!

Micro. Make me a Constable!
Make me that am the simplest of my Neighbors
So great a Magistrate! so powerful an Officer!
I blush at my unworthiness a Constable!
The very Prince of the parish! you are one Sir
Of an ability to discharge it better,
Let me resign to you

Cau. How? I a Constable?
What might I be in your opinion Sir?

Micro. A Carpenter of worship.


Cau. Very well,
And yet you would make me a Constable.
I Will evidently demonstrate that of all men
Your Carpenters are best Statesmen; of all Carpenters
I being the best, am best of Statesmen too:
Imagine, Sir, the Commonwealth a Logge,
Or a rude block of wood, your Statesman comes,
(For by that word I mean a Carpenter)
And with the saw of Policy divides it
Into so many boards or several orders,
Of Prince, Nobility, Gentry, and the other
Inf^riour boards called Vulgar fit for nothing but to make styles, or planks
to be trod over,
Or trampled on: This adds unto the Log
Called Commonwealth at least some small perfection;
But afterward he plains them, and so makes
The Commonwealth, that was before a board,
A pretty Wainscot; some he carves with Titles
Of Lord, or Knight, or Gentleman; some stand plain*
And serve us more for use then Ornament,
We call them Yeomen; (Boards now out of fashion.)
And lest the diproportion break the frame,
He with the pegs of amity and concord,
As with the glew-pot of good Government
Ioynts'e m together, make an absolute edifice
Of the Re-publique, State-skill'd Machiavell
Was certainly a Carpenter; yet you think
A Constable a Gyant-Dignitie.

Micro. Pray Heaven that ^eares like I do not melt
The waxen plumes of my ambition!
Or that from this bright Chariot of the Sun
I fall not headlong down with Phaeton,
I have aspired so high: make me a Constable
That have not yet attained to the Greek tongue!
Why it is his office for to keep the peace,
His Majesty's peace: I am not fit to keep
His Majesty's Hogs. much less his Peace, the best of all his Jewels* How
dare I presume to charge a man in the Kings-Name I faint
Under the burden of so great a place,
Whose weight might press down Atlas: Magistrates
Are only Sump^er-Horses, Nay they threaten me
To make me warden of the Church.
Am I a Patriot? or have I ability
To present Knights-Re^usant, Clergy reelers,
Or Gentlemen Fornica^or^?

Col. You have worth
Richly enameled with a modesty;
And though your lofty merit might sit crowned
On Caucasus or the P^enean mountains
You choose the humbler valley, and had ^athe^
Grow a safe shrub below; then dare the Winds,
And be a Cedar, Si^ you know there is not
Half so much honor in the Pilots place
As danger in the storm, Poor windy Titles
Of Dignity, and Offic^s that puff up
The bubble ride till it swell big and burst,
What are they but brave nothings? Toys called Honor
Make them on whom they ar^ be^tow'd no better
Then glorious slaves, the servants of the Vulgar:
Men sweat at Helm, as much as at the Oar.
Ther^ is a Glass within shall show you, (...)
The vanity of these Silk worms, that do think
They toil (...) ^^^se they ^^in so fine a thr^^d.

Micro. I Will see it. Honor is a babies ra^tle*
And let blind Fo^^une where she will bestow her;
Lay me o^ earth, and I shall fall no lower.

Cau. Colax, what news


Col. The Persian Emperor
Is desp^^^tely sick.

Cau. Heaven take his so^le
When I am the g^and Sophie (^s it is lik^ly
I may be) Colax thou art made for ever,

Col. The i^ ^^ke they say prepares again for Poland.


Cau. And^^ no Easham yet? Sultan repent it!


Col. The State of Venice too is in distraction.


Cau. And can that State be so supinely negligent,
As not to know whom they may choose their Duke?

Col. Our Merchants do report the inhabitants there
Are now in consultation for the settling
The Crown upon a more deserving head
Then his that bears it.

Cau. Then my fortunes rise
On confident wings, and all my hopes fly certain.

Colax. Be bold, thou see the Prester-Iohn.
Well England, of all Countries in the world
Most blind to thy own good. Other Nations
Woo me to take the bridle in my hands
With gifts and presents; had I lived in Rome who durst with Caunus stand a
candidate?
I might have choice of AEdils, Consul, Tribune,
Or the perpetual Dictators place.
I could discharge 'em all, I know my merits
Are large, and boundless: A Caesar might be hewed
Out of a Carpenter, if a skillfull workman.
But undertook it.

Colax. It Is a worthy confidence.
Let Birds of night and shame, with their Owls eyes
Not dare to gaze upon the Sun of Honor;
They are no Presidents for Eagles: Bats,
Like dull Microsychus; things of earth, and lead,
May love a private safety; men in whom
Promotheus has spent much of his stolen fire.
Mount upwards like a flame, and court bright honor
Hedged in with thousand dangers! Wh^ts man
Without desert, and what is desert to him
That does not know he ha^ it? Is he rich
That holds within his house some buried Ch^sts
Of Gold, or Pearl, and knows not where to look them, *
What was the Lodestone, till the use was found,
But a foul doatard on a Fouler Mistress?
I praise your Argus eyes, that not alone
Shoot their beams forwards, but reflect and turn
Back on themselves, and find an object there
More worthy their intentive contemplation:
You are at home no stranger, but are grown
Acquainced with you virtues, and can tell
What use the Pearl is of, which Dunghill cocks
Scrape into dirt again. This searching judgment
Was not intended to work wood, but me^.
Honor attends you. I shall live to see
A Diadem crown that head. There is within
A glaffe that will acquaint you with all places
Of Dignity, Authority and renown,
The State, and carriage of them: Choose the bent,
Such as deserve you, and refuse the rest.

Cau. I go, that want no worth to merit honor;
It Is honor that wants worth to merit me,
Fortune, thou arbitresse of humane things
Thy credit is at stake: if I but rise,
The worlds opinion will conceive thou have eyes.

Exit, SCEN. 3.
Orgylus. Aorgus. Rosc. These are the extremes of meekness. Orgylus an ^gry
quarrelsome man moved with the least shadow, or ap^earance of injury. The other
in desect, Aorgus, a fellow ^ patient, or rather insensible of wrong, that he
is not ca^^ble of the grossest abuse.


^^g. Persuade me not, he has awaked a fury
^^at carries steel about him. Dags, and Pistolls!
To bite his thumb at me

Aor. Why should not any man
Bite his own thumb?

Org. At me 'weare I a sword
To see men bite their thumbs! -- Rapiers and Daggers --
He is the son of a whore.

Aor. That hurts not you.
Had he bit yours, it had been some pretense
To Have moved this anger; he may bite his ow^
And eat it too.

Org. Musets, an Cannons! -- eat it?
If he dare eat it in contempt of me,
He shall eat something else too that rides here;
Iletry his Estridge stomach.

Aor. Sir, be patient


Srg. You lie in your throat, and I will not.


Aor. To what purposeis this impertinent madness^?
Pray be milder.

Org. Your Mother was a whore, and I will not put it up.


Aor. Why should so slight a toy thus trouble you?


Org. Your Father wa^ hanged, and I will be revenged.


Aor. When reason does in equal balance poize
The nature of two injuries, yours to me
Lies heavy, when that other ^vould not turn
An even scale; and yet it moves not me;
My anger is not up.

Org. But I will raise it;
You are a fool!

Aor. I know it, and shall I
Be angry for a truth?

Org. You are besides
An arrant Knave!

Aor. ^o are my better^, Sir.


Org. I cannot move him -- O my spleen -- it rises,
For very anger I could eat my knuckles.

Aor. You may, or bite your thumb, all is one to me:


Org. You are a horned beast, a very Cucko^d,


Aor. It Is my Wives fault, not mine, I have no reason
Then to be angry for another sin.

Org. And I did graft your horns, you might have come
And found us glewd together like two Goats,
And stood a witness to your transformation.

Aor. Why if I had, I am so far from anger
I would have e'ne fallen down upon my knees,
And desired heaven to have forgiven you both.

Org. Your children are all Bastards, not one of them
Upon my Knowledge, of your own begetting.

Aor. Why then I am the more beholding to them
That they will call me father* it was lust
Perchance, that did beget them* but I am s^re
It Is charity to keep the Infants.

Org. Not yet stirre'd?
It Is done of mere contempt, he will not now
Be angry, to express his scorn of me.
It Is above patience this, insufferable.
Proclaim me coward, if I put up this!
Dotard you, will be angery, will you not;

Aor. To see how strange a course fond wrath does (...)
You will be angry 'cause I am not so.

Org. I can endure no longer, if your spleen
Lie in your breech, thus I will kicked it up --

Aor. Alpha. Beta. Gamma. Delta, Epsiton, Zeta, Eta. Theta. Iota. Kappa.
Lambda, Mu. Nu. Xi. O^icron. Pi. To. Sigm^ Tau. Vpsilon. Phi. Chi. Psi. Omega.


Org. How? What contempt is this;


Aor. An antidote
Against the poison, Anger: 'twas prescribed
A Roman Emperor, that on every injury
Repeated the Greek Alphabet, that being done
His anger too was over. This good rule
I learned from him, and Practice.

Org. Not yet angry?
Still will you vex me? I will practice too, ( Kicks again)

Aor. Aleph, Beth, Gimel.


Org. What new Alphabet
Is this?

Aor. The Hebrew Alphabet, that I use
A second remedy.

Org. O my Torment still?
Are not your Buttocks angry with my toes?

Aor. For ought I feel your toes have more occasion
For to be angry with my buttocks.

Org. Well,
I Will try your Physic for the third assault;
And exercise the patience of your nose.

Aor. A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. I. K. L. M. N. O. P. Q. R. S. T. V. W. X. Y. Z.


Org. Are you not angry now?


Aor. Now sir? why now?
Now have you done.

Org. O it is a mere plot this,
To jeer my tamenesse: will no sense of wrong
Waken the Lethargy of a cowards soul?
Will not this rowse her from her dead sleep, nor this*

Aor. Why should I Sir be angry if I suffer
An injury? it is not guilt of mine;
No, let it trouble them, that do the wrong;
Nothing but peace approaches innocence*

Org. A bitterness o'reflows me; my eyes flame,
My blood boyles in me, all my faculties
Of soul and body move in a disorder,
His patience has so tortured me: Sirrah villain
I will! dissect thee with my rapiers point;
Rip up each vein, and ^inew of my storque,
Anatomize him, searching every entraile,
To see if nature, when she made this ass,
This suffering ass, did not forget to give him
Some gall.

Cola. Put it up good Orgylus,
Let him not glory in so brave a death,
As by your hand, it stands not with your honor
To stain your rapier in a cowards blood.
The Lesbian Lions in their noble rage
Will prey on Bulls, or mate the Unicorne;
But trouble not the painted butterfly,
Ants crawle securely by him.

Orgy. It Is intolerable!
Would thou were worth the killing.

Colax. A good wish,
Savouring as well discretion, as bold valor:
Think not of such a baffled asle as this.
More stone, then man* Meedusa's head has turned him.
There is in ants a choler, every fly
Carries a spleen: poor worms being trampled on
Turn ^ayle, as bidding battle to the feet
Of their oppressors. A dead palsy sure
Has struck a desperate numnesse though his soul.
Till it be grown insensible: Mere stupidity
Has seized him: Your more manly soul I find
Is capable of wrong, and like a flint
Throws forth a fire into the strikers eyes.
You bear about you valors wherstone, anger;
Which sets an edge upon the sword, and makes it
Cut with a spirit; you conceive fond patience
Is an injustice to our selves, the suffering
One injury invites a second that,
Calls on a third, till wrong^ do multiply
And reputation bleed. How bravely anger
Becomes that martial Brow, A glass within
Will show you sir when your great spleen does rise
How fury darts a lightning from your eyes.

Org. Learn anger sir against you meet me ne^^,
Never was man like me with patience vexed. Exit.

Aor. I am so far from anger in my self,
That it is my grief I can make others so.

Colax. It proves a sweetness in your disposition,
A gentle winning carriage -- dear Aorgus,
O give me leave to open wide my breast,
And let so rare a friend unto my soul;
Enter, and take possession; such a man
As has no gall, no bitterness, no exceptions;
Whom nature meant a Dove, will keep alive
The flame of amity, where all discourse
Flows innocent, and each free jest is taken.
He Is a good friend will pardon his friends errors;
But he is a better, takes no notice of them.
How like a beast with rude and savage rage
Breathed the distempered soul of Orgylus?
The pronenesse of this passion is the Nurse
That fosters all confusion, ruins states,
Depopulares Cities, lays great Kingdoms waste;
It Is that affection of the mind that wants
The strongest bridle, give it reins it runs
A desperate course, and draggs down reason with it.
It is the whirlewind of the soul, the storm
And tempest of the mind, that raises up
The billows of disturbed passions
To shipwrak Judgment, O -- a soul like yours
Constant in patience! Let the Northern wind meet
The South at Sea, and Zephyrus breath opposite
To Eurus; let the two and thirty sons
Of Eolus break forth at once, to plow
The Ocean, and dispeople all the woods;
Yet here could be a calm; it is not danger
Can make this cheek grow pale, nor injury
Call blood into it. There Is a Glass within
Will let you see your self, and tell you now
How sweet a tamenesse dwells upon your brow.

Aor. Colax, I must believe, and therefore go;
Who is distrustful will be angry too.

SCEN. 4.
Alazon. Eiron Rosc. The next are the extremes of Truth, Alazon one that
arrogates that to himself which is not his; and Eiron, one that out of an itch
to be thought modest dissembles his qualities; the one erring in defending a
falsehood, the other offending in denying a truth.


Alaz. I hear you're wondrous valiant?


Eir. I! alas
Who told you I was valiant

Alaz. The world speaks it.


Eir. She is deceived, but does she speak truly?


Alaz. I am indeed the Hector of the age;
But she calls you Achilles.

Eir. I Achilles!
No, I am not Achilles: I confess
I am no coward. That the world should think
That I am an Achilles yet the world may
Call me what she please.

Alaz. Next to my valor,
(Which but for yours could never hope a second)
Yours is reported.

Eir. I may have my share;
But the last valor showed in Christendom
Was in Lepanto.

Alazon. He might be thought so sir^ by them (...) knew him not;
But I have found him a poor, ^af^l'd snake^)
Sir I have writ him and proclaimed him cowar^
On every post in the City.

Eiron. Who?


Alaz. Lepanto,
The valor sir that you so much renown.

Eir. Lepanto was no man sir, but the place
Made famous by the so much mentioned battle
Batwixt the Turks and Christians.

Al^z. Cry you mercy!
Then the Lepanto that I meant it seems,
Was but Lepanto's namesake. I can
Find that you are well skilled in history.

Eir. Not a whit, A novice, I! I could perchance
Discourse from Adam downward, but what is that
To History? All that I know is only
The Original, continuance, height, and alteration
Of every Common wealth. I have read nothing.
But Plutarch, Livy, Tacitus, Suetonius, Appian, Dion, Iuniu^, Paterculus,
With Flo^^, Iustine, Salust, and some few
More of the Latin: For the modern, I
Have all without book Gallo-Belgicus,
Philip De-Comine, Machiavele, Guic^iardine,
The Turkish and Egyptian Histories,
With those of Spain, France, and the Netherlands.
For England, Polydore Virgill, Cambden, Speed,
And a matter of forty more; nothing
Alas to one that is read in Histories.
In the Greek I have a smack or so, at
Xenophon, Herodotus, Thucydides, and
Stowes Chronicle.

Alaz. Believe me sir, and that
Stowes' Chronicle is very good Greek; you little
Think who writ it! Do you not see him? are
You blind? I am the man.

Eir. Then I must number
You with my best Authors in my Library.

Alaz. Sir the rest too are mine, but that I venture 'em
With other names, to shun the opinion
Of arrogance; so the subtle Cardinal
Calls one book Bellarmine, 'nother Tostatus,
Yet one man's labor both. You talk of numbering;
You cannot choose but hear how loud fame speaks
Of my experience in Arithmetique:
She says you too grow near perfection.

Eir. Far from it I; some in-sight, but no more.
I count the Stars, can give the Total sum,
How many sands there bei'th' sea, but these
Are ^^ifles to the expert, that have studied
Pen keth-ma^s president. Sir, J have no skill
In any thing, if J have any, it is
In languages, but yet in sooth I speak
Only my mother Tongue; I have nor gained
The Hebrew, Chaldee, Synack, or Arabic;
Nor know the Greek with all her Dialects.
Scaliger and Tom Choriate both excel me.
I have no skill in French, Italian, Spanish,
Turkish, Egyptian, Chi^a, Persian Tongues.
Indeed the Latin, I was whipped into;
But Ruscian, Sclavonian, and Dalmatian
With Saxon, Danish, and Albanian speech,
That of the Cossaches, and Hungarian too,
With Biscays, and the prime of languages,
Dutch, Welsh, and Irish are too hard for me
To be familiar in: and yet some think
(But thought is free) that J do speak all these
As J were borne in each; but they may err
That think so; It Is not every Judgment sits
In the infallible chair. To confess truth
All Europ, Asia, and Africa too;
But in America, and the new found world
J very much fear there be some languages
That would go near to puzzle me.

Alaz. Very likely.
You have a pretty pittance in the Tongues,
But Eiron, I am now more general;
I can speak all alike, there is no stronger
Of so remote a nation hears me talk
But confidently calls me Countryman.
The witty world giving my worth her due
Surnames me the Confusion: I but want
An Orator like you to speak my praise.

Eir. Am I an Orator Alazon? no;
Though it has pleased the wiser few to say
Demosthenes was not, so eloquent;
But friends will flatter, and I am not bound
To believe all Hyperboles: something sir
Percha^ce I have, but it is no^ worth the naming,
Especially Alazon in your presence

Alaz. Your modesty Eiron speaks but truth in this.


Colax. I need not flatter these, they will do it themse^ves,
And cross the Proverb that was wont to say.
One Mule does scrub another, here each Ass
Has learned to claw himself.

Alaz. I do surpass
All Ora^ours. How like you my Orations?
Those against Ca^iline, I account them best,
Except my Philippick^; all acknowledge me
Above the three great Orators of Rome*

Eir. What three, Alazon?


Ala. Marcus, Tuttius,
And Cicero, the best of all the three.

Eir. Why those three names are all the selfsame man's


Alaz. Then all is one. Were those three names three men,
I should excel them all. And then for Poetry

Eir. There is no Poetry but Homers I^iads*


Alaz. A less 'twas writ ith nonage of my Muses,
You understand the Italian?

Eir. A little, sir,
I have read Tasso.

Ala. And Torquato t^^?


Eir. They Are still the same*


Ala. J find you very skillful
Eiron, I err only to found your judgment.
You are a Poet too?

Eir. The world may think so,
But it is deceived and I am for^y for it.
But I will tell you sir some excellent verses
Made by a friend of mine; I have not read
A better Epigram of a Neoterique.

Ala. Pray do my eyes the favor, sir, to let me learn 'um.


Eir. Strange sights there late were seen, that did affright
The multitude; the Moon was seen by night,
And Sun appeared by day -- is it not good?

Ala. Excellent good! proceed.


Eir. Without ^e^o^se
Each star and planet kept their wonted course.
What here could fright them? ( mark the answer now)
O sir ask not that;
The Vulga^ ^now not why they fear, nor what.
But in their humors too inconstant be,
Nothing seems strange to them but constancy*
Has not my friend approved himself a Poet?

Alaz. The verses sir are excellent, but your friend
Approves himself a thief.

Eir. Why good Alazon?


Alaz. A Plag^ary, I mean, the verses sir
Were stolen.

Eir. From whom?


Alaz. From me, believed I made 'um.


Eir. They are alas unworthy sir your owning,
Such trifles as my muse had stumbled on
This morning.

Alaz. Nay, they may be yours: I told you
That you come near me sir. Yours they may be.
Good wits may jump: but let me tell you, Eiron,
Your friend must steal them, if he have them.

Col. What pretty Gulls are these? I Will take u^ off.
Alazon, You are learned.

Alaz. I know that.


Col. And virtuous.


Alaz. It Is confessed.


Col. A good Historian.


Alaz. Who dares deny it?


Col. A rare ^rithmetician*


Alaz. IN have heard it often.


Col. I commend your care
That know your virtues, why should modesty^ neighbors
Stop good men's mouths from their own praise? our
Are envious, and will rather blast ^ur memories
With infamy, then immorralize our names;
When same has taken cold, and lost her voice,
We must be our own trumpers; careful men
Will have an Inventorie of their goods,
And why not of their virtues? should you say
You were not wife, it were a sin to truth.
Let Eirons modesty tell bashful lies,
To cloak and masque his parts; he is a fool for it.
It Was heavenly counsel bid us know our selves.
You may be confident, chaunt your own encomiums.
Ring out a Panegyrique to your self;
And your self write the learned Commentary
Of your own actions.

Ala. So I have


Co. Where is it?


Ala. It Is stolen.


Co. I know the thief, they call him C^sar.
Go in good sir, there is within a Glass
That will present you with the Felons face. Exit Alaz.
Eiron, You hear the news?

Eir. No^ I, what is it?


Co. That you are held the only man of Art.


Eir. Is It current Colax?


Col. Current as the air
Every man breathes it for certainty

Eir. This is the first time I heard on it in truth.
Can it be certain? so much charity left
In men's opinion?

Co. You call it charity
Which is their duty: Virtue sir, like yours
Commands ^ens praises. Emptiness and folly,
Such as Alazon is, use their own Tongues,
While real worth hears her own praise, not speaks it.
Other men's mouths become your trumpeters,
And winged fame proclaims you lowdly forth
From East to West, till either pole admire you.
Self praise is bragging, and begets the envy
Of them that hear it, while each man therein
Seems undervalued: You are wisely silent
In your own worth, and therefore 'twere a sin
For others to be so: The fish would lose
Their being mute, ere such a modest worth
Should want a speaker: yet sir I would have you
Know your own virtues, be acquainted with them.

Eir. Why good sir bring me but acquainted with them.


Col. There is a glass within shows you your self
By a reflection; go and speak 'em there.

Eir. I should be glad to see 'em any where. Exit. Eir.


Rosc. Retire your selves again, for these are sights
Made to revive, not burden with delights.

Exeunt omnes. Finis Actus 3.
ACTUS 4.
SCENA 1.
Flowrdew, Bird, Roscious: Bird. My indignation boyleth like a pot,
An over heated pot, still, still it boyleth;
It boyleth, and it bubleth with disdain.

Flow. My Spirit within me too sumeth, I say
Fumeth, and steemeth up, and runs ore
With holy wrath, at these delights of flesh.

Rosc. The Actors beg your silence -- The next virtue whose extremes we
would ^resent, wants a name both in the Greek^ and Latin.


Bird. Wants it a name? it is an unchristian virtue.


Rosc. But they describe i^ such a modesty as directs us in the pursuit, and
refusal of the meanet honors, and so ^^swers to Magnanimity, as Liberality to
Magnificence: But here, that humor of the persons, being a^^eady foresta^^'d;
and no pride n^w so much practiced, or countenanced as that of apparel, let
me present you Philotimia, an overcurious Lady, t^o ^^at in her attire; and
for Aphilotimus, Luparius a^^asty sordid sloven.


Flow. Pride is a vanity worthy the correction.


Philotimia* Luparus. Col^x. Phil. Wh^^ m^le dr^st me to day? O patience!
(maids)
Who would be troubled with these mop-ey'd Chambe^*
There Is a whole hair on this side more then the other,
I am no Lady else! come on you sloven.
Was ever Christian Madam so tormented
To wed a swine as I am? make you ready.

Lup^* I would the Tailor had bin hanged for me.
That first invented cloath^s -- O nature, nature!
More cruel unto man then all thy creatures!
Calves come into the world with doublets on;
And Oxen have no breeches to put off.
The Lamb is borne with her Freez-coat about her:
Hogs go to bed in rest, and are not troubled
With pulling on their Hole and shoos ^ i^ morning
With gartring, girdling, trussing, but^oning,
And a thousand torments that afflict humanity.

Phi. To see her negligence! she has made this cheek
By much too pale, and has forgot to whiren
The natural redness of my nose, she knowesnot
What it is wants dealbation. O fine memory!
If she has not set me in the selfsame teeeh
That I wore yesterday, I am a Jew.
Does she think that I can eat twice with the same,
Or that my mouth stands as the Vulgar does?
What? are you snoring there, you will rise you sluggard,
And make you ready?

Lupa. Rise, and make you ready?
Two works of that, your happy birds make one;
They when they rise are ready. Blessed birds!
They, fortunate creatures! sleep in their own clothes,
And rise with all their feather-beds about them.
Would nakedness were come again in fashion;
I had some hope then when the breasts went bare
Their bodies too would have come to 't in time

Phi. Beshrew her for it, this wrinkle is not filled.
You Will go and wash -- you are a pretty husband!

Lupa. Our Sow never was^^^' yet she has a face
Me thinks as cleanly, Madam, as yours is,
If you durst wear you own.

Co. Madam Superbia,
You're st^dying the Ladies Library,
The Looking-glass; it is Well! so great a beauty
Must have her ornaments. Nature adorns
The Peacocks tail with stars; it is she attires
The Bird of Paradise in all her plumes;
She decks the fields with various flowers; it is she
Spangled the Heavens with all those glorious lights;
She spotted the Exmin's skin; and armed the fi^h
In silver male. But man she sent forth naked
Not that he should remain so, but that he
Endued with reason should adorn himself
With every one of these. The silk worm is
Only man's spinster, else we might suspect
That she esteemed the painted Butterfly
Above her masterpiece. You are the Image
Of that bright godesse, therefore w^are the Jewels
Of all the East; let the red sea be ransacked
To m^ke you glitter, look on Luparus
Your husband there, and see how in a sloven
All the best characters of Divinity,
Not yet worn out in man, are lost and buried.

Philo. I see it to my grief, pray counsel him.


Col. This vanity in your nice Ladies humors
Of being so curious in her toys, and dresses,
Makes me suspicious of her honesty.
'These Cobweb-lawnes catch Spiders Sir, believe it;
You know that clothes do not commend the man,
But it is the living; though this age prefer
A cloak of Plufh, before a brain of art.
You understand what misery it is to have
No worth but that we owe the Draper for;
No doubt you spend the time your Lady loses
In tricking up her body, to cloth the soul.

Lup. To cloth the soul? must the soul too be clothed?
I protest sir, I had rather have no soul
Then be tormented with the clothing of it.

Rosc. To these enter the extremes of modesty, a near kins-woman of the
virtues, Anaiskyntia or Impudence, a bawd, and Kataplectus an over-bashfull
Scholar: where our Author hopes the women will pardon him, if of 4. and 20
vices, be presents but two ( pride and impudence) of their sex.


SCENE. 2
Anaiskyntia. Kataplectus. Philo. Here comes Anaiskyntia too; -- O fates*
Acolastus, and Asotus have sent for me,
And my breath not perfumed yet! Kat. O sweet mother*
Are the Gentlemen there already?

Anais. Come away,
Are you not ashamed to be so bashful? well
If I had thought of this in time, I would
As soon have seen you fairly hanged as sent you
To 'th Universitie.

Phil. What gentleman is that?


Anais. A shamefast Scholar, Madam: look upon her,
Speak to her, or you lose your exhibition
-- You Will speak I hope, wear not away your buttons.

Kata. What should I say?


Anais. Why tell her you are glad
To see her Ladyship in health, nay out with i^
Katap -- Gaudeo'te been valere --

Phil. A pretty Proficient!
What standing is he of in the Universitie?

Anais. He dares not answer to that question, Madam --


Philo. How long have you bin in the Academy?


Katap.. Profecto D^ -- Dom na sum Bac -- Bac -- Bacchalaureus Artium.


Phil. What pity it is he is not impudent!


Anais. Nay all my cost I see is spent in vain;
I having as your Ladyship knows full well,
Good practice in the Suburbs; and by reason
That our Mortality there is very subject
To an infection of the French Disease,
I brought my Nephew up in the Universitie,
Hoping he might (having attained some knowledge)
Save me the charge of keeping a Physician;
But all in vain: he is so bashful, Madam,
He dares not look upon a woman's water.

Colax. Sweet Gentleman proceed in bashfulnesse,
It Is virtues best preserver --

Kata. Recte dicis, sic inquit Aristoteles.


Col. That being gone,
The rest soon follow, and a swarm of vice
Enter the soul; no color but a blush*
Becomes a young man's cheek: pure shamefastness
Is porter to the lips, and ears, that nothing
Might enter, or come out of man, but what
Is good, and modest: Nature strives to hide
The parts of shame, let her, the best of guides,

Katap. Natura dux optima.


Colax. Teach us to do so too in our discourse.


Katap. Gratias tibi ago.


Philo. Inu^e him to speak bawdy.


Anais* A very good way* Kataplectus here is a Lady,
Would hear you speak obscenely.

Katap. Obscenum est, quod intra scenom agi non oport^^


Anais. Off goes your Velvet cap! did I maintain you
To have you disobedient? you will be persuaded?

Katap. Liberis operam dare.


Anais. What Is that in english?


Katap. To do an endeavor for children.


Anais. Some more of this, it may be something one day^


Katap. Communis est omnium animantium conjunction^^ appetitus procreandi
causa.


Phil. Construe me that.


Katap. All creatures have a natural desire, or appe^ret^^ to be joined
together in the lawful bonds of Matrimony that they may have sons and
daughters*


Anais. Your Landresse has bestowed her time but ill.
Why could not this have been in proper terms?
If you should catechize my head, and say,
What is your name, would it not say, a head?
So would my skin conf^sse it self a skin;
Nor any part about me be ashamed
Of his own name, although I catechized
All over. Come good Nephew, let not me
Have any member of my body nicknam'd

Col. Our Stoique, the gravest of Philosophers,
Is just of your opinion, and thus argues;
Is any thing obscene, the filthinesle
Is either grounded in the things themselves,
Or in the words that signify those things;
Not in the things, that would make nature guilty,
Who creates nothing filthy and unclean,
But chaste, and honest; if not in the things,
How in the words, the s^^^^owes of those things
To manure grounds, is a chaste honest term;
Another word that signifies the same,
Unlawful: every man endures to hear,
He got a child; speak plainer and he blushes,
Yet means the same. The Stoique thus disputes,
That would have men to breath as freely down'ward,
As they do upward.

Anais. I commend him Madam,
Unto your Ladyships service, he may mend
With counsel; let him be your Gentleman Usher;
Madam, you may in time bring down his legs
To the just size, now overgrowne with playing
Too much at football*

Philo. So he will prove a Stoique;
I long to have a Stoique strut before me:
Here kiss my hand. Come what is that in Latin?

Katap. Deosculor manum.


Philo. My lip; -- nay sir you must if I command you.


Katap. Osculor te, vel osculor a te.


Philo. His breath smells strong.


Anais. It Is but of Logic, Madam.


Philo. He will come to it one day -- you shall go with me
To see an exquisite glass to dress me by.
Nay go! you must go first; you are too mannerly.
It is the office of your place, so -- on -- Exeunt.

Colax. Slow Luparus rise, or you will be metamorphos'd;
Acteon's fate is immiment.

Lup. Where Is my wife?


Colax. She Is gone with a young Snip, and an old b^wd.


Lup. Then I am cuckolded; If I be, my comfort is
She 'has put me on a cap, that will not trouble me
With pulling off, yet Madam (...) prevent you. Exit.

Rose. The next are the extremes of justice.


SCEN. 3.
Enter Justice Nimis Justice Nihil. Plus and Minus their Clarks. Nim. Plus!


Plus. What says your worship?


Nim. Have my tenant^
That hold their lease of lust here in the suburbs.
By copyhold from me, their Lord in chief, paid their rentcharge?

Plus. They have, and't please your worship;
J, Receiver general gave'em my acquittance.

Parum. Sir I resign my Pen, and, ink-horn to you; shall forget my hand, if I
stay here.
I have not made a Mitimus since I served you,
Were I a reverend Justice as you are,
I would not sit a Cipher on the Bench,
But do as Justice Nimis does, and be
The Dominus-fac-totum of the Sessions.

Nihil. But I will be a Dominus-fac-misericordiam
Instead of your Totums: People shall not wish
To see my spurs filled off, i^t does me good
To take a merciful nap upon the Bench,
Where I so sweetly dream of being pitiful
I wake the better for it.

Nim. The yearly value
Of my fair manor of Clerken-well, is pounds
So many -- besides New Years capons, the Lordship
Of Turnball so -- which with my Pick ha^ch grange
And Shoreditch farm, and other premises
Adjoining -- very good, a pretty maintenance
To keep a Justice of Peac^, and Coram too;
Besides the fines I take of young beginners,
With harriots of all such as due, quatenus whores,
And ruined bawds, with all Amercements due
To such as hunt in Purly, this is something,
With mine own Game reserved

Plus. Besides a pretty pittance too for me,
That am your worships Bailey.

Parum. Will It please your worship sit, to hear the Catalogue
Of such offenders, as are brought before you?

Nihil. It does not please me, Sir, to hear of any
That do offend; I would the world were innocent.
Yet to express my mercy you may read them.

Par. First here is one accused for Cutting a purse


Nihil. Accused? is that enough? if it be guilt
To be accused, who shall be innocent?
Discharge him Parum.

Parum. Here Is another brought
For the same fact, taken in the very Action.

Nihil. Alas it was for need, bid him take warning,
And so discharge him too; It Is the first time.

Nimis. Plus, say, what hopes of gain brings this days sin?


Plus. Anaiskyntia Sir was at door
Brought by the Constable.

Nimis. Set the Constable by the heels. he is at certain with us.


Plus. Then there is Intemperance the bawd.


Nim. A tenant too.


Plus. With the young Lady, Madam Incontinence.


Nim. Search over my Doomes-day book; is not she Plus
One of my last Compounders?

Plus. I remember it.
Then there is jumping Jude, Heroique Doll,
With bouncing Nan, and Cis, your worship's sinner.

Nim. All Subsidy women, go free'em all.


Parum. Sir, here is a known offender: one that has
Been stockt, and whipped innumerable times,
Has suffered Bridewell often; not a Jayle
But hee'^ familiar with, burnt in the hand,
Forehead, and shoulder; both his ears cut off,
With his nose slir, what shall I do with him?

Nihl. So often punsh* d*nay, if no correction
Will serve his turn; even let him run his course.

Plus Here Is Mistress Frailty too, the waiting woman.


Nim. For what offense?


Plus. A sin of weakness too


Nim. Let her be strongly whipped.


Plus. An't please your worship
She has a noble man's letter.

Nim. Tell her, Plus, she must
Have the Kings Picture too.

Plus. Besides
Sh'has promised me J should examine her
Above in the garret.

Nim. What'ts all that to me?


Plus. And she entreats your worship to accept --


Nim. Nay, if she can entreat in English, Plus,
Say she is injured.

Par. Sir here is Snip the Tailor.
Charged with a riot.
Nihil, Parum, let him go,
He is our Neighbor.

Parum. Then there is a stranger for quarrelling.


Nihil. A stranger! O it is pity
To hurt a stranger, we may be all strangers,
And would be glad to find some mercy, Parum.

Plus. Sir here is a Gentlewoman of S. Ioanes is
Charged with dishonesty,

Nim. With dishonesty?
Severity will amend per, and yet Plus
Ask her a question, if she will be honest?

Plus And here is a cobblers wife brought for a scold.


Nim. Tell her of cooking-stooles, tell her there be
Oyster queanes, with Orange women,
Carts and coaches store, to make a noise,
Yet if she can speak English,
We may suppose her silent,

Par. Here Is a Batchelour
And a Citizens wife for flat Adultery,
What will you do with them?

Nih. A Citizens wife!
Perchance her husband is grown impotent,
And who can blame her then?

Par. Yet I hope you will bind over the Batchelour.


Nih. No enquire
First if he have no wife, for if the Batchelour
Have not a wife of his own, 'twas but frailty;
And Justice counts it venial.

Plus. Here Is one Adicus,
And Sophron, that do mutually accuse
Each other of flat selony!

Nim. Of the two which is the richer?


Plus. Adicus is the richer.


Nim. Then Sophron is the thief.


Plus. Here is withal
P^nourgus come with one called Prodote^
Lay treason Sir to one another charge
Panourgus is the richer.

Nim. He Is the Traitor then.


Plus. How Sir? the richer?


Nim. Thou art ign^rant Plus;
We must do some injustice for our credit,
Not all for gain.

Plus. Eutr^peles complains Sir,
^omolochus has abused him.

Nim. Send Eutrapeles to the Jaile.


Plus. It is Eutrapeles that complains Sir.


Nim. Tell him we are pleased to think 'twas he offended.
will must be law: were not for Summum Ius,
How could the land subsist?

Colax. I, or the Justices
Maintain themselves -- go on -- The Land wants such
As dare with rigor execute her Laws:
Her festred members must be lane'^ and tented
He Is a bad Surgeon, that for pity spares
The part corrupted, 'til the Grangrene spread
And all the body perish; he that is merciful
Unto the bad, is cruel to the good.
The Pillory must cure the ears disease;
The stocks the foots offenses; let the back
Bear her own sin, and her rank blood purge forth
By the Phlebotomy of a whipping post:
And yet the secret, and purse-punishment
Is held the wiser course; because at once
It helps the virtuous and corrects the vicious
Let not the sword of Justice sleep, and rust
Within her Velvet sheath; preserve her edge,
And keep it sharp with cutting, Use must whet her
Tame mercy is the breast that suckles vice,
Till Hydra-like she multiply her heads.
Tread you on sin, squeeze out the Serpents brains,
All you can find ^ for some have lurking holes
Where they lie hid. But there is within a glass
Will show you every close offenders face,

Nim. Come Plus let'ts go in to find out th^se concealements;
We will grow rich, and purchase honor thus --
I mean to be a Baron of Summum Ius. Exit. Ni. Plus.

Parum. You are the strangest man, you will ackn^wledge
None for offenders, here is one apprehended
For murder.

Nihil. How!


Par. He killed a man last night.


Nih. How cam't to pass?


Par. Upon a falling out.


Nih. They shall be friends, I Will reconcile 'em, Parum.


Par. One of them is dead.


Nih. is he not buried yet?


Par. No Sir.


Nih. Why then I say they shall shake hands.


Col. As you have done
With Cl^mency, most Reverend Justice Nihil;
A gentle mildness thrones it self within you,
Your worship would have justice use her balance
More then her sword; nor can you endure to dye
The robe she wears, deep scarlet, in the blood
Of poor offenders: How many men has ^igour
By her too hasty, and severe proceedings
Prevented from amen^ment, that perchance
Might have turned honest and have proved good Christians
Should Jove not spare his thunder, but as often
Discharge at us, as we dart sins at him,
Earth would want men, and ^he himself want arms,
And yet tire Vulcan, and P^racmon too.
You imitate the Godsland he sins less
Strikes not at all, then he strikes once amiss.
I would not have justice too falcon-eyed;
Sometimes a wilfull-blindnesse much becomes her;
As when upon the bench she sleeps and winks
At the transgressions of Mortality:
In which most merciful posture I have seen
Your pitiful Wor^hip snorting out pardons
To the despairing sinner, there is within
A mirror sir like you! go^ see your face
How like Astreas it is in her own Glass

Par* And I Will petition Justice Nimi's Clerk
To admit me for his under Officer. Exeunt.

SCEN. 4.
Agroicus. Rosc. This is Agroicus, a rustique clownish fellow, whose discourse
is all Country; a^ extreme of urbanity, whereby you may observe there is a
virtue in jesting.


Agro. They talk of witty discourse and fine conceits, and I ken not what a
deal of prittle prattle, would make a Cat piss to hear 'em. Cannot they be
content with their Grandams English? They think they talk learnedly, when I
had rather hear our brindled curre howl, or Sow grunt. They must be breaking
of jests with a murrain, when I had as live hear 'em break wind Sir
reverence. My zonne Dick is a pretty bookish Scholar of his ago, God bless
him; he can write and read, and makes bonds and bills, and hoblig^tions God
save all. But by'r Lady, if I wotted it would make him such a Jacksawce, as to
have more wit then his vore-vath^rs, he should have learned nothing for old
Agroicus, but to keep a tally. There is a new trade lately come up to be a
vocation, I wis not what; they call 'em -- Boets, a new name for beggars I
think, since the statute against Gypsies. I would not have my zonne Dick one
of those Boets for the best Pig in my stye by the mackins: Boets? Heaven shield
him, and zend him to be a good Varmer; if he can cry ^y, ho, gee, hut, gee, ho,
it is better I trow then bring a Boet. Boets? I had rather zee him remitted to
the Jayle, and have his twelve God-vathers, good men and true contemn him to
the Gallows, and there see him vairely persecuted. There is a Bom^lchus one of
the Boets, now a bots ache all the red-nose tribe of 'em for Agroicus! he does
so abuse his betters! well 'twas a good world, when I virst held the plow!


Col. They cared not then so much for speaking well
As to mean honest; and in you still lives
The good simplicity of the former times:
When to do well was Rhetorique, not to talk.
The tongue-disease of Court spreads her infections
Through the whole Kingdom; flattery, that was wont
To be confined within the verge, is now
Grown Epidemicall, for all our thoughts
Are borne between our lips: The heart is made
A stranger to the tongue; as if it used
A language that she never understood.
What is it to be witty in these days,
But to be bawdy, or profane? at least
A busy? Wit is grown a petulant waspe,
And stings she knows not whom, not where, nor why;
Spues Vinegar, and gall on all she meets
Without distinction, buys laughter with the loss
Of reputation, Father, Kinsman, Friend;
Hunts Ord'naries only to deliver
The idle Timpanies of a windy brain;
That beats and throbs above the pain of childbed,
Till every care she meets be made a Midwife
To her light Ba^^ard issue; how many times
Bomolochus sides, and shoulders ache, and groan!
H^'s so witty -- here he comes -- away --

Agro. His wit is dangerous, and I dare not stay. Exit.


SCEN. 5.
Bomolochus. Rosc. This is the other extreme of urbanity; Bomolochus a fellow
conceited of his own wit, though indeed it be nothing but the ^ase dregs of
scandal, and a lump of most vile and loathsome scurrility.


Bird. I, this is he we looked for all the while!
Scurrility, here she hat^ her impious throne,
Here lies her heathenish dominion,
I^ this most impious cell of corruption;
For it is a Purgatory, a mere Lymbo,
Where the black Devil and his dam Scurrili^y
Do rule the roast, foul Princes of the air*
Scurrility! That is he that throws scandals,
Sows, and throws scandalls, as 'twere dirt
Even in the Face of holiness, and devotion.
His presence is cont^gious, like a dragon
He belches poison forth, poison of the pit,
Brimstone, hellish and sulphurous poison;
I will not stay, but fly as far as zeal.
Can hurry me -- the roof will fall and brain me,
If I endure to hear his blasphemies,
His graceless blasphemies.

Rosc. He shall vent none here;
But stay, and see how justly we have used him,

Flow. Stay brother, I do find the spirit grow strong.


Col. Hail sacred wit! -- Earth breeds not B^yes enough
To crown thy spacious merit.

Bomo. Oh -- Oh -- Oh --


Col. Cratinus, Eupolis, Aristophanes,
Or whatsoever other wit did give
Old Comedies the reins, and let her loose
To stigmatize what brow she pleased with slander
Of people, Prince, Nobility -- All must yield
To this triumphant brain.

Bomo. Oh -- Oh -- Oh --


Col. They say you will lose a friend before a jest,
It Is true, there is not a jest that comes from you,
That is the true Minerva of this brain,
But is of greater value then a world
Of friends, were every pair of men we meet
A Pylades and Orestes.

Bomo. Oh -- Oh -- Oh --


Col. Some say you will abuse your Father too,
Rather than lose the opinion of your wit;
Who would not that has such a wit as yours?
'Twere better twenty Parents were exposed
To scorn and la^ghter, then the simplest thought
Or least conceit of yours, should dye abortive,
Or perish a brain Embrio.

Bomo. Oh -- Oh -- Oh --


Col. How Is this? that tongue grown sile^t that Sirens
S^ood still to admire?

Bomo. Oh -- Oh -- Oh --


Col. Twere better that the spheres should lose their harmony,
And all the Chorister^ of the wood grow hoarse:
What Wolf has spied you first!

Bomo. Oh -- Oh -- Oh --


Col. Sure H^^mes envying that there was on earth
An eloquence more than his, has struck you dumb!
Malicious deity!

Bomo. Oh -- Oh -- Oh --


Cola. Go in sir, there is a Glass that will restore
That tongue, whose sweetness Angels might adore.

Bomo. Oh -- oh -- oh -- oh -- oh -- oh -- oh --


Rosc. Thus Sir you see how we have put a gagge
In the licentious mouth of base scurrility;
He shall not Ibis-like purge upward here,
T'infect the place with pestilentiall breath;
We Will keep him tongue-tide; you, and all, I promise
By Phoebus and his daughters, whose chaste zones
Were never yet by impure hands unti^d;
Our language shall flow chaste, nothing sounds here
That can give just offense to a strict ear.

Bird. This gagg has wrought my good opinion of you.


Flow. I begin to think 'em lawful recreations.


Colax. Now there is none left here, whereon to practice,
I Will flatter my dear self -- O that my skill
Had but a body, that I might embrace it!
Kiss it, and hug it, and beget a brood,
Another brood of pretty skills upon it!
Were I divided I would hate all beauties,
And grow enamored with my other half!
Self-love, Narciss^us, had not been a faul^,
Had thou, instead of such a beauteous face,
Had but a brain like mine: I can gild vice,
And praise it into Alchymie, till it go
For perfect gold, and cozen almost the touchstone,
I can persuade a toad into an Ox,
Till swelled too big with my Hyperboles
She burst asunder, and it is ver^u^s name
Lends me a mask to scandalize her self.
Vice, if it be no more, can nothing do:
That art is great makes virtue guilty too.
I have such strange varieties of colors,
Such shifts of shapes, blew P^oteus sure begot me
On a Cameleon, and I change so quick
That I suspect my mother did conceive me,
As they say Mares do, on some wind or other.
I Will peep to see how many fools I made
Wi^h a report of a miraculous glass.
-- Heaven bless me, I am ruined! O my brain
Witty to my undoing! I have jested
My self to an ^ternall misery,
I see lean hunger with her meager face
Ride Post to overtake me, I do prophecy
A Lent immortal; Phoebus I could curse
Thee and thy brittle gifts; Pandora's box
Compared with this might be esteemed a blessing.
The Glass which I conceived a fabulous humor,
Is to the height of wonder proved a truth,
The two extremes of every ver^u^ there
Beholding how they either did exceed,
Or want of just proportion, joy^d together,
And are reduced into a perfect Mean:
As when the skillful and deep learned Physician
Does take too different poisons, one that's cold,
The other in the same degree of heat,
And blends them both to make an Antidote;
Or as the Lutanist takes Flats and sharp^,
And out of those so dissonant notes, does strike
A ravishing Harmony. Now there is no vice
It Is a hard world for Colax: what shift now?
Dyscolus does expect me -- since this age
Is grown too wise to entertain a Parasite,
I Will to the Glass, and there turn virtuous too,
Still strive to please, though not to flatter you.

Bird. There is good use indeed-la to be made
From their Conversion.

Flow. Very good insooth -- la
And edifying.

Rosc. Give your eyes some respite.
You know already what our Vices be,
In the next Act you shall our virtues see.

Exeunt. ACTUS 5.
SCEN. 1.
Roscius, Flowrdew. Bird. Flow. Now verily I find the devour Be
May suck the honey of good Doctrine thence,
And bear it to the hive of her pure family,
Whence the profane and irreligious spider
Gathers her impious Venom! I have picked
Out of the Garden of this play a good
And wholesome salad of instruction!
What do you next present?

Rosc. The several virtues.


Bird. I hope there be no Cardinal Virtues there!


Rosc. There be not.


Bird. Then I Will stay, I hate a virtue
That will be made a Cardinal: Cardinall-vertues,
Next to Pope-vertues are most impious.
Bishop-vertues are unwarrantable
I hate a virtue in a Morris dance.
I will allow of none but Deacon-vertues,
Or Elder-vertues.

Rosc. Those are Morall-vertues.


Bird. Are they lay-vertues?


Rosc. Yes!


Bird. Then they are lawful,
Virtues in Orders are unsanctified.

Rosc. We do present them royal, as they are
In all their state, in a full dance.

Bird. What dance?
No wanton Jig I hope, no dance is lawful
But Prinkum Prankum!

Flow. Will virtues dance?
O vile, absurd, Maypole -- Maid-Marrian virtue!

Rosc. Dancing is lawful, etc.


Flourish. Enter Mediocritie. Flow. Who Is this?


Rosc. It is the Mother of virtues.


Flow. Mother of Pearl^ I think she is so gaudy,


Rosc. It is the golden Mediocritie.


Flow. She looks like the Idol of Cheap Side*


Mediocritie. Med. I am that even course that must be kept
To shun two dangerous gulfes; the middle tract
'Twixt Scylla and Charybdis; the small Isthmus
That suffers not the AEgean tide to meet
The violent rage of the Ionian wave.
I am a bridge over an impetuous sea;
Free, and safe passage to the wary step:
But he whose wantonness, or folly dares
Decline to either side, falls desperate
Into a certain ruin, -- Dwell with me,
Whose mansion is not placed so near the Sun,
As to complain of's neighborhood, and be scorched
With his directer beams: nor so remote
From his bright ra^es as to be situate
Under the Icy Pole of the cold Bear;
But in a temperate zone: it is I am she,
I am the golden Mediocritie:
The labor of whose womb are all the virtues,
And every passion too commendable:
Sisters so like themselves, as if they were
All but one birth; no difference to distinguish them
But a respect they bear to several objects:
^lse had their names been on^ as are their features*
So when eleven fair Virgins of a blood,
All Sisters, and alike grown ripe of years,
Match into several houses, from each family,
Each makes a name distinct, and all are different:
They are not of complexion red or pale,
But a sweet mixture of the flesh and blood*
As if both roses were confounded there.
Their stature neither Dwarf nor Gyantish,
But in a comely well disposed proportion*
And all so like their Mot^er, that indeed
They are all mine* and I am each of them.
When in the midst of dangers I stand up
A wary confidence betwi^t fear and daring*
Not so ungodly bold, as not to be
Fearful of heaven's just anger when she speaks
In prodigies, and tremble at the hazard
Of my Religion, shake to see my Country
Thr^at^ed with fire and sword, by a stark coward
To any thing may blast my reputation:
But I can scorn the worst of poverty,
Sickness, Captivity, Banishment, Grim death,
If she dare meet me in the bed of honor;
Where, with my countries cause upon my sword
Not edged with hope or anger, nor made bold
With civil blood, or customary danger*
Nor the fools whetstone, in experience;
I can throw valor as a lightning from me,
And then I am the Amazon fortitude!
Give me the moderate cup of lawful pleasures,
And I am Temperance Take me wealths just st^ward,
And call me: Liberality; with one hand
I Will gather riches home, and with the other
Rightly distibute them, and there observe
The persons, quantity, quality, time and place:
And if in great expenses J be set
Chief Arbitresse, I can in glorious work^,
As raising Temples, Statues, Altars, Shrines,
Vestures, and ornaments to Religion, be
Neither too thrifty nor too prodigal.
And to my country the like mean observe,
In building Ships, and Bulwarks, Castles, walls,
Conduits, Theaters, and what else may serve her
For use or ornament: and at home be royal
In buildings, Gardens, costly furniture,
In entertainments free and hospitable,
With a respect to my estate, and means,
And then I may be named Magnificence;
As Magnanimity, when I wisely aim
At greatest honors, if I may deserve'm,
Not for ambition, but for my countries good,
And in that virtue all the rest do dwell.
In lesser dignities I want a name;
And when ^ am not over patient,
To put up such gross wrongs as call me coward,
But can be angry, yet in that observe
What cause has moved my anger, and with whom*
Look that it be not sudden, nor too thirsty
Of a revenge, nor violent, nor greater
Then the off^nce, know my time when, where
I must be angry, and how long remain so;
Then, then you may firname me Mansuetude.
When in my carriage and discourse I keep
The mean that neither f^atters nor offends,
I am that virtue the well nurtured Court
Gives name and should do being -- Courtesy.
Twixt fly dissembling and proud arrogance
I am the Virtue Time calls daughter, Truth.
Give me my sword and balance rightly swayd,
And Justice is the Title I deserve.
When on thi^ stage I come with innocent wit,
And j^sts that have more of the salt then gall.
That move the laughter and delight of all*
Without the grief of one; free, chaste conceits,
Not scurril, bafe, obscene, illiberall,
Or contumelious slandyrs, I am then
The virtue they have termed, V^banity:
To whom if your least, countenance may appear
She vows to make her constant dwelling here.
My daughters now are come.

The Song. SCEN. 2*
The Masque, wherein all the Virtues dance together. Medi^c. You have seen all
my daughters, Gentlemen*
Choose you wives hence; you that are Batchelours
Can find no better; and the married too
May wed'em, yet not wrong their former wives*
Two may have the same wife, and the same man
May wed two Virtues, yet no Bigamie;
He that weds most is chastest* These are all
The daughters of my womb; I have five more,
The happy issue of my intellect
And thence syrnam'd the intellectual Virtues
They now attend not on their Mothers train,
We hope they Act in each ^pectator^ ^raine.
I have a Niece besides a beauteous one
My daughters dear companion -- lovely Friendship
A^ Royal nymph; her we present not too,
It is a virtue we expect from you.

Exit cum Cho^o cantantium. SCEN. 3.
Bird. O Sister what a glorious train they be


Flow. They s^em to me the Family of love,
But is there such a Glass, good Roscius?

Rosc. There is! sent hither by the great Apollo
Who in the worlds l^r^ght eye and ev^ry day
^et in this Car of light, sur vaies the earth
From East to Wests who finding every plac^
Fruitful in nothingbut fantastique follies*
And most ridiculous humors, as he i^
The God of Physic, thought it apper^ain'd
To him to find a cure to purge the eart^
Of ignorance and sin, two grand diseases,
And now grown Epidemicall: many Receipts
He thought upon, as to have planted H^llebore
In every Garden -- But none pleased like this.
He takes out water from the Muses spring,
And sends it to the North, there to be freez'd
Into a Crystal -- That being done, he make^,
A Mirror with it: and instills thi^ virtue,
That it should by reflection show each man
All his deformities both of soul and body,
And cure'em both --

Flow. Good Brother lets go see it!
Saints may want something of perfection.

Rosc. The Glass is but of one days continuance
For Pluto, thinking if it should cur^ all,
His Kingdom would grow empty (for ti 's ^in
That peoples hell) went to the fates and bid'em
Spin it too short a thread; (for every thing
As well as man is measured by their spindle.)
They, as they must obey, gave it a thread
No longer then the Beasts of Hyppanis
That in one day is spun, drawn out, and cut.
But Phoebus to require the black Gods envy,
Will, when the Glas^e is broke, transfuse her virtue
To live in Com^edie -- If you mean to see it,
Make haste --

Flow. We will go post to reformation. Exeunt.


Rosc. Nor is the Glass of so short li^e I fear
As this poor labor -- our distrustful Author
Think^ the same Sun that rose upon her cradle
Will hardly set before her funeral:
Your gracious and kind acceptance may
Keep her alive from death, or when she is dead;
Raise her again, and spin her a new thread.

SCEN. 4.
Enter Flowrdew and Bird. Flow. This ignorance even makes Religion sin,
Sets zeal upon the rack, and stretches her
Beyond her length -- Most blessed Looking-glass
That did instruct my blinded eyes to day,
I might have gone to hell the Narrow way!

Bird. Hereafter I will visit Comoedies*
And see them often, they are good exercises! --
I Will teach devotion now a milder temper,
No^ that it shall lose any of her heat
Or Purity* but henceforth shall be such Exeunt.
As shall burn bright, although not blaze so much.

EPILOGVS. Roscius solus.
Y' Have seen The Muses Looking-glass, Ladies fair,
And Gentle youths; and others too who ere
Have filled this Orb: it is the end we mean^
Your selves unto your selves still to present
A soldier; shall himself in Hector see,
Grave Councillors, Nestor, view themselves in thee
When Lucrece Part shall on our Stage appear,
Every chaste Lady sees her shadow there.
Nay come who will, for our indifferent G^asses
Will show both sooles, and knaves, and all their fates,
To vex and cure them: But we need not fear,
We do not doubt but each one now that is here,
That has a fair soul and a Beauteous face,
Will visit often the Muses Looking-glass.
FINIS.

