A SERMON PREACHED To the Honorable HOUSE OF COMMONS: At their late Solemn
Fast, Wednesday, Jan. 31. 1644.

BY SAMUEL RUTHERFURD, Professor of Divinity in the University of S. Andrews.

EXODUS 3. 2. And he looked, and behold, the Bush burned with fire, and the
Bush was not consumed. Published by Order of the House of Commons.

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1644.

Die Mercurii 31. Ianuar. 1644.
IT is this day ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Mr. Rous
do from this House give thanks unto Mr. Rutherfurd, for the great pains he
took in the Sermon he preached this day (at the entreaty of the said Commons)
at S. Margarets Westminster, it being the day of public Humiliation, and to
desire him to print his Sermon. And it is ordered that none presume to print
his Sermon without authority under the handwriting of the said Mr. Rutherfurd.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint Richard Whittaker, and Andrew Crook, to print my Sermon.

Samuel Rutherfurd.

To the Christian Reader.
WHether time or the fashion has obtained of me (worthy Reader) that this
Sermon should come under the providence of your favorable judgment and
Candor, I can hardly determine: But you have it as it is, only I shall
heartily desire, in reviewing of it, your serious thoughts in these ensuing
considerations.

1. What I speak here of God and his excellency, is but a shadow to the
expressions of others; and what others can say, men or Angels, is but a short
and rude shadow of that infinite All, the High Jehovah, Creator of Heaven and
Earth: so my thoughts come forth as shadows of shadows, for there behoved to be
much honey in the Ink, much of Heaven in the breast, much of God in the Pen of
any who speaks of such a transcendent subject; yet if these do affect you, it
is possible I say more, if not, I shall desire not to spill the Lords highest
praises with my low-creeping under-expressions. 2. Concerning Gods dispensation
now in Britain, and his Churches condition; I shall be your debtor, in all
humble modesty, to beg these thoughts to go along with God. As 1. Let the Lord
have a charitable sense and good construction of his most wise dispensation,
that he who has his fire in Zion, Esa* 31. 9.
and his furnace in Jerusalem, sees good that Christ's Cross should be the
Church of Christ's birthright, and that a life-rent of afflictions, is a surer
way for Zion, then Summer-dayes. 2. You are not to stumble that God All-wise
providence a School-Probleme, Jer. 9. 21.
nor asks, Why is our Zion builded, with carcasses of men, in two kingdoms,
fallen, as dung in the open field, and as the handful after the harvest man?
Why is the wall of the daughter of Zion sprinkled with blood? One thing* I
know, It is better to believe, then to dispute; and to adore, then to plead
with him who gives not account of his matters. 3. Innocence the joy of the
hypocrite. 4. Christ's Church can neither shift nor adjourne such a share of
affliction, as is written in Gods book. It is a standing and a current court
which has decreed what grains of Gall and Wormwood England must drink; what
a cup is prepared for Scotland; and the Balance of wisdom has weighed by
ounce weights, how much Ireland. 5. You know it is generally the condition of
the Church, if she have any Summer, that it is but a good day betwixt two
Fevers; Heaven, heaven is the home Bride, the Lambs wife. 6. It is much better
to be afflicted, then to be guilty; and that the Church may have pardon, which
is more precious then gold, can bid the devil do his worst, and that the
patience of the Saints can out-weary the malice of Babylon or Babel, on whose
skirts is found blood of the Saints. 8 That it is now and ever true, as when a
hungry man dreameth, Esa. 29. 8.
and behold he eats, but he awaketh and his soul is empty; or, as when a
thirsty man drinks, but he awaketh, and behold he (is) faint, so shall the
multitude of all nations be that 9. Vengeance is gone out from the Lord against
those who feast upon Zions tears, Ezech. 28. 9.
and they must die the death of the uncircumcised, Ezech. 25 6.
who clapped their hands, and stamped with the feet, and rejoiced in heart with
all their despite against the land of 10. They are in no better condition who
refuse to help the Lord against the mighty, and whose heart is as a stone and a
piece of dead flesh, at all the revolutions and tossings of Christ's Kingdom,
who dance, eat, and laugh within their own orb; and if their desires be
concentrick to the world and themselves, care not whether Joseph die in the
stocks or not, or whether Zion sink or swim, because whatever they had of
Religion, it was never their mind both to summer and Jesus Christ. 11. The
rise of the Gospel-sun, is like the prodigious appearance of a new Comet, to
the woman that sits on many waters, to that mother Rome- planted, as a Vine
in blood, the Lioness, whose Whelps, Papists and Prelates in Ireland and
England, have learned to catch the prey, and this Comet prophesies, Woe to the
Pope, King of the bottemlesse pit, and his bloody Lady Babel, if Christ shall
arise, God has now as great a work on the wheels, as concerns the race of
the Chariots of Jesus Christ through the habitable world; pray, O let his
Kingdom come, and farewell.

Yours in the Lord Jesus, S. R.

A SERMON, PREACHED Before the Honorable House of COMMONS, At their last
solemn Fast, Wednesday, January 31. 1644.
DANIEL 6. 26. I make a Decree, that in every Dominion of my Kingdom, men
tremble and fear before the face of the God of Daniel, for he is the living
God, and indureth for ever, and his Kingdom that which shall not be
destroyed, and his dominion shall be to the end.
MEthod requires, that first, the words be expounded; secondly, that they be
taken up in a right order; thirdly, that such observations be hence deduced as
serve most for the present condition of the times.

The words are plain: here first is a Statute of a great King, Sim, that the
seventie interpreters render (...), a decretall letter; for sometimes, though
seldom, the Lords cause finds the grace of fair justice with men. The
matter of the Decree is, that men tremble and fear.

Lehevon zognin vedachalin: The Seventie render it, (...), that is, that they
be such as fear and tremble before the God of Daniel; fear is indeed put for
the worship of the true God, so is God called, Genesis 31. 42. The fear of Isaac,
but it is not the word used here; a devout man as Simeon is called, one taken
up with a religious fear, (...), Luke 2. 25. Act. 8. 2. nor are the words used
here, those which do express Jobs fearing of God, Job 1. 1. though I know the
words do express trembling and fear, and also horror and dread, such as was
given to creatures and false Gods; and therefore from this none can infer the
conversion of this King to the true knowledge of Jehovah. God also is called
kajam, an enduring and standing God, from Kum surrexit, and well rendered to
the sense by the Seventy, (...), the Eternal GOD, in opposition to all falling
and fading time-gods, and Kings of clay; and so he is a God to whom Daniel did
with a great deal of reason, rather tender the honor of prayer, then to King
Darius, or the supposed deities of Persia or Chaldea, who are not standing gods
enduring for ever, but come out of times womb, and decay, and fall as
creatures also do.

Lastly, his Kingdom, that is, his People and Servants, (such as Daniel, and
his Church) and his dominion shall endure to the end, Gnadsopha, which is not
so to be taken, as if Gnad did signify a date or tearme-day, at which time
the dominion of God should have an end; for 2. Samuel 6. last verse, it is
said, Michol had no child, Gnad jom mothach, even till the day of her death,
that is, she never had any Child, for the sense cannot be that she had any
Child after the day of her death: so Psalm 48. 14. For this God is our God
for ever and ever, he will be our guide, Gnadmuth, even till death: it is not
intended that the Lord shall cease to be their God and guide after death,
which is contrary to express Scripture, Matthew. 22. 32. Rev. 7. 16, 17. and
Matthew 28. 20. I am with you, (...) to the end of the world; the sense is, I
am with you for ever, for at the end of the world Christ does not leave his
own servants, I know, Gnad otherwise does often signify a certain definite
time, as Psalm. 132. I will not sleep until I find a place for Jehovah, Gnad
emptsa makom: and 1 Samuel 14. 9. Psalm. 73. 17. Psalm. 105. 19.

2. The words contain this general, a Proclamation royal of a great King:
and for particulars,

1. Who gives out the Proclamation, From my face a Decree goes, I Darius make
a Decree.

2. The parties to whom, to every dominion of my Kingdom.

3. The matter, that they fear and tremble.

4. The object, before the face of the God of Daniel.

5. The reasons of the Decree, for Law without reason is will, not Law; men go
to heaven or hell with reason.

1. He is the living God: and this is form his nature.

2. He is eternal: then from his government, his kingdom, such as, 1. time,
2. violence, 3. wisdom cannot destroy; but such a Church and Kingdom as
shall endure for ever, and his dominion endures to the end.

[I make a Decree.] This Darius the Mede, called Nabonithus, succeeded to
Belshazzar the son of Evil-Merodach, about the year of the world 3393.
others 3442. and did reign 17. or 19. years. And having advanced Daniel to
great honor, by force of a wicked law cast Daniel to the Lions, and God having
miraculously delivered Daniel from the Lions, this King gives out a Law, that
all his Subjects fear and serve the God of Daniel. Whence observe,

1. All Princes are obliged to govern and rule for the Lord and his honor. 1.
So Scripture speaks, it shall be in the last days, Esaias 49. 25. Kings shall
be thy nursing fathers, and Queens thy nursing mothers. Psalm. 72. 10. The Kings
of Tarshish and of the Isles shall bring presents. (I would the King of this
Island were in this Text) ver. 11. The Kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer
gifts, yea, all Kings shall fall down before him.

2. Princes are Gods Standard-bearers, they bear his sword by office, Romans 13.
4. and they hold Crown and Scepter of him, as great Landlord of all powers.

3. In a special manner they are second Gods. Psalm. 81. 6. Nor do rulers judge
for men, the judgment is the Lords, 2 Chro. 19. 12. All rulers in the act of
judging are Gods deputies, even though their second calling be to be sent by a
King, and therefore see what judgment God himself would pronounce, if he were
on the bench, that same must they decree, except they would make the deputed
mouth to belie the mind of the great Lord who sent them.

4. The Lord has entrusted Christian Rulers with the most precious thing he
has on earth, he has given his Bride and Spouse to their tutory and faith.

5. What sweeter comfort can the Ruler have, either when his soul lodges in
an house of groaning and sick bones, and the image of death sits on his
eyelids; or in the day of his greatest calamity, then to look back and smile
upon such an old friend, as a good conscience? and to say as Job does, chapter 29.
13. The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me, and I caused the
widows heart to sing for joy, etc.

Use 1. You are entrusted by God with an honorable Virgin, a Kings daughter,
Psalm. 45. 9. Now then for her Fathers sake, and for her Fathers blessing, deal
kindly with her: As you love the Bridegroom take care of the Bride. You have
now amongst your hands Christ, his Crown, his Israel, his glory, Esaias 46. 13.
his Prerogative Royal: be faithful Tuterers and active Factors for the
Privileges, Laws, and Liberties of the high Court of heaven.

Use 2. If this be the place and relation that Princes have to Christ and his
Church, then can the Lord have given no power to any Ruler to waste and destroy
the mountain of the Lord.

For, 1. All royal power given of God, Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19, 20. in the first
moulding of royal highness, was a power to rule according to that which is
written in the Book of the Law, and so there can be no royal power to the
contrary, truly royal.

2. That power cannot be from God as a lawful power, the exercise and acts
whereof are sinful. I speak of a lawful moral power.

3. If such an uncontrollable power as cannot be resisted, be of God, then are
Princes given to the Churches and people of God, as judgments of God, then are
all Christian States, actu primo, made slaves by God, in the very intention of
God the giver, and of the gift, at what time he gives them a Nurse-father to
feed and govern them; and so shall Gods gifts be snares, plagues, and no
gifts. If God give a fatherly power to a father to kill all his children, and
if a State give to their General a military power to fell and destroy all his
Soldiers, so as neither Sons nor Soldiers may defend themselves; then the
fatherly power should be of its own nature a plague to the Sons. If any say,
the Prince, the Father, because they fear God, will not put forth in acts such
a power; I answer, thanks to the Princes goodness for that, but no thanks to
his office and power. God gave him the Sword as a Prince, if he do not draw
that royal Sword to drink blood, we cannot impute the cause to the nature of
the royal gift or intention of God the giver, but to the goodness of a man;
which must be bad divinite.

Doct. 2. So much as Darius has of God, or any good Ruler, so far is his
spirit for the public.

He hears something of the God of Daniel, now then he has a public spirit
to send something of God to all nations, people, and languages, v. 25. Though
there be nothing to prove that the man had saving grace, yet the general
holds, so much of God as any has, in so far is he for the public.

1. Because grace is a public beam of God, and a branch of Gods goodness,
and so of a spreading nature; and the better things be, the more public they
are: the Sun is better then a Candle; God best of all; because every thing
that has being, has something of God; and Christ best of all, because he is
the Savior of many, and Col. 1. 20. has reconciled all things in heaven and
earth to himself.

2. Graces end is the most public end of the world, even Gods glory, for all
things are for God, Romans 11. 36. Prove. 16. 4. men's private ends are sinful
ends.

3. The more gracious men be, the more public they are; David will not be
David alone in praising God, but Psalm. 148. he will have a world in with him,
even Angels, Sun, Moon, Stars, Heaven of Heavens, Dragons, deeps, fire, hail,
snow, vapor, stormy wind, mountains, trees, beasts, creeping things, fowls,
Kings, Judges, old and, young, to hold up the song. Moses and Paul would lay
out in ransom their part of heaven to redeem Gods glory, and salvation to the
Lords Church; the Martyrs desired that their pain and torment might praise and
exalt God. How broad, how catholic and public was his spirit who said, 1
Cor. 9* 19. Though I be free from all men, yet have I made my self servant
unto all, that I might gain the more. 20. And unto the Jews I became as a Jew,
that I might gain the Jews; to them that are under the Law, as under the Law,
that I might gain them that are under the Law. 21. To them that are without
the Law, as without Law, (being not without Law to God, but under the Law to
Christ) that I might gain them that are without Law. 22. To the weak became I
as weak; I am made all things to all men, that I might by all means save
some. A public spirit is not himself, he is made a Jew, a Gentile; a weak
man, not a weak man; he is made Law and Gospel; he is made a bridge over a
River, that the Church may go over him dry; he complyeth with all who but
lend out half a look to Christ; and he is, in a complement of grace, a
servant to all. 2 Corinthians. 4. 5. We preach not our selves (except we preach
our own sins, our own condemnation by nature, and that we under-preach all
eminency in our selves) but our selves your servants for Christ's sake; yea,
your servants servants for Christ. See the Complement of a public heart, of
one who is willing to stoop, and put his head and hair under the feet of the
Church, and of the poorest and most despised passenger who makes out for
heaven.

Use. Then Grace makes men rich Parliament men, and there is a wide difference
betwixt a public man, and a public spirit; all Parliament men are public
men, but they are not all public spirits, else so many of them would not have
deserted the public, and run away from Christ's Colors, to seek their own
private Idols. Men void of grace make an Idol of themselves, every wicked man
is wholly himself, and wholly his own, Phil. 2. 21. They all seek their
own, not the things of Jesus Christ. He who is for the Bridegroom, cannot
be against the Bride, nor against the Commonwealth; he who is a Statesman of
heaven, and knows savingly the fundamental Laws of Jesus Christ, the power
and prerogative roall of the King of Kings; he who is acquainted with the frame
and constitution of the Kingdom of sin, in his own heart; he who fears
God, who fears his own light, and is awed with the Decrees and Laws of an
enlightened conscience, shall be fast for the public; and the man who sells
his Religion and his soul for his private ends, will soon sell his country,
his Parliament, the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom. Will he put the Law of
God, and the Crown and Scepter of that Princely Lord Jesus to the market, and
will he stick for his Court and Honor, to sell the Laws of England? and
will he forfeit Heaven, and will he not forfeit you all, and your Parliament
and Liberties? O then be entreated now to be for Heaven, and Christ, as his
public State-wits, to convey Decrees for Christ's honor, for Reformation
(against Babylon and her sons) through this whole Kingdom. You have now
power and opportunity to send the Glory of Christ over Sea, to all Europe; the
eyes of Nations are upon you, exalt the Son of God: think it not sweet
policy to have peace with Babylon, and war with God; consider if Church and
State did ever prosper since the Queens Idol of the Mass was set up amongst
you: and what is your part when many Masses are now in the Kings Court at
Oxford?

[I make a Decree] There was a wicked Law and a cursed Decree made by Darius,
that for thirty days, neither Daniel nor any of Gods people should pray to
God, or to any god save to Darius: Daniels enemies prevail thus far, that
Daniel, the Churches right eye now in the Court, should be decourted and cast
out to be meat to beasts; Behold the artifice and fathomlesse depth of Gods
wisdom, who brings a contrary Decree out of this wicked Decree, even a
Decree for adoring that God of Daniel, whom they had dishonored.

Doct. It is the art of the deep wisdom of divine providence to bring good
out of the sins of his enemies and the sufferings of his own.

Joseph's brethren moved with envy, sell their brother; Potiphar casts him in
prison: the wisdom of God comes in, in the game, and he exalts Joseph,
and keeps alive people in famine. Herod, Pilate, Jews and Gentiles, crucify
the Lord of glory, the Art of free grace, deep wisdom in God must be more
then half play-maker here, and in this redeem the lost world. The Chaldeans
spoil Job and plunder him; Satan makes him an empty house, and a childelesse
father; mercy comes up in the Theater, and free Grace, makes Job an
illustrious and fair copy of patience and faith to all ages. Achitophel did,
as many now with our King does, he gave wicked counsel against the Lords
servant and a just cause, divine justice comes in in the game, and Achitophel
hangs himself.

The use of this shall answer two questions.

1. Why does God suffer sin to be, and so much sin in England and Ireland?

2. Why does he suffer his people in Covenant with him, to be a land of blood?

The former question is a general, a wicked Marcion asks, why the Lord, who
foresaw the event, did suffer Evah and the Devil to confer? and if he was
able, why did he not hinder sin to be, except he had been either envious,
and would not, or weak, and could not hinder the enters of sin in the world?
Tertullian answers, Because the Lord is free in his gifts. Augustine
answers, Epist. 59. ad Paulinum, Quia voluit, because it was his will.
Prosper and Hilarious both with Augustine, say; The cause may be unknown, it
cannot be unjust. Though it were in the Potters hand, to turn clay into
brass, yet his power should not destroy his liberty, to cause him to make a
lame vessel such, as if it had reason and will to fall, it should not be
broken. Why should Daniels enemies prevail so as to cast him to Lions? that
these knees that bowed often to God, and these hands which was lifted up to
him, should be eaten with Lions? O lame vessel believe, believe but dispute
not. And the answer is clear, sin is the worst thing that is, but the
existence of sin is not ill: otherwise (says Augustine) God should never
permit it to be. Yea sins being in the world, is (silva justiciae divinae,
officina gratiae Christi) A field for the glory of revenging justice, and sin
is the work house of the pardoning grace of God. And therefore there be good
reasons why the Lord should permit sin, and such sins.

1. That there may be room in the play for pardoning grace; the color and
beauty of free grace had never been made obvious in such a way, to the eye of
Angels and Men, if sin had not been.

2. There had been no employment for the mercy of a soule-redeeming Jesus.

3. We should not have had occasion in the ears of Angels, to hold up for
ever and ever the new Psalm of the Praises of a Redeemer.

4. By this, nature, clay, and frail nature, and selfe-dependence is cried
down, and God exalted.

5. By this, the humble love of the contrite and broken in heart is
necessitated to kiss the bowels of him who binds up the broken hearted
mourners in Sion, and furrows of blood put to real acknowledgement of
everlasting compassion.

6. Hence also are minors and poor pupils put to improve their faith and
dependence upon so Kingly a Tutor, as never enough loved and admired Jesus
Christ.

7. Hence, to the praise of grace, Satan has fair justice, and that (in foro
contradictorio) in open patent Court, when clay triumphs over Angels and
Hell, through the strength of Jesus Christ.

The other question is also soon answered: Why should the cause of God be so
oppressed, and his Churches garments rolled in blood?

But 1. God must be known to be God in his own chair of estate, and he
must be The Savior of Israel in the time of trouble.

2. Satan, Prelates, Papists, Malignants, shall be vnder-workmen and
kitchin-servants to him who has his fire in Sion, and his furnace in
Jerusalem, to purify and refine the vessels of mercy in the Lords house.

3. Christ's Bride must know that this is their Inn, not their home; their
Pilgrimage, not their Country; otherwise our Lord knows how to lead his
passengers to Heaven, not by Sea, but by dry land.

4. All must see that the loss of men is not the Lords loss, but the Gospels
gain.

5. His glorious grace must be commended who suiteth in marriage a spouse to
himself, in no place rather then in the Furnace, Esaias 48. 10.

6. Prayers and praises must be the rent paid to him to whom belongs the
issues from death. The Lord has a great work now on the wheels in Britain*
Be very charitable of our Lords dispensation, though the slain of the Lord be
many in England and Ireland, look not on the dark side of Gods providence, or
on the black and weeping side of his dispensation; widows are multiplied
almost as the sand of the Sea; children weep and cry, Alas my father! mothers
in Ireland die twice, when they see their children slain before their eyes,
and then are killed themselves. Oh! (say men) why does the Lord this? Behold,
the fair and smiling side of Gods providence; contrary winds from Rome, from
hell, by the art of omnipotency, promove the sailing and course of Christ's ship.

1. God is now drawing an excellent portract of a refined Church, but with the
ink of the innocent blood of his people; say not, What is the Lord doing? or,
Is there knowledge in the Almighty? who has given the Lord counsel? better
we be his courtiers, then his counselors.

2. If we love the dust and the stones of Sion, Psalm 102. 14. Christ is
ravished with one of his Churches eyes, and with a chain of her neck, Cant. 4.
9. God loves his own glory more ardently then I can love it.

3. The Church is dearer bought to Jesus then to me or you; he has given too
great a price for her, to lose her.

4. Rather when we cannot see to the bottom of providence, believe upon plain
trust, and say as Esaias 8. 17. I will wait upon the Lord that hides his face
from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him.

Part. 2. [In every dominion of my kingdom.] This is the second part, wherein
the parties to whom this Law is given, are expressed in their universalitie, as
they are, v. 25. To all people, nations, and languages that dwell on all the
earth, peace: Whence observe; That Nations without the visible Church never
wanted means, either ordinary or extraordinary, to know God; though we cannot
in reason say that the Decree or Law of a heathen King is the Arminian
universal grace, yet some means all have: And God has laid open four books
to all nations. 1. That book of creation of the Heavens and his works, Psalm
19. 1. The Heavens, Mesappe-rajim cevodel, do book, and register the glory of
God, Romans, 1. 20.

2. The book of ordinary providence is a Chronicle or Diurnall of a Godhead,
and a Testimony that there is a God, Acts 14. 17. Acts 17. 27.

3. There is a book of the extraordinary works of God, and some report of the
true God, upon occasion carried to Nations without the borders of the visible
Church; As our text says: And Rachab says, Josh. 2. 10. We have heard how the
Lord dried up the red Sea, etc. But as children sport themselves and play with
the pictures in a book, and with the gold on the covering of the book, and
the ribbins, not knowing the sense and meaning of this book; so do we sport
our selves in looking on the outside of these three books, not searching it to
read and understand the invisible things of God, his eternal power and
Godhead, Romans 1. 20.

4. The book of man's conscience, Romans 2. 14, 15. does speak of God to all
Nations, though now by reason of our sinful blindness and dullness, that book
be uncorrected, and dimme-printed, written with white and watery Ink, so that
we see not God distinctly in it; yet all these four serve to make men without
excuse, because, when they know God, they glorify him not as God, neither are
thankful, Romans 1. 20. But this condemns us to whom there is laid open a
better, and fairer, and learneder piece, Psalm. 19. 7.

Use. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul.

Yea, if Christ in the Gospel had not come to us, we should have had no sin
(no evangelick guilt of unbeleefe) but now we have ((...)) no shift of Law, no
cloak for our sin. Hence, though this Island be in a more blessed condition,
by reason that the Sun shines in his strength and light in our Meridian,
(God has not done so to every Nation, Psalm. 147. 19, 20.) yet by reason of
despising salvation in this daylight of the Gospel, we are in a most dangerous
condition.

1. Because Sodomy is not so heinous a sin as unbeleefe, and the despising of
the Gospel, Matthew. 10. 15. For Evangelick unbeleefe is against the flower and
garland (to speak so) of the excellency of God; not only against a Creator,
but against a Savior, and against those most lovely and soul-ravishing
attributes of God, his mercy, goodness, free grace, longanimity, patience,
bowels of compassion: and therefore an unbeleeving Covenanter with God in
England and Scotland, is to look for a hotter furnace in the lake of fire and
brimstone, then one of Sodom and Gomarrah.

2. Because there is some exception against the Law-vengeance, for the Gospel
is a clear exception against those who are under the Law-curse, John 3. 16.
But there is no exception against the Gospel-vengeance: this is a year and age,
and Eternity-vengeance, for the final rejecter of the Gospel has not a
Sacrifice for sin to look to, as the Law-breaker has, Heb. 2. 1, 2. Heb.
10. 26, 27.

3. The rejecting of the Gospel is a fighting against the Spirit of the Gospel,
whereas the Law is but a letter: and unbelief is a sin against the Holy
Ghost, though it be not always the sin against the Holy Ghost; therefore are
the despisers of the Gospel kept, as desperate robbers are, to the judgment of
the great Court day, and chained up and fettered to the last and terrible
vengeance, 2 These. 1. 8, 9. Deuteronomy. 32. 22. Heb. 10. 26.

O tremble and stand in awe of this high treason, for your sin is not like
Sodomes, nor like the despising of the religious decree of such an heathen King
as Darius. But ere I proceed, it may be asked, Is unbelief a greater sin
then Sodomy, which has a cry up to Heaven? unbelief sounds no such cry to
Heaven?

I answer: Heinous sins against the second Table are borne with a shout and a
cry in their mouth, and are very broad-faced and bloody, and have more of a
natural conscience in them, because the duties of the second Table are written
in our heart in fairer print, and in a bigger Character then the duties of the
first Table. Therefore natural men can hear the cry of these sins; and that
is our corruption, that a man is more wounded in mind if he offend his earthly
Father, then if he blaspheme his heavenly Father, the great and eternal
Jehovah. But the duties of the first Table are written in our heart by nature,
in a more dim and obscure way, and has less of natural conscience; and the
principles of the Gospel are not written in our heart at all, at least as they
are Evangelicke, we know them not but by revelation, Gal. 1. 15, 16. Mat. 16.
17. and therefore sins against the Gospel are borne dumb, and being more
cleanely and spiritual sins, they have no shout or cry against the
conscience, except in so far as they are enlightened supernaturally, in whom
unbelief has a stirring and a pain of Conscience. Hence observe a
considerable difference by the way, betwixt the natural and renewed soul: A
natural man may be pained in conscience with parricide, robberies, acts of
cruelty, but never shall you hear him troubled in mind with unbelief, and
doubting of a Godhead, and the souls immortality, as Judas was wakened in
conscience for blood and treachery against his innocent Master, but not for
unbelief and blasphemy, whereof he was guilty in an high measure. But the
renewed are troubled with spiritual sins, which are only discerned by a
spiritual and supernatural light, as with unbelief, ignorance, security,
wandering of heart in Prayer, doubtings of a providence that rules all.

Also it may be questioned, How it comes to pass that God sends not
sufficient helps to all Nations, that they may come to the knowledge of the
truth and be saved?

I answer shortly: It is enough that he gives sufficient means in this sense,
That Gods justice is cleared, and men are without all excuse, in that they
wilfully lose themselves. 1. Men are not formally guilty because they are not
saved. 2. Nor are all men guilty because the Gospel comes not to them. 3. Nor
are they all guilty because they believe not; For how shall they believe in
him, of whom they have not heard? Romans 10. 14. But they are guilty because
they do not use that which is given them for God.

Object. 1. But God gave me no more grace, and what can I do without grace?

Answ. This argument touches those who hear the Gospel, as well as those who
never heard of it: And it is a chiding with the sovereign Lord, because he
gave not efficacious grace to all: And Patrons of nature, and Arminians, are no
less straited with this incomprehensible dispensation of God then we are.

Object. 2. But if I had had such grace as God gave to Peter, I should have
believed.

Answ. It is the carnal man's argument, Romans 9. 18, 19. If he have mercy on
whom he will; He cannot be angry against me, who do not believe, for no man
resists his will. Yea, but as the clay should not dispute with the Potter, so
the clay having a corrupted will, does wilfully refuse to believe, and the
creatures willing disobedience, and Gods free decree of denying grace, does
meet in one, for which cause the creature is justly condemned.

Object. 3. But more grace should make me believe, and more grace God denies
to me.

Answ. It is easier to complain for what we have not, then thankfully to use
what we have. If the creditor crave the payment of ten thousand pounds from a
Land-waster, it is bad payment to say, You are to be blamed that I pay not,
because you lent me not twenty thousand pound.

Object. 4. But I have a strong inclination, and cannot resist when I am
tempted.

Answ. O lame vessel, tremble, but dispute not. 2. It is lawful to complain
and sigh under those fetters, Romans 7. 24. but unlawful to child and excuse
sinful rebellion.

Part. 3. That men tremble and fear before the face of the God of Daniel.

In this third Part we have to consider these two:

First, Who commands trembling and fear.

Secondly, The thing commanded, trembling, and fear.

1. The Commander is Darius, but whether converted, or not, is a question. I
think there is no ground to hold that he was a converted man: 1 Because all
that he commands, is trembling, and fear of God; upon the occasion of a
miracle, the positive worship of God is not commanded. 2. He calls not God,
his God, but the God of Daniel. 3. He acknowledges Daniels God to be the
living God, but does not command that he only shall be served, and all dead
gods cast off. 4. The Babilonish History shows he still kept his idol-gods.
5. The rise of this Proclamation is a miracle, and such as breeds rather a
servile fear then a filial adoring of God. 6. There is nothing here of the
means to instruct his people in the knowledge of the true God: And to command
Religion without information of the minds, is rather Tyranny over the
conscience, then true zeal: Hence unrenewed men may out of the dominion of a
convincing light, be forced to acknowledge the Lord, when yet the will and
affections are not subdued to the knowledge of God. Hence I express my
thoughts in this point, in these assertions.

1. Assertion. The natural conscience is not its own Lord in knowing,
bleeving, and confessing something of God. For, first, Devils believe there is
a God, but they tremble, James 2. 19. They believe against their will, as a man
condemned to death for a crime, believes he must die, but his will is opposite
to his faith. Judas awaked cannot choose but believe a vengeance. Light is a
King, and a conqueror sometime. 2. You seldom find but enemies have given a
testimony, now or then, for God. Exodus 14. 25. Let us flee, (say the Egyptians)
for the Lord fights for them, against the Egyptians: Pharaoh being mastered
in conscience with the plague of hail mingled with fire, says, Exodus 9. 27. I
have sinned [this] time: The Lord is righteous, and I and my people are wicked:
Deuteronomy. 32. 31. For their rock is not as our rock, our enemies being Judges:
Psalm. 126. 2. Then said they amongst the heathen, the Lord has done great
things for them. Saul's conscience speaks truth, in a dream, through his
sleep, though he went to bed again, 1 Samuel 24. 17. Thou art more righteous
then I, so speaks he to David. The Devil can say no otherwise, Luke 4. 34.
I know thee who thou art, the holy one of God. Pilate must say of Christ, I
find no fault in him. Caligula his fear must make his faith a liar, and when
he hears a thunder, say, Mine ears hear the God which my heart denies to
have any being. Nero cannot say but hell is begun in his soul before the
time. The Apostate Julian said, Vicisti tandem Galilaee, At length, O Jesus,
thou art victorious. Paul the third, a monster of men, said dying, I shall now
be resolved of three things: 1. If the soul be immortal: 2. If there be a
God: 3. If there be a hell. Plinius the second wrote to the Emperor, that
Jesus Christ was a great Prophet, and a holy man. Many Papists of old gave
testimony that the Waldenses were holy men. Many at Rome, said Luther, was for
the truth, and counseled that Leo the tenth would reform the Church, as
Guiciard. hist. l. 3. says. Malignants on their deathbed have said, the
Parliament of England is for justice and religion, and Scotland contend for the
purity of the Gospel; and let but adversaries ask at their conscience in cold
blood, whether the world, and their own ease, or the truth of God bottomed
their conscience in following the ways of Cavaliers; and ask, on whose side
are lies, perjury, blaspheming, mocking of godliness, the idolatry of the
mass.

Assertion 2. The will and affections have a dominion over conscience in many
things; in that,

1. There is a Covenant betwixt conscience and concupiscence, while (as
Chrysostom says) Men believe not what they know, but what they will, and will
is half play-maker in their faith, 2 Pet. 3. 5. Of this they are willingly
ignorant: excellently is it said, Ier. 9. 6. Bemirmah, In deceit they refuse to
know me, says the Lord. The will has a pack-pull on the mind: Light and
malice, mind and will are vowen through other, the wills malice soureth and
leaveneth the minds light, as rotten matter mixed with good wine overmastereth
it, and takes taste and color from it.

2. The will and affection has power to suspend the acts of, Considering of
Christ's excellency: 2. Sins horror: 3. Truths beauty: 4. The sweet peace of
obedience to God: 5. The eternity of heaven and hell. Hos. 7. 1. The thief
comes in, and the troops of robbers spoil without, and they say not in
heart, that I remember all their wickedness. The will and affections should
engage and take the mind surety and obliged to consider of God and his
ways: But it is here as when a merchant comes in, and overbiddeth the
customer, and causes the seller and the customer part company. When the mind
is upon this or the like: What shall the wrath or the smiles of a King do to
me, when my eye-strings shall be broken? What thoughts can I have of gain,
lust, pleasure, court, when worms shall make their nests in my eye-holes? In
these, affections come in and divert the mind from such precious thoughts; and
here be two errors in the will: First, a sort of wicked diverting of the
mind from necessary truths. Secondly, a will-heresie, when faith and divinity
is swallowed up in the will and affections.

3. The will and affections resist truth in the mind, as Act. 6. 10. The
adversaries could not resist the wisdom and spirit by which Stephen spoke:
then their mind was convinced, Act. 7. 51. You do always (says Stephen)
resist the holy Spirit. Behold, they could not resist light, yet they do of
malice, resist light.

4. The will and affections can imprison and cast in fetters Truth, Romans 1. 18.
They keep the truth of God captive, or in bonds: though Truth sometime break
the fetters, and bolts, and escape, and come out to a confession, yet they
apprehend Truth again, and lay it in fetters.

Assertion 3. The only saving grace of God, infused in the mind, will, and
affections, does subdue the conscience to truth, and obedience of the truth.
Grace is the greatest conqueror of all. Jer. 20. 9. I was weary with
forbearing, and I could not stay. Act. 4. 20. We cannot but speak the things
which we have seen and heard. New wine must have vent.

Use 1. We would beware of sins against light, these are under water in the
ship, and are sinking sins; a Reformation has been calling on you, and
offering it self to you these fourscore years, and men have been saying, It
is not time to build the house of the Lord: and consider I pray you, how
fearful it is, for men not to stoup and fall down, as taken captives to the
truth of God, for every thought should be brought as an apprehended soldier
and a captive, to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5. And specially the land
is to be humbled for such sins as by the light of the Gospel has been cried
against, as luxury, vanity, pride, and fullness of bread, uncleanness,
swearing, lying, unjustice, oppression, but especially multiplied Altars,
Idolatry, superstition, will worship.

Use 2. The honorable Houses are to beware of the half reformation of Darius;
nothing more odious to God then*

1. A negative devotion: Nebuchadnezzar thinks he has done all if nothing
be spoken amiss of the true God, Dan. 3. 29.

2. Agrippa his almost a Christian, is not a Christian at all, Ier. 3. 10. Yet
for all this her treacherous sister Judah has not turned to me with her whole
heart.

3. God detesteth lukewarmnes, and coldness in his matters.

4. He hates a mixture, it is a mark put on Samaria, 2 King. 17. 33. They
feared the Lord, and served their own Gods; this is that which brings the
stretched-out arm of the Lords fury on the land, Zeph. 1. 5. because they
swear by the Lord, and by Malcom, and because the people halteth betwixt the
Lord and Baal, 1 King. 18. 21. And it is Johu his reproachful reformation, 2
King. 10. 28. Thus Jehu destroyed Baal out of Israel. 29. Nevertheless he
departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nobat; O how fearful to
be under this? he is for the good cause, nevertheless he knows nothing of
the power of Religion, so he is right in the house, nevertheless, he
complains much with Malignants. It is known to you all when the Whore of
Babylon was cast out of the Church, that she left behind her a gold ring, and
some love tokens, I mean Episcopacie, and humane Ceremonies; this was the
whores policy to leave a token behind her, that she might find an errand in
the house again: and she was indeed returning to the house to demand her
love-token again, but it shall be Heavenly wisdom to make a perfect
Reformation: keep nothing that belongs to Babylon, and let not a stone, to be
a cornerstone or a foundation, be taken out of Babylon for the building of
the Lords house, for they are cursed stones.

[That they tremble and feare] In Part 2. of the third member of our Text we
are to consider, that Jehovah is to be looked and served with fear and
trembling; upon these six grounds all applicable to the present condition of
times.

1. He is a great God, Ier. 30. 6. For as much as there is none like unto thee
O Lord, thou art great, and thy Name is great; who would not fear thee, O King
of Nations? Ier. 5. 22. Fear ye not me, says the Lord; will ye not tremble at
my presence, which have placed the sand for the bound of the Sea, etc. Alas we
fancy to our selves a little God, and a great mortal King, therefore we
tremble at the one, and fear not the other; so when we have to do with an
earthly power, the soul is servilely timorous; when we have to do with God,
the conscience is all made of stoutnesse.

2. The sins of the Land should make us tremble, Esa. 24. 16. But I said, my
leanness, my leanness, woe unto me, for the treacherous dealers deals
treacherously, Ier. 23. 9. My heart within me is broken, all my bones shake,
etc. Psalm. 119. 53. Horror has taken hold of me, because of the wicked that
keep not thy law: What should the sins of Court, of Prelates, make me tremble?
are they my sins? Yea 1. every sin that I am not grieved for is mine. 2. He
never mourned for his own sins, who is not humbled for the sins of the land. 3.
A gracious Samuel will own the sins of Saul.

3. Gods great works call for trembling, Habak. 3. The Prophet considering
Gods walking through the red Sea with his horses, makes him say, though it was
a work of mercy, verse 16. When I heard it, my belly trembled, my lips
quivered, rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in my self. O
tremble at this Lord, who has, 1. Wrought State miracles, if not miracles in
nature; he has commanded the Sun of righteousness to stand still in the
Meridian of Britain. 2. He has divided our red Sea. 3. He has brought us
back from the bordell-house, and renewed a Covenant with us. 4. Our enemies
are fallen, and those are enlarged who were banished, imprisoned, vexed by
Prelates for the heinous crime (as they thought) of piety, holiness, and
orthodoxie. Tremble at his goodness, Fear the Lord and his goodness, Hos. 3.
5. Rejoice in trembling, Psalm. 2. 11. An ingenuous mind fears debt, mercies
tendered to us are debts lying on us; O how shall we repay him? what shall we
render to him? Are we not banckrupts to mercy and the goodness of God.

4. Tremble at Gods judgments, Psalm. 119. 120. My flesh trembles for fear of
thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments, Jer. 4. 19. My bowels, my bowels, I
am pained at the very heart, my heart makes a noise within me, I cannot hold
my peace, because thou have heard, O my soul, the sound of the trumpet, the
alarm of war. Here is a waste field of trembling: God in Germany is God to
be feared in all places, for in these lands the wife could scarce have the
half of her husband to bury, the best half has been blown up in the air
with fire-work. 2. Horse has been esteemed good meat. 3. In Ireland the
mothers have heard their young children ask mercy at the rebel with his
Skainzer cutting the throat of her son; and has not the Sword multiplied
Widows, and multiplied Orphans in this land? It is fearful to man to bide it
out, as a war, whether Gods displeasure will or no.

5. We are exceedingly to tremble at his anger, Amos 3. 8. The Lion has
roared, who would not fear? When God does but seem to be angry. The children
of God have been distracted, and almost besides their wits with Gods terrors,
Psalm. 88. 15. and they were scarce in the suburbs of hell. Is there not cause
to fear, if any of the land break the oath of God, that the flying roll and
book of vengeance, twenty cubits long, and ten cubits broad, shall enter into
such a man's house, and remain in the midst thereof, and shall consume it, both
timber and stones? Zac. 5. 4. When God declares himself angry, mountains and
hills do tremble, Psalm. 114. 3. The sea saw it, and fled, Jordan was driven
back. 4. The mountains skipped like Rams, and the little hills like Lambs. 5.
What ailed thee, O thou Sea, that thou fleddest? thou Jordan, that thou wast
driven back? ver. 7. Tremble thou earth at tho presence of the Lord. Hab. 3.
10. The mountains saw thee, and they trembled. That God is now angry, it may
appear, 1. Because your adversaries never prospered in any wars before, and
now the Lord has girded them with strength. 2. The godly man is taken away, it
is clear then there is evil coming, Esaias 57. 1. Mich. 7 1. When an old sheep
flees into an hedge, it is like a storm is coming. 3. There be more blood
shed then would have recovered the Palatinate.

6. We are to tremble when the Lord is like to depart; and that Christ and the
Gospel shall depart from this Kingdom, is intended by Papists and Prelates,
for the extirpation of Protestants and Protestant Religion, is the design of
Babylon, and of those in whom is any of her spirit: and consider what this is,
Hos. 9. 12. Though Ephraim bring np children, yet will I bereave her of them,
that not a man shall be left; that is a sad condition: but this is a sadder
case coming, also woe be to them when I depart from them, Zach. 11. 9. Then
said I, I will feed you no more. Nay, but (say some) we are not to tremble at
that, if the Gospel be removed, and Popery come in, we shall have the good old
world, and plenty of all things: Take heed of that good old world; in these
same words, I will feed you no more, that which perishes, let it perish, and
that which is cut off, let it be cut off, and let the rest eat the flesh one
of another: woe, woe to the Land if the Lord depart from us, and remove his
Kingdom: this is worse then the Sword, therefore let Christ have welcome in
the land, and his Throne be exalted, and his Temple builded, that he may
delight to come and fill the Temple with the Cloud of his Glory.

[That they tremble and fear.] Darius requires outward subjection to the God
of Daniel, even trembling and inward subjection, fear; and both being put
together, he then would teach, that the true God should have the highest
bensill and outmost pitch of the strength of the affections of fear, desire,
joy, love, etc. Hence it may be questioned, whether or no, affections in their
highest pitch are conducible in Gods Service.

I answer in these Assertions.

1. Assertion. Those affections which go before the deliberate acts of
understanding, do overcloud and mist reason, and mar the acts of believing
in God, and serving and obeying God, Luke 24. 41. The disciples believed not
for joy, and wondered: So hungring for Christ's presence does sometime hinder
faith, and this is seen here, tam misere cupio ut vix credam, I so eagerly
long for Christ, that I believe never to enjoy him.

2. Assertion. The more grace, the less passion; I mean the less inordinate
affection; this is clear in Christ Jesus, in whom was the fullness of grace,
and therefore affections in him were rather actions, then passions, John 11. 3.
Jesus groaned in spirit and was troubled, (...), he troubled himself, Christ
did call upon sorrow to rise, and sorrow in him did not arise uncalled;
affections in Christ were servants, in us they are masters. There is mud in our
bottom, even when our affections are liquid and clear in the brimme,
especially the sensitive part is clayie and drimmely water. 2. Grace is a good
stirseman, and overmastereth passion; and reason, in the renewed man, is made a
mass of Grace; and the most mortified have most reason, and strongest light,
Romans 8. 7. The carnal mind (that is, the unmortified mind) is enmity with
God, Philippians 3. 8. Yea doubtless, and I count all things loss for the
super-excellent knowledge of God in Christ Jesus my Lord. Then he was dead to
all his privileges, that he might excel in the knowledge of Christ; and
where there is little or no mortification, there is little or no heavenly
light: therefore, 2 Pet. 3. 5. walkers after their lusts, and mockers and
scoffers at the day of Christ's second coming, are willingly ignorant, and
brutish in that which they should know, and so there is as much Clay in the
Fountain as Water.

3. Assertion. The more faith, the less passion; for as some say of the Sun,
that light is not an accident of the Sun, but the essence thereof, so as the
Sun is but a mass and body of pure light; so is faith a Globe of heavenly
light of reason. The believer is the most reasonable man in the world, he who
does all by faith, does all by the light of sound reason, and Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 3.
prays to be delivered from unreasonable men; but how unreasonable? because
verse 2. they have no faith: faith is a beam of Heavens light; Idolaters are
far from faith, and so they are cruel and superlative in passions of anger,
hatred, envy: for this cause Babylon is fat with drinking much blood. When
mortification is commanded, Romans 12. 1. it has the name to be called
reasonable service to God.

4. Assertion. If the action be done in faith, the more affection in the
action, the better: But if it be not done in the light of faith, the action is
the worse. Jehu casts down Altars from anger and fury, not from faith:
Hezekiah casts Altars from the light of faith and zeal. If a strong ship be
fair before the wind, if all other things be right, the more wind the
better: so two principles of grace in Hezekiah, are better then one carnal
principle in Iehu. In reformers of the Lords house, and in those who purge the
Temple, and cast out the buyers and the sellers, there should be strong
affections of love, anger, zeal; but all these are bad principles, if there
be not much light of sound faith in reformers, yet a caution is here needful.
In actions of the second table, where our self, or our neighbor, and not God
or Religion has place, the higher bent the affection be, the action is the
worse; duties to Prince, parents, husband, wife, children, Parliament, require
not all the love, all the fear, all the joy; half love is best here, and it
is good that love, fear, joy, desire, anger, go by ounce weights; but
Reformation, God, Religion calls for all the heart, all the soul, all the
strength, Psalm 42. 2. David's soul and his flesh are allowed in seeking after
the living God, to long, to faint, to cry out with a shout for the living God;
so more affection should be for Christ's fundamental Laws, for Religion, then
for the fundamental Laws of a Kingdom, or for the power and privileges of
Parliament. And it is clear in ill actions, the less affection the better;
Pilates slaying of Christ, had less hatred and envy, then the Scribes and
Pharisees killing of him; and the more innocent that the affection be, the bad
action is the less evil: fear is a more innocent affection then hatred.
Those who out of fear desert the Lords cause, are not to be punished in that
degree with those who out of malice and hatred to the truth joined to the
Malignant faction. How ever, God challenges the flower of our affections, and
it is a sweet thing to spend the vigor and flower of the affection upon God,
and if you had ten tongues to speak for God, a hundred hands to fight for him,
many lives to lose for him, Achitophels wisdom to employ in his services,
except you engage the heart and affections in his service, you do nothing to
him. If Prelates, Papists and Malignants be hated only as hurtful to your
State, to the gain and external peace of the Commonwealth, and not as Gods
enemies, as Idolaters, as they are under the King of the bottomless pit, the
Antichrist, and Comets who borrow light from that fallen Star, and not as
servants to our King; the war is shedding of innocent blood; heart
reduplications in the affections do mightily invert the nature of actions;
Jehu 2 Kings 10. 30. 31. did right in the sight of the eyes of God, and did to
the house of Ahab according to all that was in Gods heart; yet because he did
it with a crooked and bastard intention, for his own honor and Idol ends, his
obedience is, Hosea, 1. 4. murder before God.

art. 4. [The God of Daniel.] This is the fourth point considerable here.
Darius speaks of the living God, as natural men do, with a note of
estrangement of affection, he applies him to Daniel, as the God of Daniel, but
applies him not to himself, as making him his own God, but rather does
insinuate that he had another God then Daniels God: So do natural spirits
destitute of faith stand afar off from God, and bide at a distance with God,
whereas only faith can claim interest in God, and father it self upon the
Lord. Laban speaks thus to Jacob, Genesis 31. 29. The God of your father spoke
to me yesterday, Exodus 8. 25. Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, and said,
Go ye sacrifice to your God in the land, 1 King. 13. 6. Jeroboam says to the
Prophet. Entreat now the face of the Lord thy God, and pray for me: and Rachab
speaking in the name of the people of Jericho says, Josh. 2. 11. For the Lord
your God he is God in the Heaven above, and in the earth beneath; unbelief
makes the unbeleever that which he is, even a bastard and stranger, not a
son nor an heir; whereas faith challenges right and heritage in God, Psalm
5. 2. Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my King and my God, Psalm 7. 1. O Lord
my God, in thee do I put my trust. Psalm 18. 1, 2. The Lord is my strength.
The Lord is my rock, my fortress, and my deliverer: my God, my strength in
whom I will trust, my Buckler, and the horn of my salvation, my high tower;
here be nine relations, nine My'es. 2 Chr. 20. 12. Our God, will thou not
judge them? Ezra, 9. 6. O my God, I am ashamed, etc. Dan. 9. 4. And I prayed
unto the Lord my God: the three children say, Daniel 3. 17. Our God is able to
deliver us, Ioh. 20. 28. Thomas said, my Lord, my God. Daniel here is made
proprietor and heritor of the true and living God; and Darius and all his
people have their own Gods, called the gods of nations, and Darius puteth it
as a ground, That the God which any man serves, and trusts in, he has a
relation to him, as to his own God: every man may by Law claim what is his
own. Hence are these two questions to be discussed.

1. Quest. Whether Application be essential to Faith or not?

2. What ground have those who hear of God, and those within the visible
Church, to call God their God.

For the discussion of the first, these following assertions may resolve us.

1. Assertion. Faith is more then a naked, hungry, and poor assent to the
truth, there is in it a fiduciall acquiescence and a leaning upon JEHOVAH,
expressed by diverse expressions full of marrow, as Psalm 22. 8. He trusted,
the Hebrews say, He rolled himself on JEHOVAH; which is, when a wearied man
sweating under a burden casts himself and his burden both upon a place or a
bed of rest Gol El-Jehovah as that Psalm. 55. 22. Cast thy burden on JEHOVAH,
and 1 Pet. 5. 7. Roll all your care on him, Psalm 37. the Chaldee Paraphrase
says on the place, for [he rolled himself on God] I spoke praises to God,
which holds forth, that Faith is a work of the heart and affection, rather
then of the mind; So Psalm 37. 5. Resign, and give over, or roll over thy
ways to the Lord, as Jerome does well turn it; Bibl. Complutense, flee in to
Jehovah. Psalm 18. 18. They prevented me in the day of my calamity, but
Jehovah was my stay; referring this to the Lord his bearing up of David's heart
in his trouble (which in reason cannot be denied) Mis^gnan is, (as Arias
Montanus turns it) fulcrum; Junius, scipio, or baculus; the seventy
Interpreters (...), the Lord was David's stay and his staff: so is the word
used, Esaias 3. 1. The Lord takes from Judah the stay and the staff; and it is
not evil that Christ is the sinners stay, and the lamed man's staff, Esaias, 26.
3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed (as a house
holden up by a proppe) on thee, Psalm 112. He that fears the Lord, is not
afraid of ill tidings because his heart is fixed: Samuch Libbo, leaning on the
Lord; and believing is not simply in the word, a giving credit to God, in what
he says; but it is when men put their weight on God, as Esaias, 10 20. The
residue of Israel shall lean upon the Lord, the Holy one of Israel: and so is
the word, Micah. 3. 11. They lean upon the Lord, saying, Is not the Lord
amongst us? and faith is termed, Hebrews 11. 1. (...) the substance of things
hoped for: some do not ill expound it to be the pillar and ground-stone of
the soul, in expecting good from God; and so is it the buckler of faith,
Ephesians. 6. 16. and these two words say, that Faith is a most valiant Soldier,
which yields not to that which comes against it, but that the believer,
when he is killed and fallen, does still stand and live. Doeg is thus made a
wicked man, Psalm 52. 7. Lo this is the man that made not God his strength;
Mahhuzzo, his fortitude, says Jerome; and in the matter of giving assent to
truths. Consider in this comparison, how Faith lays it self upon God: There
be six men condemned to die for treason; the King sends a sealed pardon to
one, all the six read the pardon, and all believe it is the true deed of the
Prince, but five of them do believe it with sorrow, and no love to the Prince,
because their names are not in the pardon; but the pardoned man believes it,
not only as true, but his heart cleaves to it with a heat and warmenesse of
soul resting upon the grace of the Prince: So does the believer thrust his
heart upon Christ, and his free grace, and has a soule-kindenesse to the
promises, when he hears them, which is not in these, who only take the word
as true, Canticles, 8. 5. Who is she that comes upout of the Wilderness
associating, or neighboureth her self upon her well-beloved? Faith makes
Christ a neighbor and a companion to the soul, and therefore here must be an
Application of the heart to God in Christ.

2. Assertion. Some even deserted and missing the Lord to their feeling, may,
and do apply him to themselves, as their own Lord. Psalm 22. 1. My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? Canticles 5. 6. I opened to my well-beloved,
and my well-beloved had withdrawn himself; then a God hiding himself, and
withdrawing his felt love to my faith, may be my God. Esaias 49. 14. Zion says,
My Lord has forgotten me: so Mary Magdalen says, John 20. 13. They have taken
away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him: then he may be a
forgetting and taken away Lord to my feeling, and yet to my faith also my Lord;
as though I were in Hell and Christ in Heaven, I may believe and apprehend the
relation standing to me, as the wife may believe that the angry and the
forsaking husband is still her husband; Gods glooming sometimes does not break
the relation of a Lord or Savior to me, no not in my apprehension and feeling.

3. Assertion. To believe that God is my Lord, who from eternity did choose
me, and of intention sent Christ to die for me, is not essential to saving
faith; for the doubtings of many believers who dare not say (he is my God) and
yet dare not renounce God, or give over their claim and interest in Christ,
does evidence manifestly that such doubting ones do also believe, though they
cannot believe so much as appropriation of Christ as proper possession. Hence
two cases they be in, who thus doubt.

1. They believe but in the dark; They stay on Jehovah, and yet see no light,
Esaias 50. 10. as children say their lesson sometimes without their book, and as
those who are in the dark make their hands serve for their eyes, and grope
with their hands stretched out, when they cannot see with their eyes.

2. They be ready to half the Covenant, and to divide it betwixt God and their
souls, and believe God to be a father, and yet dare not say they are Gods
sons: so the Prodigal divides, as it were, the relation of a father, from
the relation of a son, which is the bad Logic of unbeleefe, Luke 15. 18. I
will arise and go to my Father, and say, Father, I have sinned against thee;
then he believed him with a broken and halting faith to be his Father, yet
his petition, says he, did not fully believe himself to be a son, and
therefore he craveth a place in the house inferior to a son, ver. 19. Make
me as one of thy hired servants.

The other question is, What warrant has any weak doubter to believe that God
is his God in Christ? And there be two grounds on which the doubt is bottomed.

1. No man knows whether he be elected or reprobated, when he is first
charged to believe.

2. The Lord is not really (a part rei) the God and the Lord of the thousand
part, who hears the Gospel, and are condemned, because they believe not on
the only begotten Son of God: I set down these Assertions for an Answer.

1. Assertion. The question is often, not so much whether a poor soul would
have Christ or no, (for there is no question of that) as if he would have
Christ to be his God, in his own legal way, that is, if he would first be
holy and worthy, and then take Christ for his Savior.

2. Assertion. Gods Decree of Election, or his intention to save me, is not the
proper object of my Faith, but rather of my sense and feeling: we go mightily
beside the line, in the method of believing, when we go to believe at first
Gods intention to save me: The order is, being humbled for sin, we are to
adhere to the goodness of the promise, not to look to his intention to
persons, but to his complacencie and tenderness of heart to all humble
sinners: So Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 15. embraces by all means that good and faithful
saying, Jesus Christ came to save sinners; before he put himself in as the
first of these sinners, as the condemned man believes first the Kings grace
and clemency to all humbled supplicants, who sueth for grace, before he
believe grace to himself; and if this were not, the method of applying Christ
were unreasonable. The woman diseased with the bloody issue, heard of Jesus,
and therefore came and touched the hemme of his garment: What had she heard?
nothing of his exorable kindness and tender mercy toward her self, but
toward others, and upon this believed; so a Rope is cast down in the Sea to a
multitude of drowned men, and all are bidden, for their life, lay hold on the
Rope, that they may be saved; it were unseasonable and foolish curiosity for
any of these poor men, now upon death and life, commanded to hold fast the
Rope, to dispute whether did the man, who cast down the Rope, intend and
purpose to save me, or not, and while my mind be at a point in that, I will
not put out one finger to touch the Rope: but fool, dispute with hands and
arms, and lay hold on the remedy, and do not thou begin a plea with Christ,
and leave that question to another time. A Prince proclaims a free market of
gold, moneys, fine linen, rich garments, and all precious Jewels, to a number
of poor men, upon a purpose to enrich some few men, whom of grace he purposes
to make honorable Courtiers and Officers of Estate; all these men are now not
to dispute the Kings secret purpose, but to repair to the market, and to
improve their Princes grace, and buy without money. Christ holds forth his
Rope to drowned and lost sinners, and lays out an open market of the rich
treasures of heaven; do thou take it for granted, without any further dispute,
as a principle after to be made good, that Christ has thoughts of grace and
peace concerning thee, and do but now husband well the grace offered, lay hold
on Christ aye while he put thee away from him, and if there be any question
concerning Gods intention of saving thee, let Christ first move the doubt, but
do not thou be the first mover.

3. Assertion. It is true, your Christian name, John, Peter, Anne, Mary, are
not in the New Testament, but here is as good and better, and a more
individual designation then your Christian name, if thou bring sin with thee
to Christ, and there be no man but he has this name, bring a lost soul with
thee. Luke 19. 10. The son of man came to seek and to save that which was
lost. Matthew 9. 13. Christ says, I am not come to call the righteous, but the
sinners to repentance. Then if it be said, What is thy name, who layest hold on
Christ? there is an answer, My name is a sinner. 2. Leave, behind thee,
righteousness when thou come to Christ, thou may easily leave true
righteousness behind thee, and come without it, because true righteousness
of thy own is a non-ens, and just nothing, and nothing is the proper heritage
of the poor; bring want and poverty with thee, and there is another name,
say, Lord Jesus, my name is not in the royal promise of grace made to
Traitors and Rebels against the Crown of Heaven, but my name is poverty,
they call me want and necessity; and all men hitherto has these two names,
sinners, poor and unrighteous; but three bring some feeling and sense; come
wearied and laden, and then thou have a third name. This is harder, yet it is
amongst the most easy things required of thee; the Law which works (if it
were felt and heard) will work this in thee, and though then thou want it,
thou have that which is nearest to it, even sin; for these two be of one
blood almost, to wit, want of clothing, and nakedness, a heavy load, and a
wearied body; and nakedness is a near friend to shame and cold, and poverty
is very near of kindred to hunger; hunger is come of that same stock and
house; and if thou can say, O Physician Jesus, my right name is sickness; O
rich Jesus, they call me want; O bread of life, they call me hunger; it is
enough.

Object. 1. But it is not faith, but presumption, for me, without a warrant,
and without law or right, to believe in a God, who was indeed Daniels God, but
not mine.

Answ. 1. Presumption is a sister to Pride; if thou be wearied and laden, thou
cannot readily be proud. 2. Thou ask a warrant of Law to believe in Christ.
I answer by another question: What Law or Warrant have country beggars to cry
for Alms at the hands of the rich? often Acts of Parliament and Laws are
against begging. What Warrant or Law have they to beg? Let the beggar answer
it himself. I have no Law (he can answer) but I am poor, I have nothing, and
I cannot steal, I cannot starve; so by the Law of want thou restest upon Jesus
Christ; I want all things, Christ has all things, and wants nothing; and
this is as good as any act of Parliament in the world.

Object. 2. Daniel was one of the righteous men on earth; Noah, Job, and
Daniel, were none-suches, Ezekiel. 14. 14.

Answ. The Cart wheel moves, because it is round, not that it may be round,
but the sinner does not believe, because he is righteous, but that he may be
righteous; it were a wicked faith, and it were to believe treacherously, to
believe, because you are holy, or as holy as Daniel; faiths bottom is want,
sin, damnation; and the Kingdom of believers is but (as we say) a nest of
beggars.

Object. 3. But if I were worthy to believe and rely upon Christ, I should then
come to him with some boldness.

Answ. This is the Papists merit of congruitie, that we will not come to
Christ while we have an hire, and it is seeming humility, but real pride: I
will not come to Christ's Market, without money; you will not come to the
fountain, while your thirst be quenched, nor to him who can give you fine
gold, and fine linnin, while first you be rich and well clothed, and that is
cursed righteousness, and unholy holiness, that any soul gets out of
another then Jesus Christ.

Object. 4. But if I cannot come to Christ without sense of sin and poverty,
then is my coming and my act of believing founded and bottomed upon something
that I have before I come to Christ.

Answ. This is the question betwixt us and Antinomians, like the very question
betwixt us and Papists concerning the authority of the Scripture: but I say, as
the Churches authority is not the formal reason why I believe Scripture to
be the Word of God, yet the Churches authority is not excluded from being a
mean and motive; for, Romans Chapter 10. verse 17. Faith comes by hearing,
so Christ himself is the formal reason of my Faith, I rest on Christ, because
he is Christ: sense of poverty is a strong motive, for except I be driven and
compelled to come to Christ, I shall never come; sense of poverty is not the
foundation of the wall, yet it may be a pinning in the wall.

Antinomians teach, D. Tobias Crisp. Christ exalted, Sermon. 15. Sermon. 16. Sermon.
17.
that inherent qualifications and all works of sanctification are but
doubtful evidences to us of our interest in Christ, or that we are in the
state of grace. What then makes me, John, Anne, by name, sure in my
conscience that I am in Christ, even to the full removal of all
heart-questions?

That which reveals (say they) my evidence of assurance, that I am my
well-beloveds, and that he is mine, is the Spirit speaking personally and
particularly to my heart with a voice, Son, be of good cheer, thy sins are
forgiven thee; and this is that broad Seal of the Spirit making an immediate
impression on my heart, without any begged testimony of works of
sanctification, which is the revealing evidence of my interest in Christ; and
the receiving evidence is Faith, believing this testimony of the Spirit, only
because Gods Spirit says so, not because I have evidences, by particular works
of sanctification, such as are universal obedience, sincerity of heart, and
love of the brethren.

But to speak a little of this for the times; The Papist is the black Devil,
taking away all certainty of assurance that we are in Christ, or that any man
can know this. The Antinomian is the Golden white Devil; a spirit of Hell
clothed with all Heaven, and the notions of Free Grace: and first, the
Wellhead of all is, Free Grace in us is a dream, Sanctification inherent is a
fiction, Christ is all, there is no Grace existent in the crearure, Grace is
all in Christ, and nothing but imputed righteousness, for if works of
sanctification be not marks intelligible, or which can come in under the
capacity of received light, to be known with any certainty or assurance. 1. The
joy and rejoicing that we have in the the testimony of a good conscience, that
in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace
of God, we have our conversation in the World, 2 Cor. 1. 12. must be a dream.
David, Job, Moses, Samuel, the Prophets and Apostles, their joying in a good
conscience, arise from doubtful and conjecturall evidences: yea, no man can
say in any assurance, (I believe in Christ,) (in the inner man, I delight in
the Law of the Lord,) (I am crucified to the world,) (my conversation is in
Heaven) for all these are inherent qualifications in the child of God, but
they are doubtful and uncertain. How then has God promised to love the
righteous, to reward believing with life eternal, to give the prize to him
that runs? etc. 2. The testimony of the Spirit bearing witness to our
spirit, that we are the children of God, Romans 8. 16. is in this sense an
immediate act of the Spirit, because reflex acts of the soul are performed
without any other medium or means, but that whereby the direct acts are
performed: I know that I know; I know that I believe; my sense by that same
immediate operation of the Spirit, by the which I know God without any other
light, teaches me to know that I know God: even as by light I see colors, but
my common sense needs not another Sun, or another light, to make me know that
I see colors. The Lamb when it sees a Wolf, though it never did see a Wolf
before, knows it to be an enemy, and flees: but to make it know that it
knows the Wolf, there is nothing required but the internal and common
instinct of nature: So when I believe in Christ, that habitual instinct of the
grace of God, actuated and stirred up by the Spirit of God, makes me know that
I know God; and that I believe, and so that I am in Christ to my own certain
feeling and apprehension; but this does not hinder, but the assurance of my
interest in Christ is made evident to me by other inferior evidences, 1 John
2. 3 And hereby we know, that we know him, if we keep his Commandments. By the
keeping of Gods Commandments we do not know simply that we know God by
certainty of faith: But we know that we know God these two ways: 1. We know
(the instinct of the new man being stirred up to action by that wind which
blows when and where it lists) our knowing of God to be sound saving, and
true. We do not so much know our knowing of God, by this supernatural sense,
as we know the supernatural qualification and sincerity of our knowing of God.
So that we rather know the qualification of the act, that the work is done
according to God, then the act according to its substance, though we do also
know it in this relation, 1 Ioh. 3. 14. We know that we have passed from death
to life, because we love the brethren: that is, our love to the brethren does
evidence to us, both that we are translated to the Kingdom of grace, and also
it does evidence that that translation is real, true, sincere, sound and
effectual by love, and all the fruits of the Spirit. 2. By these works of
sanctification we have evidence that we have interest in Christ, not as by
former light, suggesting to us that the immediate impression of this great and
broad Seal of the King of glory, and his personal and particular testimony is
true; (for Gods Spirit needs not another witness to add authority to what
he says,) but because this conclusion, (Thou John, Anna, have interest to
Christ to thy own feeling) must be proved by Scripture (except with
Enthusiasts and fanatic Spiritualists we separate the Word and the Spirit)
therefore these works of sanctification prove the conclusion consequenter by
Scripture and sense, and so lead us to the word of promise, thus to prove this
conclusion, (I John, Peter, Anna, have interest in Christ, to my own reflect,
and private assurance;) the major proposition is made good by Scripture; the
Assumption by sense; and the conclusion leads us to the certainty of faith in
the promises: as,

He that believes, and makes sure his belief, by walking not after the
flesh, but after the Spirit, has a clear evidence to his own feeling, that
he has interest in Christ.

But I John, Peter, Anna, do believe, and do make sure my belief, by walking
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.

Therefore I John, Peter, Anna have a clear evidence to my own feeling, that
I have interest in Christ.

The proposition is Scripture, John 3. 36. Ioh. 5. 24. Ioh. 11. 25, 26. Romans 8.
1, 2. 1 Ioh. 1. 4. 1 Ioh. 2. 3. The Assumption is made sure by sense, not at
all times, but when the wind is fair, and the Spirit is breathing upon the
soul; for though I do believe and walk after the Spirit, yet to my own feeling
I have only evidence of my interest ^n Christ, when the Spirit stirs up my
sense to compare my says, and walking with the promises of God in Christ: But
says the Antinomians, Alas, all the certainty then, and the whole personal
evidence that I have to know that I have interest in Christ, is ultimately and
principally resolved on this weak and rotten foundation, to wit, On my own good
works, which being examined by the law of God, will be found so sinful as they
shall involve me under the curse of God, and so the debate of conscience shall
stand in full vigor, and I shall never be satisfactorily resolved of my interest
in Christ: for you lead me from the impression of the immediate seal of the
spirit to my good works; and this is to drive me off Christ, and put me back
again to my old Jailer and my old keeper the law. But I answer, this
consequence is just nothing: for if my good works of sanctification were causes
of my peace of conscience, this connection had some color of truth; but though
those works be sinful by concomitance, because sin cleaves to them, yet
because my supernatural sense of the Spirit suggesteth that these works are
the fruits of faith, and are done in some measure of sincerity, and flow not
from the spirit of the Law, but from the Spirit of the Gospel: therefore they
lead me to Christ, and drive me upon a clear Evangelick promise, That 1. the
adhering sinfulness of my works are purged in Christ's blood. 2. That this
promise is a shore before mine eyes. He that fights the good fight of faith,
a Crown of righteousness is laid up for him, 2 Timothy 4, 7, 8. He that runs,
shall obtain, 1 Cor. 9. 24. And here is an Evangelick word, Revel. 22. 14.
Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have right to the
tree of life, and may enter in through the gates to the City. So that the right
of your peace and clear evidence, in assurance of your right to the Tree of
life, is not laid upon your works, but upon the promises of the Gospel: only
your inherent qualification leads you as a moral motive to look to the
promises of God, which is the bottom and the foundation of your peace; even as
my walking, eating, drinking, may assure me I am a living man; and from the
knowledge that I live, I come to know what I stand in relation to the King, as
a son and an heir of a Crown; yet my right to the Crown (suppose I were
the eldest son of a King) stands not on this pillar, that I eat and drink
and live, but upon my birth and my relation to such a father. All my inherent
qualifications do well prove that the tree and stock they grow on, is faith;
but is it hence proved that the Tree is bottomed upon the branches? nay, but by
the contrary, the branches are stocked upon the Tree.

3. If works of sanctification be no sure marks of my interest in Christ,
because sin adhereth to them, and the sin adhering to them, involveth me in
condemnation; then neither can faith in Christ be a sure mark of my interest
in Christ, because faith is always mixed with sinful doubting: for I do not
think that Antinomians do believe with all their heart; and sin of unbeleefe
adhering to our faith no less involveth the sinner in a curse, being committed
against the Gospel, then sins against the Law. And therefore as faith
justifies, not because great and perfect, but because lively and true, as the
palsy hand of a man may receive a sum of gold, no less then a strong and
healthy arm; so also do our inherent works of sanctification give us
evidences that we are in Christ, and so lead us to the promises of the Gospel,
as signs, not causes of our interest in Christ, and that under this notion;
because they are sincerely performed, not because they are perfect and without
all contagion of sin cleaving to them.

4. In exalting Christ's righteousness one way, by making Christ all, they make
Christ nothing another way, by vilifying the glory of sanctifying grace; for we
are not by good works to make our calling and election sure to our selves, and
in the evidence of our own consciences, if our good works be no signs of our
interest in Christ.

5. The spirit which these men make the only witness, must be known to us by
Scripture, not to be a deluding spirit: for if this spirit cannot be known by
these things which are called, Galat. 5. 22. the fruits of the spirit, to wit,
by love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance: as the fruits are evidences of the life of the tree, men are to
labor for faith, and the raptures, impressions, and immediate and personal
influence of a Spirit from Heaven, without any conscience of holy living; and
this is the pathway for men void of all sanctification and inherent
qualifications to believe they are in Christ. So the Devil puts upon
holiness, inherent and constant walking with God, the foul scandal of fair
white civility, and market morality, that so men may walk after the flesh, and
believe the testimony of the broad Seal of an immediate working Spirit.

Object. 5. But what be these which go before faith in Christ?

Answ. 1. Sense of sin. 2. Half an hope, etc. What if I venture out upon
Jesus Christ for my life? he is called a Savior, a Prince of much tenderness
of grace. 3. The soul is first put to What shall I do? Luke 16. 3. 4. It is
put to an half prising of Christ, and to some raw wishes to have Jesus Christ,
but otherwise no man can prize Christ, but he who has him already. However, we
have in all this an advantage of our adversaries the Papists now in Arms, they
call faith and resting on God as our God, Pride: as if it were pride for the
drowned man to flee to the rock, and pride for the Physician to cry, O my
Physician help. Yet do Papists really cry, O my Idol, awake; O my god of
bread, hear; O my intercessour Mary, answer me: But be not afraid of their
gods: Nor are we to fear their prayers to Saints, or the Cavailiers Fridayes
fasting. But we are to learn how in time of need to make use of faith; and let
Israel trust in the Lord, he is an hiding place and a covering in the ill day:
and let the weak soul that finds nothing but darkness, wants, fears, from
that flee to Christ: bleeding of wounds is here preparatory to believing: Want
is beginning of motion; let it be made a motive of believing: the less
evidence, let adherence be the stronger.

The God of Daniel.] The History makes it most evident, that Daniels God, and
his Honor and Court, both were aimed at, to be laid on the dust by his
enemies. Here Daniels name goes through, verse 25. all people, nations,
languages, that dwell on all the earth, and the God of Daniel is exalted. Hence
observe, first, how God blesses right preciseness and strictness in his way.
Moses stands by this (not an hoof) and he obtains his end, God brings
him and Israel out of Egypt. Mordecai not half a leg to Haman, and he is
promoted to great honor. What lost they ever, who stood upon the latitude of
an hair for Christ? either they gained both life and Gods Cause, as Daniel did
here, and Jesus Christ, who died, but put his life in pawn three days, and
took it up again and gained the Cause; or if they lost their lives, they
gained the Cause, as the Martyrs of Christ: and therefore let not the Saints
bear the name of Precisians, except in an heavenly sense, because they walk
precisely, Ephesians. 5. 15. These be the right Precisians who contend for
substance, for God, for Heaven, for the purity of the Gospel. And certainly God
is not a thing indifferent, and excellent Jesus Christ is no circumstance; but
those be damnable Precisians who contend for feathers, and things indifferent.
Now Court-favour of Princes, this clay-world, honor, ease, are really in their
nature things indifferent, and being compared with Christ (and Christ is no
trifle, but all substance) are less then things indifferent, even toys,
shadows, loss, dung; therefore the Malignants who make this choice, are the
Precisians.

2. Obser. How God disappointeth all the purposes of his enemies, and honors
those who fear him, and makes Daniel evidently known to be the true Royalist:
and observe how the enemies must be disappointed: how can it be otherwise? for
first, they take two cross ways to compass their end: First, sinful means;
there is no way for the Princes of Zoan to come by their ends but idolatry:
surely they are fools, and drunken men staggering in their vomit, Isa. 19. 11,
14. and the adversaries now find no better means to set up their Idol-god in
Britain, and their abominable Mass, then after they have made the Prince
glad with their lies, to kill and destroy the innocent, and devour and eat up
the Lords people as bread. Secondly, they set the policy of hell against the
wisdom of God: hence so many plots, first to divide, then to seduce; so many
lies and perjuries in print, and all with this profession, To defend the true
Protestant Religion: But surely he has a strong Metaphysicall faith, more
subtle then solid, who believes that an army of Papists, led on by the rules
of Jesuits, and helped by the forces of the Irish Rebels, have a mind to
defend the true Protestant Religion: I hope never to believe it. Yet as God
disappointed Daniels enemies, so are they misled in all their purposes: God
has always done this. The enemy of God and a good Cause, Psalm. 7. 14. is with
child, but the Justice of God is Godfather, and gives the name of the child,
it is named, A lie: behold, he travelleth with iniquity, and has conceived
mischief: and the birth, when it is borne, is no King, no God, he brings
forth a lie: Esaias 33. 11. Ye shall conceive chafe: and the child is a
monstrous bastard, a child of straw and stubble: and ye shall bring forth
stubble: Job 15. 35. They conceive mischief, and bring forth vanity. There is
a long web now in weaving in England, and many hands spin threads to the web, as
England, Scotland, Ireland, Rome, Italy, France, Spain, Denmark, Papists,
Jesuits, Cardinals, Princes, Pope, Prelates, Politicians: and Jehovah the Lord
has an hand eminently in the contexture; and almost all (except the Lord and
his Church) have sundry ends, therefore they weave in threeds of sundry
colors, Babylon, Rome, and Papists are for their idolatry set up in Britain:
God has broken that thread once, twice, but they cast new knots, and do still
spinne and weave Prelates ends with shouting, and garments rolled in blood (let
our great Diana stand) the honor, the bellies of fourteen, and twenty and six
must be defended by the sword, and the blood of the Church of Christ. God has
often broken their thread: Ireland has no end but that their Babel shall be
built again with blood, and their hearts like a piece of the nether millstone
are grinding blood and revenge; this end must fall. The Politician and
Malignants end is the world, and the glory of Court, and their glory is very
lean: Princes weave in their thread, to set up their absolute and independent
sovereignty, and if any more be intended, God knows; but by the wool we may
judge of the web. But when all is done in this long and great web, though the
enemies black policy be transparent and sevved with white thread: hear the
conclusion of all, Psalm. 33. 10. The Lord brings the counsel of the heathen
to naught, he makes the devices of the people of none effect. 11. (But) the
counsel of the Lord stands for ever.

For he is the living God] Darius says in this verse, and in the follovving,
much of God and of his Nature, Greatness, Power, and Sovereignty. Hence learn
we, that how much of God is revealed to us, so far are we to have high and
noble thoughts, and suitable expressions of God; hence are we Christians far
more to think and speak of God; and that upon these grounds, Because he is 1.
God. 2. Great. 3. Gracious. 4. Glorious. 5. Beautiful. 6. Omnipotent.


1. The notion; and that great thing God is admirable. God will say no more to
put Abraham upon a course of contentment, when he had the spoil of the Kings of
Sodom, and to set him in a way of obedience, but Genesis 17. 1. I am God
all-sufficient, and goodness and mercy are included in the very essence of God,
Hos. 11. 9. I will not execute the fierceness of my wrath against Ephraim: for
I am God, and not man. And he says no more in the Covenant, and it is much and
all. I will be your God; for if you say God, you say all that can be said.

2. For greatness any way, he is above all; hear what Zophar says, Job. 11. 7.
Can thou by searching find out God? can thou find out the Almighty unto
perfection? 8. It is high as Heaven, what can thou do? deeper then hell,
what can thou know? 9. The measure thereof longer then the Earth, and broader
then the Sea. 2. Consider the supreme absolute Sovereignty that he has over
Heaven and Earth; what created royalty is in the pieces of Clay, who carry
diadems of clay on their heads, is eminently in him, Artaxerxes is but King of
some Kings; but God is absolutely the supreme Monarch, Superior, Landlord and
King of Kings, and of all Kings and Lord of Lords, Ahashuerosh sent his royal
mandates through an hundred and twenty seven Provinces: he sends his
Officers of the state of Heaven, his Angels, through his Monarchy of Heaven and
Earth, and they fulfill his will, Psalm. 103. 20. He sends his Sea-posts,
stormy winds to destroy Armado's, and to break the ships of Tarshish, Psalm.
30. verse 4. The Lord is great, and greatly to be praised, he is to be feared
above all Gods. And we put him out of his Throne, when we appoint Peers to
sit and give Counsel, and make Laws with this highest Lord; make a Throne of
glory the height of thousand thousand millions of Heaven of Heavens, and set
that Throne above the circumference of all these Heavens; set Worlds of Angels
and millions of Seraphims, or if there be created Arch-Angells, and thousand
thousands of Dominions, Thrones, and Principalities, as servants under the
footstool of his Throne, yet he were set too low; he deserves a Throne
above that Throne.

3. Consider his gracious nature. 1. How tender hearted to his afflicted
people, Jud. 10. 16. The Lords soul was grieved for the misery of Israel, Jer.
31. 20. Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? for since I did speak
against him, I do earnestly remember him, my bowels are troubled for him, I
will surely have mercy on him, says the Lord? What tenderness! O what
compassion in the heart of an infinite God! Psalm. 147. 3. The Lord heals the
broken in heart, he binds up their wounds. O how softly and compassionately
does his heavenly hand put in joint the bones of a broken heart? his Son Christ
has a room in his heart for the Lambs which are not able to go there alone,
Esai. 40. 11. He shall gather the Lambs with his arms, he shall carry them in
his bosom.

4. He is (Psalm. 13. 1. Clothed with glory, Psalm. 104. 1. Clothed with honor
and majesty. 2. Covered with light (uncreated light) as with a garment. How
dear must every yard of that garment be? poor earthly Kings ride upon horses of
flesh; He rode upon a Cherub, and did fly upon the wings of the wind, Psalm.
18. 10. Nor is he then upon his highest horse, he can ride higher then on the
wings of the wind, Psalm. 104. 3. Psalm. 18. 10. Kings of Clay have their Tents
on the cold Earth: He makes dark Clouds his pavilion: It should kill the
holiest on earth to see one glimpse of his glory.

5. What beauty must be in this Lord? Angels and glorified souls are not able
to look off his Face for all eternity, Mat. 18. 10. Revel. 22. 3. Esai. 24. 23.
The Moon shall be confounded, and the Sun ashamed, when the Lord of Hosts
shall reign in Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem before his ancients gloriously. He
must be a fair Lord when the fair Sun blusheth, and is ashamed to appear and
shine before him. Nothing David desired in this side of time, but to dwell all
the days of his life in the house of the Lord, and behold the beauty, (the
heavenly increated beauty) of the Lord, Psalm. 27. 3. Put all the imaginable
colors of the Firmament, Of the morning sky, Of all the Lillies and Roses of
the Earth, which surpass Salomons royalty, in one; Imagine a Rose to be of
the quantity of the Earth, all these should be but created shadows to him,
Zach. 9. 17. How great is his goodness? how great is his beauty? he is both
good and fair.

6. Who can speak of omnipotence and boundless power in God, Esai. 40. 12. Who
has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meted out Heaven with a
span, and comprehended the dust of the Earth in a measure, and weighed the
mountains in Scales, and the hills in Balance? there is but one in all the
World, and from eternity to eternity never was there any save one who can do
all this. What fingers be those, which at one time are in the furthest borders
of the Eastern Heaven, and of the Western Heaven? ver. 15. Behold the Nations
are as a drop of a bucket, and are compted as the small dust of the balance,
behold he takes up the Isles as a very little thing. And he can take up the
whole I Will of Britain in his hand, and can hang the weight of the massy body
of Heaven and Earth on the top of his finger, who is he who hangs the Earth,
yea, the whole world upon nothing? what hinders, (seeing there be such
Broils, Tumults, Motions in Heaven, Earth, and Hell) but this great huge
vessel of the great All, this whole world should fall to the one side and
break? but omnipotence holds it up: who has Arms to spread a web of black
darkness from the East to the West? Esai. 50. 3. I cloth the Heavens with
blackness, and I make sackcloth their covering; and alas, all that I say here
is nothing; it must be true here, praestat tacere quam pauca discere; better be
silent in so great a matter, as speak little.

Use is, To teach us not to be in love with the creature, or with men. What is
man, but a weeping, groaning, dying, nothing? Esai. 40. 17. All Nations are
before God as nothing and less then nothing, and vanity. What is nothing? it
is the least thing that can be, but (I pray you) what is less then nothing?
nothing can be less then nothing, but all Nations being compared with God
evanish infinite miles, out of the world of some things: and if one man be
nothing, nations of men, and nations of nations are nothing: multiply Ciphers
to millions of millions, they cannot make a number, because every Cipher is
nothing, and therefore the product must be nothing; so multiply infinitely
Nations, let Spain, France, Italy, Ireland, Denmark, and what the power of men
can make, the product shall be nothing. Millions and Hosts of men are millions
and Hosts of vanities, God is all, and in infinite all, and what can we do to
make him lovely and desirable. We may preach this admirable Lord, but we shall
never out-preach him; and praise him, but shall never outpraise him, his favor
is more to be sought then favor of Kings, he is more to be feared then Kings,
Esai. 5 12. I, even I, am the Lord, the Lord that comfort you: Who art thou
that should be afraid of a man, that shall die, and of the Son of man that
shall be made as grass? Hence are you to see to the prerogative royal of the
King, but more to the prerogative royal of the Prince of the Kings of the
Earth: And therefore, O Judges be wise: O all you who carry on your heads,
Diadems, and royal Crowns of yellow dust, and glistering clay, I mean of gold
and precious stones, stoop, stoop before this Monarch, cast down your Crowns
and Scepters at the feet of the King of Kings: Know your Superior the highest
Landlord of dying Monarchies, Zach. 2. 12. It is said, The Lord shall inherit
Judah, and shall choose Jerusalem: O but Kings and Dominions who keep Judah
captive, cry out with a shout, Judah shall serve us, and our King, and Jesus
Christ shall not reign over us: but there is a royal Proclamation given with
an, o yes, from his palace of glory, who inhabiteth Eternity, v. 13. Be silent,
O all flesh, before the Lord. So Psalm. 2. 2. Jew and Gentile are upon foot
raging, and consulting with all, Let us break his bands and cast his cords from
us; nay v. 6. one who is not on foot, but sits in Heaven, laughing, not
troubling himself with the Tumults of clay-nothings, sent out a princely
mandate! I have set my King upon my holy Hill of Zion: I have put the Crown on
Christ's head, what men of dust and ashes shall pull it off his head? Psalm. 46.
9. He breaks the Bow, and cutteth the Spear, he burns the Chariots in the
fire. The heathen cannot endure this, they fly on armies, and cry with a
shout, He shall not break our Bows, He shall not burn our Chariots with fire;
therefore a royal Commandment and Decree comes out, v. 10. Be still, and know
that I am God, I will be exalted above the heathen, I will be exalted on Earth.
He is crying, O Rome: O Spain: O Ireland: O Kings, and powers of the world, O
Babylon, Lady of Nations: O Pope and Cardinals hold your peace, speak no more,
Esai. 46. 13. I bring near my Righteousness, it shall not be far off, and my
salvation shall not tarry, and I will place salvation in Zion, for Israel, (for
Britain) my glory.

2. Use is, To bring hearts in a fervor and sickness of love with God, and make
us mould higher and more Majestic thoughts and conceptions of this most high
Lord, then ordinarily we do; and therefore consider, how inconsiderable and
incomprehensible he is. 2. Summon all created glory before him, by way of
comparison. 3. Look at him as the last end. First then consider two words that
Paul has, Ephesians. 3. 18, 19. That you may be able (it is his prayer) with all the
Saints to comprehend, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height,
19. And to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge. Now from the love
of Christ you may take the measure, in some proportion, of this great Lord
himself: Then conceive a love higher then the Heaven of Heavens, deeper then
the Earth, broader then the Sea, yea broader and longer then the circumference
of the outmost shel, or orb of the Heaven of Heavens, that love should not
pass knowledge; but seeing I am warranted to speak of love according to
dimensiones of Height, Breadth, Depth, Length; But imagine, in the capacity of
knowledge and understanding, ten thousand millions of new created Heavens and
Worlds at the East end of this Heaven that now is, and ten thousand millions of
new Worlds created at the West end of this Heaven that now is, and let your
knowledge run along to the North and the South, and to the thirty two points of
the four Cardinal arches, here would be great Height, Length, Breadth, and
Depth of love; yet, I am sure, this love should not pass all knowledge, for
the understanding of man will go along through all these, to multiply and
multiply again and again, and yet all love within knowledge, What then must
himself be? if we could separate God and Gods Love. Again, conceive so many
multiplied new Worlds, new Heavens, new Earths, new Seas, new Forests, Woods,
Trees, Reeds, Herbs, Grass, Stones, and all the rest multiplied; and conceive
so many worlds of men and new created Angels, and let all these millions of
VVoods, Trees, Forests, Herbs, Grass, be all made pens, and let all these
thousands millions of new created Seas, Fountains, Rivers, be all Ink; and all
these thousands millions of Heavens, yea of Heavens, Air, Earth be paper, and
let these thousands of millions of men and Angels write Books and Psalms of
praise of this infinite and incomprehensible Lord, and let their wits be
enlarged in the capacity of so many thousand millions of degrees of
understanding, above what they now have, according to the former multiplied
numbers, and let their wits for all eternity, conceive new expressions and most
heavenly conceptions of the infinite excellency, transcendent glory,
incomparable goodness, and matchless and boundless highness, greatness,
omnipotence of this never enough admired and adored Lord, of this high and
lofty one who inhabiteth eternity, and yet all these should not pass
knowledge; for you and I, and any ordinary understanding of no great capacity
may know all this, and therefore all these should not say any thing to express
this Love and this Lord who passes all knowledge. O if we could be drawn to a
higher measure of Love, and to put a greater price on this Lord then we do. 2.
From this we may easily see the comparison betwixt this Lord and Peers of
created nothings: And if all Nations be before him as nothing, and as less
then nothing, as it is said by himself Es. 40. 17. Then say, O small, base
nothing of a Creature: O highest: O excellency of all things in the Creator: O
little and really small creature: O great and surpassing great, and
incomparable Creator: O man, poor man, that living lie; and that dying and
expiring nothing: but O infinite all: O unspeakable and infinite glory of
uncreated being! O man, a breathing fable, a living and a laughing vanity: O
self-sufficient and al sufficient life of solid happiness: O creature: a dying
vanity, and a weeping nothing, a nothing rejoicing, eating, drinking, sighing,
dying: O highest Creator: O eternity of ever-living and ever-joying life: O
self-living immortality of endless and uncreated joy: O created sparks, and
poor drops of creature-goodnesse, and creature-mercy: O Sea: O boundless
world of worlds of infinite goodness, and bottom-lesse mercy in the Creator of
all things: O shamed and despised royalty of Princes of Earth and Clay: O
never enough admired glory of uncreated royalty in the incomprehensible God! O
fair Sun! O beautiful Moon! but rather, O confounded and shamed Sun and
Moon, Esa. 24. 23. and, O infinitely fair and glorious Lord who made Sun and
Moon: O pleasant Roses and Lillies: but, O pleasanter Lord the Creator of Roses
and Lillies: O mighty and powerful Kings and Emperors, but most mighty and
matchless King of Kings: O foolish and unwise men: O unstedfast and changeable
Angels: O Lord there is no searching out of thy understanding: O unchangeable
and unmovable mover of all things: O pieces of Breathing, Laughing, and then
dying Clay: O creature of yesterday, of the last bypast hour, for the world is
not of one weeks standing to him; seeing a thousand years are to him as one
day. But, O Lord, The ancient of days, Daniel 7. 13. O Father of eternity,
Esai. 9. 6. O King of ages, 1. Tim. 1. 17. And King of time: O weak men: O
mightlesse and infirm Heavens which shall wax old as a garment: O eternal
Lord: O what an Arm of omnipotency is in him, who shall with a shake of his
right Arm move the Heavens and loose all the fixed Stars, and cause them to
fall out of the Heaven, as Figs fall off a Fig Tree shaken with a mighty Wind,
Revel. 6. 13. O all you created Gardens and Orchards and Paradises, be ashamed,
blush and hide your selves beside the Tree of life, which bears twelve manner
of fruit every month: Every Apple growing on this Lord who is the Tree of
life, is life eternal: O Gold: O Silver: O Rubies: O precious Stones, much
desired by Adams sons! What are you to him whose City is fairer, Revel. 21.
18. And the building of the Wall was of Jasper, and the City was pure gold like
unto clear glass. He says not there was abundance of gold in the City, and
multitudes of precious stones, but the City was all gold, and precious stones;
a City like Rome, Venetia, or Constantinople; in which, Timber, Walls, Stones,
Streets, and all the buildings were nothing but precious stones and gold, were
admirable; O all fair Rivers and Seas, what are you but pooles of dead water,
being compared with a pure River of water of life, proceeding out of the Throne
of God, and of the Lamb? Rev. 22. 1. Every drop of that water is an heaven. O
created welbeloveds you are black, and the Sun has looked on you, when you
come out and stand beside the Standard bearer amongst ten thousand, Cant. 5.
10. Oh, who are sick of love for this Lord: O for eternities leisure to look on
him, to feast upon a sight of his Face: O for the long summer-Day of endless
ages to stand beside him and to enjoy him! O time: O sin be removed out of the
way: O Day: O fairest of Days dawne: O morning of eternity break out, and
arise, that we may enjoy this incomprehensible Lord. And therefore, O come out
of the Creature. 3. Make not Clay and the Creature whose mother is purum nihil,
pure mere nothing, your last end; Alas, make not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
a post-horse to ride your own errands, or a Covenant with the most high Lord a
Chariot and Stirrup to mount upon the height of your carnal and Clay-projects:
this is, as if one should stop the entry of an Oven with a Kings roberoyall.
Let God, only God, be your last end.

1. He is the living God] The words Chajah and Havah, to be, and to live, are
near of kindred together, for living is the most excellent being, and it is
most agreeable to reason that JEHOVAH, who is the first being, and has being
of himself, should be the living God. And you do not find man called living
man, though man have a life, as God is called the living God; he is the living
God, because all life is originally in him, Psalm. 36. 9. With thee is the well
of life, Joh. 1. 4. In him was life; all heat is orignally in fire, and in
other things at the second hand: all light originally in the Sun; and other
things have light by loan only; and light in other things is from the Sun by
a sort of grace. 2. He is the living God, in opposition to dead Idols, who,
Psalm. 115. want life. 3. And have mouths and speak not, eyes they have, but
see not: you need not be afraid of the Pa^ists, gods of wood, and silver, and
gold. But because I haste to an and* The use is. 1. If all things that live,
and we mortal men borrow our life from God, we are to correct three errors.
1. We take this borrowed breath for our proper heritage, and we make this lif^
our Idol and our last end: hence all is done for this life, men betray the
cause of God for their life, men desert the cause of God, Parliament, Country
and Religion, for a life to them and theirs; men kill and destroy for life; men
rise early in the morning, and go late to bed at night, and eat the bread of
sorrow for life: but oh! little do we for the living God, and a communion with
the living God in the best life, the life of grace. Our second error is, that
as our life is but a borrowed thing, we do not think on two things; 1. The
paying of the annual of this borrowed sum, even the dedication of our life,
actions, ways, and purposes to God, and his honor: Secondly, we do not think
of paying back again the principal sum, and who has the sum in his hand, and
his soul in readiness to render to God? 2. But like bankrupts we mind not to
pay except we be arrested, and then the soul is taken from money, but if we do
not render it, the ghuest is pulled out, but does not come out, anima ejicitur,
non egreditur. Who lives as having no morrow? who walks as if death were
always at his right side? 3. We love best the worst of our life, we are much
for the time-accidents, and the clay-accidents of this life, such as are court,
honor, riches, pleasure, ease: some sell Religion to be free from plundering,
others to keep a whole skin, and to go to heaven, as they imagine without loss
of blood, comply with Papists, Prelates, Court, and the Times. And for that
which scarce deserves the name of Life; men give, (as the Liar says, Job. 2.
4.) skin for skin, and all that they have for life: but oh! that noble
accident of life, eternity of life, or rather that excellent substance,
eternal life, is much neglected; the life hidden up with Christ in God, Col 3.
3. is regarded.

2. How sweet is it to make God a friend sure and enduring to thy soul, who
cannot die? is it sure to trust in the Prince who returns to his Earth, the
Earth whereof he is a landed heritor, when he dies? Psalm. 146. 3. Is it not
surer to trust in the Lord who made the Heaven and the Earth? verse. 6. Is it
sure to trust, 1. Tim. 6. 17. (...), in riches which deal not plainly and
fairly with us, nor go out the high way, but are uncertain, like a friend, and
you know not when to have him, and when to want him? Is it not better to trust
in that living God? that God who lives for ever, whereas riches is a dead and
a dying God; David speaking of his own greatness, valor in war through Gods
strength, and of Nations, People, and Kingdoms, who served him, yet looks on
one above all, Psalm. 18. 46. The Lord lives and blessed be my Rock: this
puts me in mind of a Prince, who heard of the death of many of great and
noble friends in war, and that this Duke and this Prince, and this and this
worthy friend was killed in war, yet comforted himself with this, vivit
imperator, sat habeo; the Emperor lives, and I am happy enough. But is not
this better, to a soul that knows God, my father is killed, my brother lost,
my Prince dead, my dear friend buried, but God lives, and blessed be my Rock;
yea, but say thy God the King of Britain lives, yet his favor to thee may
die before he die himself, and then what have thou? Court, Court is made of
glass, and can glister, and be broken in one hour, the pavement of the
chamber of presence is Icy and slidy, and thou may fall: It is known to many,
the Courtier is as a compter laid down in the compting Table to day for a
thousand pound, and taken up and laid down in the next account for a farthing:
O but these two be sweetly combined; The ever-living God, and The ever-loving
God: how comfortable that I believe Gods love toward me is as old as God, and
that as God did never begin to be God, so he never began to love me, but as he
is eternal, so his love is eternal, and I know the Court shall not change
upon me.

And abiding, or steadfast for ever.] This is another attribute of Gods blessed
nature that Darius ascribes to God; He is a God eternal, Daniel 7. 13. He is
the ancient of days, Psalm. 102. 26. The Heavens shall perish, but thou shall
endure, yea all of them wax old as a garment: as a vesture shall thou change
them, and they shall be changed. 27. But thou art the same, and thy years shall
have no end. I know now that the whole created mass of heaven and earth, and
all therein, is but as a web of cloth, and as a Suit of clothes, and the best
end of the web is old and moth-eaten, and shall be laid by, as an old
threed-bare Cloak, ragged and holed, when God shall endure for ever and ever.
2. Time goes not about God, as it goes about creatures, there is not with him
yesterday and to morrow, and this year, and the last year; but his duration
is an instant standing always still; you and I slide through months and
years, and at length we are over ears in time, and under the water by death:
but he stands still, his being is in no flux or motion from first and last,
from time past to time to come, because he is Revel. 1. 17. The first and the
last, and v. 8. The Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, says the
Lord: he which is, and which was, and which is to come. Imagine there were a
verb that does involve an action done and ended yesterday, and in doing to
day, and to be done to morrow, and yet a completely perfected action that
should express Gods duration best; whereas our being takes three verbs to
express it, this man was, and continues yet, and to morrow shall be, but may
not be, 2 Pet. 3. 8. One day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a
thousand years as one day. And therefore he is the King of ages, 1 Timothy 1. 17.
as if generations and centuries of years were his subjects and servants. His
Son Christ is, Esaias 9. 6. The Father of Eternity: And Esaias 57. 15. He
inhabiteth Eternity. Men do not inhabit Eternity, For, in this, we do but
take by the curtains of time, and look into the borders of Eternity, and in
the life to come we shall be beside Eternity, and not inhabit Eternity, so as
if nonexistence and our glorified natures should involve a contradiction;
whereas existence is as essential to the glorious Majesty of God as his
blessed essence, and his blessed essence involveth a contradiction not to be.
And all time-gods are no gods: for if you say God, you say an eternal
necessity of an eternal and ever living God: And this makes God free from
change, and from ups and downs, from falling and rising, that are incident to
all created natures, even to men and Angels.

Use 1. If God be eternal and Lord of time, we must be careful that we say
not as the people does, Jer. 8. 20. The harvest is past, and the summer is
ended, and we are not saved. We are inclined to weep upon time as being too
long, especially when we our selves, and the Lords Church have sad and bloody
days. But the children of God have three advantages, which are as many motives
to cause us to submit to Gods dispensation of time. 1. Wait on, for Psalm. 9.
18. The hope of the poor shall not perish for ever, Psalm. 40. 1. I waited
patiently on the Lord; and what was the issue? and he inclined his ear and
heard my cry. 2. He brought me also out of the horrible pit, out of the mirie
clayes, and set my feet on a rock, and established my goings. Hence, as while
the bellows blow, the fire casts heat and light, so does the heat and fervor
of our long lodging under the cross make broad aims of praising and walking
thankefully; and when the breathing of the Bellows cease, the fire goes out
again; so when we are delivered, and are cooled, we turn cold in performing
real thankfulness to God; but let faith in long troubles wait on, and sow
seed in Heaven and on Christ (and that is excellent soil) and we shall reap
in due time, if we faint not. 2. Gods delays are the seeds of greater mercies;
we are (to borrow that expression) to pardon the long delayed salvation of God,
and to forgive times leaden wheels which move slowly, because God recompenseth
want of present deliverance with a superplus of grace; Was it not best that
Jacob was not blessed at the first? his faith was lengthned to continue with
this; I will not let thee go while thou bless me. The woman of Canaans
daughters body is not freed of the devil at the first or second cry, but her
own soul is enriched with faith, great faith, and fervor of spirit, to
continue in praying and humble submission to be willing to be a dog to
Christ; and here the Lord often recompenseth the want of Brass with the
presence of Gold. For faith here intrusteth a stock in Gods hand, and does
forbear and suspend both principal and annual till Gods time come. Therefore
we are to take heed that while we fret and challenge our Lord, that he loses
time, that we be not in the mean time losing time our selves; if he hold his
Church long in the furnace, if his Church do not join with God actively, to
melt her self, and to humble her self under Gods mighty hand, then the Church
loses her time, but God does not lose a moment. The Goldsmiths should hold his
vessel in the fire till it be melted and refined. Here also we are to
consider, that to deliver out of some cross, as it is Gods mercy, so it is my
duty. I lose a father, a child, a dear friend in war; I can never in this
life be delivered from this cross, according to the reality of it: for my
father, my child, my dear friend, once being dead, cannot return to me
again: but though I cannot be delivered from the real loss, yet may I by
Gods grace deliver my self from the impatient fretting and distrustful
apprehension of that loss, by doing that for conscience to the God of
patience, (who commands me to submit) which for length of time I shall do;
but here we obey time rather then God.

3. Gods time is better then ours, for he knows when we are ripe for
deliverance, and when the dross comes away from the mett^ll, and when we cast
our scumme. Here before we glorify him, we would bind him to deliver us; and
we desire here to be served before God, that he should deliver before we be
mortified and dead to our lusts. But it is better that our pain continue
praising and believing, as both pain and faith be removed. How excellent is
that of the Church crying out of the deep, Psalm. 130. 5. I wait for the Lord.
But many lie still under the load, rather then wait, because they cannot help
the business; therefore he adds, My soul does wait. 2. Many wait, and they
know not whereon; it is a fools nest they seek; therefore he adds, And in
his Word do I trust. A soul is not bottomed on a dream in his on-waiting,
when he has the Word of God for his warrant. 3. Many do wait, but it is
deliverance that they wait for, and not for God himself; therefore says he,
ver. 6. My soul waits for the Lord. It is as much for God and a communion
with him that faith waits for, as for deliverance. 4. But many wait, but very
lazily, and with great deadness; the Prophet expresses more of himself, My
soul waits for the Lord, more then they that watch for the morning, I say,
more then they that watch for the morning. Such a waiter with these four
qualifications can never be delivered out of time. Here then are news; Awake,
O Sion, sit no longer in ashes, put on thy beautiful garments, O people really
in Covenant with God; England, Britain, be not weary, the King is coming,
Christ is in his journey posting, deliverance is at hand. O believer make no
haste; O prisoner of hope, die not in the prison. Oh! we want faith. It is the
art and cunning of faith to believe and not see, and to have memory for eyes
and sense; but we would both sow and reap in one day, and would have physic
and health both in one hour; we would always be at miracles.

Use 2. If God be eternal, his love and decrees must be necessary and
irresistible; nothing is so necessary as that which is eternal. Then I could
easily yield, (considering who are this day against us) we should be sunk and
overwhelmed, if those three hold good which Papists and Arminians hold. 1. Our
salvation were in danger, if free will, which has its rise and working in
time, were the Axeltree upon which are rolled the wheels of eternal election
and reprobation. But there is as good reason to say, that a sucking child may
reach up his arm above the Sun and Stars, and roll about the wheel of the
first Heaven from East to West, and turn the wheel again from West to East,
as to say that time-free-will can turn about the eternal counsel of God, and
that our acts of believing are not believing; and our good and evil works which
have their rise from yesterday and to day, and are like Jonahs gourd, up and
down in one night, do roll about the eternal will and decree of God, from
favor and love to hatred and rejecting of men. Better make the former of all
things supreme and sovereign, then give the Prerogative Royal of all to
naughty and sinful clay.

2. We could easily grant that it were in men's power to destroy the Church of
God, and that the King of the bottomless pit, and his Lady and Queen Babylon
the great whore, and their sons, Papists and Prelates, might cut off the name
of the Lords Israel, if upon the supposall of their dream of N. media scientia,
the new eyes which Jesuits (with all humble submission and glory to the
glorious God be it spoken) have given to the Almighty, contingency did rule
all: for upon the nod and dominion of causes, without all determination of Gods
righteous providence and eternal counsel, all revolutions of Church and
Kingdoms depend, say they, and all hang upon these two poles, may be, may not
be; what hinders then that Christ have no Spouse, no redeemed people, and
that he be a husband without a wife, a King without Subjects, a Savior without
a ransomed people, as they expressly teach, who with Arminians are advocates for
nature, and pleaders against the grace of God; but we believe God to be
eternal, and his counsel eternal, and his eternal decree to have a strong
influence in the safety of his Church, against which the gates of hell shall
not prevail, and that Devils, Men, Babylon, Rome, Spain, Irish rebels, powers
on earth in their plots, machinations, counsels, endeavors, battles,
victories, all which, come from free causes, are yet chained and fast linked to
the high dominion and independent sovereignty of an eternal God. And we
believe that this differenceth Jehovah from all other Gods, who, as Esaias says,
Can neither do good nor evil. Therefore there is not an arrow steepd in hell
and shot against the Church, but it comes out of Gods bow, and he says it,
Esaias 43. 13. Yea, before the day was, I am he, and there is none that can
deliver out of my hand. I will work, and who shall let it? The Churches
victories and deliverance depend upon an eternal hand, and therefore the
sons of Belial prevail not, and the sons of Jacob are not consumed. 3. It
were a desperate matter for the elect to be saved, if the first Adam were our
surety; but our Tutor Jesus Christ is old and wise, the ancient of days,
Daniel 7. 13. and he has seven eyes; they cannot choose but hold the apostasy
of the Saints, who make free will our tutor: And therefore if I were half in
heaven, and my one foot in eternity, and my other in time, if such a sinful
principle as free will should tutour and guide me, I should come back again out
of heaven, and be damned eternally. If any weak soul apprehending wrath, and
under a fervor of desertion should complain, What hinders me to be eternally
condemned? for I am not distracted, I am privy to my self, that I have sold
my birthright, and sinned against the grace of God hainously: Let me answer,
That the selling of your birthright depends upon the consent of your tutor
Jesus Christ, who is the King of ages, as no minor can sell his inheritance
without the consent of his tutor, and if he should do it, it cannot stand in
Law, but may be revoked. Christ is first heir, and all the elect joint heirs
with him, Romans 8. 17. and joint heirs in Law, though many persons, yet they
make but one heir: consider then, if he who is your eternal King of ages, and
so unchangeable, has not given his consent to the bargain, that you should
sell his birthright and inheritance, and under him, your own birthright, you
had no power to do it; Christ because he is God eternal cannot subscribe, nor
sign with his hand the writs wherein you have sold your inheritance, therefore
the bargain in Law is a mere nullity.

Thirdly, if he be God enduring for ever, What fools are we to place our hope
in a King that shall die? Surely they cast their anchor in ill ground, who
trust in the creature; thou put thy heaven betwixt the brows of a King and
in the light of his countenance; he is but a man, and may change, and though
his favor were constant, yet when his eye-strings shall be broken, with one
breath he shall breathe out his own soul, and thy heaven: And what can thou
then say or do? because sense and the flesh leads us, and time goes about us
from the cradle to the grave; we are all for time, we are for a time-Court, a
time-Glory, a time-Prince, a time-Friend, a time-Husband, a time-Brother, a
time-Heaven and happiness, a time-deliverance in trouble, time-Riches,
time-joy and time-pleasure, time-triumphing, a time-life, etc. But we may find
in this King of ages, who indureth for ever, these same good things of another
nature, as we find in God, eternal Court, eternal Glory, an eternal King,
an eternal Friend, an eternal Husband, an eternal Brother, an eternal
Happiness, an eternal Salvation, eternal riches, eternal victory and
triumph, and in sum, life eternal.

His Kingdom such as cannot be destroyed] The other class of arguments to
prove Daniels God to be the true God, is from his government; His Kingdom;
that is, The people of his kingdom cannot be destroyed: and now the King does
say, though there be variety and choice of gods in Chaldea and Persia, yet
Daniels God is incomparably above them all; and Daniel and his fellows are
blessed and more happy in their God, then all that serve other gods. The Lord
when he is tried, will be found the only excellent and matchless God above
all gods, and none like to him and his people, the only happy people; that
man's portion is fallen in pleasant lines who has the Lord for his portion; but
I must go on to make good this doctrine, That the Kingdom and Church of God is
the most permanent and enduring society on earth, and a Kingdom which cannot
fail; and I go upon these grounds, There is a most firm and sure Covenant made
betwixt the Lord and his people, Jer. 31. 35. Thus says the Lord that gives
the Sun for a light by day, and the ordinances of the Moon and Stars for a
light by night, which divides the sea when the waves thereof roar, the Lord
of hosts is his name, verse. 36. If these ordinances depart from before me,
says the Lord, then the seed of Israel shall cease from being a Nation before
me for ever. I might allege other Scriptures also, as Jer. 32. 39, 40. Ezech.
36. 26, 27, 28, 29. Esai. 54. 10, 11, 12. Esai. 59. 21. Heb. 8. 7, 8, 9, 10,
11. Now then because God has bottomed the eternity of his Church upon his own
unchangeable counsel, they must raze the acts of Heaven who can take away the
Church of God. I leave it to the thoughts of the judicious, if the rooting out
of the Protestant Religion be a rational purpose of intelligent men. What if
we should imagine a society of transported men should convene in Parliament,
and make Statutes thus, We ordain as a Law and Statute, that from the 22. of
January the Sun shall shine no more by day, and the Moon and Stars shall
give no more light by night; also we inhibite and discharge, under the highest
pain of treason, from this time forth the Sea shall never ebb or flow again.
These or the like, should be but the notions of sick imiginations; acts of
night counsels have been these; first, fire the City of London; secondly, cut
off the Parliament; thirdly, leave not alive in Ireland a Protestant or their
seed; fourthly, root them all out of France, and Germany; fifthly, destroy
Scotland and their Covenant; sixthly, undo all reformation of Religion in
Britain.

Secondly, Consider the strength of the Church of God, Numb. 24. 8. He has, as
it were, the strength of an Unicorn; he shall eat up the nations his enemies,
he shall break his bones, and pierce them through with his arrows. Why? and the
Church is but a feeble worm: let it be so, yet he says, Esaias 41. 14. Fear
not, worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel, I will help thee, says the Lord thy
Redeemer, the holy One of Israel in the midst of thee. verse. 15. Behold, I will
make thee (worm as thou art) a new sharp threshing instrument having teeth;
thou shall thresh the mountains and beat them small, and shall make the hills as
chafe. verse. 16. Thou shall fan them, and the wind shall carry them away,
and the whirle wind shall scatter them. You have not seen such a miracle, that
a worm shall destroy a great mountain, and blow it away as chafe; But it is
Gods way, that Omnipotence rides on a straw, on a worm, and triumph. And how
can it be but thus? The Church is the weakest thing in the earth, but in God
incomparably the strongest, Psalm 46. 1. God is our refuge and strength: Gods
strength is the absolute greatest strength, and so overcome God and overcome
the Church, for a greater strength must overcome the less. Where dwells he?
in earth, in Hell, or in Heaven? who has strength above the strength of God?
they do not fly to the strongest side, who desert the Parliament and fly to
Oxford; they run but down to Egypt, but Esaias 30. 7. Their strength is to sit
still.

Thirdly, the destroying of the Church is not a work of reason or deep
policy, as men suppose; they will but swallow down and drink the
Protestants, let them be doing and go on: Put the Church of Christ in a cup
and drink her, but you will be sick when she is in your belly, and had better
drink many quarts of lead or brass melted and coming hot out of the furnace,
for Zach 12. 2, There is poison and death in the cup. I will make Jerusalem a
cup of trembling unto all the people round about: The gall, the wormwood, the
poison of the vengeance of the Lord, and the vengeance of his Temple is in the
cup; Drink who will, they shall be sick, and drunken, and vomit, and fall, and
die in their vomit, and never rise again. Pharaoh drank of this cup, but he
was killed with it, and made fishes meat. Nebuchadnezzar and Belshazar drank,
but they swelled hand and foot* and died. Herod Acts 12. had the cup at his
head, and took a draught of this wine, but he was stricken with worms:
Papists, Prelates, the Irish good Catholic subjects, the Emperor, Spain,
Rome, the Antichrist, the powers of the earth are now drinking one to another,
and the cup of trembling goes in a round to them all; but consider how sick
they shall be, Zach. 14. 12. And this shall be the plague wherewith the Lord
shall smite all the people that have fought against Jerusalem: their flesh
shall consume away while they stand upon their feet, and their eyes shall
consume away in their eyeholes, and their tongue shall consume away in their
mouths. Babylons cup-bearers, and Atheists, and Malignants, to whom the morning
of a sound reformation is as the shadow of death, would then know how deadly a
cup is now at their head.

Fourthly, consider Gods promises to his Church. There is a true Diurnall
written from Heaven, that God is to make a glorious Church in the end of the
world, Esa. 30. 26. Moreover, the light of the Moon shall be as the light of
the Sun, and the light of the Sun sevenfold, as the light of seven days. And
when the new resurrection shall be, I mean the in-coming of that elder sister,
the Church of the Jews, Romans 11. 15. and when all Israel shall be saved, What
a glorious house shall he build for the Lord, when that shall be fulfilled!
Esaias 60. 13. And the glory of Lebanon shall come unto theee; the fir tree, the
pinetree, and the box together, to beautify the place of my sanctuary, and I
will make the place of my feet glorious. v. 14. The sons also of them that
afflicted thee shall come bending to thee; and all they that despised thee shall
bow themselves down at the soals of thy feet, and they shall call thee The City
of the Lord, The Zion of the holy One of Israel. v. 19. The sun shall no more
be thy light by day, neither for brightness shall the moon give light unto
thee: but the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of thy
mourning shall be ended. All which, with many other places, do make God say,
That the Church shall stand, and never be prevailed against by the very gates
of hell.

Fifthly, Christ cannot leave off to be a King, therefore his Kingdom must
stand: there is a seed and a reward promised to Christ for his labors, Esaias
53. 10. There be Articles of grace concluded betwixt the Father and his Son,
which cannot be broken.

Sixthly, there are in all the sufferings of the Church two things most
considerable: first, a turn; secondly, a contexture: a turn or return, Genesis
39. 21, 22. Joseph was cast in prison; But the Lord was with Joseph. Genesis 49.
23. The archers have sorely grieved Joseph, and shot at him, and hated him: but
consider the return, verse. 24. But his bow abode in strength, and the arms of
his hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob. Psalm. 3. 2.
Many say of my soul, There is no help for him in God. See so sweet a (But)
verse. 3. But thou O Lord, art a shield for me, my glory, and the lifter up of
my head. So is the child of Gods condition made up of two haltes, Psalm. 18.
18. Hence the fall; They prevented me in the day of my calamity: Then the rise;
But the Lord was my stay. Psalm. 22. 7. All that see me laugh me to scorn, etc.
Hence faiths rise, verse. 9. But thou art he that took me out of the womb, etc.
Psalm. 30. 5. Weeping may endure for a night; then the return, But joy comes
in the morning. Psalm. 34. 19. Many are the troubles of the righteous; this is
their down, but they lie not; But the Lord delivers them out of all. Psalm.
71. 7. I am a wonder to many; that is dark night; but the day dawneth again;
But thou art my strong hold. So does the servant of God fall, Psalm. 109. 4. For
my love they were mine adversaries; but faith rises again, But I give my self
to prayer, Psalm. 118. 13. Thou have thrust sore at me that I might fall: see
the escape, But the Lord helped me, verse. 18. The Lord has chastised me sore;
shall he lie in that condition? No, But he has not delivered me to death. Esaias
54. 7. For a small moment I have forsaken thee; behold the return, But with
great mercies will I gather thee. Esaias 63. 6. For we are all as an unclean
thing, and all our righteousness as filthy rags, and we all do fade as a leaf;
our iniquities like the wind have taken us away: this is death; and look to
life again, verse. 8. But thou, O Lord, art our Father, etc. Jer. 1. 19. They
shall fight against thee; there were but a whole Parliament, all the estates of
the Land, Kings, Princes, Priests, and People against Jeremiah, but he must not
lie on the dust; But they shall not prevail against thee, for I am with thee
to deliver thee. Joh. 16. 22. Ye now therefore have sorrow; that is a sad case,
yet it has a turn, But I will see you again, and ye shall rejoice, and your
joy shall no man take from you; so are these two at once in the Lords witnesses
his Apostles. 2. Cor. 4. 9. persecuted, But not forsaken; cast down, But not
destroyed. 2. Tim. 4 16. At my first appearing no man stood with me, but all
men forsook me; yet is he lifted up, verse. 17. But the Lord stood with me, and
strengthened me. Secondly, There is a contexture of contraries, as black and
white, sweet and sour woven through other, as daylight and night in a morning
twy-light: as contraries in one subject. 2. Cor. 6. 9. As dying, and behold we
live; as chastened, yet not killed, verse 10. Or, as sorrowful, yet always
rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, yet possessing all
things. How can these two be in one? They kill us, but we die not; they bury
us, but we live again in the grave; we have nothing, and we have all things;
we have, we want not. Romans 8 36. Killed all the day long, and counted as sleep
for the slaughter. 37. Nevertheless in all these more than Conquerours, etc.
Hence they are killed all the day long, and they live all the day long. I know
not how it is, but the Churches death is a living and a breathing death, their
poverty a rich poverty, their shame glorious shame, their sadness joyful
sadness, their foyles victorious foyles, their pain an health, and an easy
pain, their weakness strong and mighty weakness.

I desire to make some use of this, And 1. There be no worldly States and
Monarchies of whom this can be said, Their Kingdom such as cannot be
destroyed. Where is there a worldly Kingdom that cannot be shaken? Moab was a
Kingdom, and yet Moab shall die in his own vomit. Jer. 48. 26. Egypt is a
great Kingdom, and yet it is broken like an old Clay-pot or a lame Vessel.
The four great Monarchies are become like four May-flowres, withered, and
their rosy blossoms are fallen off them in their month. Did they mean no
truth who said of earthly Kingdoms? Omnis faelicitas ad culmen perducta,
retrogreditur; and, Magna suo pondere ruunt. VVorldly felicity when it is at
the height of the Stairs, sits down and slippeth back again; And great
things of this Earth are a burden to themselves; summisque negatum stare diu.
It is denied to great things to stand long. Alas, how long did one of the Kings
of Gods People reign, even Zachariah? poor six months. Shallum came not to
this, he reigned in Samaria one month. And Zimri who came to the Crown by
blood, had a shorter reign; He did walk with a Crown seven days; If Pope
Victor the fifth had a longer time of a golden chair, it was but five years;
and Clemens the third ruled but three years; and Alexander the eleventh only
two years. And though it be but a fiction that Kingdoms have their fatal
years, and Monarnarchies are under Planetary hours, yet some truth must be in
this; Kingdoms have their infancy, and come to a greater strength, till they
come to their flower, and then they begin to turn: and it is congruous to their
experienced truth, That Kingdoms find old age; And gray hairs are here and
there upon Ephraim, and he knows not. 7. 9. It is much better to be a
subject, or one of the States of the Kingdom of grace; for grace knows no
old age, nor has grace an internal principle of corruption, for it is the
seed of eternal glory; and though the Powers of the Earth may subvert the
foundation and Fundamental Laws of earthly Kingdoms, yet cannot Christ's
Kingdom or the constitution of it be broken. But that which does loose the
Pillars of a Kingdom is sin. Amos. 1. For three transgressions of Edom and
for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof, So Ammon, Moab, Judah,
are under the same punishment. There is no way to secure England from wrath,
but turning to the Lord: And especially two sins in the State are to be
seriously taken to heart. 1. You suffered many worthy servants of God who
pleaded the Lords cause for a Reformation against the Prelates, to be silenced,
deprived, imprisoned, banished. Both in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and of
King James, Prelates oppressed the servants of Christ, and did tyrannize over
the conscience of the Lords people in this Land: former Parliaments did not
give Christ and his servants fair Justice, and now has the Lord stirred up
these oppressors to oppress your Parliament, and to raise bloody wars against
the Land. 2. It is said, Hos. 5. 11. Ephraim is oppressed and broken in
judgment, because he willingly followed the Commandment. It has been the
sin of this Land, that when Episcopacy, Antichristian Ceremonies,
Superstition, and Will Worship were enjoined by Law, to pleasure an earthly
King, you willingly followed after the command, against the direction of the
King of Kings: and now has the Lord delivered the people of the Land into the
hand of their KING. And for this the Sword of the Lord has gone through the
Land.

2. Use. From the perpetuity of the Lords Kingdom, we may infer, That this
Cause of God shall prevail, and that the Church, though in the burning Bush,
cannot be consumed; for JEHOVAH is in the Bush. There be three grounds that
there is hope that God will build his own Jerusalem. 1. God never laid the
foundation of so fair a building, and then deserted the Work: when he has
put it into the hearts of the Parliament and Land to enter into a Covenant with
the Lord, the Cause does now in formal and direct terms become the Lords
Cause: And so the Lord is become surety for England. 2. When did the Lord ever
finally prosper his bloody-hearted enemies? Babylons Womb and Bowels are
swelled with blood, they intend to root out the Protestant Religion. Can God
say Amen to this in Britain? No, he will not, this end was sworn at the
council of Trent; It was aimed at by Charles the fifth, by Leo the tenth
against Luther, and the design of the Actors of that bloody massacre of Paris;
yet hitherto all has failed them. 3. Gods Noble and stately acts of
disappointing and discovering so many Plots, give us hope; for in them all God
makes true of England what is said, Esai. 66. 7. Before she traveled, she
brought forth, and before her pain came, she was delivered of a Man-child.
When she was sleeping, ere the blow came, the Child was borne, and the Woman
delivered.

His Dominion shall be to the end] Dominion is a power to use a thing, as you
please, for such ends as you think good; in the Creature, our pleasure is
supposed to be regulated by Law and Reason; but men or Angels will or pleasure
is not the rule of the use or lawful exercise of Dominion, but in God; whose
blessed will, not being differenced from his holy reason, and infinite
wisdom, its the rule of the use of his Dominion, and none may say to him,
What do thou? that but stands still to the Creature as a binding Law.
Illud tantum possumus quod jure possumus, we have no more lawful moral power
given to us of God, then we can, or do lawfully exercise according to the
moral rule: But Gods Dominion is to be discussed thus, as it stands in those
following heads. First, in the manner of it, its complete. Deus Dominatur in
totum ens, and in totum entis; God has Dominion over every being of the
Creature, and over every part of the being. God has Dominion over his
Creatures soul, and his souls faculties, his will, mind, conscience,
affections, faith, hope, fear, love, joy; over the body, and all the powers
and motions thereof. So God has a complete Lordship over the Creature: One
Creature has not a complete Lordship or Dominion over another, yea a free
reasonable Creature has not a complete Dominion over himself. The reason is,
God made the Creature, he made all and every being and part of the Creature; He
made the soul, the body, the faculties of both, the actions and purposes of
both: Therefore he has an absolute Dominion over both. The potter has a
Dominion of art, not a Dominion by creation over the Lame-pot: he made the
Lame-pot, but he created not the Clay: He has therefore but a Dominion of art
over the Clay, not to annihilate the Clay as god can do. His Dominion is of Art
to frame of the Clay a Vessel of honor, for a Kings Table, or a Vessel of
dishonor for the receiving of Urine. The Master amongst the Jews might sell
his manservant, and put him in his purse; but the truth is, when he sold him,
he sold but his bodily-service, as he was useful to labor and work; but he
could not sell his servants soul, nor his understanding, nor his will, nor his
love, nor his faith or Religion, nor any of these: Courtiers then and
Cavaliers, Prelates, Atheists who profess they are of the Kings Religion, and
will dispose of their souls at the Kings pleasure, to kill the innocent, they
make their souls bastards and unlawful broods, and they make the King the
Creator of their souls, and the absolute Lord of their Religion: O fool, the
King did not make thy Soul, there is an other Soule-Lord then the King! Ezekiel.
18. 4. Behold all Souls are mine, says the Lord; and there is another
Soule-former, then the King of Britain: hear God speak himself, Esai. 57. 16.
If I should contend for ever, the spirits should fail before me, and the
souls that I have made! O find me an Earthly King that can form Souls, and
then let the Cavaliers swear that which many now practice, I am the Kings
wholly, both soul and body, faith and conscience. But I pray you, are not all
in England the Kings Subjects? yea truly and all in Scotland also, but not one
soul, not one conscience in all the three Kingdoms is the Kings Subject.

2. Gods Dominion: for the matter is universal, he can press an Army in the
Clouds, and in the Firmament, Judge. 5. 20. The Stars in their course fought
against Sisera: he has an host in Hell, and raised an Army against the
firstborn of Egypt, Psalm. 78. 49. He troubled them by sending, Malokim
ragnim, evil Angels, or Devils amongst them. He can blow a Trumpet, and cry to
the dust of the Earth, Arms, Arms, and there arises an host of Catter-pillers,
or Canker-wormes, Joel 2. and verse. 6. before the faces of these Worms the
people is much pained, and all faces gather blackness; that is, strange to see
valient men of War tremble before a Worm, and one man with a tramp of his
foot may kill hundreds of them, but this is the Dominion of JEHOVAH the Lord.
He has an host of Waters, every wave of the Sea being a Soldier, every fish
receiving pay from JEHOVAH, first to drown Pharaoh, and then to eat him and his
Princes.

3* He has a Sovereign Dominion over the salvation and damnation of men, as
Romans 9. 21. The potter has power over the Clay. Arminians and Papists will
have Freewil Lord and Carver of the white roll of election to glory, but Gods
own Pen from eternity did write in the Lambs Book of life so many, and did book
those from eternity, whom he was, of free grace, to make Senators of heaven, to
walk with the Lamb in white: nor does freewill pen its own doom: But God
hates Esau, before he does good or ill.

4. God has an absolute Dominion in all the operations of second Causes. The
Stars these five thousand years have marched so orderly, and kept their Orbs,
Distance, Line, that not one of them ever transgressed the borders of another.
And Gods Dominion herein is so eminent, that in necessary causes the Lord
works a sort of contingency, and in contingent causes, a sort of necessity;
as he says to the fire, Burn, Burn not; Burn those who cast into the Furnace
the three Children; Burn not the three Children, Daniel 3. 22, 24. He
commands the Sun to move, and it moves, Psalm. 104. 19. He commands it to
stand still, and it does so, in the days of Joshua. He says! O sea, ebb and
flow, Ier. 5. 22. and it does so. He says! O sea, stand still, as a Wall, or
as an heap of Ice, do not ebb, nor flow, while my people go through dry; and
it does so. And what he has decreed must be, though it fall out in a
contingent way; Joseph's Brethren must fell him, Potipher must cast him in
prison, King Pharaoh must exalt him to honor.

5. When causes seem confused in their operations, God exercises his
Dominion. Why should an Arrow smite Achab betwixt the joints of the harness,
and kill him? many thousands may be killed as soon as he: But God shot the
Arrow; the Bow and the Arrow of JEHOVAHS Dominion was here, when two Armies of
many thousands on every side join battle: What confusion is there, when
thousands are rolled in blood? who marshalleth bullets through the Air? God
ranketh Bullets, Arrows, and Fireworks as his Soldiers, flying in the Air,
and will have a good man killed in a good cause, and a wicked man in an evil
cause: to come fair and safe off here, must be the Dominion of God.

6. How is it that Satan and wicked men in their blackest works of hell are as
Chariots and Horsemen, carrying on the counsels of Heaven, and serving Gods
eternal counsel, when they are not serving God himself? we are to draw this
into our selves, for God communicates an inferior Dominion to his Church and
people, for the which he is to be adored.

1. God is conquering men's judgment, that they yield to truth.

2. He has given a Dominion to his saints, and given them to be above all
things, and put all Creatures under the child of God, and has put the world,
life, death, court, glory, riches, under the fear, faith, love, and joy of his
own children: nothing is great to a believer, but Christ; nothing high but the
most high, nothing fair but he who is white and ruddy, and the fairest of the
sons of men, Cant. 5. 10. Psalm. 45. 2. Nothing ancient; as the ancient of
days. Nothing honorable as the King of ages. Nothing desirable as the Lord,
the desire of all Nations, when creatures have Dominion over us, and are above
us, and too great in our affections, we be then under their power, and our
hearts are mastered and over-loaded by clay and shadows; especially if death,
torture, the sword, loss of the sweet pleasures of this life have a Dominion
over us, our life is a bondage to us. The people of God are Romans 8. 36, 37.
killed, and yet conquerors and victors.

3 We are to effect a Dominion over sin. How can this be? for the children of
God for the most are foiled in their combat betwixt the spirit and the flesh;
Paul was led captive: I answer, This may be, and yet the Dominion is on the
child of Gods side. 1. Because victory must not be measured by one blow, but
by the issue of the battle; Christ at length in all his Saints shall bring
forth Esai. 42. 3. judgment unto truth, Mat. 12. 20. into victory; The Gospel
at length is victorious in the heart of the child of God. 2. That the spirit
keeps the fields in that same soul with the flesh, is a great Dominion; in
carnal men the spirit is not in the Fields at all; and therefore he is a
servant not a captive; and when the child of God sins, it is but with the
half of the will, and so the flesh has but half a vote; and there is a
protestation made on the contrary by that supernatural instinct. A morgaging,
or a woodsetting is not a buying, the soul gives half consent, but with
reversion, and a power to take back again at another time. what is now given. A
man is legal proprietor, and Lord of Lands morgaged, though he want the
present use of them. 3. The foyles of the child of God are the seed of
humility, of hunger for a fuller measure of grace, of cautelous and more strict
walking; and often here falling one way is rising another way; and this fall is
a vertuall Dominion over pride. Sin helps, by Gods grace, to mortify it
self.

4. We are to pray, that the Gospel may have a Dominion! O that we might be
witnesses to see him who rides on the white horse go forth through the
habitable world with his Bow, and his Crown conquering, and to conquer, and
that he would cause his servants always to triumph in Christ, and make
manifest the savor of his knowledge in every place! Revel. 6. 2. 2. Cor. 2.
14. Pray, exalted be the glory of Jesus; high, high for evermore be his Throne!
O that the Pearls and Diadems of his royal Crown may glister as far as the
beams of the Sun in the Firmament shine. Let the wheels of his Chariot be as
the wings of an Eagle. Let his enemies bow before him, and those brazen knees,
which will not bow to Jesus Christ, let them be broken! O Lord let thy Kingdom
come.

FINIS.

