Advertisement.
THERE is published by the same Author, a small Treatise, entitituled, Religion
the Perfection of Man: In 8o.

A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES AT NORWICH, Upon the Fifth Day of August 1693.

By J. R. M. A. Rector of Brundal.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Hayes, Printer to the University, For Samuel
Oliver, Bookseller in Norwich. 1694.

January 12. 1693/4.
Imprimatur,

Guil. Stanley, Procan. Jo. Beaumont, S. Th. Pr. Jo. Eachard, Aul. Cath.
Magister. Ja. Balderson, Coll. Emman. Magister.


Mark 12.17. -- Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the
things that are Gods.


REligion and Government being the two great Institutions that Nature dictates,
and that God has ordained for the Benefit of Mankind; The one for our present
tranquillity, and to give us the Advantage of Society, and peace in the world;
And the other for securing of our Greater Interests both here and hereafter,
Notwithstanding the disorders and inconveniences our discomposed Nature and
ruffled State has subjected us to, and involved us in; The Wisdom of God, and
the Savior of men, abundantly demonstrating his love to the World, has both
improved Religion to the utmost Capacity of Assisting its Great Design, and
taken all possible Care to establish Government: He has supported the
Authority and strengthened the Necessity of both by his Laws; and that men may
obtain the happy end of both, he has most indispensably enjoined that they
Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are
Gods.

Sometimes indeed the Design of Religion is frustrated; The Errors and
Corruptions that some mix with it, disappointing them of the Salvation they are
in pursuit of; And sometimes also the design of Government is so perverted,
that men have not that benefit of Security and Peace under it, that God and
Nature seem to have intended them thereby; That as it is a matter of Great
Difficulty, in some Churches especially, to obtain the end of our faith; so in
some States it is really as difficult, to lead quiet and peaceable lives:
Nevertheless, the foundation of God stands sure, and when the face of the
World is most uneven, and the times most Critical, when Tyranny and Confusion
are most rampant in the World, to pay a due observance to Princes, and to
observe a due regard to God, is to reserve our Peace in both Worlds, as safe as
any Rules can prescribe, or practice effect.

To pretend so much conscience toward God, as to deny a due Honor to Princes,
if it be not a mere Sham and the Covert of ill Design, yet seems an error in
practice, being most evidently a lameing of the Good Design which the Wisdom of
God has contrived for our Peace, and a forward step to those troubles that are
commonly awarded to such as are stubborn and disobedient: And on the other
side, to resolve all Religion into Loyalty, is as ridiculous and absurd, as to
say the Roman is the Catholic Church, and may prove of as ill Consequence and
worse: But as pure Religion established and faithfully practiced, and
Government well settled and Prudently managed, is the most Natural and Rational
ground for the Repose of the World, so those men that concur therewith, and
bearing a due regard to both, with upright minds Render to Caesar the things
that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are Gods, not only consult well
for the Glory of God, and the Public. Tranquillity, but also demonstrate
themselves good Subjects, good Christians, and Wise Men.

All these I am sure our Lord would have us to be, and I fuppose his words in
the Text drive at it, and therefore I shall endeavor in this Discourse to
assist his Design; And to this end I shall observe to you, that there is in the
Words;

First, Something granted, viz. That there is a Due or Right that belongs to
the Prince, and to God, which ought to be rendered to them;

Secondly, That there is something supposed, viz. That these Rights are
consistent with one another, and that men may render to Caesar the things that
are Caesar's, and yet render to God the things that are Gods, or that men may be
good Subjects with safe Consciences.

Thirdly, There is something enjoined, viz. That we render to each his Due.

Lastly, There is something intimated, viz. That as there is sometimes Great
Prudence required in this Practice, so there is Great Security in it: In
rendering to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are
Gods, there is Wisdom and Safety.

All these I shall discourse a little upon, and I hope they will give me the
Advantage of making some Good Improvement, for the Glory of God, the Repose of
the World, and the Good of Men both here and hereafter.

First, There is in the Text something granted, which is that there is a Due or
Right belonging to the Prince, and to God, that ought to be rendered.

This is indeed the Foundation of all Religion and Government, without which
all kind of Confusion, Impiety, and Idolatry would ensue, that the disordered
State of Mankind is subject to: And it is so Natural, as well as Christian a
Maxim, that it has the Universal assent of all Nations and Ages. Neither has
it been thought any infringing either of Liberty or Property, if rightly
understood; for as the Apostle says, we are not our own, 1 Cor. 6.19.
that is, so absolutely, as to exclude all others from any Interest in us, so
all that we have is not to be accounted so entirely ours, that none else can
claim a Right to any part of it but our selves: We do not subsist of our
selves, but do indeed entirely depend upon God, and all that we have and are,
is from him; he has a Right to us and in us; and what we have, we hold from
him, and consequently an acknowledgement at least is more his due, then the
remainder ours. We hold what we have by the Power of Government, and it is the
Prince that defends our Persons, and that maintains us in the possession of
what God bestows upon us; and consequently an acknowledgement and assistance is
due to him; so that there are three Parties that are concerned and interested
both in our Persons and Possessions, viz. God, the Prince, and our selves: God
has a Right, the Prince a Right, and the residue is Property; And what is
reserved to them, is, if paid, as a Quit-rent which ensures and confirms the
rest to us; And if we be obliged to render it, it is not to be accounted an
infringing of our Liberty, because it is the most Rational way, to secure both
it and our selves.

That there is a Due to be rendered to the Prince; not only the necessity of
Government requires, but it seems to be his intermixed Right with his Subjects,
in them and their Possessions, that denominates him Lord, and is the ground of
Dominion and Rule; in as much as without such a Right there could be no claim
to either, as indeed the Power of Government cannot be maintained without it.
That every one should be absolute in his own Possessions, and all level Lords
of their own Fee, is rather a hoped Chimera of distempered heads, then a
possible attainment of the wisest Men; for if all were absolute Lords, and had
not a common Head to unite themselves under into a Body, against the Designs
and Practices of any that are Covetous-and Ambitious, and withal Active and
Daring, there would be continual bickering and Contests, till a forced
submission be gained to a Conquering Tyrant that would have all: But the
uniting of the Community into Society, prevents confusion, and the individuals
conceding to the Supremacy of one, and his being interested in them, as they in
him, is the method, Prove. 8.15.
which the Divine Wisdom careful of the Concerns of Mankind, has established
upon a Natural necessity for their Good: This seems to be the Foundation of
Government, which is of such a Nature, that there is necessarily a Due to be
rendered to him that orders and manageth it.

But then the Question will be, how comes this to be any one man's Right and not
another? Caesar has a Right, but who has the Right to be Caesar? To which
the words of Daniel, or rather of that voice that came from Heaven, may be
given in answer, Dan. 4.25, 32. The most high rules in the kingdom of men, and
gives it to whomsoever he will. As Government is the Ordinance of God, Romans
13.2.
and the Product of natural necessity for the good of Mankind, so the Great
Lord of the World, the King of kings, and the Lord of lords, as he has the
Right, so he does put in his own Deputies, and that not always according to the
common Methods of ascending to Empire and Rule, but as on purpose to assert and
demonstrate his own Prerogative: For tho Observation and Event have taught us
that the usual way is either by Inheritance, Election, or Conquest, yet
sometimes Princes arrive at their Dignities, in a way that cannot well be
reduced to any of those Rules; And therefore Bellarmine speaks of a fourth way
which he calls Dono Superioris, Bellarm. de Contrev. Tom. 1. lib. 5. cap. 4.
whereby he does not mean by Donation from the Pope, (tho it be agreeable
enough with his thoughts) but speciali dono Dei, by the special gift of God.
And because God has the sole Right to set up and appoint whom he will, those
that he invests with the Government, (whether by the common Methods, or by some
special and singular Providence,) have a Right to that Due by the justest and
most Venerable Title in the World.

The Jews who were the People concerned in the Text, had anciently a Charter
from Heaven that entailed the Crown upon the house of David, so that there was
in that Family a Divine Right to it and its appurtenances; And it seems that
according thereto Jesus of Nazareth was the king of the Jews, tho the aforesaid
Cardinal would deprive him of that Hereditary Right, as being descended of
Jechonias, Bellarm. suprat Ad quid illud jus, quo nunquam usuri erant.
and would not have him be accounted King de jure, because he was not to be so
de facto: But for once we will suppose that the Roman Procurator was more in
the Right, than the Cardinal, John 19.19.
and that Jesus of Nazareth was the king of the Jews; And yet since the Roman
Emperor was invested with that Dignity, in compliance with the order of Heaven
he superseded his own Right, and declared for him that was in Possession; And
tho the Princes of this World will not always so exactly follow his Example, yet
his Doctrine ought to take place; and for as much as he requires that Augustus
should have Caesar's due, we may rationally infer and conclude, that he that is
invested with the Sovereignty has a Right to that due which is here granted in
the Text.

What and how much that Due is the words do not define, neither will I presume
to determine; only thus much the Nature of the thing seems to exact, viz. That
the Right or Authority to Govern is the Princes due, as it is his Prerogative;
And consequently, such Honor is due to the Head, and such Submission and
Obedience, as is necessary to constitute Government, and to answer the Design
of Heaven in appointing it: As for Tribute and Taxes they are but that share
which the Prince has in the Possession of his Subjects, for the Defense and
Support of the Government; and tho there are commonly very pressing Reasons for
those Humane Laws that exact them; the Divine Precepts for giving tribute to
whom tribute, Romans 13.6, 7
and custom to whom custom is due, tho founded upon the most solid Reason,
Equity, and Wisdom, need nothing more to render them obliging, than the Will of
him who is the Supreme Lord and Monarch of the World. The service also of the
Persons of his Subjects for the Defense of his Person, Country, and Government,
seems to be a due that necessarily belongs to the Prince, because he alone
cannot be supposed able to do it: As for Gratitude as well as Honor, it is
ever due to him that bears the burden for us, and Love and Thankfulness are
always the Merit of Gracious and Indulgent Princes. What other Dues there are,
the Constitutions and Customs of Kingdoms and States will best direct: For tho
Society and consequently Government stands upon a Natural necessity, and is the
Order of Heaven, yet there seems to be no Particular Rules for the Government
of States set down in Gods word, (since the Jewish Economy was dissolved:) But
the Prudence of Men in all Regular States, invents Laws agreeable to the Genius
of People, and the Situation and Climate of Countries, that may best conduce
to their Welfare; And where there is a Regular Ascension to Principality, and
Princes stipulate with their People, and enter upon the Government according to
the Rules of the State, the received Laws are at once the Subjects and the
Princes Guide, and determine his Due and their Duty.

And as it is granted in the Text, that there is a Due belonging to Caesar, so
also is it, that there is a Due to God: For tho for the benefit of Mankind and
the Peace of the World, he has imparted of his Power and Authority to Princes
for the Government of Men, yet he has not so divested himself, as only to
retain the empty name of King of kings, and Lord of lords. Rev. 19.16.
It is so far from this, that Princes themselves in their Highest Orbs are but
his servants; the Ministers of God, for the Administration of the Affairs of
the World: And tho as his Vicegerents upon Earth they are Highly Exalted above
others, yet they in common with the meanest of the People, must account for
their Faith and Allegiance to the Author of their Beings, and give an account
of their Stewardship before the Great Judge at the last day. And so much does
he reserve this his Right and Sovereignty over all his Creatures, that he will
be Owned and Adored for ever, as the blessed and only Potentate, 1 Timothy 6.15.
in whom the Devotion and Service of Heaven and Earth, of Angels and Men must
center.

It is not therefore proper to ask of how great extent Gods Right is, since it
comprehends all; the easier way to know our Duty is to enquire what concessions
he has made to Men; and what is not granted, is yet reserved as his own Right.
To Princes he has granted Authority, and a Right to Rule, and such an Interest
both in the Persons and Possessions of their Subjects as is necessary to
Constitute Government, and Maintain Order and Peace: To Men in General he has
given the earth with the fullness thereof; And Justice managed by the hand of
the Ruler, is to determine what by the Merit and Procurement of Humane
Industry, or by the Divine disposings, is every particular Man's Right. As for
our selves, We are not our own, but are reserved as the peculiar Possession of
our Creator and our Lord, and all that we must pretend to, is that we are his
servants: yet some are more peculiarly reserved for Gods more immediate
service, as the Levites among the Jews; and now the Ministers of the Gospel are
Gods ((...)) Clergy, his Portion consecrated to him out of the common Stock;
and it seems not only Expedient, but Necessary and Just that there should be a
continual Stock consecrated to God for the Management and Transaction of
Religious Matters and Divine Worship, as well as Rules for the Administration
of Secular Affairs in the World. As for our Possessions, he that gives us all
things richly to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6.17.
yet reserves a part for an acknowledgement, that what we have, we hold from
him: Sacrifices therefore and Oblations were from the beginning Rites or Modes
of agnizing him Lord of the Creatures, and our Benefactor, and consequently to
be duly and devoutly offered and paid; The Maintenance also of Gods Clergy,
and of his Worship, was ever a Divine Right and Reservation, which Nature
taught the Heathen, 1 Cor. 9.14.
and the Gospel teaches Christians: And above all things, the Love and
Devotion of our Souls, with all kind of Religious Worship, is so much Gods
peculiar Right, that no Creature must presume to claim it to himself, to confer
it upon any thing else, or deny it him: And whatever other dues there are, Gods
word, which is our Best Counselor, will direct, and a well informed
Conscience is our best Guide. Thus, as it is granted in the Text, there is a
Due belonging to God, as there is also to Caesar, which ought to be rendered.

Secondly, It is supposed in the words, that these are consistent, and that Men
may render to each his Due without infringing the others Right, and may be Good
Subjects with a safe Conscience. For that Wisdom of God, by whom Kings reign, 1
Cor. 14.33.
is in no wise the Author of Confusion; but as in the great Machin of the
World, the Almighty hand of the Wise Creator has placed a multitude of vast
Orbs which continually observe their several Motions without interfering with
one another: or as in Political States, there are diverse Societies and
Corporations, neither justling with one another, nor yet with the State it
self, but observing their order in their proper Sphere, are rather an
Assistance to the Public, than a Disturbance to it; so in the Regiment of the
Universe, that part of it which the Divine Providence has committed to Men, is
like the Prophets wheel within a wheel, Bzek. 10.10
moving upon the same Axis with the Divine Providence General, and serves as a
means to carry on its disposings about Humane Affairs. It cannot be supposed
that God Instituted a check to his own Authority, when he granted Sovereignty
to Princes, nor delegated his Power to disturb the Wise and Benign
Determination of his Counsel, but rather on the contrary, that as Princes are
his Ministers, they are to preserve the Divine Rights and as they are the
Governors or Rulers of Men, they are to concur with, and assist the Gracious
Designs of his Providence toward the World; to keep Order and Peace in it; to
divide between Man and Man the Bounty that Heaven bestows upon them, and then
to Maintain them in it against Aggressors; to preserve their Subjects, and to
do their Country Good; to defend the Innocent, to reward the Righteous, and to
punish the Wrong Doers; And that they may be able to do all this (as in Duty to
God they are bound) to preserve the Authority that Heaven has committed to
them, lest they be able to do none at all: Such we must conceive the Natural
Constitution of Government according to the Divine Institution and Intention,
and consequently that Caesar's Due and Gods are so far from being inconsistent,
that they mutually Assist and Support one another; God gives Authority to
Princes, and that Authority serves as a means to carry on his kind Intentions
to the World. So that the Question is not so much whether a Man may be a Good
Subject with a safe Conscience, as whether a Man can be a Good Christian, that
is not so? or whether a Man can render to God the things that are Gods, and not
render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's? For Government is the Institution
of Nature and the Ordinance of God, Princes are his Vicegerents, and their
Office to bless the World with Tranquillity and Peace; so that not to render to
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, seems to affront the Great Governor and
Judge of the World, to be injurious to the Public, and to offer our Talent to
introduce all those Evils that our discomposed State is subject to, and which
the kind Intentions of Heaven design to prevent: Only there is this in the
way; Things do not always answer their ends, and the Good Intentions of God and
Nature are at once frustrated and abused: Through Pride and Ambition some
Princes, instead of Preserving, have themselves Invaded the Divine Rights,
exacting Divine Honor to their Persons, and a subjection of their Subjects
Consciences to their Will; and others taking the Advantage of their Power,
instead of those kind Offices that God has given them in charge, Tyrannize
over their People, demanding of them what was never granted to them: so that
the case is, who shall divide between God and the King, and between him and his
Subjects? For it seems too forward a step to Slavery and Idolatry to obey
without limitation and reserve. But as those are the happiest States that are
Governed by fixed Laws, and not by the Arbitrary Power of Princes, because
those Laws are standing Rules, and secure the Subject against any Invasion
either of his Liberty or Property, especially when unbyassed and Righteous
Judges interpret and execute them; so the Laws of God, and the received
Traditions of Divine Instruction will best decide the case between God and the
Prince, which, if Princes will not observe in their Demands, Subjects must in
their Obedience, because they are to be judged thereby at last: and therefore
these are always better Counselors than our own Pusillanimity or Secular
Interest, or the obsequiousness of others; and a better Guide than the
temporizing humor of Parasites or the Practice of Ambitious and Devoted
Courtiers, as was well seen in the case of Daniel and the three children. Dan.
3.26, 27, 30. Chap. 6.22, 28.


In such Difficult Cases as these, there is indeed need of the wisdom of the
serpent, and the innocence of doves, and the Resolution of Men. But when
Princes demands, are at once congruent and subservient to the Will of God, the
Design of Government, and the Common Good of Men, all Difficulties and Cavils
are superseded, and there is no hinderance in the case, (except it be
Dishonesty and Ill Design,) but that a Man may render to Caesar the things that
are Caesar's, and to God the things that are Gods; Here is no snare, but only a
ground laid for the Glory of God, the Repose of the World, and the Security of
Men both here and hereafter: Only this must be observed, that since the thing
is possible and practicable, it must be done.

Thirdly, This is that which is enjoined in the Text; and it is the doing of
our Duty that chiefly recommends us both to God and Man: Those Men that fail in
these Practicks, are neither Good Subjects, Good Christians, nor (in this case)
Wise Men; but they that do them, so far at least, are all: they therefore that
own themselves either Christians or Subjects, or that intend to act Wisely for
themselves, shall do well to remember this Injunction of our Savior, which
ought to be more Obliging than all the Interests in the World, because it is
his.

To talk of Good Things, and discourse of Piety, and censure others, has been
the chief part of the Religion of some; and by this means they have gained the
Reputation of Good People, whilst they have deceived the World and themselves;
And to speak high for Kings and those in Authority, has been the Chief Part of
the Loyalty of others, whilst they Betrayed the Powers they Adored, buoying up
Authority to demands that were most likely to ruin either it, or themselves;
But when a just and necessary Submission is required, in compliance with what
Heaven has Ordained, and Nature it self demands for the Common Safety, it is
denied. But both these seem to fall short of the Character of Wise and Good
Men; for as Virtue chiefly consists in Practice, so does Wisdom, and therefore
they that would attain both, must do their Duty: And doubtless a little
consideration will teach us that an honest simplicity and Godly sincerity in
all things is the Best Policy, and especially in the present case, it being the
most Rational way to reserve our Peace in both Worlds.

Fourthly, And this is that which our Savior so plainly intimates to us in the
Text; viz. That in rendering to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God
the things that are Gods, there is Wisdom and Safety. He knew that Malice it
self could not lay hold of such Integrity, and accordingly they that came to
entangle him in his talk, marvelled and left him, and went away: Matthew. 22.12.
And it seems also, that tho they designed to bring him in danger of the State,
yet in his wonted tenderness and Clemency, he gives them a Rule, at the same
time he answered for himself, that might be as effectual to secure them, as he
knew it would himself; For he certainly foresaw That Peoples ruin, and their
untractableness to the Government they were under, would bring that Destruction
upon them, which by their repeated and continued Impieties they had prepared
for themselves: And they might as well have observed the innuendo in his
Answer, as they were convinced of its Wisdom; And had they taken the hint, and
acted accordingly, they would have experienced it a most certain Method for
their safety; so that indeed we have not only a sure Rule for Personal Safety,
but a Topic of Divine Policy for that of the Public.

For first, Government being the only Rational Method for the Preservation of
Society, and giving Men all the Advantage that can be of Tranquillity and
Security in the World, the only Rational way to establish it, and render it
capable of answering its ends, is to be just to him that manageth it, and
render him what may enable him to preserve both it and them; whereas on the
contrary, he that detracts his share for the Preservation and Defense of the
Government he lives under (especially if it be well ordered and directed to the
Proper Ends for which it is Ordained) seems to act the part of one that resuses
to lend his hand to Defend the Banks against the Sea, or to stop a Raging Fire
in his Neighborhood, and consequently deserves to be treated as one of the
Greatest Nuisances in the Common wealth: And indeed every well ordered State is
obliged to justify its self against such as deny it those just Dues that are
necessary for its Support, and to exact at least the Penalty of those Laws that
are provided for its Defense and Peace. And tho some are so mild and tender as
not to take the Advantage of Men's errors, being willing that even all should
have the Benefit of Peace and Security, yet it seems necessary to take Notice
of continued Obstinacy, lest ill Men should think the Government too weak to
Vindicate its self, and so be encouraged to attempt its Ruin. And if any think
to escape the Danger of the Law by such attempts, yet the Confusions they
create, may chance to affect them so, as to make them Repent of their
Indiscretion; For as it belongs to God alone to make Alterations in the World,
so he only is able in Great Revolutions to make all things fall Right: but
when the Folly and Distempers of Men excite them to break in pieces that Order
of Heaven that it has demonstrated, and they experience to be full of Grace,
as they will be unable to make all things jump with their Expectations, (for
that must be left to God at last) so in all likelihood, they will taste the
resentments of contemned Goodness, and be overwhelmed in the Deluge they let
in; And for our part, all the Prospect that is before us, is only such an
Universal Ruin, or such a Government, as neither the Wisdom of the Serpent,
nor the Innocence of Doves will enable us to escape the ill effects of.

With some the Public Safety is no motive to do their Duty, nor Common
Calamities any check to their Headstrong Follies. But as those that are thus
hardened against such Reproaches, seem to bespeak for themselves such Calamities
as belong to those that upbraid the Care of Heaven and have forfeited their
Share in the Common Providence, so how well soever others may shift in the
Hurries of the World, they have all Reason imaginable to expect to be made
Exemplary in their Sufferings, if Heaven have any Hand in the Chances that
attend Mortals. And tho the Reward of such should be reserved by the Divine
Counsel for another World, yet it must be owned that such bid as fair every way
for present Ruin, as one that staves the Ship he sails in, on purpose to get a
Plank to save himself from being swallowed up in the Raging Ocean: So that as
such People seem to have outlived all manner of Concern or Regard for the
Public; so likewise, to fall far short of the Common Policy of Men, how Great
States men soever they may be in their own Opinion: For certainly there is no
such way either for Personal, or the Public Safety, as to be Just and True to
the Government we live under, and, as God and Nature direct, to unite our
Interests with it.

Secondly, The observance of this Rule in reference to Almighty God, seems also
to be, as of much Greater Moment, so also of as good Effect to this end; in as
much both Kingdoms and Men have a greater dependence upon Heaven, than upon any
thing else, and God has a Greater Power over both, than all the World has;
whether we see it or no, we live and move and have our beings in him? Act;
17.28.
And tho we think we may provide well enough for our selves by our own Industry
and Management, yet we must be convinced, that God is the Great Dispenser of
our Fortunes here, as well as the Sole Arbiter of our Fate hereafter; and that
he will not let go the Government of his own World, out of his own Hand. That
Almighty God is unconcerned about the Affairs of the World, and takes no Notice
of the Unrighteousness and Affronts that are offered to him, is indeed what the
vain Politics of some Great Statesmen would persuade, and that which the
Wishes of some prompt them to believe and hope, but continual Experience, and
that Sense that Heaven has Planted in Humane Souls to prevent such Dangerous
Illusions, convinces us of the contrary. And those that are not willing to
credit God's Word so far, yet are forced to believe that Good Men are under the
Care of a Watchful and Gracious Providence, and that howsoever others may
fare, yet even in the worst of Times, those that fear God, are the most secure,
and in the Happiest Condition: And so Great and Visible is his Power that Elihu
challenges the World to oppose him, either in his Designs of Kindness, or in
the Effects of his Indignation; When he gives quietness, Job 31.29.
who then can make trouble? And when he hides his face, who then can behold
him, whether it be done against a Nation, or against a man only: And because
his Power extends not only to this World, but also to the utmost reach of
Eternity, that Man certainly consults best for himself, that has a just Regard
to him, and most Faithfully and Uprightly observes his Duty: Doubtless the work
of such righteousness is peace, Isaiah 32.17.
and the fruit of it, quietness and assurance for ever. Let things fall how
they will in the World, he that keeps in with him that is the Great Orderer of
all things now, and that must determine our Fate at last, is in the most secure
State; however he may fare at present, Psalm. 7.37.
Mark the upright man, and behold the just, and the end of that man is peace.

But to conclude; our Christian Rule has a more general tendency and influence
and is the most Rational Security of Nations and States; Government is the
Support and the Protection of Heaven, the Safety of any People, and the
Foundation of a lasting Prosperity is laid in both: To render therefore to
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are Gods, is the
most Wise Provision for the Public Good; and no People are so Happy as those
that are united in their Duty to God and their Princes. But on the other side,
to have no Regard to God, is to cut off the best Defense, and inrage the most
Dreadful Enemy; to be false to the Prince, is to Renounce the most Natural
Establishment; and to be Unjust to both, is Fatal without remedy.

Having thus far insisted upon what our Lord seems to intend in the Text; The
Improvement I would make of all is, to assist his most Gracious Design; to
promote the Glory of God, the Repose of the World, and the Happiness of Men;
And, if I might, also help to mend the Ill State of these Times, and lend my
Hand to lay a ground for our own Peace.

It is too manifest that we are in a very Ill Case, and that most apparently,
through the neglect of what our Savior here enjoins: Through the great decay
of Piety, we are sunk into a very Ill Habit; The Displeasure of Heaven seems to
be upon us already, and we Languish under the expectation of Greater still; and
this Ill Habit is so far Irrecoverable, that nothing but the Restoration of
the Power of Godliness can restore us; and yet that only Remedy seems to us as
unacceptable as the Disease. Through the want of a due and orderly Submission
and Faithfulness to the Powers that be, we are become a kingdom divided and
false within it self. Our sins have almost Ruined us, and the prevailing Power
of Sedition, which has broken the Crasis of this Politic Body, now looks like
a near Forerunner of some Dismal Fate. Virtue and Morality are sunk, and the
Nation looks rather Barbarous than Christian: Rebellion sets up for True
Loyalty; and that Uniform Submission to Government, which is the Stability of
Kingdoms and States is lost: and by this wretched jumble of Impiety and
Faction, of Vice and Sedition, Consusion creeps upon us, and a visible Ruin
calls aloud to Reform these Reproachful Disorders, and to render to Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are Gods. And therefore to
that end I presume to persuade these two things, which our Lord so expressly
calls for in the Text, and a third which apparent Necessity seems to require in
Reference thereto,

First, That we become more Just to Heaven.

Secondly, That we become more Just to the Princes and Government we live under.

Thirdly, That all that are concerned in the Government, be so Just to God and
their Majesty's, as to take a due care that these things be done.

First, That we become more Just to Heaven; That is that we come to a through
Reformation of the Impieties that are daily so universally committed by all
sorts of Men to the Great Dishonor of God. This is that indeed which has so
often and so long been talked of and pretended; But so little of it is yet
intended or done, that the profane Age now takes the Advantage, and perfectly
ridicules it. But yet this is it that must be our Refuge at last. We must
either cease our Provocations, or else we shall Experience that our iniquities
will be our ruin; 1 Samuel 12.25. Ezekiel. 18.30.
We must either come to a more Pious Temper, or else we must never expect the
Blessing of God in this World, or Mercy in the next; neither Prosperity here,
nor a Lot among the Saints at last. This has always been the means that God
himself has propounded for the averting of his Judgments and attoning
incensed Vengeance; And those that have been so Wise as to make use of it, have
ever found it Successful; whilst a continued stubbornness in their Impieties
has never failed to accomplish his wrath upon wicked and unreclaimable People.

Those that have made the most Wise Observations in History of common
Calamities, and the Ruin of Empires and Nations, have commonly assigned the
cause thereof to the vices and wickedness, either of the People, or their
Princes; whereby, as they have become too effeminate and soft to be either
Valiant or Wise, so they have at once lost their Courage and Conduct, and
incensed Divine Justice against them. And if we look into the Holy Scripture
(which only gives us an Impartial Account of such things) we shall find that
all the Desolations that are there mentioned to have been in the World, were
more owing to the vile Practices of Men, and their sins against God, than to
the Power of Enemies: Look upon the Destruction of the Old World, and the
overthrow of Sodom and Gomorra, Genesis 6.5, 6, 7. Genesis 18.20. and Chap. 19.24, 25.
Adma and Zeboim, and you will find the true cause of all their Ruin was their
continued Enormities, and their Brutish Practices, and because they would not
be brought to Repentance and Reformation, tho Noah and just Lot, as well as
their own Destruction so earnestly persuaded it. And St Peter says, 2 Pet. 2.6.
these things were an ensample for those that should after live ungodly; Look
upon those seven Nations that God gave over to be destroyed before the children
of Israel, Levit. 18.25, 28.
and you will find, that because they had polluted it with their abominations,
the land it self is said to have vomited them out; And God charge his own
People not to follow their Example, That the land spue not them out also, as it
spued out the Nations that were before them. Look upon the final Desolation of
the Jewish State and Nation; and their continued Obstinacy and Rebellions
against God, notwithstanding the repeated Calls of our Lord and his Apostles to
Repentance, was their Ruin: Our Savior had indeed before read them their
Destiny under the Parable of the Husbandmen, Matthew. 21.23, etc.
that would not render their Lord the fruit of his Vineyard. And they might
well have taken the hint in our Text: For, not rendering to God the things that
were Gods, they (to bring on their own Destruction) were so besotted as not to
render to Caesar the things that were Caesar's; but mutining about the Roman
tribute, under Florus and Albinus, they lost their Temple, Sacrifice, and
Service; and after they had suffered the most Dismal Shock of Cruelty that ever
fell upon any part of Mankind, their State was utterly overthrown. The old
Persian Empire, when sunk into Debauchery, and stewed into Softness and
Effeminacy by their abominable Lusts, easily fell before the small Force of
Alexander; and that which made him Great, was, that he happened to extend his
Arms where Luxury and Vice had made way for Conquest and Destruction before:
And nothing gives the present Scourge of Europe a clearer Prospect of an
Universal Monarchy, then the Universal Vitiousness and Impiety, (his most
agreeable Harbingers) that have prepared his way: And he is certainly as much
beholden to the Perfidiousness and Treachery, to the Knavery and Falsehood that
Irreligion and the Decay of Piety have so plentifully produced in this Age, as
he is to any thing else, except it be the Divine Vengeance, that is now
Chastising this part of Christendom, with that Firebrand, for our great
degeneracy in Religion and Manners.

These things are certainly very plain Admonitions to us, upon whom the ends of
the world are come, as St Paul speaks: And if such warnings and our own Ill
State; neither the Judgments of God upon others, nor the Prospect of them upon
our selves; neither the present Discoveries of his Displeasure, nor the
terrors of the Wrath to come, will prevail with us to consider our ways, and
to come to a more Pious Temper and more Christian Practice, he that runs may
read our Fate: For what our Lord said to the Jews, is as applicable to us, both
as to Particulars and as to the Nation in general, Luke 13.3.
Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish.

Let not therefore Religion and Piety which are a better Defense than either
Walls or Bulworks, and the only means to save our Souls, be the only
contemned things in the World, and Traffic and Business be preferred before
both. Let not the Sacred Ordinances of God be treated as mere Diversions, and
less esteemed than Masks or Plays: Let not his Holy Day be only respected as a
Retirement from Public Employments, to more Private Indulgence and
Licentiousness, and the rest esteemed most useful to us: Let not the Holy Name
of God be more used to Swear and Curse with, than to Adore and Praise: Let not
our Glorious Creator, and most Merciful Lord, the Great Judge of Quick and
Dead, and the Almighty Revenger, be treated as an Insignificant Being, and left
out of our thoughts: Let not his Laws be contemned, his Counsels slighted, his
Mercy abused, or his Judgments be provoked: But let us all Unite in his Fear,
and by a timely and through Reformation of such Horrid Provocations, endeavor
at once to prevent the pouring out of his Fury upon the Land, and the Final
Damnation of our own Souls.

Secondly, I am to persuade a just rendering to Caesar the things that are
Caesar's: that we come to a more united adherence to the Powers that be, and to
a more just Observance of those Duties that Gods word and the Necessity of
Affairs requires in reference to them. This is the most Rational and Natural
Method to assist that means which God and Nature have ordained, both for the
Establishment and Defense of Humane Societies and the Commonwealth; and next
to the propitiating of Heaven, by our returning to our Duty to God, it is the
most Proper Course to prevent and dissipate our Dangers: Matthew. 12.25.
Our Lord has given us too plain a hint of the Danger that divided States are
in, to be either overlooked or contemned: and if we will not yet take warning,
it is too probable, we shall find his words true. When the Subjects of this
Kingdom were so cullied in their Faith, as to reserve a kind of Allegiance to
the Prince of the Roman State, as they could not be so firmly United to the
Common Interest of their own Princes and Country, as was necessary to its
Freedom and Safety; so if we transcribe the Error, that we have so often
Renounced, and they so Happily escaped, it is but to make a very forward step
to engulf our selves into the same Condition and Worse. And certainly such a
Prospect is not so very inviting, but that the Dreadful Confusions and
Miseries that must usher it in, and attend it, might prevail with Men, not to
be so passionately in Love with it.

It is no standing to dispute Titles, and to fall out about what God seems to
have determined, when without a Vigorous concurrence with the way that his
Providence has put us into for our Safety, we are the most Unfortunate People
in the World. If all that are concerned (as even those also seem to be as much
as any others that are so willing to run the adventure of another Revolution)
would but concur in the same Common Interest; to partake of the Common Safety,
will certainly be a Greater Reward, than they can expect for assisting the
Ruin of their Country by Treachery and Perfidiousness: Enraged Tyranny seldom
makes Distinctions, and General Confusion does not always leave room for the
Authors to escape, especially if their Numbers are many, and their Figures
great; so that their Reward is not like to be so much according to expectation,
as desert. But to wave all Fears, let us all lay aside that Discord and
Falsehood that are at once so great a Reproach, and such Fatal forerunners of
mischief; Let us concert for the Public Safety, and Unite in the same
Interest; and by a Cheerful and Honest rendering to Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, let us strengthen the Hands of our Princes, which is now the only way
left for the Preservation of the Church and State, of our Country and Religion.

Thirdly, But to conclude; The last thing I am to persuade, is, that all that
are concerned in the Government, would take a due Care that these things be
done, and that all Men render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God
the things that are Gods.

This is that Justice that all in Authority owe to God and their Princes; and
the Faithful discharge of that Duty, is to consult Wisely for their own Safety
and Honor, as well as for the Glory of God, and the Establishment of that
Government they serve. To execute judgment between Man and Man, and do
justice, is the Indisputable and Indispensable Command of God; and without it
Societies cannot be preserved, nor States and Empire long upheld. For Justice
is the Stability of the Affairs of the World, Prove, 16.12.
and the throne is established by righteousness. But to neglect the just
Interests of Princes and the Glory of God, is to countermine the other
Practice: For to suffer the Affronts and Impieties that the Atheistical and
Profane temper of the Age is so very Pregnant with, to go unpunished, is to
forfeit the Care of Heaven, and bespeak all the Judgments of God: And to
suffer those Affronts to Princes and their Government which the perverse
Humors of turbulent Spirits are so subject to, is to give way to their fall:
Whereas a Faithful Discharge of those Grand Duties, would as much as may be
prevent those Dangers, and not only so, but also would render such Noble
Patriots names Great, their Memory Honorable, and themselves Blessed.

It is no wonder to hear Men despise dominion and speak evil of Dignities, Jude
8.
if they may do it without a check; and it is no wonder if Men without control
Blaspheme the Most High, to hear them revile the Gods, Exodus 22.28.
and curse the Rulers of their people; But if the Power of Religion and the
true Spirit of Government be so sunk that these Practices are common and
unpunished, it would be a Wonder indeed, if they do not Ruin the Government
that should suppress them, and bring Confusion upon the Land.

To obviate therefore the Power of these Black Arts, and in behalf of all that
fear God and love their Country and Religion, I presume in the Name of God to
demand that Justice which is so evidently his, and his Vicegerents due, and
whereupon the Common Welfare has so Great dependence. And because Magnanimity
and Courage as well as Justice is requisite in this Case, the Enemies of our
Peace being so many and Impudent of both sorts, let Almighty God, the Author
and lover of Justice and the Faithful Rewarder of Good Men, strengthen your
Hands and Hearts to this Good Work, and give Success to your Endeavors.

Thus have I endeavored to assist the kind Design of our most Loving Friend
and Savior; And so far as it succeeds, there shall be Glory to God, Peace on
Earth, and good will toward Men: Which the Lord of his Infinite Goodness grant
in our days for Jesus Christ's sake, to whom only with the Holy Ghost be
Adoration and Glory for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by Samuel Oliver Bookseller in Norwich.
DE Naturali Religione Liber, in tres parts divisus: ubi falsa candide
refelluntur, vera probantur, vel deteguntur, ac Orthodox. Eccles. fratres ad
concordiam vocantur. Autore Petr. Chanvin. Roterodami apud Pet. Vander Staart,
sumptibus Sam. Oliverii Norvicensis. 1693.

A Sermon preached at the Assizes at Thetford 1693. by J. R. A. M. Rector of
Brundal in Norfolk. Published at the Special instance and Command of the Judges.

The Duty and Encouragement of Religious Artisicers described in a Sermon
preached in the Cathedral Church of Norwich, at the Weavers Guild. 1693. By J.
Jeffery, A. M. Minister of Saint Peter's of Mancroft in Norwich.


