Sir Thomas Fairfax's PROCEEDINGS IN THE WEST Against the Enemy since he
Advanced to BODMAN in CORNVVAL: SENT To the Honoble William Lenthal Esquire Speaker
of the Honorable House of Commons.

Wherein is a List of the Names of the Lord Mohuns and diverse other Persons of
Quality of that County that are come in to the PARLIAMENT.

Together with the Cornish PETITION to Sir Tho: Fairfax, for their Acceptance
to join with him in this Cause.

Also a Summons sent to the Lord Hopton.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Letter and Petition
be forthwith Printed and Published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edw. Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
and are to be sold at his Shop at the sign of the Golden Dragon in
Fleetstreet, near the Inner Temple. March 7. 1645.

TO The Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker to the Honorable House of Commons.
SIR,
IN my last I gave you an account of the Armies being at Bodman, Listithiel,
and parts thereabouts; since that time we have not advanced (it being held fit
to spend two or three days in securing as far as we are gone, and leaving all
safe behind us (the business of Mount Edgecomb has somewhat taken up our
time, I hope to good purpose; for this day came Mr. Coriton, Mr. Lower, Mr.
Glanvile, (all formerly Members of the House of Commons) and Mr. Trevisa to the
General from Mr. Edgecomb, concerning the Surrender of this Fort, and
disbanding of his Regiment and the forces thereabouts, which is agreed unto, I
hope upon such conditions as will not be unacceptable to the Parliament. What
influence this, and the coming in of other Gentlemen of this County, may have
upon the rest of the Country, you may easily perceive, especially if you
consider the quality of the persons of those that are already come in, and
desire to live under the Protection of the Parliament: Viz. The Lord Mohun. Sir
John Trelawny. Colonel Trelawny. Sir Nicholas Lower. Thomas Lower Esquire Pierce
Edgecomb Esquire William Scawen Esquire Mr. Corriton. William Bond Esquire Richard Edgecomb
Esquire Mr. Glanvile Esquire Major Nicholas Saul. Capt. William Bond of Earth. Capt.
Bourn. Capt. William Saul. Alexander Lower Esquire Mr. Francis Saul. Nath:
Trevanion of Tregerthen Esquire Major William Trevisa of Crokedon Esquire John
Battersby Esquire Richard Spur Esquire Io: Roe of Trewurnan Esquire John Horndon, Col:
Champernoon. Mr. Rashly. Mr. John Trevery, Governor of Foy. Mr. Bagley. Mr.
Walter Hele. Lieut. Colonel Fortescue. Major Warren. Sir Richard Prideaux, High
Sheriff of the County, and diverse others. Also Mr. Arrundel the Papist, a man
of power, desires to be under the Protection of the Parliament.


And as a further Testimony of the reallity of some others of the Inhabitants
of this County near St. Columb (and yet in a manner now in the power of the
Enemy) this ensuing Petition delivered by the Hands of Mr. Vivian, with the
consent of the Inhabitants of those parts where he lives, will in some measure
show their affection to the Parliament. To the Right Honorable Sir Thomas
Fairfax Knight, Captain General of the forces, raised by the High Court of
Parliament under his Command; and other the renowned Worthies of that Army.
Right Honorable,
WE (though not an acceptable number of a more unacceptable County) having by
Gods Blessing, so fair an advantage of giving our due respects to your Honor,
do with them present our persons also; which we most unfainedly protest have
been hitherto by us, most vnvoluntarily separated, as our former readiness and
frequent endeavors to advance this service; besides imprisonments, fines, or
other most miserable sufferings, the same can evidently testify: And therefore
we first bless the great Lord of Hosts, by whose providence you are made such
victorious Ministers of our diliverance from such intolerable bondage; and
next to our great and Wise counsel, by whose public care and mission, we have
the happiness this day to see you conquerors for the preservation of our
Religion, so long violated, and restitution of our liberty so long inthralled:
Neither may we omit a grateful acknowledgement of the unexampled valor and
vigilance, which have been so magnanimously exercited for the reducing of this
unhappy Kingdom from the woeful condition of a bloody war, to so fair hopes of
an assured and most happy peace: And now since it has pleased God thus to
bless us; we presume not to motion through difference your future care of his
Glory, and the Common Wealths good; having so many rare examples of your
readiness to defend both: However, give us leave as a people that is our great
grief and misery have so long a time wanted the happy influence and equity of
the Law to relieve us, to mention our desires of their reparation; whereby also
to distinguish our selves from those which have with an high hand endeavored
to subvert them: and as hitherto you have not wanted our prayers to God for a
blessing upon your counsels and actions. So now, your Honor shall not want the
ready, though weak assistance, so far as the lives and fortunes shall extend of
your servants and faithful vocaries.



The taking into consideration this Petition, and the coming in of the persons
aforementioned; as also the rising of the Inhabitants at Camelford,
Ginny-Hill, and other parts in the East and North of Cornwall: For our
assistance it was held fit to summon a Posse of five or six of the Hundreds, to
appear at Bodman-Down to morrow being Friday, where some will be fitted with
Instructions, to impart the Generals mind unto them: For to morrow, part of
the Army advances to S. Columbe and other parts; the Enemy is retreated from
Castle-Dennis, and last night had his Head-quarter about Truro: some part of
their Forces at S. Allens, and kept Guard near S. Columb; as our staying here
three days will prove to our advantage in settling these Eastern parts of the
Country; So we are confident it will do so for the Western; for Gerings Horse
will sufficiently incline the people to wish the coming of this Army for their
ease and preservation. The Enemy gave out they would plunder Truro, because the
people there already appear for us; but it was answered, Whether should they go
with their plunder when they had it: Several of the Princes servants have sent
unto the General for Passes to come in, and to repair to their homes; which I
conceive they now solicit for, in regard the Prince is gone to Sea: but where
he is landed, we yet hear not. Last night a Vessel out of Ireland came into
Padstow, the Townsmen seized upon her, and three other Vessels, going out with
plundered Goods, and sent to our Forces at War-bridge for assistance, which was
this morning accordingly sent unto him. A Spy is just now come from the
Enemies Quarters; most of their force are North of Truro: We shall be very near
Truro to morrow night. I believe the General after one days advance, will send
a Summons to the Lord Hopton. I take my leave, and rest

Your most faithful and humble servant, Io. Rushworth.
Bodman, March 5. Two in the Afternoon. 1645. SInce the writing of my Letter,
here is Cap. Far come from Padstow, who with Cap. Wogan boarded the Irish
Vessel; and with the assistance of the Townsmen and Towns-women put them all
to the Sword but two, about thirty in all, wicked natural Irish. God has most
seasonably brought that Vessel thither: It enrages the Country against the
Kings party, for bringing in of forraigners. These are but the forerunners of
many thousands speedily to come over, as by their Packets of great concernment,
appears: Indeed, of so great concernment considering from whom they come, that
it is not fit to be lightly mentioned: they were thrown into the Sea, yet
recovered; an express is to come up with them: We have cause to bless God for
such a mercy. Several of those Letters subscribed by Glamorgan, Ormond and
Digby, were this day read to Mr. Corriton, Mr. Lower, Mr. Glanvile, Mr.
Trevisa, etc. And one of the two that had not his throat cut, was brought
before them, which has further satisfied them of the Kings intentions, and
ready preparations to bring in bloody Irish Rebels into his Kingdom, that they
offer, to the hazard of Life and Estate, in person to oppose them. I will say
no more till the Letters come: Pardon my haste.

Bodman, March 5, 1645. six at night.

A Summons is gone to Hopton.

The Letters bear date the twenty eighth of February last. I beseech you to
hasten Ships to the Irish Coasts.



FINIS.

