Sr THOMAS WENTWORTH Knight. EARL of STRAFFORDE, Viscount Wentworth, Baron
Wentworth of Wentworth, Woodhowse, Newmarch, Oversley and Raby, Ld. Lieutenant
General, and General Governor of the Kingdom of Ireland: and Ld. President
of ye Council established in ye North parts of England, Ld Lieutenant of ye
County and City of York, and one of his Maty most honble Privy Council, and
Knight of ye most Noble order of the Garter.


THE TRIAL OF Thomas Earl of Strafford, Lord Lieutenant of IRELAND, Upon an
Impeachment of High Treason BY The COMMONS then Assembled in PARLIAMENT, In the
Name of THEMSELVES and of All the Commons in England: Begun in Westminster Hall
the 22th of March 1640. And Continued before Judgment was Given until the 10th
of May 1641.

Showing the Form of PARLIAMENTARY Proceedings In an IMPEACHMENT of TREASON.

To which is Added A short Account of some other MATTERS of FACT Transacted in
Both Houses of PARLIAMENT, Precedent, Concomitant and Subsequent to the said
TRIAL: With some Special Arguments in LAW Relating to a BILL of ATTAINDER.

Faithfully Collected, and Impartially Published, Without Observation or
Reflection, By JOHN RUSHWORTH of Lincolnes-Inn, Esquire

LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the Crown on Ludgate Hill, and Richard
Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1680.

To the Right HONORABLE GEORGE EARL OF HALIFAX; One of His Majesty's most
Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL.
My LORD,

NO Man (I believe) understands better than your Lordship, the Interest and
Concern that Posterity has, in a true account of all matters of moment, that
were transacted by their Ancestors; and I know none in whose Devotion, to the
service of the King and Kingdom, I could so confide, as in your Lordships, to
Patronize this plain and full Relation of the proceedings in Parliament, in the
Case of the greatest Minister of State, in his time.

I some times doubted that the Dedication of these Papers to your Lordship,
might be improper, because of your Lordships Descent from the Sister of that
great Personage, whose unhappy Fate is here related. But having well
considered, that Honor, Truth, and Justice, have the Supreme Empire in your
truly Noble Soul; and that a full and clear Narrative of all the Matters of
Fact, that occurred in this great Affairs, with the Intentions and
Constructions of them, as declared from the mouth of your Noble Ancestor
himself, is the fairest and justest way to represent him truly to future Ages;
I conceived it not unfit for your Lordship to favor this true Account of him,
which may protect his Name from the injuries, both of Ignorance and Malice.

I ought not, neither can I flatter your Lordship; you are too well known to
need any thing that can be said by me of your Worth and true Nobleness; and the
Character of this your Ancestor is best to be collected from the following
Papers. His Letters published by me in the Second Part of my Historical
Collections, and his Behavior in this solemn Trial here published, discovers
the greatness of his Parts, the quickness of his Apprehension, the excellence
of his Wit and Eloquence, the contempt he had of Death, and the serene
Composure of his mind in that Part of his Life, which falls within this History,

I should not have dared to present this Work to your Lordship, so nearly
related to this eminent Minister of State, if I had not been a Witness to all
the steps of the proceedings in this great* Action, and if I had not taken in
Characters, as well and truly, all that was said for him, as what his Accusers
said against him; and therefore I can with great assurance aver it to be a
candid Representation of Matter of Fact, which is all I pretend to publish to
the World: andas far as the exactest care could carry me, I have done it so
punctually true, that I am hopeful there is none can have any just Exception to
any part of it. My Lord, There is none alive can judge of a Work of this nature
better than your self, who as you are descended from a Race of Statesmen, being
Nephew and Grandson to the Two chief Ministers of the last age, this Great
Earl, and the Wise and Fortunate Lord Keeper Coventry, so are you looked on by
all, as a Person born for the Service of the KING, and the public good of
your Country: And as I have always had a constant Experience of your Goodness
and Indulgence to my self, so I humbly hope your Lordship will favorably
construe my intentions in this Dedication, and accept of it as a tribute of
Duty and Acknowledgement humbly offered by

May it please your Lordship, Your Lordships most Humble, Most Faithful, and
Most obliged Servant JO. RUSHWORTH.
March 25. 1680.
THE PREFACE.
I Cannot think that there wants an Apology for publishing the ensuing Papers,
although the Press seems overcharged. The Trial of Thomas Earl of Strafford,
was, and is, some way or other, the Concern of every Man of England; and the
Commissioners of Scotland and Ireland, thought those Kingdoms also Sufferers by
his Deportment, and joined in the Prosecution against him.

All the Commons of England by their Deputies in Parliament were his Accusers,
and the Impeachment against him was in their Names.

The Matter of his Charge had Reference to every English Man, and all their
Posterities; He was accused of designing to destroy the security of every of
their Estates, Liberties and Life's, and to reduce them all to be subject to
mere Will and Pleasure.

It may therefore be said in the Maxim of our Government, not much varying the
sense, Quod Omnes tangit, ab omnibus tractari debet. Every man ought doubtless
to know his own Case, to understand whether that Great Man was justly accused
of such a heinous Crime; and whether the Kingdom escaped such a fatal blow, as
was then alleged by his exemplary Fall, under the Judgment of the King and
Parliament;

For this purpose I expose to the common view, the whole Proceedings of his
Trial, being the most solemn, deliberate, and every way, the greatest Trial,
whereof we have any Account in our English Story.

The Preparations for his Trial were made with an unusual solemnity, and were
the Results of the Prudence of many selected Lords and Commons, as a Committee
of both Houses.

The usual places for Administering Justice, and Trials of Offenders, were
thought too mean upon so great an occasion, and therefore Scaffolds were
erected in Westminster Hall, fit to receive so great an Assembly, as were to
attend his Trial.

His Majesty had a Closet provided for him, the Queen and Prince near the
place, where the House of Peers sat, and was every day at the Trial of the
said Earl, and might hear what was said, and see what Witnesses were produced,
and take a full view of the greatness of the Assembly, and yet remain privately
in His Closet unseen. Seats were prepared for the Lord High Steward, and all
the House of Lords, who sat as his Judges; Woolsacks were placed for all the
Justices or Judges to be their Assistants: There were also Seats provided for
all the Commons in Parliament, though they came not with their Speaker and his
Mace, as a House of Parliament, but as a Committee of the whole House; Seats
were likewise prepared for the Commissioners of the Kingdom of Scotland and
Ireland, which made it an Assembly of Three-Kingdoms.

At the lower end of the Scaffolds, a place was provided for Thirteen Members
of the House of Commons, who were appointed for the Earls Prosecutors, to
manage the Evidence against him; near to them stood the Prisoner with a Table
before him, and a Desk to write upon, and a Chair was set for him to rest
himself when he found it needful.

The Author of the ensuing Papers was purposely placed near the Earl, to take
in Characters whatsoever should be said, either against or for him, and to the
best of his skill, he did impartially put in Writing what was said in the Case
Pro and Con; he has not wittingly or willingly omitted the least Particle said
in the Prisoners Defense, either by himself or any body in his behalf; he has
not varied the form or manner of his Expressions, being full of Eloquence, and
pleasing Rhetoric, and excellently adapted to move compassion, both in his
Judges, and the numerous Assembly of Auditors.

The Greatness of this Minister of State's Trial every way answered the High
Station and Employments, unto which he had been advanced; and the lofty Designs
he had managed. And the Books of his Life, from the time of his admission in
the Cabinet of his Princes Council, were exposed to the Worlds View and the
most profound Learning of the Laws of our Country, the sharpest Wit; and the
deepest wisdom of our Kingdom were employed to examine and measure what he had
done. Not only by those Rules of Justice, whereby all our ordinary Courts of
Justice are wisely bound by our Ancestors, to proceed in the Trial of
Criminals, but by those Fundamental Rules, and Maxims of our English
Government, which that Parliament asserted to be the safeguard, both of the
King and People, and to be so reserved in the custody of the Supreme
Legislative Power, that no Criminals, by the violation of those First
Principles, which they said gave the Being to our Government, can be judged
otherwise than in Parliament, the ordinary Judges being obliged by that famous
Statute of the 25th of Edw. 3. concerning Treasons, to Respit Judgment in all
such Cases, until the matter be declared in Parliament, and Judgment there
given; whether the offense whereof any shall be accused, be Treason, or other
Felony

This Trial being upon an Impeachment for Treasons, not specially named and
declared in the Statute of the 25th Edw. 3. occasioned more industrious and
exquisite searches to be made into the most ancient Records of the Kingdom,
than had been for some hundreds of years, and also caused the most Learned of
the Long Robe to tumble over their Law Books, and to apply their minds to look
into the bowels of our ancient Laws, and the reason of them, from whence they
had their Being, and doubtless the Counsel on either side brought out of their
most secret Treasuries, the quintescence of all their Learning and Studies;
besides the weight of the Cause, every man's Reputation pushed him to show his
utmost skill before so great and so grave an Assembly of such Critical and
excellent Judges and Auditors.

The Reader may find in these Papers all the sweetness of Learning, Wisdom, and
Policy, which was the issue of the long Labors and Travels of many industrious
Bees, in the whole spring of their youth and vigor.

The long continuance of this Trial, is another Evidence of its greatness; it
begun the 22 of March 1640. and continued with the interposition of diverse
Intervals, for deliberation, and providing Evidence, until the 12th of April
1641. And an ACT for Judgment in a Bill of Attainder, passed against the Earl
in the House of Commons the 21 of the same month, and in the House of Peers on
the 10th of May following.

I ought not to anticipate the Reader with any thing that happened during this
solemn Trial, nor to point at matter of Law or Fact; every Reader ought to
suppose himself present at the Trial, and to make his own Comments upon the Law
and Fact, as it appeared; every Professor or Student of the Law may transcribe
into his Common place Book, what he shall judge of most use, and every
Statesman may do the like in his Studies; and every Man great and small, may,
if he please, make excellent Moral Reflections upon the Rise, Greatness, and
fall of this seeming Fortunate, and yet at last Unfortunate Gentleman.

This Great Man's principal Crime, objected against him by the Sea Historical
Collections the First Part. Pa. 500.
Parliament, was his attempts to subvert that excellent Law called The Petition
of Right, which he himself (especially in a Speech made by him in Parliament
on, the 22 of March, in the year 162^ had promoted and pressed with the most
ardent Zeal, as the best Inheritance he could leave his Posterity, and all the
Laws confirmed and renewed in that Petition of Right, were said to be the most
invenomed Arrows that gave him his mortal wound; but how justly these were
urged against him, is not my part to determine.

I wish my Labors in Collecting truly the Matter of Fact, may be an occasion
to many, to make True and Righteous Judgment in this particular Case so much
Controverted, and that from these Matters of Law and Fact, such right measure
may be taken, that all our future Ministers of State may escape the conjoined
Complaints of the Three Kingdoms against them: and that the Government may be
so Administered, as shall best conduce to the happiness of the King and Kingdom.

ADVERTISEMENT,
THere is lately published Historical Collections: The Second Part. Containing
the principal Matters which happened from the Dissolution of the Parliament, on
the 10th of March, 4 Car. I. 162^. until the summoning of another Parliament,
which met at Westminster, April 13. 1640. With an Account of the Proceedings of
that Parliamet, and the Transactions and Affairs from that time, until the
meeting of another Parliament, Nov. 3, following, with some remarkable passages
therein, during the Firstsix months* Impartially related and disposed in
Annals. Setting forth only Matter of Fact in order of Time, without Observation
or Reflection. By John Rushworth of Lincoln's Inn, Esquire

An Introductive Account of several Passages previous to the GRAND TRIAL of
Thomas Earl of Strafford, who was Impeached by the House of Commons on the 11th
of November, 1640. As also of Passages and Proceedings in Parliament from that
time unto the 22. of March the same Year, when his Trial first began in
Westminster Hall.
Likewise an Account of Proceedings and remarkable Passages in both Houses of
Parliament, and some material Matters elsewhere Concomitant to the said Trial,
during the time it lasted, which was until the 30th of April, 1641.
Friday, November 6th, 1640.
THe House of Commons having in the first place, according to ancient Custom,
settled all their Grand Committees, for Religion, Grievances, Courts of Justice,
Trade, and Privileges; It was moved, That in regard the Complaints of the
Kings Subjects in Ireland were many, who had undergone great Oppressions in
that Kingdom by Male-Government there, and come to this Parliament for Relief,
might be referred to a Committee of the whole House for that purpose only to be
appointed. This motion being made by Mr. Pym, and seconded by Sir John
Clotworthy, avowing many particulars of the Complaints mentioned to be true, it
made a Discovery to such as were well-wishers to Thomas Lord Wentworth Earl of
Strafford and Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, that this Motion was intended by a
side-wind, to accumulate Complaints against him the said Lord Lieutenant, in
order to an Accusation; so when the question was put, after long debate, viz.
Whether the Irish Affairs should be referred to a Committee of the whole House?
The House was divided, Sir John Clotworthy and Sir Henry Mildmay being of
Opinion for the Yeas, were appointed Tellers of the number of the No's; and Sir
Edward Bainton and Sir Richard Luson being of Opinion, not to refer this
business of Ireland to a Grand Committee, conceiving it without President, were
appointed Tellers of the number of the Yeas, and when they had told all, they
came up to the Table, and made this Report to Mr. Speaker, That there were with
the Yeas 165, and with the No's 152, whereupon it was Resolved upon the
Question, That the Irish Affairs should be referred to a Grand Committee of the
whole House, to meet to morrow in the Afternoon at Two of the Clock in the
House, and afterward every Thursday at the same hour and place: And this
Committee is Ordered to have the like Power as the other Grand Committees of
the whole House have.

This Vote being carried for a Grand Committee as to Irish Affairs, a Cabal of
Friends to the Earl of Strafford sent down post unto him into Yorkshire to
acquaint him, that they apprehended a Design against him in the making of this
Committee, and left it to his own Election, whether he would stay still on the
Head of his Army, or come up to the Parliament. But if he did incline to come
up, that he would, at his first appearance, Impeach some Members of both Houses
(if he had Evidence for the same) of being privy to the bringing the Scotch
Army into this Kingdom, and told him, It was his wisdom to begin first, and not
to be first Impeached, as the Earl of Bristol was by the great Duke of
Buckingham. The said Earl, upon the receipt of this Advertisement, suddenly
resolved to come up and abide the Test of Parliament. But his Friends, then
with him in the North, told him, That his frank appearance would make Polit^ans
doubt, whether he did thereby assume his Judgment and wonted Prudence, to go
thus from his Army to the Parliament, where his Wisdom could not but know, that
the Scots and Scotizing-English had resolved his destruction, and therefore
(said they) unto him, It were better to keep under the safeguard of the
English Army, at his Command, (from which he had acquired some affection) or
retire to the Army in Ireland, then being also at his Devotion, or take
Sanctuary in some Foreign Parts, till fair weather might invite him home,
neither (said they) would Discretion Vote it a betraying of his Innocence to
decline a Trial, whereby the means of Factions raised in England and Scotland
by his malicious Prosecutors, and backed with Power, his Innocence could not
protect him. They further told him, that if Sentence should pass against him
for Nonappearance, yet he had kept his freedom till better times, when he
might have occasion to do His Master better Service abroad, than in Council at
White Hall.

But the said Earl conceiving he had got good Evidence in the North, that the
Scots came in by Invitation and Confederacy, between the Heads of the
Covenanters and some of the English Members of both Houses, and having digested
such his Intelligence almost into the form of an Impeachment, he posted up with
the same, intending to present it to the House of Peers, as soon as he arrived
there. But on Wednesday, Nov. 11th the House of Commons being acquainted by a
Member, that there was a business of great weight to be imparted, desired the
House that the Lobby without might be first cleared, and the Key of the House
brought up to the Table, which was done accordingly; and as the House had
entered into debate about the Earl of Strafford, there came a Message from the
Lords by the Lord Chief Justice Bramstom, and Judge Foster, That the King had
commanded the Lords Commissioners, who were appointed to Treat with the Scots
Commissioners at Rippon, to give an Account to both Houses of Parliament of
that which passed there and at York, and thereupon the Lords desire there may
be a meeting, by a Committee of both Houses this Afternoon in the
Painted-Chamber at Three of the Clock, if the occasions of this House will give
leave.

At this time many Members of the House conceived this Message was now sent, to
get Intelligence, what private debate was in hand; The House of Commons
returned this Answer by the same Messengers, That at this time they were in
Agitation of very Weighty and Important Affairs, and therefore they do doubt
they shall not be ready, to give them a meeting this Afternoon, as the Lords
desire, but as soon as they may, they will send an Answer by Messengers of
their own.

After the Messengers were withdrawn, the House proceeded in the Debate they
were in before, and appointed a Committee to prepare matter upon the said
Debate, for a Conference with the Lords, concerning the (...) of (...), and
named seven Members, viz.

Mr. Pym, Mr. Stroud, Mr. St. John, Lord Digby, Sir John Clotworthy, Sir Walter
Earl, and Mr. Hampden.
Which select Committee retired immediately into the Committee-Chamber, to
prepare Matter of a Conference to be prayed with the Lords, and a Charge
against the Earl of Strafford.

The said Committee presently returned to the House, and reported the Resolved
to Accuse the E. of strafford of High Treason.
Matter to them referred; Whereupon it was Resolved upon the Question, That a
Message be sent from this House to the Lords, in the Name of this House, and of
all the Commons of England, to accuse Thomas Lord Wentworth, Earl of Strafford,
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, of High Treason, and to desire that he may be
Sequestered from Parliament, and be Committed to Prison; and that within some
convenient time this House will resort to their Lordships with particular
Accusations and Articles against him.

Mr. Pym went up with this Message to the Lords, and at his Return made this
Report to the House.

That he had Repaired to the Lords, and there, in the Name of this Report of
the Message of High Treason.
House, and of all the Commons of England, did Accuse the said Earl of
Strafford of High Treason, and that he had also delivered the other Particulars
he had in Charge. Their Lordships Answer was, That they do desire to take this
weighty Matter into their serious Consideration, and will speedily send an
Answer by Messengers of their own.

Afterward Mr. Pym was sent up to the Lords, with a Message that some fit
course be taken, that there may be free Passage between England and Ireland,
notwithstanding any Restraint made there to the contrary.

The same day came a Message from the Lords by the two Chief Justices, Message
of Sequestration of E. of Strafford.
That the Lords have taken into serious Consideration, the Accusation sent from
this House against the Earl of Strafford, and have Sequestered him from the
House, and have Committed him in safe Custody to the Messenger of their House,
and they will move his Majesty, that the Passage from Ireland into England may
be open, notwithstanding any Restraint made there to the contrary.

The Message delivered by Mr. Pym was in manner following:

My Lords, The Knights, Citizens and Burgesses now Assembled in the Commons
House of Parliament, have received Information of diverse Traitorous Designs and
Practices of a great Peer of this House, and by virtue of a Command from them,
I do here in the Name of the Commons now Assembled in Parliament, and in the
Name of all the Commons of England, Accuse Thomas Earl of Strafford, Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, of High Treason: And they have Commanded me further to
desire your Lordships, that he may be Sequestered from the Parliament, and
forthwith committed to Prison. They further Commanded me to let you know, that
they will within a very few days resort to your Lordships with the particular
Articles and Grounds of this Accusation.

The Earl being required to withdraw, it was debated by the Peers, Whether he
should be Imprisoned on a general Accusation, without any particular act of
Treason charged against him or not? But upon the question it was carried in the
Affirmative, and he being called in, kneeled at the Bar; and after standing up,
the Lord Keeper spoke to him as follows:

My Lord of Strafford, The House of Commons, in their own Name, The Lord Keeper
to the E. of Strafford.
and in the Name of the whole Commons of England, have this day Accused your
Lordship to the Lords of the Higher House of Parliament of High Treason, the
Articles they will in a few days produce; in the mean time they have desired of
my Lords, and my Lords have accordingly Resolved, That your Lordship shall be
committed into safe Custody to the Gentleman Usher, and be Sequestered from the
House, till your Lordship shall clear your self of the Accusations that shall
be laid against you. And thereupon he was immediately taken into Custody by
James Maxwell, Usher of the Black Rod.

Thursday, November. 12th, 1640.
A Message came from the Lords by the Lord Chief Justice Littleton, Message
from the Lords.
and the Lord Chief Baron Davenport:

That the Lords have Commanded Us to let You know, that in pursuit of your
desire Yesterday, to have the Ports open between Ireland and Conference, that
Ports of Ireland shall be open.
England, some of the Lords had moved His Majesty in it, and it shall be done
speedily and effectually.

This day the House fell into serious Debate concerning Sir George Ratcliff, an
Intimate of the Lord Lieutenants of Ireland, in whom he reposed great Trust and
Confidence, and by the discourse was as if he were guilty of High Treason, in
endeavoring to subvert the Fundamental Laws, and that he did join with the
Earl to bring in an Army from Ireland into this Kingdom, and had joined with
the said Earl to use Regal Power, and to deprive the Subjects of this Kingdom
of their Liberties. It was moved, that he might be sent for over; as also for
Sir Robert King, who is a material Witness against the Earl of Strafford. But
for as much as they were Members of the Parliament then sitting in Ireland, it
was referred to a Committee, viz.

Mr. St. John's, Mr. Seldom, Committee how to send for Sir George Ratcliff.
Mr. Ieofrey Palmer, Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Maynard, Mr. Grimston, Mr. Chadwell.
Which Committee had Power to consider what was fit to be done in sending for
Sir George Ratcliff, and Sir Robert King, in regard they are Members of the
said Parliament now sitting in Ireland, and to present it to the Consideration
of this House, and are to meet to morrow Morning at Seven of the Clock in the
Committee-Chamber.

Ordered, Mr. Speaker be entreated to be here this Afternoon, to sit Mr.
Speaker to sit at the Grand Committee for Irish Affairs.
by, at the Great Committee for Irish Affairs, and if there be Cause, to resume
the House.

And accordingly the Grand Committee of the whole House sat this Afternoon
upon the Irish Affairs, and the Speaker sat by, according to Order. There came
word that the Lords were come, and expected the Irish Affairs.
Committee of this House at the Conference; concerning the Proceedings at the
great Council at York. Mr. Speaker assumed the Chair, and it was moved, That
the Committees that sat in other places, might be sent for to attend the
Conference; that those Gentlemen might be sent for by the Mace that were gone
before to the Conference.

The House rose, and the Committee went up to meet the Committee of the Lords
at the Conference; and Mr. Speaker adjourned the House, and went home.

Friday, November. 13th, 1640.
Ordered, that the Committee for preparing the Charge against the Lord
Committee concerning the Earl of Strafford.
Lieutenant, being now Sine die, meet this Afternoon at Four of the Clock in
the Treasury-Chamber, which Committee has Power to receive all such Petitions
and Papers, as may conduce to the business, and have likewise Power to send for
Records, Papers, Parties, and Witnesses, or any other thing that they shall
think may conduce to the perfecting that Charge.

The King's Solicitor Reported from the Committee appointed to consider of the
manner of sending for Sir George Ratcliff and Sir Robert King, being, as is
informed, Members of the Parliament in Ireland.

That the Committee were of Opinion, That it is better to examine this Matter,
according to the Rules and Foundations of this House, than to rest upon
scattered Instances: They distinguished between the Case of Sir George Ratcliff
and Sir Robert King thus, We find an Information given (which if it be true) of
High Treason against Sir George Ratcliff, then there is no doubt, but in Case
of High Treason, Privilege of Parliament neither here nor there does reach to
protect him, but that Sir George Ratcliff may be sent for, though a Member in
Parliament there; this was the Opinion of the Committee.

For the other, Sir Robert King, the Case did differ, for to send for him to
testify in any Case, were of dangerous Consequence; or to send for him to
testify in the Kings Bench in Case of Treason, where the Court does ordinarily
sit; but this Case differs between sending for a Member of Parliament to give
Evidence in any ordinary thing, or in any ordinary Court, for the Parliament is
a Court that does not ordinarily sit, a Court of the great Affairs of the
Kingdom; therefore to be sent for hither to this High Court, and to testify in
a Case of the highest Nature, in case of Treason informed of against Sir George
Ratcliff, We did conceive it to be no breach of Privilege of Parliament that
he should be sent for, and if the House require of us our Opinions concerning
the manner of sending for him, we shall tell you what we conceive of it.

Which Report being made, It was Resolved upon the Question: Resolutions
thereupon.


That Sir George Ratcliff shall be forthwith sent for, to answer the
Information that is Charged against him here of High Treason.

Resolved upon the Question, That Sir Robert King shall forthwith be sent for
hither, as a Witness to testify in case of High Treason.

Mr. Solicitor likewise offered, from the Committee, to the Consideration of
the House, two Orders, which were read, in haec verba, and by Vote Ordered
accordingly, viz.

It is Ordered by this House upon the Question, That Sir George Ratcliff being,
as is informed, a Member of the Parliament in Ireland, because Sir Robert King
to be sent for.
there is an Information in this House of High Treason against him, shall be
forthwith sent for, and brought hither in safe Custody, no Privilege of
Parliament extending to this Case.

Ordered two Messengers to be sent with these Orders, and each Messenger to
have Copies of both the Orders.

It was likewise Offered from the Committee, That the Honorable Persons, near
the Chair, would beseech His Majesty, that He would be Expedition.
pleased to give such Directions, as in His Wisdom He shall think fit for the
more Expeditious sending for these Parties. Mr. Treasurer delivered this
Message to His Majesty.

Saturday, November 14th, 1640.
Mr. Treasurer after he had read out of a Paper, the Message which Yesterday
the House desired him to deliver to His Majesty: Declared, that he Mr.
Treasurer Reports the Message from the King.
had acquainted the King therewith, who, this morning, has given Order to Mr.
Secretary Windebank, who deals for the Affairs into Ireland, to make instant
Dispatch to the Deputy there, that all Expedition be done according to the
Message. Secondly, Concerning the three Letters desired by my Lord Mountnorris;
they were procured by Mr. Secretary Cook, who was employed about the Affairs
for Ireland at that time, that he is now in the Country in Darbyshire; His
Majesty will take some time to be informed in this, and no time shall be lost,
and there shall be an Account given.

Wednesday, November 18th, 1640.
Ordered that no Member of this House shall visit the Earl of No Member to
visit the Earl of Strafford without leave.
Strafford, during the time of his Restraint, without License first obtained
from the House.

Ordered a Message be sent to the Lords, to desire them, that they would please
to appoint a Committee of a very few, that in the presence Message to the Lords
for a Committee to examine Witnesses.
of some of this House might take such Depositions, and examine such Witnesses
as they should name upon Interrogatories and Questions, as shall be presented
to them by Order of this House concerning the Earl of Strafford, and the
Interrogatories, Testimonies, and Witnesses to be kept private, until the
Charge be made full and perfect.

Ordered that Mr. Pym go up with this Message, accompanied with so many as
shall be pleased to go.

Then the House fell into Debate, concerning those Lords who petitioned the
King for a Parliament to be called: Whereupon it was Resolved Approbation of
the Lords Petitioners for a Parliament.
upon the Question, That those Lords which were Petitioners to His Majesty at
York; in their Petition, a Copy whereof was here now read, have done nothing
but what was Legal, Just, and Expedient for the good of the King and Kingdom,
and is now approved by the whole body of the Commons.

Resolved upon the Question, That the Copy of the Petition now read, Petition
to be Entered.
and formerly preferred by the Lords to His Majesty at York, shall be here
Entered.

Thursday, November 19th, 1640.
It is Ordered, That if occasion shall be for the examination of any Speedy
examinations against the Earl of Strafford by Members of both Houses.
Members of this House in the business concerning the Earl of Strafford, they
shall be ready upon Notice, to be examined upon Oath. It is likewise Ordered,
That upon the Message to be sent from this House, the Lords be desired to make
the like Order for the Members and Assistants of their House, and to desire
their Lordships, that if occasion be, that any Privy-Counsellors be produced as
Witnesses, they will take such course as in their Judgments they shall think
fit, that they may be examined.

This Message to be sent to morrow morning, by the Messengers formerly sent.

Mr. St. John's, Mr. Palmer, Mr. Glimer, Mr. Seldom, Mr. Grimstone, Mr. Maynard,
Committee to search Attainders.
Sir Simond D'ewes, Mr. Whstiler, Mr. Thomas Widerington, Mr. Solicitor.
This Select Committee, or any two of them, are appointed to search the Record
of Attainder in the Kings Bench, in such manner, and at such time, as they
shall think fit, for the furtherance of the Charge in hand against the Earl of
Strafford.

Friday, November 20th, 1640.
Mr. Whistler Reported from the Committee for Irish Affairs, That Report Irish
Remonstrance.
he is required, by the Committee, to Report to the House the Affairs of that
Kingdom, as they were set forth in a Remonstrance, made by the House of Commons
in this present Parliament in Ireland, wherein it appeared that Trading was
destroyed, Industry disheartened, new and unlawful Impositions were Imposed, the
Arbitrary Determinations of all Causes for Goods, Land and Possessions, by
Petitions, and Act at Council Table where no Writ of Error can lie, and the
King loses a Fine upon the Original Writ thereby: That His Majesty's Gracious
Inclination for the good of that Kingdom is kept from them: That there is a
Monopoly of the sole Trade of Tobacco, of more gain to the Parties interessed
therein, than the King's whole Revenue in Ireland. The destroying of the
Plantation of Londonderry; The Exorbitant Power of the High Commission, which
cries loud in all the three Kingdoms: The Proclamation forbidding any to
depart thence for England without License, and pay dear for it: The many
Subsidies given, and Moneys raised for the King, and still he is in Debt, and
therefore demands an account of His Treasure, and desires present Redress, or
Access to His Majesty.

A Copy of the Remonstrance was delivered in, under the Hand of the Clerk of
the Parliament there, and was read, and shall be entered, if so Ordered.

That the Secretaries there, Mr. Slingsby and Mr. Little, be required to Book
of Petitions sent for over.
send hither the Book of Entries of the several Petitions presented to the late
Lord Deputy, now Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and the several Orders and
Proceedings thereupon made.

That Mr. Little the younger and Mr. Carpenter, who have the Monopoly for
Tobacco, be required to send hither those Warrants by which Warrants for Taxes
upon Tobacco.
they demand, and have laid those Taxes upon Tobacco.

That the several Affairs of the Custom-House and Ports, (viz.) Dublin,
Kingsale, Yowhall, Waterford, Cork, Galloway, Carrick-Fergus, and Bangor
Entries of Impositions.
be required to send hither their Books of Entries, whereby the Impositions
laid upon several Commodities, may appear; there were several Warrants issued
forth according to this Order, and sent away.

Post Merid.
The Articles offered by a Member of this House against the Earl of Strafford
are referred to the Committee, that are to draw up the Charge against the said
Earl, which being Reported, were as follows:

Articles of the Commons assembled in Parliament against Thomas Earl of
Strafford, in maintenance of his Accusation, whereby he stands Charged of High
Treason.
1. That he the said Thomas, Earl of Strafford, has traitorously endeavored
Articles against the Earl of Strafford.
to subvert the Fundamental Laws and Government of the Realms of England and
Ireland, and in stead thereof, to introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical
Government against Law, which he has declared by traitorous words, Counsels,
and Actions, and by giving His Majesty Advice, by force of Arms, to compel his
Loyal Subjects to submit thereunto.

2. That he has traitorously assumed to himself Regal Power over the Lives,
Liberties, Persons, Lands, and Goods of His Majesty's Subjects in England and
Ireland, and has exercised the same Tyrannically, to the subversion and
undoing of many, both of Peers and others of His Majesty's Liege People.

3. That the better to enrich and enable himself to go through with his
traitorous Designs; he has detained a great part of His Majesty's Revenue,
without giving Legal account; and has taken great Sums out of the Exchequer,
converting them to his own Use, when His Majesty wanted Money for His own
urgent Occasions, and His Army had been a long time unpaid.

4. That he has traitorously abused the Power and Authority of his Government,
to the increasing, countenancing, and encouraging of Papists, that so he might
settle a mutual Dependence and Confidence betwixt himself and that Party, and
by their help prosecute and accomplish his malicious and tyrannical Designs.

5. That he has maliciously endeavored to stir up Enmity and Hostility
between His Majesty's Subjects of England, and those of Scotland.

6. That he has traitorously broke the great Trust reposed in him by His
Majesty, of Lieutenant General of His Army, by wilful betraying diverse of His
Majesty's Subjects to death, his Army to a dishonorable Defeat by the Scots at
Newborn, and the Town of New Castle into their hands, to the end, that by the
effusion of blood, by dishonor, and so great a loss as that of New Castle, His
Majesty's Realm of England might be engaged in a National and irreconcilable
Quarrel with the Scots.

7. That to preserve himself from being questioned for those and other his
traitorous Courses, he labored to subvert the Right of Parliaments, and the
ancient course of Parliamentary Proceedings, and by false and malicious
Slanders, to incense His Majesty against Parliaments. By which Words, Counsels,
and Actions, he has traitorously, and contrary to his Allegiance, labored to
alienate the Hearts of the King's Liege People from His Majesty, to set a
Division between them, and to ruin and destroy His Majesty's Kingdoms, for
which they Impeach him of High Treason against our Sovereign Lord the King, His
Crown and Dignity.

8. And he the said Earl of Strafford was Lord-Deputy of Ireland, and
Lieutenant General of the Army there, viz. His most Excellent Majesty, for His
Kingdoms both of England and Ireland, and the Lord President of the North,
during the time that all and every the Crimes and Offenses before set forth
were done and committed; and he the said Earl was Lieutenant General of all His
Majesty's Army in the North parts of England, during the time that the Crimes
and Offenses in the fifth and sixth Articles set forth were done and committed.

9. That the said Commons by Protestations, saving to themselves the liberty of
Exhibiting at any time hereafter any other Accusation or Impeachment against
the said Earl; and also of replying to the Answers that he the said Earl shall
make unto the said Articles, or to any of them, and of offering Proofs; also of
the Premises, or any of them; or any other Impeachment or Accusation that
shall be exhibited by them, as the Cause shall, according to the course of
Parliaments, require, do pray that the said Earl may be put to Answer for all
and every of the Premises, that such Proceedings, Examinations, Trials and
Judgments may be upon every of them, had and used as is agreeable to Law and
Justice.

Tuesday, November 24th, 1640.
These Articles thus Resolved upon by Question, were by another Question
Articles to be engrossed.
Ordered to be engrossed against to morrow Morning, and no Copies to be
delivered of them in the Interim; and the same Committee that prepared the
Charge is to draw up the Interrogatories, and Mr. Pym is to go up to the Lords
with the Charge.

Wednesday, November 25th, 1640.
Lord Digby went up with this Message to the Lords:

That this House desires a Conference with their Lordships, by a Committee
Conference concerning the Earl of Strafford's Articles.
of both Houses, concerning the Articles to be Exhibited against the Earl of
Strafford.

Lord Digby brings Answer, That their Lordships have Considered the Message,
and desire to meet a Committee of that House, with a Committee of theirs,
presently in the Painted-Chamber.

The engrossed Articles were again openly read in the House, and Articles
engrossed.
agreed to be sent up to the Lords by Mr. Pym, by a Vote upon the Question.

Mr. Pym before he went, made a short Declaration of the substance of Mr. Pym
gets leave to speak.
that he intended to deliver unto the Lords, both before and after the delivery
of the Articles.

Mr. Pym's Report of the Conference with the Lords, in delivering up the
Articles against the Earl of Strafford, that he attended the great Committee
Mr. Pym Reports the Conference.
of this House, and, in their presence, delivered to the Committee of the Lords
House the Charge against the Earl of Strafford, and if any thing passed him
through weakness, or disability, he desires the excuse of this House.

It was moved, that Mr. Pym might have Thanks for his well delivery Thank's to
Mr. Pym.
of the Charge against the Earl of Strafford.

Friday, November 27th, 1640.
A Message from the Lords by Justice Littleton and Justice Bartley. Message for
a Conference.


The Lords desire a Conference by a Committee of thirty of their House, with a
proportionable number of this House, concerning the Message that was brought
unto them by Mr. Pym, touching the Examination of their Members, in the
Accusation of the Earl of Strafford, and desire a free Conference touching the
last Point of that Message, that some of the Members of this House should be
present at the Examination, and they desire it this morning in the
Painted-Chamber, if it may stand with the convenience of this House.

Answer returned by the same Messenger, That this House has taken into
Consideration their Lordships Message, and will in Convenient time Answer.
return Answer by Messengers of their own.

Saturday, November 28th, 1640.
Mr. Whistler Reports from the Grand Committee for Irish Affairs, that Mr.
Whistler's Report from the Committee for Irish Affairs.
there are many Petitions, and full of matter of Complaints of the proceedings
in Ireland, and Suitors here for Justice. There are many Petitioners here whose
Estates are so exhausted, that they are scarce able to bring Witnesses from
Ireland hither; many great Persons of Quality and Trust are in Ireland,
material Witnesses to be examined, as the Master of the Rolls, the Lord
Chancellor, and others; these can hardly be spared, to come hither, to give
their Testimony. The Committee desires the Advice of the House in this
particular (which without their Judgments cannot be determined) to think of
some way how these Parties might have their Testimony taken, and the Truth
might be known, and Justice done. This whole matter thus Reported from the
Committee for Irish Affairs, is recommitted to the same Committee again to
consider of it, and to draw those things that are to be inquired of under apt
Heads, and so present them to the judgment of this House to proceed accordingly.

Mr. Maynard, Mr. St. John's, Mr. Hide, Mr. Whistler, Mr. Ieofrey Palmer, Mr.
Glyn, Mr. Solicitor.
This Committee is to Collect and Offer to this House, Reasons for this House
to make use of, and insist upon, in maintenance of that Point of the Message
of this House to the Lords, which desires the presence of some of the Members
of this House, at the Examination of such Witnesses, as shall be Proposed by
this House in the Accusation of the Earl of Strafford.

To the Right Honorable the Lord-Deputy.
The Humble and just Remonstrance of the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of
the Parliament assembled.
SHOWING,

THat in all Ages since the happy Subjection of this Kingdom to the Imperial
Crown of England, it was, and is a Principal Study, and Princely Care of His
Majesty, and His Noble Progenitors, Kings and Queens of England and Ireland, to
the vast Expense of Treasure and Blood; that their Loyal and Dutiful people of
this Land of Ireland, being now, for the most part, derived from British
Ancestors, should be Governed according to the Municipal and Fundamental Laws
of England, that the Statute of Magna Charta, or the Great Charter of the
Liberties of England, and other Laudable Laws and Statutes, were in several
Parliaments here Enacted and Declared, That by the means thereof, and of the
most Prudent and Benign Government of His Majesty, and His Royal Progenitors,
this Kingdom was, until of late, in its growth a Flourishing Estate, whereby
the said people were heretofore enabled, to answer their humble and natural
desires, to comply with His Majesty's Princely and Royal Occasions, by their
free Gift of 150 Thousand Pounds Sterling; and likewise by another free Gift of
120 Thousand Pounds more, during the Government of the Lord Viscount Faulkland,
and after by the Gift of 40 Thousand Pounds; and their free and cheerful Gift
of Six entire Subsidies in the 10th Year of His Majesty's Reign, which, to
comply with His Majesty's then Occasions, signified to the then House of
Commons, They did allow should amount, in the Collections, unto 250 Thousand
Pounds (although, as they confidently believe) if the Subsidies had been levied
in a moderate Parliamentary way, they would not have amounted to much more than
half the Sum aforesaid, besides the four entire Susidies granted in this
present Parliament. So it is, May it please Your Lordship, by the occasion of
the ensuing, and other Grievances and Innovations (though to His Majesty no
considerable Profit) this Kingdom is reduced to that extreme and universal
Poverty, that the same is less able to pay Subsidies than it was heretofore, to
satisfy all the before recited great Payments: And His Majesty's most Faithful
people of the Land do conceive great fears, that the said Grievances and
Consequences thereof, may be hereafter drawn into Presidents, to be perpetuated
upon their Posterity, which in their great Hopes, and strong Beliefs, they are
persuaded is contrary to His Royal and Princely intention toward His said
people; some of which said Grievances are as follows:

1. The general apparent decay of Trades, occasioned by the new and illegal
raising of the Book of Rates and Impositions upon Native, and other
Commodities, Exported and Imported, by reason whereof, and of extreme Usage and
Censures, Merchants are beggered, and both disinabled and discouraged to Trade,
and some of the honorable Persons who gain thereby, are often Judges and
Parties, and that in the conclusion His Majesty's Profit thereby is not
considerably advanced.

2. The Arbitrary decision of all civil Causes and Controversies, by paper
Petitions, before the Lord Lieutenant and Lord Deputy, and infinite other
Judicatories upon reference from them, derived in the nature of all Actions
determinable at the Common Law, not limited into certain time, cause, season,
or thing whatsoever: And the consequences of such proceedings, by receiving
immoderate and unlawful Fees, by Secretaries, Clerks, Pursevants, Sergeants at
Arms, and otherwise, by which kind of proceedings His Majesty loses a
considerable part of his Revenue upon Original Writs, and otherwise; and the
Subject loses the benefit of his Writ of Error, Bill of Reversal, Vouchers,
and other legal and just Advantages, and the ordinary Course and Courts of
Justice declined.

3. The proceedings in civil Causes at Council Board, contrary to the Law and
great Charter, not limited to any certain time or season.

4. That the Subject is, in all the material parts thereof, denied the benefit
of the Princely Graces, and more especially of the Statute of Limitations of 21
of Iac. granted by His Majesty in the Fourth Year of His Reign, upon great
Advice of the Councils of England and Ireland, and for great Consideration, and
then published in all the Courts of Dublin, and in all the Counties of this
Kingdom, in open Assizes, whereby all Persons do take notice, That contrary to
His Majesty's Pious Intentions, His Subjects of this Land have not enjoyed the
benefit of His Majesty's Princely Promise thereby made.

5. The extrajudicial avoiding of Letters Patents of Estates, of a very great
part of His Majesty's Subjects, under the Great Seal (the Public Faith of the
Kingdom) by private Opinions, delivered at the Council Board, without Legal
Evictions of their Estates, contrary to Law, and without President or Example
of any former Age.

6. The Proclamation for the sole emption and uttering of Tobacco, which is
bought at very low Rates, and uttered at high and excessive Rates, by means
whereof thousands of Families within this Kingdom, and of His Majesty's
Subjects in several Islands, and other parts of the West Indies (as your
Petitioners are informed) are destroyed; and the most part of the Coin of this
Kingdom is engrossed into particular Hands, insomuch that your Petitioners do
conceive that the Profit arising and engrossed thereby, does surmount His
Majesty's Revenue, certain or casual, within this Kingdom, and yet his Majesty
receives but very little profit by the same.

7. The universal and unlawful increasing of Monopolies, to the advantage of a
few, the disprofit of His Majesty, and impoverishment of His people.

8. And the extreme cruel Usage of certain late Commissioners, and other
Stewards of the British Farmers and Inhabitants of the City and County of
Londonderry, by means whereof the worthy Plantation of that Country is almost
destroyed, and the Inhabitants are reduced to great Poverty, and many of them
forced to forsake the Country, the same being the first and most useful
Plantation in the large Province of Ulster, to the great weakening of the
Kingdom in this time of danger; the said Plantation being the principal
Strength of those parts.

9. The late Erection of the Court of High Commission, for Causes
Ecclesiastical, in these necessitous Times; the proceedings of the said Court,
in many Causes without legal Warrant, and yet so supported as Prohibitions have
not been obtained, though legally sought for: And the excessive Fees exacted by
the Ministers thereof, and the encroaching of the same upon the Jurisdiction of
other Ecclesiastical Courts of this Kingdom.

10. The exorbitant Fees, and pretended Customs, exacted by the Clergy against
the Law, some of which have been formerly represented to your Lordship.

11. The Petitioners do most heartily bemoan, that His Majesty's Service and
Profit are much more impaired than advanced by the Grievances aforesaid; and
the Subsidies granted in the last Parliament, having much increased His
Majesty's Revenue by the buying of Grants, and otherwise: And that all His
Majesty's Debts then due in this Kingdom, were satisfied out of the said
Subsidies; and yet His Majesty is of late (as the Petitioners have been
informed in the House of Commons) become indebted in this Kingdom in great
Sums. And they do therefore humbly beseech, That an exact Account may be sent
to His Majesty, how and in what manner His Treasure is issued.

12. The Petitioners do humbly conceive just and great fears, at a Proclamation
published in this Kingdom, in Anno Domini 1635. prohibiting men of Quality or
Estates to depart this Kingdom into England, without the Lord-Deputies License,
whereby the Subjects of this Kingdom are hindered and interrupted from free
access, to address to His Sacred Majesty, and Privy Council of England, to
declare their just Grievances, or to obtain Remedies for them in such sort, as
their Ancestors have done in all Ages since the Reign of King Henry the Second,
and great Fees exacted for every of the said Licenses.

13. That of late His Majesty's Attorney General has exhibited Informations
against many ancient Buroughs of this Kingdom, into His Majesty's Court of
Exchequer, to show cause by what Warrant the said Burgesses (who heretofore
sent Burgesses to Parliament) should send the Burgesses to the Parliament, and
thereupon, for want of an Answer, the said Privileges of sending Burgesses was
seized by the said Court, which Proceedings were altogether Coram non Iudice,
and contrary to the Laws and Privileges of the House of Parliament, (and if
way should be given thereunto) would tend to the Subversion of Parliaments, and
by Consequence to the Ruin and Destruction of the Common Wealth.

And that the House of Commons has hitherto, in this present Parliament, been
deprived of the Advice and Counsel of many profitable and good Members by means
thereof.

14. By the Powerfulness of some Ministers of State in this Kingdom, the
Parliament in its Members, and Actions, has not its natural Freedom.

15. And lastly, That the Gentry and Merchants, and other His Majesty's
Subjects of this Kingdom, are of late by the Grievances and Pressures before
said, and other the like, brought very near to Ruin and Destruction: And the
Farmers of Customs, Customers, Waiters, Searchers, Clerks of Unwarrantable
Proceedings, Pursevants, and Goalers, and sundry others, very much enriched,
whereby, and by the slow Redress of the Petitioners Grievances, His Majesty's
most Faithful and Dutiful People of this Kingdom do conceive great fears, that
their readiness approved upon all occasions, has not been of late rightly
represented to His Sacred Majesty: For remedy whereof, the said Petitioners do
humbly, and of right, beseech your Lordships, That the said Grievances and
Pressures may be speedily Redressed; and if your Lordship shall not think fit
to afford present Relief, that your Lordship might admit a Select Committee of
this House, of Persons uninteressed in the benefit arising of the aforesaid
Grievances, to be Licenced by your Lordship, to repair to His Sacred Majesty in
England, for to pursue the same, and to obtain fitting remedy for their
aforesaid and other just Grievances and Oppressions; and upon all just and
honorable Occasions, they will, without respect of particular Interest or
Profit to be raised thereby, most humbly and readily in Parliament extend their
utmost endeavor to serve His Majesty, and comply with His Royal and Princely
Occasions, and shall pray, etc.

Monday, November 30th, 1640.
Sir Thomas Roe, Mr. Pym, A Committee to meet a Committee of the House of Lords
about the Examination of Witnesses, in the Case of the E. of Strafford.
Mr. Strode, Mr. St. John's, Mr. Grimston, Lord Digby, Sir John Clotworthy, Sir
Walter Earl, Mr. Hampden, Mr. Maynard, Mr. Hyde, Mr. Whistler, Mr. Palmer, Mr.
Glyn, Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Seldom, My Lord Dungarvan, Sir Francis Seymor, Sir
Hugh Cholmely, Lord Wenman, Sir Io. Evelyn, Sir Benjamin Rudyard, Sir James
Thynn, Sir John Culpepper, Sir John Strangwaies, Sir Simon D'Ewes, Mr. George
Vane, Lord Cramborne, Lord Compton, Mr. Bellassis, Mr. Kirton, Sir Thomas
Hutchison, Sir William Bowyer, Sir James Smith, Sir Arthur Ingram, Lord
Russell, Lord Ruthin, Mr. Comisby, Mr. Noel, Sir Thomas Bowyer, Mr. Cecill,
Lord Fairfax, Sir Thomas Widdrington, Sir Peter Hayman, Sir John Holland, Mr.
James Fynes, Sir Robert Crane, Sir John Corbet, Mr. Io. Alford, Sir Roger
North, Sir Edmond Mountford, Mr. Whitlocke, Mr. Mountagne, Lord Faulkland, Sir
Peter Stapleton, Sir Henry Mildmay, Lord Herbert, Sir Richard Wynn, Sir Edward
Rodney, Sir Ralph Hopton,
This Committee is to meet with the Committee of 30 of the Lords, concerning a
Message sent hither on Friday last from their Lordships, touching a Message
sent formerly from this House to them by Mr. Pym, for the Examination of their
Members, in the Accusation of the Earl of Strafford, and touching a free
Conference upon the last Point of that Message, that some of the Members of
this House should be present at the Examination of Witnesses, to be propounded
by this House, to be examined in the Accusation of the Earl of Strafford.

The Petition of several of the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the
Petition from the Parliament in Ireland read.
Commons House of Parliament in Ireland, whose Names are underwritten, directed
to the whole House of Commons in England read.

The Humble Petition of the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons
House of Parliament in Ireland, whose Names are underwritten: To the King's
most Excellent Majesty read.

The two Gentlemen, Mr. Io. Bellewe and Mr. Oliver Castle, who brought over
those Petitions were called in, and demanded by Mr. Speaker several Questions.

These Gentlemen were again called in, and Mr. Speaker told them:

This House has taken into Consideration your Petition, and in due time you
shall know the Pleasure of this House.

Ordered, That the Lieutenant of the Tower be required from this Sir George
Ratcliff not to speak with, or write to the E. of Strafford.
House, that he do not suffer Sir George Ratcliff to speak with the Earl of
Strafford, a Prisoner there, until further Order be given from this House, nor
suffer any Message or Letter to be sent from Sir George Ratcliff unto him; or
if any such be, to give Notice of it to this House, Sir George Ratcliff being
already sent for, by Order of this House, upon an Information of High Treason.

Resolved upon the Question, That the Earl of Craford's Troop, and A Troop of
Reformado Officers in the Army to be disbanded.
those other Officers in the Army, that go under the Name of Reformadoes are
unnecessary Charge, and fit to be spared; and that my Lord General be moved by
Message from this House thereunto.

Resolved, That those Companies, or other Officers, that shall be thus
Casheer'd by the Lord General, shall be paid to the Eighth of December next.

Tuesday, December 1. 1640. A Message from the Lords by Baron Trevor and Judge
Bartley.
The Lords have sent Us to this House, to desire a present Conference A Message
for a Conference for some of the Members to be present at the Examination of
Witnesses.
in the Painted Chamber, with the same Committee that was concerning the matter
of the free Conference Yesterday.

Answer returned by the same Messengers.

This House has taken into Consideration the Message of the Lords, and they
return this Answer, That they will give a meeting presently, as is desired.

Mr. Pym Reports from the Conference this day, That the Lords Committee, with
whom we had a free Conference Yesterday, took the Matter into Consideration,
and their Resolution is:

That such Members of the House of Commons, as they shall make Mr. Pym's Report.
choice of, shall be present from time to time at the preparatory Examinations
concerning the Earl of Strafford.

The Lord Keeper expected we should say something. We told them, We had no
Warrant; for a Conference was desired concerning the matter of free Conference,
and that a free Conference was not desired; the Question they would have been
satisfied in, was, Whether we did intend to have the Examinations taken public
in the House, or by a private Committee? I answered, We had no Commission for a
free Conference.

The same Committee that were appointed to draw up the Charge against the Earl
of Strafford, are to be present at the Preparatory Examinations of Witnesses
before the Lords, to present such Questions unto the Lords as they shall think
fit thereupon; and after a full Examination, to present the whole state of the
business to this House.

A Message to be sent to the Lords, to acquaint them that the House is ready,
by some Members of this House, to present diverse Witnesses to be A Message by
the Commons.
examined, and such questions as they shall desire that those Witnesses so
propounded by them may be all examined one after another, with speed and
secrecy.

Thursday morning is peremptorily appointed for Sir George Ratcliff to appear
here, and if he come not then, a Message is to be sent to the Sir George
Ratcliff to come in by a day.
Lords, to desire them to move His Majesty for a Proclamation to be ordered
against him, to bring him in.

Power is given to the Committee that is to be present at the preparatory
Examination of Witnesses before the Lords, to summon such Witnesses to be
examined to morrow as they shall think fit.

Mr. Maynard's Report from the Conference Yesterday.
The Lords said, They had taken the Message into Consideration sent A Report of
the Conference for the Lords Members to be examined.
by Mr. Pym, some things were Resolved, others not, and for that purpose
desired a free Conference; whereas we did desire to examine some Members of
this House, they were ready to examine them when we should require. They
answered, That the Peers of their House that shall be desired, and all the
Assistants of that House, when they shall be thereunto required, shall be
examined upon Oath; and next for the time and secrecy, They said they should
be speedily examined, and Examinations secretly kept.

Thursday, December 3. 1640.
A Message brought from the Lords by my Lord Chief Justice Littleton and Judge
Bartley, That according to a desire of this House, by a late Another Message
concerning Members to be present at the Examination.
Message, they have deputed certain of their Members to take the Examination of
Witnesses in the Case of the Earl of Strafford, which they will be ready to
perform in the presence of such Members of this House, as shall be deputed to
that purpose.

Ordered, That the Earl of Kildares Petition, presented to the Grand Committee
for Irish Affairs, be referred to the Sub-Committee for those Affairs.

Friday, December 4. 1640.
Ordered, That those Members of this House, that be appointed to be present at
the preparatory Examinations before the Lords, be required to declare that by
their Duty they owe to this House, they are obliged to keep all those
Examinations secret.

Those Eight appointed for that Service did make all of them Protestations to
that purpose. A Protestation of Secrefie.


Ordered, That those Eight, or any Four of them, may be present at the
preparatory Examinations before the Lords.

Mr. Seldom, Mr. Dutton, Mr. Crew, Sir Peter Hayman, Sir Harbottle Grimston,
Sir Henry Anderson, Sir Nevil Poole, Sir Thomas Barrington.
Saturday.
The Petition of Richard Heaton and Lyonell Farrington were read, and
Farrington called in, did avow his Petition; the Petitions are referred to the
Committee appointed to draw up the Charge against the Earl of Strafford to make
use of it, if they shall see Cause.

December 26th, 1640.
Ordered, That the Committee appointed to draw up the Charge against the Earl
of Strafford, shall have Power to examine Witnesses concerning Sir George
Ratcliff, and to prepare a Charge against him, and to present it to this House.

Tuesday, December 29th, 1640. The Articles against Sir George Ratcliff Read.
Resolved upon the Question, That this House shall Accuse Sir George Articles
against Sir George Ratcliff.
Ratcliff Knight, of High Treason, in the Name of all the Commons of England.

That these Articles thus Read, shall be the Ground of this Accusation.

That a Message shall be sent forthwith to the Lords, to Accuse Sir George
Ratcliff Knight, of High Treason, in the Name of this House, and of all the
Commons of England, and that very speedily they will bring Articles against him.

Resolved upon the Question, That the Articles prepared by the Committee
against Sir George Ratcliff, and Read here, shall be engrossed against to
morrow, to be sent to the Lords, as a Charge, against him.

A Message sent from the Lords by the Master of the Rolls and Judge A Message.
Reeves.

The Lords have Commanded Us to say to You, That whereas there came a Message
from this House, to Accuse Sir George Ratcliff of High Treason; They would
know, Whether they should presently take care to make safe his Person?

Answer returned by the same Messengers:

That this House has taken their Lordships Message into Consideration, and will
forthwith return them Answer by Messengers of their own.

Mr. Pym went up to the Lords to acquaint them, that this day the Ratcliff.
House of Commons gave no Instructions to their former Messengers, concerning
the Committing of Sir George Ratcliff, because his Person is already in safe
Custody in the Gate House, and they intended to have acquainted their Lordships
with it, when they had produced the Articles against him, which would have been
very shortly, but since they are prevented by their Lordships, they refer what
to do in it to their Lordships.

Mr. Pym brings Answer from the Lords of his Message, That concerning the safe
Custody of Sir George Ratcliff, they had sent for him, and had taken Order in
it, and touching the receiving of the Examinations in this Cause, there should
be the same course observed in them as was in the Earl of Strafford.

Thursday, December 31. 1640.
The Articles against Sir George Ratcliff, by former Order engrossed, were
twice Read; And then it was Resolved upon the Question, That these Articles
thus engrossed and read, shall be sent up to the Lords by the Commons Assembled
in Parliament, in maintenance of their Accusation of Sir George Ratcliff,
whereby he stands Charged of High Treason; And it is Ordered, That Mr. Pym go
up with these Articles.

Resolved upon the Question, That a Message be sent forthwith to the Lords, to
desire a Conference of both Houses, concerning Articles exhibited in
maintenance of the Charge against Sir George Ratcliff.

Sir John Strangways went up with this Message.

It was moved, That the House would think of some Answer to the Lords,
concerning the Charges against the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Earl
of Strafford, delivered from the Scottish Commissioners, at a Conference by a
Committee of both Houses.

Monday, January 4th, 1640.
Ordered, That a Conference be desired with the Lords to morrow morning,
concerning the state, the disorders and dangers of the new levied Irish Army.
Irish Army, and to present them to their Lordships, and to desire them to join
with the House in a Petition to His Majesty, for the disbanding of that Army.
The Committee appointed for the Earl of Strafford's business, are to prepare
the Heads of this Conference; and the Members of this House are required to
bring into this Committee, between this and to morrow morning, such
Informations as shall come to their Hands conducing to these matters; Sir
Walter Earl and Sir John Clotworthy are to manage this Conference.

It was likewise moved, That at this Conference, Considerations might be had of
the great Resort daily made to the Earl of Strafford.

Mr. Nathaniel Fines is to go up to morrow morning with a Message to the Lords,
to desire a Conference with their Lordships, concerning the Disorders and
Inconveniences of the new levied Irish Army.

And to desire a free Conference concerning those Declarations presented by the
Scottish Commissioners, against the Lord Lieutenant and the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, as Incendiaries; Sir Peter Hayman to go up with this Message.

The Subject of his Conference to be, to present to the Lords, that it may be
made known to the Lords Commissioners, that the Scottish Commissioners be
desired to bring in their Proofs against the Lord Lieutenant, and the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, to the end, the Parliament may proceed to Judgment.

Tuesday, January 12th, 1640.
Ordered, That the several Petitions of Sir Henry Wallop, the Lord Petitions
referred to the Sub-Committee.
Viscount Nettersfield, be referred to the Sub-Committee, formerly appointed by
the Grand Committee for Irish Affairs for the business of Sir Henry Wallop,
because there is something in those Petitions that will materially conduce to
the Charge of the Earl of Strafford.

Ordered, That the Committee appointed to prepare some fit way of Representing
to the Lords the four Irish Causes formerly Reported here, (viz.) That of the
Lord Mountnorris, the Lord Dillon, Lord Viscount Ely, and the Earl of Kildare
do sit.

Friday, January 15th, 1640.
Ordered, That the Committee appointed to draw up the Charge against
Depositions concerning the Earl of Strafford.
the Earl of Strafford, shall desire to have the Depositions that are yet
sealed up, delivered unto them, and may add and insert such particular
Instances, and other Circumstances, as they in their Discretions shall think
fit to the several Articles delivered in Charge against the Earl of Strafford,
according to the saving in the conclusion of those Articles, and that they
present the whole matter to the House on Monday morning next.

Saturday, January 16th, 1640.
Mr. Pym went up to the Lords with a Message to this Effect: A Message
concerning Examinations.


To desire their Lordships, That those Examinations which, at the Request of
this House, were taken, in the Case of the Earl of Strafford, by the Lords
deputed to that purpose, may be delivered to the Commissioners of this House
appointed to draw up the Charge against the Earl, that they may make use of
them for the enlarging of their Charge, in particularities of Evidences,
according to the Clause of Resolution in the conclusion of the said Charge; and
likewise to make a Declaration, That howsoever, by the Course of Parliament,
this House might proceed with the Charge in general, yet to avoid all scruples,
and to bring the business sooner to a conclusion, they do desire to conclude in
this way.

Saturday, January 23. 1640.
Mr. Seldom, Mr. Palmer, Mr. Whitlock, Mr. Maynard.
By Order, are added to the Committee that are to draw up the Articles against
the Earl of Strafford.

Thursday, January 28th, 1640.
The further Impeachment of Thomas Earl of Strafford, by the Commons The
further Impeachment of the Earl of Strafford.
Assembled in Parliament, was this day read.

Friday, January 29th, 1640.
Ordered, That the Consideration of the Commission granted to the Earl of
Worcester, and his eldest Son the Lord Herbert, and some Commissions by them
granted to others, for the levying of Forces in the several Counties of England
and Wales, and all the Circumstances depending thereupon, be referred to the
Committee to draw up the Charge against the Earl of Strafford, and to consider
of the Magazine in Sir Piercy Herbert's Custody.

Saturday, January 30th, 1640.
The further Impeachment of Thomas Earl of Strafford was again read, and the
Title of the Impeachment, and every Article, and the Conclusion, were every of
them particularly put to the Question, and were every of them assented unto,
and Resolved upon the Question: And afterward it was Resolved upon the
Question, That these Articles being engrossed, shall be forthwith sent up to
the Lords.

Ordered, That Mr. Hambden go up with a Message to the Lords, to desire a
Conference with their Lordships presently (if it may stand with their Lordships
Occasions) by a Committee of both Houses, touching the further Impeachment of
Thomas Earl of Strafford.

Mr. Pym is to manage this Conference, and Mr. Maynard is to be Assistant to
him.

Mr. Pym acquaints the House, That according to their Command, he had delivered
unto the Lords the Articles for the further Impeachment of Thomas Earl of
Strafford.

Ordered, That the Thanks of this House be given to Mr. Pym, and to the whole
Committee, for the great Service they have done this House in the great pains
they have taken, in preparing and drawing up the Charge and Articles against
Thomas Earl of Strafford.

Tuesday, February 16th, 1640.
Sir Philip Stapleton went up to the Lords, with a Message, to desire a
Conference with their Lordships, by a Committee of both Houses, presently (if
it may stand with their Lordships Occasions) concerning the Earl of Strafford.

Resolved upon the Question, That the Heads Reported by Mr. Pym from the
Committee appointed to prepare the Heads of the Conference to be desired with
the Lords, concerning the Earl of Strafford, shall be Heads of that Conference,
and that Committee is to manage the Conference.

Sir Philip Stapleton brings Answer from the Lords, That their Lordships do
expect His Majesty at their House this Morning; and that so soon as His Majesty
shall be gone, they will send Answer by Messengers of their own.

Thursday, February 18th, 1640.
The Lords desired a Conference by a Committee of both Houses, concerning
Sequestration of Thomas Earl of Strafford.
the Sequestring of Thomas Earl of Strafford from his Offices, presently in the
Painted Chamber, if it may stand with the convenience of this House.

To which, Answer was returned, That they will give a meeting presently for a
free Conference.

Mr. Pym Reports the free Conference.

Upon Mr. Pyms Report, It was Ordered, That this Committee, viz.

Sir Walter Earl, Sir Io. Culpepper, Mr. Hollis, Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Vaughan,
Mr. Hyde, Mr. Pym, Mr. Maynard, Mr. Seldom, Mr. Palmer, Mr. Whitlock, Sir Simon
D'Ewes, Mr. Whistler, Mr. Glyn, and Mr. Hampden.
Do take into Consideration the whole matter of the Report of the free
Conference now made by Mr. Pym, and also what concerns the Right of the Commons
in the Proceedings in the Lords House against the Earl of Strafford, and what
Concerns the Kingdom in general, and the Legality of these Proceedings; and
they are likewise to Consider, What is fit for the Commons to claim in Causes
of Impeachment; and they are to meet this Afternoon at Two of the Clock in the
Treasury Chamber.

Friday, February 19th, 1640.
That the Committee for the Earl of Strafford shall have Liberty to open To
open Letters.
all Letters directed to Sir George Ratcliff, and if they find it worthy the
knowledge of the House, they are to acquaint the House therewith.

Ordered, That the Committee, appointed to consider of the Proceedings in the
Lords House against Thomas Earl of Strafford, do meet this Afternoon at Two of
the Clock in the Treasury Chamber.

Tuesday, February 23. 1640.
A Message from the Lords, desiring a present Conference by a Committee
Concerning Council for the Earl of Strafford.
of both Houses in the Painted-Chamber (if it may stand with the convenience of
this House) concerning the Conference that was Yesterday, touching the
Proceedings against Thomas Earl of Strafford.

Answer returned by the same Messenger, That this House has taken into
Consideration their Lordships Message, and will give a meeting for a free
Conference, as is desired.

Mr. Glyn Reports from the Conference, That the Lord Keeper delivered the Lords
Answer in these words, viz. First, That We shall admit him no further use of
Council, than the necessity of the Case, for his just Defense, requires, and
wherein Council may, with the Justice and Honor of this House, be afforded
him. Secondly, That there shall be no delay in Proceedings, but all Expedition
used according to their own desires.

Wednesday, February 24th, 1640.
A Message from the Lords, desiring a Conference by a Committee of both Houses,
touching the Answer of Thomas Earl of Strafford presently, if it may stand with
the Convenience of this House.

Answer returned by the same Messengers, That this House will give a meeting
presently, as is desired.

Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Maynard, Mr. Pym, Mr. Reynolds, Mr. Palmer, and Mr.
Hampden,
Are appointed Reporters of the Conference.

Mr. Solicitor Reports from the Conference, That Yesterday was the day the
Lords had prefixed for my Lord of Strafford to give in his Answer, that
accordingly he was there, and had given it in; and that this Answer which now
they had delivered to the Commons was the Answer which the Earl of Strafford
was to stand or fall by.

The engrossed Answer, and a Copy of it, were both delivered in by the
Reporters, and was desired, that when the Copy was perfectly examined, the
Original might be delivered to the Clerk of their House.

Ordered, That Mr. Speaker be here this Afternoon at One of the Clock, and that
the Earl of Strafford's Answer may then be read and considered of.

The same day in the Afternoon the several Articles of the further Impeachment
of Thomas Earl of Strafford, by the Commons, were all read; and to every of the
said Articles, the particular and several Answers of the said Earl were
likewise read.

The Answer held three hours reading, being above 200 sheets of Paper, too long
to be here inserted; yet take an exact Abstract of the said Answer to the
Articles exhibited against him, which are as follows:

Answers to 28 special Articles.
To the First Article, he says, He conceives that the Commission and
Instruction differ not from those formerly granted, but refers to them, and
that such Alterations and Additions as were made, were (for ought he knows)
rather for the explanation than for the enlarging of the Jurisdiction, the Care
whereof was left to the Secretary of that Council, and to the King's Learned
Council, to be passed for the good of the King's Service, and the Public
Welfare of that Province; for Legality of the Proceedings, diverse eminent
Lawyers were joined with the President, who, for the Legal parts, was by them
to be directed. He did not advise or procure the enlargement of the Commission
and Instructions, and he believes nothing has been practiced since, that was
not in former Times, contained in former Commissions, under general words. He
believes Sir Conyers Darcy was lawfully Fined for Misdemeanors, as a Justice
of Peace; and has heard, he being in Ireland, that Sir John Boucher was Fined
for some great Abuse at the Kings being at York, going into Scotland to be
Crowned; to the Proceedings he refers himself. He denies that he has done any
thing by that Commission or Instruction, other than he conceived he might by
virtue thereof lawfully do.

To the Second Article, He denies the speaking of those words, but The little
Finger of the Law
says, That 30, 40 l. or more, being returned as Issues out of the Exchequer,
against some that had compounded for Knighthood, for 10 l. or 20 l. so as the
Issues far exceeded the Composition, and yet would next time have been
increased. The said Earl upon this occasion said, That now they might see, that
the little Finger of the Law was heavier than the King's Loins, which he spoke
to nourish good Affections in them toward His Majesty, and not to threaten or
terrify any, as the Article is supposed.

To the Third Article, he says, Ireland is not Governed by the same Ireland a
Conquered Nation
Laws that this Kingdom is, unless it be meant by the Common Laws, their
Customs, Statutes, Execution of Martial Laws, Proceedings at Council Board very
much differ, they spoke not the words in the Article to any such intent; He
says, It might be fit enough for him to remember them of the great Obligation
they had to the King and His Progenitors, that suffered them, being a Conquered
Nation, to enjoy Freedom and Laws, as their own people of this Kingdom; and it
might be, that upon some such occasion, he said to those of Dublin, That some
of their Charters were void, and nothing worth, and did not bind His Majesty
farther than He pleased, which he believes to be true, having been formerly so
informed by His Majesty's Learned Council upon sundry occasions.

To the Fourth, he says, That the legal and ordinary Proceedings at Lawyers
not to dispute the Orders of the Council Board, in the Earl of Cork's Case.
Council Table are, and time out of mind have been by Petition, Answers,
examination of Witnesses, as in other Courts of Justice concerning British
Plantations, the Church and Cases hence recommended by the King, for the time
being, and in Appeals from other Courts there; and the Council Board have
always punished Contempts to Orders there made, to Proclamations, and Acts of
State, by Fine and Imprisonment. He says, That it might be, he told the Earl
of Cork, that he would imprison him if he disobeyed the Orders of the
Council Table, and that he would not have Lawyers dispute or question those
Orders, and that they should bind, but remembers not the Comparison of Acts of
Parliament; and he has been so far from scorning the Laws, that he has
endeavored to maintain them; the Suit against the Earl, in the Castle-Chamber,
was concerning the Possessions of the College of Youghall, worth 6 or 700 l.
which he had endeavored to get, by causing of unlawful Oaths to be taken, and
very undue means, the matter proceeded to Examination and Publication of
Witnesses, and after, upon the Earl of Cork's humble Suit, and payment of 15000
l. to His Majesty, and his acknowledgement of his Misdemeanors, obtained a
Pardon, and the Bill and Proceedings were taken of the Files; and he remembers
not any Suit for breach of any Order made at Council Table.

To the Fifth, he says, The Deputies and Generals of the Army have Lord
Mountnorris sentenced to suffer death by Martial Law.
always executed Martial Law, which is necessary there; and the Army, and the
Members thereof, have been long time Governed by printed Orders, according to
which, diverse, by Sentence of the Council of War, have formerly been put to
death as well in the time of Peace as War. The Lord Mountnorris, being a
Captain of a Company in the Army, for mutinous words against the said Earl,
General of that Army, and upon two of those ancient Orders was proceeded
against by a Council of War, being the Principal Officers of the Army, about
twenty in number, and by them, upon clear Evidence, sentenced to Death, wherein
the said Earl was no Judge, but labored so effectually with His Majesty, that
he obtained the Lord Mountnorris's Pardon, who, by that Sentence, suffered no
personal hurt or damage, save about two days Imprisonment. And as to the other
Persons, he can make no Answer thereunto, no particulars being described.

To the Sixth, he says, The Suit had depended many years in Chancery, The Lord
Mountnorris put out of Possession.
and the Plaintiff Complaining of that delay, the said Earl, upon a Petition,
(as in such Cases has been usual) calling to him the then Master of the Rolls,
the now Lord Chancellor, and the Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, upon the
Proofs in the Chancery, decreed for the Plantiff, to which he refers himself,
and it may be the Lord Mountnorris was thereupon put out of his Possession.

To the Seventh, he says, His Majesty being Entitled to diverse Lands, upon an
Inquisition found, Proclamation was made, That such as Claimed Lord Dillon his
Patent questioned.
by Patent should come in by a day, and have their Patents allowed, as if they
had been found in the Inquisition, and accordingly diverse were allowed. The
Lord Dillon produced His Patent, which being questionable, he consented, and
desired that a Case might be drawn, which was drawn by Counsel, and argued, and
the Judges delivered their Opinions, but the Lord Dillon, nor any other, were
bound thereby, or put out of Possession, but might have traversed the Office,
or otherwise legally have proceeded, that Case or Opinion notwithstanding.

To the Eighth, he says, That upon Sir John Gifford's Petition to the The Lord
Loftus close Prisoner, not delivering the Great Seal.
King, His Majesty referred it to the Deputy and Council of Ireland, where the
matter proceeding legally to a Decree against the Lord Loftus, and upon his
Appeal, that Decree, by His Majesty and His Council of England, was confirmed,
to which Decree and Order he refers himself, believing the Lord Loftus was
committed for disobeying that Decree, and for continuance in contempt committed
close Prisoner. He says, That the Lord Loftus having committed diverse
Contempts, the Council by Warrant required him to appear at the Board, and to
bring the Great Seal with him; which Order he disobeyed, and was shortly after
Committed, and the Great Seal was delivered up by His Majesty's express
Command, and not otherwise. And an Information was exhibited in the
Star Chamber, for grievous Oppressions done by the Lord Loftus as Chancellor,
whereof he was so far from justifying, as that he submitted, desiring to be an
Object of His Majesty's Mercy, and not of His Justice.

The Earl of Kildare for not performing of an Award made by King James, and of
an Award made in pursuance thereof, by the said Earl of The Earl of Kildare
Committed.
Strafford, upon a Reference from His Majesty, was by the Deputy and Council
Committed, and a Letter being unduly obtained, he did not thereupon enlarge
him; but upon another Letter, and submission to the Orders, as by the King was
directed, he was enlarged.

The Lady Hibbots, and one Hoy her Son, having upon a Petition, Answer,
Examination of Witnesses, and other Proceedings at Council Board, been found to
have committed foul abuses by Fraud and Circumvention, to have made a Bargain
with the Petitioner Hibbots, for Lands of a great value, for a small sum of
Money, was Ordered to deliver up the Writing, no Assurances being perfected, or
Money paid, and it is like he threatened her with Commitment if she obeyed not
that Order, but denies that the Lands were after sold to Sir Robert Meredith
to his use, or that by any Order by himself made, any one has been Imprisoned
concerning Freeholds, but for debts and personal things, as some have been used
by all his Predecessors in like Causes.

To the Ninth, he says, Warrants to such Effects have been usually granted to
the Bishops in Ireland, in the times of all former Deputies; but the Earl not
satisfied with the convenience thereof, refused to give any such Warrants in
general to the Bishops as had been formerly done; but being informed that
diverse in the Diocese of Down gave not fitting Obedience, he granted a Warrant
to that Bishop, whereto he refers, which was the only Warrant he granted of
that Nature, and hearing of some Complaints of the Execution thereof, he
recalled it.

To the Tenth; he says; The Lord Treasurer Portland offered the Farm of the
Customs for 13000 l. per annum in some particular Species, but the Earl of
Strafford advanced the same Customs to 15500 l. per annum, and 8000 l. Fine,
and by His Majesty's Command became a Farmer at those Rates proposed, without
addition to those Rates, as by the printed Books 7 Car. Regis may appear; he
dissuaded the advance of Rates lately proposed by Sir Abraham Dawes, so as it
was declined; the Rates of Hydes and Wool are moderate, consideration being
had of their true value, and of the Places whereto they are to be transported;
and of the Statute made in the time of Queen Elizabeth, and there in force,
prohibiting the Exportation of Wool, unless they pay to the Crown 5 s. the
Stone; the Trade and Shipping of that Kingdom are exceedingly increased.

To the Eleventh, he says, Pipe-staves were prohibited in King James's Time,
and not Exported, but by License from the Lord Treasurer of England, or
Lord-Deputy of Ireland, who had 6 s. 8 d. a 1000, and his Secretary 3 s. 4 d.
for the License; but to restrain that destruction of Timber, by Command of His
Majesty, and Advice of His Council, for His Revenue in Ireland, first 30 s.
then 3 l. the money was paid to His Majesty, who has thereby about 1500 l. per
annum, and his Lordship lost about 4 or 500 l. per annum, which his
Predecessors had for such Licenses. This is paid by the Transporter, not by the
Natives, whose Commodity nevertheless appears by the Article to be very much
increased.

To the Twelfth, he says, The Subsidies there are an Inheritance in the Crown
by Act of Parliament, 6 d. was paid for Subsidy, and 1 s. 6 d. for Impost upon
every pound of Tobacco, and Farmed 10 or 20 l. per annum, the Commons in
Parliament, 10 Car. Regis, finding the Revenue to be short of the Expense of
that Kingdom 24000 l. per annum, Petitioned, those Grants might be applied to
increase His Majesty's Revenue, without calling upon the Subject, but upon
urgent Occasions: Hereupon upon the Advice of the Committee of the Revenue; and
in consideration of a Proclamation made in England, several Proclamations were
made, and this settled in a way, till it could be confirmed by Parliament, for
which purpose a Bill is transmitted, according to the desire of the Commons,
and the Impost of Tobacco is Let to Contractors for eleven years, at 5000 l.
per annum for the first five years, and 10000 l. per annum for the other six
years, and the Earl has lent money to forward the business, and by His
Majesty's Allowance is a Partner, but has not as yet in two years last past
had any Accounts thereof, or made benefit thereby. He knows of no whipping,
or other punishment; the Farms of the Customs are better than formerly, 2000
l. per annum, five 8 parts whereof is yearly paid unto His Majesty; the prices
of Tobacco exceed not 2 s. or 2 s. 4 d. the pound, the settling of that Revenue,
according to the Petition of the Commons, he has not raised, or countenanced
any Monopolies, but opposed the same.

To the Thirteenth, he says, He endeavored to advance the Manufacture of
Linen rather than of Woollen-Cloth, which might prejudice that Trade here; he
bought Flax-seed in the Low Countries, and sold it at the same Rate to such as
desired if, they making their Clothes not above a foot broad, and winding 8 or
10 threads from several bottoms together; the contrary was twined, their Flax
formerly not above a foot, became a yard in length, and that soil is fit to
bear it, and the people love such easy Works; He has set up many Looms, made
much Cloth, and sold it to the loss of some Thousands of pounds; but when the
State saw the Natives would not change their old Courses for new and better,
the Proclamation was declined. What he did was for the Public Good, and had
nothing from them that was not fully paid for.

To the Fourteenth, he says, He refers to the Oath and Proclamation, which was
set forth by the said Earl and Council of State there, at the instance of the
Farmers of the Customs, toward the defrauding of the King's Duties being in
France, whereof His Majesty had five eight parts: He never heard any Complain
of the Oath, or of any that refused to take it, and conceived it to be lawful,
diverse of the Council approving it, being Learned Judges of the Law, to whose
judgment, for the legality, he submitted, as well in that as to other matters
of like nature.

To the Fifteenth, He denies what is in the Article Objected, but says, That
about the Year 1626. certain Agents authorized in Ireland, were sent into
England, and offered and agreed to pay to His Majesty 120000 l. in six years,
toward the maintenance of His Army, and a like payment of 20000 l. per annum,
was after agreed, and continued for three years longer; the Assessments were
made, and it was shortly after, by them and the Lord Faulkland then Deputy,
agreed in Ireland, that the money should not be charged upon Record, but levied
by Captains, by Paper-Assignments, upon Warrants from the Lord Deputy; and this
course was held four years in the Lord Faulkland's time, and the four years
wherein the Lord Loftus and the Earl of Cork were Lords Justices there; and it
held for the remaining year only, after the Earl of Strafford came thither; but
the Earl of Cork having spared those Towns for the benefit of himself and
Tenants during the time of his being Justice: The Earl of Strafford reduced the
Assessments to what it was made by the Lord Faulkland, and gave way that Sir
William St. Leiger, Lord President of Munster, to take the same Arrerages, in
satisfaction of a Debt due unto him by His Majesty, and he is confident no
force was used in levying the same: It has been usual to lay Soldiers to levy
that Contribution, to send Soldiers to apprehend Contemners of Orders made at
Council Board, and the like; and when Outlaws and Rebels have been in the
Woods, no Soldiers have in his time been laid, but by the Advice of the
Council there. Touching the Castle-Chamber, it is a parcel of the Territory of
Ideough, whereto the King was Entitled by Inquisition, and the Possession
established in a Legal way, when the said Earl was in England, and no Soldiers
were sent, but only 12 at the entreaty of Mr. Wanesford, for security of his
Houses and Plantations against Rebels that then were out, and burned and
spoiled Houses thereabouts; and neither Richard Butler's, or any other Family
were thence expelled by the said Earl from their Estates.

To the Sixteenth, he says, There was such a Proposition which was just, to
prevent clamourous Complaints here, which there might be redressed, but
conceives that by the Laws there, and the Articles known since (by the name of
the Articles of Grace made about fourteen years since) none ought to depart
that Kingdom without License.

Thereupon, the Advice of the State, the Proclamations were set forth, but not
with such intent as in the Article.

He denied License only to Three, the Earl of Cork, the Lord Mount^ and Sir
(...) Hamilton; to the two former, in regard of (...) (...) then against them
in the Castle-Chamber; to the other by special Command from His Majesty; but so
soon as Sir Frederick said he would Complain of the Earl, he made Suit to His
Majesty, That Sir Fredrick might come over, which was granted; He conceives
such restraint to be necessary, and if that it be not continued, it will prove
of evil Consequence to that Kingdom.

Parry was questioned at the Council Board for Misdemeanors, and to avoid
Sentence, secretly went out of the Kingdom, and at his return, for that and
other Offenses, was Fined and Imprisoned, to the Sentence thereof he refers,
and knows of no other that were Imprisoned, as by the Article is Charged.

To the Seventeenth, he says, It Is like he might say (for the better
encouragement of the Officers and Soldiers of the old Irish Army, in discharge
of their several Duties) that His Majesty was so well satisfied in the way and
pains they took in using and practizing of their Arms, that in that Point he
would set them as a Pattern to be imitated; and conceives it would not be ill
if they were so, they being in the Opinion of those that have seen them
Exercise, very able and expert Soldiers, he spoke not other words, or to other
purpose.

To the Eighteenth, he says, When the Earl of Cork was one of the Lords
Justices, he seized some Houses in Dublin, pretending they belonged to Jesuits
and Friars, without Legal Proceedings, which, upon Suits prosecuted at
Council Board, were, according to Justice, restored to the Owners; but how
since employed the Earl of Strafford knows not, but endeavored the utmost he
could to maintain that Seizure. Touching the 8000 men, he says, They were
raised according to the King's Warrant, and that the said Earl left the Care
thereof to the Earl of Ormond and others, and what number are Protestants, what
Papists, he knows not, but believes such a Body cannot be there raised,
without many Papists; the greatest number of the Captains and Officers are
Protestants, chosen by the said Earl. The 1000 men were drawn out of the old,
to make Officers for the new Army, and believes the 1000 put to the old Army
are Protestants, in regard by his express Order no Papist is to be admitted
there a Common Soldier. He never preferred any Captain, Lieutenant or Ensign
to be of that Army that was a Papist, and conceives they are duly paid; and
believes those newly raised exercise the Religion no otherwise than was
practiced before the Earl's coming thither: He was a Commissioner to Compound
with the Recusants for their Forfeitures, and endeavored to be informed of the
utmost value of their Estates; in four years he brought that Revenue from 2300
l. to be between 11 and 12000 l. per annum, more than ever was raised formerly
in so short a time, by which faithful dealings, for His Majesty, he procured
the hard Opinion of the Recusants throughout the Kingdom; that out of those
Compositions he has paid near 100000 l. into the Exchequer; and they had no
other Privileges than what was exercised in the Commission, and in former like
Commissions, and as are in the present Commission to the Lord Treasurer, and
others.

To the Nineteenth, he says, The last Summer was twelve months, when the
English and Scotch lay in the Fields near Berwick, the Earl and Council of
Ireland having a general motion thereof, were in fear that the Scots in Ulster
(being almost 100000 in number) might be drawn to side with the Covenanters,
and advising how to secure that Kingdom, the Principal of the Nation of
Scotland, living in Ireland, came to Dublin and Petitioned, That he might have
an Oath whereby they might give Testimony of future Obedience to His Majesty;
whereupon an Oath was by the Advice of Council of State framed, and cheerfully
taken by those Scotch Gentlemen, and generally by all the Nation in Ireland, as
the Earl conceives to their advantage, and the satisfaction of others; he
believes that some were Sentenced for refusing it, but none were otherwise
exiled. The Earl in his Vote said, That he would endeavor, that all of that
Nation should take that Oath, or leave the Kingdom, all which was done by His
Majesty's Direction and Approbation; and it was not contrived to the intents in
the Article Charged, but to prevent their adhering to the Covenanters then in
open Arms, and not concerning the Ceremony or Government of the Church.

To the Twentieth, he says, That in the Year 1638. the Earl was in Ireland,
when Preparations were made for War, and Summons sent to the Nobility of this
Kingdom: In the Year 1639. a General was appointed, and an Army drawn to the
Field, and Encamped near Berwick, whereby it appears he was not acquainted that
the Article of Pacification had been broken on both Sides, and so distempered,
that it was held fit an Army in England should be raised, to suppress the
Covenanters, if the business could not with Honor and Safety be otherwise
composed. The said Earl humbly advised His Majesty to call a Parliament, and
used many Motives thereunto; after the Parliament was called, and before the
Sitting thereof, ten of the Lords, and other of the Council for Foreign
Affairs, being assembled, His Majesty then present, an Honorable Person
related the Covenanters Demands; it was then Voted by all, That they were such
as might not in Honor and Safety be condescended unto by His Majesty; and if
they could not be otherwise reduced, His Majesty must be constrained to bring
them to it by force; the like Resolution was after at the Council Table by
twenty of the Council: Whereupon His Majesty appointed a Council of War, and it
was held necessary to borrow 200000 l. upon good Security, till the Supplies by
the Parliament might come in. He never said the Scotch Nation were Rebels, but
was ever persuaded that many of them are most Loyal Subjects.

Those that raised Arms, when they were at such distance from His Majesty, he
might say they were no less than Rebels and Traitors; by Warrant from the Lord
Admiral, he caused diverse Ships and Goods to be seized, but not with an intent
to set on the War, but as much as in him lay to bring all to fair
Accommodation, without expense of blood.

To the 21th, he says, The pacification was broken before he came over, as in
the Answer to the former Article he moved His Majesty for a Parliament in
England, but not with such intent as in the Article, but out of a desire to
have settled a right Understanding between the King and His people. It may be,
he said, (though he remembers it not) that if the Parliament would not Supply
His Majesty, he would serve His Majesty in any other lawful way; being well
assured that His Majesty would not employ him, nor any man else, in any other
kind.

To the 22th, he says, According to His Majesty's Instructions, he did set
forth to the Parliament of Ireland, the State of the Affairs as they then
stood, and they freely gave four Subsidies, as an acknowledgment of His
Goodness and happy Government, as by the Act and Remonstrance appears in Print;
He, by His Majesty's Direction, then gave Order for the raising of 8000 men,
who still remain in the King's pay, and were sent into Ulster to secure those
Parts, or to land in Scotland, to divert the Earl of Argile, in case he joined
with the Covenanters Army against the King; but it was mentioned in the King's
Letter, 2. Mertii, 1639. he had purposely given out, That they should join with
the King's Army at Berwick, to color other Designs; but the true cause of
their Levying was made known to be as aforesaid unto the Earl of Ormond, Sir
John Burlace, and the Marquess of Hamilton, and Earl of Northumberland, at the
time of the writing the Letter, and he denies the words charged in the
Articles, or any other words to such intent and purpose.

To the 23th, he says, The matters of the Parliament were no otherwise
referred to him, than to the rest of the Council, that coming sick from Ireland
about ten days after the Parliament were set, and after the Treaty with the
Earl of Dunfermline, Lord Lowdon, Scotch Commissioners, was broken off, and the
Army preparing, and the Parliament not supplying Moneys as His Majesty desired;
His Majesty advised what might move them to prefer His Supply; in debate
whereof, he humbly advised His Majesty, by a Message to the House, to lay down
Ship Money, and promise never to demand it, and give way to reverse the
Judgment by a Writ of Error in Parliament, and to promise a Redress of
Grievances when they should be prepared. And secondly, That they would
presently agree upon such Supply as should maintain His Army, for reducing the
Scots to their Obedience, wherein their Safety and His Honor was concerned:
His Majesty assented conditionally, that he might have 12 Subsidies; the Earl
besought Him that it might not pass as a Condition, but to Relinquish
Ship Money, and put himself upon their Affections, and drew up the Message in
Writing, and delivered it to Mr. Secretary Vane to deliver to the House of
Commons: He desired to know if His Majesty would not take less than 12, His
Majesty Answered, He feared less would not serve His Occasions; The Earl of
Strafford besought His Majesty to accept of Eight, so His Majesty assented, and
desired Mr. Secretary to signify so much, as occasion should be offered; but
whether he did so or not the said Earl knows not. The House of Commons being
in debate two days, and not Resolving. His Majesty about the 5th of May last
called a Council at Seven of the Clock in the Morning, the said Earl being
sick, came late, and was told, (as he remembers) by the Earl of Bark-shire,
the King had declared His Resolution to Dissolve the Parliament; the Earl of
Strafford besought His Majesty to hear the Advice of His Council, and first of
those that were Members of the House of Commons, by whom the rest might the
better be guided: Mr. Secretary Windebank said, He feared the House would first
be Answered of their Grievances, and Voted for a Breach of the Parliament. Mr.
Secretary Vane, in opposite terms, said, That there was no hope that they would
give the King a Penny, and therefore absolutely Voted for a Breach. And the
Earl of Strafford conceiving His Majesty's Pleasure to have accepted Eight
Subsidies, had been delivered to the House of Commons by Mr. Secretary Vane,
did, in His Majesty's turn, deliver his Vote for Breach of the Parliament,
which otherwise he would not have done; it being contrary to what he Resolved
when he came thither, and like Opinion was delivered by the rest of the Lords,
being about twenty, except two or three at the most. The Parliament being
Dissolved, His Majesty desired Advice of His Council, How money might be
raised, affirming, That the Scotch Army was ready to enter into the Kingdom;
The said Earl, in presence of others in the Council, delivered his Opinion,
That in a Case of absolute and unavoidable necessity, which neither would nor
could be prevented by ordinary remedies, provided by the Laws, nor all His
Majesty's other means sufficient to defend the Common wealth Himself, or their
Lives and Estates from an Enemy, without force of Arms, either actually entered,
or daily expected to Invade the Realm; He conceived that His Majesty was
absolved from ordinary Rules, and might use (in as moderate a way the necessity
of the Cause would permit) all ways and means for defense of Himself and
Kingdom, for that he conceived in such extremity, Salus Populi was Suprema Lex,
provided it were not colorable, nor any thing demanded employed to other use,
nor drawn into Example, when Law and Justice might take place; and that when
Peace was settled, Reparation was to be given to particular men, otherwise it
would be unjust. This was not officiously declared but in Council, forced by
the duty of the Oath of a Counselor, which is, that he shall in all things to
be moved, treated and debated in Council, faithfully and truly declare his Mind
and Opinion according to his Heart and Conscience; which Oath the said Earl
took, and humbly prays their Lordships Consideration thereof; He denies the
words in the Article, or any words to the intent thereby expressed.

To the 24th, he says, He delivered his Opinion with such Cautions and
Restrictions, as in the Answer to the Precedent Article, and is well assured
his Discourse at all times has been without ill Intentions to either of the
Houses of Parliament, which he ever did, and shall think and speak of with all
Reverence. He denies that he knew of the Publishing or Printing of the Book,
nor who caused it to be Printed or Published, for at that time he was sick in
his Bed, more like to die than to live.

To the 25th, he says, Ship Money was levied, and adjudged to be due, before
his coming over. Sheriffs were then called up as before, and not otherwise. If
any were sued in Star Chamber, it was without any particular endeavor of his:
It appearing at the Board, That the Mayor and Sheriffs of London had been slow
in Collecting Ship Money, he said, They were but Ministerial, and ought to
Exact, and not dispute the King's Writs, and that if through their remisness
the King should be less able to provide for the Public Safety, when any
Foreign Army was ready to enter the Kingdom, they might deserve to be Fined
and Ransomed; which he spoke more to hasten them, than of purpose to advise any
such Prosecution; but denies the other words, being, under favor, such
Expressions as he is not accustomed unto.

To the 26th, he says, He advised not either of those Projects (being then
sick in Bed) but it being debated at the Council Table, Whether it were better
for the King to raise Gold and Silver, or Coin base Money? He (for the Reasons
then given) delivered his Opinion for the latter. Sundry Merchants Adventurers
coming to his house, desired him to move His Majesty, then at Oatlands, to
Release the Bullion, or Money, he told them, He knew of no such thing, and
would not meddle with it; nor would his Health permit him to go abroad, and
said, That if their denying the King in such a Public Danger, the Loan of
100000 l. upon good Security, the King were constrained, for the Preservation
of the Land, to stay the Bullion, they might thank themselves; and the City
receiving so great a benefit by Residing amongst them, they made but an
unthankful acknowledgment in such a Straight, to refuse the Loan of that Sum.
The Officers of the Mint came to the Council Board, and the Earl then showed a
Letter, he received from the Earl of Leicester, wherein was related, That the
Cardinal had appointed Commissioners to go into the Merchants houses at Paris,
to peruse their Shop Books and Accounts, and to Cess every man, according to
his Ability, toward the payment of the King's Army, and then said, That it was
but just for Us here in England, to bless God for being under a King which
could not think upon such a Pressing upon the People. But the words in the
Article, or words to any such intent, he did not speak, and cannot sufficiently
bemoan himself to have been in all his words so ill understood, or so untruly
Reported as he has been.

To the 27th, he says, He persuaded the Gentry of that Country, to allow the
Trained-Band a months Pay, which they yielded, and His Majesty graciously
accepted. It was by Council of War (His Majesty being present) thought fit the
Trained-Bands should return, save the two Regiments under the Command of Sir
William Pennyman and Sir Thomas Danby. It was assented unto by His Majesty, and
the great Council of the Peers then Assembled, That those spared should
Contribute, and the said Earl was Commanded by them to see it done; which was
done accordingly by Warrants from him and from his Deputy Lieutenants, which
was much less Charge to the Countries than otherwise, and denies the other
particular in the Article mentioned.

To the 28th, he says, He was Lieutenant General to the Earl of
Northumberland, about the 24th of August, of 10 or 12000 Foot and 2000 Horse,
being at New Castle under the Command of the Lord Conway and Sir Jacob Ashley,
and the rest of the Army at York; the said Earl went from London, and the 26th
of August, notwithstanding his extreme weakness, and came to York, and having
received a Letter from Sir Jacob Ashley, that New Castle was Fortified, and
that they must be Infamous Beasts to lose it, and that it was fully Secured;
and being acquainted with several Dispatches sent by Mr. Secretary Vane, by His
Majesty's Directions, to the Lord Conway, General of the Horse, to oppose the
Passage of the Scots over the River of Tyne, the one dated 22. Augusti, the
other 23. Augusti, another 24. Augusti, another 26. Augusti, the substance of
which Letters are particularly mentioned in the Answer to this Article, and to
the same Letters the said Earl refers himself.

The said Earl, upon sight of this and Sir Jacob Ashley's Letter, had reason to
believe, that all fitting preparation was made, and then understanding that if
the Scottish Army should pass the River, not only New Castle altogether
Unfortified on the South part, would be lost, but the said Army of 11000 Foot
and 2000 Horse endangered; and hearing that the Scottish Army were distresied
for want of Victuals, and knowing the advantage that was in opposing the
Passage of such a River. Hereupon the said Earl, by a Letter dated the 27th of
August, advised the Lord Conway with all the Horse, and at least 8000 Foot, and
all the Cannon, to March and Fight with them; upon the passage of the River, at
which time the said Earl had no Charge of the Army; but the truth is, the Lord
Conway having not with him all the Horse, and not above 1500 Foot, and only
some part of the Cannon was in a posture to fight, for the passage before the
said Letter of advice came, which he received not half an hour before the Fight
began, and proceeded according to his own judgment, and His Majesty's said
general Direction; and afterward, that is about the 30th of August, and not
before, the said Earl took upon him the Charge of the Army at Darlington, and
brought it to York to be supplied with Necessaries that they wanted, and
purposed to have staid where they were quartered. But hearing from many hands
that there was a purpose to question him in Parliament, and His Majesty having
given him Liberty of staying there, or coming away, he left the Charge of the
Army with the Lord Conway, and other Officers, as His Majesty had directed, and
came to London on Monday the 9th, and the 11th of November was put under
Restraint, and so has ever since remained. And says, That the Town of
New Castle was no way under his Care; and as to other matters whereto by Law he
ought to answer, and has not answered, he says, He is not Guilty of them, or
any of them, in such manner and form, as in the said Article is expressed, and
humbly prays a convenient time for making his Proofs, and to justify and
maintain his Actions in Ireland, by sight of His Majesty's Warrants, Records,
and Witnesses in that Kingdom, and that if any mistake be in this Answer, it
may be amended.

And this the said Earl hops, that upon equal Construction of his Words and
Actions, he shall appear free from any great and heinous Offenses wherewith he
is Charged; and howsoever it shall please God to dispose of him, he shall ever
pray, that by their Lordships great Wisdoms and Prudence, the Affections of His
Majesty, and Duty of His Subjects, may this Parliament be so surely knit
together, as may by God's blessing lastingly tend to the Prosperity and
Flourishing Estate both of King and People.

Friday, February 26th, 1640.
Ordered, That the same Committee that was formerly appointed to draw up the
Charge against the Earl of Strafford, with the Addition of Committee to
consider of the Proof.
Mr. Palmer, Mr. Seldom, Mr. Whitlock, and Mr. Maynard, do consider of the
Articles and further Impeachmment of Thomas Earl of Strafford by the Commons;
and likewise the said Earl's Answer to those Articles and further Impeachment.
And they are likewise to consider of the Proofs, and how the Witnesses may
conveniently be brought together, to give their Testimony Viva Voce in the
business; and they are to proceed in the secretest and speediest way they can,
for the advantage of the business, in preparing it for a Trial and further
Proceedings; and they have Power to send for Persons, Witnesses, Papers,
Records, or any thing else, that they in their Judgments shall conceive fit, or
may conduce to the Service; and they are to meet this Afternoon at Two of the
Clock in the Treasury Chamber.

The four Lawyers that were added to the Earl of Strafford's Committee, made
their Protestation of Secrecy openly in the House.

Sir George Wentworth, upon his Protestation made to the House to keep secret
all such Matters as passed this day, had leave to resort to his Brother the
Earl of Strafford, but all the other Members of this House are restrained from
resorting unto him, without leave first obtained.

Saturday, February 27th, 1640.
Mr. Whitlock Reports from the Committee for the Earl of Strafford. The House
does declare, That they are well satisfied, that the Evidence Members to manage
the Evidence.
to be produced against Thomas Earl of Strafford at his Trial be managed by
those Members.

Friday, March 5th, 1640.
Upon Mr. Whitlock's Report from the Earl of Strafford's Committee, It was
Resolved upon the Question, That there shall be no Replication put No
Replication to the Earl's Answer.
(...) the (...) of (...) (...) in (...) but that the further Proceedings shall
be (...) (...) (...) as is now (...) by the Committee.

Mr. Whitlock is to go up to the Lords with this Message, viz.

That the House of Commons have considered of the Earl of Strafford's Answer,
and do aver their Charge of High Treason against him, and that he is Guilty in
such manner and form as he stands Accused and Impeached, and that this House
will be ready to prove their Charge against him, at such convenient time as
their Lordships shall prefix, and intend to manage the Evidence by Members of
their own, and desire a free Conference with their Lordships, by Select
Committees of both Houses, to consider of some Propositions and Circumstances
concerning the Trial.

Mr. Whitlock brings Answer from the Lords, That their Lordships have taken the
Message from this House into Consideration, and will give a meeting, for a free
Conference, by a Committee of 24 on Monday Morning at Nine of the Clock.

The Committee of the Commons.
Mr. Pym, Mr. Strode, Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Grimston, Lord Digby, Sir John
Clotworthy, Sir Walter Earl, Mr. Hampden, Mr. Whitlocke, Mr. Palmer, Mr.
Seldom, Mr. Maynard, Mr. Treasurer, Sir Io. Culpepper, Mr. Reynolds, Mr. Hyde,
Mr. Prideaux, Mr. Whitlock, Mr. Martin, Mr. Proxholm, Mr. Gray, Lord Faulkland,
Mr. Vaughan, Lord Russell, Sir John Strangwaies, Mr. Bellasis, Sir Guy Palms,
Mr. Sutton, Mr. Whistler, Sir Simon D'Ewes, Sir An. Irby, Sir Martin Lomly, Mr.
Waller, Mr. Coventry, Mr. Upton, Sir John Eveling, Lord Fairfax, Sir William
Massam, Mr. Pierepoint, Sir Benjamin Rudyard, Sir Thomas Barrington, Sir Philip
Stapleton, Mr. Capell, Mr. Carry, Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir Robert Hatton, Sir
Gilbert Gerrard, Mr. Nathaniel Fines.
A Committee of these 48 are to meet a Committee of 24 of the Lords at a free
Conference, concerning the Trial of Thomas Earl of Strafford, on Monday Morning
next, at Nine of the Clock in the Painted-Chamber

The Committee for the Earl of Strafford are to manage this free Conference
with the Lords.

Monday, March 8th, 1640.
Upon Mr. Whitlock's Report from the Committee for the Earl of Strafford, the
Heads of a Conference appointed to be had this day concerning the Trial of the
said Earl. It was Resolved upon the Question:

(1.) To Propose to the Lords, That they will be pleased to take some Order,
that there may be a convenient Place appointed for the Trial of Thomas Earl of
Strafford, and to give such Directions as shall be fit for preparing
convenience of room for both Houses, and for such Members of the House as are
appointed to manage the Evidence, and for Witnesses, and for the Prisoner; and
for excluding of all such as ought not to be present at the Trial.

(2.) That whereas, in the last Message to the Lords, this House did Intimate
unto them, That they did intend to manage the Evidence by Members of their own;
They are now Commanded to explain their Reason, That their Lordships may take
notice, That We do not expect any Council shall be admitted the Earl of
Strafford at the giving of Evidence at the Trial.

Thursday, March 11th, 1640.
Mr. Whitlock Reports from the free Conference, concerning the Trial of Thomas
Earl of Strafford, That the Lord Privy Seal began with this Concerning the
manner of the Trial of the Earl.
Introduction; That this Parliament, both Houses, have had often Conferences,
and to good Purpose, which had preserved a true Understanding between both
Houses, That at the last free Conference their Lordships did receive from this
House certain Propositions, concerning the Trial of Thomas Earl of Strafford,
which We our Selves call Circumstances. (1.) Concerning Place. (2.) Persons.
(3.) Managing the Evidence. (4.) Use of Counsel; he was pleased to remember the
words of the Proposition, as they were delivered unto them, and told Us those
were Circumstances; yet Circumstances were Servants to Execution, and might be
altered; and if they should Change from the House they now sit in into the
Painted-Chamber, or the Court of Requests, upon Survey of it, by skilful men,
they were informed the Floor of it is so weak, that it might be very dangerous
for so great a Resort to be in together at the Trial, therefore left that to
Our further Consideration. The Lords thought of this, That the Bar in their
House might be removed higher, and the Room there made longer; and that being
made a Scaffold, might be a Capacity sufficient to receive the Members of this
House; this he did only Propose, and said, The Bishops did desire to be absent
at this Trial, so there would be more room, for the Earls would sit in their
places. Next that, their Lordships did desire to understand, Whether We meant
to be there as a House, which they thought We did, or as single Members of the
House. (3.) His Lordship was pleased to tell Us, They desired an Exposition of
the words managing of Evidence: Whether We intended a marshalling and applying
of the Proof? (4.) That the Lords did desire, concerning the Place and Persons,
to know how they have been admitted in former times, that they might be
fortified by Presidents for Place and Persons, and for Counsel. Their Lordships
are careful not to admit of more than is according to the Law of this Kingdom:
And thereupon their Lordships have made this Resolution, That the Earl of
Strafford, in matters of mere Fact, shall not make use of Counsel, but in
matter of Law he shall; and if any doubt arise, what is matter of Law, and what
is matter of Fact, the Lords do reserve the Judgment hereof to themselves; this
came by intimation of Ours, that We did intend to manage the Evidence; and at a
Conference We explained Our Selves, That We did not expect they would allow Him
any Council at the giving of Evidence. After this he was pleased to tell us,
That he had not forgot another thing, though he omitted it, that he that
delivered the Proposition, at the Message, used words to this purpose, That
this House did hold it necessary and fit, that all the Members of the House
might be present at the Trial, to the end, every one might satisfy his own
Conscience, in the giving of their Vote, to demand Judgment. Upon this We
thought it not fit to make an Explanation, till We had acquainted the House
with it.

Ordered, That the whole matter of the Report, now made of the free Conference
with the Lords, concerning the Trial of Tho. Earl of Strafford, be referred to
the Committee for the Earl of Strafford, to search and consider of Presidents,
and to prepare Reasons, and to present them to the House to morrow morning, and
they are to meet this Afternoon at Two of the Clock in the Treasury-Chamber.

A Message from the Lords, to desire a free Conference by the same Committee
that last met, touching the Demands concerning the Trial of Thomas Earl of
Strafford in the Painted-Chamber presently, if it may stand with the
convenience of this House.

Answer returned by the same Messengers, That this House has taken their
Lordships Message into Consideration, and will give a meeting presently by the
same Committee, as is desired.

The Committee, for the Earl of Strafford, are appointed to manage and Report
this Conference.

Friday, March 12th, 1640.
Mr. Whitlock Reports from the Earl of Strafford's Committee such Heads, as
that Committee does present unto this House to be the Heads of a free
Conference, to be desired with the Lords concerning the matter of the last free
Conference with the Lords, touching the Trial of Thomas Earl of Strafford.

Upon this Report, It was Resolved upon the Question, That this shall be the
first Head of the free Conference, viz. 1. As concerning Place, that this House
does conceive, that although the Bar of the Lord's House be removed, and some
Members thereof absent; yet without the Bar, the Room will not be sufficient to
contain the Members of the House of Commons, and that their Lordships will be
pleased to direct some other Place for the Trial. For the Presidents concerning
the Place, their Lordships take notice in their Conference, That the Parliament
sat in the Chamber Blank, 1 R. 2. but the Parliament being Summoned to appear
at the King's Palace at Westminster, if one Room be not convenient, another
Room might be desired that shall be more convenient.

Resolved upon the Question, That this shall be the Second Head of the free
Conference, viz. (2.) That the Earl of Strafford, being Impeached by the
Commons, it does belong to the House of Commons to Resolve who are to be
present at the Trial, and that of Right they may come as a House, if they
please, but however they are Resolved to send their own Members as a Committee
of the whole House.

Resolved upon the Question, That this shall be the Third Head of that free
Conference, viz. (3.) That by the managing of the Evidence, this House does
mean the ordering, applying, and enforcing the Evidence, according to the truth
of the Fact.

Ordered, That the Fourth Head of this Report now made from the Committee, of
the Earl of Strafford, concerning the matter of Council, be recommitted to the
same Committee, with the addition of the Lawyers of the House as was Yesterday
made; and they are likewise to take into Consideration, what those Gentlemen
have incurred that have been of Council with the Earl of Strafford, he being
accused of High Treason by this House, in the Name of Themselves, and of all
the Commons of England; and to present to this House what they think is fit to
be done in that business, and Mr. Peirepoint and Mr. Martin are added to this
Committee as to this business, and they are to meet this Afternoon at Two of
the Clock in the Treasury-Chamber.

Saturday, March 13th, 1640.
Mr. Peirepoint is appointed to go to the Lords, to desire a free Conference
Concerning the place of Trial, and the Council for the Earl.
by the same Committee that was last appointed for the free Conference,
touching the Trial of Thomas Earl of Strafford.

Mr. Whitlock Reports from the Committee for the Earl of Strafford, That the
House had heard part of this Report the other day, viz. (1.) The place of
Trial. (2.) The Persons to be present. (3.) The managing of the Evidence; these
three passed their Vote Yesterday. The Fourth Head concerning Counsel was
recommitted, which received this Resolution, That the Commons do acquaint their
Lordships, that if at any time, during the Evidence, the Counsel for the Earl
of Strafford shall interpose, when the Members of this House, that are
appointed to manage the Evidence, are speaking, they must of necessity desist,
because it will not become them to plead against Counsel; and as concerning the
allowing of Counsel in matters of Law, and reserving to their Lordships to
judge the Doubts, what is matter of Law, and what Fact; the Commons do save to
themselves all Right that does appertain to them, according to Law and course
of Parliament, and do declare, That the Proceedings in this Case shall not be
drawn into President, to the prejudice of the Commons. For the other matter,
concerning the Offense of the Counsel of the Earl of Strafford, by being of
Counsel with him, without leave of this House; the Committee could not proceed,
the other matter taking up the whole time.

The Committee, for the Earl of Strafford, are to manage this Conference.

Mr. Whitlock acquaints the House, That according to the Command of this House,
he had delivered unto the Lords the Votes that had passed here, concerning the
Trial of Thomas Earl of Strafford.

A Message from the Lords, desiring a free Conference by the same Committee,
touching the Demands concerning the Earl of Strafford presently in the
Painted-Chamber, if it may stand with the convenience of this House.

Answer returned by the same Messengers, That this House has taken their
Lordships Message into Consideration, and will give a meeting presently, as is
desired. The same Committee is to manage and Report this Conference.

Mr. Whitlock Reports from the free Conference, touching the Demands concerning
the Trial of the Earl of Strafford, That the Lord of Bath was pleased to
declare, in the Name of the Lords, That the House had taken into Consideration
those Demands made this Morning, and agreed upon an Answer to every one of them.

(First,) As to the Place, they had agreed, it should be in Westminster Hall,
and the King to be made acquainted with it by the Lord Great Chamberlain.
(Secondly,) For Persons, their Lordships agreed to it, That the House of
Commons be present as a Committee of the whole House for this time, with a
saving of the Right of the Lords House, either according to Law or
Parliamentary Proceedings; and that this shall not be drawn into President
hereafter on either side. For the (Third,) For the managing of Our Evidence,
they grant it wholly. For the (Fourth,) For Counsel in managing and forcing of
Evidence; the Counsel of the Earl of Strafford is not to speak nor interrupt
the matter of the House of Commons until all the Evidence is finished; and the
Counsel is not to stand at the Bar, but in some convenient place where they may
hear; and that they may speak for matter of Law, but not for matter of Fact,
and that not unless their Lordships shall see fitting. (Next,) For the time, my
Lord of Bath did tell Us, They could not yet Resolve upon it, till the Surveyor
and Workmen, that did take care to build the Scaffolds, did give account how
soon they could be ready.

Ordered, That it be referred to the Committee for the Earl of Strafford, with
the addition made to the Committee for this purpose, to consider of the saving,
and the other part of the Report now made from the free Conference, concerning
the Trial of Thomas Earl of Strafford, and they are to present to the House
what they think fit to be done thereupon.

Monday, March 15th, 1640.
A Message from the Lords, That the House of Peers desire a Conference The time
of the Trial.
concerning the time of the Earl of Strafford's Trial, and some other
Circumstances that concern that Trial; they desire it presently in the
Painted-Chamber, if it may stand with the convenience of this House by the same
former Committee.

Answer returned by the same Messengers, That this House has taken their
Lordships Message into Consideration, and will give a meeting presently, as is
desired by the same Committee.

Mr. Whitlock Reports the Conference had with the Lords, concerning Concerning
the Place for the Trial.
the Trial of the Earl of Strafford, in haec verba, That the Lord of Bath did
tell Us, That he had something to acquaint Us from the Lords, That their
Lordships had Ordered, That the Place for the Trial of the Earl of Strafford
shall be in Westminster Hall; That the King has been acquainted therewith, and
has been pleased to assent thereunto: That the time for the said Trial shall
begin on Monday next at Nine of the Clock in the Forenoon; and that against
that time Care is taken that all things shall be prepared and made ready; and
that the Lords will be pleased to give notice of the time appointed for this
Trial to the Earl of Strafford to attend accordingly; and a Warrant is to be
directed to the Lieutenant of the Tower, to bring the said Earl of Strafford at
the time and to the place aforesaid.

After this the Earl of Essex told Us, The Lords did take into Consideration
something alleged in the Earl of Strafford's Answer to the 27 Article, wherein
the Peers, that were of the Great Council, had some Aspersion cast upon them,
that they had entered this Protestation.

Whereas the Lords of the Great Council at York, to clear their Honors only,
have made their Protestation, That they did neither Command nor Approve the
raising of Moneys in Yorkshire, as is alleged by the Earl of Strafford in his
Answer to the 27th Article. Now the said Protestation is by this House
unanimously admitted. And it is likewise Ordered, That so much may be intimated
to the Committee of the House of Commons at the next Conference.

Moved, That the Committee for the Earl of Strafford do consider of the last
part of the Report now made, concerning the Protestation made by the Lords of
the Great Council at York, how far they may make use of it in the Evidence at
the Trial of the Earl of Strafford.

Ordered, That the Committee for the Earl of Strafford consider of the last
part of the Report of the Commitee, concerning the Protestation made by the
Lords of the Great Council at York, how far they may think fit to make use of
it as Evidence at the Trial.

Tuesday, March 16th, 1640.
Mr. Whitlock Reports from the Committee for the Earl of Strafford, That
whereas the House of Commons have formerly declared to their Lordships, that
the Earl of Strafford being Impeached by them, they do conceive it does belong
to them to Resolve, in what manner they will be present at his Trial; and that
of Right they may come as a House if they please; but for some special Reasons,
upon this occasion, they are Resolved to send their own Members as a Committee
of the whole House, Authorized by the House to be present at the Trial to hear,
and some particular Persons of themselves to manage the Evidence. The House of
Commons does still continue their Resolution in every part thereof and therein,
and in the matter of allowing Counsel: And their Lordships Reservation to their
Judgment what is matter of Fact, and what not, the House of Commons do save to
themselves, as they have formerly done, all Rights that do appertain to them,
according to Law, and the course of Parliament; and do declare, That the
Proceedings in this Case shall not be drawn into President, to the Prejudice of
the Commons.

Ordered, That this Protestation be by way of Conference transferred to the
Lords.

Wednesday, March 17th, 1640.
Ordered, That Mr. Pym shall make Report of three especial Cases that concern
the Earl of Strafford's business on Friday morning next.

Thursday, March 18th, 1640.
Ordered, That the Earl of Strafford's Committee of Twelve do attend that
Service, and lay aside all other Excuses and Occasions, unless they be
otherwise Commanded by this House, and Mr. Glyn is added to this Committee.

Friday, March 19th, 1640.
Ordered, That a Warrant under Mr. Speaker's Hand, be directed to the Master of
the Marshalsey, of the Kings Bench, requiring him to send Robert Coin (a
Prisoner there upon Execution in safe Custody) to attend the Committee for the
Earl of Strafford De die in Diem, so long as the Committee shall so require.

Ordered, That Patrick Allen, an Irish Merchant, who has a Petition depending
here, shall have the Liberty to go abroad with a Keeper to Prosecute his
business here, and to be examined as a Witness at the Committee for the Earl of
Strafford.

Sir Thomas Barrington, Sir John Culpepper, Sir Io. Strangwayes, Mr.
Ashburnham, Members appointed to View the place of Trial.
Sir Io. Hotham, Sir William Litton, Sir Io. Holland, Sir Robert Pie, Mr.
Wheeler, Mr. Lawrence, and Mr. Whittaker, are appointed as a Committee to View
the place for the Earl of Strafford's Trial, and to think of some convenient
manner for the Committee of the House to go in, and be present at the said
Trial; and for Mr. Speaker to be there in a private manner, and they are to
meet this Afternoon at Two of the Clock in the inner Court of Wards.

Saturday, March 20th, 1640.
Ordered, That the Earl of Strafford's Committee of 13 shall have Power to
manage the Evidence in such manner, as they shall think fit to manage the same
at the Trial of the Earl of Strafford.

Ordered, That Mr. White and Mr. Prideaux be appointed to take Notes of the
Passages of the Trial of Thomas Earl of Strafford, and to Report them to the
House, if occasion be; and that the Committee shall have Power, if occasion be,
to make use of two more, such as they shall think fit, though not of the House.

Moved from the Earl of Strafford's Committee, That it would please the House
to give a fair and candid Interpretation of the Committees Labors and
Endeavors in this business.

Upon Sir John Culpepper's Report from the Committee appointed to view the
Place, and to Regulate the Order and the Manner of the Committee of the Houses
coming and being there: It was Ordered, (1.) That the Members of the Commons
shall sit together, without any Intermixture of others, in that place which is
prepared for them. (2.) That in respect of the inconveniency of it, the Members
shall not come to meet at the House on Monday morning, but come directly to the
place of the Trial. (3.) That for the well-ordering of the business, the said
Committee, with the addition of Mr. Peard, shall be present at the several
doors at the Entrance of the place appointed, for the Members of the House by
Six of the Clock, and are directed and required by the House to admit none but
such as shall bring Tickets of their Names and the Places for which they Serve;
and that none of the Members of the House shall be admitted to come in before
those that are appointed to attend at the doors shall come; and if any, either
Stranger or Member of the House, shall offend this Order, those who are
appointed to attend this Service shall Report it to the House. And it is
further Ordered, That all of the House shall be there by Eight of the Clock at
the farthest; and that such places shall be reserved for them, who shall attend
this Service, as they shall find to be most proper and convenient for them.
(4.) Ordered, That the Sergeant at Arms shall attend within the Court, and his
Men without, to be employed in such Service as they who manage the Evidence
shall appoint.

Sir John Culpepper further Reported, That the Speaker might be present in some
private place, and as a particular Member of this House; but the Committee does
not think fit that the House should declare any Order in it.

Touching the Members of the House being covered at the Trial, the Committee
thinks it not fit for them to deliver any Opinion, only they offer the
difference that may be when both Houses meet, or Committees of both Houses, and
the present Case, where the Lords are to meet as a House, and the Commons as a
Committee of their House.

Resolved upon the Question, That the House shall sit this Afternoon, and shall
meet at Two of the Clock.

Mr. Bellasis went up to the Lords with this Message, To desire their
Lordships, That in regard this House is much straightened in time, and has great
Affairs in hand, and will sit this Afternoon, and may have occasion of a
Conference with their Lordships, that they will be pleased to sit likewise.

The humble Petition of Thomas Earl of Strafford was this day read, wherein he
desires, That he may make use of some Members of this House, E of Strafford's
Petition read.
nominated in his Petition, as Witnesses at his Trial; and the House leaves
those Members, nominated in the said Petition, to do therein as they shall
please, without their giving any offense to the House.

Mr. Martin is to go up to the Lords, to desire a free Conference with their
Lordships by the same Committee that was formerly appointed, touching the
matter of the last free Conference concerning the Trial of the Earl of
Strafford.

Ordered, That those Members of the House, that are appointed to manage the
Evidence at the Trial of the Earl of Strafford, shall have Power, if any
Witnesses be produced for the Earl, to ask if they have been sworn, and if it
shall appear that they have been sworn; or if any shall be sworn at the Bar, to
forbear to proceed any further in the managing of their Evidence, until they
have resorted unto the House, and have received further Order.

All the Orders that concern the Proceedings against the Earl of Strafford are
required to be Copied out, for the Service of the Committee.

The Names of the Members of the House of Commons, appointed to manage the
Evidence against Thomas Earl of Strafford at his Trial before the House of
Peers, upon an Impeachment of High Treason.

George Lord Digby.

John Hampden, Esquires. John Pym,

Oliver St. John, Esquire shortly after Solicitor-General to King Charles the First.

Sir Walter Earl, Knight.

Ieoffery Palmer, afterward Knighted, and made Attorney General to King
Charles the Second.

John Maynard, Esquire afterward Sergeant at Law to King Charles the Second.

John Glyn, Esquire Recorder of London, afterward Sworn one of the Council to King
Charles the Second.

The Place for the appearance of the Lord Lieutenant was the great Hall in
Westminster, where there was a Throne erected for the King, on each The great
Hall in Westminster appointed for the Trial of Thomas Earl of Strafford.
side whereof a Cabinet, enclosed about with Boards, and before with Arras:
before that were the Seats for the Lords of the Upper-House, and sacks of Wool
for the Judges, before them ten Stages of Seats extending farther than the
midst of the Hall, for the Gentlemen of the House of Commons; at the end of all
was a Desk closed about and set apart for the Lord Lieutenant and his Counsel.

On Monday Morning, March 22. about Seven of the Clock, he came Menday.
from the Tower, accompanied with six Barges, wherein were one hundred
Soldiers of the Tower, all with Partisans, for his Guard, and fifty pair of
Oars: At his landing at Westminster, there he was attended with two hundred of
the Trained Band, and went in guarded by them into the Hall. The entries at
Whitehall, Kingstreet and Westminster, were guarded by the Constables and
Watchmen, from four of the Clock in the Morning, to keep away all base and
idle persons.

The King, Queen, and Prince came to the House about Nine of the Clock, but
kept themselves private within their Closets, only the Prince came out once or
twice to the Cloth of State; So that the King saw and heard all that passed,
but was seen of none. Some give the reason of this from the received practice
of England in such Cases: Others say, That the Lords did entreat the King,
either to be absent, or to be there privately, lest pretentions might be made
hereafter, that His being there was either to threaten, or some other ways to
interrupt the Course of Justice. A third sort, That the King was not willing to
be accessory to the Process, till it came to His Part; but rather chose to be
present, that he might observe and understand if any Violence, Rigor, or
Injustice happened. When the Lieutenant entered the Hall, the Porter of the Hall
(whose Office it is) asked Master Maxwell, Whether the Ax should be carried
before him or no? Who did Answer, That the King had expressly forbidden it; nor
was it the Custom of England to use that Ceremony, but only when the Party
Accused was to be put upon his Jury. Those of the House of Lords did sit with
their Heads covered, those of the House of Commons uncovered. The Bishops upon
the Saturday before did voluntarily decline the giving of their Suffrages in
matters Criminal, and of that nature, according to the provision of the Cannon
Law, and practice of the Kingdom to this day, and therefore would not be
present; yet withal they gave in a Protestation, that their absence should not
prejudice them of that, or any other Privilege competent to them, as the Lords
Spiritual in Parliament, which was accepted.

The Earl of Arundel, as Lord High Steward of England, sat apart by himself,
and at the Lieutenant's Entry, Commanded the House to proceed. Master Pym being
Speaker of the Committee for his Accusation, gave in the same Articles, which
were presented at his last being before the Upper House, which being read, his
Replies were subjoyned and read also, the very same which were presented before
in the Upper House: Some gave the reason of this, because the House of Commons
had not heard those Accusations in Public before. Others, that the formality
of the Process required no less, however that day was spent in that Exercise.

The Queen went from the House about Eleven of the Clock, the King and Prince
staid till the meeting was dissolved, which was after Two. The Lieutenant was
sent to the Tower by his Guard, and appointed to return upon Tuesday at Nine of
the Clock in the Morning. The crowd of people was neither great nor
troublesome, all of them saluted him, and he them, with great humility and
courtesy, [both at his Entrance and at his Return,] therefore let Fame pretend
what it please about the malice and discontent of the Multitude, That if he
pass the stroke of Justice, they will tear him in pieces; yet there is more in
Rumor than in Sight and Appearance; and in this Report, as in all others of
this nature, more is thrust upon the Vulgar (who seem as well fearful of
Punishment, as exempt from it, for all their great number) than they did justly
deserve at this time.

Monday, March 22. 1640. Post Merid.
The House of Commons spent the Forenoon in the first days Trial of Thomas Earl
of Strafford in Westminster Hall: But in the Afternoon the House Ordered, That
in case the Earl of Strafford shall ask leave, or shall have liberty given him
to speak any thing by way of Defense, before such time as the Members appointed
to manage the Evidence, shall enter into the managing of their Evidence, that
then they shall Interpose; and if so be that notwithstanding such
Interposition, the Lords shall give him leave so to speak, that then they shall
forbear to proceed any further in the managing of their Evidence, until they
have Reported unto the House, and received further Order from them.

Ordered, That the House shall meet to morrow in Westminster Hall as a
Committee; and that the House sit to morrow in the Afternoon at Two of the
Clock.

Ordered, That the Committee formerly appointed shall attend at the doors, at
the Entrance of the place prepared for the Committee of the House of Commons,
at the Trial of Thomas Earl of Strafford.

Tuesday, March 23. 1640. Post Merid.
Sir Philip Stapleton went up to the Lords with this Message, To desire a free
Conference by a Committee of both Houses, concerning their joining with this
House to Petition His Majesty, To disband the new-levied Irish Army, Disarming
the Papists Recusants, and the removal of Papists from Court; especially those
formerly named, viz. Mr. Walter Montague, Sir Kenelme Digby, Sir John Winter,
and Sir Toby Matthew.

Sir Walter Earl and Mr. Reynolds are to manage this Conference, and are to
move the Lords, to appoint a Petition to His Majesty, and are to enforce their
desire of removing the Papists from Court by that Circumstance of Mr. Walter
Montagues appearing Yesterday, before both Houses, at the Trial of the Earl of
Strafford.

Ordered, That the House meet as a Committee in Westminster Hall at Eight of
the Clock, and in the House at Two in the Afternoon, which they are constantly
to observe De die in diem during the Trial.

The House does Expect that all the Members of the House should conform
themselves to the Order made for Regulating matters at the Trial of Thomas Earl
of Strafford; and that the Committee appointed for that business shall complain
of any that Conform not thereunto.

Wednesday, March 24th, 1640. Post Merid.
Ordered, That Mr. Treasurer and Mr. Comptroller move His Majesty, That the
Committees for the Earl of Strafford may have the perusal of Sir Edward Cook's
Pleas of the Crown.

Ordered, That no Member of the House shall stand in the place appointed for
the Earl of Strafford's Witnesses, at the time of his Trial, unless they be
such as by the said Earl be required to be there as Witnesses.

Ordered, That Sir Henry Mildmay move the Lord High Chamberlain, that the door
at the Entrance in at the Room, appointed for those that manage the Evidence at
the Trial of Thomas Earl of Strafford, be kept shut, and that there be some
other passage for the Members to come into the House at, and Captain Charles
Price is added to the Committee appointed to Regulate matters at the Trial of
Thomas Earl of Strafford.

Ordered, That no Member of the House Confer with the Earl of Strafford during
the time of the Trial.

Thursday, March 25th, 1641. Post Merid.
Ordered, That the Committee appointed to manage the Evidence at the Trial of
Thomas Earl of Strafford, shall have liberty to proceed upon such Articles, as
they shall think most Important for the speediest expediting of the Trial, and
to contract and proceed in such manner as they shall think most expedient.

Ordered, That the Committee for the Earl of Strafford presently withdraw into
the Court of Wards, to prepare Heads for a Conference, to be desired with the
Lords, concerning the preventing of all Delays in the speedier expediting the
Trial of Thomas Earl of Strafford.

Sir John Culpepper Reports from the Committee that was appointed to draw Heads
for a Conference to be desired with the Lords, concerning the preventing of all
Delays in the Trial of the Earl of Strafford, to this purpose:

To Represent to the Lords the necessity of Expediting the Earl of Strafford's
Trial, in respect of the pressing Occasions of both Houses, and of the Estate
of the whole Kingdom, which will be much interrupted and prejudiced by the
Protraction of this Trial: In this Consideration the House of Commons desired
their Lordships, that they would be pleased to prevent all unnecessary Delays
which may be occasioned by the Earl of Strafford's impertinent Exceptions,
which as they will take up much time in Debate, so they may occasion frequent
Adjournments, the which we desire their Lordships to take into Consideration,
that they may be avoided.

Resolved upon the Question, That this shall be the Subject of the Conference.

Sir Io. Eveling went up to the Lords, to desire a Conference concerning the
Trial of the Earl of Strafford; and Sir Io. Culpepper is appointed to manage
this Conference.

Monday, March 29th, 1641. Post Merid.
Sir Thomas Barington is appointed to go up to the Lords, to desire a
Conference by a Committee of both Houses, concerning the Trial of Thomas Earl
of Strafford.

This House does conceive, That the Examination of the Lord Primate of Ireland,
already taken, is not to be urged, in regard none of the Members of this House
were present at the taking of it, but the Examination of him (provided) that
some of the Committee appointed to manage the Evidence at the Trial be present
thereat, this House will not oppose it, saving their own Rights; and in like
cases the House leaves it to the Committee to proceed in such manner as they
shall think agreeable to Law and Justice. And this to be the Subject Matter of
the Conference, and Mr. Whitlock is to manage it.

Friday, April 2. 1641. Post Merid.
Mr. Pym went up to the Lords, to desire, That such of their Lordships as this
House shall have occasion to make use of, in the Trial of the Earl of
Strafford, would be pleased to be present at the said Trial, and by Name the
Lord Treasurer, Lord Admiral, Earl of Bristoll, Earl of Holland, and Lord
Conway, be also named to the House, with some other Lords that the House should
have occasion to make use of; namely, the Lord Primate of Armagh, E. Morton,
and Lord Newburgh.

Mr. Pym likewise nominated some Members of this House, viz. Mr. Treasurer, Sir
William Pennyman, Sir John Hotham, Sir Hugh Cholmly, Mr. Henry Cholmy, Mr.
Thomas Price, Sir John Strangways, Mr. Controllor, Mr. Henry Piercy, Sir
William Envidale, Sir Frederick Cornwallis, Sir Henry Mildmay, Mr. Nichols, Mr.
Fines, Sir Thomas Heal, Sir Thomas Barington, Mr. Herbert Price; a Note of
these Names was given to the Sergeant at Arms, attending on this House; and he
is Ordered to give Notice to the Members of the Lords, to be present upon all
occasions.

Saturday, April 3. 1641. Post Merid.
The Petition of Thomas Earl of Strafford was this day read, and the like Order
made upon it, as was made upon the Petition of the 20th of March.

Tuesday, April 6th, 1641. Post Merid.
The humble Petition of Thomas Earl of Strafford was read, and the same Order
made upon it as was upon that of the 20th of March.

Friday, April 9th, 1641. Post Merid.
The Lord Russel is appointed to go up to the Lords, to desire a Conference by
a Committee of both Houses, concerning the Proceedings in the Trial of Thomas
Earl of Strafford.

The Heads of the free Conference to be to this effect:

To acquaint the Lords with the great Necessities of the Kingdom, the Pressures
of the Time, and how much time has been spent in this Trial: How prejudicial it
will be to the Kingdom, if any more then has been be spent, and therefore to
desire that to morrow may be appointed for a Peremptory day, for the Earl of
Strafford to be heard, if he will come; otherwise that the Committee of this
House may proceed to the Replication to the whole matter, and the Earl of
Strafford to be absolutely concluded, for saying any more to the matter of Fact.

Mr. Pym is to manage this Conference, and Mr. Glyn and Mr. Hampden are joined
unto him as Assistants.

Mr. Pym acquaints the House, That he has delivered to the Lords what he was
entrusted with by this House, concerning the Trial of Thomas Earl of Strafford.
They gave no other Answer, then that they would send Answer by Messengers of
their own.

A Message from the Lords by Baron Hendon and Mr. Heath.

That the Lords have taken the last Message to this House into Consideration,
and have Resolved, That if the Earl of Strafford come to morrow, he may proceed
according to the former Order; if he comes not, that then this House may
proceed to Sum up the Evidence as to matter of Fact, and the Earl of Strafford
to be concluded as to matter of Fact.

Saturday, April 10th, 1641. Post Merid.
Mr. Glyn Reports from the Committee, for the Earl of Strafford, some Grounds
concerning the further Evidence that is offered by the Committee to corroborate
the Evidence upon the latter part of the 23. Article. And thereupon Sir Henry
Vane the younger and Mr. Pym are appointed by this House, to declare their
whole knowledge concerning the matters contained in the 23. Article against the
Earl of Strafford, and how, and by what means they came to the knowledge
thereof, which when they had done, what Paper was produced by Mr. Pym, and so
much of it read by him as concerned the Earl of Strafford: And then it was
Resolved upon the Question, That the Paper whereof Mr. Pym had now read in
part, shall be all of it read, which was done; and Notice being given of a
Message from the Lords, It was Ordered, That all the Members keep their Seats,
and go not out of the House without leave.

Resolved upon the Question, That the Bill of Attainder of the Earl of
Strafford of High Treason shall be now read.

And accordingly the Bill was twice read.

Monday, April 12. Post Merid.
The Heads of a Conference to be desired with the Lords touching the
Proceedings against the Earl of Strafford.

1. The Narrative of the Evidence the Committee intended to have given on
Saturday last, concerning which they resorted to the House of Commons for
further Direction, to which Evidence two Members of this House were ready to
depose.

The House fell into a great and long debate of the second Head. And in the
mean time Mr. Hampden went up to the Lords with this Message, to signify unto
their Lordships, That this House is now in Debate of a business of great
Importance, which they do intend to Communicate unto their Lordships, but are
not yet fully ready for a Conference; and therefore they do entreat their
Lordships would be pleased to sit a little while, and they hope they shall come
up very suddenly unto them.

The Earl of Strafford's Committee who retired to prepare the Second Head,
after some stay returned and presented this following to the House for a Second
Head, which was read and allowed of by the House, (viz.)

2. That the House having taken Consideration thereof, did conceive it very
material, that in regard of the Danger and Distractions of the present Times,
and that what time might be spent in Debate touching the admitting of the
Evidence, they Resolved to come to a general Reply, setting aside that Evidence
for this time, saving to themselves their Rights, to make use of the said
Evidence, for the farther Prosecution of the 23. Article, if their Lordships
shall be unsatisfied concerning the same, without admitting the said Earl of
Strafford to examine upon any of the other Articles, which the House does do,
to the end, that the business might come to some speedy Conclusion, the loss of
time being of extreme Danger and ill Consequence to the Commonwealth, as they
conceive.

Mr. Hampden brings Answer, That the Lords will sit a convenient time.

3. The third Head, That upon occasion of discovery of this Evidence, a Paper
was read in the House, whereby it did appear, that at the same time when the
dangers abroad were spoken by the Earl of Strafford, touching the bringing the
Irish Army into England, other words were spoken by two others then present,
descyphered by those Letters L. Arch. and L. Cott. (by which We conceive is
meant the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury and Lord Cottington,) very full of
Pernicious Counsels to the King, and Slander to the Commons Assembled in the
last Parliament; as will appear, if their Lordships will be pleased to hear the
Papers read, which Paper the Committee is commanded to read, and leave it to
their Consideration, and to desire that their Lordships will take some course,
that it may be duly examined by whom these words were spoken, that there may be
some further Proceedings, to prevent the dangers that may ensue thereupon, and
that those Counsels may be looked into, and searched to the bottom.

These three Heads were all severally put to the Question, and by Resolution
upon the Question, Ordered to be the Heads of this Conference.

Mr. Stroud went up to the Lords with this Message, to desire a Conference with
their Lordships, by a Committee of both Houses, touching the Proceedings
against the Earl of Strafford, and some other matters lately discovered.

Ordered, That at the next sitting of the House the Bill for the Attainder of
the Earl of Strafford shall be read the second time, and Mr. Speaker is to put
the House in mind of this Order.

A Message from the Lords by Mr. Heath and Sergeant Glanvil.

The Lords desire a present Conference, by a Committee of both Houses, in the
Painted-Chamber, if it may stand with the convenience of this House, concerning
the last Conference about the Proceedings against the said Earl.

Answer returned by the same Messengers, That this House has taken their
Lordships Message into Consideration, and will give a present meeting, as is
desired.

The Committee appointed to manage the Evidence at the Trial, are appointed
Reporters of this Conference.

Mr. Glyn Reports the Conference with the Lords to this purpose:

That the Lord Steward spoke in the Name of the Lords, and did declare, That
their Lordships are Resolved this House may proceed, as formerly was intended,
before the offer of further Evidence to be propounded, the Earl of Strafford to
recollect his Evidence first, and that being done, the Members of the House of
Commons to state their Evidence, and this to be done to morrow morning, whereof
they will give the Earl of Strafford Notice.

Tuesday, April 13th, 1641. Post Merid.
The House only met and adjourned till the next morning.

Wednesday, April 14th, 1641. Post Merid.
An Act was read the second time for the Attainder of Thomas Earl of Strafford
of High Treason, upon the Question, Committed unto a Committee of the whole
House, Mr. Speaker sitting by.

The Order for Resolving the House into a Committee, to Consider of the Bill,
for the Attainder of Thomas Earl of Strafford of High Treason, was read, and
accordingly the House was Resolved into a Committee, and Mr. Peard called to
the Chair.

Then Mr. Speaker assumed the Chair.

A Message from the Lords by Judge Reeves and Sergeant Glanvile, That their
Lordships have appointed to hear the Council of the Earl of Strafford to morrow
at Eight of the Clock in Westminster Hall, concerning the matter of Law.

Thursday, April 15th, 1641. Post Merid.
Mr. Arthur Capel went up to the Lords with a Message, To desire a free
Conference by a Committee of both Houses, concerning the Proceedings against
Thomas Earl of Strafford, so soon as it may stand with their Lordships
Convenience.

Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Maynard, Mr. Glyn, Sir John Culpepper, Mr. Pym, Mr.
Whitlock, Mr. Whistler, Mr. Stroud.
As a Committee are to retire presently into the Committee-Chamber, to prepare
Heads for a Conference, concerning the Proceedings against the Earl of
Strafford.

Mr. Maynard Reports from this Committee, the Heads of the Conference to be
desired with the Lords, concerning the Proceedings against the Earl of
Strafford, to this effect.

1. To offer unto their Lordships, that it was last night Five of the Clock
before this Intimation of their Lordships Intentions, to hear the Earl of
Strafford's Council, came to this House.

2. That upon some Conferences heretofore had with their Lordships, a saving
was made by this House in the Point, Whether Counsel should be heard or not?
and it is not now time to consider, Whether they should depart from this saving.

3. Great difficulties to know to what purpose the Counsel shall be heard, the
Case not being stated, agreed on, or made, when to propound the danger and
inconveniences; if his Counsel make a Case, and ravel into all our Evidence in
such an Auditory; and whether to put the Case as it is alleged in the
Articles, that the Evidence of Fact being given, it was in Propositions, from
the beginning, to go by way of Bill, and that a Bill is Exhibited here for his
Attainder.

That the Proceedings, by way of Bill, stands in no way of opposition to those
Proceedings, that have already been in this business. These several
Considerations make more difficulty in this House, than to come to a sudden and
present Resolution.

Resolved upon the Question, That these shall be the Heads of this Conference;
the Committee appointed to prepare the Heads, are likewise appointed to manage
and Report the Conference, if occasion be.

Mr. Maynard Reports, That the Earl Marshall acquainted them, that he had made
a Report of what had been delivered by the House of Commons, and they had
entered into Debate about it, and so soon as they had come to a Resolution, they
would send Answer by Messengers of their own. But in the mean time they had put
off the hearing of the Earl of Strafford's Counsel for this day.

Ordered, That the House be Resolved into a Committee, to debate further the
Bill of Attainder of Thomas Earl of Strafford.

A Message from the Lords by Judge Foster and Mr. Heath, That the Lords desire
a free Conference, by a Committee of both Houses, concerning the business of
the Proceedings against the Earl of Strafford presently, (if it may stand with
the convenience of this House) in the Painted-Chamber.

Answer returned by the same Messengers, That this House will give a meeting
presently, as is desired.

The same Committee that managed the Conference this morning, are to manage
this, and to Report it, if occasion be. Mr. Fines is added to the Committee; if
any new matter be propounded by the Lords at this Conference, the Committee is
to give no Answer unto it, but to Report it to the House.

Mr. Whitlock Reports this Conference, That the Lord Say told them, That they
had taken into Consideration the great business, and were not absolutely
Resolved how it should proceed, that the Earl of Strafford's Counsel should
have Notice to attend there to morrow, and should not speak to any matter of
Fact, but to matter of Law; only it was afterward said by another Lord, That
the time was so short, that they had Resolved not to send for him, till they
heard from this House.

Friday, April 16th, 1641. Post Merid.
Ordered, That the House do first take into Consideration the Report of the
Conference with the Lords Yesterday, concerning the Proceedings against the
Earl of Strafford.

Resolved upon the Question, That it is sufficiently proved, that the Earl of
Strafford has endeavored to subvert the ancient and Fundamental Laws of the
Realms of England and Ireland, and to introduce Arbitrary and Tyrannical
Government against Law.

Mr. Peard went up to the Lords with a Message to this effect:

That this House at present is in Debate of a great business, and fear they
cannot come to a Resolution so soon as to come to their Lordships for a
Conference this Afternoon; If they can, they Resolve to sit this Afternoon, and
desire their Lordships to do the like, if it may stand with their Convenience.

Mr. Peard brings Answer, That their Lordships will meet at Four of the Clock.

Resolved upon the Question, That a Committee of the whole House shall hear the
Earl of Strafford's Counsel in Westminster Hall, concerning matter of Law.

Ordered, That the House do this Afternoon take the Proceedings against the
Earl of Strafford into further Consideration.

The Committee is to retire presently into the Committee-Chamber, to prepare
Heads for a Conference to be desired with the Lords, concerning the further
Proceedings against the Earl of Strafford.

Mr. Maynard Reports the Heads of this Conference to this effect:

1. To take Notice of their Lordships Resolution, to hear the Earl of
Strafford's Council in matter of Law.

2. To put their Lordships in mind of the saving of this House in that Point,
and further to tell them, That if after his Council shall be heard, any doubt
shall remain with their Lordships, they shall be ready to satisfy them in due
time.

3. That to this end they do intend to send a Committee of this House, only to
hear what his Council shall say. These Particulars raised some Debate in the
House, and being put to the Question, the House was divided upon it; but yet
after the Tellers were appointed, the No's yielded to the Yeas without telling.

4. To desire that their Lordships will be pleased to use all Expedition to put
an end to this Trial, as much as in Justice may be.

5. To desire a continuance of their Care, that the Counsel, under color of
speaking to the matter of Law, ravel not into the matter of Fact.

Sir Robert Harly went up to the Lords, to desire a free Conference with their
Lordships by a Committee of both Houses, upon the free Conference had Yesterday
with their Lordships, concerning the further Proceedings against the Earl of
Strafford.

Sir Robert Harly brings Answer, That their Lordships will give a present
meeting, as is desired.

The Committee that was appointed to prepare Heads for the Conference,
concerning the further Proceedings against the Earl of Strafford, are to manage
this Conference, and to Report it, if occasion be.

Ordered, That the Committee formerly appointed to preserve places for the
Committee of the whole House in Westminster Hall, do apply their Endeavors in
that Service.

A Message from the Lords by Justice Foster and Justice Heath, That the Lords
have sent this Message, that they will be set to morrow at ten in the Forenoon
in Westminster Hall, to hear the Earl of Strafford's Council in matter of Law.

Saturday, April 17th, 1641. Post Merid.
Ordered, That the House be Resolved into a Grand Committee, to take into
further Consideration the Bill of Attainder of Thomas Earl of Strafford.

Mr. Speaker left the Chair, Mr. Peard was called to the Chair of the Grand
Committee, and Mr. Speaker again assumed the Chair.

Ordered, That the Debate of the Bill of Attainder of the Earl of Strafford, be
resumed on Monday morning at Seven of the Clock.

Monday, April 19th, 1641.
Ordered, That after the Conference shall be ended, the House shall again be
Resolved into a Committee, to resume the farther Debate of the Earl of
Strafford, and all the Members are required to return from the Conference to
the House.

Resolved upon the Question, That the endeavor of Thomas Earl of Strafford to
subvert the Ancient and Fundamental Laws of the Realm of England and Ireland,
and to Introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government, against Law, in both
these Kingdoms, is High Treason.

The Lord Digbye's Speech in the House of Commons, to the Bill of Attainder of
the Earl of Strafford, April 21. 1641.
Mr. Speaker, We are now upon the Point of giving (as much as in Us lies) the
Final Sentence unto Death or Life on a great Minister of State, and Peer of
this Kingdom, Thomas Earl of Strafford, a Name of hatred in the present Age, by
his Practices, and fit to be made a Terror to future Ages by his Punishment.

I have had the Honor to be Employed by the House in this great business, from
the first hour that it was taken into Consideration; It was matter of great
Trust, (and I will say with confidence) that I have served the House in it both
with Industry, according to my ability, and with most exact Faithfulness and
Secrecy.

And as I have hitherto discharged my Duty to this House, and to my Country, in
the Progress of this Great Cause, so I trust I shall do now in the last period
of it, to God and to a good Conscience.

I do wish the peace of that unto my self, and the blessings of Almighty God to
me and my Posterity, according as my judgment on the life of this man shall be
consonant with my heart, and the best of my understanding in all Integrity.

I know well Mr. Speaker, that by some things I have said of late, whilst this
Bill, was in agitation, I have raised some prejudices upon me in the Cause.

Yea some (I thank them for their plain dealing) have been so free as to tell
me, that I suffered much by the backwardness I have shown in this Bill of
Attainder of the Earl of Strafford, against whom I had been formerly so keen
and so active.

Mr. Speaker, I beg of you and the rest but a suspension of Judgment concerning
me, till I have opened my heart unto you freely and clearly in this business.

Truly Sir, I am still the same in my Opinions and Affections, as unto the Earl
of Strafford, I confidently believe him the most dangerous Minister, the most
insupportable to free Subjects that can be charactared.

I believe his Practices in themselves have been as High, as Tyrannical, as any
Subject ever ventured on, and the malignity of them are hugely aggravated by
those rare abilities of his, whereof God has given him the use, but the Devil
the application (in a word) I believe him still that grand Apostate to the
Commonwealth, who must not expect to be pardoned in this World, till he be
dispatched to the other. And yet let me tell you Mr. Speaker, my hand must not
be to that dispatch, I protest, as my Conscience stands informed, I had rather
it were off.

Let me unfold unto you the mystery Mr. Speaker, I will not dwell much upon
justifying unto you my seeming variance at this time from what I was formerly,
but by putting you in mind of the difference between Prosecutors and Judges.

How misbecoming that fervor would be in a Judge, which perhaps was
commendable in a Prosecutor; Judges we are now, and must put on another
Personage.

It is honest and noble to be earnest in order to the discovery of Truth, but
when that has been brought as far as it can to light, our judgment thereupon
ought to be calm and cautious.

In prosecution upon probable Grounds, we are accountable only for our industry
or remisness, but in judgment; We are deeply responsible to God Almighty, for
it is Rectitude or Obliquity in Cases of Life, the Judge is God's Steward of the
Parties blood, and must give a strict account for every drop.

But as I told you Mr. Speaker, I will not insist long upon the Ground of
Difference in me now, from what I was formerly.

The truth on it is, Sir, the same Ground whereupon I (with the rest of the
Five, to whom you first committed the Consideration of my Lord Strafford)
brought down our Opinion, That it was fit he should be Accused of Treason, upon
the same Ground I was engaged with earnestness in his Prosecution, and had the
same Ground remained in that force of belief with me, which, till very lately
it did, I should not have been tender in his Condemnation. But truly, Sir, to
deal plainly with you, that Ground of our Accusation, That Spur to our
Prosecution, and that which should be the basis of my judgment, of the Earl of
Strafford, as unto Treason, is to my understanding quite vanished away.

This it was, Mr. Speaker,

His Advising the King to employ the Army of Ireland, to reduce England.

This I was assured would be proved, before I gave my consent to his
Accusation. I was confirmed in the same belief, during the Prosecution, and
fortified in it most of all since Sir Henry Vane's preparatory Examination, by
the assurances which that worthy Member, Mr. Pym gave me, that his Testimony
would be made convincing, by some Notes of what passed at that Iunto concurrent
with it, which I ever understanding to be of some other Councellor, you see
now, prove but a Copy of the same Secretaries Notes, discovered and produced in
the manner you have heard, and those such disjoynted Fragments of the Venomous
part of Discourses, no Results, no Conclusions of Counsels, which are the only
things that Secretaries should Register, there being no use at all of the
other, but to Accuse and to bring men into danger.

But, Sir, this is not that which overthrows the Evidence with me, concerning
the Army of Ireland, nor yet, that all the rest of the Iunto, upon their Oaths,
remember nothing of it.

But this, Sir, which I shall tell you, is that which works with me, under
favor, to an utter overthrow of his Evidence, as unto that of the Army of
Ireland; before, whilst I was a Prosecutor, and under tie of Secrecy, I might
not discover any weakness of the Cause, which now as a Judge I must.

Mr. Secretary was examined thrice upon Oath, at the preparatory Committee.

The first time he was questioned to all the Interrogatories, and to that part
of the Seventh, which concerns the Army of Ireland: He said positively in these
words, I cannot Charge him with that. But for the rest, he desires time to
recollect himself, which was granted him.

Some days after he was Examined a second time, and then deposes these words,
concerning the King's being Absolved from Rules of Government, and so forth,
very clearly. But being pressed to that part, concerning the Irish Army, He said
again, I can say nothing to that.

Here we thought we had done with him, till diverse weeks after, my Lord of
Northumberland, and all others of the Iunto, denying to have heard any thing
concerning those words, Of reducing England by the Irish Army. It was thought
fit to Examine the Secretary once more, and then he deposes these words to have
been said by the Earl of Strafford to His Majesty, You have an Army in Ireland,
which you may Employ here, to reduce (or some word to that sense) this Kingdom.

Mr. Speaker, these are the Circumstances which, I confess with my Conscience,
thrust quite out of doors that Grand Article of our Charge, concerning his
desperate Advice to the King, of Employing the Irish Army here.

Let not this, I beseech you, be driven to an Aspersion upon Mr. Secretary, as
if he should have Sworn otherwise than he knew or believed; he is too worthy to
do that; only let thus much be inferred from it, that he, who twice upon Oath,
with time of recollection, could not remember any thing of such a business,
might well a third time mis-remember somewhat in this business, the difference
of one letter, here for there, or that for this, quite alters the Case, the
latter also being more probable, since it is confessed of all hands, that the
Debate then was concerning a War with Scotland; and you may remember, that at
the Bar he once said, To employ there. And thus, Mr. Speaker, I have faithfully
given you an account what it is that has blunted the edge of the Hatchet or
Bill with me toward my Lord of Strafford.

This was that whereupon I Accused him with a free heart, Prosecuted him with
earnestness, and had it, to my understanding, been proved, should have
condemned him with Innocence. Whereas now I cannot satisfy my Conscience to do
it.

I profess, I can have no notion of any bodies intent to subvert the Laws
Treasonably, or by force; and this design of Force not appearing, all his other
wicked Practices cannot amount so high with me.

I can find a more easy and more natural Spring, from whence to derive all his
other Crimes, than from an intent to bring in Tyranny, and to make his own
Posterity, as well as Us, Slaves; as from Revenge, from Pride, from Avarice,
from Passion, and Insolence of Nature.

But had this of the Irish Army been proved, it would have diffused a
Complexion of Treason over all, it would have been a With, indeed, to bind all
those other scattered and lesser branches, as it were, into a Faggot of Treason.

I do not say but the rest may represent him a man as worthy to die, but
perhaps worthier than many a Traitor. I do not say, but they may justly direct
Us to Enact, That they shall be Treason for the future.

But God keep me from giving Judgment of Death on any man, and of Ruin to his
innocent Posterity, upon a Law made a Posteriori.

Let the Mark be set on the door where the Plague is, and then let him that
will enter die.

I know, Mr. Speaker, there is in Parliament a double Power of Life and Death
by Bill, a Judicial Power, and a Legislative; the measure of the one, is what is
legally just; of the other, what is Prudentially and Politickly fit for the
good and preservation of the whole. But these two, under favor, are not to be
confounded in Judgment: We must not piece up want of legality with matter of
convenience, not the defailance of prudential fitness with a pretense of legal
Justice.

To Condemn my Lord of Strafford Judicially, as for Treason, my Conscience is
not assured that the matter will bear it.

And I do it by the Legislative Power, my reason consultively cannot agree to
that, since I am persuaded, neither the Lords nor the King will pass the Bill,
and consequently that Our passing it will be a Cause of great Divisions and
Combustions in the State.

And therefore my humble advice is, That laying aside this Bill of Attainder,
We may think of another, saving only Life, such as may secure the State from my
Lord of Strafford, without endangering it, as much by Division concerning his
Punishment, as he has endangered it by his Practices.

If this may not be hearkened unto, Let me conclude, in saying that unto you
all, which I have thoroughly inculcated to mine own Conscience upon this
occasion. Let every man lay his hand upon his Heart, and sadly consider what We
are going to do, with a Breath, either Justice or Murder; Justice on the one
side, or Murder heightened and aggravated to its supreamest extent. For as the
Casuists say, That he who lies with his Sister commits Incest, but he that
marries his Sister sins higher, by applying God's Ordinance to his Crime: So
doubtless he that commits Murder with the Sword of Justice, heightens that
Crime to the utmost.

The danger being so great, and the Case so doubtful, that I see the best
Lawyers in diametral opposition concerning it: Let every man wipe his Heart, as
he does his Eyes, when he would Judge of a nice and subtle Object. The Eye if
it be pretincted with any color, is vitiated in its discerning. Let Us take
heed of a blood-shotten Eye in Judgment.

Let every man purge his Heart clear of all passions, (I know this great and
wise Body-politick can have none, but I speak to individuals, from the weakness
which I find in my self) away with personal Animosities, away with all
flatteries to the people, in being the sharper against him, because he is
odious to them; away with all fears, left by the sparing his blood they may be
incensed; away with all such Considerations, as that it is not fit for a
Parliament, that one Accused by it of Treason, should escape with Life.

Let not former Vehemence of any against him, nor fear from thence, that he
cannot be safe while that man lives, be an ingredient in the Sentence of any
one of Us.

Of all these Corruptives of Judgment, Mr. Speaker, I do before God discharge
my self to the uttermost of my power.

And do with a clear Conscience wash my hands of this man's blood, by this
solemn Protestation, That my Vote goes not to the taking of the Earl of
Strafford's Life.

Ordered, That the Debate of the Bill of Attainder of the Earl of Strafford, be
resumed to morrow Morning at Eight of the Clock, and Mr. Speaker is to put the
House in mind of this Order.

Ordered, That Sir Edward Cook's Book, Of the Pleas of the Crown, be delivered
to the Earl of Strafford's Committee, for the special Service of the House.

Tuesday, April 20th, 1641. Post Merid.
The Committee, according to Yesterdays Order, reassumed the Debate of the Bill
of Attainder of the Earl of Strafford.

Mr. Speaker reassumed the Chair.

Ordered, That the House sit this Afternoon at Three of the Clock, and reassume
the Debate of the Bill of Attainder against Thomas Earl of Strafford.

The House Resolved into a Committee, Mr. Peard being called to the Chair, then
Mr. Speaker reassumed the Chair. (Afternoon.)


Ordered, That the further Debate of the Bill of Attainder of the Earl of
Strafford, be reassumed to morrow Morning at Eight of the Clock.

Wednesday, April 21th, 1641. Post Merid.
According to an Order Yesterday made, the House was Resolved into a Committee
to Consider of the Bill of Attainder of Thomas Earl of Strafford. Mr. Peard
being called to the Chair, then Mr. Speaker reassumed the Chair.

Ordered, That the Doors be locked, and the Keys brought up to the Table, and
that no man go out without leave of the Committee.

Mr. Peard again called to the Chair.

Mr. Peard Reports from the Grand Committee the Bill of Attainder of the Earl
of Strafford, with the Additions and Amendments thereunto, the which Addition
and Amendments were twice read, and the Bill upon the Question Ordered to be
Engrossed.

Ordered, That the House meet this Afternoon at Three of the Clock, and
(Afternoon.)
the third time read an Act for the Attainder of Thomas Earl of Strafford of
High Treason; and upon the Question for the Passing, the House was divided. The
Lord Digby, Mr. Lloyd Tellers for the Yeas, Sir Gilbert Gerrard, Sir Thomas
Barington Tellers for the No's; with the No's 59, with the Yeas 204. Upon the
Report thereof the Bill Past.

Mr. Pym is appointed to carry up the Bill to the Lords, and was further
Ordered to express unto the Lords, That it is a Bill that highly concerns the
Commonwealth, especially in the expediting of it.

Mr. Pym acquaints the House, That according to the Commands of this House, he
had delivered the Bill of Attainder, with special Recommendations for the
Expedition in regard of the Importance, and that this House was ready to
justify the Legality of the Bill, if any way their Lordships should desire a
Conference by a Committee of both Houses; the sooner and the more public the
way, shall be the better, and the more agreeable to the desires of this House.

Thursday, April 22th, 1641. Post Merid.
A Message from the Lords by Judge Reeve and Judge Forster.

The Lords have agreed to hear this House in Westminster Hall at Eight of the
Clock on Saturday next, touching the matter of Law in the business of the Earl
of Strafford, if this House shall so please.

Answer returned by the same Messengers, That this House has taken their
Lordships Message into Consideration, and will send an Answer by Messengers of
their own.

Mr. Solicitor St. John is enjoined by this House to maintain the legal part of
the Bill of Attainder of Thomas Earl of Strafford on Saturday Morning next, and
Mr. Maynard and Mr. Glyn are adjoined unto him as Assistants.

Sir John Eveling went up to the Lords with this Message, to desire a free
Conference by a Committee of both Houses, concerning their Lordships Message
sent this day, touching the matter of Law in the Case of the Trial of the Earl
of Strafford.

Mr. Pym, Mr. Pierepoint, Sir John Culpepper, Mr. Fines, Mr. Hampden, and Mr.
Prideaux, are to prepare Heads for this Conference with the Lords, and to
manage the Conference.

Sir John Eveling brings Answer, That their Lordships will give a present
meeting, by a Committee of the whole House, as is desired.

The Heads of the Conference, Reported by Mr. Pierepoint, to be desired with
the Lords, touching the matter of Law in the Case of the Earl of Strafford.

That this House received a Message from their Lordships this day, to this
effect, That their Lordships are ready to hear this House in Westminster Hall
on Saturday Morning next, touching the Point of Law in the Case of Thomas Earl
of Strafford, they conceive, this did arise from the Message of this House upon
the delivery of the Bill of Attainder of the Earl of Strafford. That this House
is ready at a Conference by a Committee of both Houses, to justify the Justice
and Legality of the Bill of Attainder.

Mr. Pym, Mr. Stroud, Sir Thomas Barrington, Mr. Hollis, and Sir Io. Hotham,
are to prepare Heads for this Conference, and to manage it.

Mr. Pierepoint Reports the Conference had with the Lords, touching the matter
of Law, in the Case of the Earl of Strafford. My Lord Privy Seal said, That the
intention of their House was to have proceeded in the former way, to have heard
the Council upon the legal part; but since it is your desire to have a
Committee of both Houses, to meet at the time and place before appointed; the
day being now far spent, and finding something of moment to be considered of,
their Lordships will send an Answer by Messengers of their own in time
convenient, and therefore shall not meet on Saturday in Westminster Hall, but
will sit on Saturday in their own House.

Friday, April 23th, 1641. Post Merid.
Exceptions were taken by diverse Members of the House to the Lord Digby, for
many Passages in a Speech of his, delivered at the passing of the Bill of
Attainder of the Earl of Strafford. The Lord Digby rose up, and in his place
explained himself, touching those several Passages, and there was no more done
thereupon at this time.

Saturday, April 24th, 1641. Post Merid.
Two Petitions from diverse of the Citizens of London were this day read. (1.)
To the House of Commons. (2.) To the Honorable Assembly of the Lords and
Commons, as follows:

To the most Honorable Assembly of the Lords and Commons in this present
Parliament. The Petition of diverse Citizens of London to both Houses of
Parliament, wherein is an account of their Grievances, together with their
desires for Justice to be executed upon the E. of Strafford, and other
Delinquents.

The humble Petition of diverse Citizens of London.
SHOWS,

THat notwithstanding His Majesty's Gracious Answer, to the humble Petition of
his Loyal Subjects, in Summoning this Parliament, with the great Care and
Endeavored pains taken by both Houses, for the removing the heavy Grievances
in Church and Commonwealth; whereof the Petitioners have already received some
Fruit, for which they desire to return their most humble and utmost Thanks; yet
nevertheless they are enforced, with all Humility, to represent to this most
Honorable Assembly, some of those Obstructions which do still hinder that
freedom and fullness of Trade in this City they have formerly had, and, which
considering the numerous multitude thereupon depending, they conceive it not
able comfortably to subsist.

As the unsettled Condition of the Kingdom, even since the Troubles in Scotland,
has caused both Strangers, and also some of our own, who did furnish great
Sums of Money to use, to call it in, and remit much of it by Exchange into
Foreign Parts, and stand now in expectation of what the Issue of things may be.

The stopping Money in the Mint, which till then was accounted the safest
place, and surest Staple in these Parts of the World, still does hinder the
Importation of Bullion; the Scots now disabled to pay such Debts as they owe to
the Petitioners, and others in the City; and by reason of the Oppressions
exercised in Ireland, their Debts also are detained there.

The English-Trade, by reason of our general Distractions and Fears, is so much
decayed, that Country Tradesmen cannot pay their Debts in London as formerly.

The great Sums of Money unduly taken by His Majesty's Officers and Farmers,
for Impositions upon Merchandise Exported and Imported, and the want of Relief
in Courts of Justice against them.

The drawing out from the City great Sums of Money (which is the Life and
Spirit of Trade) for His Majesty's Service in the North, and being there
employed, is not yet returned.

Besides all which, from what strong and secret Opposition the Petitioners know
not; they have not received what so much time and pains might give and cause to
hope, but still Incendiaries of the Kingdoms, and other Notorious Offenders,
remain unpunished: The Affairs of the Church, notwithstanding many Petitions
concerning it, and long Debate about it, remains unsettled; the Papists still
Armed, the Laws against them not Executed, some of the most Active of them
still at Court, Priests and Jesuits not yet Banished, the Irish Popish-Army not
yet Disbanded, Courts of Justice not yet Reformed, and the Earl of Strafford,
who as now appears, has Counseled the Plundering of this City, and putting it
to Fine and Ransom; and said, It would never be well, till some of the Aldermen
were hanged up, because they would not yield to Illegal Levies of Moneys, had
so drawn out and spent this time in his business, to the very great Charge of
the whole Kingdom, and his endeavor to obtain yet more, all which makes us
fear there may be Practices now in hand to hinder the Birth of your great
Endeavors, and that we lie under some more dangerous Plot than we can discover.

All which Premises, with their Fears and Distractions, growing therefrom, and
from things of the like nature; the Petitioners humbly offer to the most grave
Consideration of this most Honorable Assembly, as being the true Causes of
decay of Trade, discouragement of Tradesmen, and of the great scarcity of
Moneys, with the Consequences they labor under.

And do humbly pray, That their said Grievances may be Redressed, the Causes of
their Fears removed, Justice executed upon the said Earl, and other
Incendiaries and Offenders, the rather, in regard till then the Petitioners
humbly conceive neither Religion, nor their Lives, Liberties, or Estates can be
secured.

And as in Duty bound, they shall ever pray, etc.

Subscribed to the Petition 20000, all Men of good Rank and Quality.

After the Petition was Read and Considered.

The Lord Russel goes up to the Lords with this Message, to desire a
Conference, by a Committee of both Houses, concerning a Petition from the City
of London, directed to both Houses of Parliament.

Mr. Glyn is Ordered to manage this Conference, and Mr. Hill to assist him, and
to deliver the Petition from the Citizens of London at this Conference, and
thence to take occasion of representing the Desires of this House; likewise for
the Expediting of the Bill of Attainder of the Earl of Strafford.

Monday, April 26th, 1641. Post Merid.
A Message from the Lords by Judge Reeves and Judge Heath, That they are ready
for a Conference, by a Committee of both Houses, to the Petition presented from
London, for which this House sent a Message on Saturday last.

Answer returned by the same Messengers, That this House has taken their
Lordships Message into Consideration, and will give a meeting presently, as is
desired.

According to an Order on Saturday last, Mr. Glyn and Mr. Hill went up to
manage this Conference, and Sir Walter Earl is Ordered to manage Mr. Pym's
part, in respect of his absence at this time.

Tuesday, April 27th, 1641. Post Merid.
A Message from the Lords by Judge Foster and Judge Heath, That their Lordships
will be ready to meet at a Conference, by a Committee of both Houses, at Nine
of the Clock upon Thursday Morning in Westminster Hall, and there to hear this
House, according to their own offer, when they brought up the Bill of Attainder
of the Earl of Strafford.

Answer returned by the same Messengers, That this House has taken their
Lordships Message into Consideration, and is Resolved to give a meeting at the
time and place, as is appointed.

Wednesday, April 28th, 1641. Post Merid.
Ordered, That Mr. Solicitor St. John have Power to send for such Records, as
he shall think needful for that Service committed unto him, for maintaining the
Point of Law, in the Case of the Earl of Strafford.

The same Committee as was formerly appointed to keep the Doors at
Westminster Hall, is appointed to keep the Doors again to morrow.

Mr. Solicitor, and Mr. Maynard, and Mr. Glyn, appointed as Assistants unto
him, are to sit in the most convenient places in the middle of the lower Rank.

Mr. Edward Hide went up to the Lords with this Message, to acquaint their
Lordships, That the House has received such Information, as has moved some
Fears in them, that the Earl of Strafford may have a design to Escape, that he
has Ships at Sea at Command, and that the Guards about him are weak; therefore
to desire their Lordships he may be a close Prisoner, and the Guards
strengthened.

Mr. Hide brings this Answer, That their Lordships had heretofore given
Directions to the Lieutenant of the Tower, that he should be close Prisoner,
and take Care for a stronger Guard, and will take it into Examination, and give
Directions as is desired.

Friday, April 30th, 1641. Post Merid.
Ordered, That Mr. Solicitor be required from this House, to bring in a
particular Copy of his Argument Yesterday in Westminster Hall, and likewise
that Mr. Pym bring him a Copy of the Speeches spoken by him in
Westminster Hall, both at the beginning and latter end of the Trial of the Earl
of Strafford.

A Copy of the Paper posted up at the Corner of the Wall of Sir William
Bronkard's House, in the Old Palace-Yard in Westminster, declaring the
following Names to be Enemies of Justice.
The Lord Digby, Lord Compton, Lord Buckhurst, Sir Robert Hatton, Sir Thomas
Fanshaw, Sir Edward Alford. Nicholas Slanning, Sir Thomas Danby, Sir George
Wentworth, Sir Peter Wentworth, Sir Fred. Conwallis, Sir William Carnaby. Sir
Richard Winn, Sir Gervas Cliffton, Sir William Withrington, Sir William
Pennyman, Sir Patrick Carwin, Sir Richard Lee, Sir Henry Slingsby, Sir William
Portman, Mr. Gervas Hollis, Mr. Sydney Godolphin, Mr. Cook, Mr. Coventry, Mr.
Kirton, Mr. Pollard, Mr. Price, Mr. Trevanyon, Mr. Ieane, Mr. Edgcombe, Mr.
Ben. Weston, Mr. Seldom, Mr. Alford, Mr. Loyd, Mr. Herbert, Captain Digby,
Sergeant Hyde, Mr. Tailor, Mr. Richard Weston, Mr. Griffith, Mr. Scawen, Mr.
Bridgman, Mr. Fettyplace, Doctor Turner, Captain Charles Price, Doctor Parry a
Civilian, Mr. Richard Arundel, Mr. Newport, Mr. Nowell, Mr. Chichley, Mr.
Mallory, Mr. Porter, Mr. White, Secretary to E. D. Mr. Warwick.
It is a Presumption that these Names were thus Posted up by some of A Memorial
of the Member that first took the Names.
those who came in multitudes to the Parliament House, but he that took the
List of their Names (as Mr. Elsing told the Author) was one Mr. W -- who Served
for some Borough in the County of Wilts, and who did not afterward go to the
King at Oxford in time of War, though his Wife did; but he staid in the
Parliament to do what friendly Office he could for the King and his Party: It
is probable he gave a Copy of those Names to some Friends, not intending to
have the same made Public in that manner. The Name of one Member of the House
that was in the List, who is omitted in this, viz. Sir John Strangwayes, who
was not then in Town, but Sir John, after his Return out of Dorsetshire,
complained that his Name was Posted up amongst others, and moved, that the
business might be Examined how the List came abroad, and was made Public, as
aforesaid, he being then in the Country.

Wednesday, May 5th, 1641.
Mr. Solicitor is appointed to bring in his Argument he made in
Westminster Hall, at the Trial of the Earl of Strafford on Monday last.

A Message from the Lords by Judge Reeves and Judge Forster, That they give
this House Thanks for sitting so long, that they are still in Debate of the
Bill against the Earl of Strafford, so that this Night they cannot be ready for
a Conference.

Saturday, May 8th, 1641.
A Message from the Lords by Judge Forster and Judge Heath, That the Bill of
Attainder of Thomas Earl of Strafford is passed their House, without any
Alteration or Amendments.

Ordered, That a Message be sent to the Lords, to desire a free Conference, by
a Committee of both Houses, concerning the Bill of Attainder of Thomas Earl of
Strafford.

Mr. Hotham is to go up with this Message, Mr. Pym is to manage this
Conference, the substance whereof is:

That in regard the Peace of the Kingdom does much consist in the Execution of
the Bill of Attainder of Thomas Earl of Strafford, to desire their Lordships to
move His Majesty as speedily as may be to give His Assent.

Mr. Hotham brings Answer, That the Lords will give a present meeting at a free
Conference, by a Committee of both Houses, as is desired.

Mr. Pym Reports, That he had performed the Command of this House.

Ordered, That this House shall join with the Lords, to attend His Majesty, to
appoint a time when He would be pleased to set, concerning His Assent to the
Bill of Attainder of Thomas Earl of Strafford.

Mr. Pym brings word, That the Lords have sent to His Majesty, and this House
shall hear from them very speedily.

A Message from the Lords by Judge Forster and Judge Heath, That the Lords
appointed by their House, attended His Majesty, who appointed that both Houses
should attend Him at Four of the Clock in the Banqueting House, concerning the
Bill of Attainder: That they have Passed the Bill concerning the not Dissolving
the Parliament.

Monday, May 10th, 1641.
The Gentleman Usher of the Black-Rod came to signify to the House, That His
Majesty's Assent to the Bill of Attainder is now to be given by Commission, and
that the Lords did expect Mr. Speaker and the House of Commons to come up.

Articles of the Commons Assembled in Parliament against Thomas Earl of
Strafford, in Maintenance of their Accusation, whereby he stands Charged with
High Treason.
WHereas the said Commons have already Exhibited Articles against the said
Earl, in haec verba, Now the said Commons do further Impeach the said Earl as
follows, (That is to say,)

I.
That the said Earl of Strafford the 21th day of March, in the Eighth Year of
His Majesty's Reign, was President of the King's Council in the Northern parts
of England.

That the said Earl being President of the said Council on the 21th of March, a
Commission under the Great Seal of England, with certain Schedules of
Instructions thereunto annexed, was directed to the said Earl, or others the
Commissioners therein named, whereby, among other things, Power and Authority
is limited to the said Earl, and others the Commissioners therein named, to
hear and determine all Offenses, and Misdemeanors, Suits, Debates,
Controversies and Demands, Causes, Things and Matters, whatsoever therein
contained, and within certain Precincts in the said Northern Parts therein
specified, and in such manner as by the said Schedule is limited and appointed.

That, amongst other things, in the said Instructions, it is directed, That the
said President, and others therein appointed, shall hear and determine
according to the course of Proceedings in the Court of Star Chamber, diverse
Offenses, Deceits and Falsities therein mentioned, whether the same be provided
for by Acts of Parliament or not, so that the Fines imposed be not less than by
the Act or Acts of Parliament provided against those Offenses is appointed.

That also amongst other things in the said Instructions, it is directed, That
the said President, and others therein appointed, have Power to examine, hear,
and determine, according to the course of Proceedings in the Court of Chancery,
all manner of Complaints, for any matter, within the said Precincts, as well
concerning Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, either Freehold, Customary, or
Copyhold, as Leases, and other things therein mentioned, and to stay
Proceedings in the Court of Common Law by Injunction, or otherwise, by all ways
and means, as is used in the Court of Chancery.

And although the former Presidents of the said Council had never put in
practice such Instructions, nor had they any such Instructions, yet the said
Earl in the month of May in the said Eighth Year, and diverse years following,
did put in practice, exercise and use, and caused to be used and put in
practice the said Commission and Instructions, and did direct and exercise an
exorbitant and unlawful Power and Jurisdiction over the Persons and Estates of
His Majesty's Subjects, in those parts, and did disinherit diverse of His
Majesty's Subjects in those parts of their Inheritances, Sequestered their
Possessions, and did Fine, Ransom, Punish, and Imprison them; and caused them
to be Fined, Ransomed, Punished and Imprisoned, to their Ruin and Destruction;
and namely, Sir Coniers Darcy, Sir John Bourcher, and diverse others, against
the Laws, and in subversion of the same. And the said Commission and
Instructions were procured and issued by advice of the said Earl.

And he the said Earl, to the intent that such Illegal and Unjust Power might
be exercised with the greater License and Will, did advise, counsel, and
procure further Directions; in and by the said Instructions to be given, that
no Prohibition be granted at all, but in cases where the said Council shall
exceed the limits of the said Instructions: And that if any Writ of Habeas
Corpus be granted, the party be not discharged till the party perform the
Decree and Order of the said Council.

And the said Earl in the 13th Year of His Majesty's Reign, did procure a new
Commission to himself, and others therein appointed, with the said
Instructions, and other unlawful Additions.

That the said Commission and Instructions were procured by the solicitation
and advice of the said Earl of Strafford.

II.
That shortly after the obtaining of the said Commission, dated the 21th of
March, in the Eighth Year of His Majesty's Reign, (to wit) the last day of
August then next following, he the said Earl (to bring His Majesty's
Liege-people into a dislike of His Majesty, and of His Government, and to
terrify the Justices, of the Peace from executing of the Laws: He the said
Earl, being then President, as aforesaid, and a Justice of Peace) did
publicly at the Assizes held for the County of York, in the City of York, in
and upon the said last day of August, declare and publish before the people,
there attending for the administration of Justice according to Law, and (in the
presence of the Justices sitting) that some of the Justices were all for Law,
and nothing would please them but Law; but they should find that the King's
little Finger should be heavier than the Loins of the Law.

III.
That the Realm of Ireland having been time out of mind annexed to the Imperial
Crown of this His Majesty's Realm of England, and Governed by the same Laws:
The said Earl being Lord Deputy of that Realm, to bring His Majesty's
Liege-Subjects of that Kingdom likewise into dislike of His Majesty's
Government, and intending the subversion of the Fundamental Laws, and settled
Government of that Realm, and the destruction of His Majesty's Liege-people
there, did upon the 30th day of September, in the Ninth Year of His now
Majesty's Reign, in the City of Dublin (the chief City of that Realm, where His
Majesty's Privy Council, and Courts of Justice do ordinarily reside, and
whither the Nobility and Gentry of that Realm do usually resort for Justice,)
in a public Speech before diverse of the Nobility and Gentry of that Kingdom,
and before the Mayor, Aldermen, and Recorder, and many Citizens of Dublin, and
other His Majesty's Liege-people, declare and publish, That Ireland was a
Conquered Nation, and that the King might do with them what he pleased; and
speaking of the Charters of former Kings of England made to that City, he
further then said, That their Charters were nothing worth, and did bind the
King no further than He pleased.

IV.
That Richard Earl of Cork, having sued out Process-in course of Law for
recovery of his Possessions, from which he was put, by color of an Order made
by the said Earl of Strafford, and the Council Table of the said Realm of
Ireland, upon a Paper-Petition, without Legal proceeding, did the 20th day of
February, in the Eleventh Year of His now Majesty's Reign, threaten the said
Earl (being then a Peer of the said Realm) to imprison him, unless he would
surcease his Suit, and said, That he would have neither Law nor Lawyers dispute
or question his Orders. And the 20th day of March, in the said Eleventh Year,
the said Earl of Strafford, speaking of an Order of the said Council Table of
that Realm, made in the time of King James, which concerned a Lease, which the
said Earl of Cork claimed in certain Rectories or Tithes which the said Earl of
Cork alleged to be of no force, said, That he would make the said Earl, and
all Ireland know, that so long as he had the Government there, any Act of
State, there made, or to be made, should be as binding to the Subjects of that
Kingdom as an Act of Parliament; And did question the said Earl of Cork in the
Castle-Chamber there, upon pretense of breach of the said Order of
Council Table, and did sundry other times, and upon sundry other occasions, by
his words and speeches arrogate to himself a Power above the Fundamental Laws,
and Established Government of that Kingdom, and scorned the said Laws and
Established Government.

V.
That according to such his Declarations and Speeches, the said Earl of
Strafford did use and exercise a Power above and against, and to the subversion
of the said Fundamental Laws, and Established Government of the said Realm of
Ireland, extending such his Power, to the Goods, Freeholds, Inheritances,
Liberties and Lives of His Majesty's Subjects of the said Realm; and namely,
the said Earl of Strafford the 12th day of December, Anno Domini, 1635. in the
time of full Peace, did, in the said Realm of Ireland, give and procure to be
given against the Lord Mountnorris (then and yet a Peer of the said Realm of
Ireland, and then Uice-Treasurer and Receiver-General of the Realm of Ireland,
and Treasurer at War, and one of the Principal Secretaries of State, and keeper
of the Privy-Signet of the said Kingdom,) a Sentence of Death, by a Council of
War called together by the said Earl of Strafford, without any Warrant or
Authority of Law or Offense, deserving any such punishment. And he the said
Earl did also at Dublin, within the said Realm of Ireland, in the Month of
March, in the Fourteenth Year of His Majesty's Reign, without any Legal or due
Proceedings or Trial, give and cause to be given, a Sentence of Death against
one other of His Majesty's Subjects, whose name is yet unknown, and caused him
to be put to Death, in execution of the same Sentence.

VI.
That the said Earl of Strafford, without any Legal Proceedings, and upon a
Paper-Petition of Richard Rolston, did cause the said Lord Mountnorris to be
disseised, and put out of Possession of his Freehold and Inheritance of his
Manor of Tymore in the County of Armagh, in the Kingdom of Ireland, the said
Lord Mountnorris having been 18 years before in quiet possession thereof.

VII.
That the said Earl of Strafford, in the Term of holy Trinity, in the
Thirteenth Year of His now Majesty's Reign, did cause a Case, commonly called
The Case of Tenures upon defective Titles, to be made and drawn up without any
Jury or Trial, or other Legal Process, and without the consent of Parties, and
did then procure the Judges of the said Realm of Ireland, to deliver their
Opinions and Resolutions to that case, and by color of such Opinion, did
without any Legal proceeding, cause Thomas Lord Dillon, a Peer of the said
Realm of Ireland, to be put out of the possession of diverse Lands and
Tenements, being his Freehold in the Country of Mayo and Roscomen, in the said
Kingdom, and diverse other of His Majesty's Subjects to be put out of
Possession, and disseised of their Freehold by color of the same Resolution,
without Legal proceedings, whereby many hundreds of His Majesty's Subjects were
undone, and their Families utterly ruinated.

VIII.
That the said Earl of Strafford, upon a Petition of Sir John Gifford Knight,
the first day of February, in the said Thirteenth Year of His Majesty's Reign,
without any Legal Process, made a Decree or Order against Adam Uiscount Loftus
of Ely, a Peer of the said Realm of Ireland, and Lord Chancellor of Ireland,
and did cause the said Uiscount to be imprisoned, and kept close Prisoner, on
pretense of Disobedience to the said Decree or Order.

And the said Earl, without any Authority, and contrary to his Commission,
required and commanded the said Lord Uiscount to yield up unto him the Great
Seal of the Realm of Ireland, which was then in his Custody, by His Majesty's
Command, and imprisoned the said Chancellor for not obeying such his Command.

And without any Legal Proceeding, did in the same Thirteenth Year imprison
George Earl of Kildare, a Peer of Ireland, against Law, thereby to enforce him
to submit his Title to the Manor and Lordship of Castleleigh in the Queens
Country, (being of great yearly value) to the said Earl of Strafford's Will and
Pleasure, and kept him a year Prisoner for the said cause; two months whereof
he kept him close Prisoner, and refused to enlarge him, notwithstanding His
Majesty's Letters for his Enlargement to the said Earl of Strafford directed.

And upon a Petition exhibited in October, Anno Domini 1635. by Thomas Hibbots,
against Dame Mary Hibbots Widow, to him the said Earl of Strafford; the said
Earl of Strafford recommended the said Petition to the Council Table of
Ireland, where the most part of the Council gave their Uote and Opinion for the
said Lady; but the said Earl finding fault herewith, caused an Order to be
entered against the said Lady, and threatened her, that if she refused to submit
thereunto, he would imprison her, and fine her Five hundred pounds; that if she
continued obstinate, he would continue her Imprisonment, and double her Fine
every month; by means whereof she was enforced to relinquish her Estate in the
Lands questioned in the said Petition, which shortly after were conveyed to Sir
Robert Meredith, to the use of the said Earl of Strafford.

And the said Earl in like manner did imprison diverse others of His Majesty's
Subjects, upon pretense of Disobedience to his Orders, Decrees, and other
illegal Command by him made for pretended Debts, Titles of Lands, and other
Causes in an Arbitrary and extrajudicial course, upon Paper-Petitions, to him
preferred, and no Cause legally depending.

IX.
That the said Earl of Strafford the Sixteenth day of February, in the Twelfth
Year of His Majesty's Reign, assuming to himself a Power above and against Law,
took upon him by a general Warrant under his hand, to give Power to the Lord
Bishop of Down and Connor his Chancellor, or Chancellors, and their several
Officers thereto to be appointed, to attach and arrest the Bodies of all such
of the meaner and poorer sort, who after Citation should either refuse to
appear before them, or appearing, should omit or deny to perform, or undergo
all lawful Decrees, Sentences, and Orders, issued, imposed, or given out
against them, and them to commit and keep in the next Gaol, until they should
either perform such Sentences, or put in sufficient Bail to show some reason
before the Council Table, of such their contempt and neglect; and the said
Earl, the day and year last mentioned, signed and issued a Warrant to that
effect, and made the like Warrants to several other Bishops and their
Chancellors in the said Realm of Ireland to the same effect.

X.
That the said Earl of Strafford being Lord Lieutenant, or Deputy of Ireland,
procured the Customs of the Merchandise Exported out, and Imported into that
Realm, to be farmed to his own Use.

And in the Ninth Year of His now Majesty's Reign, he having then Interest in
the said Customs (to advance his own Gain and Lucre) did cause and procure the
native Commodities of Ireland, to be rated in the Book of Rates for the Customs
(according to which the Customs were usually gathered) at far greater Ualues
and Prices than in truth they were worth (that is to say) every Hyde at Twenty
shillings, which in truth was worth but Five shillings, every Stone of Wool at
Thirteen shillings four pence, though the same were really worth but Five
shillings, at the utmost Niue shillings; by which means, the Custom, which
before was but a twentieth part of the true value of the Commodity, was
enhanced sometimes a Fifth part, and sometimes to a fourth, and sometimes to a
third part of the true value, to the great Oppression of the Subjects, and
decay of Merchandise.

XI.
That the said Earl, in the Ninth Year of His Majesty's Reign, did by his own
Will and Pleasure, and for his own Lucre, restrain the Exportation of the
Commodities of that Kingdom without his License, as namely, Pipe-staves, and
other Commodities, and then raised great Sums of Money for Licenses of
Exportation of those Commodities, and dispensation of the said Restraints
imposed on them, by which means the Pipe-staves were raised from Four pound ten
shillings, or Five pound per thousand, to ten pounds, and sometimes Eleven
pound per thousand; and other Commodities were enhanced in the like proportion,
and by the same means, by him the said Earl.

XII.
That the said Earl, being Lord Deputy of Ireland, on the Ninth day of January,
in the Thirteenth Year of His now Majesty's Reign, did then under color to
regulate the Importation of Tobacco into the said Realm of Ireland, issue a
Proclamation in His Majesty's Name, prohibiting the Importation of Tobacco,
without License of Him and the Council there, from and after the First day of
May, Anno Dom. 1638. after which Restraint, the said Earl, notwithstanding the
said Restraint, caused diverse great quantities of Tobacco to be Imported to his
own use, and fraughted diverse Ships with Tobacco, which he Imported to his own
use: and that if any Ship brought Tobacco into any Port there, the said Earl,
and his Agents, used to buy the same to his own use, at their own price; and if
that the Owners refused to let him have the same at under values, then they
were not permitted to vent the same there; by which undue means, the said Earl
having gotten the whole Trade of Tobacco into his own hands, he sold it at
great and excessive prizes, such as he list to Impose for his own profit.

And the more to assure the said Monopoly of Tobacco, he the said Earl on the
Three and twentieth day of February, in the Thirteenth Year aforesaid, did
issue another Proclamation, commanding that none should put to sale any Tobacco
by Wholesale, from and after the last day of May, then next following, but
what should be made up into Rolls, and the same sealed with two Seals by
himself appointed, one at each end of the Roll. And such as was not sealed, to
be seized, appointing six pence the pound for a Reward to such persons as
should seize the same: and the persons in whose custody the unsealed Tobacco
should be found, to be committed to Gaol; which last Proclamation was colored
by a pretense for the restraining of the sale of unwholesome Tobacco, but it
was truly to advance the said Monopoly.

Which Proclamation the said Earl did rigorously put in execution, by seizing
the Goods, Fining, Imprisoning, Whipping, and putting the Offenders against the
same Proclamation on the Pillory; as namely, Banaby Hubbard, Edward Cavena,
John Tumen, and diverse others; and made the Officers of State, and Justices of
Peace, and other Officers to serve him in the compassing and executing these
unjust and undue Courses, by which Cruelties, and unjust Monopolies, the said
Earl raised 100000 l. per annum gain to himself. And yet the said Earl though
he enhanced the Customs, where it concerned the Merchants in general, yet drew
down the Impost, formerly taken on Tobacco, from Six pence the pound to Three
pence the pound, it being for his own profit so to do.

And the said Earl, by the same, and other rigorous and undue means, raised
several other Monopolies and unlawful Exactions for his own gain, viz. on
Starch, Iron-pots, Glasses, Tobacco-pipes, and several other Commodities.

XIII.
That Flax being one of the principal and Native Commodities of that Kingdom of
Ireland, the said Earl having gotten great quantities thereof into his hands,
and growing on his own Lands, did issue out several Proclamations, viz. the one
dated the One and thirtieth day of May, and the Twelfth of His Majesty's Reign;
and the other dated the One and thirtieth day of January in the same Year,
thereby prescribing and enjoining the working of Flar into Yarn and Thread, and
the Ordering of the same in such ways wherein the Natives of that Kingdom were
unpractized and unskilful: which Proclamations so issued, were by his Commands
and Warrants to His Majesty's Justices of Peace, and other Officers, and by
other rigorous means put in Execution, and the Flax wrought or ordered in other
manner than as the said Proclamation prescribed, was seized and employed to the
use of him and his Agents, and thereby the said Earl endeavored to gain, and
did gain in effect the sole Sale of that Native Commodity.

XIV.
That the said Earl, by Proclamation dated the Sixteenth of October, in the
Fourteenth Year of His Majesty's Reign, did impose upon the Owners, Masters,
Pursers, and Boat-Swaines of every Ship, a new and unlawful Oath, viz. That
they (or two or more of them) immediately after the arrival of any Ship within
any Port or Creek in the said Kingdom of Ireland, should give in a true
In-voice of the outward bulk of Wares and Merchandises first laden aboard them,
together with the several marks and number of Goods, and their qualities and
condition of the said Goods, as far as to them should be known, the Names of
the several Merchants Proprietors of the said Goods, and the place from whence
they were Fraughted, and whither they were Bound to discharge; which
Proclamation was accordingly put in Execution, and sundry persons enforced to
take the said unlawful Oath.

XV.
That the said Earl of Strafford traitorously and wickedly devised and
contrived, by force of Arms, and in a Warlike manner, to subdue the Subjects
of the said Realm of Ireland, and to bring them under his Tyrannical Power and
Will; and in pursuance of his wicked and traiterous Purposes aforesaid, the
said Earl of Strafford, in the Eighth Year of His Majesty's Reign, did, by his
own Authority, without any Warrant or color of Law, Tax and Impose great Sums
of Money upon the Towns of Baltemore, Bauden-Bridge, Talowe, and diverse other
Towns and Places in the said Realm of Ireland; and did cause the same to be
levied upon the Inhabitants of those Towns by Troops of Soldiers, with Force
and Arms, in a Warlike manner. And on the Ninth day of March, in the Twelfth
Year of His now Majesty's Reign, traitorously did give Authority unto Robert
Savile, a Sergeant at Arms, and to the Captains of the Companies of Soldiers,
in several parts of that Realm, to send such numbers of Soldiers to lie on the
Lands and Houses of such as would not conform to his Orders, until they should
render Obedience to his said Orders and Warrants, and after such submission
(and not before) the said Soldiers to return to their Garrisons. And did also
issue the like Warrants unto diverse others, which Warrants were in Warlike
manner, with Force and Arms, put in Execution accordingly; and by such Warlike
means did force diverse of His Majesty's Subjects of that Realm, to submit
themselves to his unlawful Commands.

And in the said Twelfth Year of His Majesty's Reign, the said Earl of
Strafford did traitorously cause certain Troops of Horse and Foot, armed in
Warlike manner, and in Warlike array, with Force and Arms, to expel Richard
Butler from the Possession of the Manor of Castle-Cumber, in the Territory of
Idough, in the said Realm of Ireland, and did likewise, and in the Warlike
manner, expel diverse of His Majesty's Subjects from their Houses, Families, and
Possessions; as namely, Edward O Brenman, Owen Oberman, John Brenman, Patrick
Oberman, Sir Cyprian Horsefield, and diverse others, to the number of about an
hundred Families, and took and imprisoned them and their wives, and carried
them Prisoners to Dublin, and there detained, until they did yield up,
surrender, or release their respective Estates and Rights.

And the said Earl, in like Warlike manner, has during his Government of the
said Kingdom of Ireland, subdued diverse others of His Majesty's Subjects there
to his will, and thereby, and by the means aforesaid, has levied War within
the said Realm against His Majesty and His Liege-people of that Kingdom.

XVI.
That the Earl of Strafford, the Two and twentieth of February, in the Seventh
Year of His Majesty's Reign, intending to Oppress the said Subjects of Ireland,
did make a Proposition, and obtained from His Majesty an Allowance thereof,
That no Complaint of Injustice or Oppression done in Ireland, should be
received in England against any, unless it appeared, that the party made first
his address to him the said Earl; and the said Earl having by such Usurped
tyrannical and exorbitant Power, expressed in the former Articles, Destroyed
and Oppressed the Peers, and other Subjects of that Kingdom of Ireland, in
their Lives, Consciences, Land, Liberties and Estates; the said Earl to the
intent the better to maintain and strengthen his said Power, and to bring the
people into a disaffection of His Majesty, as aforesaid, did use His Majesty's
Name in the execution of the said Power.

And to prevent the Subjects of that Realm of all means of Complaints to His
Majesty, and of redress against him and his Agents, did issue a Proclamation,
bearing date the Seventeenth day of September, in the Eleventh Year of His
Majesty's Reign, thereby commanding all the Nobility, Undertakers, and others
who held Estates and Offices in the said Kingdom, (except such as were employed
in His Majesty's Service, or attending in England by His special Command) to
make their personal residence in the said Kingdom of Ireland, and not to depart
thence without License of himself.

And the said Earl has since issued other Proclamations to the same purpose,
by means whereof the Subjects of the said Realm are restrained from seeking
relief against the Oppressions of the said Earl, without his License; which
Proclamation the said Earl has by several rigorous ways, as by Fine,
Imprisonment, and otherwise, put in execution on His Majesty's Subjects; as
namely, one -- Parry, and others, who came over only to complain of the
Exorbitances and Oppressions of the said Earl.

XVII.
That the said Earl having by such means, as aforesaid, subverted the
Government and Laws of the Kingdom of Ireland, did, in March, in the Sixteenth
Year of His Majesty's Reign, in scandal of His Majesty's Government, of all His
Kingdoms; and in further Execution of his wicked Purposes aforesaid, speaking
of the Army in Ireland, declare, That His Majesty was so well pleased with the
Army of Ireland, and the consequences thereof, that His Majesty would certainly
make the same a Pattern for all His Three Kingdoms.

XVIII.
That the said Earl of Strafford, for the better effecting of his traitorous
Designs, and wicked Purposes, did endeavor to draw dependency upon himself of
the Papists in both Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and to that end, during
the time of his Government in Ireland, he restored diverse Fryeries and
Masse-Houses, (which had been formerly suppressed by the precedent Deputies of
that Kingdom; two of which Houses are in the City of Dublin, and had been
assigned to the use of the University there) to the pretended Owners thereof,
who have since employed the same to the Exercise of the Popish Religion.

And in the month of May and June last, the said Earl did raise an Army in the
said Realm, consisting of 8000 Foot, all of which, except one, or thereabouts,
were Papists, and the said One thousand were drawn out of the old Army there,
consisting of Two thousand Foot, and in their places there were a thousand
Papists, or thereabouts, put into the said old Army by the said Earl.

And the more to engage and tie the said new Army of Papists to himself, and to
encourage them, and to discourage and weary out the said old Army, the said
Earl did so provide: That the said new Army of Papists were duly paid, and had
all Necessaries provided for them, and permitted the Exercise of their
Religion, but the said old Army were for the space of one whole Year and
upwards unpaid.

And the said Earl being appointed a Commissioner within eleven several
Counties of the Northern parts of England, for Compounding with Recusants for
their Forfeitures due to His Majesty; which Commission bears date the Eighth
day of July, in the Fifth Year of His Majesty's Reign that now is; and being
also Receiver of the Composition-money thereby arising, and of other Debts,
Duties, and Penalties, by reason of Recusancy within the said Counties, for His
Majesty's Use, by Letters Patents dated the Ninth day of the same July; He to
engage the said Recusants to him, did Compound with them at low and under
Rates, and provided, that they should be discharged of all Proceedings against
them in all His Majesty's Courts, both Temporal and Ecclesiastical, in manifest
breach of, and contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, in that behalf
Established.

XIX.
That the said Earl having Taxed and Levied the said Impositions, and raised
the said Monopolies, and committed the said other Oppressions in His Majesty's
Name; and as by His Majesty's Royal Command, he the said Earl in May, the
Fifteenth Year of His Majesty's Reign, did of his own authority contrive and
frame a new and unusual Oath, by the purport whereof, among many other things,
the party taking the said Oath, was to swear that he should not protest against
any His Majesty's Royal Commands, but submit himself in all due obedience
thereunto. Which Oath he so contrived to enforce the same on the Subjects of
the Scottish Nation, inhabiting in Ireland, and out of a hatred to the said
Nation, and to put them to a discontent with His Majesty, and His Government
there; and compelled diverse of His Majesty's said Subjects there to take the
said Oath against their wills; and of such as refused to take the said Oath,
some he grievously fined and imprisoned, and others he destroyed and exiled;
and namely, the Tenth of October, Anno Dom. 1639. he fined Henry Steward and
his wife, who refused to take the said Oath, 5000 l. a piece, and their two
Daughters and James Gray 3000 l. a piece, and imprisoned them for not paying
the said Fines. The said Henry Steward his Wife and Daughters, and James Gray,
being the King's Liege-people of the Scottish Nation; and diverse others he used
in like manner; and the said Earl upon that occasion did declare, That the said
Oath did not only oblige them in point of Allegiance to His Majesty, and
acknowledgment of His Supremacy only, but to the Ceremonies and Government of
the Church Established, and to be established by His Majesty's Royal Authority;
and said, That the Refusers to obey, he would prosecute to the blood.

XX.
That the said Earl has in the 15th and 16th Years of His Majesty's Reign, and
diverse years past, labored and endeavored to breed in His Majesty an ill
Opinion of His Subjects; namely, of those of the Scottish Nation, and diverse and
sundry times, and especially since the pacification made by His Majesty with
His said Subjects of Scotland in Summer, in the 15th Year of His Majesty's
Reign, he, the said Earl did labor and endeavor to persuade, incite and
provoke His Majesty to an offensive War against His said Subjects of the
Scottish Nation: And the said Earl, by his Counsels, Actions, and Endeavors,
has been, and is a principal and chief Incendiary of the War and Discord
between His Majesty and His Subjects of England, and the said Subjects of
Scotland, and has declared and advised His Majesty, that the Demands made by
the Scots, in their Parliament, were a sufficient cause of War against them.

The said Earl having formerly expressed the height and rancour of his mind
toward His Majesty's Subjects of the Scottish Nation, viz. the Tenth day of
October, in the Fiftteenth Year of His Majesty's Reign, he said, That the
Nation of the Scots were Rebels and Traitors, and he being then about to come
to England, he then further said, That if it pleased His Master (meaning His
Majesty) to send him back again, he would root out of the said Kingdom (meaning
the said Kingdom of Ireland) the Scottish Nation both Root and Branch.

Some Lords, and others, who had taken the said Oath in the precedent Article
only excepted: and the said Earl has caused diverse of the Ships and Goods of
the Scots to be stayed, seized, and molested, to the intent to set on the said
War.

XXI.
That the said Earl of Strafford, shortly after his Speeches mentioned in the
last precedent Articles, to wit, in the 15th Year of His Majesty's Reign, came
into this Realm of England, and was made Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and
continued his Government of that Kingdom by a Deputy: at his arrival here,
finding that His Majesty with much Wisdom and Goodness had composed the
Troubles in the North, and had a pacification with his Subjects of Scotland; he
labored by all means to procure His Majesty to break that pacification,
incensing His Majesty against His Subjects of that Kingdom, and the proceeding
of the Parliament there.

And having incited His Majesty to an Offensive War against His Subjects of
Scotland by Sea and Land, and by pretext thereof, to raise Forces for the
maintenance of that War; he counseled His Majesty to call a Parliament in
England, yet the said Earl intended that if the said proceedings of that
Parliament should not be such as would stand with the said Earl of Strafford's
mischievous Designs, he would then procure His Majesty to break the same; and
by ways of force and power, to raise moneys upon the Subjects of this Kingdom.
And for the encouragement of His Majesty to hearken to his advice, he did
before His Majesty and His Privy Council, then sitting in Council, make a large
Declaration, that he would serve His Majesty in any other way, in case the
Parliament should not supply him.

XXII.
That in the month of March, before the beginning of the last Parliament, the
said Earl of Strafford went into Ireland, and procured the Parliament of that
Kingdom to declare their Assistance in a War against the Scots, and gave
directions for the raising of an Army there, consisting of 8000 Foot, and 1000
Horse, being for the most part Papists, as aforesaid. And confederacing with
one Sir George Ratcliff, did together with him the said Sir George traitorously
Conspire to employ the said Army for the ruin and destruction of the Kingdom
of England, and of His Majesty's Subjects, and of altering and subderting of
the Fundamental Laws and established Government of this Kingdom.

And shortly after the said Earl of Strafford returned into England, and to
sundry persons declared his Opinion to be, that His Majesty should first try
the Parliament here, and if that did not supply him according to his Occasions,
He might use then His Prerogative as He pleased, to levy what He needed, and
that He should be acquitted both of God and man; He took some other courses to
supply Himself, though it were against the wills of His Subjects.

XXIII.
That upon the Thirteenth day of April last, the Parliament of England met, and
the Commons House (then being the Representative Body of all the Commons in the
Kingdom) did accordingly to the Trust reposed in them, enter into Debate and
Consideration of the great Grievances of this Kingdom, both in respect of
Religion, and the public Liberty of the Kingdom; and His Majesty's referring
chiefly to the said Earl of Strafford, and the Archbishop of Canterbury, the
ordering and disposing of all matters concerning the Parliament: He the said
Earl of Strafford with the assistance of the said Archbishop, did procure His
Majesty by sundry Speeches and Messages, to urge the said Commons House to
enter into some Resolution for His Majesty's supply, for maintenance of His War
against His Subjects of Scotland, before any course taken for the relief of the
great and pressing Grievances, wherewith this Kingdom was then afflicted.
Whereupon a Demand was then made from His Majtsty, of Twelve Subsidies, for the
release of Ship Money only; and while the said Commons then Assembled (with
expression of great affection to His Majesty and His Service) were in Debate
and Consideration concerning some supply, before any Resolution by them made,
he the said Earl of Strafford, with the help and assistance of the said
Archbishop, did procure His Majesty to dissolve the said Parliament, upon the
Fifth day of May last: and upon the same day the said Earl of Strafford did
treacherously, falsely and maliciously endeavor to incense His Majesty against
His loving and faithful Subjects, who had been Members of the said House of
Commons, by telling His Majesty, They had denied to supply him. And afterward
upon the same day did traitorously and wickedly Counsel and Advise His Majesty
to this effect, viz. that having tried the affections of His People, he was
loose and absolved from all rules of Government, and that he was to do every
thing that Power would admit, and that His Majesty had tried all ways, and was
refused, and should be acquitted toward God and man; and that he had an Army
in Ireland, (meaning the Army above mentioned, consisting of Papists, his
dependants, as is aforesaid) which he might employ to reduce this Kingdom.

XXIV.
That in the same month of May, he the said Earl of Strafford, falsely,
traitorously, and maliciously published and declared before others of His
Majesty's Privy Council, that the Parliament of England had forsaken the King,
and that in denying to supply the King, they had given Him advantage to supply
Himself by other ways, and several other times he did maliciously, wickedly,
and falsely publish and declare, That seeing the Parliament had refused to
supply His Majesty in the ordinary and usual way, the King might provide for
the Kingdom in such ways, as He should hold fit, and that He was not to suffer
Himself to be mastered by the frowardness and undutifulness of the people.

And having so maliciously standered the said late House of Commons, he did
with the help and advice of the said Archbishop of Canterbury and the Lord
Finch, late Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, cause to be printed and
published in His Majesty's Name a false and scandalous Book, entitled, His
Majesty's Declaration of the Causes that moved Him to Dissolve the last
Parliament, full of bitter and malicious Invectives, and false and scandalous
aspersions against the said House of Commons.

XXV.
That not long after the Dissolution of the said last Parliament, (viz. in the
months of May and June) he the Earl of Strafford, did advise the King to go on
vigorously in levying the Ship Money, and did procure the Sheriffs of several
Counties to be sent for, for not levying the Ship Money, diverse of which were
threatened by him to be sued in the Star Chamber, and afterward by his advice
they were sued in Star Chamber, for not levying the same, and diverse of His
Majesty's loving Subjects were sent for and imprisoned by his advice, for that
and other illegal payments.

And a great loan of a hundred thousand pounds was demanded of the City of
London, and the Lord Mayor, and Sheriffs, and Aldermen of the said City were
often sent for, by his advice, to the Council Table, to give an account of
their proceedings in raising of Ship Money, and furthering of that loan, and
were required to certify the Names of such Inhabitants of the said City as
were fit to lend, which they with much humility refusing to do, he the said
Earl of Strafford did use these and the like Speeches, viz. That they deserved
to be put to Fine and Ransom, and that no good would be done with them, till an
example were made of them, and that they were laid by the heels, and some of
the Aldermen hanged up.

XXVI.
That the said Earl by his wicked Counsels, having brought His Majesty into
excessive Charge, without any just cause, he did in the month of July last (for
the support of the said great Charges) counsel and approve two dangerous and
wicked Projects, viz.

To seize upon the Bullion, and the Money in the Mint.

And to imbase His Majesty's Coin with the mixtures of Brass.

And accordingly he procured one hundred and thirty thousand pounds which was
then in the Mint, and belonging to diverse Merchants, Strangers, and others to
be seized on and stayed, to His Majesty's use. And when diverse Merchants of
London, Owners of the said Bullion and Money, came to his house to let him
understand the great mischief, that course would produce here, and in other
parts, and what prejudice it would be to the Kingdom, by discrediting the Mint,
and hindering the importation of Bullion; he the said Earl told them, that the
City of London dealt undutifully and unthankfully with His Majesty, and that
they were more ready to help the Rebels than to help His Majesty. And that if
any hurt came to them, they may thank themselves: and that it was the course of
other Princes to make use of such moneys to serve their Occasions.

And when in the same month of July, the Officers of His Majesty's Mint came to
him, and gave him diverse reasons against the imbasing the said money, he told
them, That the French King did use to send Commissaries of Horse with
Commission to search into men's Estates, and to peruse their Accounts, that so
they may know what to levy of them by force, which they did accordingly levy;
and turning to the Lord Cottington, then present, said, That this was a point
worthy of his Lordships consideration, meaning this course of the French King
to raise moneys by force, was a point worthy of his Lordships consideration.

XXVII.
That in or about the month of August last, he was made Lieutenant General of
all His Majesty's Forces in the North, prepared against the Scots, and being at
York, did then in the month of September by his own authority, and without any
lawful Warrant, impose a Tax on His Majesty's Subjects in the County of York of
eight pence per diem, for maintenance of every Soldier of the Trained Bands of
that County, which sums of money he caused to be levied by force. And to the
end to compel His Majesty's Subjects out of fear and terror to yield to the
payment of the same, he did declare, that he would commit them that refused the
payment thereof, and the Soldiers should be satisfied out of their Estates;
and and they that refused it, were in very little better condition than of High
Treason.

XXVIII.
That in the months of September and October last, he the said Earl of
Strafford, being certified of the Scottish Army coming into the Kingdom, and he
the said Earl of Strafford being Lieutenant General of His Majesty's Army, he
did not provide for the defense of the Town of Newcastle, as he ought to have
done, but suffered the same to be lost, that so he might the more incense the
English against the Scots.

And for the same wicked purpose, and out of a malicious desire to engage the
Kindgoms of England and Scotland in a National and bloody War, he did write to
the Lord Conway, the General of the Horse, and under the said Earls Command,
that he should fight with the Scottish Army at the passage over the Tyne,
whatsoever should follow; notwithstanding that the said Lord Conway had
formerly by Letters informed the said Earl, that His Majesty's Army, then under
his Command, was not of force sufficient to encounter the Scots, by which
advice of his, he did, contrary to the duty of his place, betray His Majesty's
Army, then under his Command, to apparent danger and loss.

All and every which words, counsels and actions of the said Earl of Strafford
were spoken, given, and done by him the said Earl of Strafford, traitorously,
and contrary to his Allegiance to our Sovereign Lord the King, and with an
intention and endeavor to alienate and withdraw the hearts and affections of
the King's Liege-people of all His Realms from His Majesty, and to set division
between them, and to ruin and destroy His Majesty, and Majesty's said
Kingdoms, for which they do further impeach him the said Thomas Earl of
Strafford of High Treason against our Sovereign Lord the King, His Crown and
Dignity. And he the said Earl of Strafford was Lord Deputy of Ireland, or Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, and Lieutenant General of the Army there under His most
Excellent Majesty, and a sworn Privy-Counsellor to His Majesty for His Kingdoms
both of England and Ireland, and Lord President of the North during the time
that all and every the Crimes and Offenses before set forth were done and
committed, and he the said Earl was Lieutenant General of His Majesty's Army in
the North parts of England during the time that the Crimes and Offenses, in the
27th and 28th Articles, set forth were done and committed.

Tuesday, May 11th, 1641.
Ordered, That Mr. Solicitor give Order, That the Arguments he made in
Westminster Hall, touching the matters of Law in the Case of the Earl of
Strafford, be Printed; and that Mr. Pym give the like Order, That his Speeches
at the beginning and ending of the Trial of the said Earl of Strafford be
likewise Printed.

The Names of those Gentlemen that managed the Evidence in this Trial, being,
through oversight, omitted to be inserted in their particular places, for the
first Nine Articles; it is thought fit, for more exact satisfaction, to give an
account of them in this place, with particular References; which may, by the
Reader, be easily supplied.
The Names of the Managers.
FOlio 115. Line 17. Mr. Pym. Ibid. Line 33. Mr. Pym. Ibid. Line 40. Mr. Pym.
Fol. 116. Line 5. Mr. Pym. Ibid. Line 44. Mr. Pym. Fol. 117. Line 14. Mr.
Maynard. Ibid. Line 43. Mr. Maynard. Fol. 120. Line 20. Mr. Pym. Fol. 124. Line
27. Mr. Pym. Fol. 127. Line 29. Mr. Pym.
To the First Article.
Fol. 138. Line 29. Mr. Maynard. Fol. 139. Line 3. M. Maynard. Fol. 142. Line
17. M. Maynard. Ibid. Line 24. Mr. Whitlock. Fol. 143. Line 7. Mr. Glyn. Ibid.
Line 15. Mr. Maynard. Ibid. Line 25. Mr. Glyn. Fol. 144. Line 2. Mr. Maynard.
Fol. 145. Line 3. Mr. Maynard. Fol. 147. Line 31. Mr. Maynard.
To the Second Article.
Fol. 149. Line 14. Mr. Maynard. Fol. 153. Line 6. Mr. Glyn. Fol. 152. Line 14.
Mr. Maynard. Ibid. Line 16. Mr. Maynard. Ibid. Line 18. Mr. Maynard. Fol. 154.
Line 4. Mr. Maynard. Ibid. Line 32. Mr. Maynard. Fol. 155. Line 7. Mr. Maynard.
To the Third Article.
Fol. 156. Line 8. Mr. Maynard. Fol. 164. Line 9. Mr. Maynard. Ibid. Line 22.
Mr. Glyn. Ibid. Line 17. Mr. Maynard. Ibid. Line 28. Mr. Maynard. Fol. 165.
Line 7. Sir Io. Clotworthy. Ibid. Line 36. Mr. Maynard. Fol. 167. Line 25. Mr.
Pym. Fol. 157. Line 11. Mr. Maynard. Fol. 168. Line 16. Mr. Pym. Fol. 158. Line
2. Lord Digby. Ibid. Line 25. Mr. Pym. Ibid. Line 37. Mr. Maynard. Ibid. Line
34. Mr. Maynard. Fol. 163. Line 42. Mr. Maynard. Fol. 171. Line 28. Mr.
Maynard.
To the Fourth Article.
Fol. 173. Line 30. Mr. Glyn. Fol. 183. Line 10. Mr. Maynard. Fol. 174. Line 8.
Mr. Glyn. Fol. 184. Line 11. Mr. Glyn. Fol. 179. Line 44. Mr. Glyn. Fol. 185.
Line 1. Mr. Maynard. Fol. 180. Line 37. Mr. Maynard.
To the Fifth Article.
Fol. 185. Line 21. Mr. Glyn. Ibid. Line 35. Mr. Maynard. Fol. 188. Line 17.
Mr. Glyn. Fol. 202. Line 31. Mr. Maynard. Fol. 198. Line 1. Mr. Glyn. Ibid.
Line 36. Mr. Maynard. Fol. 201. Line 19. Mr. Glyn. Fol. 204. Line 5. Mr. Glyn.
Fol. 202. Line 7. Mr. Maynard.
To the Sixth Article.
Fol. 205. Line 6. Mr. Glyn. Fol. 216. Line 22. Mr. Maynard. Fol. 206. Line 31.
Mr. Glyn. Fol. 217. Line 21. Mr. Palmer. Ibid. Line 37. Mr. Glyn. Fol. 218.
Line 17. Mr. Glyn. Fol. 210. Line 38. Mr. Glyn. Ibid. Line 21. Mr. Glyn. Fol.
213. Line 23. Mr. Glyn. Fol. 219. Line 32. Mr. Stroud. Ibid. Line 29. Mr. Glyn.
To the Eighth Article.
Fol. 222. Line 8. Mr. Glyn. Fol. 228. Line 10. Mr. Glyn. Ibid. Line 34. Mr.
Glyn. Ibid. Line 26. Mr. Glyn. Fol. 223. Line 22. Mr. Glyn. Fol. 229. Line 11.
Mr. Glyn. Ibid. Line 42. Mr. Maynard. Ibid. Line 33. Mr. Glyn. Fol. 226. Line
42. Mr. Glyn. Fol. 233. Line 25. Mr. Glyn.
To the Ninth Article.
Fol. 236. Line 16. Mr. Glyn. Fol. 239. Line 14. Mr. Maynard. Fol. 238. Line
22. Mr. Glyn. Fol. 240. Line 10. Mr. Glyn.
THE TRIAL OF T. Earl of Strafford.
The First day.
Monday, March 22. 1640.
THe Lords being set in a place prepared in Westminster Hall, purposely for the
Arraignment of Thomas Earl of Strafford, upon a charge of High Treason laid
upon him by the Commons House of Parliament, in the Name of themselves, and of
all the Commons of England. And the House of Commons being there likewise,
seated as a Committee; and those who were to manage the Evidence on behalf of
the House of Commons, being Members of that House, standing at the Bar, The
Prisoner was called for; And being brought by Sir William Balfour, Lieutenant
of the Tower, after Obeisances given, he came to the Bar and kneeled; and
after standing up, The Right Honorable The Prisoner at the Bar.
Thomas Earl of Arundel and Surrey, Lord High Steward of England, spoke to him
as follows.

Your Lordship is called here this day before the Lords in Parliament, to Lord
High Steward.
Answer to, and to be Tried upon, the Impeachment presented to them by the
Commons House of Parliament, in the Name of themselves, and all the Commons of
England: And that their Lordships are resolved to hear both the Accusation and
Defense, with all Equity. And therefore think fit in the first place, That your
Lordship should hear the Impeachment of High Treason read.

The Impeachment was accordingly read by the Clerk of the Parliament.

A little after the entrance into it, a Chair was brought to the Prisoner by
the Gentleman Usher, and the Prisoner sat down thereon by their Lordships
direction.

After the Charge was read, the Earl of Straffords Answer was likewise read.
And no more of proceedings that day.

Only the Lord Steward said further to the Prisoner, That his Lordship Lord
High Steward.
had heard the whole Impeachment of the House of Commons read; And his own
Answer: on which he has put himself for Trial. That which is now to follow,
their Lordships have commanded him to say, is the managing of the Evidence by
those the House of Commons shall please to appoint, for the proving of this
Charge.

But likewise they have Commanded him to say, That the time being so far spent,
it may not be so proper now to proceed further in the business; That this shall
be sat upon only once a day, which will be fittest both for their Lordships,
and for the House of Commons: And that they conceive it will agree with the
sense of the House of Commons, not to fall into the particular management of
the Evidence so late, but to defer it till the morrow, at the hour of nine of
the Clock.

My Lord of Strafford did then desire to know, whether he might with E. of
Strafford.
their Lordships good leave and favor, say any thing at that time or no.

The Lord High Steward answered, that their Lordships Commandment is, Lord High
Steward.
to let his Lordship know, That if the House of Commons proceed not by their
Members to manage the Evidence this day, then what his Lordship has to say to
this House, may be put off to another time.

And so their Lordships Adjourned to the House above, (by which is meant the
House where the Lords use to sit in Parliament) and appointed the next morning
to proceed in this business.

The Second day.
Tuesday, March 23. 1640
THeir Lordships being set, the Lord Steward recited in brief the proceedings
of the day before, adding, that naturally and properly, it Lord High Steward.
belongs (in the next place) for those whom the House of Commons have deputed
to manage their Evidence, in pursuance of the Articles of Impeachment, to begin
the work of the day.

Then Mr. Pym, one of the Committee appointed for the management of the
Evidence, began as follows.

My Lords,

We stand here by the Commandment of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, Mr.
Pym.
now assembled for the Commons in Parliament. And we are ready to make good
that Impeachment whereby Thomas Earl of Strafford stands charged in their Name,
and in the Name of all the Commons of England, with High Treason.

This, My Lords, is a Great Cause, and we might sink under the weight of it,
and be astonished with the Luster of this Noble Assembly, if there were not in
the Cause strength and vigor to support it self, and to encourage us; It is
the Cause of the King, it concerns His Majesty in the Honor of His Government,
in the Safety of His Person, in the Stability of His Crown.

It is the Cause of the Kingdom, It concerns not only the Peace and Prosperity,
but even the Being of the Kingdom. We have that piercing Eloquence, the Cries
and Groans, and Tears, and Prayers of all the Subjects assisting us. We have
the three Kingdoms, England, and Scotland, and Ireland, in Travail and
Agitation with us, bowing themselves, like the Hindes spoken of in Job, to cast
out their Sorrows.

Truth and Goodness (My Lords) they are the Beauty of the Soul, they are the
Perfection of all created Natures, they are the Image and Character of God upon
the Creatures.

This Beauty, Evil Spirits, and Evil Men, have lost; but yet there are none so
wicked, but they desire to march under the show and shadow of it, though they
hate the reality of it.

This unhappy Earl, now the Object of your Lordships Justice, has taken as
much care, has used as much cunning to set a face and countenance of Honesty
and Justice upon his Actions, as he has been negligent to observe the rules of
Honesty in the Performance of all these Actions. My Lords, it is the greatest
baseness of wickedness, that it dares not look in his own Colors, nor be seen
in its natural Countenance. But Virtue, as it is amiable in all respects, so
the least is not this. That it puts a Nobleness, it puts a Bravery upon the
Mind, and lifts it above Hopes and Fears, above Favor and Displeasure; it
makes it always uniform and constant to it self.

The Service Commanded me and my Colleagues here, is to take off those Vizards
of Truth and Uprightness, which has been sought to be put upon this Cause, and
to show you his Actions and his Intentions, in their own natural Blackness and
Deformity.

My Lords, He has put on a Vizard of Truth in these words, (wherein he says)
That he should be in his Defense more careful to observe Truth, than to gain
Advantage to himself. He says, he would endure any thing rather than be saved
by Falshoood.

It was a noble and brave Expression if it were really true.

My Lords, He has likewise put on the Vizard of Goodness on his Actions, when
he desires to recite his Services in a great many particulars, as if they were
Beneficial to the Commonwealth and State, whereas we shall prove them
Mischievous and Dangerous.

It is left upon me, My Lords, to take off these Vizards and Appearances of
Truth and Goodness, in that part of his Answer which is the Preamble. And that
I shall do with as much Faithfulness and Brevity as I can.

1. The First thing (My Lords) that I shall observe in the Preamble is this,
That having recited all those great and honorable Offices which he has done
under His Majesty, he is bold to affirm, That he has been careful and faithful
in the Execution of them all.

My Lords, If he might be his own Witness, and his own Judge, I doubt not but
he would be Acquitted.

It is said in the Proverbs of the Adulterous Woman, That she wipes her mouth,
and says, she had done no Evil. Here is a wiping of the mouth, here is a verbal
expression of Honesty. But (My Lords) the foulness and unjustness will never be
wiped off, neither from his Heart, nor from his Actions; I mean for the time
past, God may change him for the time to come: That is the first thing I
observe.

2. My Lords, In the second place, out of his Apologetical Preamble, I shall
observe this, He does magnify his own Endeavors in five particulars: 1. That
he has Endeavored the maintenance of Religion. (I may miss in words, I shall
not miss in sense.) 2. That he has Endeavored the Honor of the King. 3. The
Increase of His Revenue. 4. The Peace and Honor, and Safety of the Kingdom. 5.
The Quiet and Peace of the People. These are his five particulars; and I shall
give a short Answer to every one of them.

1. For Religion, (My Lords) we say, and we shall prove, that he has been
diligent indeed to favor Innovations, to favor Superstitions, to favor the
Encroachments and Usurpations of the Clergy: But for Religion it never received
any advantage by him, nay, a great deal of hurt.

2. For the Honor of the King: (My Lords) We say it is the Honor of the King
that He is the Father of His People, that He is the Fountain of Justice; and it
cannot stand with His Honor and Justice to have His Government Stained and
Polluted with Tyranny and Oppression.

3. For the Increase of His Revenue: It is true, there may be some Addition of
Sums; but we say, There is no Addition of Strength nor Wealth, because in those
parts where it has been increased, this Earl has taken the greatest share
himself: And when he has spoiled and ravined on the People, he has been
content to yield up some part to the King, that he might with more security
enjoy the rest.

4. For the Strength and Honor, and Safety of the Kingdom: (My Lords) In a
time of Peace he has let in upon us the Calamities of War, Weakness, Shame and
Confusion.

5. And for the Quiet of the Subjects, He has been an Incendiary, he has
Armed us amongst our selves, and made us weak and naked to all the World
besides. This is that I shall answer to the second Head of his Apology.

3. The Third is this, (My Lords) That by his means many good and wholesome
Laws have been made since his Government in Ireland.

Truly, (My Lords) if we should consider the particulars of these Laws, some of
them will not be found without great Exception. But I shall make another
Answer, good Laws, nay, the best Laws are no advantage when Will is set above
Law, when the Laws have force to bind and restrain the Subject, but no force to
Relieve and Comfort him.

4. He says in the Fourth place, He was a means of calling a Parliament not
long after he came to his Government. My Lords, Parliaments without
Parliamentary Liberties, are but a fair and plausible way into Bondage; That
Parliament had not the Liberties of a Parliament; Sir Pierce Crosby for
speaking against a Bill in the Commons House, was sequestered from the
Council Table, and Committed to Prison.

Sir John Clotworthy, for the same Cause, was threatened that he should lose a
Lease that he had. Mr. Barnewell, and two other Gentlemen, were threatened they
should have Troops of Horse put upon them for speaking in the House. Proxies by
dozens, were given by some of his Favorites: And (My Lords) Parliaments coming
in with these Circumstances, they be Grievances, Mischiefs, and Miseries; no
works of Thanks or Honor.

5. The Fifth is, That he has been a means to put off Monopolies, and other
Projects that would have been Grievous and Burdensome to the Subject; if he had
hated the Injustice of a Monopoly, or the Mischief of a Monopoly, he would have
hated it in himself; he himself would have been no Monopolist. Certainly, My
Lords, It was not the love of Justice, nor the Common good, that moved him: And
if he were moved by any thing else, he had his Reward. It may be it was because
he would have no man gripe them in the Kingdom but himself; his own
Harvest-crop would have been less, if he had had sharers. It may be it was
because Monopolies hinder Trade, he had the Customs, and the benefit of the
Customs would have been less; when we know the particulars, we shall make a fit
and proper Answer to them: But in the mean time, we are sure whatsoever was the
reason, it was not Justice, nor love of Truth, that was the reason.

6. He says in the sixth place, He had no other Commission but what his
Predecessors had: And that he has Executed that Commission with all
Moderation. For the Commission, it was no Virtue of his if it were a good
Commission, I shall say nothing of that. But for the second part, his
Moderation; when you find so many Imprisoned of the Nobility; so many men, some
adjudged to Death, some Executed without Law; when you find so many public
Rapines on the State, Soldiers sent to make good his Decrees; so many whippings
in defense of Monopolies; so many Gentlemen that were Jurors, because they
would not apply themselves to give Verdicts on his side, to be fined in the
Star Chamber.

Men of Quality to be disgraced, set on the Pillory, and wearing Papers, and
such things, (as it will appear through our Evidence) can you think there was
any Moderation. And yet truly, (My Lords) I can believe, That if you compare
his Courses with other parts of the World ungoverned, he will be found beyond
all in Tyranny and Harshness; but if you compare them with his mind and
disposition, perhaps there was Moderation; Habits we say, are more perfect than
Acts, because they be nearest the principle of Actions. The Habit of Cruelty in
himself (no doubt) is more perfect than any Act of Cruelty he has Committed;
but if this be his Moderation, I think all men will pray to be delivered from
it: And I may truly say that is verified in him, The Mercies of the Wicked are
Cruel.

7. I come to the seventh, and that is concerning the Kings Revenue: That he
has improved it from 57000 l. to 120000 l. and that he has done it by
Honorable and Just ways. That he has made the Kingdom able to Support it
self. That he has improved the Kings Revenue by many rich and great Purchases.
That he has saved the Charge of the Navy, by bearing 7000 l. a year in
Ireland, which was born here before. And then he says for a Conclusion, That he
never took Money out of the Kings Exchequer. My Lords, I must run over all
these.

For the Enlargement or Increase of the Revenue of that Kingdom, I think there
is a little fault in his Arithmetic, but I will not charge him with that now.

But for his Honorable ways of Increasing it; if Monopolies, if Vexation of
the Subject, be Honorable ways, we shall leave that to your Lordships to
judge. But most of his increases are made upon Monopolies. It is true, there is
another way of bargaining, but it has been mixed with Rigor and Rapine, and
Injustice. Men have been driven out of their Estates; Offices have been found
by force. Men have been driven to resign their Estates: And is this a Just way
of improving a Kings Revenue? that I shall submit to your Lordships.

Then he says, He has made the Kingdom able to Support it self: My Lords, He
that has no Harvest of his own, must Glean after another man's Reapers. Truly,
this was none of his work: The Kingdom was able to subsist of it self before he
came thither. For that we shall Appeal to the Records of the Exchequer, betwixt
the year 1622. and the time of his Government, which was nine years at least,
during which, nothing went out of this Kingdom to the support of that Island.
The 7000 l. for the Navy, was born in Ireland before his time a year or two; so
he comes near the truth of that, yet misses a year of the truth.

But if it were true; has it been only by the ordinary Revenue that it has
supported it self? He has had six Subsidies; a year, or two of Contribution,
which the Irish gave toward the supporting of the Charge of Ireland. It was
not his Husbanding, nor his managing of the Revenue; And truly if the Kingdom
were able to support it self, (as it was before he came thither) by the Revenue
of the Kingdom, and by the help of that Contribution, it would be very fit,
(since there may be many Increases since) to know what is become of 300000 l.
for six Subsidies, and of the Contribution money; and indeed there is a great
suspicion, that that went another way But that you may the better observe his
Husbandry, I shall speak of his last years Account; the 20th of March, (now
something more than a year since) the Under-Treasurer delivered an Account, on
which there was 101000 l. remaining in the Kings Coffers. Since that time there
has been received 112000 l. for the King. (I speak of round Sums, (My Lords) I
leave out pounds and pence, and such things: This is 213000 l. He has received
out of the Exchequer in England 50000 l. There are Debts in Ireland, 60000 l.
and what other Debts we know not: Here is above 320000 l. consumed in a year;
which is almost as much as Queen Elizabeth consumed in any year when Tyrone was
in Rebellion, and an Army of Spaniards was there.

My Lords, He says he never took Money out of the Exchequer; if he rests in
that Affirmation, it will be very near truth, yet serves but to shadow a
falsehood, which is worse, to cover and to glaze, under such a Color of Truth
as that is, a notable Falsehood.

My Lords, It is true, he has taken no Money out of the Exchequer; but he
could be content to take from the Under-Treasurer of the Exchequer, 24000 l.
about two years since, and to keep it for his own occasions; when the Kings
Army was in want: And he paid it in but lately.

And before I pass from this matter of the Revenue, give me leave to speak
something of the increase that comes in by the Customs.

It is true, there is a great increase; but if your Lordships look to the
beginning of that bargain, you shall find the notablest cozenage that ever was
offered to a Prince, in one that was a sworn Servant, and entrusted with so
great a Charge.

It will be more fully opened in the Article that concerns the Customs; but I
shall speak of it a little: He made a bargain, and under pretense of getting of
1350 l. gain to the King, he gave cause of Allowances and Defalcations; whereby
he took forth of the Kings Purse 6000 l. a year, or very near, which the King
had before. He laid new Additions of charge on the Customs, which came to 12000
l. So that on a bargain of giving 1350 l. more than was reserved on the former
Lease, He was sure, that when he made the bargain, of gaining 18 or 20000 l.

8. But I shall pass from the Revenue of the Crown, to the Revenue of the
Church, (which is in the 8th place) He says he has been a great Husband for
the Church, and truly has brought in many Lands to the Church; but he has
brought them in by ways without Law, without Rules of Justice: He has taken
away men's Inheritances. And here (My Lords) is an offering of Rapine, an
offering of Injustice and Violence: And will God accept such an Offering. Must
the Revenues of the Church be raised that way. It is true, it was the more in
the way of his own Preferment. He knew who sat at the Helm here, the
Archbishop of Canterbury; and such services might win more credit with him. It
was not an Eye to God and Religion; but an Eye to his own Preferment. I shall
speak no more of that.

9. I come to the 9th head; and that is the building of Churches. Many Churches
have been built since his Government. Truly, My Lords, why he should have any
Credit or Honor, if other men builded Churches, I know not: I am sure we hear
of no Churches he has built himself: If he would have been careful to have set
up good Preachers, that would have stirred up Devotion in men, and made them
desirous of the knowledge of God, and by that means made more Churches, it had
been something; But I hear nothing of Spiritual Edification, nothing of the
knowledge of God that by his means has been dispersed in that Kingdom. And
certainly they that strive not to build up men's Souls in a Spiritual way of
Edification, let them build all the material Churches that can be, they will do
no good; God is not worshipped with Walls, but he is worshipped with Hearts.

10. He says in the 10th place, That many Orthodox and Learned Preachers have
been advanced by his means; and the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of
England, by his means Protected and Defended. My Lords, I shall give but two or
three Paterns of the Clergy that he has preferred. If you will take Doctor
Atherton, he is not to be found now above Ground; for he was hanged for many
foul and unspeakable Offenses.

Doctor Bramhill has been preferred to a great Bishopric; but he is a man
that now stands charged with High Treason: he has been but few years in
Ireland, and yet has laid out at least 30000 l. in Purchases. I shall name but
one Chaplain more, and that is one Arthur Gwyn, who about 1634. was an
Under-Groom to the Earl of Cork in his Stable: In the year after, Dr. Bramhill
preferred him to be a Clergyman; and a Parsonage, and two Vicaridges
Impropriate, were taken from my Lord of Cork, and given to this Arthur Gwyn. I
shall add no more Patterns of his Clergy.

11. I go to the 11th, and that is concerning the Army: He has many glorious
Expressions of his Service concerning the Army; That they are 1000 Horse and
2000 Foot: And that there has been very few Papists Soldiers or Officers; and
none preferred by himself. Truly, I think he says true, or within one of true
in this; for there was but one preferred by himself, and therefore I shall not
stand upon that.

But he says this Army was paid out of the Revenue of the Crown, which
heretofore it was not wont to be. To that I have spoken before, and showed,
that many years before his time all the Charges of Ireland were born within
Ireland.

He says, (and I speak that as to the Army too) That neither the Arms nor Wages
have been burdensome to the people of Ireland; but their Lodgings and
Billettings have not been easy, and not without discontent, Why (My Lords) in
Dublin it self, where they have a Charter that exempts them from Billetting of
Soldiers, they have been faign to pay for Billetting of Soldiers. Nay, those
Soldiers that were Servants and Dwellers in his own houses, and other places,
must have their Billetting moneys. And of this there has been Petitions and
Complaints; nay, it has been spoken of in Parliament there; and yet he can
tell you, that the marching and laying of Soldiers is without burden and
grievance to the People: that was the Eleventh.

12. I go to the 12th, and that is the great increase of Trade: The increase of
Shipping 100 to one. Truly (My Lords) in a time of Peace, and in a growing
Kingdom as that was, being formerly unhusbanded, It is no wonder, that when
Land increases in the Manurance, and People increase in Number, both Shipping
and Trade increases. But it is the advantage of the time, not the advantage of
his Government; for (My Lords) his Government has been destructive to Trade:
And that will manifestly appear by the multitude of Monopolies that he has
exercised in his own person. And that is all I shall speak to the 12th.

13. The 13th is, That Justice has been administered without bribery, without
partiality, without Corruption; these are Glorious things. But there will as
much fall upon him of Corruption and Injustice, as of any other Offense; And
that (My Lords) will appear to you through the whole course of our Evidence: I
shall not now speak of the particulars. And that we may not content our selves
with particular witnesses only, I shall humbly desire, That the Remonstrance of
the Parliament of Ireland, both of the Lords and of the Commons, may be read:
And they will give a sufficient Testimony of the quality of his Justice.

14. The 14th (My Lords) is this, That he has been a Means to His Majesty for
a Parliament in England. It is true he was: And it is as true, that we count
that as mischievous a part of his design, as any thing else. Into what a
miserable Dilemma (My Lords) did he bring the Kingdom, that we must surrender
the Liberties of the Kingdom in Parliament, or see them oppressed with Force
and Violence out of Parliament. The particulars of this I shall leave for the
instant; for there is an Article that concerns this.

I have now passed through all the material parts of the Apologetical Preamble.

He concludes with a desire, That he may not be charged with Errors of his
understanding or Judgment, being not bred up in the Law, or with weakness, to
which humane Nature is subject. Truly, it would be far from us to charge him
with any such mistakes; No (My Lords) we shall charge him with nothing but what
the Law in every man's breast condemns, the Light of nature, the Light of common
reason, the Rules of common Society: And that will appear in all the Articles
which my Colleagues will offer to you.

My Lords, I have some few Witnesses which I shall desire may be heard to the
points I have opened; and I shall in the first place desire, that Sir Pierce
Crosby may be heard concerning the breach of Privilege in Parliament: Also Sir
John Clotworthy, Nich. Barnewell, Nich. Plunket, and Sir James Montgomery. I
have some Witnesses to the point of Revenue, Sir Robert Pie, Sir Edward Warder,
and Sir Adam Loftus.

Gentlemen, You who are of the Committee, I am commanded to let Lord High
Steward.
you know, That the Lords will allow you all the Testimonies you can produce to
make good the Impeachment; but the Witnesses which you do produce, must be
deposed before their Lordships.

Mr. Pym replied, My Lords, the Commons agree to it; and in the first Mr. Pym.
place we shall call Sir Pierce Crosby, who was sworn accordingly.

My Lords, I humbly crave leave whether I may not make my exception E. of
Strafford.
to any Witness.

Yes, you may. Lord High Steward.


We desire to be heard upon that point of Exception, That if my Lord Mr. Pym.
of Strafford will make any Exception why a Witness should not be heard at all,
it may be according to the Rules of Justice.

The Lord High Steward declaring, the Prisoner might except against the Lord
High Steward.
person of the Witness, if he have just Cause, my Lord of Strafford proceeded
in substance as follows:

My Lords, I humbly conceive, that I have against this Gentleman Sir Pierce
Crosby, just occasion of Exception, (as not being a competent Witness) E. of
Strafford.
for that the said Sir Pierce has been sentenced in the Star Chamber, for a
very undue practice against me, tending to no less than the taking away of my
Life, charging me, (and practicing to prove it by Testimony of witness) that I
had killed a man in Ireland, whom I protest, I did never so much as touch.

That ever since (the said Sir Pierce having broke Prison, and made an Escape
out of the Fleet) he has remained abroad, and never came hither till such time
as the Parliament sat here; and now is returned to make Complaint in this
business against me, or indeed against the Court of Star Chamber rather: And
standing thus, whether the said Sir Pierce shall be allowed a Witness against
me, I humbly refer it to Your Lordships Judgments.

My Lords, We expected my Lord of Strafford would have shown on Mr. Maynard.
what reason Sir Pierce was censured; for a man Criminous in one kind, may be
nevertheless fit to give Testimony in another kind. If it be a particular
practice against my Lord of Strafford, when their Lordships have heard what
that practice was, and have heard likewise the Witness, they will believe him
according to the weight of the Testimony, compared with the fault, or
whatsoever else is in the Sentence. But in the mean time, they conceive it is
no Exception, but that the Witness should be heard, This that is charged on my
Lord of Strafford, being a Crime of High Treason, it concerns the
Commonwealth, the King being party, and not the Witness that is produced.

And whereas it is informed that Sir Pierce Crosby brake Prison: The Gentleman
tells us it is not so; he paid the Kings Fine, and so was discharged. But
though he had, it will not take away his Testimony when he is present; which he
said, he spoke only to give satisfaction to that aspersion.

I must desire their Lordships directions, whether Sir Pierce Crosby be Lord
High Steward.
allowed, notwithstanding my Lord of Straffords exceptions against him, and Mr.
Maynards allegations why his Testimony should be given in this case, or no: And
diverse of their Lordships called to have the House Adjourned to the House
above, that they might there debate and determine it.

Mr. Pym did thereupon offer, that they will at present lay him aside till Mr.
Pym.
their Lordships have had opportunity to consider, and bring him again to
morrow; whereunto Mr. Maynard added this further: We desire Mr. Maynard.
rightly to express our selves to Your Lordships, We will lay him aside till
Your Lordships have heard others, not that they wave him wholly: And we pray it
may be so entered, The Lord Steward declaring it so to be.

It is so understood. Lord Fligh Steward.


In the next place, we desire that Sir John Clotworthy may be called, whom we
produce to this point, That during the Parliament in Ireland, Mr. Pym.
for speaking against a Bill in the Commons House, he was threatened by Sir
George Ratcliffe, (whom we take to be bound up in one Cause with my Lord of
Strafford, and to be moved by my Lord of Straffords spirit) and that
Parliaments are not Privileges, when Parliament Liberties are not observed.

Sir John Clotworthy was sworn:

My Lords, We desire he may be asked, whether for having delivered Sir Io.
Clotworthy, a Witness.
his Opinion against a Bill preferred to the Parliament in Ireland by the Earl
of Strafford, about the 10th year of this King, he was not asked by The
Question.
Sir George Ratcliffe, concerning a Lease that he had; the question intimating
a Threat, that he should suffer for speaking so freely?

To which he answered, My Lords, In the 10th year of the King, I Sir Io.
Clotworthy.
serving in Ireland in Parliament, did Vote against a Bill; as soon as I had
Voted against it, Sir George Ratcliffe, being one of the Tellers, on his
counting the numbers, how many Yea's, and how many No's, He came to me, and
said thus, Have not you a Lease in such a place? I told him yea; remember that,
says he: This is all I can remember. And this (he added) was in the Commons
House.

2. He being interrogated whether he knew any thing of Sir Pierce Crosbies
Commitment, or no?

He answered, I know it only by hearsay, he was a Member of the House when I
had the Honor to serve; I heard the expression of Sir George Ratcliffe at that
time: And the common voice was, that he was under restraint; but I saw him not.

Being asked whether there was any other occasion of these words but his said
Vote:

He answered, Truly (My Lords) I can apprehend none.

4. Being asked whether he heard Sir George Ratcliffe threaten Sir Pierce
Crosby in Parliament:

He answered, I heard Sir Pierce Crosby speaking against a Bill in Parliament;
and as soon as he had sat down from speaking against the Bill, Sir George
Ratcliffe said to him, That is not Privy-Councellor like, or to that purpose, I
heard him.

To the point of Sir Pierce Crosbies being sequestered from the Council upon his
speaking in Parliament.

The Lord Ranulagh being sworn, was interrogated whether about the Lord
Ranulagh a Witness.
10th year of the King, he knew Exception to be taken against Sir Pierce
Crosby, for delivering his Opinion in Parliament; and what proceedings were
against him thereupon:

He answered, (My Lords) to the best of my remembrance, Sir Pierce Crosby being
a Privy-Councellor in Ireland, was charged at the Council Board for Voting
against a Bill that was transmitted by the Lord Deputy and Council; and
hereupon the Opinion of the Board was asked; and by the advice of that Board
Sir Pierce Crosby was sequestered from the Council. This is as much as I can
remember.

2. Being asked by whom he was sequestered: He answered, By the Deputy and the
Council.

3. Being asked who began the Question: He answered, My Lord Deputy charged him.

My Lords, I humbly desire that my Lord Ranulagh may be asked, whether E. of
Strafford.
when things are handled at the Council Table, the Deputy be not the man that
propounds them to the Council or no; not as a party complaining, but as
belonging to the duty of his place: And how he behaved himself in that business.

To which the Lord Ranulagh being interrogated,

Answered, It is the constant course for the Deputy to propose the Lo. Ranulagh.
things that be brought to the Board; and seldom does any of the Council
propound any thing; but the Proposition comes from the Deputy.

But being further asked on the Committees motion, whether this of Sir Pierce
Crosbies came to the Board by motion of my Lord alone, or that any other moved
him in it, or conveyed it to him:

He answered, I cannot charge my memory where it had beginning; but as I
remember, My Lord Deputy Wandesford that died last, and Mr. Wandsford, and Sir
George Ratcliffe, were movers of it; but whether it moved originally from them,
or from my Lord himself, I know not, I rather believe it proceeded from my Lord
Deputy, as being proper for him.

The Lord Mountnorris sworn and interrogated, whether he was present L.
Mountnorris a Witness.
at Council Table when Sir Pierce Crosby was sequestered from Council Table; and
for what Reasons he was sequestered:

He answers, I was then present at Board, and he was removed on Complaint made
by Sir George Ratcliffe at the Board, touching his Voting of a Bill in
Parliament: And when he said it was not spoken like a Councellor, he said, he
would answer it to him that made him a Councellor. That was the effect, as I
can remember, of his Accusation; and there were several others that testified
the same words that Sir George Ratcliffe accused him of, and that was the
reason he was sequestered by most Voices at Council Table, though he had many
Votes with him.

And being further asked, what my Lord of Straffords Vote was:

He answered, It was for his Sequestration.

Mr. Nicholas Barnewell sworn; Being asked, whether for his delivering his
Opinion in Parliament, Sir George Ratcliffe did ask whether the said Nicholas
Barnewell a Witness.
Mr. Barnewell's house was capacious to receive 500 men, to be laid upon him;
intimating thereby, that he must look for Soldiers to be laid upon him for that
reason:

He answered, There was a Debate in the House concerning certain Boroughs
sequestered from the House by reason of a Judgment in the Exchequer, which the
House conceived an Erroneous Judgment, and were of Opinion that the old
Boroughs should be called in; I was of that Opinion, Sir George Ratcliffe was
of another Opinion; and would have another question debated: And coming out of
the House, he asked me, Will not your House hold Five hundred men? I answered,
you know what my house will hold as well as my self; and I smiling at it, he
answered, But it is no laughing matter, you shall have 500 men laid on you.

I desire it may be asked, when this was spoken: E. of Strafford.


He answered, It was in November last; and that my Lord of Strafford was not
then in the Kingdom.

Mr. Pym observed, That the Spirit of my Lord of Strafford could move in Sir
George Ratcliffe, wheresoever it was spoken; And Mr. Barnewell added, Mr. Pym.
it was done in November then last.

In the next place, We shall show the untruth of that part of my Lord of
Straffords Preamble, that says, The Soldiers in Ireland are disposed with so
much contentment to the People, that they are no burden to them.

Mr. Egor was called for a Witness, and Sworn. Mr. Egor a Witness.


Being interrogated whether he knew of any Soldiers Billetted in Dublin?
whether they were not a Grievance? whether that City has not a special Charter
of Exemption?

He answered, May it please Your Lordships, the City of Dublin does bear the
Charge of 40 Horse, and pays to them 45 l. a month for Billetting; which is
conceived they should not bear, in regard they have a Charter that says, Nullus
Mareschallus Capiat hospitium intra Civitatem; and therefore they conceive it a
heavy burden, and it is as much as a Subsidy: And another part of the City
standing in another County, pays 10 l. a month; so they pay in all 55 l. a
month.

I humbly desire he may be asked, whether before my Lord of Straffords time,
and as long as he can remember, The Lord-Deputies Foot-guard, and E. of
Strafford.
Horse-Companies, were not Billetted in Dublin?

He answered, To the Foot-guard, when my Lord of Faulkland was there, they gave
Lodging continually; but it was never drawn to matter of money: And till now we
had never Horse upon us, except it were for a month, or so.

In the next place, We humbly desire the Remonstrance of the Nobility, Mr. Glyn.
and the House of Commons in Ireland, might be read as Testimonies of my Lord
of Straffords Justice.

I desire to know whether questions are to be asked of matters not contained E.
of Strafford.
in the Charge, as the Remonstrance is not.

My Lords, The Subverting of the Laws, and Corruption in Government Mr. Glyn.
and Justice, is generally laid in the Charge; and he has answered, that he
has administered Justice with Integrity: And this we produce to show, That the
frontespiece of his Answer, is in that part untrue.

To prove the Truth of the Copy of the Lords Remonstrance now produced, the
Lord Digby of Ireland was Sworn; and he on his Oath said, That the Copy was
delivered him at his coming over, by the Clerk of the Lords House in Ireland,
to be brought over hither by Order of the Lords there.

And the Lord Baltinglasse Deposed, That he knew it to be the Clerks hand; and
they were both present at the Voting of it.

The same was read, bearing date February 22. 1640. The Protestation
Remonstrance.
and Declaration of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled;
We desire to apply it to disprove part of the Preamble of my Lord of Straffords
Answer.

I desire my Lord Digby may be asked whether he gave his Vote to this E. of
Strafford.
Protestation;

We produce it not as the Act of any particular man, but of the Manager.
Lords.

Your Lordships may observe, that this is fallen out since my Impeachment of
High Treason here: And that it is followed by Faction and Correspondence, E. of
Strafford.
as in time might be made appear, if I could undertake it; and a strong
Conspiracy against me.

My Lords, These words are not to be suffered; Charging the House of Mr. Glyn.
Commons with Faction, Correspondency, and Conspiracy, We desire Your Lordships
Justice in this.

God forbid I should think there was, or could be any thing in that E. of
Strafford.
House, or any Member of it, but that which agrees with Truth and Justice, and
Equity. I must profess to Your Lordships, I had no Reflection or Intention,
either upon the Lords House there, or upon the Honorable House of Commons
here; but upon certain Persons that are not Members of the House here, that
have Correspondency with them in Ireland, that are not Members of the House
there.

We must consult with the House of Commons concerning the prosecution Mr. Glyn.
of this Exception to his words; and in the mean time we will reserve it to our
selves; and so we shall proceed.

We desire the Remonstrance made by the House of Commons in Ireland, (being
deposed unto by Patrick Gough, That about February 25. it was delivered him,
sealed up in a box, with other things, before his face; being called on by the
House to be brought to the Committee for Irish affairs in England) may be read.

Which Remonstrance was read accordingly. Remonstrance.


Your Lordships may observe, That my Lord of Straffords glorious Declaration
Manager.
of his own Merits, was confuted by the whole Parliament; and that the whole
sum of the Charge, is confirmed by the Testimony of all Ireland.

To the point of Revenue of Ireland; for the contradicting of my Lord of
Straffords Affirmation, That Ireland supporteth its own Charge;

Sir Edward Warder produced, and Sworn, was interrogated when the last money
was sent out of this Kingdom for support of His Majesty's Affairs of Ireland:

He answered, The last money sent over for payment of the Army there, Witness.
was in the Term of Easter, 1621. and it was 10000 l. in full of 20000 l. for
one whole years charge, beginning the first of April, 1619. and ending the last
of March following; which was 17 Iac.

Being interrogated, whether since that time the State here has been actually
charged with the Affairs of Ireland.

He answered, Nothing has been issued out of the Receipt of His Majesty's
Exchequer for the Maintenance of Ireland since this time, only such moneys as
have been lately issued for the Army, and what has been issued to the
Treasurer of the Navy, and the Officers of it, for the maintaining of Ships on
the Coast; but otherwise, no money has been issued as a constant settled thing
out of the Receipt of His Majesty's Exchequer, for any thing arising since the
last of March, 1620.

I desire he may be asked what was since issued for the Navy. E. of Strafford.


We admit that the Charge of the Navy continued diverse years after, yet a few
years before my Lord of Straffords Government it was taken Manager.
off too.

The Manager did so open it, and Sir Edward Warder did in effect set it Lord
High Steward.
forth so: Therefore that question was waved.

Sir Robert Pie produced, and Sworn to that point of Revenue; and being
interrogated to the same purpose,

Answered, No money has issued out of the Receipt, but as Sir Edward Witness.
Warder delivered it; and I know of no other money, but only for the Maritime
parts, something has been paid to the Treasurer of the Navy: And besides the
50000 l. of late, I know not any.

The Lord Mountnorris was called upon; and being asked whether the Charge of
7000 l. a year for the Navy of Ireland, was not taken off a year before my Lord
of Straffords Government:

He answered, I cannot say the sum was 7000 l. But two of the Whelps Witness.
employed there before my Lord of Strafford came to the Government, were
defrayed; whether wholly, or in part, I cannot tell, but they had good large
sums of money, and were paid in the Kingdom.

I desire my Lord Mountnorris may be asked, whether when I came to the
Government, the constant Charge did not exceed the constant Revenue; E. of
Strafford.
and how much?

It is true, the Irish gave sixscore Thousand pounds toward the Charge;
Manager.
so that the Supply came out of Ireland, though not out of the constant Revenue
of Ireland: but it came not out of this Kingdom.

He further answered, the Constant Revenue did not do it, There was Witness.
a Contribution by Loan from the Country, to supply it; but before my Lord of
Faulkland went over, I heard my Lord of Middlesex tell him, They must look for
no more money, England had nourished Ireland long enough, she must now live
upon her own Milk.

The reason why money did not go out, was because 120000 l. was supplied E of
Strafford.
by a Contribution; notwithstanding which, when he came to serve the King in
that Kingdom, the Crown was indebted very near 100000 l. Sterling.

He has received 300000 l. for Subsidies. Manager.


It will Appear on Accounts, to be bestowed faithfully and justly every E. of
Strafford.
penny, for the King.

To the point of my Lord of Straffords taking of 24000 l. of the Kings money,
and disposing it for a year and a half, notwithstanding His Majesty's Wants,
and the Necessities of the Army.

Sir Adam Loftus Vice-Treasurer, produced and Sworn, was interrogated, whether
my Lord of Strafford had not 24000 l. out of the Kings Revenue? and how long
time? and when was it paid in?

He answered, My Lord of Strafford and Sir George Ratcliffe, had never Witness.
a penny out of the Exchequer, but on such Warrants as I durst not deny them,
for their due Entertainment, and other things importing His Majesty's Service.
But I must confess, that they being Partners in the Customs, some moneys were
to be paid for the profits of the Customs which were in arrear; and Sir George
Ratcliffe moved me to give discharges for it, and he would give me my Lord
Lieutenants Bond, and his own, for paying of it upon demand; which I accepted
of, and accordingly did give those discharges.

Whence observe, discharges are money; for so much money should have Manager.
been paid in, and if it be intercepted, the King wants His money.

Being asked what was the sum; and how long was it kept:

He answered, The sum, as I take it, was 19000 l. on one Bond, and Witness.
5000 l. on another; and as I take it, it was in the year, 1638.

Being asked again, how long it was kept:

He answered, It was paid lately; within these three months.

Whence observe, it was since the questioning of him in Parliament. The Manager.
Parliament proves a good Officer for the King there.

I shall reserve my self to give full satisfaction to this in its proper time,
E. of Strafford.
it being part of my Charge; But at present I desire Sir Adam Loftus may be
asked the question, Whether when I came into that Kingdom, the constant Revenue
fell not short of the constant Charge, at least 20000 l. a year.

We except against Interlocutory discourses; and having now concluded this part
of the Charge, we desire, that if my Lord of Strafford would Manager.
say any thing in answer to what has been now said, he might say it presently,
else we should be on great disadvantages.

My Lords, I conceive the Proposition to be fair; and it is that which I
desire, my memory being weak, and not versed in these kinds of Proceedings: E.
of Strafford.
I intended to have made it my humble suit for longer time to Answer to this
days Proceedings, but shall readily Answer every particular Article in order as
they go along; and shall obey and observe the Order proposed. But as to these
things which I did not expect, as the Remonstrances, and other Matters opened,
being not in this particular Charge, I humbly crave Your Lordships leave and
liberty, to recollect my self, and then I will give them the best Answer I can.
For to Answer them suddenly I confess I am not so well fitted, as I trust I
shall be.

And I desire leave to say in the presence of Almighty God, That I shall desire
to be delivered from the Afflictions that God Almighty has laid on me for my
sins, no other way than as in the Intention of my heart, and Endeavor of my
mind, I have been most faithful and true to His Majesty and the Commonwealth;
and I well trust and hope, that by the time all these things come to
conclusion, and have been fully heard, I shall recover in great measure, the
favor and good Opinion of the Honorable House of Commons; in which House, I
have spent a great part of my time: And I doubt not but it is known to diverse
that sit here, what my Carriage and Behavior has been there. And I desire no
more, (and I am sure it will be granted, they are so just and good) but that
they will reserve toward me, an Opinion of Charity, that I give such an
Account, as may preserve me to be the same in their Opinion, that I was
formerly. I was never yet Impeached in my private Conversation, of untruth, and
hope they will think of me charitably, till they have heard the whole business;
and I doubt not but I shall take off, in great part, their hard Opinion, and
procure to my self, their Compassion and Favor; and that I shall go in peace
and quietness to my Grave, leaving all public Employments whatsoever. And I
humbly beseech the House of Commons, to incline a gracious Opinion to me, so
far forth, that I am the same man in Opinion, that I was when I was one of
them; and I doubt not but this, out of their Nobleness and Goodness, they will
afford me.

But for these particulars, I humbly crave, that with Your Lordships good
leave, I may have a little time with my self to consider them, because they be
new; and for the rest, I shall obey Your Lordships Order, and give them thanks.

No Exception is taken, but to what is affirmed in his own Answer; and the
Commons will think it another man's Answer, and not his own, if he Manager.
be not ready to make good the Truth of it. These things should not be new; for
every man should be ready to maintain his own Assertions.

I am (My Lords) in an unknown way, being not versed in these things; E. of
Strafford.
if I might have had the Assistance of Council, it would have been a great ease
to me: but it is not possible for me to recollect all which the Worthy
Gentleman has said so materially, and with so much weight. Matters of Fact I
could answer to, Article by Article; but to answer presently so great and
tedious a discourse, so well delivered, and so weighty, I profess I am not
able; my Memory being not able to carry it. But if Your Lordships would please,
out of Your Nobleness and Goodness, to give me Respite to recollect my self to
these things that be Generalities, I should be able to give a good Account
thereof, protesting seriously, That I think every part of the Preamble to be
very Just and True; and I hope, under favor, to make it appear so, when I
shall show those things which have not yet been so fully informed and known, as
I trust they may be hereafter.

My Lords, We humbly desire, that since my Lord of Strafford is not Manager.
ready to give Satisfaction to what has been disproved in his Answer, we may
proceed to that which he is ready to give Answer and Satisfaction to; and that
my Lord of Strafford might understand, That if he Answers not now what has
been said concerning the Preamble, he must have no time to Answer it hereafter.

I Appeal to Your Lordships; and I renew my Request, That I may for E. of
Strafford.
these, have time to recollect my Thoughts till next day: If it may not be
granted, I beseech Your Lordships to bear with many of my Infirmities, being
very great, both in Body and Mind; and to consider, That my sad Condition does
some way plead for a little Compassion and Favor, I being in a way I was never
in before, and having not the great Parts that others have. Yet rather than I
should be thought to Abuse Your Lordships with Untruths, I will do the best I
can to maintain my Answer presently; being confident, through the Blessing of
Almighty God, that though the particulars thereof are delivered with a great
deal of Weakness and Disadvantage, yet Your Lordships shall find them Truths,
my own Heart (I protest before God) telling me so; and hope that God will give
me Help and Assistance to make it appear so: And other than that I desire not
to be; for if I were the man I am represented, I were not worthy to live: I
confess, the Honorable House of Commons have proceeded against me with all
Reason and Justice that can be; being informed as they were, they could do no
less; if they had done less, they had not performed their Trust with that
fullness they should; and therefore I find no fault with them. But I beg leave
to express a Truth as well as God shall enable me; hoping it will appear, that
all I have said is true, as all is true to my knowledge. And I know it is in
the Heart of every man that hears me, That I should have time to clear a Truth;
no man can deny it: And therefore I humbly pray, I may not be suddenly taken,
protesting seriously, I have said nothing but what I knew, or verily believed
to be true.

We pray Your Lordships Resolution in this point, before we proceed Manager.
any further.

Their Lordships thereupon Adjourned to the Upper-House; and about half an hour
after, returned.

I am commanded to impart their Lordships Resolution, That since the Lord High
Steward.
Commons do not press these things as matters of Crime, but rather upon the
matter of Truth, they conceive my Lord of Strafford need not further time for
these particulars. And that if his Lordship will make any Answer to these
particulars, he is to do it now.

I shall never do other than readily obey whatsoever Your Lordships E. of
Straffords Speech.
should please to command me, my heart paying you Obedience; and so in truth
shall every thing that proceeds from me. The question (I observe) is matter of
Truth, or not Truth, in the Preamble (as they call it) of this my Answer; and
to that, with all the Humility and Modesty in the World, I will apply my self,
as not conceiving it any way becoming me to speak any thing of Sharpness in any
kind, but with all Humility and Reverence to bear all these Afflictions, with
acknowledgment unto Almighty God, and to lay them so to my heart, that they may
provide for me in another World, where we are to expect the Consummation of all
Blessedness and Happiness. And therefore to lay aside all these Aggravations by
words, wherewith I have been set forth to Your Lordships (only with this) that
I trust I shall make my self appear a person otherwise in my Dispositions and
Actions, than I have been rendered; and shortly and briefly, I shall fall upon
the very points, as near as I can, that were mentioned by that Noble Gentleman;
and if I should forget any, I desire to be remembered of them, that I may give
the best Answer I can on a sudden; with this Protestation, That if I had had
time, I should have given a far clearer Answer, than on the sudden I shall be
able to do.

I will take them as they lie in Order: And the first thing in this Answer is,
That in Ireland, by my means, many good Laws were made for increase of the
Kings Revenue, and for good of the Church and Commonwealth; and this I humbly
conceive, was not denied directly, only it was inferred, That Laws were of no
use where Will was put above Law.

That these Laws were made, the Acts of Parliament that are extant, and visible
things, do make appear; For (though I might express it darkly, by reason I
understood not matters of Law) the truth of it is, before such time as I came
there, the Statutes of Wills and Uses, and Fraudulent Conveyances, were not of
force in Ireland; by which there was a very great mischief that fell many ways,
both on the King, and specially on the English Planters: For by want of these
Statutes, no man knew when he had a good title; and old Entayles would be set
on foot, and by that means the later Purchaser avoided; by which means there
was a great loss and prejudice to the King in his Wards; which by these Laws
are settled, and the Laws of Ireland brought much nearer the Laws of England
than before. And in this point I conceive I am not absolutely gainsayed, but
only conditionally, that is, that notwithstanding this, I have set up another
Government, Arbitrary, and Tyrannical. To which, I shall not now trouble Your
Lordships with an Answer, that being in the particulars of my Charge. And thus
I think the first to be fairly and clearly Answered.

Then, that there were more Parliaments in the time of my Government, than in
50 years before. There were two in my time; and if I might call Witnesses, it
would appear, that there were not so many within that time before; but being
not material to my Defense or Condemnation, I will not trouble Your Lordships
with proof, unless you will require it; I having them here, that I think can
make it good. And whereas in my Answer I deny that I ever had hand in any
Project or Monopoly; and that I did prevent diverse, that otherwise would have
passed: I said that, under favor, with all duty and confidence; I must still
affirm it, That I never had hand or share in any manner of Monopoly or Project
whatsoever, unless the Tobacco-business were a Monopoly, which, under favor, I
shall clear not to be; but that being part of my Charge, I think it impertinent
now to give Answer unto it; but will satisfy Your Lordships in that behalf, in
proper time and place: But more than that of Tobacco, I say absolutely and
directly, I never had my hand or share in any Monopoly or Project; nay, I did,
as murh as I could, Oppose all of them, particularly the Monopoly of Iron-Pots;
for which, I reserve my self to Answer as part of my Charge: And a new Book of
Rates, whereby it was proposed, That the Rates of the Kings Customs might be
increased. And this I did Oppose and Disavow, albeit I was a sharer in the
Farm, and consequently should have had the Benefit and Advantage of it for my
proportion; and by the Kings gracious Goodness (when His Majesty came to be
more fully and clearly informed of it) it was stopped, and never went on: And
this I will make appear in that point of the Articles that concern the Customs.

The Fourth is, That I have not had any greater Power, or larger Commission,
than my Predecessors in that Government have had; which I conceive, under
favor, is not controverted, but granted, and therefore stands good to me; or
if it were controverted, I am able to make it appear, that I have brought in
nothing more than was formerly accustomed in the point of the
Deputies-Commission.

The next thing in my Answer is, That the Revenue of Ireland was never able to
Support it self before my coming thither; and that I say still, with all
Humility and Duty, is most true: And I trust to make it apparently true
presently, if Your Lordships will give me leave to call for, and examine my
Witnesses. It being the Proofs Your Lordships will look to, and not to what was
only alleged by that Worthy Gentleman: And further than Your Lordships shall
find proved, I desire not to be believed.

The proof offered against me, is by Sir Edward Warder, and Sir Robert Pie, who
testified, That from the year 1621. nothing went out of the Kings Exchequer to
supply the Irish Affairs, saving only for the Maritime occasions. And this I
believe to be true; for they be Gentlemen of Credit that speak it: and I will
believe them on their Words, much more on their Oaths.

But (under favor) there was for eight years together before my coming, a
Contribution of 20000 l. a year paid by the Country; which was no part of the
Kings Revenue, nor as I conceive, ever came into Account, nor was paid into the
Exchequer, as will appear on the Fifteenth Article; but was a Gift of the
Country, and applied to the Kings Occasions: and that determined, the Revenue
fell short 20000 l. of the Charge.

Besides, when I came into Ireland, the Crown was extremely indebted, above (as
I think (not to stand on particular sums and pence) 100000 l. Sterling. And by
the Gentleman's own saying, when I came out of Ireland, I left 100000 l. in the
Kings Coffers: And if any ask where the Account for the Subsidies is, There is
100000 l. Debt paid, 100000 l. left in the Kings Coffers; (For it appears by
Sir Adam Loftus, that there was 100000 l. in the Exchequer when I came from
thence) There was 15000 l. employed for buying Land, that yields the King 2000
l. a year. And so much of my Lord of Ormond, as yields 2500 l. a year: So that
the Accounts will show the bestowing of the Subsidies, with as much Advantage
as might be, for the Kings Service. That the Revenue was short, I could make
appear clearly. The occasion that no money came out of the Exchequer, was
accidental, by a Contribution of the Country, no Revenue of the Kings. And if
that had not been supplied, there had been no possibility of defraying the
Ordinary Charges of the Crown out of the Revenue; and that is the point wherein
I differ from the Gentleman, his meaning being, That the ordinary Revenue of
the Kingdom could not bear the ordinary Charge of the Kingdom. And I desire
that Sir Adam Loftus and Sir Robert Dillom, may be examined upon such questions
as shall be propounded in this point.

Your Lordship may examine them, but not upon Oath. Lord High Steward.


I will not displease, but perfectly obey in every thing. E. of Strafford.


It will not be denied, but the Revenue is increased by such means as my
Manager.
Lord of Strafford has increased it by; yet it was not the natural Revenue,
but the additional part, that came in by the Bounty of the Country, that
supported the Charge many years before my Lord of Strafford came: So that if it
be said Ireland supported not it self before he came thither, in the general
sense it is untrue; if it be said in a special sense, that the Kings proper
Revenue did not support it, that his Lordship says is true.

Whence I infer, that it was not much material to insist on this, for I meant
E. of Strafford.
it so; and it is plain and clear, that the Kings Revenue there was not able to
bear the Charge of that Kingdom, by very near 23000 l. or 24000 l. a year: And
it is now able to bear its own Charges, and yet there is an increase of Charge
by 600 Horse; by which, the Army is stronger than it was.

And whereas it is said, I was short in the Shipping; I affirm, that under
favor, I was not. It is true, that in the time of the late Justices, my Lord
of Cork, and my Lord Loftus, the last years Charge of the Shipping was paid
forth of Ireland: But it is as true, that when the Kingdom underwent the
Charge, they lessened the Charge of the Kings Army, by striking 500 off from
the Army; and transferred the Charge of their pay, to the easing of the Kings
Revenue on the Navy. But that Charge being now increased again, and brought to
the former certainty, I conceive I might truly say, There was in my time an
ease to the Crown of England, (all things considered) which formerly it had
not: It being not with the prejudice of the Kings Service elsewhere, or
lessening the standing Army, which in all times has been the strongest support
of the Kings Justice, and Ministers there; and which it deeply concerns the
Crown of England, to keep in such a Condition, that they may be responsible to
the King for the Services he shall Command: So that though the Shipping Charge
was paid the last year, yet so paid, that the Kings Army was weakened 500 Foot;
whereas now it is paid, and the Kings Army raised to a certainty again; and a
Change is made to the better; for instead of 500 Foot, there is 600 Horse. And
that I say, my Lord of Cork remembers very well, there being Letters of his,
That Sir Pierce Crosby his Regiment, should be put off, and the money for
maintenance thereof, should go to defray the Charge of the Kings Ships, for
guard of the Coast.

And yet the Charge is much more now than it was; for the Charge was then only
two Whelps, as my Lord Mountnorris said: And now there be three Ships, The
Swallow, a Ship of the Third Rank, and two lesser Vessels; so that I conceive
my Answer, in my sense, was true.

For the matter of having money out of the Exchequer, I conceive my Answer to
contain no matter of Untruth; for I had out of the Exchequer only 15000 l. and
for that the King will be answered 2000 l. a year good Fee-farm Rent, in lieu
of it; which he thought was no ill bargain. It is true, (I say) the money
spoken of by Sir Adam Loftus, was borrowed on my own, and Sir George Ratcliffes
Bond, to be paid upon sight. At that time (I praise God) I had Credit for 20000
l. and at this time (I thank God for that too) I have not Credit for 20 d. Gods
Will be done, I obey it. But this money is honestly and justly paid; Where is
the Crime then? might not I borrow of a Gentleman that would trust me with
money, but it must be an Offense? It is true, it was of the Kings money; but
the King had no use for it at that time. Had not I made use of it, it must
otherwise have lain in the Exchequer, and yielded no profit; and besides, I
borrowed it of one that was Accomptable for it.

But since I am put to it, I will show that which will clear it from being a
Crime indeed; which according to the Duty I owe unto His Majesty, my Master,
his Command hitherto have I kept private to my self: And that is the Kings
Warrant, being all of His own Hand writing.

Sir Adam Loftus, being then Vice-Treasurer, and now demanded the question,
Whether that Warrant was produced to him at the borrowing of the money,
confessed, that my Lord of Strafford never told him of the Witness.
Warrant.

The Warrant was read, containing a License to make use of 40000 l. Kings
Warrant read.
of His Majesty's Treasure, now in the hands of His Majesty's Vice-Treasurer,
for three years; Provided, that for Security, there be always left in the hands
of the Comptrollers, a Stock of Tobacco, amounting to 40000 l. at the least;
with a direction to conceal this particular favor to him, that it might not be
brought into precedent.

There was accordingly so much Tobacco left. But, by what Law E. of Strafford.
I know not, The Magazines are seized on by Order from the Commons House of
Parliament, my Goods possessed, and given over to others, to sell at their own
prices; my people imprisoned, as if they had been Traitors Goods, and as if an
Inquisition had been found upon me as a Traitor. And this is my Misfortune, to
be very hardly dealt withal by the Commons House there, to say no more.

And whereas by the Kings Goodness I had liberty to take 40000 l. I took but
24000 l. And where I had liberty to take it for three years, (which expires not
till Michaelmas next) I paid it in long before the time. And by this one
particular I hope it will appear to Your Lordships, and the Gentlemen of the
House of Commons, how Noble it will be to believe Charitably of me, till they
hear all can be said; for I trust, in the whole course of this Trial, to appear
an honest man.

And whereas I said, I never had but 15000 l. out of the Exchequer, and yet had
24000 l. borrowed as aforesaid. The King Commanded me I should not take notice
of His gracious Favor; and therefore I conceive, that in Duty to my Master I
ought not to have taken notice of it, otherwise my Answer should have clearly
and plainly expressed it: I never having Disobeyed His Majesty, nor, by the Grace
of God, never will.

For the 7000 l. for the Guard of the Irish Coast, that was mentioned already;
and I shall not need to Answer it further.

To the point of restoring the Possessions of the Church in a great measure; I
say, there was not only a Restitution, but a Preservation by an Act of
Parliament, for preserving the Possessions of the Church from being mis-used by
the present Incumbent, to the prejudice of the Successors; which Act, I wish
were in England: But that I conceive not to be Controverted, but granted me.

But it is said, The Possessions of the Church were restored in an Illegal way,
to please my Lord of Canterbury: To which I Answer, The Gentleman indeed spoke
it, but there is no proof of it, neither has he offered any proof; and till it
be proved, I conceive it not fit to trouble Your Lordships with Answering it: I
have done nothing in Church or Commonwealth, but Justly and Uprightly.

Albeit I conceive it a hard case, that having the Honor to be the Kings
Deputy sitting in Council, where there be Twenty who Voted as well as my self,
That I should be noted to Answer for them all, though I did constantly submit
my self to the Major part.

And as to my Lord of Canterbury, I beseech Your Lordships to think, That what
I have done for the Church of Ireland, was out of a faithful Conscience to God
Almighty, out of a desire to increase the Religion I Profess, and which I will
witness with my Blood, by the Blessing of Almighty God, if there should be
occasion. And when I have done it with respect to that Piety of His Gracious
Majesty, which I would faithfully pay Him. I desire it may not be put upon me,
as done in an respect only to my Lord of Canterbury, where no such thing is
proved: No, I did it out of Conscience, my Duty to God, to the King, and to the
People, that they might be instructed in the way to Eternal Life. And I beseech
Your Lordships to believe, I have a Heart a little greater than to do any such
thing to please any man living, with Modesty be it spoken.

For the Building of Churches, I confess, I built not any; and in my Answer I
said no more, but that Churches were built; which the Worthy Gentleman
acknowledged in some part. I confess they were not Built by me, or at my
particular Charge; nor do I say otherwise in my Answer: And it had been a vain
thing to have said it, though I had done it my self.

But it is said, the Answer is not right, in saying there be diverse Worthy
Churchmen preferred; and three are instanced in, Bishop Atherton, the Bishop
of D. and one Gwyn: To this I beseech Your Lordships, that I may be bold to let
the Gentlemen know, That Bishoprics are not in the gift of the Deputy, but of
the King; and that he is not Responsible for what the King does.

But not desiring to deny any thing that is true, I confess, I think Bishop
Atherton was unknown to His Majesty; and that I my self recommended him to the
Bishopric; and at that time I thought the Bishop a Person fit for that Charge:
But suppose he had a secret fault of his own, (God knows it was unknown to me)
may not a man be deceived in his Judgment of a man, but this shall be turned
against him? It is a very easy thing for a man to cover his faults from the
eye of the world; I thought him not a vicious man, he proved so, and he had his
merit, he suffered for it: And unless I had the Inspection of Almighty God, I
suppose, this cannot be laid to my Charge; if any private End or Respect should
appear in the doing of it, I desire no more of Your Lordships Favor; and I
profess, I had rather be out of the World, than not have the Favor of Your
Lordships, and the Honorable House of Commons; of whom I desire, that they
would hear me with that Equity that they hear every thing.

For the Bishop of D. all that is mentioned against him is, That he is
Impeached of High Treason by the Commons House of Parliament in Ireland: And
how the Bishop will acquit himself I know not; but for that the Bishop must
Answer for himself, not I.

This Bishop has lived in my House a long time, as my Chaplain; and I humbly
recommended him to that Bishopric, taking him (and I hope he will so approve
himself) to be a very Learned man, and that I think no body will deny:
certainly he has the Elements to make him a very Worthy Churchman as most I
know.

For that Gwyn, I profess I never heard of him before, nor do I know him; But
recollecting my thoughts, I think he was recommended to me by my Lord of D. for
in matters of the Church I did use that Gentleman; and if I were to begin the
World again, I would use him still, holding him a very honest Worthy man: And I
think there was some Rectory or Impropriation that the Earl of Cork had
possession of, which was restored to the Church; and it was of so small and
trivial a value, that they knew not who to get to serve the Cure; and on that
occasion this man was recommended to it: And I think, that if it shall come to
be examined, Thirty pounds a year will go far in his preferment. And if such a
thing should happen, and miscarry in his hands, it is no such heinous Crime as
is objected.

But I desire leave to show what I have done in this kind instead of this Mr.
Gwyn; and Your Lordships may see a List of those I have preferred to the Church
of Ireland, and perhaps they may be known to some of Your Lordships, and to
many Gentlemen of the House of Commons. And first I say, I preferred Mr. Gray,
and have done for him according to the means I had by the Favor and Goodness
of the King; perhaps he has that which is worth 3, or 4, or 500 l. a year by
my Gift. And this Mr. Gray (if I be not mistaken) was sometimes Chaplain to a
Noble Person that sits on the Earls Bench; and if it were material further to
enquire of him, I might give satisfaction what he is. I likewise brought into
that Kingdom Mr. Tilson, now Bishop of Elphin, and sometimes Fellow of
University College of Oxford, a most Worthy, Honest, Religious Person he is;
and those that know him, I am sure will give him that Testimony. I likewise
preferred Dr. Margetson, Dean of Christ's Church; he was of Cambridge, and a
Worthy man. Mr. Forward, Dean of Drummore, an Oxford man; who if he were known,
would appear worthy of that Preferment. Mr. Dean Cressy an Oxford man. Mr.
Road, Dean of Derry, a Cambridge man, of Sydney College. Dr. Wentworth, Dean
of Armagh, of Oxford. Dr. Price, Dean of Conaught, of Christ's Church in Oxford.
Mr. Thorpe, a Cambridge man. I preferred likewise one Mr. Parry, whom I found
in Ireland; but all the rest I brought, and sent for out of England: Nay, I
sent for them, and did those things for them before they did ask the Question,
or knew of it; That being a means, under Gods Blessing, to conform that Kingdom
to the Church of England. And these, and far greater numbers than these, to my
best Judgment and Understanding, I made use of as Instruments to Gods Glory,
His true Service, and the reducing of the people to the Profession of the same
Religion that is here in England; and for no other end. But concerning my
Carriage of the Trust reposed in me by the King, touching these Ecclesiastical
Preferments, I desire no other Testimony or Witness for me, but the Lord
Primate of Ireland, who is sick, and cannot come hither: To whom I will Appeal,
whether I have not in my preferring to the Church Preferments, carried my self
with all clearness and care I could possibly.

To the point of increasing of Protestants; if Your Lordships please to hear
any thing in that kind, I shall call my Lord Dillon, and Sir Adam Loftus, who
if they should be asked, Whether there be more Protestants in Dublin now than
when I first came thither? I doubt not but they would give an account of a
greater number.

We Charge him not upon this point; so it was set aside. Manager.


My preferring of none but Protestant Officers, if I mistook not, the Noble
Gentleman did acknowledge. E. of Strafford.


To the disposing of the Army without Grievance to the Subject; I Billetting of
Soldiers in Dublin.
leave that, (which was spoken with so much Advantage and Ability, above any
thing that from such a poor man as my self, could be expected) and proceed to
that which was proved; observing, That one only Testimony was produced, (viz.)
Alderman I. who said, they have a special Charter at Dublin to exempt them from
Billetting of Soldiers. But whether it be so or no, it has ever been denied by
the Deputies: And by his own Confession, the Foot-Companies of my Lord of
Faulkland were Billetted in Dublin. And whereas it was said they had Lodgings,
not Money, That was altered upon a Composition with the Soldiers, who can
expect only Lodging; but if for the Ease of the Town they will allow the
Soldier Money, and leave him to provide for himself, it is all one.

For the Horse-Troops, My own is, and ever since I was there, has been
Billetted in Dublin. And it is in the power of the Deputy to Garrison part of
the King's Army where he pleases, and without controversy, has been so at all
times.

And I desire that my Lord Ranulagh may be asked, Whether the Soldiers of the
Company he has, be not Billetted in Athlone, at least some part of it. It is
true, my Lord of Faulkland's Troop was not Billetted in Dublin; but they were
in the Counties round about, which was more chargeable.

And besides, here is produced but one single Witness; and I hope my own Answer
may stand equal, and in as much Credit, as a single Testimony, that on the
matter, confesses the thing in a great part.

For the increase of Shipping, the Gentleman questioned it not; and really
Increase of Shipping.
there is now 100 Tun for one, that was there before my coming. And if I had
time to send into Ireland for the Certificates of the Officer of the Ports,
(the Surveyor, I think) who views the Ports once a year, it should appear to
Your Lordships, that I have not abused you, nor the Honorable Gentlemen that
hear me. And whether that be an Argument that the Trade and Wealth of the
Kingdom is improved, (I appeal to all that hear me) when the Shipping does so
much increase: And the Customs, which were not above 13000 l. a year, are come
to 40000 l. and that on the same Book of Rates.

Concerning the Sentencing of Jurors, and the questioning of them Jurors
Sentence in the Star Chamber.
in the Star Chamber. It is true, diverse of their Sentences were past: And to
those Sentences I refer my self, till something be proved against the Truth and
Justice of them. And I think it will stand with Your Lordships Goodness, to
judge the best of the Court of Castle-Chamber, wherein the Deputy has but one
Voice, They being the King's Ministers, and standing upon their Oaths to do
their Duties: But I think in my Conscience, there was the greatest reason in
the World to sentence those persons. And when it comes to be examined, it will
prove so. And unless a strict hand be in that kind held upon the Natives, the
Priests shall carry them against all things that can be. For either they do
not, or will not, understand their Evidence: so that it begets one of the most
crying sins in Ireland. And if some Examples have been made, they are upon
strict grounds and reasons of State. For if Jurors going directly and
manifestly contrary to their Evidence, be not punished, that high and ancient
Trial by Jury, will fall. And is it not ordinary in England to have Juries
Sentenced for not finding according to the Evidence? But if any one has not
been Just, upon instancing of the particulars, I will Answer for his Vote as
well as I can: For it must stand or fall according to the Merit of the Cause.

But one thing which I observe the Gentleman to say, is very Considerable; for
he tells what was spent there this last year. This I have little to Answer for:
For when I came out of Ireland, there was 100000 l. in the Exchequer; and how
it has been issued, I know not, but it has not been done by my Warrant or
Direction; yet I doubt not but it will appear, when examined, that it has been
faithfully and justly disposed. But I am not to Answer for it, only I can say,
That when I came out of that Kingdom, the Kingdom was so far from being 60000
l. in Debt, (as some such thing was spoken) that there was 100000 l. in the
Kings Coffers.

And for the 50000 l. received by me in England, Mr. Vice-Treasurer in Ireland,
is Accomptable for it, though Mr. Vice-Treasurer never touched the money, and
my self as little. And Mr. Vice-Treasurer discharges himself of it by Warrants
issued from me, and charged it upon other Accomptants; who when they come to
Account, I doubt not but a good Account will be given. Though (under favor of
the Gentleman) of the 50000 l. 14000 l. is yet unpaid, only there is an
Assignment. But it lies on him and his Credit for discharge of the Kings
Service: And it must lie on him, or on some other person, if himself have
nothing left him.

And whereas it is said, the money I had as borrowed, was taken out when the
Kings Army was in want, I desire Your Lordships to observe, It was two years
ago when I had this money; and then there was 100000 l. in Surplusage. And
though the King gave me Liberty, of His Goodness, to use it three years, it was
not wanting to the Army when it stood in need of it.

The next thing urged, was my Cozenage in the Custom-house; and that I had
there Cozened the King notably, 5 or 6000 l. a year deep.

To Answer this, I reserve my self till I come to the particular Article; but
desire leave with all Modesty to say, That it shall appear I have not Cozened,
nor deceitfully abused His Majesty for a Farthing Token, neither in that, nor
in anything else. And that there is no other Allowance, nor Defalcation by the
Grant wherein I am Interessed for 15600 l. a year, and 8000 l. Fine, then was
allowed to the former Farmers, that had it at the Rent of 13000 l. a year. And
that I have made the King a much more profitable bargain than he had, or could
have without it.

The next was for the Revenues of the Church, That they were got without Rules
of Justice; And were an Offering of Rapine. And that I had an Eye to my own
Preferment, in the Person of my Lord of Canterbury: To that I have already
Answered.

And thus having run over all the Preamble, I humbly beg leave to make some
Observations upon the Testimonies produced, (viz.) That the Examinations of Sir
John Clotworthy, and my Lord Ranulagh, I conceive, do not concern me. Mr.
Barnewells was for things spoken when I was out of the Kingdom; and were
concerning Sir George Ratcliffe, and not me.

For the Remonstrances showed, wherein they disclaim the Preamble to the Act
for four Subsidies, I beseech Your Lordships to consider, how unlikely it is
that I should do any thing in that kind fraudulently or surreptitiously: For
by the Custom of that Kingdom, the Laws must be transmitted hither under the
Hand of the Deputy and Council, and so pass the Seal, and be returned to
Ireland; when that Law was transmitted, I was here in England, as I take it:
And absolutely and directly, I protest I never knew any thing in the World of
that Preamble, never saw it, nor heard of it, I think, till I saw it in the
Copy of the Remonstrance; I never heard it was excepted against, it having
passed the Vote, and three times reading, in both Houses: And I would have
consented to have it struck out, as in truth I will now, being far from any
thing of vanity, and not thinking my self better or worse by being put in or
out: And if it were charged upon me as a Crime, or were material for me to
prove it, I think I could by Witness in Town prove, That it was the general
Vote of the Commons House, and passed with as much Applause and Cheerfulness,
as any thing. And, that if my Lord Dillon, and Sir Adam Loftus, and some other
of the Irish Commissioners, were examined upon Oath, I believe they would Swear
they never heard any Exceptions against it, till the time I was Impeached with
High Treason.

For the Particular concerning Sir Pierce Crosby, it concerned not me; but the
reason of his being put from the Board was this: All Laws must first be
transmitted from the Deputy and Council; the Bill against which he Voted was
transmitted, Sir Pierce Crosby was there, and set his hand to the transmission;
and because he did not except against it then, being a Member of the Board, but
did except against it afterward, it was thought fit he should be Sequestered
(as I remember) till His Majesty's Pleasure should be known; but Committed he
was not: And it was done by the Vote of the whole Board, but no way to infringe
the Liberty of the House; and so in Obedience to Your Lordships, as near as I
could, with a great deal of Weakness and Infirmity, I have said as much as I
can for the present recollect, toward the making good the Truth of my Preamble.

And I conclude with this humble suit, there being some Exception took at some
Words that fell from me, Many men's Tongues and Mouths may offend, where their
Hearts do not: And that in truth I may say, my Heart did not offend against
that Reverence and Duty I shall always pay, on all occasions, to the Honorable
House of Commons, and every Member of it; but to others, that are neither
Members of this House, nor of the House in Ireland, I meant what I said: And I
do beseech the Gentlemen of the House of Commons to accept my Acknowledgment of
this truth: and that my Words may not be any ways raised against me as a Cause
of their thinking worse of me; or that I should be peccant or offending, in
having other thoughts of the Members and Proceedings of the House, than with
all Submission, and all belief of the Equity of it.

To which Defense, one of the Managers appointed for this days Service, briefly
replied, in substance as follows.

What I have said in Answer of the Preamble, was not by way of Manager.
Charge, but only for disproof of that whereby my Lord of Strafford would take
away, or nullify the Charge. So that if the Charge remains in force, the
Services performed by him, are not effectual to mitigate it.

That what we have proposed still stands unavoided, as we conceive,
notwithstanding any thing my Lord of Strafford has said.

That as concerning Sir Pierce Crosby his agreeing to the Transmission, if that
be true: That there is a preparative part of the Law, and there Sir Pierce
Crosby might speak as a Councellor; But there is a Legislative part of the Law,
and that is done in Parliament; and these being distinct, if Sir Pierce Crosby
did do any thing at Council Table, it deprived him not of his Liberty to speak
in Parliament. But we are informed, he gave his denial to consent to the
Transmission.

And if my Lord of Strafford were not guilty in his own Person of breach of
Privilege; yet if under his Government, Privilege of Parliament be broken, it
is no matter of Merit to say, he procured Parliaments.

It is no Answer to say, things are not proved, when any thing we urged, is
contained under an Article; for then he refers the proof when he comes to the
Article; as many things concerning the Lands of the Clergy, will be made good
in the proofs of the proper Article.

That he has preferred many Divines; that is no part of his Merit, nor takes
away his fault, though it be true.

That for the Value of his living, we never heard of it till on this occasion;
but be it small or great, it is nothing to justify my Lord of Strafford, being
offered to this purpose; That though his Lordship were careful of the Lands of
the Ministers, He was not careful of the Ministers themselves, in suffering a
Groom to execute that high Function; Ministers being not to be chosen according
to the Quality of the Living, but according to the Quality of the Function.

That for the matter of Monopolies, if his Lordship do stop any, he may stop
them for sinister Reasons and Respects; and however, there is no Compensation,
doing his Duty in one thing, not satisfying for Neglect in another.

And then concluded, That what we have not now replied unto, shall be made good
in the Charge; and ought not in their Lordships Opinion, make my Lord of
Strafford more plausible; for the Charge shall be made good against him in the
truth of the Fact, and the Aggravation of it.

Hereupon the Court was Adjourned, and the Committee directed to proceed to the
Proofs conducing to the particular Charge, the next Morning.

The Third day.
Wednesday, March 24. 1640.
Gentlemen,
YOU who are of the Committee to manage the Evidence against the Earl of
Strafford, I am to acquaint you, Their Lordships have considered Lord High
Steward.
of that point of Sir Pierce Crosby, his being examined as a Witness, and my
Lord of Straffords Exceptions; and have resolved that he shall be Examined; and
that the Validity of his Testimony shall be left unto their Lordships Judgments.

Your Lordships have with great Patience attended the Charge that has been
read, and the Answer, and the Exceptions taken to the Preamble, Mr. Maynard
Manager.
which my Lord of Strafford to ingratiate himself, did make to the main of his
Defense.

My Lords, I shall repeat little of that that has been said, only pardon me if
I say this to Your Lordships, That wherein my Lord of Strafford answered to
very many particulars, yet to that one main he answered not, which was
principally objected against him; which I therefore speak to put him in mind of
it, that if he can, he may Answer: And that is, Your Lordships were pleased to
hear the Complaint and Protestation of the whole Kingdom of Ireland read before
you. The principal of their Aim seems to be, to take off the Extolling of my
Lord of Strafford, that himself, or his Agents, had put upon him in a Bill of
Subsidies; wherein indeed the Praise and Honor due to His Majesty, was much
Attributed to my Lord of Strafford, which grieved the Parliament, who would
take it off, and my Lord of Strafford is now willing to lay it down; and he
does well to do so when he can keep it no longer, when those from whom he took
it by fraud or force, would wrest it again from him. I desire Your Lordships to
remember, and I am sure you will, That the main of our Complaint is, His
alteration of the fundamental Laws against Will; His introducing of new Laws at
his Will and Pleasure: This is not only the Cry, but the Testimony of a whole
Kingdom before Your Lordships; of all the Lords and Commons of Ireland.

I shall not touch that which concerns breach of Privilege of Parliament, he
would fain put that off on Sir George Ratcliffe, his bosom Friend, and put it
off himself. My Lord of Strafford Sequestered Sir Pierce Crosby from the
Council, his Vote went with it, others joined with him; but I am sure he moved
it, he concurred with it.

But now, My Lords, I humbly Address my self to that we are ready to maintain,
The Body of the Charge: And because some time has been spent between the
reading of the Charge, and the main of the Defense, I desire leave to open what
is the Nature, what the Height and Quality of the Offense, of which this great
Lord stands Accused before you?

My Lords, It is a Charge of the highest Nature that can be against a man; A
Charge of High Treason. It is a Treason, not ending and expiring in one single
Act of a discontented Heart, but a Habit, a Trade, a Mystery of Treason
exercised by this Great Lord, ever since the Kings Favor bestowed on him.

My Lords, It has two Evils to deprive us of that which is good; that is, to
subvert and take away the fundamental, the ancient Laws, whereby we are secure
of whatsoever we do enjoy; it has (My Lords) a positive Evil in it, to
introduce instead of that an Arbitrary Government, bounded by no Laws, but by
the Evil Councels of such Ministers as he has been.

My Lords, It is the Law that gives that Sovereign tie, which w^ all Obedience
and Cheerfulness, the Subject renders to the Sovereign. It is the Law (My
Lords) that gives Honors to the Lords and Nobles; Interest, Property, and
Liberty to the Subject.

My Lords, The Law, (as it is the Foundation and Ground of all these) has its
distribution in a course of Justice. Justice is derived (as by so many
Channels) by the several Courts of Justice; whereby the Kings Justice (for it
is His) is brought and conveyed to the Subject.

My Lords, Of all this has my Lord of Strafford endeavored, not only to put
the Subject out of present Possession, but to make him incapable of the future
Benefit of it.

Other Treasons, yea, a Treason against the Person of a Prince (which is the
most Transcendent and High Treason that can be) fall short of this Treason; For
a good Prince may be gathered to His Fathers, yet another may succeed Him, that
supports the Glory and Justice of His Throne. We have had Experience of it:
When blessed King James was taken from us to Heaven, Sol occubuit and nox nulla
secuta est. But if any one such a design as this should take effect, That the
Law and Justice should be taken from the Throne, and Will placed there, we are
without hope of ever seeing Remedy.

Power in so great a measure taken, is not easily laid down, unless it be by
the exceeding great goodness of so merciful and just a Prince as we have.

My Lords, The Particulars of this Treason are Conveyed to Your Lordships in 28
several Articles. I shall shortly and briefly touch but the Heads of those on
which I shall insist, and give some distribution of them. And I think the best
way will be this; To consider first what he did, and what he said, before he
went into Ireland; then what he did and said there; and what he has done
since. And in all of them, you will find this his main design, which I have
opened, That Law might no where stand against his Will; and to settle it, that
he might continue so.

My Lord has declared this in incroaching Jurisdiction where it was not, in
exercising an Arbitrary Power under that Jurisdiction; In taking on him a Power
to make Laws; In Domineering and Tyrannizing over the Lives, the Liberties, the
Goods, the Estates, and whatsoever is the Subjects.

And (My Lords) this has he done, not only on those of the meaner sort that
could not resist him, but on the Peers, on the greatest and most ancient
Nobility of Ireland: And what might Your Lordships expect, but the same measure
at his hands, had his Will had its passage here, which it had in Ireland.

I shall now come to the particular Articles.

1. And first, Whereas it pleased His Majesty to place him with Power and
Honor in his hand in the North as President, he had not been long there; but
that Commission which bounded and pleased his Predecessors, he must needs
surmount and overgo. There was a Commission in 16 Iac. which the then Lord
Deputy had, in which was that Legal phrase Secundum antiquum cursum, his own
Commission 4 Car. pursued that, without any alteration; but being in but four
years, this would not please his boundless Ambition, he must needs have the
Power that the Lords in the Star Chamber have, put in in express terms, a Power
to proceed according to the course of the Chancery, that his Conscience might
limit other men's Estat^; That his Injunctions might stay other Proceedings at
Law: And which is highest of all, if any thing be done in that Court, within
these Instructions, than no Prohibition should be Awarded. He would make
himself safe from any supervising of other Courts.

If he Committed any man to Prison, though a Habeas Corpus were granted (then
which, the Subject has no other remedy to vindicate his Liberty) the Officer
(for the encouragement of those which be under his Power) must not obey it. And
if any Fine be put upon the Officer, then comes a command in this Commission,
That the Fine shall be discharged; so he not only takes a Power to himself, but
also takes the Scepter of Justice out of the Kings Hands; for by this means
there is an impossibility the Subject should have the Justice that my Lord
knows is due to him; and he knows it right well: for when he was a Member of
the House of Parliament, it was his own motion, who now stands at the Bar,
That all the Officers and Ministers of State, should serve the King according
to that Law, and he is the first Officer and Minister of State, that breaks it;
and in the most transcendent degree that ever it was broken.

My Lords, He does in this, as much as in him lies, say to the Laws, Do your
worst; You can but Fine, and that you can do shall come to nothing; The Fine
shall not be paid, The Officer shall not obey you.

If this had been a single Act, we should never have accused him of this
Treason, though it comes very High, and very Transcendent. But the Oppressions
and Injustice, the Councels and Speeches that we present to Your Lordships, we
present them not singly, but as together, designing and noting, what a
Treasonable purpose and disposition is in him.

2. My Lords, The next thing he does when he is in the North among the Justices
of the Peace, and the People attending for Justice, you shall see what
Encouragement he gives them to look for it; and how foul a thing he dares to
fling on the Sacred Majesty that did advance him. He tells the Justices that
were to do Justice, and the People that were to receive Justice, That some of
the Justices were all for Law, but they should find, The Kings little Finger is
heavier than the Loins of the Law. Your Lordships may consider what a
transcendent Speech this was, out of whose Mouth it came, what sad Accidents
happened upon it; nothing could move this Lord to utter it: but his Will and
his Violence must out, though he burst a Kingdom in pieces for it.

3. The next thing is this, When he goes into Ireland you will find his Temper
and Spirit not a whit Allayed; but now being further from His Majesty's Person,
he is higher in his Power and in his Will. It is true, that Kingdom was annexed
to this many years ago; but they that now possess the greatest part of it, are
Subjects of this Kingdom, descended from them that went from hence thither. Yet
he tells them in a solemn Speech, not suddenly but solemnly, That Ireland is a
Conquered Nation, and the King might do with them what he would; and that their
Charters were nothing worth, and bind the King no longer than he pleases.
Surely (My Lords) We might see what he would do if he had Power. But God be
blessed, we find not that disposition any where resented by His Majesty; and we
hope that such Councels shall never have Access to so good and gracious an Ear.

4. The next thing, he stays not in words, but will be as good as his word if
he can; and he begins high. For that we present next, is a Peer of the Kingdom
thrust out of his Possession by my Lord of Straffords Order; and when he Sues
at Law for recovery of his Right, my Lord Threatens him. Truly Threatenings are
not good, in such a case, where a man Sues for Justice, And from him that ought
to Administer Justice, and further him in it; yet he Threatens him
Imprisonment, to which Peers are not ordinarily liable.

First my Lord tells him, He will not have Law nor Lawyers question his Orders;
he might debar the Lawyers in some Cases, but why a man should have a Spleen at
the Law, that his Orders should not be examined by, that I know not. And he
goes higher; for when there was an occasion to speak of an Act of State, he
tells him, That he will make him and all Ireland know, that as long as he had
the Government there, any Act of State made, or to be made, should be as
binding as an Act of Parliament.

My Lords, He cannot go higher in Speeches than this, That an Act of State of
his own making, and his own Power, should be as binding as an Act of Parliament.

Nay, he tells them in Parliament, That they were a Conquered Nation, and must
expect Laws as from a Conqueror.

5. Next we shall show diverse Instances wherein he exercises Power over the
Lives, Lands, and all that is the Subjects; deduced into several Articles, viz.
the 5th, the 6th, the 7th, and the 8th.

In particular, one I shall be bold to open, That is the Case of my Lord
Mountnorris, another Peer of that Kingdom, and a great Officer there. Some
words fell from that Lord, speaking of one that had trodden on my Lord of
Straffords Toe, That he hoped the Party did it not in Revenge; for he had a
Brother that would not have sought such a Revenge. For these words, spoke at a
private Table, half a year, yea seven months before, my Lord of Strafford calls
a Council of War, and judges his Lordship to death.

My Lords, It is no wonder that he would make the Kings little Finger so heavy,
that could make his own Toe heavy enough to tread the Life of a Peer under his
Feet.

And he did not only give Sentence in that Case, but caused Execution to be
done in another Case, upon one D. who was condemned by Martial Law, and hanged
at Dublin, where there was no War at all.

Other particulars will follow when I fall upon proof.

9. Then he comes to make Laws; and that is in the 9th Article. By the Laws of
England and Ireland too, the Ecclesiastical Power is distinct from the other,
it not extending to the Imprisonment of the Person, but is to attend the Kings
Courts, and to receive directions from thence; yet he makes a Warrant to the
Bishop of Down, (and he made it to others too) That if any of the poorer sort
did not appear upon the Bishops Citation, or not obey when they did appear,
they should be Attached and Imprisoned; Here he makes a Law of himself, and
subjects the Liberties of the Subjects to his own Pleasure; but this was for
the poorer sort of People, though Justice sees no difference in matters of
Estate, betwixt Poor or Rich: But when he has brought it on the Poor, he will
afterward bring it on the Rich.

10. The next is a Power of laying Impositions on the Subjects: First he is a
Farmer of the Customs, he puts excessive Rates upon the Commodities; that which
is worth but 5 s. as the Hydes, he will have valued at 20 s. and the Wool,
which is worth 5 s. he will have it valued at 13 s. 4 d. and by this he takes
away, in effect, whatsoever the Commodity is worth; for the Customs come very
near the Value.

Another particular in this I shall be bold to open, and I hope his Lordship
will provide to give an Answer, He has advanced by this the Kings Customs, and
a Rent of 1350 l. is increased to the Crown: But it will appear to Your
Lordships, that the Crown has lost, and he only has gained. And whereas my
Lord of Strafford says there was no other Defalcations in his Patent, than in
the former, that will fall out to be otherwise; for this is the State of the
bargain,

There was a former Rent of 9700 l. which the Duke of Buckingham paid out of
this Farm. On the Earl of Straffords Patent that Rent is reserved, and as much
as came to 1350 l. more, but in lieu of 1350 l. advanced to the King, my Lord
of Strafford has in his Grant the Surplusage of Wines (which were not in the
Dukes Patent) worth 3400 l. a year, besides a Rent paid for the Term of the
Wine of 1400 l. And whereas there was no defalcation of the Customs of London,
Derry and Colerane in the Dukes Lease, which amounted to 1500 l. a year; my
Lord of Strafford must have a defalcation for them: And then the Seizures,
which were 500 l. a year; and for Knockvergus and Straniford 2500 l. a year, so
here is above 5000 l. a year less to the Crown, in lieu of the advance of 1350
l. a year, besides the increased Customs, amounting to 12000 l. a year: And yet
he again has far exceeded this proportion. We say further, he does not only
impose on the Subjects, but takes away that which is the Subjects utterly and
entirely, as in the case of the Flax. It is true, the Employment of it belongs
to Women; but it is the greatest Commodity (one of them) of that Kingdom, and
of greatest profit, the Revenue of the Custom of it being 800 l. a year; and
this he has gotten into his own hands and possession. This he got from the
Natives, and took it to himself. He does for that purpose, issue a
Proclamation, That they shall use it in such a way wherein the Natives were
unskilled, and if it were not so done, it should be seized; and it was seized
accordingly, yea their Houses broke open, and their Goods taken away, and
brought to my Lord of Straffords house, where they were employed in his works.
The like we shall instance in Tobacco.

15. Next we shall show to Your Lordships how he has levied War upon the Kings
Subjects. We opened in the beginning, what an Arbitrary Jurisdiction he set up;
here we shall show how he used it by a mere course of Enmity and Hostility. For
(My Lords) this was the course; If a Decree or Order were made by him, and not
obeyed, he issues a Warrant to the Sergeant at Arms, to go to the next
Garrison, and take Soldiers, with an Officer, and carry them to the House of
the party in question; it is no matter where it was, but to the House of them
that were pretended to be disobedient, they were to go: If the Decree had been
to raise so much money, or to put parties in possession. In plain terms, the
Soldiers were to lie like Free-booters, and Enemies on the King's People, to
eat them up. They have killed their Sheep, their Oxen, and they have lain not
on the parties only, but on their Tenants, till the party comes in and renders
himself. They have burnt their Houses, taken their Wives, and Friends, and
carried them away, till Obedience was rendered, and this is a levying of War
upon the King; For the King and the People are both so united in Affection and
Right of Law, that there cannot be Violence offered to the King, but it
redounds to the People; nor can any Oppress the People in this sort, but it
redounds to His Majesty. Besides, it is contrary to a Law of that Kingdom;
whereby it is Enacted, That if any person shall assess Horse or Foot, on any of
the Kings People, without their consent, it is High Treason.

The next thing we shall go to, is the Favor he showed to the Papists, in
their Compositions and Exemptions from all penalties of Law; for they were
expressly not to be proceeded against, nor to be Convicted; and so that which
has influence into Religion and Reformation, is quite taken away, and nothing
but matter of Profit is left.

The next Article is that that concerns the Kingdom of Scotland. First he
begins with them in Ireland; contrives an Oath, which is set forth in the
Articles, That they shall obey the Kings Royal Commands without exception. This
he enforces, by Fining and Imprisoning them that disobeyed him: And so in all
the other particulars when his Proclamations were broken, his course was by
Fine and Imprisonment to enforce an Obedience.

My Lords, He does not only press them in their Estates, but strives to infuse
into His Majesty an ill Opinion of them; he provokes and incites Him by all his
Arguments, to lay down his Mercy and Goodness, and Justice, and to fall into an
offensive War against that Kingdom. He gives out, that the Nation of them (not
this or that man) are Rebels and Traitors: And if it please the King to bring
him back to the Sword (indeed he is fit for that, it is a violent weapon) he
will root out the Scottish Nation, Branch and Root; some few excepted of those
that had taken the Oath.

When he comes into England, he find that His Majesty, with great Wisdom, had
pacified those Storms and Troubles that threatened us there: Yet he does incense
the King still to follow this to an Offensive War, and prevails; He plots to
call a Parliament, but with an intention (if it furnished not his design) it
should be broken, and he would set up other ways of force to raise Moneys of
the Kingdom; and this fell out unhappily: For thus far his project took, the
Parliament was broken; and broken at the very time when the subject was in
debate and consideration, how to have yielded Supply to His Majesty.

But that he might break it, he falsely informs the King, That the Parliament
had denied to Supply him; there is his Counsel, that the Parliament had
forsaken the King; and now the King having tried his People, might use all
other ways for the procuring and raising of moneys; and the same day wherein
that Parliament was unhappily Dissolved, he gives his further Counsel to His
Majesty, (which because no man can put such a Spirit of Malice into the words
besides himself, I shall take the boldness to read) That having tried the
Affections of his People, he was loose and absolved from all Rules of
Government; and he was to do every thing that Power would admit. And that His
Majesty had tried all ways, and was refused, and should be acquitted both of
God and man. And that His Majesty had an Army in Ireland, which he might employ
to reduce this Kingdom. It is added in the printed Book (to reduce them to
Obedience) I know not who Printed it, but the Charge is only (to reduce this
Kingdom.)

And (My Lords) you may please to consider, what a sad time this man took to
reflect upon these bad Councels, when our Hearts were swollen with Sorrow for
that unhappy breach of the last Parliament. And what does he advise the King?
what positions offers he? That he was absolved from all Rules of Government. If
there be no Rule of Government, (My Lords) where is the Rule of Obedience? for
how shall the People know to obey, when there is no Rule to direct them what to
obey? He tells the King he was refused, which was untrue; for he was not
refused to the last breath we had in Parliament: but we spoke in that point,
how to supply the King, and to prefer it at that time, before the Complaints of
our just Grievances.

But what does he fall into? that which in another Article we charge him with,
a Plot and Conspiracy betwixt him and Sir George Ratcliffe to bring in the
Irish Army for our Confusion, to root out our Laws and Government; a pernicious
Counsel. He says not you shall do it; but he that persuades it, does as much as
if in express terms he had councelled the acting of it. Does he mean that we
should be to his Irish Pattern; (for speaking of the Irish Army, consisting of
Papists and his Adherents, he said, that he would make it a Pattern for all the
Kingdoms;) did he mean to reduce us to the Pattern that he had placed in
Ireland? Surely he meant to reduce us to a Chaos and Confusion. He would have
us without all Rules of Government; and these be the means, wicked and cruel
Councels, and the Cruelty of an Army inspired with his Spirit, and consisting
of Papists, Enemies of our Religion: And what Mercy could we of this Religion
expect from Popish Enemies with Swords in their hands? That cannot but strike
all English Hearts with Horror and Dread, that an Irish Army should be brought
into England to reduce the Subjects of England. I hope we never were so far
gone in any thing, as that we should need an Army to reduce us. I cannot but
say here is the Counsel of Haman, when he would in one day cut off all the
Jewish Nation, and have the King intend a Favor to him. The King propounds a
question, What shall be done to the man whom the King will Honor? Haman
thought in his heart, Whom will the King Honor but my self? And so my Lord of
Strafford having raised this Army, it was set up by him; and if such a Counsel
as this was entertained, into whose hands should it be put? (here were Hamans
thoughts) who should have the Power of it, but he that has inspired it, and
since maintained it.

Truly (My Lords) it was a desperate Counsel; and methinks the Counsel of
Achitophel might have been compared to it: for when he had stirred up the
Rebellion of Absalom against his Father, he persuades Absalom to that which
might breed an irreconcilable hatred between them. Yet a Father and a Son might
be reconciled. But he that adheres to the Son in this case, might not so easily
forgive. Therefore this Lord falls upon a Counsel which he thought would never
be forgiven. A Counsel of irreconcilable difference, to subdue us by Force and
Power; and takes away all possibility of Addressing our Complaints to the King,
as he had done from those of Ireland; when he not only forestalls their
Complaints, but by a Proclamation takes order, that none should come over too,
without his License; which was in effect, that none should complain of his
Oppression without his good liking.

Some violent Speeches he uses, suitable to these Counsels, That no good would
be done upon the Aldermen, till they were hanged; That the French King employed
Commissaries to look into men's Estates; which will be insisted upon in their
proper place.

Next, he levied eight pence a day for maintenance of the Trained Soldiers,
against the Will of the Country, which he said was done by the consent of the
Lords of the great Council; which we know is untrue. And we shall prove it
untrue in the other part, where he says, it was done freely, by consent of the
Gentlemen of the Country: Most of them that did consent, were his own Friends,
and Papists. But the Petition of the Country, (as to that part of it that
concerns a Parliament) he rejected, because he would have no Parliament. And he
prefers another in the name of the Country, and that he calls, The Petition of
the Country.

And now I shall apply my self to the proofs; and shall take care to offer
nothing, but what will fall out to be proved. And shall first apply my self to
the first Article, concerning the Commission for the North parts; where an
Arbitrary Power was thereby granted, as is used in the Star Chamber and
Chancery.

In the opening of it, first we shall produce the Commission of 8 Car. and that
of 13 differs but little from it. We shall show that these Clauses were
procured by him to be inserted upon occasion of a Gentleman's, Sir Thomas Gore
being Fined in the Court of Star Chamber there, and his being Arrested by a
Warrant from my Lord Wentworth here in London. We do not go about to prove that
he solicited for this Commission, but that he expressed his desire of it; and
upon that it was granted.

We shall prove that it was executed in this high manner, that when
Prohibitions have been taken out, he has punished the parties, some he has
threatened; Nay, Money has been given to those that were Defendants in the
Prohibition. And we shall offer this too, The Judge is dead before whom it was;
but upon occasion of a Prohibition, he went to a Judge, a Reverend and Just
man, Mr. Justice Hutton; what was said privately between them, we cannot tell;
but we shall prove, that Mr. Justice Hutton complained with Tears in his Eyes,
how that Lord used him about a Prohibition: And so we shall leave this Article
with this. We shall not go about to prove Decrees, for which he might have
Color; but for these Clauses he could have no Color, they never being in any
Commission before.

THE First Article. The Charge.

THat the said Earl of Strafford the 21st day of March, in the Eighth year of
His Majesty's Reign, was President of the Kings Council Article 1.
in the Northern parts of England.

That the said Earl being President of the said Council, on the 21st of March,
a Commission under the Great Seal of England, with certain Schedules of
Instructions thereunto annexed, was directed to the said Earl, or others the
Commissioners therein named; whereby, among other things, Power and Authority
is limited to the said Earl, and others the Commissioners therein named, to
hear and determine all Offenses and Misdemeanors, Suits, Debates,
Controversies and Demands, Causes, Things and Matters whatsoever, therein
contained, and within certain Precincts in the said Northern parts therein
specified, and in such manner as by the said Schedule is limited and appointed.

That amongst other things in the said Instructions, it is directed, That the
said President, and others therein appointed, shall hear and determine,
according to the Course of Proceedings in the Court of Star Chamber, diverse
Offenses, Deceits and Fal^ties therein mentioned, whether the same be provided
for by Acts of Parliament, or not, so that the Fines imposed, be not less than
by the Act or Acts of Parliament provided against those Offenses, is appointed.

That also, amongst other things in the said Instructions, it is directed, That
the said President, and others therein appointed, have Power to Examine, Hear
and Determine, according to the course of Proceedings in the Court of Chancery,
all manner of Complaints for any matter within the said Precincts, as well
concerning Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, either Freehold Customary, or
Copyhold, as Leases, and other things therein mentioned; and to stay
Proceedings in the Court of Common Law, by Injunction, or otherwise, by all
ways and means, as is used in the Court of Chancery.

And although the former Presidents of the said Council had never put in
Practice such Instructions, nor had they any such Instructions, yet the said
Earl in the Month of May, in the said Eighth year, and diverse years following,
did put in Practice, Exercise and Use, and caused to be used and put in
practice, the said Commission and Instructions; and did direct and exercise an
exorbitant and unlawful Power and Jurisdiction over the Persons and Estates of
His Majesty's Subjects in these parts, and did Dis-inherit diverse of His
Majesty's Subjects in those parts of their Inheritances, Sequestered their
Possessions, and did Fine, Ransom, Punish, and Imprison them, and caused them
to be Fined, Ransomed, Punished and Imprisoned, to their Ruin and Destruction;
and namely, Sir Coniers Darcy, Sir John Bourcher, and diverse others, against
the Laws, and in Subversion of the same. And the said Commission and
Instructions, were procured and issued by Advice of the said Earl.

And he the said Earl, to the intent that such illegal and unjust Power might
be exercised with the greater License and Will, did Advise, Counsel, and
Procure further directions, in and by the said Instructions to be given, that
no Prohibition be granted at all, but in cases where the said Council shall
exceed the limits of the said Instructions. And that if any Writ of Habeas
Corpus be granted, the party be not discharged till the party perform the
Decree and Order of the said Council.

And the said Earl in the 13th year of His Majesty's Reign, did procure a new
Commission to himself, and others therein appointed, with the said
Instructions, and other unlawful Additions.

That the said Commission and Instructions, were procured by the Solicitation
and Advice of the said Earl of Strafford.

Proofs touching the Commission for Government in the North, enlarged.
To the point of Star Chamber Power.
THe Commission granted 21 Mar. 8 Car. was read, 19 Article, whereby my Lord as
President, or in his absence the Vice President, assisted, (prout in the
Commission) are authorized to hear, end and determine, according to the Course
of proceedings in the Star Chamber, all and all manner of Forgeries,
Extortions, etc. And to Fine, etc. So as the Fines imposed be not less than by
the Acts of Parliament is provided, etc.

Whence observe, That he would have power in Fining to go beyond, but not less
than the Fines in the Act of Parliament. Manager.


To the point of Chancery Jurisdiction.
Article 23. was read, whereby Power is given by Injunction, to stay
Proceedings in any Court of Common Law.

Article 28. was read, whereby Power is given to send the Sergeant at Arms,
and Attach in any part of the Realm of England; and to bring before the Lord
President, etc. any person departing the Jurisdiction of that Court, after
Commission of Rebellion sued forth.

Article 29. whereby is granted, That no Prohibition be granted in the Court of
Westminster, to stay Proceedings in that Court. But in cases where the Court of
the President shall exceed the Kings Instructions; and if any Habeas Corpus
shall be sued forth for not performing the Order of that Court, the party
Committed, not to be discharged, so long as such Orders shall stand in force;
and if any Fine be thereupon estreated, The Treasurer and Barons of the
Exchequer to discharge it.

Whence observe, That the not granting of Prohibitions, or Habeas Manager.
Corpus's, and the discharging of the Fines estreated, are new.

To the sending of Process actually before these Clauses granted; and to the
Earl of Straffords procuring the Clause to be supplied, when he found the
Defect.

John Gore Sworn; and being interrogated how his Father was Arrested, and how
long before this Commission?

Answered, That Sir Thomas Gore his Father, was Arrested in London, Witness.
by a Sergeant at Arms; That his Father conceiving it to be out of the
Instructions at York, did Appeal to the Council Table: That Mr. Mason argued
for his Father, and made it appear, That the President and Council had no
Instructions to take a man without the precincts of the Court. That my Lord of
Strafford fell on his Knees, and besought the King, That if his Instructions
might not be so good as to bring in a Delinquent that had affronted the Court,
if by stepping over the water he should go beyond the precincts of it, he might
leave that Service, and lay his Bones in his own Cottage.

That his Father was Arrested in November, 1632. as he takes it, and was kept
18 Weeks before he was discharged.

Evers Gower Sworn, and Interrogated about the time of his Fathers Arrest:

Answered, That it was in November, 1632. and his Father kept in Prison 14 or
18 Weeks; but referred to his Brothers Deposition for a Witness.
more particular Answer.

To the matter of Prohibitions;
John Musgrave Sworn; was examined, Whether he knew of any Prohibition sued
forth in Vaux his Cause: And whether a Warrant were granted to Attach: What
Threats my Lord of Strafford used to the party that sued it out, being after
Octavo Caroli.

After some Exceptions taken to it by the Earl of Strafford, as not being
within the Charge, The Witness Answered,


That he knew of an English Suit between Musgrave and Vaux: That Witness.
upon notice given by Musgrave, a Prohibition was procured; Direction was
given, that an Affidavit should be made of serving the Prohibition. That
Affidavit being made, a Warrant was directed to the Pursevant, or his Deputy,
to Arrest Vaux. On which, he was Arrested, and Rescued. That after Affidavit
made of the Rescue, a further Warrant was sued forth for bringing in of the
Rescuers from London; which Warrant was now produced. That the Rescuers being
thereupon brought to York; and having lain several days in Prison, an
Information was Exhibited by Sir George Ratcliffe, then the Kings Attorney at
York, by relation of Francis Musgrave: To which they did Answer. And after,
upon full hearing, That before the Censure, he the Deponent, in Michaelmas
Term, before 1632. did come to London on behalf of Francis Musgrave, to move
the Court of Common Pleas, to have the Prohibition dissolved: And likewise Vaux
did procure a Rule for a Prohibition in the Information Cause; which the
Witness offered to show under the Court Hand, That it was moved by Sir Robert
Heath, that the difference might be referred to Mr. Justice Hutton, and Sir
Robert Heath. That he the Deponent undertook for Musgrave, and Vaux did submit:
That afterward, by Sir George Ratcliffes direction, thinking it not fit to
refer the Cause, it concerning the Jurisdiction of the Court of York. My Lord
President being acquainted with it, the Reference went not on that Term, but
stayed till the Presidents pleasure was known; with which Mr. Justice Hutton
was made acquainted. That in December, upon his this Deponents return to York;
and upon hearing the Information Cause, December 1632. Sir George Ratcliffe did
offer to the Court, (the Lord President being there) whether he might go on in
the Information Cause; (for that there was a Reference between Musgrave and
Vaux, to Justice Hutton and Sir Robert Heath) or whether the Reference might go
on or no? That the Lord President thereupon answered, That a Rule for a
Prohibition, was no Prohibition; but if there were one, he would not obey it:
And whosoever brought a Prohibition there, he would lay him by the heels. And
as he the Deponent remembered, he directed his Speech to the Register of the
Court; and told him, there was a Letter from the King to that purpose: but
that, he said, he could not very well remember. And as touching the Reference,
my Lord said, It was a Cause that concerned the Jurisdiction of the Court of
York; and no private man should end it: He would try the Jurisdiction of the
Court upon it; and the next Term would go to London, and acquaint the Judges
with it; and if they remanded the Cause back again, so; if not, he would Appeal
to the King in it.

That after Christmas, in Candlemas Term, 1632. He the Deponent went to London
with my Lord, and moved again for dissolving the Prohibition, and for Liberty
to proceed. That again it was agreed between the Judges of that Court, and my
Lord, to have a Treaty: And several Treaties they had, but could not agree. The
effect of the Treaty was, That if a Trial could be directed at Law upon a
fained Action, I should go to Law, reserving the Equity to the Court; if not,
that the Judges would remand the Cause back again. But after they had several
days met, and no Trial could be directed, nor any Action devised at Law to try
it, my Lord thereupon said, He would give no further meeting, but would Appeal
to the King; and the party should Petition: On which, a Petition was drawn,
which the Deponent offered. And the Judge speaking something of Vaux, my Lord
said, he should not be in England, but he would have his Body; or words to that
purpose.

F. Thorpe Sworn; being interrogated touching some words he heard Mr. Justice
Hutton speak touching these Prohibitions, and some other things in that point,

He Answered, He would give the best account he could of what passed; being
diverse years since: That he was with Justice Hutton in his Study, Witness.
and they had Conference together (as they had many times) touching that height
that my Lord of Strafford was pleased to carry the business of Yorkshire with:
And that amongst other things, my Lord was pleased to say, my Lord had been
with him, and showed himself very angry with him, because he had granted a
Prohibition. And this is all he could remember; He took it to be seven years
ago, and in the Cause that concerned Vaux, as he took it; and this was at
London: And added, That the Judge spoke with a great deal of Passion, to think
things should be carried in that manner as they were, that the Judges should
not have Liberty to grant Prohibitions: For the Judge said, that he had thus
debated the business with my Lord, Why should you be angry for granting of
Prohibitions? They in the King's Bench can grant Writs of Error to examine our
Proceedings; and we think it no offense, and hold our selves as able to Judge,
as they: And it is the Justice of the Law that requires it to be so; and
therefore you must submit to us, as we must submit to them.

F. Thorpe being asked what he knew of my Lord of Straffords distaste against
them that sued out, or solicited, or councelled Prohibitions, or Habeas
Corpus's?

He first desired to be excused from saying any thing that concerned himself;
but being commanded to speak,

He Answered, That he would speak nothing but the Truth, if he must do it,
though he perish for it: And he professed, that he had not spoken in any place,
to any person, what he was now to say.

That in the beginning of my Lord of Strafford's time, it fell to him, in his
ordinary course of Practice, to move for a Prohibition; and on his motion some
were obtained.

That he was informed by diverse men, that my Lord of Strafford was much
offended with him; and some spoke it to him by way of Threat, some others by
way of Advice and Friendship.

That he should give over moving for Prohibitions, which he did not understand
to be a fault, since the Justice of the Kingdom was, that they should be
granted; and it continued a matter of a year after.

That then he took an occasion to go to my Lords House to Gantropp; and his
Errand was, partly to present his humble Duty and Service to his Lordship; and
in the second place, if he could have opportunity, and if his Lordship would
please to speak with him, to give his Lordship satisfaction in any thing he had
done in that particular; because it was conceived, he opposed the Jurisdiction
of that Court.

That after he had the Favor to speak with his Lordship, (which was long
first) He was pleased to say no otherwise than thus, I have nothing to say to
you, you are one that oppose me: But at the present I have eased you of the
Office of Justice of the Peace; so you need not trouble your self with that.

That he did humbly thank his Honor for it; for howsoever he meant it, he took
it to be no dis-favour, but a Courtesy, he having been in three or four years,
but not executing any Authority, it standing not with his occasions.

And his Lordship added, Hereafter you and I shall speak further of the
business; That afterward his Lordship met him in London, in the Inner
Star Chamber, he then attending on a motion day before the Lord Keeper, amongst
others of his Rank.

That my Lord President was pleased to come behind his back, and lay his hand
on his shoulder, and said, I Command you not to depart the Town. That the words
were something strange to him; and not understanding well what his Lordship
meant by it, he instantly went to his Lordship, and desired that he might know
his mind, he not very well hearing him.

That his Lordship repeated the words again, I Command you not to depart the
Town.

That for a matter of a Week, or such a thing, he did attend under this
Command: And then applied himself to his Lordship, by all Means and Friends
that he could. He Petitioned three or four times; he is uncertain which: He
made means, by Persons of Quality, to his Lordship, That his Lordship would
tell him the place where he was to attend, or the Cause for what, or the Person
before whom; but his Lordship was not pleased to give him any satisfaction:
only thus much he received, That he was one that did oppose his Lordship, and
he should attend. Seeing there was no Remedy, he made his Address to a Noble
Friend present, and acquainted him with the business; who was pleased to take
the matter so to heart, as to move it to his Lordship.

That then he conceived the fault he had committed, The not paying the
Knighthood money in Yorkshire. And his the Deponents Answer was, he had
offered it, but was not chargeable by Law; for he had not 40 l. a year three
years before the Coronation, as the Writ did enjoin.

He speaks now of that which is not in the Charge; which ought not E. of
Strafford.
to be.

We desire he may proceed, leaving it to Your Lordships to sever that which is
material, from that which is not material. Manager.


F. Thorpe proceeded, and said, He could not say he punished him for the
Prohibition; but he conceived, all did follow because he moved sometimes for
Prohibitions: And that he had opposed his Authority and Power in Yorkshire.

I Appeal to Your Lordships Judgments, whether it be not out of the E. of
Strafford.
Charge; Mr. Thorpe could not search my heart to know the Ground of the Offense.

The Charge against my Lord of Strafford, is not only the Executing of Manager.
these Instructions; but also the exercising of an exorbitant and unlawful
Power and Jurisdiction, over the Persons and Estates of His Majesty's Subjects,
To which, the matter offered by the Witnesses, is material.

The Lord Steward, speaking to the Witness, said, Apply your self as Lord High
Steward.
much as you can, to the point in question.

F. Thorpe proceeded, and said, That he conceived the Question was asked him
generally, What he could say concerning Prohibitions, or them that had to do
with them.

That no man living has less desire to speak of my Lord of Strafford, than he
had; and if he had not been asked this Question on his Oath, and before that
Presence, and on this Command, he should not have said it: For what he said
now, he never had spoke before; and with what Sorrow he came now to speak it,
he knew; and said, that he spoke not this to any other purpose, but only, That
these things which were done, were done on the occasion of the Prohibitions.
For the matter of Knighting-money, though it were made the cause of staying him
in London, yet, under favor, (he said) That was not, nor could be the Cause;
For he had offered it below in the Country, only thus, That he was not
Chargeable by Law, but very willing to pay it, if my Lord would have him pay
it; so he might comply with his Lordship, or serve any occasion wherein his
Lordship was employed.

And therefore that of Knighting was the occasion taken, yet he conceived that
was not the true occasion. And lastly, that after he had been kept 12 or 14
days under this Command, his Lordship was pleased (on that which passed between
that noble Lord (my Friend) and his Lordship) to give him leave to go home, and
then he paid the money.

We desire the Witness may not conceal any thing, but speak it; and being
demanded accordingly. Manager.


F. Thorpe answered, There was another particular happened on him; F. Thorpe a
Witness.
and though another occasion was taken, part came from the said Root, but he
desired to be pardoned in not speaking of it.

Being required to speak, and to set forth what time this was, and what that
Noble man's name was, who, upon my Lord of Straffords motion, procured him
liberty.

F. Thorpe answered, That he conceived the time to be about the Knighting-money
business, and the Lords name was, My Lord Goring.

Your Lordships may observe this was long before the Commission in Manager.
8 Car. and some two years after my Lord of Strafford came to the Place.

Being Interrogated further, Whether he or his Clients have forborne to move in
that Cause of Prohibitions out of fear of my Lord of Strafford.

He answered, For his own particular he has forborne, and durst not Witness.
adventure it, nor any that had to do with him in those parts, as he knew,
durst move till of very late; For he knew very well the price of my Lord of
Strafford's displeasure.

Being asked if he knew any thing of the Case of Leyton, about a Prohibition.

He answered, He knew nothing of it.

I humbly desire, with your Lordships leave, to interpose a Question. E. of
Strafford.


We desire that our Witness might first be heard out, and we shall not Manager.
interrupt my Lrod of Strafford in asking what questions he pleases in his just
defense.

Let the Witness proceed. Lord High Steward.


To your Lordships Order, and in all things, I shall pay Obedience, I E. of
Strafford.
desire nothing in the World but a clear understanding of the Truth in this
business, and so I am sure every man does that hears me; and without Offense,
and with all Reverence, I humbly offer, That the Witnesses may stand apart from
the Committee for the Commons, the Commit asking the Witnesses many
questions, which I conceive, by your Lordships Rule, should be asked by your
Lordships only; For which I crave pardon, if I have offended in moving of it, I
standing for my Life, and which is dearer, my Honor, and my Children.

Their Lordships Rule has been kept, and things shall be carried clearly on
all hands. Lord High Steward.


We desire the Witness may proceed to speak concerning his own Imprisonment;
Manager.
and the Lord Steward Interrogating him accordingly, he kept to the same Point.

F. Thorpe proceeds, saying, That he could give no other ground for it, F.
Thorpe a Witness.
though another occasion was taken, yet he conceived the true ground, because
he was too busy in meddling with Prohibitions.

That the Pursevant attending the Council at York, came to his house, and
carried him before the Lord President and Council, where he attended a day, and
then had liberty to speak with my Lord; That his Lordship was pleased to tell
him, there was an Accusation against him, but they that laid it were not come
to Town, therefore he must attend; and that they were his betters, and
therefore he had reason to attend: He desired to know what it was, but could
not have that favor; but some eight days after (being in the mean time in the
Pursevants Custody) he was brought to the Council Table again, and his Lordship
sitting at the upper end, commanded him to kneel, he coming as a Delinquent;
which he did accordingly, bringing with him a spirit of submission, knowing
very well his ruin depended on his opposition, and on his rising, his Lordship
was offended, he stayed no longer kneeling.

Afterward a Letter was read from some Gentlemen in the Country, wherein they
had written, That I had spoken at the Sessions a little more than became me to
the Court, in defense of a Client, on a Traverse to an Indictment. And what
they had written (I confessed) was very true; for it was thus; upon the
Traverse of an Indictment, the question being, Whether the bare Indictment were
Evidence to the Petit Jury, I did say it was no Evidence, and I desired to
Appeal to the Judges. My Lord President was pleased to say, He would teach me
to know, there were other men for me to complain to, viz. The President and the
Council. I told his Lordship, I was ready to complain to any where I might have
Right: And I Appeal to the Kings learned Council, Whether it was not Law what I
spoke. I was then put out, and direction sent, I must find Sureties, and make
public submission at the Sessions for saying these words: I did find Sureties,
and when I went to Sir W. Ellis to enter the Recognizance, He told me, I am
sorry, but I cannot help you, for my Lord of Strafford overruled us; and you
are to be bound to the good Behavior, and make submission at the Sessions: And
he said further, That what he was enjoined, he did perform. And all this, I
conceive, originally grew, for that I did oppose the Jurisdiction of the Court
at York, and not for the Causes pretended. And this binding to my good
Behavior was eight or ten years ago.

And being further asked, Whether he knew of any other that had been oppressed
with this Exorbitant Power, or no?

F. Thorpe answered, He had heard of many, but he was not present at their
Commitment, nor saw their Orders, and can say nothing of his knowledge; only he
knew Sir Thomas Gore was under Custody.

George Hawes was produced next, and interrogated, What he knew of George Hawes
a Witness.
Sir Conyers Darcies Fining.

I confess I was there, and gave consent to his Fining; but it was not by
virtue of the said Commission, for it was before my time. E. of Strafford.


The Manager did now sum up the Evidence, and my Lord of Strafford's Answer was
expected.

I desire a little time to retire: And after some debating thereof betwixt E.
of Strafford.
his Lordship and the Committee, It was Resolved his Lordship should have some
little space to rest, and peruse his Notes at the Bar, which the Manager
alleged to be unusual in any Court of Justice in a proceeding of this Nature.

My Lords, there is a great deal of difference betwixt the Case of a man E. of
Strafford.
that answers for a bloody, heinous, and known Treason, by the Statutes of the
Realm, before the Lord Steward and his Peers, in an ordinary way of proceeding;
and him that answers a mixed Charge, partly Misdemeanors, and partly (as
apprehended) Treason. There is nothing in this that can be Treason, and when
1000 misdemeanors will not make one Felony, shall 28 Misdemeanors heighten it
to a Treason? And in that Point, in due time, I shall desire my Council may
express themselves, Whether any thing in this Charge (admit it all to be true)
be Treason, that if they be but Misdemeanors, I should be admitted Council, and
examine Witnesses by Commission. I had no leave to summon a Witness before
Friday last, and the greatest part of my Proofs and Charge comes out of
Ireland; and to be debarred from these, under pretense of Treason, I conceive
to be, in this Case, a little severe. But I shall proceed to my Defense.

And first, As for the Instructions which I am charged withal, being E. of
Straffords Defense.
21. March, 8 Car. they were not procured by me, I knew nothing of them.

The Commission and Instructions to the President and Council of York, are of
course renewed on the death of one of the Council of the Fee in Ordinary, and
the putting in of a Counselor at large, is only by Letter.

Sir Arthur Ingram, who was Secretary, going out, and Sir John Melton
succeeding, these Instructions of 21 March 8 Car. were renewed.

That in the Case of such Renewing, the Kings Council of the Fee, do, by the
Secretary, offer the Kings learned Council such things as they conceive
conducing to the clearing and bettering of the Kings Service in those parts:
And it finally comes to the Lord Keeper or Lord Chancellor, and they agree it.

I protest that I gave no direction in these, nor do I conceive any thing
offered, proves me to be the man that procured them.

As to the Execution of it, from the date of that Commission to this hour, I
did never one Act, nor stayed a minute as President of the Council of York. The
Commission being granted 21 March Oct. Car. and I went toward Ireland in July
following, which I can prove by my Servants, if they might be sworn. And before
I be convinced of a Misdemeanor, I conceive they must be sworn: But that now I
answer only to Treason.

If I were neither privy to the taking out of the Commission, nor any way
employed in the executing of it, I Appeal unto your Lordships, and the
Gentlemen of the House of Commons, Whether I can be charged as Criminal, as to
this Commssion, or any thing that proceeds from it.

As for the Sentence against Sir Conyers Darcy, it was Just, and he complained
not of it: Of which I have a Copy, and desire it may be read.

That from the first Institution of the Court of President and Council at York,
That Court had both a Star Chamber and Chancery Power; as will appear by all
the Instructions before that time.

That if there be an Error in a Judge, so that he give a Sentence otherwise
than a man of better understanding conceives reason for, there is no cause it
should be heightened to a Treason, to take from him his Life and Honor, and all
he has, merely because he was not so wise a man as he might have been, nor so
understanding as another: And if this be pressed on Judges, I think few Judges
will serve. And for my part, I had rather go to my Cottage, as the Witness
says, then serve on these Terms.

The Charge lays it to be done in May, 8 Car. and diverse years following, and
the Instructions came not in time till the 21st Mar. 8 Car. which I conceive to
be a mistaking of the year.

That as to the Sentence of Sir John Bourcher, which is charged upon me, but
not insisted upon by the Gentleman, I was no way acquainted with the beginning,
proceeding, or ending of the Cause, being all that while in Ireland; so Your
Lordships may observe with what uncertainty men may speak, that do inform in
such Cases.

That of the Commission, the 13th of the King, with which I am likewise
charged, as the Procurer of it, I had no more knowledge, than of that which was
most foreign; being at that time in Ireland, and the Commission renewed of one
of the Council in Fee.

I shall now descend to Proofs.

That the Commission 8 Car. was renewed upon Sir John Meltons coming to be
Secretary, instead of Sir Arthur Ingram, The Committee admitted it.

To the Testimonies given by the Witnesses, I observe, That John Gore, the
first Witness, speaks nothing to the renewing of the Commission, but to his
Fathers Commitment; and that was in November, but what year, Non liquet. But
this is not within my Charge, therefore I shall not Answer to that; Though if
it were in Charge, I doubt not, but in that, and every thing else, I shall give
an account of an honest and just man, not to say of a discreet, and a wise man.

That for the Testimony of John Musgrave, it contains nothing within my Charge:
and I can say nothing to it, but by way of Divination. And he is but a single
Witness; And therefore I conceive, shall hardly be able to convince any man of
High Treason, hardly of a Trespass.

That what John Musgrave speaks of, is grounded on a question of the
Jurisdiction of Courts; and one rule of our Law is, Boni judicis est amplicare
Iurisdictionem. And why the enlarging of a Jurisdiction should be heightened to
a Treason, I Appeal to Your Lordships Nobleness, Justice, and Honor, to
consider; for I think there are none in place of Judicature, but they will
desire to enlarge their Jurisdiction, as far as in Reason and Justice they may:
And it is a chaste Ambition (if rightly placed) to have as much Power as may be,
That there may be Power to do the more good in the place where a man lives.

For F. Thorpe's Testimony, I observe, That I have nothing to say to him of
Exception; but that he speaks nothing to the purpose, nor to any thing in the
Charge, I being Charged with the Execution of the Commission 8 and 13 of the
King; and all he speaks of, is precedent in time: And what he says, is by
hearsay from Mr. Justice Hutton, and Sir William Ellis. I do not remember my
Lord Gorings speaking to me about Mr. Thorpe, it being 12, 13, or 14 years ago.
I have put in my Answer, and if that be not Impeached by Testimony of Witnesses
(as it is not) I conceive it ought to be allowed.

I desire to produce Witnesses, wherein I have Liberty; but not to examine on
Oath.

And first, To the time of my going toward Ireland.

His Lordships Secretary being interrogated;

He Answered, That his Lordship went from London 8 July, 1633. toward Ireland,
the 9th year of the King.

Mr. Railton, To the time of his Lordships going toward Ireland, said,

That 8 July, 1633. My Lord began his Journey into Ireland, being the Ninth
year of the King.

The Committee for the Commons, admitted that he went over in Manager.
July, 1633.

To the time of my Lord of Straffords coming from York;

Mr. Thomas Little says, His Lordship came from York in January was eight
years, and returned not to York till 1636.

To his Lordships doing any act as President of York, since the said New
Commission of Octavo Caroli;

Mr. Thomas Little says, That since the date of that Commission, his Lordship
never sat as President of the North, in any Cause whatsoever.

His Lordship offered to prove his being in Ireland when Sir John Bourcher E.
of Strafford.
was censured by the Vice President and Council; But the Commons not pressing
his Lordship in that matter, he said, If it be granted, I have done.

To the Earl of Straffords being in Ireland when the Commission 8 Car. was
renewed.

Mr. Thomas Little Answered, being questioned, My Lord was in Ireland at that
time; he went over in 1636. having come over in November before; and was not in
England again till 1639.

And so (My Lords) I conclude my Defense, That I am charged only E. of
Strafford.
with procuring and executing the Commission.

And this Answer I humbly offer and submit.

John Gore speaks particularly of the occasion of enlarging the Commission, The
Managers Reply.
upon the Arresting of his Father.

That my Lord of Strafford fell on his Knees, desiring from His Majesty an
enlarging of his Power; else that he might go home: So going out of England in
July after, the Commission answers to the Procurement that was before.

That which his Lordship has answered to F. Thorpe, That the things by him
complained of, were in the time before the Commission, may be used as an
Argument, That he was privy to the Instructions.

We produce I. Musgrave, only to show my Lords Violence about Prohibitions,
before this Commission was procured; He growing so high, a little before, That
he would lay them by the Heels that brought the Kings Writ; The Council were
awed, that they durst not demand Justice: So that the procuring of it, suited
most with his Design.

That his Witnesses had little contradicted what the Witnesses for the Commons
had said.

That whereas it is said, the Charge is not Treason; if the Fact shall appear
to their Lordships, satisfaction will in good time be given. That though this
particular is not Treason, yet all the parts of it amount to the Subversion of
the Laws of the Kingdom; That is pressed as Treason, and this as an Evidence.

That for the second Commission, it follows as the other; if he procured the
one, he is guilty as if he procured both, it being the same Power still.

THE Second Article. The Charge.
THat shortly after the obtaining of the said Commission, dated the 21st. of
March, in the Eighth year of His Majesty's Reign, (to Article 2.
wit) the last day of August then next following, he the said Earl (to bring
His Majesty's Liege People into a dislike of His Majesty, and of His
Government, and to terrify the Justices of the Peace from executing of the
Laws: He the said Earl being then President, as aforesaid, and a Justice of
Peace) did publicly, at the Assizes held for the County of York, in the City
of York, in and upon the said last day of August, declare and publish before
the People there attending for the Administration of Justice according to Law,
and in the presence of the Justices sitting, That some of the Justices were all
for Law, and nothing would please them but Law; but they should find, That the
Kings little Finger should be heavier than the Loins of the Law.

WE are come now to the second Article, touching words spoken Manager.
of the King, That the Kings little Finger should be heavier than the Loins of
the Law.

For that, we desire to produce Witnesses, and they will show how my Lord of
Strafford is mistaken in his Answer: Or if he says true, As he slanders the
King in one sense, so he slanders the Law in another.

Witnesses produced.

William Long Sworn, and interrogated, What words he heard my Lord of Strafford
speak concerning the comparison between the Kings little Finger, and the Loins
of the Law, On what occasion, Where, and at what time?

Answered, When Sir Thomas Leyton was Sheriff of Yorkshire, 1632. Witness.
(as he takes it) My Lord of Strafford being there, he heard his Lordship say
these words,

That some, nothing would content but Law; but they should know, The Kings
little Finger should be heavier than the Loins of the Law: And this was spoken
in the place where the Judges sat in York-Castle, at the Assizes that year.

The occasion he knew not, but it was publicly spoken; and as he thought, my
Lord did not then sit on the Bench, but stood at the Bar.

Sir Thomas Leyton was Sworn; and being thick of hearing, the Manager was
directed by my Lord Steward, to interrogate him to the effect aforesaid;

Who Answered, My Lord said, Some would not be satisfied but by Law; but they
should have Law enough; for they should find the Kings Sir Tho. Leyton a
Witness.
little Finger, to be heavier than the Loins of the Law. His Lordship being on
the Bench then with the Judges at that time, and abundance of the Country being
there then at Lammas Assizes, at the Castle-Bench; And he thinks it was 1632.
or 1633. but he knew not the occasion.

Marmaduke Potter having been examined as a preparatory Witness, and since
being deceased, it was desired his Deposition might be read.

The Lord Steward declared, That the Examinations of those preparatory Lord
High Steward.
Witnesses, should be read, in case any should be dead.

To prove Marmaduke Potter's death, Thomas Harrison was Sworn: Being
interrogated what he knew concerning the death of Marmaduke Potter:

Answered, That since his coming out of Yorkshire, he heard a report Tho.
Harrison a Witness.
from his Neighbors, that M. P. is dead and buried, That he the Deponent,
lived a Mile from the said Marmaduke Potter; which is Ninescore and Ten Miles
from this place; but he heard no particular of the day of his burial.

The Examination of Marmaduke Potter, Gent. taken January, 1640. to the 10th
and 11th Inter. He says,

That about eight years since, when Sir Thomas Leyton was Sheriff of
Yorkshire, he heard the Earl of Strafford make a Speech publicly at the Bench
at Summer-Assizes; and he said then, That the Kings little Finger should be
heavier than the Loins of the Law.

I know not whether it were material for me to Answer this, or no; but as the
Charge is laid, it is impossible I should be guilty of the words: For E. of
Straffords Defense.
it is laid to be the last of August, next following the 21st of March, in the
Eighth year of His Majesty's Reign; which falls out to be when I was in Ireland.

But I desire not to stand on such Niceties, but that Truth may appear.

The words confessed in my Answer, are quite contrary, being, That the little
Finger of the Law, was heavier than the Kings Loins. And that I set forth in my
Answer, and the occasion of them; which these Witnesses do not, or else will
not, remember. The occasion was this:

There came diverse Levies in the year when Sir Thomas Leyton was Sheriff, for
diverse great sums of money for issues in the Knighting-business, on some that
had compounded, and paid their money to me, the Receiver of that money then,
and by me answered in the Exchequer; yet these Issues came down, through some
Error above, and were levied with very great rigor by Sir Thomas Leyton.

When I came down, I spoke with Sir Thomas Leyton, and showed him how the men
were injured; and did desire him to return the money to them again, and I would
see him discharged in the Exchequer, which he was contented to do. And then, to
give satisfaction to the Country, I told them, That that Commission was a
Commission of Grace and Favor, and that their Compounding with the King, was
an ease to them, and much greater ease than by a proceeding at Law would have
fallen on them, the very first Issues being three or four times more than they
had compounded the whole for. And thereupon I applied that Speech, That the
little Finger of the Law was heavier than the Loins of the King. For if I
should then have fallen to threaten them, I had spoken contrary to the end I
had proposed, which was to incline them: And further, that not one of the
Witnesses spoke any thing to the occasion of the Speech.

That it is long since, and was never yet complained of; and that man must have
a stronger memory than I, that will undertake to swear positively the very
words spoken seven or eight years ago: And, under favor, he ought to have
better Ears than Sir Thomas Leyton, who appears to have such an infirmity in
hearing, that he must now be whoopt to at the Bar, before he can hear; and
sure his sense of hearing is much decayed, else he could not have heard me
speaking at that distance to the place where the Sheriff sits in an open place,
as far distant, as from the Bar where I now stand, to my Lord Steward, or very
near.

Dr. Duncombe being asked, Whether he came accidentally to York that day? and
what he heard the words repeated to be?

He Answered, He came from Durham, being sent for on other occasions; Witness.
That he was at York in his Journey from Durham, the first day of the Assizes;
and being at Dinner at Dr. Stanhopps, there came a Gent. Sir Edward Stanhopp,
who called Dr. Stanhopp Uncle, from the Assizes. That the Doctor asked what
news, specially concerning my Lord Presidents Speech, he told them, that he
pressed hard to hear, and could tell some passages of it. Then they asked what
they were, says he, My Lord President was speaking of this, That the way of the
Prerogative was in some particulars, easier than the Common Law: And in his
expression, he said these words, The little Finger of the Common Law, is
heavier than the Loins of the King. This the said Sir Edward Stanhopp told him,
in the presence of diverse others, who he thinks, do remember the words were so
related; and that he had related them often since, and never took it otherwise,
till he saw it in the Charge; and there it was clear otherwise.

And upon further question, at my Lord of Straffords motion,

He Answered, That he never acquainted my Lord of Strafford that he could say
any thing in this, till Sunday night; and then talking with Sir William
Pennyman, he told Sir William the story.

My Lord of Strafford desired Sir William Pennyman might be heard; E. of
Strafford.
and humbly acknowledged the Favor that had been done him by the House of
Commons, in giving liberty unto it upon his suit.

Sir William Pennyman being asked, whether he was present at the time when my
Lord of Strafford spoke the words of comparison, between the Kings little
Finger, and the Loins of the Law; what was spoke, and what was the occasion:

He Answered, That he was present at the Assizes at York at that time, and
heard my Lord speak these words in another order and position, than is
testified by these three Witnesses. And in truth (he said) he could wish he
spoke now on his Oath, for he knew he spoke on much disadvantage; The occcasion
was this, A Rumor was cast up and down in the Country, That my Lord of
Strafford had received great sums of money concerning Knighthood, which he had
detained in his own hands, and not paid into the Exchequer; Hearing of this,
his Lordship thought himself much wronged in it, and took occasion to vindicate
himself; and there spoke of it, and told them, (to the best of his remembrance)
there was some omission on the Secretaries part, or some of the Officers of the
Exchequer. Hereupon my Lord took occasion to discourse of the Legality of
Knighthood-money; and told them, Gentlemen, you may see this is a Commission of
Grace and Favor: for whereas you may compound with the King for a matter of 20
or 30 l. you have in two or three Terms, run into great sums. He added, That he
did not remember the proportion; but the Inference was, So that you may see,
that the little Finger of the Law, is heavier than the Loins of the King.

One of the Managers desired he might be asked, by what means this Manager.
was brought into his memory, and how long since:

He Answered, He had the retention of it in his memory before; but it was
revived on occasion of these Articles, when they were exhibited.

It is enough, and he did his Duty well, that being a Member of the Manager.
House of Commons, he never informed the House of it.

My Lords, I desire my Answer may be read; wherein, the occasion, and E. of
Strafford.
the words, are directly set forth, quite contrary to those in the Charge; and
I protest, that I will take my Oath on it, That it was so.

And my humble request is, That no Witness I produce, may be prejudiced for any
Testimony he shall give here, being with the Liberty and Allowance of both
Houses. For if they should be discountenanced, nay, punished for it, I should
think my self a very unhappy man indeed; and rather than I should prejudice any
man in that kind, I profess, I would put my self on Gods mercy and goodness,
and not make use of any Member of either House, (and my principal Witnesses
must be of both Houses) rather than acquit my self by their prejudice; for I
account it an unjust thing, to overthrow another to save my self.

The Testimony of a Member of the House, has great credit in the Manager.
House, and they take not the least exception against Sir William Pennyman, for
any thing he said before their Lordships, but wish he may speak with clearness
and truth; but had he informed this particular himself to the House, he had
done my Lord of Strafford more right, than by not informing, to let it come in
Charge; and bring in his Testimony contrary to his Vote. When a Witness hears a
thing in question, though it be not required of him, certainly he should
vindicate the Reputation of his Friend, in contradicting it in season, but it
is not so done; and certainly his silence to the House, was not well.

My Lords, This concerns me nearly, This Gentleman, Sir William Pennyman, is my
Noble Friend, and a Worthy Gentleman; and I would E. of Strafford.
give him my Life on any occasion: but I know him to be a Person so full of
Virtue and Nobleness, that he would not speak an untruth for all the world;
perhaps he might not think fit to speak it in the House, men are left at their
liberty.

The Charge came out in Print very lately, and whether Sir William Pennyman
might know any thing of it, I leave it to those that better understand it. But
with this humble Request to the noble and worthy Gentlemen of the Commons
House, That they would please to regard it so, that no man may suffer by me, I
protest I had rather suffer ten thousand times my self.

The business concerns the House of Commons, the Committee knows not how they
will apprehend it; But it is only offered, That the Judgment Manager.
of the House of Commons may not be prejudiced.

The Lord Steward concluded this matter, That his Lorship is put upon Lord
Steward.
the Trial of his Peers, who will give him all fair Respect. That his Lordship
shall be denied no just way for his clearing, that he could say nothing in the
Name of the Lords to this particular that is come out on the present, nor these
Gentlemen in the name of the Commons, only he may be sure to find all that is
fit: which my Lord of Strafford said he doubted not, and hoped their Lordship
would pardon him for moving it, it concerning him very much.

As to the mistake in point of time, the Commons laying it to be after Managers
Relpy.
the Commission 21. March, 8 Reg. and prove it to be before the time, is not at
all material. The offense is not that he spoke it on that day, but that he
spoke the words.

The Exception to Sir Thomas Leyton's Testimony, that he had need to have
better Ears; he is a Gentleman of worth, his Deposition is an Oath, and he knew
best what he heard; the truth is, he stood within little distance of my Lord
when he spoke the words, and has not been deaf above two months, and two other
Witnesses concur fully with him.

For Doctor Duncombe, whether he be the man that laid Aspersions in the North
on some Noble Lords, I know not; but his Testimony only is, that he heard so
from one that spoke it at the Table, not upon Oath, and not knowing what use
would be made of it. And another Witness shall be produced, that will speak to
the occasion, and that it was not the matter of Knighting-money.

Sir Thomas Leyton being asked how long he has had this Infirmity in his
hearing.

Answered, That he got a great Cold since he came to Town, and had this
Imperfection since Christmas, and had his hearing well before.

Being asked how far he sat from my Lord of Strafford.

He Answered, Four yards off.

My Lord of Strafford desired it might be asked the Witness, Whether he sat on
the Seat where the Sheriff uses to fit, he answered Affirmatively. His Lordship
excepted against his Testimony, himself sitting where the President uses to
sit, betwixt my Lord Chief Baron and Mr. Justice Vernon: And he Appealed to my
Lord Chief Baron, Whether the Presidents Seat and the Sheriffs Seat, be not as
far distant, very near as far, as from his Lordships then station to the Lord
Steward.

But the Committee observed it not to be material, that there should be any
Geometrical measure, but be three, four, five, six or seven yards off.

Here the Committee offered other Witnesses, but my Lord of Strafford desired
their Lordships Judgment, Whether they should not bring all together, which the
Lord Steward declared they might as to this Point.

Sir David Fowls being produced, was excepted against.

My Lords, He is no competent Witness, he lying in the Fleet, on a Sentence in
the Star Chamber at my Suit, being fined for diverse things he E. of Strafford.
had said, which concerned my self, which depended on this in question, and
conducing to it.

He comes not at his own Request or Suit, but in a Suit that concerns Manager.
His Majesty and the Commonwealth, and might offer the Presidents own Rule in
the Case, but that the Law speaks for him; that a Witness ought to be heard in
this Cause, though there have been particular ill affections between them, and
your Lordships well know how to compare him with other Witnesses, and to value
him accordingly.

This has been Resolved in the Case of Sir Pierce Crosby, that he should be
sworn, and then value his Testimony, as the Lords shall see Cause, and Lord
High Steward.
this may be put into the same way.

Sir David Fowls being sworn, the Lord Steward put them in mind of the former
Caution, that their Lordships would judge the value of his Testimony, the
Committee not admitting what was excepted against him, he being not to obtain
any thing for himself, nor his own Interest concerned, but produced for the
King and Commonwealth, and therefore an indifferent Witness in the Case.

And then being Interrogated, touching the words of Comparison between the
King's little Finger and the Loins of the Law, whether he heard them, and the
occasion.

Sir David Fowls answered, He heard him say the very same words, Sir David
Fowls a Witness.
That there were some for Law, and nothing but Law; but the King's little
Finger should be heavier on them than the Loins of the Law. The occasion he
cannot well remember; but there was some discontent taken by my Lord against
him he being desired by a Messenger to levy Money to mend a Bridge, he told the
Messenger, He could not well do it of himself, for there was a Statute, as he
took it 24 H. 8. that appoints four Commissioners to be at the doing of such
Service, and he being but One, durst not undertake to do it: Besides, he said,
He must see an Order or Warrant from the Sessions, else he could not do it, and
none was showed. Some other Exceptions he took to the unlawfulness of the
business, and the Messenger reported this to my Lord, and that he conceived was
the cause my Lord broke out so violently against him.

But being Interrogated on what occasion the words in question were spoken.

He answered, Before my Lord went to Ireland, he made a Speech to the whole
County, and desired them to go on in their Service; and so brake out, Some are
all for Law, but they shall find the Kings little Finger heavier on them than
the Loins of the Law. And this is all he can remember.

Sir William Ingram sworn and examined, touching his knowledge of these words.

Answered, That he was on the Bench at that time, Sir Thomas Leyton was
Sheriff, and he heard my Lord speak these words; Some of you are all for Law,
but you shall find that the King's little Finger is heavier than the Loins of
the Law, but he does not remember the occasion.

The main point I must insist on is, That the very words, if they had been
spoken by me, as they are laid (concerning which, I call God to witness, E. of
Strafford.
I have spoken the truth, and the occasion.) It is no Treason within the
Statute. And that being a point of Law, I crave leave to reserve my self
according to your Lordships Order, that my Counsel, in time fitting and proper,
may speak as concerning that in point of Law.

We shall close this Article, the last thing mentioned by his Lordship Manager.
was spoken to before; as to the words, we had five Witnesses express in the
Point, and therefore shall expect your Lordships Judgment in that. And so the
Court was adjourned.

The Fourth day. Thursday, March 25. 1641.
THE Third Article. The Charge.
THat the Realm of Ireland having been, time out of mind, annexed Article 3.
to the Imperial Crown of this His Majesty's Realm of England, and governed by
the same Laws: The said Earl being Lord-Deputy of that Realm, to bring His
Majesty's Liege-Subjects of that Kingdom likewise into dislike of His Majesty's
Government, and intending the Subversion of the Fundamental Laws, and settled
Government of that Realm, and the destruction of His Majesty's Liege-people
there; did upon the 30th day of September, in the Ninth Year of His now
Majesty's Reign, in the City of Dublin (the chief City of that Realm, where His
Majesty's Privy Council, and Courts of Justice do ordinarily reside, and
whither the Nobility and Gentry of that Realm do usually resort for Justice,)
in a public Speech, before diverse of the Nobility and Gentry of that Kingdom,
and before the Mayor, Aldermen, and Recorder, and many Citizens of Dublin, and
other His Majesty's Liegepeople, declare and publish, That Ireland was a
Conquered Nation, and that the King might do with them what he pleased: And
speaking of the Charters of former Kings of England made to that City: He
further then said, That their Charters were nothing worth, and did bind the
King no further than he pleased.

I Humbly move your Lordship, That since diverse things were spoken E. of
Strafford.
by the Witnesses Yesterday, which I conceiving not material as to the Charge,
forbore to answer to them, whereby I understand I have received some prejudice;
therefore I desire I may now give satisfaction therein, being well able to do
it.

We hope your Lordships remember your own Order. We desire he may not have that
allowed him to day, which was not granted him Yesterday. Manager.


The Evidence having been given for His Majesty, my Lord of Strafford having
answered, and the Commons Replied: Touching which the Lord Steward declared,
that the due Course had been followed; The Evidence being given for the King,
my Lord having Answered, and a Reply made.

My Lord, this is a Court of Honor, which is a Rule to it self, and no other
Court is a Rule to it; and therefore if any thing were omitted one E. of
Strafford.
day, through want of memory, your Lordships may in your Nobleness allow
another. Your Lordships being your own Judges and Rule, and most fit it should
be so. I do therefore beseech your Lordships, that I may have liberty to offer
new matter formerly omitted, else I shall be on great disadvantage, being to
answer on a sudden, and had no time till Friday last to bring in Witnesses,
and many perhaps may come up before my Trial ends.

We desire in the Name of the Commons of England, we may proceed according to
the Rule propounded, that his Lordship may not invert the Manager.
course on pretense of new matter, for then it will be impossible for us to
make good the Charge: (Which was accordingly Resolved) adding further, that
there has been ostentation of more Evidence, We desire it may make no
Impression with your Lordships.

We shall open the Third Article, containing very seditious words, spoken by my
Lord of Strafford, in a public Assembly, to the Kings Subjects, Manager.
That Ireland is a Conquered Nation, That the King may do with them what he
pleases: And speaking of the Charters of Dublin, He said, The Charters are
nothing worth, and binding the King no farther than he pleases.

I humbly desire, My Lords, that the Witnesses may stand in another Room from
the Committee, it being not usual in other Courts, though I E. of Strafford.
dare not offer any Court to be a Rule to this, and that your Lordship will
direct the question.

We have been sensible his Lordship has been large in his Imputations. We
shall behave our selves as becomes us in duty; we speak nothing to Manager.
the Witnesses, but what any man may hear, and we must tell them what they must
speak to, and less we cannot do.

I am the loathest man in the World to speak any thing that may give offense in
general or particular; neither did I charge any, only desired E of Strafford.
that they might stand clear, and that the question might come immediately to
them from your Lordship.

Robert Kennyday produced and sworn.

I humbly offer to your Lordships, That this Witness has been questioned E of
Strafford.
for many Misdemeanors, and extortion in execution of his Place, as
Remembrancer of the Exchequer, and for this was sentenced; and that he knew he
wished his Lordship no great good; and left it to their Lordships, Whether he
be a fit Witness, adding it to be his Misfortune, That all that have suffered
under the Kings Justice in his Ministry, are ready to be Witnesses against him.

My Lords, if he be guilty of Extortion, it follows not that he is therefore
Manager.
guilty of Perjury, neither does any thing stand proved: But if he has taken a
sum of Money, that makes him not to be believed when he gives Testimony.

Robert Kennyday being examined what words my Lord of Strafford spoke Robert
Kennyday a Witness.
in Dublin, of Ireland, Whether it was a Conquered Nation, and what he said of
the Charters of Dublin, and when.

He Answered, That 30. of September, 1633. he was the Kings Remembrancer in
Ireland, and that day the new Mayor of Dublin was presented to my Lord. The
Recorder of the City making a Speech, touching the Presentment of the Mayor,
cited many of the Favors and Graces of the Kings and Queens of England, and,
among the rest, one Charter, wherein he alleged was contained; That no
Lieutenant, Deputy, or Governor for the time being, or any Justice or Justices
could assess, or lay any Soldiers on the City of Dublin, without their
consent. That after the Recorder had made an end of Speaking, my Lord
Lieutenant was pleased to Answer him in many Particulars: Among the rest, he
told them, You are a Conquered Nation, and the King may do to you what he
pleases, and for your antiquated Charters, they bind nothing farther then
pleases Him.

The Witness added some things, to take off the Aspertions cast on him by his
Lordship, saying, He was never brought to Censure.

Being asked on my Lord of Strafford's Motion, Whether he said they were not
void by misusage, or the like.

He answered, No truly, Not a word that he heard.

Richard Earl of Cork produced and sworn.

I must profess, My Lords, my sorrow and unwillingness to speak my Exceptions
to the Earl of Cork, as conceiving him no competent Witness, in E. of Strafford.
respect of an Information exhibited against him in the Castle-Chamber, by the
King's Attorney there, which I desire may be read, and is, I will not say in
all the points of it, but so far acknowledged, that he confesses himself, under
his Hand and Seal, to be in the mercy of the King, and desires he may be made
the Object of his Majesty's Compassion, not of His Justice. And when your
Lordships shall see the nature of it, I Appeal to your Lordships, Whether my
Lord of Cork shall be admitted as a Witness against me, especially he being a
little displeased, and I am sorry for it; for something done in the Cause, he
giving 15000 l. for a Composition which the King had.

There are two grounds of my Lord of Straffords Exception to the Earl Manager.
of Corke's Testimony, as I conceive. First, His Censure, or questioning upon
the Information against him in the Castle-Chamber, which we have heard, to be
much of the nature of the Star Chamber here: And that part we suppose, was
cleared by Your Lordships wisdom yesterday; That not a Censure, much less an
Information in the Star Chamber, should be a fit Exception against a Witness.
The other part is, the ill will which my Lord of Cork, may bear my Lord of
Strafford on that occasion. Truly, (My Lords) if ill will, and offense against
my Lord of Strafford should be an exception and prejudice to a Witness, I am
afraid there will be few in the three Kingdoms, whose Testimonials will not be
prejudiced. But this I humbly offer to Your Lordships likewise, My Lord of
Cork is a Privy Councellor to His Majesty, and made a Privy Councellor since
by His Majesty; and certainly it is not seemly, to have that Reproach cast on
such a Person, That for a Prosecution in the Star Chamber, he should be made an
uncompetent Witness.

The reading of the Information being hereupon denied, My Lord of Cork was
asked, What words he heard my Lord of Strafford speak, touching Ireland being a
Conquered Nation, and that the Charters of it were of no value, further then it
pleased the King to make them.

His Lordship answered, And first desired leave to speak a word, hoping Lord
Cork a Witness.
he should do no wrong to any man: That when he had obtained my Lords License,
under the Great Seal, to come over hither, he came with as great a Resolution,
never to complain of any sufferings he had, or to Petition against him, as any
man did, and left all his Papers and Writings behind him, that he might have
nothing to move him against my Lord of Strafford, but to do him all the service
he could.

To the question, his Lordship said, That all he can say, is this, that he was
present that day the Mayor of Dublin was presented to my Lord Deputy that then
was, and the Recorder set forth the Great Charters they had from the several
Kings of England; and fell on that matter of placing Soldiers in Dublin,
without their consent; That my Lords Answer was, You must understand, Mr.
Recorder, Ireland is a conquered Nation, and the King may give them what Laws
he pleases. And then going forward with the Charters, he said, They be old
Antiquated Charters, and no further good, than the King is pleased to make
them: To that sense (he said) he is sure.

We desire to observe to Your Lordships, That this time, was not the Manager.
only time; he spoke the very words in effect, to the whole Kingdom afterward,
in Parliament.

The Lord Gorminstone produced and Sworn: Being asked whether he Lord
Gorminstone a Witness.
heard my Lord of Strafford speak words to the effect as aforesaid, That
Ireland was a conquered Nation, etc.

His Lordship Answered, That he remembers, that in the 10th year of the Kings
Reign, 1634 on occasion of a Petition presented to my Lord Lieutenant, in
behalf of the Country (as far as his remembrance leads him) from the House of
Commons, desiring the benefit of some Graces His Majesty had been pleased to
confer on them, and he in the open Parliament, sitting under the Cloth of
State, in presence of both Houses, told them, Ireland was a conquered Nation,
and they must expect Laws as from a Conqueror: And the Instructions granted
from His Majesty for settling the Government of that Kingdom, were procured from
a company of narrow-hearted Commissioners.

Being asked on my Lord of Strafford's motion, when these words were spoken,
whether the first day of the Parliament, or at any other time:

His Lordship answered, That to his best remembrance, it was not the first day
of the Parliament.

My Lord of Strafford saying it was at the opening of the Parliament, and the
second day; my Lord Gorminstone being further asked about the time:

His Lordship answered, He knew not whether it were the second day, or another
day, but the particular words he took notice of; and it was in presence of both
Houses of Parliament, the Speaker standing at the Bar.

The Lord Killmallock produced, and Sworn; and interrogated touching the same
words.

His Lordship answered, That he was a Member of the Commons House, Lord
Killmallock a Witness.
the 10th and 11th of the King, and the House of Commons Petitioned the then
Lord Deputy, the Earl of Strafford, for the gaining of the Act of Limitations,
for the confirming of their Estates, amongst other Graces granted to the Agents
for that Kingdom, in the fourth year of the King. These Graces he answered to
in writing; and on the second or third day after, came into the House of Lords,
and there sent for the Commons; and in his Speech (amongst other things, I well
remember, and to my grief, and to the grief of that Kingdom) he uttered these
words, That that Kingdom was a conquered Nation, (the words as he remembered)
and therefore they must expect Laws as from a Conqueror; adding further, that
the Book of Instructions, established in King James his Reign, for the orderly
Government of the Courts of Justice in that Kingdom, were Instructions
contrived, and procured by a Company of narrow-hearted Commissioners, who knew
not what belonged to Government.

Sir Pierce Crosby being asked touching the same words,

Answered, That he very well remembered the words, as they had been Sir Pierce
Crosby a Witness.
spoken by the Noblemen that had been examined before him; My Lord of
Strafford, then Lord Deputy of Ireland, in the hearing of both Houses, said,
That Ireland was a conquered Nation, and that the Conqueror should give the
Law. He added further, that the Book of Instructions for the Government of that
Kingdom, was drawn up, or procured, by the means of some narrow-hearted
Commissioners, meaning those Commissioners that were employed by Commission
from the King out of the House of Commons, being a select Committee, whereof
there was one that is now a Noble Member of this House, that sits on the Earls
Bench: And that he has heard many of both Houses, repeat the same words as
spoken by him.

And so the Commons concluded the Article, expecting my Lord of Straffords
Answer.

After a quarter of an hours respit, my Lord of Strafford began his Defense as
follows:

First, I desire to open two points set forth in my Answer, which under E. of
Strafford.
favor, I must stand to, as that by which I must stand or fall. First, That
the Kingdom of Ireland, (as I conceive) is governed by Customs and Statutes,
and Execution of Martial Law, and Proceedings at Council Board, in a different
manner from the Laws of England. Secondly, That touching the Charters, I said,
these Charters were void, and nothing worth, and did not bind the King further
than he pleased; both which I hope to make good.

The other business, that comes in De novo, is no part of my Charge, and
therefore I hope will not be laid to my Charge.

I observe in the beginning of this part of the Charge that concerns Ireland,
That the Governors for the Crown of England, that have been it Ireland, in all
Ages, almost, have had these misfortunes, That the Native Subjects of that
Country have not been propitious toward them. I instance in the case of Sir
Io. Perott, who on Testimonies here, was Attainted of Treason in a Legal
ordinary way of proceeding, whereupon he lost his Estate, though not his Life;
and afterward it was confessed, there was little truth in all that Accusation.

Next, my Lord of Faulkland, against whom, many of the Witnesses that I think
will come against me, informed; as Sir Pierce Crosby for one, my Lord
Mountnorris for another, and diverse others; who had so prejudicated me when I
went into Ireland, in their Opinion, by the generality of their Charge, that I
was a little distrustful whether it was not so: And thus much I have spoken
once before His Majesty at the Council Board, on another occasion, and now
speak it to Your Lordships, to the Honor of that Person, that is now with God,
my Lord of Faulkland, notwithstanding all the heavy cries that were against
him, and the wrongs and injuries laid to his Charge, I had the fortune to have
all the Examinations whereupon they proceeded, and looked over them all; and
now I protest, and call God to witness, not any way as making to me, I found
the said Lord to have proceeded as Honorably, Justly, and Nobly, to his
understanding, as any man could do; and yet was decryed as much as any man
could be. And so I beseech Your Lordships to consider me the Kings Servant; and
that in the Administration of the Commands and Justice entrusted with me, I had
occasion to give offense to many; and that it has been the ill fortune of
those that have been Governors there, when they have left the Government, not
to be so well reported as otherwise they might be.

Besides, There is nothing in this Charge can possibly amount to Treason, admit
all to be as it is laid, though perhaps to a Misdemeanour.

That if it be no Treason, it will fall to be but Misdemeanour; and then I
conceive, it stands with the Justice and Practice of this Court, to allow
Council and Witnesses, which I am debarred from, by the involving me under the
general Charge of Treason; and having no further time to prepare, then since
Friday last.

That though before, I durst not say Your Lordships were bound by Rules of any
Judicature, but stood to Your own Honor and Nobleness, and were a Rule to Your
selves, (and herein I take Your Lordships to witness) yet since the Gentlemen
at the Bar, have pressed the rules of other Courts, I desire leave to offer,
That in all ordinary Courts of Judicature that ever I heard of, where the
Criminal party does Answer, and that Answer is not replied to, nor he admitted
to make his proof, the Answer of the party is taken and confessed; from which
universal Rule of Justice, no man can show him a transgression: And therefore,
since I cannot be admitted my proofs, it being impossible to fetch Witnesses
out of Ireland since Friday last, my Answer, I conceive, ought to be admitted,
and the Charge taken as I confessed it, not as it is on proof.

Saving to my self, that I said I would go on to give the best Answer I could,
on a sudden, professing, That if I had had time, I am confident, through the
mercy and goodness of God, and the Innocence of my own heart, I should be able
to clear my self of Treason (the greatest Crime between man and man) toward
His Majesty, and toward his People, (my heart being innocent of it; and never
having suggestion or thought, but for the Greatness and Honor of His Majesty,
and the Prosperity and blessed Estate of His People, all the days of my life;
and ever desiring the best things, and never satisfied I had done enough, but
did always desire to do better) but also of all other foul Crimes of Injustice
or Oppression: Errors I may have many; perhaps my Tongue has been too free,
my Heart perhaps, has lain too near my Tongue; but God forbid every word
should rise up in Judgment against me. If every word that is spoken amiss should
be observed, who is able to endure it; for words spoken, ten, twelve, eight or
nine years ago, to be brought in Judgment of me, is a very heavy Case; and I
beseech your Lordships to turn the Case inward, and to tell me if it be not a
hard Case to be put upon such an Examination.

I shall observe further, that words ought to be charged within a certain time
by the Proviso in the Stat. in E. 6. time, they must be brought in question
within 30 days as I take it, which Proviso stands good in Law; but I go now
into a Learning that God knows I have little skill of; to this I desire my
Council may in due time be heard, to open and Plead. In the mean time I desire
to say, that if popular actions must be concluded within a year or two at the
most, sure words should be questioned within a less time.

I shall proceed to maintain the truth of my Answer, That Ireland is not
governed by the same Laws that England is; and for that I shall read a few
words in my Lord Cooks Learning (which God knows I understand not) it is in
Calvin's Case; where the words are, So as now the Laws of England, became the
proper Laws of Ireland. And therefore because they have Parliaments holden
there, whereat they have made diverse particular Laws, as it appears in the 20
H. 6. 8. and 20. and in Ed. Dyer 360. And for that they retain to this day
diverse of the ancient Customs, the Book of 20 H. 6. holds, That Ireland is
governed by Laws and Customs separate and diverse from the Laws of England.

Therefore in all things belonging to my Charge that came out of Ireland, I
hope Your Lordships will take along with you the consideration of the Customs
and Practices of that Kingdom, and not judge me according to that which has
been the Custom and Practice of the Kingdom of England.

In the second place, I come to the words of Ireland being a conquered Nation;
The words laid in the Charge being, that I should say; That Ireland was a
conquered Nation, and the King might do with them what he pleased.

And first, I should do extremely ill to the Honor of the English Nation, and
to the memory of diverse of Your Lordships Noble Ancestors, if I should not both
say and think, that Ireland is a conquered Nation; when here is mention made in
the Laws, and in the Acts of State, of English Rebels, and Irish Enemies,
certainly there is something in that; for till the Kings of England gave them
the advantage and benefit of the Laws of England, it is well known, they were
held Irish Enemies, and so termed and styled in all the Records one shall meet
withal in these times. And that it was a conquered Nation, I have very good
Authority in the Statute made 11 Eliz. at the Attainder of that famous Rebel
Shan Oneale.

In one part of which it is said,

That all the Clergy of the Realm assembled in Armagh, at the time of the
Conquest, etc. See the Statute.

Is it then so much for me to say what is in the Act? and is it not for the
Honor of the English Nation to say it? and it must be said to the Worlds end,
for it is a truth. And therefore there is no cause it should be taken so
hainously, or heard with so much displeasure; and if I displease for telling
the truth, I cannot help it: He reads another part of it, viz.

And therefore it is to be understood, that King Hen. 2. the first Conqueror of
this Realm, etc.

And so it has been acknowledged in all stories and times, and many an English
man has spent his blood in it, whose Posterity will be ashamed to view it,
other than as a conquered Kingdom.

Nay, I believe many Noble Persons are yet living, that have bled for it, and
will take it ill, if it be termed less than a Conquest, in them who lived in
those famous times, and spent their blood in Obedience to their Sovereigns
Command.

So that by these words heartily and rightly taken, no manner of ill could
come, being spoken, not with any sharpness or upbraiding, but merely to let
them see, That being in that Condition, they were infinitely bound to the Kings
of England, who were pleased to communicate to them the Laws of their own
Kingdom: And so far were they from being taken ill, that no man at that time
took offense at them.

For the words, The King might do with them what he pleased, let them relate to
the Conquest, and there is no offense in them; for the Conqueror might give
them what Laws he pleased, and yet nevertheless, has been so gracious and
good, as to give them the Laws of his own People: Give me that understanding of
the words, and then where is the Crime? how can it be brought in Judgment
against me in it self, or be aggravated to High Treason.

I acknowledge I did speak to the Recorder of Dublin, yet some things I am put
in mind of, which I am forced to deny with a great asseveration, That I do not
remember the words, nay, I am sure I never spoke them, let all the world, and a
cloud of Witnesses, say the contrary, when I know in my own heart I did not
speak them; though I offer not this to Your Lordships, to convince your
Judgments: And on the other side, there is nothing that is true, but I will
acknowledge it with all Ingenuity in the world, on the Testimony of any one
single Witness.

I desire that Mr. Slingsby, his Servant, might be asked, whether he was not
present when I spoke these words; and whether then any offense was taken at me,
in respect of the high manner of my speaking; or whether they were not rather
extremely well satisfied.

Now if Your Lordships take words in pieces, and not altogether, any man living
may be convinced; but taking my words altogether, though something might be
thought harsh, yet something gave abundant satisfaction.

I am upon a mighty prejudice, in being denied to have my Witnesses examined
upon Oath in these things that are not Treason. But they be persons of good
credit, and I trust your Lordships will believe them, as much as if they spoke
on Oath, since I think none of them would say a word to your Lordships, which
they would not swear.

Mr. Slingsby being asked, Whether he was present when my Lord of Mr. Slingsby
a Witness.
Strafford spoke to the Recorder of Dublin, what he said, and what acceptance
it received.

He Answered, He was then present, being on the occasion of presenting Sir
Robert Dixton, the Mayor of Dublin; that he cannot remember the particular
words, nor deliver them to their Lordships, as they were spoken by the
Lord Lieutenant: But he remembers particularly the scope of the Discourse was
to ingratiate His Majesty's present Government to them; That the words were
well accepted by several persons whom he spoke with, and took that Effect, that
his Lordship was thereupon invited to the Mayors House, where diverse of the
City Congratulated his coming to them.

I shall now proceed to the second part of the words, That their Charters E. of
Strafford.
were nothing worth, and they bind the King no farther than he pleases; and I
conceive I may say so still. If their Charters be nothing worth, they do not
bind the King, but he may do with them what he pleases. In that, I desire your
Lordships to call to mind what my Lord of Cork said, That Ireland was a
Conquered Nation, and the King might give them what Laws he pleased, and that
the Charters were Antiquated, and no farther good, than it pleased His Majesty
to make them. It is likely (I confess) I might say so, and yet not say amiss;
for it is most evident and clear, their Charters are void in point of Law, and
therefore it is in the King's good will and pleasure, Whether he will make them
good or no. And that they were void, the King's Council informed me so; that
they were questioned at Council Board upon it, for diverse unlawful Exactions
they took, under color of Charters, for diverse Bylaws that they had made,
against Law, by those Charters, for diverse neglects of Duties that they ought
to do by those Charters; and generally, for not performing the trust reposed in
them, by those Charters, with that Integrity and Care they ought to do And for
the truth of it, that many Complaints were made against the Mayor and Aldermen
at that Board, for neglecting their Duty: I dare Appeal to my Lord of Cork. I
adding this, That the greatest part of the Aldermen were Recusants, and would
never be brought to obey the Order of the Board; but stood on their Charters,
and would be Masters; and by that means great Disorders continued.

And to prove that upon Examination, they appeared to be void in Law. I desire
Sir George Ratcliffe may be admitted to speak on what Grounds those Charters
were called in, and are now (as I think) deposited with the Clerk of the
Council.

Sir George Ratcliffe standing charged with High Treason, by the Commons
Manager.
of England, before your Lordships, and of a Conspiracy with my Lord of
Strafford; and whether it be fit to hear one charged with High Treason, to
clear another so charged, we Appeal to your Lordships.

That Sir George Ratcliffe is charged to be a Conspirator with me indeed, and,
in truth, I must confess Sir George Ratcliffe and my self (under favor) E. of
Strafford.
are equally guilty of Treason, and I hope we shall both justify our selves;
but I know so much of him, that I am not ashamed to say, That I think that Sir
George Ratcliffe is my Friend, and I wish him well, and so I think will all
other men (I trust in God) when they hear him. But I conceive Sir George
Ratcliffe might be heard in these Points; if he be examined as a Witness
against me, I desire he may be examined as a Witness for me.

Sir George Ratcliffe is not examined, nor at all sworn in the Cause on our
Motion, and admitted, that if they produced him as a Witness, they Manager.
would not deny my Lord of Strafford to cross examine him. The Lord Steward
declared the sense of their Lordships, That Sir George Ratcliffe could not be
examined.

I shall readily obey; but yet observe, That if it were only matter of
Misdemeanor, he might be examined, though charged. But this is my unhappiness,
E. of Strafford.
to be debarred of my Witnesses, because I am charged with Treason in general,
though there be nothing in particular that is near the complexion of Treason.

We desire to observe, that this justifies a part of our Charge, for the
Charter of the Subjects Liberties are, as his Lordship confesses, brought
Manager.
to the Council Table, and judged there, and not to the proper Courts where
they ought to be judged; the Council Table having no Power to declare the
Validity or Invalidity of Charters from the King to the Subject.

I crave Liberty to explain my self, That I said not they were brought to the
Council Table to be judged, but that consideration might be had, E. of
Strafford.
Whether there was ill usage and extortion practiced under color of them or
no; whether any thing were done that hindered the growth of that Town, and the
good of the People, and the Protestant Religion, that it might appear how the
business stood in point of State; but to give a judgment upon them in Law, it
was never in my thoughts.

Robert Lord Dillon being then asked, Whether the Charters of Dublin have not
been brought before the Council of Ireland, there to be considered concerning
the Validity of them, and whether it did not appear that for diverse Occasions,
Exactions and Tolls, and Bylaws, and other abuses in the exercise of these
Charters; they did not appear to the King's Learned Council, and others learned
in the Law, to be void.

He Answered, That it was a question he did not expect; and yet being called,
he should faithfully and freely tell his knowledge of it, to his best
remembrance: That he does remember very well, that the Charters of Dublin have
been brought to the Council Board, and argued strongly against by the Kings
Learned Council. That there was one particular of 3 d. Custom challenged by the
City, which endured a very long debate: That it was argued against them, That
they exercised Bylaws, contrary to the Common Law of the Land, and that diverse
other things were urged against them; but he remembers not the particular
determination of the Board upon the question.

Being asked severally, what time those Charters were so brought, and how long
after my Lord of Strafford's coming into Ireland.

He Answered, That he precisely remembers not the time, but he takes it to be
five or six years ago, something more or less, and he thinks about a year or
two after my Lord of Strafford's coming, but he remembers not the time, not
expecting to be Interrogated in it.

We desire your Lordships to observe, That the words were spoken before Manager.
the Charters were brought to the Council Board.

It follows not, That because they were questioned at Council Board E. of
Strafford.
afterward, I did not therefore know them to be void, when I spoke of them,
for they were complained of in Parliament, as great Grievances, in the
exercising of them, and to that purpose I desire my Lord Dillom may be heard.

And being asked what he knew concerning the Charters of Dublin, being
questioned in the Commons House for diverse Oppressions, unlawful Bylaws, and
other ill usage of their Liberties.

He Answered, That he was a Member of the first Parliament after my Lords
coming into Ireland, 1634. After this Visitation of the Mayor some half an
year, but he knows not the time precisely. That diverse Members of that House
did object diverse Misdemeanors, in mis^sing the Privileges of those Charters.
That the particulars were several Bylaws which they did execute, contrary to
the Common Law: Another was, that by the Privilege of those Charters, they
excluded diverse of the Tradesmen that came out of England to set up
Manufactures there, which was conceived a great Grievance to that Kingdom.
Another was, that having the Government of that Town, being a Navigable Port,
they permitted the Soil to be emptied into the River, without care or regard.

That at the time of the Presentment of the Mayor, my Lord took occasion to
advise and advertise the Mayor of several Defects in that Town, and diverse of
the Commons House of that Parliament are here that were present.

Hence observe the Reason and Grounds of my Exception to these E. of Strafford.
Charters, and the Effects of questioning them, which were two: First, By this
means I am persuaded (and thereof I beseech the Honorable House of Commons to
take notice, as that which is reputed my greatest Crime in Ireland) there be
three Protestants in Dublin, at this hour, for one that was there when I came
over; for the Townsmen did keep all the Trade, and ingross all the Manufactures
into their own hands; and being Natives, and Romish Catholics, did depress the
English, that strangers out of England had little advantage of Trade. And
whatsoever any man may say or think on Information from persons that do not
love me, who are Members of neither House (for so I desire to be understood,
when I speak of persons unfriendly to me; I complain of nothing that is or
shall be done me here, but will leave it all, with thankfulness to God
Almighty, and with that Duty and Reverence to this House, that becomes me.) It
will be known hereafter, when I perhaps am in my Grave, that my greatest fault
in Ireland, has been my extreme Zeal to bring them to conform with the Church
of England, which by that means has provoked a great deal of Displeasure.

And secondly, I observe, That this argues no great malice in my heart, nor
desire to oppress the King's People, when I shall tell your Lordships, That to
this day those Charters were never legally questioned, but are enjoyed. So far
was I from pressing rigorously any thing against them, I desiring nothing but
Reformation, and to have them what they ought to be, and to leave them not
less, but more happy than I found them.

And if I should serve there again, as I hope I shall serve only God Almighty,
and my Master with my prayers, they should be freed from all exactions and
misusings of them, tending to the prejudice of the Town, the King's Service,
and the Service of Almighty God.

And so I hope I have made a clear Answer to so much as was charged, to free my
self from guilt of Treason, reserving to my self the advantage of having my
Counsel heard, in proper time, to the matter of Treason in point of Law,
according to the liberty your Lordships have afforded me.

Next, I shall proceed to that which is proved, and no way charged, which I
forbore to speak to the day before, as holding it an impertinent expense of
time to your Lordships, and a spending of my own spirits, which, God knows, are
weak and infirm indeed. If I were permitted to speak this morning to all the
things extrajudicially formerly offered, I should give a free and clear Answer.
But suffering by my Ignorance and silence then, I now desire leave to Answer
those things that came de Novo, and that by three Witnesses, touching words
spoken at another time to both Houses of Parliament.

I confess it to be true, that the second day of the last Parliament, but this
that is now sitting, I had the Honor to sit as His Majesty's Deputy, and it
was the greatest Honor that ever I received; and I should be loath to say any
thing, sitting in that Place, that should not fully comply with the Goodness,
Clemency, and Justice of His Majesty, or should mis-represent Him in any kind
to his People in another sense, or to other purpose than his own Great and
Princely Virtues do Merit and Deserve.

And that all I said at that time tended to that purpose, to show and set forth
to them the excellent Goodness of His Majesty, and the Graciousness of His
Government. Therefore if I should say any thing to the purpose, as it is
offered, I should go much against the purpose for which I intended my
Discourse. For me to have said openly there, in the King's Chair, that they
were a Conquered Nation, and must expect Laws from Him, as from a Conqueror,
when I knew it most false; and expected from His Majesty, that He would Govern
them by the same righteous Rules of Justice and Honor (as his Predecessors had
before him) I had been much too blame, and it had been against the drift of my
Discourse. And I must say, and will say, to the death, I never spoke such
words, That they must expect Laws from Him as from a Conqueror. I know very
well how it is proved, and what my own affirmation does in foro Iudicii; but
how it may work in foro Conscientiae, I trust I have so much credit left in the
World, as to be known to be a man of truth, and not usually to speak untruths.
And I take the heavenly God to Witness, that I never spoke them. I remember the
words, and the occasion by a good token, without which I should not have
remembered them; my Friends desiring a Copy of my Speech, which Copy is in
Ireland; and were it here, would satisfy every man. It was to incline them to
take into consideration the great Debt that lay on the Crown, being near 100000
l. the shortness of the Revenue, which was then short of the yearly Charge
24000 l. though the first day it was stood upon, and would have been colored
over, as if there had been no such thing. I was to move thereunto a supply to
pay the Debt, and to improve the Revenue to such a height as might answer the
Charge of the Kingdom; that to induce this, I told them the Kingdom of England
had expended great and vast Sums of Money, and had issued a great deal of Noble
blood for the reducing of them to Obedience, and in that happy State wherein
they then lived. That they must not think the Kingdom of England must always
bear the Charge of the Crown, but they must so fit the business, that the
Kingdom may bear its own Charge; For, said I, and these are the words, (I take
God Almighty to Witness) and no other. If the Kingdom of England should still
be put to their Charges, and the whole Expense should still rest on the
Conqueror, you might very well think you are so dealt withal, as never any
other Conquered Nation had been. That on these words my Lord of Ormond came to
me, and told me, That the words he had spoken were not well taken; For that I
had said, The Irish are a Conquered Nation, and that is not well. I answered
his Lordship, Truly, my Lord, you are a Conquered Nation, but you see how I
speak it, and no otherwise.

But this I am not charged with, and offer it only to keep and preserve me in a
good Opinion, as much as I can of both Houses of Parliament, which I desire of
all things under Heaven, next the Favor of Almighty God, and his Gracious
Majesty.

He then proceeded to examine Witnesses: And first Robert Lord Dillom being
asked, Whether he was present when he spoke these words to both Houses of
Parliament, and what they were?

We desire to put your Lordships in mind that there were two times when my Lord
spoke such words; one, when he spoke to hoth Houses of Manager.
Parliament at the Public Speeeh now mentioned; the other, upon delivering a
Petition by the House of Commons: That the words which the Commons Charge, were
the last mentioned by me, not the first, and that was desired to be observed.

The Question being repeated.

The Lord Dillom Answered, That he served as a Member of the Commons House that
Parliament, and in respect of the Honor he had to be of the King's Council,
and the Son of a Peer of the Realm, he stood under the Cloth of State, and was
present when my Lord made his Speech to both Houses; for that passage of the
Conquest, some touch there was of it; and he has heard my Lord of Ormond speak
in particular of it: For the other words, That they should expect Laws as from
a Conqueror, he took God to witness, he did not remember them.

Being asked whether he remembers them to be spoken at any other time: He
answered, That on his Soul he does not.

Sir Adam Loftus being asked to the same purpose.

He Answered, That he was the first and the last day at the Parliament, that he
does not well remember the middle day, and he cannot burden his memory with any
such words spoken that he heard either then, or at any other time.

Sir Robert King was called, and asked to the same purpose.

He Answered, That he thinks he was present that day, but not within hearing,
and he never heard the words at any other time.

Lord Renula being asked, Whether then, or at any time he heard my Lord of
Strafford say, They must expect Laws from the King, as from a Conqueror.

He Answered, That he was then in the House, and remembers the words in the
first place, That Ireland was a Conquered Nation; that for the words in the
second place, something was spoken, but how far he cannot witness.

Sir George Wentworth questioned on the same Point.

Answered, That he sat under the Chair of State at that time, and remembers
not that my Lord ever spoke these words, That the King might do with them as he
pleased. That it pleased my Lord Lieutenant to send him into England at that
time, to attend His Majesty, with the Success of that Parliament, and that he
brought the Speech with him, and can confidently affirm, There was no such
thing in the Speech; and the Speech he did deliver to some Privy-Counsellor,
and added, That he never heard my Lord publicly or privately say those words,
They must expect Laws from the King as from a Conqueror.

We desire to know, Whether the Witness was returned out of England when this
Remonstrance was delivered. For the Commons Charge it Manager.
thus, That the House of Commons delivered a Petition, to have the Laws
executed according to the Instructions, upon which the words were spoken, and
we believe Sir George Wentworth was not come back, and then it was impossible
he should hear him, for it was after the Parliament had sat, and some
proceedings had.

I observe, How it is in some of the Witnesses, for my Lord Gorminstone E. of
Strafford.
fixed it on the first beginning of the Parliament.

He spoke it to the occasion of the Petition, but the distinct time he does not
remember. Managers Relpy.


Sir George Wentworth being asked touching the time of his going into England.

He desired to know what time the Petition was delivered; but he went over some
few days after the Subsidies were granted.

Lord Robert Digby being asked, Whether at the Parliament at Dablin, or any
other time, he ever heard my Lord of Strafford speak those words.

He Answered, That he never did; that he does not know whether he was present
at that time or no; that he did diligently wait, but does not remember the
words, nor occasion, but he thinks he was not present.

Your Lordships have heard my Lord of Strafford's Defense with much Managers
Reply.
patience, That he has said nothing that takes off the Charge, but some things
that aggravate it.

That he would answer the Particulars, as his Lordship had propounded them. And
first he observed, That his Lordship denies not the words Charged, which makes
greater way for proof of them.

He informs of the ill Fortune of other Governors, that one was Attainted, and
the Informations afterward retracted, that my Lord of Faulkland was complained
of, yet a Noble and good Governor, against whom, or any Deputy, we can say
nothing: But what is this for my Lord Strafford to say, Others were questioned,
therefore he is Innocent.

These were complaints of particular men, This against my Lord of Strafford, is
the complaint of all the Commons of England.

It is said, here is no Treason in this Article, no Argument of Treason; but
the Commons never pressed these words singly and dividedly, to be Treason; but
take all together, they discover that Disposition, that Counsel, that
Resolution that my Lord of Strafford had taken on him, the ruin and subversion
of the Common Law, in both Kingdoms.

It is said, an Answer is put in, and no Replication. It is true, in other
Courts, if you go on Bill and Answer, the Answer is taken pro Confesso; but the
Commons desire not to bind up my Lord of Strafford with Formalities; but by the
substance of their Charge, they have averred their Charge, which is as much as
a denial of his Answer.

To there being another Government in Ireland than in England, my Lord himself
spoke of it by himself; but he thinks it will not be material to this purpose;
for whatsoever it is, some Government there is: but the Speech of my Lord tends
to take away all Laws; for they must expect Laws as from a Conqueror, in that
Limitation.

For his referring it to the time, taking it in the sense, that the then
Conqueror might do what he pleased, that is true, and justifiable: But that is
to suppose the words otherwise than they are; being spoken, not of the Kings
that were before, but of His Majesty that now is.

My Lord would make an Argument, his words were well accepted, because Mr.
Slingsby heard nothing to the contrary; the words had much Acrimony and
Sharpness, and we dare not believe the Mayor of Dublin durst tell my Lord of
Strafford so, or forbear any Complement to him, though he had been displeased
with him. But if that be material, the Witnesses that have proved the words,
will tell Your Lordships, it was resented with a great deal of Grief and Sorrow
in all the hearers.

His Lordship justifies what was spoken of the Charters, on these grounds,
First, That the Witness said they were Antiquated Charters, and therefore did
not bind; whereas it was a scornful Epithet, their Antiquated, and Worm-eaten
Charters, did not bind.

It is said, they were void through negligences, questioned at Council Table,
complained of in Parliament. But they must take the words to pieces, not
altogether. Had he spoken of the Charters alone, that they were void Charters,
it were no crime, no indiscretion. But take it with the occasion and connection,
it admits of no such mitigation, or interpretation. He tells them, they are a
conquered Nation, and they must expect Laws as from a Conqueror: And they are a
conquered Nation, and their Charters are no further good than the King pleases.

It is said, It is strict to answer presently what may be objected; and the
Examinations are extrajudicial; we doubt not but Your Lordships will
justifie-our Proceedings, nor is there any strictness in them; for if a man be
questioned of a Crime, and several Evidences be brought to make up this Crime,
some concurrent, some precedent, they will be allowed of in other Courts; It
being never used, to set forth in a Charge all circumstances of Proof, The main
is produced, and this is an Evidence to prove that, and it is within the
Charge; for there is a Charge, that he corrupts the Laws and Government.

Then my Lord produces diverse Witnesses, who speak in a different sense, Sir
Robert King heard nothing; another, that he remembers nothing; and if he
remembers nothing, it may as well be said of the rest, That there might be
something they did not hear, or remember; for they speak no more, but they did
not remember; There may be something they forgot, as well as another forget all.

My Lord Ranulagh says, He remembers the first words, and something as spoken
of the second; but he cannot tell how far: So that there is rather a doubt,
that something was spoken to that purpose, than otherwise. The Lord Digby was
not present, Sir George Wentworth remembers not the words; he has a Copy of
the Speech, and is confident the words were not spoken. But they were not
spoken in the first Speech, whereof there was a Copy, when the Petition for the
Laws was delivered.

And this is an Aggravation against my Lord of Strafford, that by his own
showing, there was an Exception taken, when he spoke in a milder sense, and to
advance His Majesty's Government, it had an ill impression, and was taken
notice of, and the Exception delivered to himself.

Now if after Exception taken to a Speech delivered in Parliament, clothed
with so much mildness, he in the same Parliament, as soon as Subsidies are
granted, shall tell them, they are a conquered Nation, and shall not have
Graces, but such Laws as the King will give them: This puts the Offense in
higher terms than before; so far are they from mitigation of the Offense.

We desire Witnesses may be heard concerning the circumstance of time.

Mr. Fitzgarret produced, and Sworn. Mr. Fitzgarret a Witness.


Was asked whether he knew of a Petition delivered to the Earl of Strafford by
the Commons, concerning the Laws; and how in time it followed the public
Speech at the beginning of the Parliament, and what Answer was given to it.

He Answered, That he was then a Member of the Commons House, and present when
the Petition was delivered: But after the House of Commons had given the King
six Subsidies, the House of Commons entered into consideration, of Petitioning
for such things as were necessary and expedient for the Commonwealth, as they
thought; this Petition was preferred to the Lord Deputy, a good space of time
after the Subsidies were granted, and Advertisement sent to England, of the
good service done in obtaining those Subsidies from the House of Commons, That
he remembers not any part of the Answer given; There was an Answer given in
Writing, either at Council Table, or in full Parliament, from the House of
Lords; but that he spoke only to the point of time.

My Lord of Strafford did here affirm it to be most certainly true, That E. of
Strafford.
the Petition concerning the things Mr. Fitzgarret mentions, was delivered at
Council Board, and not in Parliament; and desiring Mr. Fitzgarrets further
explanation of himself:

He Answered, That he conceives there were two Petitions; one, as he thinks,
concerning the performance of the Instructions of 1628. whereunto an Answer
might be given at Council Board; and he believes it was subscribed by many of
the Council. There was another Petition of Grievances, seeking redress of them;
and to whether of these his Lordship gave an Answer in Parliament, he remembers
not; but believes there was an Answer made to both, or one of them, in full
Parliament.

The Lord Gorminstone being demanded at what time, and on what occasion my Lord
of Strafford spoke the words, he was examined on before, in Lord Gorminstone a
Witness.
the Parliament at Dublin:

He Answered, A Petition was delivered to my Lord of Strafford, and he spoke to
the House, wherein he spoke the words that he had formerly related, That they
must expect Laws as from a Conqueror; and that the Instructions published for
the settling of that Government, were procured by a company of narrow hearted
Commissioners; That he did not then remember the certain time; but he is sure
it was in Parliament; and so resented, that almost all took notice of it; when
most part were English and British Extractions, and very few Irish.

The Lord Killmallock being demanded to the same purpose, Lord Killmallock a
Witness.


Answered, That he conceived the occasion was, a delivery of a Petition to his
Lordship. It is true, it was not delivered in Parliament, nor were the words
spoken at the Council Table where the Petition was delivered: But he conceives,
it was on occasion of delivering that Petition, that his Lordship speaks: For
after the Petition was delivered, three or four days after, his Lordship came
to the Parliament House, he called both Houses before him, and there delivered
these words, That Ireland was a Conquered Nation, and therefore must expect
Laws as from a Conqueror. Adding further, That the Book of Instructions,
meaning the Book Printed in King James His Reign, for the orderly Government of
the Courts of Justice, was contrived and procured by a company of narrowhearted
Commissioners, who knew not what belonged to Government. The words, he said, he
remembers very perfectly, as having great misery on his heart in the speaking:
And whereas it is said, none did take notice of them; They did, but they durst
not, it wrought inwardly; and had they spoken of it, they expected no redress,
but a greater addition of calamity to them.

We shall now proceed, and observe, That this Article touching the Manager.
Laws of Ireland, gives the groundwork of what follows in the subsequent
Articles concerning Ireland.

And first, We desire Your Lordships to take into remembrance, That though
Ireland differ in some particular Statutes from England, yet they enjoy the
same Common Law, without any difference.

That by the Statute 28 H. 6. in Ireland, It is Enacted, That every Cause shall
be remitted to its proper Court; It is true, the King has this Prerogative,
not to be tied to sue in the King's Bench; but may sue in any Courts of Justice,
for matters Triable in the Common Pleas, or Chancery, or Exchequer; all Courts
are open to him, wherever he will have his Cause judged; but with the Subject,
the proper Cause must go to the proper Court, and according to this, the
exercise and use is continued in that Kingdom.

Some Encroachments being made, King James, of blessed memory, took
consideration of it, he appointed Commissioners, and Instructions were Printed
in pursuance of this: A Noble Earl now present, Justice Jones, Sergeant Crew,
and diverse others, were employed in that Service. These Instructions, as they
remit the Causes to the proper Courts, so they declare, that it had crept in at
the Council Table in latter times, to take Oaths; but direct, that it shall be
forborne for matters of Interest and Complaint between party and party, and
matters of Title.

And it stays not here; but a Proclamation is issued to the same effect.

This Statute, these Instructions, and this Proclamation, we desire may be read.

Accordingly the Statute was read, whereby it was ordained to the Governor of
the Land, or other Officer for the time being, He that accuses, shall find
sufficient sureties for the damage of him that is accused; and if it shall be
adjudged that the Suggestion or Accusation, is not true, etc. And also, that he
that is Arrested, may go by Surety or Bail, till the matter be determined.

And if it be matter of Treason or Felony, to be remitted to the King's Bench;
if Conscience, to the Chancery; if Franchise, to the Seneschal of the Liberty;
if for Debt, to the Common Pleas, etc. saving the Kings Prerogative.

Then part of the Instructions were read, published 1622. wherein it is
Ordered, That the Council Table shall keep it self within its proper bounds.

Amongst which, the Patents of Plantations, and the Offices on which the Grants
are founded, are to be handled as matters of State, and to be determined by the
Lord Deputy and Council publicly, but Titles between party and party, are to
be left to the ordinary course of Law, and neither Lord-Deputy, Governor, nor
Council Table, hereafter to intermeddle, or trouble themselves with ordinary
businesses, within Cognizance of ordinary Courts, nor meddle with possession of
Land, nor make or use, private Orders, Hearings, or References concerning such
matters, nor grant Injunctions, nor Orders for stay of Suits at Common Law,
Causes recommended from the Council of England, and spiritual Causes concerning
the Church, excepted.

Then the Proclamation was read, dated November 7. 1625. whereby it is
commanded, That the Deputy and Council Chamger in Ireland then, and from time
to come, shall not entertain, or take consideration of any private Cause or
Causes, or Controversies between party and party, concerning their private and
particular Estates, nor any Cause or Controversy of that Board, which are not
of that nature that do properly concern matter of State; But that all Causes
and Controversies of that nature, moved or depending between party and party,
concerning private and particular Interests, be proceeded in in the ordinary
Courts of that Kingdom respectively, to whom the Cognizance of these Causes and
Controversies does belong, etc.

For that Objection from the Opinion of my Lord Cook in Calvin's Case, if it
were an Opinion to the contrary in an Argument, it is no binding Authority; But
that Opinion is nothing at all against what has been said; for it is express,
That Ireland did retain the same Common Law with England. It is true, Ireland
has Statutes and Customs particularly retained; and so there be diverse
particular Customs in England, that differ from the Common Law, yet are
approved and allowed in it; as in Wales, and the Custom of Gavel-kind, and the
Common Law, which is the general Government, is the same. If there be any
Statute that gives my Lord of Strafford, as Governor alone, power to take
Cognizance of merely private Causes, it is something to the purpose to say,
there is a particular Statute; but till that be showed, he has in this,
erected an Arbitrary Power.

And so he concluded the Reply, and the Third Article.

THE Fourth Article. The Charge.

THat Richard Earl of Cork, having sued out Process in course of Law, for
recovery of his Possessions, from which he was put, by Article 4.
color of an Order made by the said Earl of Strafford, and the Council Table
of the said Realm of Ireland, upon a Paper Petition, without Legal proceeding,
did the 20th day of February, in the 11th year of His now Majesty's Reign,
threaten the said Earl, (being then a Peer of the said Realm) to Imprison him,
unless he would surcease his Suit, and said, That he would have neither Law nor
Lawyers, dispute or question his Orders. And the 20th day of March, in the said
11th year, the said Earl of Strafford, speaking of an Order of the said
Council Table of that Realm, made in the time of King James, which concerned a
Lease which the said Earl of Cork claimed in certain Rectories or Tithes,
which the said Earl of Cork alleged to be of no force, said, that he would
make the said Earl, and all Ireland know, that so long as he had the Government
there, any Act of State there made, or to be made, should be as binding to the
Subjects of that Kingdom, as an Act of Parliament; and did question the said
Earl of Cork in the Eastle. Chamber there, upon pretense of breach of the said
Order of Council Table; and did sundry other times, and upon sundry other
occasions, by his Words and Speeches, Arrogate to himself a Power above the
Fundamental Laws, and Established Government of that Kingdom; and scorned the
said Laws and Established Government.

ONE of the Managers opened the 4th Article, and said, The former Articles show
my Lord of Straffords Words, this his Actions.

This Article concerns my Lord of Corke's being disseized of an Impropriate
Rectory, upon a Paper Petition to my Lord of Strafford, and referred to the
Council Table, the Earl of Strafford saying, upon the questioning of the
Proceedings thereupon, That neither Law nor Lawyers, should question or dispute
his Orders; an Order of Council Board in King James his time, enjoining, That
no Parson, Patron, or Ordinary, should make a Lease for longer time, than the
life of the Incumbent, was made use of as a ground to dispossess the Earl of
Cork.

In the first place, We desire to open the Proceedings at Council Table before
my Lord of Straffords time, (viz.) That in no case concerning Manager.
Land, no Decree has been there made, to bind up the party for remedy at Law.

The Lord Ranulagh being interrogated, whether by the course of Proceedings
Lord Ranulagh a Witness.
at Council Table, the Deputy and Council have determined Title of Land and
Possession, and interrupted the parties to proceed at Law.

He Answered, That he has observed the course of the Board for 22 years; and
the course was, That if Title of Land, between party and party, were in debate,
It was commonly dismissed from the Board, with a leading order, to be tried by
course of Common Law.

Being asked, whether a Deputy alone has determined private Interest.

He Answered, That he cannot positively say, whether it were done privately;
but to the best of his remembrance, he knows not that ever any Deputy
determined any matter of private Interest, but brought it to the Board, though
by reference, or private proceeding, it might have proceeded before it came to
the Board.

My Lord of Strafford desired he might be asked, whether he ever E. of
Strafford.
knew, that any matter of Inheritance was ever by himself and the Council
determined, whilst he was Governor there, that was barely Title of Land, and
nothing else.

He Answered, And desired to explain himself concerning the former, That Causes
of the Church, and matters of Plantations, were resolved in Witness.
former Deputies times, to be dispatched at the Board. And for the latter
question, he never knew matter of Title determined at the Board, but in Causes
of the Church, and Plantations.

My Lord of Strafford desired he might be asked, whether as President E. of
Stafford.
of Connaught, he did not familiarly, on Paper Petitions, rule all things in
the same nature, as the Deputy on Petitions to him.

The Fifth day.
Friday, March 26. 1641.
AFter consideration of this matter by their Lordships, it was resolved in the
Upper-house, That my Lord Ranulagh ought not to be examined on that point, it
tending to an Accusation of himself.

The Earl of Cork being Sworn, and questioned touching my Lord of E. of Cork
2 Witness.
Straffords words to him, upon his excepting against the Orders made upon the
Petition touching the said Rectory.

His Lordship Answered, That he had been in Possession, as Tenant of the Crown
thirty five years, of a Rectory and certain Tithes in the County of Tiperany,
for which he paid a yearly Rent; and having enjoyed it so long, my Lord
presented to it Arthur Gwyn, that had been his Coach-mans Groom. That when he
heard of it, he went to my Lord privately, and told his Lordship, that he was
His Majesty's Farmer of those Tithes, and paid a Rent; and desired he might not
be sued for them in the Council Chamger: but if a Suit must be ommenced, that
it might be in the proper Court, the Exchequer. That my Lord told him, he
should Answer it there: That he did so, and my Lord ordered it against him;
That a Commission went down, and Examinations were taken: And after my Lord had
ordered it against him, an Order of course was set down, that Gwyn should have
them till I recovered them by course of Law. That thereupon, I brought an
Action against him, and his Tenants, who were Arrested, and came to Dublin; and
then went to my Lord, and Dr. Bramhill, Bishop of Derry. That thereupon I was
sent for before my Lord Lieutenant that then was; and my Lord Lieutenant told
me, Sir, You have taken out Writs against Gwyn, to whom I Ordered the Tithes of
the Rectory. I confessed I had, and desired to know why he aked me so; adding,
that I am sure your Lordship will not take away my Possession, by a Paper Bill,
without Trial. That my Lord of Strafford answered, call in your Writs, or if
you will not, I will clap you in the Castle; For I tell you, I will not have my
Orders disputed by Law, nor Lawyers.

Gwyn was a poor man, and if he should get the Rents of the Impropriation into
his hands, I could not get them again: And therefore I desired security, That
if by course of Law I should recover it, I might have it again; That my Lord of
Strafford thereupon said, It was very fit and just; but the Order being brought
unto me, I said there was no such thing in the Order.

Being desired by the Earl of Strafford to repeat the last over again,

I say, that I told the Lieutenant, that I did hold, the Council Chamger could
not hold Plea of this, and thereupon cited 28 H. 6. the Book of Orders, the
Proclamation. Then I moved his Lordship, that in regard Gwyn was a poor man,
and not answerable, and might get the Rents, being near 100 marks a year, he
might give security for the Rents, if I should recover them by course of Law;
That my Lord of Strafford thought it just it should be so entered in the Order.

And being asked how that came to be left out,

He Answered, That Sir Paul Davis, the Clerk of the Council, told him, my Lord
of Strafford found fault with it, and struck it out with his own hand.

Being asked what words he heard from my Lord of Strafford, concerning the said
Order at Council Board, in King James his time:

He Answered, That there was a Parsonage in the County of Kerry, in his
Presentment, and it fell void; the Dean, and some others, commended one
Atkinson to be his Vicar, That on their Commendation, not knowing him himself,
he presented him, without any consideration. That Atkinson afterward fell into
decay, and was Imprisoned; and the Prison being very loathsome, the Bishop
wrote unto him, this Deponent, and sent him a Lease, under the Hand and Seal of
him the said Bishop, and the Incumbent, with a Label for his the Deponents
hand, and desired him to seal it for 40 s. a year to another, that Atkinson
might pay his Debts, and stock himself with Cattle; That he the Deponent,
refused it, though brought 50 miles from his House, fearing it might be
prejudicial to the next Clerk. That the Bishop sent Atkinson's Wife back over
the Mountains with his Letter, and the Lease; and he the Earl of Cork, did
sign it then; For, seeing the misery of the poor Woman, and her Children, he
thought it a work of Charity; and it continued so till my Lord of Strafford
came to the Government.

That then he had a Bill preferred against him in the Star Chamber, for
breaking an Act of State, That none should make a Lease for longer than the
Incumbents life, and desired that the Bill should be read, in all the
Proceedings of it; That thereupon he told the Earl of Strafford, it was a work
of Charity, and he never heard of such an Act of State, being not published,
and made in King James his time, and in the Lord Grandisons Government, who are
both dead: And therefore he conceived, there was no cause to charge, or
prosecute him for it, being but an Act of State. That my Lord of Strafford
Answered, I tell you, my Lord, as Great as you are, I will make you, and all
the Subjects of Ireland know, That any Act of State made, or to be made, shall
be as binding to you, and the Subjects of Ireland, during my Government, as an
Act of Parliament.

Being asked on my Lord of Straffords motion, whether the Order made in the
Case of Gwyn, was not made by the major part of the Votes of the Board:

He Answered, That he did say that it was Voted at the Council Table, but he
knows not whether it were done by the major part; and afterward (with a lower
voice) His Lordship added, that he thinks it was never Voted.

John Waldron Sworn; was examined touching the words my Lord of John Waldron a
Witness.
Strafford was charged to say, touching an Act of State, being equal to an Act
of Parliament; and the occasion:

He Answered, It was his chance to be at Council Table, when a Cause, depending
between the Merchants of Galloway, and some others, that prosecuted the
business in behalf of the Church, about a Lease made by the Dean of Derry;
which was debated at the Council Board. And there was one Mr. Martin of Council
for the Merchants, and he pressing hard for his Clients; It pleased my Lord to
think he had over-shot himself, or was too forward; and asked what he had to
say, that he pressed that Cause so hard; That Mr. Martin Answered him, He had an
Act of Parliament, or Statute, or to that purpose.

That my Lord of Strafford Replied again, Sir, I will make you know, That an
Act of this Board shall be as good as any Act, or Statute, or words to that
effect.

John Kay, after some Exceptions taken by the Earl of Strafford against him, as
no fit Witness in respect of his prosecuting a Suit against his Lordship, for
the Lady Hibbotts, which was Overruled by their Lordships, was sworn, and
being asked touching the said words to be spoken by the Earl of Strafford, and
the occasion and the time.

He Answered, That he was present at Council Table by chance, when there was a
Cause, wherein Mr. Martin pleading for his Clients: My Lord-Deputy then asked
him, What made him so earnest for it; He said, He had an Act of Parliament, or
Statute, to justify his Cause. Hereupon my Lord-Deputy Answered, He should
know, that as long as Himself sat in that Place, An Act of State should be as
strong as an Act of Parliament, or words to that effect.

Being asked of the time.

He Answered, He does not remember the time, but it was three years and
upwards. It was before July 1637. but the Day and Year he remembers not; but it
was in the Case where Mr. Martin was Council.

My Lord Cork being asked about the time, he said, It was in 1635. about
February.

Mr. Waldron being asked, Whether it was in a Church-Cause. Answered, My
Lord-Deputy made an Offer, That if they would take a Lease for 21 years, at
full value, they should have it. But if they would stand on the Trial of the
Lease, they must take the adventure.

And Mr. Hoy being asked, Whether it was a Church-Cause.

He Answered, He conceived the Church was Interested in it.

Lord Kill mallock asked, Whether he heard my Lord Strafford say, An Act of
Council should be as Valid as an Act of Parliament, when, on what occasion, and
to what scope.

He Answered, That he was at Council Table some four or five years ago, and
there did hear my Lord of Strafford say to one of the Council (he cannot say it
was Mr. Martin) He would have him know, as long as himself was Governor, An Act
of State should be as binding as an Act of Parliament; on what occasion he
cannot say. He further said, That in the 10th Year of the King, in the
Parliament held in Ireland, he heard Sir George Ratcliffe (my Lord of
Strafford's Echo) in that House, say, On occasion of a Bill that was cast out
in that House, making it Felony for any to have Powder without License. It is
all one, he would have an Act of State for it, which should be as binding as an
Act of Parliament.

Sir Pierce Crosby was asked, Whether he heard my Lord of Strafford at another
time say, An Act of Council should be as valid as an Act of Parliament, when,
on what occasion, to what intent.

He Answered, That he does very well remember the words, the time not
precisely; but he was sure it was soon after my Lords coming into Ireland, and
before the Parliament, and was the cause of the first Exception against him the
said Sir Pierce Crosby, for he reasoned it with his Lordship, being at his own
Table at Dinner, there being then present, and sitting next to him, a Member of
this Honorable House, my Lord Castlehaven. There were likewise my Lord Osmond,
and several others of the Council of Ireland. The words were these, That if he
lived, He would make an Act of State to be of equal Power with an Act of
Parliament. That he, the Deponent, thought his Lordship spoke it merrily, and
answered him in the same kind, saying, My Lord, when you go about to do this, I
will believe some body will rise, as an English Gentleman did in England, and
desire a Clause of Exception, that it may not reach to himself, his Kindred and
Friends. That my Lord of Strafford looked on him very earnestly, and said, He
would take him, whosoever he was, and lay him by the heels.

That this was in Parliament time: And he the Deponent would fain have
qualified it; but Parliament, or not Parliament (says my Lord) Ireland is a
Conquered Nation, and the Conqueror should give the Law. That he the said Sir
Pierce Crosby Replied, My Lord, then, I beseech you, give me leave, I am one of
those that must uphold an Act of State, by all lawful ways, having the Honor
to be a Member of the Government, though unworthy. What will be alleged on the
other part? they will say an Act of Parliament attaints and restores Blood, and
does many things an Act of State cannot reach to, for it is confined within the
limits of the Government. That my Lord having not to Reply to this, rose in
some choler; and told him, the Deponent, of something else he conceived he the
Deponent had done amiss at Council Board on a Statute that was in debate.

And so the Manager concluded the Article with thus much more; The Article, in
the conclusion of it, charges him with scorning the Government and Laws. And it
was desired their Lorships would take notice of what is proved out of these
words, and the concurrent proof Yesterday.

The Earl of Strafford begins his Defense, saying,

First, I must stand upon the truth of my Answer, which must be good, till it
be denied, so far as goes to matter of Misdemeanor. E. of Strafford.


I have not had time to examine Witnesses, having not liberty till Friday last,
which I urge by way of excuse, if my Answers give not full satisfaction.

Here is an Order of the House of Commons there, whereby your Lordships may
perceive how unlikely I am to have any thing from Ireland that may work to my
Justification, which was read, and bears Date 25. February, 1640.

Authorizing those undernamed to go aboard any Ships, and seize, search, and
break up all Trunks, Chests, and Cabins aboard. To seize on all Silver and
Gold, except small Sums; and all Debts, Evidences, and Writings as they shall
think fit, of him the said Earl of Strafford.

This his Lordship conceived to be a great Violation of the Peerage of the
Kingdom.

For making good of his Answer, his Lordship Alleged:

That the Council Board of Ireland is a Court of Record, which differs much
from the Council Board of England; and that they proceed there by Bill, Answer,
Examination, Publication, and all the formal courses of legal Proceedings.

That my care to preserve the Authority of the Deputy and Council, is not a
Subversion of the Laws: Only it directs it, and puts the execution of the Law
another way.

That for Reasons of State, it must be preserved, being the place of Resort for
Protection and Defense of the English Planters, and Protestant Clergy.

I shall produce and acknowledge the Instructions made 22 Iac. and I shall read
part that bounds the Council Board particulary mentioned in the Reply to the
Third Charge.

I desire a Book may be read, a Book in the hands of Mr. Denham, containing
certain Answers given by the Lord Chichester, to certain Complaints made
against that State, and written with Mr. Baron Denham's own hand, which on
debate, was Resolved not to be read, being written only for a private
Remembrance.

I shall refer to my Lord Ranulagh's Deposition the other day, to satisfy your
Lordships touching the Proceedings at Council Table.

To prove the Council Board to be a Court of Record.

Robert Lord Dillom being asked, Whether before my Lord Strafford's time he had
not known always, during his memory, the Deputy and Council in all causes of
Plantation, and the Church, proceed by Petition, Answer, Examination of
Witnesses, Publication, and Hearing, as in other Courts of Equity, and upon
Oath.

He Answered, That he remembers in my Lord Chichester's time of Government, it
was the practice of the Board so to do: That he remembers it in my Lord
Grandison's time; that he had the Honor to be called to the Council Board
under my Lord Faulkland's Government, and knew it then. And it was in the
Justices time that preceded my Lord Strafford's Government, To have Petitions,
Examinations of Witnesses, Publication, a day of hearing granted, and all
ordinary Proceedings.

Being asked, Whether at that Board they have not been punished, who have
disobeyed Proclamations, and Acts of State, before my Lord Strafford's time,
and how long.

He Answered, That out of his Observation, at Council Table Acts of State were
made, because of the scarcity of Parliaments, that they might be a Supplement
to Acts of Parliament, that he has known before; and when he sat at the Board
on contempts of these Acts of State, or Proclamations, which, he said, he had
heard the Judges say to be a kind of Law of the Land, for the present; the
Parties were Attached, brought to the Board, and upon full Examination of the
Cause, and Proof of the Contempt, sometimes Imprisoned, sometimes Fined,
according to the Delinquency and Degree of the Offense supposed to be committed.

Being asked of Fines in Cases between Party and Party.

He Answered, That he does not remember any Fine imposed in a special Cause
betwixt Party and Party.

Sir Adam Loftus being asked to the same purpose.

He Answered, It has ever been, since his remembrance, the constant Practice
there, in Causes of the Church and Plantation, to proceed on Petition, Answer,
etc. and Fines imposed on Breakers of Public Acts of State and Proclamations.
But he remembers not any Fines for Contempts, in case of particular and private
Interest.

We shall admit it to have Cognizance of matters of Plantation and Church, and
such as are recommended from the King to the Council here. Manager.
But not to be a Court of Record.

From these Proofs, I infer, That the Council Board there has another
Constitution then here, where it is only a Court of State. E. of Strafford.


I shall produce the Order made in my Lord of Corke's Case, which I observe to
be in the Case of the Church, and so within the Cognizance of Deputy and
Council.

The Order was read, being signed by Sir Paul Davis, and acknowledged by my
Lord of Cork to be Sir Paul Davis's hand.

Upon reading whereof, my Lord of Strafford observed, That it appears to be a
Church-Cause, That the Order was just, and that the Clause for the Plaintiffs
giving of Security to answer the mean Profits, which my Lord of Cork said was
struck out of the Order, and for my Lord of Corke's liberty to bring his Action
at Law, only he was limited to prosecute it within a year.

Mr. Leake was produced by my Lord of Strafford, and being asked what Authority
he has known the Council Board in Ireland to exercise, both before my Lord of
Strafford's coming thither, and since, in Causes of the Church and Plantation,
and concerning Contempts to Proclamations, and Acts of State, and what
Countryman he is.

He Answered, That his name is Leake of Leake, in the County of Nottingham,
where, he said, his Family has continued 400 years: That it is 14 years since
he went into Ireland, and before this Lords-Deputies time; and before that time
he did not observe any restraint from Injunctions on the Council Board, till
the Instructions published, and they did stay them.

That they proceeded by Injunction, Process, Bill, Answer, Examination, and
other Courses, as in the Chancery of England. And since the same course has
been held. And my Lord of Strafford has had in the Castle-Chamber diverse
Causes of Law argued before him concerning the Church, wherein one Chadwick and
diverse others were convented thirty times, when he the Examinant was there and
heard them twenty he is sure, but he thinks thirty. But my Lord of Strafford
did forbear to give Sentence, till he heard these Causes argued: That 14 years
he has been very well versed in that Kingdom, that he has known Injunctions
have gone out from thence to stay Proceedings in Causes, where they have Power
of Jurisdiction, that he has known my Lord Chancellor Loftus that was, to
grant an Injunction without Bill, and before any Complaint depended before him,
and that he himself had the Injunction granted.

Being asked about the time of his going into Ireland.

He said he went betwixt 1627. and 1628.

Whence observe, that the Witness has made an Observation of the Instructions
five years before he came into Ireland. Manager.


Being asked some other questions touching the occasion of his going into
Ireland, and how he came to take notice of the Proceedings there.

He Answered, He has been there at several times, to pursue some Tenants of
his that fled into Ireland; and by reason of the Suits and Petitions he
prosecuted in his own Right, he had occasion to enquire after Proceedings
there, having been there for the most part of 14 years.

To the Statute of 28 H. 6. which the Commons have pressed as a Rule for the
re^ing of Causes to their proper Courts, and to annihilate all E. of Strafford.
these Proceedings before the Deputy and Council; and before the Deputy alone
in his particular Jurisdiction, in the nature of a Court of Requests in
England. I reserve my self to have my Council give satisfaction therein: Only
desire your Lordships to observe the last Clause, saving the King's Prerogative.

These Proceedings are not against Magna Charta, they being according to the
Laws and Customs of the Land; though it be not the Custom of England. And if he
has been an Innovator, it has been to conform Ireland by all ways he could in
Religion and Laws, to the better and more excellent Pattern of England.

To the Objection made against Mr. Gwyn, he is altogether unknown to me, only
was recommended to me, and here is a Certificate that Gwyn is Master of Arts;
but that was not read, nor insisted on.

To the matter of words Charged upon him.

He Answered, That words without Fact can be no matter of Treason, though of a
higher nature then these.

That words are to be charged within a limited time.

1 E. 6. Ca. 12. whereby it is provided, That none shall be Impeached
concerning Treason for words only, if the party, being within the Realm, be not
accused within thirty days: If out of the Realm, within six months, etc. Which
Proviso his Lordship read, and reserved to his Council farther to apply it.

For the words spoken to my Lord of Cork, That neither Law nor Lawyers should
dispute my Orders. I conceive I might justify the speaking of them, if the
Orders, and Acts of State be justly warrantable, and honorably made.

Yet it is improbable I should speak the words, when the Order refers it self
to Law.

If they were spoken, they are at the highest indiscreet and foolish; and it is
a heavy thing to punish me for not being wiser than God Almighty has made me.

For the last words, That I would make the said Earl and all Ireland know, That
so long as I had Government there, An Act of State made, or to be made, should
be as binding as an Act of Parliament. I observe my Lord of Corke's quick
memory, that could swear them roundly, without missing a letter or syllable as
they are laid in the Charge.

That these words are only in the Charge, and so only to be answered to. And
for Answer, I say, That in case of an Act done, they may be brought
collaterally, as an inducement, to prove the intention. But the Act must be
proved, before they can touch me as of Treason.

My Lord of Cork is a single Witness, and by a Proviso, 1 E. 6 Ca. 12. no
person, after the first of February then following, is to be Arraigned, etc. of
Treason, etc. for any words to be spoken after the said first of February,
unless the Offender be accused by two sufficient Witnesses, or should, without
violence, confess them.

To the words spoken of by the other Witnesses being the same in effect, I am
not to answer, being extrajudicially proved, and spoken in other places and
times than I am Charged withal.

Yet I think they might be fairly interpreted: For if an Act of State be not
made against an Act of Parliament, or a Fundamental Law of the Land, but
consistent with it, and made by way of provision for remedying some present
Mischief in the Commonwealth, till the Parliament may provide Redress for it.
They are as binding during the time they are in force, as an Act of Parliament
(though I confess, the Comparison is not good) because they be made according
to Law and Justice; according to the Fundamental Laws of the Land, wherein the
Prerogative of the Crown has a part, as well as the Property of the Subject:
For if the Propriety of the Subject, as it is, (and God forbid but it should
continue) be the second, undoubtedly the Prerogative of the Crown is the first
Table of that Fundamental Law, and has something more imprinted upon it: For
if it has a divinity imprinted upon it, it is God's Anointed; It is he that
gives the Powers. And Kings are as Gods on Earth, higher Prerogatives than can
be said, or found to be spoken of the Propriety or Liberty of the Subject; and
yet they go on hand in hand, and long may they do so, long may they go in that
Agreement and Harmony, which they should have done hitherto, and I trust shall
be to the last, not rising one above another in any kind, but kept in their own
wonted Channels. For if they rise above these heights, the one or the other,
they tear the Banks, and overflow the fair Meads equally on one side and other.
And therefore I do, and did allow, and ever shall, for my part, desire they may
be kept at that Agreement and perfect Harmony one with another, that they may
each watch for, and not any way watch over the other. And therefore this being
a Care of the Prerogative, as long as it goes not against the Common Law of the
Land, it is the Law of the Land, and binds, as long as it transgresses not the
Fundamental Law of the Land, being made provisionally for preventing of a
Temporary Mischief, before an Act of Parliament can give a Remedy.

And this Condition must be employed, That it must be binding, provided it be
according to the Law of the Land. I instance in that Exception that King James
would take, when a man says he will do a thing as far as he may with
Conscience and Honor; because in Persons of Conscience and Honor, those words
are always implied.

That the Wisdom of our Ancestors has prevented this Mischief; That for a
mis-word, a Peer of England should lose his Privilege, being as great as any
Subjects that live under a King, that is not a free Prince of the Empire. And
the Preamble of a Statute in Queen Elizabeth's time, the very bent whereof is to
take away the dawning of words, without any further Act; which Preamble was
read to their Lordships.

And so I conclude, the words were unwisely spoken, because they may be brought
to a hard sense, but not Criminal, for none of them swear any thing done in
breach of the Law.

I except against my Lord Kilmallock's swearing Sir George Ratcliffe to be my
Echo, as if he knew my thoughts; and against Mr. Hoy, as a party concerned in
Interest, though not in name, in a Suit that is or will be brought against me
before your Lordships come to the end of the Charge.

I confess Mr. Waldron's Testimony makes me stagger, being the only person
could make me believe I said the words.

I except against Sir Pierce Crosbies Testimony, having been formerly Sentenced
in Star Chamber, and I know what Sir Pierce Crosby swore there, and that I
never Communed with him so far, as to have such a Discourse, as is mentioned,
in all my life.

To the Suit in the Castle-Chamber against the Earl of Cork, on pretense of
breaking an Order of Council Table. I conceive it had relation to an Order made
in King James his time, 20. March, 11 Iac. which I desire may be read, (being
now produced) as also the Information there exhibited, that so I may justify
my Answer in that point of it; That the Suit was not upon that Act alone, but
for other matters also; but that was admitted by the Committee. And so the
reading of them was waved.

To that Point of Mr. Waldron's Testimony, touching the offering of a Lease to
the Person concerned, rendering the half value: I conceive this Circumstance
qualifies the words, it being according to Law.

To demonstrate which, the Statue was read.

That no Lease shall be granted, upon which less is reserved to the Lessor
(during 21 years) then the moiety of the Lands value.

And so his Lordship concluded his Defense, and the Manager made Reply in
substance as follows.

That this Article proves my Lord of Strafford's Intention to subvert the
Manager.
Laws.

That the long time spent in maintaining the Jurisdiction of the Council Board,
is the least part of the Article.

That though these words singly, be admitted not to be Treason, yet several
words and actions must prove the general Charge, of his endeavoring to subvert
the Laws.

To the several Provisoes in that Act of Parliament, mentioned by my Lord of
Strafford, concerning words, we observe, That the words Charged are only matter
of Evidence, to his general Intention, of subverting the Laws. And whereas he
says they are not charged in time, the Commons bring this as done long ago, and
continuing to this day, if he were not prevented; so they take him Flagrante
Crimine.

To the Practice of the Council Table before his time, his Witnesses have
proved their proceedings in Cases of the Church and Plantations. But in other
Cases we deny it, for it is contrary to Law.

That admitting the extent given by the Instructions to Church-Causes (though
the Proclamation has no such exception.) Yet it comes not to the Case of my
Lord of Cork, who claimed the thing in question as a Lay-Impropriation; derived
to the Crown, by the Statute of Dissolution.

That my Lord of Strafford makes this Government Arbitrary, in threatening the
Earl of Cork, to lay him by the heels, if he went to Law, whereas the Order
gave him liberty.

That the Original Order in my Lord of Corke's Cause was drawn, with these
words put out, concerning Gwyn's giving Security, and that justifies my Lord of
Cork's Testimony.

That notwithstanding my Lord of Strafford's justification of his words, That
neither Law nor Lawyers should question his Orders. This is to assume an
Arbitrary Power; for if his Orders be legal, the Law must justify them, if
not, question them.

That the words, Of making an Act of State equal to an Act of Parliament, are
proved by my Lord of Cork; and those spoken are a confirmation of those
before, and expressly within the Article. The latter point thereof recites, that
he spoke the words at other times.

This altogether justify my Lord of Corke's Testimony, though a single
Witness, and prove that my Lord of Strafford has made it a habit to speak such
words.

That they have one Witness more, and that is my Lord of Strafford himself, who
says, He never spoke any thing but truth; and said, That he would make an Act
of State equal to an Act of Parliament.

We desire, that for the taking off the Aspersion cast on Sir Pierce Crosby, my
Lord of Castlehaven may be examined, touching the words alleged to be spoken
in his presence.

The Earl of Castlehaven being sworn and examined touching the said words, E.
of Castlehaven a Witness.


Answered, That it is a business past long ago; and but a Table-discourse, and
he took not much notice of the Circumstances: But as he remembers, there fell a
difference between my Lord of Strafford, and Sir Pierce Crosby, within three or
four months after my Lords coming over; and that as well as he can remember, my
Lord of Strafford did say, That an Act of State was equal to an Act of
Parliament; but he remembers not the occasion.

That the Justice of the Order in my Lord of Corke's Cause, is not material, or
whether within the Jurisdiction of the Council Table, the Manager.
Charge being, That upon such an Order made, my Lord of Strafford threatened the
Earl of Cork for Suing at Law.

That the Justification brought by my Lord of Strafford, is an Aggravation,
restraining Liberty to Sue at Law, to a year, else to be concluded for ever.

Whereas my Lord of Strafford says, he has spoken unwisely, but done nothing;
sure he that Threatens does something; and his Actions will appear in the next
Articles.

For the Privilege of Peerage, It were to be wished he had known, or remembered
it sooner, in my Lord Mountnorris his Case.

That though he says, Acts of State are to be allowed for temporary provision,
till an Act of Parliament, yet when things are propounded, and rejected in
Parliament, shall he supply it by an Act of State.

We desire to examine one Witness more.

The Earl of Strafford excepting against it, as not regular, the Lords
Adjourned to their House, to take consideration of it.

And a little after, returning, the Lord Steward declared their Lordships Lord
High Steward.
Resolution, That the Witness might be examined; The matter in question,
arising from what was offered from the Earl of Straffords Defense.

Roger Lotts Sworn, and examined, what words my Lord of Strafford Roger Lotts a
Witness.
gave out, when an Act for Powder would not pass in the Commons House; and what
Act of State was thereupon made.

He Answered, That he had the Honor to be one of the Members of that
Parliament that began 1634. and ended April 1635.

That at the Close of that Parliament, my Lord of Strafford then Lord Deputy,
told the House of Commons, then sent for up, That they had Voted against some
Bills in the lower House, amongst the rest, that of Gunpowder; where it was
made Felony for any man to buy, or have any, unless he got a License first for
it: That my Lord afterward told them, That notwithstanding they had Voted
against it, yet he would make that, and some other Bills they had Voted
against, Acts of State, that should be as good; and said, he heard it was done
afterward, but he does not know that.

This Witness is something of Justification of my Lord of Corke's Testimony;
against which, my Lord of Strafford has made some Exception. Manager.


And the Lord Digby added something for the Justification of my Lord of
Killmallocks Testimony; against which, my Lord of Strafford had likewise
excepted.

And so the Reply was concluded.

To the Deposition of Roger Lotts, my Lord of Strafford Answered,

I had received direction concerning Powder; it being not conceived fit, E. of
Strafford.
for Reasons of State, to buy, and have Powder at pleasure, or that that
Commodity should be so frequently brought into the Kingdom, and committed to
unsafe hands; so in that point, I did but what I was commanded out of many
Reasons; which I desire I may forbear to express, it not conducing to my
Acquittal or Condemnation.

And so the Lords Adjourned.

The Sixth day.
Saturday, March 27. 1641.
THE Fifth Article. The Charge.
That according to such his Declarations and Speeches, the said Earl of
Strafford did use and exercise a Power above, and against, and Article 5.
to the Subversion of the said Fundamental Laws, and Established Government of
the said Realm of Ireland, extending such his Power, to the Goods, Free-holds,
Inheritances, Liberties, and Lives of his Majesty's Subjects of the said Realm;
and namely, the said Earl of Strafford, the Twelfth day of December, Anno
Domini 1635. in the time of full Peace, did in the said Realm of Ireland, give,
and procure to be given, against the Lord Mountnorris (then, and yet a Peer of
the said Realm of Ireland, and then Uice-Treasurer, and Receiver-general of the
Realm of Ireland, and Treasurer at War, and one of the Principal Secretaries of
State, and Keeper of the Privy Signet of the said Kingdom) a Sentence of death
by a Council of War, called together by the said Earl of Strafford, without any
Warrant, or Authority of Law, or Offense deserving any such punishment. And he
the said Earl, did also at Dublin, within the said Realm of Ireland, in the
month of March, in the Fourteenth year of his Majesty's Reign, without any
Legal or due Proceedings, or Trial, give, and cause to be given, a Sentence of
Death against one other of his Majesty's Subjects, whose name is yet unknown;
and caused him to be put to Death in Execution of the same Sentence.

THe Manager began to open this Article, showing, That though my Lord of
Strafford insisted on it, That whatever his words Manager.
were, his Actions were not against Law. This Article comes properly to reply
to that Answer, It charging him with exercising of a Tyrannical Power over the
Person of a Peer of that Realm.

And first, It was desired that the Sentence of Death against my Lord
Mountnorris, might be read, which was attested on Oath, to be that which was
delivered by Mr. Secretary Windebanck, upon the Commons humble Suit to His
Majesty, for His leave, to have a Copy thereof, That the Papers concerning my
Lord Mountnorris, might be delivered into the House, occasioned upon my Lord
Mountnorris his Petition to the House in that behalf.

The Sentence was read.
Reciting first, His Majesty's Letter, July 21. then last, wherein notice is
taken of the Respect due to the Deputy and General of His Majesty's Army; and
of the Carriage of my Lord Mountnorris, holding a Captains place in the Army;
in uttering Speeches, inciting a Revenge on the Earl of Strafford, Lord Deputy,
and Lord General; and Command thereby given, on receipt thereof, to call a
Council of War; and that the Lord Mountnorris should undergo such censure, as
the said Council of War should impose, for the Lord Deputies full reparation.

Secondly, That a Council of War was accordingly called; the words are also set
forth, and the occasion, as follows, That within three or or four days after
the Lord Deputy had Dissolved the Parliament, his Lordship sitting in the
Presence Chamber, one of his Servants, in moving a Stool, happened to hurt the
Lord Deputies Foot, then indisposed, through an accession of the Gout, which
being spoken of at the Lord Chancellors Table, one said to the Lord
Mountnorris, being there present, it was Your Lordships Kinsman, who is one of
the Lord Deputies Gentlemen Ushers, that did it.

Whereupon, the Lord Mountnorris publicly, and in a scornful and contemptuous
manner, answered, Perhaps it was done in Revenge of that public Affront that
my Lord Deputy did me formerly. But I have a Brother that would not have taken
such a Revenge.

Thirdly, The Sentence likewise sets forth, That the Lord Mountnorris would not
Answer the said Charge negatively or affirmatively, though required by the
Council of War.

Fourthly, That thereupon, the Witnesses, for proof thereof, were called, viz.
Viscount Moore, and Sir Robert Loftus, who upon Oath deposed the same words, to
be so then, and there spoken; and the Lord Mountnorris at last, submitted
himself to the Council, protesting, that whatsoever interpretation might be put
upon his words, he intended no hurt to the person of his said Lordship; and
affirmed, That he would dye before he would give the Deputy and General
occasion to give him such a Rebuke.

Fifthly, That for the nature of the offense, It was conceived to contain a
Calumny to the Lord Deputy and General, insinuating the affront pretended, in
these words of my Lord Mountnorris's, to be given to the said Kinsman, and an
Incitement to Revenge; and that if the words had been spoken of the Person of
the King, it had amounted to High Treason; which by some rules of Proportion,
might be applied to His Deputy.

Sixthly, That the words were spoken when the Lord Deputy had the Honor to be
Apparelled with his own Robes of Majesty and Sovereignty; when part of the Army
was in motion, and the Lord Deputy and General present.

Seventhly, That the words were adjudged an apparent breach of the 21st Article
of the Printed Orders, and Laws for War, dated the 13th of March, 1633. whereby
it is Ordered, that no man shall give any disgraceful words of any person in
the Army, upon pain of Imprisonment, public Disarming, etc. And also of the
13th Article, That no man-shall offer Violence or Contempt to his Commander, or
do any act, or speak any words, to breed mutiny in the Army, or Impeach the
obeying of the principal Officer, upon pain of death.

Eighthly, That according to the said Articles, the Counsel do unanimously,
with one joint consent, (not one of us of another Opinion) adjudge the said
Lord Mountnorris, for his high and great Offense, to be Imprisoned, to stand
from henceforth deprived of all his Places, and Entertainments due, which he
holds in the Army. To be Disarmed, to be banished the Army, and disabled from
ever bearing Office. And lastly, to be Shot to death, or lose his Head at the
pleasure of the General.

Given at His Majesty's Castle at Dublin, December 12. 1635. Valentia Cromwell.

This Sentence of Death against a Peer, was pronounced by Martial Law, Manager.
against the fundamental Rules of Law, without Trial, Answer, or Hearing; That
though my Lord of Strafford owns it not, yet he made relation of the Injury to
His Majesty: His Majesty did justly direct, that my Lord of Strafford should
have just reparation. That my Lord of Strafford produces the Witnesses,
refused to let my Lord Mountnorris Answer, though he demanded the benefit of
the Law; owns it in his own Person, for he said, (treading on our Foot) and an
Injury done to us.

And whereas some would have mitigated it, and found him guilty of the first
Article, He himself pronounces it, both or none.

The whole proceeding was but half an hour; no notice was given beforehand,
and my Lord Mountnorris checked, for desiring to crossexamine.

My Lord Mountnorris produced as a Witness; some Exceptions were taken against
him by my Lord of Strafford, but were overruled.

His Lordship being Sworn, and being directed to declare the whole Lord
Mountnorris a Witness.
truth in this business, Answered as follows:

Upon the 11th of December, 1635. I was warned by a Pursevant, late at Evening,
to attend my Lord Deputy in the Council Chamger, at a Council of War next
morning, by Eight of the Clock.

Coming thither accordingly, I found many of the Council, and Captains of the
Army; and having conferred with several of the chief of them, and with my Lord
Valentia Cromwell, and others, they said, they knew not for what that Council
of War was summoned; after a whiles stay, my Lord Deputy came into the Room,
and sat down at the Boards end, and commanded the rest to sit down; where my
self, that had the Honor to be His Majesty's Vice-Treasurer, by His Grace and
Goodness, sat in my place: After all were set, my Lord Deputy expressed, he had
called that Court to do himself Right and Reparation against my Lord
Mountnorris. At those words, I rose up from my place, and humbly presented my
self at the Boards end, as the manner is, near his Lordship; who making some
Speech, about words uttered by me shortly after the preceding Parliament, which
was April 18. 1635. and the words spoken within three or four days after, took
a Paper in his hand, and out of that, read the words wherewith he charged me;
to the effect, I conceive, as they are mentioned in the Sentence. After his
Lordship had read them, he demanded of me, whether I would confess them, or
deny them. I did humbly desire, I might have the Charge in writing, that I
might Answer it by advice of Learned Counsel, the words being charged to be
spoken long before, and it was hard to Answer them suddenly. His Lordship
Answered, That was not the course of a Martial Court, I must Answer directly. I
did several times desire I might have the Charge in writing; and my Lord of
Strafford answered in the same kind, That I must Answer, whether I would
confess, or deny them.

Two or Three of the Counsel of War spoke something also to that purpose; as I
remember, the Lord Cromwell for one, and Sir Chapter Coote, and Sir John Burlacy;
who intimated, that the manner was, I must confess them, or deny them. Standing
a while silent, my Lord Deputy said, He thought they must proceed against me as
a Mute; for he will not Answer, and therefore they must take them for granted.
I said over again what I had said before, and desired I might have my Charge in
writing; and that I might have Advice of Counsel, that I might be used as a
Peer of the Realm, and an Officer of the Crown; and still his Lordship denied,
That must not be, It was not the Order of a Martial Court.

I replied, and told the Lord Deputy, I had seen it otherwise in a Martial
Court in England, between my Lord Reas and Ramzie, where the Cause was debated
by the Advocates in writing. The Lord Deputy told me again, That must not be, I
must Answer directly; and hereupon, the Lord Deputy caused His Majesty's
Letter, dated the last of July, to be read; and when that was read, required me
to make Answer: I confess, I was amazed at hearing of this Letter, and was much
grieved; and with Humility and Grief, expressed on my Knees what Sorrow it had
wrought on me; and that I had never willingly Offended His Majesty, or His
Laws: And declared, that I had been misrepresented to His Majesty, and those
Letters were got by misinformation; and humbly desired a Copy of those
Letters, and the Charge, that I might Answer by writing; and that His Majesty
might know my Answer before further Proceedings. His Lordship upon that,
rebuked me with worse Language than was fit to be used to a meaner man, and not
a Peer, that desired but Law and Justice. The Lord Deputy told me, I was not
misrepresented to His Majesty; for himself had represented me, and that
matter, to His Majesty; and he did not use to mis-represent any thing: And then
directly required me, whether I would confess them, or deny them. If not, he
would prove them on Oath; and thereupon my Lord Deputy called for my Lord
Moore, sitting at Board with him, and required him to give his Testimony; who
had an Oath given him by the Lord Deputies command, by the Clerk of the
Council; and referred himself to what he and Sir Robert Loftus had long before
put under their hands: Thereupon the Lord Deputy gave that Paper to the Clerk
of the Council to read; which was the Paper the Lord Deputy held in his hand,
and out of which he had read the Charge: And that being showed to my Lord
Moore, he said, to his best remembrance those were the words spoken. Sir Robert
Loftus was also called in, and he being required to give his Testimony,
referred himself to that which he and my Lord Moore had put under their hands;
and being showed him, with his hand to it, he affirmed it. Then my Lord Deputy
asked me, what I could now say, since the words were proved to my face: I
humbly told his Lordship, and made solemn protestation, and offered to take my
Oath, That I did never speak the words, as I was able to prove by several
Witnesses; and desired, That the Lord Chancellor (at whose Table they were
spoken) and Judge Martial of the Kingdom, then in Town, might be summoned to
give his Testimony for truth, and Sir Adam Loftus his Son, and near twenty
others; and desired they might be examined in the Cause; and that I was well
able to prove, that the words charged to be spoken by me, were not spoken by
me, but by others, as to that part that concerns the Affront; but his Lordship
refused me to have any examined.

Being asked, whether all the Army was then on the march, as my Lord of
Strafford had said in his Answer. He Answered,

There was at that time three, or four, or five Companies, I am not able to say
how many.

When my Witnesses were refused, and I had made my protestation, that I had not
spoken them, and was ready to prove it, (my Lord Deputy Answered, That he knew
my Oaths and Protestations well enough) I took Exception to the Testimony of
the Lord Moore, and Sir Robert Loftus, as I might in a Legal way. But my Lord
Deputy rebuked me, and spoke in commendation of them; and bid my Lord Moore sit
down now, and be one of my Judges: And thereupon commanded me to withdraw,
which I did, and went out into a Gallery by, where I stayed about the space of
half an hour, I think not more, I am sure not an hour; and was then called in,
and at the beginning, was required to Kneel as a Delinquent; which I conceived
I was not, having endeavored always to show my self a faithful Officer.

Then my Lord Deputy commanded Sir Charles Coote to pronounce the Sentence, as
Provost Martial of Connaught; which he did briefly, in effect as in the
Sentence: And my Lord Deputy took occasion to make a Speech, and told me
invectively enough, (amongst other things) there remained no more now, if he
pleased, but to cause the Provost Martial to do Execution. But withal added,
That for matter of Life, he would supplicate His Majesty. And I think he said,
he would rather lose his Hand, than I should lose my Head; which I took to be
the highest scorn, to compare his the Lord Deputies Hand, with my Head: I said,
I never did, and hoped I never should, endanger my Head by Offending His
Majesty's Laws.

I was hereupon commanded to be taken to Prison, by the Constable of the
Castle, who took me thence away; what past in the time of my absence, I knew
not; but the Articles I was charged with breach of, were not declared, nor I
urged to Answer; if I had, I could have Answered, I knew of no such Articles,
nor ever saw them, till June 1636. published by his own Authority; and made in
time of War: And though made for regulating of the Army, yet were never put in
practice; And on a Conference with some of the Council of War, I was informed,
they differed in Opinion amongst themselves; and some moved, both the Articles
might not be pressed; And his Lordship Answered, he would have both or none.

Being asked on my Lord of Straffords motion, how long after the Sentence
given, he remained a Prisoner in the Castle:

I was Committed the 12th, and remained until the 18th, and was not Witness.
released by any Favor of my Lord Deputy, but on a Certificate of the
Physicians; and that not admitted but upon Oath, That I was in peril of my
Life; and a Petition drawn by them that had more care of my Health than my
self, being so afflicted in body and mind, with the high Injustice and
Oppression I had, that I was extremely ill; and was then remitted on Security,
given by the Chief Justice in 2000 l. Bond, to be a Prisoner.

Being asked on the Committees behalf, whether he was not taken to Prison
again; and how long he continued in Prison for this Cause.

I continued at my House, and was very ill; and after that several times, was
called to the Council Table by my Lord Deputy; and an Information Witness.
exhibited in the Star Chamber for pretended Crimes, which I shall ever desire
to Answer in any public Legal Judicature, rather than live.

And I was imprisoned again the 11th of April; being sent for to my House, and
found with my Counsel about me, preparing my Answer in the best manner I could;
and the Advice was, I should demurr to that Information, because I stood under
the Sentence of death: I was carried by the Constable to the Castle, and
brought before my Lord Deputy; and the said 11th of April 1636. was committed
close Prisoner; and there continued till the second of May: And I knew no other
cause, but that I had (as he said) neglected the Kings Grace; and had sent my
Wife into England, and transgressed a Proclamation.

To which I answered, I had not transgressed it; that my Wife was full of Grief
at my Calamities: and I had sent her to save my Life.

Then my Lord Deputy told me, that I had refused the Kings Grace offered me, in
not accepting his Pardon; which I thought not Legal for me to take: And
thereupon Committed me.

Being asked on the Lord Lieutenants motion, whether the Council were not
present;

He Answered, Some of the Council were present; but my Lord Committed Witness.
me, the Council not speaking a word.

Being asked again about the time of his Commitment;

I was first Committed the 12th of December, let go the 18th to my House;
Committed again the 11th of April, put out the second of May: I was then in
great Extremity, and admitted to my House again; where I lay in a long
continuing sickness, and under the hands of Physicians: And the 30th of January
afterward, because I sued not out the Pardon, was imprisoned again, and there
continued till March 1637.

The Lord Dillom was called, and after some exception taken by my Lord Dillom a
Witness.
Lord of Strafford, to the examining of him, because he might speak things that
amount to an Accusation of himself, the same was overruled; the Committee for
the Commons declaring, that they would make no use against him, of any thing he
should speak concerning himself. His Lordship was thereupon Sworn, and asked
what my Lord of Straffords carriage was at the said Sentence, not accusing
himself:

He Answered, That he was present at the Council, on Summons to be there; and
the Council being set, as a Council of War, my Lord of Strafford did show what
they were called for; and did set forth some Injuries he conceived done him by
my Lord Mountnorris.

Upon that my Lord Mountnorris was spoken to, and much interlocution there was,
before he would say he did speak the words, or deny them; and after much debate
to and fro, the Witnesses were called in, my Lord Moore, and Sir Robert Loftus;
and they did testify the words in the Charge, upon Oath; much debate there
was; to call every particular to remembrance he cannot at this present, but as
near as he can he will, that was before my Lord Mountnorris withdrew; and after
his withdrawing, and some Speeches to the Council of War, they came to Voting;
and in the Voting, there was never a man, to his remembrance, in giving his
Vote on both Articles, but did profess he gave it in a confidence, that there
should be Mercy extended to my Lord Mountnorris; and with an Intercession, that
he might find Mercy from His Majesty: And when the Votes were all past, my Lord
of Strafford stretched forth his right Arm, and protested he had rather have
his Arm cut off, or lose his right Arm, than my Lord Mountnorris should lose a
hair of his Head, or a drop of his Blood, for that cause; and that he would
write to His Majesty, to supplicate Him for Mercy.

Being asked on the Committees motion, whether my Lord of Strafford did not
publish, he had acquainted His Majesty with it, and they were called together
to give Reparation of some Injuries done to himself.

He Answered, My Lord made a long Speech at that time, setting forth the
Charge, and making mention of His Majesty's Letter, and His Majesty's Letter
was read; and he did understand by my Lord Deputy, it was to give Reparation;
but the particular words, on his Oath he does not remember.

Being asked, whether (some of the Council moving they might proceed on the
Article that did not extend to Life) my Lord of Strafford did not reply, Nay
both.

He Answered, That he remembers very well it was proposed to the Council of
War, that they were to judge on both Articles.

And being asked by whom:

He said, he will Ingeniously answer, he believes my Lord of Strafford did; but
specially to say, who, or in what manner, he cannot.

Being asked, whether the Evidence given against my Lord Mountnorris, was not
written in a Paper, drawn out by my Lord of Strafford; and that the Witnesses
referred to that wholly:

He Answered, He did see a piece of Paper in my Lord of Straffords hand; and
believes it was some note for his remembrance, what it was, he knows not; and
when the Witnesses were brought in, there was a paper to which they had set
their hands of the words spoken.

Being asked other questions successively, touching the pressing of the
Councels proceedings on the Article only, that touched not death; and whether
my Lord of Strafford wished them to proceed on both:

He Answered, He remembers it not so pressed on that occasion; nor does he
remember whether such a Provision was made, That the Proceedings should be on
the Article that touched not Life.

Being asked, whether any beside my Lord of Strafford moved, they might proceed
on both Articles.

He Answered, He remembers in the debate, the manner of proceeding was spoken
of; and to his best remembrance, by the Discipline and Rule of the Army, it was
said, he was to be proceeded against on both.

Being asked on my Lord of Straffords motion, whether the Earl of Strafford did
not in plain and direct terms say, He would not be a Judge in that Cause, nor
give a Vote by any means:

He Answered, He remembers he gave no Vote, and being more than five years
since, the special words he does not remember; but in general, after he had set
forth the Injuries done to himself, he professed, he would give no Vote, but left
it to the Council.

Being asked on the Lord of Straffords motion, whether he did not desire the
Council of War, but to proceed as to any other Officer in the Army; and what
Sentence they should give, he would not take ill.

He Answered, When my Lord Mountnorris was withdrawn he spoke not a word, but
did when he came in again: He does not remember the words.

Being asked whether the Army was not a great part of it in Dublin, and in
motion, and daily exercised, when the words were spoken by my Lord Mountnorris.

He Answered, He cannot tell precisely whether the most part was there; but
there was a part of the Army there, and they did exercise.

Being asked on the motion of the Committee, whether the Sentence he approved
so well of, he thanked them for it.

He Answered, That he does not remember any special words; but he thinks, in
Civility he would do it.

Being further asked, whether, after my Lord Mountnorris was withdrawn, my Lord
of Strafford did not continue in his place, and sit at the Table end amongst
the Council.

He Answered, I do really believe he did so.

The Lord Strafford confessed he did, when the Votes were delivered; but
desired the Lord Dillom might be asked, whether he sat only as a party, not as
a Judge; and sat bare through the whole proceeding of the Cause.

He Answered, He does not remember it particularly, whether he sat bare all
the while; for it is long ago, and he did not heed it.

The Lord Ranulagh being asked, whether he was present at the Lord Mountnorris
his Sentence; and whether my Lord Strafford declared, they Lord Ranulagh a
Witness.
were called together to give satisfaction for Injuries done him by my Lord
Mountnorris.

He Answered, That in this particular my Lord of Strafford was Nobly pleased to
mention his tenderness of my Lord Dillom, least he should be his own accuser,
He was pleased to mention something the other day, wherein he had tenderness of
him; That he shall be as little fearful to speak the truth in this Cause, as in
that, having been required by their Lordships; as presuming he has done
nothing but what he may justify; That for that particular question, he has
been heretofore examined in some particulars of it; and shall now, with the
best of his memory repeat, and offer to their Lordships, according to his
weakness, every passage in it.

That he was summoned to appear in the Council Chamger; and, as he takes it, it
was December 12. 1635. That being there, my Lord sat in a Council of War, and
he (amongst others) having the Honor to wait on him, my Lord Mountnorris's
name being mentioned after he was set at the Board, arose, and stood as near my
Lord Deputies Person, as was fit for him, toward the upper end of the Table:
And there stood charged with several dis-respectful words spoken by him; and
the words mentioned in the Censure that was read, were the words; That he was
charged to have spoken those words in breach of certain Articles, by which the
Army of Ireland was Governed, the 13th and the 41st, That there was much
interlocution from my Lord Deputy to my Lord Mountnorris, and returned from my
Lord Mountnorris to my Lord; the substance was, That he was ready to give his
Charge, That he had violated those Articles, That my Lord Mountnorris desired
time to answer by Counsel; and that he might have his Charge in writing. That
being not readily granted, he insisted on it, That he might have time to
prepare his Answer, but was told, it was contrary to the form of that
proceeding; But whether that Objection of the form, came from my Lord himself,
or from some other Member of the Board that I heard before named, I cannot
possibly say. But thus stands the state of it, my Lord Mountnorris neither
confessing nor denying the Charge, my Lord Deputy replied, Sir, If you do
neither confess nor deny the Charge, how shall we proceed? The Deputy called on
the Lord Moore, and said, What shall we say to this business? My Lord, says
the Lord Moore, what I can say, is under my Hand; That a little time after, a
Letter was read from the King, whereby His Majesty was pleased to give
direction to proceed in a Martial Court, for Reparation and Honor of the Lord
Deputy, on the Complaint and Information given to the King. That my Lord
Mountnorris instantly fell on his Knees, expressing a great deal of Grief and
Sorrow, and in truth Passion, and had not much to say for himself; and soon
after, was bid to withdraw; and being withdrawn, my Lord Deputy said, That as
he had complained to the King, so he would expect that Honor from the Board,
That his Cause should be taken into consideration, and such Redress given as
was fit; He demanded Justice according to the Articles insisted on: And having
declared it, there was a silence amongst us for some time; That he was the
first that brake that silence; and in as humble manner and terms as he could
light upon, did humbly desire my Lord Deputy to give him leave, to ask whether
he would give leave to wave either of those Articles; but my Lord said, he
would demand Justice on both.

That this being so, there was some Interlocution of discourse among the
Council, and in truth he thinks, that he was one of the first that said, that
these Articles, and the words, cannot bear so good a construction, but that
there may be some danger of a breach upon these Articles.

Being asked whether the words were not represented to the Council of War in a
Paper written, and the Testimony given in pursuance of that Paper.

He Answered, That as he remembers, my Lord Moore having made a return to my
Lord Deputy, My Lord, What I can say, your Lordship has under my hand; he
thinks my Lord Deputy said, My Lord, if you deny it, I have it under your hand
to show.

And thereupon (as he remembers) the Clerk of the Council standing by, had
direction to draw up some Interrogatories, which my Lord Moore did acknowledge;
and Sir Robert Loftus too did affirm, that they were spoken by my Lord
Mountnorris, as much as was mentioned in the Paper.

Being asked how many Companies of the Army were then in Town; how many in a
Company; and whether they were exercised in a more than ordinary Training; and
how many Companies the Army consists of:

He Answered, That he thinks the Horse-Troops were 40, or 50 at the most; some
my Lords own. The Foot-Companies were 50. And of those Companies there were (he
takes it) two Horse-Troops, besides my Lord's own Troop, and four
Foot-Companies; they were called up to guard and attend our Occasions in
Parliament, and they did their Duties as Soldiers every day, as indeed my Lord
of Strafford was careful of well exercising the Army as any General he ever
saw; and there are forty Companies of the old standing Army.

Being asked on my Lord of Straffords Motion, Whether my Lord of Strafford did
not declare he would not give Judgment in the Cause, but Appeal to them as a
Suitor for Reparation.

He Answered, That my Lord of Strafford held them to the Point of the Articles,
demanding Justice on the Articles; that he said sometimes, he would depend on
our Judgment in it, and yet he would hold us to the Point of the Articles. And
further, that if there were not a necessity of his being there, he would have
withdrawn too. But my Lord would not give the Council a latitude to proceed
according to the King's Letter for Reparation, but he held them to the Point of
the Articles.

Being asked on my Lord of Strafford's Motion, Whether he did not tell my Lord
Mountnorris, when he went out of the Room, that he would not speak a word till
he came into the Room again, and whether he did not do it accordingly; and
whether he sat bare all the while as a Party, and not as a Judge.

In answer, he desired leave to offer to their Lordships, that he acquainted
their Lordships before; that as soon as my Lord Mountnorris was withdrawn, my
Lord did declare what he the Lord Renula had formerly said. But after the
Council fell into debate of it, he spoke not a word, nor gave any interruption.
And he cannot positively say, that he sat bare all the while.

Being asked, Whether this was not in the time of full Peace, and whether any
Rebels or Enemies were in the Kingdom.

He Answered, Certainly it was a time of very full and happy Peace.

To prove, that in discourse concerning this Sentence, my Lord said afterward,
Manager.
He would not lose the Honor or Share of it.

The Earl of Cork being asked to that purpose. Earl of Cork a Witness.


Answered, That all he can remember is, that the Sentence was publicly read in
the Star Chamber, and my Lord said, He would not lose his Share in the Honor
of it, but he cannot remember the day.

Lord Viscount Dillon asked to that purpose.

Answered, That he happened to be in the Star Chamber that day, by my Lord of
Strafford's Command, and carried the Sword that day. That the reading of the
Sentence he remembers not, but the words he heard, That the Sentence given
against my Lord Mountnorris, by the Council of War, was a noble and just
Sentence, and for his part he would not lose his share of the Honor of it.

The Commons proceeded to that part of the Charge, which concerns the execution
of another man by Martial Law.

William Castigatt sworn, being asked several questions touching that William
Castigatt a Witness.
part particularly, Whether he knew one executed by Martial Law, and by whom?
etc.

He Answered, Yes, his name was Thomas Denewitt, and it was last Summer was two
years, that he was on the Green, when he was hanged, and they were born in the
same Town: He said, he knew not what Martial Law is, but he was hanged on one
of the bows of a growing Tree, and he takes it my Lord of Strafford was
present; he added, that all the Soldiers were there, and the Company; but
knows not whether he was condemned by a Jury or no. And he heard that he was
hanged for a quarter of Beef, that he, and some of the Company took away.

Lord Viscount Dillon being asked, If he knew of the Execution of the Lord
Dillon a Witness.
said Person, whether he was condemned by Martial Law, and whether he was a
Suitor to my Lady Strafford, and could not prevail.

He Answered, He did not know that man by name that was hanged, but it was by
Martial Law. And he, and another noble Lord that sits here, were Suitors for
him to my Lady, and she told them, she did endeavor, but could not prevail for
a Pardon.

That it was a little before the 500 men went to Carlisle, out of Ireland.

That he was not present at the Trial, but saw him hanged on the Green at
Dublin on a Tree, and knows not his name; and he conceives the Provost-Marshal,
or the Provost-Marshal's Son did Execution, for they were there both of them.
That the Cause was double, as he heard, for which he was condemned; for flying
from his Colors, and for stealing some Beef.

Patrick Gough sworn, and asked to the same purpose as before. Patrick Gough a
Witness.


He Answered, That he remembers about the time of the 500 Soldiers sending to
Carlisle, and the Army in Dublin, this man was executed by the
Provost-Marshal's Son, and on a Tree, and that time two other Soldiers were
whipped. The voice of the Report was, He was hanged for a quarter of Beef, and
running away from his Colors.

Lord Renula asked what Answer was given, when a motion was made that this man
should be tried at Law.

He Answered, That he was warned to come to a Marshalls Court, and the
Messenger came so late, that he came not timely enough to give his Vote in the
Court. That he came when the matter was fully heard, and having done his duty
to the Lord-Deputy, sat down behind the Chair. That there were some
controverted Opinions concerning the condemnation of the man. The Lord-Deputy
was pleased to desire his Opinion, and stated the Evidence to him, as it
appeared before the Court, which, to his remembrance, stood thus; The party was
accused to have stolen some Beef; and charged to have run from his Colors,
which was the reason of the parties being called thither, as he conceived. And
it was thus, coming to his Lieutenant to demand his Pay (if he be not mistaken,
and if he be, he should be glad to be certified by any,) the Officer said, He
had it not; then he desired to be Discharged, Then go and be hanged, said the
Officer; and thereupon left his Colors, yet left his Musket with his Corporal.
That for the Beef, it seems the Fact was clear, that this was when a Regiment
of Foot was to be transmitted to Carlisle, and were at Dublin attending their
Transportation hence. That he the said Lord Renula was desired to inform
himself of the particular charged upon his going from his Colors. The thing in
his excuse was, The Officer's bidding him go and be hanged, and leaving his
Musket: That therefore he, the Lord Renula, did the rather advise he should be
tried by the Law, than in that Court: That he does not conceive the Sentence
was made certain before he came in, and if he be not mistaken, there is a Noble
Peer of this House sat in that Council, and he is sure, that he (the said
Peer) offered Reasons why he should not die for that Fact, for he heard him
argue it so, and that is my Lord Conway.

Lord Conway was sworn, and asked his knowledge of this. Lord Conway a Witness.


He Answered, That he has been asked of this heretofore, and therefore is
something more in his memory than otherwise it would have been, for he had
almost forgot it, and it is very imperfectly in memory. He remembers that he
was at a Council of War in Dublin, that there was a man condemned to be hanged,
and that it was for such a matter as their Lordships had heard spoken, more of
it he does not remember.

And being further asked, Whether any Proposition was made to my Lord of
Strafford, to have the man referred to a legal Trial, or the Execution deferred.

He Answered, He remembers it not.

And so they closed the Article, observing it to be fully proved in both parts
of it, and that it makes good the general Article, of exercising a Tyrannical
Government over His Majesty's Subjects.

The Earl of Strafford began his Defense.

I humbly conceive my Answer must be allowed me, if I prove clear of E. of
Strafford's Defense.
Treason, having been debarred of Witnesses.

My Answer says, That the Deputies have always exercised Martial Law in time
of the Armies march, and diverse Articles for regulating the Army printed,
according to which diverse have been put to death in Peace as well as War.

That the Lord Mountnorris, for breach of two of those Articles, was proceeded
against by 20 in number, and Sentence of Death pronounced, wherein I was no
Judge; and I obtained from His Majesty that no personal hurt befell him, but a
few days Imprisonment.

If I had been questioned on my Life for Murder or Felony, I might in extremity
have feared (perhaps) but certainly this can by no Law be made Treason, for
which only I must answer, being a Crime of another nature.

I trust this will appear no Crime, or such a one as, I hope, His Majesty will
grant me a Pardon for, as He has done to others.

I desire to excuse a Mistake in my Answer, about the whole Armies being at
Dublin, and I desire in my Answer to have liberty to rectify a mistake.

I humbly desire the Commission may be read under the Broad-Seal, whereby I am
made General of the Army, and Power derived to exercise Marshal-Law, which was
read, and this limitation is in it as to the exercise of Marshal-Law, Si opus
fuerit. And this I observe is according to the practice of all the World in
Cases of this Nature.

That the Army in Ireland is a standing Army, in the King's pay, and and has,
and always had Marshalls, Sergeants, Majors, Generals, Provost-Marshalls, and
other Officers.

We admit that there is an Army in Ireland that is in pay, and distributed in
the Country, and has Officers belonging to it. Manager.


The Generals there have from time to time set forth Orders in Print, for E. of
Strafford.
the Government of the Army, and the Officers of it, particularly my Lord
Wilmott, whose Orders are here to be read.

My Lord Wilmott being examined, confessed there were Orders made for regulating
the Army, that he had the Honor to be General four years, Lord Willmott a
Witness.
and that the Articles offered by my Lord of Strafford, and by him viewed, are
attested under his Hand, for which he took Pattern from my Lord Faulkland, my
Lord Grandison, and my Lord Chichester, and he did it by the Power he had the
Honor to hold under His Majesty as General: That yet he used them so
sparingly, that neither in that time, nor in the Government of Munster (in
which he had as large Authority as ever any man had) he never did condemn a man
to death in peaceable times, and that the Authority has been good. That
Martial-Law is so frequent and ordinary in Ireland, that it is not to be
denied, and so little offensive there, that the Common Law takes no exception
at it. That he has lived to see three or four Parliaments there, and they
never complained of it. And to Govern an Army without Martial-Law, is
impossible, for occasions, in an Army, rise on a sudden, and something must be
done on a sudden for example-sake to others.

That Martial-Law was certainly in Ireland ever since he remembers, and long
before; but it has been used so sparingly, that in the time of Peace, for his
part, he did never know any executed in his time.

Being asked on the Lord Strafford's Motion, Whether he has known Sir Charles
Coote as Provost-Martial of Conaught, and Sir John Bower Provost-Marshall of
Leimster, in time of Peace, execute diverse Persons, Rebels, and others, by
Martial-Law.

He Answered, For Sir Charles Coote he can very well answer, though he had
Authority, yet it is out of his memory that he ever executed any. And for Sir
John Bower, he dwells remote from him, that the said Sir John Bower has
Authority, and so have many other Presidents, Marshalls of the Army,
Provost-Marshalls of every Province, and upon great Reasons for it; for though
they be Inferior men, yet the intent of their Commission is but to prosecute
those men that cannot be had into the Law, that is, Rebels and Fugitives, and
those men he has heard have been hanged.

Whence my Lord of Strafford inferred, That he had done nothing de Novo.

That Provost-Marshalls have been always appointed, and executed those Places
under the General for the time being.

The Committee admitted that there be four Provost-Marshalls, but deny that
they exercise Marshall-Law.

That those Provost-Marshalls have executed diverse men to death by E. of
Strafford.
Marshall-Law, Rebels and Traitors.

I desire to produce an Order of my Lord of Faulkland's, taken from his Book of
Entries; but being not proved, nor written with my Lord Faulkland's own hand,
the reading of it was not admitted, but left to their Lordships Consideration.

To prove the Practice of the Provost-Marshalls.

Sir Adam Loftus being asked concerning the Provost-Marshalls executing of
Marshall-Law before my Lord of Strafford's time, and on what men.

He Answered, That it is most apparent, in all times, since he can remember,
Martial-Law has been executed, that is undoubted.

But it was on Rebels and Outlaws, and he has known no other, but such,
executed by Martial-Law.

Lord Robert Dillon being asked to the same purpose.

Answered, He has heard the Provost-Marshals have taken and hanged men by
Martial-Law in time of Peace, since the beginning of King James his Reign, that
of Rebels and Outlaws there is no question.

My Lord of Strafford desired to compare his Orders with those of my Lord of
Wilmotts.

And they were compared accordingly in diverse Articles.

His Lordship produced a Copy of His Majesty's Letter, attested to be a true
Copy by Charles Gibson.

Which was read, being the Letter recited in the Sentence of my Lord
Mountnorris.

I observe, That the Sentence of my Lord Mountnorris takes notice E. of
Strafford.
that the Army was part of it in motion, and diverse Companies daily exercised,
and that my self was for the most part there present, which shows the truth of
my Answer to that Point in part.

To free my self from the said Sentence, I desire a Letter from my self and
Council of War to Secretary Cook 13. December, immediately after the Sentence,
may be read, to show that I was a Suitor to the King in my Lord Mountnorris's
behalf.

But being after the Sentence, and written by himself and the Council of War,
for extenuating of the Fact, the reading of it was overruled.

I conceive my Lord Renula and Lord Dillon made it appear, that I declined E.
of Strafford.
giving Judgment in the Sentence.

But for further proof, Sir Robert Farrer was asked, Whether my Lord of
Strafford did not declare he would be no Judge, nor give Opinion in that Cause,
and whether he sat bare?

He Answered, That he was present at the Sentence, and heard my Lord of
Strafford say, that he would give no Judgment, nor have to do with the business
concerning my Lord Mountnorris, and he sat a good time with his hat off.

Being asked on one of the Committees motion, touching his pressing of both the
Articles.

He said, He acknowledged my Lord did require Judgment on both Articles, and
yet sat silent at the time they were upon the Sentence.

Being asked, Whether my Lord of Strafford did not desire them to regard him no
more than an ordinary Officer, and do no otherwise than in reason and judgment
they should think fit.

He Answered, My Lord of Strafford said these very words, That they should not
look upon him, but go to the Cause according to their Opinion directly.

And being asked, Whether my Lord Mountnorris was a Captain of the Army.

He Answered, Yes, and the Council did admit it.

Sir George Wentworth being asked to the same purpose as Sir Robert Farrer.

He Answered, He was present at the Sentence, and heard my Lord of Stafford say
publicly, He did not sit there as a Judge, and that he would give no Vote in
it.

Being asked, Whether my Lord of Stafford did not tell Sir George Wentworth
that he should give no Vote in it, because he was his Lordships Brother.

He Answered, Yes, and he gave no Judgment upon that reason; that my Lord of
Strafford did publicly bid them all look on him as a private man, and sat by
as a Suitor, not as a Judge, and put off his hat at the beginning to speak, and
sat uncovered all the while, till Sentence was pronounced.

To show that my Lord Mountnorris was enlarged by me presently after, I here
produce the Warrant Dated 18. December, though indeed he was released 15.
December.

The denial of my Lord Mountnorris, to examine Witnesses, was by my Lord
Cromwell, Sir Charles Coote, Sir John Burlacy, not by me, I sitting by as a
private party: For this I refer to my Lord Mountnorris's own Deposition, and my
Lord Renula's.

To prove it further, Sir Robert Farrer was asked touching the denying of
further time and Council.

He Answered, He cannot tell who denied him, he remembers my Lord Cromwell
spoke something, but knows not whether to that effect.

Sir Robert Farrer being asked on one of the Managers Motion, Whether Sir
Robert Farrer a Witness.
before their coming together they did know the occasion of their meeting.

He Answered, He did not, he was warned to attend, and did not know the
business till he came thither.

I did never Communicate it to any man, till I brought the Letter, E. of
Strafford.
because I was resolved to speak of it to no man living; and in conclusion,
left it wholly to the Council.

For the words, That I would not lose my share in the Honor of that Sentence;
if I spoke the words, I meant the Justice and satisfaction done me by that
Sentence, being by the prime Officers of the Kingdom.

And whereas it was said yesterday, that though I thought it hard to lay words
to my Charge, yet I thought it not hard to lay words to the Lord Mountnorris
his Charge; there is a difference between laying words to a man's Charge, to
Accuse and Condemn him of High Treason, to loss of Estate, Life, Honor and
Posterity, and pressing words to only two days Imprisonment, being only
intended to discipline my Lord Mountnorris, and teach him to govern his Speech
with more modesty.

His Defense to the business of Denwitt's Execution.

He confesses his Vote concurred, and thinks he had Authority, and may E. of
Strafford.
justify it.

He produced the Sentence Dated 13. February, 1638. where his Crimes are set
forth to be the fellonious stealing of a quarrer of Beef, and running away from
his Colors, in breach of the 9th and 6th Articles, for which he was sentenced
to Death, according to the use of Martial-Law.

His Lordship opened the Nature of the Offense, being committed at a time when
the 500 men were attending to go to Carlisle; and the Example might be
dangerous, and desired Sir George Mountnorris might be asked, Whether Denwitt
was not convicted to be guilty, adding, that he had been burnt in the hand; and
running from his Colors is death by the Laws of Ireland.

He produced a Statute of Ireland, 20 H. 6. C. 19. whereby it is Enacted, That
every man that receives the King's Wages, and departs from his Captain, etc.
shall be proceeded against as a Felon.

As also the Statute 7 H. 7. C. 1. The departing of a Soldier from his Colors
is Felony, and the Offender to undergo punishment of Law. And 10 H. 7. all Laws
formerly made in England are to be in force in Ireland, and so that of 7 H. 7.
For further clearing whereof, he refers himself to the Council.

One of the Managers did make Reply in substance as follows: Manager.


That if this Fact be not Treason, yet it seems to prove his Intention to
subvert the Law, which is Treason.

Whereas he hopes for the King's Mercy, so the Commons do as really trust for
the King's Justice.

The Commission he insists on, is limited with Si opus fuerit; and the King
intends Execution according to Law, Magna Charta, and the rest of the Laws of
England being of force in Ireland.

There has been an Army in pay in Ireland since Henry the Eighths time, and so
there are some in pay here, in Portsmouth and Plymouth, and yet it follows not
England must be Governed by Martial-Law.

The Lord Wilmott was produced by him, to justify the publishing of Orders,
and exercise of Martial Law in Ireland. But we Appeal to your Lordships,
Whether he gave Testimony of executing any by Martial-Law.

Sir Adam Loftus says, There are Provost-Marshalls, and they do use to put men
to death, but they are Rebels whom they execute, which squares not with this
Case, only that of Sir Thomas Wayneman is a full President.

For the King's Letter, it is written on his Information, and if the King's
Ministers misinform him, He is just before God and men; and the Letter directs
Reparation, as it was fit there should be.

My Lord pretends he was no Judge in the Cause, your Lordships may remember who
procured the Letter to proceed, and who sat there to manage the business,
though he sat with his Hat off; if he would have been indifferent, he should
have left the Counselors to themselves.

And when some moved they might proceed on one Article, he cried both, and so
he was the Procurer of the Sentence, with which he is charged, not with the
Voting of it.

He pretends he sat by and said nothing, yet no man talked more at the
Sentence than himself.

He proves not the Course of Martial-Law, and there is a Judge-Marshal, to
whom, in any proceedings in a Martial way, address should be made, and it was
desired he might be called, to testify how they went about it.

Another of the Managers did add, by way of Reply, That whereas my Lord of
Strafford insists much, as if Martial-Law were part of the same Law Manager.
of Ireland, but the 25 E. 3. is in force there, and that is recited in the
Petition of Right in force here, as the ground why Martial-Law ought not to be
in England, and therefore there is the same ground why it should not be in
Ireland.

For that Commission he speaks of Opus est, is Martial-Law, when there is
bellum flagrans; but what need was there of Martial-Law in my Lord Mountnorris
his Case, when he would rather lose his Hand than the Sentence be executed.

For the Orders made by my Lord Wilmott and others, there is difference between
making an Order in way of terror, for fear of Execution, and putting that thing
in execution.

Many Witnesses are produced to prove the practice, but not one speaks in point
of Execution, unless upon Rebels and Traitors, and such as would not come into
Law, whereas my Lord Mountnorris was had into the Law.

Whereas he takes the Example of those before him; the Commons cannot see the
Restrictions put upon his Commission for Martial-Law, but in the preceding
Deputies time there was a limitation, that the Provost should leave the
Soldiers to trial at Law, except in time of War and Rebellion.

The Statute of 20 H. 6. is against him, for it makes the Soldiers running
from his Colors Felony, and certainly meant it should be tried by that Law
that makes it Felony, which would have given him the benefit of Clergy, not by
Martial-Law.

And though he thinks he may justify it, he falls at last to a Pardon.

He says, He acquainted no body before hand with the business; but if he may
give the Interpretation, he will be sure to put a good end to it; if he would
not prepare the Council for Justice, why should not the Delinquent be prepared?

The words are pretended to be spoken in April, my Lord of Strafford procures
the King's Letter in July, and questions it not till December, here is no opus
est.

The very words of the Order, the Witnesses were examined by our Command, which
make it his own.

One of the Managers desired that two of the Instructions of former Deputies
Manager.
might be read.

To this my Lord of Strafford excepted, as supplemental and dangerous, and not
warranted by any other Judicature.

After some debate touching the admitting of my Lord of Ely to be examined, to
the Course of Martial-Laws in Ireland, being new matter, arising out of his
Answer; It was Resolved that he should be examined only to that new matter.

The Earl of Ely sworn, was examined what was the proceedings of Earl of Ely a
Witness.
the Marshalls Court when he was Judge-Marshall, and how long he had been so.

He Answered, He was 40 years since Judge there, and for the manner of
proceeding, There was never any Deputy, or Governor of that Kingdom, but they
had a Commission of Martial-Law to be exercised in the time of their
Government; but the exercise of that Law was twofold, one was Summary, the
other was Plenary: That which was Summary and short, was committed to the
Provost-Marshall, that sought after the Rebels and Kernes that kept the Woods.

These, when they were apprehended, the Provost-Marshall hanged them on the
next Tree; and this was in poor Cases, where the estate of the party that
prosecutes is not worth 40 s. In the second, which is the Plenary proceeding,
there are three Considerations to be had, of the time, the place, and the
person; the time must necessarily be in time of War, the place in the Field,
and the persons must be such as are subject to the Rule of Martial-Law. And the
proceeding was thus; The parties complained, the other appearing, an
Information was drawn in writing, Witnesses produced, and reduced in writing, a
Sentence given absolutely or condemnatory, and the Party punished or acquitted,
and the Warrant directed to the Provost-Marshall to put the Judgment in
Execution. But when the Army was dissolved, and every one returned to their own
home, Soldiers, Captains, and Commanders; this Power ceased, and was no
farther executed; for it had been an extraordinary damage to His Majesty, that
by the Martial-Law every one should be tried; for he loses nothing but his
life, not his Lands or his Goods, and therefore the proceeding without was so
slow and seldom, that he had not remembered any man of quality worth 100 l. or
200 l. in thirty years to have been executed by Martial-Law.

Here the Manager did offer the Instructions given in my Lord Faulkland's
Manager.
time, which Mr. Fitz-Gerard testified to be by him examined with the Original
in the Signet-Office, as to the 33. and 34th Articles. Part of the Instructions
were read, viz.

33. Such as are to be brought to Trial at Law, are not to be executed by the
Marshal, except in time of War and Rebellion.

One of the Managers observed, That my Lord of Strafford would have Manager.
Power of Martial-Law over my Lord Mountnorris, but would not execute him;
which shows he desires not blood so much as Power of blood; that the Law of all
the Peers might be under his Girdle, and he besought their Lordships to
consider it.

Whereas, he said, The blood of their Lordships Ancestors was spent in the
Irish Wars; this way, their own blood may be spent in the Peace of Ireland, and
Peace of England, etc.

My Lord of Strafford taking notice of some words, charging him that my Lord
Mountnorris lost his Offices in that Sentence; In way of Answer said, That they
were lost in a Sentence in the Castle-Chamber for Misdemeanors fully proved,
and by himself confessed, and therefore His Majesty disposed of them.

To which one of the Managers Replied, That there was no sentence in Manager.
the Castle-Chamber against him.

And so after some Discourses and Resolution touching the Method of the
Proceedings about the next Articles, the House was Adjourned.

The First day. Monday, March 29. 1641.
THE Sixth Article. The Charge.
That the said Earl of Strafford, without any Legal Proceedings, and Article 6.
upon a Paper-Petition of Richard Rolstone, did cause the said Lord Mountnorris
to be disseized and put out of possession of his Freehold, and Inheritance of
his Manor of Tymore in the County of Armagh, in the Kingdom of Ireland, the
said Lord Mountnorris having been 18 years before in quiet Possession thereof.

MR. Glyn opened the Sixth Article, setting forth the Execution Manager.
of an Arbitrary Power by the Earl of Strafford, contrary to Law, in point of
the Estates of His Majesty's Subjects, by disseizing and putting the Lord
Mountnorris, a Peer, out of Possession of Lands of 200 l. a year, which he had
possessed 18 years before, on a Paper-Petition, without any Rules of Justice,
during the said Lord Mountnorris his Imprisonment, contrary to an Act of
Parliament read the other day, to King James his Instructions, to the
directions of His Majesty's Proclamation, and the Rules of proceeding in the
Kingdom of Ireland.

The Decree made in the Cause betwixt Rolstone and my Lord Mountnorris was
first offered, the Manager observing, that it was nothing to the matter,
whether the Decree were just or unjust, and that it never depended in the
Chancery, as is set forth in his Answer.

Thomas Little, the Lord of Strafford's Secretary, being sworn, attested Thomas
Little a Witness.
that the Copy produced was under his own hand.

And here my Lord of Strafford informed their Lordships, that upon his Defense
he would ask Mr. Little some questions, desiring their Lordships E. of
Strafford.
to remember that he is upon his Oath.

The Decree was read Dated 28. July, 1637. whereby for the Reasons therein set
forth, and with the assistance of the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas;
It was, among other things, Ordered, That Henry Rolston should be put into
quiet Possession of certain Lands therein mentioned.

Lord Mountnorris being Examined, Whether he was put out of possession by
Virtue of that Order, and how long he had Possession of the Lord Mountnorris a
Witness.
Lands?

He Answered, He was in quiet and peaceable Possession from May 20. till he was
put out by my Lord of Strafford's Warrant, August 29. 1637. as was written to
him from an Agent that was there from the delivery of the Warrant to the
Sheriff. That he was all the while the business was in prosecution, till his
coming into England, a little before his putting out of possession, in prison,
under restraint, for not suing out his Pardon, upon the Sentence of the Council
of War.

Mr. Anslow sworn and interrogated to the same purpose. Mr. Anslow a Witness.


Answered, That to my Lord Mountnorris's possession of the Lands, he can say
only by seeing the Accounts passed by former Receivers, and the Patent my Lord
Mountnorris had of the Land; but for his being put out of the possession by the
Order, he found when he was left in Ireland, about a year and half ago he was
put out of possession by an Order of my Lord of Strafford, and that he being
there, could have no Rents paid, Henry Rolsion's Son being in possession, the
Father being dead.

Being asked, Whether a Petition was not preferred for liberty to proceed at
Law.

He Answered, It was in his own behalf, for the Land was estated on him by his
Father: And that he the Deponent being to pass his Land on the Commission of
Grace, Rolston Petitioned for it himself; and therefore he the Deponent
Petitioned it might be hindered to pass, and that he might have his Right tried
legally, but he could get no Answer; the Commissioners saying, They sat not
there to question any Lords Estate.

The Manager observed this to be the assuming of an Arbitrary Power of
Jurisdiction, in a case of Land, without any former President; wherein, Manager.
if he be justifiable, he may as well, riding on the Highway, determine any
man's Estate; and added, That if my Lord of Strafford insist on this, they shall
prove it not only in this, but in twenty more of this condition on the Reply.

My Lord of Strafford desiring they might bring their Proofs at once. E. of
Strafford.


The Manager Answered, That they should prove an Act of the same Manager.
Nature, but of a higher strain, concerning a Peer of the Realm (for he chased
such Lions.)

But my Lord of Strafford desiring they might be kept to that within E. of
Strafford.
the Charge.

His Lordship began his Defense in substance as follows:
I confess I am Charged with Treason by the Honorable House of Commons, and
that is my greatest grief; for if it were not an Arrow E. of Strafford.
sent out of that Quiver, it would not be so heavy as it is, but as it comes
from them it pierces my heart through; not with Guilt, yet with Grief, that in
my Gray hairs I should be mis-understood by the Companions of my Youth, with
whom I have formerly spent so much time.

If the Decree be just (as it is most just) I hope it will go very far in the
Case.

That whereas it is said it was against a Peer, Justice excepts not persons,
and I know no Privilege Peers have in point of possession of Land above common
persons.

The Act of Parliament read the other day, against which, it is supposed to be
made, I conceive it to be the Statute in H. 6. time, and desire your Lordships
to remember, that by the last words, the King's Prerogative is saved.

I have done nothing contrary to the Instructions in King James his time, nor
the Proclamation, nor any thing, but according to the Power of former Deputies.

I acknowledge my Answer is mistaken, in saying, the Cause depended formerly in
the Chancery, which was not out of cunning, but a mere failing of memory.

I desire my Commission may be read, whereby it will appear I had Power to do
that for which I am now questioned.

The Commission was read, whereby he had Authority to proceed Secundum
consuetudines terrae, etc.

From whence he observed, That having so great a Power, the receiving of a
Petition, and giving Relief to a poor body, should not be so great a fault,
being at the most, but the exceeding of a Jurisdiction, but by no Construction
can be made Treason.

That yet this is no exceeding of a Jurisdiction, but was a Power always in the
Deputies before his time, and warranted.

To prove it, he produced the printed Instructions, whereby the Deputy and
Council Table are forbid to meddle with common businesses within Cognizance of
ordinary Courts, nor alter possession of Land, nor make private Orders, or
Hearings, nor make Injunctions for staying Suits in any Civil Cause.

Which shows, that that course was in practice before the Instructions took it
away, (viz.) to alter Possessions, to grant Injunctions, etc. To prove by
Witnesses, that this Power was always exercised by the Deputy in the nature of
a Court of Requests in England.

He offered my Lord Primate of Armagh his Deposition, being taken, by reason of
his sickness, by virtue of an Order of their Lordships; but for that the
Commons had liberty by that Order to cross-examine, and yet had no notice
thereof, or of the Depositions so taken; the using of these Depositions was
waved, after much debate, till the next day, in the mean time the Commons may
cross-examine.

Henry Dillon asked, Whether Petitions have been usually preferred to the
Deputies, and in how many Governors time he has known it to be so, That these
Paper-Petitions have been preferred.

He Answered, His Father had a Lease during his own life and his Wives, and the
longer liver of them, and fifteen years after to his Executors and
Administrators, which he the said Henry Dillon (being come to full age)
enquired into; and looking upon his Fathers Evidences, he found a business
there depending between Sir Patrick Plaintiff, and his Father Defendant, before
my Lord Chichester, in the time of his Government; and he found several Orders
under my Lord Chichesters Hand in that Cause, that he being Executor to Maurice
Fitzgerard, and having occasion to peruse his Writings, to see what Debts were
due to him, he found among them several Orders of my Lord Grandison's time, one
Petition of Fitzgerard, as well for Debts as for Land. That in the time of my
Lord Faulkland he observed, and has seen several Orders made by his Lordship,
and one made on behalf of his Sister Mary Dillon, for a Portion paid by his
Father, and he recovered the portion, and received the Money.

That in the time of my Lord of Cork and Lord of Elyes being Governors, there
was a Petition preferred against him, by my Lord of Longford, for a Horse taken
by him the said Henry Dillon, as Sheriff of the County of Longford, pretending
it to be a stray, and belonging to His Majesty, and triable, as he conceived,
in the Exchequer, and that he did appear, but my Lord of Longford died before
Examination.

Being asked, Whether the Causes were before the Deputy alone, or the Deputy
and Council.

He Answered, That in the time of my Lord Chichester he knows not whether they
were before the Deputy alone, but he found only my Lord Chichester's Hand to
the Orders. In my Lord Grandison's time he saw his Hand only, but where the
Causes depended he knows not.

But that in my Lord Faulkland's time, was only by my Lord-Deputy: That of my
Lord Corkes and Lord of Elyes, he remembers not whether it was before their
Lordships and the Council; but the way he was called to Answer was by
Pursevant, before he had notice of the Suit.

Being asked, Whether Examinations were taken.

He Answered, That in the Case of his Sister, he conceives there were
Examinations taken upon Oath.

And that in the Cause before my Lord of Cork and Lord of Ely the Attachment
was under the Hands of the two Lords Justices alone.

Being asked on the Managers motion, Whether he has any of those Orders to
show.

He Answered, He knows not whether those in my Lord Chichester's time were
delivered to my Lord Dun, on composing the Difference, or in his Custody.

Robert Lord Dillon was asked, What he heard my Lord Grandison say in
maintenance of this Judicature by my Lord-Deputy alone.

He Answered, That he heard my Lord Grandison himself say nothing of it, but he
heard by others, that he pretended to it as a Judicature belo^nging to the
Sword.

Being asked what he has known of the practice of this Court before the Lord
Deputy alone, before how many Deputies; and upon what occasions:

He Answered, That he has seen diverse Orders of Deputies, or Petitions, singly
signed by themselves, and no other hand but the Deputies.

Being asked in how many Deputies times;

He Answered, That he has seen of my Lord Faulklands, and Lord Grandisons, and
to his best remembrance (but he will not peremptorily say it) of my Lord
Chichesters.

Being asked of the Earl of Bathes motion, whether he has known them to
proceed upon Petition for matters of Land.

He Answered, He never knew any.

Being asked on Mr. Maynards motion, whether they were Orders of Reference, or
by consent;

He Answered, He remembers one more particularly, and it was an Order of my
Lord of Faulklands, of reference to my Lord Angier, that was Master of the
Rolls; and was for a Debt.

Being asked on my Lord of Straffords motion, whether Sir Paul Davis Clerk of
the Council, do not ordinarily examine on Oath; and thereupon Causes come to
publication.

He Answered, The Clerk of the Council has a Commission for taking Oath, and
wheresoever the Deputy requires, he is to take Oath; but whether de facto he
took Oath on those former Orders, he remembers not. And whether he takes Oath
in things determined by the Deputy alone, he knows nothing of it. But it is the
common course of proceedings, when there is an Order for an Attachment, an Oath
is taken of course, that the party is in contempt.

Being asked on Mr. Whitlocks motion, how anciently Commission has been
granted to the Clerk of the Council to take an Oath.

He Answered, He does not know; but knows, that since he had the Honor to
sit at the Board, they have had them, and that is 12 or 13 years.

Being asked whether he has known in matters of Equity, or Title of Land, any
determination by any other Deputy alone; And whether my Lord of Strafford has
not done it in many Cases:

He answered to the first, That he does not remember any particular Case of it:
To the second, That he never knew my Lord of Strafford, with his Remembrance,
meddle with matters of Law; but for matters of Equity, to his Remembrance he
has.

And this my Lord of Strafford confessed, this being in the Court of Requests
is to the Chancery.

To prove that the Clerks of the Council have power to examine on Oath, an
Order was read to the Lord Chancellor from the Lord Faulkland, for drawing up a
Commission to enable Sir William Usher for taking Affidavits, and ministering
Oaths in all Causes wherein the Lord Deputy or the Board, etc.

His Lordship came to show that the Instructions were so much mistaken, that
they were never observed by the Deputy, Judges of Assize, Presidents E. of
Strafford.
of Provincial, etc. nor could the poor Irish be debarred from remedy on
Petitions, without occasioning an universal outcry, being not acquainted with
Legal forms, and beggarly; and the man that came against my Lord Mountnorris,
was in forma Pauperis.

To prove this, my Lord of Straffords Book of Entries was mentioned, and an
Order of my Lord Faulklands made in June 1629. which is after, the Instructions
being in 1622. and being affirmed by my Lord Wilmott to be under my Lord
Faulklands hand, it was read:

Containing a Petition, which set forth the Petitioners disturbance in his
Possession of certain Lands by Sir James Fitzgerard, contrary to a former
Order, and assaulting and beating the Petitioner and his Tenants, etc.

And my Lord of Faulklands Warrant thereupon for Sir James his appearance, to
Answer the Contempt; and for the Sheriffs keeping the Petitioner in possession.

He produced another Order of my Lord of Faulklands, August 20. 1626. being for
Attaching diverse persons that had not paid Provisions for the Deputies Household.

He produced another Order made on Walter Dennotts Petition, October 1624. for
direction to certain Debtors to pay some moneys due.

Being a Warrant to examine the truth of the Plaintiffs demands; and a Command
to the Debtors to pay what is due, or give better Security, else to appear, to
show cause to the contrary; the same being grounded upon Letters out of England
in the Petitioners behalf.

He produced an Order of my Lord of Cork, and Lord of Ely, affirmed by the
Lord Cork to be under his hand, on Petition of Henry Iawant: The Order being a
Reference to the Lord Primate; and to take Order for the Petitioners Relief as
by a former Order of Reference was directed.

And whereas it may be objected that these were in Church Causes, or Plantation
Causes, His Lordship observed, That these Orders were made E. of Strafford.
by the Deputy and Justices alone, without the Council, though by the
Instructions, the Deputy ought not to meddle with such Causes, without the
Council.

He then offered to show, that this Practice of hearing business on Paper
Petitions, is used by the Presidents in their Provincial Courts, and by the
Judges in their Circuits, by Commissions from the Deputy; whence his Lordship
observed, That if the Deputies have Power to Authorize, they have likewise
Power to Execute; and he offered to this purpose, my Lord Ranulagh's Answer at
Council Board, under Mr. Mewtis his hand.

Here the Manager observed, That my Lord of Strafford is charged with Manager.
Exorbitant using of the Law, and cannot be justified with others breaking of
the Law; besides, it is neither in the Charge, nor in his Answer.

My Lord of Strafford answered, That he offered this only to show, that he is
no Innovator of the Law, further than others before him; and to show that the
Instructions were mistaken in that point, and could not be observed, nor can
they without much detriment to the Commonwealth, yea that they have broken
them, and that he only has observed them.

And so this matter was laid aside, as not fully pertinent to the Charge.

His Lordship in the next place observed, That as the Case stands with E. of
Strafford.
the Government and People of Ireland, there is a necessity that this Power
that has been thus at all times in the Deputies, should still remain there,
for relief of the poorer sort of People, who are not able to undergo the long
Circuit of Legal Proceedings, nor are acquainted with them; and must be drawn
to it by Degrees; and that the Plaintiff in this Cause was a Suitor in forma
pauperis; That it is a great assistance to the Merchants, where they may
recover their Debts suddenly, and not lose their occasions, and their benefit
by increase of Trade; That some Reports being raised, as if he had neglected
the poorer sort of People, and not given Redress as former Deputies have done,
he advertised it over to His Majesty, and fully informed Him of the Proceedings
and Instructions, and desired His Majesty's Pleasure; which was declared by a
Letter under His Majesty's Signet, received October 6. the Ninth year of the
King, and to himself directed, which was read; Wherein recital is made of the
Instructions, 1622. and particularly in the point of Judicature by the
Deputies, That it is necessary to uphold such Power, especially for relief of
the poorer sort there, as formerly had been used; And Power is thereby to him
given, (notwithstanding any former Directions, Proclamation, or Restraint) to
hear and determine such Causes as shall be brought before him, according to the
Power of former Deputies, yet not to meddle with Titles of Freehold, except in
Cases of Equity; but to refer Title of Freehold to its proper Judicature, and
not to hear Causes where there is Priority in other Courts, unless in case of
Appeal for lack of Justice, after due Obedience: Power likewise (the said Rules
observed) to call before him any person complained of, and therein to make such
Order and Decree as shall stand with Justice, and to cause the same to be put
in Execution. Dated October 5. 9 Car.

He then offered the first Decree in the Cause to be read, that had formerly
been read, having relation to this, bearing date May 23. 1636.

And the same was read, being Signed Wentworth. Gerard Lowther, etc.

Whence his Lordship observed, That the Order was made for Relief E. of
Strafford.
of a poor man, where my Lord of Mountnorris had by Violence, and extreme hard
pressure, possessed himself of Lands worth 200 l. a year, never paying out of his
Purse above 30 l. the rest arising on a Letter procured for Sawing Mills, and
by interest at above 20 in the hundred; wherein his Lordship had the Assistance
of two Reverend and Learned Judges, the Chancellor that now is, and Sir Gerard
Lowther, That the Decree is in every part just and equitable; and if he had not
given relief, he had been justly censured, That the party is now in Town, and
means to complain, and Sue for 600 l. more than he is yet allowed.

The Committee declared, they insist not on the merit of the Cause, as not
being material.

And so my Lord of Strafford observed, That he stands justified by the Kings
Letter, which makes things differ from what they did formerly, and show, that
the Power was there before, and is now restored.

His Lordship further added, that his Practice in exercising Jurisdiction, was
conformable to that Letter, viz. That he meddled not with Title of Land triable
at Law, nor with Causes which had priority of Suit in other Courts; That he
referred the business of the Provincial Courts to these Courts, and many
businesses to the Judges of Assize, and none determined by him, but upon full
Hearing and Assistance of the Judges.

And whereas it is said, my Lord Mountnorris was kept in Prison by reason of
not Suing out the Pardon on his Sentence pronounced by the Council of War, I
will make it appear it was for Contempts, in refusing to answer a Bill
Exhibited against him on the Kings behalf, in the Castle-Chamber.

Mr. Slingsby being asked touching that point;

Answered, That he did constantly wait on my Lord to the Castle-Chamber, and
there heard the Information of the Kings Attorney against my Lord Mountnorris
read, and my Lord Mountnorris was called to Answer it several times, and was
committed to Prison for not Answering it; but he cannot precisely speak to the
time, but he thinks he was left in Prison upon that, till my Lords going into
England.

Sir Adam Loftus asked touching the same point, did first make his humble Suit
that he might not be Examined in any Cause concerning my Lord Mountnorris, for
some reasons inducing him thereunto.

Which my Lord of Strafford said was, because Sir Adam succeeded my Lord
Mountnorris in the place of Vice-Treasurer; and being required (if that were
all) to speak notwithstanding:

He Answered, That he conceives he was Committed for not answering the
Information; but the precise day of his Commitment, and the time how long, he
cannot well remember.

Being asked, whether he was not brought before the Deputy a day or two before
he came away, and refused to Answer, and was thereupon Committed:

He Answered, That it was true.

Being asked on the Managers motion, whether he was not Committed on the old
Sentence, and remained in Prison on that;

He Answered, That he does not know.

If I had time to produce the Orders of the Castle-Chamber, I could make E. of
Strafford.
it appear when my Lord Mountnorris was Committed, and how long he continued
so; but he was Committed for that Contempt, and remained Committed six Months,
I think, before he would Answer; which I would not speak if it were not true.

The Lord Dillon called, and asked to the same purpose:

He Answered, That the Judges of the Castle-Chamber are by Commission, and that
he is not of that Commission. That the Deputy, or Chief Governor, calls by way
of Assistance, such as he pleases. That he heard at Council Board, my Lord
Mountnorris was Committed for a Contempt, in not answering in the Star Chamber;
but when it began, or how long, he knows not.

In Execution of this Jurisdiction, I had no private advantage to my E. of
Strafford.
self, nothing but trouble was gained by it, no new thing was done, but such as
was formerly by all the Chief Governors there; and such as I had special
Warrant for from His Majesty. I have observed the Rules that guide others in
Chancery, and other Courts of Equity, and the Judges in their Circuits:
Therefore it can be no Subversion of the Laws; for the same thing done by
others has been Legally done, it differs only in respect of place, being
before my self; and so cannot be Treason: And though it might be Illegal here,
yet it is according to the Laws and Customs of Ireland, by which I am to be
judged for all things there done. And the same is done by the Presidents of the
North, and of Wales; who did familiarly receive Petitions from Poor people that
cannot seek remedy by a Legal course; and yet it is not Treason in England: And
it cannot sink into my understanding, how the enlargement of a Jurisdiction
should be strained to High Treason; specially being warranted by ancient
Practice, and modern Authority, being only according to the nature of a Court
of Requests, and not entrenching on the Jurisdiction of Law Courts. And so I
hope this will never rise up in Judgment against me as Treason, either in it
self, or by way of Application.

The Manager began his Reply, in substance as follows:
Whereas my Lord of Strafford says, This is not Treason; this is the Manager.
burden of his Song: But this is one of the particulars that prove his design
to subvert the fundamental Laws of both Kingdoms; He will not acknowledge a
cumulative Treason, he must have a Treason over Shoes and Boots; yet if he
will look on it all together, he shall see the horridness of it, and it will
prove as great a Treason as ever was presented to a House of Parliament.

The Manager opened the Article, and said, they dispute not whether if it had
been done in Chancery, or other Courts, it had been well done; but it is done
by him without Rule of Law; and hereupon he has drawn to himself an Arbitrary
Power.

Whereas my Lord of Strafford, to take from himself the Act of Parliament 28 H.
6. enjoining, That Causes should be referred to the proper Courts, urged the
last words, [Saving the Kings Prerogative] We do observe, That when he is
Charged with an Exorbitant proceeding, to the destruction of the Law; he flies
to the Kings Prerogative for shelter.

That to mention the Kings Prerogative in the face of the Peers of the Realm,
and in presence of all the Commons, when he is charged with an Exorbitant
proceeding, to the Subversion of the Laws, is but to cast a Scandal upon the
Kings Prerogative, and to make it have a worse relish; whereas the Law supports
the Kings Prerogative, and the Subject supports it.

When his Answer is charged not to be according to Truth, he casts a Gloss upon
it, from the easiness of his being mistaken; whereas, when he is able to
justify it, he glories in it, as that whereto he must stand or fall.

That the Letters Patents which my Lord of Strafford produces, rise in Judgment
against him; for the King has trusted him ad custodiendas leges Regni, and
therefore if he has broken through them, he has broken his Trust.

He says, It is strange the exceeding of Jurisdiction should be laid to his
charge as Treason; He is charged with the Subverting of the Law, and that is
more than the Exceeding of a Power. He read the Instructions to warrant his
Act; and by these the Commons desire to be judged, whether they do not in the
Negative say, there shall be no such Proceeding before the Deputy; and yet he
will imply, there have been proceedings to the contrary, which we cannot see.

He justifies his Proceedings by former Deputies, and has produced Henry
Dillon, who has seen several Proceedings in Sir Henry Bagnalls time, and
others, where Orders have been made by the Deputy alone, but the Orders
themselves are not brought; whereas if they were looked on, and consideration
had what results out of them, their Lordships would not have suffered them to
be read, without Attestation that they were true Copies. But now whether they
be entered or no, or what other Proceedings there were, the Witness does not
know; and therefore they are no Evidence, nor in truth ought to be offered: And
the Witness being asked what the Orders were, he says, one was a Reference, and
whether Witnesses were examined, he says, he does not know.

He produces my Lord Dillon; and we offer to be adjudged by him; for he says,
He knew not any Deputy before my Lord of Strafford, that has intermeddled with
matters of Land, except in Plantation and Church Causes; and this Order is
charged to be made by him alone.

He pretends this is a Court, and a Prerogative of the Sword.

We know not whether my Lord of Strafford intends to keep it by force; but
whereas he produces a Commission for giving Oath to the Clerk of the Council;
this Commission needed not if it were a Court, for the Court it self would give
an Oath; and whereas he mentions it to be in the nature of the Court of
Requests, we would gladly know, whether there be not Authority in the Judge to
give an Oath.

He produces several Orders in my Lord of Faulkland's time,

The first is expressly for Plantation Lands; and there was no determination in
Equity, or otherwise.

The second Order he produced in my Lord Faulkland's time, was a mere
Green-cloth Case, and nothing to this purpose.

The third Order produced, was in a business recommended from England to my
Lord of Faulkland, and such Causes as are out of the Instructions excepted.

The Order in the Lord of Corke's time, was but an Order of Reference to the
Archbishop; and a Reference is no Determination, a private person may do as
much.

So that we observe, nothing has been offered to prove, that a Deputy alone
has determined matter of Possession; and in this we rest with confidence, That
none ever did before himself; and shall therefore desire the Examination of
some Privy-Counsellors.

He produced a Letter from His Majesty to proceed in such Causes: But if by Law
it ought not to be, then a Letter, and Authority derived thereby, is void, and
warrants not Proceeding in the Subject; the Letter was as just as might be,
being obtained on his Information, to whose Government and Trust His Majesty
had committed the Kingdom; and if he mis-inform, he must Answer it. And the
Letter is written with caution, giving Authority to proceed in matter of
Equity, as former Deputies had done; and if it be not proved that his
Predecessors had used such Proceedings, where is his Authority?

He says, he has proceeded according to the direction of the Kings Letter;
that is, he never determined Title of Land but in Equity; and when such Causes
have come to him, he has referred them to Law, which we are forced to disprove
that, by offering it under his own hand, that whereas a Nobleman of the Realm,
my Lord of Baltinglas, had mortgaged to Sir Robert Parkhurst, for 3000 l. Land
of a 1000 l. year: when Sir Robert had Title at Law, and might as Mortgagor,
have entered after the day past, Sir Robert prefers a Petition to my Lord of
Strafford himself, and he without the Council, determines the Possession, and
takes it from the Mortgagee, and afterward he purchases the Lands himself, and
letts them for 680 and odd pounds a year.

For my Lord Mountnorris his Imprisonment, the Manager said, That when his
distressed Lady, the Mother of Twelve Children, Petitioned His Majesty,
declaring the great Distress her Husband suffered by the Tyrannical Power
exercised over them; His Majesty like a Gracious Prince, referred it to the
consideration of the Deputy, That on submission he should deliver him out of
Prison. But when the poor Lady presented it with Tears in her Eyes, and cast
her self at his Feet, though there was a Reference from His Majesty; yet he,
that would at another time shelter himself under the Kings Prerogative, refuses
to give so much Respect as to entertain it; and when the eldest Son came,
refused to accept it.

Another of the Managers added, That whereas there is a restriction in the
Kings Letter, That the Earl of Strafford should not meddle with any thing in
other Courts, they would show, that after two Decrees in a Court, my Lord has
on a Petition, Decreed quite contrary; and it was no Beggars Cause, but a
Knights, and 5000 l. value: That to the Kings Letter they will give all
Reverence.

But if my Lord of Strafford had found such a constant practice to be proved,
he needed no Letter to set up the Jurisdiction that was in him before; That
this Letter under the Signet, can give no Countenance against an Act of
Parliament; which Orders, That the Deputy shall not meddle with Causes, but
remit them to their proper Courts; and no other Exposition can be given of the
saving of the Kings Prerogative, but only a reservation of His Liberty to Sue
in any Courts,

And for him to seek by misinformation, to procure a Letter from His Majesty,
for a Power not warrantable by Law, he conceives it an Abuse of His Majesty,
and that makes his fault the greater; and he instanced in the Marquess of
Dublin, who for procuring Letters Patents under the Great Seal, to exercise a
Power against Law, was complained of in Parliament, and had Judgment for it,
among other things, of High Treason.

They proceeded to Proof. And first,

The Earl of Cork being asked, whether before my Lord of Straffords E. of
Cork a Witness.
time, he has known the Deputy, or Justices alone, determine any matter of
Land, in Equity or otherwise;

He Answered, He remembers not any, except in cases of the Church and
Plantation.

The Lord Ranulagh being asked to that point, Lord Ranulagh a Witness.


Answered, Never any to his knowledge; having been of the Table two and twenty
years.

Sir Adam Loftus being asked to the same point,

Answered, He remembers not any; having been a Privy-Counsellor S. Adam Loftus
a Witness.
20 years.

The Lord Mountnorris being asked to that point,

Answered, He never knew any, having been a Privy-Counsellor since Lord
Mountnorris a Witness.
14 Iac. and lived in Ireland 38 years; That he was there all the time of my
Lord Chichester, or very near; and was so acquainted with his proceedings, that
he dare engage himself for all he is worth, that the Lord Chichester never put
any such Order under his hand.

The Earl of Bath Sworn, and asked to that point;

Answered, That he has often heard the Deputy in cases of Debt, Earl of Bath a
Witness.
for relief of poor men, has proceeded alone; but in cases of Land he never
heard of any.

To take off Henry Dillon's Testimony, the Manager alleged, That he had been
Sentenced at the Council Board, for speaking untruths.

My Lord of Strafford desired the Exception might not be made; some E. of
Strafford.
Exceptions by him made to Witnesses against him, being not admitted; and that
there might be unum pondus, una mensura.

The Manager Answered, In eodem genere Mali. This Exception is not Manager.
for Extortion, or collateral matters, but for Perjury.

Thereupon his Acknowledgment was read; wherein he confesses he had highly
transgressed against the Honor of His Majesty and the Board, in presuming to
declare apparent untruths.

And that such an Acknowledgment was made, was testified by Sir Adam Loftus,
and likewise by the Lord Dillon, who showed their Lordships the occasion
thereof.

To the matter of my Lord Mountnorris his Imprisonment, it was offered under my
Lord of Straffords own hand, to show that it was partly upon the Sentence,
December 24. 1636.

My Lord of Strafford not denying it to be his hand, it was read, being a
Reference upon my Lord Mountnorris his Petition, and in substance as follows.

That for the Petitioners restraint more than twelve months, he has no body to
blame but himself, that has all that space lain under a deserved censure of
the Council of War, and stood in Contempts, and trifled with the Court of
Castle-Chamber.

That His Majesty's removal of the Sentence has been often signified, but
never sued forth; That the Petitioner did to the same effect, Petition the Lord
Deputy in May last, and therefore all the Answer that for the present can be
given, is, that his most gracious Pardon seeks no man, nor can His Majesty
remit all of that Sentence to be applied to the Petitioners benefit, till by
his humble suit he procured His Majesty's Pardon under the Great Seal, etc.
which taking the usual way, and humbly acknowledging the justness of that
Sentence, he may have, etc.

A Petition was then read, directed to the Earl of Strafford from my Lord
Mountnorris.

Praying a Warrant for a Pardon under the Great Seal, according to the Law and
the purport of His Majesty's directions; if his Lordship shall conceive His
Majesty's Letters (on which the Lord Mountnorris relied as sufficient) did not
amount to a Legal Pardon.

Then was read my Lord of Straffords Answer.
Dublin, January 30. 1636. When the Petitioner shall prefer his Petition for
the said Pardon, acknowledging the justness of the Sentence pronounced against
him by the Council of War, we shall take his Request into our further
consideration.

Wentworth.

Whence one of the Managers observed, That the King directs a Pardon to be
drawn; and till the Sentence be acknowledged to be just, no Manager.
consideration shall be taken, and that the Preamble of the Pardon recites as
much; and he would not suffer it to be Sealed till this Acknowledgment passed.

Then was produced the Lady Mountnorris her Petition to His Majesty, referred
to the Lord Strafford.

Mr. Anslowe Sworn, attested the truth of the Copy; and it was Mr. Anslowe a
Witness.
read.

Setting forth her Sorrow on behalf of her Husband, suffering in Honor,
Health, and Imprisonment, for a word mis-interpreted, and still pursued in the
Castle-Chamber; and humbly praying a Command for his coming into England, etc.

His Majesty's Reference to my Lord of Strafford, July 18. 1636.

His Majesty is pleased, That on such a Submission as the Lord Deputy shall
approve of, he shall have his Liberty to come into England; wherein the Lord
Deputy is to take notice, and to give Order therein accordingly.

Mr. Anslowe being asked, whether this was brought to the Deputy by the Lady
Mountnorris; and whether he did not reject it:

He Answered, That he was by when my Lady Mountnorris presented the Petition,
she was humbly on her Knees to desire my Lord of Strafford to receive it: And
he refused absolutely to receive it from her.

They then produced the Order in a Cross Suit, int. Robert Parkhurst Plaintiff,
and the Lord Baltinglasse, and al. Defendants, Et e contra.

The Order was read, whereby certain Lands for 3000 l. paid at several times to
the Viscount, and 300 l. more to be paid afterward, were settled with Sir
Robert Parkhurst.

William Brettergh Sworn, was Interrogated touching my Lord Baltinglasse
William Brettergh a Witness.
his Possession of the said Lands, and his dispossessing thereof.

He Answered, That he was Solicitor for prosecuting of this Cause, and made
Defense of it in behalf of my Lord of Baltinglasse, being then in England: But
at the time of the Decree, his Lordship was come over; That his Lordship never
made Answer to it; but when the Cause came to hearing, my Lord of Strafford
ordered the Possession of the Land against my Lord Baltinglasse; and the
Possession before was in one Grimble, who was Tenant. And that he could speak
many other things concerning the carriage of it.

Mr. Glyn desired the Witness might be examined touching my Lord Manager.
of Straffords purchase of those Lands; and offered the Articles whereby my
Lord of Strafford leased the Land for 28 years, and at 666 l. per annum.

My Lord of Strafford confessed thereupon, that he had it, but it was E. of
Strafford.
in Trust for a Noble Person.

The Manager observed, That whether it was for a Friend, or himself, it is
equal; for a man will do a courtesy for his Friend, as soon Manager.
as for himself; And so he concluded his Reply, hoping that their Lordships
were satisfied, that he has introduced an Innovation; and being so, that he
has exercised a Tyrannical Power over the Estates of His Majesty's Subjects.

To such parts thereof as was new matter, my Lord of Strafford replied, in
substance as follows.
I desire that these matters that come on me suddenly, and being no part E. of
Straffords Defense.
of my Charge, may not stick with Your Lordships.

In the business of my Lord of Baltinglasse, I remember little, only that my
Lord Baltinglasse had forfeited his Estate to Sir Robert Parkhurst, who had a
clear and free Estate in the Land, by Fine and Recovery, and diverse
Conveyances; The Lord Baltinglasse desired me to take the hearing of the Cause,
to see if I could procure from Sir Robert Parkhurst, a further sum of money:
The Order was made with both their likings; and my Lord Baltinglasse was
content to perfect the whole Estate. Sir Robert Parkhurst was in Possession at
that time, not the Lord Baltinglasse; That seeing no cause to relieve him in
Equity, they left him to seek relief in other places. That afterward an
Agreement was made, 300 l. received by the Lord Baltinglasse; and after 100 l.
more got to be given, and so there was a full Conveyance and Acquittance from
Father and Son, That himself has no Interest in it, but only of Trust to
another use.

For that which was offered against the Jurisdiction; the Proofs are Negative,
and contradict not what I have offered; And if I might show my Lord of
Faulklands Book of Entries, I could produce as much done by my Lord Faulkland
alone, 1623. Attachments against Body and Goods, Hearings between Parties and
Parties, Warrants for Distresses, Warrants to the Sheriff for Possession of
Lands, Injunctions to Judges of Assize.

For my Lord Mountnorris his Imprisonment, I desire Your Lordships to observe,
that His Majesty's Reference is, That I shall not set him at liberty without a
Submission, so that he may thank himself for his Restraint.

For my Carriage to the Lady Mountnorris at the delivering the Petition, I
desire Your Lordships to hear a Witness.

Who being asked to that purpose,

Answered, That he was present when my Lady Mountnorris was once with my Lord,
but knows not whether that were the time in question. It was about 1636. That
he was present when her Son delivered one before; which my Lord would receive,
but her Son would not deliver the Reference, but a Copy, being so Commanded by
his Lady Mother.

That when my Lady delivered it on her Knees, my Lord told her, She had done
him the greatest Injury she could devise; and that if she had broke his Head,
she should have pleased him better.

Being asked, whether my Lord rejected the Petition;

He Answered, That he cannot certainly remember what was done with it; but my
Lord said, he could not do any thing on a Copy.

The Lord Viscount Dillon being asked to the same point,

Answered, He was by when my Lady Mountnorris came to my Lord to the
Covent Garden, with a Petition in her hand, and kneeled to my Lord, but my Lord
desired her to rise, and offering the Petition, he said, he would not meddle
with any Petition at that time; That my Lord was going abroad, and led her to
her Coach in Civility, but received not the Petition.

My Lord of Strafford professes, these things be so long past, that he
remembers them not well, nor whether she offered a Copy the second E. of
Strafford.
time.

The Manager did here observe, That he acknowledged the Civility of my Lord of
Strafford in this point; but there is one point sticks with him, Manager.
as higher than any offered, and then their Lordships may think he goes high
enough; That there has been proved my Lord of Straffords Tyrannical.
Proceedings on the Life and Fortune of my Lord Mountnorris; One step more, the
Manager said he had heard off, and that was his Soul, and that sticks with him
more than any thing else, He kept him in Prison till he should acknowledge the
justness of a Sentence, which in his Heart he abhorred, and held unjust; That
all former Tyrants, when they would proceed against a man, have found out two
false Witnesses; but when a man shall be made a false Witness against himself,
it is much more Tyrannical. And he wished this Design had kept only in Ireland,
and had not come into England, which he hopes shall be so no more.

And so after a short Reply to the two particulars last mentioned, the Manager
closed the 6th Article, conceiving that it remains as was offered, That my Lord
of Strafford has determined things contrary to the Commission and Authority
obtained from His Majesty.

The Manager added, That for the present the Commons will pass by the 7th
Article, and proceed to the 8th, concerning Arbitrary Power over the Estates of
the Kings Subjects; And of that, the last part, only concerning the Lady
Hibbott.

But my Lord of Strafford professing his disability to endure the Toil; E. of
Strafford.
and that he was ready to drop down, in respect of his much sickness and
weakness, and desiring their Lordships to turn the case inward, and to see in
the Closet of their own Hearts, if there be not reason, that being upon his
Life, his Honor, and Children, and all he has, he should not be pressed
further; and setting forth how the rest of the day after his going hence, is
disposed of.

The House was Adjourned till next day.

The Fourth day. Thursday, March 26. 1641.
THE Eighth Article. The Charge.
THat the said Earl of Strafford, upon a Petition of Sir John Gifford Article 8.
Knight, the first day of February, in the said Thirteenth Year of his
Majesty's Reign, without any Legal Process, made a Decree or Order against Adam
Uiscount Loftus of Ely, a Peer of the said Realm of Ireland, and Lord
Chancellor of Ireland, and did cause the said Uiscount to be imprisoned, and
kept close Prisoner, on pretense of Disobedience to the said Decree or Order.

And the said Earl, without any Authority, and contrary to his Commission,
required and commanded the said Lord. Uiscount to yield up unto him the Great
Seal of the Realm of Ireland, which was then in his Custody, by His Majesty's
Command, and imprisoned the said Chancellor for not obeying such his Command.

And without any Legal Proceeding, did in the same Thirteenth Year imprison
George Earl of Kildare, a Peer of Ireland, against Law, thereby to enforce him
to submit his Title to the Manor and Lordship of Castleleigh in the Queens
Country, (being of great yearly value) to the said Earl of Strafford's Will and
Pleasure, and kept him a year Prisoner for the said cause; two months whereof
he kept him close-Prisoner, and refused to enlarge him, notwithstanding His
Majesty's Letters for his Enlargement to the said Earl of Strafford directed.

And upon a Petition exhibited in October, Anno Domini 1635. by Thomas Hibbots,
against Dame Mary Hibbots Widow, to him the said Earl of Strafford; the said
Earl of Strafford recommended the said Petition to the Council Table of
Ireland, where the most part of the Council gave their Uote and Opinion for the
said Lady; but the said Earl finding fault herewith, caused an Order to be
entered against the said Lady, and threatened her, that if she refused to submit
thereunto, he would imprison her, and fine her Five hundred pounds; that if she
continued obstinate, he would continue her Imprisonment, and double her fine
every month; by means whereof she was enforced to relinquish her Estate in the
Lands questioned in the said Petition, which shortly after were conveyed to Sir
Robert Meredith, to the use of the said Earl of Strafford.

And the said Earl in like manner did imprison diverse others of His Majesty's
Subjects, upon pretense of Disobedience to his Orders, Decrees, and other
illegal Command by him made for pretended Debts, Titles of Lands, and other
Causes in an Arbitrary and extrajudicial course, upon Paper-Petitions, to him
preferred, and no Cause legally depending.

The Article was opened by the Manager.
THomas Hibbott's Petition to my Lord of Strafford was read, setting forth;

That Sir Thomas Hibbot's being seized of certain Land, conveyed the same to
the use of himself for life, after death to the Petitioner in Tail, and diverse
Remainders over: That Sir Thomas of the said Lands became seized for life, and
died, the Petitioner being in England, and not knowing of the Conveyance. That
Dame Mary Hibbots, John Hoy her Son, and others, taking advantage of his
absence, combined to get the Deeds, touching the Lands, into their hands. That
they caused one Booky to come into England to persuade the Petitioner to go
into Ireland, and he went accordingly, and was brought to the place of the said
Ladies abode, who pretended that she had an estate in the Lands during life.
That by this means, before he could be advised, he was drawn to contract for
the Lands at half value, and he entered into Bond to perform Agreements. That
the Petitioner was more willing thereunto, in respect of a desire to buy other
Lands of John Martin's, and agreed for it, and was to receive 1800 l. of the
said Lady, which Martin was to receive, and the greatest part paid out at the
time and place appointed. That a Deed-Poll was drawn from him to Seal to, and
acknowledge a Fine, and deliver Security for great part of the purchase-money.
That notwithstanding a Fine acknowledged, and Security given up, the Lady
Hibbots refused to let Martin have the said money, and so the Petitioner
disappointed of the Bargain; and therefore prays, that the Evidences,
Deed-Poll, Fine and Bond might be delivered up, and the Agreement discharged,
being surreptitiously obtained.

The Lord-Deputies Warrant was subscribed and read, bearing Dated 15. October,
1635. viz.

That the Lady Hibbot, etc. should on sight thereof, forthwith deliver the said
Deeds, etc. to Sir Paul Davis, and to appear at Council Table the 20th of this
instant October.

The Manager observed, That the Petition was preferred in the name of Thomas
Hibbots, though, in truth, he had never knowledge of the exhibiting Manager.
of it, and that the first Bargain with the Lady Hibbots was made 22.
September, 1635. the Petition exhibited 15. October, 1635.

The Decree was read, John Hoy attesting it to be a true Copy, wherein the
Petition is recited, and the time; and it is set forth, that the Courts of
Justice were not then open, that the Petitioner being a Stranger, it was not
fit he should long attend. That the Defendants denied the fraud charged: To
which the Plaintiff Replied, the Defendants rejoin, time given to examine
Witnesses, and a day for hearing set down. That at the hearing, it appears the
said Lady brake into her deceased Husbands Study, possessed her self of the Deeds
and Writings. That Booky was sent over (as might be conceived) to circumvent
the Plaintiff. That getting him to her house, she contracted with him for 1600
l. before he knew of the value; that understanding it to be worth 2250 l. he
refused to proceed, and then the Lady raised the price to 2500 l. That by not
payment of a part of it, the bargain with Mr. Martin (the cause of his treaty
with the Lady) was disappointed. That the Lady pretended an Estate for life in
the Lands, when she had only an Estate in part for 99 years, if she lived so
long, and no Estate in other parts thereof, which the Plaintiff knowing not of,
could not suffer a Praecipe quod reddat without her joining, whereas being but
Lessee for 99 years he might.

That it appears by the Deeds that the Plaintiff intended not to sell the
Lands, for that he knew them not, as appeared by Circumstances, which the Order
does more particularly set down. That the criminal part should be reserved, to
be made use of by the King's Council; that for the civil part, the said Bargain
was Ordered to be void. That the Fine not yet recorded, but remaining
unreturned, shall be cancelled, if the Plaintiff shall require it. And the Lady
to have only such Estate as she had before, and no other. And both Parties are
hereunto to yield Obedience, 24. November, 1635. Adam Loftus Chancellor,
Ormond, Valentia, Moore, Dillon, Sherley, Lowther, Wainsford, Manwareing,
Tiringham, George Ratcliffe.

The Manager opened the Nature of the Cause, observed the particular Manager.
parts of the Order, showing, that there was a Conveyance executed, a Fine
levied, though not returned by his Order, no Witnesses examined, though she
denies the Fraud, and Arguments are made to convince her by observation of
circumstances, and so concluded to overthrow a Bargain in October before. That
it is pretended to be when the Courts of Justice were shut, though it was heard
in full Term, 24. November, 1635. the Term there beginning as in England, but
adjourned to the 2. of November, and the said Order was contrary to the Vote of
the Council Board. That when that Bargain was overthrown, the Lands were
purchased by Sir Robert Meredith and others for 3000 l. to the use of the Earl
of Strafford, and he sold them back to the Lady Hibbots for 7000 l. That when
this Petition was preferred, Thomas Hibbots desired to be gone, and have his
money; applies himself to Sir William Parsons for advice, Whether he might not
withdraw his Petition; he sends him to Sir George Ratcliffe, Sir George opposes
it; the Petitioner goes to my Lord of Strafford, and he tells him, Do not
withdraw your Suit, 500 l. more in your purse will do you no hurt.

John Hoy was first produced as a Witness, and sworn.

My Lord of Strafford offered to their Lordships Consideration, that the
Witness is to have the Inheritance of the Lands, and so swears directly for E.
of Strafford.
himself.

But the Manager Answered, That if he shall have the Inheritance, his Manager.
Lordship knows the terms, he has paid 7000 l. for it. And Mr. Maynard added,
that if the Decree were of force against him, it were something, but the Land
is since paid for; and whether the Decree be good or bad, he can neither lose
nor win by it, for he comes in as a Purchasor. Yet my Lord of Strafford pressed
it, that the Witness complained, and seeks Relief against the Decree. But the
Manager Answered, It was for his Mother, not for himself; though upon my Lord
Stewards demand, he confessed he was the Lady Hibbots Son, by a former Husband,
and that the Inheritance is now in him. But my Lord of Strafford observed, if
he can recover 3 or 4000 l. upon his Oath for his Mother, It is well. And their
Lordships admitted him to be examined.

He was asked, What he knew concerning the Agreement between Thomas Hibbots and
the Lady Hibbots, for the Purchase of the Reversion of the said Lands, the
terms and times.

He Answered, with desire to use his Notes, That Thomas Hibbots about 7.
September continued two or three days in Dublin, and then came to Castlington,
continued there a full day, and not a word spoken of the Bargain. That the
Writings, whereby the Estate was settled, were showed him, the said Thomas, and
he read them. That being asked, Whether he would have more satisfaction; He
said, He was satisfied; being demanded whether he would live in Ireland, and
keep his Estate; he said, No, and that he would sell most of it. That the Lady
Hibbots desired she might be preferred in the Sale, having interest by
Jointure, and she conceived it for life; and demanded what he would ask, that
he answered, What she pleased above 2000 l. That being asked, Whether he knew
the Land, he answered, He knew it, for some years before he was in Ireland in
Sir Thomas his life time, and a Servant of his had showed him the Land. That
she offered 1500 l. and he said, For 1600 l. she should have it, and so it was
agreed. That she sent the Deponent up for 100 l. but the said Thomas said, He
would not use so much, and took only 20 s. to bind the Bargain. That on Monday
following they went to Dublin to draw up Articles to perfect the Bargain, and
two or three days were spent about it. That he the Deponent tendered the
Articles, and he the said Thomas excepted against the general Warranty, which
he desired might be amended, and then he would perfect them, and it was amended
accordingly. That in the interim, the day before Sir Robert Meredith went to
him, and treated with him, offering, if he would break off, he the said Sir
Robert would save him harmless, as Thomas Hibbots told him the Deponent. That
thereupon Thomas Hibbots flies off, and told him the Deponent Sir Robert
Meredith offered him 2250 l. That thereupon he the Deponent left the Town, and
went to his Mother, and informed her of it.

That before the breach of the Bargain, he the Deponent procured a Subpaena, to
sue the said Thomas thereupon, and that the said Lady coming to Town with the
Deponent, the said Thomas came to her, and being asked the reason, why he would
break the Bargain, he answered, Sir Robert Meredith had offered so much, and
she answering, That she would not give an under-value, because she would not
have another get the Reversion. He Replied, That for 2500 l. she might have it,
which she was content to give; and the Agreement was made. That the said Thomas
went immediately to Sir Robert Meredith to give him an Answer, and satisfied
him; That he the Deponent met Sir Robert Meredith coming out of his Lodging,
and challenged him of this unneighborly courtesy, who said, it is true, he was
about it, but the Lady Hibbots had bid more than he, and wished her much joy of
it.

That the next day the Articles for the 1600 l. were perfected, and a Bond
given for 900 l. to make it up the Sum of 2500 l. and this to be paid in
England (for there was no motion about Land in England from the said Thomas.)
That two days after he the said Thomas went to John Martin, who had a little
Estate, and treated for the Estate, for which he was to give him 1900 l. That
the said Thomas came back to Dublin, and tells the Deponent of it, who had
taken a course to exchange 2000 l. for him, and was to have near 80 l. for
exchange of it. That notwithstanding, on Mr. Hibbots return, he the Deponent
was content he should have it paid there.

That soon after Thomas Hibbots acknowledged a Fine, perfected a Feoffment, and
so passed all the Estate that could be in himself. But the Lady thought it
could not be secure without a Recovery; for the said Thomas had but one Son,
who had no Son, and the life of the man is uncertain; yet before that was
desired, Thomas Hibbots saying Mr. Martin was willing to receive the money; he
the Deponent appointed a day for receiving of it, and paid Mr. Martin 1800 l.
giving Bond for payment of 100 l. 16. November, this being 9th of October. That
he delivered Mr. Hibbots 60 l. and procured a Bill of Exchange to be paid at
Nesson on sight 40 l. That he took up the 900 l. Bond, entered into by his
Mother, and gave a Bond for payment of 500 l. at Chester a day following. That
the money being sealed up by Mr. Martin, it was left there that night, and the
next day they were to go to the Lady to enquire if they had sufficient
Security, and went accordingly, and carried the Deeds along with them. That the
Ladies Council told her, a Recovery was necessary, which might be done the
first day of the Term. That he the Deponent desired Mr. Hibbots to stay till
the Term, and offered to bear his Charges, but he would not, Winter growing on,
and said plainly, He would not stay. That thereupon he the Deponent served him
with a Writ he had prepared on the first Bargain. That immediately the said
Thomas goes away to Mr. Sambridge, and informed him, that he had been often
with him the Deponent to break the Bargain, and now is served with a Writ, and
therefore prayed him to draw a Petition to my Lord-Deputy, which was drawn
accordingly. To which the Lady and Deponent had time to Answer till Thursday:
That the time was short, and there was a mistake in the Answer; for it was set
forth that the Lady had an Estate for life, whereas she had an Estate but for
99 years, if she lived so long. That on this mistake discovered, my Lord-Deputy
called for the Constable of the Castle, and commanded the Clerk of the Council
to draw a Warrant to commit their Council, till the Gentleman fell on his
knees, and openly asked forgiveness. That then they could hardly get Council to
plead: That there was a Reply and Rejoinder. And in the interim Mr. Hibbots
came to him the Deponent, went to the Master of the Wards, and desired to be
dismissed. That Sir George Ratcliffe appointed them to attend him, which they
did. That Sir George took Mr. Hibbots with him, and on Sunday following the
Lord-Deputy being informed of Hibbots consent, on Monday he sent for Hibbots,
and wishes him to go on with the Suit, and asked him, What hurt it would do him
to carry 500 l. more to England. The next day being Tuesday, there was no
Witnesses examined, though a time was appointed to examine them; for the Clerk
of the Council was busy, and could not attend it. That they desired Hibbots
might be examined, and they would be bound by his Oath, and his Lordship
granted a Warrant for it; and Mr. Hibbots was almost examined, for on a
Council-day the Order was given to the Deponent. But that very Afternoon my
Lord-Deputy came to the Council Board, and as soon as he was sat, spoke to
this effect; Here is a business concerning my Lady Hibbots, prosecuted with a
great deal of Violence that ever I knew, and an Order procured for the
Examination of the Plaintiff; but if any such Order be, or Examination taken, I
will have it damned; and this is as much as he can speak.

Being asked, Whether my Lord of Strafford did not threaten my Lady Hibbots
with Imprisonment, till she performed the Order.

He Answered, That on the first of January, after the Decree, my Lord-Deputy
sent to the Lady Hibbots house, to require her and him the Deponent to attend
him, which they did accordingly, and were called into his Chamber, where was
Mr. Sambridge of Council with Mr. Hibbots, a Sister of the Deponents, he the
Deponent, and some others. That my Lord-Deputy asked them, Why they would not
perfect the Re-assurance according to the Order, to which the Deponent offered
some Exceptions, drawn up by the Council, alleging, that they could not
possibly perform the words of the Order, and that they might perform them as
near as might be; they showed a course that might be observed, but my
Lord-Deputy said, He would not be cavil'd withal, he would have the Order of
the Board obeyed; and since they juggle thus, his Lordship said, He would have
the Orders drawn up, and tendered, and that if they will not perform them, he
will commit them to the Castle, where they shall lie a month, at that months
end he will send for them to the Council Board, and tender them again, and if
they would not perform them, he will Fine them 500 l. and another months
Imprisonment, and then tender them again, and if they will not perform then, he
will Fine them 1000 l. and another months Imprisonment, and so from time to
time, till they had performed the Orders of the Board.

Being asked, Whether these Lands were not purchased in the Name of Sir Robert
Meredith, and others, and to whose use?

He Answered, That he has the Deeds of the Land himself, and what the Dates
are he does not remember. But he knows the Lands were purchased in the Name of
Sir Robert Meredith and others, but he cannot speak to whose use, but from Sir
Robert Meredith's own mouth, for when he the Deponent paid 7000 l. to him, he
the Deponent was telling him the great advantage he made by this Bargain. In
truth, says Sir Robert, the advantage is nothing to me, I receive it with one
hand, and carry to the Castle with the other. That the beginning of December
last Sir Robert sent for this Deponent, and told him, He heard he was coming
over to complain of such a matter, but desired him the Deponent not to trouble
him, for he protested seriously, he had nothing to do with the business, his
Name was only used as Sir Philip Persivals and Sir Robert Loftus, it was merely
to my Lord Lieutenants use.

The Manager observed, That when their Lordships have heard this, they Manager.
will not wonder at the next Witness they shall produce, that a Supreme Judge
should persuade to continue a Suit, which he would have withdrawn; and that
notwithstanding the major part of the Board was against the Petitioner* yet the
Order was drawn for the Petitioner.

Mr. Hoy being asked to the matter of the Vote.

He said, He was withdrawn when they gave their Vote, but a noble Mr. Hoy a
Witness.
Member of the Board came to his Mother to Supper, and named to him the
Deponent every man that Voted for and against her, that he writ down their
Names at that time, and there were twelve Votes for her, and nine against her;
that he the Deponent was afterward informed by another then at Board, that the
major part of the Board went for his Mother.

Thomas Hibbots was sworn, and being asked, Whether there was not a Thomas
Hibbots a Witness.
Petition preferred to the Lord Lieutenant there for breaking off the Bargain
between himself and the Lady Hibbots, and answered before he knew of it.

He Answered, having the Questions dictated by the Clerk, being an old deaf
man: That he caused a Petition to be drawn, but not this; that this Petition he
knew nothing at all of; that he wished a Petition to be drawn by Mr. Sambridge,
but it was only that he might have his money, and go into his Country.

Being asked, Whether, after the Petition drawn and answered, he did go to Sir
William Parsons, and desired to be quit of the Suit, and that he went thereupon
to Sir George Ratcliffe, and what passed?

He Answered, He sent to Sir William Parsons, and he sent him to Sir George
Ratcliffe, and Sir George Ratcliffe said, He should not be dismissed from the
Board.

Being asked, Whether my Lord of Strafford did not send for him, and tell him
500 l. more in his purse would do him no harm.

He Answered, It is true, my Lord wished him to go on with his Suit at the
Board, and that no man in Ireland should do him wrong, and it would do him no
harm to carry over 500 l. more.

Being asked, What Sir Robert Meredith said to him.

He Answered, That he would bring all the Writings to him the Deponent.

Being asked on my Lord of Strafford's Motion, what Fees he laid out.

He Answered, 40 l. to Mr. Sambridge; and the Manager observed, he was
preferred presently after the Bargain was executed.

Being asked, What words were used to the Lady Hibbots.

He Answered, That my Lord-Deputy asked, Will you not perform the Order; If not
by such a day, I will send you to the Castle, and there you shall lie a month,
and at the months end you shall be brought to the Board, and have 500 l. laid
on your head, and at another months end 1000 l. more Fine, and you shall go
back to the place again, and after that a third months Imprisonment, and your
Fine increased; your Estate I know is very great, and if it were ten times
bigger than it is, I will make it crack.

To prove that the major part of the Board was against the Plaintiff.
The Lord Mountnorris was asked, Whether he was present at the Council Table
Lord Mountnorris a Witness.
at that time when this Cause was agitated, and which way the major part of the
Votes went at that time.

He Answered, He was there present, and the major Vote went for the Lady, and
there were 12 or 11, he cannot possibly say which (though he took it then
perfectly into memory) on one side, and nine on the other side.

The Earl of Cork asked to the same purpose. Earl of Cork a Witness.


He first made an humble Suit to their Lordships, that he might not be produced
as a Witness against the Prisoner. His Reason is, That when he has delivered a
true Testimony, my Lord of Strafford presently pursues him, and lays
Imputations and scorns upon him; and therefore humbly prayed to be spared, else
that he might have liberty to justify himself.

Whence the Manager observed, What it is to fall on Witnesses persons
extravagantly, when they produce them, and therefore desired my Lord Manager.
of Strafford might forbear it, being a great disheartening to Witnesses.

My Lord of Cork added, That my Lord of Strafford accused him to have a
Pardon, whereas he knows he has none. That he is an honest man, and wishes my
Lord of Strafford could leave the Kingdom with as much Reputation as himself
had left it. And for the matter demanded, his Lordship said, He was at the
hearing of the Cause, and Voted against the Plaintiff; but whether the major
part Voted against him or no, he knows not.

Being asked, What words my Lord of Strafford said about making a party in that
Cause.

He Answered, That he thinks he spoke these words, He did not think there would
have been a party against him, for if he had, he would not have brought it to
that Table, for the Petition was preferred to himself.

Sir Adam Lofius being asked, What Sir Robert Meredith told him of his part in
the Bargain.

He Answered, That he heard him say, He had no Title or Interest in it, but
only his name used in trust, but for whom he did not declare, and that was all
he said to him.

The Manager added, That they have another Witness to prove that of the
majority of the Vote, my Lord of Ely, but he is sick. Manager.


And so the Manager summed up the Evidence, and observed it to be something,
that my Lord of Strafford should pitch upon the very sum of 500 l. that Mr.
Hibbots had by way of increase. That the Order was made with an examination of
Witnesses, on pretense of Fraud, where the Lady denied it on Oath, and that
though it was so great a fraud in the Lady to procure a Reversion for 2500 l.
which was sold for 3000 l. and afterward re-sold to the Lady for 7000 l. and
so concluded that it is an Arbitrary Government, drawn into my Lord of
Strafford's own breast, and the Inheritance of a great Estate taken from the
King's Subject without Rule of Law, there being a Fine levied, but being not
returned (as the Commissioners are bound to retorn it) he made an Order it
should not be returned, and a Lady threatened with doubling and trebling the
Fine, and one of the Feoffees, Sir Robert Meredith, confesses it was for my
Lord of Strafford. And to prove that, Sir Philip Persival acknowledged so much.

Mr. Fitzgarret was Interrogated, What Sir Philip Persival said, who thereupon
answered, That Sir Philip had often told him, the Purchase was to the use of my
Lord-Deputy, now Earl of Strafford. That he has had occasion of Conference
with him about the Estate, and has sometimes discoursed with him concerning
the Estate wherein his name was used. That he the Deponent might understand how
far it concerned him, telling him, that the Estate would one day be questioned.
And Sir Philip protested, he never knew of this business till his name was put
into it, and he came to Seal the Writings, and that it was to the use of my
Lord-Deputy.

Some Questions arising about the number of Hands to the Order, being in all 14.

The Manager observed, That more have subscribed than those that gave Manager.
their Vote, being a Cause introduced by my Lord of Strafford. That all
subscribed the Orders, as well those against them, as those for them, and
Appealed therein to my Lord of Cork. The Course being, when an Order is made,
to bring it to the Table another day, and take all the Hands of them present;
and he added, That their Lordships that are Counselors know that Course to be
used here.

My Lord of Cork being asked to that Point. Lord Cork a Witness.


Answered, That he knows nothing of it.

The Lord Primate of Ireland his Examination was offered, and was admitted Lord
Primate a Witness.
accordingly to be read, being taken 30. March, 1641.

To the fourth Inter. That when the Major part of the Council Board go one way,
and the Minor part another way; when the Order is drawn up, the Minor part
Signs it as well as the Major. The Lord-Deputy alleging it to be the practice
of the Council of England, and he himself had done it; but before my Lord of
Strafford's coming he never knew it to be so.

Lord Renula being asked to the same Point. Lord Renula a Witness.


Answered, That he does not remember that Order to be of force there till of
late years, and that my Lord of Strafford has declared to them that it is the
practice of England, and when the Major part does subscribe, though others be
of different Opinions, they are involved in it, and must subscribe.

The Lord Savil desired he might be asked, Whether he ever knew, that when the
Major part did Vote against an Order, they did subscribe it.

The Manager answered, That that is their grief; and though there be no such
Course, yet if it concern my Lord of Strafford, he will make it a Manager.
course.

Lord Renula being asked, Whether he were present at the Council Table when
this Vote was given, and what he heard concerning the Lord Renula a Witness.
Vote.

He Answered, That he was not there, and he heard very little of it; that the
most he heard of it, was since the coming of this Gentleman, Mr. Hoy, into
England; and that to his best remembrance he heard Sir William Parsons, now
Lord Chief Justice, say, He was informed the Major Vote went against Sir Robert
Meredith.

And so the Manager concluded the Charge as to the Eighth Article, saying, That
here is a Proceeding for a Freehold, contrary to the Fundamental Laws of the
Kingdom, contrary to the Instructions in the manner and measure as their
Lordships had heard.

My Lord of Strafford, after some time given for the re-collecting of his
Notes, began his Reply in substance as follows:
I will, with your Lordships noble permission, justify my self against E. of
Strafford.
the Charge of High Treason exhibited against me.

Having been blamed by the Gentlemen at the Bar for going to matters not
pertinent, I shall henceforth keep my self to that within the Charge, trusting
that the things wherewith I am not Charged, shall not dwell with your Lordships
to my prejudice, but that your Lordships will in your Nobleness and Justice
reserve to your selves, till in its proper place and kind, I shall Answer
thereunto, conceiving that I am to Answer only to Treason, not to Misdemeanor.

The Charge opened, is a Decree given by the Deputy and Council of Ireland, to
the subversion of the Fundamental Laws, and to the bringing in of an Arbitrary
and Tyrannical Government.

Whether it be so or no, or whether by any manner of Construction it can be
brought as an Argument to convince me of High Treason, I conceive I am to
Answer.

Whether the Decree be in it self just or unjust, is not the question, but will
come clearly to your Lordships judgments upon the Petition of the party when
she shall sue for her Right. And when it comes to be Charged upon me as a
Misdemeanor, I shall give such an Answer as befits me.

There is nothing in this Charge that can be interpreted Treason, for it is but
the exercising of a Jurisdiction in the Deputy, which he has Commission for
from His Majesty; and the enlarging of a Jurisdiction in a Judge, I conceive, is
not Treason.

The Proofs formerly offered to prove the use and practice of the Deputies
(which I need not repeat, your Lordships being Persons of great Wisdom, and
once said, always said,) come to my help and assistance in my Charge, the
question being upon the same Jurisdiction only, and that in one particular
Circumstance I conceive my self stronger in this Cause than in that of my Lord
Mountnorris. This Case being of a Petition preferred to me, but referred by me
to be heard before the Council Board; and the Witnesses say, That though they
did not know nor remember, that the Deputy himself heard Causes alone, yet it
was frequent for the Deputy to receive Petitions, and refer them to the Board.
So that I conceive I have exercised or done nothing, but according to the
Practice and Customs of that Kingdom, and consequently cannot be made use of as
an Argument that I subvert the Fundamental Laws, or bring in Arbitrary or
Tyrannical Government, when I step in the paths of my Predecessors, and the
practice of other men in the like Cases. And that I say as to this Point of
Jurisdiction.

The next Point I am Charged with is, That the most part of the Council Board
Voted against it; whereas I say in my Answer, the most part Voted for it, and
on that I most humbly insist still, and shall make it clearly appear to be so.

For Proof on the other Side, they have only my Lord Mountnorris his Testimony,
who says, They had 12 against the Order, and nine for it. And Mr. Hoy says,
That an Honorable Person that night told him, 12 were for him and nine against
him; so it must all be one man, and one Testimony.

To prove the Major part was for the Decree, there was the Order signed under
the Clerk of the Council, a sworn Minister, who could not draw it up without
the plurality of Voices, being against the constant practice of the Board to do
otherwise.

That this was the practice, I desire my Lord Primate's Examination may be read
to the second, third, fourth, fifth and sixth Interrogatories.

Those his Examinations which were taken in the presence of the Peers and
Commons, taken this morning, being admitted to be read, and the former taken in
the absence of the Members of the Commons House, being declared to be
suppressed. The said Examinations were read accordingly.

2. To the Second, he knows the use was to prefer Petitions to all the Chief
Governors that have been within these fifty years last, but what has been
thereupon he cannot say. This my Lord of Strafford observed is to the
Jurisdiction.

3. It is the received practice of that Board, that the Clerk of the Council,
being a sworn Minister, should draw up the Opinions according to the Major part
of the Board.

4. That he has not known the Earl of Strafford to have at any time urged or
pressed any Member of the Board contrary to his own Opinion.

5. That he has heard him diverse times profess he had but a single Voice, and
that Matters were to pass according to the major part of the Voices of the
Board.

Whence my Lord of Strafford observed, That the Clerk of the Council, being a
sworn Officer, is perjured, else the greater part of the Board was against the
Lady Hibbots.

Robert Lord Dillon being asked concerning the use of the Board in the Clerk of
the Councils drawing up Orders, according to the major Lord Dillon a Witness.
part of the Votes, and what he had observed in this particular Case.

He Answered, That the Clerk of the Council is a sworn Minister of His Majesty,
and by duty of his Place is to take notice of the Votes, and accordingly to
draw up the rough draughts of Orders, and to present them to the Board, to see
whether they be to the sense of the major part of the Votes. That he was
present at the Council Board when this Cause was Voted, but cannot say, upon
his knowledge, it was drawn up according to the major part of the Voices at the
Board, for he counted not the Votes; but that was an inducement to him to
believe so, because the Clerk of the Council drew it up so; and it is the Order
of the Board, when the major part Votes, those that dissent, in regard their
Votes are involved, do commonly Sign, and that he had seen some Sign to the
Order which had given Vote against the Decree.

Being asked severally how his Vote passed in this Order, and whether the major
part did not Vote it, whether my Lord of Strafford did not always submit his
Opinion to the major part, and whether in a Case that concerned my Lord Renula,
there were eight at the Board, and four went one way, and four another, that my
Lord of Strafford would not overruled it, but called in another, and desired
the whole business might be referred to him; whether before my Lord of
Strafford's restraint, this Order was questioned on this Point for want of the
major part of Voices, and whether at the signing of it, or any time after, he
heard any Councellor except against the Order.

His Lorship Answered, That he gave his Vote for the Decree, that he reckoned
not the Votes, but conceives the major part were for it; that he remembers not
my Lord urging any man to Vote contrary to his Opinion, or overruled it, but
was content to let it go: That he remembers not the contrary, but my Lord
submitted to the major part of the Votes: That in the business betwixt my Lord
Renula Plaintiff and one Ormesby, he remembers there were but eight men at the
Board, whereof my Lord-Deputy made one, and four fell on one side, and four on
the other, and my Lord Renula was then present, as he takes it, though
withdrawn at the instant, and for ought he knows my Lord Renula can say
something to it. That when my Lord gave his Vote, he said, He would not take
the privilege of casting the Cause, but left it to an absent Counselor, and
which way soever he inclined, the Cause should go; and afterward that
Councellor did Vote against the Opinion of my Lord-Deputy, and the Order was
drawn up so: That he never heard of any Complaint of the Order, nor heard of
the business, till he came to the Board: That he does not remember any
Exception taken at the time of the signing the Order, nor at any time after.

Sir Philip Manwareing being asked concerning the matter of the major Sir
Philip Manwareing a Witness.
part.

Answered, That he was present at the Council Table, and his Vote went for the
Decree, and he conceives the major part of the Table did so too, he is very
confident of it; and he does the rather believe it, because he never knew the
contrary practice at that Board in any Case; besides, he knows the Clerk of the
Council is a very faithful and careful Servant, being a sworn Officer; and it
is the duty of his Place to draw up Orders according to the major part of the
Voices, and that no member of the Board took Exception at the signing of this
Order that he knows.

For the matter of Imprisoning the Lady, my Lord of Strafford offered, That he
hopes it is no great offense for the Deputy of Ireland to say as much to a
Subject that is bound to perform the Order of the Board, and does not; I ought
not (under favor,) favor lets in that Case; for if Obedience be not had, it
is to no purpose Orders should be made.

For the words concerning Fining of her, I offer to your Lordships
Confideration, that one that gives Testimony thereof is Mr. Hoy, who is a party
interessed, and to whom the benefit will accrue of whatsoever shall be
recovered; and that your Lordships may remember what a ready story he told, and
wronged his memory, to desire to speak out of his Notes, for I never heard one
speak more readily, and conceive he is not in this particular so entire a
Witness to convince me. That the other Witness is Mr. Hybbots himself, a weak
old man, that has not Judgment sufficient, but says forward and backward, and
may be taken any way: Therefore his Testimony is not so strong and binding.
That suppose I had said the words, they cannot make a Treason; Fining in cases
of Contempts being usual in Chancery here, to enforce men to conform to
Decrees. However, I stand not charged with it; and when it comes in its proper
place and time, I trust I shall make a fair and just Answer in it.

The last thing in the Charge, is the conveying of the Lands to Sir Robert
Meredith, and others, to my use, which I deny in my Answer, and under favor,
deny it still.

For the Witnesses offered,

I except against Mr. Hoy, as I must, under favor, as often as I mention it.

That the words spoken by Sir Robert Meredith, is only his saying, and offered
here as a Report; and when Sir Robert speaks for himself, I believe he will say
another thing.

That the Testimony of Mr. Fitzgarrett, is but what Sir Philip Percival said;
and when Sir Philip comes to be examined himself, I trust Your Lordships will
find it otherwise, I having never spoke to Sir Philip in all my life, touching
the business.

When my Lady Hybbotts complains of the Injustice of the Decree, before Your
Lordships, I hope I shall clear it in its proper place, but in the mean time it
is no part of my Charge; and I dare say they would not offer such a thing in
Charge, to my Lord Keeper, or my Lord Chief Justice; or if they should offer
it, they know they should have a rebuke; for Lawyers must keep within the
limits of the Charge; and therefore in this particular, I may reserve my self,
without prejudice in Your Lordships Opinions, till it comes to its proper
place; where I hope I shall justify my Carriage to be Honest and Faithful,
according to the Trust reposed in me.

His Lordship having finished his Defense, the Manager began his Reply
thereunto, in substance as follows.

That he shall not need to labor much in making a Replication, little The
Managers Reply.
being answered to the Charge, which he recited and opened.

That his Lordships Proceedings have in this matter been contrary to Law, they
must rest on their Lordships memory, the Act of Parliament cited before, the
Instructions, and the Proclamation, the Exercise of a Jurisdiction on the
Estate of a Lady, without the least color of Jurisdiction; whereas if there
had been any, it would have been heard of.

That his Lordship answers nothing to his sending for the party Petitioning,
bidding him go on with the Suit; and Prophesying, that he might have 500 l.
more: That perhaps it is not material, whether the Order were just or unjust;
and my Lord of Strafford will answer only to the Jurisdiction. But we observe,
that yesterday he made a great flourish to the justness of a Decree, let the
Jurisdiction be what it will; and when he cannot justify that, then he
declines it.

That my Lord his Pulse is still beating, that this is no Treason, yet it is an
Article to prove and conduce to the General Charge, of subverting the Laws; and
though he pretends that these Circumstances, of purchasing the Lands to his own
use, and speaking to the party to proceed, and his Threats, are not to the
purpose; yet under favor these, and his saying, when he perceived a great part
to Vote against him, (though not the major part, as he says) that he could have
kept it in his own hands, do come home to the point, That he has exercised an
Arbitrary Power, specially when it is for his own benefit.

His pretense, that this Cause was heard before the Lords of the Council, and
therein differs from that of my Lord Mountnorris, is no answer at all; for the
Lords of the Council have nothing to do in matters of Freehold or Inheritance,
when it concerns not Plantation, or the Church, or is specially recommended.

That they concur with my Lord Primates Examination, that the Clerk of the
Council should draw up Orders according to the major part of the Votes; but
what he has done in this case, they know not; and how far a Deputy might
prevail with the Clerk of the Council, they submit: And there is an express
proof of one of the Counselors, that there was 11. or 12. against the Order,
and nine for it.

And whereas it is said, he is but a single Witness, my Lord of Cork says,
though he remembers not which way the major voice went, yet he remembers very
well my Lord Deputy expressed those words, concerning the making of a Party;
which shows, that something was done that did not agree with his will: And
another Witness says, that Sir William Parsons told him, that the major Vote
was against the Order.

And whereas my Lord Strafford pretends, that the Privy-Counsellor that told
Mr. Hoy, there were more Voices for his Mother than against her, must be my
Lord Mountnorris, That is denied; and we desire Mr. Hoy may in that point
explain himself.

He has called Sir Philip Maynwaring, and others, that would have testified
the truth to his advantage; but not one of them expresses any thing to their
knowledge, but as they believe it; because by the Duty of his place, the Clerk
of the Council ought to have drawn it up according to the Votes.

The Threats to Imprison and Fine the Lady; and the kind of Threats are proved
by two Witnesses, with this addition by one, That he would crack her Estate;
which show a great fervency in my Lord of Strafford to have the Order
performed; and why should he be so earnest, if he had not had some game to play
afterward.

If the Conveyance had not been to his own use, my Lord of Strafford would have
provided his Testimony; It being proved in whose name it was, and both they
affirm it to be for the use of my Lord of Strafford.

Mr. Hoy being asked, whether the Counselor who told him how the Votes passed,
was my Lord Mountnorris or no;

He Answered, That Sir James Erskyn, since dead, gave him a Note of the Names:
And that the Lord Archbishop of Dublin told him presently after, the Vote went
on his Mothers side.

Mr. Palmer observed, That the Lord of Strafford draws an Argument, that
because there was no complaint of the Order, therefore there was no mistake;
and desired Mr. Hoy might be asked, why he made no complaint.

Mr. Hoy being accordingly asked;

Answered, That he was ready to come for England, and to take Ship, and that
Evening he went to the Master of the Court of Wards, to take his leave of him,
and to acquaint him with his going. That Sir Paul Davis being there, he and the
Master of the Wards, desired him to walk into the Study, and persuaded him
against his going, telling him of my Lord Deputies great Power; and that he
might as well run his head against a Rock, as have any Remedy against my Lord
Strafford, as the times go now; and this was very soon after the Decree, and as
he conceives, between it and Christmas following.

Being asked, whether Sir Paul Davis showed him the Order, and whether it was
interlined; and by whose hand:

He Answered, That he was at the Clerk of the Council to have got a Copy of the
Order, and saw the Order interlined with a strange hand; and asking whose it
was, Sir Paul told him, it was my Lord Deputies.

Here my Lord of Strafford observed, that it is very ordinary for the E. of
Strafford.
Clerk of the Council to bring Orders to the Deputy, who if he sees cause,
mends them.

Sir Dillon being asked, whether any that Voted in my Lady Hybbots Case, did
tell him which way the major part of the Votes in my Lady Hybbots Case went;

He Answered, That a little before his coming out of Ireland, speaking of the
Charge against my Lord of Strafford, and particularly of this Cause, one or two
of the Privy Council said publicly, The major part of the Council was for my
Lady Hybbots.

To this last part my Lord of Strafford answered, with a desire that the E. of
Strafford.
Witness might be asked, whether Justice Parsons be not Father-in-Law to Mr.
Hoy; And that this was since his my Lord of Straffords questioning.

And so the 8th Article was concluded, being his Exercise of an Arbitrary Power
over the Estates of His Majesty's Subjects; though they have diverse other
Instances, as in the Case of the Earl of Ely, and my Lord of Killdare, the
prime Earl of that Kingdom.

THE Ninth Article. The Charge.
THat the said Earl of Strafford, the sixteenth day of February, in the Twelfth
year of His Majesty's Reign, assuming to himself a Article 9.
Power above, and against Law, took upon him by a general Warrant under his
hand, to give Power to the Lord Bishop of Down and Connor, his Chancellor, or
Chancellors, and their several Officers thereto to be appointed, to Attach and
Arrest the Bodies of all such of the meaner and poorer sort, who after
citation, should either refuse to appear before them, or appearing, should
omit, or deny to perform, or undergo all Lawful Decrees, Sentences and Orders,
issued, imposed, or given out against them, and them to Commit, and keep in the
next Goal, until they should either perform such Sentences, or put in
sufficient Bail, to show some reason before the Council Table, of such their
contempt and neglect; and the said Earl, the day and year last mentioned,
signed and issued a Warrant to that effect; and made the like Warrants to
several other Bishops, and their Chancellors, in the said Realm of Ireland, to
the same effect.

MR. Glyn opened the Ninth Article, charging my Lord of Strafford with assuming
of a Power above Law, in granting of a general Warrant to the Bishop of Down
and Conner, to attach such persons of the meaner sort as should not appear on
their Citation, to apprehend their Bodies, and bring them before the Council;
an Act so high, that higher could not be, unless it extended to Life, as my
Lord Mountnorris his Case; to grant a Warrant at pleasure contrary to Law, to
apprehend the Bodies of His Majesty's Subjects, that live under the protection
of the Law; which if it be made good, will be of great might, and prove the
Charge fully.

A Copy of the Warrant being produced, my Lord of Strafford excepted against
it, as not to be read, by the proceedings of the Court, being not the Original.

To which the Council at the Bar answered, That that is the way to shelter any
Crime, if none but the Original Warrants in such Cases should be admitted; it
being no Record that they may repair to it. And their Lordships being desired
that a Witness might be heard, what he can say for the attesting of it; after
which, it will be proper for their Lordships to judge of the Copy.

Sir James Mountgomery Sworn, and asked whether he saw the Original Sir Ia.
Montgomery a Witness.
Warrant; and whether this be a true Copy.

He Answered, He can depose, that he has seen the Original Warrant, and read
it; and that the Bishop of Derry did show it himself. That this Copy, he
believes, both in matter and words, to be a true Copy; for he has another Copy
agreeing with this; and that he knows this Warrant has been put in Execution
many times; and he himself has been charged to assist them that have put it in
Execution, by virtue of this Warrant.

Thereupon the Warrant was read; being in effect as follows.

By the Lord Deputy.
FOrasmuch as We have been informed by the Right Reverend Father in God the
Lord Bishop of Down and Conner, that the most frequent Offenses against God,
and the greatest Contempts against the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, are
Committed by the meaner and poorer sort of People in that Diocese; whose
faults, for the most part, escape unpunished, by reason the Writ de
Excommunicato Capiendo, is so long before it can be sued forth, and executed on
them, that they remove to other parts, and cannot be found; or if they be
taken, their Poverty is such, that they cannot satisfy the Sheriff, and other
Officers Fees, due for taking them on that Writ; whereby the Officers become
negligent, and backward of doing their Duties. We therefore desiring the
suppression of Sin, and Reformation of Manners, have thought fit to strengthen
the Ecclesiastical Authority of the said Right Reverend Father in God, the Lord
Bishop of Down and Conner, with our Secular Power, and do therefore hereby
give Power and Authority to the said Lord Bishop, his Chancellor or
Chancellors, by their several Officers by them to be appointed, to Arrest and
Attach the Bodies of all such of the meaner and poorer sort, that after
Citation, shall refuse to appear before them, or appearing, shall omit or deny
to perform and undergo all Lawful Decrees, Sentences and Orders, issued,
imposed, and given out against them, and them so Arrested to Commit, and keep
in the next Goal, till they shall perform such Sentences, or put in sufficient
Bond, to show some reasons before the Council Table of such their Contempts,
etc. willing all Justices of the Peace, etc. in that Diocese, to be Aiding,
etc. as they, etc. Given, etc. Febr. 16. 1636.

Tho. Little.

Mr. Glyn opened the several parts of the Warrant, and offered, that it was
expressly against Law, putting their Lordships in mind of the former words, That
he would make an Act of State equal to an Act of Parliament: But now he is
better than his word; for he will make an Act of State higher than an Act of
Parliament: For whereas by the Law, no Subject of the Kings, in any
Ecclesiastical Court, may be taken till he be cited; and then on disobedience,
he is Excommunicated; and on Excommunication, there is a Writ called, Capias
Excommunicatum, by virtue of which he is apprehended. Now my Lord of Strafford
issues a Warrant to take him, if he appear not on Citation, breaking through
the Law, and making no matter of that, but he will make a Law that extends to
the Liberty of the Subject.

And if this had never been put in Execution, it had been all one to the
purpose of the Commons; for this shows how, being entrusted with the Kings Law
in Ireland, he discharges that Trust. But for Execution, they desired Witnesses
might be heard.

Sir James Mountgomery being asked, how this Warrant was Executed; and the
Kings Subjects used under color of his Authority:

He Answered, That he has seen several Warrants that have issued under the
Hand of the Bishop of Downe's Chancellor, sometimes to the Constables,
sometimes to his own Apparitors, with their Assistance for to apprehend the
persons under-named; That there have sometimes twenty, sometimes thirty,
sometimes more, sometimes less names, been put in the Warrant. That he has
known them executed with great cruelty, sometimes wounding, beating,
imprisoning them.

Being asked on my Lord of Straffords motion, how long since he knew any thing
done upon that Warrant:

He Answered, Since the time of the Warrant granted; and he thinks the Warrant
bears date February 1636. till of late, much about this time Twelvemonth,
which was the last time he was charged himself, to be assistant to the
Execution of it. That he heard the Bishop of Derry had taken up the Warrants in
Summer last, on many and frequent Complaints that had come; and had withdrawn
it from the Bishop of Down about July last.

The Manager closed this Article, observing, that my Lord of Strafford Manager.
not only takes this Power, but gives it over to others; and see how they do
execute it over the Kings Subjects; Knights, and men of Eminency must be called
to assist; and therefore it was high time to accuse my Lord of Strafford of
subverting the Laws of Ireland.

And so expected his Lordships Answer.

My Lord of Strafford began his Defense, in effect as follows.
Such Warrants have been usually granted to the Bishops of Ireland, in times of
all former Deputies. E. of Strafford.


But not satisfied with the convenience thereof, I refused to give such
Warrants generally, as was formerly used.

Being informed that diverse in the Bishopric of Down gave not fitting
Obedience, I gave this Warrant, being the only Warrant of this kind that I
granted; and hearing complaints of the Execution of it, I called it in again.

They have produced only a Copy of the Original Warrant, and what words may be
omitted that is in the Original, God knows; and I think, under favor, it would
not be an Evidence at the King's Bench Bar.

And this stands with the practice of former Deputies, to grant such Warrants
of Assistance to the Bishops.

The Lord Primate of Ireland, his Examination read.

To the 7th Interrogatory, That he remembers his immediate Predecessor in the
Bishopric of Mead told him, he had a Warrant of Assistance from the then Lord
Deputy, who was either the Lord Chichester, or the Lord Grandison; That the
Recusants in his Diocese desired it might be so, for the saving of those
Charges which would come on them by the Writs de Excommunicat' Capiendo.

Robert Lord Dillon, being asked whether he had known formerly such Warrants to
be granted, and by whom.

He Answered, He has heard Writs of Assistance have been granted by former
Deputies, but he remembers not that ever he saw any.

Mr. Tho. Little being asked, whether this Warrant was granted according to
former Presidents:

He Answered, That he has seen one of the Original Warrants before my Lords
coming there; and that it was brought to him to draw another by; And going to
instance in some Copies seen in my Lord of Faulklands Book of Entries,

The Manager excepted against him, for meddling with a Book formerly Manager.
overruled.

Mr. Little proceeds, That he has seen an Original Warrant by which this was
drawn, and it was under my Lord of Faulkland's hand; and this was made
according to that pattern.

Being asked, whether my Lord of Strafford did not restrain, and give direction
to him not to issue any other Warrant of that nature:

He Answered, There was no more made but this, though diverse required them, my
Lord forbidding him at all times afterward.

My Lord of Strafford offered his humble request to their Lordships, that E. of
Strafford.
in all things that concern the Irish Charge, they will please to remember, it
was not possible for him to procure any Witnesses in this short time of his
Trial, having not liberty till Friday was seven night; These things being
notorious, and might have been cleared if he had had time.

He added, That whether this be a true Copy of the Warrant or no, I cannot
tell, but likely enough it is.

That it was moved for by the Bishop of Down and Connor, to whom, for some
reasons, I was willing to grant it; but being afterward told by Sir George
Ratcliffe, that he doubted whether it was Legal or no, I called it in again,
and never granted any but this.

That (as appears in the proof) I sent to the Bishop of Derry, and desired him
to call in the Warrant, and so he did long before this complaint: And thence I
infer, that it could not argue my intention to break the same.

Whereas the Gentleman at the Bar said, that I had been better than my word;
for I had said, an Act of State should be as good as an Act of Parliament; but
here I made an Act of State better than an Act of Parliament. I observe, that
he is willing to make me better than my word, when it may be for my
disadvantage; but is willing to make me worse than my word, when by disproving
me, he may hurt me. That therefore it befits me to do as well as I can for my
self in this case; yet not to take it amiss from the Gentleman, who does but
his duty.

Finally, I conceive it not Treason in me to follow the President and Practice
of those which have gone before me, which though it be not altogether so Legal,
yet I hope it is not Treasonable. Nor is it Treason to mistake the Law; if it
should, there would be more actions of Treason than Trespass in
Westminster Hall; for I think few understand it, I do not I am sure.

And so I hope this shall never rise up in Judgment against me in its self, or
as a concurrent Argument toward Treason.

Mr. Glyn replied, in substance as follows:

What my Lord of Strafford is charged with, he confesses to be an Authority
Manager.
above Law; and that it is not justifiable.

Yet he would justify it by the practice of his Predecessors, wherein the
examination of my Lord Primate, offered for Proof thereof, aggravates the
Offense, the Warrant therein mentioned, being procured at the Request of the
Papists; and perhaps it might be so now: but the Protestants have been
Oppressed by it. That was to save the charge of a Capias Excommunicatum, which
was the Process issued upon Excommunication; but by this Warrant they must be
taken on the Citation, downright Club-Law, having in similitude the Civil Law.

That his own Secretary that made the Warrant, and is as guilty as himself,
tells of a President, according to which he made this; Therefore the Copy
produced is a true Copy, else he says not truth.

That whereas his Lordship says it is a single Act, and as soon as he had
notice of the Illegality of it, he recalled it, and therefore it should not be
laid to his Charge: Indeed if it were a single Act, this Answer might be taken;
but when in the case of my Lord of Cork, his Inheritance was to be determined,
and desired the benefit of the Law, did my Lord of Strafford suffer the course
of Law to go on: Now when he is pleased to make an excuse for himself, he calls
it in; but when in matter of Life and Inheritance concerning Peers, Right is
demanded, he denies it. If this single Act be compared with other Exorbitant
Proceedings, we refer it to Your Lordships Wisdom and Justice, whether it be
not a strong Evidence to prove his subverting of the Laws.

After some discourse touching their proceeding on with the 10th Article, for
that the same would hold long, the day far spent, and my Lord Cottington and
Sir Arthur Ingram, material Witnesses for My Lord of Strafford, (as he
alleged) were absent; for whose Examination his Lordship desired a Commission,
Their Lordships Adjourned the House.

The Ninth day.
Wednesday, March 31. 1641.
THE Tenth Article. The Charge.
THat the said Earl of Strafford being Lord Lieutenant, or Deputy of Ireland,
procured the Customs of the Merchandise Exported Article 10.
out, and Imported into that Realm, to be Farmed to his own use.

And in the Ninth year of His now Majesty's Reign, he having then Interest in
the said Customs (to advance his own gain and lucre) did cause and procure the
Native Commodities of Ireland, to be rated in the Book of Rates for the
Customs, (according to which the Customs were usually gathered) at far greater
Ualues and Prices, than in truth they were worth, (that is to say) every Hyde
at Twenty shillings, which in truth was worth but Five shillings; every Stone
of Wool at Chirteen shillings four pence, though the same were really worth but
five shillings, at the utmost nine shillings; by which means the Custom, which
before was but a Twentieth part of the true value of the Commodity, was
Enhanced sometimes a Fifth part, and sometimes to a Fourth, and sometimes to a
Third part of the true value; to the great Oppression of the Subjects, and
Decay of Merchandise.

MR. Maynard proceeded to the 10th Article, saying, They had showed what my
Lord meant to do, what he threatened, what he did concerning the Lives of His
Majesty's Subjects, what advantages he found to order their Tongues, to cut off
their Heads; but he rested not there, Their Lordships have heard how he
Executed one without Law; The subsequent Articles were under color of Law, to
take away the Subjects Lands, to distribute them in a way of Justice; and yet
they come to his own profit. Now the 10th Article charges him, that he did
procure to Farm to his own use, the Customs of Ireland, that he inhanced those
Customs, procured a Book of Rates to be made, and Goods valued Treble to the
worth of the Commodity; instancing in two particulars, Wools worth 5 s. the
Stone, or at most Nine, rated up to 13 s. 4 d. and a Hyde valued at 20 s. which
was in truth worth but 5 s. That these High values were put upon them to
increase the Customs. That my Lord of Strafford in his Answer, pretends it not
to be done for his own benefit, but for the advantage of His Majesty, and gives
some Colors, which are left to himself to open and prove. That they shall
prove the Fact to be done for his own advantage, to the great deceit and
disadvantage of His Majesty.

The Case was stated thus.

His Majesty King James did, in the 16th year of his Reign, Lease to the Duke
of Buckingham, the Customs of Ireland for 10 years: In which Lease there were
Exceptions and Agreements of Defalcations, as the Custom of Wines, which were
Leased to my Lord Carlisle, at the Rent of 1400 l. per annum to the Crown; and
on this Lease was reserved 6000 l. a year Rent, and half the clear profits
above the Rent; which half did amount to 3700 l. a year. There was a second
Lease made to the Duchess of Buckingham, being in the time of 7 Car. who was
to have a certain sum out of the Lease, but the profit was for my Lord of
Strafford and his Partners. Mr. Maynard observed the difference of the two
Leases; and showed, that it was not only a bargain of loss to His Majesty, of
what he had, but also a bargain by way of advancement of that which was not by
inhancing the values.

Which he demonstrated thus; The King out of the first Lease to the Duke 6000
l. and 3700 l. that is, 9700 l. by the latter Lease 11050 l. so at first view,
1350 l. gain, besides the Fine pretended to be paid; But in lieu thereof, the
Lease to my Lord of Carlisle was procured to be surrendered, upon which the King
had 1400 l, a year Rent, before the Duchess, that is now my Lord of Straffords
Lease, was Sealed; which 1400 l. a year, is not reserved in the said latter
Lease, the surrender being 21 Mar. the Demise 24 Mar. So that 1400 l. a year is
swept away by my Lord of Strafford, instead of the 1350 l. by way of advance.

Besides the surplusage of the profit of the Farm of Wines, Demised to my Lord
of Carlisle, amounted to 3400 l. a year; sometimes an odd 500 l. sometimes 200
l. but Communibus annis, it was above 3000 l. And this being by Surrender,
drawn into my Lord of Straffords purse, but out of the Kings purse, and that
not only by way of gift; for this surplusage above the 1400 l. per annum on the
Wines, was to be made good out of the 11050 l. So that out of the 11050 l.
there is drawn from His Majesty 4500 l. instead of an advance of 1350 l. And it
rests not here, for besides these, the Customs of London Derry, and Colerane,
worth 1500 l. a year, and the Customs of Knockfergus and Strangford, (reserved
in the Dukes Lease) are stolen out by way of Defalcation in the Earl of
Straffords Lease.

Besides, whereas the Duke of Buckingham had a moiety of the Kings moiety, of
all Seizures in case of men's concealing Custom, or Landing Goods at
unseasonable times, the Statute allowing to His Majesty in some such cases a
Moiety, in some cases the whole, my Lord of Strafford by his Lease, must have
all that belonged to the King.

And whereas the Duke of Buckingham had, for Merchants Goods that came in by
way of prize, an allowance of Custom. By the Lease of my Lord of Strafford,
whether they be the Kings Goods, or his Subjects, Custom must be paid by His
Majesty, to his own Subjects.

Mr. Glyn observed also a strange Clause in the new Grant; which is to the
matter of opposition and Subversion of the Laws, That this Grant shall hold,
whether it be repealed by Parliament or not: And further, the Rates are
inhanced when they come to my Lord of Straffords Grant, in 12 particulars; so
that the Customs which at that time were presented as worth 12000 l. a year,
fall out on proof to yield, seldom less than 40. sometimes near 60000 l. a
year; all which Gain has gone out of the Kings Purse, and is in my Lord of
Straffords, and his Partners.

The Lease made to the Duke of Buckingham was first read, as to the Grant, the
Render, and the Defalcations, Dat. 23 May, 16 Car.

The Lease to the Duchess of Buckingham was next read, dated 24 Mar. 7 Car.
from the several parts whereof, Mr. Maynard observed the inhancing of the
Rates; The Grant of the Wines, the Payment of the Customs for the Kings
Prize-goods, the Clause touching the Repeal by Parliament, the Defalcations,
the allowing the part of the Kings Moiety of the Seizures, so formerly opened,
to be fully manifested.

In this Lease there is 20000 l. consideration by way of Fine, and 11050 Rent
received.

The Grant of the Surplusage of the profit of Wines to the Earl of Carlisle
above the said 1400 l. per annum Rent, for the remainder of fifteen years, was
read.

Wherein is recited the original Grant under the said yearly Rent of 1400 l.
and the Surrender thereof to the Crown, 21 Martii, 7 Car.

They proceed to prove the Values.

And first, Witnesses were produced to prove, that by the Duke of Buckinghams
Lease, 3700 l. per annum, was answered to the Crown for the Moiety of the
Surplusage of Profits, over and above the 6000 l. yearly Rent thereupon
observed.

The Lord Ranulagh being asked to that point, Lord Ranulagh a Witness.


Answered, That he was a Partner in the Farm in the time of my Lord of
Faulklands Government in Ireland, and on the Lease there was reserved to the
King, over and above the 6000 l. a surplusage of the profits, which came to
3700 l.

To prove the value of the Wine-Customs above the 1400 l. Rent, reserved on the
Earl of Carlisles Lease, which was to be answered to the Earl of Carlisle, out
of the 11050 l.

Sir James Hey sworn and interrogated to that point. Sir James Hey a Witness.


Answered, That in 1635. the late Earl of Carlisle sent him into Ireland, to
settle his affairs there, where he stayed almost 12 months; and then he
received a years account of the Wines, which he has to produce under the hand
of the Auditor of that Kingdom, which is the money received for the profit of
the Wines.

The Account was read, viz.

A Collection of what the Impost of Wines amounted to, according to the old
Rates for the year ended, March 1635. in the several parts following, wherein
all Wines discharged out of foreign bottoms, are rated as strangers, viz.

The Total, 3787 l. 15 s. 9 d. Sterling. Out of which the sum of 1400 l. the Rent
formerly reserved to His Majesty out of the said Impost defalked, there will
remain 2387 l. 15 s. 9 d.

Sir James Hey further said, That 1636. my Lord of Carlisle dyed, and he will
not depose for that years Account, but he conceives it is an Account sent over
from the same party: And that he had a Letter from an Officer of the
Custom-house at Dublin, wherein he mentioned the Impost to amount to 5000 l.
and upwards, either 1638. or 1639. but he is not certain which.

To prove the Value of the Defalcations of London Derry and Colerane.

Robert Goodwyn sworn; being asked what the Customs of London Derry and
Colerane amounted to Communibus Annis: Robert Goodwyn a Witness.


He Answered, That the Customs received in the Town of Colerane, In-gate and
out-gate, from 25 Mar. 1634. till 25 Mar. 1639. being for the space of five
whole years, as appears by the several Accounts thereof, is 1079 l. 6 s. 1 d..
That the Total of the Customs of London Derry, where he collected himself
in-gate and out-gate, from the last of Febr. 1634. till Michaelmas 1639. as
appears by the several Accounts thereof made by His Majesty's Commissioners for
the City and County of London Derry, is 5348 l. 11 s. 10 d. That he shall
acquaint their Lordships with the full Truth. These were not Collected
according to the Book of Rates, but at an under value. That all the Book of
Rates 1634. and so forward to the last Book, do value Beef at 16 l. a Tun. But
because Beef is sold in Derry and Colerane, for 6 or 7 l. a Tun at utmost;
therefore he was directed by the City of London to take 6 s. after the rate of
6 l.

Then for Hydes, these Books of Rates value a Hyde at 12 s. and where he should
have taken 6 d. he received by direction of the City but 2 d. at the Infancy of
the Plantation, and for the good of the place, which the City tendered.

Henry Brawd sworn, and examined to the same matter, Henry Brawd a Witness.


Answered, According to the Deposition of Robert Goodwyn, for the value of the
Customs of Colerane and London Derry.

To prove the value of the Farms in Ireland.

John Welsh sworn, and examined to that point.

Answered, That he can speak nothing of knowledge, but only by hearsay.

To prove the value of the Customs, as increased on the New Book of Rates.

Robert Cogan sworn, and Examined to that Point. Robert Cogan a Witness.


Answered, That he never cast them up in particular, but he did estimate them
before they took the Farm to be worth 10 or 12000 l. a year.

Here on my Lord of Strafford's Motion, Mr. Cogan was asked, Where he now lives.

He Answered, In London.

To prove the increase of Customs 1636, 1637, 1638, 1639.

John Welsh Examined to that Point. John Welsh a Witness.


Answered, That he was directed from the Committee to come hither: That he went
into the Exchequer-Office, and took notice of some Books there, presented to
him by one of the Officers of the House, and he Collected these four years,
1636, 37, 38, and 39. and as they came to his hands he put them down, 1636.
they came to 39936 l. 1637. 38889 l. 1638. 57380 l. 1639. 55582 l.

Being asked concerning the value of Hydes, Wool, and Tallow.

He Answered, That he knew the values very well, being Commodities he deals in
daily: That he has bought Hydes for 3 s. some 4 s. some 5 s. and very few
exceed these Rates.

And in their Parts they ordinarily give 50 l. a Last, which is 200 Hydes, and
then they have ordinarily 30 or 40 Hydes on the Last to make them full Hydes.
For Wool there is of 3 s. 4 s. 5 s. 8 s. 9 s. and that is the highest price he
ever paid, or knew any of his Neighbors to pay, he living in Waterford.

Whence Mr. Maynard observed, That a Hyde of 5 s. is rated at 20 s. and 9 s.
the uttermost for Wool, rated at 13 s. 4 d.

Lord Renula being Interrogated to the value of the Customs 1636, 37, Lord
Renula a Witness.
38, and 39.

He Answered, That all he knew of it is this, about Christmas last he called on
the Remembrancer of the Office of Exchequer, that keeps the Books of the
Customs, he desired a Note of the value of the Customs for three or four years
back, and the Officer gave him a Note 1636, 37, 38, 39, which Note he has, but
forgot to bring it with him this Morning. But to the best of his remembrance
the value of the Customs for these years is thus, 1636. either 38. or 39000 l.
and some odd hundreds, 1637. 39000 l. and odd, 1638. is the greatest year, and
then it was 57000 l. and 1639. 55000 l.

Patrick Allen sworn, and examined to the value of Hydes and Wool in Patrick
Allen a Witness.
Ireland.

Answered, That he has bought Hydes at 4 s. 4 s. 6 d. 5 s. and 6 s. the most
that ever he knew any pay for Hydes; for Wool there is a course Irish Wool
not worth 4 s. some is worth 6 s. some 7. s. 8 s. but 11 s. is the most that
ever he knew paid for Wool.

And so Mr. Maynard closed the Article, and left it to their Lordships
Consideration, what the King has left, what profit my Lord of Strafford has
received.

To which my Lord of Strafford made Defense, in substance as follows:

I shall, under favor, proceed to make a just Defense of my self, as to this
Impeachment of Treason brought against me by the Honorable House E. of
Straffords Defense.
of Commons, for that is the thing in question, and which I shall only Answer
unto, as being Charged with nothing else.

I desire I may read the Charge, and then your Lordships will see how
pertinently the time has been spent in the proving of it.

He reads his Charge as to the Tenth Article.

With humble submission to your Lordships great Judgments, I conceive there is
nothing in this Charge, that can by any Law that ever I heard of, be brought to
be Treason.

These Gentlemen have told your Lordships what His Majesty lost by a Contract
with the Duchess of Buckingham, which I conceive concerns not in me at all,
being no Party to it.

If the Duchess, by her Grant of 24. March, 7 Car. had more Privilege than
the Duke of Buckingham had for the 10 years preceding; yet by their own showing
here is 20000 l. Fine, and an increase of 1350 l. a year Rent, so that there
was a Consideration for it.

That these Twelve Commodities were raised, and the values inhanced on that
Consideration 24. March, 7 Car. but the Lease wherein himself was Partner bears
Date 21. April after; So that the Book of Rates was not raised by me, but by
them that had care of the business between the King and the Duchess of
Buckingham: And this being set by the King's Officers, to whom it was proper,
in the 7th Year of the King, it falls very short of what is Charged in the
Article, that I should do it in the 9th Year of His Majesty's Reign. If they
can show a Book of Rates raised the 9th, it may be said he has raised the Book
for his advantage, for then he had a quarter part of the Farm, and the King
has parts to himself; and these things have been tumbled and tossed over and
over again, and fully answered in another place, and I shall be well able to
answer it still, that the King has had as great a Service done in this
particular, as may be in this matter. But that is not the question of the day.
I am Charged with raising a Book of Rates in the 9th Year of the King, and if
there be any such Book, it is more than I ever saw, I know of none but that
which was settled in my Lord of Portland's time, before I had any Interest in
the Farm, which I think will go far to my clearing in this Point.

Whether these Rates be indifferently set or no, is a business for Merchants,
and matter of Proof, and if it should be Charged on me as a Crime, I hope your
Lordships will allow me time to examine Witnesses, and likewise Council. But I
conceive it can be no way conducing to me as a Crime, and as a Treason I think
your Lordships Judgments will clear me, and that is my Answer as to the Book of
Rates, and I think a clear one.

For the values, your Lordships may be pleased to consider, that it may be a
loss to the Farmer, and consequently to the King, who has five parts of eight.
But it can be a Crime to no body, and I hope your Lordships will give time to
prove the point of value.

Your Lordships may suppose I know not the price of Hides, and Wool and
Tallow, being out of my Calling; but their worth will appear to be such, that
the Duty is but taken according to the Articles of Tunnage and Poundage, that
give this Duty to the Crown. For Tunnage and Poundage in Ireland is of another
kind than in England, for here it is given Temporally, but it is an Inheritance
to the Crown in Ireland, being 15 H. 4. given to the King and his Heirs; and
producing the Book of Rates, his Lordship said, That nothing is taken but what
is justly due by that Book. And if Merchants (who speak for their own
advantage) be rested on for the price of things, the Customs will be little.
But this Book of Rates was set by the Lord Treasurer that then was, and justly
and fairly I think, and accordingly Customs have been taken; and when it shall
be laid to my Charge in a proper way, I shall give such satisfaction, as to
clear my self of the least Fraud or Deceit to my Master, and in the mean time
I know your Lordships are so just, as not to prejudice me in this matter.

I will now show how I came into the business of Farming the Customs, not
voluntarily, or upon my Suit, nor did I ever intend it, but was commanded and
enforced to it, and came in merely for the doing of the King a Service; and if
it prove a Bargain of advantage, I never knew the making of a good Bargain
turned on a man as Treason. It was justly, fairly, and honestly procured, and
prove it never so beneficial, that can never make it a Crime.

His Majesty has been from time to time acquainted with the increase of this
business most exactly and truly, it rising indeed beyond all imagination; the
Customs, when we entered on them, being but 12000 l. per annum, and now your
Lordships see what is proved, and may judge with what truth they inform, in the
Remonstrance, out of Ireland, that Trade is decayed.

On their own showing, by the Testimony of my Lord Renula, and others, it
appears, that when they were Farmers, there was 6000 l. paid to the King, and a
Devident of the other moity, which came to 3700 l. So the whole value of the
Customs was then 13400 l.

His Lordship desired that my Lord Cottington might be asked a few Questions.

Lord Cottington being asked, Whether in the Seventh year of the King Lord
Cottington a Witness.
there was not a Bargain concluded by the late Lord Treasurer, the Earl of
Portland, with Captain Williams, Captain Henshawe, and others, for the Customs
of Ireland, paying 15500 l. Rent, and 8000 l. Fine.

His Lordship Answered, That he conceives my Lord of Portland rested satisfied,
that he had made that Bargain for the Rent and Fine, and that he so understood
it, as to acquaint His Majesty with it, and understood it to be a very good
Bargain.

Being asked, Whether did not Williams afterward relinquish the Bargain.

His Lordship Answered, That he well remembers he did refuse it, and he thinks
he refused it, because Henshawe was the chief man in it, and he died, and
thereupon Williams flew off. And that my Lord of Portland was very much
troubled, because Williams, and the rest fell off, as he remembers.

Being asked, Whether after they had given it over, any body would give so much
as they offered.

He Answered, He thinks there was no body that came near it, at least he never
heard so.

Being asked, Whether after it was so left, it was not undertaken by Sir Arthur
Ingram, and his Partners, on the very terms that Williams refused it, paying
only 100 l. a year more Rent.

He Answered, It is very true, Sir Arthur Ingram, and diverse Partners, by his
procurement, paid 100 l. more Rent, and, as he takes it, the same Fine, but for
a quicker time; for the first men were to have time, and Sir Arthur Ingram was
to pay it all in ready money.

My Lord of Strafford here added, That Henshawe, and the rest, having given
over the Bargain, himself went to my Lord at Rohampton, and E. of Strafford.
found that these other Partners that had it afterward, would undertake the
Farm, if he the Earl of Strafford would be a Partner with them, which was a
thing he never intended, but refused.

Therefore on his Lordships Motion

Lord Cottington was further asked, Whether being moved by my Lord of Portland
to come into the Farm, he the Earl of Strafford did absolutely Lord Cottington
a Witness.
tell my Lord of Portland, that he would not meddle therewith, not knowing how
it would be interpreted; that he being the King's Deputy should be a Farmer.

His Lordship Answered, That he well remembers my Lord of Portland did conceive
that to draw in these later Farmers; it was very necessary, and all the Succor
they had to have my Lord of Strafford a Partner in it; because they conceived
they should thrive in the Bargain, if he, having so great a Power, were a
Partner; so it lay on my Lord of Portland to persuade him to yield to it; and
my Lord of Portland told him, That if my Lord of Strafford would do the King
that Service, he should not lose by it. And though my Lord of Strafford was
unwilling to come in for a part, yet at last he did, and his coming in, drew in
the rest, as he the Lord Cottington thinks. And further, that my Lord Portland
told the King of it, and prepared the King to command him for the making of the
Bargain, depending on his taking of a part.

My Lord of Strafford here observed, That he humbly conceived the Goodness and
Grace of the King, and the love of my Lord of Portland, E. of Strafford.
was such at that time, that they would not have brought him into a business
that should be laid to his Charge as Treason.

Lord Cottington being, on Mr. Maynard's motion, asked about the time, whether
it was 7 Car. Lord Cottington a Witness.


His Lordship Answered, That he must refer himself to the Grant, for the Lease
my Lord of Strafford showed did follow immediately after.

Sir Arthur Ingram being, on my Lord of Strafford's Motion, Examined to diverse
of the Points before proposed to the Lord Cottington. Sir Arthur Ingram a
Witness.


He Answered, He conceives there was a Bargain made by my Lord Treasurer and my
Lord Cottington, with Williams and Henshawe for 15500 l. a year, and, as he
conceives, 8000 l. Fine, and this was under their hands in Writing, as he heard.

That he knew nothing that my Lord of Strafford was to be a Partner, or to have
any Interest in it.

That he conceives Williams did clearly refuse it after Henshawes death, what
other Reasons he had he knows not; That he cannot tell, nor does remember, that
my Lord of Strafford used means to persuade Williams to stand to that Bargain;
but certainly Williams was persuaded much by my Lord of Portland.

Being asked, Whether it was so left by Williams, did not he and his Partners
undertake the Farm?

He Answered, That he was several times offered to come into that Farm, and
from time to time refused it: That Williams pressed him exceeding much, and
others before him; and he was moved to it by one Cogan, but refused it.

That the truth is, his Son Arthur Ingram was Partner in it, and there came in
my Lord Mountnorris, Sir George Ratcliffe, and one Cogan, that they labored
much he should take the Farm, and he had much ado to be brought in.

Being asked, Whether these came in upon the same Terms offered to Williams.

He Answered, It will appear on the Warrant to the then Attorney, Sir Robert
Heath, that they paid 15500 l. Rent, and 8000 l. Fine; and whereas the Officer
should have paid it at six and six months, these were to pay ready money.

Being asked, Whether he had moved my Lord of Strafford to be a Partner in it.

He Answered, That he does not remember he ever said so, but it might much
encourage him to come in, if my Lord of Strafford were a Partner. But he the
Examinant had no such great cause to desire it, for he was not in three years,
but his Son was put out again; when it came to matter of profit they were gone.

To this my Lord of Strafford, did by the way, Answer in substance, That His
Majesty gave Consideration for it, and had the benefit E. of Strafford.
himself.

And so, I hope, I have cleared how I came into the Bargain, and that I cannot
be Charged with procuring the Book of Rates, it being Printed 10. March, and my
Lease began 21 April after, and that the Right being in the Crown, your
Lordships will not conclude it, till you have heard it for the King, it being
his loss in parts, which was entirely His.

And whereas I am Charged with raising the Book of Rates (though done before my
time) yet I was taught here in England that they might have been raised to a
much higher Rate than they were, and to that purpose there came a Letter from
His Majesty, whereby in 1637. a Proposition was made of raising the Rates, the
Book being conceived not to be so high as it ought to be.

His Majesty's Letter was read, Mr. Slingsby affirming it to be a true Copy,
and that he saw it compared with the Original. Imparting, That His Majesty
finding the Impositions set, on Merchandise of all Ports, to be well accepted,
and to have ready and free passage, had Resolved, That such Impositions be laid
in Ireland as be fit for that Kingdom, and to that end had caused a Book to be
drawn, with fit Considerations of the difference of Trade in both Kingdoms,
which was sent to my Lord of Strafford, to advise of the Particulars, who, if
he found that any may bear a greater proportion, he may add what he will; if he
find any over-rated, he may deliver his Reasons to be considered, and Regulated
by His Majesty's Committee here, Dated the 10th of July, 1633.

My Lord of Strafford observed, That at the date of this Letter, he E. of
Strafford.
had an Interest in part of the Farm, and desired that my Lord Dillon might be
asked, how my Lord of Strafford carried himself in it.

Lord Robert Dillon being asked, Whether my Lord of Strafford did not join with
the Council to dissuade it. Lord Dillon a Witness.


He Answered, That he was at the Board when the Original of this Letter was
read, as he takes it, for there was brought with it a Book of Rates, that he
remembers not the particular words of my Lord of Strafford; but he is sure, by
the whole Board, the entertainment of those Rates was dis-advised. And it was
Resolved a Letter should be written to dis-advise it; but he remembers not when
the Letter was written.

Whence it may be observed, That I was not very tender of my own E. of
Strafford.
profit, which laid to the other, I hope, will clear me of this Article,
wherein there is nothing of Treason; and nothing can be imputed to me, unless
that the Kingdom of Ireland is under the King's blessed Government, an
increased and growing Kingdom, and the Trade enlarged to such a proportion as
makes the Customs of far more value than they were heretofore, should be turned
on me as a Crime. And as for Treason, your Lordships see no Complexion toward
so foul a Crime, and for all things that may reflect on me as Misdemeanors, in
due time and place, I trust, I shall clear my self from that as well as I do
from this Charge of High Treason.

Mr. Maynard Replied thereunto in substance as follows:

That whereas my Lord of Strafford says, That to prove the matter of profit to
himself, of loss to His Majesty, is impertinent: They Charge, Mr. Maynard's
Reply.
that what he did was for his own Lucre. He Answers, That what he did was for
His Majesty's Profit. Therefore whether it be for his Lucre or not, is in
issue, and that they have proved; and that which he puts in issue is not to the
purpose, nor proved.

Whereas, he says, This Article is not Treason, yet look to the whole body of
the Charge, his taking away the Property of the Subjects, his inducing this by
subtilty, by force or advice, to bring it to pass, if these be proved, their
Lordships will be of Opinion with the House of Commons, That it is a high and a
great Treason. Therefore let him not say this or that piece is not Treason, let
him Answer it if he can, That the subverting of the Fundamental Laws be not
great a Treason.

My Lord takes advantage, that the Patent to the Duchess concerns not him, for
it is granted in March, and his 21. April following; but if the Times be
observed, it will answer it self, for the 10th of March, 7 Car. the Rates are
raised, 21. March my Lord of Carlisles Patent is surrendered, 24. March, the
Duchess Patent dated, and 21. April 8 Car. some 30 days after my Lord of
Strafford's Lease is passed. If this had been intended for the Duchess, she
would have kept it, but she keeps it not to pay a days Rent, or receive any
profit.

But this will entrench on my Lord of Strafford's Answer, on the ingenuity of
which he stands so much, for he says, There were Propositions to raise these
Rates, and he was acquainted and entreated to go on, and thereupon he enters
into the Bargain: We desire your Lordships to mark the time, that if there were
these Propositions to raise the Rates, and this Lease must be drawn on the
raising of the Rates; then was he interressed in the raising of the Rates,
before he was interressed in the Lease. And then there is the Execution of a
Design carried in several hands, which tend to one purpose, for he enters into
it the seventh year, and his own Lease is the eighth; and therefore it was on
his own Design and Counsel, and for his own Profit.

My Lord instanceth, That the Article lays the Book of Rates to be raised 9.
whereas this was done 7. Mr. Maynard observed, Time is not material; had they
charged him to have made a Book of Rates such a Date, it had been something.
But if an Offense be laid in one year, and it appears to be done in another
year, he must be punished for that now which he did at any time.

To the Tunnage and Poundage, being the Inheritance of the King, it is so in
Ireland; but the Point is the Oppression of the Subject, when he makes that
three which is but one; and so instead of giving the King his due, to extort
from the Subject what he ought not to pay.

If he says, Proofs could not be had to prove a greater value of the
Commodities, he had time to produce a Witness out of all Ireland. The Commons
have produced them that speak of the highest value, and there is great
difference between three, four, five, the highest is six, and twenty.

What occasioned Williams to Relinquish the Bargain is not material: But in
what Case is the Subject of Ireland, that when a Bargain is to be set at the
highest, he that is to be their Governor and Judge, to whom all Appeals must be
made, shall enter and put in his Authority to make a Bargain that none else
would take. The Subject is like to have good Justice, when the Judge must lose
by the Judgment he gives in the Cause; when the Deputy of Ireland must be both
Judge and Party.

It is said Williams first entertained it, and left it; but though my Lord be
not the first that Projected it, he is the man that first put it in Execution,
the first that took it under the Great Seal, and first brought it to be a
Grievance to the Subject, and that he is Charged withal. It might be fit for
Goldsmiths, and such to prosecute it, but not for them that are employed in
Administration of Justice, and in great designs to follow such a Design.

But when Profit comes roundly in, Sir Arthur Ingram must be put out, and for
11 years have half a years value.

Mr. Maynard added, That my Lord of Strafford, in his Answer, gives it as a
Justification of himself, that he did not hold it fit to take such a Bargain
from the King, wherein there was not 1000 l. to be got.

But though he thought it not fit to take when he could get but 1000 l. yet he
held it fit to take such a Bargain from the King, where, in holding it eight
years, he gets 30000 l. He thrusts out Sir Arthur, and why not himself. And
there is no wonder, that he that gained so much, would seem to Interest His
Majesty in part, that his share might remain more entire; surely it was the
more injustice in him to retain the Bargain, when he had stepped into it.

For the Letter of July, 1637. there was a Proposition, showing His Majesty's
Care for His Subjects in Ireland what to inhance, no, to inhance if there were
Cause. My Lord pretends he was loath to make an Inhancement, but that was the
Opinion of the Board: It is to be wondered that he took them not down rather.

And so he concluded, That they had proved the Charge; that he has procured
the Customs to be advanced, they were not advanced till he entered. And their
Lordships were desired not to let one thing pass without Observation. That from
7 Car. to this time such gain has been made, that there is come to his purse
and his Parteners 300000 l. if the Depositions be to be credited, and it must
be four more, if the succeeding years hold proportion. That here is not only an
Inhancement of Rates on the Subject, by way of Extortion, but this is soaked
out of the Kings Purse. That is the 1400 l. a year Rent for the Wines, the
Surplusage of the Wines, the Defaulcation of Colerane, Londonderry, Knock
fergus, and Strangford. And besides their Lordships may observe the Clause in
the Patent; the Grant must be good, though there be an Act of Parliament
against it, and the King must pay for His own prize Goods, which is left unto
their Lordships Judgments.

The Commit did now declare, That for the present they would lay aside the
Eleventh Article, and proceed to the Twelfth.

THE Twelfth Article. The Charge.

12. THat the said Earl being Lord Deputy of Ireland, on the Article XII.
Charge.
Ninth day of January, in the Thirteenth year of His now Majesty's Reign, did
then, under color to Regulace the Importation of Tobacco into the said Realm
of Ireland, Issue a Proclamation in His Majesty's Name, Prohibiting the
Importation of Tobacco without License of him and the Council, there from and
after the First day of May, Anno Dom. 1638. after which Restraint, the said
Earl, notwithstanding the said Restraint, caused diverse great quantities of
Tobacco to be Imported to his own use, and fraughted diverse Ships with
Tobacco, which he Imported to his own use: and that if any Ship brought Tobacco
into any Port there, the said Earl and his Agents used to buy the same to his
own use, at their own Price; and if that the owners refused to let him have the
same at under-values, then they were not permitted to Uent the same there: By
which undue means the said Earl having gotten the whole Crade of Tobacco into
his own hands, he sold it at great and excessive prizes, such as he list to
impose for his own Profit.

And the more to assure the said Monopoly of Tobacco, he the said Earl, on the
Three and twentieth day of February, in the Thirteenth year aforesaid, did
Issue another Proclamation, Commanding, That none should put to Sale any
Tobacco by Wholesale, from and after the last day of May, then next following,
but what should be made up into Rolls, and the same Sealed with two Seals, by
himself appointed, one at each end of the Roll. And, such as was not Sealed, to
be seized, appointing Sir pence the Pound for a Reward to such persons as
should seize the same: and the Persons in whose custody the Unsealed Tobacco
should be found, to be committed to Goal, which last Proclamation was Colored
by a Pretense, for the restraining of the Sale of unwholesome Tobacco, but it
was truly to advance the said Monopoly.

Which Proclamation the said Earl did rigorously put in Execution, by Seizing
the Goods, Fining, Imprisoning, Whipping, and putting the Offenders against the
same Proclamation on the Pillory, as Namely, Barnaby Hubbard, Edward Cavena,
John Tumen, and diverse others: and made the Officers of State, and Justices of
Peace, and other Officers, to serve him in the Compassing, and executing these
unjust and undue Courses; by which Cruelties, and Unjust Monopolies the said
Earl raised 100000 l. per Annum Gain to himself. And yet the said Earl, though
he Enhaunced the Customs, where it concerned the Merchants in general, yet
drew down the Impost formerly taken on Tobacco from Sir pence the Pound to
Three pence the Pound, it being for his own Profit so to do.

And the said Earl, by the same, and other Rigorous and Undue Means, raised
several other Monopolies, and Unlawful Exauions for his own Gain, viz. on
Search, Iron-pots, Glasses, Tobacco-pipes, and several other Commodities.

Mr. Maynard did begin to open the 12th Article, which was Read.

THat he did Impost Tobacco himself, Mr. Maynard.
and restrained others: forced the Subjects to sell their Commodity at Low and
Under-values, because they could not Import it without his License; and when
himself had Bought it at Low Rates, he Sold it at Excessive great Rates; so
that he has made near 100000 l. Profit by his Monopoly.

That when his Proclamation is made, and Oppression put upon the People, he
does the 23d of Feb. 13 Car. Ordain, That none should Sell Tobacco within the
Kingdom, but such as was Sealed by his Appointment; and, they that Sold
otherwise, their Goods should be Sold.

That, by occasion hereof, the Kings Subjects have been grievously punished by
Fining, Imprisoning, Pilloring, Whipping, and the like.

To prove the Restraint, the Proclamation on the 9th of January, the 13th Car.
was first Read.

By the Lord-Deputy and Council. A PROCLAMATION concerning the Importing of
TOBACCO.
By which Proclamation, is set forth in Substance as follows.

THat whereas unsound Tobacco is brought in, etc. by the Unlimited Liberty
Proclamation.
of diverse to Import, etc. and being no Usual Commodity, etc. a strict Charge
is given, That none presume from the First of May next, to Import any Tobacco
without Special License from Us, on pain of incurring His Majesty's high
displeasure, and the Punishments due for such Contempts.

The Proclamation concerning Sealing of Tobacco was next Read, the 23d of Feb.
13 Car.

By the Deputy and Council.
Wherein,

THe former Proclamation is Recited: And, to prevent Secret Ways of
Proclamation.
Importation, a Charge is given from the last of May next, no Tobacco be put to
Wholesale, unless it be in complete Rolls, which may be conveniently Sealed,
and to be Sold with two Seals, one to be affixed at each end, which Seal order
is taken to be provided for that purpose. That what Tobacco shall be found
without those Seals, the Kings Officers may search for, and seize, and convey
to the next Port, which Course shall be taken, that every Seizor shall have 6d.
for every Pound, as an Encouragement; and, that the Officers shall commit the
Persons of such in whose hands such Tobacco shall be found, till Security shall
be given to appear before the Deputy and Council, and not to depart without
Leave, etc.

Mr. Maynard observed, That John Carpenter, etc. Mr. Maynard.
who are employed in this business, are all Servants to my Lord of Strafford,
but Little, who is Sir George Ratcliff's Servant, who did accordingly make
Seizure.

And he farther observed, That my Lord of Strafford had several Magazines of
Tobacco, and that, from time to time brought in, was bestowed there. And, on
the First Day of his Defense, my Lord of Strafford said, 40000 l. of his
Tobacco was Seized.

To Prove the Execution of these Proclamations.

Timothy Crosby Sworn, and Asked, Whether Ships have not been Mr. Crosby.
Witness.
Prohibited to Land their Tobacco?

He Answered, Yes: Since the 11th of November, 1637. and he Instanced in
Governor Briskett of Montserratt, Mr. Arundel.

Being Asked, If any Ship Perished upon the Restraint?

He Answered, The John of Kingsale: It came into Lymerick, and being not there
suffered to Sell, was forced to Galloway, and was cast away going into another
Harbor: And this, because She was not one of the Magazine.

Being Asked, What Rates the Merchants sold their Tobacco for before this
Restraint, and what since?

He Answered, Before the Restraint, for 6d, or 7d the Pound: and other times
for 14d, and 16d on Shipboard; and since, some at 9d a Pound, and others at 6d
Ob.

Being Asked, Why the Ships were not permitted to Land?

He Answered, Because they would not pay 2 Shillings a Pound, 18d Custom, and
6d Impost.

Whence Mr. Maynard Observed; That if they come for the Use of my Mr. Maynard.
Lord of Strafford, and his Party, they must pay 3d; if for others, 18d, and
Impost.

Patrick Allen Sworn: Being Asked to the matter of Restraint. Mr. Allen.
Winness.


He Answered, That a Ship of 80 Tun was not admitted to Land at Yoghall, but
forced to carry her Lading of Tobacco to St. Mallis in France, where he
believes it is.

That a Proclamation was out in 1638, That no Merchant should Land any Tobacco
without special License of the Patentees.

That before the Proclamation he bought Tobacco for 6d and 7d, a Pound, a great
Quantity, of one of Dartmouth: and since they pay 2 Shillings, 7 Groats, 8
Groats, and 3 Shillings. That the Patentees pay the Merchant 6d or 7d a Pound,
which is the most he has heard of.

John Welsh Sworn, and Interrogated to the same matter. Mr. Welsh. Witness.


Answered;

It was not granted, they sold as much as would pay for their Provisions, for
which they had 6d a Pound; but would not give way to Land any more of it.

That one Arundell of Excester put into Waterford, and he the Deponent was in
Company with him to Dublin; and desired, that if the said Arundell could get
off his Tobacco, he would sell it him the Deponent, who would give him 2
Shillings a Pound for it: That he could not get it off, and sold it to Joseph
Carpenter for 6d a Pound. That he paid for some Landed at Waterford by one
Wells, 16d a Pound ready Money. That the Patentees do usually buy at 6d, Only
there was a Bargain made with one Arundell, to take it at 8d, or 9d; but, how
far they went he knows not. That one White of Waterford put into Lymerick, and
told him the Deponent, That he got but 4d a Pound for his Tobacco.

Being Asked, What Quantities he conceives is brought in Annually?

He Answered, That he has Estimated it with advice of others, that Ireland
cannot consume less then 500 Tun a year; Others say, It does far exceed: and
500 Tun is near 140000 l. at 2 s. 6d a Pound.

Being Asked, Whether he knew any Sentenced on these Pretenses?

He Answered, He saw Patrick Wells, Merchant, of Waterford, stand on the
Pillory for having Unsealed Tobacco, and exposing it to Sale. Richard Whitwick
for the like offense Pillory'd at Waterford. That he has heard of diverse
others. And, he thinks the Book of Censures is here under the hand of the
Farmers Solicitor, and sent to the Committee out of Ireland by a Messenger
Express.

Patrick Gough being required to Answer truly, Whether the Book Mr. Gough.
Witness.
produced, containing an Abstract of the Sentences made in the Castle-Chamber,
was delivered him by the Committee in Ireland?

He Answers, That he believes it was among other things delivered him by the
House of Commons, to be brought to the Committee, Sealed up in a Box.

But the Committee not thinking fit to offer the Book in Evidence.

Patrick Gough was examined, whether he heard of any Sentenced in Patrick
Gough. Witness.
the Proclamations for Tobacco?

He answered, He knew diverse, and there were three or fourscore from time to
time attending in the Council Chamger, committed to the Marshalsey, and
prosecuted by Hunt; and these were, (as he remembers) in Easter Term last. And
Michaelmas Term before, and every year for three years past: That he has heard
of 60 at a time committed, and they were sentenced for having Tobacco unsealed.

Being asked on my Lord of Strafford's motion, whether my Lord of E. of
Strafford.
Strafford was a Party to them?

He answered, That as he remembers, in Michaelmas Term last was 12 months,
there were three Waterford men sentenced, whereof one was for 9 l. of Tobacco.

One of them Fined 100 l. and loss of his Office, being Waiter. The other 100
l. and the Merchant 100 l. and both committed, and their Fines reduced after to
20 l. That they were fined before the Council, at the Council Table; and as he
remembered, my Lord of Strafford was then there.

Mr. Maynard did then produce a Sentence, under my Lord of Mr. Maynard.
Strafford's hand (as he himself conceived it to be) wherein diverse persons
were sentenced.

Mr. Glyn desired a proof concerning the value, for which a witness Mr. Glyn.
should have attended, but is withdrawn; but the Remonstrance of Ireland speaks
particularly to it.

That the value of it, exceeds all the Kings certain and uncertain Revenue in
the Kingdom of Ireland.

Mr. Plunkett being sworn, being examined touching the truth of Mr. Blunkett.
Witness.
the Copy. Answered, That he had the Copy from the Clerk himself being a Member
of the House. That he has looked on the Article of Tobacco, and as it is in
substance with that which was voted.

My Lord of Strafford desired he might be asked what proofs were there E. of
Strafford.
offered.

But Mr. Glyn opposed that, hoping there was no question to be made of the
proof of a thing that was done by all the Commons of Ireland, to Mr. Glyn.
whom perhaps, their own knowledge is the proof.

The Remonstrance read as to the 6th Article.

That the Tobacco bought at low rate, is sold at excessive rates, whereby
thousands of His Majesty's Subjects are destroyed, and most part of the Coin
of this Kingdom engrossed into particular hands; insomuch, that the Profits
arising thereby, surmount His Majesty's Revenue, certain or casual within this
Kingdom, and yet His Majesty receives very little profit by the same.

Timothy Crosby being interrogated how much Tobacco comes into the Port of
Kinsale for three years last past. Mr. Crosby.


He answered, 60 Tunn in three years.

Whence Mr. Maynard observed, if one Port brings in 200 Tunn, the rest will go
to a great height. Mr. Maynard.


Being questioned what the Patentees give, and what they require for such as is
refuse Tobacco upon the sorting of it.

He answered, that for the refuse, the Owners had not above 1 d. and the
Patentees sold none of that under 2 s.

And so Mr. Maynard closed this Article, observing that they have proved the
Restraint and the Execution of it. That it is turned into a Monopoly; Mr.
Maynard.
That none must be imported without their License; That they buy what is
brought in at low rates, at 6 d. a pound, when others will give 2 s. That 4 s.
8 d. or 9 d. is the highest they give, so that they sell for three or four
times the value of what they pay: That by an estimate, 500 Tunn is imported:
That punishments are inflicted; The Kings free Subjects Whipped, Pilloryed,
Fined; And so my Lord of Strafford's Answer was expected.

After a little Respit his Lordship made his defense to this Article, in
Substance as follows.

That he conceives he has very little crime to answer, as to this Charge,
especially as unto Treason.

That he wishes with all his heart he had so much profit to answer for, as is
pretended that he gained by this business.

His Lordship presented in the first place a Petition presented by the Commons
House of Parliament in Ireland; in the Parliament preceding this, wherein they
desired, that this Lease of the Impost of Tobacco might be taken in, and
compounded for, and converted to the Kings benefit: That the Revenue might be
able to bear the Charge, and the Subjects eased from demand of Contribution,
and supply for this purpose; so that this was originally ordained by
themselves, on their own Petition, to be settled as a Revenue of the Crown.

The Petition being affirmed by Mr Gibson, to be a true Copy, being Mr. Gibson.
examined by him before Sir Paul Davis in Ireland, was read as to that point,
and it imports.

Lastly, They do humbly advise, that the six Subsidies, cheerfully granted in
this Parliament, may be employed for the buying of the Leases and Farms, that
the same may be able to supply the necessary charge of this Kingdom in the
first place. And in the second place, to satisfy and discharge the Debts and
Encumbrances aforesaid, as in manner aforesaid, and for the other not included.
The House would not enter into Consideration thereof, but are confident, that
when others justly due, shall appear, your Lordships will take a course that
shall stand with your Honor and Profit.

My Lord of Strafford offered a Witness to prove, that the Tobacco is one of
the things that goes under the name of Leases.

Mr. Slingsby being examined to that point.

Answered, That he was a Member of the House of Commons the first Mr. Slings by.
Parliament, and Debate was offered, how the Kings Revenue might be supplied,
to maintain the Charge; several Grants and Leases, applied to particular men,
were thought fit to be brought in, to be applied to the Kings advantage there;
there was the Custom, Wine, and Aquavitae Licenses; there was Tobacco, and in
the Kingdom.

My Lord of Strafford desired liberty to reserve Sir Adam Loftus, whom E. of
Strafford.
he conceived a material Witness for him, but was now absent.

Lord Robert Dillon being asked whether he was of the Parliament House Lord
Robert Dillon.
when these Leases were advised to be brought in, and whether the Lease of
Tobacco was not one that was advised to be brought in, and applied to the
Crown; and that part of the Subsidies should be employed to that end.

His Lordship answered, That he did serve in the House of Commons that
Parliament, that they were upon the Kings Revenue, and they wished that the
Charge might be answered by the coming in of the Rents. He remembers, that on
debate in the House, a Committee was appointed to consider of the disposing of
part of the Kings Revenue, to take off the Encumbrances then of His Majesty's
Revenue, to the end, the Rent of His Majesty being raised, they might be able
to answer the ordinary and standing charge of the Kingdom, and so diverse things
were to be brought in; but for the very particular of Tobacco, he does not
remember, it by name though he remembers Wine and Aquavitae, and the
Encumbrances on the Customs.

My Lord of Strafford in the second place, shows the Grant of the Imposition E.
of Strafford.
on Tobacco, as they were Let June 13. Iac. and at that time were Let for 10
l. a year Rent.

Which being attested by Mr. Gibson to be a true Copy, and to be by him
examined at the Rolls in Ireland, was read, as to this point purporting, Mr.
Gibson.


That the King appoints, That from the Date thereof, there shall be received by
way of Imposition Money 18 d. current, upon every pound of Tobacco, which is
demised to William Massam and John Pit for 7 years, under the yearly Rent of
10 l. Dat. 6 June, 13 Iac.

Next he offered a Lease of the said Impositions to Mr. Line for 21 years, at
20 l. per ann. Dat. 8 Feb. 19 Iac.

But Mr. Maynard admitting it, the reading thereof was forborne. Mr. Maynard


Next, He offers the Kings Letter 18 July, 12 Car. whereby His Majesty directs
the settling of this business, and is a warrant for issuing of the Proclamation
wherewith he is charged.

Which being affirmed by Mr. Gibson to be a true Copy, was read, whereby is
imported. Mr. Gibson.


That His Majesty being given to understand, that the pre-emption of Tobacco
may be rightly assumed, had resolved to lay hold of the present opportunity,
requiring my Lord of Strafford to advise with such of the Council there, as he
should think fit, or by what Limitations and Conditions the pre-emption may be
settled; and afterward, to direct a course for licencing the sale thereof, to
the best improvement.

Yet so as a care may be had as near as may be, to prevent the bringing in of
unfound Tobacco, leaving to his judgment, all necessary provisions to be
determined about this business, Dat. 18 July 12 Car.

My Lord of Strafford observed, that this Letter was sent upon the like course
taken here in England, it being thought fit to be alike in both Kingdoms; but
the business of England preceeded it, and was the occasion of the Letter.

The next thing observed was the Proclamation in England, to probibit the
planting of Tobacco in England and Wales, and the landing of Tobacco in any
part of England or Ireland, but only at London, other than such, and so much
Spanish Tobacco, and Plantation Tobacco, as should be allowed and determined to
be competent, upon pain of Confiscation: A Moiety to the King, a Moiety to the
Discoverer.

Which was read, being dated 14 Mar. 13 Car.

Which my Lord of Strafford observed to be the same with that wherewith himself
is charged; and that the Letter directing him to take this business into
Consideration, bears date July 12. Car. and the first Proclamation issued out
ult, Ian. 13 Car. So that he made no haste.

The next thing his Lordship offered, was the Contract it self, Dat. 7 Nov. 13.
Car. which being affirmed by Mr. Gibson, to be a true Copy, was read, being
Signed by the Deputy and Council, and Imports

That Carpenter, Bartholomew Peatly and others had made an humble Proposition,
thereby setting forth, That no Order has been taken for the due bringing in of
good and sufficient Tobacco, or quantities proportionable to the Consumption
thereof, whereby the price is too much inhaunced, or the Market glutted, and
desiring that they may have the Renting of the Tobacco business for 11 years,
paying yearly 5000 l. For the first five years, 10000 l. for the six last years
freed from Custom, and only paying 3 d. Impost, and the Custom not to be
advanced; that, they, and such as they shall contract with, may be free to
return, and enter in London or Ireland: That in case of War, they may account
only for the Profits, in lieu of the Rent.

That upon my Lord of Strafford's leaving the Government, they may be free to
surrender their Grant, and not stand charged.

That Tobacco may be solely imported, and the sale licensed by them.

That no Tobacco be planted in Ireland, during the Term.

Whereupon, a Warrant was issued for the paying of a Grant to them of the sole
Importation, and Lycensing the sale of Tobacco for 11 years, paying 5000 l.
yearly for the first five years, 10000 l. for the last six years, above the
custom of 3 d. per pound, with all the Customs received for His Majesty since
Michaelmas last, and all Impositions to be laid down during that term, etc.
Dat, 7 Nov. 1637.

And such security to be given for the Rents, as to the Court of Exchequer
should be thought meet

Where my Lord of Strafford observed, that he did nothing herein, without the
assistance of the Principal of the Council there.

And further, That before this was resolved, advertisement was sent His
Majesty, that His direction might be given, and the Letter from the Council of
Ireland, to Secretary Cook, being affirmed by Mr. Gibson, to be a true Copy,
was read, importing the substance of the said Treaty, and the conditions
thereof recited, Dat. ult. May, 1638.

The next thing offered is the Grant it self, Dat. 22. June, 14 Car. And an Act
of Parliament for the confirmation of it, according to the Petition and the
King's Letter.

The Clerk of the Crown did now inform their Lordships, That there is a Bill
concerning Importation of Tobacco, transmitted out of Ireland in July last, and
it was sent back at Michaelmas last, with a Commission to the Lieutenant, to
give Royal Assent, but whether it was given or no, he cannot tell.

But my Lord of Strafford, said, it was only transmitted from the Deputy and
Council, and sent back under the Great Seal, but did not pass the Parliament
there; and he desired it might be read only as to the Title: But that was laid
aside.

And then his Lordship added, That as for the Proclamation, he with the rest of
the Council, did set his Hand thereunto; and that he conceived then, and trusts
it will appear now to be upon very good Warrant, and justifiable; he having the
Kings Command in the point, and it being only Temporary, till an Act of
Parliament might make final in it, that it might remain in the Crown for
aftertimes, and a Proclamation thus issued till an Act of Parliament comes, he
conceives very Justifiable; if it be an Error, it is an Error he has been
always misguided by. That the King may make a Proclamation till a Parliament
comes to make it more lasting.

And whereas some Transgressors against these Proclamations, are Sentenced, yet
he is charged with none of them, and so on the matter is not charged with their
Sentence; though he conceives the same very justifiable, there appearing to be
Perjury in some of them; and if they be poor, and men of no great fortunes, he
knows not what is more proper or deserved, than to see men taken in so foul a
Crime, on the Pillory, as being a fair and moderate punishment; and the Fines
were in Terrorem, there being little or nothing of them paid. And this point of
Jurisdiction for punishing Transgressors of Act of State and Proclamations, he
conceives fully proved before in the former Articles.

And whereas it is said; the Tobacco was not sold at reasonable Rates as
formerly, he desired their Lordships to observe, that the Contract was made 22
June, 14 Car. and in September was Twelve months, he was not privy to it.

And on this the Contractors stand on their Justification, and hope to make it
appear, if they may have time, that the Planters have in no part of
Christendom, so good a value as here; and that they sell at as moderate rates,
as ever was sold heretofore, and better conditioned Commo^ty.

His Lordship further observed, That the proof which makes the great Cry in
point of value, is weak enough.

That there should be near 100000 l. profit a year, is a wonderful estimate,
and admirable to him. That during his being there, which was one year, it shall
appear they were loosers by it; which he speaks confidently, thinking those
entrusted with it, would not abuse him; they having protested, the Country was
so abused, that they could get very little by their Office.

That how it is sincehe knows not, for the Contractors, one of them is laid up
in prison, and the Tobacco seized on, under pretense that he is impeached of
Treason; But they profess (and he believes them) That when Sir George
Ratcliffe came out of Ireland, they had received in Money 80000 l. and they had
laid forth in Rent, buying Tobacco, Stock, and Charges, 86000 l. so that they
had not in their Money by 60000 l. And Sir George Ratcliffe (who is now in
Town, and though his misfortunes are heavy and sad enough, yet is known to be a
person of Honesty and Worth) he dares say, will take his oath on it, and they
that know him, know he would not take a false oath, to gain all the world; That
there be indeed some debts which are not gathered, and some collected, and paid
into the Exchequer: and this he said, is to the value of the bargain; and where
he hears the Gentleman say, the Customs have been worth to him and his Partners
300000 l. Surely the Informations have been much mistaken from them that gave
the notice out of Ireland; for it is to be understood, that whatsoever the
Profits are, the Kings Rent must be taken out, which is 15500 l. of the rest
the King has parts, and himself but part; so that on the matter, he thinks
they have been worth to him, 4 or 5 or 6000 l. a year better than the Rent,
though the value is not considerable in his Charge against him of Treason.

That their Lordships might see the Reasons why he could not prepare a
particular Account of these things, His Majesty had had a particular Account,
had not the Ministers been so dealt withal, laid in prison, and abused; If you
will speak of a tyrannical and arbitrary way of Government (The Commons
expressing some distaste at this Egression; my Lord of Strafford says he
complains of Ireland, not of things here) and desires leave to read two Orders
of the Commons House, who have seized on all, given order for sale of them,
taken the Contractors, employed and imprisoned them, and he thereby rendered
altogether unable to clear things, as otherwise he might have done; and these
things they do, he knows not how, but to his undoing indeed.

Mr. Maynard did here interpose and desire to know, to what purpose he would
have them read; and whereas he speaks of a Tyrannical usage, he desires to know
whom he presses, whether the House of Commons there or here.

And Mr. Whitlock added, That my Lord of Strafford in his defense of the last
Article, let fall some things that were an Aspersion on the whole state of
Ireland, the Lords and Commons there Assembled; for he said, Their Lordships
might perceive the truth of the Remonstrance, presented from thence on a former
occasion, and now he speaks of a Tyrannical Government, on his making of
Orders, which himself mentions to be made by the House of Commons in Ireland.
And therefore their Lordships were desired to vindicate the Honor of the
Kingdom of Ireland, which suffers by those aspersions.

Sir John Clotworthy further insisted on it, That their Lordships are witnesses
of the many Commendations my Lord of Strafford has formerly issued, concerning
the people of Ireland, as long as they were subservient to his Courses, and
could not find a way to extricate themselves from his Lord ships yoke, they
were cried up, to be numbered amongst the best of His Majesty's Subjects. Now
when they are seeking to vindicate and relieve themselves from his heavy yoke,
they must be called a people, he knows not how bad, and therefore beseeches
their Lordships that they may be set right in their Lordships opinions.

The reading of the Order being opposed by the Committee, as tending nothing to
the Cause; Mr. Maynard alleging that my Lord would have them ready to give
their Lordships satisfaction, why they should not be read, for he imports, they
be tyrannical, and something he would deduce out of them, to the aspersion of
others.

Whence my Lord of Strafford added only on the execution of them; And Mr.
Maynard replied, prove them on the Execution, they were at last permitted to be
read.

One dated 27 Feb. 1640. importing,

THat whereas great sums of Money have been raised by Customs, above the Rent,
and my Lord of Strafford, and Sir George Ratcliff are impeached of High
Treason, therefore it is Ordered, That all persons that have Money of His
Majesty's in their hands, concerning the Monopolies, shall forthwith bring the
same into his Highness Receipt; and the Commissioners appointed to oversee the
Ports, shall bring in their Letters Patents to be considered of; and because
the Customs of Dublin amount to of Ireland, and the now Collector is not
responsible for his great charge, if he should miscarry; therefore Sir Edw.
Bagshaw, Knight. now Customer and Collector, shall collect all the Customs, and
pay the same into the Receipt. That the Magazine-keeper of Tobacco shall
forthwith return a true List of all Tobacco remaining in his hands, and what
was sold since Michaelmas 1637. and to what account, and what Moneys are
received, and to whom the same is paid, and what Money, Bonds, Bills, and other
Debts remain unpaid of the Premises, and in whose hands they be; And that all
Customers, and Officers in the Ports and Creeks, do deliver into this House
within two months, a true List of all such seizures of Money, Tobacco, and
other Commodities, that they, or any of them have made or compounded for, or
what remains in their hands; and likewise all forfeited Bonds for Goods
transported into England, etc. and of all Fees they have received, and their
Warrants, and a Note of all such persons as receive Fees, and are no Officers,
and what Fees, etc. for seven years last past.

The Second Order was dated 3 Mar. 1640. importing in effect, That

FOrasmuch as much Tobacco lies in the Magazines, which is perished, It is
Ordered, that certain persons in the Order named, shall make sale thereof to
the best advantage; and the Contractors are required to make weekly Accounts of
all the Moneys they shall receive, or which shall accrue out of the Tobacco by
them sold, and deliver the Money to certain persons therein named, or any two
of them, who are required to take the burden on them, and receive the Account
weekly due, etc. and to be answerable to His Majesty, etc.

My Lord of Strafford observed, that these he showed, to justify, that he
could not give particular satisfaction, those employed being in prison.

And further, that in the whole proceeding of this, he had done nothing but
what is warrantable, and howsoever it proves a good or a bad bargain, that is not
in question; for he never knew the goodness of a Bargain could make a Treason:
If every one that makes a bad bargain with the King, should be a Traitor, it
were hard, but at that time none would be a partner with them, among them all
that say, it was so great a bargain.

That in fine, the worst of this can but be, that it is a Monopoly, a sole
buying and selling of Tobacco; and he has known in his little poor experience
many Monopolies overthrown by sentence of the Commons House,; but under favor,
never heard it to be judged Treason before this time.

For the Port of Kinsale, it is the Port wherein in a manner, all the Tobacco
of the Kingdom comes to be Landed, and thence transported again; and that the
value of the Tobacco is worth 100000 l. is but an estimate, and no
Consideration herein had of the price, the Customs, the Losses and Charges,
and the Remonstrance of the Commons, is only that they conceive it to be so;
And this is all the Testimony to the value. And so his Lordship concluded his
Defense.
And Mr. Maynard made Reply in substance as follows.


And First he observed, That whereas it was said, the Orders of the Commons
House were Rigid, indeed Tyrannical, when they be heard, there is no such thing
in them; they appoint two of my Lord of Strafford's Agents, at least one of
them is his Agent, and the other Patentee to account the Money: That they shall
only bring in a List, without taking away the Books, or any thing conducing to
his defense.

That he knows not for what purpose my Lord of Strafford objected the Lease 10
Iac. for that concerned imposition on Tobacco, but the question here is, That
none must sell Tobacco without License of the Patentee.

Here my Lord of Strafford interposed, That any man that will pay Imposition
and Custom, may bring in what Tobacco he pleases. But Mr. Maynard answers,
That that is more than the Tobacco is worth, and if the Patentees may sell
without Imposition and Custom at their own Prizes, they are 2 s. a pound
before any man.

Mr. Maynard proceeded to answer, That of the Commons petitioning for
regulating the King's Debts, and observed, That it was only that the
Encumbrances on the Kings Revenue might be taken off; and this is no ground
that the Subject must not have his Goods, because the Kings debts must be
regulated, nor a good service done His Majesty, that when the Commons shall
desire something may be done, therefore this is an Argument, and Justification,
that any thing may be done; this being to stop the issues of the affections of
the Kings people, when what they propound, shall be so far beyond their
Intention; besides, some have been whipped, Pillory'd, and, Was that the
Intention of the Commons House, to put such Severity, pardon him if he say
Cruelty, upon the Subject?

That the Letter from His Majesty was on a Misinformation; for it says, His
Majesty is given to understand the Preemption of Tobacco may be rightfully
assumed; Yet the known Law in England, or Ireland, being, that any preemption
may be put upon a Commodity, to take it from the Subject; so they have the more
to answer for it that did inform it: and, if the Question be, Who? Surely out
of my Lord of Straffords own Defense, he himself appears to be the Man; for, he
makes the Proposition of the Commons-House the ground of his Proceeding: So it
was an Arrow out of his Quiver. Besides, though it was to be assumed to His
Majesty, yet the Question is, Who had the Profit? the King had little in
proportion to what has been raised.

For the Proclamation, March 13 Car. Whereas my Lord makes that in England the
Example of that Issued in Ireland; if that which follows may be an Example to
that which goes before, it may be true: But, the Proclamation in Ireland was in
January, and the Proclamation here is in March, the same year; Therefore that is
a great Mistake.

Besides, if there be a Monopoly set up in England, Shall that Justify
another? A Crime being aggravated, when it becomes an Example; for, when they
go to the other, one strengthens another; and there is more Mischief to the
Commonwealth.

And, in Parliament, they must be bold to say, when Ill Ministers shall take on
them to Vouch the Sacred Names of His Majesty to Justify a Monopoly, His
Majesty is Innocent, but they liable to great Punishment; and the more
Punishable, because they Justify it under such a Color.

As to the Advertisement of it hither by the Deputy and Counsel; Shall their
Advertisement, of what was done Unjustly, make it Just?

Besides, my Lord of Strafford takes on him the Encouragement of the Contracts;
for, there is one Proposition that (in case we remove) they may have liberty to
surrender their Patents, which is a strong relish of my Lord of Strafford: For
else, Why should they desire no longer to continue the Grant, then they may
have his Protection to Whip, and Pillory Men? And, the truth is, he is the sole
Man that has the Benefit of it, and the rest are his Servants; And, they will
desire Mr Little may be examined to that point by and by.

He added, That his Lordship had a Weak Defense, else he would not have fled to
such a Buckler, as an Act of Parliament, certified from Sir Christopher
Wainsford the Deputy of Ireland; that he thinks it fit to pass, who was one of
them that Acted at the Councel-Table, so far as his part came; but, it was
never propounded to either of the Houses. And, where my Lord says, A
Proclamation may be made, till an Act of Parliament make it more lasting; Mr.
Maynard said, Yet he hoped, by no Law in England, a Proclamation may take away
the Goods of the Subject: That there is a Right in Proclamation he will never
speak against; but, it is no Temporary Law to raise a Monopoly.

And, whereas he says, Tobacco yields no where so good a Value as in Ireland,
that is nothing to the Point of Buying; that when the Subject may have 2
Shillings, my Lord of Straffords Agents shall have it for 6d, and sell it again
for 2 or 3 Shillings.

My Lord says, The Contractors are out of Purse 6000 l. and it is but said; And
that will not abate the Testimony.

For Kinsale, the Witness being an understanding Man, says, That in that one
Port there comes in 200 Tun; and whereas it is said, There comes none, in a
Manner, in any other Port, Why then has my Lord Five Magazines of Tobacco at
several places? Nothing is offered by way of Defense: And he that shall
Justify such things by the Commands he has produced, does exceedingly
Justify our Complaint in that Point; for, were it not that by Misinformation,
the Subject is left Remediless at Law, he might be helped there: but, when my
Lord of Strafford, and other Great Officers there shall use the King's Name,
That Is our Trouble, therefore their Profit: And, therefore, though my Lord
makes light of it, it will come heavy at the last, and is a great breach on the
Property of the Subject, Soleemption may be made of all things else.

Mr. Glyn desiring to add a Word, observed, That Two things my Lord of
Strafford mainly insists on, to Justify his Actions. First, That the House of
Commons desired the Revenue might be unfettered, by taking off the Leases in
being; And Urges, That they intended the Lease of Tobacco among the rest, which
appears not: But admit it, their Intention was to take off the Fetters and
Engagements from the Kings Revenue, that the King might make the best of it;
not that others should feed on what was His, and he in the mean time want.

Now their Lordships may observe, how my Lord of Strafford executes these
Intentions; he gets a Lease of it, but does not he retain the Kings Revenue,
being worth 100000 l. a year to himself for 5000 l. if the Witness speaks
truth? So it falls on his own head, and is a plain deceiving of the King. There
is a Letter, which Answer is made to; but, if their Lordships recall to Memory
what the Letter was, it was as just as could be, to take a course for
Preemption of Tobacco; no, they afterward enter into Consultation, and Advice,
what should be done: And, What do they? They lay a Restraint that no Man should
Import unless they would Sell unto my Lord of Strafford, at his Rate, and so it
is executed to Tyranny over the People.

There is another thing my Lord Insists on: Is the making of a good Bargain
Treason? But, out of the making of this Bargain, if their Lordships well
consider it, They shall find a double Treason to result; First, Exercising an
Arbitrary Power, by laying what Tax he will, for he may lay 19 Shillings as
well as 6d. Secondly. His depriving the King of His Estate, under Color of
Advancing His Revenue, which is to deprive the King of His Government: For, if
one takes away my means of Livelihood, and defense against an Enemy, it is a
killing of me round about, though it were a more immediate killing of me to run
me through.

If he take away the Kings Livelihood and Just Revenue, whereby He is enabled
to Govern and Protect His People, Is it not to take away the Government out of
His Hand?

And one word Mr. Glyn desired to add from something that fell from my Lord of
Strafford, by way of Prevention, concerning the Parliament of Ireland: We live
under one King, and one Government, and no doubt ought to be sensible of one
another Honor, the Parliament of England, and the Parliament of Ireland.

Here is an Article against my Lord of Strafford, for endeavoring to put Him
out of Opinion of Parliaments: In this Assembly, where the Commons and Peers
are Assembled he has endeavored to blast a Parliament: In the next Kingdom he
talks of a Tyrannical Government, an Arbitrary Power: (these were his Words in
effect) Is not this as much as in his Power to cast a Blast and Ill Affection
(in any Man that hears him) on the Parliament of Ireland? And he that will do
it in the presence of a Parliament, in England, What will he do of a Parliament
of this Kingdom, in the absence of a Parliament, and when there is no
Parliament Sitting?

And so Concluded the Twelfth Article, and the House was ADJOURNED.

THE Thirteenth Article. The Charge,

13. THat Flax being one of the principal and Native Commodities of that
Kingdom of Ireland, the said Earl having gotten Great Article XIII. Charge.
Quantities thereof into his Hands, and growing on his own Lands, did Issue out
several Proclamations, viz. The one Dated the One and Thirtieth of May, in the
Twelfth of His Majesty's Reign; and the other Dated the One and Thirtieth day
of January, in the same Year; Thereby prescribing and enjoining the Working of
Flax into Yarn and Thread, and the ordering of the same in such ways, wherein
the Natives of that Kingdom were unpractised and unskilful: Which Proclamations
so Issued, were, by his Commands and Warrants to His Majesty's Justices of
Peace, and other Officers, and, by other Rigorous Means put in Execution; and
the Flax Wrought, or ordered in other manner then as the said Proclamation
prescribed, was Seized and employed to the Use of him and his Agents: and
thereby the said Earl endeavored to gain, and did gain in effect the Sole Sale
of that Native Commodity.

April 1. 1641.
THe Thirteenth Article was this Day Read and Opened by Mr. Maynard, concerning
Flax, one of the Native Commodities of the Kingdom, which my Lord of Strafford,
by several Proclamations, enjoined the Natives to work into Yarn, in a way
wherein they were Unskilful; and Prohibited the Buying of any Yarn of this Flax
otherwise made; and upon this occasion, much was Seized: So that by the
Complaints of the Commons, it appears, that Thousands were Undone, their Goods
being taken away, and Converted to my Lords Use.

For Proof,

The Second Proclamation of Deputy and Counsel was Read; wherein the first is
Recited, Importing in effect, That by reason of the multiplicity of ends in
Yarne, there is much confusion; That for remedy, a Proclamation Issued the last
of May last, which has taken good effect: and, in regard some ill-disposed
persons have nevertheless contracted for Yarn at cheap and low rates, though
not made according to the first Proclamation; That therefore the said first
Proclamation be strictly observed, and that none presume to buy any
Linnen-Yarn, but shall be Reeled on one end, and no more, etc. That if any
person shall, after the first of April next, offend, contrary to this
Proclamation, he shall be proceeded against at the Council Board, or Castle
Chamber: Some are appointed to enquire of Contempts, to whom Recompense is
promised. Given, etc. 31 Ian. 12 Car. 1638.

The Natives not being able to apply themselves to his Commands, a Warrant went
to Seize the Goods, made, or brought contrary to this Proclamation; so that
People forbore the Markets, durst not sell none openly, and so could not pay
their Rents.

The Warrant was produced under my Lord of Straffords Hand and Seal, which his
Lordship affirmed, being in effect,

By the Lord Deputy Wentworth.
TO all Justices of the Peace, etc. Whereas Benjamin Croky is Authorized to
inform himself, and advertise the State, of Abuses and Contempts committed and
done, against a Proclamation made for Reformation of the Abuse of Spinsters of
Linen Yarn, and to stay all Yarn made contrary, etc. till Our pleasure be
further known: And whereas he now informs us, he cannot discharge that Trust,
in regard diverse persons do privily, in their own Houses, and not in open
Markets, make Sale of their Yarn; and though he has desired Assistance of
Public Magistrates, yet they have failed to afford him the same, in that
measure that is fitting: In consideration whereof our pleasure is, and we do
hereby require and authorize you, to be aiding and assisting to Benjamin Croky
and his Deputy, To seize on, and take all Yarn which shall be found to be made
contrary to the said Proclamation, and to cause diligent search to be made in
all Houses, etc. where you shall be informed any such Remains lie hidden, and
the same to seize and bring to Dublin, to be disposed of, as We shall direct
the Party delivering it, taking Crokies hand for Receipt thereof, etc.

To prove Execution of it.

Benjamin Croky Sworn, was Interrogated, Whether he, by virtue Benjamin Croky,
Witness.
hereof, has Seized any Yarn, and how much? and how it was disposed of?

He Answered, That his Deputy did Seize Yarn, and it was taken from him by
means of Joseph Carpenter the Steward, who received the Yarn into his Custody,
and converted it into my Lords Loomes. He does not know what quantities, but it
was a great parcel; And, he thinks, it was to Carpenters use, but most part of
it unto my Lords. Further, this Steward did employ John Townesend to buy Yarn,
contrary to the Proclamation; He also employed others to Buy some for my Lords
use and his own. This he knows.

Sir John Clotworthy Interrogated, What he has known done in Execution of
these Commands, being a Justice of Peace? Sir John Clotworthy Witness.


He Answered, That he had formerly heard of this Proclamation; and another
Dated in May, concerning the Yarn business, That there was this same, or the
Copy of this same Warrant, under my Lord Deputies Hand, brought to him, being a
Justice of Peace; and he required to give Assistance in it: That he sent for
the People that had been Distressed in the business, and likewise the Party
employed by this Crooky, and one White named in the Proclamation, to know, by
what Authority they put this in Execution? Thereupon they produced both the
Proclamation and this Warrant.

That he conceived, there was an Extrajudicial proceeding in it, and therefore
took Examination of it; and found, in the putting of the thing in Execution,
That whereas there was a Clause in the Proclamation, They should Seize on all
Yarne, that was not an Hundred Threads every Skean, and should Seize on it when
they found it short of this.

That having taken the Examinations, he sent them up to my Lord Deputy (they
being now out of his head) with a Letter, Declaring the Abuse of the Business:
That he heard nothing in Return of the Business; but was Severely Threatened;
and received a Letter from Mr. Secretary Little, then my Lord Lieutenants
Secretary: That it was very ill taken, that he interposed in any thing, wherein
my Lord was concerned: And my Lord Rainalaugh had much ado to keep off a
Sergeant at Arms to be sent for him.

My Lord of Strafford desired the Letter might be shown: But, Sir E. of
Strafford.
John Answered, That it was Written four or five years ago, and he did not
keep it; but, if Mr. Secretary Little be Interrogated, he doubts not but he
will Acknowledge it.

Lord Rainalaugh being Interrogated to the same effect? L. Rainalaugh.


He Answered, It is true, he was at Dublin when some Information had been given
of Sir John Clotworthy, for something had been done in the Yarne business, and
that he applied himself to Sir George Ratcliffe, to desire him to preserve Sir
George from an ill Office, and Sir George moved in it accordingly, so that Sir
John escaped trouble at that time: For the Execution of the Warrant about the
Flax, that he knows is this White, or his Fellow, or one of them, he knows not
whether; but, he coming to the Fair of Athlone (where the Lord Rainalaughs
Residence is) gave a Deputation to John Dennis, a Soldier of my Lord Wilmots;
and, that within little time after, several Complaints were brought to him, as
well by some of the Townsmen of Athlone, or diverse of the Country, that this
Dennis had seized on a great deal of Yarne in the Shops in the Town, and abroad
in the Country.

That he sent for the Soldier, and Asked him, By what Authority he did so? who
thereupon showed the Proclamation, a Warrant from my Lord Deputy, and such a
kind of Warrant as this; (whether a Warrant, or a Copy, he cannot say): That he
Examined what proportion of Yarn he had taken; and, he told the Lord
Rainalaugh, he had as much as a Cart could carry: Asking him what he would do
with it? the said Dennis answered, He would carry it to Dublin: And he asking
him farther, What he would do with it there? He told him (the Lord Rainalaugh)
he had direction to deliver it to Mr. Carpenter, my Lord Deputies Steward: That
he, the Lord Rainalaugh, meddled not with it, but thereupon posted a Gentleman
to Dublin, that had ready Access to the Deputy, and told him the Complaints,
and this abuse, by Execution of that Warrant: and, that though it was not
agreeable to my Lord of Straffords intentions (he conceived) to have them used,
he thought fit to Represent them: Thereupon, He the Lord Rainalaugh went to
Dublin.

Sir John Clotworthy being Interrogated, what he knows about breaking Sir John
Clotworthy Witness.
open of Chests, for finding of Flax, or any thing of that Nature.

He Answered, That (as it has been laid open) immediately on the Issuing of
these Proclamations, and these Men's going abroad. The Markets were deserted,
and little came to the Markets at all, though it were the most Native Commodity
of the Kingdom, and paid most part of the May-Rents; For, it is That the Women
work on all the Winter-Season: And, when the Markets were deserted, people were
fain to bring their Yarn into houses, and sell it under shelter, where they
might not be seen, nor these Fellows Seize on it; That thereupon these Men
would come to Justices of Peace, and Officers, and they came to Sir John
himself, and though he would not assist, they would threaten the Constables,
and break open Chests, and thereupon he the said Sir John Clotworthy took away
Yarn from them, and restored it to the Proprietors. This was done in the Town
and County of Antrim: that he cannot tell how long it is since; but, it was in
pursuance of this Proclamation and Warrant.

Being Asked, Whether the People were not ready to rise in Tumults and
Uproares, where these were Executed?

He Answered, That it made very great Disorder, and great Reason for it; for,
they took away all they had provided for their Half years Rent, and many
people, even Multitudes, starved.

Lord Rainalaugh being Interrogated the time, Answered, He could not L.
Rainalaugh Witness.
tell the certain time; but, my Lord of Strafford did withdraw it himself.

Patrick Gough being Interrogated, Where he had the Remonstrance of the House
of Commons? Mr. Gough, Witness.


He Answered, It was delivered him the 25th of February, in the Commons House
of Parliament in Ireland, the whole House Sitting: to be transmitted to the
Committee for Irish Affairs here, with many other things.

Which Remonstrance was Read, being, in effect, the most Lamentable Complaint
of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses chosen for the Provinces of Conaught,
and Ulster, touching that most Cruel Extortion, or rather Robbery committed by
a Company of Pursivants, sent abroad to Seize Yarne, by Color of diverse
Proclamations by the Lord Deputy, January and May, 1636.

I. THe said Pursivants came into all the Public Markets, and seized on all
the Linnen-Yarne and Clothing, by which the Markets were destroyed.

II. The Merchant was forced to meet the People at their private Houses; which
they understanding, way-layed the People, and took away their Yarne, and Cloth,
and seized on what the Merchants had bought.

III. When any came to the Markets, they went to the Houses of poor people, and
took up the Hutches where their Cloth lay, and seized on all, leaving not so
much as to cover their Nakedness.

IV. They took away all the poor peoples Iron Pots, on pretense of another
Proclamation, so that on this great Cruelty, which exceeded Pharoes, the poor
Children were forced to go into the Fields, to eat Grass with the Beasts of the
Field, where they lay down and died by Thousands; If it be denied, it will be
proved by Twenty Thousand: and the Judges of Assize, etc. procured my Lord
Lieutenant to Recall all the foresaid Proclamations.

Mr. Fitzgarret being Interrogated, as to the Value of this Commodity, Mr.
Firzgarret Witness.
to the Kingdom of Ireland?

He Answered, That he has known the Province of Ulster, and had occasion to
converse with the best of it for 24 years last past: That he was for 8 years
employed in the Circuit for these parts, and observed, the Natives made a very
great Commodity of Yarne and Linen Cloth: That he may safely call it the
Staple-Commodity of that part of the Kingdom; That the Merchants buying their
Yarne, and transporting it to Lancaster, it was a very great Commodity, and
many lived on it; That the Proclamation and Execution of it (as he was informed
by a man of very good rank) Impoverished the whole Province, especially the
Irish Natives, of whom few have Lands or Estates, but live as Tenants; and the
Lands there not yielding Wheat or Barley in abundance (as other Countries) they
convert the best Lands to the sowing of Flax, and make a very great Commodity
of it; That he had continual conference, especially in Term-time, with the best
in those parts, and especially Mr. Robert Braithwait, Agent for my Lord of
Essex, and Dr. Cook, of whose two Towns, one is supported by this Commodity,
and Dr. Cook said, there has been a hundred pounds worth of Yarn in a day sold
and bought in that place, and by this means the Markets are wasted, the People
impoverished, and that he the said Dr. Cook thinks in his Conscience, many
thousands are famished by the scarcity of Money that ensued on the seizing of
this; and the extremity was such, that one of the Deputies of those men's
authorizing, went into the house of a Scotchman in the parts of Ulster (himself
being in England or Scotland) would open the Chests, and used such cruelty,
that they thrust a stick into the Woman's throat, and she died of it, and the
man was tried for it, as he was informed.

And so Mr. Maynard concluded the Charge, supposing it to be Mr. Maynard.
sufficiently proved.

After a little respite, my Lord of Strafford made his defense in substance as
follows.

That in this Charge, he hears something tending to Oppression, but nothing at
all toward Treason, for which he is only to answer.

That the intention of these Proclamations touching Yarn, was certainly very
good, and he thinks the power very lawfully executed, being but temporary, to
take away an abuse, and make it better for the Commonwealth.

That he conceives not, how these Proclamations should be particularly laid on
him, for he has very good company goes along with him, being set out by the
Deputies and Council, and affixed to them the Hands of my Lord Loftus, the Lord
Primate, the Archbishop of Dublin, Earl of Ormond, Lord Dillon, Sir Adam
Loftus, the two Chief Justices, and others: That he had rather answer all, than
impute any thing to any body else, but he believes their Lordships will
conceive he is not particularly answerable, for things done by the advice of
the Council, as for the best.

That he conceives they had power to issue these Proclamations, as in other
things was frequent, as in Drawing by the Horse tail, burning the Straw, and so
taking the Corn from it; to bring them from these Irish Customs to the English
Manners: So in this, that their winding of Thread might be brought off with
more convenience, as being of so much more value; for the unwinding was as much
trouble as the thing was worth, so that the authority was lawful, and well
executed in the granting of it.

He craved leave to tell their Lordships wherefore it was, being desirous to
regulate this business more than any other thing whatsoever; And it was out of
that Duty and Service he did, and ever should owe to the English Nation;
however for the present, he may not be thought one, he had those affections,
and shall have to his death, to wish the Kingdom all prosperity and happiness,
in all the parts of it.

That at his coming over, he did observe, the Wool of that Kingdom did
increase very much, that if it should there be wrought into Cloth, it would be
a very great prejudice in time to the Clothing trade of England, and therefore
he was willing, as much as he might lawfully and fairly, to discourage that
Trade: That on the other side, he was desirous to set up the trade of Linen
cloth, which would be beneficial there, and not prejudice the trade of England;
But it was extremely to his loss, for he says he lost 3000 l. and the Stewards
Chamber being searched, and it appearing so, the Accounts were delivered back
again; so that he conceives they had lawful power so to do, till a Law might
make it more certain and settled; and then he is answerable for nothing in all
the rest, because the execution was nothing to him, and the abuses of the
Officers he is not to answer for, of whom Croky was the principal Executor, and
if there was an Offender, he is the greatest Offender himself, and my Lord
Rainalaugh tells their Lordships plainly and truly, that upon complaint of the
ill execution of it, it was absolutely recalled, and that within two years: so
if it were a fault, he was not incorrigible, but willing to amend it on the
first notice.

For the Warrant, there is nothing proved of any thing amiss in him, but it
goes only to second the Proclamation, and that there should be assistance in
the due and just execution of it: only it says the Yarn shall be brought to
Dublin, there to be disposed of, as he should direct; but there is no proof of
any brought to him, only my Lord Rainalaugh mentions a Cart-load brought to
Dublin, as the fellow told him; and Croky says, some was brought to Dublin (but
he knows not how much) and it was converted partly to his use, partly to
Carpenters, but he is a single witness; whereas my Lord Rainalaugh says, there
was taken at Athlone (as he was told) a Cart-load of Yarn, and Sir John
Clotworthy says, they starved by multitudes in Ulster; my Lord of Strafford
said, he could not conceive how so little a quantity taken in Conaught, should
be an occasion of starving multitudes in Ulster, nor the small quantities taken
by Croky, but if there were so many starved, it must be occasioned by some
other means than this.

That his Looms should be an occasion of starving so many men, he conceives
very strange, for in truth, the value of Cloth made in those Looms in a year
(which he left his Tenants to manage) was not, as he remembers, above 16 or
1700 l. and if their Lordships consider the value of the Yarn with the Labor,
they would wonder the making of such a quantity in a year should starve so many
thousands.

It is very true, (he said) he is sorry for that Remonstrance, read of the
Commons House in Ireland, thinking he had merited a better opinion in that*
Kingdom; but howsoever they have been informed, he doubts not, but when things
are showed them more clearly, than they have been hitherto, he shall have their
good opinion still; he never in truth, doing or saying any thing in all his
life, but with very clear and faithful intentions to the good and prosperity of
that Commonwealth and Kingdom; his Lordship added, That he had some little
fortune amongst them, not great indeed, nothing near that which is reported,
hardly the fifth part, but something he had there, honestly and justly come by,
and for that reason he had cause to wish well to the Kingdom; and it grieved
him extremely to hear such a Remonstrance read: there would be a time he hoped,
when he should have means to give them better satisfaction; but it is but a
charge, and cannot (under favor) be the proof of a Charge, being only received
by information of witnesses, and no Oath being given by the Commons-House, he
conceived it could not be made a proof against him, but the truth of the Charge
comes to be examined; for the Remonstrance says, that these things will be
proved by 20000. To which he can say nothing, but that he is infinitely sorry,
he should be so mistaken in that Kingdom, where (to his best understanding) his
Conscience tells him he has deserved very well (with modesty be it spoken, his
Lordship added) of them all, and desired to do Justice amongst them, and there
would come a time when he should be better understood, as well there, as here
he hoped

For the testimony of Mr. Fitzgarret, he speaks nothing of knowledge, but what
he has been informed and heard, and what has been credibly reported to him,
and those are no proofs to be judicially taken, as he conceived, nothing being
by Mr. Fitzgarret spoken, but by report; and their Lordships have heard this
reported as well as he, yet knew not whether it be true, further than is proved.

So he concluded where he began, something may look like an oppression in them
that did execute it, but nothing as to himself and the rest of the Counsel, who
issued the Proclamation on just and warrantable grounds, and according to that
power they had from the King, which he conceived was a full and clear acquittal
of him (humbly submitting to their Lordships better Judgments) of this
Article, so far forth, as it amounts in any kind, to convince him of High
Treason.

To which Mr. Maynard made reply in substance as follows, Mr. Maynard.
And first he observed,

That my Lord of Strafford was still striking on the same string, here (said
he) is no Treason, though something tending to oppression, and so at this rate,
he can never want an answer: for if this be not (in this particular) as high
and wilful an overthrow of the fundamental Rules and Justice of the Kingdom, as
can be imagined, I appeal to your Lordships: and that is it wherewith he is
charged, not as if this singly would amount to Treason: And

Whereas his Lordship says, his intention was good, if (when an oppression of
High Justice is committed) it be enough to say, he had a good intention, it is
a good defense to take away men's Goods, and apply them to his own use; and so
this being practiced by him universally, on a whole Kingdom, may be excused by
a good intention: But God knows the heart, your Lordships are Judges of his
actions and oppressions. He says the Proclamation was a Temporary Law to take
away Goods, break open Houses, forbid and annihilate Contracts; this he says in
the face of the Kingdom; so that there cannot be better evidence given against
him, than comes from his own mouth: for that, which is put upon him, is, That
he would erect a Government that depends merely upon Will, and take away that
which is obliged to Laws. To say a Proclamation is a Temporary Law, is to make
a Law, as long as it pleases them that award the Proclamation to continue: for
when shall it have an end, but by the pleasure of them that send it forth? He
would excuse himself, that he has gone in good company: Did the Commons insist
on this, as a single misdemeanor, my Lord might say, he is not the only man
that deserves punishment, but he cannot say, but that he is the Principal man,
and indeed, and in effect the sole man, as it will appear in the answer to the
rest. They are too blame that follow his misguidance, but he is not innocent
that draws others into such actions with him.

Mr. Maynard observed the nature of the Proclamation, it was not to appoint a
regulation, but to take away the Subjects Goods; neither giving them time to
vend the Commodities in their hands, nor to depart from that (if it were an ill
usage) but forthwith, as soon as the Proclamation was out, the Goods must be
seized, because they did not do the things they could not do.

He says the Execution is nothing to himself, but to his Agents. Surely, he
that will command unjust and evil things, is not a whit less guilty, because he
has Ministers, that will apply themselves to his pleasure, to execute unlawful
Commands. He commands, they execute it; and when they had executed it, they
bring it to his Looms, that is, to his profit.

He says it was recalled after two years or thereabouts, but your Lordships may
remember, on what misfortune and cruelty it was recalled, the tumults, the
stirs, the oppressions it did produce: and his recalling it after two years,
makes him not innocent before, when 1000 or 2000 or 3000 had perished by the
oppression of it; he was not innocent, because 10000 or 12000 did not perish;
it was too long kept on foot, and he that does unlawful things in so great a
measure, is not to be excused, because he cannot bring them wholly to pass. For
that is all can be said, He could go no further, and therefore he leaves it off.

He says, his Warrant is not amiss, but it is extremely amiss, for the Minister
should advertise the State touching the Subjects Conformities; but my Lord of
Strafford will have them presently enter the House, and seize the Goods: the
Proclamation puts them on it, but the Warrants command Justices of Peace, and
all Ministers of Justice, to come in and countenance this cruelty; and when
they did not conform to it, they had reproofs from my Lords servants. And if
the point were only to produce witness, that the Flax or Yarn came to my Lords
own hands, it might be despaired of, but when the profit comes to his hands by
his Agents, and those set on work by him, it is no excuse to say it was done by
others.

Mr. Maynard said further, he wondered my Lord should say, there was no proof,
when there were two express witnesses; my Lord said, he heard but of a
Cart-load, Mr. Maynard answered, he heard not the word, but he heard of about a
Cart-load, and could that starve 1000 men? yet if a Cart-load be not sufficient
to starve 1000 men, if there be more than 1000 starved, then more than a
Cart-load was seized. At that time there came in but a Cart-load, but there
came in by good quantities, when it came in by Cart-loads.

He says the Remonstrance is but a charge, but it comes in on good proof, and
it is concerning a whole Province, and (as it is likely) they were there that
knew of the miseries that befell the Provinces.

Mr. Maynard further observed, that heretofore in the matter of Tobacco he told
your Lordships, he had a command; it was expected, he would have produced
something to the purpose now, but God be thanked he has not: he says Tobacco
is a superfluous thing, but these things that are for clothing are not
superfluous, and being he has gone into this excess, Mr. Maynard concluded
with this, that he must leave him to their Lordships Judgments, for he had
made an excuse, tho that he said did not reach an excuse,

And whereas my Lord said, the Cart-load of Yarn was taken in Conaught, not in
Ulster.

Mr. Glin added that one thing was observable from my Lord of Strafford's own
evidence, which seemed to convince him of what he denied. Mr. Glyn.
He pretends this was for advancement of Trade, not for his own use, and that
there was but 1700 l. worth made in a year, but himself casting his Accounts
says, he lost 3000 l. so he owns it by the loss, but not by the benefit, which
convinces the principal point himself denies.

Here my Lord of Strafford desired leave to explain himself, that (when he said
he lost 3000 l. and 1700 l. a year made of it) he said he made Cloth there 6 or
7 years as hetook it, and the Cloth it self, not the Yarn, was worth 1700 l.
for the Yarn was not worth 400 l. and in that time he might very well loose
3000 l.

And so the Thirteenth Article was concluded, and the Fourteenth Article being
for the present laid aside, the Committee proceeded to the Fifteenth Article.

THE Fifteenth Article. The Charge,

15. THat the said Earl of Strafford, traitorously and wickedly devised and
contrived by force of Arms, and in a warlike manner to subdue the Subjects of
the said Realm of Ireland; and to bring them under his tyrannical Power and
Will, and in pursuance of these wicked and traitorous purposes aforesaid; The
said Earl of Strafford in the eighth year of His Majesty's Reign, did by his
own authority, without any Warrant or color of Law, Car, and Impose great sums
of Money upon the Towns of Baltemore, Bandenbridge, Talo'we, and diverse other
Towns and places in the said Realm of Ireland, and did cause the same to be
levied upon the Inhabitants of those Towns by Troops of Soldiers, with Force
and Arms, in a warlike manner. And on the Ninth day of March, in the Twelfth
year of His now Majesty's Reign, traitorously did give authority unto Robert
Savill, a Sergeant at Arms, and to the Captains of the Companies of Soldiers,
in several parts of that Realm, to send such numbers of Soldiers, to lie on the
Lands and Houses of such as would not conform to his Orders, until they should
render Obedience to his said Orders and Warrants, and after such submission
(and not before) the said Soldiers to return to their Garrisons. And did also
issue the like Warrants unto diverse others, which Warrants were in Warlike
manner with Force and Arms, put in execution accordingly, and by such Warlike
means, did force diverse of His Majesty's Subjects of that Realm, to submit
themselves to his unlawful commands.

And in the said Twelfth year of His Majesty's Reign, the said Earl of
Strafford did traitorously cause certain Troops of Horse and Foot, Armed in
Warlike manner, and in Warlike array, with Force and Arms, to expel Richard
Butler from the possession of the Manor of Castle-Cumber, in the Territory of
Idough, in the said Realm of Ireland, and did likewise, and in like Warlike
manner, expel diverse of His Majesty's Subjects from their Houses, Families,
and Possessions, as namely Edward O Brenman, Owen Oberman, John Brenman,
Patrick Oberman, Sir Cyprian Horsefield, and diverse others, to the number of
about an hundred Families, and took, and imprisoned them and their Wives, and
carried them prisoners to Dublin, and there detained until they did yield up,
surrender, or release their respective Estates or Rights.

And the said Earl in like manner, has, during his Government of the said
Kingdom of Ireland, subdued diverse others of His Majesty's Subjects there to
his Will, and thereby, and by the means aforesaid, has levied War within the
said Realm, against His Majesty, and His Liege People of that Kingdom.

Mr. Palmer proceeded to open the 15th Article, which concurred with the
precedent in point of Evidence, to make good the Charge of the Commons against
the Lord of Strafford, in point of High Treason. The main Accusation being, his
laboring to subvert the established Laws and Government, and instead of them,
to introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Power.

THAT this laid in the 15th Article, Article XV. Charge.
does more than prove this Charge, charging him with Acts of Force and
Hostility, which are not only an Evidence to Mr. Palmer.
prove his design, but are actual subversions of Law, and introducing of an
arbitrary Power, as their Lordships will perceive, when they shall hear how he
executed his Commands by Soldiers.

And as this contributes with the rest in proof of the main Charge, so he
humbly offered, that this Article, singly and individually of it self,
contained a Charge of High Treason, and that the nature of the offense would
appear in the proofs of the Article.

The Article is first general, That he did traitorously devise, to subdue the
Subjects of the Realm of Ireland, by force of Arms, in a Warlike manner, under
his tyrannical Power and Will.

In pursuance of these things that are charged in the Article; the first they
said, they would pass over at that time, and my Lord of Strafford also had
notice, that they intended to wave it for the present.

The Second is, that 9 March 12. of the King, he gave a Warrant to one Savill,
a Sergeant at Arms, and to Captains and Soldiers of that Kingdom, to Quarter on
the Houses and Lands of such, as would not conform to render Obedience to his
Orders, such number of Soldiers, as the Sergeant at Arms should think fit,
according to the demerit of the Delinquents, and to be kept there, until they
made submission, and then to return, and not before. And the like Warrants were
issued to others, and to the Subjects of that Realm, who were forced to submit
to his illegal Commands, and this is charged to be a levying of War against the
King, and his People.

Your Lordships may please to remember, what a Power my Lord of Strafford had
assumed to himself from the Courts of Justice established by Law, in taking to
himself an Arbitrary Power, to determine Causes on Petitions, and that without
any legal Process. And he intended to himself, an execution of these Orders in
this manner. If a Petition was presented, First a signification went to the
Party, that he should satisfy the complaint, else show cause; if he did not
appear, then there went a Messenger, or Pursivant; on his Affidavit that the
Party was not found (as well he might not be found) then an Attachment: after
that, the Sergeant at Arms. This Sergeant at Arms had always with him a Warrant
dormant, (not a particular Warrant in the Case complained of) that whenever
he should have an Order to fetch any man in (if once he had made Affidavit he
could not be found) he was by virtue of that Warrant, to repair to the next
Garrison, and there to take such numbers of Soldiers, as he thought fit, and
quarter them on the House of the Party: and this was as ordinarily executed, as
any powers of Law in legal Cases.

In the execution of this, the Party suffered as much insolency, as is
incident to War; their Catel taken, their Corn thrash'd out, their growing Corn
cut, their Houses burnt, and some exiled, and forced to leave their Country,
and fly to remote places, by reason of their Soldiers insolences.

The method propounded is, First, to prove the Fact: then to observe the nature
of the offense, both from the Stat. of 25. Edw. 3. and also from a particular
Stat. in Ireland 18 H. 6. whereby the Offender in this very case, is adjudged
to be a Traitor.

Mr. Savil the Sergeant at Arms produced and sworn, and a Copy of his Warrant
offered. My Lord of Strafford excepted against the reading of Mr. Savill,
Witness.
the Copy in a Charge of High Treason; adding, that it concerned him very much,
he being to be tried for his Life and Honor, since upon this the whole Charge
was to be grounded. On other things he did not insist so much, but submitted to
their Lordships pleasure, because they said they would consider them in their
Judgment; but this being the ground and foundation, whereupon they intend to
charge him with High Treason, he besought their Lordships to consider it, with
that Honor, and Goodness, and Justice they did in all things.

Mr. Glyn in Answer alleged, that their Lordships had overruled it in Mr.
Glyn.
the Case of the Bishop of Down. That (suppose a Warrant is offered by force,
whereby High Treason is committed) if a Copy may not be given in evidence, then
let him that is guilty in such a Case, get away the Originals, it cleares him
of the Treason: besides, it is no matter of Record: and Mr. Maynard observed,
That if one writes a Letter, and therein commands one to commit Treason; if the
Letter be burnt, this man shall not prove the Command, if only the Original
must make it good.

Mr. Savill being asked what was become of the Original Warrant?

He answered, it was in Ireland, he not expecting any question about this
business, but this was the Copy of it, and under his own Mr. Savill.
hand.

My Lord of Strafford offered to their Lordships, that he that is to swear it
to be a true Copy, is the man, that (if a fault be committed) is in fault
himself as much as any, for he is the man that executed this Treason, and now
he shall swear to the justifying of his own act.

Mr. Savill being (on my Lord of Clares Motion) Asked, How they came by the
Copy?

He Answered, He knew not how it came into their hands.

But, Mr. Palmer added, Now he sees it in our hands, and he knows it: Mr.
Palmer.
And that this Copy cannot be questioned, unless he question what is done
already; for, in this very Case, a Copy is allowed to be an Evidence, for the
Relation it has to the greatness of the Charge, as to my Lord of Strafford;
and it cannot alter the Justice of the Evidence; for, if it be an Evidence, it
is an Evidence in whatsoever the Cause is.

Mr. Savill being Asked, How he came to set his hand to the VVarrant? Mr.
Savill.


He Answered, That in January last there came to him one William Somer,
Secretary to my Lord Rainalaugh, and told him; Mr. Sergeant Savill, you had a
Warrant to Quarter Soldiers on one within the Town of Athlone, but the parties
were Friends, and you removed them; one of those Soldiers committing Extortion,
in taking away two Pewter Dishes, and is to be Tried at our next sitting; and,
unless the Soldier have a Copy of your Warrant, he is like to suffer in it:
That he thereupon Answered, He could not deny it; and brought the Original
Warrant, and being a good Clerk, he bad him Copy it out.

He says, he desired you to let some of your own Men do it, and I will give
him for his pains --

That he, the said Mr. Savill, did thereupon deliver the Original Warrant to
his Servant, Edmond Brumingham, as he remembers, who Copied it out. That Mr.
Somer came, and told him, Here is a Copy: That he asked Mr. Somer, Whether he
had examined it? Yes indeed, says he, it is a true Copy: That upon that, he
the said Mr. Savill delivered this to Mr. Somer, under his Hand, but did not
compare it himself, yet is confident it is a True Copy.

Mr. Maynard observed, That they Charged a Treason in an Act, That Mr. Maynard.
my Lord of Strafford gave Authority to do such a thing; not that he gave this
Particular Warrant; and though they proved no Copy at all, yet proving the
Command, it maintained sufficiently the Charge: for, a Treason may be a
Treason, though not put in Execution. That they produced not this Copy, as
necessary to give a precise Copy, but to prove that there was such a Command
and Authority given; and, as a farther evidence, they show a Copy taken on such
an occasion: And, Witnesses are here, who will clearly Depose, That this is the
very substance and effect of the Warrant, given under my Lord of Straffords
hand.

Here my Lord of Strafford interposed; That it was Charged on him in L.
Strafford.
particular, That on the 9th of May, in the 12th year of the King, he gave
Traitorously, Authority to Robert Savill, etc.

But Mr. Palmer insisted, That they did not find much on Reading this Mr.
Palmer.
Warrant; but, if the Authority was proved it was sufficient.

And Mr. Pym added; That they could not wave any part of the Evidence, and
therefore prayed it might be read. Mr. Pym.


Mr. Savill being (on the motion of the Earl Bath) Examined, Whether this was
the occasion of his coming over? and, Whether he had not said, Mr. Savill
Witness.
He had brought all his Warrants with him?

He Answered, That by the Oath he has taken, that he knew nothing of it, till
the night he came to the City: That he had not said, He had brought all his
Warrants; for he had none; and should have spoken an Untruth if he had said it:
and he came on his own occasions, not sent for.

Being Asked, Whether he thought in his Conscience, That it was a True Copy?

He Answered, Yes; I am confident; for the Substance of it.

To Determine the Question, their Lordships resolved to Adjourn to the House
above.

Mr. Palmer desiring it might be Remembered, That the Copy was Signed by
Savill's Hand; That Savill was the Person to whom the Warrant Mr. Palmer.
was directed; and, The Man that has the Principal Warrant in his Custody;
That gave direction for the Copying of it; and added, That himself was ready to
prove the substance and effect of it.

Their Lordships Adjourning, and shortly after returning:

The Lord Steward Reported their Lordships Resolution, viz. That their
Lordships had taken into consideration this Copy, and thought of it seriously;
L. Steward.
and that in this individual Case, they held it not fit to be read, because it
was not Attested: And that their Lordships, in no other Case since the Trial
began, had admitted the like Copy, but where it was Attested: That they
conceived, this could be no Impediment, or failer in the proceeding, because
the truth, and verity of it would depend on the first general power given to
execute it, which they that manage the Evidence for the Commons, say, they can
prove.

Mr. Palmer thereupon Alleged, That they would apply themselves to Mr. Palmer.
their Lordships Directions: That the thing offered in Evidence had been
executed; That Soldiers (according to what was deposed to be the effect of this
Warrant) have been Quartered on the houses, and Lands of such Persons, as have
been Complained of on Paper Petitions, either in case they have not appeared,
or after appearance, did not render obedience.

Mr. Savill being Asked, What he did in that kind? and, What Warrant he had for
it? Mr. Savill.


He Answered, That the Warrant, by Virtue of which, he laid Soldiers on several
Delinquents Lands, was delivered to him by my Lords Deputies Secretary, Mr.
Edmonds (as he remembered) by Virtue of which Warrant, after five or six several
times going for the Delinquents, when they could not by any means be brought
in, he did (according to my Lord Deputies Command, make use of his Warrant, and
laid Soldiers on them till they had submitted themselves: And, that the
Warrant was given under my Lord Deputies Hand.

Being Asked, What he meant by Delinquents?

He Answered, thus; He ever observed on Complaints made to his Lordship, my
Lord Issued his Command; This Command was served on the Party Complained of;
And, on Return of that, Oath being made of it, that the Party gave not
satisfaction, A Warrant was Issued to the Pursivant; On the Pursivants return
(he not meeting with the Party) the Party possibly absenting himself, or
Rescued out of the Pursivants hands, there is an Oath taken by the Pursivant, a
Warrant given to the Sergeant at Arms, who goes in Person, or sends his Deputy
three or four or five times, and when the Party cannot be got, then he lays
Soldiers.

Being Asked, What he means by laying of Soldiers?

He Answered, That he was to go to the Captain, or Chief Officer of the next
Company, or Garrison, to Complain of the Party he calls Delinquent, and show my
Lord Deputies Warrant, and then he Commands them to rise with such a number, as
he shall think convenient, and March to the Party Complained of, in whose House
they lie, till they receive further direction.

Being Asked of the Questions severally.

He Answered; That it was by a General Warrant he laid Soldiers on Delinquents,
and that he had a particular Warrant first, but when that was disobeyed, he
used this General one, that the Soldiers might not March but with an Officer;
That he did never see those Soldiers go on Service like Naked Men, but they had
such Arms as were fit for Soldiers; That he has seen them Armed with Muskets,
Swords, and such furniture. That they have meat and drink from the Party they
lie on, though (for his own part) he had never Meals Meat from him.

Being asked, Whether they lie on the Parties Lands?

He Answered, For that purpose they go.

Being Asked, On how many several Persons he had done it? and, Whether it was
ordinarily done?

He Answered, That he had done it on several occasions; and that he was afraid
that sometimes he should be Complained of to my Lord Deputy, in not putting it
in Execution, when the Parties have thought he the Deponent has been
favorable without cause: That he had, on several occasions, executed his
Command; as namely, he caused Soldiers to be laid on one Francis Ditton,
likewise on one Conolly, and on Luke Borne, as he takes it, and some others,
whereof he does not remember the particulars: But, those Men could not be
brought in by any other means, that he knew.

Being Asked, Whether it has been done ordinarily on all occasions, and on
Persons of Quality as well as others?

He Answered, That when he had my Lord Deputies Warrant in a general way, he
never made any difference of Persons.

Being Asked, Whether by Horse or Foot?

He Answered, Never Horse that he knew of, unless in case of Necessity, when no
Foot was to be had near them; And, that was but once.

Being Asked, Whether the Number was left to his discretion, or a certain
number assigned?

He Answered, The Warrant says, he shall raise so many, as shall be thought
fit in the discretion of the Sergeant.

Being Asked, Has this been Executed on several parts of the Kingdom?

He Answered, Yes; as well in one part of the Kingdom as another, when the
occasion served.

Being asked, Whether it was done by himself only, or another?

He Answered, There was none but himself, till the Lord Deputy, for the better
Service of His Majesty, was pleased to direct another.

Being Asked, Whether my Lord Deputy ever spoke to him, about the Complaints
made of him?

He Answered, Never, In Good Faith; and he thinks my Lord will clear him of
that.

Being Asked, Was there not Complaints made of his showing Favor?

He Answered, He must Confess there was.

Being Asked, What he said on that occasion?

He Answered, sometimes my Lords Secretary would demand, Why he would not put
the Warrant in Execution? and he (this Deponent) would say, They were poor Men:
but, it never came to my Lords hands, so far as he could remember.

Being Asked, on my Lord of Straffords Motion, What number of Soldiers he
commonly laid, and what was the greatest number usually?

He Answered, That the greatest number was Five and an Officer; but, for the
most part 2, or 3, or 4; but, of late, he has heard of more.

Being Asked, Whether another had not a Warrant to the same purpose? and, How
many he had laid?

He Answered, He never saw the VVarrant; but, he has heard he has, by Virtue
of such a VVarrant, laid Soldiers, but he knows not how many; he not looking to
the actions of others, but his own: and he wished it had all layen in his power
still, and he had done well enough.

Patrick Gough being Asked, Whether he had seen such a Warrant under Gough
Witness.
the Hand and Seal of my Lord of Strafford, whereby the Soldiers were Assessed,
and under whose Hand?

He Answered, He had seen a VVarrant, Signed by my Lord Wentworth on the top,
and a Seal to it, directed to the Sergeant Savill, to the same purpose: that an
Affidavit made to him of the absence of the Contemptor of the first VVarrant,
he might lay Soldiers on the Land; And that he made search for it, and saw it
in Secretary Littles Book, but it was long ago.

Being Asked, What he knew of the Execution of this VVarrant? Upon whom? How
many? and, Upon what Occasion?

He Answered, It was a constant course, on a Command, and Affidavit made of
serving a VVarrant, to the Pursivant, on the Parties failing, an Attachment was
granted to the Sergeant, and a Dormant VVarrant, that on his not finding him,
he might lay Soldiers on the Land; This was constantly practiced during my
Lords Government, as he obsered; And particularly, upon one Richard Butler in
the County of Typerary last Summer: And, no other cause could he learn or know,
but not giving obedience to my Lord of Straffords Orders, The Original Contempt.

Being Interrogated, What Insolences he had known committed by Soldiers in
this Case?

He Answered, That he had heard, Soldiers were left on one Bernes Land, and
they took other Men's Cattle that Grazed on the Lands, and killed them, and
burnt part of the House (as he was told) and broke up the Hutches where he had
his Corn, and sent it to the next Market Town to buy Beer for them.

Being Asked (on my Lord of Straffords Motion) Whether in his VVarrant any
Command was given to take other Men's Goods?

He Answered, He believed no such word was expressed in the VVarrant.

Being Asked, Whether there was not Authority to lay Soldiers? and, What was
meant by laying of Soldiers?

He Answered, The VVarrant Imports, That, on their Default, or Absence, the
Sergeant at Arms may lay Soldiers on the Land, there to lie to feed on the
Contemptors Goods, and live there till he surrender his Body to the Sergeant at
Arms. Then the Sergeant gives notice to the Soldiers, that the Party is come
in, and they go to their Garrison.

Richard Welsh Sworn: Being Interrogated, Whether he had seen a Warrant Richard
Welsh Witness.
under my Lord of Straffords Hand, for laying of Soldiers?

He Answered, That he had seen my Lord Deputies Hand Signed (if it was his
Hand) Wentworth: as he had seen it to many Orders, being very well acquainted
with his Hand: That he had seen his Hand to such a Warrant; that the Man that
showed him the VVarrant, was one of my Lord Deputies Troopers (by name Patrick
Brady, who told him) he was going to fetch Soldiers by direction of Sergeant
Savill, to lay on one Francis Dillon, who was in Contempt at this Bradyes own
Suite: That the occasion he showed him it, was; That Brady was Indebted to him
(the Deponent) and he (the Deponent) intending to Petition my Lord against him,
Brady desired him to forbear it, for he had a good way to get Money, and showed
him the Warrant; he (the Deponent) saw it under my Lord Deputies Hand and Seal.

Being Asked, What was the Suit? He said, The Suit was on a Paper-Petition; for
(as he remembers) 100 l. and so Dillon falling into Contempt, a Warrant was
issued to the Pursivant, and so, according to the practice, the Soldiers were
laid on him.

Being Asked, What was the effect of the Warrant under my Lord Deputies Hand?

He Answered, That the effect of the Warrant was, That the Sergeant at Arms
should bring upon the Delinquents (such as was incontempt) out of the next
Garrison, Soldiers, with an Officer, and lay them on the Delinquents Lands,
till he had rendered his Body.

Patrick Clear Sworn: was Interrogated, What Execution he knew of my Lord of
Straffords Warrant, to lay Soldiers? Patrick Clear. Witness.


He Answered, That he had seen no Execution done: but, he had a Letter sent out
of the Country, by a Gentlewomans Son, and she desired him (the Deponent) to
Petition, To have Soldiers that were laid on her Land discharged, it being
only for a Contempt, in not Appearing. That he got a Copy of the Petition, her
Name being Agnes White, and therein she Petitioned my Lord of Strafford to have
them discharged; and said, she was very old, and would die, if she submitted
her self to any Sergeant at Arms. The Order was, That upon an Affidavit he
would give other Direction. The Son made Affidavit, that she was 80 years old:
On that, an Order was made, requiring Sergeant Savill to take off the Soldiers,
and trouble her no more, she paying him his Fees. And he knew further, That
Sergeant Pigott having an Attachment against John Barrow, who was gone away, by
reason of certain Cruelties, sent after him, by Secretary Little, who threatened
to put Soldiers on him, if he came not to compound with him for his Fees.

Being Asked, How far the old woman lived from Dublin?

He Answered, In the County of Kilkenny, 40 or 50 Miles from Dublin, and this
was four years ago.

Being Interrogated, What the Contempt was?

He Answered, That the Petitioner said, He was dammaged 500 l. by not
performing Covenants; so she was commanded to pay 500 l. or else to show cause
to the contrary: She was an old woman, always on her Bed, and did not appear,
not knowing what belonged to Law. Affidavit being made, That she appeared not,
nor gave satisfaction, an Attachment issued to the Pursivant; The Pursivant
could not find her, on Affidavit. The Sergeant at Arms goes for her, and, not
finding her, the first or second time; he lays Soldiers on her: And there they
remained eating and drinking three or four weeks, till he got them discharged.
And he heard by the Sergeant at Arms, that this was very usually and
ordinarily done.

Being Asked, If Pigott had such a Warrant?

He Answered, He did not see the Warrant, but Pigott himself said, He would lay
Soldiers on Barrow, if he did not submit and pay Fees.

Nicholas Ardah Sworn: Being required to deliver what he knew concerning
Nicholas Ardah Witness.
laying of Soldiers in case of Paper-Petitions.

He Answered, That he had heard of many, but never saw any but one, which was
in the City of Dublin; One Tho. Cusacke of Dublin was seized by Sergeant
Savill, with Corporal Hamond, and some others of my Lord Lieutenants Troops,
for not obeying an Order within these two years and a half: That he saw the
Horse, and the Pistols at their Sadles; there were two or three as he takes it.

Being Asked in what Case it was?

He Answered, A Merchant of Manchester, trusted with Money, or Commodities, and
being not able to pay him, he sued him, and so far, that he got a Warrant; and
this was before my Lord Deputy, on a Paper-Petition.

Being Asked, How long the Soldiers remained there?

He Answered, some three or four days, till the Man surrendered himself to the
Sergeant at Arms.

Edmond Berne being Sworn, and Interrogated, How many Soldiers were laid upon
himself, by virtue of this Warrant? and, For what cause? Berne. Witness.
and, What Contempt? and, What was the loss? and, Whether the Soldiers were
Armed?

He, in his several Answers, Deposed, That there came to his House Ten of my
Lord Deputies own Foot-guard, and an Officer, in the County of Wicklowe in
Ireland, in the Bernes Country, 12 Miles from Dublin; That it was on the 17th
or 18th of October, 1639, and they came on his Land, under color of a
Contempt, and there lay 15 days: In which time, they consumed and devoured all
his Goods and Chattels they found at that time: They Thrasht out three Ricks of
Corn; one of Wheat, one of Rye, the other of Oats, which were very well worth
50 l. at the least: After they had Thrashed this Corn, and devoured the
Victuals they found in the house and about the house, they sent some of this
Corn to a Market Town within three Miles, called Bray, and that they sold for
Tobacco, Aquavitae, some Beer, and Victuals for themselves: And they would not
be content with this, to satisfy themselves on his Goods, but they must bring
in the Women of the Town, and made the Women drink, and offered to Ravish them,
but that some of the Town came in to Rescue them: That after they had consumed
all his Goods, they broke up his Tenants doors, killed their Geese, their Hens,
and destroyed their Victuals; and when they had destroyed all his Tenants
Goods, they came on the Town-people which were not his Tenants, and broke open
their doors, and struck them, and eat their Victuals, and killed their Geese
and Hens; and after they came to his Tenant, one Timothy Wells, they came on
his Land, and understanding he was his Tenant, they took away 40 English Sheep,
and brought them to his house, and there, that night, they killed two of them:
That his Tenant understanding them to be there, referred himself to the Lord
Chief Justice of Ireland then, and Petitioned, to this purpose, that is, my
Lord Dillon, and Sir Christopher Wainsford, that Mr. Wells, which was his
Tenant, had an Order to take away his Sheep from the Soldiers: and then the
Soldiers Replied, That since he had got an Order to take away his Sheep, they
were sorry they did not kill more of them: That they were not content to have
Wood (which was for his the Deponents own fuel, and to destroy that) but they
burnt his Partitions, his very House-door, sold his Trunck, his Bedsteads, his
Dining-Table, and all they could light on in his house; that after this time,
he was not able to keep house, but left his Wife and Children to the courtesy
of his friends, and was fain to fly his Country, and to serve in the Low
Countries as a Soldier; that he may very well take it on his oath, that this
loss was at least 500 l. out of his way, for he was not able to sow the
Fallowes, and was fain to break up House and Home, and was never able to keep
House since.

That this was upon color of a contempt, upon a Petition preferred against him
to my Lord Deputy, by Mr. Thomas Archibald for a pretended debt of a matter of
Ten pounds, and these Soldiers were armed with Swords, Muskets, and Halbeards
some of them.

Being Interrogated (on my Lord of Strafford's motion) whether he the Lord
Strafford was then in Ireland?

He Answered, That before the Soldiers came on his Land, my Lord Deputy came to
England.

But Mr. Palmer observed, that the Warrant was from my Lord Deputy, and Mr.
Palmer added, that all will refer to the time of the Warrant Mr. Palmer.
dormant.

Being asked, what Warrant was showed for laying on these numbers of Foot?

He Answered, That he durst not come in their sight.

But Mr. Maynard observed, that this was one of the men Savill did lay Mr.
Maynard.
Soldiers on, and therefore it behoved to be by that Warrant.

Being asked, whether the Debt might not have been compounded for 5 l. and why
he would not rather pay 5 l. than suffer prejudice to 500 l?

He Answered to the First, Yes. To the Second, That he conceived the Debt not
lawfully due.

Mr. Robert Kennedy being Sworn and Interrogated, what he knew of Mr. Kennedy.
the laying of Soldiers on the said Berne, and the occasion, and what they did.

He Answered, That one Archibald preferred a Petition against Berne, for a
pretended Debt to my Lord Lieutenant, and (as his usual course was) his
Lordship would referr the matter to the two next Justices of Peace
uninteressed, and they to determine the matter by consent, if they could; else
to certify that the party bringing the Petition to him, the Deponent desired
him to draw the Warrant according to my Lord-Lieutenants Order. They sent a
Warrant for Berne, who appearing, they examined the business, and it was so
trivial, that he the Deponent, desired them to compound it. Berne stood on it,
that the Plaintiff ought to have none, and would pay him none. They certified
my Lord Lieutenant. After this Certificate, he (the Deponent) heard not of it,
till he heard that Soldiers came to this Gentleman's Land, and hearing of it,
and that some Tenants of his the Deponents were wronged by it; he came thither,
and some of them he knew, and asking by what authority they were there? We come
(say they) by Warrant of the Sergeant at Arms Mr. Pigott, That the Deponent
thereupon said. Mr. Pigott has no Warrant; Yes, say they, my Lord Lieutenants,
and he directed us not to leave, till Berne delivered his Body for a contempt.

That he the Deponent Answered, Though you have a Warrant for lying on his
Land, you have no Warrant to destroy his Goods, for they were selling his Corn,
and loaded the Horses that went through the Town.

That there was to the number of 8 or 12 of my Lords Guard, armed with Pikes,
and Guns, and Swords. But my Lord of Strafford he thinks was not then in
Ireland, he was newly gone.

Being asked (on my Lord of Strafford's motion) whether he saw the Warrant
under Pigotts hand?

He Answered, He did not, but the Soldiers told him, Pigott laid them on the
Land, by virtue of my Lord Deputies Warrant.

Being asked, how long Pigott had been a Sergeant?

He Answered, About Ten years.

And whether there was any more than two?

He Answered, No more that attended the State; and Mr. Kenneday, added, that he
wondered at the course, for he never heard of any such course before my Lord of
Straffords time.

Mr. Palmer here observed, that they were my Lord Deputies own Guard, which
could not be but originally from him. Mr. Palmer.


Mr. Robert Little, my Lord of Straffords Secretary being sworn, was
interrogated several questions, viz. Whether he had made out any Warrant Mr.
Little Witness.
by the Lord of Strafford's Direction, and under his Hand and Seal to Pigott,
or any else, for raising Soldiers after this manner.

He Answered, That he does not know that Pigott has any such Warrant; nor does
he remember any such Warrant passed the Office if it did, it was by Precedents
of former times, but in good faith, he does not remember it.

Whether he made any such Warrant to Pigott to his knowledge?

Answered, That he never made any, or heard of any, nor knew of any.

Was one made to Savill?

Answer, He never made that to Savill, and he cannot tell whether there was one
to Savill, or not?

Was there an Entry of any Warrant in his Book to that purpose?

Answer, That he did not enter them at any time, nor did he ever see any such
Entry or Warrant.

Mr. Palmer inferred from hence, That he said the same for Savill that he Mr.
Palmer.
said for Pigott, and yet how public a thing this of Savill's was their
Lordships have heard, and it could not but come to his knowledge, at least his
ear.

And Mr. Maynard, observed, he swears that he never made any such Mr. Maynard.
Warrant, but if any were made, it was according to former Precedents.

But my Lord of Strafford Answered, That if any says he cannot tell, it is Lord
Strafford
as much as he can say for another man's act.

Lord Ranalaugh being Interrogated, what he knew of this Warrant, of Lord Rana.
laugh.
laying of Soldiers, upon whom? and how long?

His Lordship Answered, That he had heard something of it heretofore, but more
particularly in November last, when being at the Council Board, a Petition was
preferred to the then Lord Deputy and Council, by one Davis, who dwelt in the
County of Clare; and by his Petition he set forth, That notwithstanding on a
Reference from my Lord Deputy to the Judges of Assizes, he had obtained a
Report from him; yet by combination betwixt his Adversary and the Sergeant, he
had Soldiers laid on him, which made him leave his Dwelling: That he the (said
Lord Ranalaugh) asked the party, how the Sergeants came to lay Soldiers? Yes
says he, My Lord Deputy Wansford has made a Warrant dormant, and taken a
course for it from my Lord Lieutenant, and from himself, (as he the Lord
Ranalaugh takes it) tho positively he could say, that the Warrant Dormant was
the general Cause.

Being asked whether it had been used before, or if it be an Innovation?

He Answered, That he knew a custom has been in Ireland, for laying Soldiers
on the relievers of Rebels, and for laying of Contribution-money, in case of
Delinquency, or not payment; Or where a return was made by the Sheriff, that
the Kings Rents did not come in, these Rents being applied to the payment of
the Army. The course before my Lord of Strafford's coming was, That Soldiers
were laid to constrain such, but in a civil cause between party and party, he
never heard of it before in his life.

Being asked (on my Lord of Strafford's motion) whether (he the Lord Ranalaugh
was not a Captain of the Army before the Lord of Strafford came, and whether he
had not Commission by Soldiers, to levy part of the money due to him, from the
Deputy and Vice-Treasurer?

He Answered, That before my Lord-Deputy came into Ireland, the course was, as
he formerly touched, that where there was arrear of Rents to the King, and
these Rents did not come in to the Exchequer, then was assigned for the payment
of the King's Soldiers, and the Acquittances delivered to the Captains, on part
of their entertainment: and this Acquittance out of the Exchequer was given by
a special Warrant from the Deputy, and according to that course, his (the
Deputies method) was with other Captains, and thus he levied the Rent by his
own Soldiers, by virtue of that Warrant.

Being asked when the Money was Assessed thus on Countries, was it not by
consent of the Country?

He Answered, (That if he has not forgotten) when the Gentlemen of Ireland
were here 1628. they were suitors to the King for several Graces, and they
obtained several of them from His Majesty: among the rest (if he has not
forgotten) that in case of non-payment of Rents or Contribution, Soldiers might
go, and lie upon the Defaulters,

Mr. Palmer observed, that when he speaks of Contribution or Rent, he speaks
not of this course, to compel to obedience on Paper-Petitions. Mr. Palmer,
And so (he said) they would conclude with their Witnesses, reciting, that
their Lordships have heard the course taken, to secure that Power, my Lord of
Strafford assumed to himself, in hearing of Causes. That this Usurpation on
ordinary Courts of Justice, to whom it belongs, could not be secured without
Arms in a Warlike manner, to compel obedience. Their Lordships have heard how
it was executed, that if the proceeding had been legal, the proofs of Law had
been according to the calm and quiet Rules of Justice, but being an incroached
Power, it must be executed by force, and Arms, and War indeed (for so it is in
substance) on the Subjects of Ireland. That this was in time of Peace, the
troubles of Ireland being long since appeased, and the People reduced to the
condition of Subjects, governed by ordinary Laws and Magistrates: and now to
put an extraordinary Power in execution, to compel the Subjects by Act of
Hostility, they conceive is within the Statute of 25 Ed. 3. A levying of War
against our Sovereign Lord the King within His Realm. which is nominally
Treason in that Statute, and shortly for this reason.

The King being invested with His Sovereign Power, whereby they are protected,
but this Power being (instead of Protection) used by his Ministers to the
subversion and destruction of His Subjects, does on the matter, make an
Invocation on the King himself, this being a bereaving the subjects of the Law
by which they should live; dispossessing them by force of Arms, in warlike
manner, must be a war against himself, That Law is of force in Ireland, by 10
H. 7. whereby all the Laws made before that time, were made of force there.

And by a particular Statute made the 18. H. 6. this very offense of Sessing
Soldiers by Lords, or any others, or any the Kings people without their
consent, is adjudged Treason, and the Offender is to be judged a Traitor.

The Statute was read.

Statutes and Ordinances made in a Parliament, holden at Dublin 18 H. 6. chapter 3.

AN Act that no Lord or others, shall charge the Kings Subjects with Horse,
Horsemen, or Footmen, without their good Will, and by so doing, the Offender is
a Traitor.

IT is agreed and established, that no Lord, or any other, of what condition
soever he be, shall bring or lead from henceforth Hoblers, Kern, or Hooded men,
neither English Rebels, nor Irish Enemies, nor any other people, nor Horse to
lie on Horseback, or Foot to lie on the Kings people, but on their own cost,
without consent. And if any so do, he shall be adjudged as a Traitor.

Mr. Palmer concluded that this has been done, and how their Lordships have
heard that this has been done by Soldiers that profess hostility, brought from
Garrisons, (the places of War) in great numbers, and Mr. Palmer.
indeed the number left indefinitely to the discretion of the Sergeant at Arms,
in Warlike furniture, which is literally true in the case: And so he concluded
the Article, expecting my Lord of Strafford's Defense.

My Lord of Strafford desired their Lordships would be pleased, to give him
liberty to look over his Notes, and he doubted not but to give their Lordships
a very clear satisfaction, by the help of Almighty God. E. of Strafford


After a little respite; his Lordship began his Defense in substance as
follows. And First,

He desired their Lordships would please to remember, that if he proved Defense.
not all things so clearly and fully, the reason was obvious and plain, the
shortness of his time, the Witnesses being to be fetched out of Ireland, and he
having none but such as come accidentally.

That the other day he read to their Lordships, out of Sir Edward Cook's Book,
that the Customs of Ireland are in many things different from the Customs of
England: That for the things done in Ireland, he conceived he was to be judged
by the Laws and Customs of Ireland, and not by the Laws and Customs of this
Kingdom; and that his Commission was to execue the place of Deputy, according
to the Laws and Customs of that Kingdom.

That what has been opened to their Lordships to be so extraordinary, he must
justify as very ordinary, frequent, and usually exercised by the Customs of
that Kingdom: That in all times the Army of Ireland, and the Officers and
Soldiers of it, have been the chief hands in executing all the Justice of the
Kingdom, and of bringing that due obedience to the Kings authority, that is
necessary, and fit, and due.

That if they had not been so used, he thinks (those who know the State of
Ireland will acknowledge) the King's Writs had never run in Ireland, they being
all executed by their Power and Assistance.

First, his Lordship undertook to make it appear, that (in case of bringing in
Rebels and Offenders of that nature, and forcing them to come in) it had been
the ordinary practice of the Deputy and Council, before his time, to Assess
Soldiers, not only on the party, but the kindred of the partys, till the party
be brought in, and yet it is no levying of War for all that.

And because his Lordship heard much speaking of Rebels and Traitors, he
desired to represent to their Lordships, what they be (viz.) a company of petit
loose fellows that would be here apprehended by a Constable.

Lord Robert Dillon was called for, and my Lord of Strafford desired he Lord
Dillon.
might be asked, whether it had not been the practice of the Deputy and
Council, to Assess Soldiers, not only on the persons, but the Septs and whole
kindred of Rebels?

Here Mr. Palmer interposed, that for saving of time, if my Lord makes this the
Case, that Soldiers have been laid upon the Septs of Traitors or Mr. Palmer.
Rebels, that lie out in Woods, and esloigne themselves from the Kings
protection, whom they call Kernes, Outlaws, and Rebels; they (the Committee)
will admit the usage, though it will not justify the Case, being expressly
against Law; for by a Stat. 22 Eliz. If any lie out as Traitors, or Rebels,
five of the Sept that bears the Surname, shall be Fined at the Council Chamger,
but not have Soldiers laid on them; and against a Statute there can be no
Usuage.

To which my Lord of Strafford answered, And these are but ordinary E. of
Strafford.
fellows: And he desired their Lordships would clearly understand what is meant
by Rebels, for every petty fellow stealing Sheep, and the like, if the party be
out in action, they commonly term such Rebels.

Robert Lord Dillon being asked, whether ordinary fellows in Ireland, passed
not under the name of Rebels?

His Lordship Answered, That touching this point he has observed, that when a
party has committed some Felony, or unjustifiable Lord Dillon.
Act, and withdraws himself into the Woods, a Proclamation is made, for his
coming in by such a time, to render himselfamenable to the Law; and if he then
comes not in, but keeps out, in commmon reputation he is accounted a Traitor or
Rebel.

Sir Arthur Tyrringham being asked, whether of his knowledge the Deputies
Tyrringham.
and Council have not frequently Sessed Soldiers on Offenders and Rebels, when
they could not be brought forth to Justice, and what is understood by a Rebel
in Ireland.

He Answered, That it has been the ordinary practice ever since he knew that
Kingdom, since my Lord of Faulklands being Deputy there, and has been ever
practiced there, both by him, and the Justices that came after him: That
ordinary fellows be commonly reputed Rebels, with this observation. It is true,
That every man is not a Rebel, at his first going out, though he be called so;
but the course is first to proclaim them, and if they be not ameneable to Law,
they be Rebels, and so they may be for Felonies of a very small value.

To prove that most of the Kings Rents, as well Exchequer Rents, as Composition
Rents, have been levied by Soldiers in all the times of my Lord of Cork.

My Lord of Strafford desired.

John Conley might be called for; who being examined, how long since he has
been in Ireland: and whether in his time the Rents were not col lected by the
Soldiers and Officers of the Army?

He Answered to the First, 15 years. To the Second, That he remembers Conley,
Witness.
it very well, that in my Lord Faulklands time, it was an ordinary course,
where the Kings Rents were due, to send some Horse and Horsemen, and takeup
these Rents, and lie on them till they were collected and taken up. So in my
Lord Grandisons time, and in all Chichesters time; and this is all he cansay.

Henry Dillon was called, And First my Lord of Strafford desired liberty Henry
Dillon.
to defend the credit of his Witness, as to some exceptions taken to him the
other day, and offered the occasion of the Order of Council Board made against
him, to be only this; That he said, he heard some such thing said, and
thereupon was commanded to make an acknowledgement, and to this he was invited
and persuaded by my Lord Dillon, for quietness sake, rather than he should be
troubled about so small a matter, and that being granted, he supposed the
Gentleman stood upright, and was a competent Witness in this or any other
cause. To which some of the Committee for the Commons answered, That they
except not against the hearing of him, but offer to their Lordships memory his
acknowledgement, that he spoke falsely, as a weakening of his memory. And then,

Henry Dillon being asked, Whether he knew not that the Exchequer and
Composition Rents, upon failing of payment, have been levied by the Army, on
the appointment of the Deputy, or chief Governor?

He Answered, That he had known several Acquittances put into the hands of Sir
Thomas Dutton, for Rents due on certain parcels of Land in the County of
Longford, that were not paid into the Exchequer by a certain time, for which
a-fore-time, Pursivants issued out against the Tenants; that himself was one of
the Tenants, and being out of Town, Sir Thomas Dillon seized three of his
Horses, at his the said Dillons House, and there they remained till he came to
Town for 13 s. 4 d.

This being in the time of my Lord of Cork and my Lord of Ely being Justices.

Being asked, as to the Contribution and Composition-Rents?

He Answered, That some years before that, in my Lord Faulklands time when he
lived in the County of Longford, that were not paid, he remembers 30000 l. was
granted on the coming of Sir John B. -- into the Kingdom of Ireland, and
afterward, Sixscore thousand pound toward, maintaining of the Kings Army, and
there was a Troop of Horse of Sir Robert -- sent into the County of -- But he
knows not whether this be the Money called Contribution-Money; That he was then
Sheriff of that County, and had direction sent to Sesse the Soldiers on them
that refused to pay the Money. That at that time he conceived that was not so
fully understood by the Country, that they should have paid it, and himself
and others did except against it; conceiving the Money was not granted farther,
than as they would willingly pay. And Valerian -- on the Statute urged, of
assessing Soldiers, refused to Assess Soldiers on the Warrant of my Lord of
Faulkland; and thereon was sent for to the Castle, the Soldiers sent to his
house and remained there, as long as he had Provision; and after that, from his
house they were assessed on several Delinquents, as the Soldiers pleased to
Billet themselves; and the Foot-Company of Sir Arthur Tyrringham was then in
that County. And one night he remembers, 25 were Assessed on his own house,
because he did not pay the Money: but he remembers not any thing of the
Composition-Rents.

Being asked whether he had not seen a Warrant to this purpose, subscribed by
the Chief Governor?

He Answered, That being Sheriff of the County of Longford in 1634. or 1633.
there were Warrants directed from my Lord of Cork, and my Lord Chancellor, and
he thinks under the hands of the rest of the Lords of the Board, for levying
Moneys allotted to the Soldiers, and he had three Warrants himself, and by
virtue thereof levied Money, and paid the Money to the Troops there, under the
hands of my Lord of Cork, and Lord of Ely, and the Council.

Sir Arthur Tyrringham being asked whether he had not received Order,
Tyrringham.
with a Warrant, for attaching a person in case of Debt, and for laying
Soldiers on him in case he paid it not, and who was the person?

He Answered, That he had; And the Sheriff of the County brought the Warrant
from my Lord of Faulkland, to lay some of his Men on a Debtor there, till he
paid the debt;; That these Soldiers were laid, being under his command, and
stayed till the Debt was paid, at the charge of the party; and he tells this
particular in it, that makes him remember the whole circumstance: The debt was
very small, not above 16 or 20 s. The Sheriff bringing him this Warrant, he did
not a little wonder at the matter, to require Soldiers for levying such a sum.
But it was then so ordinary and frequent, that it was seldom denied on any
reasonable occasion: the Men stayed there some 8 or 10 days, when the party had
enough, he sends to him the said Arthur, to recall the men; that he told him he
would, if he the said party had satisfied the Money; the party answered, he had
not yet, but he would; that he the said Sir Arthur told him, what a strange man
are you, that will keep a charge on your self? where, if you had paid it the
first hour, I would have withdrawn the Men.

Why, says he? I do not care for giving half a score Men a Meals Meat.

Being Asked (on Mr. Palmers motion) Whether it was a Debt between party and
party, or the Kings Debt?

He Answered, He could not tell: But, the Sheriffs name was Fleming.

Being Asked, Under whose hand was the Warrant?

He Answered, Under my Lord of Faulklands Hand, otherwise he would have levied
no Money.

Lord Rainalaugh being Asked, Whether before my Lord of Straffords Ranailaugh.
coming into Ireland, the Kings Debts and Rents, as well Exchequer as
Composition-Money, were not raised by Assessing of Soldiers?

He Answered, That he remembers in the Lord Justices time, my Lord of Cork,
and Lord of Ely (the Kings Rents being slowly paid in) they did usually give
Acquittances out of the Exchequer, to the Captains and Officers of the several
Companies; and, if they were not paid by some time limited, and if the
Sheriff, or the Collector, did not bring in the Money, the last resort was to
fall on the Defaulters, by assessing Soldiers on them, and there to lie till
the Money was paid.

Here my Lord of Strafford, conceiving he had spoken of Contribution and
Composition-Rents, desired my Lord Rainalaugh might Repeat what he said.

Thereupon his Lordship Answered, That he thought what he said he was sure of,
and might justly say: That for the Exchequer-Rents, and Contribution Payments
(for the Compositions he would say nothing) the course was this. That for the
Exchequer-Rents, the Vice-Treasurer gave out his Acquittances, These were
assigned to some Captains, whose turn it was for Payment, and they, accompanied
with a Warrant from the Deputies, to constrain the payment by some few Soldiers.

Hereupon my Lord of Strafford Observed; That this Cause would seem Strafford.
strange in England.

And whereas my Lord Rainalaugh spoke of Contribution-Money, Mr. Palmer.
Palmer humbly desired, he might be Asked, Whether the raising of it by
Soldiers, was not so agreed to in the Country? For my Lord of Straffords own
Answer says, The Country choose rather, that on Delinquency it should be so
levied than otherwise; And, if it be by consent, the force of the Statute is
taken away.

My Lord Rainalaugh being Asked accordingly?

His Lordship Answered, That he had already spoken to that purpose, and he
believed, some of the Committee that were there had the particular Instance to
produce.

Being required to name them in whose hands it was; His Lordship said, In Mr.
Plunkets, or Mr. Brown.

Being Asked, When this course began?

He Answered, He did not remember the time; but, he thought, in 1628. on
certain of the Agents out of England.

My Lord of Strafford did here offer, That if he might have Read the Ancient
Book in my Lord Faulklands time, he could have showed Sir Tho. E. of Strafford.
Wayneman sent up and down, to this and that County, to fetch in the
Composition-Rents, and that they have been thus levied.

His Lordship added, That the next Point he should have endeavored to prove,
was, That the Gentry that granted the Six score thousand pounds for Supply of
the Army in my Lord Faulklands time, agreed, That the same should not be
brought into the Kings Exchequer, but be levied by Soldiers: nor be mentioned
in any Account of the Kings, least it should be mentioned to their prejudice:
but, let the Gentlemen that manages the Evidence, labor to prove this.

And Mr. Palmer declared again, That they agreed to it.

Whence my Lord of Strafford observed, That it concerned him both to E. of
Strafford.
make good the truth of his Answer, and to tell their Lordships, how narrowly
he is moved to look to himself; for, though they now agree it to be done by the
Agents, and practiced by them, yet the first part of this Killing Charge is,
That he should Traitorously and Wickedly devise, to subdue the Subjects of that
Realm, by levying Money on them.

But Mr. Palmer explained himself; That they did admit the Contribution Mr.
Palmer.
to be levied by the Agreement of the Agents, and by consent, but they intend
not to admit, that it did extend to a practice by his Predecessors, for that it
was formerly done, they did in no sort admit.

And Mr. Pym added, That they do not Charge him with levying the Contribution
Money, but with levying Money after the Contribution, was Mr. Pym.
paid, which was more than the Contribution, but that is not in issue.

So my Lord of Strafford concluded that Point; That the Contribution, for eight
years before his coming, was levied by Soldiers, is admitted; So that for all
the things concerning that Contribution, he did no more than was agreeable to
the Agents themselves.

His Lordship then desired, That the Second Article of my Lord of Faulklands
Instructions might be Read, by which he was expressly appointed to lay Soldiers
on such, as paid not their Rent to the King.

And it was Read.

ARTICLE II. FOr the Collection of our Rents, in Cases of Default; That First a
Summoning Process shall Issue: Secondly, The Pursivant sent: And Lastly, if
this be not sufficient (in case the same be not levied) then our
Vice-Treasurer, by Warrant of our Deputy and Council, shall appoint a competent
number of Soldiers of the next Ayding, and Garrison, to collect the Rents of
the charge of the Parties complained of; having care, that no man be burdened
with a greater number of Soldiers, than the Service shall necessarily require.

Mr. Palmer desiring, That the first Article of these Instructions might be
Read, it was read accordingly. Mr. Palmer.


AT the humble Request of our Subjects, We are graciously pleased to direct,
for the better preservation and ease of our Subjects, the Soldiers shall be
called in, etc.

My Lord of Strafford from his Proofs inferred, That he had made it E. of
Strafford.
clearly appear, That, notwithstanding the Statute cited, it had been the
frequent use and custom of Ireland, to assess Soldiers on Septs of Offenders,
for the levying of Exchequer-rents, levying Debts, as appears in one particular
Case which is left in Dublin, for the levying of the Composition Rents by
Troops of Horse and Horsemen; and for the Contribution, that State gives no
difference, betwixt sessing for the Kings Rents, and for contempts and
disobedience to Justice, and certainly it would be High Treason: for, if the
Deputy had power to assess the Soldiers, without being guilty in the former
Case, certainly his assessing of Soldiers on Contemners, to bring them to be
ameneable to the Kings Justice, cannot be by any construction made Treason in
him: So that though it comes not to the particular individuum, yet it comes
thus far, that sessing of the Soldiers is a power that was in the Deputies of
Ireland, and so he trusts was by the Law of that Land, without making them
Traitors.

His Lordship did further alleadg, That when he came into Ireland, he found
that none of the Kings Rents were levied in other manner; Paper-Attachments
being given unto the Captains, and they, on these assignements, levying the
Money for their Entertainments: that he was willing to remedy this, being not
much in love with the course; and, since his time, it was never practiced, the
Rents being brought in before it comes to that; though if they had not been
paid sooner, it must have come to that: And therefore he desired he might show
them a Proclamation, Issued within three months after he came into Ireland, to
show, that he brought not the Custom with him, but found it there.

Which Proclamation was Read, being Dated 27th December, 1633. And Imported.

THat whereas the Surplusage of his Majesty's Revenue is appointed to be
applied toward the Payment of the Army, thereby to give the Country more
ease, etc.

To which Proclamation diverse of the Counselors Names were added, and were now
Read.

So that if Sessing of Soldiers, in any case, be Treason, certainly it is in
this; Posito, That if the Law be good, it equally goes to both.

And so he conceives he has showed the use that has been, and must be of the
Officers of the Army, being the most ready way to procure obedience to the
Kings Courts.

His Lordship observed, That the Gentlemen at the Bar waved part of his
Charge, though there was a Book in Print, wherein he appears to be charged in a
Traiterous manner, to subdue, etc.

He waves the Article.

And though they decline it, he besought their Lordships he might give an
Account of this particular, least it should stick with their Lordships, when
they read the Article, and find no Answer to it.

But the Committee opposed it, as conceiving it not fit he should Answer to an
Article to which he was not pressed (specially since they have not wholly laid
it aside) and that he had notice yesterday, that they intended not, for the
present, to proceed upon it; which my Lord of Strafford confessed, and gave
thanks to the House of Commons for it.

His Lordship then proceeded in his Defense, setting forth to their Lordships,
That the first Instruction to my Lord of Faulkland is no limitation to him, it
being not good, as to him, unless it were given him, which he mentions only by
the way.

For the Warrants charged to be by him Issued, and the Execution of them, His
Lordship desires to free himself from the Testimony given by Mr. Berne and Mr.
Kennedy, concerning a very foul misdemeanour committed by some Soldiers, under
pretense of coming to see the Kings Writ executed, and his Justice complied
withal, before he comes to that, that concerns Mr. Savill.

1. It appears, these Soldiers were laid when he was not in Ireland; so that he
is not answerable to any thing Deposed by these Gentlemen, further than that he
gave a Warrant for it to Mr. Pigott.

II. He denies that ever Pigott had any such Warrant from him, nor is any
Proof to that purpose offered: Therefore it is not to be laid to his Account.

III. Only Patrick Clear (says Pigott) threatened to lay Soldiers on some if
they would not obey: but, because he threatened, therefore he had such a
Warrant, is (under favor) no consequence; men commonly threaten most, when
they have least to show.

IV. Mr. Kenneday says directly, Pigott had done what he did by direction;
but, in express terms, he says, He never saw the Warrant.

Then there remained only Mr. Savill's Warrant.

This Warrant is not showed, nor comes it in Judgment against him: and though
some Testimonies are given, that they have seen such a Warrant, for Assessing
Soldiers, etc. yet he conceives it very hard, That the Warrant should be the
ground of convincing him of Treason, and yet the Warrant not be shown, for what
the grounds are, and what the Limitations may be do not appear: And, if there
were such a Warrant, it is long since it passed from him; But, it is not shown;
and therefore to convince him in modo and forma is very hard to be done; for
what may be in it to qualify, or what amiss, no body knows. But, to the
Proofs, his Lordship observed, That the Proofs are very scant; This great
Mighty War made on the King and his People, in breach of the Statute cited, is
one of the Poorest Wars that ever was made in Christendom; for, last Summer,
one says, he knew Soldiers laid on one man.

The Sergeant says, He never laid above 6, sometimes 2, sometimes 3; and that
this should be heightened to the making of a War against the King and his
People, seems to be a very great strain put upon it, and more he hopes than the
matter will bear.

That it was never complained of to him, all the while he was in Ireland, in
respect of any manner of prejudice sustained by it.

That if there be such a Warrant, he is glad it has been so moderately
Executed, that no worse consequence has come of it, than their Lordships have
heard.

But, he shall make it appear, that the Sergeant at Arms is a public Officer;
and, what Warrant soever he has from him, it is not in relation to him, but to
the execution and procuring obedience to all other the Kings Courts of Justice,
as well as those of the Deputies Jurisdiction; and, it was only to enable him
the better to secure the Kings Right: And he desired, that Nicolas Ardah be
examined, Whether he be not an Officer of the Exchequer in Ireland, and whether
he knows of any particular Sessing of Soldiers by the Sergeant at Arms, before
my Lord of Straffords Government? And being Asked severally these Questions;

He Answered, To the first; That he has some Employment in the Ardah Witness.
Exchequer, and was employed in a Commission of Churchbounds.

And, that about the Second Year of His Majesty's Reign, there was one Tho.
Fitzgerard High Sheriff of a County, that had not perfected his Accounts, and
not appeared to the Pursivant; The Lord Chancellor that now is, desired the
rest to assist him to move my Lord of Faulkland to lay Horse on him; And that
the Party was brought in within a short time after; but, whether by Soldiers,
he knows not; but he heard there was a Warrant.

Mr. Savill being Asked, Whether the Warrant to him granted was not agreeable
to former Precedents?

He Answered, That he never saw any other Warrant of the same Nature: Savill,
Witness.
but, he has heard by him that was his Predecessor (now a Captain of the Army)
that he had received a Warrant from my Lord of Faulkland, to Sess Soldiers on
the Land of Tho. Fitzgerard, who had refused to come to pass Accounts.

Mr. Henry Dillon being Asked, Whether he knew of any such Warrant formerly
granted? And what Relation the Sergeant at Arms has to other Dillon. Witness.
Courts?

He Answered, That he conceives, the Sergeant at Arms is an Officer, as well
to the Court of Exchequer, as to the Chancery, on the last Process of Contempt.
The last Process is a Writ to the Sergeant, to Attach a Man, whether betwixt
party and party, or concerning the King; and that he had spoken with Thimbleby,
Sergeant at Arms, whether he did so in his own right, or as Deputy? And Asking
him, What he would do if the Warrant was disobeyed? and he pretended he would
Assess Soldiers; and being a Scholar at -- 23 years, he heard one had Soldiers
sessed on him for disobedience to the Sergeant at Arms; but, what the
particular was he does not know.

Here Mr. Palmer speaking some words, which my Lord of Strafford interpreted E.
of Strafford.
an Interruption; his Lordship desired, That no hasty words might be
misinterpreted, he being for his Life and Children; and added, The Gentlemen
will do well not to put him out of his way, but let him speak the poor few
things he can for himself, and then leave them to their Lordships wisdom. And
then proceeded.

So he supposed there could be no such severe construction put upon this
Warrant, that it should be adjudged a levying of War against the King and his
People, when it appears to be the using of half a dozen, sometimes two or
three Soldiers to lie on refractory persons, and bring them to be conformable
to Justice; that the Kings Law might be obeyed, without any Treasonable or
corrupt intention whatsoever: And, he hopes their Lordships will have a more
favorable and compassionate consideration, than to Judge him a Traitor for
such a piece of business, accompanied with all these circumstances.

But he added, That some ways he is more qualified then an ordinary person, by
reason he had the honor to be His Majesty's Deputy; and, by His Commission, had
power to pursue Rebels, and to use the Kings Army for punishing of Rebels, or
securing the Public Peace of the Realm, as in his discretion he should think
fit; and, that he conceives, a Warrant, though there had been no President in
the Case (but with these accompanied) cannot be laid on him as a Crime. For
this, he refers himself to his Commission, which had been formerly read, and
therefore trusts this will not fall into their Lordships Judgment as a High
Treason, he being to govern according to the Customs of the Realm: There is a
Statute 10 H. 7. cap. 17. whereby it was Ordained, Enacted, and Estabished by
Authority of that Parliament, That from that time forwards there be no Peace
nor War undertaken in the Land, without the Deputies License; but, all such War
and Peace to be made by the Lieutenants, for the time being; And this comes in
time, after the Statute of 18 H. 6. This was never complayn'd of as a fault,
and no ill consequence followed on it. If a Man shall enter by force, and
wrongfully keep away possession, that may be as well said to be a levying of
War as this; and yet a forcible Entry is familiarly punished in the
Star Chamber, but not spoken of as a Treason.

As to the Statute in Ireland, of 18 H. 6. cap. 3. An Act, That no Lord, or
other, shall Charge the Kings Subject, etc.

HE Conceives, he cannot be brought within compass of this Statute: For,

I. He has heard it said, That the King cannot be concluded in any Statute,
unless he be particularly named, and consequently not his Chief Governor: For,
these words, No Lord, or any other, of what condition soever, etc. Must imply,
a condition of a Lord, or one under a Lord, not a condition above a Lord, as
the Chief Governor is.

II. He shall not lead, or bring. He has neither brought, nor lead them into
Action; for the Sergeant at Arms has done it, though under his Warrant.

III. It speaks of bringing English Rebels, or Irish Enemies, or Hooded Men,
Hoblers, Kernes, etc. But, that sending of the Kings Soldiers to apprehend and
attach such Refractory Persons should be within the Statute, is a Stretching of
the words of it very far.

IV. Notwithstanding this Law, the Chief Governor has always used to assess
Soldiers (and Practice is the best Interpreter of Laws) and yet his acts have
not, by this Statute, been concluded Treason; since they have Compounded for
it, and they pay a great Rent; The Composition Rents paid for their discharge
from the assessing of the Army, being one of the greatest Revenues before his
coming there.

And, if their Lordships will have it proved, there be few of the Irish but
know it; And, in Conaught the King may take, or leave as he pleases.

Though he shall not insist on it (as desiring never to depart from their
Lordships Judgment, nor thinking himself more safe in any other; therefore
freely and voluntarily he puts himself under their Lordships Censure, for his
Life, as for his Death: But, if he should insist on it, admitting all this,
That it was a Treason by the Statute Law of Ireland, yet he is not Tryable for
it here: But, he makes no use of it to that purpose; but, had he a Thousand
lives, he would humbly lay them every one at their Lordships feet.

He added, That it is a very heavy Case, that such old Laws as these should be
started, in this manner, when the Practice has been quite contrary; and
Kindled, to destroy him and his Posterity at a Blow. But, he trusts, God
Almighty has provided better for him, by their Lordships Favor and Justice:
For, though the Gentlemen at the Bar are much more Learned than himself; yet,
it may be, they are not so well Read in the Irish-Statutes, as they be in the
English: Besides, he is most confident, he shall make it appear that Statute is
Repealed.

And, if it falls in his Judgment, their Lordships (he hopes) will find, he had
Reason to think, what he shall offer, might be available; and, that their
Lordships will not be offended if he mistakes the Law; and this, as in other
things, he desires the Advantage of by Counsel, concerning these Points of Law,
before he be finally concluded.

First, By the Statute of 8 Ed. 4. ca. 1. (and, had these Gentlemen seen these
Statutes, he believes they would never put it in Charge against him.) Whereby
it is Enacted, Confirmed, and Ratified, by Authority of the said Parliament,
that the said Statute be Adjudged and Approved in force and strength; and the
said Statute may be of force in this Land from the 6th day of March next; and
that from henceforth the said Act, and all Statutes and Acts, made by Authority
of Parliament, within the Kingdom of England, be Adjudged and Ratified from the
said 6th day of March.

This comes in time, after the Statute of Treason of H. 6. and, Ratifying all
the former Statutes of England, Ratifies the 25th of E. 3. in England, which is
the Statute of Treason: and, 1 H. 4. which says, nothing shall be Treason, but
what is said to be Treason within the said Statute of 25 E. 3.

So that nothing can be Treason in Ireland, but what is Treason by 25 E. 3. or
1 H. 4. or something subsequent, for these being confirmed later, do take away
the Statute of 18 H. 6.

Secondly, By the Statute of 10 H. 7. c. 22. and this is a Repeal in
Judgments, far better then his own. The former was for another purpose. By
this, all the Statutes made in England before that time, are brought to be Laws
within Ireland; and, all Laws contrary to these Laws are hereby repealed. But,
the Law urged by those Gentlemen is against the Laws of 25 Ed. 3. and 1 H. 4.
and consequently is repealed very clearly; and, the words are these in effect;
It tells of the Benefit and Advantage that might come to them, after the
English Laws should be brought in; And, if any Statute have been made contrary
to them, the same to be annulled void, and of none effect.

And, that it has been so taken and conceived, that that Law is Repealed, he
has, as he conceives, a Judgment in Parliament clearly on his side, to clear
him, as to this Treason, That the Deputy has power to Assess Soldiers, in
Cases where he shall think convenient.

It is a Power, which (God forbid) any Many should exercise, but with all fair
Intention, and Mildness that possibly can be; and he speaks it, not to draw any
inconvenience on that Kingdom (he being willing to spend his Life for them,
rather than do them any hurt) nor will he carry from this Bar the Remembrance
of any thing of their Unkindness, in Prosecution (he means not them that are
Members of this House:) praeter gratuitas Cicatrices, and will never look the
worse on them he Vows to God.

The Statute is 11 Eliz. ca. 7. Being an Act for taking away Captainship, and
all Exactions belonging thereunto from the Lords and Great Men.

WHereas, Most Gracious Sovereign Lady, The Lords and Chieftaines of this
Realm, in the time of desolation of Justice, have arrogated to themselves
Absolute and Regal Authority, etc. For Remedy whereof, your Faithful Subjects
most humbly beseech it may be Enacted, etc. That no Earl, Viscount, Baron,
Lord, etc. dwelling within this Realm, shall assume, etc. the Name of Captain
of any Country, except such as has, or shall have the same by Letters Patent
from Your Majesty, etc. or by the name of Captain, or therwise exact for the
finding of him, or them, their Horse, Foot of or upon any of your Majesty's
Subjects, Tax, Sess, Subsidy, etc., nor shall call togethe people of the same
Country to Treat, Conclude, and Agree for making War or Peace, etc. Sess, nor
lead the people, etc. without the Great Seal, or Warrant from the Lord Deputy,
etc. upon pain to every Earl, Viscount, Baron, or Lord, etc. for every time 100
l. of lawful Money of Ireland.

Whence he inferred, that here is a Commission, that the Deputy and chief
Governors have power to Assess, and yet are no Traitors; a penalty which they
would have spared, had they thought that Law to have been in force.

So that as he has been free in his heart from any Treasonable design toward
His Majesty or His People, and as he has been innocent to God Almighty within
doors, so from this Statute he shall stand clear abroad, and this cannot be
brought as to this Case, to convince him of Treason.

And his Lordship did recall one thing in the Lord Dillons testimony, (which he
had formerly omitted) That the Assessing of Soldiers was on men being in
Rebellion for any unjustifyable Act.

And so his Lordship conceived, there remains no more for him to do at this
time, but to answer that objection.

That this proceeding of his, was Treason, by 25 Edw. 3. though he had thought
Treason had been like Felony in this respect; That there must be a felonious
intent to make Felony, and so to make Treason, there must be a Treasonable
intent. And he said (God knows) he had no Treasonable intent in all this, for
if he had a mind to have raised War against the King and his People, surely he
should never have done it by laying two or three Soldiers on a private man, and
then taking them off again; And is this that levying of War against the King
and his People, that is meant in the Irish Statute of 25 Edw. 3?

The words of which Statute his Lordship read, viz.

If any man levy War against the King in His Realm, or adhere to His enemies,
etc.

He appeals to their Lordships, desiring them to lay it to themselves, and tell
him whether 2 or 3 poor Soldiers sent in this manner to bring in a man, that
will not be liable to the Kings Justice, could by any construction, be brought
to be a War levied against the King and his People? which, said he, if it be an
error, he knew it was no Treason, for he had thought it had been for the Honor
and Authority, and Justice of the King, and not done as an enemy to him.

And therefore all laid together, though he must needs say, Men are dark
toward themselves, and toward their own Cases, and less able to judge, than
in the Case of other men; in truth, under favor, withal Humility, and
submission to their Lordships better judgments, he cannot believe nor fear,
but for any thing proved this day against him, as he is clear in his heart from
all Treasons, and treasonable Intentions toward the King and His People; so he
stands clear from Treason upon this Charge, not only in respect of the Irish
Statute, but likewise the English Statute; and he shall beseech their
Lordships, when it comes to its time, they will give his Council leave to urge
these things for him, who he is sure will be able to do it with far greater
reason and strength than himself, it being out of his profession.

Here his Lordship took notice, that there was another part of the Charge which
he desired to speak to: but Mr. Palmer said, That was subsequent, and not yet
come to.

To which his Lordship Answered, That he should do all things without offense,
only so long as he does mannerly move any thing for his clearing, he hopes he
may do it.

And so the Defense was concluded.

And then Mr. Palmer replied in Substance as follows.

That their Lordships have heard a very long Defense, made by my Mr. Palmer.
Lord of Strafford, and that he would not apply himself to enforce any thing by
circumstances, but to represent the truth, and to avoid those things offered by
way of Answer, for most part of that may be confessed, and yet avoided.

Whereas my Lord of Strafford has made the greatest part of his Defense in
matter of Fact from Usage, their Lordships may please to consider, Reply.
that there can be no legal Usage contrary to an Act of Parliament, made before
time of memory, as 25 E. 3. in England, and 18 H. 6. in Ireland, much less can
there be Usage for committing of Treason.

The Usage insisted on, is First, for Soldiers being Assest on Septs, till
Rebels and Traitors not apprehendible, were brought in; and by Rebels, his
Lordship would have understood, not Rebels against the King and State, but
petit Offenders and Felons, and for that did examine Witnesses: But the
Witness says, That when such had committed Felony, and withdrawn themselves
into Woods, a Proclamation went out to call them in, and if then they came not
in, they were esteemed Rebels, and Soldiers were laid on their Septs, which is
not to lay Soldiers on Subjects in time of Peace, when they will not conform to
his private Orders.

The Stat. 11 Eliz. describes what the laying Soldiers on the Sept was, viz.
When Outlaws and Rebels lie in the Woods, and will not be apprehended with the
ordinary Arm of Justic, then five of the best of the Sept shall be Fined, but
not, that Soldiers shall be laid on them. And this being a Statute and lately
made, must needs give the Rise to this laying of Soldiers on the Septs by the
Council Board, instead of a Fine; so this is no justification or excuse, it not
bringing a full Answer home to the present Case; nor is this of right to be
justified.

The next Usage was concerning the Kings Rents, which Mr. Conley only extends
beyond the time of my Lord of Faulkland, he speaks of it in the time of my Lord
Grandison and Chichester, yet it was no positive Testimony, and he was an old
man, and his Evidence uncertain for those times. Besides, there was no account
given of the certain reason, whether by a legal Process or no: For there might
be due Process awarded, and a Writ of Assistance, to carry the power of the
Country, and so the thing be done by legal authority; and therefore since it
cannot be applied to any rule, it must be intended to be an illegal power, if
at all.

The rest were all for Rents in the time of my Lord of Faulkland. The
instructions were produced by my Lord of Strafford himself in time 1628. which
was before my Lord of Faulkland went out of that Government.

And by these instructions there is an Agreement, and it is taken to be for the
benefit of the people, that the Kings Rents should be levied by Soldiers; so
that for all the time of my Lord of Faulkland, and the Justices since, it was
within the compass of the Instructions, and reduced to the consent of the
people, and the words of the Statute are, No Soldiers shall be Assest without
consent, but this remains charged to be by force, and against consent.

That concerning the Contribution-money, in which another Usage is alleged, is
set forth to be an agreement of the people, That because it might not come into
the Exchequer, to be made a Precedent, it should not be levied by ordinary
Process, but by Soldiers, if it were behind, it being assigned for relief and
pay of Soldiers, and being by consent is out of the present case.

Sir Arthur Tyrringham speaks of this Use in case of a petit debt of 16 Sir
Arthur Tyrringham.
or 20 s. on a Warrant from my Lord Faulkland, which is the only Case of Debt
prooved, but he could not tell whose or what debt it was, nor how determined or
judged. If it were the Kings debt, it might be one of the Rents, or some duty
leviable by consent of the people; neither did he say, it was on a suit before
the Deputy, and therefore that will not come to the Case.

For that my Lord Dillon was called again touching Contribution, Composition,
and Rents; Composition-Rents fall under the same Consideration.

That Sir Thomas Wayneman laid soldiers is but an affirmation, and expects no
answer, (but if the Information be true) he used very violent courses, for it
has appeared he hanged a man, without any occasion.

My Lord produced the Instructions of 1628. and out of them enforced, that it
might be lawful for him to levy Soldiers with authority; but it appears by the
first Article it was consented to at the writing, and for the Benefit of the
Subject, as was before answered; and that very much money was assigned for the
Soldiers, and it may be proved (if there be occasion) That there issued
Acquittances to the Captains of the Company, to deliver to the persons from
whom the Money was due, in case of payment; and if they did not pay by consent,
Soldiers were laid, and not otherwise.

For the Proclamation of December 1633. whereby the payment of His Majesty's
Rents and Revenues was ordered, it recites diverse Rents were behind, that the
surplusage would not pay the Soldiers, that by want of Money, the Soldiers
might make irruptions on the County; That according to direction, to prevent
inconveniences, Moneys should be levied, which had Rise from the Instructions,
1628. For the time of it was 1633. A Proclamation might well second that which
was settled before, by the Instructions: If it did not pursue them, surely the
Proclamation was an offense in it self, and then there is no justification of a
Treason by a Treason, but it might have been as well objected against, as this
in hand; But it is true, it has the countenance of these Instructions.

But on all these, there is no pretense of forcing submission to my Lord of
Strafford's Orders.

After Usuage his Lordship observes the Testimonies produced, and takes
exceptions to that of Berne; that the ground of his complaint was, when my Lord
of Strafford was in England; That it was done by Pygott's Warrants, who was not
proved to have any Warrant from him. It is true, there is no full and precise
proof, that Pygott had his Warrant from my Lord of Strafford. But though it was
done after his coming for England, yet if his Warrant were made before, though
it were executed in his absence, it will lay it on my Lord of Strafford. But we
say the Warrant was made before, and to Pygott as well as Savill. One Witness
says, Pygott himself did vouch my Lord of Strafford to have given him his
Warrant, it was my Lord Lieutenants Warrant, he was my Lord Lieutenants
Sergeant, the Soldiers were my Lord Lieutenants Troopers; the Soldiers laid by
Savill, are by my Lord Deputies Warrant, proved to be under his Hand and Seal,
and many Witnesses are in Savills Case produced. And whereas my Lord says, no
Warrant was showed; if himself had not excepted against it, a true Copy had
been produced, and if none be showed, it is his own fault; but my Lord of
Strafford should have showed it, if any thing was in it to qualify the matter,
for it is proved he gave authority, and by his authority the Soldiers were laid.

Whereas my Lord says, this cause was not complained of, Berne gives the
reason, he durst not complain there, but came over hither to complain, and has
prosecuted the complaint.

My Lord of Strafford was pleased to ask Ardah, what he heard concerning
laying of Soldiers?

It is true, he and Savill mention the laying on Soldiers on Fitzgerard but it
was for the Kings Money, and they spoke it not on their own knowledge, but by
hearsay, and it was done but once; and whether since the Instructions, it does
not appear, and if it was since, then it was by consent, and this Fitzgerard
lay out as a Rebel, and if it was done, it was done under that capacity. To
that point a Witness was produced.

Mr. Kennedy being Interrogated, Whether he the said Fitzgerard did did not lie
in the nature of a Rebel when Soldiers were laid on him?

He Answered, That this Fitzgerard was Sheriff in the County of Cork, and
failing in his Account at the time, Process was issued on his Recognizance, and
he held out three or four years. That he, (the Deponent being then the Kings
Remembrancer) thought it his duty to acquaint the Barons of the Exchequer, that
he could not be found, but kept abroad in the Woods, being a man of good
Estate; and then on acquainting my Lord of Faulkland with it, a Warrant was
procured to the Sergeant at Arms.

Henry Dillon says nothing of the Usage, but pretends one Thimbleby said he had
a Warrant, but whether he had a Warrant, or did execute it, appears not.

And if it be so, it appears not for what time, when it was, nor out of what
Court the Process came, upon which the last Assessment was made.

This is all offered in matter of Fact; my Lord proceeds to other
justifications. First, That His Majesty's Deputy is so qualified, that he has
power to resist Rebels and secure Peace: and it is true, he has power, but he
has no power at all to make a War, especially in time of Peace: now all things
are appeased there, and no occasion is given of a War; only that Soldiers be
maintained for a Nursery of Martial Discipline, but there is no occasion of
Soldiers to be laid on the Kings people.

He alleged a Stat. 10 H. 7. that no War or Peace should be made, but by the
Deputies License; and therefore he infers, that by the Deputy War might be
made; It is true, where there is hostility or Rebellion, then to oppose and
repress that Rebellion, the Deputy may make a defensive War; but to do it in
time of Peace, on the Kings people, that are under the Government of His
Majesty's Laws, is to make War on the Kings Subjects, under His Peace and
Protection, and consequently, on the Sovereign Power that does protect them.

He would compare it with forcible Entry, but the circumstances do very much
diversity it from Riots, or forcible Entries; It is done by Soldiers that come
furnished with all warlike Ammunition, brought from Garrisons, the places of
War, brought with an Officer, brought in numbers; and though the Lord of
Strafford extenuates the numbers, yet the Sergeant at Arms was unlimited. So
the power given to him, was a vast power, to take such a number of Soldiers as
he should think fit.

His Lordship observes, that the Stat. of 18. H. 6. cannot conclude him,
because Statutes here in England do not include the King, unless he be
nominated in them, the Committee expected not to hear this reason; That because
the Kings Sacred Person is not mentioned in a Statute, who cannot be within the
blemish of such an offense, therefore it should not extend to a Subject. This
is to take a power above Law, and make himself equal to Sovereignty, to say
that he should not be comprehended more than the King himself.

He says he did not lead the Soldiers, but only gave a Warrant, and therefore
this should not be Treason; but though he leads them not, the Commander is an
Actor; and to give Warrant for Treason, is Treason.

He says this is a Statute Law in Ireland, and not examinable before their
Lordships here. Mr. Palmer alleged, that he would do my Lord right; that he
submitted to their Lordships Judgments, and craved leave to give answer to
that point, and said, The Laws of Ireland are devised from the Crown of
England, the King being seized of it in the right of his Crown of England, and
as a parcel of this Crown: The power they have to make Laws there, is
derivative from the Crown of England, and they did thankfully accept them from
the first Conqueror: Since that, they had power to make Acts of Parliament, but
that is subordinate, the Laws there are the Laws of England applied to that
place: As any particular custom of a place, not the general Law of the Land, is
the Law of that place by a general custom, and yet may be judged out of the
precincts of that custom; so the Laws of Ireland are the Laws of that Kingdom;
yet may be judged by this Supreme Court, out of the limits of Ireland. Though
in an inferior Court, when a thing questioned in Ireland, is brought by Writ of
Error, they judge according to the Laws of Ireland, not of England.

And my Lord has prayed, and werequire, that he may be judged according to the
Laws of Ireland. So this Law of 18 H. 6. may be judged by their Lordships,
though it be a Law in Ireland. But my Lord urges, that this Law is repealed,
and for that he gave reasons on many Acts of Parliament; First, a Statute made
8 Edw. 4. That is made to a particular purpose, reciting one particular
Statute, and repealing that, and then by a general clause, ratifying and
introducing all the Statutes of England into Ireland. This being but on a
particular occasion, with such a general Clause, will not be applyable,
however, it will be the Answer to that that follows. It is a general Clause to
introduce the Laws of England, and shall not have that reflection to repeal any
Law of force in Ireland. This introducing of our Laws thither, shall not work
to repeal their Laws, but make a consistance of both Laws, so far as they may
stand together. On that Mr. Palmer said, he would not enlarge himself, it being
not matter of Fact, and it was not expected that matter of Law would have been
insisted on, and therefore he leaves it to those that shall hereafter give
their Lordships satisfaction in point of Law.

That which my Lord called a Judgment in Parliament, 11 Eliz. recites that it
was in time of desolation of Justice; That the Captains had brought oppressions
on the people. It was in a time, when, though the Irish had been victi long
before, yet they were not brought perfectly under subjection of the Laws of
England, there then remained Rebellions and Tumults; It was in time of
Hostility and War, And that Statute gives but an Implication neither, that
Captains should not Assess without the Deputies Warrant: And it follows not,
that therefore he has authority to do it. But howsoever the thing be, this was
for defense of the people, to make resistance against Rebels. But the thing in
charge was in time of peace, and full government of the Law, and so that
Statute will give no justification at all.

My Lord of Strafford concluded, that there was no Treasonable Intent in this,
and therefore it should be no Treason on the Statute of the 25 Edw. 3.

My Lord recited the words of the Statute, Not to be only the levying of the
War, but adhering to the Kings enemies; but these glosses are not to be
confounded but severed. The adhering to the Kings enemies, is one offense
within that Statute, Levying of War another; so that if there be no Adherence,
yet if there be Levying of War, it will be Treason.

And this levying of War, it was on the Kings People; perhaps there was no
intent upon the Kings Sacred Person; yet if it be against the Kings People,
such a levying of War is Treason; ordinary Cases of Felony are to be against
the Kings Crown and Dignity, though it be the Homicide of a mean Subject, it is
against the Kings Crown and Dignity, because it is against the protection and
safety of that man that is the Kings Subject; and so the levying of War on the
Kings People, by laying Soldiers in this hostile manner, being against the
protection, by which they are governed, against the safety, by which the King
is to defend them. It is a War against the King, his Crown, and Dignity,

This is the Answer to the Defense. And Mr. Palmer concluded, That he conceived
the Charge of the House of Commons, in matter of Fact, was fully maintained,
and for matter of Law, if there remained any scruple, a farther Argument, and
stronger Reasons should be offered hereafter.

And so a Recess being granted for a day, upon the Humble Request of my Lord of
Strafford, the House was Adjourned, and Saturday following was appointed for
the next meeting.

THE Sixteenth Article. The Charge.

16. THat the Earl of Strafford the Two and twentieth of February, Article XVI
Charge.
in the 7th year of His Majesty's Reign, intending to oppress the said Subjects
of Ireland, did make a proposition, and obtained from His Majesty an allowance
thereof, that no complaint of injustice or oppreision done in Ireland, should
be received in England against any, unless it appeared, that the party made
first his address to him the said Earl, and the said Earl having by such
usurped, Tyrannical, and exorbitant power, expressed in the former Articles,
destroyed, and oppressed the Peers, and other Subjects of that Kingdom of
Ireland, in their Lives, Consciences, Land, Liberties, and Estates; the said
Earl to the intent, the better to maintain and strengthen his said power, and
to bring the people into a disaffection of His Majesty, as aforesaid; did use
His Majesty's Name in the execution of the said power.

And to prevent the Subjects of that Realm of all means of complaints to His
Majesty, and of redress against him and his Agents, did issue a Proclamation,
bearing date the 17th day of September, in the Eleventh year of His Majesty's
Reign, thereby commanding all the Nobility, Undertakers, and others, who held
Estates and Offices in the said Kingdom, (except such as were employed in His
Majesty's service, or attending in England by His special command) to make
their personal Residence in the said Kingdom of Ireland: and not to depart
thence, without License of himself.

And the said Earl has since issued other Proclamations to the same purpose,
by means whereof the Subjects of the said Realm are restrained from seeking
relief against the oppressions of the said Earl, without his License; which
Proclamation, the said Earl has by several rigorous ways, as by Fine,
Imprisonment, and otherwise, put in execution on His Majesty's Subjects, as
namely, one Parry, and others, who came over only to complain of the
exorbitances and oppressions of the said Earl.

April 3. 1641. Mr. Palmer Proceeded in further Maintenance of the Charge of
High Treason, by the Commons of England, against the Earl of Strafford; and
said, They were now entering upon the Sixteenth Article of his IMPEACHMENT, and
showed;
THat from the Former Articles had been represented several and diverse sorts of
Crimes; and how that in every of them their Lordships might perceive a Power
assumed by my Lord of Strafford, above, and contrary to the Laws, and
destructive to them in every part, so far as concerned the Subject Matter; and,
how these Multiplications of Acts did presuppose an Habit, and evidently proved
that main Charge, wherewith he was Accused, viz. His endeavoring the
Subversion of the Established Laws and Government, and to introduce an
Arbitrary and Tyrannical Power.

And, that by this Article it would appear unto their Lordships, that those
Exorbitances that were done in Ireland, were prepensed and intended, before his
going thither; That those Oppressions were so by him done; and, that he might
Countenance it, the Article Charges him, that on the 22th of February, in the
7th year of the King, he procured from his Majesty's own allowance, that no
Complaint of Injustice, or Oppression should be received in England, unless the
Party made first his Address himself to the Deputy, and this was obtained on
his repairing to that Government: And this was to be observed by the
Secretaries here, the Masters of Request, and all others by whom Complaints
might have passage to His Majesty; and, it remained as a Caution, that none
should be admitted.

It is true, many specious Reasons and Arguments were subscribed to this
Proposition, but the effect of them was, to take the Reins of Rule into his
own hands, to prevent the immediate access and approach of the Subjects to His
Majesty, in their seeking of redress for their Grievances.

And, in the 11th year of the King, after some time spent there, to prevent
them of all means of Redress, their Complaints being before Imbargued, that
they could not be received, no person at all must come over without License;
There must not be a Rumor of what was done in Ireland, but such as he should
so Authorize. To that end, by color of some Laws in Ireland, concerning them
that were to maintain their Lands against the Irish in times of Hostility and
Rebellion; and, under color of some Instruction, for their keeping their
Residence on their Lands, as also of a Letter to that purpose from His Majesty,
he is Charged; that on the 17th of Sept. 11 Car. he issued a Proclamation, and
that Commands the Nobility, Undertakers, and others that held Estates in
Ireland, to reside there, and not to depart without his License, and so
restrained them from seeking Relief against his Oppressions, without his
License. To them that desired Licenses, he denied them: On them that adventured
to repair hither without License, he imposed Fines and Imprisonments for
transgressing that Proclamation; and, howsoever this may be Colored with
Pretenses of Instructions, and Letters from His Majesty, it is an Usurpation on
Regality, and an undermining of the Protection of His Majesty over His People.

For Proof thereof,

John Loftus being Sworn, Attested; That the Copy of the Propositions, John
Loftus Witness.
made by my Lord of Strafford, was taken out of the Clerk of the Councils
Office, and was a true Copy.

The said Propositions were Read.

At White Hall, 22th of Feb. 1631.

Propositions to be considered of by His Majesty, concerning the Government of
Ireland.

These Propositions were entered according to His Majesty's pleasure, signified
by Mr. Secretary Cook.

These Propositions made to His Majesty by the Lord Wentworth Lord Deputy of
Ireland, and Lord President of the North, were Read and Approved of at the
Council Board, 17th Feb. 1631.

There being Present, etc.

THat no particular Complaint of Justice, or Oppression, be admitted here
against any, unless it appear, the Party made first his Address to the Deputy,
This is but Justice to the Deputy, who must needs, in some measure, be a
Delinquent.

Whence Mr. Palmer Inferred, It did appear that this was to be Entered, and
remain with the Secretaries, Masters of Requests, and all others whom it might
concern.

The next thing is the Proclamation, in effect as follows;

17th of Sept. 11 Car, By the Lord Deputy and Council. A Proclamation, That
Noblemen, Undertakers, and others, shall be Resident here.

After the Preamble it Imports,

WE therefore, in Obedience to His Majesty's Royal Command signified by the
said Letter, Do Publish, Declare, and make known His Princely Pleasure, That
all the Nobility, Undertakers, and others that hold Estates and Offices in the
Kingdom (such only excepted, as are employed in His Service in England) do
hereafter make their Personal Residences here; And not depart to England, or
other place, without License of us the Lord Deputy, any former Letter to the
contrary notwithstanding: And, in case we the Lord Deputy shall have notice of
their Contempt of His Majesty's Will, We shall proceed against them in an
Exemplary way to deter others: Therefore we straightly Command all manner of
persons to take notice of this Proclamation.

Mr. Palmer observed, That by the Propositions, all Complaints are prevented:
by the Proclamation all persons are restrained from coming over without the
Lord Deputies License. And, that in pursuance hereof, several persons that have
required Licenses have been refused; That many of their occasions to come over,
were Complaints against the Deputy himself; That such use has been made of
this Act, that the Committee of the House of Parliament there were restrained
from coming over, on pretense of this Prohibition.

Witnesses were produced. And first,

Richard Wade being Sworn, was Interrogated, Whether my Lord of Wade Witness.
Esmond did not require License to come into England, and if it was denied him?
And, Whether he had not a Suit depending with my Lord of Strafford, and he
would not let him come over till Publication passed, whereby he was prevented
of examining his Witnesses?

He Answered, That in August, 1638, my Lord of Esmond sent him with a Petition
to my Lord Deputy, for License to go to make an end of the Cause, wherein my
Lord Lieutenant was Plaintiff; That he delivered the Petition to my Lord
Lieutenant himself, and waited on him every day for his Answer; that he could
not get License on that Petition. That, after this, in Michaelmas-Term, 1638,
as he takes it, my Lord of Esmond procured the Kings Letter; This Letter he
delivered to my Lord Deputy, by direction of my Lord of Esmond; but, in this,
could not get License: So that he was detained from Aug. 1638, till April
following, and he thinks till Publication was granted.

Lorky being Sworn, and Interrogated touching my Lord of Esmonds Lorky Witness.
restraint, till the passing of Publication,

He Answered, That when my Lord of Esmond heard, that my Lord of Strafford had
Incerted him into a Bill, amongst other Defendants in the Star Chamber, my Lord
desired leave to come to England, to make his Defense in that Cause, and to
appear in it in person, because without his Lordships leave he could not come
over, by virtue of this Proclamation. My Lord solicited his leave, first by a
Petition, Aug. 1638. afterward by several Letters, some, he (the Deponent)
carried to his Lordship, who still denied leave, and would not suffer my Lord
of Esmond to come over, till after Publication was granted in the Cause, which
he conceives was in April; my Lord of Esmond having solicited from April,
1638, till April following.

Richard Wade Interrogated, What my Lord Lieutenant said to him, concerning my
Lord of Esmonds coming over? Richard Wade Witness.


He Answered, That on delivery of the Kings Letter to him, when he looked on it
in the evening, the outside (said my Lord of Strafford) is Secretary Crookes
hand; and, to morrow morning, if you attend me, you shall have an Answer.

That the next morning, he (the Deponent) came to the Secretary Carr, who told
his Lordship, The Deponent was there.

That my Lord sent for him, the Deponent, to his Study, and said, What needs my
Lord of Esmond be so importunate, for he can do nothing there; but his Attorney
and Agent may do it. Indeed, said he, the Deponent, My Lord intends only to go
over to get a Commission to justify his Innocence: Why then says my Lord of
Strafford, I will not give way, he shall have no Commission but what is out
already: and, if he have any Commission, it is but Negative.

And, Mr. Palmer observed, That by this means my Lord of Esmond Mr. Palmer.
came to be Sentenced; and, Mr. Maynard added, That so might the most innocent
Man.

Lord Roche Sworn, and Interrogated, Whether he did not demand a Lord Roche
Witness.
License, and was denied; and, in what suit he thought to be relieved?

He Answered, That he prayed my Lord to give him leave, and he denied him: That
his occasion to come over was about an Information, preferred against him half
a year before in the Star Chamber: conceiving, that there were some intentions
against him, that tended much to his prejudice, by my Lord Deputy, and Lord
President of Munster, who were the occasion of the Information, as he
conceived; and, that he intended to come over, hoping he might do something
with the King, and their Lordships; and, when he demanded License (his Lordship
coming to take Ship, and he (the Deponent) conducting him) he denied it him
(the Deponent) and the Suit was not pursued in five or six months; and, till my
Lord went over nothing was said of it, which was five or six months more.

My Lord of Strafford desired he might be Asked, Whether he was not then
Prisoner in the Castle? he alleging, That he was in prison for diverse E. of
Strafford.
great Misdemeanors, and being Interrogated accordingly,

He Answered, That he was not a Prisoner in half a year after, till my Lord
came out of England; nor was the Cause followed in five or six Months after he
propounded a License to his Lordship, which was the day his Lordship went
Aboard.

The next case offered is the case of Dermond Mac Carty, who had a Suit against
him several times, dismissed in a Court of Justice, which my Lord Deputy took
afterward into determination himself, and made an Order against him in the
Cause that was so diminished: Mac-Carty, Grandchild to him against whom the
Order was made (who was not bound by the Order; having no Land, nor Office in
Ireland, and so not bound by the Proclamation) desired leave to come into
England, to Complain indeed of this Injustice, though he pretended it was for
his Education, but was denied by my Lord, and by others in his absence, because
my Lord had denied him before.

The Petition subscribed by my Lord Deputy himself was Read, my Lord
Acknowledged it to be under his own hand.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount Wentworth, etc.
THe humble Petition of Dermond Mac-Carty, showing, That your Petitioner, for
his Private Occasions, specially for better Breeding and Education, is desirous
to Travel into the Realm of England; He therefore most humbly prays, your
Lordship will be pleased, to License and Dispense with his Journey thither, And
he will ever pray, etc.

Dublin-Castle, 28 June, 1637.
FOr Our Reasons, best known to Our Selves, We think it not fit to Grant the
Petitioners Request; but do rather hereby expressly inhibit, and forbid him to
Transport himself into England, or any part beyond the Seas, without Our
License first had in that behalf: And, of these Directions the Petitioner is
required, not only to take notice, but also obey the same, as he will answer
the contrary at his utmost Peril.

On a second Petition preferred by Mac-Carty (because my Lord Deputy had
refused to give him License) Sir Christopher Wainsford did also refuse his
License.

The Petition, and the Answer thereunto purporting to that effect, were Read.

James Nash Sworn, and Interrogated, Whether the occasion of these Petitions
was not to Complain of that Decree, made by my Lord Deputy, in a Cause, that
had in a Court of Justice been dismissed?

He Answered, That he knew the passages of all the Causes, having Nash Witness
been a Solicitor and Agent for the Father of Mac-Carty, and waiting on their
occasions in Dublin. That after the obtaining of two Dismissions in the Suit,
my Lord did Order and Decree for Sir James Craig 5496 l. against Mac-Carty.
And, on this Decree, an Order, to Dispossess him of all his Fathers Estate; and
he being Banished into a Foreign Part the young Man, for fear, would not come
in and appear; but, hoping to have Redress in England, did Petition in this
matter, in desire and hope to have Redress in that dismission made by the Lord
Strafford.

Mr. Palmer Opened the Case of Parry his Fine and Imprisonment, who is
mentioned in the Article; That he was Servant to the late Lord Chancellor, was
Examined before my Lord Deputy of some things that concerned his Master, and
had Answered so much as it pleased my Lord to require of him. That after this
(being used to follow my Lord Chancellors occasions) my Lord Deputy, to prevent
his coming over, referred him to further Examination before the Judges, whom he
attended five or six days, but there was nothing to examine him upon, for he
had delivered all that was required, as fully as he knew; That finding my Lord
Chancellors occasions very urgent, he came into England; and, as soon as he
came hither, it seems he was followed with directions thence; for, by Warrant
from Secretary Cook he was apprehended by a Messenger; and the Warrant
expresses it, that he was one that came over without License: That he was
turned over to Mr. Ralton, my Lords Agent, and must give Bond to repair, and
make his appearance in Ireland: Before that Bond was discharged, he did return;
and, after his return, he Petitioned to be Discharged of this Bond, he
conceiving he might come over without License, having no Estate nor Office in
Ireland; yet notwithstanding he was Sentenced, Fined, and Imprisoned. It is
true, the Cause expressed in the Sentence, is, Because he went away not being
Examined; and the Sentence expresses, That he is not Fined for coming without
License, but because he came away without being Examined.

Henry Parry Sworn, was Interrogated, Whether the Copy showed unto Parry Witness
him was a true Copy of Secretary Cooks Warrant?

He Answered, That he examined it with the Original.

The Warrant was Read.

THese are, in His Majesty's Name, to will and Command you, to make your
present repair to any place, where you shall understand of the -- of Henry
Parry Gent. lately come out of Ireland without License; and, by Virtue hereof,
to take him into Custody, and keep him safe till you hear from me.

Greenwich, 20 June, 1633. To Thomas Welsh, Messenger of the Kings Chamber.

Henry Parry being Interrogated, What were the Proceedings with him about his
Examinations in Ireland, before his coming over? And, What was the whole
Process of the business?

He Answered, That 21 April, 1638, my Lord of Ely, then Lord Chancellor, his
Lord and Master, was Committed to the Castle of Dublin, and, no sooner
Committed, but he (the Deponent) was sent for to the Council Board, and, an
Oath Administered to him, by the Clerk of the Council, on my Lord of Straffords
direction. That thereupon his Lordship Interrogated him, Where the Great Seal
was? He answered his Lordship, That he knew not where it was, unless it was
with my Lord of Ely: And, after his Lordship had Examined him to that, he
Commanded him to attend the Judges the next day, to be Examined on some Papers
of his (the Deponents) which his Lordship had seized and brought to the Council
(...), and thereupon he was dismissed at night. That Monday next (this being
Saturday) he attended the Judges alone to be Examined, and attended not only
that day, but five days more, from thence to Saturday. That on Saturday, my
Lord of Ely told him, He had occasion to send him over into England, and
desired him to go: That he did come away with some Letters from his Lordship,
to some of his Lordships Friends here; And, as soon as he came here with
Instructions from his Lordship, the Instructions were given to his Lordships
Friends, to Solicit His Sacred Majesty for his Relief, and Enlargement out of
Prison; and he continued a matter of two Months or thereabouts; and on that,
one Thomas Welsh, by Virtue of Secretary Cooks Warrant, attached him, and kept
him in Restraint about three weeks. At the end of three weeks he was sent for
to Mr. Ralton, who told him, It was Secretary Cooks pleasure he should enter
into Bond to go into Ireland, else he should be sent by a Messenger.

That he (the Deponent) Answered, He could not pay a Messenger, but if he could
not get leave to stay, he would enter into Bond to go to Ireland: That Mr.
Ralton took a Bond, to appear the 10th or 12th of August following, this being
in July, 1638. That he came into Ireland according to the Tenor of his Bond.
That my Lord of Strafford being to go into the Country, he presented himself
before his Lordship in the Gallery at the Castle, and acquainted his Lordship,
that he was there to attend his Lordship, according to the Tenor of the Bond.
His Lordship Asked him, Who took his Bond? he acquainted his Lordship, That it
was his Agent Mr. Ralton. His Lordship Asked, What Warrant had Mr. Ralton to
take Bond of you? He, (the Deponent) acquainted his Lordship, He did not know
any Warrant he had: but, he said, He had direction from Secretary Cook.

My Lord Asked further, Where he took the Bond, if at the Signet-Office? No:
said he (the Deponent) It was at his own house. My Lord Answered, That he (the
Deponent) might do well to attend at the next sitting of the Council Board.
And, that he (the Deponent) going away, his Lordship called him back, and said,
Methinks, Mr. Parry you are much Sun-burned, the weather is very hot in
England. He (the Deponent) Answered again, The weather is very fair. His
Lordship Interrogated him, Where my Lady Moore was? and, How she did? He (the
Deponent) acquainted his Lordship, She was in England.

Here my Lord of Strafford interrupted him, Asking, If this was to the E. of
Strafford
Business? but, having direction to go on,

He Added, That my Lord Asked him, Why he did not stay abroad to help my Lady
Moore to spread abroad her Malice against him (my Lord of Strafford) to which
he (the Deponent) said, He could say nothing: and so was dismissed. That
afterward he attended with a Petition of my Lord of Ely's; and, that my Lord
Asked him, Where his Petition was? He said, He had not any, but presented his
Person. His Lordship told him, That it was Councel-Board-day for Petitions, and
wished him to come some other time: yet after, was called back, and had an
Answer to the Petition. That the Tuesday following, (as he takes it) he
appeared before his Lordship again, without any Petition, not knowing any cause
he had to Petition: That, the next day after he Petitioned; and on Reading his
Petition, the Constable of the Castle was called, and thereupon he (the
Deponent) was Committed, and Censured (as he was told the next day) 500 l. That
his Lordship Declared the Order of the Board, That he (the Deponent) was Fined
500 l. Bound to his Good Behavior; Committed to the Castle of Dublin; and to
Acknowledge his Offense at the Board, and to Mr. Ralton; and there he continued
in Prison, and was utterly Ruined.

Being Asked, Whether he was heard to Answer in the Cause? or, Whether he was
Examined after his Return?

He Answered, That he never put in Answer in Writing, nor was there any
Petition against him, but only his own Petition; nor further Required to be
Examined from that day to this.

Being Asked, How much of his Fine he paid?

He Answered, That before he could see his Order, he was fain to pay Sir Paul
Davis 45 l. and, when he saw his Order for reducing it, for it was reduced from
500 l. to 250 l. of which he paid 184 l.

Mr. Palmer proceeded, observing, That the next thing was, a Refusal Mr.
Palmer, Afterward His Majesty's Attorney General.
of the whole Kingdom to Present their Complaints: It is true, said he, it was
not by my Lord of Strafford himself, but it ensued on these Acts, and
Proclamations; and that was hindering the Committee of the Parliament that were
to come over, to make a Remonstrance of their Grievances to His Majesty.

Sir Robert Smith being Sworn, and Interrogated, Whether he was Linch Witness.
employed by the House of Commons to come over hither? and, Whether he was
denied License?

He Answered, That we were sent for by my Lord Deputy Wainsford, and he put us
(as we conceived them) several catching Questions, as, If they had not my Lord
Deputies License, and the Boards. Whether they would repair to England or no?
We Answered, That, in obedience to the House of Commons, we did intend to
repair to England. No, says my Lord Deputy, Answer me Catagorically; Would you
go or no, If we would Command you not to go? to this we Answered, No: being
between two Jurisdictions, both from His Majesty; for, we had a Command from
the House of Commons, and a Counter-Command from His Majesty, and we were
denied License, and a restraint of Ships, for that cause they conceived to
restrain them.

Being asked, whether the Deputy did know the House of Commons had ordered them
to come over, and yet refused?

He answered, the Lord Deputy did know it, it was apparently known to all the
Kingdom.

Mr. Fitz-gerard being examined to the same points, as Sir Robert Linch.
Fitz-gerard Witness.


He Answered, That after the the Session of Parliament, 1 October. last, and the
House of Commons had traveled till the 6 Nov. in the affairs of the Kingdom,
the grand Committee had heard and discussed many grievances general and
particular, and voted them to the House. That about the beginning of Nov. the
House entered into consideration of those grievances, and drew up a Petition of
Remonstrances to be presented to the Lord Deputy, which was voted in the House
of Commons 7 Nov. 9 Nov. the whole House attended with the Speaker, and the
Speaker read it publicly before him. The grievances were of that nature, that
they did Humbly, and of Right (as he remembers) petition for redress of those
grievances; that the House conceiving the Parliament would be Prorogued, or
Dissolved before Redress was given, they entered into consideration of a course
to present it to His Majesty. And 11 Nov. made an Order: that the Committee
should be appointed to repair to England with a Caution, That if Redress should
not be had before Dissolution, or Prorogation of the Parliament, that Committee
should not proceed. 12 Nov. it was Prorogued without Redress; that the next day
after Prorogation the Committee was summoned to attend at the Board, and there
was interrogated severally on a question, as far as he can remember, viz. Of
their intention to go into England, whether they would ask leave to go into
England? and admitting my Lord Deputy should command them not to go, till His
Majesty's pleasure was known, whether they would go? To all they were severally
to answer, and Catagorically (this was my Lord Deputies word) after Answer
given, they were ordered to withdraw, and being called in again, it was made
known by the Lord Deputy Wainsford; That he and the Lords had considered the
whole matter, and bade them take notice, there was a Proclamation, restraining
all the Subjects of Ireland to make repair to England till application was made
to the Deputy. That he engaged them in Allegiance, not to depart, till he (the
Lord Deputy) had known His Majesty's pleasure, whether they should go or no,
which he would labor to know speedily.

The next thing Mr. Palmer offered, was the Irish Remonstrance, which was read.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Deputy, The humble and just Remonstrance of
the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in Parliament. THe Petitioners do conceive
great and strong fears of a Proclamation published in this Kingdom, Anno 1635.
Prohibiting men of Quality or Estate, to depart this Kingdom without the Lord
Deputies License, whereby the Subjects of this Kingdom are hindered and
interrupted from free access to His said Majesty and Privy Council of England,
to obtain remedies against their just grievances, as their Ancestors have had,
since the Reign of H. 2. and great Fees exacted for the said Licenses.

And so Mr. Palmer summed up the Evidence, That by the Proposition Mr. Palmer.
made before my Lord Deputies going over, it appeared what was intended, That
no complaints of oppression should be made without address, First, to the
Deputy, and what followed, declares plainly the execution of it; That
notwithstanding the injustice and oppression done, complaints could not be
received. By the former Article, their Lordships have heard what he did there,
and the great causes of complaint; After in time, is the Proclamation, their
Lordships see the use made of it,, that those who had made complaints against
my Lord himself, and his Orders, were refused to have License; some that
adventured to come without License were Fined and Imprisoned to their utter
ruin. The whole Parliament, when the Order was well known, were refused to
have License; it is true, not by my Lord of Strafford, but the Deputy, who
colored his denial from these Acts of my Lord of Strafford; what fears they
had, their Lordships may apprehend by the Remonstrance; My Lord of Strafford
assumed a great power to himself, all Addresses being first made to him, and
the Subject thereby excluded from His Majesty, till such address was made; so
that his Lordship is not Par negotio, but Supra, above all the authority
committed to him; not an Accessory but Principal; not in the nature of a
Subject but Domini, and so he expected his Lordships Answer.

My Lord of Strafford after a little time of recollecting himself, began E. of
Strafford.
his Defense in substance as follows.

That he should only apply himself to the things in charge, as near as he
could, and give the fairest Answer he could, where, by the way he alleged,
That he might very justifiably say, he had never in his life other thoughts or
intentions before his going into Ireland, or during his abode there, but justly
and faithfully in the service of His Majesty and the Kingdom; nor did he ever
desire, or intend any thing, so much as to introduce the English Laws and
Government there: And whereas he is charged with a subversion of the
fundamental Laws, he may say, he thinks, with Truth and Modesty, that the Laws
had never so free a passage, that never any Deputy gave less interruption to
the proceedings of the Law, than it had, during all his time: That it did not
appear by all that has been said, that there was any stay of legal
proceedings; for all the Causes spoken of him, came originally, and primarily,
before they depended in any other Court; and that he never hindered, but gave
all furtherance to the passage of the Common Law; and therefore if their
Lordships find (as they cannot but expect from him much) Error and mistakes, he
besought them out of their Goodness and Nobleness, to apply it rather to his
Infirmity and Weakness, than to any habit of ill he had got, as he trusts, he
should make appear to their Lordships. The Charge, is to have procured, with an
intent of oppression, a stop of all complaints of Injustice, that none might be
received in England, unless it appeared, That the party did make his address to
him.

To prove this, the Gentlemen have read a Proposition of his, made before his
going into Ireland, and as appears, by their own showing, such a Proposition as
was allowed and approved of by their Lordships at the Council Board. He desires
that in this (as in all things else) he might not be taken in pieces, but
altogether; for if they take part, and leave what they please, they may make a
man speak strange things; and therefore he desired their Lordships would hear
the reasons inducing that Proposition as well as the Proposition it self, being
under the Clerk of the Councils hand, and so attested by Mr. Ralton: The
Proposition and Reasons were accordingly read as follows in substance.

Feb. 1631. A Proposition amongst diverse others, entered in the Register of the
Acts of Council 22 Feb. 1631. follows in haec verba.

THat no particular complaint of Injustice or Oppression be admitted here
against any, unless it first appear he has made his Address to the Deputy.

And indeed, this is but justice to the Deputy, who must needs in some measure
be a Delinquent, if the complaints be true, as being in chief universally to
take care that His Majesty's Justice be thoroughly complied with in that place;
and therefore good reason his Judgment should be informed, and his Integrity
first tried, before either be impeached; Nay, it is but justice to the
Government it self, which would be exceeding scandalous, through the liberty of
complaints, and the Ministry therein extremely discouraged, upon every petit
matter to be drawn to answer here, when the thing it self is for the most part
either injurious, or for which, the party might have received good satisfaction
at his own door. But where the complaint appears formally grounded, and where
due application has been made to the Deputy, without relief to the party, let
it be thoroughly examined, and severely punished, wheresoever the fault proves
to be, especially if it be corrupt or malicious; for so he shall not only
magnify his Justice, but punish an unfaithful Minister, or clamorous
Complainant, and his service shall thereby be bettered.

From whence my Lord of Strafford inferred, That by this it might appear to
their Lordships, his intent was not to assume any greater Authority, than
became him to desire; but merely to prevent clamors and unjust complaints, and
that they might be redressed nearer home without Complaint, and no way to
hinder any man's just complaint.

And so it had no relation nor aspect to himself, but merely to the furthering
of the Kings Justice. And so that Proposition could not (he conceived) be
turned upon him, otherwise then as Just and Honorable. For the Proclamation it
self, and the staying of men from coming without License (the thing complained
of) he begged leave to acquaint their Lordships with some particulars.

He conceived, by the Laws of Ireland, no man that is a Subject and Liege-man
there, can come from thence without License from the Deputy, but it is very
penal, and to that purpose he would mention two or three Statutes of that
Kingdom; One is the 26 H. 6. ca. 2. The Title whereof is, An Act that the Kings
Subjects, or Officers in Ireland, may be absent by the Commands of the King or
Governor, or Council, without Censure of, etc.

The words of the Statute in substance.

Also it is decreed and agreed, that none of the Kings Liege men (who
comprehend all, as he conceives) or Officers of the Land, go out of the Land,
but by Commission from the King or his Heirs, Lieutenant-Iustices, etc. All the
Rents, Benefits, Offices, or other Possessions by their said Absence, shall be
seized into the Kings hands, etc.

Whence my Lord of Strafford inferred, That if they go without the Governors
License, there is a forfeiture of all these.

Another is 25 H. 6. Ca. 9. It is ordained, etc.

That if any Liege-man be out of the Kingdom, by the Commandment of the King
or his Heirs, or the Lieutenant there, Deputy-Iustices, or Council; Their
Rents, etc, shall not be seized, etc. Whence his Lordship inferred, That if
they go without License, they are punishable for it.

The next is a certain Article, preferred by certain Irish Agents then in
England in May 1628. or thereabouts, long before he was thought on for a Deputy
in Ireland, either by himself or any body else; and this is from their own
desire and Petition,

Being attested by Mr. Ralton to be a true Copy, one Article was read, being in
substance as follows.

May 1628. TO the Kings most Excellent Majesty, the humble Petition of Your
Majesty's faithful Subjects, appointed Agents to prefer certain humble
Requests, etc. to your Highness, in behalf of your Kingdom of Ireland.

After the Preamble, amongst other things it contained,

That His Majesty would be pleased, that in respect of the non-residence of
many great men, who spending their Estates abroad, the Kingdom was
impoverished, and great sums of Money transported; Order might be taken, that
both they, and all Undertakers, on whom Estates have been bestowed, for the
better supporting and improving of the Kingdom, may make their personal
Residence, at least half the year, and not to depart without License.

His Majesty's Answer was given in these words.
ALL the Nobility, Undertakers, and others, who hold Estates and Offices within
that Kingdom, are to make their personal Residence there, and not to leave it
without License, such persons excepted only, as are employed in Our Service in
England, or attend here by Our special Command.

Next my Lord of Strafford desired, he might read the Lord Faulklands
Instructions, which, as he conceived, were pursuing to this, and they were, as
he takes it, 24 May, 1628. which being attested by Mr. Brooks to be examined by
the Original, was read.

C. R.

Instructions to be observed by, or, etc. Henry Viscount Faulkland, or Council
there, etc.
ALL the Nobility, Undertakers, and others, who hold Estates, or Offices in
that Kingdom, are to make their personal Residence there, and not to leave it
without License; such persons only excepted, as are employed in Our Service in
England, or attend here by Our special Command.

Next His Lordship offered His Majesty's Letter of 20th of January 1634.
Commanding the publishing of this Proclamation, which Mr. Ralton affirming to
be a true Copy was read.

C. R.

To the Lord Deputy of Ireland.
WHEREAS amongst other things in the Graces vouchsafed to Our Subjects, 1628.
We signified Our Pleasure, That the Nobility, Undertakers, and Others, holding
Estates in Ireland, should be resident there, and not to depart without
License: And being now given to understand, That notwithstanding those
Directions, diverse persons (not of the meaner sort) take liberty to pass into
this Kingdom, or foreign parts, as if they understood not what they owed to Us
in their Duty, or themselves in their evil Carriage, which presumption we may
not long suffer, etc. We do therefore hereby Will and Require you, by Act of
State, or Proclamation, to make known Our Pleasure, That all Nobility,
Undertakers, and others, that hold Estates and Offices, (such persons only
excepted, as be employed here, etc.) do hereafter make their personal
Residence, and not depart for England, or other place, without privity of Our
Deputy, any former Letters to the contrary notwithstanding.

And because We resolve to have this course constantly observed (if you shall
have notice of any Contemner of this Command) Our Will and Pleasure is, That
you proceed against them in an exemplary way to deterr others; And for so
doing, this shall be your Warrant.

My Lord of Strafford observed, That he might well have hoped, that this being
required by the Laws of the Land, that no man should depart without License,
but it should be penal to him, having their own Articles, which desire the same
thing; That by this Proclamation the E. of Strafford.
Power of my Lord of Faulkland was established upon him; and the Kings Command
for the issuing this Proclamation, being justified by the Kings own Letter, so
that this should not have been laid to him, for so great and high a crime as it
has been represented to your Lordships; and he trusted that by that time,
their Lordships thought it not so great a crime, as it might at first seem to
be.

That he was not very hasty in issuing the Proclamation, (he having no interest
in it, nor nothing to drive him forwards) for tho His Majesty's Command was,
bearing date 20 June 1634. yet the Proclamation issued not till Sept. 17. 1635.
And because all he had said, had been turned on him as a crime, his Lordship
gave this further Answer,

That there could be no Proclamation made by the Deputy alone, (he being
absolutely restrained by his Commission, not to make a Proclamation without the
Council) therefore he could not be singular in the fault, but had the consent
of all the Kings Council; and for instance, in matter of Law, the Chief
Justices are sitting at the Board, to whom all matters of Law are referred, and
they are answerable for it; and are so learned, that they could not do things
so frequently, without good authority; and this he offered in excuse of this,
and all other Proclamations, not doubting but it was according to the Laws and
Customs of the Land.

And for further satisfaction, that part of his Commission that concerned the
Proclamation was read, and in this particular he desired leave to offer
something more with all Humility, that tho none of these were for his
justification, yet for Reasons of State, this Restraint was most necessary; for
whosoever goes over Deputy, while these two great men (to term them no worse) O
Neal and Tir-Connel, have Regiments of the most ancient Irish Septs, serving
the King of Spain, under their Command, it is necessary for him to have an eye
upon them; for if every one might withdraw himself at pleasure, without giving
an account, it would open all the power and means that possibly can be, to
distemper that State, and certainly if that liberty might be granted, he feared
it would produce sad events in that Kingdom.

Moreover, if all the Primogeniture and Nobility of that Religion, should be
suffered to go over to Doway, St. Omer, and the Jesuits Colleges, it was to
be feared, they should not be so well brought up for the service of the King
and Commonwealth, as may be desired; and therefore it was necessary, according
to the constitutions of that Kingdom, that they shall give an account to the
Chief Governor; And it was no other than what is practiced here in England; no
man being at liberty to go hence into France without License. And certainly,
said he, it is an Account we owe to the King, and stands with the Law of
nature. Pater Familiae may take account of his own Household, and the King being
the great Father of the Commonwealth, we owe this Account to him; Therefore he
conceived it can be no great offense in him, to do this on these grounds; and
as he recommended the prosperity of that Kingdom, and His Majesty's affairs
there and here, to God, by his Prayers and good desires; so he wishes it might
be taken into good consideration, that this may be continued as a principal and
necessary expedient, to give His Majesty that account, without which, the
Governor shall not be able to take just measures of things there. His Lordship
then observed, that something had been observed, that was no part of his
Charge, and therefore presumed their Lordships would not expect an answer to
it, or conclude him any way in their Judgment guilty of it, since the means of
giving that satisfaction, which otherwise he should have done, are now taken
away.

But when they came to be complained of in their proper place, he is ready to
give such an account, as becomes a Just and Innocent man. But that which seems
to be the foulest of them, was that concerning my Lord of Esmond, of which he
remembered very little; but something darkly, and if it appeared not as he
should say, he was extremely mistaken; for what he did not know or remember, he
would not speak of it confidently, and in short, the point is this.

Two men swear that he (the Lord of Strafford) denied liberty to my Lord of
Esmond to come for England, Aug. 1638. and that he was kept in Ireland, and
could not have License to come away till April 1639. His Lordship confessed it
to be very true, and that he remembered my Lord of Esmond desiring to go over,
was stopped by him a while, (he being Sergeant Mayor-General of the Army) the
Army having occasion of motion, and that he was sure it was much about the
time, if his Memory failed him not extremely, (but when it came to this time,
and he had means to produce witnesses, he hoped to make this appear) besides,
he was mistaken, if he did not very shortly after give him a License, and that
he found not occasion to make use of it; and if that was was so, all they said
was taken away, for he afterward finding it to draw toward winter, laid aside
the License till the Spring, at Spring he asked it, and had it; but in these
things not judicially brought against him, and to which he could not make
certain Answers, he hoped he might stand clear, and unprejudiced, till he may
answer positively for himself; and then as their Lordships should find him,
they might judge of him: and he should ever most willingly submit to their
Judgments, and abide it whatever it was: And whereas the Witness said, my
Lord of Esmond was hindered, because he had no Commission to examine Witnesses,
my Lord of Strafford said, he was able to prove, that a Bond was granted him to
examine Witnesses.

And the Witness being accidentally there, his Lordship took notice of Gods
providence from that, and said, God Almighty was willing to help and assist him
wonderfully in his Trial, and that his Goodness to him in this Cause had been a
great deal more than he would trouble their Lordships withal at that time; but
he said, he was confident, God had him in his protection, and would never
forsake him; and whatsoever he should loose in this world, he would make it up
to him in another world.

And for this purpose Mr. Riley was produced, who being questioned, whether he
was employed in suing out a Commission for examining of witnesses in Ireland,
in a Cause concerning my Lord of Esmond, and Sir Pierce Crosby?

Mr. Riley Answered, That he was employed as Clarke in the Cause, where Mr.
Attorney was Plaintiff, by Relation of my Lord Lieutenant against my Lord of
Esmond and Sir Pierce Crosby, Mr. Riley, Witness.
and when that Cause came to Commission, they for the Defendant brought
Commissioners names, and did join in that Bond, but he cannot remember the time.

Being asked (on Mr. Maynards motion) whether Sir Pierce Crosby, or Mr. Maynard.
my Lord of Esmond fued it out? He Answered, he could not directly say; but the
Clerk for the Defendants could.

Mr. Ralton being asked to the same point. Mr. Ralton.


He Answered, that he remembers, that about this time, 1638, or 1639.
Commissions were sued out in the business, between my Lord Lieutenant and my
Lord of Esmond, and Sir Pierce Crosby, and that he was very confident, that my
Lord of Esmond had the benefit of examining Witnesses.

My Lord of Strafford observed, that these Gentlemen stirred up those E. of
Strafford.
things, to beget an ill opinion of him, but in short answered, they were not
in his Charge.

And further, That he conceived my Lord of Esmond was stayed on a complaint of
Sir Walsingham Cokes, concerning a practice of his, to the endangering of Sir
Walsingham's life. And that he was stayed upon that account, to be examined,
and if he (the Lord Strafford) was not mistaken) my Lord Esmond was, after
examination left at liberty; But these things he said, were rather aggravations
of his Charge, than within the Charge, and therefore he humbly conceived, that
in these cases their Lordships would allow him liberty, and hoped the Gentlemen
will likewise allow it, that so he might satisfy them, their Lordships, and
all the world, that he has carried himself justly and fairly in all these
particulars; Also assuring himself, that these Gentlemen were willing he should
give the best answer to all these things he could; And so he would, and that
with all respect and reverence to them in the world.

The next Case is my Lord Roches, and his Lordship conceives, that my Lord
Roche himself gives a fair answer, for he was informed against him in the
Starchamber, and my Lord of Strafford said indeed, he remembered there was such
an occasion for it, as he was willing to forget it, for that noble Gentleman's
Cause, and that the complaint was of so high a nature against my Lord Roche, as
he was not willing to press it, to his prejudice, nor ever did, but where there
was great reason: and when he should come to answer for it (for he imagines it
is not expected he should answer it finally now, being not within his Charge)
Heaven should justify him, and show that he had reason to stay him at that
time.

The next is Dermond Mac-Cartyes: and, the Cause of his stay appears to be,
That he would go abroad for his Breeding. Now if he and such other should go to
Doway and St Omer, he thinks their Lordships and the House of Commons would
have blamed him more for giving him and such persons leave, then faulted him
for restraining them: And, had he alleged, That he intended to go over to
Complain of that Decree, he would not have hindered him; and, to that purpose,
he has Witnesses, that he never stayed any Man, that pretended he would
complain of him. The Decree was made by a Letter from His Majesty, on a notable
fraud of Mac-Carty (the Father) in the Case of Sir James Craig, and he that
Swears in it is Solicitor in the Cause, and so not altogether so competent a
Witness.

But, these are all on the by, and come rather to prove an Intention, then that
which is pressed on him, as a thing to which he is properly and finally to
Answer.

The next is concerning the Sentence of Mr. Parry, in which business my Lord
humbly offered, That no Testimony is yet produced, other, than the Testimony of
the Party himself. Now, if the Judge may be Convinced, and Condemned on the
single Testimony of the Party grieved, he knows no man would willingly sit in
Judgment on these Terms: and, out of this single VVitness (being qualified
with the attribute of the party grieved) Must he be Condemned, that was one of
the Judges?

But, as they have Proved nothing Judicially, that can weigh with their
Lordships, it will be fit for him to justify himself for this Sentence, so far
as comes to his share, for all the whole Board consented to it: And therefore
he besought their Lordships, to give him the honor, To offer the Sentence given
against Mr. Parry, wherein their Lordships would see the Reason, that it was
not for departing without License, but for great and foul neglects and
contempts to the Board.

Mr. Gibson Attesting it to be a true Copy, the Decree of the Deputy and
Council was Read, being in substance; Mr. Gibson.


WHereas Henry Parry, one of them who attended the Lord Chancellor, as his
Lordships Register-keeper, or Clerk for private Iudicatures, and Keeper of the
Books of these Private Proceedings, was Commanded to attend the Board to be
Examined; And whereas in Contempt thereof, he not only neglected to attend
accordingly, but departed this Kingdom, which being represented to His Majesty,
it pleased His Majesty to require his return hither to attend this Board; To
which end a Bond was taken for his Appearance here the next Councilday, after
the 12th of Aug. and whereas he was present himself at this Board 9th October,
1638, but offered no Petition; as if he disdained so far to humble himself to
this Authority; whereupon it ebing made known to him, That it became him, in
the Duty he owed to the dignity of this Board, to come by Petition, as all
other Men: but he forbearing to exhibit his Petition, till he was called by us
the Deputiee to do it; and then when he exhibited it, he therein misrecited his
Offense; alleging it to be for his repairing to England without License;
License; whereas his Offense was, The disobeying the Orders of this Board.
Secondly, He laid a Tax on William Ralton Esquire Alleging, That on pretense of
Direction from Secretary Cook, he took his Bond for Appearance here, whereas
he knew it was not by any feigned direction, but by appointment of Secretary
Cook, by His Majesty's Direction. Thirdly; In stead of humbling himself, he
desired Cancelling of his Bond, and Dismission from attendance; and the rather,
because he conceived he had not in any degree transgressed the Proclamation;
cautelously alleging that to be his Offense, which was not laid to his Charge.
And, for as much as his first Offense in Estoyning himself to shun the guilt
whereof he was convinced; and after his bold and insolent behavior at this
Board (in answering plainly That he conceived the Command of the Lord
Chancellor ought to free him from the Command of this Board) deserves such
proceedings against him, as may be both Punishment to him, and Example to
others: It is therefore Ordered, That he stand Fined in 500 l. Bound to his
Good Behavior; stand Committed to the Castle during the Deputies pleasure; and
make acknowledgment of his Offense at this Board. And, the Form of his
Submission is set down, I Acknowledge I presented a Presumptuous and Untrue
Petition, etc. Given 30 October, 1638.

The Names of those that Subscribed it were also Read.

Whence my Lord of Strafford observed, That he was not Sentenced for going
without License, but for other Causes; and desired my Lord Dillon, and Sir Adam
Loftus (whose hands are to the Decree0 might be Asked a Question or two. And
first to the business of my Lord of Esmond, which had been forgot before.

Robert Lord Dillon being asked, Whether he remembered any Charge Dillon Wit.
ness.
laid against my Lord of Esmond, for a practice against Sir Walsingham Coke?
whereupon being Examined, And, When it was?

He Answered, That he remembered it was about that time, when a Letter was
written from the Judges of Assize that went the Circuit of the County of
Wexford; and they Reported, That they had taken Examinations: Whereupon it was
mistrusted, or at least suggested, That my Lord of Esmond was to set some on to
cut off Sir Walsingham Coke; and, this being taken into consideration, it was
resolved, That till the Judges had determined, Whether it was Treason, or not,
he should be stayed for a time; and, as he takes it, it was Resolved he should
be Advertised into England.

Being Asked (on Mr. Maynards Motion) What time this was? Mr. Maynard


He Answered, The Question is sudden to him; but, it was much about the time
that my Lord of Esmond had been in Town before; but, he cannot expressly speak
to the time.

But, my Lord of Strafford observed, That the Complaint came from the Judges of
Assize, when they came from the Circuit, and that was always about August.

Lord Dillon being Asked, What year it was?

He Answered, He cannot tell the year of the Lord in Terms: but, he remembers,
it was much about that time when my Lord of Esmond was Questioned, and about
Summer Circuit.

My Lord of Strafford proposing, That my Lord Dillon might be Asked, What he
remembered of the Sentence against Parry? and, What his behavior was?

To this Mr. Maynard excepted, as not proper to Examine the Judge, Mr. Maynard.
Whether his Sentence was just or no?

To which my Lord of Strafford Answered, That it is as equal the Judge that
gives Sentence should be Examined, as the party against whom the Sentence is
given. That this is a Sentence for things spoken and done at the Board, which
stands not on such Niceties; but Contempts and Misdemeanors to a Court are
frequently determined, without Examination of Witnesses; and, this is a
Misdemeanor done in the place.

But, my Lord Dillon being spared from Answering,

Sir Adam Loftus was Examined, What he knew of that practice of my Lord of
Esmond, against Sir Walsingham Cokes Life? And when?

He Answered, That the first time he heard of it, was, upon an Information of
the Judges of the Circuit to my Lord Deputy, then in Ireland, as he takes it;
and, he thinks, my Lord was not then in Town, but sent that Information to the
Council at Dublin, his Lordship being then at his Countrey-house; and therein,
some Practice against Sir Walsingham Coke, of certain Rebels and Outlawes, that
had laid in Ambush near his house, was set forth; and thereupon that Letter was
sent to the Council to Consider of it, and take course for his Security: That
this was not all neither; for, the Examination of a Rebel in the Castle,
brought it home nearest to my Lord of Esmonds Case. But, because the Rebel was
a Man of that condition, it was not thought his Testimony could be prevalent
against my Lord of Esmond: therefore the other Witnesses were sent for to be
Examined in the Cause. Now, this Course of Examination held a matter of three
weeks or a month, or thereabouts (he does not well know the time) but, these
Men not concurring with the Testimony of the Rebel, in Restraint, there was no
words made of it; but my Lord of Esmond was dismissed, and left to take his own
Course. The time was, as he takes it, in the Summer Assizes, 1637, or 1638, he
knows not which: And this is the truth, and all he knows of the business.

Whence my Lord of Strafford Inferred, That being under that Charge E. of
Strafford.
of Sergeant-Major-General of the Army, he denied him liberty to go into
England; but, as soon as he was clear, he had his License.

Mr. Maynard desiring their Lordships to observe, that my Lord of Strafford
Explained himself thus; That he thought so, or very shortly after: And added,
That the Gentleman is very quick with him, being a Man of great understanding,
and himself a weak Man. But, that he means very justly, and would not be taken
in an Untruth; and said, That he has a Servant that was with him, when my Lord
of Esmonds Agent came to him, at his House in the Country; And desired, he
might be Asked, What Answer he gave him?

Francis Wetheringe being Asked, What he knew concerning my Lord of Straffords
giving of License to my Lord of Esmond?

He Answered, That he remembers very well that the Gentlemen were Mr. Wether
inge.
Examined, before they came to Fairework-Parke; while he was waiting on his
Lordship at that time, the Gentleman came to him, and desired him to tell my
Lord he would speak with him: that he heard my Lord say, It was concerning his
License, to repair to England; and, my Lord said, He should have it; but, it
was Winter time, and he would let it alone till the Spring.

Being Asked, What Month it was?

He Answered, He could not very well remember, but it was the latter end of
Summer as he thought.

Mr. Ralton being Asked, Whether the business of my Lord of Esmond, Ralton.
and Sir Walsingham Coke, were not Advertized over hither?

He Answered, That he does very well remember the business (he being then Agent
for my Lord Lieutenant.) That in one of his Letters, or the Councils,
Advertisement was given of this practice against Sir Walsingham Coke; and, as
he takes it, was in Sept. 1638. or thereabouts; and that my Lord was pleased to
do him (the said Mr. Ralton) the favor, to give him some passages of it.

Therefore my Lord of Strafford desired, These things might not stick E. of
Strafford.
with their Lordships, or the House of Commons, to his prejudice; when he had
not Means, nor Possibility to make his Defense: but, that in Charity they would
reserve their Opinions till they sound the truth to the bottom; and then he
hoped he should appear an honest Man, and that was all he pretended to.

For the Remonstrance of the House of Commons in Ireland, it is no Evidence,
but a Charge to call him to Account rather, than to Condemn him or Judge him
by: For, it is the Remonstrance of the Commons House, that have not power to
give an Oath, and so may be easily misinformed, when they want a Means to try
out the Truth.

But, for the Great Fees exacted for these Licenses; Here are two of his
Secretaries employed in this business, whom his Lordship desired might be
Examined, What Fees they demanded, and had in this particular? He added, That
he durst say, Thousands that went over without License were never questioned
for it: nor any, but where there was Cause; as, in Case a Man was ill-affected,
and then he was looked after.

Mr. Slingsby being Asked about the Fees for Licenses?

He Answered, They did give the Clerks directions never to demand Slingsby
Witness.
any Fees for Licenses; and, that the Clerk never accounted to him for above
Five shillings for any License, which he said was voluntarily given, not
demanded.

Mr. Little being Asked to the matter of Fees?

He Answered, That he Charged his servant still to demand no Fees Little
Witness.
for Licenses, except of Privy-Counsellors, or Officers of the Army; and, when
they had Licenses they paid for them; and, the Fee of the License from the
Captains was 20 Shillings; the ordinary Fee for others Five shillings; and,
many times none at all was paid.

And then my Lord of Strafford added, That he had now gone over all the E. of
Strafford
particular Proofs, as near as he could remember them: And, the last he shall
insist on is this. That there is nothing in this Charge as he conceives of
Treason; and he must needs Conclude every Article so, in regard Treason is the
only thing he is Charged withal: And, he conceives he has given such Answers
to this, that nothing shall convince him before their Lordships of Treason.
And, for matter of Misdemeanors, he knows their Lordships will give him time
to examine Witnesses, and leave for his Counsel to be heard, and then he shall
Acquit himself as becomes him; and so with all humility, submit it to their
Lordships.

And thus his Lordship concluded his Defense.

ARTICLE XVI. REPLICATION.

Mr. Palmer Replied thereunto in substance as follows;

THat my Lord of Strafford, in the Preamble of his Defense, has made Mr.
Palmers Reply.
a great Profession to their Lordships of his endeavor to preserve the Laws in
Ireland; and, that no Deputy did ever less interrupt the Legal Proceedings:
Which, though it be not the matter of the Cause, he desired leave to put their
Lordships in mind, how much he has interrupted the legal proceedings, because
it has been another part of his Army.

That it has been fully proved, How he Assumed to himself, out of the ordinary
Jurisdiction, Causes to be heard before himself, on Paper Petitions, which, how
grossly he has determined, their Lordships have heard: And, whether this be not
an Interruption to legal proceedings, he submitted to their Lordships, and also
left them to Judge how contrary it was to this Profession of my Lord of
Strafford.

To the Matter of the Defense, viz. That these Particulars were not complained
of; Mr. Palmer Answered, It is true, There is no particular Complaint Mr.
Palmer.
in the Article: but, my Lord of Strafford, in his Answer, said, He never
denied Licenses to any man to go into England, and that puts it in Is sue, and
gives occasion to prove his Denial.

To the Reasons of his Propositions, Mr. Palmer observed, they were, viz.
Because he was responsible for the Justice of the place; and therefore good
reason his Integrity should be tried before any Complaints came: The Officers
and Ministers of Justice should not be drawn from thence on every Complaint,
where they might have redress at their own doors. These are fair shows, and
something must be said to induce His Majesty's Allowance; and, as much as Art
and Skill could invent to prevent the Subjects access to their Sovereign with
Complaints of Injustice and Oppression; It must have a great deal of Wit and
Art to color it, and so he uses it: Their Lordships cannot expect it from him,
nor will their Lordships expect it in the Proofs, that he should tell His
Majesty he does all this, that they may not complain of Injustice and
Oppression, for this is a hard thing to be done; But, the thing it self shows
for what end he obtained it, his many Acts of Injustice prove, Quo obtentu,
this Proposition was gotten; If this had been gotten on the fair grounds
pretended, then, upon Complaints here, His Majesty, in consideration of them,
had had it in his own power, to have referred them back to Ireland, if they
were misinformed; but, means were used that they should not come to the King,
the Bar was laid with the Secretaries, and Masters of Requests, that His
Majesty should, by no means know, as to consider of the fitness, or unfitness
of them.

For the Matter of the Judges and Ministers being withdrawn; it is true, they
were most likely to be complained of; but, when they cannot be complained of
but to my Lord of Strafford, this draws a great Dependence on him, and makes
them amenable to his Will. As, in the Sentences wherein they concurred, and
whereby he would justify himself.

Again, the discouraging of Complaints in this Proposition, and the Arguments
used to His Majesty, provided a Punishment for Clamorous Complaints; so, that
they, which had Cause of Complaint, being terrified with a Punishment (though
they were not Clamorous) might now be made appear to be so.

For the Authorities whereby he justifies this Proclamation. First, He insists
on the Laws of that Kingdom, that by the Law they could not depart the Realm,
and that by an Implication 25 H. 6. But, Mr. Palmer observed, that that is no
Prohibition of coming out of Ireland; but, if any Liege man, etc. shall, by the
Kings Command, depart the Realm, his Lands should not be seized; and, the only
inference can be, That if others went without License, their Lands might be
seized, but not that their persons might be restrained from coming without
License.

There were such Provisions and Ordinances in Ireland, to which the
Instructions following, and His Majesty's Letter had Reference; That those
persons that had great Possessions in Ireland, in time of Discord, were to be
resident upon their Land Personally, so that their Land might be maintained
against Incursions. And, this is plain, by a Statute 28 H. 8. Ca. 3 Reciting
the Inconvenience from those they call Absentees; That is, that having large
Possessions by Descent, or Grant, did Demurre in England, and left those
possessions unsafeguarded; and, by this means, the Lands (which His Majesty had
been at great Cost in Conquering) were regained by the Irish, and therefore
there was a Penalty on those Lands; and, it is provided, that the King shall be
Entitled to the Duke of Norfolkes Land for that cause: But, here is only a
Provision that the Lands should be safeguarded, but not that the Subject should
not resort to the Kings Majesty, for redress of Grievances and Oppressions, and
that is in the Charge against my Lord of Strafford.

For the Instructions of May, 1628, on a Petition by the Inhabitants; the
Petition was, That they might make personal Residence at least half a year;
but, that related to Undertakers, and others that have Lands and Offices there,
and so was for the same purpose that the Lands should be safeguarded: But
certainly, there is great difference between Residence, and Restraining a
Resort hither to make Complaint to His Majesty: It is true, there should be a
Residence, they were not to depart without License; but, if they had Temporary
occasions, or Reasons of Complaint, it is not against the Instructions that
Licenses should be denied.

My Lord insists on this, that it is the Law of the Land, and agreeable to the
Laws of this Land, and he would willingly bring the Laws of this Land into
Ireland. But, under favor, the Laws of this Land are not so; It is no offense,
or Contempt for any Subject, to depart this Land without License: Our Books are
so. The Statute 5 R. 2. did provide, that none should depart without License (a
general Prohibition) except they were Lords and good Merchants: Therefore, by
the Law, (before that Statute was) any Man might depart without License; and,
that Statute is since Repealed, by a Statute made 4 Iac. So that by the Common
Law of England the passage is open again; and, it is no offense at all to
depart without License. It is true, His Majesty may restrain by a Ne exeat
Regno, etc. or by a Proclamation on special Causes, but till then the passage
is open, and they may depart by the Law of the Land, and the Penalty is only in
the Case of the Absentees.

My Lord alleges the Kings Letter; There is as much skill as can be for a
Defense, The Proclamation reciting these Letters, and the Instructions. But,
the grounds are false: for, that which is appliable to a Residence for Defense,
my Lord makes a ground to restrain all kind of Resort.

My Lord takes notice of his Moderation, in Executing the Kings Letter, in
respect of the distance of time, between the Letter, January 1634, and the
Proclamation, Sept. 1635. If it had been a Service to His Majesty, it should
have been speeded sooner; It was a disservice in being so long delayed, if the
matter required it; but, there was something else; It was not fit for my Lords
opportunity till then; and, when it was fit he published it, and not before.

My Lord deserting his Justification by the Proclamation, as a Temporary Law
(as he may, for Proclamations be not Temporary Laws, in case they be against
Law, but Publication of Laws.) Now, he insists on this, That by his Commission
he himself has not power to publish Proclamations, but by advice of others; So
the power is not in himself alone, for he had the Concurrence of other
Counselors joined with him.

Mr. Palmer desired their Lordships to observe his own Answer; and, the Reason,
why that Unreasonable allowance was got, which is, That he is Responsible for
the Justice of that place; and, if he be so, he takes but their Concurring with
him; in a thing so much against Law, it may make it an Offense in them, it
cannot extenuate his Offense.

He insists on a necessity of this, that it is fit for that Kingdom, and wishes
it might be so continued; and that in several respects; in respect of O Neale,
and Tirconnel, and the Rebels that adhere to them; and that it might be
dangerous, if those in Ireland should go out at their pleasure. Indeed, if
their Resort were thither, it were true; But, the Commons having offered
nothing, but their Request to come into England, where there is no O Neale, nor
Tirconnel, to Complain to the King of Oppressions: and, however my Lord of
Strafford does conceive it fit in Ireland, their Lordships hear by the
Remonstrance, what Just Fears they apprehended; It is an Innovation brought on
them, which was never on their Ancestors from the time of Henry the Second.

The next thing was his Demeanor in the Execution of this Proclamation; Then he
made that General Protestation, That these particulars were not Complained of.
To which Mr. Palmer said, He must Answer as before. My Lord has put it in
Issue, That he never did deny License, which casts the Commons on Proof, That
that in particular has been denied.

The Case of my Lord of Esmond is observed to be in time, 1638. And whereas it
is said, A License was denied, because there was some Charge against him, of
practicing against Sir Walsingham Cook. This needs no other Answer, but what
Sir Adam Loftus has given, That the business was continued in Examination no
longer than three weeks, or thereabouts, and was then dismissed; whereas the
Denial continued longer. But, if it be truly informed, This demand of License
to come over was in August; the Information came not till September after: so
that the Information cannot be applied to avoid the Denial of the License.

Torky being Asked the time of year the Summer Assizes used to be in Torky
Witness.
Ireland?

He Answered, That he has observed them, since his knowledge of that Kingdom,
to be in September for the County of Wexford.

Whence Mr. Palmer Inferred, That if the Petition were in August, the Assizes
in September, this could be no Reason, why in August an Information in
September should be the Cause of denying the License.

My Lord says afterward, He did give him a License; but your Lordships may
remember, it was not till the opportunity was past of examining Witnesses. And,
whereas it has been said, in Answer, That my Lord of Esmond did join, and
Riley was produced; yet Riley says, There were two Defendants, Sir Pierce
Crosby, and my Lord Esmond; and, for whom the Commission was, he cannot tell:
And, if there were a Commission, it is very ordinary to have more then one;
and, if it be desired, a second is just as the first. Mr. Ralton says, he is
confident there was a Commission: if there was so, Why is not that Record
produced?

The next particular was my Lord Roche, and the Answer to that is, That there
was an Information against him in the Starchamber. It is true, but that had
ceased half a year before he desired a License, and therefore could not be a
cause to hinder a License.

For Dermond Mac-Carty it is said, his Petition was for liberty to go over for
breeding, and therefore he might go to Doway or St. Omer. etc. But their
Lordships might observe this Petition was to come into England, and the
occasion was his Relation to that Suit, and that is conceived the cause of
denying that License; for my Lord could not but know that Mac-Carty had
relation to the suit before him, which was decreed after a double dismission,
and it is no Exception that the Witness is his Solicitor in the Cause: It is
ordinary that the Solicitor be admitted a Witness, and the best Witness in
Courts of Justice.

And to answer that fully and clearly, it shall appear, that this very thing is
assigned by Secretary Little, to be the reason why he should not go over, that
he might not complain of his suit, and a Witness did depose to that effect.

John Meaugh bein sworn and Interrogated to the Cause of denying the said
License.

He Answers, That he went to Dublin with Mac-Carty the Son, with the Petition,
and that Secretary Little took the Petition in his hand, and said, Are not you
Mac-Carty's Son? Yes said he. And you intend to go and complain against the
Order my Lord conceived against your Father? No indeed, says he, I do not;
Says the Secretary, I will take your Petition and deliver it to my Lord, and I
believe my Lord will not grant your Request, and they left the Petition and
went out. A little after, a kinsman of his, the Deputies Master, Sir Valentine
Brown said to him, the Son, I have heard my Lord has granted your Request in
your Petition; so they came to the place to receive the Petition, and this is
the Petition showed their Lordships, when his, the Deputies Master saw the
Petition, he would not take it. Take notice Gentlemen, says Mr. Little, what
Charge he has, and if he does any thing to the contrary, let it be on his
peril; so they took the Petition, and went away.

Against Parries Testimony; First, my Lord says, he is a single Witness, E. of
Strafford.
but if that be not admitted, there is no need of his Testimony; for Secretary
Cook's Warrant proves what was the reason, and their Lordships may know whence
that came. His Sentence is thus far in question here, whether he was sentenced
for coming over or otherwise; It is true (and that is the iniquity of it) the
sentence does express it to be for another Cause; It is not usual in Sentences,
to say what it is not for, but what it is for; but it is for his not
petitioning the Council Table, and setting forth after in his Petition, that
his offense was his coming overwithout License; and saying Mr. Ralton pretended
Secretary Cooks' directions, whereas he must so speak truth, as not to be
charged with a pretense. And it were most just to sentence him for coming
without License; then for his being not called, nor any way able to answer the
Defense. That others are joined with him in the Sentence, it does not excuse
his Lordship: They show the more dependencie upon him, and by this means, no
complaints of Injustice or Oppression, can be brought to any but E. of
Strafford.
himself, and that brings them under his wing; However, the fault is in them,
as well as in him.

The Remonstrance he says, is only a Charge, but it is the Declaration and
Voice of all the People, of sufficient credit, to represent their grievances,
what they conceive to be their true Liberty, and how they have used it ever
since the time of H. 2. Which is, that they should have redress for grievances,
which is no other than the Common Law; That the Subject should have free Access
to the Sovereign.

His last is, That there is nothing of Treason in this: And to this the same
Answer is given, as to all the rest, which are not individual Treasons. The
Multiplication of Acts, all containing something in them of an Arbitrary power,
conclude, as effects from the cause, from whence this proceeds.

And this thing is not so petty as my Lord makes it, to deny the Access of the
Subject to their Sovereign; and tho it be allowed by His Majesty's Letter and
Instructions, yet these being obtained by himself, make it worse, he taking so
Sovereign a Power, that Non sentit parem, nec superiorem.

Mr. Palmer instanced in that great Case of the Marquis of Dublin, that had the
Dominion of Ireland granted him, he had Merum and maximum Imperium, under the
Broad Seal, and his Patent passed in Parliament, yet it was one of the Articles
charged on him, for it tended to the Severance of the Allegiance of the People
from their King.

In the next Article their Lordships shall hear his demeanor to those of the
Scotch Nation.

Mr. Maynard desired to add a word to what had been said; First, My Lord says,
that the particulars are not in the Charge, but that is a mistake, for this
Case of Parry is particularly charged, and diverse others; it is true, the rest
are general, but this is particular, so the Charge is good in that.

And whereas my Lord had endeavored to justify this by Law. Mr. Maynard
observed, That they do not lay the point upon that, how far the Subject may be
restrained in that particular: but here is the sting of my Lord of Strafford's
proceedings, he takes this (be it lawful or unlawful) to prevent the Complaints
which might be brought to His Majesty against his Injustice, for he has done
all that tothis people: now an ill intent may make that ill which in it self
otherwise will not be ill; and he besought their Lordships to take this into
consideration, what a miserable condition the Subjects of Ireland are in, when
there are never so great grievances laid on them, yet they cannot complain, and
no complaint can be received, unless he that oppresses them, gives them leave
so to do, and when their oppressions ri^ so high, when shall he give them leave?

My Lord* of (...) says, Thousands have come, yea many he is sure, that have
not been punished nor questioned. Whence Mr. Maynard observed. That it is ill*
l^k that the oppressed are always punished, others may go without punishment;
but it falls out unhappily, That they that have Complaints against him, are the
men that are restrained, and it may not be thought that they will bear a
Complaint sometimes, that they may seek a better opportunity, when they shall
see such examples; that is, one Fined for exhibiting a Petition, and saying,
that is untrue; when against another, an Information that has laid dead half
a year, shall be quickened upon that occasion, and they must be punished more,
that are more oppressed, as in the Case of my Lord of Esmond.

And whereas my Lord of Strafford says, he never punished any, where there was
Complaint before. Mr. Maynard besought their Lordships to observe, that it is
point blank contrary to the Evidence, and Oath before their Lordships; for in
that particular Case of Mac-Carty, there were two Dismissions: It is true, the
Merits of the Causes are not proper to be offered, but there is cause to take
Confidence, that where it is called a fraud on Mac-Carty's part, when it is
examined, it will be a very heavy oppression.

And whereas it has been said by way of Justification (mitigation at least)
that there has been no Fees taken for Licenses, but such as were given
voluntarily, except in case of Officers of the State, or the Army; proof was
offered, that Mr. Little that takes on him to swear for himself or his fellows,
tho he did not know whether it were or no, has denied License without Fees;
and that certain Fees were demanded, shall be made appear.

Whereupon Richard Wade being Interrogated, whether Fees were Richard Wade
Witness.
not demanded by the Secretaries, for Licenses of men's passage into England,
and what Fees?

He Answered, That for Fees for my Lord of Esmond's License, he was demanded 24
or 25 s.

Patrick Gough being asked to that point. Patrick Gough Witness.


He Answered, That he remembers he has taken Licenses twice or thrice for my
Lord Viscount Mountgomery, and for every one of them paid 25 s. and for three
of his servants 25 s. and that those were demanded, for he (the Deponent) would
have given less if they would have taken less, and that these were demanded by
Secretary Littles Servants.

Mr. Glyn desired one word more, and the rather, said he, because it Mr. Glyn.
seems my Lord of Strafford slights this Article, which is the most proved, and
the least answered of any yet heard, their Lordships may observe what is laid
to his charge, the subverting of Laws, and the introducing of a Tyrannical
Government. And before he goes about his work, he puts off all means of redress
beforehand; that if he give any occasion of offense, he that is offended, shall
not possibly have remedy. His justification is, because of that great danger
that may ensue, for they may join with Rebels, but that is a pretense; Indeed he
used that Argument when he moved it to His Majesty; but it was, that they might
not come over to make complaints.

That his Propositions were made, and entered at the Council Table, here he
aggravates his offense, and Mr, Glyn did thus illustrate it; That if a man come
to him, and desire leave to lie in his House, if he gives the party leave, and
he by that means takes occasion to betray him, or to commit Felony, or steal
his Goods, That leave was well given, but it aggravates the others offense,
when he does mischief to him that lodged him.

So my Lord of Strafford's Proposition was fair, but if their Lordships observe
the subsequence of it, that he might exercise his Power, and leave the Subject
without means of redress, but they must come to himself for it. Mr Glyn further
said, he thinks, had he suffered under his hands after the example of my Lord
Mountnorris, he should be loath to say to his face, he would complain.

An Act of Parliament he produces for his Justification, which is plainly
against him, for it shows there were some that held Lands there by tenure, and
if they were not resident they forfeited; Then comes the Act and says, That
those whom the King commands to be absent, they shall not forfeit, which shows
they had a personal Power without License; so that the very Law produced, is
expressly against him, and there Lordships may see by his own Proposition, the
occasion of his introducing this Letter. And Mr. Glyn concluded, That he
supposes that my Lord of Strafford has made no answer to that.

And so the 16th Article was finished, and the 17th and 18th being for the
present set aside, the Committee that managed the Evidence, proceeded to the
19th Article.

THE Nineteenth Article. The Charge.

19. That the said Earl having Taxed and Levied the said Impositions, Article
XIX Charge.
and raised the said Monopolies, and committed the said other Oppressions in
His Majesty's Name, and as by His Majesty's Royal Command; He the said Earl in
May, the 15th year of His Majesty's Reign, did of his own authority, contrive
and frame a new and unusual Oath, by the purport whereof among many other
things, the party taking the said Oath, was to swear, that he should not
protest against any of His Majesty's Royal Commands, but submit himself in all
Obedience thereunto; which Oath he so contrived to enforce the same on the
Subjects of the Scottish Nation, inhabiting in Ireland, and out of a hatred to
the said Nation, and to put them to a discontent with His Majesty, and His
Government there, and compelled diverse of His Majesty's said Subjects there, to
take the said Oath, a against their Wills, and of such as refused to take the
said Oath, some he grievously Fined and Imprisoned, and others he destroyed and
exiled; and namely the 10th of October, Ann. Dom. 1639. He Fined Henry Steward
and his Wife, who refused to take the said Oath, 5000 pounds apiece; and their
two Daughters, and James Gray, 3000 pounds apiece, and imprisoned them for not
paying the said Fines. The said Henry Steward, his Wife and Daughters, and
James Gray, being the Kings Liege people of the Scottish Nation, and diverse
others he used in like manner; and the said Earl upon that occasion did
declare, that the said Oath did not only oblige them in point of Allegiance to
His Majesty, and acknowledgement of his Supremacy only, but to the Ceremonies
and Government of the Church established, and to be established by His
Majesty's Royal Authority; and said, That the refusers to obey, he would
prosecute to the Blood.

Mr. Whitlock proceeded to open the 19th Article, setting forth in substance as
follows.

THAT the next Article in which they shall proceed, to make good the
Impeachment of all the Commons of England against my Lord of Strafford is the
19th Article.

That their Lordships have heard his demeanor to the Subjects of the Irish
Nation; what power he exercised over their Liberties, their Properties, their
Lives.

That he used His Majesty's Subjects of Scotland in the same manner, exercising
an unlawful power over their consciences, by imposing a new and unlawful Oath
on such of them as lived in Ireland.

That the Kings Subjects of the Scottish Nation, have the same benefit of
protection from His Majesty and His Laws, as his other Subjects have; since
they are bound to the same Allegiance, to the same Obedience, and therefore
what ought not to be done to any other of the King's Subjects, ought not to be
done to them.

That a new Oath cannot be imposed, without Assent of a Parliament yet my Lord
of Strafford is pleased to enjoin this Oath, to contrive it, to threaten them
that desired to consider of it; he sends forth Commissions, to the Gentry in
the Country to tender it, and such as refused were brought up by Pursivants
and Officers to Dublin, and committed to Prison, and diverse of them, rather
than they would take this Oath, were fain to forsake their Families, their
Estates, and Lands, and fly away, and were exiled the Kingdom.

That the Charge, particularly mentioning the sentencing of Henry Stuart his
Wife, and two Daughters, and one James Gray, above the age of 16. who for
refusing this Oath, were Fined, Stuart himself 5000 l. his Wife 3000 l. his
Daughters 3000 l. apiece, and James Gray as much; and in their Sentence my Lord
was pleased to declare himself so bitter against that Nation, and so much
resolved, that this Oath should be taken by all of them (though against Law)
That he publicly said, That those who refused to take the Oath, he would
prosecute to the Blood.

That the Scotch Nation were Rebels and Traitors, and that if His Majesty
should please to send him back to the Government of Ireland (he being then to
come into England) he would root out the Scottish Nation root and Branch. And
further, did declare, That this Oath thus enjoined, did bind to the Ceremonies
of the Church, not only those that were established, but such as were to be
established: so that the Oath had some affinity with the Oath in this Kingdom,
not long since.

Sir James Mountgomery being Interrogated, what he knew concerning the
contriving and imposing of the said Oath?

He Answered, That he was very unwilling to give any Testimony in this
particular, because he knows there is a Petition for this Oath, to which
Petition his hand is among others, and therefore some perchance, who do not
know the passage of the business, may think there was a discordance, and a
disagreement between the Instrument under his hand, and the Testimony he must
give, being put to it upon Oath, but he hopes there shall none appear when he
has spoken.

That in April (as he remembers) 1639. My Lord Lieutenant, then Lord-Deputy,
did write down Letters to the most part of all the Noblemen and Gentlemen of
the Scottish Nation, dwelling in Ireland, (in the Province of Ulster especially)
amongst whom the Deponent received one Letter himself, and he was required by
that Letter (as the rest, whose Letters were to one effect) to repair to
Dublin, 27 April as he remembers, that his Lordship might confer with them
about some affairs, that did concern His Majesty's special service, and
therefore they were required not to fail to be there that day. That thither
they came, and being come, my Lord Viscount Mountgomery being not well in his
health, having got a cold in his journey, the said Lord Viscount sent to excuse
himself to my Lord Deputy, that he was not able to come abroad for a day or
two; and my Lord Deputy sent him word he would come to his Lodging, and gave
warning to the rest of the Gent. to meet his Lordship there the next day at two
of the clock; that there they did all come, and there were the Bishops of Down
and Raffo, and some others of the Clergy; And being met, my Lord Deputy came
thither and told them, he was there as their friend, to acquaint them with some
things that did much concern them, and to give them his advice; He did then
tell them of great disorders in Scotland, of great jealousies raised against
them, and that they who were present, might possibly be favorers, or
furtherers of those distempers; but he added, that he hoped better of them:
however, that it behoved them to do something to vindicate themselves from this
aspersion; and that they should offer it freely of themselves, and not stay
till it were imposed by Authority. That he did insist further in his Speech,
and insinuated to them, what was expected they should do, and that they should
be suitors for it. That an Oath was expected according to the example of
Scotland, as they had there joined in a Covenant.

To this purpose he did deliver himself.

That when his Lordship had ended, the Bishops of Raffo and Down, one seconding
the other, gave his Lordship thanks for his Lordships favor to them, and told
his Lordship, that as those in Scotland had joined together, and conspired by
an unlawful Oath, so they here would join in a lawful oath in opposition to
that, and would petition for it to his Lordship. It was seconded by the Bishop
of Down, and some others of the Clergy there, little being spoken by others.
That the Bishop of Down desired he might draw it, but the Lord-Deputy put it on
the Bishop of Raffo. That some of them thought it a little too hasty, and when
my Lord was risen up he (the Deponent) took on him to speak to his Lordship,
and told him, the things spoken of there, were not charged against the Nation,
but against the Covenanters in Scotland, and did not concern themselves: and
therefore thought, under favor, that it should not be amiss to think what they
should do, before they appointed a man to draw a Petition, or to this effect.

That his Lordship was pleased to turn toward him something in choler, and to
tell him; Sir James Mountgomery, you may go home and petition or not petition
if you will, but if you do not, or who does not, or to this effect, shall do
worse. That they seeing his Lordship had resolved it should be so, there was no
more said; The Bishop of Raffo went with the Petition in his hand to some of
them, being desirous to see it, to contribute their advice to them, and
somewhat suspecting this Train of the Gentry, that night again the said Bishop
met with my Lord Mountgomery, Sir William Stuart, Sir James Craig and himself,
(the Deputy) and brought two draughts of Petitions: the one indeed was down
right railing, the other not very mild he thinks: howsoever, they did desire to
have qualified it something in words; but the Bishop told them, it was already
so cold, he was ashamed of it, and could not engross it, till he had showed it
my Lord Deputy, to know whether he would accept of it; The next morning some of
them saw it with him, and took exception at some bitter words that were in it;
and the Bishop said it was not to be disputed, for my Lord Deputy had seen it,
and it was done with his good liking. After that it was engrossed, they met to
have Signed it, and some took exceptions, that there was too great a latitude
in it, and desired it might be entered, That they should be in the case with
other His Majesty's Subjects; but the Bishop said, he could alter nothing,
without my Lord-Lieutenants knowledge, and he would go to my Lord with it, and
to my Lord Mountgomery; They entreated to go along with him, and my Lord was
willing these words should be added, That it should be in equal manner and
measure with other His Majesty's Subjects; so the Petition was engrossed, and
signed, and was afterward delivered to his Lordship: That then my Lord Deputy
desired them, to appoint five or six of their number to wait on his Lordship,
and some of the Council the next morning, to confer concerning the Oath, and
they made choice of six, the Lord Mountgomery, -- Stuart, and these two
Bishops, Sir William Stuart, and himself the Deponent; when they came, his
Lordship caused the Clerk of the Council to read the Oath that was to be
Administered; and some other debates they had, some offered some motions, to his
Lordship for some words, by way of explanation; as that they should not protest
against any of His Majesty's Royal Commands, and it was desired it might be
explained, By just Commands, or Commands according to Law. My Lord did then
tell them, they were not to expect any other Commands from His Majesty; the
Oath was for no other intent, and needed no alteration. The Bishop of Raffo
would have had more added, saying, The Oath was so mean, he would not come from
his house to take it; and so my Lord Deputy told him, the Oath had been well
considered of, and needs no alteration; That he the Bishop then desired a Copy
of it, to carry to the Gentlemen that were not present, and were waiting for
them at my Lord Mountgomeries lodging. His Lordship was pleased to deny that,
but would send the Clerk of the Council, who should bring the Oath and Read it,
and bring it back again, and he did so.

After this, the next day, or that afternoon, they were appointed to come to
the Council Board, and have the Oath Administered; That here they came, and my
Lord himself was pleased to Administer the Oath to every one of us, two by two,
or three by three. And this was the manner of Administering it.

Being Interrogated, Whether they knew the occasion of their being sent for?

He Answered; They knew not for what cause, nor heard any thing of it.

Being Asked, If he knew what Scotchmen were those that left the Kingdom,
because they would not take this Oath?

He Answered, That (soon after they were dismissed in May) Commissions came
into the Country to certain Commissioners, for Administering the Oath, to all
of that Nation, above the Age of Sixteen; and, he believes (whether by the main
Commission, or private Instructions, he cannot tell) That it was ordered, it
should be Administered, both to Men and Women above that Age: And, they were all
called at certain days by the Commissioners; some were scrupulous, and thought
in their Consciences, they could not take it; others, that were satisfied in
their Consciences, did take it; and those that did not take it, the
Commissioners were required to certify their Names, and Places of Residence,
to my Lord Deputy and Council, that they might be proceeded against, as
Contemners of His Majesty's Royal Authority, according to the Proclamation, and
Commission.

After the Proclamation had called them, some did appear, and they that did
not, their names were certified, and afterward Pursivants issued to apprehend
them that did not appear, or them, who on appearing, did refuse. He knows of
many that fled away into Scotland, and very many that fled up and down in the
Country, and many were apprehended by the Pursivants, and carried up, and some
he thinks were Censured.

Being Asked, Whether they left their Corn on the Ground, and Goods in their
Houses?

He Answered, That they did.

Being Asked, Whether any Papists of the Scottish Nation were sent for by
Letter, or had the Oath tendered?

He Answered, None of them that he could hear: and the Oath was not Administered
to any of them, neither were they called.

Being Asked, If there were not diverse Scottish Papists there?

He Answered, Yes; diverse Gentlemen of good Quality: and he named some of
them, viz. Sir William Hamilton, etc.

Being Asked (on the Earl of Clares motion) Whether the Refusers fled into any
part of Scotland?

He Answered, In Truth not, to his knowledge; but they fled out of the Kingdom
of Ireland.

The Oath was next Read, viz.

IN. do faithfully Swear, Profess, and Promise, that I will Honor and Obey my
Sovereign Lord King CHARLES, and will bear Faith and true Allegiance to Him,
and will defend and maintain His Regal Power and Authority; and that I will not
bear Arms nor do any Rebellious or Hostile Act against Him, or Protest against
any His Royal Commands, but submit my self in all due obedience hereunto: and,
that I will not enter into any Covenant, Oath, or Bond of Mutual Defense, or
Assistance, against all sorts of persons whatsoever; or into any Oath,
Covenant, or Mutual Defense, or Assistance against any person whatsoever, by
Force, without His Majesty's Sovereign and Regal Authority. And I do renounce
all Covenants, contrary to what I have Sworn and Promised. So help me God in
Christ Jesus.

Whence Mr. Maynard observed, from these words, That they shall not Mr. Maynard.
Protest against any of His Majesty's Royal Commands. That he believed all men
were satisfied, that His Majesty never did, nor will Command any thing
unlawful, but what a subordinate Minister may command in His Majesty's Name,
and publish, as His Command, in Ireland, their Lordships have heard enough of,
and that may make them tender to take the Oath; besides, the Oath being new, it
is conceived to be against Law.

Mr. Maxwell being Sworn, and Interrogated, In what manner were Mr. Maxwel.
Gentlemen sent for to Dublin about this matter? And what he knew in particular
about it?

He Answered, That he was one that received a Letter from my Lord Lieutenant
upon that account; and that he, as well as the rest, were required to be all at
Dublin at a certain day; and, being there, and my Lord Mountgomery being a
little sick, and not able to go abroad, desired their excuse for a day or two.
My Lord Deputy was pleased to give Command, that all that were written for,
might be at my Lord Mountgomeries lodging: And, at the time appointed, my Lord
Lieutenant came, and at his coming he called them together, and showed the
Dissenters in Scotland, and desired that they would show themselves Faithful
and Loyal Subjects to their Master; and, that it behoved them, as their own
desire, to Petition for it; whereupon my Lord Bishop of Down, R^o, and some
others of the Clergy being there, did second my Lords Speech, and told them,
That as they Rebelliously proceeded in Scotland, in that the Scots had taken in
hand against the King; so they would do well by Petition, and by Oath to his
Lordship and the Council, to show their willingness toward their Masters
Service: So my Lord Lieutenant was pleased to take hold of my Lord Downs
Speech; and my Lord Down desired, he might be the drawer of the Petition. But
my Lord perceiving him a little too vehement, told him, Smilingly, That he
would recommend that to the Bishop of Raffo: So the Bishop of Raffo was
appointed for the drawing up of that Petition. The next day they desired to
peruse the Petition, before it went to my Lord; and, after they had perused it,
they went in to my Lord Lieutenant with it; after he had seen the Petition, he
mended something in it; and, among the rest, he remembers, the Bishop of Raffo
told him, That my Lord had put in, That these that were here should be of no
worse condition, then the rest of His Majesty's Subjects. The next day the
Petition was Engrossed, and Signed by them, and presented to my Lord
Lieutenant: afterward there were two Noblemen, two Bishops, two Gentlemen,
appointed to go to my Lord concerning the Oath, and they desired a Copy of the
Oath. My Lord Lieutenant sent Sir Paul Davies out to my Lord Mountgomery, and
it was Read to them all; and they were commanded to attend at the
Council Table, and my Lord gave them the Oath.

Sir Hen. Spottewood was offered a further Witness, but their Lordships being
satisfied with what was formerly offered, spared his Examination.

And Mr. Whitlock observed, That they did produce these Witnesses the Mr.
Whitlock.
rather, because my Lord of Strafford says, in his Answer, they willingly came
to Dublin, and were Suitors for the Oath. Whereas my Lord sent for them; when
they were there, my Lord persuaded them; threatened them; contrived the Oath
himself; altered the Petition; appointed who should draw it; which disproves
what is in his Answer alleged.

To prove, That because diverse of the Scottish Nation were tender, and loath to
take the Oath, or submit to all the Commands of my Lord of Strafford (though
they would to the Kings) they fled the Kingdom, and left their Estates.

Sir John Clottworthy being examined to that particular; Sir John Clotworthy
Witness.


Answered, That he could speak to this particular clearly to his own Knowledge;
for then my Lord was pleased to insert him as a Commissioner in the said
Commission, and he was there sometimes, and beheld the Execution of it. He did
likewise see the Multitude (when the Oath was generally pressed on several
Commands from my Lord Deputy to enforce it) did leave their Dwellings, and
Habitations, their Corn on the Ground, and their Cattle, and fled away; but,
whether into Scotland, or no, he could not precisely say; but so it was
reported: but, that Multitudes went away, he knew to be certainly true.

Being Interrogated, Whether my Lord of Strafford did, by his Instructions,
deny liberty to the parties to whom it was tendered, to peruse the Oath?

He Answered, That he cannot precisely charge himself with it, for the
Instructions are out of the way; but that was (as he verily remembers) part of
the Instructions, That they should have the Oath Read over to them, but no
Copies delivered to them at all.

Being Asked (on my Lord of Straffords motion) Whether the Commission and
Instructions were not under the hand of the Council, as well as himself?

He Answered, That he never saw a Commission under the hand of the Deputy or
Council, but under the Seal; but the Instructions were under the hand of Deputy
and Council.

And Mr. Whitlock observed, That my Lord of Strafford drew in the Mr. Whitlock.
rest to himself.

Mr. Whitlock then proceeded to the matter of the Sentence, against Stuart and
Gray, who were Imprisoned, Fined five times more than the value of their
Estates; detained in Prison a very long time, very hardly and cruelly used;
and, on this Sentence, were the words spoken by my Lord of Strafford, which
shows his Rancour to the Scotch Nation.

Richard Salmon Sworn, and Interrogated, What he knew concerning the Sentencing
of Stuart, his Wife and Daughters, and Gray in Ireland? Mr. Salmon, Witness.


He Answered, That on the 10th of October, 1639, after the Kings Attorney, Sir
George Ratcliffe, and many other Lords and Noblemen, had given their Sentence
concerning this Oath, many of them pleading to make it High Treason; and, that
it was a merciful proceeding against Mr. Stuart, his Wife, and two Daughters,
and Gray, in that Court: My Lord Primate came to show, that if it had been
against the first part of the Oath (to deny Allegiance and Supremacy to His
Majesty) it had been so: but being against the second part, they were to be
Judged in that Court. My Lord of Strafford told my Lord Primate, he was
mistaken, and that the Bishop of Derry had said well, in that they would not
Abjure all other Oaths, Bonds, Covenants whatsoever, it was as palpable
High Treason, as if it were against the first part of the Oath. Thereupon my
Lord said, These people are mad: and I know not how to express my self, without
going beyond my self, they have almost made me lose my self. But, says he, Mr.
S^t, now you have heard my Lord Primate thus much, What can you speak for your
self? Mr. Stuart Answered, He was willing to take the first part of the Oath;
but, in that the Oath seemed to bind them, not only in point of Allegiance and
Supremacy, but likewise in point of Ecclesiastical Duties, therefore he durst
not take it: My Lord told him again, he (the said Mr. Stuart) was not mistaken,
but had judged right; the Oath was not only intended to bind them to Allegiance
and Supremacy, for that they had other Oaths, but likewise to be obedient to
the Ecclesiastical Ceremonies of the Church, either established, or that should
be established by His Majesty's Royal Command: and, that whosoever would be
obedient to the Ecclesiastical Orders of the Church, he would lay his hand
under their feet to do them good; but, whosoever would resist, he would
prosecute them to the Blood.

Being Asked (on the Earl of Clares motion) Whether he be a Minister?

He Answered, That he had Taught School in Dublin, but has not taken Orders.

Being Asked, What other Orders my Lord of Strafford let fall, concerning the
Scottish Nation being Rebels.

He Answered, He remembers my Lord said, They had caused him to forget himself.
He said also, That they were Traitors and Rebels: and that if His Majesty would
honor him so much, as to send him back again, he would eradicate root and
branch even all of that Nation out of the Kingdom of Ireland, saving such Lords
and others that had taken the Oath.

Being Asked, What Fines were Imposed on Stuart, and the rest?

He Answered, (To the best of his Remembrance) it was 5000 l. on him, 5000 l.
on his Wife, 3000 l. a piece on his two Daughters, and 3000 l. on James Gray.

Being Asked, Whether they were worth these Sums?

He Answered, That it is not known to him: but he conceives Gray was not worth
a hundred pound; for, he lived on the Maintenance of Mr, Stuart in the Prison;
And, he knows not whether they paid any thing of the Fine or no.

But, Mr. Whitlock observed, That Stuart was fain to sell his Estate to pay his
Fine.

John Loftus being Sworn, and Interrogated, Whether he was present at John
Loftus Witness.
the Sentence against Mr. Stuart and the rest? And what it was?

He Answered, He was in Dublin, when Mr. Stuart, his Wife, and two Daughters,
and James Gray, were brought by the Sergeant at Arms from their House to
Dublin, where they remained Prisoners in his Custody, and were thence carried
one by one to Mr. Attorney, and Sworn by him; and after their Examinations
taken, were called to the Court of Star Chamber, and proceeded against Ore
tenus. At which hearing, he (the Deponent) was; And, after the rest of the
Lords had delivered their Opinions, he heard my Lord Deputy deliver his
likewise; and his in substance was; He consented in fine, to that the Lords had
laid before, viz. 5000 l. on Stuart, 5000 l. on his Wife, 2000 l. a piece on
his Daughters, and 2000 l. on Gray: and my Lord expressed himself, That he wanted
terms to set forth the heinousness of this Cause; and, that he was to leave
his Sword; but, if it pleased His Majesty to return him thither again, he hoped
to have such, as would not Conform themselves to the discipline of the Church,
rooted up Stock and Branch.

Being bid to repeat his Testimony,

He said, He Declared he was then to leave his Sword, and if His Majesty would
return him thither again, such as would not conform themselves to the
Government of the Church, who were of the Scottish Nation, He hoped to root them
up stock and branch, or words to that effect.

Mr. Whitlock did then Sum up the Evidence; That he conceives it proved, Mr.
Whitlock.
that my Lord of Strafford Contrived the Oath; sent for them of the Scotch
Nation by Letter, and then wrought with them to make it their own Work, and
Suit (though it was his Command) and, by threats to some of them, that did but
desire to consider of it: That diverse of the Scotch Nation being tender in
their Consciences to take the Oath, it being a new Oath, and tendered without
Authority of Parliament; and so, rather than they would take it, were forced to
leave their Habitations, their Corn standing, with all their Goods and
Fortunes, and to fly out of the Kingdom: That Mr. Stuart, his Wife, and
Daughters, and one James Gray, were Sentenced very deeply for refusing this
Oath; and, that my Lord of Strafford declared, That this Oath extended to the
Ceremonies of the Church established, and to be established; That the Scotch
Nation were Rebels and Traitors; not going to any particular Man, but the
Nation in General. And, that if His Majesty would send him back again to that
Government, he would root them out root and branch.

This is to take a Power far above the Law; this is to bind their Consciences
by an Oath, and to force them to that which they are tender of; the Execution
of this with so much rigor and cruelty, shows the strength of my Lord of
Straffords design to alter the Laws, and to do it with a strong hand, with all
his Force, and with all this Cruelty. And so my Lord of Straffords Answer was
expected.

And then my Lord of Strafford, after a little respit, began to Defense.
make his Defense, in substance as follows;

That almost every new Article sets forth a new Treason, that (for his E. of
Strafford.
part) he never heard of before: but, for this, that is now the Treason, and
concerns the Administering of an Oath to such of the Scotch Nation as were in
Ireland. He, the Defendant, besought their Lordships in the first place, to
take into consideration, the time when this Oath was Administered because of
something else, that in the Conclusion, for his further Justification, he shall
be bold to offer to their Lordships; but, he will begin with that which is
matter in hand; which, though he cannot say was the true Reason, that made him
first think of it; yet was a sufficient reason of it self, if there had been
nothing else.

The Proclamation for this matter he remembered was dated 20th of May, 1639,
and, in what condition the Kings Affairs then stood, their Lordships, and my
Lord Steward in particular, who was General, are very well able to call to
mind, and what fears there were of the ill events of the things then in hand.
The apprehensions were, That the Scots being a great Body in Ireland (and not
so few, he is persuaded, as 100000, by reason of their nearness to their own
Countries confining upon it) might, perhaps, have Intelligence and Occurrence
with their Countrymen, called, Those of the Covenant. And, this was the sense
of all that were Ministers of that State under the King, as well English as
Irish, and even those of their own Nation. Thereupon they entered into
Consideration, how to secure that Kingdom, and settle things in quiet.

Besides, there was a Man afterward Condemned of Treason, for having a Plot
and Design to have seized on Knock-fergus Castle, and delivered it to a great
Man in Scotland (whom my Lord said he would not name) for which he lost his
life afterward.

These particulars were confirmed by several Witnesses.

And, to prove that there was a Debate at Council Board, for preventing of
these Inconveniences, my Lord of Strafford desired some Privy-Counsellors of
Ireland might be examined.

Robert Lord Dillon being Asked, Whether he and the State of Ireland Robert
Lord Dillon Witness
were not very apprehensive of the danger, that might happen to the Kingdom of
Ireland, If the Scots should declare themselves any way to the disquieting of
that Kingdom?

He Answered, That about that time there were some Advertisements out of the
North, of particular Meetings, and Contrivances of some Plot or other by the
Scots, which made the State very apprehensive, that there might be danger
ensuing, and that the consequence would be ill.

Being Asked, Whether there was not a course taken upon that for an Oath, to
secure the quiet of the Kingdom?

He Answered, It was debated at the Board, and concluded, That it would be a
great Security and Obligation on those of the Scotch Nation in Ireland, to keep
them from Treating, or Concluding any thing together, if there should be any
Invasion.

Being Asked, Whether it was not thereupon resolved, To Consult the Principal
Gentry of that Nation, and to speak with them? and, Whether my Lord of
Straffords Letters were sent in persuance thereof?

He Answered, That he thought the Letters were singly subscribed by the Lord
Deputy himself, but it was also with the privity of the Council.

Sir Philip Manwaring being Asked to the same Point, Answered, That Manwaring.
at the time the Proclamation Issued, he was in England, which was the 16th or
20th of May; But, before he came from Ireland, there were very many
Apprehensions, that Inconveniences might arise, and many Considerations in
Council, which way to prepare and prevent them.

Sir Adam Loftus being Interrogated to the same Point? Sir Adam Loftus Witness.


Answered, That there were at that time some Apprehensions and Fears of Danger,
that might arise from the People of the Scotch Nation, in respect of their
numbers there, lest they should adhere to them of the Covenant in Scotland, and
thereby endanger the Kingdom of Ireland at that time: And therefore it was
debated at the Council Table, that some Oath or Bond might be made, that might
divert them from joining in the Scotch Covenant; and thereupon it was resolved,
That the Principal Noblemen, and Gentlemen of Scotland, that were then in
Ireland, should be sent for, and there dealt withal, both to express their
Loyalty and Service to the Nation of Ireland, by their due obedience, and also
to offer some Means that might be Security to the King and themselves.

And being further Interrogated, Whether my Lord of Strafford's, sending for
these Principal Gentry of the Scotch Nation, Was not with the Privity of the
Council?

He Answered, That he thought it was: and Added, He was very Confident it was,
though the reason was not expressed in those Letters.

Being Asked (on Mr Maynards Motion) Whether he was there, when Maynard.
my Lord Mountgomery, and Sir James Mountgomery made Exception to the Form of
the Oath contrived?

He Answered, He was not present at any Exceptions taken at it.

Being Asked (on Mr Whitlocks Motion) who were those that took it so Whitlock.
cheerfully? And whether the Bishops were not more cheerful then others?

He Answered, That indeed he observed no Reluctance.

My Lord of Strafford here added, That he speaks it truly (to the honor of that
Nation be it spoken) the Oath was taken with much cheerfulness, E. of Strafford.
and not any man made scruple in the whole business, to his understanding, save
only Sir James Mountgomery, but took it with all the readiness in the World.
This is as true as he lives, and he thinks he speaks it for their honor; and,
were he one of the Temporal men in that kind, he should be very unwilling to be
asked, whether the Bishops had been more ready to give Allegiance to His
Majesty, than himself? and he thinks, he that asked the question, does them a
great deal of prejudice in it.

Finding them thus prepared, he was glad of it; and they being willing to
prefer such a Petition, he went to them, and served them with all willingness,
as he had reason.

The Petition was cheerfully brought to him to be looked over, and to have his
opinion how he liked it. It was brought him by my Lord Mountgomery Sir James
Mountgomery's Brother, and some others, whom he remembers not. But these words
he remembers particularly in it. An offering of their Lives and Fortunes, for
vindicating the Authority of Regal Power, which he said was too general; and
though they intended it well, might be turned too strictly on them, and
therefore he desired, it might be qualified with these words, In equal manner
and measure with other His Majesty's Subjects; and the words were put in by
him, as he is sure, my Lord Mountgomery would justify.

The Petition was read, and the Act of State, wherein it is recited, being in
substance as follows.

By the Lord-Deputy and Council,

WENTWORTH.

Where we have lately made an Act of Council in these words.

WHereas diverse Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Knights, and others inhabiting in
this Kingdom, have lately exhibited a Petition to us, in these words following.

To the Right Honorable, the Lord Deputy and Council, etc.

The Humble Petition of, etc.

The Petition recites,

The horror apprehended by the Petitioners, His Majesty's Subjects of the
Scottish Nation inhabiting in Ireland, for the Covenant sworn by some of their
Countrymen in Scotland, without His Majesty's Authority and Consent;

Their dislike thereof, and their consideration, that the causes of that action
may be understood, to reflect on the Petitioners, though innocent.

They crave leave to vindicate themselves from so great a Contagion, and desire
his Lordship to prescribe a way by Oath or otherwise, to free themselves from
these proceedings, to declare their acknowledgement of the Kings Regal Power,
and their dislike of that Covenant, and of all other Covenants entered into,
etc. without His Majesty's Regal Authority, which they are desirous to manifest
by offering their lives and fortunes, to vindicate the honor, etc. of their
Sovereign, which they are ready to do in equal manner and measure, with other
His Majesty's Subjects, etc. and diverse names were to the said Petition
subscribed.

In consideration of which Petition, we cannot but commend the wisdom of the
Petitioners, which we will not fail humbly to represent to His Majesty; and for
that we know many of this Kingdom, have expressed good affection to His Majesty
and His Service, and dislike those disorders: We hold it fit, etc. to free them
the better from the Crimes and Scandals which their Contrymen have gone
into, as also to free them from all prejudice, and to approve to the King, and
to the whole world, their Allegiance to him and his Regal Power, and the
dislike of that unlawful Oath and Covenant: We do therefore ordain, That all
and every person of the Scotch Nation, that inhabit, or have Estates, or any
Houses, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments within Ireland, shall take the Oath
herein expressed on the Holy Evangelists, on pain of His Majesty's
High-displeasure. The tenor of which Oath follows. etc. To several seect
persons, etc. Authorizing them to call before them, and administer the Oath to
every person of the Scotch Nation, etc. At such time and place etc. And such
Instructions as shall be in that behalf given by the Deputy and Council, etc.
And to certify the names of all that take the Oath, and if any refuse to
certify their Names, Quality, and Residences to the Lord Deputy, etc. And
there is a Command, that all of the Scotch Nation do appear before the said
Commissioners, at times by them to be appointed, and to take the said Oath
before them; and that all persons may have due notice, we think fit this be
published, Dated May 1639.

To prove a design of seizing the Castle of Knock-Fergus, my Lord of Strafford
desired Mr. Slingsby might be examined, and being Interrogated?

He Answered, That about the time, when it was supposed the King was Mr.
Slingsby Witness.
in the Field of Berwick, there was an Advertisement from Knock-Fergus, that
one Trueman had writ a Letter, for betraying of the Castle there; the party
that sent the discovery was to be employed in the Letter, and he informed,
there were the hands of Twenty that should have subscribed it, the Letter was
conceived to be voluntarily from Trueman, and not solicited out of Scotland.

Trueman was sent to Dublin and examined, and sent back to be tried Trueman
Witness.
in the Country, and there he received his Trial, and was Hanged, Drawn, and
Quartered.

Being asked of what Nation he was?

He says he does not know of what Nation, but he supposes he was an Englishman.

For his further justification, he says, at the same time there was the like
Oath, and Proceeding here in England.

The Copy of which Oath now read, being affirmed by Mr. Ralton to be a true
Copy.

5 June 1639. A Copy of an Oath tendered to some of the Scottish Nation,
resident here in England, as it is entered in the Scottish Book, being in
substance

IN Do faithfully swear, profess, and promise, that I will faithfully obey my
Sovereign Lord King CHARLES, etc. and defend and maintain His Royal Authority;
and that I will not bear Arms, nor do any rebellious Act against him, nor
profess against any His Royal Commands, etc. And that I will not enter into any
Covenant or Bond, etc. Of mutual Defense or Assistance against any person, etc.
or into any Covenant, Bond of mutual defense or assistance whatsoever, without
His Majesty's Sovereign and Regal Authority. And I do renounce and abjure all
Covenants, contrary to what is here sworn, professed and promised,

And he submits it to their Lordships Wisdom and Justice, what offense this had
been for a Deputy of Ireland in a time thus conditioned for securing the
public peace of that Kingdom, where he serves the Crown upon such
apprehensions as these, fairly without any constraint or violence offered, to
endeavor by such a manner of means as this, to secure the King of the Royalty
and Allegiance of His Subjects. To procure it to these ends, by these ways, at
such a time, how this can be strained to be High Treason, he confesses he does
not well understand; especially, since he is confirmed in that opinion, by the
allowance given of it here in England, as, by the Oath read appears; And if all
this had been done by him solely as Deputy, by the power of that Commission he
had from His Majesty, where should be the crime that should rise so high, as to
convince him of Treason? But that is not all, he has something else to say for
himself, and that is, the Kings Letter of His Majesty's own Handwriting, as
follows.

WENTWORTH,
COnsidering the great number of Scots that are in Ireland, and the dangerous
consequences may follow, if they should join with the Covenanters in Scotland;
I hold it necessary you should use your best endeavor, to try them by an Oath,
not only to disclaim their Countreymens proceedings, but likewise, never to
join with any in Covenant, or otherwise against Me, To which purpose I Command
you, to frame and administer such an Oath, to the abovesaid intent, to my
Scottish Subjects of that Kingdom, that I may know the well from the
ill-affected of that Nation, of which fail not, as you love my Service. And so
I rest,

Your assured friend Chapter R.
Dated 16 Jan. 1638. Whitehall.

So he had His Majesty's Warrant, but handled the matter so, that he never
discovered it.

And this he conceives does clearly justify him in all his proceedings. That
none can administer an Oath, but by Authority of an Act of Parliament, is, as
he conceived, an ignorance; And that upon a Command, and being not against Law,
but intended for the better preservation of the peace of the Kingdom; a Deputy
of Ireland might do it: and if he has failed, he shall not willingly undergo
any punishment, since it was an act of Obedience, and if it were to do again
(being informed as he then was) he must obey, and he had rather suffer in
obeying His Majesty, than dispute with His Commands in that kind,

And so he hoped, that for the Oath and Proclamation, he had said that which
might acquit him before their Lordships.

Then his Lordship applied himself to give an Answer to the other matters,
brought in his Charge, and the next thing urged against him is, the Cenfure of
Mr. Stuart, his Wife and Daughters, and Gray.

That Sentence was the very day before he came from Ireland, Michalmas was
Twelve months.

To that he can say no more, but that he delivered his opinion concerning them,
as the rest, in the Castle-Chamber, where the Deputy has no more voices, than
such as my Lord Keeper has in the Star Chamber, a Casting voice, if the voices
be equal, and otherwise but a single voice; and the truth is, that the whole
Court did agree in it.

And for their Fine, one of their own Witnesses says, That he delivered his
opinion, as concurring with the rest of the Court; so that the Fines were set
before it came to him to vote. And the greatness of the Fine, was only to show
the greatness of the offense, and not with respect to the persons, or with any
purpose to take the Fines of the parties; for when it shall be examined, it
will appear, that little of that has been paid or looked after, for they might
have had their pardon the next day, if they would have taken the Oath; And if
he that shall refuse the Oath of Allegiance, shall instantly incurr the penalty
of a Praemunire, the Fine was very moderate in this case.

In the Oath there is nothing of Ecclesiastical businesses, but only a Temporal
Allegiance, though some of the Witnesses speak of the extending it to the
Ecclesiastical affairs.

My Lord Primate should have been a Witness in the Cause, but he is sick, and
therefore if it may well stand with their Lordships Favor and Justice to
deferr this point, till he may be examined, and heard about it.

The next thing was the words charged upon him, spoken at the same Sentence,
That the Scottish Nation were Rebels and Traitors, and that he would root them
out of the Kingdom, root and branch.

These words he absolutely denied, and so under favor, he said, he must do
still, being well assured, he never spoke them; and he is privy to his own
heart so far, that he can as truly say, he never thought them. He knows very
well what he owes to that Nation, as being the Native Country of His Majesty;
and that respect, if there were nothing else, is sufficient for him to wish to
it all Happiness and Prosperity, which he does from his heart.

Besides, he knows there be many of that Nation, most Faithful and Loyal
Subjects, he trusts there are few amongst them otherwise; and therefore for him
to say, the whole Nation are Rebels and Traitors; certainly were a Speech of a
man frantique, and out of his wits, rather than of a man in his Senses: For
though he has some infirmities, of hastiness in him, yet he is not so divested
of Reason and Understanding, as to speak like a mad man, especially in things
of this nature.

His Lordship repeated it, that he never spoke them, never thought them, nor
ever wished any thing to that Nation, but Honor and Happiness in all his life;
nor has he any manner of particular exception against them, either in general
or particular. Besides, he never received personal wrong from any of that
Nation; he has received many courtesies from some of them, and therefore owes
them no Animosity, but all the respects in the world.

But when it comes to the proof, that is sufficiently justified, for nothing is
proved of that they charge him with, and when he has shown the weakness of the
proof offered to convince him of them, he shall offer a Witness or two, that
will absolutely clear him. Nor did he speak any thing whilst he was in Ireland,
concerning the Nation in general, but whatsoever he spoke, was concerning the
Faction in it; and it is an easy matter for a man at a distance, to mistake
one word for another; and when he spoke of the Faction there, it was with a
great deal of more moderation, and better phrase than the words charged.

For Sir James Mountgomery, he has said little as to this matter, for he was
not there, nor speaks at all, as if He (the Lord of Strafford) should have
carried himself in that business, otherwise than became him; only himself
confesses when Sir James would have some words put into the Oath (Of lawful and
just Commands) He (the Earl of Strafford) said That that was needless, for they
could expect no Commands from His Majesty, but what were lawful and just, and
such is the Wisdom and Justice of the King as he dares say they will always be
so; and the words of the Oath are, They shall be so far complying with these
Commands, as in due obedience they are bound and obliged to be. So it was not
Caeca obedientia. Sir James says, That he (the Earl of Strafford) did
administer the Oath. This one single Testimony; but to tell their Lordships
plainly the truth, he confesses he did give that Oath, being not only obliged
by the Council, but they directing him, and that the Petition was not got
forcibly from them, it appears evidently, for there is nothing against it.

Sir John Clotworthy says, That on this Oath administered, great multitudes
went away, but he names not one of that multitude, and if they did go, who
could help it? If they would go away, rather than give such a pledge of their
Allegiance, he should have been loath to have restrained them, to make them stay
against their Wills.

For the Instructions that went with the Commissions, Sir John Clotworthy very
truly says, they were under the hands of himself and all the Council, but what
these Instructions were, he cannot expressly say; and that, under favor, he
conceives is no witness, and so is no Charge on him.

But to express his rancor against the Scottish Nation, next come the words
proved by Richard Salmon the Schoolmaster, and he swears positively and
directly, that he (my Lord of Strafford) spoke these words the 10th of October
1639. The plain truth is, that he (the Earl of Strafford) was come into England
in September before; and if that man shall notwithstanding, undertake
positively to swear that individual day, he is less to be credited. The said
time of his coming into England was confirmed by two Witnesses.

Mr. Thomas Little being (upon my Lord of Straffords motion) asked, Little,
Witness.
about the time of my Lord of Straffords coming from Ireland.

He Answered, That my Lord Lieutenant came from Ireland, Thursday 12 Sept.
1639. and landed the next day, and came to London 21 Sept, 1639.

Mr. Ralton being examined to the same point.

Answered, He very well remembered my Lord came to London 21 Ralton.
Sept. 1639.

For the words themselves, That the Scotch Nation are Rebels and Traitors, and
that he will root them out Root and Branch, the Witness is a single Testimony;
their Lordships see how true he is in the first part of it, and he is equally
true in the second.

The other Testimony is one John Loftus, and he says my Lord of Strafford
wanted terms to express the heinousness of that offense, and he hoped to have
such of the Scotch Nation, as would not submit to the Ecclesiastical
Government, rooted out Stock and Branch from that Kingdom And this (said my
Lord) is quite another thing, and no way agreeing; with the former, but nearer
the truth, and far from rooting out the Scotch Nation; for there are but few
that submit not to the English Church Government.

So there is left only one single Testimony of the Schoolmaster, that has not
learned his Lesson perfectly, but is taken tardy, as if he were a Scholar; and
the other makes it quite another business: And as they have offered these
things, and have not proved them, by more than one single testimony, and he a
very infirm one* He, my Lord of Strafford, besought their Lordships that he
might call for a Witness or two, that were there, and heard all that passed,

Sir Philip Manwaring (my Lord said) was a Judge of the Court, and nearer him
than the Witness, and likely to hear more distinctly:

Sir Philip being asked what the words were, and of what nature they Sir Philip
Manwaring Witness.
were, whether they were not restrained to the Faction of the Covenanters, and
them that would not take the Oath in Ireland, and not the Nation it self?

He Answered, That he was present that day, and sat within the Court and
within hearing, so that he heard every word that fell from my Lord Deputy: it
is true, his Speech there was very long, but he shall repeat no more of it,
than that he conceives pertinent to the present occasion, that is, Whether he
should say these words, Against the whole Nation, or speak only to the Faction,
and properly, and pertinently, shun the word Nation. It was on the occasion of
Mr. Stuart, who stood at the Bar with his Wife and Daughters, and Gray; My Lord
telling him he was sorry, that bearing the name he did, he should be the only
man that carried himself with that disobedience, and my Lord expatiated very
much, and in conclusion said,

That Scottish Nation (with respect I speak of it) for I know there be among
them gallant and worthy persons, and I have great experience of them, and of
the Loyalty and Faith they bear to their Sovereign; but there is a Faction
amongst them, which I shall endeavor, as near as I can, to bring to that
obedience, at least, to keep them that are within this Kingdom, to that
Obedience, Loyalty, and Duty, that Subjects ought to bear.

Being asked, Whether my Lord did not express himself at that time, that he
would not take on him to judge any thing of the Action in Scotland, not knowing
the Law of that Kingdom; but such of that Nation, as are here in Ireland; if
they will not submit to the Government of Ireland, he will do the best he can,
they shall not stay here?

He Answered, That it is very true, my Lord Deputy did at that time speak to
that purpose, as near as he can remember in truth (viz.) That he did not know
the Laws nor Customs of that Kingdom; therefore would say nothing to them; but
for so much as concerned the Kingdom of Ireland, and the keeping of the King's
Subjects in Loyalty and Obedience there, he would do his best to preserve that.

Being asked (on Mr. Glyn's motion) whether he heard these words Root and
Branch, or Stock and Branch?

He Answered, In truth he did not.

Robert Lord Dillon being asked to the words spoken by my Lord of Robert Lord
Dillon Witness.
Strafford in the Castle-Chamber at the Sentence, and how he expressed
himhimself concerning the Nation of Scotland?

He Answered, That he confesses, it has been his custom (and it may be it is
an ill one) never to mind words spoken in the place, unless he supposes he
shall be called to account for them: he remembers my Lord spoke of the refusing
of the Oath, and of some rigor to them that should refuse it, but for
particular words, he members not.

Sir Adam Loftus being asked what he heard of these words? Sir Adam Loftus
Witness.


He Answered, That he was at the Censure, but truly he cannot burden his memory
with any the words that tend to this question; It was a great while ago, and
he little thought they should come to any recapitulation of them, and in truth
he does not remember them.

Being asked whether Stuarts Sentence was not given by the unanimous Vote of
the whole Council?

He Answered, Indeed he believes it was.

Sir Philip Manwaring being asked, what he heard the Master of the Rolls say
that day?

He Answered, That coming from the Castle-Chamber, waiting on my Sir Philip
Manwaring. Witness.
Lord Deputy to the Castle, where many Dined, and all that had been Judges; and
Mr. Wainsford, the Master of the Rolls, took occasion to speak to my Lord
Deputy, in his (the said Sir Philips) hearing, and commended him for carrying
himself with that caution, that he had no way reflected on the Nation, but the
Faction in that Kingdom, and had shunned the words, which might reflect on the
Nation.

And so his Lordship concluded his Defense, and said, he hoped that there was
nothing proved that should touch him so deeply as Treason; for if the obeying
of the Commands of this Case be so great a crime, he must confess, if it were
to do again (being not better informed by wiser men, tho hereafter he may be
better informed, and prevent it) he should be that Trairor over again, and do
the self-same thing again: and therefore if he had done it out of ignorance, he
hopes their Lordships will not look on him as having any evil intention or
wicked purpose, but to serve His Majesty with faithfulness, which he hopes will
procure an easier judgment from their Lordships, than to think of a High
Treason in this Article.

And then Mr. Whitlock made Reply thereunto, in substance as follows.
Whitlock's. Reply.


That in his Answer to my Lord of Strafford's Defense, he shall begin with
that, which his Lordship was pleased to mention last, and also at the
beginning, That this should not be accounted Treason, he knows not the
Illegality of it, and if it were to be done again, he would do it on that
Command. Whence Mr. Whitlock observed, that his slighting, or rather justifying
of this offense, when he is told in this great Presence, that it is against
Law, and will be made good, and appear to be against Law, is a great
aggravation of the offense.

It is well known, that a new Oath cannot be Imposed without Assent in
Parliament. It is legistativa potestas; The Oath of Allegiance is as ancient as
our allegiance, and nothing needed to have been added to that: and, had it been
tendered to them, as it might have been by Law, this would have performed the
Kings Command, which, under favor, went no farther, and would have been
sufficient security of what was doubted and feared: But, my Lord of Strafford
will go farther; the Oath that the Law enjoins does not please him, he must
have a new one framed by himself, and published by his Authority, thereby to
make his Authority equal to an Act of Parliament.

It Is indeed believed, there were some apprehensions of dangers in Ireland, by
the great number of the Scots there, and a Covenant in Scotland then Sworn, but
that Covenant is not to be meddled withal now. The Charge enforced against my
Lord of Strafford, is not his Care of preventing danger to the Kingdom, but
that he caused a new and unusual Oath to be Imposed; and particularly, that
they should submit to all the Kings Royal Commands.

The Committee confess, and think, no man had ever yet a heart to doubt, That
the King would command any thing that should be against Law: But, it has been
sufficiently proved, that my Lord of Strafford (a Subordinate Minister under
the King) has published his own Commands in the Kings Name, which are not
Justificable, nor according to Law: And that, under favor, might be a good
cause for the Scots, to be tender of taking his Oath; knowing, that these
Commands here, were not His Majesty's Immediate Commands, but the Commands of
my Lord of Strafford, which they saw many times so unlawful and exorbitant.

My Lord of Strafford has produced diverse Witnesses, to prove, It was Debated
on at Council Board; And, that the Scots did cheerfully take the Oath: but, in
this, he has labored to disprove his own Answer, which is, That the Scots
came up, and desired to have an Oath; whereas it appears, the Council Table
thought fit to send for them by Letters, under his Lordships hand; and it was
propounded to them to take such an Oath.

He says, himself put these words into the Petition; In equal manner and
measure with other His Majesty's Subjects: Which shows, That my Lord of
Strafford himself had the Perusal and Correction of this Petition, which is a
good Proof, that he contrived the Oath.

The Petition does only beseech my Lord Deputy, That an Oath might be framed to
vindicate themselves from the Faction of their Countrymen, and the Covenant,
which they might have done by the Legal Oath, the Oath of Allegiance. But he
put something in above what they desired, and that was, for submission to all
the Kings Royal Commands: which may extend to Liberty, to Property of Goods,
and so is a great deal further, than His Majesty was pleased to Command by His
Letter, wherein there was nothing but what was very fit to be commanded by my
Lord of Strafford, and very fit for him to obey.

And, What if my Lord of Strafford should procure a Letter from His Majesty to
do that, which is not warrantable by Law? the Kings considerations are far
above the particular Points of the Municipal Law of this Kingdom; He cannot
know them, but is to be informed of them by His Ministers: Now, if my Lord of
Strafford shall misinforme Him, and desire to have that by His Authority, which
is not warrantable by Law, the fault is my Lord of Straffords; and, it much
aggravates the Crime; but, the Kings Letter does not warrant my Lord of
Strafford, for he has proceeded further.

He says, concerning the Censure of Mr. Stuart, That he delivered his Opinion
among the rest: but, their Lordships may remember, he went as high as to charge
him with Treason. It is true, the Bishop of Derry conceived it might be
Treason; And, the Primate said, The Denial of the former part might be Treason,
but not the latter: but, my Lord of Strafford conceived the latter part to be
Treason too: And therefore, surely, his Opinion had more harshness and severity
then the rest; and, being his Opinion, it was of sufficient weight to carry
along with him all the rest: and, that which was his own Act at the beginning,
which he Contrived and Treated with the Scotch Lords and Gentlemen, That he
persues in his Sentence; and, if others join with him in a hard Sentence
against Law, his fault is not the less, but rather the greater, to draw others
into the same fault.

His Lordship says little of the Fine that is paid. It is true, it cannot be
proved how much was paid; but, those that were Fined continued in Prison till
very lately, for that Fine.

And, whereas he says, Any, taking the Oath, might have been Released the next
day. It is the more Cruelly done, to keep them in Prison till they take an
Oath, who cannot satisfy their Consciences, that they may take it.

My Lord says, If one refuse the Oath of Allegiance in this Kingdom, he shall
incur a Praemunire, and this Sentence was more moderate, Indeed, if that had
been tendered, they had incurred the like sentence, and that might serve the
turn; but, my Lord must stretch his power higher, and above the Law; He would
frame a new Law; and, for not observing that, a new Punishment too.

He says, There is nothing of the Ecclesiastical Discipline in the Oath: but,
the Witnesses express it, that my Lord interpreted it, to extend to the
observation of the Ceremonies, and Government of the Church established, and to
be established.

His denial to speak the words, That he would root out the Scotch Nation, does
not disprove that, which is so clearly and strongly proved by two Witnesses.

He says, He should be Frantic, if he should speak such words: but one of the
Witnesses said, He expressed himself to be transported, and that he knew not what
he said in that Sentence.

He says, He never received wrong from that Nation, but Courtesies, then those
words show the more Ingratitude.

He says, Sir James Mountgomery speaks nothing that sticks on him: It is true,
he speaks only to the Contravening of the Oath; but, he shows that to be
expressly otherwise, then in my Lords Answer.

He confesses he gave the Oath: but, whether he did or no, his Authority
Injoyning of it, would have been all one.

He says, Sir James Mountgomery desired the words, Just and Lawful Commands,
might be added: and, that my Lord expounded it, No other were intended. But
then there was the less reason to deny the inserting some of them, for their
sakes that were tender, and desired to have them put in, for their satisfaction.

He says, That Sir John Clotworthy deposes, That Multitudes of the Scotch
Nation went away; but, he names none: But, if Sir John be Asked, he will give
very good satisfaction.

Sir John Clotworthy being Asked to that Point?

He Answered, That he might easily, amongst so great a Multitude, Remember so
few names; and when he heard my Lord of Straffords Exception, Multitudes did
throng in upon him, whereof he did now particularly name about six, and said,
He could name a great many more.

Being Asked, concerning the Execution of Trueman, as a Traitor, for the matter
of Knockfergus?

He Answered, That he was at Knockfergus at the Assizes, when this Trial was
concerning this Trueman; and was then on the Bench, and heard all the passages
of the business; whereof he made this brief Relation as follows.

This Trueman was an Englishman, that dwelt not far from Knockfergus, and one
that was sent about the Country; but, by whom, Sir John could not tell: but,
there were vehement Suspicions, that he was Employed to find out those that
would engage in Discourse concerning the Scotch business; he spoke with one
Captain Giles, who feigned himself a great Friend of the Scotch Nation; and
said, That he conceived they were greatly distressed; and wished, that he could
use means whereby they might be eased. Hence he discoursed with Trueman, who
was but a silly Man, and got from him words, whereby he discovered a good will
to the Scotch Nation; and some discourse about the Castle of Knockfergus;
insomuch, that he got Truemans Letter to recommend him into Scotland, whether
he pretended a desire to go, to serve under that Command: Upon this he produced
the Letter, and that was given in Evidence against him, and so he was Condemned
and Executed.

Mr. Whitlock proceeded, and said; My Lord alleges for his Justification, Mr.
Whitlock.
another Oath, enjoined here to the Scots, by the Authority of the
Council Board; but, this gives no Countenance to that in Ireland; for the Oath
enjoined, there was another after that, enjoined by my Lord of Strafford:
therefore that which came first, can receive no color from that which came
last. And the Oath here being the same (as near as we can remember) with that
in Ireland, was rather a Precedent for this. Howsoever, the Committee never
heard that the Oath here, was executed, or enjoined to any.

Though Richard Salmon was mistaken, in point of time, of speaking those words
of the Scotch Nation at the Sentence; yet, he speaks to the substance and
matter of the Sentence and Words, and it was when my Lord of Strafford was in
Ireland: and though the name of the Month be mistaken, it cannot weaken his
Testimony; and my Lord of Strafford confesses he was at the Sentence, and the
day before he came to England.

And, with him, concurs Loftus, though not in Words, yet in Substance.

My Lord produced Witnesses concerning these words. Sir Philip Manwaring
affirms, my Lord said, He was very sorry Stuart should be the only Man: yet, it
is proved, that diverse were brought to Dublin, and Imprisoned there; and many
hundreds forsook the Kingdom, and left their Estates; therefore he could not be
the only man. But, though he and the rest remember not the words, yet if the
Witnesses produced do precisely remember them, the forgetfulness of my Lord of
Straffords Witness shall not at all Impeach the other.

So the Committee concluded thus; That it stands clear, that my Lord of
Strafford has assumed a power to himself above Law, to Administer an Oath
contrary to Law; a new Oath, to bind Men's Consciences with great severity. He
said formerly, He would make an Act of State equal to an Act of Parliament, and
nothing can make an Oath but an Act of Parliament; in this therefore he is as
good as his word. This is an assuming of a Power above Royal-Power; for an Act
of Parliament cannot be made, without the Three Estates, their Lordships and
the Commons are Interested in it; for, this is not -- Penes Potestatem ministri.

Mr. Maynard added, That some Exceptions had been taken against Sir James
Mountgomery, viz. That he was scrupulous to the Petition, but not Mr. Maynard.
to the Oath.

My Lord of Strafford takes a Power to Administer an Oath. It is hard to lay
such Bonds on any; but, to put it on general and ambiguous words, is much
harder: And, how far that may entrench on any Man, if for refusing such an Oath
he shall be Sentenced in the Star Chamber, more then he is ever able to pay,
and more than my Lord of Strafford confesses he would expect payment of; this
is so transcendent an Incroachment, that there cannot be a greater: for, it
takes away Liberty of Conscience, and endangers the whole Estate. And, the
Kings Letter does not justify the proceeding at all: for, had my Lord persued
that, and gone no farther, there had been no Complaint; for His Majesty
enjoined him to take an Oath, that might distinguish one from another; but,
does not enjoin to punish them that refused it: the Grievance is the Coertion
of it; and so, under favor, It is no Justification.

Mr. Stroude added, That my Lord of Strafford, at the end of his Speech, said,
If this were Treason, and the Occasion offered, he would be ready Stroud.
to do it again. And Mr. Stroude said, He must confess he does believe him:
and, this makes him consider a heavy thing that once befell this Kingdom; When
Gaveston came to over-act his bold offenses, how heavy that befell the Kingdom,
he leaves to their Lordships Consideration.

My Lord of Strafford desired to clear this Point; and said, The Gentlemen E.
of Strafford.
is a great way off him, and may easily mistake; For he said, Were it again to
do, being no better informed then he was at that time, he should do it: But now
he understands more than he understood before. But, Mr. Stroud Stroud.
Answered, That under-favour he did not mistake my Lord; for, he remembered, how
fierce my Lord was upon an Oath in the Case of the Loan when he was a Commoner.

My Lord of Strafford did here desire a Motion or two:

The First Importing, That he should be very unwilling any thing E. of
Strafford.
should befall him, that might be a Prejudice to the Peerage of the Realm; and,
out of the duty he owes to that, he might crave leave humbly to enform their
Lordships, That he has a great Family in Ireland; his Wife and Children are
there; that all he has is seized on: So that he has not, as he protested (but
as he borrowes it) Money to buy Meat to feed himself here: And, how his Wife
and Children, and Servants do in Ireland, he knows not; but, that they are
under the Providence of Almighty God. That it is a heavy Case, that being
Impeached of Treason (and Constructive Treason, he hopes, it will prove at the
most) that he should be thus used, being a Peer of the Realm, to have all he
has taken in this sort, and his Wife and Children, and Family thus unprovided
for, and left without so much means as to feed themselves: he therefore
besought their Lordships to take him into Consideration, that he may not be
worse than the meanest sort of people, having the honor to be a Peer, under the
pretense of Treason.

The Second was, That, since my Lord Keeper, and my Lord of Northumberland may
be very good Witnesses for him in the subsequent Charge, that will next come
before their Lordships: And, whether my Lord Cottington be in disposition to be
here on Monday, He knows not; that therefore some course might be afforded,
that he might have the benefit of their Testimony, when he shall come to Answer
the next Charges.

Being demanded by the Lord Steward, By whom his Goods were seized? and,
Whether by the Orders of the House of Commons Read the other day, that their
Lordships might clearly understand him? His Lordship answered, Yes: From whence
Sir John Clotworthy observed, That, by these Orders, nothing could be Inferred,
but a Sequestration of the advantage, that might possibly be had by the
Tobacco; And, that his Lordship had a fair Estate in Ireland of -- per Annum
acquired, since he came into Ireland, which is not at all touched.

To which my Lord of Strafford replied, That he had a Thousand a Year in
Ireland, and that was all: And, he had Two hundred and sixty in Family; and,
how those can be maintained (All the Customs being seized, and a little Money
he had, having but narrowly escaped) he desired their Lordships to take it into
their Consideration.

For these Particulars, his Lordship had direction to Petition to their
Lordships; And so the House was Adjourned, and Monday morning next appointed to
proceed about the ARTICLES.

The Council for the House of Commons having proceeded against the Earl of
Strafford Article by Article, till they came to Article 20, but then finding
the following Articles so nearly related to one another, they would tie
themselves no more to these Rules; but, pleaded for Liberty, to handle them,
not as they lay, but as they were Related to one another: And, after my Lord
Strafford had long and vigorously opposed this, my Lord High Steward Determined
the Case, and Ordered, They should be handled promiscuously, and in cumulo, as
the Council for the Commons-House should think fit. Therefore I have set down
these Articles that were thus Debated here.

THE Twentieth Article. The Charge.

20. THat the said Earl has, in the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Article XX. Charge.
years of His Majesty's Reign, and diverse years past, labored and endeavored
to breed in His Majesty an ill Opinion of His Subjects; namely of those of the
Scotch Nation. And diverse and sundry times, and especially since the
Pacification made by His Majesty with His said Subjects of Scotland in, Summer,
in the Fifteenth year of His Majesty's Reign; he, the said Earl, did labor,
and endeavor to persuade, incite, and provoke His Majesty to an Offensive War
against His said Subjects of the Scotch Nation: And the said Earl, by his
Counsels, Actions, and Endeavors, has been, and is, a principal and chief
Incendiary of the War and Discord between His Majesty and His Subjects of
England, and the said Subjects of Scotland, and has declared and advised His
Majesty, that the Demands made by the Scots, in their Parliament, were a
sufficient cause of War against them.

The said Earl having formerly expressed the height and rancour of his Mind
toward His Majesty's Subjects of the Scotch Nation, viz. the Tenth day of
October, in the Fifteenth year of His Majesty's Reign, he said, That the Nation
of the Scots were Rebels, and Traitors; and he being then about to come to
England, he then further said, That if it pleased his Master (meaning His
Majesty) to send him back again, he would root out of the said Kingdom (meaning
the said Kingdom of Ireland) the Scotch Nation, both root and branch.

Some Lords and others, who had taken the said Oath in the precedent Article,
only excepted: and the said Earl has caused diverse of the Ships and Goods of
the Scots to be ^aped, seized, and molested, to the intent to set on the said
War.

THE One and Twentieth Article. The Charge.

21. THat the said Earl of Strafford, shortly after his Speeches, Article XXI.
Charge.
mentioned in the last Precedent Articles, to wit, in the Fifteenth year of His
Majesty's Reign, came into this Realm of England, and was made Lord Lieutenant
of Ireland, and conti^ed his Government of that Kingdom by a Deputy: at his
arrival here, finding that His Majesty, with much wisdom and goodness, had
composed the Troubles in the North, and had a Paci^ation with His Subjects of
Scotland; he labored, by all means, to procure His Majesty to break that
Pacification, Incensing His Majesty against His Subjects of that Kingdom, and
the Proceeding of the Parliament there.

And having Incited His Majesty to an Offensive War, against His Subjects of
Scotland by Sea and Land, and by pretext thereof to raise Forces for the
maintenance of that War, he compelled His Majesty to call a Parliament in
England: yet the said Earl intended, that if the said Proceedings of that
Parliament should not be ^ch* as would stand with the said Earl of Straffords
mischievous D^, he would then procure His Majesty to break the same, and, by
ways of Force and Power, to raise Moneys upon the Sub^cts of this Kingdom. And,
for the encouragement of His Majesty to hearken to his Advice, he did, before
His Majesty and Privy Council, then sitting in Council, make a large
Declaration, That he would serve His Majesty in any other way, in case the
Parliament should not supply him.

THE Two and Twentieth Article. The Charge.

22. THat in the month of March, before the beginning of the last Article XXII
Charge.
Parliament, the said Earl of Strafford went into Ireland, and procured the
Parliament of that Kingdom, to declare their assistance in a War against the
Scots; and gave ^ns for the raising of an Army there, consisting of 8000 Foot,
and 1000 Horse, being for the most part Papists as aforesaid. And confederating
with one Sir George Rateliffe, did together with him the said Sir George,
traitorously conspire to employ the said Army, for the ruin and destruction of
the Kingdom of England, and of His Majesty's Subjects, and of altering and
subverting of the fundamental Laws, and established Government, of this Kingdom.

And shortly after, the said Earl of Strafford re^ited into England, and to
sundry persons, declared his opinion to be. That His Majesty should first try
the Parliament here, and if that did not supply him, according to his
occasions, he might use then His Prerogative as he pleased, to levy what he
needed; and that he should be acquitted both of God and Man, if he took some
other courses to supply himself, though it were against the Wills of His
Subjects.

THE Three and Twentieth Article. The Charge,

23. THat upon the Thirteenth day of April last, the Parliament Artic. XXIII
Charge.
of England, (...) and the Commons House (then being the representative Body of
all the Commons in the Kingdom) did according to the Trust reposed in them,
enter into Debate and Consideration of the great grievances of this Kingdom,
both in respect of Religion, and the public Liberty of the Kingdom; and His
Majesty referring chiefly to the said Earl of Strafford, and the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the ordering and disposing of all matters concerning the
Parliament: He the said Earl of Strafford, with the assistance of the said
Archbishop, did procure His Majesty by sundry Speeches and Messages, to urge
the said Commons House, to enter into some resolution for His Majesty's Supply,
for maintenance of His War against his Subjects of Scotl before any course
taken for the relief of the great and pressing Grievances, wherewith this
Kingdom was then afflicted. Whereupon a demand was then made from His Majesty
of 12 Subsidies, for the release of Ship money only; and while the said Commons
then Assembled (with expression of great affection to His Majesty, and His
Service) were in Debate and Consideration concerning some Supply, before any
resolution by them made, He the said Earl of Strafford, with the help and
assistance of the said Archbishop, did procure His Majesty to Dissolve the said
Parliament, upon the 5th day of May last; and upon the same day, the said Earl
of Strafford did treacherously, falsely and maliciously, endeavor to incense
His Majesty against His loving and faithful Subjects, who had been Members of
the said House of Commons, by telling His Majesty they had denied to supply
Him. And afterward upon the same day, did traitorously and wickedly counsel
and advise His Majesty to this effect, viz. That having tried the affections of
His People, He was loose and absolved from all rules of Government, and that he
was to do every thing that Power would admit; and that His Majesty had tried
all ways, and was refused, and should be acquitted toward God and Man; and
that He had an Army in Ireland (meaning the Army abovementioned, consisting of
Papists, his Dependants, as is aforesaid) which he might employ to reduce this
Kingdom.

THE Four and Twentieth Article. The Charge,

24. THat in the same month of May, he the said Earl of Strafford, Art. XXIV.
Charge.
falsely, traitorously, and maliciously, published and deciared before others of
His Majesty's Privy Council, That the Parliament of England had forsaken the
King, and that in denying to supply the King, they had given him advantage to
supply himself by other ways; and several other times he did maliciously,
wickedly, and falsely, publish, and declare, That seeing the Parliament had
refused to supply His Majesty in the ordinary and usual way, the King might
provide for the Kingdom in such ways, as he should hold fit, and that he was
not to suffer himself to be mastered by the frowardness and undutifulness of
the people: And having so maliciously slandered the said late House of Commons,
he did, with the help and advice of the said Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
Lord Finch, late Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, cause to be printed
and published in His Majesty's Name, a false and scandalous Book, Entitled,
His Majesty's Declaration of the Causes that moved him to Dissolve the last
Parliament, Full of bitter and malicious Invectives, and false, and scandalous
aspersions against the said House of Commons.

Monday, April 5. 1641.
THE Right Honorable the Lord Steward did this day L. High Steward.
in the first place, acquaint the Gentlemen that managed the Evidence at the
Bar, That their Lordships had commanded him to let them know, that my Lord of
Strafford on Saturday in the evening, gave in his Petition for the examination
of my Lord of Northumberland; and that he coming in so late, it happened so,
that the Gentlemen of the House of Commons could not possibly have leave to
cross examine, and so the examinations are come only on one side, sealed up;
wherefore his Lordship proposed, that things might for the present be so
carried, as the proceedings of this day might not be hindered thereby.

Mr. Whitlock Answered, That they shall go on according to their Lordships
Whitlock.
Order, but he desired the cross-examination of my Lord of Northumberland, and
the Testimony of some other witnesses that are sent for, and not yet come
(whose names they shall give in) may be reserved.

To which my Lord of Strafford replied, That the motion is very new to E. of
Strafford.
him, and in these things of form, he may be easily mistaken, and prejudiced
before he is aware: That to their cross-examining of my Lord of Northumberland,
he is very willing; but for examining of Witnesses, whose Names are not yet
known, and to have such a Latitude as to reserve supplemental proof, he
conceives may be hard, and so appeals to their Lordships, whither their
Lordships will not have them name their Witnesses, and assign them a certain
time, within which they shall examine them. And he desires likewise, the
examination of my Lord Keeper, who is not yet examined, may be reserved for
him. And likewise that my Lord of Canterbury may be examined, he having been
examined, (as he understood) against him, which if he had not been, he should
not have moved it: and that the advantage of their two Testimonies may be
reserved to him.

But Mr. Whitlock and Mr. Maynard thus explained it, that they intend Whitlock.
Maynard.
not to examine those who are not yet named in writing, but to produce them
viva voce; and that they should take the boldness to name one of them to their
Lordships, and that is Mr. Sergeant Glanvile, who was sent for eight days
since, and will be in Town to night, And for my Lord of Canterbury, if they
have examined him, it was before his Charge, and they shall make no use of his
examination, neither is he a person capable of being a Witness, being now
charged, and in some particulars, for conspiring with the Lords at the Bar, and
therefore they submit it, whether it be convenient he should be examined,
though if they shall urge his Testimony, it will be something; and likewise
their Lordships overruled it in Sir George Ratcliff's Case. But my Lord of
Strafford submitting all to their ordships good pleasure, it being his part
only to move (as his Lordship said) and do what their Lordships should in their
wisdoms think fit. The Lord Steward declared their Lordships pleasure, that
Sergeant Glanvill and the other Witnesses might be reserved to be heard to
morrow viva voce; and L. H. Steward.
that the examinations of my Lord of Northumberland, and my Lord Keeper might
be likewise reserved; for my Lord of Canterbury it was observed, that he was
examined before the Charge, and that the Gent. of the Commons-House intend not
to make use of his Testimony. And so the Committee proceeded to the next
Article.

Mr. Whitlock proceeded, putting their Lordships in mind, that they Mr.
Whitlock.
had been pleased to take a view of my Lord of Strafford's Courses in Ireland,
which have manifested his design to subvert and change the Law and bring in an
Arbitrary Government; That his execution of that Arbitrary Power upon the
persons, Estates and Lives of the Kings Subjects there, has been a clear proof
of this his design. They shall now proceed to show their Lordships what his
design was in England and Scotland, as the same was set forth in the 20th21,
22, 23, and 24th Articles, together with the matters contained in them, they
being interwoven and depending one upon the other, and so are but one business.

My Lord of Strafford did thereupon offer, that he conceived it was E. of
Strafford.
agreed, they shoul go Article by Article, that his Memory is short, and his
Abilities weak; and if three or four be brought together, his Memory will not
serve him to give them that account, that otherwise he should be able to do;
And since the order of proceeding Article by Article was by consent, he
besought that course might be persued, not giving consent to the alteration of
it.

But Mr. Maynard desired leave to remember their Lordships, that they Mr.
Maynard.
offered to go Article by Article, till they came to some that were woven
together, which might change the course. They find much time is lost between
Article and Article, and there will need no great Consideration of of these,
being only about words; and when my Lord of Strafford stands by way of Defense,
he may not inform them which way to proceed, and they will proceed no way
differently from what was formerly proposed.

My Lord of Strafford humbly appealed to their Lordships, Whether the Favor
offered him for recollecting his Notes, had spent much E. of Strafford.
time; and added, perhaps if another man had been in his case, he would have
thought as long a time as he had taken, necessary, tho a far abler man than
himself; but this inverts the whole Order agreed on, and brings him to a great
inconvenience, and therefore he desired he might Answer them single, in the
manor as was agreed upon.

To which Mr. Whitlock Answered, That if the Articles be not proceeded in
together, and as having relation to one another, they will loose much Mr.
Whitlock.
of the Application, Evidence, and Proof; and he conceives will be more easy
to my Lord of Strafford: And for the Order mentioned, there was, under favor,
no order in it; but when my Lord of Strafford made the motion (Mr. Whitlock
said) he took the boldness to inform their Lordships, that he should proceed on
some of them altogether, which my Lord of Strafford did not deny, and their
Lordships approved of, and according to that they desire to proceed.

Mr. Glyn adding, That he never knew before this time, a Prisoner at Mr. Glyn.
the Bar prescribe a Method to the Evidence, especially if he be charged with
High Treason; and my Lord may afford them the same favor they do him, for if
he will answer Article by Article, he may; but as they leave him to his course,
so they desire to take their course.

But in that case my Lord of Strafford desired he might have time to E. of
Strafford.
Answer till to morrow morning, and professed that he should be extreme
unwilling to offer any thing that became him not in Humility and Modesty, or to
prescribe a course to any, he being in his condition; but he trusts he may with
Humility and Duty, offer to their Lordships consideration, these things that
may be for his Assistance and Defense, without offense to any.

So the Committee that managed the Evidence for the Commons-House, had
direction to proceed as they had propounded.

Mr. Whitlock then proceeded to open the Charge of these Articles, which will
refer, to prove a design of my Lord of Strafford against Scotland, Mr.
Whitlock.
to subvert their Parliament, and our Government here, and to bring in an Army
on us, to force us to submit to an Arbitrary Power.

First, they shall apply themselves to prove his design against Scotland,
which lies first in the Charge; That he advised the King two or three times,
that the demands made by the Scots in their Parliament, were a sufficient
ground for a War against them, notwithstanding that Parliament was indicted by
the Kings Royal Authority, and they have their liberty to Propound and Treat.

Your Lordships may remember what my Lord of Strafford said at the sentencing
of Stewart in Ireland, whereby he expressed his hatred and rancor toward them,
and his opinion of them at that time, being after the pacification made, and he
continues in the same ill opinion of them, and to give the same ill Council.

That at another time he told His Majesty, the demands of the Scots in their
Parliament, were not matter of Religion; but struck at the root of Government,
and that it was fit to punish them by force.

That he caused the Ships of the Scots in Ireland to be seized.

That he procured the Parliament in Ireland to declare their assistance, and
give supply for a War against Scotland, and that several times he endeavored
to persuade His Majesty to an offensive War against the Scots, under which
particulars will fall in proof, his design against Scotland.

His design against England was of the same nature, which will appear by his
words and by his Councils, and by some Speeches given out by those that have
very near Relation to him, and are his creatures, who agreed with his own words
likewise.

They shall prove to their Lordships, That on a discourse between Sir George
Ratcliffe and Sir Robert King, concerning the War with the Scots, and my Lord
of Straffords being engaged in it. Sir George Ratcliffe told him, We are
engaged in a War with the Scots, and we must go on with it; and being demanded
how the King would do, if he were not supplied by Parliament? He said the King
has 30000 men, and 400000 l. in his Purse, and his Sword by his side; and if
he wants Money, who could pity him? That he said likewise he could make peace
with the Scots when he list, but that was the worst of Evils.

There were other words spoken by Sir George Wentworth, my Lord of Strafford's
Brother, to a Gentleman, a Member of the House of Commons; that England was
sick of Peace, and it would never be well with it, till it were again
conquered. These were the words of others his Creatures, They shall prove his
Lordship's own words and Counsels.

That he declared his opinion to my Lord Primate of Ireland, that in case of
necessity, His Majesty might use his Prerogative, to levy what he needed,
saving first to try the Parliament, and if that supply him not, then to use his
Prerogative as he pleased.

That at another time when my Lord Conway, a Nobleman of this House, was
pleased to ask him, How the Forces raised, and to be raised, should be paid? My
Lord of Strafford said, he doubted not but twelve Subsidies would be given. My
Lord Conway putting the doubt to him again, What if they should not be given?
My Lord of Strafford was pleased to reply, Then the King would be acquitted
before God and Men, if he took some other course to supply himself, though it
were against the Will of the Subject.

At another time, when His Majesty had Graciously declared himself, that he
would have a Parliament, he was pleased to say, That in case the Parliament
should not supply him, he would be ready to serve him in any other way. These
Words and Counsels were all before the calling of the last Parliament.

In the time of the sitting of the Parliament, the House of Commons were
frequently urged by Messages, procured by my Lord of Strafford from His
Majesty, to take consideration of the Kings Supply for a War aagainst Scotland;
and before consideration and relief of the grievances in Religion and
Government of the Kingdom, 12 Subsidies were demanded, for release of the
Ship Money only, and when the House of Commons were in debate concerning
Supply, and before they came to resolution, by advise of my Lord of Strafford,
that Parliament was dissolved.

After the Parliament was dissolved they shall show, how, by diverse Words and
Counsels my Lord of Strafford endeavored, to incense His Majesty against His
loving Subjects, and so to slander them to His Majesty, as to make a division
between them; And also of His design, to bring in an Army upon us.

That he declared to His Majesty, that the Parliament had denied to supply him,
and had quite forsaken him: and that he said to a Noble Earl of that House,
That the Parliament in this great distress of the King and Kingdom, had refused
to supply the King in the ordinary and usual way, and therefore the King might
provide for the Kingdom, by such ways, as he thought fit; and that the King was
not to suffer himself to be mastered by the frowardness, and undutifulness of
his people.

That he said at another time to a Nobleman in this House, That the Parliament
in denying to supply the King, had given him advantage to supply himself by
other ways. And if worse words can be uttered or spoken than what have been
mentioned, they shall conclude with such of his words, as none can be imagined
to be of more fearful and dangerous consequence, viz. The same day that the
Parliament was dissolved, my Lord of Strafford, by way of advice and Counsel,
told His Majesty, That now he had tried the affections of His People, and that
he was loose, and absolved from all rules of Government: That he was to do all
that Power would admit; since he had tried all ways, and was refused, and
should, in so doing, be acquitted before God and men, and that he had an Army
in Ireland, which he might employ to reduce his Kingdoms.

They began with that which concerned Scotland; The Earl of Traquair E. of
Traquair
being sworn, was asked, What he remembered to be spoken by my Lord of
Strafford, concerning the demands made by the Scots in their Parliament, when
he (my Lord Traquair) made relation of those demands, with the time, and other
circumstances.

He Answered, That it would be hard for him to answer to so general a question,
for their Lordships, and a great many know, that he made relation of the
demands made by the Scotch Subjects in Parliament, at two several times, one by
the King's Command here, before the Lords of the Council: Another by the like
Command of His Majesty, before the Peers at York.

But being directed to apply himself to the words spoken by my Lord of
Strafford, when he made his relation before the Council here.

His Lordship Answered, That he could hardly give an Answer to such a general
Question; but he believed my Lord of Strafford when he was at Council, gave his
opinion in any thing brought in debate, as the Lords of the Council did: He
knew what was brought in debate, but cannot condescend to every thing that my
Lord spoke there.

Mr. Whitlock here interposed, and said, That he mentioned not the Mr. Whitlock.
particular words, that might come from my Lord Traquairs own expression; but
the question he desired, was, Whether my Lord of Strafford did not say, The
demand of the Scotch Parliament was a sufficient ground for the War?

To which my Lord Traquair being Interrogated?

He Answered, That he should very clearly declare to the best of his memory,
what he heard upon that occasion; but for the present E. of Traquair.
he could not remember particularly, of any such words expressed by my Lord of
Strafford here at Whitehall (for he believes it was there when the Council met,
when he made the first relation) But he remembered he was Deponed on these
before, and if it might stand with their Lordships pleasure and form, he would
willingly remit himself to his former Deposition.

Mr. Whitlock offered to their Lordships, that (for the recollecting of his
memory) my Lord Traquair might peruse the former Deposition.

But my Lord of Strafford opposed it, because their Lordships having not yet
made use of any thing taken on oath, he desired that Rule might be still kept.

Mr. Palmer insisted on it, it being not offered as a proof to be heard, but
Mr. Palmer.
because it was tendered to him to vary (being on his oath) though but in a
Syllable, from what he had spoken before; And Mr. Glyn added, That this is very
ordinary at Law. But my Lord of Portland moved that the House might be
Adjourned, that the examinations should not be made use of.

My Lord Traquair desired, that he might not be mistaken, for he would express
his Reasons, and humbly submit it to their Lordships, that he was by order of
their Lordships, examined on oath before, and examined on the same question,
and he only submitted this to their Lordships, whether or not their Lordships
would allow him, to remit himself to the Depositions in writing? And if it was
not fit, nor consisted with their Lordships pleasure, he should go on to the
best of his memory, and if he keep not the very words, he should keep the
sense. And this he said was, that he might not vary from any thing that was in
his written Deposition.

Mr. Maynard to induce their Lordships thereunto, instanced, That if a Mr.
Maynard.
man writes a thing in a Book, and he after produced as a Witness, the Witness
may have leave to look on his own Book, much more when he is examined, and
there can be no suspicion of fraud in this.

Whence my Lord of Strafford inferred, That this Gentleman desired E. of
Strafford.
my Lord Traquair should desire that which my Lord himself did not desire.

The Lord Traquair then proceeded and said; All that he remembered E. of
Traquair.
in this particular, to the best of his memory, was upon occasion of a Debate
at York, at the Kings Majesty's last being there; where it was required, That
he should make that same relation before the Peers, who were to meet the next
day after, that he had made at the Council Board here: Some question having
been made, what should be the ground or occasion of this relation again, since
it was conceived, the business was not in the same condition it was, at the
time of making his first relation: Because, as it was alleged at the time of
making this relation, that it was only of Demands, and these Demands had been
represented by the Commons of Parliament to His Majesty, with other Demands;
and likewise in Parliament they had made these Demands pass into an Act: It was
therefore represented by some, that there was not a necessity of making the
same relation he had before; But of the Demands only, and not the Case of the
business, as it stood before.

And upon this, (wherein he shall not be obliged to words) but something to
this sense; my Lord of Strafford expressed, That he conceived, E. of Strafford.
That the unreasonable Demands of Subjects in Parliament, was a ground for the
King to put himself into a posture; or to this sense: and his Lordship
repeated, and explained it; That the unreasonable Demands of Subjects, was a
ground for the King, to put himself into a posture of War. Being asked, Whether
it was spoken of Demands in Parliament?

His Lordship Answered, It was, that the unreasonable Demands of His Subjects
in Parliament etc. for it was on the Scotch business they were speaking.

Being asked, where this was spoken?

He Answered, It was spoken before the meeting of the Peers, at the Council,
which was convened, and he believes his Majesty was present.

Being directed to repeat the words again?

His Lordship said, the words were, That the unreasonable Demands of Subjects
in Parliament (for it was on the Scotch Demands) my Lord conceived, might be a
ground for the Kings Majesty, to put himself into a posture of War.

Being asked, Whether these Demands of the Scots were not in Parliament?

He Answered, That all the Demands made to the Kings Commissioner, are in
Parliament, or by the Parliament; and here he said he was forced to make a
little digression, if he Answered to this, for the Parliaments there, use not
that way that the Parliament does here: For he being the Kings Commissioner,
Propositions, and Demands, and Articles were made for him which are the
preparatory ways of Parliaments; and some Commissioners from the Gentry and
Nobility, made motions and demands to him in private, before they were voted in
public. And of them all, he was tied to make an account. All were made in
Parliament, or by Warrant of Parliament, or by some Body of the Parliament.

Being asked, whether some of the Lords then present, did not declare and
express themselves to be of a contrary opinion?

He Answered, That truly as he believed the occasion of this came upon this
debate, and he believed there were some of the Lords of the Parliament, by way
of debate, of another opinion, as he remembered it. And particularly my Lord
Morton said, he was of another opinion, to the best of his memory.

Being Interrogated, who first spoke in Council after this relation?

He Answered, That he believed in this there might be a mistake, for at that
time he had made no relation, but was to make a relation next morning before
the Peers, and this was only the debate, whether he should make relation or
not? But at that time at York no relation was made before the Council, but
before the Peers next morning.

Being Asked, But after the Relation made to the Peers, Who then spoke first?

He Answered, That truly he could not tell.

Being Asked, Whether he could tell who spoke first at Whitehal?

He Answered, That it is very well known to a great many Lords here, that he
(by His Majesty's Command) made a Narrative of the Demands made to him in
Parliament by the Subjects of Scotland. In which Relation (he hoped my Lords
memory would serve) he left the Commissioners, who were coming up, by Warrant
from His Majesty, on Petition, to give a Reason of their Demands. This he did,
and it was his greatest care to do it faithfully and ingenuously, without
burdening of any whom it concerned: and, to burden his memory, who spoke first,
and who spoke last, he could not tell; but, on debate of the business,
something was proposed to the Table, and every man declared his Opinion; and,
he thinks, they all agreed in one; but, who spoke first, and who last, he knows
not.

Being Asked, Whether he remembered the words my Lord of Strafford spoke, at the
making of that Relation to the Privy Council?

He Answered, That he remembers that (which he hopes all my Lords well
remember) on that Relation of his, the Kings Majesty being then present in
Person, was graciously pleased to take notice of that, he (the Deponent) had
there affirmed, That some one (he thinks his name was Cunningham) was sent from
the Parliament of Scotland, to supplicate His Majesty to allow some of their
own members to come up to His Presence, and present their Demands. The King was
pleased it should be so; and when they were all of the same Opinion, the King
condescended to it; and, to the best of his remembrance, it was consented to by
my Lord of Strafford and the whole Board; That at their coming up, if they
should not give good Reasons and satisfaction for their Demands, they would be
assistant to His Majesty to put him in a posture, to reduce them to their due
Obedience; But he cannot tie himself to words.

Being Asked, What was meant by a Posture?

He Answered, A posture of War he believed, must needs be a capacity and
Power, to reduce them to Obedience.

Being desired (upon my Lord of Straffords motion) to repeat the words again.

He Answered, That he made a Narrative Relation, and a Narrative Relation only:
and the Commissioners, whom His Majesty was pleased to condescend to their
coming up, to give Reasons of their Demands, That the Scotch Subjects had made
in Parliament: This being the State of the Question; and the Kings Majesty
graciously condescending, that some of their own Members should come up, to
represent their own Demands; It was put to the Question, What should be done?
And this was the Conclusion (to his Memory, there being no Clerk nor Register
there, wherein my Lord of Strafford was no more involved then the rest) that if
these Commissioners should not, at their coming up, give good satisfaction
touching their Demands, the Council would be assistant to His Majesty, to put
Him into a Posture of War, to reduce them to their Obedience. He will not say,
these very words were reported again to my Lords at York, but the Sense and way
of them was.

My Lord Digby did here desire leave of their Lordships, to represent L. Digby.
something on Consideration of that, which was last in Question, touching the
Witnesses helping themselves by their former Examinations. He did forbear it
before, in regard he saw this Honorable Lord, for his own particular, did not
insist on it; But, for the future, he thought it very necessary to represent it
to their Lordships, as a thing not only much concerning the validity of the
Proofs, but likewise very much conducing to the honor of many of their
Lordships here; and, concerning the validity of their Proofs, he shall humbly
offer this to their Lordships. That this noble Lord was often pleased to say,
That he hoped he should not be tied to Words: Now, their Lordships may be
pleased to consider the Charges of the present Articles are consisting
principally of Words; to say, he shall not be tied to Words, is as much as to
say, he shall not be tied to the Question. And this he offered only concerning
the validity of the Proofs; But concerning the honor of some Noble Lords that
sit here, he confesses he is very zealous in that when he thinks of it; that
diverse of them have been Examined formerly upon Oath, and upon Oath set down,
without great Leisure, and Recollection of the truth of things: and now,
whether (so many Months after, being called again suddenly on Oath, to give
account of these Words) the best memory may not be subject to variance and
discrepancie, and may not forget some prejudice and disadvantage to those noble
Lords honor, he humbly submits to their Lordships.

And Mr. Glyn added, That this Noble Lord has prevented him; My Mr. Glyn.
Lord of Traquair has not varied from his Examinations in substance, but if he
had, under favor, they must stand upon his Examinations; and, it is Legal, and
Just, and Ordinary; and never a Judge in England will deny it; that if a
Witness be examined, and varies, his Examinations shall be read to his face,
and it is no prejudice, for the party is ready to explain himself; And, he
said, he was about the offering it, and now must offer it, according to the
trust reposed in him by the House of Commons; that, if it stand with their
Occasions, the Examinations may be read, and under favor they may.

To this my Lord of Strafford Answered, That here is a Question now stirred,
that has been hitherto denied; for, he could leave out any Examinations E. of
Strafford
taken, and certainly, as he conceives, it was never intended, that these
Examinations should be made use of. They were preparatory and no other: And (by
this learned Gentleman's leave) whereas he speaks of the manner of proceedings
on Trials of ordinary Felonies, he (the Defendant) has seen some of them; and,
in all particulars, where the Witness has been viva voce, he never heard
Examinations Read.

But, Mr. Glyn averred what he said before; That if there be Examinations Mr.
Glyn.
taken of a Felon at Common Law, and the Witness comes viva voce; and the Kings
Council takes advantage, they do Read the Examinations taken.

And here the Lord Steward declared, That it is not denied to any to recollect
himself.

My Lord Traquair thereupon further alleged, That this was the first E. of
Traquair.
time he was ever Examined upon Oath; and, if he has been occasion of any
Scruple, he desired Pardon: but, it was long since he was Examined, and he
could not see his Depositions; and, lest he should have erred in his Words, he
desired this favor.

Mr. Whitlock further added, That they must affirm this to be the ordinary and
constant practice; and, if their Lordships doubt it, it shall be Mr. Whitlock.
made good: and, he hopes, the Commons of England shall not be in worse Case,
then an ordinary Prosecutor.

And then offered the Deposition of my Lord Morton (he being taken ill at that
time) to this Point.

By which means my Lord of Strafford observed himself to be debarred, E. of
Strafford.
of Cross-Examining him.

And Mr. Whitlock Answered, And so is every Prisoner in the like Mr. Whitlock.
Case.

Yet my Lord of Strafford desired, He might reserve to himself the benefit E.
of Strafford.
of Cross-examining him, if he should see Cause.

But Mr. Whitlock said, That, under favor, in this Case, no Prisoner has
benefit of Cross-Examination, where Examinations are read at Mr. Whitlock.
Trial.

And Mr. Glyn added, That he perceived by my Lord of Strafford, that Mr. Glyn.
he expected notice, what Witnesses they were ready to produce, and his
Lordship knew what Witnesses will be necessary for his Defense, and should be
careful of them: But, Mr. Glyn said further, That he thought never any Prisoner
expected to know from the Prosecutor, what Witnesses would be produced against
him.

My Lord of Strafford confessed, he might easily mistake, for never did so E. of
Strafford.
ignorant a Man, in their Proceedings, stand at the Bar: But, he conceived,
that if the other party do examine, it stands with Reason they should give him
notice of it, else he cannot possibly Cross-Examine.

Mr. Whitlock thereunto replied, That their Examinations are taken Mr. Whitlock.
preparatorily, and it is according to Course of Law; That, if any Witnesses
die, or be necessarily absent, their Examinations be used at the Trial.

Yet my Lord of Strafford said, He takes it, That if these be those they E. of
Strafford.
call preparatory Examinations, they ought not to be read but by an Order of
the House.

So my Lord Steward put an end to this matter, saying, That if it can L. H.
Steward.
be, the Witnesses, by the Order of the House, shall be Examined viva voce; if
not, upon Faith made, the Examinations are to be heard. And then they proceeded
to Read the Examinations of the Earl of Morton, taken 23 January, 1640. by
virtue of, and according to a Commission under E. of Morton.
the Great Seal of England, issued in Parliament, and dated 11 Ian. 1640.

To the 103. Interrogatory, This Examinant says, That he was present at York,
the Night before the meeting of the Great Council of the Peers of England, then
at a Debate before His Majesty, touching the ground of that War against the
Scots.

104. He says, That at, or in the said Debate, he heard the Earl of Strafford,
in His Majesty's presence, say, That the unreasonable and exorbitant Demands
made by the Scots in their Parliament, were a sufficient ground to make a War
against them; and that the King needed not to seek for any other grounds for
it, or words to that effect.

105. That toward the end of the said Debate, this Examinant told His Majesty,
That His Majesty having given the Scots leave, in their Parliament, to Petition
for Redress of such things, as they conceived to be Grievances, he said, His
Majesty would not think it a sufficient ground, to make War against them for
any Demands by them made in Parliament, without first hearing the Reasons
thereof, which reasons were not before that time related at, or in any meeting
of the Council, whereat this Examinant was present; howbeit the said Earl of
Strafford again said, That there was ground enough for that War. After which
his Majesty was pleased to say, That this Examinant had reason, for what this
Examinant did then say.

Whence Mr. Whitlock observed, That my Lord Morton went further then was
opened; For though he told His Majesty, that that which was Mr. Whitlock.
treated on in Parliament, especially by the Kings leave, and before the reason
of these demands were declared, was not a sufficient ground of a War; yet
notwithstanding, my Lord of Strafford, though he heard not these Reasons, nor
knew whether they were unlawful or no, (he was not versed in Republica aliena)
yet he reiterates and declares his advice again to His Majesty, That these
Demands were a sufficient ground of War.

106. He says, That when my Lord Traquair made Relation at the Council Table,
of the Demands made by the Scots in their Parliament, without rendering any
reason of the said Demands, as leaving this to the Scotch Commissioners, who
were on their way, coming toward His Majesty, by His Majesty's leave, and
allowed to yield their Reasons in that behalf: which Course of the said Earl of
Traquairs, in leaving the said reasons to the said Commissioners, His Majesty
well approved of, and pleased himself to expect from him a Relation only what
the said demands were; this Examinant, on the said occasion, heard the said E.
of Strafford say to His Majesty, after the said Demands so related, That the
said Demands were not matters of Religion, but such as did strike at the Root
of Government, and such as he thought were fit for his Majesty to punish by
force; or words to such effect.

Whence Mr. Whitlock observed, That the words last read, were spoken Mr.
Whitlock.
by my Lord of Strafford, at that time, when my Lord Traquair made a Relation
before the Council here, which was a great while before the second Relation at
York, before the Great Council of the Peers. And, though the King himself, in
his Clemency and Goodness, thought that a sufficient Reason, to do no more upon
it at that time, having not heard the Reasons; yet my Lord of Strafford was
pleased then to give Him this Counsel.

My Lord Traquair being Interrogated, Whether the Reasons of the Demands E. of
Traquair. Witness.
were given before, or at the Meeting at Whitehall?

He Answered, That at his first Relation, their Lordships know very well, the
Commissioners were not come up; but, he cannot burden his Memory, That he
heard my Lord of Strafford say such words.

Mr. Glyn observed, That they put it only to this, That the Reasons Mr. Glyn.
were not, nor could not be related, the Commissioners being not come up.

And, from these Proofs, Mr. Whitlock conceived it to stand proved, Mr.
Whitlock.
That my Lord of Strafford labored to persuade His Majesty to an Offensive
War, to Imbroyle both Kingdoms in a National Quarrel, and the blood one of
another, and this several times: and that at Whitehall being Three Quarters of
a year before the other, which was at the Council at York.

For Proof of the further Prosecution of his Design.

Sir Henry Vane, Treasurer of His Majesty's Household, and Principal Secretary
of State, was Sworn and Interrogated, What Advice my Lord of Sir Henry Vane
Witness.
Strafford gave to His Majesty, concerning making of a War with Scotland; or
seizing their Lordships?

He Answered, That he should be very glad to understand the Question clearly,
before he makes an Answer; for, to part of it, he is able to say nothing: that
is, concerning the Ships of Scotland, he not hearing of it till now. And, he
will be sorry here, to say any thing, that is not true; for, he conceives, the
Witnesses were put upon a great strait. The Examinations were taken long since;
and, for his part, he has seen none of them: And he besought their Lordships,
to take so much care of them, that they may not be subject to cross what was
said before; and, peradventure, bespatter our selves, when we ought to have our
Memories a little refresht in it. This he said he thought fit to speak before
he Answers the Question; and, if he be asked such a Question as he cannot
clearly Answer to, he shall do it Heartily and Ingenuously; but, to the Ships,
he can say nothing.

Being Asked, Whether about the 5th day of May, 1639, he heard my Lord of
Strafford persuade the King to an offensive War against the Scots?

He Answered, saying, That to that question he is able to speak; and, he is the
better able (which he may declare to their Lordships here) because His Majesty
has been pleased, out of the Justice and equality he owes to all his Servants,
to give him leave to do it: To that point then, this he says, clearly and
plainly, Whether it were upon the 5th day of May, or no, he is not able to say;
but either that day, or shortly after, where diverse of my Lords were present,
being commanded, after the breach of the Parliament, to speak what was fit to
be done, and every man to vote in his own turn, and he amongst the rest took
his turn; and he must say, that after Mr. Secretary Windebank had spoken first
of it, it came to him: There were then diverse Reasons agitated, which do not
occurr to his Memory; but this he remembers well, a Defensive War was proposed,
for it was proposed by himself: Thereupon that was not thought fit to be done;
and certainly my Lord of Strafford was of opinion for an Offensive War. This he
can say, and this is all he can say to this point.

Being Interrogated, What he could say against my Lord of Straffords procuring
the Parliament of Ireland, to engage themselves in a Supply for a War against
Scotland?

He Answered, That this was new to him; and, he could say nothing to it in
particular, but what in general came to his knowledge; That so many Subsidies
were given to the King: and that is all he can say, having not heard of the
Question till now.

Mr. Whitlock desired to read my Lord of Northumberland his Examination. Mr.
Whitlock.


But, my Lord of Strafford conceived that not so proper, his Examination E. of
Strafford.
being reserved.

Which Objection Mr. Whitlock taking off, by offering to their Lordships that
for which they desired to reserve him, was another Matter, they now Mr.
Whitlock.
desiring his Examinations only to the point, of my Lord of Straffords
persuading the King, to an Offensive War against the Scots.

The Examination of Algernon Earl of Northumberland, taken 5th December, 1640.
Read.

To the 16th Interrogatory, he says; That the said Lord Lieutenant E. of
Northumberland. Witness.
did, after the breach of the last Parliament, advise His Majesty, To go
vigorously on in an Offensive, and not Defensive War against the Scots.

The Lord Bishop of London, Lord Treasurer of England, Sworn, and Interrogated,
Bish. of London Witness.
What he knew concerning the Earl of Straffords giving Advice to His Majesty,
to go on in an Offensive War against the Scots, before, or after the breach of
the last Parliament?

He Answered, That all he remembered of my Lord of Straffords Advice, touching a
War, was, That which he gave publicly in Council at the Council Board; for, he
remembered not any single Advice that he gave at all. The Advice given by his
Lordship (the Deponent) at the Council Board, after the Relation made by my
Lord (the Earl of Traquair) to the best of his remembrance was this; My Lord
Traquair did make a Relation before His Majesty, and my Lords, of what had
passed in the Parliament of Scotland, and of many Demands made there; whereunto
they did desire to have His Majesty's consent and approbation: His Majesty was
pleased to signify to those Lords, That, among these Demands, there were some
of them very prejudicial to that Crown; insomuch, that He could by no means
give way to and consent to them, with His Honor and safety, and thereupon the
Advice, or Opinion, given, was (and then was given by my Lord the Earl of
Strafford, (as well as others of my Lords) and the Demands being of that
nature, as they were then informed, and the Commissioners, as he remembers,
being then come up, or at lest had a License to come up;) It was Resolved upon,
That, in case they should insist upon those Demands, that had been so related,
and would not recede nor alter, nor submit otherwise, then His Majesty should
prepare Himself to reduce them by force; this he takes to be my Lord of
Straffords Expression, and the Substance of what was there delivered.

Being Asked, Whether my Lord of Strafford advised then an Offensive War, or a
Defensive War?

He Answered, That he did not well remember what kind of War, but he thinks it
was an Offensive War.

Being Asked, Whether at the Dissolving of the last Parliament, my Lord of
Strafford did not advise to an Offensive War?

He Answered, That he remembers, upon a Meeting afterward, of casting up the
Charges, and other things, there was a discourse of it, Whether it was best to
have a War, as only Defensive (the War being then resolved upon) or to make an
Offensive War? that is, to enter into Scotland with Force: And there were
diverse Opinions in it, and he believes my Lord did incline to the Opinion, for
an Offensive War.

Being Asked (on my Lord of Straffords motion) Whether he (my Lord of
Strafford) delivered any Opinion at that time, different from the rest of the
Lords present?

He Answered, That every man there, expressed himself in such sort as he thought
fit; some in one kind, some in another; but he did not observe any difference
as to the main, in the Opinion of any man.

Being Asked, About the time, When this was?

He Answered, It was at the Council Board, at that time, when my Lord Traquair
made his Relation, and, as he remembers, it was about December.

Being Asked, Whether he delivered his Opinion once, or twice?

He Answered, The Opinion was delivered but once, as he Remembers.

To the Seizing of the Scotch Ships in Ireland, after the Pacification,

Mr. Nich. Barnewell Sworn, and Interrogated, What he knew of Mr. Barnewell
Witness.
the stopping of the Scotch Ships in Ireland?

He Answered, That Sir Robert Loftus had a place under my Lord Admiral, and had
seized on some Scotch Ships and Boats; and, that others fled away: and, that
Sir George Ratcliff was Angry that he spoke of it in so Public a Place, as to
give them occasion to run away; but, the time he does not remember: and, he
thinks, Sir Robert Loftus was Vice Admiral of Lemster; but, he cannot take his
Oath that the Warrant was from my Lord of Strafford; but, Sir Robert told him,
He had a Warrant.

And so Mr. Whitlock said, They would leave it, as to the matter of Mr.
Whitlock.
Scotland, and observed the Proofs. That when a free Parliament was Convened
there, by the Kings Authority, and had liberty to treat of their Grievances and
Demands; and, when these Demands, by way of Narration, were declared in my Lord
of Straffords hearing, though the reasons of them were not then delivered: yet
my Lord of Strafford gave his Advice to the King, That these Demands made in
Parliament were a sufficient ground of a War against them, even after His
Majesty had declared Himself satisfied, and would stay to hear the Reasons; but
that would not satisfy my Lord of Strafford, he himself declared it at several
times, and before himself had heard the Reasons, that the Demands made by the
Kings Free Parliament, were a sufficient ground of a War: And if it be so (Mr.
Whitlock, said he) he is sure then, Parliament or no Parliament, no Liberty,
nor Property can subsist with it.

My Lord of Strafford has declared his intention and design, to subvert the
Parliament, and to subvert the Government of Scotland. That he persuaded the
King to an offensive War, and told the King, their Demands were not matter of
Religion, but struck at the root of Government, and that it was fit to punish
them by force, and on these proofs it is conceived his Design was manifest.
After this Mr. Whitlock proceeded to show also his Design against England, and
began with the Testimony of my Lord Primate of Ireland.

The Examination of the Right Reverend Father in God, James, Lord Archbishop of
Armagh, Primate of all Ireland, taken 11 Ian. 1640.

To the 119th Interrogatory he says, That in or about April last past,
Archbishop of Armagh Witness.
in discourse betwixt the Earl of Strafford, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and
this Examinant at Dublin in Ireland, touching the Levies of Money upon the
Subjects by the King, he did hear the said Earl of Strafford declare, That he
did agree with those in England, who thought, that (in case of imminent
necessity) the King might make use of his Prerogative, to levy what he needed,
save that, as his Lordship then further said, in his opinion) His Majesty was
first to try His Parliament, and if that supplied him not, then he might make
use of His Prerogative, as He pleased Himself; or words to that effect.

The Lord Conway being asked what words my Lord of Strafford used, L. Conway
Witness.
when the said Lord Conway Demanded, How the Army should be paid, in case the
Parliament gave not supply?

His Lordship Answered, That he had been formerly examined upon this thing, and
then gave his Answer, and besought their Lordships to give him leave to look on
what he said, that he might not vary.

And after some Debate thereupon, having the Copy of his Examination showed him.

He Answered to the said Question, That it was only for one word, that he
desired to look into the Paper, and it was, whether in the later end he did not
say (or words to that effect) These words about which he is examined, did pass
between my Lord of Strafford and him in private discourse, when (he believes)
neither of them thought they should have been called to an account for them;
for they were then thinking of raising of Horse, and seeing but small sums of
Money, He asked my Lord how these Forces should be paid? His Lordship Answered,
He made no doubt, but that the Parliament would give assistance to the King by
12 Subsidies; and if they did that, it would sufficiently pay the Army, or some
such words. But said he (my Lord Conway) What if the Parliament shall not
supply the King, or not give these Subsidies? Then my Lord of Strafford said,
or words to that effect, That the King had need, and if the Parliment would not
supply the King in those things that were just and lawful to be supplied; and
if they would be so wilful, as not to supply him; then the King was justified
before God and Man, if he did help himself in the Goods of the Subjects (or to
this effect) tho it were against their Wills.

Being directed to repeat the words again (on my Lord of Strafford's motion.)

His Lordship Answered, That in his examination he said words to this effect,
and so he does now, yet does not depose absolutely, that these very words were
spoken, but to his understanding, and as he then conceived them, they were to
this purpose; when he asked my Lord of Strafford, how these Troops then raised
should be paid? My Lord of Strafford said, He made no doubt but the Parliament
would supply the King, and give him 12 Subsidies. And saying again. What if the
Parliament would not give him that assistance? My Lord of Strafford said, The
cause was very just and lawful, and if the Parliament would not supply him,
then he was justified before God and Man, if he sought means to help himself,
though it were against their Wills.

Sir Henry Vane being Interrogated, whether he did not hear my Lord Sir Henry
Vane Witness.
of Strafford (when consideration was had of a Parliament, before the last
Parliament) promise His Majesty, in case the Parliament did not succeed, he
would be ready to serve him in any other way?

He Answered, That he must begin, as the Lord that spoke last (since they have
no help of their Examinations) which is, that the words were such, or to such
an effect, for otherwise, they that be Witnesses have a very hard task to play,
for they lie open to be excepted against, and peradventure when they speak
truly, may be entangled, if their memory help them not out. But to the Question
proposed, he says this, That upon the 5th of December, as he takes it, he did
hear my Lord of Strafford speak words to that effect, as they are now asked, to
his best remembrance: and truly (he thinks) really he did viz. That truly if
the Parliament should not succeed, his Lordship would be rea die to assist His
Majesty any other way, or words to this effect.

Mr. Whitlock summed up the Evidence, and said, There was an intent to Mr.
Whitlock.
call a Parliament, to try if they would give the King a Supply, and being
engaged in a War against the Scots, my Lord of Strafford before the Parliament
came, doubted not but 12 Subsidies would be given, and while the Parliament was
sitting, that was the number demanded by a Message from the King.

This design did not take other effect than himself expected, and it seems
desired; for when the Parliament was set, and frequently urged by messages from
His Majesty, to give that very number of 12 Subsidies, and that for release of
Ship Money only, whereas by the old and right course of Parliaments, the
grievances are in the first place to be considered of, and to be humbly
presented to His Majesty; and upon redress of those grievances, the people are
to show their thankfulness to His Majesty, for His Grace and Goodness, in
redressing of them, by their free gift of Subsidies.

My Lord of Strafford changes this course, and persuades His Majesty to put the
Subsidies in the first place, and to fall at first on consideration of supply,
and that so great a proportion, and while the Parliament was in debate of this,
and before they had resolved whether they would give Supply or no, by my Lord
of Strafford's advice, the Parliament was Dissolved; His Lordship confesses in
his Answer, he did give his Vote for dissolving of the Parliament, and they
shall make it appear in time, that he did procure it.

After the Parliament was Dissolved, my Lord of Strafford goes on, endeavoring
all that lay in his power, to incense a Gracious Sovereign against His loving
Subjects, to slander the people to the King, and for ever to break off all
Parliaments, and take away the Liberty and Property of the Subject; and by what
course? By Force, by bringing in an Army amongst us. That was his Advice, tho
(blessed be God) His Majesty was pleased to reject it.

1. To prove what was said by the Creatures and Friends of my Lord of Strafford.

Sir To. King being Interrogated, What words he heard from Sir George Sir To.
King. Witness.
Ratcliffe to this purpose, That the King had an Army, and Money in his Purse,
and if His Subjects in England should not supply him, what use he might make of
His Army for supply, and the times?

He Answered, That he demanded of Sir George Ratcliffe, How the King would do
for Money to maintain the Scotch War? Sir George Ratcliffe said, The King could
not want Money, His Majesty had an Army of 30000 Men, and he had 400000 l. in
his Purse, and a Sword by his side, and if he would want Money, who could pity
him? or words to this purpose.

To which he the Deponent objected, How can this course be taken, when the
Scotch are on foot unpacified? Sir George Answered, They can make peace with
the Scotch when they please; and being riding together to the -- -- he the
Deponent said, That my Lord Lieutenant, and the said Sir George had least
reason of all His Majesty's Subjects to desire a War. Sir George Answered, It
is true, For his part he would give 20000 l. to be quit of it, but we are now
engaged, and we cannot but go on; and then he (the Deponent) asking, What he
would do for Money? Sir George Answered, The King could not want Money, He had
an Army, etc. as before is deposed.

Being asked what was the reason of making this Demand, and whether he did
conceive a forcible way was intended?

He Answered, He did understand that by the words, That if they would not
supply him, the King was ready to supply himself.

Lord Ranalaugh being Interrogated, What he heard Sir George Ratcliffe L.
Ranalaugh Witness.
speak, concerning the Kings levying Money by force, or to that purpose?

He Answered, That the words he is to inform their Lordships of, and on which
he was formerly examined, proceeded from Sir George L. Ranalaugh Witness.
Ratcliffe, not to him privately and only, but they were spoken in a Council of
War, when they were assembled together upon that service. My Lord Lieutenant
arrived in Ireland in March was 12 Months, and after his Lordship had spent
some days in Ireland, (within which time he (the Deponent) with others, were
commanded, to attend at a Council of War) departed that Kingdom, leaving
direction behind him, how this affair should be proceeded in, in his Lordships
absence; and as he takes it, in the beginning of April, my Lord departed out of
Ireland; and not long after, they being assembled in a Council of War, there
was occasion to speak of all preparations that should be, for the raising of an
Army of 8000 Foot, and Provision for transportation of 1000 Horse, which was
the Army of Ireland at that time. In these discourses they found there was a
great deal of Treasure to be consumed, and much Money required, to supply the
occasion: It was computed (and he thinks, Sir George Ratcliffe had a privy hand
in the computing of it) how much charge would maintain the Army for a year? and
to the best of his remembrance, it was computed at 270000 l. and odd, which
gave them occasion (considering the Army to be transported out of Ireland, was
but in proportion of what was prepared in England) to speak of the Charge that
must be raised in England, according to that proportion: And they finding it to
amount to so great a sum, it fell into question, how the King should be
supplied with Money, for so great expense of Treasure, if he were not supplied
by Parliament? Sir George Ratcliffe Answered, The King has his Sword by his
side, and 30000 men at command, and if he want money, let no man pity him. It
was thereupon replied, and as (he the Deponent takes it, by himself) how can
Money be raised, when the Scotch Army is on foot, and so strong? Sir George
Answered, We can make peace with the Scots when we list, but that is the worst
of evils; and this is in substance as much as the Deponent can remember.

Whence Mr. Whitlock observed, That their Lordships heard what passed Mr.
Whitlock.
from Sir George Ratcliffe in Words and Counsels, and that their Lordships knew
the nearness and relation between Sir George Ratcliffe, and my Lord of
Strafford, and this was after direction was left for raising the Army; and when
my Lord of Strafford was come away himself, it seems he had left his directions
with Sir George Ratcliffe, as it will appear by my Lords own words concurring
with these.

And Mr. Maynard desired their Lordships to take notice of these words, Mr.
Maynard.
(We can make peace with the Scots when we will) it was not Sir George
Ratcliffe alone.

Sir Tho. Barrington being Sworn and Interrogated, what words passed Sir Thomas
Barrington Witness.
from Sir George Wentworth to him, About Englands being sick of peace, etc, at
what time it was, and on what occasion?

He Answered, That immediately after the last Parliament, Sir George Wentworth
had accidentally a discourse with him, being a Gentleman, with whom, he (the
Deponent) never had intercourse or interlocution before that time. On some
discourse betwixt them concerning the former Parliament, in the close of his
discourse, he was pleased to express himself thus. This Commonwealth is sick of
Peace, and will not be well till it be conquered again. The application of
these words, he (the Deponent) said, he must leave to their Lordships better
Judgments, he not being able to decide it: And to the occasion, according to
the truth which shall be ever present with him, he (the Deponent) said he would
deliver it clearly. They had some occasion to discourse of the former
Parliament, and speaking now on his oath, he must express that, which otherwise
he should not, being the words of a private discourse, which in the course of
his life he has ever avoided, especially in the Case of a Gentleman. They were
in discourse of the former Parliament, and the carriage of that; and Sir George
Wentworth was of one opinion, and he (the Deponent) of another. Sir George
expressed himself in this sense, That he conceived the Parliament had no
intention to give the King Money, he (the Deponent) said, That if the Kings
Majesty had pleased, they had sat awhile together; they had supplied him, And
on the close, that expression fell from him, that which he (the Deponent) said,
he shall not not need to repeat.

Sir Robert King being Interrogated, what sense and apprehension was in my Lord
Ranalaugh, on the words that fell from Sir George Ratcliffe King Witness
at the Council Board?

He Answered, That my Lord Ranalaugh did conceive, there was an intention to
take Money forcibly in England, and was much troubled with the words, and cast
out some such Speeches; That we shall turn our swords on them from whom we are
descended, and having cut their throats, make way for our own safety, or some
such words.

Lord Ranalaugh being Interrogated, what his sense was of these words,
Ranalaugh Witness.
spoken by Sir George Ratcliffe?

He Answered, That the expression of these words, and some other words, that
fell from my Lord Lieutenant to himself, before his Lordships departure out of
Ireland, made him doubt that there might be some danger intended, by the
transportation of the Army; and it was not his sense alone, for upon discourse
betwixt others that were of the Council and himself, the like apprehensions
were amongst them, as between my Lord President of Munster and him; and also
between Sir Adam Loftus and him: Those that durst be free one to another, did
express their fears and apprehensions about it.

Being asked, what the words were my Lord of Strafford spoke to him, on which
the apprehensions were grounded?

He Answered, That it was thus: My Lord of Strafford at his last being in
Ireland, was pleased to say to him, My Lord, will you buy any Land? I will sell
you all the Land I have in Ireland. To which, he the Lord Ranalaugh Answered,
That he is not able to buy Land, being in debt, and God forbid his Lordship
should sell his Land in Ireland; Truly says he, my Lord, we are like to have a
troublesome world, and I am willing to part with it. To which, the Lord
Ranalaugh replied, it will be hard then with us, that have no Estates but in
Ireland. No my Lord (says my Lord of Strafford) I do not mean it so, for I
believe you will be quieter here, than they will be in England: But he does not
think that ever he spoke these last words to Sir Robert King in his life.

Being asked, How he expressed his sense of those words to Sir Robert King?

He Answered, That the first discourse was from Sir George Ratcliffe; the
latter was from my Lord to himself. He apprehended there was some design (as he
feared) in England, and he had this reason for it too. For in that condition
they were then in, they of the Council of War saw no possibility to make this
Army in a readiness to invade Scotland within the time limited; for by
directions of my Lord of Strafford, left with them, they were to be ready at
the Provincial Rendezvous, by the 18th of May, and that by subsequent
directions, was forborne till 18th June: then they all met, to march to the
general Rendezvous; The Arms, Ammunition, and Preparations could not be ready
so soon, nor were they in readiness, till the end of Sept. following; So that
on the whole matter, those amongst them that might be free, their consultations
all agreed, that it might tend to the purposes here declared.

And from the time observed by my Lord Ranalaugh, for the raising of Mr.
Whitlock.
the Army in Ireland, Mr. Whitlock observed, That it could not be intended for
Scotland, for no Army was raised in Scotland, till some months after.

To prove the words spoken by the Lord of Strafford himself, to show his
design to bring the Army to England.

Sir Tho. German Comptroller of His Majesty's Household, being Interrogated, Sir
Tho. German, Witness-
whether he heard not the Earl of Strafford tell the King, that the Parliament
had denied to supply him, and had sorsaken him, or words to that effect?

He Answered, That he should humbly presume to crave one thing of their
Lordships, and it was briefly this, There is nothing that he can be
Interrogated upon in this Cause, but it must fall within the cognizance and
knowledge of many of my Lords here present, who must needs remember all that he
has to say, as well, or perhaps better than he can himself; His humble desire
therefore to their Lordships is, That if through distance of time, and the
weakness of his memory, there be any thing that may be better remembered by some
of their Lordships, than is at this time by himself, it may not be imputed to
him, as from a desire of concealing any part of the truth, but a failor in
memory; and that their Lordships will believe of him, that in this great
Assembly, he shall be very unwilling to speak any thing, but, that that shall
perfectly occurr to his remembrance, and that request granted, he shall humbly
answer to every thing. And to the question he remembers very well, that he was
Interrogated upon the same terms heretofore, that he is now. His Answer was
then, as he takes it, in these words; That he remembered that he heard my Lord
of Strafford say something of the Parliaments deserting, or forsaking the King,
or something to that effect or purpose; but he did not remember then, what
inference my Lord made upon it, nor what he did conclude thereupon; neither can
he now call himself to further remembrance on that point, than he then deposed.

The Earl of Bristol Sworn and Interrogated, Whether he heard any E. of Bristol
Witness.
words spoken by my Lord of Strafford, That in this great distress of King and
Kingdom, the Parliament had refused to supply the King in the ordinary and
usual way, and that therefore the King might provide for the Kingdom, by such
ways as he thought fit, and was not to suffer himself to be mastered by the
frowardness and undutifulness of his people, or to that effect?

He Answered, That it is very true, that about 12 months since, by mere
accident, he had a private discourse with my Lord of Strafford, and some months
after had discourse with a Peer of this House, my Lord Conway by name, merely
to let him know the difference that was between some Tenants of my Lord of
Straffords and himself (the Earl of Bristol) What use has been made of it, he
does not know; But upon this, he does conceive he comes to be Interrogated: It
is almost Twelvemonths ago, since this discourse did happen, yet afterward he
was called, now a month or six weeks since, and was examined on oath on several
Interrogatories; After he had well recollected himself, he did set down for his
memory, what he could think of, and out of those Notes and Papers, he did then
make his Answer: Now his examination being upon oath, he shall be very loath to
depose particularly to words, but to the effect of what passed: And therefore
he shall crave leave, not out of his examinations, but out of the words he then
set down, to read the effect of what he then spoke; for if a man be deprived of
words, and tell not the sense and coherence, and subsequents, he shall not do
himself right, but may do a great deal of wrong to the party accused: and
therefore, though it be somewhat the longer, he shall tell the circumstances.
It is true, That after the disso lution of the last Parliament, he had
discourse accidentally with the Earl of Strafford, but being many months since,
he cannot precisely depose unto the words that then passed; But he remembers,
that speaking then together of the great distractions of those times
(Videlicet) touching the present things, that were then at Lambeth (for it was
just about that time of the Mutiny of some Soldiers against their Officers) of
the present great danger apprehended by the ensuing War (as was feared) of
Scotland, and of the said Parliament being broken, without supplying the King;
he (the Earl of Bristol) did then, in his discourse, chiefly attribute these
disorders to the breach of the Parliament; And, speaking what might be the best
way for help in these distressed times, he then conceived and said, that he
thought the best way to prevent any desperate undertakings, would be, to Summon
a new Parliament, that might quiet the times for the present.

The expectation thereof might quiet the Distempers at that time. And, as for
the War of Scotland, he did much fear the success of it, unless the King should
be assisted both with the Purse and Affections of his People. And he Alleging
to my Lord of Strafford many Reasons for it, conceiving it was not likely, that
our Nation, lying under great Grievances, should go willingly and cheerfully to
a War, laboring under the same grievances with themselves. My Lord of
Strafford (he must speak it, and confess it very ingenuously) seemed no way to
dislike the Discourse; but said, he did not conceive it to be Counsellable at
that time; neither did the present dangers of the Kingdom (which were not now
imaginary, but real and pressing) admit of so slow and uncertain a remedy, as a
Parliament was; for that the Parliament had, in the great distress of the King
and Kingdom, refused now to supply the King, by the ordinary and usual way of
Subsidies: and therefore the King must provide for the safety of his Kingdom,
by such ways as He should think fit in his wisdom. And he (the Earl of
Bristol) does remember, that the said Earl of Strafford, at the same time, did
use the Sentence, Salus Reipublicae Suprema Lex: And further (not to bind
himself to words, but to the sense) at the same time, the Earl of Strafford
used these words, or words to this effect. That the King was not to suffer
himself to be mastered by the frowardness and undutifulness of his People, or
rather (as he conceives) by the disaffection and stubborness of some particular
men.

And this he said from his former Notes, which he thought fit rather to use,
than to trust his Memory.

Being Asked, Whether by particular Men, he meant not particular members of the
Parliament?

His Lordship Answered; By his Troth he conceives so, for he was speaking of
the Parliament.

Edward Lord Newburgh being Sworn, and Interrogated, Whether he did not hear my
Lord of Strafford speak these words to His Majesty, That the Parliament, in
denying the King, had given him advantage to supply himself by other ways?

His Lordship Answered, That those very words he never heard, nor words to that
effect. But, he has Answered, in his Deposition, what he has heard; and he
shall desire to speak a little before he Repeats it; And this it is. When he
was Examined, he did then speak that, which occurred to his memory; but, since
the agitation of this business, something else has come into his thoughts;
And, if he shall speak that which his Conscience now tells him, he shall desire
my Lords that then Examined him, and the Gentlemen, not to misinterpret him, if
he shall add something to what he formerly delivered. He cannot say, whether
(when he heard these words) the King was by or no, for he does not remember it;
But, he very well remembers, that after the breach of the last Parliament, he
heard, at the Gallery, or Council Table, but he rather believes now at
Council Table, some words to this effect; That, seeing the Parliament had not
supplied the King, His Majesty might take other Courses, for Defense of the
Kingdom: But, though he cannot possibly Swear, my Lord Lieutenant spoke these
words; yet, he verily believes he heard him speak something to this purpose:
And, this is all he can testify.

Henry Earl of Holland Sworn, and Interrogated, Whether he did not E. of
Holland Witness.
hear my Lord of Strafford say to His Majesty, That the Parliament, in denying
the King, had given Him advantage to supply Himself, by other ways, or words
to that effect?

His Lordship Answered, That he needs not trouble their Lordships with
Circumstances, or long Discourses; but, these words, to the best of his
remembrance, according to his Oath, he conceives were said to the King, upon
the Dissolving of the Parliament, at the Council Table; That the Parliament, in
denying to supply the King, had given Him advantage to supply Himself by other
ways. But, he will not tie himself so particularly to the words, but, as at
the time when he was Examined before the Gentlemen of the Committee, he added,
or words to this effect.

Being Asked, By whom they were spoken?

His Lordship Answered, By my Lord of Strafford.

Mr. Whitlock then proceeded to the latter words of the 23d Article, which Mr.
Whitlock.
show, in full and plain terms, what my Lord of Straffords design was, and
what he would have labored, and endeavored His Majesty to entertain.

The words of the Charge were Read.

And, to prove them, the Examination of Algernon Earl of Northumberland was
first Read, taken the 5th December. 1640.

To the 7th Interrogatory he says, That the Earl of Strafford said, That in
case of necessity, and for the Defense and Safety of the Kingdom, if the People
do refuse to supply the King, the King is Absolved from Rules of Government:
and, that every thing is to be done for the preservation of the King and His
People; and, that His Majesty was acquitted before God and Man; And he says,
that the said words were spoken at the Committee for Scotch Affairs, in the
presence of His Majesty; and, for the time of speaking these words, he does not
perfectly remember. He says, That these were the Discourses mentioned in his
Answer to the third Interrogatory, which made him believe what he has answered
to the said third Interrogatory.

Their Lordships calling to have the third Interrogatory Read, It was Read.

To the Third and Fourth, he says, That the Forces which were to come out of
Ireland, were to Land in the West part of Scotland; but he does not know, nor
has heard (to his Remembrance) that these Forces, or any other, were to be
employed in this Kingdom, to Compel, or Awe the Subjects of this Realm, to
yield to such Taxes and Charges, as should be Imposed on them by His Majesty.
He says, That he has heard my Lord Lieutenant make some Discourses to the
King, whereby he believes, that in case the King were not supplied by
Parliament, that some Course was intended to raise Moneys by Extraordinary
ways.

He says, That the said Lord Lieutenant did declare, in His Majesty's
presence, That the Design was to Land the Irish Army in the West parts of
Scotland.

Sir Henry Vane being Interrogated, What words he heard my Lord of Strafford
speak to the King, before the Parliament, or after the Dissolution Sir Henry
Vane Witness.
of it, tending to this; That the King had tried the Affections of His People,
and was Loose and Absolved from all Rules of Government: and on what occasion?

He Answered, That to the General Question, of what was spoken before, or after
the sitting of the Parliament, he does not remember: and there are no
particular words asked him. But, to these words, which have been read, he
shall, as near as he can, ingenuously deliver, what he did formerly depose;
ever reserving to himself words to the same effect. That he considers very well
where he is, and the presence before whom he speaks; That he has never, in the
whole course of his life loved to tell an untruth, much less in this Honorable
Assembly. That he shall, as near as he can, in this Case, tell their Lordships
plainly and truly the matter. It is true (as my Lord Admiral has declared to
their Lordships) that these words he is to testify, were spoken at the
Committee of Eight for the Scotch Affairs: For the time, he shall crave pardon,
if he cannot particularly speak to it: But, thus far he shall say, It was
clearly after the Dissolution of the last Parliament; It is true, and if he do
not very much mistake, it was when the debate, whether a Defensive or an
Offensive War, was Controverted; And, to the best that he can remember, and
clearly as he conceives, there were words spoken, either these he shall now
relate, or to the same effect, by my Lord of Strafford, who is now at the Bar.
The occasion being, Whether an Offensive or Defensive War? and Arguments were
Controverted in it. My Lord of Strafford did say, in a Discourse (for he must
be ingenuous, he must say all he has deposed, or is required) Your Majesty
having tried all ways, and being Refused; and, in Case of this extreme
necessity, and for the safety of the Kingdom, You are acquitted before God and
Men: You have an Army in Ireland, which You may Employ here to Reduce this
Kingdom, or some words to this effect: And, Sir Henry Vane added, That he
desires to speak clearly to it; It is true, My Lord of Strafford said these
words, You may. But, by that, he (the Examinant) cannot say it was intended,
but that the words were spoken; and, if it were the last hour he is to speak,
it is the Truth to his best Remembrance.

Being Asked (on the several Motions of my Lord of Clare, and my Lord Savil)
Whether, by this Kingdom, he meant the Kingdom of England, or Scotland? and,
Whether it was meant, That he might employ the Army in England, or in Ireland,
because he said, The Army might be there employed?

He Answered, That he shall, as near as he can: And, because he would
have-Truth appear, he shall desire, That if in this Case, any word fall, which
may be uncouth in the Sense, they would resort to his Examinations, for there
it remains under his Hand and Oath.

But, to his best remembrance, he thinks, neither then, nor there were used;
But, Your Majesty has an Army in Ireland, You may Employ to reduce this
Kingdom: But, far be it from him (the Examinant) to Interpret them. He tells
their Lordships the words, and no other.

Being directed by the Lord Steward, to repeat what he had spoken.

He Answered, That he shall plainly and clearly do it; These words were spoken
(as my Lord of Northumberland has testified) at the Committee of Eight, for
the Scotch Affairs: It was an occasion of a Debate, Whether an Offensive, or a
Defensive War with the Kingdom of Scotland? That, on some Debate then, some
being of Opinion for a Defensive, some for an Offensive War; he did say the
words related, as he conceives. That in a Discourse, the Earl of Strafford said
these words, or words to this effect; Your Majesty having tried all ways, and
refused; in this case of extreme necessity, and for the Safety of Your Kingdom
and People, You are loose and absolved from all Rules of Government; You are
acquitted before God and Men; You have an Army in Ireland; You may employ it to
reduce this Kingdom.

Being Asked, How long this was after the Parliament was Dissolved?

He Answered, He cannot tell the time; but, it was suddenly after, or within
few days after the dissolution of the Parliament.

Being Asked (on my Lord of Clares motion) Whether these words, You have an
Army in Ireland; did immediately follow these words, You are Absolved, etc.

He Answered, That, to his best remembrance, it did interpose; and, my Lord of
Strafford did speak it once or twice.

And, to his best remembrance, at first it was agitated, to press the Offensive
War; for, there were diverse Reasons given, as the Kingdom stood then, that
there should be no Offensive War; and, he must speak clearly, and plainly, he
(the Examinant) did move for a Defensive War: For, the Subjects of England, how
they stood affected to this War, they knew; and besides a breach of a
Parliament, he thought it would but induce an ill effect. On these
Controversions the words were spoken.

Here Mr. Whitlock observed, That these words were spoken in England, Mr.
Whitlock.
on this occasion, Of the Kings trying His People, etc. which cannot be
intended any other place but England, where the Parliament was broken, and
where the King had tried his People.

Being Asked (on the motion of the Earl of Southampton) Whether he says
positively, my Lord of Strafford did say these words, or words to that effect,
or whether to his best remembrance?

He Answered, That he speaks positively, either those words, or words to that
effect.

The Earl of Clare desiring further satisfaction, to the Question formerly E.
of Clare.
proposed on this Motion, Whether he meant by this Kingdom, the Kingdom of
England, or the Kingdom of Scotland?

The Lord Steward put his Lordship in mind, That Sir Henry Vane testifies L. H.
Steward.
to the Words, not to the Interpretation.

And, Mr. Maynard said, The Question is put, Whether this Kingdom, Mr. Maynard.
be this Kingdom?

And, so Mr. Whitlock said, They should conclude their Evidence, conceiving Mr.
Whitlock.
the last words spoken, to be very fully proved; and, by connection with those
other words proved before, he thinks it is very clear and manifest, That my
Lord of Strafford had a strong Design and Endeavor, to subvert and change the
Fundamental Laws and Government of England, and to bring in an Army upon us, to
force this Kingdom to submit to an Arbitrary Power. That he shall not trouble
their Lordships with repitition of words, nor with the Application of them, for
indeed they be above Application; and, to aggravate them, were to allay them;
they have in themselves more bitterness and horror, then he is able to express:
and so he left them to their Lordships consideration and application, expecting
my Lord of Straffords Answer to them:

Only he desired their Lordships, in one point, to hear what Mr. Treasurer can
say further, concerning the breach of the last Parliament, and what Words and
Messages he heard of, during the sitting of that Parliament, procured by my
Lord of Strafford; unless their Lordships will reserve that, till the rest of
the Witnesses come to morrow morning, and then they shall be ready to produce
all relating to that point together.

Whereupon liberty was granted for the reserving of them accordingly.

My Lord of Strafford did hereupon crave of their Lordships E. of Strafford.
leave, to recollect his Notes, being (as he said) a little Distracted, how to
give Answer to these things; for, diverse Articles are mingled together, which
will make his Answer not so clear as otherwise he had hoped to have made it,
but trusts he shall do it still.

He desires leave to Answer Article by Article: and, how much horror soever
this Gentleman is pleased to say, there is in these words, he trusts, before he
goes out of the Room, to make it appear, that though there may be error of
Judgment, yet nothing that may give offense, when the Antecedents and
Consequents are brought together: and, that he shall give such an account, that
(whether or no their Lordships will clear him, as to the Charge of an
Indiscreet Man, he knows not) but, as for Treason to the King, and His People,
he shall give clear satisfaction, that no such thing was spoken or intended.

His Lordship desired, He might be favored with the sight of my Lord of
Northumberlands Examinations.

But this, Mr Glyn opposed, and said, His Lordship being to Answer Mr. Glyn.
to matter of Fact, let him first say how it stands, and then prove it.

To which my Lord of Strafford Answered, That, in truth, they make E. of
Strafford.
much more of it then he did; for, he trusts, by the blessing of Almighty God,
to give the Answer of an honest Man to all Objections, he will not say of a
discreet Man; and, once for all, he humbly besought their Lordships (and so he
knows in their Wisdom and Judgment they will) to look what is proved, and not
to what is enforced on those proofs from these Gentlemen: For words pass, and
may be easily mistaken, but their Lordships having regard only to what is
Deposed, and that they were to guide themselves by that.

After some Respit, my Lord of Strafford began to make his Defense as follows.

That it will be very hard for him to know, in what order to Answer all the
matters objected against him; But, the best course he can take for his own
direction (and he trusts it shall not be displeasing to their Lordships) will
be, to go over the Articles as they lie in order, and under every Article to
give his own Proof, and to repeat all the Proofs pressed against him for that
Article.

The other day, an end was made of the 19th Article, but then likewise the 20th
was entered into; so, the middle part of that Charge is answered already,
touching words by him spoken at his last being in Ireland; and, to that he
shall not need farther to Answer.

But, here is in it, that he did labor to Persuade, Incite, and Provoke to an
Offensive War against the said Subjects of the Scotch Nation; and, to have
been, by his Counsels, Actions, and Endeavors, a Principal Incendiary.

To prove this, they have offered first my Lord Traquairs Depositions; and, he
craved leave to represent to their Lordships, How he conceived his testimony
was delivered (viz.) That upon a Relation of his (the Lord Traquair) made at
the Council Board, he gave his Opinion as other their Lordships did; and, that
it was condescended to by the Council Board, That if the Comissioners of
Scotland gave not satisfaction, that then the King might put himself in a
posture of War; so that he gave only an Opinion as others did.

And that is proved (as he conceives) by my Lord Traquair; who, among other
parts of his Testimony recited, says; That there was no difference in the main
amongst the Votes: So that by both the Testimonies, it plainly appears, that
his Opinion was no other then the Opinion of the rest; And, certainly, as that
Opinion can never be charged on any of the rest of the Lords, in any kind
whatsoever; so he trusts it shall never be charged upon him: for, he thinks, he
is in a great safety and security, when he has the concurrence of so many
wiser persons then himself, in the Opinion he then delivered, and that is, for
so much as was spoken at the Council Board; And if it were needful (as he
conceives it is not) to examine the persons that were there, it should appear
he delivered no Vote at all at that time, but the Vote of the Board: But, it is
clear in their own proofs, and their Lordships will (he hopes) justify him in
their Judgments, when it comes to Sentence.

The next thing is the Deposition of my Lord Morton, concerning something
spoken at York, at a Council there called; he met before the Assembly of the
Great Council of the Peers, where, he conceives, and, as he remembers, he (the
Earl of Strafford) spoke something to this sense; That the unreasonable Demands
of Subjects in Parliament, was a ground for the King to put Himself into a
posture of War.

When this had been resolved by the Council of England, he conceives it no
great Crime for him to say so: For, upon the Question put on those Demands, it
was said, That it was fit for the King, to put Himself into a Posture of War,
and into a Condition to reduce them by Force, if they could not be brought by
fair means, to do their Allegiance and Duty to the King.

There is something more, that my Lord Morton says; That he (the Earl of
Strafford) should say, It was a sufficient Cause, without hearing their
Reasons, to Declare a War.

This he (my Lord of Strafford) conceives under favor, is but a single
Testimony; And my Lord Morton gives himself the Answer; for he says the
Reasons were not related when he was present, and therefore, in that my Lord of
Strafford conceives there is little matter.

My Lord Traquair says one thing more, and that is, That the reasons were left
to be alleged by the Scotch Commissioners: It is true, they were so: And my
Lord Morton says, that he (the Defendant) should say, It was not matter of
Religion that was the business, but they struck at the root of Government, and
were to be punished by force.

He further adds by way of Defense, That if he thought they struck at the root
of Government, he thinks every man will say, he had reason to say, it was fit
to reduce them by force.

But he said, he should speak further of these things anon, when he should
represent, what Words are in respect of Deeds, and what difference there is
between what a man Says and Does, in case of Treason.

But under favor, these two last are no part of his Charge, though he answers
them, for he is not charged with speaking any thing to the King at York, the
night before the Great Council, but only with speaking at the Council Board on
my Lord Traquair's relation; and this he conceives is all they bring against
him, to convince him of the 20th Article, saving only the testimony of my Lord
of Northumberland, and of Mr. Treasurers; And Mr. Treasurer says, That it being
agitated, whether a Defensive or an offensive War were to be undertaken? he was
for a defensive, and my Lord of Strafford for an offensive War.

He (the Deponent) cannot conceive, how this can conduce to make a Treason; If
the War was resolved on, the Debate, whether an offensive or defensive, shall
not be Treasonable: admit it to be as Mr. Treasurer says, Mr. Treasurer
alleged his reason, and he (the Earl of Strafford) alleged his, and God
forbid it should be Treason in one, or any other, they both doing their Duties,
and delivering their Consciences according to their oaths; It was resolved as
fit to reduce them, and whether by an offensive or defensive War, being a free
Council, they were bound to deliver Judgments to a Master, that was so wise as
to know what was best for his service, and so to dispose as he should think fit.

My Lord of Northumberland says, That he (the Earl of Strafford) advised to go
on vigorously in an offensive War: Admit he did say so, it is not Treason, it
was a free debate; many reasons were given, and for him to give his reasons one
way, was as free from Crime or Offense, as for them to give their reasons
another way.

They say that (as a chief Incendiary of the troubles between His Majesty and
the Scotch) he seized diverse Scotch Ships when he was in Ireland, and for this
they have only Mr. Barnwels Testimony; and all he says, is, That Sir Robert
Loftus told him, he had a Warrant to seize the Ships, and they did seize them
accordingly, but by whose Warrant he does not know.

But if your Lordships will know by whose Warrant it was, he shall give the
best account he can, and offer some proofs.

Sir Robert Loftus was the Vice Admiral of the Province of Lemster, himself was
Vice Admiral of the Province of Munster; and about that time the Lord Admiral
sent Direction and Command to the Vice Admiral of Lemster and Munster, to seize
all the Scotch Ships then in those Ports; so that what was done, was done by
the authority of my Lord Admiral; and if their Lordships asked Mr. Slingsby, he
will say, that about that time there came these Commands, and by virtue thereof
these Ships were stayed.

Mr. Slingsby being Interrogated, whether about that time my Lord Admiral sent
Warrants to the Vice-Admirals, to seize the Scotch Ships in their several Ports?

He Answered, That he received the Letters, just as my Lord was going Slingsby,
Witness.
into England, and dispersed them to the Vice-Admirals, he executing that for
Munster as Deputy to my Lord, and the Ships were stayed after my Lords going
into England, and not before.

Whence my Lord of Strafford concluded, That it appeared, that he E. of
Strafford.
has not been an extraordinary stirrer of difference between the King and the
Subject, he never desiring any thing but peace and quietness, and that all
things might be ended (as he trusts they shall) with good understanding and
perpetuity of affection amongst our selves, and with them.

And there his Lordship left the 20th Article, hoping he had fully and clearly
satisfied their Lordships, as to any crime in it, but whether his Judgment did
mislead him in an opinion, he will not dispute, but will confess willingly,
That no man is more ready to mistake than himself.

His Lordship proceeds to the 21 Article, which his Lordship read.

This he said, he perceives is a particular they have much insisted on, but
have not (as he conceives) offered any substantial proof for what they allege.

The first proof of the 21 Article, was my Lord Primates Examination, wherein
he says, That in a discourse betwixt them concerning the levying of money on
the Subjects, in case of imminent necessity; his opinion was, the King might
use his Prerogative as he pleases, but first it was best to try his Parliament.

This is the only Testimony in this particular; being Singularis Testis, he
knows it will weigh with their Lordships accordingly; and then it is no
otherwise, but by way of Discourse and Argument; and how far that shall be
laid to a man's Charge, he must submit, in regard of the reasons subsequent in
the next Article, so that he will reserve himself to this point, till he comes
thither. But the words fairly and clearly understood, abide a sense no way of
danger to him that speaks them; For they are, That the King may use his
Prerogative as he pleases, and the Kings pleasure is always just, and will not
use his Prerogative, but justly and fairly, and for a man to think otherwise,
were a higher offense.

Besides, many things are lawful, which if they were done to the uttermost of
the Power, that his Prerogative, and the Law of the Land gives him, might be
prejudicial to His Subjects; which notwithstanding, he in his goodness and
discharge of the Trust, God Almighty has put into him, never has, nor will
exercise, but suffer them to be employed for the Subjects advantage, according
to the present occasion: And therefore to say he may use His Prerogative as he
pleases, might be without prejudice to the Subject, and very lawful. But it is
a greater offense by much, to think that the King will use his Prerogative
otherwise, then as befits a Christian and pious King.

And therefore he hopes these words shall not be laid to his charge, as a
signal crime, and of so high, deadly, and capital a nature as Treason.

The next proof offered, is my Lord Conway, and he says, on some discourse
(which being private between friend and friend, neither of them thought they
should come here to give an account of) My Lord Conway asked him where the
means should be for the Supply of the Kings Army? He told him, in Parliament,
and doubted not but the Parliament would supply His Majesty, so far he was from
thinking there should be that misfortune, as the breach of that Parliament, but
quite contrary.

And for the words, That if the King should be denied in just and lawful
things, he might justify before God and men, the seeking means to help
himself, though it were against their will. He must needs say, That to help a
man's self is a very natural motion, for commonly a man's self is the last
creature that leaves him, and that which is natural to every man, is natural to
the King, who is accountable, not only for himself, but also for all his people.

The next is Mr. Treasurer: And he says, That the 5th of December was
Twelvemonths, to the best of his Remembrance, upon a Proposition of a
Parliament to the King, he (the Earl of Strafford) should say, That if the
Parliament should not succeed, he would be ready to assist His Majesty any
other way. He sees not where the heynousness of the words lies, nor where the
venom is that should endanger him, as to his Life and Honor; And if he said he
would assist His Majesty any other way, if it were needful, or any way
conducing to his purpose, he is verily persuaded, Mr. Treasurer himself said as
much, but that is not material, for he conceives it not blameble in either of
them to have said so much; therefore he lays it not on him as a Recrimination.
For the Question was, a Parliament or no Parliament; a Parliament was the
desire of every man to settle the Commonwealth by, that they might stare super
vias antiquas. And when they were moving His Majesty for a Parliament, for him
to say, he would help any other way, does always presuppose what must be
presupposed, that it must be in all lawful ways; The King cannot command
unlawful ways; and he has that opinion of His Majesty, and of His Truth and
Faithfulness, that He will not Command him any ways, but lawful ways, he
having not carried himself in his Masters service so, as that he can have an
opinion of him, that he will do any thing, but what is honorable and just, and
therefore he hopes it is spoken without offense, being fairly and rightly
understood, That is, of lawful ways, the ways the King could command, and the
ways himself could serve him in, being no other. And this is all they bring to
prove that part of the 21 Article, that concerns his procuring of His Majesty
to break the Parliament, and by Force and Power to raise Money on the Subjects;
And this is all he says, and all they charge out of that Article.

This he must add, That when he says he will serve the King in any other ways;
in all Debates whenever he expressed himself to that purpose, he did ever in
the conclusion end with this, That there was no safe nor sure expedient, to
settle a right understanding between the King and His people, and to make both
happy, but Parliaments; as shall appear clearly and plainly by that time he
has given his proofs, and so it will appear, he meant only lawful ways.

The next particular wherewith he is charged, is to procure the Parliament of
the Kingdom of Ireland, to declare their assistance in a War against the Scots.

For that if their Lordships please to give him leave, he thinks the thing it
self will best show it self, and therefore he desired the Remonstrance of the
Two Houses of Parliament in Ireland might be read.

And that of the Commons-House was read, being in effect,

THe Declaration of the Commons-House there, Importing; Whereas they have with
one consent, clearly given to His Majesty, Four entire Subsidies toward His
present preparations, to reduce His disaffected Subjects, the Covenanters in
Scotland, to their due obedience; They still hope that His Majesty's great
Wisdom, and unexampled Clemency, may yet prevail with the worse affected of
those His Subjects, to bring them to that conformity and submission, which by
the Laws of God and Nature they owe to him: But if His Majesty shall be
enforced to use His Power, to vindicate His just Authority: This House for
themselves, and the Commons of this Kingdom, do profess, that their Zeal and
Duty shall not stay here at these four Subsidies, but Humbly promise, That they
will be ready with their Persons and Estates, to their uttermost ability for
His Majesty's future Supply in Parliament, as His great occasions, by the
continuance of His Forces against that distemper shall require. This they pray,
that it may be represented to His Majesty by the Lord Lieutenant, and Recorded
as an Ordinance of Parliament, and published in Print as a Testimony to all the
world and succeding ages; That as this Kingdom has the happiness to be
governed by the best of Kings, so they desire to give cause, That he shall
account this people amongst the best of His Subjects.

The Declaration of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal being of the same Tenor,
was spared to be read.

Upon which my Lord of Strafford said, That if he had procured this
Declaration, it had been no crime, considering what preceeded in the Kings
Council there. But he says he has no part in it, it was done with the greatest
freedom and cheerfulness that ever he did, or shall see a thing of that nature
done: It must be ascribed to that Nation, and the Zeal, Affection, and
Cheerfulness, by which they discovered themselves to the Kings service, to
which there was no need to invite them. But if he had had a part in it, he
might have justified it, considering what precedent Instructions he had from
the King, which he could show, but that he is loath to take up their Lordships
time.

The next thing he is charged withal is, for confederating with Sir George
Ratcliffe, and together with him, traitorously conspiring, to employ the Army
raised in Ireland, for the ruin and destruction of the Kingdom of England, and
of His Majesty's Subjects; and subverting the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom.

To which he says, That truly if it be made appear, that he had so much as any
such thought in his Breast, he should easily give Judgment against himself, as
not worthy to live. If he should confederate to the destruction of the Country
that bore him, and consequently to the making of himself and his posterity
little else than Vassals, who were born a free people, by the goodness of
Almighty God, and under the Protection and Justice of the King, and
particularly of His Majesty,

That he has a heart that loves freedom as well as another man, and values it
as highly, and in a modest and dutiful way, will go as far to defend it: And
therefore certainly he is not altogether so probably to be thought a person
that would go against it; Nay, he thinks that man does the King the best
service, that stands for the modest Propriety and Liberty of the Subject. It
has been once his opinion, which he learnt in the Honorable House of Commons,
when he had the honor to sit there; it has gone along with him in the whole
course of his service to the Commonwealth, and by the Grace of God, he shall
carry it to his Grave; That the Prerogative of the Crown, and Liberty of the
Subject, should be equally looked upon, and served together, but not apart.

The proof they offer for this, is a strange manner of proof; For First they
prove by Sir Robert King, what Sir George Ratcliffe said; they will not admit
the examination of Sir George Ratcliffe, but here is a Report upon a Report;
And what says this Gentleman? He tells of some time Sir George Ratcliffe said,
which was not concerning him (the Defendant) and was impertinent for him to
repeat. But the Deponent says in the conclusion, That as he understood them,
there was some danger toward, etc.

Then comes my Lord Ranalaugh, and reports the words of Sir George Ratcliffe,
and in conclusion says, That by some things he did gather, he had fears there
might be some intendment, to employ that Army in Ireland, or some other place;
but he (the Defendant (offers to their Lordships, That what Sir George
Ratcliffe said, was nothing to him, and so could not charge him with it. The
meanest Subject in the Kingdom cannot commit Treason by Letter of Attorney; and
it is a privilege which, though he has the honor to be a Peer, he shall never
desire that a Peer may do it by Proxy: Sir George Ratcliffe cannot speak, nor
procure Treason for him; and being Sir George Ratcliffes words, they cannot be
his (the Earl of Straffords) offense; and he hopes Sir George will answer them,
as an honest Gentleman, and a Privy-Counsellor to the King, which he has the
honor to be in Ireland. And how Sir Robert King understood them, is as little,
if not less to him (the Defendant) Sir Robert's understanding of a thing can
make no crime to him (my Lord of Strafford) And for my Lord Ranalaugh's fears,
he may take them back again, for it will be showed they were groundless fears,
viz. That this Army was intended for English ground: For him to imagine, that
because my Lord of Strafford said, It was like to be a troublesome world, and
that he was willing to sell his Land, therefore this Army should come into
England; These be Non sequiturs, and fancies of his own, and there was no
color for such fears in his Lordship.

Besides, my Lord Ranalaugh was not acquainted with the Design, and therefore
he might easily mistake, but others were acquainted with it, in such manner, as
is expressed in his Answer, and which (my Lord said) he shall now declare, viz.

That there was no intention or purpose of bringing this Irish Army into
England; And whereas to the Design he has expressed in his Answer, of having two
Honorable Persons to be made privy, and diverse others to his Papers, he Humbly
besought their Lordships to favor him so far, as to suffer him to ask a
Question of three or four persons he shall produce, professing that there was
never a thought in any man's heart that he knew, nor never a word in any man's
mouth, that ever he heard, that any part of the Army should ever touch a foot
on English ground, as some of their Lordships, and His Majesty knows (where his
Lordship added) If he may with Reverence name His Majesty in that poor and
distressed condition, wherein himself is; for he is not worthy of his
Protection, being in this miserable Case, and therefore it was too much
boldness for him, to name him; But his Lordship desired the benefit of reading
my Lord of Northumberland's Examination, to the point of that Design.

Algernon, Earl of Northumberland, his Examination taken.

To the First Interrogatory he says, That he has often heard both His
Majesty, and the Earl of Strafford mention the 8000 Foot, which were to be
raised in Ireland; but to his best remembrance, he never heard any intention,
of bringing the said 8000 Foot, or any part thereof into England; That the
design of landing them on the West of Scotland, was often spoke of, and so
resolved, as he believes.

To the Second he says, He does not remember, that ever he heard the Earl of
Strafford speak or mention the reducing of the Subjects of England by the said
Army in Ireland.

Here my Lord of Strafford desired their Lordships to take notice, that my Lord
of Northumberland was one of the Committee of Eight for Scotch affairs.

The Lord Marq. Hamilton being Sworn and Interrogated, what he knew or
believed, concerning the raising of 8000 Foot in Ireland; or whether he was
privy to any intention of bringing the same, or any part of them into England?

His Lordship Answered, It is late, and time is precious to their Lordships,
Marquis Hamilton Witness.
and so he shall answer as shortly as he can unto that Question. It is very
true, His Majesty was Graciously pleased to acquaint him with the resolution of
raising that Army of 8000 Foot; And it is true, that the resolution was, That
these men should Land in the West of Scotland, about a certain Town, called
Air, or where my Lord should find it most convenient. And for any thing he
(the Examinant) knows, there was no other design, he never heard of any, nor
did he hear of the bringing of them into England, for any such use or end, or
that they were ever to come to England at all.

Being asked whether he heard my Lord of Strafford speak any thing concerning
the reducing of England by the Army?

His Lordship Answered, That he does not remember my Lord of Strafford to have
spoken any such words.

Sir Tho. Lucas, Sergeant-Major-General of the Horse of the King's Army in
Ireland, who (as my Lord of Strafford said) being with him him here in
Candlemas-Term was 12 months, in his own Lodging at Covent Garden, something
passed between them, concerning the disposing of the 8000 Foot, and 1000 Horse,
to what purpose they were raised.

And being asked, What was the Intent and Circumstance of that discourse?

He Answered, That about the latter end of January 1639. my Lord of Strafford
told him, an Army was to be raised in Ireland, another in England, and with the
English Army a Regiment of Horse, whereof his (the Examinants) Troop should be
one, and some Regiments of Foot, and these Foot and Horse were to join with the
Irish Army; and that my Lord taking a Map of Scotland (which lay then in the
Chamber) said, Now I must tell you the greatest secret in all the world, and
pointed with his finger toward that part of Scotland, which lies on the
Dunbar-Frith: and said, the Irish Army is to land here, and here I intend to
take a Town (but he did not nominate the Town) and added, That he might the
more easily do it, because the Scots would not expect his Landing there, but it
is likely, will imagine the Landing of the Irish Army at Carlisle, or some
other part of England. And his Lordship said further, That when he had taken
this, he would strongly fortify it, intending it for a Magazine of Ammunition
and Victuals for the Irish Army, and so he should bring all the Country about
to Contribution, even to Edinburgh, and when he is Landed, he (the Examinant)
should have notice, and should join with the Irish Army; and that he would send
these Horse, my Lord spoke to him the Examinant, about 1000, (as he thinks) to
convey him the Examinant to him.

My Lord of Strafford added, That the truth is, there were Foot-Regiments of
Sir Tho. Wharton's, and Sir Arthur Tyrringham's, and Sir Tho. Lucas's Regiment
of 500 Horse; that (when the Irish were Landed in Scotland) were to be fetched
by Ships from St. Rees, and so to have joined with the others. And it was
supposed, 500 would have found no great difficulty on a sudden for such a
march, and Sir Tho. Wharton, and Sir Arthur Tyrringham came over purposely, to
have persued his Design; by which it appears, there was no design to bring them
to England; and so a strange Philosophy it was to bring it into any man's
thoughts, it should be so.

Mr. Slingsby being Interrogated, What he knew concerning the Design Mr.
Slingsby, Witness.
of the Irish Army?

He Answered. That he had the honor to be sworn of the Council of War, and then
the charge of making the whole Magazine of Ammunition and Provision for that
Army, was conferred on him, That he repaired to England 10 days after my Lord,
and persued his received Instructions, for making preparations of Artillery and
Ammunition directed, which he got all shipped and ready about July; that the
slow proceedings of the Irish Army did then retard his directions from my
Lord Lieutenant, for the dispatch away of those Ships which were ready.

That my Lord was pleased to tell him, he must provide some stores for a
Magazine for maintenance of the Soldiers; that he was pleased to impart to
him, That the Army was to Land in Scotland about Air; That he thereupon
proceeded to get a Map drawn of that Coast, and informed himself by that Map,
and discoursed with Scotchmen in Town; That Air was a barred Harbor, and that
diverse Ordinance were mounted to intercept the Landing, which he representing
to my Lord Lieutenant, my Lord directed him to take consideration of the
burdens of the Ships, and whether they could be brought to ride near the Town,
and that there might be provision of Flat-bottomm'd Boats to Land a good number
at once; That he had a Warrant to receive 10 of the King's Flat-bottomm'd
Boats, and 20 were provided by my Lord of Antrim the last year with Oars, and a
floating Battery to secure the Landing of the men; That he had direction to
obtain Warrants from my Lord of Newport for 10, 16, or 20 pieces of Ordinance,
That at first he had 10, afterward 6 more Iron pieces for fortification, which
(as my Lord of Strafford had imparted to him the Examinant) were to fortify
the place after Landing at Air, and were Shipped and sent away, but the Ships
were not sent a good while after, by reason of the slow proceedings of the Army.

Being asked whether my Lord of Strafford did not give him direction to get a
Coast-Map, to let him know the particular place, where he intended to Land?

He Answered, That he was particularly commanded to get a Platt drawn, and the
party that drew it is in Town, and can testify, that he designed him.

Being asked, Whether he had not Commission and Instructions from my Lord of
Strfford to discharge some Ships for the lessening of the Kings Charge, and to
take only so many, as might be fit for the service?

He Answered, That he received that command from my Lord Lieutenant, to
discharge most of the Ships, and none went about but them that were laden with
Ammunition, and he received direction to take as few Ships as he could, to
prevent charge to His Majesty, and discharged some 10 or 14 Flemish Ships that
were fraighted.

This my Lord of Strafford said, he offers, because he would not have it stick
with any man, That in the things concerning the Kings Service, necessaries were
not ready at the time; therefore he would not have any thing asperse him; for
the King never commanded him any thing, but (according to what he understood,)
he did it faithfully, and never any thing miscarried.

Sir William Pennyman being asked, What my Lord of Strafford's Answer was to
him, when he told my Lord of some News scattered, that the Irish Army were
intended for England?

He Answered, He did Ask such a Question, and remembers it (and may be, more
particularly than my Lord does) That he was newly come from his Quarter, and my
Lord told him, That some of their Lordships were come with a Petition to the
King, and, among other things, Petitioned, That the Irish Army should not come
over, and wondered, their Lordships should Petition for that; for certainly, he
should know that particular as much as their Lordships; and protested, before
God, they were never intended to set foot on English Ground: That he (Sir
William Pennyman) replied again, Certainly a great many more were in a great
deal of darkness and error; for, he had asked Sir Robert Farrar the Reason the
Irish Army did not come over, it being the conjecture of a great many they
should Land at Workington; and his Lordship protested again, That he never knew
they were to set foot on English ground.

He (the Defendant) confesses, he said, The Army was to come to Workington,
and join with the Kings Forces at Barwick; for, he had no reason to prepare the
Scots beforehand but to disguise the business, though he never thought nor
heard of any purpose under Heaven, that any of them should come on English
Ground: And added, That he did not rest here, but acquainted my Lord of Ormond
the Lieutenant General of that Army, my Lord President of Munster, my Lord
Justice Burlace (who now is General of the Artillery) that the Army was to be
sent for Knockfergus, the Northerly part of Ireland, and the business to be for
Scotland, not for England: And, the sending of all the Stores to the uttermost
Confines, shows plainly and demonstratively, that the Design wrought there,
howsoever it was pretended in another place.

The next thing brought into his Charge, is from the Mouth of his own Brother;
and, it is narrowly sought after, even in his innermost friends, his Brother,
his Table, his House, his Bed, in every place, for something to Convince him of
that, which he thanks God he was never guilty of.

It is from a Testimony of Sir Tho. Barrington, who tells what passed between
Sir Thomas and his Brother. But, in Answer thereunto, he offers, That what his
Brother says is nothing to him: his Brother is a young Gentleman; and, in
things that concern the Kings service, and where there lies the Obligation of
an Oath, his Brother knows no more from him, than a mere stranger, nor shall,
though he knows him well: and therefore he hopes this cannot convince him, when
the whole course of his actions goes another way.

But, thus much he must say for his Brother, before he be Examined, That when
it was first opened in the Parliament House, That one near to him in blood
should say, England would be never well till it be Conquered again; he could
not imagine who in the world it should be; And besought their Lordships, that,
since he now comes to know it, his Brother may be Asked, Whether he knows any
thing of it?

Sir George Wentworth being to speak as to the said Discourse, Mr. Maynard
opposed this proceeding, as tending to the clearing of himself; supposing, that
if they had examined him, whether he had spoken the words or no, their
Lordships would not have suffered him to be examined to charge himself; and
their Lordships Judgments were humbly demanded, whether if he be not to be
examined on one side, he should be examined on the other? But Sir George
Wentworth desiring to be heard for his own Justification, Mr. Maynard further
offered, That being for his own Justification, Sir George Wentworth. Mr.
Maynard.
he could not (under favor of their Lordships) be heard.

And their Lordships directed it accordingly.

My Lord of Strafford offering to their Lordships, That it is easy to E. of
Strafford.
mistake words, that pass betwixt Man and Man, in ordinary and familiar
Discourse; and, that Memories that can remember things, so long since, he
protested are quicker and fresher then ever his was.

The Committee thereupon offered to confirm the Testimony by some other
Circumstances; but, their Lordships seeming satisfied, it was forborne.

And so my Lord of Strafford concluded that part of the Charge, which concerned
his Conspiring with Sir George Ratcliffe, to bring over the Irish Army to the
prejudice of England; thinking, as he said, that he had clearly and evidently
demonstrated it to be a truth, that will not be denied him, that the intendment
was for no such purpose, and consequently there was no such Conspiracy to any
such intent: and therefore left it to their Lordships further, and wiser, and
nobler Considerations.

The next thing, is the words Charged to have been spoken after his return into
England, to sundry persons, declaring his Opinion, That His Majesty should
first try the Parliament here, and, if they did not supply Him according to His
present exigency, He might use His Prerogative as He pleased, and to Levy what
He needed.

And, all the Proof of these words, is the Testimony of my Lord Primate,
whereunto he has given that Answer already, that he hopes will be satisfactory.

As to the other part, That the King shall be acquitted before God and Men, if
he take other course to supply Himself, though against the good will of His
Subjects.

This he has Answered already, and shall not need to repeat: But, he finds
some things in the Proofs, which, whether they mean to make use of, to prove
any of the words he knows not: and therefore he desired to touch on them a
little.

The first proof hereof, Is the Testimony of Mr. Comptroller, that he, the
(Earl of Strafford) should say something of deserting the King, but he
remembers not the particulars: In which words he conceives there is nothing
that can make him Criminal before their Lordships.

The next is, of what my Lord of Bristol says; whose Discourse came in upon
some Difference between the Tenants of his Lordship (the Earl of Bristol) and
his (the said Earl of Strafford) The discourse he remembers very well, my Lord
of Bristol honoring him with a visit when he was sick; and, he remembers,
something was spoken to that effect and purpose, as it is in the Testimony.
But, What is this as to the Charge laid against him? In the Charge, there are
only such words that may prejudice him, but nothing that may forfeit his Life,
Estate, and Honor. As in the case of Extreme and unavoidable necessity, viz.
The Invasion of a Foreign Enemy, when there is not time to call a Parliament.
And, the King may in that case use, as the Common Parent of the Country, what
power God Almighty has given Him, for preserving Himself, and His People, for
whom He is accomptable to Almighty God, is a thing quite different, from what
is in an ordinary Case. He confesses, his opinion is, the King has a power
absolutely to use all possible means for the safety of the Public. In these
Cases He has a Power given Him by God Almighty, that cannot be taken from Him
by others; neither, under favor, is He able to take it from Himself. If this
be a fond and foolish Opinion, he craves their Lordships pardon; but, he
thinks, a man should not forfeit his Life and Honor, and Posterity, for a
foolish Opinion; God forbid that Common Law, or Statute Law, should make that
Treason in any Man.

So that he acknowledges, There was some such discourse; But, all things taken
together, carries the State of the Question quite another way, then when taken
to pieces.

My Lord of Bristols Testimony says further. But my Lord of Strafford then
said, The King was not to be Mastered by the frowardness or wilfulness of His
People, or rather by the disaffection of some particular men.

To which words, he says, If he did remember them, he would acknowledge them:
But, being then in that condition, delivered from a great and long sickness,
infirm and weak; both in the powers of his mind, and faculties of his Body, if
he be not able to recollect every thing, it is no marvel: But, he relies so
much on the honor and nobleness of my Lord of Bristol, that seeing he says
that he said it, he will not deny it, though he cannot remember it. But he must
say withal, That his Testimony cannot work any thing toward him further, then
a single Testimony can do in this case: and therefore, without offense, he
shall desire, in this particular, to reserve that benefit to himself, that the
Law in this case gives him, in such sort, as hereafter he shall be bold to put
their Lordships in mind of, that is, how far a single testimony may work to the
prejudice of a Man, charged with High Treason.

The next Testimony is my Lord of Newburgh; That he heard me (the Defendant)
say, or words to this effect, That seeing the Parliament had not supplied the
King, His Majesty might take other Courses for the Defense of the Kingdom.

These words I do (said the Defendant) acknowledge: And he trusts there is no
offense in this saying; for, I conceive, that the King is not secluded, nor any
one else, in a fair, and just, and an honorable way, from doing the best for
himself, and his own preservation; but those other Courses that were intended,
were just and lawful Courses; He must put that grain of salt into all the rest
of his Discourse; that it was meant of no other ways or Means, but such as
were allowed by the Laws of the Land, and were fit for a gracious and pious
King to use: and so understood, he knows no reason, but the King should be left
to supply Himself, in all the fair and just ways he can, if the Parliament
should not supply Him.

The next Testimony is my Lord of Holland's, and his Lordship says, That at
Council Table my Lord of Strafford should say, That the Parliament having
denied the King, gave Him an advantage to supply Himself otherwise.

But, he says still, other lawful ways; It gave Him advantage to use His
Prerogative in lawful ways, further then otherwise perhaps out of his
goodness, He would have done: Therefore, giving those words that
Interpretation, he conceives they cannot be laid to him as a Charge of
High Treason.

The next is the Testimony of my Lord of Northumberland, who says, My Lord of
Strafford said, That in case of necessity, and for Defense and safety of the
Kingdom; if the People refuse, the King might do every thing for the
Preservation of His People.

This brings it much to the other business before spoken of, it being in case
of necessity, for Defense and Safety of the Kingdom, and to be used for
preservation of the People; for, he must needs say, That is his Opinion,
grounded upon that Maxim, Salus Populisuprema Lex; In these things when
ordinary forms cannot be had (for when they may be had, to go to
extraordinary, is not right) but, when the ordinary ways fail, and the
occasion gives no time, God forbid, but the King should employ the uttermost of
His Power, Wisdom, and Courage, for preservation of Himself and His People;
And, to say it with limitation, under favor, does state the Question quite
otherwise, then if the words were taken alone, and not put together. But, that
with these Limitations he spoke, both these things, and diverse others, will
more fully and clearly appear in the next succeeding Article: for, here he is
charged with speaking things at large; but there at the Council Board, and
there it will come in properly.

At which time he shall desire to examine some of their Lordships, and, it
shall appear, words of this Nature went always in this sort from him, in case
of a Foraign Invasion, in case of an Enemy actually entered, or to be entered,
and not otherwise; which makes it another Question, then as by the Antecedents
and Consequents it is laid in the Charge.

Besides, this offense is, but words spoken by way of Argument, in Common
Discourse, betwixt Man and Man, without any further, or other proceeding, or
Execution upon these words: and, Shall these be brought against a Man, and
charged on him as High Treason? God forbid that ever we should live to see such
an Example in this Kingdom: A matter of infinite prejudice and danger to every
Man; for, when that is done, no Man can be safe.

Is there any thing more ordinary, then for Men in Discourse, to seem to be of
a Contrary Opinion to what they are, to invite another Man to give Reasons,
perhaps to confirm him in his own Opinion, though he seems to Argue against it?

Is any thing more familiar, than for a Man to seem to be of an Opinion, to
gain a Reason to confirm that Opinion which he is of, and contrary to that he
seems to defend, by this means to get the strength of other Men's Reasons to
confirm his own by?

Again, Is any thing more familiar in private Discourse, between Man and Man,
than when one is so far on that side the Line, for the other to go as far
himself, that he may meet the first Man in the midst? If a man meet with one
that is as far below, as himself is above, and shall seem to maintain further,
than his Reason and Belief carries him, to bring the other to moderation, Shall
this be charged on him as a Treason?

If words spoken to Friends, in familiar Discourse, spoken in ones Chamber,
spoken at ones Table, spoken in ones Sickbed, spoken, perhaps, to gain better
Reason, to give himself more clear light and judgment, by reasoning; If these
things shall be brought against a man, as Treason; this, under favor, takes
away the Comfort of all Humane Society: By this means we shall be debarred of
Speaking (the Principal Joy and Comfort of Society) with wise and good Men, to
become wiser, and better our lives. If these things be strained to take away
Life, and Honor, and all that is desirable, it will be a silent World; a City
will become an Hermitage, and Sheep will be found amongst a Crowd and Press of
People; and, no Man shall dare to impart his Solitary Thoughts, or Opinion, to
his Friend and Neighbor, but thereby be debarred from consulting with wiser Men
then himself, whereby he may understand the Law, wherewith he ought to be
governed.

But, these be but words all the while; and, if he shall show, that words of a
higher nature, shall, by the Judgment of an English Parliament, be thought not
to be Treason; Why should he think, or imagine, or fear, that their Lordships
will make these indiscreet and idle Expressions of his, reach so high as his
Head, and take the Comfort of his Life and Children from him.

No Statute makes Words Treason: and, if the Fundamental Law, the Common Law of
the Land had made them Treason, surely the Parliament would never have set a
Mulct upon them.

This Statute is, 1 Ed. 6. cap. 12. as follows,

BE it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, if any person or persons, do
compass, and imagine, by open Preaching, express words, or saying, to depose,
or deprive the King, His Heirs, or Successors, from His, or their Royal Estate,
or Title, or openly publish, or say, by express words, or saying, That any
other person, or persons other then the King, His Heirs or Successors, of right
ought to be, etc.

These be words of higher nature, than those charged upon himself; and yet the
first offense is made but loss of Goods, and Imprisonment; for the second, loss
of Lands, Goods, and Imprisonment; the third time is only made Treason.

He added, That their Lordships will never think these words, being flym-flam,
that pass in a negligent manner betwixt Man and Man, shall ever be brought to
be Treason.

And, whereas 25 E. 3. has these words, When a Man does Compass, or Imagine
the death of our Lord the King.

The very words are mentioned in 1 E. 6. When a man does compass, or imagine,
by open Preaching, etc. to Depose the King. And the first Statute provides,
That if a Man shall compass the Death of the King, and be not thereof attainted
by open Deed, it is not Treason. And, the Statute of H. 4. and 1 Mar. concur
with this, and show, That the intent of these was to take away the danger the
Subject might incurr, if bare words should be brought against him as Treason.

And, it has been the Wisdom of their Lordships noble Ancestors, and this
State, that they have always endeavored to conclude the danger that may fall
on the Subject by Treason, that it might be limited and bounded, and that it
might be so understood as to be avoided; and, he hopes, we shall never be so
improvident, as to sharpen this two-edged Sword against our selves, and the
faces of our Posterity, and to let the Lion loose to tear us all in pieces;
for, if way be given to Arbitrary Treason, and to the Wits of Men, to work upon
it, to prejudice or question Life, it would be very dangerous. And, he
believes, That in this Hall there would be Actions of Treason that would fly as
familiarly up and down, as Actions of Trespass: and therefore since by the
goodness of our King, and the wisdom of our Ancestors, we have been thus
provided for, why we should entangle our selves into the straights they could
not endure, but endeavored, by all means, to free themselves from the dangers
that familiarly follow them, he cannot see.

To the First Part of the 23d Article, concerning the last Parliament, the
Gentlemen have reserved themselves till to morrow, and therefore he shall not
need to speak to that, and so there will remain nothing for him to Answer, but
the last part of the Act, with the next Charge, concerning words spoken at the
Council Board, or at the Committee for Scotch Affairs, viz. That His Majesty
having tried the Affections of His People, He was loose and absolved from all
Rules of Government, and was to do every thing that Power would admit; and,
that His Majesty had tried all ways, and was refused, and should be acquitted
both before God and Man; and that he had an Army in Ireland, which he might
employ to reduce this Kingdom to Obedience.

Concerning this particular, he says, he remembers not anything, but what Mr.
Treasurer is pleased to speak of: And, whereas Mr. Treasurer, as concerning
that part, said, He loves to speak the truth; my Lord of Strafford said, He
doubts not but he does, for that we should all do, he is sure of it; But, Mr.
Treasurer has reversed his Testimony, in saying, that he will not speak to the
very words themselves, but to these, or words to the like effect; and, if he be
not mistaken, and to the best of his remembrance, That, His Majesty having
tried all ways, and being refused, in this extreme necessity, and, for the
safety of the Kingdom, and People, He might do, etc. And, that Your Majesty
has an Army in Ireland, which You may employ (there, he said at first) And
afterward (which You may employ to this Kingdom.) And, he says, he does not
interpret these words, but gives the words clearly and plainly, as my Lord of
Northumberland has declared, and that it was soon after the Dissolution of the
last Parliament, to his best remembrance, and at the Committee of 8; and, he
thinks, my Lord spoke them positively, or something to that effect.

Now, whereas he calls in to his aid my Lord of Northumberland, under favor,
my Lord of Northumberland declared no such words, but absolutely denies, in his
Examination, that he ever heard my Lord of Strafford mention the reducing of
England by an Irish Army: It is true, my Lord of Northumberland goes thus far,
That he has heard him say something, whereby he might conceive, there was
intended some Course of raising Moneys by extraordinary ways.

And, that my Lord of Strafford confesses is very true, for, if it were by
borrowing 3 or 400000 l. it is an extraordinary way; the Kings Revenue could
not serve these occasions, there must be other ways, and Loan was one, and
that fair, and honorable, and just.

So then, as to this Testimony, the Defendant offers to their Lordships, that
he has examined my Lord of Northumberland, and he knows no such thing; He has
examined my Lord Marquess of Hamilton, and his Lordship is pleased to say, He
remembers no such thing at the Committee of 8.

He desired my Lord Treasurer might be Examined to the same Words.

The L. Treasurer being Asked, Whether ever he heard my Lord of Strafford L.
Treasurer Witness.
in any private Council, or Debate with the King, tell him the said words?

He Answered, That he never heard my Lord speak those words of the Irish Army,
nor any thing like it; and he repeated, That he never heard his Lordship speak
it in the manner proposed, nor any thing like it.

Being Asked (on Mr. Maynards motion) Whether he ever heard my Mr. Maynard.
Lord of Strafford say, The King was loose, and Absolved from all Government?

He Answered, That he desired time to consider of that. He remembers not any
such thing, but he reserves himself for that. L. Treasurer Witness.


Being Asked on the like motion, Whether he heard my Lord of Strafford say any
thing to that purpose, That the Parliament had deserted, or forsaken the King?

He Answered, That he remembers not that he heard any such thing.

Lord Cottington being Asked (on my Lord of Straffords motion) Whether he heard
my Lord of Strafford say such words, That the King had an Army in Ireland, and
he might employ them to reduce this Kingdom?

He Answered, That he has heard the Question heretofore, and is L. Cottington.
very confident he did never hear him say it in his hearing; and, that he has
a great deal of Reason to be confident of it.

Being Asked (on Mr. Maynards Motion) Whether he heard my Lord Mr. Maynard
of Strafford say, That the King was Absolved, or Loose from all Rules of
Government, or words to that effect?

He Answered, That, as he takes it, he has been Asked to that Question L.
Cottington.
too; and, he thinks, he never heard the words, for it was (as he thinks) a
very absurd Proposition, and he should not have heard it with patience.

Being Asked, on the like motion, Whether he heard him say, The Parliament had
forsaken, or denied, or deserted the King, or words to that effect?

He Answered, That for saying, The Parliament had not provided for the King,
The Parliament was ended, and had not provided for the King; and, That the
Parliament had not provided, or left the King without Money; It is very
probable he did say it; and, he thinks, he did so, for it was the truth.

Being Asked, Whether he said, The Parliament had denied the King?

He Answered, That what his words were, It is a hard matter for him to say;
That he said, The Parliament had denied, or left the King, he will not Swear.

Being Asked, on like motion, Whether he persuaded the King that he was to be
supplied in extraordinary ways?

He Answered, That he cannot Swear that neither.

Where Mr. Maynard observed, That my Lord of Strafford himself granted, Mr.
Maynard.
and yet that is forgotten.

To which my Lord Cottington Answered, That if the Gentlemen would have heard
him out, he should have given good satisfaction. L. Cottington.
He has been Examined, Whether my Lord of Strafford used these words,
Extraordinary ways; and he cannot say he did; but he has heard him say, The
King ought to seek out all due and legal ways, and to employ His Power, and
Authority, and Prerogative, Cast and Candide, he remembers these words very
well.

For close of his Defense to these words, That His Majesty had an Army in
Ireland to reduce this Kingdom, witnessed by Mr. Treasurer. My Lord of
Strafford said, Men's memories are weak, and the best may be mistaken, or
misremember, and may think one man says that which another man says, or that a
man says that, which in truth he did not say, as it is in this Case. Their
Lordships have had all the light that is possible for him the Defendant to give
them.

My Lord of Northumberland being examined on oath, says, he remembers not the
words. My Lord Marquis Hamilton remembers them not. My Lord Treasurer of
England remembers neither that, nor any thing like it; My Lord Cottington
remembers no such thing, and is well assured, he never heard him say any such
thing. Here are all that are left of the Committee, save my Lord of Canterbury,
and him (the Defendant) cannot examine, otherwise he would.

Secretary Windebank is a little too far off to be heard at this time, and if
their Lordships could ask him, whether the Defendant ever spoke the words, on
the faith of a Christian and a Gentleman, he will take his oath, he does not
think nor believe he ever spoke them, but believes as constantly, as possible
can be, that he never spoke them; He would be loath to swear he did not, it
being so long since: But when his words shall more particularly, and specially
be remembered by another man, than by himself, he must commend that memory, that
observed what he said, so perfectly, as to be able to give a better account of
them than himself, the party that spoke the words, or any man in the company
besides.

My Lord further insisted, That this concerns him very nearly, for it would be
a grievous charge that is on him by this means (though not in the intendment)
of the Gentleman that urges it, who (he hopes wishes him well) if he should be
thought to be an overthrower of the Liberties of the Subject by a foreign Army.

However, it is a single Testimony, and no more, and that single Testimony
(without any prejudice to the Testimony) cannot rise in Judgment against him;
Nay, he cannot be Indicted nor Arraigned of High Treason for it, by the
Statutes of 1 E. 6. Ca. 12. the last Proviso of it, in these words.

BE it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person or Persons after the
First day of February next coming, shall be Indicted, Arraigned, Condemned, or
Convicted of any offense of Treason, Petty-Treason, or Misprision of Treason,
or any words before specified, after the First day of February, for which the
said Offender or Speaker shall suffer any pain of Death, Imprisonment, Loss,
Forfeiture of Goods, Lands, or Tenements, unless the said Offender, or Speaker,
be accused by two sufficient and lawful Witnesses, orshall willingly without
violence confess the same.

And if their Lordships will give leave to consider the first part of the
words, being fairly and indifferently interpreted, and with the secret
reservations, men ought to speak things withal (for we ought to think just
things, and that men will do nothing but fairly, and these are conditions
employed, when we speak of the Sacred Majesty of Kings) let that be employed, it
could not be High Treason to tell the King, That having tried the affections of
his people, he was loose and absolved from all rules of Government; that is,
all ordinary rules, and was to do every thing that Power would admit; that is,
that Power would lawfully admit, and that His Majesty had tried all just and
Honorable ways, and was refused, and should be acquitted both of God and men.

The last words, That the King had an Army in Ireland, which he might employ to
reduce this Kingdom, he denies; and if the other words be fairly interpreted
with the reservations granted a man in that case, being spoken of so great a
person as the King, nothing in them can turn so much to the prejudice of the
Speaker.

But he desires leave to offer the Antecedents and Consequents of all that he
said in Council, whereupon this is gathered; and then they find the Case
otherwise stated, than as it is strained in the Charges. God forbid any man
should be judged for words taken by pieces, here a word and there a word, where
the Antecedent and Consequents are left out, for then Treason may be fetched out
of every word a man speaks; as for example, If one asks him whether he will go
to such a place, he tells him by way of Answer, He will kill the King as soon;
the other swears, he said, he would kill the King; it is very true indeed, but
if the other words be added, it will then imply, That he will be sure not to
kill the King, and therefore he will be sure not to go to the place. And if
the words be taken together, he puts the Case thus; In case of absolute
necessity, and upon a foreign Invasion of an enemy, when the enemy is either
actually entered, or ready to enter, and when all other ordinary means fail, in
this case there is a Trust left by Almighty God in the King, to employ the best
and uttermost of his means, for the preserving of himself and his people,
which, under favor, he cannot take away from himself. And as this did precede
these words, so there were diverse restrictions added to them; for he says, this
must be done only, and upon no other pretense whatsoever, but for the
preservation of the Commonwealth, that it must be done Candide, and Cast,
That if it were done on any other pretense whatsoever, than clearly and fairly,
for preserving the Commonwealth, that would prove it to be oppressive and
injurious, which otherwise rightly employed, would become a Pious and Christian
King; and that when the present danger of the Commonwealth was, by the Wisdom,
and Courage, and Power of the King prevented, and the public Weal secured; In
a time proper and fit, the King was obliged to vindicate the Property and
Liberty of the Subject from any ill prejudice, that might fall from such a
Precedent; and until the Prerogative of the Crown, and Liberty of the Subject
are so bounded, that they may be rightly understood by King and People, (which
cannot be without a Parliament) His Majesty and they can never look to be
happy. Now if he shall make this appear to be true (as he hopes he shall) then
he conceives he states their Lordships a quite different question, from that
brought against him in the Charge, and brings an opinion so concluded, and shut
up with restrictions, and with necessity, and with unavoidable danger that were
otherwise to fall on the Commonwealth, as he trusts, cannot bring any manner
of ill consequence whatsoever publicly or privately to any Creature.

For this purpose, he desired the favor to examine some of the Noble Lords
present, and that First, the examinations of my Lord of Northumberland might be
read, and they were read accordingly.

To the Third Interrogatory he says, That the Earl of Strafford declared his
opinion, That His Majesty might use his power when the Kingdom was in danger,
or unavoidable necessity, or words to that effect.

To the Fourth, That the said Earl did often say, That that power was to be
used Candide and Cast, and an account thereof should be given to the
Parliament, that they might see it was only employed to that use.

To the Sixth, That the said Earl of Strafford said, That this Kingdom could
not be happy, but by good agreement in Parliament, between the King and His
People.

My Lord of Strafford observed, That this was at the very same time, and let
all the world judge, whether he had any intention to subvert the fundamental
Laws of the Land, or no?

Next he desired my Lord Marquis of Hamilton might be examined to the
Interrogatory my Lord of Northumberland was examined to.

Marquis Hamilton examined to the said Interrogatory, (viz.) Whether Marq.
Hamilton, Witness.
the said Earl of Strafford delivering his opinion, how far the King might use
a Power after the breach of the late Parliament, did not put the Case when
there was an unavoidable necessity, upon actual Invasion, or an Enemies Army
ready to enter the Land?

His Lordship Answered, That he hears the Question, and remembers the same
Question was asked him formerly on his oath, when he was Deponed, and he then
said as now, he could not call to mind what my Lord said in that point.

Whether my Lord of Strafford did not say, That that Power was to be used
Candide and Cast, and if it were used for any other purpose, it would be
unjust and oppressive?

His Lordship Answered, That he has heard him use those words often to His
Majesty, and on them, or immediately after, he declared his opinion, That it
would never be happy in this Kingdom, till there be a right understanding
between the King and his People, and that could not be, but by a Parliament.

Whether he did not say at that time, That the present danger provided for, and
all which settled, the King was bound to preserve the Liberty and Propriety of
the Subject, from the prejudice of such a precedent?

His Lordship Answered, He remembers something of that, but cannot positively
say, because he cannot tell what the precedent was.

Being asked (on Mr. Whitlock's motion) what time he heard these words from my
Lord of Strafford, in the said Second Question?

He Answered, professing that his memory is not good, and if it fails not him
in this, he may boldly affirm, he heard my Lord of Strafford speak the words,
both before, and since the Dissolution of the last Parliament.

Being asked (on my Lord of Straffords motion) Whether His Majesty was pleased
to declare to the Lords of the Council, That he had perfect and full
intelligence, that the Scotch Army intended to march into England? E. of
Strafford.


He Answered, he remembers very well His Majesty had frequent Advertisements M.
Hamilton.
of the Scots intentions to come into England, he knows it very well, and he
had not done his duty if he had concealed it, for he was one of them that told
him of it.

Lord Goring being examined to the First and Second Question, proposed L.
Goring Witness.
to my Lord Marquis.

His Lordship Answered, That he remembers something to this purpose, and
Candide and Cast makes him call it to mind, but the particulars he cannot
remember; Candide and Cast, for using the Kings Power, he has heard often.

Tho. German being examined to the same Question. Mr. German, Witness.


Answered, That he would be very loath to say anything that does not perfectly
occurr to his remembrance; he remembers that diverse times at Council Board, my
Lord spoke these words, Candide and Cast, and he remembers them very
perfectly, but what day and time, he remembers not; but he remembers very
perfectly, he heard my Lord of Strafford say, it must be on an urgent and
unavoidable occasion, that any by-course should be taken, or put in practice,
but what day and time he cannot tell; To the exact words of the Interrogation
he cannot say, but something to the sense, as he (the Examinant) delivers them.

Being asked whether my Lord of Strafford has not concluded, That things will
not be right, till there be a right understanding between the King and his
People, or words to that effect?

He Answered, That he thinks no man has the Honor to sit at that Board, but
will give him that Testimony, that he has often spoken, That the greatest
happiness that can occurr to the King and People, is the happy agreement and
understanding between them.

Being asked (on Mr. Glyn's motion) Whether those words were used Mr. Glyn.
before the Dissolution of the Parliament, or since?

He Answered, To his best remembrance before, yet he does not deny but they may
be said since, that he must leave to the Lords, whose memories serve better to
distinguish times.

The Lord Treasurer being examined to the First Question, proposed to L.
Treasurer.
my Lord Marquis.

He Answered, That he does not remember the discourse about his business.

Being asked to the Question Nov. 2. proposed to the Lord Marquis.

He Answered, That phraze of Candide and Cast, he remembers very well, were
used more than once; but whether they were applied to this particular, he
cannot speak: He remembers my Lord used the words in such a sense, and the
interpretation of them was chastely and honestly, but the other part he cannot
remember.

Being asked to the Question, Nov. 2. proposed to the Lord Marquis?

He Answered, That he remembers not any of it.

Lord Cottington being examined to the Question Nov. 1. proposed to the Lord
Marquis? L. Cottington.


He Answered, That if his Deposition be looked upon, it will be found, he did
say, my Lord put the Case so, and he now says it again, he the Examinant did
declare, and understand that my Lord --

Being asked to the Question Nov. 2. proposed to my Lord Marquis?

He Answered, That he thinks he has answered this already; he remembers the
words Candide and Cast, and that the Power the King had for the preservation
of Himself, His Crown, Posterity, and People, ought to be used Candide and
Cast, in all fair and just ways.

Being asked whether my Lord of Strafford did not say, That the King was bound
after the present danger provided for, to free the Subject in Propriety and
Liberty, from the prejudice of such a precedent?

He Answered, That he said the necessity being past, and the work done, the
King ought to repair it, and not to leave any precedent, to the prejudice of
His People.

Being asked, Whether my Lord did not say that in conclusion, all must be
settled by Parliament, and till all the dispute betwixt the Prerogative of the
Crown, and Liberty of the Subject be determined, neither King nor People should
be happy?

He Answered, That he verily believes many of their Lordships have often heard
him say it; He has heard my Lord say it to the King at the Council Table. It
has been always his position, and to himself the Examinant, he has said
often, both before the last Parliament, and after it was broken; and it was an
ordinary discourse to His Majesty, That His Majesty could not be happy, till
there were an happy Union betwixt Himself and the Parliament, and the
Prerogative and Liberty of the Subjects were determined.

And my Lord of Strafford desired to have so much benefit of their Lordships E.
of Strafford
Justice, as to have the Examinations of my Lord Keeper, (which are not yet
come in to these points) reserved. And now he said he had stated to their
Lordships truly and justly the Question, concerning these words that are by
pieces and paches charged; and which (taking the whole contexture of the
Discourse, from the beginning to the ending) represent them quite otherwise (as
he conceives) than might seem to be enforced against him.

He offered this further to their Lordships, That they see plainly and clearly
proved, that at all times, and frequently, he has presumed (by His Majesty's
favor and good leave) to express himself, how necessary it is, for the
happiness of the King and People, that all these matters of difference should
be settled and bounded, and that by Parliament: and that till they were so
bounded, neither His Majesty nor they could be happy: so that it was far from
going against the ancient grounds of Government, that have been here settled in
that singular Providence and Wisdom of our Ancestors; and never shall he
contribute any thing but to the maintenance and preservation of them, in all
honest and honorable ways and means whatsoever; and if these words were spoken
with that moderation and qualification, that the Power to be used must be a
lawful Power, and the ways to be taken lawful ways, they were no way subject to
exception.

Besides, there is one Argument that cleers the Intendment and meaning of the
words, as he conceives, a great deal more prevalently, than if those words of
lawful Power, and just and honorable ways, had been put in; And that is, that
nothing has been done by the King or the Council, against the Laws and Customs
of the Realm, in pursuance of them, where it has been any breach on any
Liberty or Propriety of the Subject; What extraordinary Course has been taken
not warrantable by Law? None that he knows of; so that there being nothing but
justly and fairly administered, the very Deed done, shows them to be spoken with
that meaning, and so to be interpreted so much the rather, by how much doing
well, is better than saying well; And the worst that can be made of them, they
are but words and no more; and for the excuse of them, their Lordships well
remember what he said concerning the Statute, they can never amount to Treason,
and before they shall be brought to him in a Criminal Charge, he besought their
Lordships to observe something he shall offer to them.

These words charged on him, were not wantonly, or unnecessarily spoken, or
whispered in a corner, but they were spoken in full Council, where he was by
the duty of his Oath obliged, to speak according to his Heart and Conscience,
in all things concerning the Kings service; so that if he had forborne to speak
what he conceived, for the benefit and advantage of the King and People (as he
conceived this to be) he had been perjured toward God Almighty, and now it
seems by the speaking of them, he is in danger to be a Traitor. If that
necessity be put upon him, he thanks God, by his Blessing he has learned not
to stand in fear of him that can kill the Body; but he must stand in fear of
him that can cast Body and Soul into Eternal pain. And if that be the question,
That he must be a Traitor to Man, or perjured to God, he will be faithful to
his Creator; and whatsoever shall befall him from a popular rage, or his own
weakness, he must leave it to God Almighty, and to their Lordships Honor and
Justice.

Nothing is more common, than for a Counselor to be of one opinion when he
comes out of his Chamber, and to have that opinion he delivers, presently after
confuted and cleared by the Wisdom and Prudence of his fellow-Counsellors, of
better understanding than himself. And in this case (when opinions are thus
delivered, and when there are alterations of these opinions, upon the very
debate) that an opinion thus propounded, should rise in judgment, to convince a
man of High Treason, it is very hard; nay, it is to be thought, that this was
the very case in this particular. The opinion was, according to his Heart and
Conscience given, and for any thing appears to their Lordships, something was
said at that Board by others, wiser than himself, that altered him in that
opinion; for there was never any thing moved by him, to reinforce that
proposition, he rested quiet with it, he offered it not again; there was never
any thing done in pursuance of that advice, either by himself, or any body
else, which shows he did not press it, but was rather persuaded by better
reason, that it was fit to be let alone. An opinion may make an Heretic, but
he never heard before, that Opinion should make a Traitor. And though opinions
may make an Heretic, yet they must be held pertinaciously, and against the
light of a man's own conscience; here no pertinacy appears, no contestation,
nothing done against the light of his Heart and Conscience, nothing of
Obstinacy, Frowardness, and Perverseness; but simply (simply indeed in all
respects) he did in the duty of his place, deliver his opinion modestly and
fairly, and when he had done there, he left it, and persued it no further: so
that such an Opinion as this, would not have made an Heretic, much less a
Traitor.

In the last place, he humbly beseeches their Lordships not to make themselves
so unhappy, as to disable themselves and their Children, from undergoing the
great Charge and Trust of the Commonwealth. Their Lordships have it from their
Fathers, they are born to great thoughts, and are nursed up for the great and
weighty employments of the Kingdom; and God forbid that any but themselves,
Caeteris paribus, should have this great Trust, that their Birth and Breeding,
and Ranks procure for them, under the Kings Goodness.

But let this be admitted, That a Counselor delivering his opinion under an
oath of Secrecy and Faithfulness at Council Table Candide and Cast with
others, shall upon his mistaking, or not knowing of the Law, be brought into
question, and every word that passes from him, out of a sincere and noble
intention, shall be drawn against him, for the attainting and convicting
himself, his Children, and Posterity; under favor, after this shall be so, he
does not know any wise and noble person of fortune, that will upon such
perilous and unsafe terms, adventure to be a Counselor to the King: and
therefore if their Lordships put these hard strains, and tortures upon those
that are the Counselors of State to His Majesty, when they speak nothing but
according to their Hearts and Consciences, (for we that are not of the
profession of the Law, are not bound to speak the Law, we can tell what in our
Hearts and Consciences we conceive Honorable and Just, but what is legal, is
another man's business.) This shall disable their Lordships from those great
Employments, to which their Birth and Thoughts do breed them, and make them
more incapable than any other inferior Subjects: And therefore he beseeches
their Lordships to look on him so, that his misfortune may not bring an
inconvenience upon themselves. And so he besought their Lordships to pardon
what he had said, with a great deal of disorder, and if their Lordships take
him into consideration, they will find that nothing has appeared in him, but
what is Honest, Just, and Faithful to King and People; though they were not so
advised and discreet, and well weighed as they ought to be, yet he hoped their
Lordships are so Honorable and Good, as not to lay their charge to him as High
Treason.

To the 24th Article, he said he made no Answer, there being nothing spoken to
it; And so he concluded his Defense to these Articles.

Mr. Whitlock did thereunto Reply in substance as follows.
That their Lordships have heard with a great deal of patience, this Mr.
Whitlock's Reply.
long Defense made by my Lord of Strafford, and desired the like patience from
their Lordships, in hearing the Reply, which he doubts not but they shall
obtain, and give a clear Answer to all my Lord of Strafford has spoken in his
own Defense; and how that it comes not at all to excuse him in this case.

My Lord is pleased to make it his suit, that their Lordships will not be
guided by enforcement of words against him, but by the words themselves; and
that Mr. Whitlock desired likewise, presuming that their Lordships will not be
guided by my Lord of Straffords interpretation of these words to another sense,
than the words bear, but judge according to the clear understanding, and common
signification of them, further than which he will not strain them.

Whereas my Lord excuses his words, that the Demands by the Scotch in their
Parliament, were a sufficient ground of War, because he gave no other opinion
than the rest of the Council then did; their Lordships may be pleased to
observe, That my Lord Traquair testifies, that some of the Council wereof
another opinion at that time, and that these words were spoken before the
reason of those Demands were given; and that there was a clear difference
betwixt my Lord of Straffords advice, and the advice of the rest: It is evident
by the opinion delivered by him long before that time in sentencing of Mr.
Stuart in Ireland, where, after the pacification, he was pleased to call the
Scots Rebels and Traitors, and that he would root them out Stock and Branch
that took not the Oath; And he said in his Answer, That when he came out of
Ireland into England, he found the affairs of Scotland so distempered, that he
thought fit to reduce the Kings Subjects there by force.

His Lordship says, That if the Demands struck at the root of Government, then
it was fit to say, they should be reduced by force; But the words were spoken
before the reasons of the Demands were known, and before he could know how they
could be warranted by the Laws of that Kingdom; and it is part of the Charge of
the House of Commons, That he said They struck at the root of Government, which
it appears they did not; for those very Demands, against which my Lord of
Strafford delivered his opinion, are since enacted by the Parliament of
Scotland, and confirmed by His Majesty's Royal Authority in the Treaty, which
is very well known to diverse of their Lordships sitting here.

My Lord says, It was first resolved a War should be had; and then, for him to
debate, Whether an Offensive or Defensive War, is no Crime: but, that receives
a clear Answer; for, it was his Resolution, his Advice, That there should be a
War, and an Offensive War; which shows his Design against the Kingdom of
Scotland.

My Lord labors to prove, That the seizing of the Scotch Ships was not by his
Warrant, but by Warrants otherwise procured. That was not insisted on in the
Charge, and therefore they will not insist upon it in the Reply, there is
enough besides.

My Lord is further pleased to say, That there is no substantial or concluding
proof of his intent, that the Parliament should be only called, to try whether
there would be supply given or no; and, that is only deposed by my Lord
Primate, a single Testimony: But, my Lord Primate concurs with others, in the
same sense and meaning.

To my Lord Conwayes Testimony, my Lord says, That, for the King to help
Himself, is a Natural Motion, and proper to every one: But, the other words of
my Lord Conwayes Testimony, That the King might help and supply Himself, though
it were against the will of His Subjects, must be understood, not of a Natural,
but a violent motion, and it appears to be my Lord of Straffords Design to have
it so.

He comes to the Testimony of my Lord Treasurer, and says, That does not at
all touch him, that he promised to assist the King in any other way, in case
the Parliament did not succeed.

But, this proves his intent, That if the Parliament were dissolved (as he was
willing it should, as it will afterward appear) he would assist the King in
any other way whatsoever: He took a good Pattern, Stare super vias antiquas,
and we shall prove that too; but, this was not via antiqua of Parliaments, to
propose Supplies in the first place, and to put off consideration of
grievances, to urge nothing but to give to the King; and, before a Resolution,
whether they would give or not, to inform against the Parliament by
Misinformation.

My Lord mentions the Declaration of the House of Commons in Ireland,
concerning the giving of Four Subsidies for the Kings supply of the War with
Scotland, which is in the Charge, but was not insisted upon; But, by showing
this, my Lord of Strafford has procured that which is likewise in the Charge,
That the Parliament of Ireland did engage themselves in the War against
Scotland, and by the Preamble of his Answer,

This was in my Lord of Straffords Knowledge, and may be easily proved to be by
his Procurement, being the Chief Governor there.

He says, That had he ever entertained such thought, as the words proved,
import, he should give Judgment against himself: But, as no man's thoughts can
be proved but by his words and actions, so the words proved do manifest, that
his thoughts were no other, and show clearly his intention, to bring in an Army
on us to reduce this Kingdom.

My Lord calls Sir Robert Kings Testimony a Report on a Report; and, says the
like of the Testimony of my Lord Ranalagh, which shall be answered, when he
comes to lay the whole matter together, according to the course of opening the
Articles.

Diverse Witnesses his Lordship produces, to prove, that the 8000 Foot raised
in Ireland, were designed for Scotland, and particularly for the Town of Air,
which is very improbable; for that Town (as was informed, and will be proved)
was, at that time, very well fortified; and the Coasts thereof, and the Haven
so barred, and narrow, that one of my Lord of Straffords own Witnesses says,
there could be no probability of Landing an Army there: The like may be said of
the Frith of Dunbarton, that was Fortified long before. And, if their Lordships
repair to some part of my Lord of Straffords Answer, where he says, they were
to be landed in some places near the Country of my Lord of Argile, to divert
him: These places are so far from his Country, and such Arms of the Sea, and
unpassable Mountains are interposed, that they could not be landed there with
any intention to go to Argyles Country.

But, admit there were a primary intention of this Army in some part of
Scotland, the Witnesses speak only to what was intended before the Army was
raised; But, when the Army was on foot, my Lord of Straffords intention might
be changed, and it seems it was; for he labored to persuade His Majesty, to
make use of it to reduce this Kingdom.

He says, The Testimony touching Sir George Wentworths words is single, and
spoken by his Brother, and could not reach him; but, though one Witness
testifies the words, yet it may be made appear to their Lordships, that
presently after the words spoken, Sir Tho. Barrington related them to other
Gentlemen, who are ready to testify, that he so related them.

But, their Lordships seeming satisfied in that point, directed him to proceed.

Next my Lord Discourses of my Lord of Bristols Testimony, and the differences
of opinion between them, touching the summoning of a Parliament. But, my Lord
of Bristol proves the following words, That the King was not to suffer himself
to be mastered by the frowardness of His People, etc. and, to these, no Answer
is given.

To which, Mr. Whitlock said, he would further answer in the General Reply; And
so for the words proved by my Lord of Newbrough, my Lord of Holland, and
diverse other Noble Lords of this House.

My Lord of Strafford was pleased to mention the Statute of 1 E. 6. ca. 12.
where, to compass by Preaching, or saying, to deprive the King is not for the
first offense Treason, though words of a more transcendent and high nature; and
hence he inferred, that the words charged on him are not Treason.

But that Statute is only of Treasons spoken of the King, but not of Words and
Counsels, that advise the thing to be done; And, there is no Question, but at
this day, for any man to Advise and Counsel the Destruction of the King, is
High Treason, notwithstanding that Statute. These words charged on my Lord, are
a Declaration of his intention, to subvert the Laws and Government of the
Kingdom, and, the use made of the words, is not, that they are in themselves
Treason, but as they prove that intention. But, this is the work of another
time, being matter of Law, and therefore Mr. Whitlock said, he would say no
more to it now, neither does it require his Answer, nor is it at all to this
business.

My Lord did much insist on it, that there was no mention by any of the Lords
that were of the Committee for the Scotch Affairs, concerning the words of
bringing the Army out of Ireland, to reduce this Kingdom, diverse of their
Lordships being to that point examined: But, Mr. Treasurer Swears in the
Affirmative, he heard the words spoken; and, when they come to sum up the rest
of these words, and applying them to this, show the dependence they have one
upon another, their Lordships will see plainly, that must be his intention, and
that there could be no other interpretation of his words: It is possible, for
some that were at the Council, not to hear the words, and yet that disproves
not a Witness, that says in the Affirmative, he did hear the words. And,
though some of my Lords do not remember some other passages, as, That His
Majesty was loose, and absolved from all Rules of Government, yet that is
proved by two Witnesses; and, though the rest remember them not, yet that
stands clearly proved.

Other things, which some of their Lordships did not remember, were proved by
three Witnesses: Whence it may be deduced, that, what Mr. Treasurer deposes is
to be believed, though some of my Lords that were present did not remember it.

By making a sum and Collection of the words, and comparing one with another,
it will appear very clear, that my Lord of Straffords intention was, to bring
in that Army to reduce this Kingdom.

And first, their Lordships will remember the words that passed betwixt Sir
George Rateliffe, and Sir Robert King; and, the Relation between my Lord of
Strafford and Sir George Ratcliffe; And, before my Lord of Strafford came out
of Ireland, he gave direction to Sir George Ratcliffe; and afterward, on a
Discourse, Sir Robert saying, how my Lord of Strafford, and how the said Sir
George Ratcliffe had least cause to desire a War; Sir George replied, We are
engaged (not himself only) but We (speaking of my Lord of Strafford) are
engaged in a War: and, Sir George says further, that the King has 30000 Men,
and 400000 l. in his Purse, and a Sword by His Side, and if he wanted Money,
who would pity Him? which cannot be intended but by raising of Money on the
Subjects of England.

But besides, their Lordships may remember the expression of my Lord Ranalaugh,
and Sir Robert King, that these Forces were intended to be used for raising
Moneys here; and, that my Lord of Strafford offers to sell his Land in Ireland.
Besides, his Brother said, the Commonwealth is sick of Peace, and would not be
well till it was Conquered again, which must imply Force, and an Army to do it.

It is a Proof of my Lord of Straffords intention, that a Parliament should be
summoned to give Supply, and, if not, that then it should be Dissolved, and
other Courses should be taken; My Lord Primates Deposition is, that, in case of
necessity, His Majesty might use His Prerogative, might levy what he needed,
only first it was fit to try the Parliament, and, if that succeeded not, then
to use his Prerogative as he pleases.

My Lord Conway proves the same Intention; my Lord of Strafford saying to him,
That if the Parliament supplied not the King, His Majesty L. Conway.
would be acquitted before God and Men, if he took some other course to supply
himself, though against the will of His Subjects; And, it cannot be intended to
be against their will, but it must be by force; for, if it be with their will,
it is voluntary.

And Mr. Treasurer proves, that my Lord would be ready to serve the King any
other way; that is, by Force, by Arms, or any way whatsoever.

Their Lordships may remember his words to His Majesty, That the Parliament had
denied to supply Him; that they had forsaken Him; which was only to incense
His Majesty against Parliaments.

He told my Lord of Bristol, in that Discourse with him, that His Majesty was
not to suffer Himself to be Mastered with the frowardness and undutifulness of
His People: and, if His Majesty was not to suffer Himself to be Mastered by
them, but to Master them, it cannot be, but by strength of others.

My Lord of Holland proves more fully (and my Lord of Newbrough concurs with
him) that His Majesty had an Advantage, to supply Himself other ways, because
the Parliament had denied to supply Him: And there be no other ways (save
Parliament-wayes) but extraordinary, and illegal ways.

My Lord of Strafford has much labored, to answer and qualify the last
words, but he comes short of it; And those words are as fearful, and of as high
a nature, as can be expressed by a Subject, and by a Counselor to his
Sovereign.

The first part of the said last words, are clearly proved by the Testimony of
my Lord of Northumberland and Mr. Treasurer, That the King had tried His
People, and was Absolved from all Rules of Government: That He was to do all
that Power would admit, that he had tried all ways and was refused, and should
be acquitted before God and men.

The latter part Mr. Treasurer only reaches to, that His Majesty had an Army
in Ireland, which He might employ to reduce this Kingdom: and comparing these
words with the former, if the King be absolved from all Rules of Government,
Which way can that Power be used, but by bringing in an Army, the latter words
being dependant and consequent to the former? and, if they be compared
together, and sum'd up, their Lordships will be satisfied, that this was the
intention of my Lord of Strafford, to bring an Army out of Ireland into this
Kingdom to reduce it, and that his purpose was, by a strong hand, to compel the
Subjects of the Kingdom, to submit to an Arbitrary Power, and whatsoever should
be imposed on them.

And whereas my Lord makes it a great part of his excuse, that nothing was
executed, upon this Counsel, we must give humble thanks to His Majesty, for if
his Counsel might have taken place, no doubt but that had been done, which was
labored and advised to be done; But a Gracious Sovereign would not take hold
on those Counsels, but rejected them, as to that, though so much was done on
other Counsels, and Misinformations of my Lord of Strafford, as my Lord of
Strafford will never be able to justify.

That nothing is done, is no excuse to him, It is an Obligation to the Kings
Subjects, the more to Love and Honor him; But, it shows clearly, my Lord of
Straffords intention, if it might have taken place, to have changed the Laws,
to have brought an Army upon us, and, by them, Compel us to submit to an
Arbitrary Power.

And, so Mr. Whitlock concluded, that he should trouble their Lordships no
further at this time, having answered most of the things my Lord of Strafford
has insisted on, and if he has forgotten them, he hopes he shall be helped by
some of his Colleagues; But, he supposes, it appears clearly, that my Lord of
Straffords intentions were, to subvert the Laws, to set a Division betwixt the
King and His People; and, though His Lordship is pleased to make something
slight of it, as not to be matter of Treason; yet, this compared with his other
Actions, declaring his Intention and Designs, it proves it not only to be
Crimen laesae Majestatis, but also Reipublicae.

Mr. Maynard seconded Mr. Whitlock and said, That something he should Mr.
Maynard.
presume to add, My Lord of Strafford excuses himself, because he was not alone
in the Council against Scotland; Thus far he was alone, the rest concluded upon
a Hipothetical proposition: if the Demands were unreasonable, then a War was
fit. But, in two Propositions he was a lone;

First, That before the Reasons were heard, the unreasonable Demands of
Subjects in Parliament, were a sufficient ground for the King, to put Himself
into a Posture of War;

And Secondly, That these Demands were not matter of Religion, but struck at
the Root of Government.

And, when he Answers that Point, he takes it for granted, That if he says
they struck at the Root of Government, the Resolution was just.

In his Defense, he insists upon two things, matter of Excuse, and matter of
weakening of the Testimonies produced.

For the matter of Excuse, of what he said to the King in private, it was
testified only by one, who was then present, and at other times in Council,
viz. That there would be no happiness till there was a good Agreement betwixt
King and People.

Whence Mr. Maynard observed, That they think not, that all he spoke is naught;
but, they produce Proofs, that he did speak naught; they think him not so
unwise upon all occasions, to speak words of so high a Consequence: He has
taken another course to weaken their Testimonies; and, nothing is so strong,
but (if that course be allowed that he uses) it will take off the strength of
it.

Mr. Maynard said, He has heard of breaking a thing to pieces, by taking to
pieces, and if my Lord of Strafford shall take every parcel of the proof, and
say this is a single Testimony, This is matter of discourse; This I speak at my
Table; This in my Chamber; taking them asunder, he may answer them asunder: But
if he has in his Chamber, and at Counsel, and in Bed, and on all occasions
presumed to run so high on the Liberty of the Subject, and then think, that
because he speaks sometimes good words, all must be paistered up; he must give
us leave to differ from him in that.

The Witnesses say he spoke the words Candide and Cast, some speak to the
occasion, most say they were spoken at several times, both before and after the
Parliament, and if they must be applied only to what is lawful, what need these
Adverbs to make it good? Truly he may say it was done Caute, it was not done
Cast in this Cause.

For that my Lord has said, diverse Witnesses were by, and heard not the words
deposed by Mr. Treasurer, What Argument is this? That when diverse are by, that
which diverse do not remember is not true? My Lord confesses himself sometimes,
that Witnesses do not remember all things, therefore it may be true, that
something may be spoken, which Witnesses remember not, else he confesses
against himself which is not true.

There be other things wherein the Witnesses do concur, and that my Lord
speaks not to, though he speaks to that which my Lord of Northumberland and the
rest do not remember: and therefore it is no argument to say, some were by and
heard not what was spoken.

The sum of the Case will come to this, There was a Parliament sitting, he a
little before casts out words, about raising Money, where he must have Adverbs
to make it good; he must raise Money in an extraordinary way, the Parliament is
broken, and a necessity is made, and Soldiers must be brought in, to make good
these ways: now take these asunder, and my Lord of Strafford will make it a
good Action; But as Mr. Maynard showed, they conceive all my Lord of Strafford
has done, ended in that design; he began it before he came over; and though
they believe His Majesty designed it for Scotland, they speak not what His
Majesty meant, but what my Lord of Strafford counseled, that is the thing he
is charged with.

And whereas his friends, and those nearest him, spoke of this Fire that has
burst out, he says, this concerns him not; Indeed he is very unhappy, if his
Brother, or bosom friend must be the man that must accuse him. But Noscitur ex
Comite qui non cognoscitur ex se. It comes out of his own mouth, and his
friends expressions. When Sir George Ratcliffe is asked how Money will be had?
He Answered, We will make peace with the Scots, and that is the worst of evils.
Surely, he that thought a Peace betwixt the two Nations the worst of evils,
deserves not the applause that has been given him in this place; And if that
comes to pass, this must have relation to that of which he spoke, which is the
levying of Money by force, the King has 30000 Men, and 400000 l in his Purse,
and a Sword by his side, and if he wants Money, who would pity him? Lastly, My
Lord of Strafford came to speak of their Lordships privilege, that if words
spoken in Council should be pressed, it would bring a disability on their Noble
Lordships, to enter into those employments; but, that can be no excuse, to say,
that he must take notice of things honorable; and, for every thing that a Man
speaks at Council, he must not be brought into Question.

It is not every thing, nor every thing that is illegal, that is brought into
Question; But, if he advise to bring an Army on us, to Master all we have, and
he must not be questioned, Where then are their Lordships Privileges? and, Who
knows how soon there may be no difference betwixt a Peer and another?

In all this Defense, my Lord of Strafford has not offered any Defense for the
Scandal which he put upon the last Parliament; which, to the last breath, to
the last minute of their Continuance, did advise and consult of the Supply of
His Majesty: yet, he calls this, a denying of the King; a forsaking of the
King; an undutiful stubborness; and, what else his high Speech and Eloquence
pleases, to misconstrue their Actions with.

To that Stat. 1 E. 6. Mr. Maynard said, He shall not need to give any Mr.
Maynard.
further Answer; for, if it be looked to, it will appear nothing to concern
this Case, there being great difference between words spoken with relation to
action; For, these be Counsels, and if a Man shall Counsel the death of the
King, Will any Man doubt whether this be Treason? surely no man will doubt it,
that knows the Laws of England.

The Treason is not in his words, but in his wicked Counsels: For (under favor)
if it be true that he spoke them, they may be called wicked; and, that it is
true, they have offered proof, and so he left it to their Lordships.

Mr. Glyn desired to add a word, it concerning the Kingdom and Peers; Mr. Glynn.
Their Lordships observe, how my Lord of Strafford stands questioned for
subverting of the Laws, and for designing to introduce an Arbitrary Government;
the other day his design appeared, in the exercising of a Tyrannical Power over
the Persons, Estates, and Liberties of the Kings Subjects; and, though a design
was in practice, and something put in execution, yet there was something left,
whereby that Treason might be raised to a higher strain; For that proofs were
produced the other day, the exercise of this Tyrannical power in his person,
which was the stopping of the Streams of Justice, but, the Fountain of Justice
was still uncorrupted, and hope left, and God be thanked we have hope still.

But, this days work is to prove, That he ascended the Throne, and, by his ill
Counsels, the Venom he had hatched in his own heart, he endeavored to infuse
into the Kings Person, to make Him of the same opinion with himself; and that
is to endeavor to corrupt the Fountain; But, God be thanked he has met with a
Gracious King, upon whom he cannot prevail.

The words laid to his Charge, are very many; That he should tell the King, he
was Absolved from all Rules of Government, and, that he had an Army in Ireland,
which he might employ to reduce this Kingdom: The latter part of the words he
has endeavored to answer, and the former part proved by positive Witnesses,
which he has not given answer to.

For the latter, that concerns the Irish Army, Mr. Glynn said, He shall not
need to put their Lordships in mind of any thing said; but whereas my Lord
says, They are proved by one Witness only, if your Lordships revise their
Notes, they shall find them proved by many Witnesses.

When he was not accused by the Commons, he tells Sir William Pennyman at York,
he did intend to bring the Army into England, but there was Vox populi, and
that is a horrid Witness.

My Lord Cottington, one of the Honorable persons present, when the words were
spoken, testifies to their Lordships, That he remembers my Lord of Strafford
told the King, That after things were settled, he was bound to repair the
property of the Subject, and this, under favor, proves something; for if some
Counsel and advice were not given, that there should be an invasion on the
property, what should engage him to tell the King, he should restore it?

Here my Lord Cottington explained himself, saying, That his meaning L.
Cottington.
was, he has often heard my Lord say, The King and People would never be
happy, till there was a good agreement.

Mr. Glynn proeceded, that if their Lordships please to look on my Lord of Mr.
Glynn.
Straffords Interrogatory, they shall find it asked his Lordship, Whether he
did not tell the King, that he should make restitution of the Subjects
property, when the danger was over; and why should his Conscience ask such a
question, unless there were Counsel given, to invade the propriety of the
Subject?

Your Lordships remember the words of Sir George Wentworth, (which Mr. Glynn
said he will not repeat) and when my Lord was fixed by the words of his
Brother, he said, That tho he be my Brother, I do not use to communicate my
Counsels to him, and that I am on my oath to conceal; yet this great Counsel he
did impart to Mr. Slingsby for his own purpose, and to Sir William Pennyman.

And so having spoken to the latter part of the words, (the reducing of the
Subjects of England by the Irish Army) to show that it stands not only on a
single proof, but if the whole be recollected together, there be many things
concurring to the positive proof thereof.

Mr. Glynn put their Lordships in mind of the other words, to which two great
Witnesses concur, and no Answer at all is given, viz. That the Parliament
denied Supply, and the King is loose, and absolved from all rules of
Government; put the other words out of doors (as they are not) if the King be
loose from all rules of Government, is he not loose to do what he will?

And Mr. Glynn added, That he must needs give Answer to something, that fell
from my Lord, concerning other words, that they were words of Discourse, and
what he speaks at his Bed, or his Table, or in private Discourse, he thinks
they should not be brought against him. But Mr. Glynn besought their Lordships
to remember, that if my Lord speaks the words as a Privy Counselor speaking to
the King, concerning the Subjects property, compare these words with the other
Extermination, and then see what the Case is.

The last thing in his Defense, is as high as the Charge it self. He is
charged, That being a Privy Counselor, and entrusted by the King, and a man of
such Eminence, he should endeavor to infuse into the Kings Sacred Person, such
dangerous Counsels, tending to the destruction of the Law and Government, and
consequently of King and Subject; And in the close, my Lord of Strafford put
their Lordships in mind, what a dangerous thing it is for one of the Kings
Counsel, to be charged for Words spoken at Council Table, to speak this in such
a Presence before the Peers, and Commons of the Realm; that a Privy Counselor,
who ought to be clear and candid, is not to be questioned, though he infuse
dangerous Counsels. That it is justification of his own Act, and so great, that
he knows not how my Lord could say greater; and so he said, he has no more to
say, their Lordships had heard the Proofs and Defense, and comparing them
together, he doubts not but their Lordships are satisfied, that the Commons had
just cause to do what they have done.

My L of Strafford desired to answer one thing, the Gentleman that spoke last,
said, touching his revealing the Kings Counsels to Mr. Slingsby and others; he
would be loath to be charged with breaking his Duty to God and the King, but
where he has Power and Liberty; for as concerning the employment of that Army,
the King left it wholly to him, to acquaint whom he thought fit, for the
bettering of the service.

But the thing that makes him rise, is, to represent to their Lordships, that
he has been there constantly in a great deal of weakness and infirmity, since
7 or 8 of the clock, and now it is 5. That his Speech and Voice are spent, and
it is not possible for him to come here to morrow; and therefore he most humbly
besought their Lordships, to give him the respit of a day, to restore his little
strength it shall please God to lend him, for he is not able to speak or stand.
Which the Committee for the Commons House said, they should not oppose, if it
stand with their Lordships pleasure.

Mr. Pym did only add this, That if their Lordships please to observe Mr. Pym.
my Lord of Straffords endeavors to prove diverse mitigations of his words,
some by Mr. Comptroller, and some others by my Lord Goring, But their Lordships
may observe, that the words in the Charge were spoken at the Committee; the
words spoken of by Mr. Comptroller, were at the Council Table, and therefore
they are not the same, nor serve they for extenuation of words spoken at
another time.

And so the House was Adjourned, and appointed to meet again on Wednesday next.

THE Five and Twentieth Article. The Charge.

25 THat not long after the Dissolution of the said last Parliament, Artic.
XXV. Charge.
(viz. in the months of May and June) he the Earl of Strafford, did advise the
King to go on vigorously in levying the Ship Money, and did procure the
Sheriffs of several Counties to be sent for, for not levying the Ship Money,
diverse of which were threatened by him, to be sued in the Star Chamber, and
afterward by his Advice, they were sued in the Star Chamber, for not levying
the same, and diverse of His Majesty's loving Subjects were sent for and
imprisoned by his advice, for that and other illegal payments.

And a great Loan of One hundred thousand pounds was demanded of the City of
London, and the Lord Mayor, and Sheriffs, and Aldermen of the said City, were
often sent for by his Advice to the Council Table, to give an account of their
proceedings in raising of Ship Money, and furthering of that Loan, and were
required to certify the Names of such Inhabitants of the City, as were fit to
lend, which they with much humility refusing to do, he the said Earl of
Strafford did use these, and the like speeches, viz. That they deserved to be
put to Fine and Ransom, and that no good would be done with them, till an
example were made of them, and that they were laid by the heels, and some of
the Aldermen hanged up.

April 7. 1641.
Mr. Maynard proceeded to make good the Charge of the Commons of England,
against the Earl of Strafford, touching Mr. Maynard.
High Treason, and said, They had already brought it so high, as they must
needs acknowledge they cannot go higher; a Design being laid to introduce an
Arbitrary Government, and Counsels given to maintain that, and to introduce it
by force. They can go no higher, unless those Counsels had unhappily
succeeded; but though those Counsels take not effect, yet the Principles
whereby those Counsels were given, appear still to have remained.

AND whereas my Lord of Strafford having these things proved against him by his
Speeches, Opinions, and Counsels, pretends there was no such thing done, as if
the goodness of others, would excuse the badness of his Counsels; they shall
show what he did do in the succeeding Articles: And in the 25th he proceeds,
First, to advise His Majesty to go on vigorously with the Ship Money, he
procured the Sheriffs to be sent for, and sued in the Star Chamber; he sent for
the Mayor and Aldermen, about the loan of 100000 l. and the furtherance of
Ship Money; and were told by him, That they deserved to be put to Fine and
Ransom, etc.

To prove the 25th Article.

The Lord Treasurer of England being Interrogated, What Advice my L. Treasurer.
Lord of Strafford gave, touching the levying of Ship Money?

His Lordship Answered, That he remembers my Lord of Strafford did advise, that
they should go vigorously and effectually on with the getting of Ship Money; he
takes the time to be, when as the Ship Money came in very slowly, and they were
enforced to take out of these Moneys that were provided, for the furnishing of
the Army, diverse great sums to set out a Fleet, which else would have stayed
still; and my Lord of Strafford took no tice, That if it were not repaied, the
Army would be destitute and unfurnished, and therefore advised as formerly,
That the Ship Money might go on vigorously, and the other Money be repaid
again, for the use for which it was appointed, and it was after the breach of
the last Parliament.

Tho. Wiseman Sworn and Interrogated, what he heard my Lord of Strafford Tho.
Wiseman Witness.
say, when the Aldermen of London were called to the Council Table about the
Ship Money, and the Loan, and when it was?

He Answered, That for the time he cannot very well remember, and touching the
Loan, he is able to say little; But about the Ship Money, he does well
Remember, that my Lord should say, they Tho. Wiseman, Witness.
would never do their Duties well, till they were put to Fine and Ransom,
meaning the Aldermen, that were then called before their Lordships, and this is
as much as he can say.

Being asked whether there were not words of laying by the heels, and what the
words were?

He Answered, He should not fear to do it, My Lord of Strafford did say
(Whether on the Loan or Ship Money, he is not able to remember) You should do
well to be laid by the heels; you shall have no good of this man till he be
laid by the heels, and he (the Examinant) supposes it was meant of my Lord
Mayor, who was then present, (as he remembers) and my Lord was there, and to
his best remembrance, His Majesty was present.

Earl of Barkshire being Sworn and Interrogated, What my Lord of Strafford
counseled the King, touching the said matter of Loan?

His Lordship Answered, That he remembers His Majesty desired to borrow a sum
of Money, and to give good security for it, and Interest E. of Berkshire.
after 8 per cent. on the sum. That the Aldermen were sent for, and commanded
to give in to the King, the Names of those Men, that were most able within
their several Wards, which they excusing themselves from doing; my Lord of
Strafford said: Gentlemen, in my opinion, you may be liable to Fine and
Ransom, for refusing the Kings Command on this occasion, for not certifying
the Names; and this is the effect of what he spoke.

Sir Henry Garaway being Sworn, and Interrogated, What my Lord of Strafford
said to the Aldermen, about the Ship Money and Loan-Money?

He Answered, That as he was Mayor of London in the last year, he was
oftentimes commanded to attend the Council Table, with Garaway, Lord Mayor of
London.
the Sheriffs of London; when they came about the Ship Money, there came no
body (as he conceives) but they and himself; but when they came concerning the
Loan, the whole Court of Aldermen came together. Concerning the Ship Money, he
confesses he found a great difficulty of it; he could not tell which way to
turn himself to levy the Money, to give the King satisfaction; He acquainted
His Majesty, That there were these difficulties in it, That of two years
proceeding, not one half of the City of London had paid, and therefore the
willing men that had paid the Money, thought it unequal some should pay, and
some go free. And Secondly, he said it was the opinion of the City of London,
That a Writ for Ship Money, and a Writ for a Parliament did not agree well
together, and for these reasons he found it very difficult: they were called
up, and hastened both in the Assessment of Collection, and in respect they
found every man adverse to it; the business had not that progress, nor speedy
execution it might otherwise have had, and as it had in former times. And when
he had told His Majesty this, it was ill taken, that he should deal so plainly,
because he did discover himself clearly and freely, what was the fruit of the
business And it pleased my Lord of Strafford, then in the presence of the King,
to speak, Sir, you will never do good on this man, till you have made him an
example, he is too Diffident (or to this purpose) unless you commit him, you
shall do no good upon him; This concerning the Ship Money. Concerning the
Loan-Money, when they came with the Aldermen together, he (the Examinant)
desired he might be called in singly, because he was very loath (knowing the
humor of the Court of Aldermen, how they stood affected) that they should give
the King a negative Answer at the Board, and it pleased His Majesty to call him
(the Examinant) in singly, and he told His Majesty in his hearing at that time,
That there was no good to be done, for amongst all the Aldermen, he could not
yet consent to raise above 6 or 7000 pound at the most. And then they were to
bring in out of every of the several Wards, the Names of all the able men of
the City of London, that could lend Money; wherein it was required they should
set it down, what every man was fit to lend. This they altogether declined, for
we thought it not fit we should rate men's purses, and he (the Examinant
himself) presented the Size-Cinque, the Quater-tres men, and the Deuxace men,
according to their qualities, but set a rate on men we did not, and desired His
Majesty we might be spared. Hereupon my Lord of Strafford at that time, burst
out into these words, Sir, You will never do good to these Citizens of London,
till you have made examples of some of the Aldermen; This to his best
remembrance he said, Unless you hang up some of them, you will do no good upon
them. This is the substance of what he heard.

Being asked whether this was immediately after the breach of the Parliament?

He Answered, That he cannot confine himself in time; he desired to be spared
in that, but he was several times at the Council Table; but it was after the
breaking of the Parliament.

My Lord of Strafford observing, that Alderman Garaway spoke it only E. of
Strafford.
to his best remembrance, he was Interrogated, Whether he could speak it
positively?

He Answered, That it is a great while ago, and he did hear the words, Garaway.
that is certain.

Being asked by my Lord of Strafford, whether he himself spoke them?

He Answered, Yes my Lord, your Lordship did speak them.

My Lord desiring leave to recollect himself a little, said, he will speak with
as much truth, albeit, not with so much confidence as this Gentleman.

And after a little respite, he began his Defense as follows.

The Defendant must still insist on this ground, which hitherto he has Defense
of the E. of Strafford.
gone upon, under their Lordships good leave;

That there is nothing in this Article, that can possibly convince him of
High Treason, admit it all proved, as it is laid down in the Charge; he has
very little to Answer, for there is little proved, the greatest part is offered
on a single Testimony, which as he has heretofore mentioned, he humbly
conceives, by the Laws of the Land, cannot be charged upon him in case of
Treason; for nothing can be charged upon him in case of Treason, without two
lawful Witnesses.

For the advice my Lord Treasurer says he gave in case of levying Ship Money,
surely he advised no other ways, than as had been formerly used 3 or 4 years
before his coming into the Kingdom; so that if it be an error, he was led into
it by the practice of former times, and of wiser men than himself.

Besides, there was then, as he conceives, a Judgment given in the
Exchequer-Chamber, and he has learnt always in his own practice, by reason of
his own weakness of judgment, never to be wiser than his Teachers, or to
pretend to know more in other men's professions, than they know themselves.

And therefore there being a Judgment given in point of Law by the Judges, it
was not for him to dispute what they had done, but with all humility, to submit
it to better judgments than his own, so that to advise such a thing (as it
then stood) he hopes will be excusable and pardonable in him, albeit he does
not justify himself in it, in respect of something he has heard and learnt,
since that time, and taught him likewise by wiser men than himself. And as he
then followed that which was delivered by the Judges, so he shall for the
future, follow what he has learnt by others, that ought to be believed, and by
him credited before himself: But in the mean time he conceives it a pardonable
fault, and shall never be drawn up, or put into the Scale against him as
Treason.

To the other words, testified to be spoken by him at the Council Table, He
Answers, That he might hold the Aldermen liable or subject to Fine and Ransom,
in case they did not submit to the Kings Demands (for so on the matter, my Lord
of Berkshire repeats the words) truly such has been, and shall be his
ingenuity in all things concerning this business, that these words he has
already acknowledged and confessed to be by him spoken; and he confessed now he
did say, That in his opinion, in a Case of that great necessity, and imminent
danger, which he conceived the Kingdom to be in, their refusal might perchance,
make them liable to Fine and Ransom; but the words, as he remembers them, were
appliable not to that particular, but to another.

For he says, and he says truly, the words were spoken to hasten and speed my
Lord Mayor in the services that were commanded him; not out of any intention or
purpose, to do him hurt by further moving, or prosecuting any thing against
him. He confesses, he wishes he had not spoken them, but being spoken, and
spoken to that end and purpose, as high a thing as this might have been passed
over, and not charged on him as a crime, but rather as an extravagant saying,
which God forbid a man should be Arraigned for in this kind, as he is, and a
little excess of Speech, he trusts by their Lordships Favor and Goodness, may
be excused, if not pardoned, at least so much pardoned, as it shall not be laid
to him as Treason, when it is but a hasty word, and nothing follows upon it.

For the other words which my Lord Mayor says, that he the Earl of Strafford
should say to His Majesty; Sir, there will be no good done with the Citizens of
London; till you have hanged some of them up; which at first he said, was to
his best remembrance, and upon recollection, he says directly and absolutely;
for my Lord said, he must not make it weaker against himself than it is; and he
wishes that rule might be kept on both sides, which is to repeat the Evidence
to their Lordships clearly and plainly as it is; which duty he said, he had
Religiously observed, since the beginning of the Cause, and will perform to the
last, not misrecyting any thing for his advantage or disadvantage; This being
howsoever his comfort and joy, that their Lordships are so wise, as not to
hearken to what is repeated of the Evidence, but to the Evidence it self, as it
is plainly and clearly represented, and that will not deceive them: and
therefore my Lord said, to the best of his remembrance (and the Witnesses said,
no more at the first) he spoke them not, but he thinks they were spoken in so
good company, before their Lordships of the Council Board, that it cannot but
be remembered, by some of their Lordships, if the words had been spoken, and by
His Majesty, to whom it is said they were directed.

But being an equal Testimony (however in this condition, and misfortune, and
affliction, it may be between this Gentleman and himself) he thinks that before
these troubles befell him, he was as equally to be believed as the other; and
therefore all the difference is, one says it, the other denies it.

My Lord added, That he denied it in his Answer, and he denies it at the Bar,
and in truth, to his best remembrance, he never spoke the words; and it is a
thing of no great moment, being a hasty word, and at the most very excusable,
especially to a free spoken man, as he is, and he smarts for it, which has
further engaged him, perhaps than wiser man would have been, that has much
worse thoughts than ever he had, but he hoped it will be pardoned, and not
amount to make good the Charge against him, but that their Lordships Honor and
Justice will excuse it, rather than punish it, and so his Lordship said, he
would say no more to it.

Mr. Maynard made Reply thereunto, in substance as follows.

The Committee shall need to to say little to this Answer of my Lord of
Strafford, for whereas he says nothing of High Treason is proved, their
Lordships will be pleased to remember, how often this has been answered; for if
their Lordships will look back, to what they have proved from the beginning:
They charge not this as a particular Treason, but having charged him with a
design to subvert the fundamental Laws; it appears he threatened it, That the
Kings little finger should be heavier than the loins of the Law; They have
showed what he did in Ireland, how he did not only threaten, but gave sentence
of death on one for words, how there he hanged another; it appears what a
Jurisdiction he erected against Law, and ways were taken to maintain them; how
Soldiers were forced on men's Houses against their Wills; and what Insolency
they committed, and that must not be questioned when it is propounded; When he
comes into England, their Lordships hear what Counsels he gives, which compared
with the Plots he laid, there is reason to think, that these words proceeding
from my Lord of Strafford, that men should be Fined and Ransomed, Hanged up,
and laid by the Heels, comes not out of sudden passion, but rise from those
Principles and Resolutions that were in him, to do all things according to his
Will and Pleasure, against Law.

They beseech their Lordships, these may not pass as hasty words, when they
appear to be suitable and conformable to Actions and Counsels preceding for
many years, and not yet laid down by him, for ought can be discerned.

The singleness of the Testimony has been often Objected, and as often
Answered, but this is no single Testimony; My Lord Treasure speaks of his
Advice to go on vigorously with Ship Money; Others prove Fine and Ransom, and
Hanging up, Threatened, which have all concurred to the general Charge, being
several circumstances proved by several Witnesses.

But whereas my Lord thinks to excuse himself, because there was a Judgment in
the Exchequer-Chamber; God be thanked, it appears to be a Judgment against
Law; and my Lord of Strafford spoke these words after the King offered to lay
down the Ship Money, for it was after the Parliament; But there was never any
Judgment, that a man might be hanged in such a case, nor be Fined and Ransomed
for not certifying in matter of Loan; my Lord of Strafford knows as well as any
man, that it is against Law, himself having had a great hand in the Petition of
Right.

Mr. Glyn desired he might observe one thing, that fell from my Lord of Mr.
Glyn.
Strafford, not at this time only, but at several times; That it is hard he
should for words be questioned as High Treason, being a word spoken, and no ill
effect of it; their Lordships may be pleased to call to mind, that for words
spoken concerning Treading on his Toe, he prosecuted so far as to life, and yet
they were spoken as accidentally as these, and not of less consequence, and
nothing came of them; and yet he procured a sentence of death against the
Speaker, but here he extenuates it, and must not be charged with words.

And so the 25th Article was concluded.

THE Six and Twentieth Article. The Charge,
26. THat the said Earl by his wicked Counsels, having brought Art. XXVI.
Charge.
His Majesty into excessive charge, without any just cause, he did in the month
of July last (for the support of the said great charges) Counsel and approve
two dangerous and wicked Projects, viz.

To seize upon the Bullion, and the Money in the Mint.

And to imbase His Majesty's Coin with the mixtures of Brass.

And accordingly he procured One hundred and 30000 l. which was then in the
Mint, and belonging to diverse Merchants, Strangers, and others to be seized on,
and stayed to His Majesty's use. And when diverse Merchants of London, owners of
the said Bullion and Money, came to his House, to let him under stand the great
mischief that course would produce here, and in other parts, and what prejudice
it would be to the Kingdom, by discrediting the Mint, and hindering the
importation of Bullion: he the said Earl told them, that the City of London
dealt undutifully and unthankfully with His Majesty; and that they were more
ready to help the Rebels, than to help His Majesty: And that if any hurt came
to them, they may thank themselves; and that it was the course of other
Princes, to make use of such Moneys to serve their occasions.

And when in the same month of July, the Officers of His Majesty's Mint came to
him, and gave him diverse reasons against the imbasing the said Money; he told
them that the French King did use to send Commissaries of Horse, with
Commission to search into men's Estates, and to peruse their Accounts, that so
they may know what to levy of them by force, which they did accordingly levy;
and turning to the Lord Cottington, then present, said, That this was a point
worthy of his Lordships consideration, meaning this course of the French King,
to raise Moneys by force, was a point worthy of his Lordships Consideration,

MR. Maynard proceeded to open the 26th Article, and observed, That they had
showed formerly, how my Lord of Strafford had labored a Disaffection betwixt
His Majesty and His People: Now they come to show, That His Majesty being put
to extreme Charges, by the Advice of my Lord of Strafford; my Lord adds his
advice, for seizing Money in the Mint, and for that of the base Coin, or Black
Money; And, that when some attended my Lord of Strafford about it, to show to
him the danger and ill consequence, that might arise from it, my Lord of
Strafford tells them, The City had dealt undutifully and unthankfully with His
Majesty, and were more ready to help the Rebels than His Majesty; and, they may
thank themselves; and, it was the Course of other Princes, to make use of such
Moneys. And, when the Master of the Mynts gave Reasons against it, my Lord
said, The French King uses to send Commissaries to men's Shops, and to look into
the Accounts and Books of men, to see and peruse their Estates, that they might
raise and levy it by force: And, turning to a Noble Lord by him, he said, That
was a point worthy of his Lordships Consideration.

To prove the words spoken, about seizing the Money in the Mint,

Robert Edwards was Sworn, and Examined, What he heard my Lord of Robert
Edwards, Witness.
Strafford say, when he attended him, about the Money seized in the Mynt?

He Answered, That he went to his Lordship about the danger, that the Company
of Merchant-Adventurers were in, in regard their Estates were beyond Sea,
giving his Lordship to understand the danger, in regard so much Money was taken
out of the Tower, being, as he remembers, on Saturday night. They went on
Monday morning, and desired my Lord to speak to His Majesty, that the money
might be restored again, that their Means might not be seized; for, some
strangers had threatened, they would signify to their Principal, how their
Money was taken from them, and would seek for a recompense again, by the Means
they had beyond Sea: And, my Lord made Answer again to him, and diverse others
that were there, That if they fared amiss, they might thank themselves, for if
they went on in that manner, they were like to find it themselves; and that
they should have the damage of it, if they did look to it no better. And withal
he said, That though they think it is a strange business here, yet beyond Sea
it is not so, but on Command men have their Goods taken. This was the
substance, as he remembers, of what he said to them.

Being Asked, What my Lord of Strafford said, touching the City of London?

He Answered, That he said, They did deal very unthankfully and undutifully,
for there was but 14000 l. for Ship Money that was His Majesty's due, and they
denied the payment of that; and did more to maintain the Rebels, than they did
to maintain His Majesty.

Being bid repeat his words.

He said, That they came at first to be humble Suitors to his Lordship, to be a
means to His Majesty, that the Money taken from the Tower, might be restored
again; for, the Merchants Adventurers Estates beyond Sea, were in great danger,
in regard there were some strangers threatened, to write to their Principals, to
stay their Estates there, for the Money stayed in the Tower: Whereupon my Lord
made Answer, That if they did speed amiss, they might thank themselves, for
they are more ready to hold with Rebels, then they were to give His Majesty His
due, which was 14000 l. for Ship Money.

Being Asked (on my Lord of Straffords motion) Where he spoke them? and,
Whether he was not then Sick?

He Answered, It was in his Chamber: and my Lord did sit in his Chair, and he
(the Examinant) stood hard by him, with four or five more, and he conceives my
Lord was sick at that time.

Being Asked, on like motion, Whether he did not tell them he was sick, and
could not go to the King at that time?

He Answered, That he remembers not that my Lord said, he could not go to the
King; but, he said, he knew nothing of it till that morning, to his (the
Examinants) remembrance.

Anthony Palmer Sworn, and Interrogated, What my Lord of Strafford Palmer
Witness.
said to him, concerning the mixed Money?

He Answered, That my Lord of Strafford had some Discourse with him, and the
rest of his fellow Officers, concerning base Money; and, upon the Questioning
of it, they gave him their Reasons against it, and the insufficiency of it to
do any thing, and said so much, as they conceived my Lord was dissuaded from
going any further in it: Upon this, he afterward showed them a Letter, drawn
out of his Pocket, which, as he said, was sent him out of France, and in the
French Tongue; and, because he (the Examinant) did not understand the French
tongue, he read it in English to this effect, so far as the best of his memory
will hold; That the King of France, or the French King, had appointed certain
Officers of his, to go and take view of men's Books of Account and Estates, by
that means to see what they were worth, and to know what the King might demand
of them; and, if they were not willing to pay it, there would be a force upon
them to pay it. This, to the best of his Remembrance, is that my Lord did
deliver.

Being Asked, Whether my Lord of Strafford did not speak words to this effect,
That if His Majesty should do so, he should have the Examples of others, or to
that purpose?

He Answered, Something he set forth to this effect, but the very words he
cannot express, but it was to that purpose; That he had received Letters, that
the King of France had sent Officers, that took view of Men's Books and
Accounts, to raise to himself some Moneys (if they were not willing) by
constraint, and withal some other Speeches did fall from him to this purpose,
but, the very words he cannot speak, that it was an Example, or might be an
Example, to do the like in England.

Being Asked (on my Lord of Straffords motion) Where this was spoken?

He Answered, It was in my Lords own house in Leister-fields, he thinks, and
there were present three more, Sir William Parkhurst, Mr. Gogan, and himself,
and my Lord Cottington was also there.

Henry Gogan Sworn and Interrogated, What he heard my Lord of Strafford say,
when he attended him, about the abusing of the Coin?

He Answered, That after the Coining of the Base Money was thought on, there
were Queries made, and they were to give an Answer the next day about the
making of it; That was, about the Expedition, and what it would cost, and two
other Particulars, the Paper Sir William Parkhurst has. But, some of them
spoke against the making of the Money, Mr. Palmer and the rest showed the
inconvenience of it; and then my Lord pulled out a Letter in French, and read
it in English, to this purpose; That the King of France raised money by force,
sending Commissaries of Horse to look into their Books and Estates, and levy
money accordingly; and, did turn about to my Lord Cottington, and said, My
Lord, this is worthy your consideration or hearing, or words to that purpose.

Being Asked (on my Lord of Straffords motion) Where it was spoken?

He Answered, It was spoken at my Lords House in the Fields, in the presence of
Sir William Parkhurst, Lord Cottington, Mr. Palmer, and himself.

Sir William Parkhurst being Sworn, and Interrogated, What my Lord of Strafford
said, when he and the rest attended him about the Copper Money?

He Answered, That they were sent for; and, the first Question they were asked,
was, What sorts of Money were made in Queen Elizabeth's time of Copper, for the
Kingdom of Ireland? they told him what they were, and that they could produce
the Indentures and Circumstances of making those Monyes; and they had diverse
Discourses of the matter of Money, and it was resolved into certain Queries
that they should consider of, which he the Examinant was never formerly
examined of, and the Papers are not here, neither was he warned hither to day.
And, in the discourse of these Moneys, my Lord of Strafford did produce a
Letter written in French, as news lately received from thence, and, doubting
whether they understood French or no, he Englished it, in these kinds of words,
or thus much in substance, That the French King had lately sent certain
Commissaries, or Commissioners, into diverse parts of France, there to take and
peruse the Accounts of Merchants, and the Books of Men's Estates, whereby they
might know what Estates they had, and this is the substance of what he can say,
and further he heard him not say.

Being Asked (on my Lord of Straffords motion) Who was there present?

He Answered, My Lord of Strafford, my Lord Cottington, Mr. Palmer, Mr. Gogan,
and himself.

Being Asked, on the like motion, Whether he heard my Lord of Strafford offer
to my Lord Cottington, That this was worthy his consideration or notice?

He Answered, That he did not hear it.

Being Asked, Whether he said, That if the King should do so, he should follow
the Example of other Princes?

He Answered, No.

Sir Ralph Freeman being Asked, What words my Lord of Strafford spoke
concerning Copper Money, If it were refused to be taken?

He Answered, That he was not there at the first meeting, but at the private
Council, His Majesty being present, there was a Debate about Paying
Copper-Money, and he (the Examinant) Answering, That they would not work, if
they were paid in Copper Money: My Lord of Strafford replied, You know what
course to take with them, you may send them to the House of Correction; This is
all he heard.

Mr. Maynard desired Tho. Skinners Examination might be read, as to the matter
which Mr. Stewart was examined to, he being seen at Westminster Mr. Maynard.
that morning, and acknowledged, that he was to be examined here as a Witness,
and it seems could not get in, or is otherwise kept away.

My Lord of Strafford desired, they might reserve the advantage of him, and he
would give way to it.

Mr. Maynard answered, That when he says a Witness may be kept away, it is not
that he is kept away, for he is here; but, if a Witness has been examined, and
does not come, his Examinations may be read, for it is Mr. Maynard.
possible a Witness may be kept away, though he be not sick.

George Henley being Sworn, and Interrogated, Whether he saw Skinner this
morning at Westminster?

He Answered, He saw him in the Pallace-yard, and he told him the Mr. Henley,
Witness.
Examinant, that he (the said Skinner) was to be here as a Witness.

My Lord of Strafford desiring that liberty for him to Cross-examine him might
be reserved, and that being granted, the Examinations were read.

The Examination of Tho. Skinner Gent. taken the 8th. Ian. 1641.

To the 98 Interrogatory he says, That he attended Mr. Edwards and other
Merchants-Adventurers to the Lord Lieutenant, a little after the stay of the
Money and Bullion in the Mynt, and the said Merchants represented diverse
inconveniences to his Lordship which might arise from the stay thereof; and
alleged, That it would occasion a seizure of the English Merchants beyond the
Seas. Whereupon his Lordship said, He did not know of the seizure until that
morning; But, if any Inconvenience happen, they may thank themselves: and his
Lordship further said, that though this act might seem strange in England, it
was no news in other Countries; Where Princes made use of such means to serve
their occasions; and his Lordship did very much tax and blame the City of
London, saying, They dealt unworthily with His Majesty, in refusing to pay the
14000 l. of Ship Money, which was His due; and that they were more ready to
hold with Rebels than with His Majesty; and, that they dealt unthankfully with
His Majesty, in not relieving him in His great Necessities.

And so Mr. Maynard concluded this Article, the words charged being proved, and
my Lord of Straffords Answer was expected.

After a small time given him to recollect his Notes, my Lord of Strafford made
his Defense, in substance as follows,

That he is to give his Defense to the 26th Article, the first part whereof E.
of Straffords Defense.
was, That he should Counsel and Approve two dangerous and wicked Projects.

First, To seize on the Bullion and money in the mint.

Secondly, To debase the Coin with mixture of Brass.

That he has, in his Answer, denied either the Counselling, or the approving
of these Projects, as they call them; and, for that part, which indeed would be
the principal thing in the Charge, if it were proved, there is no offer of any
proof at all, that is, concerning his Approving, Counselling, or devising those
Projects.

To this he Answers, It will appear in their own proof, he (the Defendant did
not Counsel the seizing of the money, for Mr. Edwards acknowledges, when they
came to acquaint him with the business, he professed he knew nothing of it; Nor
did he, being then sick, and unfit for this matter.

And, Mr. Skinner says, He (my Lord of Strafford) told them, That he knew
nothing of the seizure of that money; So that there is no Proof against him:
and, the Proof brought, Acquits him, as to that.

For the debasing of the Coin, Mr. Palmer says, That he and the rest of the
Officers giving Reasons against it, he (my Lord of Strafford) gave it over; He
remembers very well, there was some speech about the Copper Coin; and, that
Information was to be given, what Queen Elizabeth had done in the like case:
And, he remembers too, that it was given over: Also, that he was one of the
Committee, to take Information of the Reasons for it, and against it; and, to
report: and, further then that, he meddled not with it.

For the rest of the Charge, in telling the City, They dealt undutifully with
His Majesty, etc. he conceives the Proofs are full in the Point, and fuller
then any thing of the Charge since the Trial began.

And, it is true, he did not at that time think the City had dealt thankfully
with His Majesty, they having received so many Favors from him, and He
residing amongst them, should refuse the Loan of 100000 l. on good security
given; and, it might very well be (as he thinks he did) at that time, he might
say so; And, if he spoke it out of overmuch sense toward His Majesty, and His
Service, surely he does not conceive it to be any great Crime, to say, They
dealt undutifully with the King: But, whatsoever it was, he is sure he is ready
to amend it, and to be of another Opinion; For, he remembers very well, and, he
thinks many of their Lordships will call it to mind, that when upon the return
of diverse Noble Persons to York, he understood that the City of London had
lent the King 200000 l. he then said, That he was glad for his part, extremely
glad of it; and, all that was past formerly, was now fully satisfied, as to
him, and he should be ready to serve them with his Life for it, as long as he
lived; And this he spoke in the Great Council of the Peers at York, and that he
would be as ready to serve the City of London, as any poor Gentleman in the
Kingdom, and so he says again, he will: and if at that time, or other time, he
was so sensible of the Service of His Master, as not to think it well done of
them, to refuse so small a Courtesy, and expressed something that might have been
spared: Men oftentimes offend with the Tongue, when they offend not with the
heart; And, he hopes this can be no such Bloody Crime, it arguing him rather to
be innocent from doing any great evil, when words are so often charged on him,
rather than doing.

But, there are some things not proved, that perhaps will be mentioned, because
they be singly spoken of, but not doubly proved.

The next Charge is a Letter, that he should show, about the King of France
appointing Officers to take Accounts, and to view men's Books, and that it might
be an Example for us here. Which words he does absolutely deny. He never spoke
them. He never thought them: And Mr. Palmer only speaks it; But says, the very
words he cannot express: and, if he cannot (the Defendant) appeals to their
Lordships, whether he should be Condemned for words which cannot be expressed?
and he hopes it will be of very little force with their Lordships, when it is
so uncertainly delivered. But, however, it is a single Testimony, none of the
other Witnesses testifying the words, as he conceives.

Sir William Parkhurst denies expressly, that he heard them.

Mr. Gogan is a single Testimony, in saying, what my Lord of Strafford should
say to my Lord Cottington, That they might be worthy of his Lordships
consideration; And Sir William Parkhurst denies that he heard them.

But, it will be necessary for him, to let their Lordships know clearly and
plainly, what this great matter was concerning the French Letter, for he trusts
my Lord Cottington would remember it, and my Lord Treasurer too, if need were;
but this is no way in his Charge, and therefore he shall not insist in the
proof of it.

His Lordship having the honor to be of the Foraign Committee, my Lord of
Leicester was pleased to send weekly Letters, to diverse of their Lordships,
and, among the rest, he received one, being in the nature of a Gazette: In
which Letter, nothing was mentioned of Commissaries of Horse; but, it was
mentioned, that the Cardinal had given direction to certain Commissioners, to
go into the Houses of diverse Merchants, not over the Kingdom, but at Paris, and
Inform themselves by their Books of Account, what Estates they had, that they
might demand Supply.

This Letter, he says, he Read, with this Clause, You may see what is done in
other places; but, God be thanked you have so pious and gracious a King, that
he thinks on none of these things; he read it to them as a Gazette, a foolish
idle Letter, and no more.

My Lord Cottington being Interrogated touching the Letter, etc.

He professes that he knew nothing of such a Letter, but because he I.
Cottington Witness.
would remember it, he spoke with Sir William Parkhurst, and Mr. Palmer, and
some others, and they told him, that when my Lord was Reading the Letter, he
was Writing in another Room; and asking, Why it was said he was present? they
told him then, That they thought Gogan had said so, when there was no such
matter; For, he having seen his name in the Printed Book, he has been careful
to inform himself, what kind of Letter it was, for he professed to their
Lordships, he remembered not the Letter, nor the discourse, and asking Sir
William Parkhurst and the rest, why it was said, such words were spoken to him
by my Lord of Strafford? they say, they had been examined upon it, and had
denied it.

For Sir Ralph Freeman's Deposition, that my Lord of Strafford should say, That
if the poor men that work on the Money should refuse to work, they might be
sent to the House of Correction; That he conceives he might say without
offense, but it is no part of his Charge.

My Lord Cottington being asked (on Mr. Glyns motion) whether he had heard of
such a Letter?

He professed, to his remembrance he never heard of the Letter.

Whence Mr. Maynard inferred, there be others that speak to that, Mr. Maynard.
therefore there may be something that is not remembered.

And so my Lord of Strafford concluded, that he had told their Lordships
clearly and plainly what is proved, what the things were, and as they were; and
he trusts nothing is in his Actions, but such as may admit of a noble and
favorable construction: and so there is no more for him to Answer to this
Article, but only to say, That under the favor of these Gentlemen, nothing can
incline one way or other, to be an accusation of High Treason.

To which Mr. Maynard made a Reply in substance as follows.
That he should not hold their Lordships long in Reply to this; My Mr. Maynards
Reply.
Lord denies the Counselling and Approving the matter of seizing the Mynt, and
debasing the Coin, and a Witness produced, says, My Lord knew nothing of it;
that they can press no farther, but that is no justification to my Lord
Strafford, to retort such words concerning the Great City of this Kingdom, on
so small an occasion, as their desire to have their Money discharged. It was a
grievous thing, and is not to be slighted; that their Estates being beyond Sea,
my Lord of Strafford should make so little of it. But my Lord Answers nothing
to these words, That the City of London was more ready to help the Rebels, than
to help the King, and he does well not to do it, for whosoever does help a
Rebel, is of the same condition with the Rebel. For the matter of the Letter,
it is of no great importance whether it be so or no? But the matter is, What
Speeches were used? My Lord says, the Speeches are proved by only one witness;
But the truth is, one Witness positively swears one part, and another the other
part; but both agree, That my Lord Cottington was there, though Sir William
Parkhurst does not remember it.

Mr. Whitlock added, That my Lord of Strafford is pleased to mention a Mr.
Whitlock.
Letter from an Honouable person, my Lord of Leicester, and now he observes, it
was a Gazette, and no Letter at all from my Lord of Leicester.

But my Lord of Strafford desired, he might not be mistaken, he being very
tender to have it laid on him, that he should in any thing speak untruth, or
contradict himself.

Their Lordships know, the Letters sent familiarly every week from my Lord of
Leicesters Secretary, as News to the foreign Committee, are only in the nature
of a Gazette, and so he intended to open it.

Mr. Strowd added, there is something in the Tract of this Article that Mr.
Strowd.
sticks near to me, and I cannot let it pass; Whereas my Lord says, Words are
only laid to his Charge, which argues his innocence in Fact, in that he has
been sparing in doing, whatsoever his Language is; First, The Laws are clear,
that words may be Treason, and to every man's reason it sounds thus far, That
words in consequence may go beyond some actions; and words of the highest
nature he has used, all trenching deeper on us than some Acts might have done:
to counsel His Majesty in things of that consequence, it touches not only on
the safety of His Majesty's Crown, but also on the Liberty of his People, and
may go beyond force; for if my Lord of Strafford had brought in his 8000 Irish
by force, we might have withstood them by force.

But when he goes to the Ear of a pious Prince, and insinuates that we know not
of, and brings a desolation on a Kingdom, who shall repel such Language, when
force may repel Forces? And surely had he plotted and devised against His
Majesty, by any one (which God forbid he should, or that His Majesty should be
in that danger) the pretense of a Prince might have daunted a Traitor, that he
could not have done the work; yet had he done it (which God forbid) a Prince,
may dye with fair reputation to posterity; but when he shall inspire a Prince
in his ear, and provoke tyrannical Carriage to His Subjects, he may abuse a
good Prince, but how he may leave him to posterity, I leave to your Lordships.

But my Lord stays not singly in Counsel and Advice, but something was done
upon it. I appeal to your Lordships, when proof shall be brought in the case;
and First, consider the misery that England is now in, what could have been
done more to have made us miserable, but absolute desolation? The Aldermen were
committed that very day, and though it cannot be proved, he gave the immediate
Counsel, yet he gave the Counsel that has been proved, and that day four of
them were committed; and this the Aldermen are ready to prove.

Sir Henry Garaway Interrogated, Whether any of the Aldermen were committed?

He Answered, That he shall not need to Answer that; for my Lord Garaway
Witness.
will confess it, there were four Aldermen committed, Alderman Rainston,
Alderman Somes, Alderman Geere, Alderman Atkins, and it was the same day they
were there, to give an account of the able Men, and the loan of 100000 l. Their
Answer not giving satisfaction, they were committed the same day to several
prisons; by what Order or Direction he knows not.

So Mr. Glyn desired their Lordships, to observe the words proved against him,
That no good will be done on them, till they were laid by the heels, which my
Lord says, produced no effect; yet that very day Mr. Glyn.
four were laid by the heels, and it rests upon their Lordships Judgments, by
whose advice.

And Mr. Strowde concluded, That my Lord of Straffords Words and Mr. Strowde.
Actions Agree in this Kingdom, and the miseries of this Kingdom, do agree with
his Words and Actions.

And so the 26th Article was concluded.

THE Seven and Twentieth Article. The Charge,
26 THat in or about the month of August last, he was made Lieutenant General
Art. XXVII. Charge.
of all His Majesty's ^orces in the North, prepared against the Scots; and
being at York, did then in the month of September, by his own authority, and
without any lawful Warrant, impose a Tax on His Majesty's Subjects in the
County of York of eight pence per diem, for maintenance of every Soldier of
the Trained-bands of that County; which sums of Money he caused to be levied by
force. And to the end to compel His Majesty's Subjects, out of fear and terror,
to yield to the payment of the same; he did Declare, that he would commit them
that refused the payment thereof; and the Soldiers should be satisfied out of
their Estates; and they that refused it, were in very little better condition,
than of High Treason.

MR. Maynard proceeded to the 27 the Article; That the Mr. Maynard.
Earl of Strafford imposed a Tax on His Majesty's Subjects, in the County of
York, of 8 d. per diem, for the maintenance of every Soldier of the Trained
Band of that County, causing it to be levied by force, Threatening them that
refused with Commitment, and that they that did not pay the Soldiers, should be
satisfied out of their Goods, and they were in little better case, than the
case of High Treason, that refused to pay.

The state of their proofs will stand thus; There were three Levies; First, a
months Contribution, and that was for the general; The Second, a Contribution
for a fornight, and that was for two particular Regiments or Companies; A
Third, for a month more, so it was for ten weeks in the whole.

My Lord of Strafford pretends two things in his Answer for his excuse.

First, That it was upon a Petition from the Country; To that we say this, The
Country did petition His Majesty, offering their endeavor, in that Petition
they likewise desire a Parliament for redress of grievances, with which
Petition some principal Gentlemen of the Country, attended my Lord of
Strafford, desiring his assistance; He likes well the clause concerning the
Petitioners endeavors, but not that touching the Parliament; and therefore he
would not deliver it: though he said, it would fall out, there would be a
Parliament, His Majesty having resolved it, but he likes not that they should
Petition it. They refusing to retract from their Petition, he does in the name
of some of his Lordships Friends, and Dependants, and Recusants, prefer another
Petition, but it was when the Gentlemen of the Country were gone, and so there
was no consent of the Country.

The other thing he pretends is, That the Lords of the great Council, had
consented to that Imposition, which we say is not true, there was no such
Consent or Direction; yet this he said, both in the Country, and in his
Answer, and their Lordships best know, that the Lords of the Great Council did
not give that direction,

The first thing offered, was the Petition first intended, which Sir Hugh
Cholmley, and Sir Philip Stapleton affirming on oath, to be the true Petition,
their Hands being to it amongst others, was read, being in effect.

The Humble Petition of the Gentlemen of the County YORK.
WHEREAS Your Majesty imparted to us the danger, by the incursions of the
Scots, and the necessity of continuing the Trained-Bands of this County in
entertainment for two Months, and raising Money so long, and did Royally assure
us, That the Wardships of such as dyed in this Employment, should be freed, and
one third part of the Trained-Bands should be abated, for which we acknowledge
our bounden thankfulness, in ready obedience of Your Majesty's Command, we have
represented to Your Majesty our present Condition, and in the entrance of the
business, we found a great impediment and discouragement, by certain Warrants
produced for levying Money, toward this new service, wherein in the first
place, we cannot omit to let your Majesty know, the great grief we have, in
that the County is there charged with disaffection and backwardness therein,
which as we are confident, we never were guilty of, so we were in good hope,
your Majesty had received no such Impression of us. And in the next place, we
find our selves much grieved, that the execution of such Warrants, which we
conceive illegal, should be concluded and urged on peril of life;
notwithstanding the strictness of which Warrants, we find diverse parts of the
County have not been able to pay the Money demanded, and from thence, and the
attestation of diverse Gentlemen, we are assured the scarcity of Money is such,
that it is diabled from satisfying your expectation therein; And that Your
Majesty may know it is no pretense, but a real poverty; we are bold to
represent the Charges, viz. of Ship Money. Vast expenses the last year in
Military affairs. The Billeting and Insolency of Soldiers this Summer, part of
the time on the credit of the County. Decay of Trade. Stop of Markets.


Charge of Carriages, especially in Harvest, by which means, not only the
common people, but most of the Gentry, by the failing of Rents, are much
impoverished:

And therefore we petition Your Majesty, You will accept our endeavor, to
prevail with the Country to raise so much Money, as will pay the County one
whole month, from their first rising, within which time, (as is generally
reported) Your Majesty has Commanded the attendance of the Peers, to consult
for the safety of the Kingdom, and pray the Trained-Bands may be continued in
the Villages, where they are Quartered, except Your occasions otherwise require
it; and in the interim, for the redress of these Grievances, and security of
Your Kingdom, Your Majesty will please, to Declare Your Pleasure for summoning
the High Court of Parliament, etc.

To prove that my Lord of Strafford refused to deliver this Petition, and that
another was framed, to which the Country consented not.

Sir Hugh Cholmley was Sworn and Interrogated, whether this Petition Sir Hugh
Cholmeley Witness.
was showed my Lord of Strafford, and whether he was not unwilling to deliver
it, and why?

He Answered, That this Petition was showed to my Lord of Strafford, in the
name of the Gentlemen that had subscribed it, and it was delivered to him by my
Lord Wharton, and of those Gentlemen that subscribed their Hands, many were
gone out of Town, and desired that those that staid in Town, might attend my
Lord Wharton, and entreat him to deliver it to my Lord of Strafford, and when
it was delivered, my Lord of Strafford took only exception (at least he the
Examinant) is sure that was the chief exception) because they petitioned for a
Parliament; and said, that leaving out that Clause, he would join with him in
the Petition.

Being asked what he knew of another Petition framed afterward?

He Answered, That at that time no other Petition was framed, by the Gentry of
the Country, this Petition being rejected; for my Lord of Strafford went and
delivered some message to the King (he thinks for the maintaining of the
Trained-Bands a month) and many of them that did subscribe to the Petition not
consenting to it, met together, intending to make a Petition and Protestation
against it, and did so; intending to deliver it to His Majesty, but it was not
delivered.

Being asked what Moneys were levied, by whose Warrants, and for what time?

He Answered, That he can say nothing to the levying of Money, but in general,
he thinks Money was levied.

Sir Henry Cholmley Sworn and Interrogated, what my Lord of Strafford Sir Henry
Cholmley Witness.
said concerning Money?

He Answered, That he had the Honor to be one of the Colonels of the
Trained-Bands, and received Command from my Lord of Strafford, being
Lieutenant General of the Army, to give account in what state his (the
Examinants) Regiment stood? of what strength it was, and how provided of Money?
That he repaired to his Lordship, and told him, That notwithstanding the
Warrants sent out, they came not to him, and unless he had Money shortly, the
Regiment would disband; That his Lordship answered him, he would send a Levy on
the Goods of those that refused.

Being asked (on my Lord of Straffords motion) whether he did so send?

He Answered, No; that he knows of.

Sir John Hotham Sworn and Interrogated, what he knew touching the Petition,
and my Lord of Straffords rejecting it?

He Answered, That concerning the Petition, it is true, that being to Hotham
Witness.
meet together in the afternoon at the Common Hall, they did first consult,
what to represent to my Lord.

But when they came there, my Lord refused, and made doubt of delivering the
Petition, unless they would put out the clause, concerning the Parliament, and
some thought it fit to prefer it without it.

Some of the Gentlemen that had petitioned, went out, and delivered in
something to the King, but what it was he knows not.

And for levying of the Money, he can say nothing to it; Warrants were sent out
by the Vice President, but how far my Lord was interested in it, he can say
nothing at all.

Sir Philip Stapleton Sworn and Interrogated, as to the delivering of the
Petition.

He Answered, that for the Petition, he can say his Contrymen Stapleton
Witness,
being sent for to York by the King, and intimation given, that they should
keep their Trained-Bands for two months, they desired time to give an answer,
which was allowed them as they desired, till the next day. They met that night,
and though my Lord Lieutenant desired to meet with them, they met first by
themselves, and drew this Petition; for my Lord being Lord Lieutenant General,
and a Privy-Counsellor, they should not have been so free to deliver their
opinions, though he (the Examinant) thinks some of them should have been free
enough. They drew the Petition, and he thinks there was 100 hands to it, and
being delivered to my Lord Lieutenant, he took exception, because it concluded
with desire of a Parliament, and told them, if they would leave out that
Clause, he would deliver it, if not, he would not, and after long discourse
(wherein he showed much Eloquence) most of them continued their resolution to
stand to that Petition, and many went out of Town and left it, without making
question but it should be delivered to His Majesty. My Lord after put it to
Vote, whereof there were many Papists, and on the Vote delivered an Answer,
what, he (the Examinant) does not know, for he staid behind to draw another
Petition, and an humble protestation to His Majesty, that this Petition was the
Answer of the Country.

Lord Wharton being Sworn and Examined to the point of the Petition?

His Lordship Answered, That this was unexpected to him, for he L. Wharton
Witness.
heard not of it from the Committee, till he came into the place, but he can
perfectly speak to it, having a little Interest in it, himself being one of
them who subscribed it; That on Saturday in the afternoon, being appointed to
attend my Lord of Strafford touching this business (for most of the Gentlemen
desiring to be at home) on a sudden went out of Town, and desired him with
some others, to deliver this Petition to my Lord, by his own hand, to be
delivered to the King, he did so, and accordingly desired my Lord to deliver it
in the name of the Gentlemen, that had set their Hands to it, many being
likewise with him on that occasion; That my Lord of Strafford took exception to
the clause for a Parliament, and said, That if they would put that out, he
would join in the rest of the Petition. Diverse of the Gentlemen that were there
(there being not many that had set their hands) would not go back from that,
which with so much Humility and Reason, they thought was desired; thereupon my
Lord would not deliver it, and went to the King. But they that thought not fit
to have the Petition altered, thought not fit to go with him to the King; and
what he said, he (the Examinant) knows not.

Sir William Pennyman being Sworn and Interrogated, Whether a Warrant now
showed him, was not under His Hand and Seal?

He confessed it was his Hand and Seal. Pennyman (...)


And that being desired to be read,

Sir William Pennyman offered to their Lordships, that he presumes he comes to
be a Witness against my Lord of Strafford, not himself, and referred it to
their Lordships, whether he should answer any thing against himself, this
having an oblique aspect on himself; but if their Lordships will require him,
he will submit.

But Mr. Maynard upon opening of the matter, showing that they urge Mr. Maynard.
it only, as grounded on my Lord of Strafford's Command for levying of Moneys.

It was read, being to this effect.

To the Constable of Sergeant-Major Yaworthe's Company.
WHereas the Lord-Lieutenant-General of His Majesty's Army, by His Majesty's
Command, sent forth Warrants to the Constable of this Weapontake of
Longborough, for Collecting and Paying the Soldiers of my Regiment, Six weeks
pay, to be delivered from my hands, which is not yet received from, etc.

These are therefore once more in His Majesty's Name, to Will and Require you
forthwith, to pay, or cause to be paid to the said Sergeant-Major, the several
Rates and Proportions, both of the First and Second Contribution, Assessed on
your-Town, etc. And if any person or persons shall refuse so to do, you are
instantly on receipt hereof, to bring him or them, etc. to serve in their own
persons, for the defense of this County, as the necessity of this Cause
requires; And hereof, etc. fail not

19 October. 1640.
Sir William Pennyman being Asked, Whether the Warrant was grounded on a former
Command of my Lord of Strafford?

He Answered, That he cannot directly speak to that, he will not charge his
memory with it; for, he thinks, the first Warrant was issued by the
Vice President, and, whether any was issued by my Lord of Straffords direction,
he cannot Answer precisely, but he conceives there was; and, he has a confused
notion in his head, but he cannot particularly and distinctly remember it.

Being Asked, Whether he knew any Deputy Lieutenants were drawn to issue a
Warrant, to levy money on the Country on this ground, that the Lords of the
Great Council had consented to it?

He Answered, That he conceives they were summoned thither together, and on
this occasion; when the Trayned-Bands were disbanded, it was thought fit the
Frontier-Regiments, viz. his (the Examinants) and Sir Thomas Danbies, should be
continued, but he (the Examinant) Conceiving it unreasonable and unequal, that
they should continue at their own Charge, and the rest not tributary to them;
and, at least, they not being ordered to march successively to relieve them; he
(the Examinant) complained thereof to my Lord of Strafford, they were thereupon
sent for, and an Order was made, to which he (the Examinant) refers himself.

Being asked, Whether it was not to this effect, Whether those that would not
pay their Money, should serve in Person?

He Answered, Sure he believes it was, for his Warrant is a relative Warrant to
that other.

Being Asked, On what Grounds the Deputy Lieutenants were induced, to make such
an Order? and, Whether it was not on an Allegation, that the Lords of the Great
Council had Consented, or Commanded, it should be done?

He Answered, That he presumes it is matter of Record, if a man may say so, for
the Warrant will speak: But, he presumes there was some such thing spoken by my
Lord of Strafford, that he had acquainted His Majesty with it, or the Greatest
Counsel, or to that effect, and that induced them to put that into the Preamble
of the Order.

Being pressed to speak his knowledge,

He Answered, That truly he verily believes it was so.

Being pressed again to speak his knowledge positively.

He Answered, That he does very Confidently and assuredly believe it is so, but
he does not particularly remember it, for it is a great while since he saw that
Warrant: but, it is matter of Record, and if he sees a Copy of the Warrant, he
shall let their Lordships know, whether it be a true Copy.

Being pressed further to Answer, Upon what ground it was made? And, whether upon
an Allegation of a Consent, of the Lords of the great Council?

He Answered, That he cannot further Answer than before: he does very
confidently believe it to be so; for, he does remember, my Lord of Strafford
told them, he had acquainted the Kings Majesty, or the Lords of the Great
Council, which induced them to put them into the preamble of the Order.

Being yet urged to answer Categorically.

He Answered, That he verily believes my Lord did so; and that under favor
reaches almost to a knowledge, the thing is so notorious, that the thing it
self may be known.

Being required to speak his knowledge, Whether my Lord of Strafford told them,
the Lords had Commanded, or Consented to it?

He Answered, When that was spoken of, he was out of the Room, and it was drawn
by Mr. Rockley a Deputy Lieutenant; but, Mr. Rockley told him my Lord did say
so.

Being yet again pressed to a positive Answer (Mr. Maynard observing to their
Lordships, That when a Gentleman is brought upon his Oath in a Cause of this
Consequence, this Dalliance is not to be admitted.)

He Answered, That he Answered as clearly as can be, And the Gentlemen will not
press him beyond his knowledge; He says, he does confidently believe it, but,
under favor he was not at that time in the Room, but Mr. Rockley told him, My
Lord of Strafford had acquainted the King and the Great Council.

Mr. Maynard observing, That now he speaks less then before; and desired he
might be Interrogated, Whether at that time, or at any other time, my Lord of
Strafford told him, The Lords of the Great Council had assented to this Levy.

Which being proposed;

He Answered, He does confidently believe my Lord did it; It may be proved by a
great many others; but he is confident of this, as of any thing in the World,
that my Lord did tell them, when they went to draw the Warrant, That my Lord
had acquainted the Lords of the Great Council, and His Majesty, and that he did
it by their Consent; and, therefore they put it into the Preamble of their
Order.

Sir Hen. Griffin Sworn and Interrogated, Whether my Lord of Strafford said,
The Lords of the Great Council had consented to the levying of Money?

He Answered, He heard my Lord say so indeed (or else they had not Griffin,
Witness.
set their hands to the Order) that he had direction from the Great Council, to
levy Money for Sir William Pennyman, and Sir Tho. Danbies Regiments.

Being Interrogated, In what manner the Money was to be Levied?

He Answered, That he does not know in what manner.

Being Asked (on my Lord of Clares Motion) What he meant by this Direction?
Lord Clare.


He Answered, That there was an Order made from all them that were
Deputy Lieutenants, and my Lord of Strafford as one; and this is the Order
concerning the levying of Money for the two Regiments.

Being Asked (on Mr. Glyns Motion) Whether my Lord of Strafford Mr. Glyn.
had not directed the money to be levied in manner as is expressed in the Order?

He Answered, That to his best Remembrance, my Lord did say so, he must confess.

Being Asked, Whether in case any refused to pay this money, they were not to
be compelled to serve in person?

He Answered, There was such a Clause in the Order, to his best Remembrance.

Mr. Robert Strickland Sworn, and Interrogated, Whether my Lord of Mr.
Strickland, Witness.
Strafford said, The Great Council had directed Warrants should be issued for
the levying of Money?

He Answered, Yes. It cannot be denied: He (the Examinant) gave a Copy of that
Order, when the last Commissioners were at Rippon; and he saw a Gentleman even
now behind him, that had a Copy of the Order and Warrant, and it is declared,
that it was done by the Great Council of the Peers.

Sir John Burroughes Sworn and Interrogated, Whether he knew of any such
VVarrant, or Order, for levying money for those two Regiments? Burroughes
Witness.


He humbly entreated, That he might have their Lordships direction, before he
Answered the Question; for, their Lordships know very well, that, by His
Majesty's Command, he was appointed to be Clerk or Register of the Great
Council: Moreover, he conceives, That (by his duty, all Orders and Resolutions
of the House, especially those that concerned third Parties, without asking
leave) he was to deliver to the parties, if they required them: But, for such
Debates and Arguments, as were used in the Great Council, to and again, between
their Lordships, he humbly entreated their Lordships Direction, Whether he
should publish any thing of them or no? And, upon their Lordships Order, he
shall clearly, and with all integrity, deliver the truth.

Being permitted by their Lordships, to speak to the Questions propounded.

He proceeded, and said, That he has very good cause to remember, that upon
the 20th of October, he went to my Lords Commissioners for the Scotch Treaty at
Ripon, and, upon that day, there were two prime Gentlemen of those parts, that
came and attended the Lords, he thinks, about business of their own, and, he
supposes, only to tender their service to their Lordships; That, amongst some
other Discourses betwixt the Lords and them, they mentioned some such Order as
this was, concerning the relieving of the two Regiments, that were for the
Guard of Richmondshire, and some other of those parts, made, as they said, by
the Great Council of the Peers; and thereupon, that themselves, my Lord of
Strafford, and the rest of the Deputy Lieutenants, had granted out Warrants,
for the Assessing of Money for the relieving of those Regiments; Those that
heard it were startled at the Order, being said to be an Order of the Great
Council; and commanded him (the Examinant) to inform them, Whether he knew of
any such Order? he told them, He remembers not any such Order, and was
confident he never drew up any, because he never heard any mention of those two
Regiments in the Great Council. Their Lordships asking him, whether he was sure
of it? he told their Lordships he would look on his Notes, and faithfully
inform them how the case stood, he did so, and came back to their Lordships,
and told them he found nothing in his Notes of these Regiments; and while he
was there, he was confident no Order was drawn up; It is true, (he told their
Lordships) some Order might be drawn up, when he was absent, for he was first
at Ripon, and at York he was oftentimes employed in the Committee to write
Letters and Orders, and what was done in his absence, he could give no answer
to; but confident he was, no Order was made before the 20th of October by him,
or in his hearing or knowledge. Hereupon the Lords desired those two Gentlemen,
to give them Copies of the Warrants they had sent out, And that he (the
Examinant) should take their Testimony, which he did; this was the Twentieth or
Twenty seventh of October, which was the last day of the Great Council of the
Peers. My Lord of Strafford in Council then did take notice, that some such
thing had been done at Ripon, and then said to my Lord, that he did conceive he
had the Kings Order, and their Lordships Approbation, for the issuing out of
this VVarrant. But, since, he conceived their Lordships disliked it, he had
taken Copies of it, he was very willing to withdraw these Warrants; And, on
Debate, there was nothing more done; For his part, he never drew up an Order,
nor was he commanded to draw it up.

Being Asked (on my Lord of Straffords Motion) Whether on that last day, His
Majesty was not pleased to say in the Council, That what the Earl of Strafford
did in that Affair, was with His consent?

He Answered, It is true, He did give his consent to it, and commanded him to
go on with it; when he (the Earl of Strafford) desired, if any thing were amiss
in it, he might call back his Warrant again, and that he might easily do it,
and no hurt would come of it; and, whether His Majesty did thereupon affirm,
that my Lord of Strafford had formerly acquainted Him with it, and He Commanded
him to go on?

He Answered, That it is very true, My Lord Deputy appealed to the King,
Whether he had not His Majesty's Approbation and Order for it? and, the King
said, He did acquaint Him with it before the Lords; But not (to his Knowledge)
that He commanded him to proceed.

Being Asked (on my Lord of Essex motion) Whether some of the Lords did not
take exception at the VVarrant, and likewise thought fit, it should be called
in again?

He Answered, That the Vote generally of the Lords was against the VVarrant;
but, he remembers not any thing said for the recalling of it; but, they
absolutely declined the making of any such VVarrant.

Being Asked (on my Lord of Straffords motion) Whether it was Voted or no?

He Answered, That it was spoken to by several of my Lords, but all declined it.

Being Asked, Whether he had the VVarrant, or a true Copy of it?

He Answered, He has a Copy of that which was delivered him, by the two
Gentlemen that were then at Ripon, and their hands are to it, to attest it;
and, he saw them set their hands to it himself.

Being bid to name the two Gentlemen.

He said, They were Mr. Robert Strickland, and Mr. Mallard, Who did affirm,
That, to the best of their remembrance, this is a true Copy of the VVarrant,
sent out to the several Divisions.

To prove Execution by force,

Mr. Henry Cholmeley Interrogated, What he heard the Earl of Strafford say,
touching the Vice-Presidents issuing of Warrants?

He Answered, That shortly after my Lord of Straffords coming to Cholmeley
Witness.
York, in the Presence Chamber at York, he (the Examinant) among some other
Gentlemen, were summoned to be there, where my Lord of Strafford, speaking of
the Trained-Bands, occasion was offered by another that was there, How the
private, or common-men should be maintained? My Lord of Strafford Answered, It
had been always the Custom, that the private men should serve themselves in
person, or maintain the charge of them that served for them; and, the common
men's charge is borne by the several Constables in the Towns where they live:
And, he said to His Majesty, Sir, if you please, Mr. Vice President may, or
shall (the Examinant knows not which) send out Warrants to that purpose; but,
whether he sent out any or no, he cannot tell.

William Dowsen Sworn, and Interrogated, How he has known those moneys for the
Trained-Bands, levied?

He Answered, (His Answer being commanded by the Clark, the Witnesses Dowsen,
Witness.
having a low voice.) That Mr. Yaworth, Sergeant-Major to Sir William Pennyman,
came with Four Musketeers to the Lordship of Egton, and sent them for
Assessors, and when the Assessors came, they were importuned to have them
Assess (for they had been unwilling to Assess) and, if they would not, they
should answer it before my Lord General, and then they consented to Assess; and
he showed a Warrant from Sir William Pennyman, and gave it to the Constable for
the Collection of the Money.

Being Asked, Whether he threatened, That he should serve in person, if he did
not pay?

He Answered, Yes, by Serjeant-Major Yaworth, and so he served under Sir
William Pennymans Regiment.

Being Asked (on my Lord of Straffords motion) Whether he saw any VVarrant of
his?

He Answered, No.

Being Asked, Whether the Four Musketeers did not go along with the Constable,
from place to place to levy the money?

He Answered, Two Musketeers went with every Constable to levy it.

William Pierson Sworn, and Interrogated, Whether Four Musketeers, or
Soldiers, did not come to Collect this Money?

He Answered, Yes. And he saw them in the Town, go altogether Pierson Witness.
in with the Constables; but, in the Deals or outsides, there went but with
each Constable one; The Lordship consists of Long Deals, distant one from
another 12 score, and, in those out-places, one went with a Constable, but, in
the Town, all four went.

Being Interrogated, By what VVarrant?

He Answered, That he did see a VVarrant that was received from Captain
Yaiworth, under Sir William Pennymans hand, and he saw his name at it.

Sir William Ingram Sworn, and Interrogated, What he has heard my Lord of
Strafford say, touching this business of levying Money? and, What condition
they were in that denied to pay it?

He Answered, That soon after the Trained-Bands were Commanded Ingram, Witness.
to be drawn forth, he found the opportunity, and did move my Lord of
Strafford, acquainting him what Case Soldiers were in; For he (the Examinant)
had been with the Soldiers, and found them willing to March, if they might know
how to be maintained: the Masters had refused to pay the private men, and the
Constables said, the Parishes were so poor, that they could not collect any
more money; and desired, his Lordship would be pleased, before they were drawn
forth, he might know how they should be maintained: And, his Lordship gave him
this Answer, That the private men must maintain their Soldiers after the rate
of 8 d. a day, so long as they were forth, else he would Commit them, and order
should be taken, the Soldiers should be maintained after 8 d. a day, out of
their Estates; And commanded him (the Examinant) to speak to the Constables,
that Assessments might be made for the maintenance of the Common Army; and, if
any did refuse to pay their parts of an Assessment, they should be likewise
committed to Prison, and lie there, and the Common Soldiers should be
maintained after the rate of 8 d. a day; and, he would have men know, that
refusing to pay such Contribution, they were in little better condition, than
guilty of High Treason.

Sir Harry Griffin being Interrogated, Whether my Lord of Strafford sent not
Messengers to them, that refused to pay this Money Assessed?

He Answered, That indeed he does not know of any thing concerning Griffin,
Witness.
the two Regiments of Sir William Pennyman, and Sir Thomas Danby; but, for his
own, he can speak, That about the latter end of August last, he was commanded
by the Sergeant Mayor-General of the Trained-Bands, to advance his Regiment;
and, as soon as they were advanced, there issued forth assessments for a whole
Months pay, for his whole Regiment; and, on this Warrant he received 300 l. or
thereabouts, but more they would not, nor could not pay; whereupon he went to
my Lord of Strafford, and told him, He could not keep his Companies together
without Money; and my Lord bid him go back to his Regiment, and he would take a
Course, and my Lord did grant forth his Warrant, and on that was pleased to
send a Messenger (as he thinks) to the Constable, to whom it was directed, and
the Messengers went from Constable to Constable, and all was paid.

Being asked (on my Lord of Straffords motion) whether it were paid voluntarily?

He Answered, They were for ought he knows.

Sir Hugh Cholmley being Interrogated (on Mr. Maynards motion) of what Quality
those persons were, that staid with my Lord of Strafford, and joined in the
latter Petition? and, Whether many of them were not Recusants?

He Answered, That there were some of them Gentlemen of very good Cholmley,
Witness.
Quality, a few that had retracted their hands from the Petition, some 7 or 8,
and he does not know, whether there were not many Papists, but they took a Note
of four or six and twenty, to his best remembrance, that the Country had a
Character on them to be Papists, and Men affected that way, but he knows not
whether they were Convicted or no.

And so Mr. Maynard said, they should leave this Article a while, in
expectation Mr. Maynard
of my Lord of Straffords Answer, and then they should recollect their proofs;
in the mean time they supposed every particular was proved.

My Lord of Strafford, after some time granted him to recollect his Notes, made
his Defense in substance as follows.

And First, he desired leave to read the Charge, and their Lordships E. of
Straffords Defense.
should find, how little of the matter opened before them this day, was therein
contained, and so he is not accountable for it.

He read the 27th Article.

That in or about the month of August last, etc. His Lordship craved liberty
to dissent from that worthy Gentleman that spoke last, who in his opinion, is
very much mistaken, who was pleased to say, That all was fully proved; for he
conceives, little or nothing is proved as to him.

That he might give their Lordships the clear satisfaction, he desired to go on
in their own Order; and as the Proofs were offered, he shall offer his Answers.

The First thing spoken of, is a Petition drawn up by certain Gentlemen,
whereby they did offer a months pay to the Trained-Bands, which Petition was
showed the Defendant, and was refused by him to be delivered, and the Reason
assigned is, because in the latter part there is contained a Petition for
calling of a Parliament, and that is laid to him as a Crime, but where it is,
he does not find, and when he does, he shall answer and acknowledge it.

He acknowledged there was such a Petition, and that it was showed to him, and
having not been acquainted with it formerly, he remembers very well, he desired
to be excused from meddling with it; for having the Honor at that time to be the
Kings Lieutenant of the County; besides that, he was Lieutenant General of the
Army, and having some poor share there, though not so great as other men, he
thought it very strange, that when the King had appointed them on Tuesday to
meet together, and advise how his service might be complied with, they should
at a private meeting after Supper, resolve of this Petition, and never make him
so much as acquainted with it; And where he was made so great a stranger in the
beginning of the business, he appeals to their Lordships whether he had reason
to be over officious, to serve them in the conclusion.

He acknowledges the Petition was delivered him, and on the reading of it, when
he heard that clause, of moving the King for a Parliament, he disadvised it,
and desired to be excused concerning it, not so fitting at that time, nor for
them on such an occasion: and therefore it might be left out, or a course taken
to deliver it by some other hand than his; and he trusts it is no offense, for
which he is any way punishable, to reserve that Christian Liberty in his own
opinion, that he sees cause for, when it may be done without breach of any Law
penal, or good manners, his Liberty being as free then to himself, as to them.
But it was not out of any unwillingness the Parliament should be called; upon
which they should pinch him; and make their Lordships and the Gentlemen think
him averse from Parliaments, for he did tell them at that time, he was
confident there would be a Parliament; and that on the coming together of the
Great Council of the Peers, he did conceive His Majesty would be pleased to
call a Parliament; and that their Petition would neither further nor hinder it,
and therefore it might be forborne, and the King left in his Acts of Grace to
his People, that he might have all the Honor of it to himself; and that it
should rise out of his Own Goodness, and Royal Breast, not as advised to it on
the desire of any body else; and therefore he thought not fit that that should
be put into the Petition, not out of a desire to avoid Parliaments; for it is
well enough known, (and if need were) he could justify himself in it, that no
poor servant the King had, was more forward, nor ready, nor willing to advise
the calling of this Parliament, than he was: but he shall ever conceive it fit
in this case, to reserve the Honor of the Kings Grace and Favor, as much as
may be to himself, and not direct it to any other hand whatsoever, and did then
(as always) as much as he could, apply the thanks of the People to the King his
Master, and assume nothing to himself.

But this he conceives no crime, and therefore he shall not need to trouble
their Lordships with proof of it, there being 20 Gentlemen in the room (he
dares say) that will justify him in this particular.

They come then and speak of a second message, to have been delivered by him to
His Majesty at York; hereby he is charged to have imposed a Tax without lawful
Warrant; he humbly affirms, and trusts, he shall manifestly prove it, that the
thing was yielded to by their own universal Assent, and that it was levied by
their own voluntary Will; and that there was nothing of force from the
beginning to the ending of the business; for if he had dealt in that manner, he
had been much to blame, tho as he stood then qualified, he thinks himself not
punishable for it. On Debate of the business, not above three or four
dissented, tho there were Two hundred present, they were persuaded and
convinced, it was just and necessary to contribute, and most of them that did
dissent, have been examined before their Lordships; but they did absolutely and
totally lay aside their Petition, and gave him Commission only in words, to
signify to His Majesty, that they were most willing and ready to contribute the
pay of a Month, for maintenance of the Trained-Bands, and that he did
faithfully deliver.

And whereas it is said they are Papists, he shall name persons as free from
that Tax, as any men in the Shire, who did give their consent, and he named
diverse of them.

To prove that he did nothing by force, but by unanimous consent of all.

Sir Paul Neal was first called, and being Interrogated, Whether the Petition
Signed by the Lord Wharton, and the rest, was not by the major of the Gentlemen
there declined and laid aside?

He Answered, That he was amongst diverse others, present at this meeting Neale.
Witness.
in the Common Hall, and on the first coming thither, this Petition was
presented by my Lord Wharton in the name of the Gentlemen that had subscribed
it; on the reading of the Petition, my Lord of Strafford did conceive, that the
clause concerning the desire of a Parliament was in it self superfluous,
because the King had declared his intention to have one, if at the meeting of
their Lordships at York it should be desired; and therefore he desired the
clause might be put out, and another Petition presented to the effect of the
former, only the last clause omitted, and that might be verbally presented by
some such man, as the major part of the company should choose, and on a long
debate, it was concluded (to the best of his remembrance) by Vote, and the
whole Vote of the company went, it should be delivered by my Lord of Strafford,
according to the substance of the Petition, the last clause left out; and to
the negative part, there were some four or five, he dares confidently swear,
not above half a score.

Being asked, what number there was of the company, that were willing to wave
the Petition?

He Answered, That the Hall was very full; he cannot give account of a certain
number, nor knew the subscription of the Petition, for till now he remembers
not, that ever he heard the particular names read; but there was, he thinks 200
Gentlemen of several ranks.

Being asked whether it was not the voluntary consent of them all, that a
months entertainment should be allowed the Trained Bands?

He Answered, That he conceives the consent was given no fuller nor larger, but
just the same as in the Petition, saving that one clause.

Which Mr. Maynard observed, went not further than to promise an endeavor.

Sir Paul Neal being Interrogated, whether the Money was not voluntarily paid
all over the Country, for the months entertainment, with force or violence?

He Answered, he can give no answer to that, having nothing to do in the
Country as Deputy-Lieutenant, or Officer, and other than he heard by
discourse, he cannot speak of his knowledge,

Being asked (on Mr. Glyns motion) Whether the major part of them that Signed
the Petition, did wave it?

He Answered, That he conceives he gave an Answer to that before, for he
remembers not, that till this day, he ever knew the names of the Gentlemen that
subscribed it, but only an attestation, that about 100 had subscribed, and
whether the major part of those were present, he does not know.

Being asked (on my Lord of Straffords motion) Whether he did not know diverse
of them that Signed the Petition, declared themselves for the waving of it?

He Answered, He did not know who had Signed it, and who not, saving only some
Gentlemen speaking in the debate, did declare, that they in particular had
Signed it, and did recede from it.

Being asked what he meant when he said, that not above half a score went to
the negative of the Message?

He Answered, That he meant it of them that were in the Hall.

Sir Edward Osborne was called to be a Witness for my Lord of Strafford, but
Mr. Maynard excepted against his being examined, as being one of them that sent
out the Warrant, for paying Money on pain of death, and as Sir William Pennyman
would have declined answering any thing of his own Act, as concerning himself,
so it was desired this Gentleman might not be examined to the justification of
himself by saying, the Money was levied by consent.

But Sir Edward alleged to their Lordships, That there is particular complaint
in the Petion against his Warrant, and therefore it was issued long before the
Petition presented.

After some further debate, the Examination of him was resolved upon.

Sir Edward Osborne being Interrogated, Whether the major part of them that
subscribed the Petition, and were present at the second meeting, did not
decline the Petition?

He Answered, That he cannot say the major part of them that subscribed the
Petition, did dissent openly in the Hall, for he thinks many of them were gone
out of Town, but he is sure, the Osborne, Witness.
major part there, nay all, but about Ten, did consent to the leaving out of
the clause, touching the Parliament, and to a Months pay; and on that, it was
humbly moved to my Lord (he cannot tell whether by himself the Examinant) that
my Lord would do them the Honor, to represent their ready affections to do the
King that service, that he would be their Mouth, which accordingly his Lordship
did, and they all attended him when he delivered the Message; and he does not
remember there was above 4 or 5 Gentlemen, that opened their mouths against
this consent, not in words, what their hearts were he cannot tell.

Being asked, Whether many that had subscribed the Petition, did not declare
they would not wave it, and go the other way?

He Answered, There were some that did indeed, but he does not know how many,
Sir Edward Robinson in particular, and gave his reasons for it, Sir Richard
Hutton and some others.

Being asked, how many Gentlemen he thinks were present at that meeting?

He Answered, The Hall was very full, and there were Gentlemen, Freeholders and
others, to the number of 300, as near as he could imagine.

Being asked, Whether that was not the place and time appointed by the King,
for the Country to meet and Treat about the business?

He Answered, Yes, it was so, by His Majesty's special Command, the day before.

Being asked, whether my Lord of Strafford did not go to the Manor, and many
Gentlemen with him, and delivered their Message to the King faithfully and
justly, as he had in Commission to do, and no otherwise?

He Answered, That according to their desire to his Lordship, he went presently
to the Manor; and they all attended him, but he could not hear the Message
delivered, the crowd was so great.

Being asked (on Mr. Maynards motion) whether there was any difference between
the Message and Petition, but only the leaving out the last clause touching the
Parliament?

He Answered, Truly No, but the principal things he took notice of, was a
Months pay.

Being asked (on Mr. Palmers motion) of what quality they were that were in the
Hall, whether not some that came to gaze only, and not prosecute the matter of
the Petition?

He Answered, That it is impossible for him to see through the bodies of men;
but there were not many of inferior quality that he knew; but had he time to do
it, they should make a Catalogue of as many Gentlemen and Freeholders, as set
their Hand to the Petition: but he cannot see in such a room as this, whether
there be Serving-men, or Aprentizes in a crowd.

To which Mr. Maynard answered, much less can he hear it. Mr. Maynard.


Sir William Pennyman Interrogated, whether the Petition delivered by my Lord
Wharton, was by the major part of the Gentlemen that met, according to the
Kings appointment, at the place proper for the business, declined? And whether
they did not declare their consent to a Months pay, and that my Lord of
Strafford should deliver the Message by word of mouth?

He Answered, That the major part did decline the delivery of the Petition,
Pennyman. Witness.
and it was done upon a Vote, there being some difference of opinion, and he
thinks truly, according to his conjecture, there were 200 voices at the least,
to three or four. Happily some others tacitly might be of another opinion, but
there was to his best remembrance, three or four voted against it.

Being asked, whether diverse that Signed it, did not decline it?

He Answered, That diverse that set their Hands to the Petition did retract it,
whereof he himself was one, and diverse other Members of the House, whom he
offered to name, if their Lordships required it, but that their Lordships did
not think fit to direct.

Being asked, Whether my Lord of Strafford did not faithfully and rightfully
present to His Majesty, the Message, he was entrusted with?

He Answered, That he was one of them that went with my Lord, but was in the
same condition with Sir Edward Osborne, for the crowd was so great that he
could not come to hear.

Where my Lord of Strafford desired their Lordships to take notice, that E. of
Strafford
it was not in a corner when Gentlemen of their Quality could not come near.

Being asked (on Mr. Maynards motion) Whether there was to be any difference,
between what was to be delivered to the King, and that contained in the
Petition, the last Clause excepted?

He Answered, That he conceives nothing was to be omitted, but only that of the
Parliament.

Being asked (on the Lord Whartons motion) Whether he and another L. Wharton.
had not Commission, to acquaint my Lord of Strafford from them that had
subscribed the Petition, that they had a Petition to be delivered his Lordship
for His Majesty, and whether he brought not word back again, that they should
wait on his Lordship with the Petition on Saturday, at L. Wharton.
One or Two of the clock, and at his Lordships own house, and whether they did
not accordingly wait on him?

He Answered, That he did, and they did come, and it was purposely, Pennyman
Witness.
that they might most of them go to the Hall, not to make my Lords House a
place of his debate.

Being asked, whether he was not directed to acquaint my Lord of Strafford with
the Petition, and whether he brought back word about the time of attending?

He Answered, It is true he did, but he knows not whether he brought it on a
Message from my Lord.

Being urged to Answer that positively, Whether he brought it as a Message from
my Lord.

He Answered, That it may very well be he did, he thinks he did; but he added,
in effect his desire was to know, what the Question tended to.

Mr. Maynard thereupon desired of their Lordships, that a Witness Mr. Maynard.
at the Bar might not demand the meaning of a Question, before he answers to
the truth of it.

And Mr. Glyn observed, that my Lord of Strafford had several times Mr. Glynn.
besought, he might go on quietly with his Evidence, and they hope their
Lordships will justify them, that they have behaved themselves as men entrusted
by the House of Commons, and that their Lordships will not suffer this Language
to be used. They must demand Justice.

And Mr. Maynard added, that they desire only that the Witness may Mr. Maynard.
readily answer to the Question propounded, and not advise, what may be the
consequence, or enquire the intention of them, for they are to speak only the
truth.

But my Lord of Strafford conceived it a very fitting Question for the E.
Strafford.
Witness, to desire to understand the Question before he answers it, and that is
all he does, as he conceives.

Being required to answer positively, whether he brought that Message from my
Lord of Strafford, touching the time of delivering the Petiton?

He Answered, That he did. Pennyman Witness.


My Lord of Strafford here offered to their Lordships, that he conceives this
Question not material to him, he was then extreme sick, and in his sick Bed,
when he should send this Message; and that truly, he was never in such height
of incivility toward any man alive of a far meaner Quality than my Lord
Wharton, as to send them word, they should attend him at such an hour, he knows
what belongs to my Lord Wharton, and what to himself, much better, than to send
for, or expect any attendance from his Lordship.

Sir William Savill being Interrogated, whether the Petition Signed as
aforesaid, was not absolutely by the major part of them in the Hall declined,
and voted, that it should not be delivered?

He Answered, That he was there, and by the major part of the Savill Witness.
Gentlemen present, it was delivered, and consented, that my Lord should
deliver the substance of the Petition to the King, by word of mouth, saving the
last Clause concerning the Parliament.

Being asked, Whether there were not diverse that Signed it, who did afterward
retract it? And whether himself did not?

He Answered there were, and that he himself Signed the former Petition, and
then it came to be disputed before them, whether they should retract it or no?
he was against the retracting of it, and many delivered Votes against it, under
10 he believes, and for his own part he said nothing to it; but it was carried
so clearly by the opinion of them present, that he went along with a great
number of Gentlemen, that went with my Lord to the King, and he heard my Lord
faithfully deliver the substance of the Petition in every thing, and with more
advantage to them than the Petition was drawn, except the business of the
Parliament.

Being asked, whether part of it was not the consent to a months pay of the
Trained Bands?

He Answered, That he verily believes it was the intention of them all, that a
months pay should be paid to the Soldiers of the Country, and the months pay
was paid.

Being asked, Whether it was not willingly and voluntarily paid in every place
without constraint, to his knowledge?

He Answered, That in that part where he lived, no body denied whatsoever was
asked, so there was no pressing of any body to pay a penny, nor complaint of
any body for want of Money.

Sir William Pennyman being asked to the said last point? Pennyman Witness.


He Answered, That it was with a agreat deal of alacrity and cherfulness, and
he heard no man repine at it, then nor since.

Sir Edward Osborne Interrogated to that Point?

Answered, He never knew of any forcible course to make men pay it, Osborne
Witness.
but it was freely paid.

Sir William Savill being Interrogated, How many of them that set their hands
to the Petition, did Vote against it?

He Answered, That there were of them that set their hands to the Savill
Witness.
Petition 10, who did vote the retraction of it, and he named Sir Francis
Worteley, Sir Thomas Danby, Sir George Wentworth of Wolley (as he thinks) and
Sir Edward Rhodes.

Sir Edward Rhodes Interrogated, Whether the Country did entrust my Lord of
Strafford, to deliver a Message to His Majesty, declaring their consent to a
Months pay, etc.

He Answered, That after long debate, Whether the Petition should Rhodes
Witness.
be presented or no? it was by plurality of voices, declined and waved; and, it
was moved to my Lord, that he should present the Requests of the Gentlemen then
met, or the plurality of them to His Majesty to this purpose, That having
demanded two Months pay, the Gentlemen of the Country made that request to my
Lord, humbly to beseech His Majesty to accept of one Months pay, which his
Lordship did, and His Majesty was graciously pleased to accept of it, having
formerly given them encouragement for the abatement of 4000 men of the Trained
Bands after those Troubles were past; and, if any Gentleman suffered in that
Service, there should be no benefit taken of his Wardship, and when my Lord
presented the desire of the Gentlemen to His Majesty, He was pleased, in stead
of taking of 4000, to promise to reduce the Trained-Bands to 6000.

Being Asked what number of Gentlemen were in the Hall? and, Whether that was
not the place appointed for the County, to Consult about the business?

He Answered, That he thinks that there was 300 at the least, of the one and
the other; and for the place and time, it was both the place and time, and that
was an Exception my Lord of Strafford took, but he was not fairly dealt withal,
that in regard His Majesty gave direction, that at such a time, and such a
place, my Lord President (by that name His Majesty was pleased to call him) and
the Gentlemen of the Country should consider the business; my Lord thought
much a Petition should be drawn without his Consent, and that the business
should be Concluded before the time, and from the place of debate.

Being Asked, How many dissented from this Court?

He Answered, He thinks not above 20, if there were so many.

Being Asked, Whether diverse that signed the Petition, did not retract it?
and, amongst the rest, himself?

He Answered, Diverse did retract it; and, himself gave his voice for the
waving of it: but, he cannot say he retracted it, for his hand was not to the
Petition.

Being Asked, Whether my Lord of Strafford had not Commission from the County,
to offer a full months pay of the Trained-Bands?

He Answered, It was the desire of the Country, That his Lordship would be
pleased to entreat His Majesty, to accept of a months pay, being desired by
the King.

Being Asked, Whether they were not willing to pay it in that part of the
Country, where he lives?

He Answered, That where he served as Deputy-Lieutenant, he knows not of one
man that Complained, or showed unwillingness, or any difference, but only in
the proportion between man and man.

Being Asked, Whether my Lord of Strafford did not faithfully relate the
Message to the King, according to the Commission the Country gave him?

He Answered, That he conceives he did it most faithfully, and with great
advantage to the Country.

Sir Tho. Danby being Interrogated to the matter of the Petition, and the
declining of it; the Consenting of a Months pay; the Cheerfulness in paying of
it.

He Answered. Danby Witness


That the Petition was delivered.
That the Money was paid with a great deal of cheerfulness.
That they were content to come to a Months pay.
That he heard of no man that declared to deny it.
Being Asked (on Mr. Maynards motion) Whether any other direction was given for
the Message, besides the Petition, the last clause excepted?

He Answered, That one taken off, my Lord was to deliver the Substance of the
Petition.

Being Asked (on Mr. Maynards motion) Whether there were not two
Trained-Soldiers hanged up, for Mutyning for want of Pay?

Mr. Maynard thence observing, That if they had been well paid, there Mr.
Maynard.
had been no want of it.

He Answered, That he cannot Answer to that without some prejudice to himself;
he being questioned for hanging men by Martial-Law.

Sir George Wentworth of Wolley being Interrogated, Whether he was not present
at the Hall, where the Petition was spoke of? and, Whether a months pay was
not consented to?

He Answered, He was present, and the Petition was declined by the Major
number; there was a great number in the Hall, and my Wentworth, Witness.
Lord delivered it accordingly to the King. He was present when he presented
all the grievances expressed in the Petition, and left out only that part
concerning the Parliament.

Being Asked, Whether my Lord of Strafford had authority to acquaint the King,
There should be a Months pay?

He Answered, Yes: and, the place of Debating was the Common Hall; and, diverse
that signed the former Petition, did retract it, and himself was one of them.

Being Asked, Whether the Money was not paid willingly by every man, without
Force and Constraint?

He Answered, That he was a Colonel, and it was paid him very well.

The next thing my Lord of Strafford observed, was, concerning a Warrant E. of
Strafford
alleged to be given out by him, for levying of a Fortnights pay to the Two
Regiments of Sir William Pennyman, and Sir Tho. Danby. If in any thing in his
Answer he be mistaken, he had rather submit it than dispute it; and, if it
please their Lordships to favor him so far, he will, as near as he can, tell
every thing that passed; and, he hopes, diverse of their Lordships will
remember a great part of it.

It is very true, before this month was ended, (he is sure within it) the King
Licensed all the Trained-Bands to go home again, save the two Regiments, one
for Richmondshire, and the other for Cleaveland, which, by His Majesty's
express Command, and Council of War, were required, one to remain at Yaram, the
other in Richmondshire, to preserve them from those of the other side.

Sir William Pennyman and some others finding, that by this means these
Regiments continuing in pay, fell to be grievous to that part of the Hundred;
Those two Hundreds, or Weapontakes acquainted him (the Earl of Strafford) with
it, out of no particular end in the World, but that with Equality and Justice
in that common misfortune, they might all bear the Common Burden.

Diverse of their Lordships being there at Rippon, he did humbly present to the
King, before the Great Council of my Lords at York, That he conceived if the
whole-Charge of those two Regiments should lie on those two Hundreds, it would
impoverish and undo them; and therefore he conceived it Justice and Reason,
that the rest of the County should contribute toward the Charge (the benefit
being common to all) or else they should successively relieve those Regiments,
that the burden of all might lie equal on all.

This was his intention, and he hopes it was fair, and if not as it ought to
be, yet it was done with a very good heart, and justly intended: This he moving
at that time, His Majesty was pleased to assent to it, and liked it very well,
and gave direction he should proceed; whereupon he said, Then if my Lords
approve of it, he shall see it done accordingly. There were diverse of the
Lords then said yes; and thereupon he took it for granted, that it was their
Consent.

If in this he did mistake, of their Lordships, he humbly craves their pardon,
it being far from him to prejudice any man living in that relation, and, that
it was so, he thinks a Noble Peer, then present, (viz. my Lord of St. Albanes)
will remember, that diverse on the Motion did say, yes; and thereupon he took
it to be a thing granted.

And, that as my Lord of St. Albanes, who being gone home indisposed in his
health, my Lord of Strafford desired he might reserve himself the benefit of
his Examination, if he shall see cause, though he hopes there will be no need
of it.

After this, he understanding that some of their Lordships at Rippon were not
satisfied, because the Great Council was named for the Author of the Warrant;
the very last day the Great Council sat at York (their Lordships being then
come back from Rippon) he moved it to the King, and gave the same Relation
there, that he makes here before their Lordships, desiring to know their
pleasure, whether the Warrant should be recalled or no? for he could then
easily do it: Nothing being done upon it. Under favor, some of their Lordships
said, The Great Council had no power to levy Money; To which he Answered, That
the Warrant was not to levy Money, but that the parties concerned should do
their duties themselves, or otherwise pay the Money. At that time it pleased
His Majesty to Command him to go on; and, after the King had spoken, no man
spoke to the contrary, and so the Warrant was not recalled; but, the Moneys
were paid voluntarily, no force or constraint being put upon any, but they took
it as a great benefit that they had that favor, as for his part he conceived
it was: And, all himself got by it, was, That, by this means himself, and all
his Tenants, and those that had relation to him, came to pay their
proportionable shares, which otherwise should not have paid a Farthing, (for
they were at a great distance in the West Riding) and they paid it voluntarily,
and willingly; and, when he spoke with the Deputy Lieutenants, they all
conceived it a benefit, and advantage to the Country; and, it was done with
their Consent, and a great Ease, and a Burden to no man,

So he acknowledges such a Warrant was granted, but nothing of force or
constraint,

Mr. To. Strickland Interrogated, Whether he conceived not this a Strickland,
Witness.
great ease to the Country, thus to lay the last Fortnights Pay for the two
Regiments? And stood with his Advise, and the Advice of his Lieutenants?

He Answered, That it was very well paid for any thing he knows, but the most
part of it, if it was paid, was paid after he came to London. But, he
conceives, that if those Regiments must stand, or the other March up to their
Relief, it was for the ease of the Country, and so he conceived then,
otherwise he should not have subscribed the Warrant: and, it had laid heavy on
those Divisions, where the two Regiments of Sir William Pennyman, and Sir
Thomas Danby lay, who had been undone by it; It was done merely for their
Relief, without any ill intent whatsoever.

Sir Edward Osborne Interrogated, What he thinks of the Course? Edw. Osborne.
and, Whether he consented not to it, as a very great Advantage?

He Answered, The Question being propounded by my Lord Lieutenant to the Deputy
Lieutenants, Whether two Regiments that lived on the place, the Frontier of the
North Riding, should be paid by the Countries Contributing, or their Charge, or
the Country to send their Regiments for relief of these two; they conceived it
was a mighty ease and benefit to the Country to pay the two Regiments, and the
rest of the Trained-Bands continue; For, some of them must March 70 miles in
way, and 70 miles backwards, and, some of them that lay there, never stirred
out of their own Towns: and therefore they were of opinion, It was a mavelous
ease.

Being Asked, Whether this Fortnights Pay was voluntarily paid in the Parts
where he lived? and, Whether Force was used?

He Answered, He lived at York altogether, and cannot tell: But, some Officers
asking, What they should do for the Moneys that are behind for relief of the
two Regiments? my Lord Answered, That which will be willingly and freely paid,
you must take it; that which will not, you must let it alone: and, this was
four or five days before my Lord of Strafford came from York.

Sir William Pennyman being Interrogated, touching the Convenience and Will.
Pennyman,
Ease of this Course?

He Answered, That he conceives it very easy and advantageous, for else some
of the Regiments must have marched 70 miles, and it would have taken up a great
part of the Charge, in the very March.

My Lord of Strafford added, That he would prove it by all the Deputy E. of
Strafford.
Lieutenants that were there, that no Force or Constraint was put upon any man
by him, nor is there any proofs to prove Force: There be only two things
insisted on; One is the Warrant of Sir Edward Osborne, that they should pay
Money on peril of their Lives; He denies that he signed any such Warrant; and,
he is sure there is none under his hand: If they have it to show, he desires
they would show it; if they do not, then their Lordships Judgments will acquit
him of it. The other is Sergeant Major Yowards Warrant, and a fellow that tells
a Tale of Muskiteers, and says, there was a Warrant of his; But, he says, he
made no such Warrant; he gave no direction for it; neither is there any such
Warrant shown; and, he trusts, that will acquit him of that too: And, if there
be any thing of Crime in the business, it must be, that they have been
constrained by force, to pay the Moneys; for, if it be voluntarily offered to
take or leave, this can be no Crime; and, that there was any force, or any
Warrant issued by him, he denies: And, by this time, he thinks he has cleared
himself against all the matters charged in this Article.

But, he conceives, he has done nothing, but that he had Commission and power
to do, though he never had acquainted the Great Council with it under favor:
It is true, he was always desirous, to have the assistance of Men wiser than
himself; and, when there was means or opportunity to gain it, he took it: But,
if he had been in Yorkshire all alone, having the Power and Commission he then
had (though His Majesty and their Lordships had not been there) he conceives he
might have Justified the doing of as much, as he has done in this Parliament;
his Commission under the Seal of my Lord Admiral being in effect,

FOr the better Execution of this our Commission, we do further give and grant
to you full Power and Authority, from time to time, and at all times at your
discretion, to command, and require of and from all our Lieutenants, and
Deputy Lieutenants in our several Counties of this our Realm and Dominion of
Wales, and of and from every, or any of them, to send to you, or such place as
you shall appoint, such number of able Men for the War, as well Horsemen as
Footmen, in the said Counties respectively, or otherwise, sufficiently Armed
and Furnished, as you in your discretion shall appoint and require.

And, he did not send them to pay any Money, but to relieve by turns, Regiment
after Regiment; and, if they found it for their ease, they might be at the
Charge, else do the Duty required, which, by the Common Allegiance, every man
is bound to do. Say then he had committed an Error, he had rather confess than
justify it, as long as it is not brought to him as a Crime.

But, there is another clause, according to the Statute of 11 H. 7. viz.

ANd further, our pleasure is, and we do give and grant for us, our heirs and
successors, that whatsoever you, or any other person, or persons of what degree
soever, by your Commission, Warrant, or Command shall do, by virtue of this our
Commission, or Letters Patents, or according to the Instructions aforesaid, or
the purport of this our Commission, touching the Execution of the premises,
both you, and the said persons, in showing forth these our Letterspatents, or
the Constat, or Inrollment thereof, shall be discharged and acquitted against
us, our heirs and successors, and freed from all Impeachment, and other
molestation for the same.

He did this without sinister ends, or by-respects; and therefore if he did any
way err, by His Majesty's own gracious clause, he is to be excused; And, it is
pursuing to the Statute of 11 H. 7. c. 1. where the Preamble is very observable.

THe King, our Sovereign Lord, recalling to his Remembrance the Duty and
Allegiance of His Subjects, and that they, by reason of the same, are bound to
serve the King for the time to come in His Wars, against every Rebellion, and
Power, and Might, etc. and whatsoever falls against the mind of the Prince;
and, that it is against all Law, Reason and Conscience, that attending His
Person, or being in other places of His Command, any should lose or forfeit for
doing their true Service and Obedience. Be it therefore Enacted, etc. That from
henceforth, no manner of Person, or persons whatsoever, that attends the King
in His Person, and do Him true Allegiance in His Person, or be in other places
in His Wars, for the said Deed, or true Duty, he and they shall be any way
convicted, and Attainted of Treason, nor of any other Offense by any Process of
Law, whereby he shall forfeit Lands, Goods, Tenements, etc. and shall be for
that Deed and Service utterly discharged of any Vexation, etc.

So that he conceives he has done nothing, but what may receive a fair and
equal interpretation; what he has done, he has done very heartily, and
clearly, for the good of His Masters Service, and preservation of the Country;
and he has done nothing violently, or deliberately, to force Men to do things,
that may any way trench on the Propriety or Liberty of the Subject: and,
whatsoever evil he may have committed in this, he hopes, by the Act of
Parliament, and by the words of the Commission read, he shall stand before
their Lordships (in point of Justice, and Noble Compassion to a Man that may
err) Acquitted from any part of that Charge, that may accuse him of High
Treason.

Only one thing he has omitted, and that is the Testimony of Sir William
Ingram, where he Charges me with saying, The refusers to pay the Money are in
little better condition, than guilty of High Treason. But he is a single
Testimony; and he says, That clearly underfavour it is no mean offense for any
Man, to deny the Common Allegiance due to the King, for Defense of His Wars:
But, the words are testified to be spoken only to one Man, and he is not
Accomptable to him, nor to their Lordships, for that, he being but a single
Testimony.

Mr. Maynard began to Reply to the said Defense in substance, Mr. Maynard.
as follows.
That whereas my Lord says, They have urged much that, which was not Charged;
his Lordship has Answered, that which was not Objected as a Charge: for, the
greatest part of the time he has spent in examining so many VVitnesses, is, to
show on what grounds the first Petition was deserted, and a Message put on his
Lordship to deliver to the King: The Petition was not offered to him as a
matter of Charge, but it is charged upon him, that he procured to levy and
impole Money upon the Country by force, without a legal VVarrant, and, by way
of excuse, in his Answer, he sets forth, that the Country did yield to it by
their Unanimous consent. To that purpose it was objected to him, Not that the
delivery of the Message was a Crime (and therefore he might have spared this
labor to Answer it, as to that purpose)

But, as himself states the Case, he has much increased, rather then
diminished his Fault; for, he said, There was a Consent; yet, it appears, there
were but 109 principal Gentlemen parties in the first Petition, and he
encounters these to 200 met together; the greater part of whom consenting, and
100 of them that had subscribed, and about 5 dissenting, they resolve of a
Message to be delivered touching consent; But, they have proved, not only a
Leavy for the first month, but much more; though when the Gentry met together,
and consented to a Petition, it is no desertion of that Petition, because 10 of
109 deserted, especially when they had a Message from my Lord to meet about it,
and, relying upon it, went into the Country: besides, 200 Gentlemen
Freeholders, and others, could not lay a Charge on the rest of the Country, nor
bind them that had dissented before, and whose consent was not involved; and,
it is no legal way to raise Money by Warrant, much less by Force.

For the Money levied after the Month expired, my Lord has offered no Color
to their Lordships; for first, the ground whereupon he raised it, was contrary
to that which was the truth, viz. the Consent of the Lords of the Great
Council; whereas it appeared, and shall appear further, there was no such
Consent.

My Lord of Strafford would next justify it by a Commission, but that does
only require people, according to their Allegiance, to give attendance; and,
this is turned into a matter of laying of Money: for, the first point of the
Warrant is, to pay the Money Assessed, and, if they will not, they shall
attend, so that what is matter of service is turned out of its Course, and this
is a high abuse of his power, which makes that matter of Money, which should be
matter of Service; and, by this means, awes men to pay money.

The Country, on demand of His Majesty, did consent to a Months pay, but, my
Lord, without their consent, extends it beyond, and pretends an Order (to say
no more of it) when there was no such thing, to draw some Deputy Lieutenants
together, and, when they are drawn, to make an Order, this must be his
Justification of that which is unduely done: And, this is far from the
mitigation of an Offense. To do an unjust Act is one thing, but, it is a great
aggravation when it is drawn by pretense of an authority which never was.

On 27 October, the self same day Sir John Buroughs spoke of notice taken by
their Lordships, disclayming the Order for a Warrant; And then my Lord
acknowledged it to be an Error; and, it is doubtful, whether he would have
acknowleged it to be so, if it had not been proved so.

My Lords Commission speaks not of Money, and the Statute makes not to this
Case, it being only, That when men are on their Allegiance, doing the King
faithful service, they should not be attainted of High Treason for doing their
duty; And, the Interpretation his Lordship puts on it, is, that the duty of the
Subject cannot be done to the King, without levying money in an unlawful way;
if the levying of Money, or the Imposing of Charges be matter of duty, then he
gives a Justification of the Charge: And, whereas he says, though he had not
had command from His Majesty, nor Order from the Council of Peers, he had power
enough to do that which he did; it is to be observed, that my Lord did not
require men first to serve, but first to pay money; and if they paid not, then
he Menaces them, that they should serve, as appears by Sir William Pennymans
Warrant, and therefore the Warrant might be observed, which Sir William
Pennyman justifies so unwillingly, though in other things he be very forward;
and for a man to be required to pay Money, and if he will not pay it, then to
perform service, is hard; for now he comes not on the Kings service, but on the
displeasure of them that require Money from him, and that is a bad
discouragement to them that serve.

And whereas my Lord says, nothing is proved, or but by single proof, their
Lordships may be pleased to remember, what is proved by Sir Henry Griffin, That
my Lord said, That Money should be levied, and he would take a course for it,
and the same Gentlemen deposes, that the Warrant or Order was under my Lord
Straffords hand, which was the Warrant for them to pay Money.

It is likewise proved by Sir William Ingram, that he said the private men must
maintain after 1 d. per day, and gave out his Command to the Constables, and he
would have all men know, that those that refused it, were in a little better
condition than High Treason, so that to the first part, there is more than a
single Testimony. The latter part shall be proved by an other.

Mr. Henry Cholmley being Interrogated, What he heard my Lord of Strafford
speak, concerning Treason, in case men pay not that Money, or to that effect?

He Answered, That he heard not any thing at all of Treason. Cconcerning
Cholmeley Witness.
the not payment, Answered, That at York, at the Mannor-House my Lord of
Strafford speaking of the raising of the Trained-Bands, said, we are all by Law
tied to serve the King in our own persons, and if any refuse, they are in
little better case, than Treason (he cannot tell whether he said High Treason)
and they might be severely punished in the Star-Chamhamber.

And, their Lordships may remember Mr. Cholmeleys former Testimony, that the
Vice President might, or shall send forth Warrants to levy Money; And therefore
these Gentlemen's Testimonies stand without impeachment of that point.

My Lord says, Moneys were not levied by force; yet it was proved, that for
these two Regiments Money was levied by force; for, Four Soldiers came to the
Town, and went with the Constables.

But, he says, it concerns not him, for no Warrant of his was shown. Their
Lordships will not expect, that my Lord of Strafford should give particular
Warrants to every Officer; his Direction is proved in general; his Commands are
conveyed and distributed by particular Ministers; The Captains look for
Commands from them that are above them; and they from the Lieutenant General:
And, Sir William Pennyman conceives, the Warrant made out by the
Vice President, was by a Warrant from my Lord of Strafford, or he had my Lord
of Straffords Command. So that, take that which is under Hand and Seal; take
what Sir William Pennyman, take what Mr. Cholmeley has spoken, it cannot be
otherwise, but it was done by my Lord of Straffords Command, and that is sure
without legal Authority: and so Mr. Maynard conceived they had made a full
proof of this Article.

For that which concerns the Great Council, he desired my Lords Answer might
be read; where he says expressly, It was done by order of the Lords of the
Great Council; And, Mr. Maynard humbly prayed, that some of the Lords of the
Great Council, might declare the Truth in that Case.

But, my Lord of Strafford Answered, That he confessed it here at the E. of
Strafford.
Bar, that it is so; and, must humbly put their Lordships in mind, that in his
Answer, he prays, if any thing be mistaken, he may have time to amend it; and
he does amend it, he confesses it was put in too strongly.

Mr. Glyn added, That they put their Lordships in mind of it, that it Mr. Glyn.
may not be forgotten; After his Lordship was put in mind of it by the Lords of
the Great Council, he retracts it; yet, when he comes to Answer, he affirms it;
therefore they think it necessary, to put their Lordships in mind of it, least
he affirm it again.

Mr. Whitlock observed, That my Lord of Strafford had made Justification Mr.
Whitlock.
of his Act here; and truly, the opinions which he has here published and
declared in the face of the Parliament, are sufficient grounds of Condemnation
of him.

He said, the other day, That in case of necessity, the King was loose and
absolved, from all Rules of Government; and that then Money might be levied by
Force; and, that their Lordships very well remembers what that necessity was,
indeed no necessity at all. But, whatsoever the necessity is, they know no such
Tenent as my Lord of Strafford publishes: But, it is expressly against the
Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and a mere Course for his bringing in an
Arbitrary Power.

His Lordship said, That as he stood qualified, he might justify as much as he
has done; Which words are little less than the offense wherewith he is
charged, and prove the Charge. For him to say, That as he was then qualified,
because he was Lieutenant General of the Army, he might send his Warrants to
Tax the Kings Subjects without Parliament, is, to take on him the Power of a
Parliament; for, under favor, no such Tax can be made without assent in
Parliament: So that what my Lord of Strafford has declared as a ground of his
Defense, is a good ground of his Condemnation.

My Lord of Strafford did here desire liberty to speak to the Testimony of Mr.
Cholmley, which is new matter; and, he besought their Lordships E. of Strafford.
to observe, That he did not say, as Sir William Ingram, That the Money should
be paid, and he that paid not the Money, should be in little better condition,
then High Treason; But, he that denies his Allegiance to the King, to go with
Him in His Wars, in Defense of the Realm, is little better than guilty of
Treason, or is Fineable in the Star Chamber: But, because these are tender
Points, and he little understands them, and they take hold of all that falls
from him, he shall say no more, but that the Testimony of the one and the
other, are two several things.

And, his Lordship proceeded to speak something touching Sir William Ingrams
Testimony, which Mr. Glyn interposed, and said, That's no new matter, but it
only arises out of his Answer, and therefore he desired no more might be said
to that.

He proceeded to other matters contained in the Reply, and offered to their
Lordships, That it had been said, he did publicly justify at the Bar, that he
had power to lay Taxes, and to force payment; but he said, under favor, no
such thing; but that he having the Kings Commission and Power to call in such,
as he should think fit to serve the King, for defense of the Realm, and this
being pursuant to the Act of Parliament of 11 H. 7. he said, he might justify
(as he conceives) the calling of the Regiments to relieve by turns one another,
as there should be occasion; but to say, he had power to Tax what he pleased,
God forbid, he should say or think such a thing. He is not the wisest man in
the world, yet not so ignorant, but to know that the one were a great breach,
on the fundamental propriety and liberty of the Subject; but to call men to
perform their Duty for preservation of the King and Kingdom, he conceives to be
a quite different thing.

His Lordship proceeded to speak to some part of the Reply, concerning his
sending forth of Warrants to levy by force.

Which being excepted against, as new mattermy Lord of Strafford answered

That if he speaks new matter, it is sufficient punishment to him.

My Lord of Strafford proceeded, That he is charged to be the procurer of Sir
William Pennymans sending a Warrant to levy by force, whereas, he said, the
Warrant was issued by him and the Deputy Lieutenants.

But that being denied and apprehended to be new matter.

Mr. Whitlock desired to Reply to my Lord of Strafford's Answer, to Mr.
Whitlock.
what he had formerly opened, wherein he conceived he was not mistaken, but if
he were, he submitted, but he opened it thus. That as my Lord of Strafford with
the Power and Commission he had, he said, he might justify what he had done,
and it proved that he sent Warrants to levy Money, and these Moneys were levied
by force.

Mr. Maynard added, That they are here for the King and Commonwealth, Mr.
Maynard.
and desired, that Right might be spared them, and that there might not be
continual Replies: That no color of Answer is given; that because a man must
serve in person, therefore Money must be required of him, else he must be
brought by Head and Shoulders to serve in person. They offered a Warrant made
upon peril of Life, under the Hand and Seal of Sir Edward Osborne.

Whence Mr. Maynard observed, That there is Imprisonment; Levying of Money;
charging upon pain of Life; levying of Goods: nothing can be put upon the
Subject, but it has been offered in this Case.

Mr. Glyn Summed up their Proofs, saying, Since my Lord of Strafford will have
another Reply, they have produced their Proofs, That he Mr. Glyn.
has levied War against the Kings Subjects, and did before declare an
Intention to levy Money, which was afterward done by his direction.

Sir William Pennyman proves, that Warrants were issued, and in such sort as
mentions a coertion; They have in pursuance proved it to be levied by four
Musketeers, if he gave direction, another gave execution, and the parties Body
must be carried away, if he pays not; which is a levying of War against the
Kings Subjects: and Gogan 5 R. 2. was accused of Treason, for forceing a man to
enter into Bond, which is not so much as to force those payments on the Kings
Subjects.

They produced Sir Edward Osborns Warrant attested by Mr. Cholmley to be the
Original Warrant that he had from Mr. Vice President, to send for the levying
of the Money.

To the etc.
WHereas His Majesty is informed, that the Regiment under Command of Col.
Cholmley is set forth with little Money, which expresses great disaffection to
His Majesty's service, and wilful neglect of your own, and the whole Kingdoms
safety; the Scotch Army having taken Newcastle, and being on their march
toward these parts: These are therefore to Will and require you in His
Majesty's Name, and by His special Command, to raise, and cause to be raised by
the Port Constable, or otherwise as you shall think best, the sum of 20s. 8d.
at least for each common Soldiers belonging to such Towns or Parishes, and to
send the same immediately to York, to be delivered to the Colonel, for Pay and
Supply of the said Soldiers, and likewise to charge and command all and every
person and persons, who find private Arms, or contribute thereunto, forthwith
to send the like sum at least to York, to be disposed as aforesaid; And in case
any of them refuse to contribute, you are required by like Command, to certify
me the Names of such refusers, that a Messenger may be sent to bring them
hither to serve in person, and be severely punished, according to the Quality
of so high an offense, seeing the safety of His Majesty's Person, and the
safety of the Kingdom depends on this; Fail not in the speedy execution
thereof, as you will answer to the contrary, on peril of your life.

Dated the last of August 1640.
Mr. Maynard desired their Lordships to observe the former Deposition Mr.
Maynard.
that my Lord of Strafford should say, The Vice President shall, or may send
forth Warrants, and it is originally my Lord of Straffords fault.

And so they concluded the 27th Article.

Mr. Glyn did offer to their Lordships, that there is the 28th Article
remaining, wherein, whether shall proceed or no, they have not yet resolved.
Mr. Glyn.


But they desired another day to be heard, they having something more to say.

And so the Court was Adjourned, and the next day was appointed, a Etight of
the clock.

A SUMMARY OF THE EVIDENCE Of my Lord of STRAFFORD.
April 12.
THis Day being appointed, for the Summing up of the Evidence formerly given on
both sides, in the Cause concerning my Lord of Strafford; The Right Honorable
the Lord Steward spoke in substance as follows.

My Lord of Strafford, I am Commanded by my Lords to let you know, that they do
expect your Lordship will go on in the Order set, to sum up your Lordships
Evidence; and, those Gentlemen of the House of Commons will likewise sum up
theirs, for the Close of Proofs in Matter of Fact; and, that your Lordship do
it with all Clearness and Succinctness, avoiding any thing that may give
Impediment, to the Clear and Fair Proceeding of the Cause, which, for matter of
Fact, is come to a Period.

My Lord of Strafford humbly desired, That he might clearly understand what was
expected in that case, and then he would perfectly obey my Lords in all things;
adding, that he Conceives their Lordships intention is, that they shall go upon
what has been alleged before their Lordships, without any new matter to be
further alleged on either side.

Whereunto my Lord Steward replied, That if there be any new matter, God forbid
but they might allege it.

And, my Lord Strafford thereupon Answered, That he will offer no New Matter,
unless it should arise from the other side; professing himself ready to be
disposed of, in all Acts of Obedience to their Lordships. And then his Lordship
proceeded to Recollect his Evidence in Substance, as follows.

May it please your Lordships, it falls to my turn, by your Lordships leave and
favor, to presume to put you in mind, and to represent to you, the Proofs, as
they have been offered, which I shall do to the best of my Memory, with a great
deal of Clearness. I shall desire to represent them neither better nor worse,
then they are in themselves, and, I wish, the like Rule may be observed on the
other side; For, in the proceeding of this Cause, I heard them allege, that,
as they conceived, diverse Articles were fully proved; Whence I conceive, there
was nothing fully Proved.

My Lords, my Memory is weak, my health has been impaired, and I have not had
such quiet thoughts, as I desired to have had, in a business of so great and
weighty importance to me: And therefore I shall most humbly beseech your
Lordships, that by your Wisdom, your Justice and Goodness, I may be so much
bound to you, as to have my Infirmities supplied by your better Abilities,
better Judgments, and better Memories.

My Lords, The Charge I am to Answer, is a Charge of High Treason; and, that
which makes it the most grievous of all, it is an Impeachment of Treason from
the Honorable House of Commons: Were not that in the Case, my Lords, it would
not press so heavy and sore upon me, as now it does, having the Authority and
Power of their Names upon it; Otherwise, my Lords, the Innocence, and the
Clearness of my own heart from so Foul a Crime, is such, that I must with
Modesty say, if I had no other sin to answer for, it would be easily borne.

My Lords, as I went along Article by Article, These Gentlemen were pleased to
say, They were no Treasons in themselves, but Conducing to the Proof of
Treason: and, most of the Articles being gone over, they come to the Point at
last. And hence, my Lords, I have all along watched, to see if that I could
find that Poisoned Arrow, that should Invenome all the rest; that Deadly Cup of
Wine, that should intoxicate a few alleged Inconveniences, and Misdemeanors,
to run them up to High Treason.

My Lords, I confess it seems very strange to me, that there being a special
difference between Misdemeanors, and between Felonies and Treasons; How is it
possible that ever Misdemeanors should make Felonies, or a hundred Felonies
make a Treason? Or, that Misdemeanors should be made Accessaryes to Treason,
where there is not a Principal in the Case? No Treason, I hope, shall be found
in me, nor in any thing I hear to be charged, under favor, and not waved.

They say well, That if a man be taken threatening of a man to kill him,
Conspiring his death, and with a Bloody Knife in his hand, these be great
Arguments to convince a man of Murder. But then, under favor, the man must be
killed; for, if the man be not killed, the murder is nothing. So, all these
things that they would make conduce to Treason, unless something be
Treasonable, under favor, they cannot be applied to Treason.

My Lords, I have learnt that in this Case, which I did not know before, that
there be Treasons of two kinds; there be Statute-Treasons, there be Treasons at
Common Law, or Treasons Constructive and Arbitrary.

My Lords, These Constructive Treasons have been strangers in this
Commonwealth a great while, and, I trust, shall be still, by your Lordships
Wisdom and Justice: But, as for Treasons in the Statute, I do, with all
gladness and humility acknowledge your Lordships to be my Judges, and none but
you, under favor, can be my Judges: His Majesty is above it, the King Condemns
no Man: the great operation of His Scepter is Mercy; His Justice is dispensed
by His Ministry; so He is no Judge in the Case (with Reverence be it spoken:)
and likewise no Commoner can be Judge in the Case of Life and Death, under
favor, in regard he is of another Body: So that, my Lords, I do acknowledge
entirely, you are my Judges, and do, with all cheerfulness in the World, submit
my self unto you; thinking, that I have great cause to give God thanks, that I
have you for my Judges, and, God be praised it is so; and, Celebrated be the
Wisdom of our Ancestors that have so ordained it.

My Lords, I shall observe these Rules; First, I shall (as I hope) clear my
self of Statute Treason, and then shall come to Constructive Treason, or
Treason at the Common Law.

The first point they Charge me withal of Treason, is upon the Fifteenth
Article; Wherein neverthess, before I come to Answer the Particulars, I must
humbly inform your Lordships, that, in that Article, two of the most material
Charges are waved in the first part; that piece of the Charge that sounds so
high, concerning a Miscarriage in me, in Levying Money upon the Towns of
Baltemore, Bandenbridge, Talow, of that I hear nothing, and I shall mention it
only thus far, humbly to remember your Lordships, that, in that particular, I
trust I have spoken nothing, that I should merit less belief of your Lordships:
For my part, it is far from me, to put you upon any prejudice, by any means
whatsoever; I look only to the preserving of my self, if it may be without
prejudice and hurt to any living Soul.

Then they likewise wave another piece of the Charge, and that is, that I
should, by force of Arms, dispossess diverse persons in the Territory of
Idengh; and well they may, for, in truth, there is nothing at all of it that I
am to Answer, it being wholly done by the Order of Chancery, and I having no
more to do with it, then any man that hears it: the Matter that stays with me
in this Article, is, the alleged Warrant to Mr. Savill Sergeant at Arms, and
the Execution of it, for that I shall humbly beseech your Lordships, I may mind
you, with all humility, that that Warrant is not showed; and, I do think, that
my Lords the Judges do, in the Trials before them, observe, that Deeds are to
prove themselves in ordinary Trials betwixt Men and Men; Now, how much more in
a Trial for life, and, which is more than that (though my Misfortune will have
me to own it) in the Trial of a Peer?

The Witnesses, my Lords, say, They have seen such a Warrant; But, no Witness
says, he knows it, and will Swear it to be my Hand and Seal; or, that I set
my Hand or Seal to it; for, it may be Counterfeited, for any thing they know.

For, Mr. Savill, upon Oath, I thought (under Favor) he ought not to be
admitted against me; for, he Swears directly to justify himself: for if there
be no such Warrant, he is answerable for the Fact, not I. But, my Lords, admit
there were such a Warrant, I humbly conceive, I gave your Lordships a very
clear and full Answer to it; I showed you (and proved it, as I conceive) that
the Sessing of Soldiers has been a Coercive means used in Ireland always, to
enforce obedience to the Kings Authority; I proved it to have been used, to
fetch in the Kings Rents of all kinds, Contributions, Compositions, and
Exchequer Rents; I proved it to have been used, to bring in Offenders and
Rebels, and (as my Lord Ranalagh deposes) for any Unjustifiable Act. Sir Arthur
Terringham, for a small Debt, which appears not to be the Kings Debt; My Lords,
nothing at all is proved against it, but Negatively, the Witnesses say, they
did not know such a thing, they had not heard the like; and, I think, none of
your Lordships had, before this Cause; and yet that thing might be too.

And, my Lords, I beseech your Lordships, How should it be not Treason, to
Assess Soldiers for the Kings Debts, and yet the Assessing of Soldiers, on the
Contempt of the Kings Authority, should be Treason? for certainly the Kings
Authority is of far more Dignity, and more respect is to be had to it, then the
getting of a few poor Debts; and, why it should be Treason in one Case, and not
in another, methinks it is very strange.

My Lords, in the next place I conceive, that not in any Construction this can
be said to be a Levying of War against the King and His People, being but the
Employment of two or three Soldiers, to procure obedience to His Majesty's
Government: because (as I conceive likewise) I had Commission to make War as I
saw Cause, for punishing the Rebels, and securing the Public Peace; and
therefore, How can I be charged with that I have power to do?

The worst that can be made of it, is, an absurd execution of a Power; but, to
make it Treason, when I had Commission and Liberty so to do, methinks that is
very hard: And, it was no absurd execution of a Power, under favor neither,
when I had the Precedent of all the former Deputies and Lieutenants in the Case.

My Lords, it was never Complained of all the while I was there, for ought
appears to your Lordships; so, that it seems there was no great Innovation, nor
Inconvenience, for, if there were, I should have heard of it.

But, the Statute 11 E. 1. ca. 7. sets a penalty upon any Subject, that shall
Assess without the Deputies Authority. Now I do most humbly beseech your
Lordships, that you would be pleased to remember that, and let me know how it
should be but Penal in a Common person to do it, and yet Treason in a Deputy?

My Lords, I shall likewise humbly mind your Lordships for the Statute, or
rather two Statutes, as I take it, whereby I conceive this Statute that made a
Treason in Ireland was repealed; But, howsoever, the practice in all time has
gone quite contrary to that Statute, and the best Interpretation of Law is the
Practice of Law; and therefore the Practice having been otherwise, it is an
Argument very strong and prevalent, that the Deputy, as Chief Governor, was
never intended to be Concluded within that Act, nor never to be brought in by
General Words only.

And, that this should be a Levying of War against the King, within the Statute
of 25 E. 3. in England, surely I conceive it cannot be; for, the Burning of
Towns, the Taking of Forts, Killing and Slaying, that I conceive to be a
Levying of War; but, this is a strange Levying of War, with two or three
Soldiers to rest in Peace and Quietness, eating on Contemners only (and not
Killing and Slaying) and all to procure Obedience to the King, not in
Disobedience to His Command. If to lie upon them and eat, be High Treason, in
this Case, What shall become of a great Company of good Fellows, that at this
time eat at the Charge of the Country?

No, my Lords; This, in the Case of a private Man, had been but a Forcible
Entry, or a Riot at the most, if a man had done the same thing Mr. Savil did of
his own Authority, without the Deputy, it had been but a Force and Riot; and,
How shall this be in my Case High Treason?

The next Charge, in that Case, is, concerning a Warrant to one Piggot, another
Sergeant at Arms, and the great and crying Miscarriages and Misimployments of
such a War; if there had been any, it was when I (as your Lordships may please
to remember) was out of Ireland, and that was the Case of Bern, a very Foul
Misdemeanor, as it proved. But, my Lords, I being out of the Kingdom, and no
such Warrant shown, I conceive I am absolutely dismissed as unto that, and have
nothing to Answer for it: there was nothing done while I was in the Kingdom:
there is no Warrant of mine shown: therefore, I conceive, I stand clear of that
likewise.

But admit there were such a Warrant, the Answer goes to that as to the test;
and certainly, I hope, will fully acquit me of this Fifteenth Article, as
Treason; And so I must, in humility, submit to your Lordships wiser and better
Judgments.

The next Statute Treason, is an Intendment, or Design, or what you will have
it, for bringing over the Irish Army into this Kingdom, to reduce it, or to do
I know not what, nor I think no body else, for there is no such thing.

But, my Lords, for proof in this Case, you have two offered there, and no
more, under favor, at all: the first proof is, the Fears and Doubts of my Lord
Ranalaugh, that tells you, he Fears such a thing, and Doubts such a thing. My
Lords, if Fears and Doubts may be sufficient to Condemn me for Treason, By my
Faith, I fear, and doubt very much, these Fears and Doubts might Accuse me, and
Condemn me of Treason more then once a Year; But, my Lords, his Fears and
Doubts, he may keep to himself, I hope they shall not be brought any way to the
prejudice of me; I am, I thank God, both confident and knowing, there is no
such thing.

The next is the Testimony of Mr. Treasurer Vane; and, the Words Mr. Treasurer
does Witness against me in that particular, are, as I conceive, these; that I
should say to His Majesty, in an Argument concerning an Offensive or Defensive
War with Scotland; Your Majesty has tried all ways, and are refused, and, in
this extreme necessity, for the safety of the Kingdom, and Your People, You may
employ the Irish Army to reduce this Kingdom.

My Lords, To this I say, that (under favor) Mr. Treasurer was in this
(methoughts) a little Dubious; he was something doubtful; for, at the first, he
told your Lordships, he would deal plainly and clearly with you; that he knew
before whom he spoke: and then, my Lords, it was but to the best of his
Remembrance, that these, and these words were spoken. At the last, my Lords,
being put to it more, he was pleased to say, that these were positively the
words, or something to that effect: So, my Lords, here is but a dubious and
uncertain Witness, under favor, and these Professions of his speaking clearly
and plainly, and of his Consideration before whom he was (which are something
unusual Clauses to Men, that come to Swear upon Oath) make me conceive him
something Dubious in this point.

Secondly, My Lords, he is a Single Witness, and not only so, but, under
favor, disavowed by all the rest that were present at the Council; my Lord of
Northumberland remembered no such thing; my Lord Marquess of Hamilton remembered
no such thing; my Lord Treasurer remembered no such thing; my Lord Cottington is
very well assured he said no such thing, for if he had he should have taken
offense at it himself, which he never did.

My Lords, in the Third place, He is pleased to mention, That it was in a
Debate, Whether an Offensive or Defensive War? and, that then I should say, The
King had an Army in Ireland, etc. My Lords, It falls out in time, to be as I
conceive, to be about the 5th of May last, not many days sooner or later, the
Army of Ireland was not raised till June following. So it seems, I should tell
the King a great untruth; that he had an Army in Ireland, which he might employ
for His Service, before that Army was raised; for, it is a notorious thing, and
any of that Country knows, that the Army was not raised till the Fifteenth of
June, as I remember.

Lastly, In farther taking away of this Testimony, I have proved it, by a great
many Witnesses, beyond all exception, that there was never any such intendment
of the bringing this Army into England; nay, that the Design was quite
otherwise; and this has been apparently cleared before your Lordships, By the
Testimony of my Lord of Northumberland, Marquess of Hamilton, Sir Thomas Lucas,
and Mr. Slingsby; And might have been further justified, by the Testimony of my
Lord of Ormond President of Munster, and Sir John Burlace, Master of the
Ordnance in Ireland, if they had been here to have been produced: So that all
these laid together, the strong and clear proof on my part, the producing of a
single Witness which, by the Proviso of 1 Edw. 6. cannot rise in Judgment
against any man for High Treason. I trust, all these laid together, I shall
appear to your Lordships clear and free from these two points, whereupon they
enforce me to be within the compass of Treason by the Statute alleged.

The Third Treason that is laid to my Charge, is upon the 27th Article, where
Four Musquettiers being sent to Egton, by Sergeant Major Yawerth, to call for
their Eight pence a day, is pressed upon me, as a Levying of War upon the King
and His People, and to be High Treason upon the Statute of 25 E. 3.

These be wonderful Wars, if we have no greater Wars then such, as four men are
able to raise, by the Grace of God we shall not sleep very unquietly. But, How
do they prove this to be done by me? they produce to your Lordships the
VVarrant of Sir William Pennyman; but, had no VVarrant at all of mine to show.

Sir William Pennyman does not allege any VVarrant of mine to that purpose; he
speaks of a General VVarrant, wherein I and the Deputy Lieutenants join, for
the paying of the Fortnights pay, as they call it, and that is very true; but,
that I should give VVarrant to Levy by Soldiers, no such thing is proved; no
such thing is showed; no such thing is alleged by Sir William Pennyman, that
best knew it; and, should do it in his own Justification, if there were such a
thing: but, on the other side, I must humbly beseech your Lordships, to mind
you what a clear and full proof I made thereof to you, till you were weary,
though, I think, I could have continued it a year longer if need had been, that
there was nothing done by me in the Levying of the first Months pay, or the
second Fortnights pay, but with full consent of the Country, nothing being of
Constraint, nothing being of force put upon them.

The Second point was a VVarrant showed to your Lordships, or at least
pretended from Sir Edward Osborne the Vice President, wherein he charges them
to obey and pursue the substance and direction of his VVarrant, on pain of
Death, and this must likewise be laid to me: My Lords, I confess I have faults
enough, more then a good many, though I trust neither so crying nor grievous,
as some would pretend them to be; but, Faults I have, more then too many, I
need not take nor add to my self other Men's; but, whether this be a Fault or
no, I cannot undertake to Judge. But certainly, I am in no Fault: for, I was at
-- when this VVarrant issued from Mr. Vice President; and, I dare say, he is a
Gentleman so worthy and noble, and so great a Lover of Truth, that let him be
examined upon Oath, if he shall not absolutely clear me from Privity or
Direction of it, I so much rely on him, that I will be thought Guilty before
your Lordships for this Charge: Now, my Lords, having gone over all that first
part, which I thought fit to apply my self to, and that is Statute-Treason,
There is no Statute-Treasons in the whole Charge, nor color or pretense
thereof, save only that of Newcastle which was waved.

In these, my Lords, I hope I am clear before your Lordships; and, sure I am,
they give me little disquiet, for, in good faith, I am clear in my own poor
Judgment.

Then comes in the second Condition of Treason in the charge, and that is
Constructive-Treason; and, it is laid down in the first Article of the General
Charge.

For, my Lords, I must tell you, the First Articles exhibited, are Grounds and
Foundations whereupon the rest are gathered, and to which they resort and apply
themselves severally.

I do conceive my self, in a manner, by themselves, clear of seven of these,
for, they have, in a manner, relinquished Five of them; So that the First
Article is the main Article whereupon I must be touched, and that is laid in
the Charge thus. That I have Traitorously endeavored, to subvert the
Fundamental Laws and Government of the Realms of England and Ireland; and
have, by Traiterous Words, Councils, and Actions, declared the same; and have
advised His Majesty to Compel His Subjects, to submit thereunto by force.

My Lords, I must confess I have many times with my self considered with
wonder, at the Wisdom of our Ancestors, that set the Pillars of this Monarchy
with that singular Judgment and Providence, that I have ever observed, that so
often as either the Prerogative of the Crown, or Liberty of the Subject,
Ecclesiastical or Temporal powers exceed those modest bounds set and appointed
for them, by the sobriety and moderation of former times, the exercise of it
over-turn'd to the Prejudice and to the Detriment of the Public Weal; all the
Strings of this Government and Monarchy have been so perfectly tuned through
the skill and attention of our Forefathers, that if you wind any of them any
thing higher, or let them lower, you shall infallible interrupt the sweet
accord, that ought to be entertained of King and People.

With this Opinion I had the honor to sit many years in the Commons House;
and, this Opinion I have carried along with me exactly and entirely for
Fourteen years in the Kings Service; ever Resolving in my heart Stare super
vias antiquas, to prove, with equal care, the Prerogative of the Crown, and the
Liberty of the Subject, to Introduce the Laws of England into Ireland, ever
setting before my self a Joint and Individual well-being of King and People
(for either they must be both or neither) which made my Misfortune the greater
to be now in my Gray Hairs charged, as an under-worker against that
Government, a Subverter of that Law I most affected, and a Contriver against
that Religion, to the truth whereof I would Witness by the Sealing of it with
my Blood.

My Lords, As to the latter part, concerning my Religion, they have quitted me;
and I have nothing to answer to that, because it is waved; and, I trust, my
Lords, I shall clear my self in the first part, concerning my being a Subverter
of the Fundamental Laws, that I shall stand clear to your Lordships Judgments
in that Case.

My Lords, This Subversion must be by words, by Councils, and by Actions in
Ireland and in England,

My Lords, I shall first give you an Account of the words, wherewithal I am
Charged forth of Ireland; and, the first words are in the third Article, where
I am Charged to have said, That Ireland is a Conquered Nation, and that the
King may do with them as he pleases: And, to the City of Dublin, That their
Charters are nothing worth, and bind the King no farther than he pleases.
These are the words Charged.

My Lords, methinks it is very strange, under favor, that this can be made an
Inducement to prove this Charge, because I said, That Ireland is a Conquered
Nation, therefore I endeavor to subvert the Fundamental Laws when I speak the
Truth, for certainly it is very true, it was so.

My Lords, under favor, I remember very well, there was as much said here at
this Bar, since we began; and yet I dare well Swear, and acquit him that spoke
it, from intending to Subvert the Laws.

For, my Lords, you were told, and told truly, That Ireland was a Conquered
Nation, and that it was Subordinate to England (and, God forbid that it should
be otherwise) and that they have received Laws from the Conqueror.

My Lords, the words testified by my Lord Gormonstone and Kilmalock to be
spoken, are not the words wherewith I am charged, and so, under favor, I
conceive, cannot be brought to my prejudice, as to this Trial, and they are
words that are denied by me.

For my words concerning their Charters, your Lordships remember very well, I
doubt not, wherefore I said they were void, For their misuse of them, and that
I told them so, not with the intent to overthrow their Patents, or Charters,
but to make them more conformable to those things, that the State thought fit,
for increase of Religion and Trade, and encouraging and bringing English into
that Town; And, that it was meant so, and no otherwise; Whatsoever was said, it
appears by this, their Charters were never touched nor infringed, nor meddled
withal by me, during the time I was in that Kingdom; so that words so spoken,
and to such a purpose, that they should go to prove such a Conclusion, I
conceive there is great difference betwixt those Premises, and that Conclusion.

The next Charge for words in Ireland, is in the Fourth Article, where I am
Charged to have said, That I would neither have Law, nor Lawyers Dispute or
Question my Orders: and, that I would make the Earl of Cork, and all Ireland
know, that as long as I had the Government there, any Act of State should be as
binding to the Subjects of that Kingdom, as an Act of Parliament.

My Lords, I humbly beseech your Lordships to give me leave to say for my self,
that these words of the Charge are only Sworn by my Lord of Cork, and no man
else: and, his Lordship appeared a little mistaken the other day in one point,
on the Reading of an Order of the Council Board, for so it appears, as I
conceive; so that for one single Witness, and he the Party Aggrieved by these
words, to be the Man that must convince me, I conceive your Lordships will not
think that to stand with the ordinary Rules of proceeding.

For the rest, to say Acts of State in Ireland should be Binding, so long as
they are not contrary to Law, I confess I then conceived it had been no
Offense, for I thought them to be as binding, being not contrary to Law; but,
the Elder we grow, the wiser we may grow, if God give us the Grace, and
Attentions; and, so I trust I shall, by these Gentlemen, that have taught me to
forbear those kind of Speeches hereafter.

My Lords, These are all the Words charged against me for Ireland, saving only
some things that I shall come to anon, that is Charged upon me in one of the
latter Articles, concerning Scotland; I say, my Lords, these are all the Words
that have slipped from me in Seven years time, having been well watched, and
observed, as your Lordships may persuade your selves I have been; But, in Seven
years time, I say, these are all the words brought to my Charge: and, in truth,
I conceive, a wiser Man than my self might be forgiven for one Error, or slip
of his Tongue of that Nature in a years time, seeing it is in no greater
measure, God be praised, than these are.

My Lords, these being the words that passed from me in Ireland, there are
other words that are charged upon me, to have been spoken in England; but if
your Lordships will give me leave (though perhaps in no very good method) I
shall not fail to touch first or last, the words in every Article.

The next Article then that I am charged withal for words, is the second
Article, and these are the words that I should say, concerning the Finger and
the Loins.

My Lords, I may allege much new matter, but I will observe your Lordships
Order punctually, by the Grace of God, for what I may say in that case, if it
might be admitted, I keep it to my self; but the truth is, they that do prove
the words to be thus, That I would make the little finger of the Law, heavier
than the Kings Loins; they do not tell you the occasion of the Speech, or what
went before, or what after; for my Lords, if they had told the occasion (which
methinks they should, as well have remembered as the words) it would plainly and
clearly have appeared to your Lordships, that Sir William Pennymans Testimony
was most true, for the occasion was such, that to have said those words, had
been to have spoken against that to which I intended the discourse; but
speaking them as I said, it makes very strong for that purpose, to which I
directed them; which was to appease the Country, and quiet the Discontents;
for having been double charged with the Knight-money, and therefore it was not
properly threatening them, further to have provoked them.

My Lords, you have Sir Will. Pennymans testimony, that it was so, and my
profession; who (under favor) will not speak an untruth to save my life; I
protest before God, that I say, I verily believe, or else I will never speak it
indeed, and there it is they have proved it to have been said one way, we
another way, we give the occasion of our Speech, and disavow theirs, and so we
must leave it; and howsoever, these words so spoken, can never be drawn (as I
humbly conceive) as premises to prove their conclusions, that therefore I am
guilty of High Treason, they have made me guilty of a foolish Word, and that I
confess, and if they please, I will confess it all the day long; for I have
been foolish all the days of my life, and I hope hereafter I shall look unto my
ways, that I offend not with my Tongue, for if I cannot rule it abroad, I will
rule it within doors else I will never stir abroad, but bound it so to my own
business and affairs, that I trust I shall give no offense.

The next Article that charge me with words, is the 22 Article, and these be
words spoke in England; The first part of them, which concerns the bringing in
of the Irish Army, I have spoken to already; but in the conclusion there are
other words, and shortly, the said Earl of Strafford returned to England, and
to sundry persons declared his opinion to be, That His Majesty should first try
the Parliament here, and if that did not supply him according to his occasions,
he might then use his Prerogative as he pleased, to levy what he needed, and
that he should be acquitted both of God and Man, if he took some other courses
to supply himself, though it were against the will of his Subjects.

My Lords, as unto this, I conceive the Charge is not proved by any Witness,
that has been here produced against me; and in truth my Lords, I must needs
say this, under favor (if it be an error in my Judgment, I must humbly crave
your Lordships pardon) through the whole Cause I have not seen a weaker proof,
and if I had had time to have gotten my Witnesses out of Ireland, I hope that
should be proved, and so clearly, as nothing could be proved more; but I must
stand or fall to what I have proved, and so I do my Lords; the proof they offer
for this (as I conceive) is the Testimony of my Lord Primate, and his Testimony
is, That in some discourse betwixt us two, touching Levying upon the Subject in
case of imminent necessity, he found me of opinion, that the King might use his
Prerogative as he pleased. My Lords, this is (under favor) a single Testimony,
it is of a discourse between him and me, and there is not any other that
witnesses any thing concerning it, so that (under favor My Lords) I conceive
this will not be sufficient to bring me any ways in danger of Treason, being
but a single Testimony; and my Lords, it is to be thought, and to be believed
(and it were a great offense for any man to think otherwise) that in this case
any thing can please the King (he is so Gracious and Good) but what shall be
Just and Lawful, and then there is no doubt, but so far as with Justice and
Lawfulness, he may use his Prerogative in case of imminent danger, when
ordinary means will not be admitted.

At most, he says it was but an opinion, and opinions may make an Heretic,
but they shall not, I trust, make a Traitor.

The next is the Testimony of my Lord Conway, and the words that his Lordship
testifies are these; That in case the King would not be otherwise supplied by
Subsidies, he might seek means to help himself, though it were against the will
of his Subjects. Truly, my Lords, if I should acknowledge these words, I do not
see how they can be any way Capital in my case; but this again is but a single
Testimony, and there is no other that says it but himself, and if there be a
good sense given to them, certainly the words may very well bear it, for I
think it is a very natural motion for any man to preserve himself, though it be
to the disliking of another; and why a King should not do it as well as a
Subject, it is such a prerogative of Kings, as I never yet heard of; for I
thought, though they had been Gods on earth, yet they are men, and have
affections as men, and should preserve themselves, being not only accountable
for themselves, to God Almighty, but also for their Subjects, whose Good and
Benefit is wrapped up and involved in theirs, and therefore the King ought more
to regard his own preservation, than the Commonwealth.

The Third is, That Mr. Treasurer says, that to his best remembrance I did say,
That if the Parliament should not succeed, I would be ready to assist His
Majesty any other way; God forbid this should be any offense for to say so,
either in him or me; for I will swear, if it please you, that he said so as
well as I, therefore God forbid, it should endanger either of us both; for my
Lords, to say I will serve the King any other way, it is no other than what
became a good and faithful servant to do, always provided, the way be good and
lawful, which in this case, is always to be admitted among persons of Honor and
persons of Trust; and therefore admitting it not any other way, it was just,
and lawful, and commendable in Mr. Treasurer and me; for I vow to your
Lordships, we both said it, and he as fully as I.

But my Lords, all these come very far short, to prove the words of the Charge,
and this (under favor) is all the proof as I have taken, that I should say
these words before the Parliament.

The next words I am charged withal, are in the 23 Article, and those, my Lords
are, that having tried the affections of his people, His Majesty was loose and
absolved from all Rules of Government, and was to do every thing that Power
would admit, and that His Majesty had tried all ways, and was refused, and
should be acquitted both of God and man: For the latter part that concerns the
reducing of this Kingdom by the Irish Army, I have answered already, and
therefore shall not need to repeat it

My Lords, mine Answer (under favor) to those words, with your Lordships Noble
permission, must be thus, That they are no way proved in the most material part
of them, by any Testimony that has been offered, I shall, as near as I can,
repeat the proofs that were offered on this point (for these Articles were
brought in four or five together,) but I shall apply the proofs severally and
distinctly.

The Testimony first given, was the Testimony of the Lord of Bristol, wherein
his Lordship says, That in a discourse, there was difference betwixt his
Lordship and me, in some Tenants of ours. To which I answered the other day;
that in discourse we speak not always the things we think, but many times to
gain from other men's arguments, to strengthen me in my opinion, I will seem to
be of the contrary; This is ordinary and familiar in all conversation, and very
honest and just, so that albeit we seem to differ as we held it severally, yet
if the pulse of our hearts had been touched close, both his and mine, perhaps
we should have found it one and the same; Besides, his Lordship said, I
disliked not the discourse, we speaking of another Parliament; only I said, it
was not convenient at that time, and that the present dangers would not admit a
remedy of so long consideration; and that the King must provide for the
Commonwealth, Et salus populi suprema lex.

And truly my Lords, I think that it is very hard, any man should upon such a
discourse, have his words turned upon him, and made use of to condemn him for
High Treason.

My Lords, I know you are so just that you would judge me, as you would be
judged your selves, and whether any man that hears me, would be content, to
have every word that falls in discourse betwixt man and man, to be so severely
interpreted, I leave to every man's Breast, what he finds in the closet of his
own Heart: and desire to be judged according to that.

My Lord went further, and says, I should say that the King was not to be
mastered by the frowardness, or disaffection of some particular men, and
conceives it be meant of the Parliament.

My Lords, I say (under favor) these words are not within the Charge, and
therefore I am not to be accountable for them; besides, it is a single
Testimony, and by the proviso of that Statute, cannot be made use of, to the
end and purpose for which they bring them.

My Lords, the next Testimony offered for proving this Charge, is the Testimony
of my Lord of Newburgh, and he says, That at the Council Board, or in the
Gallery I did say, that seeing the Parliament had not supplied the King, His
Majesty might take other courses for the defense of the Kingdom. Truly my Lords
(under favor) who doubts but he might, for my part, I see not where the
offense is; for another man to have said thus, for if another man will not help
me, may not I therefore help my self? (under favor) I conceive there is no
great weight nor crime in these words, but in these likewise he stands a single
Testimony, there is no man that joins with him in it; and there is this in the
whole Cause, concerning the words, that I think there is not any one thing
wherein two concur.

The next Testimony is that of the Earl of Holland, and he says, That at the
Council Board I said, The Parliament having denied the King, he had advantage
to supply himself other ways; Truly, my Lords, I say still other ways, being
lawful ways, and just ways, and such ways as the goodness of the King can
only walk in, and in no other can he walk. And therefore I conceive, they be
far from bringing it to so high a guilt as Treason; and this likewise his
Lordship expresses as the rest do, singly on his own word, as he conceives
them, and not on the particular word of any other person, which is I say, the
case of every one that speaks in the business; and therefore there being so
great a difference in the Report and Conceiving of things, it is very hard my
words should be taken to my destruction, when no Man agrees what they were.

My Lord of Northumberland is the next, and he says, I should say at a
Committee for the Scottish affairs, That in case of necessity, and for defense
and safety of the Kingdom, every thing must be done for the preservation of the
King and his People. And this is the Testimony of my Lord in that point; if I
take any thing short, it is against my Will, I give you my Notes as far as I
have them, and further I cannot remember them.

But my Lords, I say this brings it to that, which is indeed, the great part of
my Defense in this case: There is another agreed in this too, and it is Mr
Treasurer, who says, that in Argument for Offensive or Defensive War, I should
say, That having tried all ways, and being refused, the King might in extreme
necessity, provide for the safety of himself and his People; I say this brings
it to that, which is principally for my Defense that must qualify, if not
absolutely free me from any blame; and that is that which did proceed and
follow after.

My Lords (under favor) I have heard some discourse of great weight, and of
great Authority; and that is certain, the Arguments that were used in the case
of Ship Money, by those that Argued against the King in that Case, say as much,
and will undertake, if any man read those Arguments, he shall find as much said
there, as I said at Council Board; for there you shall hear, that there be
certain Times and Seasons, when Propriety ceases, as in the case of Burning,
where a Man pulls down the next House, to preserve the whole street from being
set on fire. In the case of building Forts on any man's Land, where it is for
the public defense of the Kingdom, in both these Cases, Propriety does cease:
nay, he says that in War, Inter Arma silent Leges. Now my Lords, these are as
highly said, as any thing you have heard by me, and yet certainly is no
subverting of the Fundamental Laws for all that; and therefore, if a man must
be judged, he must not be judged by pieces, but by all together.

My Lords, Whatsoever I said at Council Board, was led in by this Case, what a
King should do, in case of a Foreign Invasion of an Enemy, when the ordinary
ways and means of levying Money would not come in seasonably to prevent
mischief, for what a King may do, in case of absolute necessity; certainly in
these cases, the ordinary Rules do not take place; as this was the Case that
let in the Discourse, so I most humbly beseech your Lordships (for it is fully
proved) to remember what was the conclusion of that Discourse; which was, That
after the present occasion provided for, the King was obliged in Honor and
Justice to vindicate and free the Liberty of the Subject from all prejudice,
and harm it might sustain in that extraordinary occasion, and that this was to
be done by a Parliament, and no other way but a Parliament: and the King and
his People could never be happy, till the Prerogative of the Crown, and the
Liberty of the Subject were so bounded and known, that they might go hand in
hand together, mutually to the assistance of one another.

My Lords, give me that which precedes, and that which follows, (both being
proved to be the Case in these words in the Charge) I think, considering these
two, I should be far from having committed any great crime or offense, in
saying these words.

But I say as I said before, I shall be more wary for the time hereafter, if it
please God to give me that Grace and Life, which I submit to him, and shall
readily and willingly resign to his good Will and Pleasure; I conceive
therefore, that as these words are accompanied, they be not words that do
amount to Treason, and are so qualifyed, and so weakly proved, that I trust
they shall not stick with your Lordships.

The next words that I am charged withal in England, be on the 25th Article,
and that is, that I should say, that the Aldermen that would not give in the
names of the able men of the City, deserved to be put to Fine and Ransom, and
that no good would be done with them, till an example were made of them, and
they were laid by the heels, and some of the Aldermen hanged up.

In the first part of the Article, there is something, concerning my advice for
raising the Money, but it is not proved that I did any thing therein, but as
others did, and as in former years had been done, before my coming into the
Kingdom: For the words, that they deserved Fine and Ransom, I confess them in
my Answer, just in the same manner as my Lord of Berkshire was pleased to
testify them the other day, that is, That if they should not do the thing
desired, they might in my opinion, be liable to Fine and Ransom.

And my Lords, admit I were mistaken in my opinion, shall it be a Treason to be
mistaken? I say in my opinion, they might be liable to Fine and Ransom; but
what is this to Treason? Under favor, nothing at all as I conceive. For the
other part, that it would never be well, till some of the Aldermen be hanged;
it proves to be testified by Mr. Alderman Garroway, and he owns it only for
himself; for it was not that some of the Aldermen should be hanged, but he said
at the Bar, till he himself were hanged.

My Lords, This is a single Testimony, and these words, as he says, were by me
spoken to the King at the Council Board, That it would never be well till some
of them were hanged, meaning himself; truly my Lords, I thank God I never spoke
such unmannerly Language all the days of my life, I have had more regard to my
words than to say such things to my Master; and your Lordships must needs be
many of you by, and I am very confident, there is not one among you, that can
remember any such words were spoke; for in good faith, I did not speak them;
And my Lords, before this misfortune did befall me, I should with modesty have
thought my self a person on equal terms, to have been believed as well as Mr.
Garraway, and I speak it with as great confidence as he, that I never spoke the
words.

My Lords, The next is the 26th Article, and that is, that I should say the
City of London dealt undutifully with the King, and they were more ready to
help the Rebels, than to help His Majesty; and if any hurt came to them, they
might thank themselves.

My Lords, I am in the first part of this Article, charged to have counseled
and approved two dangerous and wicked Projects, the one concerning the stay of
the Bullion in the Tower, the other concernin Copper-coyn, and no proof has
been offered, that I either compelled, or approved either of those two
Projects. And my Lords, it is proved to your Lordships, that when the Merchants
came, I told them, I knew nothing of the business as to the Bullion, neither
indeed, did I ever know there was any Bullion, nor any thing of that nature in
the Tower. But for the words, I conceive it had been no Treason for me to think
at that time, that the Londoners had dealt unthankfully with His Majesty, I
thought I might have said it freely, without danger of such a thought, as might
conduce to the convicting me of Treason.

But whatsoever I then thought, or on what grounds soever, it may be remembered,
that then I alleged, and now I speak it, when news was brought to York, that
the City had sent the King Two hundred thousand pounds, I took notice, that
notwithstanding all I had thought formerly, they and now made such recompense,
and so cleared their Faith and Duty to the King, that I should be their
servant, and lay my hand under their feet, as those that heard me are able to
speak; for though at first I said they had dealt unthanfully with the King, yet
afterward I was ready and willing upon all occasions, to testify the contrary
of them, and to profess that I was ready to serve them upon all occasions,
just, and honest, and honorable.

As for my saying, that they were readier to help the Rebels than the King. In
truth I am a man that cannot justify a thing I do not approve, I must needs
say, it was an unadvised Speech; and, I wish I had not spoke it: it seems I did
speak it; for I have reason to believe honest men when they Swear, though, in
truth, I remember it not: but, I have no reason or cause to think, they would
take an Oath otherwise then truth. I have no exception to the Men, and
therefore, upon their words, I must Credit them, before my own memory; but, it
was an Unadvised Speech, and he is a wise man, and much wiser then my self,
that some time offends not with his Tongue. And, in truth, my Lords, though
there be no Treason in it, they are the most unwarranted words that appear in
the whole Proof made against me.

In the 26th there are some words, that I should speak to my Lord Cottington,
concerning a Foolish Pamphlet, or Gazette, which I then had in my hand; and, it
is such a Toy in it self, and all the Circumstances of it, that I hold it not
worth the mentioning, but only that I would not forget any thing in the
Proofs, as near as I could, and the Proof is uncertain, for only one Man
says it, and, the very words he cannot express: Now, he that shall Swear, when
he cannot express the Words, his Testimony is but of small value; and, he is
but a Single Proof at best to disprove what is deposed by Sir William
Parkhurst, who says, he was by, yet heard not the Words; And, Cogam says, he
remembers not the words: and so, upon the matter, there are two against one;
and, the whole being so uncertain, I conceive it is of very little moment in
your Lordships Judgments.

My Lords, These are as near as I can gather, all that are charged as unto
words, spoken either in England or Ireland Councils, other then these I am not
charged withal, and so there remains nothing but my Actions; and, if I can
free them as well, as I have freed the Words, I conceive then, under favor, I
have fully Answered all, that has been objected against me.

My Lords, The first of these is the Fifth Article in the Case of Sentence of
the Council of War, against my Lord Mountnorris, and the Sentence of the
Council of War against Denwit.

For that of my Lord Mountnorris, I have showed plainly and clearly to your
Lordships, that I was no Judge in the Cause, but a Party, and therefore not
Responsible for any Judgment given against his Lordship. I gave no Vote, and so
consequently am not to Answer for any Guilt, if there were any; which, under
favor, I conceive, since all Martial Law is Adjudged to be against the Law, I
may be of another Opinion; but, formerly conceiving that that might have stood
with the Law, I might say something more for the Justification of it, then now
I do, but hour I was no Party.

They say, he was a Peer, and it is very true; but, as he was a Peer, so he was
a Captain of the Army; and, in this Case, we consider Men as Members of the
Army, not as Peers: And, if a Peer will not submit himself to an Officer of the
Army, he must submit himself to the Order of the Army.

Besides, I say it was intended only as a Discipline to him, the better to
remember him to govern his Tongue afterward toward other Men; and, that there
was no more Prejudice fell upon him by it, but two or three days Imprisonment,
so there was no great Animosity in the business: besides, it appeared to your
Lordships, that two or three days after we writ to the King, and obtained his
Pardon; so that I conceive, the Inconvenience was not very great to him, nor
the Proceedings such, as should make it unpardonable, or Criminal in them that
gave Sentence upon him, whereof I was none.

For that other, concerning Denwitt, your Lordships may remember, he was found
Guilty of Stealing a Quarter of Beef, and for Running from his Colors, and
was formerly Burnt in the Hand; for that he should be Proceeded against another
way: But, falling out at that time, when Five hundred Men were going over to
Carlisle, and they being unwilling to be put to Sea, we were enforced to those
proceedings for the preventing of further Mischief. And, there is another
thing; that the Martial-Law has been always in Force, and executed in all times
in Ireland, and never so sparingly as in my time; for, this is the only Man
that suffered all the time I had the Honor of the Government: And, I dare
Appeal to them that know the Country, Whether, in former times, many Men have
not been committed, and Executed, by Martial-Law, by the Deputies Warrant, that
were not Thieves and Rebels, but such as went up and down the Country? if they
could not give Account of themselves, the Provost-Martial, by direction of the
Deputies, using, in such Case, to Hang them up. I dare say there are Hundreds
of Examples in this kind; so that as to that, I do not Justify it; But, I say,
it is a Pardonable Fault; and, that others are of Course Pardoned for it; And,
I trust, that what falls of Course, shall not be laid upon me as High Treason;
or conducing to it.

The next is the Sixth Article; and that is in the Case of Richard Rollston;
and, therein, I am said to have Subverted the Fundamental Laws, by executing a
Power, and a Jurisdiction, which was not Warranted by Law, upon a Paper
Petition, putting out of Possession of his Freehold and Inheritance my Lord
Mountnorris.

My Lords, That Sentence will appear to your Lordships to be no more, then the
relieving a Poor Man in case of Equity; and, it is proved to you to be a Power,
that has been formerly practiced by the Deputies; and, I humbly conceive the
Decree is just: So that, my Lords, I must Confess, it is something strange to
me, That, having the Kings Letter to Warrant me in the Course of Proceedings,
and having the Power of former Deputies in like Case, and doing no more therein
then the Lord Chancellor, by the very self-same Law, should do in other places:
And, that which should be -- done, by the Chancellor, should be Innocent and
Just, yet become High Treason when done by me, is a thing I understand not.

The next is the Case of Tonnres; and, that is waved by them; and well may it
be; for, it was in a Case of Plantation; there was no Possession altered, and
it is fully within the Book of the Kings Instructions.

The next is in the Case of Sir John Gifford against the Lord Viscount Loftus,
which they have Waved; and, well they may; for it was grounded on a Letter from
the King, Commanding it to be heard by the Deputy and Council, which is clearly
within the Instructions, and has been since heard by the King and
Council Board, and by them Confirmed for a Just Decree.

The next is the Case of my Lord of Kildare; and, that they may well Wave too;
the Proceedings being grounded upon a Letter from His Majesty, and nothing done
but in persuance of an Award between the Lord Digbyes House, and that House of
Kildare made by King James.

The next is the Lady Hibbots Case; and that was Relief given to Poor Men,
circumvented by Practice, to the Prejudice of himself. My Lords, I had Power to
hear that Cause, and all Causes of that Nature, by the King's Letter, and
according to the Practice of former Deputies: And, I conceive, it will appear,
when it comes to be heard, to be a just and fair Decree, I do not any way
question that, though I remember little of the business.

But, at the worst, this is but an over-exercising of a Jurisdiction; and, that
it should be High Treason in a Judge to exceed his Jurisdiction, I must confess
I never heard it. I told your Lordships the other day, Bono Iudici est Amplior
Iurisdictio.

But, that it should be High Treason to enlarge Jurisdiction, is a perilous
Point; and, if it be so, it befits your Lordships, and all Judges, to be well
certained what you may do, least by going too far, you fall into great
Inconveniences.

But, my Lords, I say (under favor) that all these, if they had been done
without any manner of Authority, had not been a Subversion, but rather a
diversion of the Law: it could not be properly said, to be the subverting of
the Fundamental Laws, though it might be a diverting, and so long as I keep
the Rule of the Law, and do the same things that another man does, in a more
legal way, I mean in a more warrantable place; I say, my doing of the same
thing in an improper place, is not a Subversion, but a diversion of the Law: If
you will bring in the Thames about Lambeth, to come in again below the Bridge,
the River is the same, though the Course be diverted to another place: So the
Fundamental Law is the same, though the Course be diverted to another place; I
say, the Fundamental Law is the same, only it is carried in another Pipe: And,
Shall this be said to be a Subverting? Under favor, as the River is the same,
so the Law is the same; it is not a subversion, but a diversion. Nor does it
skill where Justice be done (I mean so far as it concerns the Subjects
Interest) for, so long as he has Justice speedily, and with least Charge, his
end is complied with, and it concerns not himself, whether he has it in the
Kings Bench, or Common Pleas; so he has it speedily, and with the least
Charge: And therefore, as long as the Laws are the same, though Executed by
several Persons, and in several places, I cannot conceive it to be a
subversion: And, I shall humbly beseech your Lordships, to take care, that
while these straynes are put upon me, to make this Personal Charge against me,
ye do not through my Sides, Wound the Crown of England, by taking that Power
from the Deputy, which must of necessity be lodged in him, if you will have
that Kingdom depend upon the Crown of England, which I hold, in all Wisdom and
Judgment, ought to be cared for: Therefore, I beseech you, prejudice not the
Deputy, to the Disabling him from serving the Crown hereafter, by Beating down
me, who am this day to Answer before you; For, if you take away the Power of
the Deputy, you shall not have that Kingdom long depend upon this Crown; for,
it rests under God and His Majesty, and must principally rest upon the care of
him that is entrusted with that Charge: And, therefore, give me leave, on the
behalf of the Crown of England, to beseech you to be wary of lessening the
Deputies Power too much; for, if you do, I fear you will find it a great
Disservice to the Crown.

My Lords, the next thing I am Charged with is the 9th Article; That is, a
Warrant of Assistance to the Bishop of Down and Connor, and, for that, your
Lordships see there was but one of them, and have heard it proved, that before
my time such Warrants were frequent indeed, no man was denied them: But, my
Lords, it must likewise be remembered, that of my own accord, I did recall it,
before I was ever questioned for it; and, it is very hard, if he that mends his
Faults, should be afterward punished for it; for, it is a Degree of Repentance,
and, it is hard, that a man should be finally Condemned after Repentance: and
therefore, my Lords, I trust, seeing there was but one of them, seeing I did my
self recall it, so willingly, as soon as I found the Inconvenience, I hope that
will be easier remitted to me.

The next is the 10th Article, that concerns the Customs, and that is rather
to be looked on as a Fraud, then as a Treason, as I conceive it, there is no
Treason in the business sure: But, I have proved, the Bargain was honestly
made; That there was more offered for it by me then any other; That I had it
upon no other Terms, then it was formerly let to others; That I was
constrained to it whether I would or no; And then, my Lords, if the Bargain, by
the Increase of that Kingdom, prove a good and profitable Bargain; it is a
very hard Case, that if it be increased through the Kings Wisdom and Goodness,
and the Kingdoms Growth, Trade and Traffic, that this should be turned upon
me, as an Argument, to make me Guilty of Treason.

I never found a good Bargain should be so charged, so long as it was honest
and fair.

But, whereas they press, That I have gained Three Hundred Thousand Pounds
Estate by it; it is a very strange mistake: For, the King has out of it His
Rent of 15 or 16 Thousand Pounds a year, and Five entire parts of Eight clear
to Himself; and therefore it was a strange Calculation, and much mistaken by
them that gave the Information of it to the Gentlemen.

For the Book of Rates it was none of mine, but was agreed on before my time; I
had nothing to do with it, and therefore have nothing to Answer for it: And,
when it shall come to be proved, it will appear, that the Rates were set fairly
and justly, and equal betwixt King and People, according to the Law, whatsoever
has been said to the contrary.

The next is the 11th Article, concerning Pipe-Staves, and that is by them
waved; and well they may, for the plain truth is, if it had been proceeded in,
it would have appeared, that there is come Fifteen hundred pounds gain to the
King, and Four hundred pounds loss to my self, and preserving of Woods, and
that is all that would be made from that Article.

The next is the business of the Tobacco, which is not applyable to Treason in
any kind; but because I would be clear in every Man's Judgment that hears me, I
beseech your Lordships to call to mind, it was the Petition of the
Commons-House of Ireland, that the Grant of Impost on the Tobacco should be
taken in, and converted to the Kings use; so that whatsoever was done, was
persuing their intention and desire.

That there was no way but this, to make benefit and profit of it, is most
manifestly showed, that there was a Proclamation in England of the like nature,
and a Command of the King to proceed in it accordingly; and an Act of
Parliament Transmitted here, for Passing it to the Crown, according to the
intention of the Commons-House; and, for the greatness of the Bargain, no
Proof has been offered to your Lordships, but only the Estimate of a
Merchant; and, how far your Lordships will be guided by the Estimate of a
Merchant I known not; but, I have had Trial of some of them, and their
Estimates never hold; for, they have always told me, I shall gain much, and
when I came to the point, I gained nothing: and if Sir George Ratcliffe should
be Sworn to the Point, he should say confidently, that we are Fourscore and six
thousand out of Purse, and; when he came out of Ireland, but Fourscore thousand
pounds received; and this is the Profit Estimated by the great Merchants, at a
Hundred and Forty thousand pounds a year: But, at the worst, it is but a
Monopoly, and a Monopoly of the best condition, because it was begun by a
Parliament. I have seen many Monopolies questioned in Parliament, and many
overthrown in Parliament, but, I never heard a Monopoly charged for a Treason.

My Lords, The next is the 13th Article, and that is concerning the Flax
business; For that, my Lords, if I had thought it any way concerning me, I
could have cleared it in a very great measure; But, I had no private Interest
in the business, much less of private profit; but only an endeavor and
desire, to bring in the Trade of Linen Cloth to that Kingdom, which would be
much advantage to both Kingdoms, and no prejudice to this Kingdom, which a
Woollen Trade would have been, if set up these.

And, the Prolcamation, when it was found not so well liking to the People, was
called in of our own accord, before it was questioned, and so laid aside, and
given over.

For any matter of private Benefit, you have no Witness but Crokay, a Fellow
brought out of Prison; Here is but a single Witness, and a sorry one; a Fellow,
who, by misbehaving and misusing the trust committed to him, was turned out;
and, upon the turning of him out, the Proclamation was absolutely called in:
and, now he comes to be a Witness, being himself the only offended in the
Cause.

But, I beseech your Lordships, to think, I have not lived with so mean a heart
in the World, that I should look to gain Four Nobles more or less, upon a Cart
Load of Flax; It is very well known my thoughts have carried me free enough
from gaining so poor and petty a matter, as that is. I know nothing in the
World of it, no more than the man in the Moon; but, when it comes to be heard,
your Lordships will find me extreme pure in that; for, I thank God I have
clear hands I assure you.

The 14th is waved by them, concerning an Unlawful Oath given to Masters and
Officers of Ships; and, it might very well be waved; for, I conceive it to be
Warranted by the Law: Sure I am, it is both the Practice of England and
Ireland, and has always, and at all times, been practiced and used, and is
only for the preventing of Fraud and Deceit in Merchants, by not paying the
Kings Duties and Customs.

The 15th is Answered already I hope.

The 16th does Charge upon me certain Propositions I made, before I went into
Ireland: And, in good Faith, my Lords, you may see, how short-sighted men may
be to their own Actions; for, I did very well believe, I should never have
reaped any thing from those Propositions but Thanks; I am sure they were well
received then, when they were offered to His Majesty and the Council; and, I
must truly Confess, I never thought they should be objected against me as a
Fault.

My Lords, The Proposition was, That no Man should be allowed to Complain of
Injustice or Oppression in Ireland, unless he first addressed himself to the
Deputy: My Lords, there was no Original Intent, but only to prevent Clamours,
and Unjust Vexations of the Kings Ministers there; that, after men had received
Judgment of the Kings Courts, they might not presently come, and, by Clamours,
call over a Chief Justice, or a Chancellor, or President, to Answer here, and
be at charge of five or six hundred pounds, unless they acquaint the Deputy
with it, that they might be righted in the place; and, this is Charged against
me as a great Crime.

Truly, my Lords, I shall Confess, and Amend any thing, and trust other
Judgments rather than mine own; but, I see not how this can Charge me, as
intending to subvert the Laws of the Land, but rather to preserve them.

The other concerns a Proclamation, That none shall depart the Kingdom without
License.

My Lords, for that I have showed, that no man out of that Kingdom, can come
without License, but upon very great Penalties. I have showed likewise, it was
the desire of their own Agents some 15 or 16 years since, That there might be
such a Restraint, and none might come over without License. I have showed you
likewise, the Instructions to my Lord of Faulkland, by which he was Commanded,
in persuance of that Desire, that none should come over without his License: I
have showed the express Command of His Majesty to me, to have it so. I have
showed you likewise the Reasons of State, why it should be so, to prevent that
practice and Intelligence, which might otherwise arise betwixt them of that
Nation, serving under Tir-Connell and O Neale; and likewise to prevent the
going over, and transplanting the Prime Nobility and Gentry to Seminaries, and
other such places, there to be brought up: and therefore, in reason of State,
it is a Restraint, and ought so to be. But, having these grounds of Law,
Warrant, Practice, Former Instruction and all, Why this should be brought to me
in particular Charge, to Convince me of endeavoring the Subversion of the
Laws, I must submit to your Lordships.

My Lords, There is, in the latter part of this, another Charge, concerning the
Sentenceing of one Parry, who was Sentenced (as I conceive) very Justly; and, I
have no more to answer for in that Sentence, then any of the rest, having but a
single Voice; and, that I should answer for all, I confess is something hard.
But, there is no manner of Testimony in the World in this, save the Testimony
of Parry himself: Now, if Parry, the Man offended, his Testimony shall be taken
against the Judge, I know no Man can be safe, and other Testimony is not
offered: and therefore I trust that that will easily fall off of it self.

The 17th is likewise waved; and is, in Truth, of no great Consequence, one way
or other, and therefore I shall give no other Answer to it; It was well waved,
and had been as well left out, having no great matter in it.

The 18th is likewise waved, but it is that which sticks very heavy upon me;
and, wherein I find my self as much afflicted, as in any one part of the
Charge: For, my Lords, here I am Charged up and down, to endeavor to draw upon
my self a Dependence of the Papists, in both Kingdoms of Ireland and England;
and, that I have, during the time of my Government, restored diverse
Mass-Houses in Dublin and elsewhere, that have been by Precedent Deputies taken
away. I am likewise Charged to have drawn to my self a Dependence of the Irish
Army, Eight Thousand, all Papists; and likewise to have miscarried my self in a
Commission entrusted with me, before my going into Ireland, concerning
Compositions for Recusants.

This is a very heavy and grievous Charge, and has raised a great deal of Ill
Opinion against me in the World, to be a Fafourer and Contriver with Papists,
and I know not whom, against the Religion I profess, a Greater and Fouler Crime
there cannot be against God or Man; and yet this goes in Print all over the
World: and, when it comes to the Point, here is no Proof, nor any part of the
Charge made good. And, therefore, since it is not made good by the Charge, I
humbly desire I may be vindicated in your Lordships Noble Opinions, and the
Opinions of all that hear me, that I am, in my Religion, what I ought to be;
and, that which I will Dye in, and Maintain against all the World: And, I am so
far from Contriving any thing to the hinderance of it, that, if God give me
life, I will serve it, and prevent any inconvenience to it: and, my Religion
and Duty to God is so Dear, and precious to me, that there is nothing in this
World, but I shall lay it down, as Straw and Stubble, under my feet, and
trample upon it, rather, then in any kind, forfeit that: but, in the mean time,
I suffer, and must be content.

My Lords, The next is the 19th Article; and, that was, for framing a New and
Unusual Oath, which the Scots did take in Ireland, to give Pledges of their
Allegiance to the King; I have showed you for that, that the Oath was framed by
the Kings express Command in January, before the Oath was given, which was, I
think, in May. And, I did then humbly conceive it lawful for me so to do, being
only to take from them a Pledge of their Allegiance to the King. I confess, I
conceived such an Oath might have been lawfully Administered to the People; and
showed, that the same Oath was Administered here in England, to those of that
Nation, I showed that it was taken in Ireland voluntarily: And, I humbly
represent to your Lordships the time when this Oath was required, when the King
and both the Armies were in the Field, lodged not far from one another: And,
whereas it is said, it should oblige the Clergy in Ecclesiastical Matters; if
your Lordships call to mind, the very Oath it self cleares that Point,
requiring only a Temporal Obedience and Allegiance, in a time of that Danger
and Distraction, given by the Kings own Command, and to no other purpose.

And, my Lords, the Proofs are nothing at all on the matter; Sir James
Mountgomery tells you a Tale, not much Material; nor Mr. Maxwell, nor Sir John
Clotworthy; there is nothing at all in it concerning Treason. Stewarts Sentence
remains only to be Answered in this Article; for that, I conceive it was
Justly and Fairly given, as I then conceived. I was one of the rest, and
nothing was intended by that Decree, but his Reformation; and, when he had
pleased to have taken the Oath, he might have been released of the Sentence,
and sent home again quietly.

The next is the 20th Article; Wherein I am Charged to be a Provoker, and
Incendiary of a War against His Majesty's Subjects of the Scotch Nation; and,
that I should say of them, They were Rebels and Traitors: and, being about to
come into England, that I should say, I would root out of the Kingdom the
Scottish Nation Root and Branch.

My Lords, I shall need no more to say in this, for my being an Incendiary; I
think, by the Proof, it has been clearly made appear to your Lordships, that
I gave no Opinion, but such as others did in the like Case. It is proved by my
Lord Traquair, and my Lord Treasurer, and might have been proved by many more,
if it had been needful.

For the Words, that I should say, The Rooting out the Scots Root and Branch,
They are only testified by one single Witness; Salmon the Schoolmaster Swears
it, and no man else but he; and, I hope, my Lords, that when your Lordships do
call to mind, how he is Crossed by his Fellow Witness John Loftus, your Lordships
will be satisfied; he Swears I will persecute them to the Blood, and Root them
out Root and Branch, and, I cannot tell what: But, John Loftus said indeed,
that I said, I hope that such of the Scottish Nation, as would not submit to the
Ecclesiastical Government, I would root out stock and branch: a wonderful
difference between these two. But, my Lords, it was testified by Mr. Secretary
Manwaring then present, that I neither spoke the one nor the other, but as in
my Answer I did truly and faithfully deliver it; I said, that unless they
would take that Oath of Allegiance, and secure the King of their Allegiance in
that point, I hope I should not see any of them stay in that Kingdom, that
refused it: and, there is no Proof in the World but the Schoolmaster; and, I
hope, your Lordships will not take him to be a good and valid proof to convince
me in this Case, being a person of no greater Quality, and crossed by his
fellow Witness: For my self, I do absolutely say, I was so far from wishing ill
to that Nation, or any Dissension or Division between them, that I never
desired other in my heart and soul, but a firm Peace through the Kings
Dominions: My Counsels tended to that; and, if I might seem to begin in a
contrary way, yet the last resort was, to bring all to quietness, and so, that
it should be without Blood. And, I dare say, there be them that heard me say it
many a time in the Kings Council, That the King should be in nothing so much
sparing and tender, as to draw any Blood in that Quarrel; I dare say, many that
heard it will Justify me in it: And, if your Lordships will give me leave, I
do think I have something that might procure your Lordships belief that it was
so; for, at that time, my Fortune (though now by Misfortune it be mean enough)
was such, as I needed not desire to shuffle the Cards, and deal a new; and,
especially, when nothing was to be got but Blows: and, that I trust will be an
Argument to your Lordships, that nothing was desired by me so much as Peace;
and that under Gods goodness, and the Protection and Benefit of His Majesty's
Scepter, I might enjoy the little Estate my Ancestors left me; for, it is
certainly true, whatever the World may think to the contrary, it is very little
better from what my Father left me; something it is, and the most part of the
Improvement of it was, before I came to serve the King; and yet I have had more
from the King then I deserved in all kinds, and all the whole service of my
Life, were it never so many years, could not Merit, nor Deserve from Him, the
Hundred part of what I had from His Favor.

My Lords, Mr. Treasurer Vane says, I was in the Argument for an Offensive,
and he for a Defensive War, for a War both of us: And, I beseech your
Lordships, How should it be more Treasonable for me, to be for an Offensive,
then for him to be for a Defensive War? for a War there must be, and the
difference was not great: and, for a Counselor to deliver his Opinion, and
have that turned upon him as Capital, to sweep from the World himself and his
Posterity, is a very hard Case, to say no more of it.

The next Article is the 21th; wherein I am Charged to be an Enemy to
Parliaments; a Breaker of Parliaments; and did, by that means, sow ill
Affections betwixt the King and His People.

My Lords, This is more fully Charged in a Subsequent Article then this; for,
this is but only for breaking of the last Parliament, that I should advise it
to be called, with an intent to break it, which is very unlikely; for, that
nothing in the World could be of so happy effect to me, as the success of that
Meeting; and yet I must destroy, and disadvantage my self in that, then which,
nothing could be of more advantage then the success of that Parliament.

The 22th Article is Answered already; and, the 23th likewise.

In the 24th Article comes in that of the Parliament more fully; and there I am
Charged Falsely, and Treacherously, and Maliciously, to have declared before His
Majesty's Privy Council, That the Parliament of England had forsaken the King,
and given Him the Advantage to Supply Himself otherwise; and having so
Maliciously Slandered the said House of Commons, that I did, with the Advice of
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Lord Finch, Publish a False and
Traiterous Book, called, His Majesty's Declaration of the Causes of Dissolving
the last Parliament, etc. This goes very heavy upon me in the World, that I
should be a breaker of Parliaments; a Counselor against Parliaments. My Lords,
there is nothing proved of it; and, I hope I shall be cleared by your
Lordships, and these noble Gentlemen, and all the World, that I had no such
thing in my heart.

For the Point of the Declaration, I was at that time Sick in my Bed, and could
do nothing in it, and therefore I trust I shall be acquitted as to that: As to
the Breaking of the Parliament, or any ill will to Parliaments, I have ever
honored them; and, far be it from me to wish, that they may not be frequent,
for the good of the King and Kingdom; but, as often as you shall have it urged,
and pressed against me, that I should be an endeavourer to Subvert the
Fundamental Laws of the Land in this kind, I beseech your Lordships, call to
mind what has been proved, that at all Public Debates, at Council, and
Privately apart, I have humbly represented to His Majesty, from time to time,
that Parliaments are the Only Way to Settle Himself in Quietness in the
Kingdom, and to acquire Prosperity and Happiness to Himself and His People:
And, when you shall hear them press upon me, that I have endeavored to Subvert
the Fundamental Laws of the Land, I beseech your Lordships to call to mind,
how frequently and servently I have advised the King, to call for Parliaments,
which, under God, is the great Protection, and Defense of the Fundamental Laws
of the Kingdom.

To the 25th I have Answered already, and to the 26th likewise.

The next is the 27th; and, for that, I can say no more, then that your
Lordships have heard the Proofs for the Levying of Money; it has been cleared
to your Lordships, that nothing was done by me, but by Consent of the Country,
with their Unanimous good liking, and for their benefit and advantage: Being
done so, and for so good ends, as I trust that shall not be enforced against
me; and, it is very strange to me why it should be expected, that if two Armies
be in the Field, one against the other (as there was at York) that they should
be Governed with as much quietness, as an Attorney walking with his Writs at
his Girdle, betwixt the Kings Bench and the Common Pleas.

For, Armies cannot be Governed without some Latitude in this kind: Inter arma
Silent Leges: rightly applied, there is truth in that. But, I did nothing in
the Business, I did nothing by Compulsion, but by the voluntary liking of the
Parties themselves: and therefore, I conceive, that shall not be Charged upon
me as Treason.

There remains now the 28th Article; and, that is the only Bloody Article, if
it had been, or could be made good, that is in the whole Charge; for, there I
am Charged, out of ill and wicked purposes (and, indeed, What can be worse than
Treason) to have Betrayed Newcastle into the power of the Scotch Army; and
likewise, to have betrayed the Kings Army at Newburn, to a dishonorable
Retreat.

My Lords, if either of these had been true, I should have saved your Lordships
the labor. I would have given Judgment against my self, that had been certain:
But, my Lords, never was any Man more Innocent, therefore they may very well
wave it.

Have I been all this while Charged as an Incendiary? and, Am I now come in the
Conclusion to be charged as a Confederate? it is wonderful strange! certainly
your Articles fight one against another in this; for, How can I be an
Incendiary in one part, and a Conspirator with them that Charged me, to be an
Incendiary in the other part?

In good Faith, I have not been very kindly dealt withal by my Confederates, if
they be Confederates, to Charge me as an Incendiary, that did them that Service
and Help, as to deliver into their hands a Town of such Consequence as that is.

No, my Lords, I wish all happiness to the Nation; but, I can never wish so to
it, as that they should take one of the Kings Towns in England, if I could have
helped it. My Lords, it was lost before I had the Charge of the Army, I had
nothing to do in the business, nor am I to give any Account of it, nor is any
thing proved.

And, as to the Defeat at Newburn, you yet fight one Article with another,
methinks in that too; for, I am charged to be the Man, that delivered up
Newcastle, and yet, all the World knows, that nothing could save it from being
lost, but the taking away from the Scots the Passages at that time: So, that I
should use all means to prevent Men from doing that, which I meant to do for
them, is very strange to me. Here is no Probability, and certainly little truth
in the whole business, as concerning my Confederating with the Scots, either
for the one or the other.

And so, my Lords, I am come to the end of these 28 Articles, that were for my
further Impeachment; I have gone over them all: and, out of these now there
remains, that other Second Treason, that I should be guilty of endeavoring, to
Subvert the Fundamental Laws of the Land, in the first of those Seven Articles.

My Lords, That those should now be Treason together, that are not Treason in
any one part, and Accumulatively to come upon me in that kind; and, where one
will not do it of it self, yet woven up with others, it shall do it; Under
favor, my Lords, I do not conceive, that there is either Statute Law, or
Common Law, that has declared this, endeavoring to Subvert the Fundamental
Laws, to be High Treason.

I say, neither Statute Law, nor Common Law Written, that I could hear of; and,
I have been as diligent to enquire of it as I could be: And, your Lordships
will believe I had reason so to do. And, sure it is a very hard thing, I should
here be questioned for my Life and Honor, upon a Law that is not Extant, that
Cannot be Showed. There is a Rule that I have read out of my Lord Cook, Non
apparentibus and non existentibus eadem est Ratio.

Jesus! My Lords, Where has this Fire lay'n all this while, so many hundred
years together, that no Smoke should appear till it burst out now, to consume
me and my Children? Hard it is, and extreme hard, in my Opinion, that a
Punishment should Precede the Promulgation of a Law; that I should be Punished
by a Law Subsequent to the Act done. I most humbly beseech your Lordships, take
that into Consideration; for, certainly it were better a great deal to live
under no Law, but the Will of Man, and Conform our selves in Humane Wisdom, as
well as we could; and, to Comply with that Will, then to live under the
Protection of a Law, as we think, and then a Law should be made to punish us,
for a Crime precedent to the Law: then I conceive no Man living could be safe,
if that should be admitted.

My Lords, it is hard in another respect, that there should be no Tokens set
upon this Offense, by which we may know it; no manner of Token given; no
Admonition by which we might be aware of it. If I pass down the Thames in a
Boat, and run and Split my self upon an Anchor, if there be not a Buoy to give
me warning, the Party shall give me Damages; but, if it be Marked out, then it
is at my own peril. Now, my Lords, Where is the Mark set upon this Crime? Where
is the Token by which I should discover? if it be not Marked, if it lie
under-Water, and not above, there is no Humane Providence can prevent the
Destruction of a Man Presently and Instantly. Let us then lay aside all that is
Humane Wisdom, let us rely only upon Divine Revelation; for, certainly,
nothing else can preserve us, if you will Condemn us before you tell us where
the Fault is, that we may avoid it.

My Lords, may your Lordships be pleased to have that regard to the Peerage of
England, as never to suffer your selves to be put upon those Moot-points, upon
such Constructions, and Interpretations, and Strictness of Law, as these are,
when the Law is not clear nor known: If there must be a Trial of Wits, I do
most humbly beseech your Lordships to consider, that the Subject may be of
something else, then of your Lives and your Honors.

My Lords, We find, that in the Primitive time, on the Sound and Plain Doctrine
of the blessed Apostles, they brought in their Books of Curious Art, and burnt
them.

My Lords, it will be likewise, under favor (as I humbly conceive) Wisdom and
Providence in your Lordships, for your selves and posterities, for the whole
Kingdom, to cast from you into the Fire, those Bloody and Misterious Volumes,
of Constructive and Arbitrary Treasons, and to betake your selves to the Plain
Letter of the Statute, that tells you where the Crime is, that so you may avoid
it; and let us not, my Lords, be ambitious to be more Learned in those Killing
Arts, then our Forefathers were before us.

My Lords, It is now full Two hundred and forty years since any Man ever was
Touched, to this Height, upon this Crime, before my self; We have lived, my
Lords, happily to our selves at Home, we have lived Gloriously Abroad to the
World; let us be content with that which our Fathers left us, and let us not
awake those Sleepy Lions to our own Destruction, by Rattling up of a Company of
Records, that have lay'n for so many Ages by the Wall, Forgotten, or Neglected.

My Lords, There is this that troubles me extremely, least it should be my
Misfortune to all the rest (for my other Sins, not for my Treasons) that my
Precedent should be of that Disadvantage (as this will be, I fear, in the
Consequence of it) upon the Whole KINGDOM.

My Lords, I beseech you therefore, that you will be pleased seriously to
consider it, and let my particular Case be so looked upon, as that you do not,
through me, Wound the Interest of the Commonwealth: For, howsoever those
Gentlemen at the Bar say, They Speak for the Commonwealth, and they believe
so; yet, under favor, in this particular, I believe I Speak for the
Commonwealth too; and, that the Inconveniences and Miseries that will follow
upon this, will be such, as it will come, within a few years, to that which is
expressed in the Statute of Henry the Fourth, it will be of such a Condition,
that no Man shall know what to do, or what to say.

Do not, my Lords, put greater Difficulty upon the Ministers of State, then
that with Cheerfulness they may Serve the King and the State; for, if you will
Examine them by every Grain, or every little Weight, it will be so heavy, that
the public Affairs of the Kingdom will be left waste, and no man will meddle
with them, that has Wisdom, and Honor, and Fortune to lose.

My Lords, I have now troubled your Lordships a great deal longer, then I
should have done; were it not for the Interest of those PLEDGES, that a Saint
in Heaven left me, I would be loath, my Lords -- (here his Weeping stopped him)
what I forfeit for my self it is nothing; but, I confess, that my Indiscretion
should Forfeit for them, it wounds me very deeply. You will be pleased to
pardon my Infirmity; something I should have said; but, I see I shall not be
able, and therefore I will leave it.

And now, my Lords, for my Self, I thank God I have been, by his Good Blessing
toward me, taught, That the Afflictions of this present Life, are not to be
compared with that Eternal. Weight of Glory, that shall be Revealed for us
hereafter: And so, my Lords, even so, with all Humility, and with all
Tranquillity of Mind, I do submit my self clearly and freely to your Judgments;
and, whether that Righteous Judgment shall be to Life, or to Death,

Te Deum Laudamus, Te Dominum Confitemur.
THE SPEECH OR DECLARATION Of John Pym, Esquire
MY LORDS,
MAny days have been spent, in maintenance of the impeachment of the Earl of
Strafford, by the House of Commons, whereby he stands charged with High
Treason; and your Lordships have heard his Defense with patience, and with as
much Favor as Justice would allow. We have passed through our Evidence, and
the result of all this is, that it remains clearly proved, That the Earl of
Strafford has endeavored by his Words, Actions, and Counsels, to subvert the
Fundamental Laws of England and Ireland, and to introduce an Arbitrary and
Tyrannical Government.

This is the envenomed Arrow for which he inquired, in the beginning of his
replication this day, which has infected all his Blood; This is that
intoxicating Cup, (to use his own Metaphor) which has tainted his Judgment,
and poisoned his Heart: from hence was infused that specifical difference,
which turned his Speeches, his Actions, his Counsels, into Treason; not
cumulative, as he expressed it, as if many misdemeanors could make one Treason;
but formally and essentially. It is the end that does inform Actions, and does
specificate the nature of them, making not only criminal, but even indifferent
Words and Actions to be Treason, being done and spoken with a Treasonable
intention.

That which is given to me in charge, is to show the quality of the offense,
how heinous it is in the nature, how mischievous in the effect of it, which
will best appear, if it be examined by that Law, to which he himself appealed,
that Universal, that Supreme Law, Salus populi: This is the Element of all
Laws, out of which they are derived, the end of all Laws, to which they are
designed, and in which they are perfected; How far it stands in opposition to
this Law, I shall endavour to show in some considerations, which I shall
present to your Lordships, all arising out of the evidence which has been
opened.

The First is this, It is an offense comprehending all other offenses; here you
shall find several Treasons, Murders, Rapines, Oppressions, Perjuries.

The Earth has a Seminary Virtue, whereby it does produce all Herbs and
Plants, and other vegitables: There is in this Crime a Seminary of all evils
hurtful to a State; and if you consider the reasons of it, it must needs be so:
the Law is that which puts a difference betwixt good and evil, betwixt just and
unjust; if you take away the Law, all things will fall into a confusion, every
man will become a Law to himself, which in the depraved condition of humane
nature, must needs produce many great enormities, Lust will become a Law, and
Envy will become a Law, Covetousness and Ambition will become Laws; and what
dictates, what decisions such Laws will produce, may easily be discerned in the
late Government of Ireland: The Law has a power to prevent, to restrain, to
repair evils; without this, all kind of mischief and distempers will break in
upon a State.

It is the Law that does entitle the King, to the Allegiance and Service of his
People; it entitles the People to the Protection and Justice of the King. It is
God alone who subsists by himself, all other things subsist in a mutual
dependence, and relation. He was a wise man that said, that the King subsisted
by the field that is tilled: it is the labor of the people that supports the
Crown: If you take away the protection of the King, the vigor and cheerfulness
of Allegiance will be taken away, though the obligation remain.

The Law is the boundary, the measure betwixt the Kings Prerogative, and the
Peoples Liberty; whilst these move in their own Orbs, they are a support and a
security to one another; the Prerogative a cover and defense to the Liberty of
the People, and the people by their Liberty are enabled to be a foundation to
the Prerogative, but if these bounds be so removed, that they enter into
contestation and conflict, one of these mischiefs must ensue: If the
Prerogative of the King overwhelme the Liberty of the People, it will be turned
into Tyranny; if Liberty undermine the Prerogative, it will grow into Anarchy.

The Law is the safeguard, the custody of all private Interest, your Honors,
your Lives, your Liberties and Estates, are all in the keeping of the Law;
without this, every man has a like right to any thing, and this is the
condition into which the Irish were brought by the Earl of Strafford: And the
reason which he gave for it, has more mischief in it, than the thing it self,
they were a conquered Nation. There cannot be a word more pregnant and fruitful
in Treason, than that word is. There are few Nations in the world, that have
not been conquered, and no doubt but the Conqueror may give what Laws he
pleases to those that are conquered: but if the succeeding pacts, and
agreements, do not limit and restrain that Right, What People can be secure?
England has been conconquered, and Wales has been conquered, and by this
reason, will be in little better case than Ireland: if the King, by the right
of a Conqueror, gives Laws to his People; shall not the People by the same
reason, be restored to the right of th e Conquered, to recover their Liberty if
they can? What can be more hurtful, more pernicious to both, than such
propositions as these? And in these particulars is determined the first
Consideration.

The Second Consideration is this; This Arbitrary Power is dangerous to the
Kings Person, and dangerous to his Crown: it is apt to cherish Ambition,
Usurpation, and Oppression in great Men, and to beget Sedition and Discontent
in the People; and both these have been, and in reason must ever be, causes of
great trouble and alteration to Princes and States.

If the Histories of those Eastern Countries be perused, where Princes order
their affairs according to the mischievous Principles of the Earl of Strafford,
loose and observed from all rules of Government, they will be found to be
frequent in Combustions, full of Massacres, and of the tragical ends of
Princes. If any man shall look into our own stories, in the times when the Laws
were most neglected, he shall find them full of commotions, of civil
distempers; whereby the Kings that then Reigned, were always kept in want and
distress; the People consumed with Civil Wars; and by such wicked Counsels as
these, some of our Princes have been brought to such miserable ends, as no
honest heart can remember, without horror and earnest Prayer, that it may never
be so again.

The Third Consideration is this, The Subversion of the Laws; and this
Arbitrary Power, as it is dangerous to the Kings Person, and to his Crown, so
is it in other respects, very prejudicial to His Majesty in His Honor, Profit,
and Greatness; and yet these are the Gildings and Paintings that are put upon
such Counsels; These are for your Honor, for your Service; whereas in truth
they are contrary to both: But if I shall take off this varnish, I hope they
shall then appear in their own Native deformity; and therefore I desire to
consider them by these Rules.

It cannot be for the Honor of the King, that His Sacred Authority should be
used in the practice of Injustice and Opprssion; That His Name should be
applied to patronize such horrid crimes, as have been represented in Evidence
against the Earl of Strafford; and yet how frequently, how presumptuously his
Commands, his Letters, have been vouched throughout the course of this Defense?
Your Lordships have heard, when the Judges do Justice, it is the Kings Justice,
and this is for His Honor, because He is the fountain of Justice: But when they
do Injustice, the offense is their own; but those Officers and Ministers of the
King, who are most officious in the exercise of this Arbitrary Power, they do
it commonly for their advantages, and when they are questioned for it, then
they fly to the Kings Interest, to His Direction: And truly my Lords, this is a
very unequal distribution for the King, that the dishonor of evil courses
should be cast upon him, and they to have the advantage.

The prejudice which it brings to him in regard of his profit, is no less
apparent, it deprives him of the most beneficial, and most certain Revenue of
his Crown, that is, The voluntary Aids and Supplies of His People; His other
Revenues, consisting of goodly Demeans, and great Manors, have by Grants been
alienated from the Crown, and are now exceedingly diminished and impaired: But
this Revenue, it cannot be sold, it cannot be burdened with any Pensions or
Annuities, but comes entirely to the Crown. It is now almost Fifteen years
since His Majesty had any Assistance from His People; and, these illegal ways
of supplying the King were never pressed with more Violence and Art, then they
have been in this time; and yet I may, upon very good grounds, affirm, That in
the last Fifteen years of Queen Elizabeth, She received more, by the Bounty and
Affection of Her Subjects, then has come to His Majesty's Coffers, by all the
inordinate and rigorous courses which have been taken. And, as those Supplies
were more beneficial, in the Receipt of them, so were they like in the use and
employment of them.

Another way of prejudice to His Majesty's profit, is this: Such Arbitrary
Courses Exhaust the people, and disable them, when there shall be occasion, to
give such plentiful Supplies, as otherwise they would do. I shall need no other
proof of this, then the Irish Government under my Lord of Strafford, where the
Wealth of the Kingdom is so consumed, by those horrible Exactions and Burdens,
that it is thought, the Subsidies lately granted, will amount to little more
than half the proportion of the last Subsidies. The two former ways are
hurtful to the Kings profit, in that respect which they call Lucrum Cessans, by
diminishing his Receipts; But, there is a third, fuller of mischiet; and, it is
in that respect, which they call Damnum emergens, by increasing his
Disbursements: such irregular and exorbitant attempts upon the Liberties of the
People, are apt to produce such miserable Distractions and Distempers, as will
put the King and Kingdoms to such vast Expenses and Losses in a short time, as
will not be recovered in many years: We need not go far to seek a proof of
this, these two last years will be a sufficient Evidence, within which time I
assure my self, it may be proved, that more Treasure has been wasted, more
loss sustained by His Majesty and His Subjects, then was spent by Queen
Elizabeth in all the War of Tyron, and in those many brave Attempts against the
King of Spain, and the Royal Assistance which she gave to France, and the Low
Countries, during all Her Reign.

As for greatness, this Arbitrary Power is apt to hinder and impair it, not
only at home, but abroad. A Kingdom is a Society of men conjoined under one
Government, for the Common good: The World is a Society of Kingdoms and
States. The Kings Greatness consists not only in His Dominion over His
Subjects at home, but in the Influence which he has upon States abroad; That
He should be great even among Kings, and by His Wisdom and Authority, so to
incline and dispose the Affairs of other States and Nations, and those great
events which fall out in the World, as shall be for the good of Mankind, and
for the Peculiar advantage of His own People. This is the most glorious, and
magnificent greatness, to be able to relieve distressed Princes, to support his
own Friends and Allies, to prevent the Ambitious Designs of other Kings; and,
how much this Kingdom has been impaired in this kind, by the late mischievous
Counsels, your Lordships best know; who, at a near distance, and with a more
clear sight, do apprehend these public and great affairs, then I can do. Yet
thus much I dare boldly say, that if His Majesty had not, with great Wisdom and
Goodness, forsaken that way, wherein the Earl of Strafford had put Him, we
should, within a short time, have been brought into that miserable condition,
as to have been useless to our Friends, contemptible to our Enemies, and
incapable of undertaking any great Design, either at home or abroad.

A fourth consideration is, That this Arbitrary and Tyrannical Power, which the
Earl of Strafford did exercise in his own Person, and to which he did advise
His Majesty, is inconsistent with the Peace, the Wealth, the Prosperity of a
Nation; It is destructive to Justice, the Mother of Peace; to Industry, the
spring of Wealth; to Valor, which is the active Virtue, whereby the prosperity
of a Nation can only be procured confirmed, and enlarged.

Its not only apt to take away Peace, and so entangle the Nation with Wars, but
does corrupt Peace, and puts such a malignity into it, as produces the effects
of War. We need seek no other proof of this, but the Earl of Straffords
Government, where the Irish, both Nobility and others, had as little security
of their Persons or Estates in this peaceable time, as if the Kingdom had been
under the rage and fury of War.

And as for Industry and Valor, who will take pains for that, which when he
has gotten, is not his own? or who fight for that wherein he has no other
interest, but such as is subject to the Will of another? The ancient
encouragement to men, that were to defend their Countries, was this, That they
were to hazard their Person, pro Aris and focis, for their Religion, and for
their Houses; But by this Arbitrary way which was practiced in Ireland, and
counseled here; no man had any certainty, either of Religion, or of his House,
or any thing else to be his own; But besides this, such Arbitrary courses have
an ill operation upon the courage of a Nation, by embasing the hearts of the
People: A servile condition does for the most part beget in men a slavish
temper and disposition. Those that live so much under the Whip, and the
Pillory, and such servile Engines, as were frequently used by the Earl of
Strafford, they may have the dregs of valor, sullenness and stubborness, which
may make them prone to mutinies and discontents; But those noble and gallant
affections, which put men to brave designs and attempts for the preservation or
enlargement of a Kingdom, they are hardly capable of. Shall it be Treason to
embase the Kings Coin, though but a piece of Twelve-pence, or Sixpence? and
must it not needs be the effect of a greater Treason, to embase the Spirits of
his Subjects, and to set a stamp and character of servitude upon them, whereby
they shall be disabled to do any thing, for the service of the King and
Commonwealth?

The fifth Consideration is this, that the exercise of this Arbitrary
Government in times of sudden danger, by the invasion of an enemy, will
disable His Majesty to preserve himself and His Subjects from that danger.
This is the only pretense by which the Earl of Strafford, and such other
mischievous Counselors, would induce His Majesty to make use of it; and if it
be unfit for such an occasion, I know nothing that can be alleged in
maintenance of it.

When War threatens a Kingdom by the coming of a Foreign Enemy, it is no time
then to discontent the people, to make them weary of the present Government,
and more inclinable to a change; The supplies which are to come in this way,
will be unready, uncertain, there can be no assurance of them, no dependence
upon them, either for time or proportion: And if some Money be gotten in such a
way, the distractions, divisions, distempers, which this course is apt to
produce, will be more prejudicial to the public safety, than the Supply can
be advantageous to it, and of this we have had sufficient experience the last
Summer.

The Sixth, That this crime of subverting the Laws, and introducing an
Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government, is contrary to the Pact and Covenant
betwixt the King and his People; that which was spoken of before, was the legal
union of Allegiance and Protection; this is a personal union by mutual
agreement and stipulation, confirmed by Oath on both sides: The King and his
People are obliged to one another in the nearest relations, he is a Father and
a Child, is called in Law pars patris: He is the Husband of the Commonwealth,
they have the same interests, they ara inseparable in their condition, be it
good or evil; he is the Head, they are the Body; there is such an incorporation
as cannot be dissolved, without the destruction of both.

When Justice Thorp in Edward the III. time, was by the Parliament condemned to
death for Bribery, the reason of that Judgment is given, because he had broke
the Kings Oath, not that he had broke his own Oath, but he had broken the Kings
Oath, that solemn and great Obligation, which is the security of the whole
Kingdom: If for a Judge to take a small sum, in a private Cause, was adjudged
capital, how much greater was this offense, whereby the Earl of Strafford has
broken the Kings Oath in the whole course of his Government in Ireland, to the
prejudice of so many of His Majesty's Subjects in their Lives, Liberties, and
Estates, and to the danger of all the rest?

The Doctrine of the Papists Fides non est servanda cum Haereticis, is an
abominable Doctrine; yet that other Tenet, more peculiar to the Jesuits, is
more pernicious, whereby Subjects are discharged from their Oath of Allegiance
to their Prince, whenever the Pope pleases; This may be added to make the
third no less mischievous and destructive to humane Society, than either of the
rest. That the King is not bound by that Oath which he has taken, to observe
the Laws of the Kingdom, but may when he sees cause, lay Taxes and Burdens
upon them without their consent, contrary to the Laws and Liberties of the
Kingdom, This has been Preached and published by diverse; And this is that
which has been practiced in Ireland by the Earl of Strafford, in his
Government there, and endeavored to be brought into England, by his Counsel
here.

The Seventh is this; It is an offense that is contrary to the end of
Government; The end of Government was to prevent oppressions; to limit and
restrain the excessive power and violence of great men, to open the passages of
Justice, with indifferency toward all; This Arbitrary Power is apt to induce
and encourage all kind of insolences.

Another end of the Government, is to preserve men in their Estates, to secure
them in their Lives and Liberties; but if this design had taken effect, and
could have been settled in England, as it was practiced in Ireland, no man would
have had more certainty in his own, then Power would have allowed him; but
these two have been spoken of before; there are two behind more important,
which have not yet been touched.

It is the end of Government, that Virtue should be cherished, Vice suppressed;
but where this Arbitrary and unlimited Power is set up, a way is open, not only
for the security, but for the advancement and encouragement of evil; such men
as are apt for the execution and maintenance of this Power, are only capable of
preferment; and others who will not be instruments of any unjust commmands, who
make a conscience to do nothing against the Laws of the Kingdom, and Liberties
of the Subject, are not only not passable for employment, but subject to much
jealousy and danger.

It is the end of Government, that all Accidents and Events, all Counsels and
Designs should be improved to the public good: But this Arbitrary Power is
apt to dispose all, to the maintenance of it self. The wisdom of the Council
Table; The authority of the Courts of Justice; The industry of all the Officers
of the Crown, have been most carefully exercised in this; the Learning of our
Divines, the Jurisdiction of our Bishops have been molded and disposed to the
same effect, which though it were begun before the Earl of Straffords
employment, yet it has been exeedingly furthered and advanced by him.

Under this color and pretense of maintaining the King's Power and
Prerogative, many dangerous practices against the peace and safety of the
Kingdom, have been undertaken and promoted. The increase of Popery, and the
favors and encouragement of Papists have been, and still are a great grievance
and danger to the Kingdom: The innovation, in matters of Religion, the
Usurpations of the Clergy, the manifold burdens and taxations upon the people,
have been a great cause of our present distempers and disorders; and yet those
who have been chief furtherers and actors of such mischiefs, have had their
Credit and Authority from this; that they were forward to maintain this power.
The Earl of Strafford had the first rise of his Greatness from this; and in his
Apology and Defense, as your Lordships have heard, this has had a main part.

The Royal Power and Majesty of Kings is most Glorious in the Prosperity and
happiness of the People; the perfection of all things consists in the end, for
which they were ordained, God only in his own end, all other things, have a
further end beyond themselves, in attaining whereof, their own happiness
consists: if the means and the end be set in opposition to one another, it must
needs cause an impotency and defect of both.

The Eighth Consideration, is the vanity and absurdity of those excuses and
justifications, which he made for himself, whereof diverse particulars have been
mentioned in the course of this Defense.

1. That he is a Counselor, and might not be questioned for any thing which he
advised according to his Conscience; The ground is true, there is a liberty
belongs to Counselors, and nothing corrupts Counsels more than Fear; He that
will have the privilege of a Counselor, must keep within the just bounds of a
Counselor; those matters are the proper subjects of Counsel, which in their
times and occasions, may be good or beneficial to the King or Commonwealth;
But such Treasons as these, the subversion of the Laws, violation of Liberties,
they can never be good or justifiable by any circumstance, or occasion; and
therefore his being a Counselor, makes his fault much more heinous, as being
committed against a greater Trust, and in a way of much mischief and danger,
least His Majesty's Conscience and Judgment (upon which, the whole course and
frame of His Government, do much depend) should be poisoned and infected with
such wicked Principles and Designs: And this he has endeavored to do, which
by all Laws, and in all Times has in this Kingdom been reckoned a crime of an
high Nature.

2. He labors to interest your Lordships in his Cause, by alleging, it may
be dangerous to your selves, and your posterity, who by your Birth are fittest
to be near His Majesty, in places of Trust and Authority, if you should be
subject to be questioned for matters delivered in Council. To this was
answered, That it was hoped their Lordships would rather labor to secure
themselves, and their posterity, in the exercise of their Virtues, than of
their Vices, that so they might, together with their own Honor and Greatness,
preserve the Honor and Greatness, both of the King and Kingdom.

3. Another excuse was this, That whatsoever he has spoken, was out of good
intention. Sometimes good and evil, truth and falsehood, lie so near together,
that they are hardly to be distinguished: Matters hurtful and dangerous, may be
accompanied with such circumstances, as may make it appear useful and
convenient, and in all such cases, good intention will justify evil Counsel;
But where the matters propounded are evil in their own nature, such as the
matters are, wherewith the Earl of Strafford is charged, to break a public
Faith, to subvert Laws and Government: they can never be justied by any
intentions, how good soever they be pretended.

4. He alleges it was a time of great necessity and danger, when such
Counsels were necessary for preservation of the State. Necessity has been
spoken of before, as it relates to the Cause; now it is considered as it
relates to the Person; if there were any necessity, it was of his own making;
he by his evil Counsel had brought the King into a necessity, and by no rules
of Justice can be allowed to gain this advantage by his own fault, as to make
that a ground of his justification which is a great part of his offense.

5. He has often insinuated this, That it was for His Majesty's service, in
maintenance of that Sovereign Power, with which he is entrusted by God, for
the good of his People. The Answer is this, No doubt but that Sovereign Power
wherewith His Majesty is entrusted for the public good, has many glorious
effects, the better to enable him thereunto; But without doubt, this is none of
them, That by his own Will, he may lay any Tax or Imposition upon His people,
without their consent in Parliament. This has now been five times adjudged by
both Houses, in the case of the Loans, in condemning Commissions of Excise, in
the resolution upon the saving offered to be saved to the Petition of Right, in
the sentence against Manwaring, and now Lutell, in condemning the Shipmoney;
And if the Sovereign Power of the King, can produce no such effect as this, the
Allegation of it is an aggravation, and no diminution of his offense, because
thereby he does labor to interest the King against the just grievance and
complaint of the People.

6. This Counsel was propounded with diverse Limitations and Provisions; for
securing and repairing the Liberty of the People. This implies a contradiction
to maintain an Arbitrary and Absolute Power, and yet to restrain it with
Limitations and Provisions, for even those limitations and provisions, will be
subject to the same absolute power, and to be dispensed in such manner, and at
such time, as it self shall determine; let the Grievances and Oppressions be
never so heavy, the Subject is left without all remedy, but at His Majesty's
own pleasure.

7. He alleges, They were but Words, and no effect followed; this needs no
Answer: but, that the Miserable Distempers into which he has brought all the
three Kingdoms, will be Evidence sufficient, that his Wicked Counsels have had
such Mischievous Effects within these two or three last years, that many years
peace will hardly repair those losses, and other great Mischiefs which the
Commonwealth has sustained.

8. These Excuses have been collected out of the several Parts of his defense,
perchance some others are omitted, which I doubt not have been Answered by some
of my Colleagues, and are of no Importance, either to perplex or to hinder your
Lordships Judgment touching the hainousness of this Crime.

The 9th consideration is this, That if this be Treason, in the Nature of it,
it does exceed all other Treasons in this, That in the Design and Endeavor of
the Author, it was to be a constant and permanent Treason; other Treasons are
Transient, as being confined within those particular Actions and Proportions,
wherein they did consist, and those being past, the Treason cease.

The Powder Treason was full of horror and maglignity, yet it is past many
years since: The Murder of that Magnanimous and Glorious King, Henry the Fourth
of France, was a great and horrid Treason; and so were those manifold Attempts
against Queen Elizabeth of blessed Memory; but, they are long since past; the
Detestation of them only remains in Histories, and in the minds of men, and
will ever remain: But, this Treason, if it had taken effect, was to be a
standing perpetual Treason, which would have been in continual Act, not
determined within one time or Age, but transmitted to Posterity, even from one
generation to another.

The 10th Consideration is this, That as it is a Crime odious in the Nature of
it, so it is odious in the Judgment and Estimation of the Law: To alter the
settled Frame and Constitution of Government, is Treason in any state. The Laws,
whereby all other parts of a Kingdom are preserved, should be very vain and
defective, if they had not a power to secure and preserve themselves.

The Forfeitures inflicted for Treason, by our Law, are of Life, Honor and
Estate, even all that can be forfeited; and, this Prisoner having committed so
many Treasons, although he should pay all these Forfeitures, will be still a
Debtor to the Commonwealth: nothing can be more equal, then that he should
perish by the Justice of that Law, which he would have Subverted; neither will
this be a new way of Blood, There are Marks enough to trace this Law to the
very Original of this Kingdom: and if it has not been put in Execution, as he
alleges, this 240 years, it was not for want of Law, but, that all that time
has not bred a man, bold enough to commit such Crimes as these; which is a
circumstance, much aggravating his Offense, and making him no whit less liable
to punishment, because he is the only Man, that in so long a time has
ventured upon such a Treason as this.

It belongs to the Charge of another, to make it appear to your Lordships, that
the Crimes and Offenses proved against the Earl of Strafford, are High Treason
by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, whose Learning and other Abilities
are much better for that Service: But, for the time and manner of performing
this, we are to resort to the Direction of the House of Commons, having in
this, which is already done, dispatched all those Instructions which we have
received; and, concerning further Proceedings, for clearing all Questions and
Objections in Law, your Lordships will hear from the House of Commons in
Convenient time.

THE ARGUMENT Of Mr. LANE, The PRINCE'S ATTORNY-GENERAL, On the Behalf of the
Earl of STRAFFORD, In Point of Law,
MY Lords, I shall not at all touch the Matter of Law, further than to clear
your Judgments of one Statute only, viz. 25 E. 3. because when the same was
Alleged by the Lord Strafford, in his own Defense, that not being Convict of
the Letter thereof, he could not be Convict of Treason: Remember the Salvo of
the Statute was much insisted upon, by those from the House of Commons, as much
Conducing to their Ends. My Lords, I will first speak of the Statute it self,
and then of it is Salvo or Provision. The Statute is, That if any Man shall
Intend the Death of the King, His Queen, their Children; kill the Chancellor,
or Judge upon the Bench, Imbase the Kings Coin, or Counterfeit the Broad-Seal,
etc. he shall be Convict, and Punished as a Traitor: That the Lord Strafford
comes not within the Letter of this Statute, is not so much as once alleged,
nor indeed it cannot be with any Reason; All that can be said is, That by
Relation, or by Argument (a Minore ad Majus) he may be drawn into it; yet, that
this cannot be, I humbly offer these Considerations.

First. This is a Declarative Law, and such are not to be taken by way of
Consequence, Equity, or Construction, but by the Letter only; otherwise they
should imply a Contradiction to themselves, and be no more Declarative Laws,
but Laws of Construction, or Constitutive.

Secondly. This is a Penal Law, and such (if our Grounds, hitherto
unquestioned, hold good) can admit of no Constructions, or Inferences: for
Penalties are to persuade the Keeping of Known Laws, not of Laws Conjectural,
Ambiguous, and by Consequence (which perhaps the most Learned may not, in their
Disputes, question, much less the Subject (who is not obliged to Interpret the
Statute) doubt of, in the point of Obedience; yea, rather, without any doubt,
he is rather to obey the Letter of the Statute, and conceive (and that truly)
that he is not liable to the Penalty.

Thirdly, We have a Notable Law, 13 Eliz. cap. 2. whereby it is declared, That
the Bringing in of Bulls from Rome, to stir up the Subject to Mutiny and
Rebellion, shall be punished as Treason: Now, if by Interpretation, or by
Consequence, this Sense might have been thrust upon the Preceding Statutes, the
making of this had been superfluous; yea, the Persons then charged with that
Crime, might have been impeached of Treason, even before the making of this Act.

Anno 21 Edw. 3. We have a Statute, declaring, That for a Servant to Kill his
Master, is an Act of Treason; and, in the 23th year of the same King, a Process
of Treason was framed against a Man for Killing his Father, grounded upon the
same Argument a Minore ad Majus: But, it was found, and the Sentence is yet in
Records, that although in the 21th year of Edward the Third, that Argument
might have been admitted, yet in the 27th it could not, by Reason of the
Declarative Law, Intervening in the 25th year; and, this Case comes very home
to the Point in Law.

My Lords, I will not demand, What kind of Offense it may be, for a Man to
Subvert the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom? the Crime, doubtless, is Unnatural
and Monstrous, and the Punishment must keep the same Proportion; only I Presume
to Offer these few things to your Lordships Consideration.

1. That one, or more Acts of Injustice, whether Maliciously or Ignorantly
done, can, in no sense of Law, be called, The Subversion of the Fundamental
Laws; if so, as many Judges (perhaps) so many Traitors; it is very Incident to
Man's Nature to err; nor does the Lord Strafford plead his Innocence in
Oversights, but in Treason.

2. I do Remember the Case of John de la Pole Duke of Suffolk; this Man, in the
28th of Henry the Sixth, was Charged by the House of Commons with Articles of
Treason, and those too very like to these against my Lord Strafford. I. That he
had given the King bad Advices. II. That he had Embased His Coin. III. That he
had Sessed Men of War. IV. That he had given out Summary Decrees. V. That he
had Imposed Taxes. VI. That he had Corrupted the Fountain of Justice. VII. That
he had persuaded the King to Unnecessary War, and the giving over of Anjou in
France.


And, for all these, though he was charged with High Treason, for wronging the
Right of the Subject, and Subverting the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, yet,
after a long agitation, the Matter was found, by the Lords of the Parliament,
not to Imply Treason, but only Felony: Add to this another, who, in the 23d of
Henry the Eighth, was Charged for subverting the English Laws, and yet no
Treason charged upon him. Add to both, the Charge of Richard Larkes, Pleaded at
the Common Pleas, who was Charged with Treason, for Subverting the Law, but
Convicted only of Felony: By which you may see, my Lords, what to this time
has been Subverting the Laws.

3. It is very considerable, That the Lord Strafford is not charged to have
Subverted, but only to have Intended to Subvert the Fundamental Laws; and
this, I conceive, if there were no more, might keep him free from that Statute,
the 25th of Edward the Third. For, although, as touching the King, His Queen
and Children, Intention is Treasonable; yet, in all other things there
mentioned, there must be Action besides Intention: for, it is not said, If a
Man do intend to Kill a Chancellor, it shall be Treason, but if he does Kill
him, and if he does actually Counterfeit the Broad Seal: And, although a Man
should prepare a Furnace, make ready his Stamp, melt his Bullion, yet if he
gives not the Kings Impression upon the Coin, all his Intentions, yea, his
Preparations will not serve to make up a Treason.

Ye see therefore my Lords, that the Body of the Statute cannot stick against
the Lord Strafford, neither in Letter nor Consequence, this is not, that must
not be: All that can be said, is, That the Fact may be Treason by the Common
Law. For my part, I profess my Ignorance, who ever thought the Common Law might
declare, but never make a Treason; it might be presupposed, that there is a
Statute whereupon to build a Declaration; and therefore, to say there is no
Statute for it, it is to say, It is no Treason at all: the Statute ever makes
the Treason, and to be declared Treason, either by Common Law, or by
Parliament, are but two different ways of proceedings, and must both resolve
into one Principle; nay, and which comes home to the Point, in the 21 of Edward
the Third; To kill a Man, employed in the Kings War, was Treason: and, the 23d,
to kill the King's Messenger was Treason, by Declaration of the Common Law, but
always by reason of the Statute; yet none of these are Treasons, but Felonies
only, because of the intervening Statute of the 25th of Edward the Third; such
has ever been thought the force of its Letter and Declaration: and so I will
leave it, and a word or two of the Salvo, which is this, That because all
particulars could not be enumerated, therefore what the Parliament should
declare to be Treasonable in time to come, should be punished as a Treason.

And, according to this Reservative, in the 8th year of King Richard the
Second, one charged before the Kings Bench, was afterward referred to the
Parliament; and there, though the Fact was not contained in the Body of the
Statute, yet because of the Proviso aforementioned, it was Adjudged Treason.

In the 11th year of the same King, the Duke of Ireland, and Nevill Archbishop
of York, were Impeached of High Treason by Gloucester, Arundel, and Warwick,
and, notwithstanding the Statute, were convicted thereof by the Salvo; but, in
the 21 of the same Richard the 2d the Tide turned, and the King had such a Hand
with the Parliament, that the Sentence was Recalled, and those Three Noblemen
themselves were Adjudged Traitors; again in the 1 of Hen. the Fourth His
Successor, that Revocation of the 21 Richard the Second was Repealed, and the
Sentence of the 11th of His Reign Established: Such were the tossings too and
fro of Treason, and all because of that uncertain Proviso.

Therefore it was, that in the same Parliament, the 1 Hen. the Fourth, a
Petition was preferred by the Nobility, to have Treason limited within some
Statute; Because they knew not what to speak, or what to do for fear thereof:
And, in Chap. 10. an Act was made upon this Petition, That the Salvo should be
holden Repealed in all times to come, and nothing esteemed Treason, but what
was Literally contained in the 25th of Edward the Third. And therefore it is
said in the Records, That there was Great Joy at the making of this Act; in
that the Drawn Sword, hanging over every Man's head, by this Slender Thread of a
Consequence or Illation, was removed by that Act. Add to this, that in the
First of Queen Mary, Cap. 1. the same is Repeated, That no Man shall be
punished in Life or Estate, as a Traitor, but for the Crime contained in the
Statute of 25 Edward the Third, without the least mention of the pretended
Salvo.

The Earl of Northumberlands Case comes nigh to the Point, he was charged with
Treason the 5th of Henry the Fourth, and if the Statute of the 1 Henry 4th,
Chap. 10. whereby this Proviso is Repealed, had not intervened, no doubt he had
been Condemned of Treason; but, he was only Convict of Felony, and that
because he could not be drawn within the Letter of the Statute of the 25th of
Edward the Third. And, I dare confidently say it, that since that Act was made,
the 1 Henry the Fourth, Chap. 10. whereby the Proviso is Repealed, no Man has
ever been declared a Traitor, either by King or Parliament, except it were upon
that, or some other Statute Literally and Declaratively taken. These two things
I do offer to your Lordships Considerations, That the Lord Strafford cannot be
Impeached of Treason, by the Statute of 25th Edward the Third; and, that the
Salvo, contained in the same, stands Repealed, almost Two hundred years ago.
And this is all, I conceive, to be necessary for that Statute, which was
Alleged by the Lord Strafford, in his Defense, for matter of Law.

The Recorder said, He could add nothing to what the former Council had spoken,
for matter of Law; but, if their Lordships would state unto him any further
Questions, he was ready to give his Resolution according to his best ability.

Mr. St. JOHN'S ARGUMENT OF LAW; CONCERNING The Bill of Attainder, April 29th,
1641.
MY Lords, The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House of
Parliament, have passed a Bill, for the Attainting of Thomas Earl of Strafford
of High Treason. The Bill has been transmitted from them to your Lordships; it
concerns not him alone, but your Lordships and the Commons too, though in
different respects.

It concerns his Lordship the highest that can be in the Penal Part; so it
does, on the other side, as highly concern your Lordships and the Commons, in
that which ought to be the tendrest, the Judicatory within that, that Judge not
them who Judge him, and in that which is most Sacred amonst Men, the Public
Justice of the Kingdom.

The King is to be accounted unto, for the loss of the meanest Member, much
more of one so near the Head.

The Commons are concerned in their Account for what is done, your Lordships in
that which is to be done.

The business therefore of the present Conference, is to acquaint your
Lordships with those things, that satisfied the Commons in Passing of this
Bill; such of them as have come within my capacity, and, that I can remember, I
am Commanded from the Commons at this time, to present unto your Lordships.

My Lords, in Judgment of greatest Moment, there are but two ways for
satisfying those, that are to give them; either the Lex lata, the Law already
established, or else the use of the same Power for making new Laws, whereby the
old at first received life.

In the first consideration of the settled Laws, in the degrees of Punishment,
the Positive Law, received by General Consent, and for the Common Good, is
sufficient, to satisfy the Conscience of the Judge, in giving Judgment
according to them.

In several Countries, there is not the same measure of Punishment, for one and
the same Offense; Willful Murder in Ireland it is Treason, and so is the
wilful Burning of a House, or a Stack of Corn: In the Isle of Man it is
Felony to Steal a Hen, but not to steal a Horse; and yet the Judge in Ireland,
has as just a Ground to give Judgment of High Treason in those Cases there,
as here to give Judgment only of Felony; and in the Isle of Man of Felony for
the Hen, as here of Pety-Larceny.

My Lords, in the other Consideration of using the Supreme Power, the same Law
gives power to the Parliament to make new Laws, that enables the inferior
Court, to Judge according to the old. The Rules that guides the Conscience of
the inferior Court is from without, the Prescripts of the Parliament, and of
the Common Law; in the other, the Rule is from within, that Salus populi be
concerned, that there be no wilful oppression of any of the Fellow Members,
that no more Blood be taken then what is necessary for the Cure, the Laws and
Customs of the Realm as well enable the Exercise of this, as of the Ordinary
and Judicial Power.

My Lords, What has been said, is because that this proceeding of the Commons
by way of Bill, implies the use of the mere Legislative Power, in respect new
Laws are for the most part past by Bill.

This, my Lords, though just and legal, and therefore not wholly excluded; yet
it was not the only ground that put the Commons upon the Bill, they did not
intend to make a new Treason, and to Condemn my Lord of Strafford for it; they
had in it other considerations likewise, which were to this effect.

First, The Commons knew, that in all former Ages, if doubts of Law arose of
great and general concernments, the Parliament was usually consulted withal for
resolution, which is the reason that many Acts of Parliament are only
Declarative of the Old Law, not Introductive of a New, as the Great Charter of
our Liberties; The Statute of Five and Twentieth year of Edward the Third of
Treasons; The Statute of the Prerogative, and of late the Petition of Right; if
the Law were doubtful in this Case, they perceived the Parliament (where the
old way is altered, and new Laws made) the fittest Judge to clear this Doubt.

Secondly, My Lords, they proceeded this way, to obviate those Scruples and
Delays, which through disuse of proceedings of this nature, might have risen
in the manner and way of proceedings, since the Statute of the First of Hen. 4.
Cap. 17. and more fully in the Roll, number 144. The proceedings of Parliament
have usually been upon an Indictment first found, though in Cases of Treason
particularly mentioned in the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. which had not been done in
this case; doubts likewise might rise, for Treasons, not particularly mentioned
in the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. whether the Declaratory Power of Parliament be
taken away, in what manner they were to be made, and by whom, they find not any
Attainders of Treason in Parliament, for near this 200 years, but by this way
of Bill; and again, they know that whatsoever could be done any other way, it
might be done by this.

Thirdly, In respect of the Proofs and Depositions, that have been made against
him; for First, although they knew not, but that the whole Evidence which has
been given at the Bar, in every part of it, is sufficiently comprehended
within the charge, yet if therein they should be mistaken, if it should prove
otherwise, use may justly be made of such Evidence in this way of Bill, wherein
so as Evidence be given in; it is no way requisite that there should have been
any Articles or Charge at all; and so in the case of double Testimony upon the
Statute of the 1 of Edw. 6. whether one direct Witness, with others, to
circumstances, had been single or double Testimony? And although single
Testimony might be sufficient to satisfy private Consciences, yet how far it
would have been satisfactory in a judicial way, (where forms of Law are more to
be stood upon) was not so clear; whereas in their way of Bill, private
satisfaction to each man's Conscience is sufficient, although no Evidence had
been given in at all.

My Lords, The proceeding by way of Bill, it was not to decline your Lordships
Justice in the judicial way, in these exigends of the State and Kingdom; it was
to Husband time, by silencing those doubts, they conceived it the speediest and
surest way.

My Lords, these are in effect, the things the Commons took into their
Consideration, in respect of the manner and way of Proceeding against the Earl.

In the next place I am to declare unto your Lordships, the things they took
into their Considerations, in respect of the Matter and Merits of the Cause,
and they are comprehended within these six heads.

1. That there is a Treason within the Statute of 25 of Edw. III. by Levying of
War upon the Matter of the 15th Article.

2. If not by actual levying of War, yet by advising, and declaring his
intention of War, and that by Savil's Warrant, and advice of bringing over the
Irish Army upon the Matter in the 23 Article; then intending of a War, if not
within the clause of levying of a War, in the Statute of 25th Edw, 3. yet
within the first Treason, of compassing the death of the King.

3. If either of these two single Acts, is within the Statute of 25th Edw. 3.
yet upon putting all together, which has been proved against him, that there is
a Treason within the first Clause, of Compassing the death of the King. Et si
non Prosunt singula juncta juvant.


4. That he has Sessed, and laid Soldiers upon the Subjects of Ireland,
against their Will, and at their Charge, within the Irish Statute of the 18th
year of Hen. 6th. that both Person and thing are within the Statute; That the
Statute remains in force to this day, that the Parliament here has cognizance
of it, and that even in the ordinary way of Judicature, that if there be a
Treason and a Traitor, that the want of Jurisdiction, in the judicial way, may
justly be supplied by Bill.

5. That his endeavoring to subvert the Fundamental Laws and Government of the
Realms of England and Ireland; and instead thereof, to introduce a Tyrannical
Government against Law, is Treason by the Common Law; That Treasons at the
Common Law are not taken away by the Statute of 25th Edw. 3. 1 Hen. 4th. etc.
nor any of them.

6. That as this case stands, it is just and necessary to resort to the Supreme
Power in Parliament, in case all the rest should fail.

Of these six, five of them are Treason, within the compass of the Laws already
established, Three within the Statute of 25th Edw. 3. and one within the Irish
Statute, the other by the Common Law of England.

If but any one of these Six Considerations hold, the Commons conceive, that
upon the whole matter, they had good cause to pass the Bill.

My Lords, For the first, of Levying War, I shall make bold to read the case to
your Lordships before I speak to it, It Is thus. The Earl did by Warrant under
his Hand and Seal, give Authority to Robert Savil, a Sergeant at Arms, and his
Deputies, to Sesse such numbers of Soldiers, Horse and Foot, of the Army in
Ireland, together with an Officer, as the Sergeant should think fit, upon His
Majesty's Subjects of Ireland, against their Will; this Warrant was granted by
the Earl to the end, to compel the Subjects of Ireland to submit, to the
unlawful Summons and Orders made by the Earl upon Paper Petitions, exhibited to
him in case of private interest between party and party; this Warrant was
executed by Savil and his Deputies, by sessing of Soldiers, both Horse and
Foot, upon diverse of the Subjects of Ireland against their Wills, in warlike
manner, and at diverse times the Soldiers continued upon the parties, upon whom
they were sessed, and wasted their Goods, until such time as they had submitted
themselves, unto those Summons and Orders.

My Lords, This is a Levying War within the Statute of 25th Edw. 3. The words
of the Statute are, If any man do Levy War against our Lord the King in His
Realm, this is declared Treason.

I shall endeavor in this to make clear to your Lordships,

1. What shall be a Levying of War, in respect of the motive or cause of it. 2.
What shall be said a Levying of War, in respect of the action or thing done. 3.
And in the third place, I shall apply them to the present case.
It will be granted in this levying of War, that Forces may be raised, and
likewise used in Warlike manner, and yet no levying of War within the Statute,
that is, when the Forces are raised and employed upon private ends, either of
revenge or interest.

Before this Statute in Edw. the 1. time, the Title of a Castle was in
difference between the Earls of Hereford and Gloucester, for the maintaining of
the possession on the one side, and gaining of it on the other; Forces were
raised on either side of many hundred men; they marched with Banners displayed,
one against another. In the Parliament, in the 20th year of Edward 1. this was
adjudged only Trespass, and either of the Earls Fined 1000 Marks apiece.

After the Statute in Hillary Term, in the 15th year of Edw. the 3. in the
King's Bench Rot. 3. Nicholas Huntercome in Warlike manner with 40 men, armed
amongst other weapons, with Guns (so ancient, as appears by that Record, they
were) did much spoil in the Manor of the Abbey of Dorchester, in the County of
Oxford, this was accounted no Treason, and so it has been held by the Judges,
That if one or more Town-ship, upon pretense of saving their Commons, do in a
forcible and warlike manner throw in enclosures, this is only a Riot, no
Treason.

The words of the Statute 25 Edw. 3. clear this point, that if any man ride
Armed openly or secretly with men at Arms, against any other, to kill and rob,
or to detain him until he has made Fine and Ransom for his deliverance, this
is declared not to be Treason, but Felony or Trespass, as the Case shall
require: all the printed Statutes which have it covertly or secret, are
misprinted, for the words in the Parliament Roll, as appears in the 17th. are,
Discovertment on Secretement, Open or Secretly.

So that my Lords, in this of Levying War, the Act is not so much to be Object.
considered, but as in all other Treasons and Felonies, quo animo, with what
intent and purpose?

My Lords, If the end be considerable in Levying War, it may be said that it
cannot be a War, unless against the King, for the words of the Statute are, If
any man Levy War against the King.

That these words extend further than to the person of the King, appears Answ.
by the words of the Statute, which in the beginning declares it to be Treason,
to compass and imagine the death of the King, and after other Treasons, this is
to be declared to be Treason, to Levy War against the King; If Levying of War,
extend no further than to the Person of the King, these words of the Statute
are to no purpose, for then the first Treason of compassing the Kings death,
had fully included it before, because that he which Levies War against the
Person of the King, does necessarily compass his death.

It Is a War against the King, when intended for alteration of the Laws or
Government in any part of them, or to destroy any of the Great Officers of the
Kingdom. This is a Levying War against the King.

1. Because the King does protect and maintain the Laws in every part of them,
and the great Officers, to whose care, he has in his own stead, delegated the
execution of them.

2. Because they are the Kings Laws, he is the Fountain from whence in their
several Channels, they are derived to the Subject: all our Indictments run
thus, Trespasses laid to be done, Contra pacem Domini Regis, the Kings Peace
for exorbitant offenses, though not intended against the King's Person, against
the King, his Crown and Dignity.

My Lords, this construction is made good, by diverse Authorities of great
weight, ever since the Statute of 25th of Edw. 3. downwards.

In R. the 2. time, Sir Tho. Talbot conspired the death of the Dukes of
Gloucester and Lancaster, and some other of the Peers; for the effecting of it,
he had caused several People in the County of Chester, to be Armed in Warlike
manner in Assemblies in the Parliament, held in the 17th year of R. 2. No 20.
Sir Thomas Talbot being accused of High Treason for this: It Is there declared,
insomuch as one of them was Lord High Steward of England, and the other High
Constable, that this was done in destruction of the Estates of the Realm, and
of the Laws of the Kingdom, and therefore adjudged Treason, and the Judgment
sent down into the Kings Bench, as appears, Easter Term, in the 17th year of R.
2. in the Kings Bench Rot. 16th. These two Lords had appeared in the 11th of R.
2 in maintenance of the Act of Parliament made in the year before, one of them
was of the Commissioners appointed by Parliament, and one of the Appealors of
those who would have overthrown it.

The Duke of Lancaster likewise was one of the Lords, that was to have been
Indicted of Treason, for endeavoring the maintenance of it; and therefore
conspiring of their deaths, is said to be in destruction of their Laws; This
there is declared to be Treason, that concerned the Person of the King and
Commonwealth.

In that great insurrection of the Villains, and meaner People, in Richard the
II. time, they took an Oath, Quod Regi and Communibus fidelitatem servarent, to
be true to the King and Commons, and that they would take nothing but what they
paid for, punished all theft with death; here is no intendment against the
Person of the King; The intent was, to establish the Laws of Villanage and
Servitude, to burn all the Records, to kill the Judges: This in the Parliament
of the 5th year of R. 2. No. 31, 32. the First Part, is declared to be Treason
against the King, and against the Law.

In the 11th year of R. 2. in Parliament, the raising of Forces against the
Commissioners, appointed by Act of Parliament the year before, adjudged Treason
by all the Judges.

The Statute Imo Mary Cap. 12. Enacts, That if 12 or more shall endeavor by
force, to alter any of the Laws or Statutes of the Kingdom, he shall from such
a time there limited, be adjudged only as a Felon. This Act was to continue but
to the next Parliament, it is expired, it shows by the words only, that the
offense was higher before the making it.

My Lords, In Queen Elizabeth's time, Grant and diverse Apprentices of London, to
the number of 200. rose, and assembled at Tower Hill, carried a Cloak upon a
Pole instead of a Banner, their intent was to deliver diverse Apprentices out of
Prison, that had been committed upon a Sentence in the Star Chamber for Riots,
to kill the Lord Mayor of London, and for setting prizes on Victuals. In
Trinity Term, 37 Eliz. diverse of the Judges were consulted withal, and
resolved, That this was a Levying of War against the Queen, being intended
against the Government and Officers of the Queen, and therefore Grant and
others were executed as Traitors.

Afterward, in that Queens time, diverse of the County of Oxford consulted, to
go together from House to House in that County, and thence to London and other
parts, to excite them to take up Arms, for the throwing in of all enclosures
throughout England. Nothing was done, nor no assembly. Yet the Statute of 13
Eliz. Cap. 1. during the Queens Life, made it Treason, to intend, or advise to
Levy War against the Queen.

In Easter Term 39 of Eliz. all the Judges of England met about the Case, it
was resolved by them, that this was a War intended against the Queen; they
agreed, That if it had been of one Township or more, upon private interest, and
claim of right of Common, it had not been Treason, but this was to throw in all
Enclosures through the Kingdom, whereunto these parties should pretend no
claim. That it was against the Law, in regard that the Statute of Merton gave
power of Enclosures in many Cases: upon this resolution Bradsaw and Burton were
executed at Aynestow-hill in Oxfordshire, the place where they intended the
first Rendezvous.

So that my Lords, if the end of it be to overthrow any of the Statutes, any
part of the Law and settled Government, or any of the great Officers entrusted
with the execution of them, This is a War against the King.

My Lords, It will be further considerable, what shall be accounted a Levying
of War, in respect of the actions and things done; there is a design to alter
some part of the Laws, and present Government, for the effecting thereof,
People be provided of Arms, gathered together into Troops, but afterward march
not with Banners displayed, nor do bellum percutere, whether the Army
themselves, and gathering together upon this design, be a War, or such
prosecution of the Design with force, as makes it Treason within the Statute?

First, If this be not a War, in respect that it necessarily occasions hostile
preparations on the other side.

Secondly, From the words of the Statute, shall Levy War, and be thereof
probably Attainted of open Deed, by People of their condition; although the bare
conspiring be not an open Deed, yet whether the Arming and Drawing of men
together, be not an open Declaration of War?

In Sir Thomas Talbots Case before cited, in the Seventeenth year of R. II. the
Acts of Force are expressed in the Parliament Roll; That he caused diverse of
the People of the County of Chester, to be armed in a Warlike manner in
Assemblies, here is no Marching, no Banners displayed.

In the Eighth year of Hen. VIII. William Bell and Thomas Lacy in Com. Kanc.
conspired with Thomas Cheyney, called the Hermit of the Queen of Faries, to
overthrow the Law and Customs of the Realm; and for the effecting of it, they
with Two hundred more, met together, and concluded upon a course of raising
greater Forces in the County of Kent, and the adjacent Shires: This adjudged
Treason; these were open Acts.

My Lords, For the application of both these, to the case in question:

First, In respect of the end of it; here was a War against the King, it was to
subvert the Laws, this being the design; for the effecting of it, he assumed to
his own Person an Arbitrary Power over the Lives, Liberties, and Estates of His
Majesty's Subjects, and determined Causes upon Paper-Petitions, at his own Will
and Pleasure; Obedience must be forced by the Army, this is declared by the
Warrant.

My Lords, If it be said that the Warrant expresses not any intent of
subverting the Laws; It expresses fully one of the principal means, whereby
this was to be done, that is, obedience to his arbitrary Orders upon
Paper-Petitions; This was done in reference to the main design.

In the cases of the Town of Cambridge and Sir William Cogan, they have
formerly been cited to your Lordships upon other occasions, the things in
themselves were not Treason, they were not a Levying of War.

In that of Cambridge, the Town met together, and in a forcible manner broke up
the University-Treasury, and took out of it the Records, and Evidences of the
Liberties of the University over the Town.

In the other, they of Bridgewater marched to the Hospital, and compelled the
Master of the Hospital, to deliver unto them certain Evidences that concerned
the Town, and forced him to enter into a Bond of 200 l.

These if done upon these private ends alone, had not been a Treason, as
appears by the very words of the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. beforementioned, of
marching openly or secretly.

But my Lords, these of Cambridge and Bridgewater, they were of the conspiracy
with the Villains, as appears in the Parliament-Roll of the First year of Rich.
the 2. Numb. 311. and 32. where the Towns of Cambridge and Bridgewater, are
expressly excepted out of the general Pardon made to the Villains; this being
done in reference to that design of the Villains, of altering the Laws; this
was that which made it Treason.

If the design went no further, than the enforcing Obedience to these Paper
Orders made by himself, it was sufficient it was to subvert one fundamental
part of the Law; nay, in effect the whole Law; what use of Law, if he might
order and determine of men's Estates at his own pleasure? This was against the
Law notoriously declared in Ireland.

In the close Roll in the Tower, in the 25th year of Edward the 1. a Writ went
to the Justices in Ireland (that Kingdom at that time was governed by Justices)
declaring, That upon Petitions they were not to determine any Titles between
party and party, upon any pretense of profit whatsoever to the King.

In the Eight and twentieth year of Hen. the 6th. Chap. 2. Suits in Equity not
before the Deputy, but in Chancery; Suits at Common Law, not before him, but in
cases of Life in the King's Bench; for Title of Lands or Goods in the proper
Courts of the King's Bench, or Common Pleas.

This declared in the Instructions for Ireland, in the latter end of King James
His time, and by the Proclamation in His Majesty's time; my Lord took notice of
them called the Commissioners, narrow-hearted Commissioners.

The Law said, He should not thus proceed in the subversion of it, he says he
will, and will enforce Obedience by the Army, this is as much, in respect of
the end, as to endeavor the overthrow of the Statutes of Laborers, of
Victuals, or of Merton for Enclosures; here is a Warrant against the King, in
respect of the end.

2. In respect of the Actions, whether there be either a Levying of War, or an
open Deed, or both.

My Lords, There was an Army in Ireland at that time, of Two thousand Horse and
Foot; by this Warrant there is a full designation of this whole Army, and an
Assignment of it over to Savill for this purpose.

The Warrant gives him power from time to time, to take as many Soldiers, Horse
and Foot, with an Officer throughout the whole Army, as himself shall please;
here is the terror and awe of the whole Army to enforce Obedience. My Lords, If
the Earl had Armed two thousand men Horse and Foot, and formed them into
Companies to this end, your Lordships would have conceived, that this had been
a War. It Is as much as in the Case of Sir Thomas Talbot, who armed them in
Assemblies.

This is the same with a breach of Trust added to it.

That Army which was first raised, and afterward committed to his Trust, for
the defense of the People, is now destined by him to their destruction. This
assignation of the Army by his Warrant, under his Hand and Seal, is an open Act.

My Lords, Here Is not only an open Act done, but a Levying of War, Soldiers,
both Horse and Foot, with an Officer in Warlike manner assessed upon the
Subject, which killed their Cattle, consumed and wasted their Goods.

Your Lordships observe a great difference, where six men go upon a design
alone, and when sent from an Army of six hundred, all engaged in the same
service, so many were sent as were sufficient to execute the Command, if upon a
poor man fewer, more upon a rich; if the six had not been able, the whole Army
must make it good. The reason that the Sheriff directed alone, or but with one
Bailiff to do execution, is, because he has the Command of the Law, the Kings
Writ, and the Posse Comitatus in case of resistance. Here Is the Warrant of a
General of an Army; Here Is the Posse Exercitus, the Power of the Army, under
the awe of the whole Army, six may force more, than sixty without it; and
although never above six in one place, yet in several parts of the Kingdom at
the same time, might be above sixty; for sessing of Soldiers was frequent, it
was the ordinary course for execution of his Orders.

The Lord Lieutenant of a County in England, has a design to alter the Laws
and Government; nay, admit the design goes not so high, he only declares thus
much, he will order the Freeholders and Estates of the Inhabitants of the
County, at his own will and pleasure, and does accordingly proceed upon
Paper-Petitions, foreseeing there will be disobedience, he grants out Warrants
under his Hand and Seal, to the Deputy Lieutenants and Captains of the
Trained-bands, that upon refusal, they will take such number of the
Trained-Bands through the County, with Officers, as they shall think good, and
lay them upon the Lands and Houses of the refusers, Soldiers in a Warlike
manner are frequently sessed upon them accordingly; your Lordships do conceive,
that this is a Levying of War within the Statute.

The Case in question goes further in these two Respects.

That it is more against the declared Law in Ireland, not only against the
Common Law, but likewise against the Statute of 28 Hen. 6th. against the Acts
of the Commissioners; against Proclamations in persuance of the Law; against
that himself took notice of narrow-hearted Commissioners.

In this, that here was an Army, the Soldiers by profession, acts of Hostility
from them of greater terror, than from Freeholders of the same County.

My Lords, I have now done with the First of Levying of War.

The Second is the Machination, the advising of a War.

The Case in this, rests upon a Warrant to Savile, and the advice in the 23
Article.

The Warrant shows a resolution of employing the old Army of Ireland, to the
oppression of His Majesty's Subjects, and the Laws.

In the 23 Article, having told His Majesty, that he was loosed and absolved
from Rules of Government, and might do every thing which Power might admit; he
proceeded further in speech to His Majesty in these words; You have an Army in
Ireland, you may employ to reduce this Kingdom.

My Lords, Both being put together, there is a Machination, a practice, an
advice to Levy War, and by force to oppress and destroy His Majesty's Subjects.

It has been said, the Statute of the 25 Edw. 3. is a penal Law, and cannot be
taken by equity and construction, there must be an actual War; the Statute
makes it Treason to counterfeit the Kings Coin, the conspiring, the raising of
Furnaces is no Treason, unless he does Nummum percutere, actually Coin.

My Lords, This is only said, not proved; the Law is otherwise, the 19th Hen 6.
fol. 49. there adjudged, That the conspiring and aiding to counterfeit Coin was
Treason, and Justice Stamford (fol. 331. and 44.) is of opinion, that this, or
the conspiring to counterfeit the Great Seal, is Treason. The Statute is, If
any shall counterfeit the Great Seal, conspiring to do it by the Book, is
Treason; if a man take the Broad Seal from one Patent, and put it to another,
here is no counterfeiting, it is tantamount, and therefore Treason, as is
adjudged in 2 Hen. 4. fol. 25. and by the opinion of Stamford, If Machination
or Plotting a War be not within that clause of the Statute of Levying of War,
yet it is within the first, of compassing the death of the King, as that which
necessarily tends to the destruction both of King and People, upon whose safety
and protection he is to engage himself. That this is Treason, has been
adjudged, both after the Statutes of 1 Hen. 4. cap. 10. and 1 Queen Mary; so
much insisted upon on the other side. In the Third year of King Hen. 4th. one
Balshal coming from London, found one Bernard at Plough, in the Parish of
Ofley, in the County of Hertford, Bernard asked Balshal what news? he told him,
that the news was, That King Richard the Second was alive in Scotland (which
was false, for he was dead,) and that by Midsummer next, he would come into
England; Bernard asked him, What were best to be done? Balshal answered, Get
Men, and go to King Richard. In Michaelmas Term, in the Third year of Hen. 4th.
in the Kings Bench Rot. 4. This advice of War adjudged Treason.

In Queen Mary's time, Sir Nicholas Throckmorton conspired with Sir Thomas
Wyat, to Levy War within this Realm for alteration in Religion, he joined not
with him in the execution. This conspiracy alone declared to be Treason by all
the Judges; this was after the Statute of Queen Mary, so much insisted upon.

That Parliament ended in October, this opinion was delivered the Easter Term
following, and is reported by Justice Dyer, fol. 98. It Is true, Sir Thomas Wyat
afterward did Levy War; Sir Nicholas Throckmorton he only conspired. This
adjudged Treason.

One Story in Queen Elizabeth's time practiced with Foreigners, to levy War
within this Kingdom, nothing done in persuance of the practice. The intent
without any adhering to enemies of the Queen, or other cause, adjudged Treason,
and he executed thereupon.

It Is true my Lords, that year 13 Eliz. by Act of Parliament it is made Treason,
to intend the levying of War; this Case was adjudged before the Parliament: The
Case was adjudged in Hillary Term; the Parliament begun not till the April
following. This my Lords, is a Case judged in point, that the practicing to
levy War, though nothing be done in execution of it, is Treason.

Object. It may be Objected, That in these Cases, the Conspiring being Object.
against the whole Kingdom, included the Queen, and was a compassing Her
destruction, as well as of the Kingdoms, here the Advice was to the King.

Answ. The Answer is first, That the Warrant was unknown to His Majesty, Answ.
that was a Machination of War against the People and Laws, wherein His
Majesty's Person was engaged for Protection.

Secondly, That the Advice was to His Majesty, aggravates the Offense, it was
an Attempt which was the Offense; it was an Attempt not only upon the Kingdom,
but upon the Sacred Person and His Office too; himself was hostis patriae, he
would have made the Father of it so to: Nothing more unnatural nor more
dangerous, than to offer the King Poison to drink; telling Him that it is a
Cordial is a passing of His death: the Poison was repelled, there was an
Antidote within; the Malice of the giver beyond expression. The persuading of
Foreigners to invade the Kingdom, hold no proportion with this Machination of
War; against the Law or Kingdom, is against the King, they cannot be severed.

My Lords, If no actual War within the Statute, if the Counselling of War, if
neither of these single Acts be Treason within the Statute, The Commons, in the
next place, have taken it into consideration, what the addition of his other
Words, Counsels, and Actions do operate in the Case, and have conceived, that
with this Addition, all being put together, that he is brought within the
Statute of 25 E. 3.

The words of the Statute are, If any Man shall Compass, or Imagine the death
of the King; the words are not, If any Man shall plot, or Counsel the Death of
the King; No, my Lords, they go further than to such things as are intended
immediately, directly, and determinatively against the Life and Person of the
King, they are of a larger extent; to compass, is to do by Circuit, to Consult
or Practice another thing directly, which being done, may necessarily produce
this effect.

However it be in the other Treasons within this Statute, yet in this, by the
very words, there is room left for constructions, for necessary inferences and
consequences.

What has been the Judgment and Practice of former times, concerning these
words, of compassing the Kings Death, will appear to your Lordships, by some
Cases of Attainders upon these words.

One Owen, in K. James His time, in the 13th year of His Reign, at Sandwich
Owen' s Case of Sandwich in Kent.
in Kent, spoke these words, That K. James being Excommunicated by the Pope,
may be killed by any Man, which killing is no Murder: Being asked by those he
spoke to, how he durst maintain so Bloody an Assertion? Answered, That the
matter was not so heinous as was supposed; for, the King, who is the Lesser, is
concluded by the Pope, who is the Greater; and, as a Malefactor, being
Condemned before a Temporal Judge, may be delivered over to be Executed; So the
King, standing Convicted by the Popes Sentence of Excommunication, may justly
be slaughtered without fault; for, the Killing of the King, is the Execution of
the Popes Supreme Sentence, as the other is the Execution of the Law. For
this, Judgment of High Treason was given against him, and Execution done.

My Lords, there is no clear intent appearing, that Owen desired the thing
should be done, only Arguments that it might be done, this is a Compassing,
there is a clear Endeavor to corrupt the Judgment, to take off the Bonds of
Conscience, the greatest security of the Kings Life, God forbid, says one of
better Judgment then he, that I should stretch out my hand against the Lords
Anointed: No, says he, the Lord does not forbid it, you may, for these
Reasons, lawfully kill the King.

He that denies the Title to the Crown, and plots the means of setting it upon
another head, may do this without any direct, or immediate desiring the death
of Him that wears it; yet this is Treason, as was adjudged in the 10th of Hen.
7. in these of Burton, and in the Duke of Norfolkes Case, 13 Eliz.

This is a compassing of His Death; for there can no more be two Kings in one
Kingdom, then two Suns in the Firmament: he that conceives a Title, counts it
worth venturing for, though it cost him his life: he that is in possession
thinks it as well worth the keeping. John Sparhauk in King Henry the Fourth's
time, meeting too men upon the way, amongst other talk, said, That the King was
not rightful King, but the Earl of March; and that the Pope would grant
Indulgencies to all, that could assist the Earls Title, and that within half a
year there would be no Liveries nor Cognizances of the King; that the King had
not kept promise with the People, but had laid Taxes upon them.

In Easter-Terme, in the third year of Henry the Fourth, in the Kings Bench,
Rot. 12. this adjudged Treason, this denying the Title with Motives, though not
implyedly of Action against it, adjudged Treason; this is a compassing the
Kings death.

How this was a compassing of the Kings Death, is declared in the Reasons of
the Judgment; that the words were spoken with an intent, to withdraw the
affections of the People from the King, and to excite them against him, that in
the end they might rise up against him in mortem and destructionem of the King.

My Lords, in this Judgment, and others, which I shall cite to your Lordships,
it appears, that it is a compassing the Kings death by Words, to endeavor to
draw the Peoples hearts from the King, to set discord between the King and
them, whereby the People should leave the King, should rise up against Him, to
the death and destruction of the King.

The Cases that I shall cite, prove not only that it is Treason, but what is
sufficient Evidence to make this good.

Upon a Commission held the 18th year of Ed. 4. in Kent, before the Marquess of
Dorset, and others, an Indictment was preferred against John Awater, of High
Treason, in the Form beforementioned, for Words, which are entered in the
Indictment Sub hac forma: That he had been servant to the Earl of Warwick; that
though he were dead, the Earl of Oxford was alive, and should have the
Government of part of that Country; That Edward, whom you call King of England,
was a false Man, and had, by Art and Subtilty, slain the Earl of Warwick, and
the Duke of Clare his Brother, without any cause, who before had been both of
them attainted of High Treason.

My Lords, This Indictment was Returned into the Kings Bench in Trinity-Terme,
in the Eighteenth year of Edward the Fourth; and, in Easter-Terme, the Two and
twentieth of Edward the Fourth, he was outlawed, by the stay of the outlawry,
so long as it seems the Judges had well advised before, whether it were
Treason or not.

At the same Session Thomas Heber was Indicted of Treason for these words, That
the last Parliament was the most simple and insufficient Parliament that ever
had been in England; That the King was gone to live in Kent, because that for
the present he had not the Love of the Citizens of London, nor should he have
it for the future: That if the Bishop of Bath and Wells were dead, the
Archbishop of Canterbury being Cardinal of England, would immediately lose his
head.

This Indictment was returned into the Kings Bench in Trinity-Terme, in the
18th year of Edward the 4th: afterward there came a Privy Seal to the Judge to
respit the Proceedings, which (as it should seem) was to the intent the Judges
might advise of the Case, for afterward he is outlawed of High Treason upon
this Indictment.

These words are thought sufficient evidence, to prove these several
Indictments, that they were spoken to withdraw the Peoples Affections from the
King, to excite them against Him, to cause Risings against Him by the People,
in mortem and destructionem of the King.

Your Lordships are pleased to consider, That in all these Cases, the Treason
was for words only, words by private persons, and in a more private manner,
but once spoken, and no more, only amongst the People, to excite them against
the King.

My Lords, here are Words, Counsels, more then Words and Actions too, not only
to disaffect the people to the King, but the King likewise toward the People;
not once, but often; not in Private, but in places most Public; not by a
Private Person, but by a Counselor ofState, a Lord Lieutenant, a
Lord-President, a Lord-Deputy of Ireland.

1. To His Majesty, that the Parliament had denied to supply Him: a Slander
upon all the Commons of England, in their Affections to the King and Kingdom,
in refusing to yield timely supply for the Necessities of the King and Kingdom.

2. From thence, that the King was loose, and absolved from Rules of
Government, and was to do every thing, that Power would admit. My Lords, more
cannot be said, they cannot be aggravated; whatever I should say would be in
Diminution.

3. Thence you have an Army in Ireland, you may employ to reduce this Kingdom.

To Counsel a King, not to Love His People, is very Unnatural, it goes higher
to hate them, to Malice them in his heart, the highest expressions of Malice,
to destroy them by War. These Coals they were cast upon His Majesty, they were
blown, they could not kindle in that Breast.

Thence, my Lords, having done the utmost to the King, he goes to the people.
At York, the Country being met together for Justice, at the Open Assizes upon
the Bench, he tells them, speaking of the Justices of the Peace, that they were
all for Law, nothing but Law, but they should find, that the Kings Little
Finger, should be heavier then the Loins of the Law, as they shall find. My
Lords, Who speaks this to the people, a Privy-Counsellor? this must be either
to traduce His Majesty to the people, as spoken from Him, or from himself, who
was Lord Lieutenant of the County, and President, entrusted with the Forces and
Justice of those parts, that he would Employ both this way. Add, my Lords, to
His Words there, the Exercising of an Arbitrary and Vast Jurisdiction, before
he had so much as Instructions, or Color of Warrant.

Thence we carry him into Ireland; there he Represented, by his place, the
Sacred Person of His Majesty.

First. There at Dublin, the Principal City of that Kingdom, whither the
Subjects of that Country came for Justice in an Assembly of Peers, and others
of greatest Rank, upon occasion of a Speech of the Recorder of that City,
touching their Franchises and Regal Rights; he tells them, That Ireland was a
Conquered Nation, and that the King might do with them what he pleased.

Secondly, Not long after, in the Parliament 10 Car. in the Chair of State, in
full Parliament again, That they were a Conquered Nation; and that they were to
expect Laws as from a Conqueror, before the King might do with them what He
would, now they were to expect it that he would put this Power of a Conqueror
in Execution: -- The Circumstances are very Considerable; in full Parliament;
from himself in Cathedra, to the Representative Body of the whole Kingdom.

The Occasion adds much, when they desired the Benefit of the Laws, and that
their Causes and Suites might be determined according to Law, and not by
himself, at his Will and Pleasure, upon Paper Petitions.

Thirdly, Upon like occasion, of Pressing the Laws and Statutes, that he would
make an Act of Council Board in that Kingdom, as Binding as an Act of
Parliament.

Fourthly, He made his Words good by his Actions, Assumed and Exercised a
Boundless and Lawless Jurisdiction, over the Lives, Persons and Estates of His
Majesty's Subjects, procured Judgment of Death against a Peer of that Realm;
Commanded another to be Hanged, this was accordingly Executed, both in times of
High Peace, without any Process or Color of Law.

Fifthly, By Force, of a long time, he Seized the Yarn and Flax of the
Subjects, to the Starving and undoing of many thousands; besides the Tobacco
business, and many Monopolies and Unlawful Taxes; forced a New Oath, not to
dispute His Majesty's Royal Commands; determined Men's Estates at his own Will
and Pleasure, upon Paper-Petitions to himself; forced Obedience to these, not
only by Fines and Imprisonment, but likewise by the Army; sessed Soldiers upon
the Refusers in an Hostile manner.

Sixthly, Was an Incendiary of the War between the two Kingdoms of England and
Scotland.

My Lords, We shall leave it to your Lordships Judgments, whether these Words,
Counsels, and Actions, would not have been a sufficient Evidence, to have
Proved an Indictment drawn up against him, as those before mentioned, and many
others are? That they were spoken and done to the Intent, to draw the Kings
heart from the People, and the Affections of the People from the King; that
they might leave the King, and afterward rise up against him, to the
destruction of the King; If so, here is a Compassing of the Kings Death, within
the Words of the Statute of 25th year of Edward the Third, and that Warranted
by many former Judgments.

My Lords, I have now done with the Three Treasons within the Statute of the
Twenty fifth of Edw. 3d. I proceed unto the Fourth, upon the Statute of the
Eighteenth year of Henry the Sixth, Chapter the third, in Ireland, and I shall
make bold to read the words to your Lordships.

That no Lord, nor any other, of what condition soever he be, shall bring, or
lead Hoblers, Kernes, or Hooded Men, nor any other People, nor Ho rses, to lie
on Horseback, or on Foot, upon the Kings Subjects, without their good wills and
consent, but upon their own costs, and without hurt doing to the Commons; and
if any so do, he shall be adjudged as a Traitor.

1. The Argument that has been made concerning the person, that it extends not
to the King, and therefore not to him, weighs nothing with your Lordships, Rex
non habet in Regno parem; from the greatness of his Office, to argue himself
into the same impossibility with His Sacred Majesty, of being incapable of
High Treason, it is an Offense; no Treason; The words in the Statute, No Lord,
nor any other, of what condition soever he be, include every Subject.

In Trinity Term, in the Three and thirtieth year of Henry the Eighth, in the
King's Bench, Leonard Lord Gray, having immediately before been Lord Deputy of
Ireland, is Attainted of High Treason, and Judgment given against him, for
letting diverse Rebels out of the Castle of Dublin, and discharging Irish
Hostages and Pledges, that had been given for securing the Peace; for not
punishing one that said, That the King was an Heretic: I have read the whole
Record, there is not one thing laid to his Charge, but was done by him as Lord
Lieutenant; He had the same Plea with my Lord of Strafford; That these things
were no adhering to the Kings Enemies, but were done for Reasons of State, that
he was not within those words of the Statute of the 25 of Edw. 3. himself being
Lord Lieutenant there.

Object. It has been said, That the Soldiers sessed upon the Subjects by him,
were not such persons as are intended by that Statute, Hoblers, Kernes, and
Hooded Men, those Rascally people.

Answ. My Lords, they were the names given to the Soldiery of those times,
Hoblers, Horsemen; the other the Foot. But the words of the Statute go further,
Nor any other People, neither Horse nor Foot. His Lordship sessed upon them
both Horse and Foot.

Object. The Statute extends only to those, that lead or bring; Savil led
them; my Lord only gave the Warrant.

Answ. To this I shall only say thus, Plus peccat author, quam Actor, by the
rule of the Law Agentes and consentientes pari plectuntur poena; if consent,
much more a Command to do it, makes the Commander a Traitor; If there be any
Treason within this Statute, my Lord of Strafford is Guilty.

It has been therefore said, That this Statute, like Goliah's Sword, has been
wrapped up in a Cloth, and laid behind the door, that it has never been put in
execution.

My Lords, if the Clarke of the Crown in Ireland, had certified your Lordships
upon search of the Judgments of Attainders in Ireland, he could not find that
any man had been attainted upon this Statute, your Lordships had had some
ground to believe it; Yet its only my Lord of Straffords Affirmation; besides,
your Lordships know, that an Act of Parliament binds until it be repealed.

It has been therefore said; That this Statute is repealed by the Statute of
the 8 Ed. 4. Cap. 1. and of the 10th of Hen. 7. Cap. 22. because by these two
Statutes, the English Statutes are brought into Ireland.

The Argument (if I mistook it not) stood thus; That the Statute of the First
of Henry the 4th, the 10th Chap. says, That in no time to come, Treason shall
be adjudged otherwise, then it was ordained by the Statute of the 25 E. 3. that
the reason mentioned in the Eighteenth year of Henry the Sixth, in the Irish
Statute, is not contained in the 25 Edw. 3. and therefore contrary to the
Statute of the 1 Hen. 4. it must needs be void.

If this were Law, then all the Statutes that made any new Treason after the
First of Henry 4th, were void in the very Fabric, and at the time when they
were made; hence likewise it would follow, that the Parliament now, upon what
occasion soever, has no Power to make any thing Treason, not declared to be so
in the Statute 25 Edw. 3. This your Lordships easily see, would make much for
the Lord of Straffords advantage, but why the Law should be so, your Lordships
have only as yet heard an Affirmation of it; no reason.

But, some touch was given, that the Statute of the tenth year of Henry the
Seventh, in words, makes all the Irish Statutes void, which are contrary to the
English. The Answer to this is a denial that there are any such words in the
Statute. The Statute declares, that the English Statutes shall be effectual,
and confirmed in Ireland, and that all the Statutes made before time to the
contrary, shall be revoked.

This repeals only the Irish Statutes of the tenth year of Henry the Fourth,
and the Nine and twentieth year of Henry the Sixth, which say, that the English
Statutes shall not be in force in Ireland, unless particularly received in
Parliament, it makes all the Irish Statutes void, which say, that the English
Statutes shall not be in force there.

It is usual when a Statute says, that such a thing shall be done, or not
done, to add further, that all Statutes to the contrary shall be void.

No likelihood that this Statute intended to take away any Statute of Treason,
but when in the Chapter next before this, Murder there is made Treason, as if
done upon the Kings Person.

That this Statute of the Eighteenth year of Henry the Sixth remains on foot,
and not repealed either by the Statute of the Eighth year of Edward the Fourth,
or this of the Tenth year of Henry the Seventh, appears expressly by two several
Acts of Parliament, made at the same Parliament of the tenth year of Henry the
Seventh.

By an Act of Parliament of Henry the Sixth's time in Ireland, it was made
Treason for any Man whatsoever, to procure a Privy Seal, or any other Command
whatsoever, for apprehending any Person in Ireland for Treason done without
that Kingdom, and to put any such command in Execution, diverse had been
attainted of Treason for executing such Commands: There is a Treason, so made,
by Act of Parliament, in Henry the Sixth's time. In the third Chapter of this
Parliament of the tenth of Henry the Seventh, an Act is passed for no other
end, then to repeal this Statute of Henry the Sixth of Treason.

If this Statute of Henry the Sixth of Treason had been formerly repealed by
the Statute of 8 E. 4. or then by the two and twentieth Chapter of this
Parliament of the 10th of Henry the Seventh, by bringing in the English
Statutes, the Lawmakers were much mistaken now to make a particular Act of
Parliament to repeal it, it being likewise so unreasonable an Act as it was.

In the Eighth Chapter of this Parliament of the 10th of Henry the Seventh, it
is Enacted, that the Statutes of Kilkenny, and all other Statutes made in
Ireland (two only excepted, whereof this of the Eighteenth of Henry the Sixth
is none) for the Commonweal, shall be enquired of, and executed: My Lord of
Strafford says, that the bringing in of the English Statute has repealed this
Statute; the Act of Parliament made the same time, says no; it says, that all
the Irish Statutes, excepting two, whereof this is none, shall still be in
force.

Object. Oh, but however it was in the 10 H. 7. yet it appears by Judgment in
Parliament afterward, that this Statute of 18 H. 6. is repealed, and that is
by the Parliament of the 11th year of Queen Elizabeth, the 7th Chapter, that by
this Parliament it is Enacted, That if any Man, without License from the Lord
Deputy, lay any Soldiers upon the Kings Subjects, if he be a Peer of the Realm,
he shall forfeit One hundred pounds, if under the degree of a Peer, One hundred
Marks.

This Statute, as is alleged, declares the Penalty of laying Soldiers on the
Subjects to be only One hundred pounds, and therefore its not Treason.

Answ. My Lords, if the Offense for which this Penalty of One hundred pounds is
laid upon the Offenders, be for laying Soldiers, or leading them to do any act
Offensive or Invasive upon the Kings People, the Argument has some force; but
that the Offense is not for laying Soldiers upon the true Subjects, that this
is not the Offense intended in the Statute, will appear to your Lordships Ex
absurdo, from the words of it.

The Words are, That if any Man shall assemble the People of the County
together, to conclude of Peace or War, or shall carry those people to do any
Acts Offensive or Invasive, then he shall forfeit One hundred pounds.

If concluding of War, and carrying the people to Acts Invasive, be against the
Kings Subjects, this is High Treason, which are the words of the Statute of 25
E. 3. for if any Subject shall assemble the people, and conclude a War, and
accordingly shall lead them to invade the Subject, this is a levying of War
within the words of the Statute; and then the Statutes of the 25 E. 3. 1 H. 4.
1 of Q Mary, which the Earl of Strafford, in his Answers, desires to be tried
by, are as well repealed, in this point, as the Statute of the 18th of Henry
the Sixth, he might then, without fear of Treason, have done what he pleased
with the Irish Army; for all the Statutes of levying of War by this Statute of
11 Eliz. were taken out of his way.

In Ireland a Subject gathers Forces, concludes a War against the Kings people,
actually invades them, bloodshed, burning of houses, depradations ensue; two of
those, that is, Murder, and Burning of Houses, are Treason; and there the other
Felony by the construction the punishment of Treason, and Felony is turned
only into a fine of One hundred pounds; from loss of Life, Lands, and all his
Goods, only to loss of part of his Goods.

The Third Absurdity, a War is concluded, three several Inrodes are made upon
the Subject; in the first a hundred pounds damage; in the second, five thousand
pounds damage; in the third, ten thousand pounds damage, is done to the
Subjects; the penalty for the last inroade is no more then for the first, only
one hundred pounds. This Statute, by this Construction, tells any man, how to
get his living without long labor.

Two parts of the hundred pounds is given to the King, a third part unto the
Informer; Here Is no damage to the Subject, that is robbed and destroyed.

My Lords, The Statute will free it self and the makers from those Absurdities.

The meaning of the Statute is, That if any Captain shall, of his own head,
conclude of Peace or War against the Kings Enemies, or Rebels, or shall, upon
his own head, invade them without Warrant from the King; or Lord Deputy of
Ireland, that then he shall forfeit a Hundred pounds.

The Offense is not for laying of Soldiers upon the Kings people, but making
War against the Irish Rebels without Warrant; the Offense is not in the Matter,
but in the Manner, for doing a thing lawful, but without Mission.

I. This will appear by the general Scope of the Statute, all the parts being
put together. II. By particular Clauses in the Statute. III. By the Condition
of that Kingdom, at the time of the making of that Statute.
For the First, The Preamble recites, that in time of Declination of Justice,
under pretext of defending the Country and themselves, diverse Great Men
arrogated to themselves Regal Authority, under the names of Captains; that they
acquired to themselves that Government, which belonged to the Crown; for
preventing of this, It Is Enacted, That no man dwelling within the Shire
Grounds, shall thenceforth assume, or take to himself the Authority or name of
a Captain, within these Shire-Grounds, without Letters Patent from the Crown,
nor shall, under color of his Captainship, make any demand of the people of
any Exaction, nor as a Captain, assemble the people of the Shire-Grounds; nor
as a Captain shall lead those people to do any acts Offensive or Invasive,
without Warrant under the Great Seal of England, or of the Lord Deputy, upon
penalty, that if he do any thing contrary to that Act, that then the Offender
shall forfeit a Hundred pounds.

My Lords, The Rebels had been out; the Courts of Justice scarce sat; for
defense of the Country diverse usurped the place of Captains, concluded of War
against the Rebels, and invaded them without Warrant: Invading the Rebels
without Authority, is a crime.

This appears further by particular clauses in the Statute, none shall exercise
any Captainship within the Shire-grounds, nor assemble the men of the
Shire-grounds, to conclude War, or lead them to any Invasion.

That that had anciently been so continued to this time, that is the Irish, and
the English Pale, they within the Shire-grounds were within the English Pale;
and ad fidem and legem Angliae. The Irish without the Pale were enemies always,
either in open act of Hostility, or upon Leagues and Hostages given for
securing the Peace; and therefore as here in England we had our Marches upon
the frontiers in Scotland and Wales, so were there Marches between the Irish
and English Pale, where the Inhabitants held their Lands by this tenure, to
defend the Country against the Irish, as appears in the close Roll of the
Tower, in the 20th year of Edw. 3. membrana 15. on the backside, and in an
Irish Parliament, held the 42 year of Edw. 3. it is declared, That the English
Pale was almost destroyed by the Irish enemies, and that there was no way to
prevent the danger, but only, that the Owners reside upon their Lands for
defense, and that absence should be a forfeiture. This Act of Parliament in a
great Council here was affirmed, as appears in the close Roll, the 22 year of
Edw. 3. Membrana 20 dorso.

Afterward, as appears in the Statute of 28 Hen. 6th. in Ireland, this
Hostility continued between the English Marches and the Irish Enemies, who by
reason there was no difference between the English Marches and them in their
apparel, did daily (not being known to the English) destroy the English within
the Pale: Therefore it is enacted, that every Englishman shall have the hair
of his upper Lip for distinction sake. This hostility continued until the 10th
year of Henry the 7th, as appears by the Statute of 10 H. 7th. and 17th. so
successively downwards, till the making of this very Statute of 11 Eliz. as
appears fully in the 9th Chap.

Nay, immediately before, and at the time of the making of this Statute, there
was not only enmity between those of the Shire-ground, that is, the English and
Irish Pale, but open War, and acts of hostility, as appears by History of no
less Authority, than that Statute it self; for in the first Chapter of that
Statute, is the Attainder of Shane Oneale, who had made open War, was slain in
open War; it is there declared, That he had gotten by force, all the North of
Ireland, for an hundred and twenty miles in length, and about a hundred in
breadth; that he had mastered diverse places within the English Pale; when the
flame of this War by his death, immediately before this Statute was spent, yet
the Firebrands were not all quenched, for the Rebellion continued by John
Fitz-Gerard, called the White Knight, and Thomas Gueverford, this appears by
the Statute of the Thirteenth year of Queen Eliz. in Ireland, but two years
after this of the Eleventh year of Queen Eliz. where they are attainted of High
Treason, for levying of War this Eleventh year, wherein this Statute was made.

So that my Lords, immediately before, and at the time of the making of this
Statute, there being War between those of the Shire-grounds, mentioned in this
Statute, and the Irish, the concluding of War, and Acts Offensive and Invasive
there mentioned, can be intended against no others, but the Irish Enemies.

Again, The words of the Statute are, No Captain shall assemble the people of
the Shire-grounds, to conclude of Peace or War; Is to presume, that those of
the Shire-grounds will conclude of War against themselves. Nor (with the
Statute) Shall carry those of the Shire-grounds to do any Acts Invasive; by the
construction which is made on the other side, they must be carried to fight
against themselves.

Lastly, The words are, That as Captain, none shall assume the Name, or
Authority of a Captain; or as a Captain shall gather the people together; or as
a Captain lead them; the offense is not in the matter, but in the manner; If
the Acts offensive were against the Kings good Subjects, those that were under
Command, were punishable, as well as the Commanders; but in respect the
Soldiers knew the service to be good in it self, being against the enemies, and
that it was not for them to dispute the Authority of their Commanders, the
penalty of 100 l. is laid only upon him, That as Captain, shall assume this
Power without Warrant, the People commanded, are not within this Statute.

My Lords, The Logic whereupon this Argument is framed, stands thus, because
the Statute of the Eleventh year of Queen Elizabeth, inflicts a penalty of 100
l. and no more, upon any man, that as a Captain without Warrant, and upon his
own head shall conclude of, or make War against the King's Enemies: Therefore
the Statute of the Eighteenth year of Henry the 6th is repealed, which makes it
Treason to lay Soldiers upon, or to levy War against the Kings good People.

But, my Lords, Observation has been made upon other words of this Statute,
that is, that without License of the Deputy, these things cannot be done; this
shows that the Deputy, is within none of the Statutes.

My Lords, This Argument stands upon the same reason with the former, because
he has the ordering of the Army of Ireland, for the defense of the people, and
may give Warrant to the Officers of the Army, upon eminent occasions of
Invasion, to resist or prosecute the Enemy, because of the danger that else
might ensue forthwith, by staying for a Warrant from His Majesty out of England.

My Lords, The Statute of the 10th year of Henry the 7th. chap. 17. touched
upon for this purpose, clears the business in both points; for there is
declared, That none ought to make War upon the Irish Rebels, and Enemies,
without Warrant from the Lieutenant, the forfeiture 100 l. as here the Statute
is the same with this, and might as well have been cited, for repealing the
Statute of the 18th year of Henry the 6th. as this of the 11th year of Queen
Elizabeth. But if this had been insisted upon, it would have expounded the
other two clear against him.

Object. My Lords, it has been further said, although the Statute be in force,
and there be a Treason within it, yet the Parliament has no Jurisdiction, the
Treasons are committed in Ireland, therefore not triable here.

Answ. My Lords, Sir John Parrot, his Predecessor, 24 Edw. was tried in the
Kings Bench for Treason done in Ireland, when he was Deputy; and Oruche in the
33 year of Queen Elizabeth, adjudged here for Treason done in Ireland.

Object. But it will be said, these Trials were after the Statute of the 34th
year of Henry the 8th. which enacts, that Treasons beyond Sea may be tried in
England.

Answ. My Lords, his Predecessor my Lord Gray was tried, and adjudged here in
the King's Bench; that was in Trinity Term, in the 33 year of Henry the 8th.
this was before the making of that Statute.

Object. To this again will we say, That it was for Treason by the Laws and
Statutes of England; that this is not for any thing that is Treason by the Law
of England, but an Irish Statute.

So that the question is only, Whether your Lordships here in Parliament, have
cognizance of an offense, made Treason by an Irish Statute, in the ordinary way
of Judicature, without Bill? for so is the present question.

For the clearing of this, I shall propound two things to your Lordships
consideration.

Whether the Rule for expounding the Irish Statute and Customs, be one and the
same in England as in Ireland?

That being admitted, whether the Parliament in England have cognizance or
jurisdiction of things there done, in respect of the place, because the Kings
Writ runs not there?

For the First, in respect of the place, the Parliament here has cognizance
there. And Secondly, If the Rules for expounding the Irish Statutes and
Customs, be the same here as there, this exception (as I humbly conceive) must
fall away.

In England there is the Common Law, the Statutes, the Acts of Parliament, and
Customs peculiar to certain places, differing from the Common Law; If any
question arise concerning either a Custom or an Act of Parliament, the
Common Law of England, the First, the Primitive and the General Law, that is the
Rule and Expositor of them, and of their several extents; it is so here, it is
so in Ireland, the Common Law of England, is the Common Law of Ireland
likewise; the same here and there in all the parts of it.

It was introduced into Ireland by King John, and afterward by King Henry 3.
by Act of Parliament held in England, as appears by the Patent-Rolls of the
30th year of King Henry 3. the first Membrana, the words are, Quia pro Communi
Utilitate terrae Hiberniae and unitate terrarum Regis, Rex vult, and de Communi
Concilio Regis Provisum est, quod omnes Leges and Consuetudines quae in Regno
Angliae tenentur, in Hibernia teneantur, and eadem terra eisdem legibus
subjaceat, and per easdem Regatur, sicut Dominus Johannes Rex cum ultimo esset
in Hibernia statuit and fieri mandavit, quia, etc. Rex vult quod omnia brevia
de Communi Iure quae currunt in Anglia, similiter current in Hibernia, sub novo
sigillo Regis mandatum est Archiepiscopis, etc. quod pro pace and tranquilitate
ejusdem terrae, per easdem leges eos regi and deduci permittant, and eas in
omnibus sequantur in cujus, etc. Test Rege apud Woodstock, Decimo nono die
Septembris.

Here is an union of both Kingdoms, and that by Act of Parliament, and the same
Laws to be used here as there, in omnibus.

My Lords, That nothing might be left here for an exception, that is, That in
Treasons, Felonies, and other capital offenses concerning Life, the Irish Laws
are not the same as here, therefore it is enacted by a Parliament held in
England, in the 14th year of Edw, 2. (it is not in print neither, but in the
Parliament Book) that the Laws concerning Life and Member shall be the same in
Ireland, as in England.

And that no exception might yet remain, in a Parliament held in England. The
5th year of Edw. 3., it is Enacted. Quod una and eadem Lex fiat tam Hibernicis
quam Anglicis.

This Act is enrolled in the Patent Rolls of the 5th year of Edw. 3. Parl.
membr. 25.

The Irish therefore receiving their Laws from hence, they send their Students
at Law to the Inns of Court in England, where they receive their Degree, and of
them, and of the Common-Lawyers of this Kingdom, are the Judges made.

The Petitions have been many from Ireland, to send from hence some Judges,
more learned in the Laws, than those they had there.

It has been frequent in cases of difficulty there, to send sometimes to the
Parliament, sometimes to the King, by advice from the Judges here, to send them
resolutions of their doubts. Amongst many, I Will cite your Lordships only one,
because it is in a case of Treason upon an Irish Statute, and therefore full to
this point.

By a Statute there made the fifth year of Edw. 4. there is a provision made
for such as upon suggestions are committed to prison for Treason, that the
party committed, if he can procure 24 Compurgators, shall be bailed and let out
of prison.

Two Citizens of Dublin, were by a Grand Jury presented to have committed
Treason, they desired benefit of this Statute, that they might be let out of
prison, upon tender of their Compurgators: The words of the Statute of the 5th
year of Edw. 4th. in Ireland being obscure, the Judges there being not
satisfied what to do, sent the case over to the Queen, desired the opinion of
the Judges here, which was done accordingly. The Judges here sent over their
opinion, which I have out of the Book of Justice Anderson, one of the Judges
consulted withal. The Judges delivered their opinion upon an Irish Statute, in
case of Treason.

If it be objected, That in this Case, the Judges here did not judge upon the
party; their opinions were only ad informandam Conscientiam, of the Judges in
Ireland, that the Judgment belonged to the Judges there.

My Lords (with submission) this and the other Authorities, prove, that for
which they were cited, that is, that no absurdity, no failure of Justice would
ensue, if this great Judicatory should judge of Treason, so made by an Irish
Statute.

The Common Law rules of judging upon an Irish Statute; the Pleas of the Crown
for things of life and death, are the same here and there, this is all that yet
has been offered.

For the Second point, That England has no power of Judicature, for things
done in Ireland.

My Lords, the constant practice of all ages, proves the contrary.

Writs of Error in Pleas of the Crown, as well as in Civil Causes, have in all
Kings Reigns been brought here, even in the inferior Courts of Westminster Hall
upon Judgment given in the Courts of Ireland, the practice is so frequent, and
so well known, as that I shall cite none of them to your Lordships, no
president will, I believe, be produced to your Lordships, that ever the Case
was remanded back again into Ireland, because the question arose upon an Irish
Statute, or Custom.

Object. But it will be said, that Writs of Error, are only upon failure of
justice in Ireland, and that suits cannot originally be commenced here for
things done in Ireland, because the Kings Writ runs not in Ireland.

Answ. This might be a good Plea in the King's Bench, and inferior Courts at
Westminster Hall; the question is, Whether it be so in Parliament? The Kings
Writ runs not within the County-Palatine of Chester and Durham, nor within the
Five Ports; neither did it in Wales, before the Union of Henry the 8th's time,
after the Laws of England were brought into Wales, in King Edw. the 1. time,
Suits were not originally commenced at Westminster Hall for things done in
them; yet this never excluded the Parliament-suits; for Life, Lands, and Goods
within these jurisdictions, are determinable in Parliament, as well as in any
other parts of the Realm.

Ireland, as appears by the Statute of the Thirtieth year of Henry 3.
beforementioned, is united to the Crown of England.

By the Statute of the Eight and twentieth year of Hen. 6th. in Ireland, it is
declared in these words, That Ireland is the proper Dominion of England, and
united to the Crown of England, which Crown of England is of it self, and by it
self, wholly and entirely endowed with all Power and Authority sufficient to
yield to the Subjects of the same full and plenary remedy, in all Debates and
Suits whatsoever.

By the Statute of the Three and twentieth year of Henry the 8th, the first
Chapter, when the Kings of England first assumed the Title of King of Ireland,
it is there Enacted, that Ireland still is to be held as a Crown annexed and
united to the Crown of England.

So that by the same reason, from this that the Kings Writs run not in Ireland,
it might as well be held, that the Parliament cannot originally hold Plea of
things done within the County-Palatine of Chester and Durham, nor within the
Five Ports and Wales; Ireland, is a part of the Realm of England, as appears by
those Statutes, as well as any of them.

This is made good by constant practice in all the Parliament Rolls, from the
first to the last; there are Receivers, and Tryers of Petitions appointed for
Ireland; for the Irish to come so far with their Petitions for Justice, and the
Parliament not to have cognizance, when from time to time they had in the
beginning of the Parliament, appointed Receivers and Tryers of them, is a thing
not to be presumed.

An Appeal in Ireland, brought by William Lord Vesey, against John Fitz-Thomas,
for Treasonable words there spoken, before any Judgment given in Case there,
was removed into the Parliament in England, and there the Defendant acquitted,
as appears in the Parliament Pleas of the Two and twentieth year of Edw. 1.

The Suits for Lands, Offices, and Goods originally begun here are many, and if
question grew upon matter in fact, a Jury usually ordered to try it, and the
Verdict returned into the Parliament; as in the Case of one Ballyben in the
Parliament of the Five and thirtieth year of Edward the 1. If a doubt arose
upon a matter tryable by Record, a Writ went to the Officers, in whose custody
the Record remained, to certify the Record, as was in the Case of Robert
Bagott the same Parliament, of the Five and thirtieth year of Edward the 1.
where the Writ went to the Treasurer, and Barons of the Exchequer.

Sometimes they gave Judgment here in Parliament, and commanded the Judges
there in Ireland to do execution, as in the great Case of Partition, between
the Copartners of the Earl Marshal in the Parliament of the Three and thirtieth
of Edward the 1. where the Writ was awarded to the Treasurer of Ireland.

My Lords, The Laws of Ireland were introduced by the Parliament of England, as
appears by Three Acts of the Parliament before cited.

It is of higher Jurisdiction Dare Leges, then to judge by them.

The Parliaments of England do bind in Ireland, if Ireland be particularly
mentioned, as is resolved in the Book-Case of the First year of Henry the
Seventh. Cook's Seventh Report, Calvin's Case; and by the Judges in
Trinity-Term, in the Three and thirtieth year of Queen Elizabeth. The Statute
of the Eighth year of Edward the 4th, the first Chapter in Ireland recites,
That it was doubted amongst the Judges, whether all the English Statutes,
though not naming Ireland, were in force there? if named, no doubt.

From King Henry the 3. his time downwards, to the Eighth year of Queen
Elizabeth (by which Statute it is made Felony to carry Sheep from Ireland
beyond Seas) in almost all these Kings Reigns, there be Statutes made
concerning Ireland. The exercising of the Legislative Power there, over their
Lives and Estates, is higher than of the Judicial in question: Until the 29th
year of Edward the 3. erroneous Judgments given in Ireland, were determinable
no where but in England; no, not in the Parliament of Ireland, as it appears in
the close Rolls in the Tower, in the 29th year of Edw. the 3. Memb. 12. Power
to examine and reverse erroneous Judgments in the Parliaments of Ireland is
granted; from hence, Writs of Error lie in the Parliament here upon erroneous
Judgments, after that time given in the Parliaments of Ireland, as appears in
the Parliament Rolls, of the Eighth year of Henry the 6th. No. 70. in the Case
of the Prior of Lenthan. It is true, the Case is not determined there, for it is
the last thing that came into the Parliament, and could not be determined for
want of time, but no exception at all is taken to the Jurisdiction.

The Acts of Parliament made in Ireland, have been confirmed in the Parliaments
of England, as appears by the close Rolls in the Tower, in the Two and fortieth
year of Edw. the 3. Memb. 20. Dorso: where the Parliament in Ireland, for the
preservation of the Country from Irish, who had almost destroyed it, made an
Act, That all the Land-Owners, that were English, should reside upon their
Lands, or else they were to be forfeited, this was here confirmed.

In the Parliament of the Fourth year of Henry the 5th. Chap. 6. Acts of
Parliament in Ireland are confirmed, and some privileges of the Peers in the
Parliaments there are regulated.

Power to repeal Irish Statutes, Power to confirm them, cannot be by the
Parliament here, if it has not cognizance of their Parliaments; unless it be
said, that the Parliament may do, it knows not what.

Garnsey and Iersey are under the Kings subjection, but are not parcels of the
Crown of England, but of the Duchy of Normandy, they are not governed by the
Laws of England, as Ireland is, and yet Parliaments in England have usually
held Plea of, and determined all Causes concerning Lands or Goods. In the
Parliament, in the 33 Edw. 1. there be Placita de Insula Iersey. And so in the
Parliament, 14 Edw. 2. and so for Normandy and Gascoigne, and always as long as
any part of France was in subjection to the Crown of England, there were at the
beginning of the Parliaments, Receivers and Tryers of Petitions, for those
parts appointed.

I believe your Lordships will have no Case showed of any Plea, to the
jurisdiction of the Parliaments of England, in any things done in any parts
wheresoever in subjection to the Crown of England.

The last thing I shall offer to your Lordships is, the Case of 19 Eliz. in my
Lord Dyer, 306. and Judge Crompton's Book, of the jurisdiction of Courts fol.
23. The opinion of both these Books is, That an Irish Peer is not Tryable here,
it is true, a Scotch or French Nobleman is tryable here, as a common person; the
Law takes no notice of their Nobility, because those Countries are not governed
by the Laws of England; but Ireland being governed by the same Laws, the Peers
there are Tryable according to the Law of England only, per pares.

By the same reason, the Earl of Strafford, not being a Peer of Ireland, is not
tryable by the Peers of Ireland; so that if he be not tryable here, he is
tryable no where.

My Lords, In case there be a Treason and a Traitor within the Statute, and
that he be not tryable here for it, in the ordinary way of Judicature, if that
jurisdiction fail, this by way of Bill does not; Attainders of Treason in
Parliament, are as legal, as usual by Act of Parliament, as by Judgment.

I have now done with the Statutes 25 Edw. 3. and 18 Hen. 6. My Lord of
Strafford has offended against both the Kingdoms, and is guilty of High
Treason by the Laws of both.

My Lords, In the fifth place, I am come to the Treasons at the Common Law, the
endeavoring to subvert the fundamental Laws and Government of the Kingdom, and
to introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government.

In this I shall not at all labor to prove, That the endeavoring by Words,
Counsels and Actions, to subvert the Laws, is Treason at the Common Law, if
there be any Common Law Treasons at all left; nothing is Treason, if this be
not, to make a Kingdom no Kingdom; take the Polity and Government away,
Englands but a piece of Earth, wherein so many men have their Commorancy and
abode, without ranks or distinction of men, without property in any thing
further than possession; no Law to punish the Murdering, or robbing one
another.

That of 33 Hen. 8. of introducing the Imperial Law, sticks not with your
Lordships; it was in case of an Appeal to Rome; these Appeals in Cases of
Marriages, and other causes counted Ecclesiastical, had been frequent, had in
most Kings Reigns been tolerated; some in times of Popery put a conscience upon
them; the Statutes had limited the penalty to a Praemunire only, neither was
that a total subversion, only an Appeal from the Ecclesiastical Court here in a
single Cause, to the Court of Rome; and if Treason or not, that Case proves not
a Treason may be punished as a Felony; a Felony as a Trespass, if His Majesty
so please; The greater includes the less in the Case of Praemunire; in the
Irish Reports, that which is there declared to be Treason, was proceeded upon
only as a Praemunire.

The things most considerable in this is, Whether the Treasons at Common Law,
are taken away by the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. which is to speak against both the
direct words and scope of that Statute.

In it there is this clause, That because many other like Cases of Treason might
fall out, which are not there declared; therefore it is enacted, That if any
such Case come before the Judges, they shall not proceed to Judgment, till the
Case be declared in Parliament, whether it ought to be adjudged Treason or not.

These words, and the whole scope of that Statute shows, that it was not the
meaning to take away any Treasons that were so before, but only to regulate the
jurisdiction and manner of Trial. Those that were single and certain Acts, as
conspiring the Kings death, Levying War, Counterfeiting the Money, or Great
Seal, Killing a Judge; these are left to the ordinary Courts of Justice: The
others not depending upon single Acts, but upon constructions and necessary
inferences, they thought it not fit to give the inferior Courts so great a
latitude here, as too dangerous to the Subject, those they restrained to the
Parliament.

This Statute was the great security of the Subjects, made with such wisdom, as
all the succeeding Ages have approved it; it has often passed through the
Furnace, but like Gold, has left little or nothing.

The Statute of the First H. 4. cap. 10. is in these words, Whereas in the
Parliament held the 21 year of Richard the 2. diverse pains of Treason were
ordained, insomuch that no man did know how to behave himself, to do, say, or
speak: It is accorded that in no time to come, any Treason be adjudged
otherwise, than it was ordained by the Statute of 25th of Edw. 3.

It has been said, To what end is this Statute made, if it takes not away the
Common Law Treasons remaining after the Statute of the 25th of Edw. 3?

Therebe two main things which this Statute does; First, it takes away for the
future all the Treasons, made by any Statute since 25 Edw. 3. to the 1 H. 4.
even to that time; for in respect, that by another Act in that Parliament, the
Statute of 21 Rich. 2. was repealed, it will not be denied, but that this
Statute repeals more Treasons than these of the 21 R. 2. It repeals all
Statute-Treasons but those in 25 Edw. 3.

Secondly, It not only takes away the Statute-Treasons, but likewise the
declared Treasons in Parliament, after the 25th of Edw. 3. as to the future,
after Declaration in Parliament, the inferior Courts might judge these
Treasons; for the Declaration of a Treason in Parliament after it was made, was
sent to the inferior Courts, that toties quoties the like Case fell out, they
might proceed therein, the Subject for the future, was secured against these;
so that this Statute was of great use.

But by the very words of it, I shall refer all Treasons to the provision of 25
Edw. 3. it leaves that entire, and upon the old bottom. The Statute of 1 Queen
M. cap. 1. says, That no offenses made Treason by any Act of Parliament, shall
thenceforth be taken or adjudged to be Treason, but only such as be declared
and expressed to be Treason by the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. Concerning Treason, or
the Declaration of Treason, and no others: And further provides, That no pains
of death, penalties, or forfeiture in any wise shall ensue, for committing any
Treason, other than such as be in the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. ordained and
provided, any Act of Parliament, or any Declaration, or matter to the contrary,
in any wise notwithstanding.

By the first of this Statute, only offenses made Treason by Act of Parliament,
are taken away, the Common-Law-Treasons are no ways touched, the words [And no
others] refer still to offenses made Treason by Act of Parliament; they
restrain not to the Treasons only, particularly mentioned in the Statute in the
25th Edw. 3. but leave that Statute entire to the Common-Law-Treason, as
appears by the words immediately foregoing.

By the Second Part, for the peins and forfeitures of Treasons, if it intend
only the punishment of Treason, or if it intend both Treason and Punishment,
yet all is referred to the Provision and Ordinance of 25 Edw. 3. any Act of
Parliament, or other Declaration, or thing notwithstanding.

It says not, other then such Penalties or Treasons, as are expressed and
declared in the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. that might perhaps have restrained it to
those that are particularly mentioned, no, it refers all Treasons to the
general Ordination and Provision of that Statute, wherein the Common Law
Treasons are expressly kept on foot.

If it be Asked, What good this Statute does, if it take not away the Common
Law Treasons?

1. It takes away all the Treasons made by Act of Parliament, not only since
the first of Hen. 4. which were many, but all before 1 Hen. 4. even until the
25 E. 3. by express words.

2. By express words, it takes away all declared Treasons, if any such had been
in Parliament; Those for the future are likewise taken away; so that whereas it
might have been doubted, whether the Statute of the 1 H. 4. took away any
Treasons, but those of the 22d and 23d years of R. 2. This clears it, both for
Treasons made by Parliament, or declared in Parliament, even to the time of
making the Statute.

This is of great use, of great security to the Subject; so that, as to what
shall be Treason, and what not, the Statute of 25 E. 3. remains entire, and so
by consequence the Treasons at the Common Law.

Only, my Lords, it may be doubted, whether the manner of the Parliamentary
proceedings; be not altered by the Statute of 1 H. 4. Chap. 17. and more fully
in the Parliament Roll, Number 144, that is, whether since that Statute the
Parliamentary power of Declaration of Treasons, whereby the inferior Courts
Receive Jurisdiction, be not taken away and restrained only to Bill, that so it
might operate no further, then to that particular contained in the Bill, that
so the Parliamentary Declarations for aftertimes, should be kept within the
Parliament it self, and be extended no further: Since 1 H. 4. we have not found
any such Declarations made, but all Attainders of Treason have been by Bill?

If this be so, yet the Common Law Treasons still remaining, there is one and
the same ground of reason and equity since the 1 H. 4. for passing a Bill of
Treason, as was before, for declaring of it without Bill.

Herein the Legislative power is not used against my Lord of Strafford in the
Bill, its only the jurisdiction of the Parliament.

But, my Lords, because that either through my mistaking of the true grounds
and reasons of the Commons, or my not pressing them with apt agreements, and
presidents of former times, or that perchance your Lordships, from some other
Reasons and Authorities, more swaying with your Lorpships Judgments, then these
from them, may possibly be of a contrary or dubious opinion, concerning these
Treasons, either upon the Statutes of 25 E. 3. and 18 H. 6. or at the
Common Law.

My Lords, If all these five should fail, they have therefore given me further
in Command, to declare to your Lordships some of their Reasons, why they
conceive that in this case, the mere Legislative Power may be exercised.

Their reasons are taken from these three grounds;

1. From the nature and quality of the Offense. 2. From the Frame and
Constitution of the Parliament, wherein this Law is made. 3. From Practices and
Usages of former times.
The horridness of the Offense, in endeavoring the overthrowing the Laws and
present Government, has been fully opened to your Lordships heretofore.

The Parliament is the Representation of the whole Kingdom; wherein the King as
Head, your Lordships as the most Noble, and the Commons the other Members, are
knit together into one Body Politic; This dissolves the Arteries and Ligaments
that hold the Body together, the Laws; He that takes away the Laws, takes not
away the Allegiance of one Subject alone, but of the whole Kingdom.

It was made Treason by the Statute of 13. Eliz. for Her time, to affirm, that
the Laws of the Realm do not bind the Descent of the Crown; no Law, no Descent
at all.

No Laws, no Peerage; no Ranks or Degrees of men; the same Condition to all.

It Is Treason to kill a Judge upon the Bench; this kills not Iudicem, sed
Iudicium; He that borrowed Apelles, and gave Bond to return again Apelles the
Painter, sent him home, after he had cut off his Right Hand; his Bond was
broken; Apelles was sent, but not the Painter. There are Twelve Men, but no
Law; there is never a Judge amongst them.

It Is Felony to Imbezle any one of the Judicial Records of the Kingdom; this at
once Sweeps them all away, and from all.

It Is Treason to Counterfeit a Twenty shillings piece; here is a Counterfeiting
of the Law; we can call neither the Counterfeit, nor True Coin, our own.

It Is Treason to Counterfeit the Great-Seal for an Acre of Land; no property
hereby is left to any Land at all; nothing Treason now, either against King or
Kingdom; no Law to punish it.

My Lords, If the Question were Asked at Westminster Hall, Whether this were a
Crime punishable in Star Chamber, or in the King's Bench, by Fine, or
Imprisonment? they would say it went higher: If whether Felony? they would say,
that is for an Offense only against the Life, or Goods of some one or few
persons; It would, I believe, be answered by the Judges, as it was by the Chief
Justice Thurning in 21 R. 2. that though he could not Judge the Case Treason
there before him, yet if he were a Peer in Parliament he would so Adjudge it.

My Lords, if it be too big for those Courts, we hope it is in the right way
here.

2. The second Consideration is from the Frame and Constitution of the
Parliament; the Parliament is the great Body Politic, it comprehends all, from
the King to the Beggar; if so, My Lords, as the Natural, so this Body, it has
power over it self, and every one of the Members, for the preservation of the
whole; It Is both the Physician and the Patient; If the Body be distempered, it
has power to open a Vein, to let out the corrupt blood for curing it self; if
one Member be Poisoned or Gangred, it has power to cut it off for the
preservation of the rest.

But, my Lords, it has often been inculcated, that Lawmakers should imitate
the Supreme Lawgiver, who commonly warnes before he strikes. The Law was
promulged before the Judgment of death for gathering the Sticks. No Law, no
Transgression.

My Lords, To this rule of Law is Frustra legis auxilium invocat, qui in legem
committit, from the Lex talionis; he that would not have had others to have a
Law, Why should he have any himself? Why should not that be done to him, that
himself would have done to others?

It Is true, we give Law to Hares and Deers, because they be Beasts of Chase; It
was never accounted either cruelty or foul play, to knock Foxes and Wolves on
the head, as they can be found, because these be Beasts of Prey. The Warrener
sets Traps for Polcats and other Vermin, for preservation of the Warren.

Further, my Lords, most dangerous Diseases, if not taken in time, they kill;
Errors, in great things, as War and Marriage, they allow no time for
repentance; it would have been too late to make a Law, when there had been no
Law.

My Lords, for further Answer to this Objection, he has offended against a
Law, a Law within the endeavoring to subvert the Laws, and Polity of the
State wherein he lived, which had so long, and with such faithfulness protected
his Ancestry, Himself, and his whole Family: It was not Malum quia prohibitum,
it was Malum in se, against the Dictates of the dullest Conscience, against the
Light of Nature, they not having a Law, were a Law to themselves.

Besides this, he knew a Law without, that the Parliament, in Cases of this
Nature, had Potestatem vitae and necis.

Nay, he well knew, that he offended the Promulged and Ordinary Rules of Law.
Crimes against Law have been Proved, have been Confessed, so that the Question
is not De culpa, sed de poena, What degree of Punishment those Faults deserve?
We must differ from him in Opinion, That twenty Felonies cannot make a Treason,
if it be meant of equallity in the use of the Legislative Power; for he that
deserves death for one of these Felonies alone, deserves a Death more Painful,
and more Ignominious for all together.

Every Felony is punished with loss of Life, Lands and Goods; a Felony may be
aggravated with those Circumstances, as that the Parliament with good reason
may add to the Circumstances of Punishment, as was done in the Case of John
Hall, in the Parliament of the 1 H. 4. who, for a Barbarous Murder, committed
upon the Duke of Gloucester, Stifling him between two Feather-Beds at Calice,
was Adjudged to be Hanged, Drawn and Quartered.

Batteries by Law are only punishable by Fine, and single Damages to the Party
Wounded.

In the Parliament held in 1 H. 4. Cap. 6. one Savage committed a Battery upon
one Chedder, Servant to Sir John Brook, a Knight of the Parliament for
Somersetshire. It Is there Enacted, that he shall pay double Damages, and stand
Convicted, if he render not himself by such a time. The manner of proceedings
quickened, and the penalty doubled; the Circumstances were considered, it
concerned the Commonwealth, it was a Battery with Breach of Privilege of
Parliament.

This made a perpetual Act: no warning to the first Offender: and in the Kings
Bench, as appears by the Book-Case of 9 H. 4. the first leaf, Double Damages
were recovered.

My Lords, in this of the Bill, the Offense is High and General, against the
King and the Commonwealth, against all, and the best of all.

If every Felony be loss of Life, Lands and Goods; What is Misuser of the
Legislative Power, by Addition of Ignominy, in the Death and Disposal of the
Lands to the Crown, the Public Patrimony of the Kingdom?

But it was hoped, that your Lordships had no more skill in the Art of killing
Men, then your worthy Ancestors.

My Lords, this Appeal from your selves to your Ancestors we do admit of,
although we do not admit of that from your Lordships to the Peers of Ireland.

He has appealed to them; your Lordships will be pleased to hear, what
Judgment they have already given in the case, that is, the several Attainders
of Treason in Parliament; after the Statute of 25 E. 3. for Treasons not
mentioned, nor within that Statute, and those upon the first Offenders without
warning given.

By the Statute of 25 E. 3. it is Treason to levy War against the King; Gomines
and Weston afterward in Parliament, in the 1 R. 2. n. 38, 39, adjudged
Traitors for surrendering two several Castles in France, only out of fear,
without any Compliance with the Enemy; this not within the Statute of 25th E. 3.

My Lords, In the 3d of Rich. 2d. John Imperial that came into England upon
Letters of Safe Conduct, as an Agent for the State of Genoa, sitting in the
evening before his door, in Breadstreet (as the words of the Records are) Paulo
ante ignitegium; John Kirkby, and another Citizen coming that way, Casually
Kirkby troad upon his Toe, it being twilight, this grew to a Quarrel, and the
Ambassador was slain; Kirkby was Indicted of High Treason, the Indictment finds
all this, and that it was only done se defendendo, and without malice.

The Judges, it being out of the Statute 25 E. 3. could not proceed; the
Parliament declared it Treason, and Judgment afterward of High Treason:
there is nothing can bring this within the Statute of 25 E. 3. but it concerns
the Honor of the Nation, that the Public Faith should be strictly kept: It
might endanger the Traffic of the Kingdom; they made not a Law first, they
made the first man an Example; this is in the Parliament-Roll 3 R. 2. Number
18. and Hillary Term, 3 R. 2. Rot. 31. in the King's Bench, where Judgment is
given against him.

In 11 R. 2. Tresilian, and some others, attainted of Treason for delivering
Opinions in the Subversion of the Law, and some others for plotting the like.
My Lords, the Case has upon another occasion been opened to your Lordships;
only this is observable, that in the Parliament of the first year of Henry the
Third, where all Treasons are again reduced to the Statute of 25 E. 3. These
Attainders were by a particular Act confirmed and made good, that the memory
thereof might be transmitted to succeeding Ages, they stand good unto this day;
the offenses there as here, were the endeavoring the Subversion of the Laws.

My Lords, after the 1 H. 4. Sir John Mortimer being committed to the Tower,
upon suspicion of Treason, brake Prison, and made his escape; This no way
within any Statute, or any former Judgment at Common Law for this, that is, for
breaking the Prison only, and no other cause; in the Parliament held the second
year of Henry the Sixth, he was attainted of High Treason by Bill.

My Lords, Poisoning is only Murder, yet one Richard Cook having put Poison
into a Pot of Pottage in the Kitchen of the Bishop of Rochester, whereof two
persons dyed, he is Attainted of Treason, and it was Enacted, that he should be
Boiled to Death by the Statute of 22 H. 8. c. 9.

By the Statute of the 25 H. 8. Elizabeth Barton the Holy Maid of Kent, for
pretending Revelations from God, That God was highly displeased with the King,
for being Divorced from the Lady Katherine, and that in case he persisted in
the Separation, and should Marry another, that he would not continue King not
above one Month after, because this tended to the depriving of the lawful
Succession to the Crown, she is Attainted of Treason.

My Lords, all these Attainders, for ought I know, are in force at this day.
The Statutes of the First year of Henry the 4th. and the First of Queen Mary,
although they were willing to make the Statute of 25 E. 3. the Rule to the
Inferior Courts, yet they left the Attainders in Parliament, precedent to
themselves, untoucht, wherein the Legislative power had been exercised. There Is
nothing in them whence it can be gathered, but that they intended to leave it
as free for the future.

My Lords, In all these Attainders, there were Crimes and Offenses against the
Law; they thought it not unjust (Circumstances considered) to heighten and add
to the degrees of punishment, and that upon the first Offender.

My Lords, we receive, as just, the other Laws and Statutes made by these our
Ancestors, they are the Rules we go by in other Cases, Why should we differ
from them in this alone?

These, my Lords, are in part those things, which have satisfied the Commons in
passing the Bill, it is now left to the Judgment and Justice of your Lordships.

Upon the Close of Mr. St. John's Speech the House Adjourned, nor was there one
word spoken but by Master St. John's, only the Lord Lieutenant used the last
part of his Rhetoric, and by a dumb Eloquence, Manibus ad sydera tensis, often
holding up his hands toward Heaven, all along Mr. St. John's Speech, made his
Replies with a deep silence.

Upon Friday, April the 30th, he Petitioned the Lords to be heard again,
alleging, That his Lawyers had not fully spoken at their last meeting, but
this was denied him, because the House of Commons were to have the last Speech,
nor were they content to speak again.

The following SPEECH of Mr. Glyns, is, by a Mistake Misplaced, for it ought to
be next to my Lords Summary of the Evidence.

Mr. GLYN'S REPLY TO THE Earl of Strafford's DEFENSE.
My Lord of Strafford having concluded the Recapitulation of his Evidence; Mr.
Glyn applied himself to their Lordships in manner following.
May it please your Lordships,
MY Lord of Strafford (as your Lordships have observed,) has spent a great
deal of time in his Evidence, and in his course of answering, has inverted the
order of the Articles; he has spent some time likewise in defending the
Articles not objected against him, wherein he has made a good Answer, if in
any: we shall presume to withdraw a while, and rest upon your Lordships
patience; and I doubt not but to represent my Lord of Strafford as cunning in
his Answer, as he is subtle in his practice.

The Committee withdrawing for about the space of half an hour, and then
returning to the Bar, Mr. Glyn proceeded as follows.

My Lords, your Lordships have observed how the Earl of Strafford has been
accused by the Commons of England of High Treason, for a purpose and design to
subvert the Fundamental Laws of both the Kingdoms, of England and Ireland, and
to introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government: The Commons have exhibited
Articles in maintenance of that Charge: My Lord of Strafford has thereunto
answered in Writing. The Commons have proceeded to make good their Charge by
proof, and thereunto my Lord of Strafford has made his Defense; and this day
my Lord of Strafford has taken upon him to recollect his Evidence, and make
his observation upon it, the most he could to his advantage.

My Lords, We that are entrusted for the House of Commons, stand here to
recollect the Evidence on our part, and to apply it to the general Charge, and
how far it conduces thereunto.

My Lord of Strafford in recollecting the Evidence of his Defense, as I did
mention before, has (under favor) expressed very much subtilty, and that in
diverse particulars, which I shall represent to your Lordships.

My Lords, before I enter upon the recollection of the proofs produced on the
behalf of the Commons, I shall make some observations, and give some answer to
that recollection of his; though very disorderly to the method I propounded to
my self.

And First, in general, it will appear to your Lordships, (looking upon your
Notes, and observing his recollection) that he has used the repetition of
Evidence on both sides, in such manner as you know who uses Scripture; that
is, to cite as much as makes for his purpose, and leave out the rest. And
likewise, that in repetition of the Evidence, he has mis-recited plainly, very
much of the proofs on both sides, and likewise has pretended some proofs to be
for his Defense, which indeed were not: and he has taken this farther
advantage; when it makes for his Defense, he has disjoynted the Proofs and
Testimonies, and severed them asunder, that it might appear to your Lordships,
like Rain falling in drops, which considered in distinct drops, bring no
horror, or seeming inconvenience with them; but when they are gathered together
into an entire body, they make an Inundation, and cover the face of the earth.
He would not have your Lordships look on those Testimonies together, but
distinctly and asunder, which being put together, look horrid, as will appear
to your Lordships, when you duly consider of them.

These be the general observations, which in my Answer I doubt not but to make
good: But before I shall enter into observations of what he has spoken, I
shall answer in general to some things which he has in general alleged.

In the first place, he has made a flourish this day, and several other days
in the way of his Defense, That if he could have had longer time, he could have
made things appear clearer, and have produced more proofs. Give me leave to
inform your Lordships, that he is no way straightened of time, for he has been
charged above three months since: he knew what was laid to his Charge, and
therefore his pretense of want of time, and of his disabilities to make better
proofs, are but flourishes. And it appears plainly, whatsoever he has had
occasion to make use of, even the least paper, though he fetched it from
Ireland, there is not one wanting; he has copies of Papers from the
Council Table, from the Parliament of Ireland, and all that may any way tend to
his justification, and yet he stands upon that flourish, that if he had had
time, he could have made it more clear.

My Lords, He has mentioned often this day, and oftener the days before, That
many of the Articles laid to his charge, are proved but by one Witness; and
thereupon he takes the advantage of the Statute of E. 6. that says, A man
ought not to be condemned for High Treason, without two witnesses. My Lords,
This is a fallacy known to his own breast, I doubt not, and not taught him by
any of his Counsel, or others Learned.

The Treason laid to his charge, is, The subverting of the Laws; the Evidence
is, the Article proved: and though some one Article appears to be proved but by
one, yet put the Evidence together, you shall never find it to be within the
words or meaning of the Statute; for the Charge is proved by a hundred
Witnesses: and because one part of the Evidence is proved only by one Witness,
since, when you put them together, you will find a hundred Witnesses, it is not
within the words, nor meaning of the Statute, neither will his Counsel direct
him to say so, I am confident.

My Lords, another observation I shall be bold to make, is, that he was pleased
to cast an aspersion (as we must apprehend) upon them that are trusted by the
House of Commons this day, That we that stand here, alleged and affirmed
things to be proved, that are not proved. He might have pleased to have spared
that language; we stand here to justify our selves, that we do not use to
express any language, but what our hearts and consciences tell us is true; and
howsoever he is pleased to cast it upon us, I am confident I shall invert it
upon himself, and make it appear, that he has been this day guilty in the
highest degree, of what he most unjustly lays to our charge.

And now my Lords, to enter upon the particulars he has been pleased to make
it his general Theme to day (though he has not spoke much to day but what he
has spoken formerly) that these particulars considered by themselves make not
a Treason, and therefore put together, he wonders how they should make a
Treason: Several misdemeanors can never make a murder, and several Murders
can never make a Treason; and he wonders it should be otherwise in this Case.
My Lords, He did instance it (if my memory fails not) in a Case of Felony; That
if a bloody knife should be produced in the hand of the party suspected to have
slain the man, if the party had been there seen before the death, it were a
strange Evidence; but there must be death in the case, the fact must be
committed, else there can be no murder: but he himself might answer himself,
for there is a great difference; There cannot be murder but there must be
death, but he knows very well there may be Treason and yet no death; it is too
late to forbear questioning Treason for killing the King, till the King be
killed: God forbid we should stay in that Case, for the very intention is the
Treason, and it is the intention of the death of the Law that is in question,
and it had been too late to call him to question, to answer with his life, for
the death of the Law, if the Law had been killed, for there had been no Law
then; and how should the Law then have adjudged it Treason, when the same were
subverted and destroyed? and therefore he is much mistaken.

The greatest Traitor, in the memory of any that sits here to hear me this day,
had a better, a fairer excuse in thisparticular, than my Lord of Strafford, and
that is Guido Faux; for he might have objected, that the taking of the Cellar,
the laying of the Powder under the Parliament House, the kindling of the
Match,, and putting it near, are not so much as a misdemeanor, if you look no
further; for it was no offense in him to lay Barrels under the
Parliament House, and to kindle the Match, and to lay it near; but collect all
together, that it was ea intention, to blow up the King and the State, there
is the Treason: but God be blessed it was not effected; so that the rule is the
same. Nay, my Lord of Strafford has not so much to say, when he is charged
with a purpose and intention to subvert the Law; for to that purpose gave he
traitorous Counsels, and executed actions, thereby discovering his intentions
to destroy the Kingdom, and to destroy the Kings claim by Law, and descent. It
is true, they were not put in execution, but they declared his intentions;
therefore this gives an answer to his first flourish, which is not so great an
Argument as the greatest Traitor might use for himself, and yet it proved
Treason in him.

My Lords, he has been plased to divide his Treasons into two parts, and his
division I allow of; that is, Treason by Statute Law, as he terms it, though it
be Treason by the Common Law; and constructive Treason: And upon that method he
has recited the evidence produced on either part; Give me leave to follow and
trace him a little, and afterward to discharge my own duty in taking my own
course, and representing the evidence as it appears, truly; and I will avoid
(as much as I can) to fall into my Lord of Straffords error, in mis-reciting a
Particle; if I do, it shall be against my will.

He begins with the Fifteenth Article, and pretends that that is not proved:
The ground and foundation of that Article, was a Warrant issued out by himself
to a Sergeant at Arms, one Savill, which gave directions and power to that
Sergeant, to lay Soldiers on any person that should contemn the Process of the
Council Board in Ireland; that was the effect: Now (says he) this Warrant is
not produced, and adds, That the Judges will tell your Lordships, that if a man
be charged with anything under Hand and Seal, the Deed must be produced and
proved, or else no credit is to be given to it. Truly, my Lords, it is true, if
it had been a Bond, or a Deed, where those that Seal it, use to call their
neighbors to testify, and be Witnesses to it, perhaps it might be a colorable
answer, that because we do not produce the Deed, and prove it by Witnesses, you
can therefore give no credit to it: But my Lords, in case of authority to
commit High Treason, I suppose my Lord of Strafford, nor any other, did call
witnesses to prove the Signing, Sealing, and Delivering of the Warrant for
execution of High Treason; and therefore it is a new way and invention found
out by his Lordship, for ought I see, to commit High Treason, and to give
authority for it; and it is but taking away the original Warrant, and he shall
never be touched for any Treason. But I beseech your Lordships patience, till I
come to open that Article, and your Lordships will find the Warrant, (though it
be not produced,) proved by three or four Witnesses, and his Hand and Seal
proved too. And whereas he pretends the Sergeant at Arms is no competent
Witness, because he excuses himself; my Lord mistakes himself, for I take it to
be no excuse, to prove a Warrant from any person whatsoever, if it be to commit
High Treason: and therefore Savil's testimony is the more strong, being so far
from excusing, that he does accuse himself: And though he is charged with
laying of Soldiers upon the Kings people, contrary to an express Act of
Parliament made in 18 H. 6. yet my Lord is pleased (I know not how to term it,
whether it be merrily or otherwise) to use his Retorick, Here is a great
levying of War, when there is not above four Musketeers, or six at most, laid
upon any one man.

My Lords, it is a plain levying of War, and without all question, and in all
sense, it is as much mischievous to me to be surprised by four or six
Musketeers, to enforce me to any thing they would have, as if there were an
Army of Forty thousand brought upon me; for if that strength will but
over-master me, it is all one to me, whether I be mastered by four, or by four
thousand. And therefore let not this be a rule, that to send four, or six, or
ten Musketeers up and down, is not considerable, because of the smalness of
the number (the danger is the same;) yet this is no levying of War, because
they go not in Troops of greater number, as it pleases my Lord of Strafford to
affirm

My Lords, Your Lordships remember what the effect of the Warrant is sworn to
be, that howsoever the Sergeant at Arms, and his Ministers that executed it,
brought but four, or six, or ten, yet the Sergeant might have brought all the
Army of Ireland, for there was authority so to do.

And admitting the matter of Fact proved, he mentions an Act of Parliament made
11 Eliz. whereby a penalty is laid upon men that shall lay Soldiers on the
Kings Subjects, and yet (as my Lord observes) it must now be Treason in the
Deputy.

My Lords, The very casting of an eye upon that Act, shows it to be as vainly
objected, as if he had said nothing; for in truth it is no other, than as if he
should say, The King has given me the Command of an Army in Ireland, and
therefore I may turn them upon the bowels of the Kings Subjects: It is no more
in effect.

Your Lordships heard him the other day mentioning two Acts of Repeal, and I
expected he would have insisted upon them; but it seems he has been better
advised, and thinks them not worthy repetition, nor indeed are they. And if the
matter of Fact be proved upon the Fifteenth Article, I am confident he will
find the Statute of 18 H. 6. to be of full force.

My Lords, I am very sorry to hear, that when levying of War upon the Kings
Subjects is in agitation, and he charged with High Treason, he should make
mention of the Yorkshire men, and the Army now on foot, whereby he would
insinuate, that if he be charged with High Treason, then they must be likewise,
though they lie quartered, and have meat and drink with the assent of the
people; which may breed ill blood for ought I know.

From the Fifteenth Article he descends to the three and twentieth, and that is
the Article whereby he stands charged with speaking of Words, and giving of
Counsel to His Majesty, to incense him against His Parliament pretending a
necessity, and telling him, he is loose and absolved from all rules of
Government; that he had an Army in Ireland, which he might make use of to
reduce this kingdom. In this he is pleased to begin with the Testimony of my
Lord Ranelagh, conceiving an apprehension and fear in him, that the Army should
go over to England, which my Lord says, is no more but his saying, and Mr.
Treasurer Vane' s.

I pray God my Lord Ranelagh had not much cause to fear; but by the same rule
he may lay a charge of unwarrantable fear upon all the Commons; for sure the
Commons of England did fear it, else they would not make an Article of it: but
my Lord Ranelagh's fear did not arise from a slight cause, and he showed
himself a good Commonwealths man in expressing it, and he is to be commended
for it, howsoever it be apprehended by my Lord of Strafford.

For his observation of the single Testimony of Mr. Treasurer Vane, give me
leave to take the same latitude as his Lordship did; for he shows to three or
four Articles what he could have proved; as to the Article concerning the Army,
he could have proved the design of it by Sir John Burlacy, and some others if
they had been here. But by this rule and liberty, he has taken to allege what
he could have shown, give me leave to tell you what we might have shown, and
are ready to show: we could have made it express, and proved it by Notes, taken
by Secretary Vane, the 5th of May, when the words were spoken, which Notes
should have been proved, if we had proceeded on the Three and twentieth
Article, to corroborate the Testimony of Mr. Secretary Vane, and that by two
Witnesses. We could likewise have shown how we came to the knowledge of it, it
being by means unknown to Mr. Secretary Vane, and have made him an upright
Counselor and Witness: but we shall prove his intentions to bring in the Irish
Army another way, when I come to open my own course and method.

My Lords, he pretends these words were spoken the 5th of May, but when they
were testified by Mr. Treasurer, he did not speak of the 5th of May, and yet
now my Lord remembers the day: and I wonder how he came to the knowledge of the
day, unless he likewise remembered the words.

But that my Lord observes, is, That being spoken then, how should he persuade
the King, that he had an Army in Ireland, when in truth he had none there? for
the Army was not on foot till a month after. This my Lords, is plainly
answered; and if he had thought of his own answer, he had answered himself: for
he tells you, That in April before, he had taken a course for the levying of the
Army, he had nominated the Officers, giving direction for raising it: and the
day of the Rendezvous of the Army was appointed the 18th of May. And so in his
own answer he makes an answer to the objection, and the objection is taken away
out of his own confession.

From that Article he falls to the seven and twentieth Article, whereby he
stands charged with Levying Money by force upon the Kings people in Yorkshire:
he is pleased to observe that all the proof for the maintenance of that
Article, is only the levying of Money by four Soldiers by Sergeant-Major
Yaworth; where he is pleased to disdain the War, because it was so weak; yet it
was too strong for them (God help them) that were forced upon pain of life to
pay it. And whereas he pretends the Warrant was not from him, I shall reserve
that till I come to the Article, and when I come to the proofs, I believe it
will remain fixed upon him.

And there he left his Statute-Treason, and now he falls to the second kind of
Treason, and that was the introductive or constructive Treason: He begins with
the third Article, that is, concerning some words that he should be charged to
have spoken in Ireland; and I shall desire that your Lordships would be pleased
to look upon your Notes, how he answers that Article; My Lords, says he, I am
charged to say that Ireland was a conquered Nation, and that their Charters
were nothing worth, and bind the King no further than he pleases; therefore I
am a Traitor because I speak the Truth. There was his Answer in his Collection.
And for their Charters he says, he might very well say so, for he intended it
no otherwise, but according to the validity of them, for they were several ways
questionable, and ought not to bind unless they were good in Law. But if you
look upon his Arguments, he has like a cunning Orator, omitted the principal
part of the Article; and that is* That Ireland is a conquered Nation, and they
were to be governed as the King pleases, the King might do with them what he
list; this he omits, although they be proved by three witnesses, and are
appliable to his intentions fully; yet he could make use of so much as makes
for him, and leaves out the rest, like your Lordships know whom.

Then he descends to the fourth Article, and this concerns some words he should
speak, upon an occasion betwixt him and my Lord of Cork, that he should tell my
Lord of Cork, He would have neither Law nor Lawyers dispute or question his
Orders. And upon another occasion, That he would make my Lord of Cork, and all
Ireland know, that all Acts of State (which are Acts of Council) there made, or
to be made, should be as binding as any Act of Parliament: This he said was
proved but by one witness: and I extremely marvel to hear him say so; for the
latter words we proved by four, or five, or six witnesses, that is, That he
would have Acts of State, as binding as Acts of Parliament. Whereas he says,
these are all the words produced against him in the time of seven years
Government there; your Lordships have heard of many words, and if we would
trouble your Lordships further in this kind, we could prove such words spoken,
as often almost as he remained days in Ireland, that is, for the mis-recital.
The other part two witnesses proved; but the residue, That they must expect Law
from the King as a Conqueror, That Acts of State should be equal to Acts of
Parliament, and when an Act of Parliament would not pass, he would make it good
by an Act of State, these speeches at other times were proved by five witnesses.

Then he falls back to the second Article, touching the words, That the Kings
little finger should be heavier than the loins of the Law.

My Lords, These words were proved expressly by five witnesses, to be by him
spoken; and if he had produced five hundred that had said he did not speak
them, they had not been equivalent to disprove five; but he produces none. Sir
William Penniman repeats other words, and inverts them, and none but he.
Another party, a Minister, reports a report that he heard concerning these
words, but my Lord, he says, the occasion of the speaking of them was not
mentioned. Truly perhaps it might be the forgetfulness of my Lords memory, but
let me put him in mind; and your Lordships remember that the occasion was
expressed by one, and that is Sir David Fowls, that he laying a command upon Sir
David, to repair a Bridge, and calling him to an account why it was not
repaired, Sir David Fowls told him he could not do it by Law. And therefore
omitting it, my Lord said to him, Sir, some are all for Law and Lawyers, but
you shall know, that the Kings little finger will be heavier than the loins of
the Law. Here is the occasion, though he would have another business, the
knighting Money to be the occasion.

From the second he falls to the three and twentieth Article, that is,
concerning words, that he should counsel His Majesty, that he might use His
Prerogative as he pleased; but in saying there was no proof offered, he here
begins to fall upon the other fallacy, that is, to pull things asunder (whereas
we produce them together) and would make that which is a Faggot, to be but a
single Stick; but under favor, when I come, with your Lordships patience, to
open the force of the proofs, and put them together, he shall find (contrary to
his expectation) that they are fully proved by the testimony of many witnesses,
upon consideration of the precedent, concurrent, and subsequent Acts and
Intentions of my Lord of Strafford.

I shall not now run over my Lord Primates testimony, or my Lord Conwayes, or
master Treasurers, or my Lord of Bristols, but make use of them in their proper
places, when I shall put all together, to show his design, and to prove his
speaking of the words.

Then he comes to the five and twentieth Article, which I shall not insist on,
though he pretends it not proved; I shall refer that to my recollection, that I
may not answer to his pieces, but bring all together, and then the horror of
his Fact shall more speciously appear. Only this (under favor) I cannot pass
over, when he comes to justify an Advice and Counsel of the Kings being loose
and absolved from all rules of Government, and that he might use his
Prerogative as he pleases, he is pleased to mention the Argument of the Judges
in the Ship Money, and what they should deliver, he makes the Warrant of his
Counsel. Now your Lordships may observe, he would justify his actions by Law,
in some cases, where it is to his advantage, but in other cases he must be
ignorant of the Law.

But my Lords, for him to mention any thing in the Argument of the Judges,
concerning the Ship Money, which is now cendemned, and to make that a ground of
his Counsel and advice to the King, and not the judgment in truth, but the
Argument of the Counsel at Bar, that therefore he is loose, and absolved from
all rule of Government; for him to make the Parliaments deferring to give
supply, to be that necessity which was insisted upon in the Counsels Argument,
and to be such an unavoidable necessity, as to beget an Invasion upon Propriety
and Liberty, it rests in your Judgments, and the judgments of all that hear
me, what argument this is, and what he declares his opinion to be this day.

In the latter part let me close hands, and agree with him; he says, Proofs
must be taken by themselves, they must not be judged by pieces, but together;
and now in good time I shall join with him, and shall desire the same
judgment, that things may not be taken asunder, but judged together according
to his own words.

For the twentieth Article, he is thereby charged with being an Incendiary
between both Nations, and an occasion of drawing two Armies into this Kingdom,
and to incense the War.

My Lords, I remember (if I did not mis-conceive, and my memory misprompt me)
my Lord said, He could have no occasion to incense a War, being a man of an
Estate, and should have no benefit by it, having sufficient to live without it:
but in due time I shall make it appear, to my apprehension, and I believe to
your Lordships, when you have heard it, that the incensing of this War, and
provoking of it, was the principal instrument of bringing to pass his design of
subverting the Laws, through the whole work of it.

My Lords, in the passage of this, he takes occasion to speak of the testimony
of Mr. Secretary Vane, who testifies, That my Lord was for an offensive, and
himself for a defensive War: Whence my Lord argues, here is no great
difference, for both were for a War: But my Lord, Is there no difference
between an offensive and defensive War, in case of Subjects that live under one
King? is there no difference to bring an Army to offend them, and for the King
to raise a force to defend himself? truly I think there is a great difference,
and a very material one too: but your Lordships see he makes no difference
between them.

My Lords, In the four and twentieth Article he mentions, That he is charged
with being an occasion to break the Parliament, and lays hold of that, as in
the other Articles, That it was not proved, but declined. My Lords, when he
shall hear the repetition of the Evidence, though part of the Article was not
particularly insisted upon, yet I believe it will appear to your Lordships, and
the world, that he was the occasion of breaking the last Parliament, and it is
expressly proved by witnesses enough; and though he says, How should any body
think him an occasion of it, that did so often advise Parliaments? yet I shall
show anon, that when he did advise them, it was to compass his own Design and
Plot, without which, his ends could not be brought to pass.

He came from the Four and twentieth Article, to the Seven and twentieth, and
he answers against that Article, That when Armies are in the field, men cannot
walk so peaceably, as an Attorney with his Box and Papers in Westminster Hall.
I know not what he means; but when two Armies are in the field, they may raise
War against the Kings people, as well as the King for his just defense; it is
the way to make his people terrified with Armies, and to avoid them as a
Serpent, and therefore it is a dangerous aspersion, as I conceive.

With these he concluded, except some things that he took, by way of artificial
insinuation, to persuade your Lordships, That it was dangerous to raise a
Treason that had lain asleep, I know not how many hundred years, and create a
Treason. A strange thing indeed it is, That a man shall be charged with a
Treason for subverting the Law! A strange thing that one should be charged with
Treason for killing a Justice sitting in the Seat of Justice, and yet it should
be no Treason to destroy King, and Kingdom, and people, and all; all which are
destroyed, if the Law be subverted.

And now having touched upon what he has spoken, with your Lordships good
favor, I shall crave leave to run the course I have propounded with my self:
and that very briefly; that is, upon the whole matter, to show how far the
Evidence, produced on the Commons part, does prove the Charge.

My Lords, That laid to his charge, is a design and purpose to subvert the
fundamental Laws of two kingdoms, and to introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical
Government; not that he did effect it, but that he did intend it: for if he had
done it, it had been too late to question it, he had left no rule whereby to
call him to Trial; but his intention and his endeavor are his charge.

My Lords, How far this is proved, if your Lordships be pleased to call to mind
the Articles and the Evidences produced on the Commons part, your Lordships
will find, I believe, that his Words, his Counsels, and his Actions, do
sufficiently prove his endeavoring to destroy.

In the first Article, where my Lord of Strafford has the first opportunity
offered him to put this endeavor in execution (that is the first place of
eminency amongst his other Places and Commands, which I take it, was his being
made President of the North) he is no sooner there, but there be instructions
procured to enable him to proceed in that Court, almost in all Causes; for a
man can scarce think of a Cause, which is not comprehended within the
Instructions obtained after his coming thither: but I shall put your Lordship
in mind of two clauses of the Instructions procured in the Eighth year of this
King, and after he was President; that is, the clause of Habeas Corpus, and
Prohibitions; that no man should obtain a Prohibition, to stay any Suit that
should be commenced before him, in the Council of York; That if any man should
be imprisoned by any Process out of that Court, he must have no Habeas Corpus.
A Prohibition is the only means to vindicate the estate of the Subject, if it
be questioned without Authority. A Habeas Corpus is the only means to vindicate
his Liberty, if he be detained without Law: but these doors must be shut
against the Kings Subjects, that if either they be questioned, or restrained
before him, there must be no relief. How far he could go further I am to seek,
there being no means for the Subject to relieve himself, if he be questioned
for his Estate without authority; no means to redeem himself, if his person be
imprisoned without Law. And he had so incircled himself about, that if the
Judges should find the party that returns not the Habeas Corpus, according to
Law, there was a Power, and a Warrant, by the Instructions, to the Barons, to
discharge the Officers of that Fine. And now I refer it to your Lordships
judgments, Whether this be not to draw an Arbitrary Power to himself.

For the execution of this Power, it is true, it is proved to be before the
instructions in the eighth year of the King; but then it rises the more in
judgment against him; for your Lordships have heard how he went into a grave
Judges Chamber, blaming him for giving way to a Prohibition, granting
Attachments against one that moved for a Prohibition; and though this was done
before the Instructions were granted, yet the Instructions coming at the heels
of it, shows his disposition and resolution more clearly, for he acts it
first, and then procures this color to protect it: and though he pretends
there was no proof, yet I must put your Lordships in mind, that when these
things were in question, concerning the apprehension of a Knight, by a Sergeant
at Arms, he kneels to His Majesty, That this defect might be supplied, and this
jurisdiction maintained, else he might go to his own Cottage.

And here being the just commencement of his greatness, if you look to the
second, it follows, That at the public Assizes he declared, That some were all
for Law, but they should find the Kings little finger heavier than the loins of
the Law. He did not say it was so, but he infused it as much as he could into
the hearts of the Kings people, that they should find it so; and so he reflects
upon the King, and upon his people; the words are proved: And to speak them in
such a presence, and at such a time, before the Judges and Country assembled,
they were so dangerous, and so high expressions of an intention to counsel the
King, or act it himself, to exercise an Arbitrary Government, above the weight
of the Law, as possibly could be expressed by words. And this is proved by five
witnesses, and not disproved, nor is any color of disproof offered, but only
by Sir William Penniman, who says, he heard other words, but not that he heard
not these words, If he does, he must give me leave not to believe him; for five
affirmations will weigh down the proof of a thousand negatives.

He stays not long in England with this power (though while he stays, you hear
how he vexes the Subject) but then he goes into Ireland, and as his authority
increases, so he ampliates his design; and no sooner is he there, but the third
Article is laid to his charge; That when the City and Recorder of Dublin, the
principal City of Ireland, presented the Mayor, upon a solemn Speech and
Discourse concerning the Laws and Liberties (as your Lordships know that is the
subject matter of a Speech at such presentiments, as when the Lord Mayor of
London is presented to the King) I beseech your Lordship, observe the words he
then used, They were a conquered Nation, and that we lay not to his charge, but
they were to be governed as the King pleases, their Charters were nothing
worth, and bind but during the Kings pleasure.

I am to seek, if I were to express an Arbitrary Power, and Tyrannical
Government, how to express it in finer words, and more significant terms than
these, That the people shall be governed at the Kings Will, that their
Charters, the sinews and ligatures of their Liberties, Lands, and Estates,
should be nothing worth, and bind no longer than the Kings pleasure, especially
being spoken upon such an occasion, and the words proved by two or three
Witnesses of credit and quality.

From thence we descend to Articles, that show the execution of his purpose.
There are three things a man enjoys by the protection of the Law; that is, his
Life, his Liberty, and his Estate. And now, my Lords, observe how he invades,
and exercises a Tyrannical Jurisdiction, and Arbitrary Government over them all
three. I shall begin with the fifth Article, that is concerning my Lord
Mountnorris and Denwit. My Lord Mountnorris, a Peer of that Realm, was
sentenced to death by procurement of my Lord of Strafford; who, howsoeve he
pretends himself not to be a Judge in the cause, yet how far he was an Abettor,
and Procurer, and Countenancer, and drawer on of that Sentence, your Lordships
very well remember; he was sentenced to death without Law, for speaking words
at a private Table, God knows, of no manner of consequence in the world,
concerning the treading upon my Lord of Strafford' s Toe; the Sentence procured
seven months after the words spoken, and contrary to Law, and himself being put
in mind of it, my Lord Mountnorris desiring to have the benefit of the Law, and
yet he refusing it.

And then it was in time of Peace, when all the Courts of Justice were open,
and to sentence a man to death of that quality, my Lord of Strafford himself
being present, an author, a drawer on of it, makes it very heinous. Your
Lordships remember this Article was fully proved, and though he pretends His
Authority by a Letter from His Majesty, I shall in due time give a full answer
to that, so that it shall rise up in judgment against him, to aggravate his
offense, and that in a great measure.

Here he exercises a Power over Life, his excuse was, That he procured a Pardon
from my Lord Mountnorris, but the Power was exercised, and the Tyranny appeared
to be the more; He would first sentence him to death, and then rejoice in his
Power, that he might say, There remains no more but my command to the Provost
Marshal to do execution. To exercise a power over his life, and to abuse him
afterward, is very high; but no thanks to him that the sentence of death was
not executed, it was the Grace and Goodness of His Majesty, that would not
suffer my Lord Mountnorris, a person of that Eminence, to be put to death
against Law.

But the other was hanged, and as appears, against Law; and though my Lord
pretends the party was burnt in the hand, yet that was not proved, nor
material: and for him to do this in time of Peace, when the Courts of Justice
were open, it argues a desire in his Breast, to arrogate a Power above Law.

And in truth I may not omit some observations that my Lord made this day; He
hopes His Majesty would be pleased to grant him a Pardon. I perceive he
harbored in this thoughts, that he might hang the Kings Subjects when he
would, and then get a Pardon of course for it. The Lord bless me from his
jurisdiction.

My Lords, give me leave to go back again, here is Power over the Lives and
Liberties of the Subject; but he exercised likewise a Tyrannical Power over his
Estate. Your Lordships may be pleased to remember the fourth Article, where he
judges my Lord of Cork's Estate, in neither Church-land, nor Plantation-land,
and therefore had no pretense of a Jurisdiction; for it is a Lay Fee divolved
by Act of Parliament to the Crown; yet he deprives him of his possession, which
he had continued for Twenty nine years, upon a Paper-Petition, without rules of
Law. And whereas my Lord of Cork went about to redeem himself (the Law being
every man's inheritance, and that which he ought to enjoy) he tells him, He will
lay him by the heels, if he withdraw not his Process: and so when he has
judged him against an express Act of Parliament, and Instructions, and bound up
a great Peer of the Realm, he will not suffer him to redeem that wrong, without
a threat of laying him by the heels, and he will not have Law nor Lawyers
question his Orders, and would have them all know, an Act of State should be
equal to an Act of Parliament: which are words of that nature, that higher
cannot be spoken, to declare an intention to proceed in an Arbitrary way.

The next was in my Lord Mountnorris his Case, and Rolstone. And here I must
touch my Lord with misrepetition. Rolstone preferred a Petition to my Lord
Deputy, my Lord Deputy himself judges his Estate, and deprived him of his
possession, though he cannot produce so much as one example, or precedent
(though if he had, it would not have warranted an illegal action) but he cannot
produce a precedent, that ever any Deputy did determine concerning a man's
private Estate; and if he has affirmed it, he proved it not: some Petitions
have been preferred to him, but what they be non constat. But though never any
knew the Deputy alone to determine matters of Land, yet he did it.

To the Seventh Article we produce no Evidence; but my Lord of Strafford cannot
be content with that, but he must take upon him to make defense for that which
is not insisted upon as a charge; but since he will do so, I refer it to the
Book in print, where he determines the Inheritance of a Nobleman in that
Kingdom, that is, my Lord Dillon, by a Case falsely drawn, and contrary to his
consent; and though he deprives him not of his possession; yet he causes the
Land to be measured out, and it is a danger that hangs over his head to this
day. And had we not known that we had matter enough against my Lord of
Strafford, this should have risen in judgment against him; but I had not
mentioned it now, if he had not mentioned it himself.

The Eighth Article contains several charges, as that of my Lord Chancellor,
How he imprisoned him upon a Judgment before himself and the Council, how he
enforced the Seal from him when he had no authority; nay, though it were
excepted by his Patent, that he should no way dispose of it; but he looked not
to Authority, further than might make way to his Will.

Another concerns the prime Earl of that Kingdom, my Lord of Kildare, whom he
imprisoned, and kept close prisoner, contrary to the Kings express command for
his deliverance; and in his answer my Lord acknowledges it, but says, That
that command was obtained from the King upon a misinformation.

These things I would not have mentioned, if he had passed them over; but since
he gives them in, give me leave to mention and say, we had a ground to put them
into Charge, and could have proved them, if there had been need, punctually and
expressly, and I believe, little to my Lords advantage.

But your Lordships, I think, do remember my Lady Hibbots Case, where the Lady
Hibbots contracts with Thomas Hibbots for his Inheritance, for 2500 l. executes
the Contract by a Deed, and Fine levied, deposits part of the Money, and when a
Petition was exhibited to the Lord Deputy and Council for the very Estate, your
Lordships remember how this came in judgment before my Lord Deputy; there was
but a Petition delivered, there was an answer made, and all the suggestions of
the Petition denied; yet my Lord spoke to Hibbots himself, that was willing to
accept the Money, not to decline the way that he was in by Petition, Five
hundred pound more will do him no hurt to carry into England with him: and yet,
without examination of a Witness, a Decree was made to deprive this Lady of her
Estate: and the purchasing of this Land by my Lord of Strafford, was proved by
two Witnesses, though not absolutely, yet by confession of Sir Robert Meredith
and others, whose names were used in Trust for my Lord of Strafford, and that
it proved according to my Lord of Straffords Prophecy; for the man had five
hundred pounds gain above the Contract with my Lady Hibbots.

But after the Lands were sold for Seven thousand pounds: so that the Lady
Hibbots offense was her making of a bargain, whereby to gain Five hundred
pounds; but there was no offense in my Lord, to make a bargain for Three
thousand pounds, and to gain Four thousand pounds presently: this you see
proved by Hibbots the party, and by Mr. Hoy, the Son of the Lady Hibbots,

So that here is a determination of a Cause before the Council Table, touching
Land, which was neither Plantation, nor Church-Land, without color of the
Instructions, contrary to Law, to Statute, to Practice; and if this be not an
exercising of an unlawful jurisdiction over the Land and Estates of the
Subject, I know not what is.

In his answer to this case he did open it (yet whether he mistook or no I know
not) that he had a Letter from the King, but he produces none in evidence; and
that is another mis-recital. I am sorry he should misrecite, and fix it upon
the Person of His Sovereign in a case of this nature.

Now he falls more immediately upon the liberty of the Subject, and that is by
the Warrant mentioned in the Ninth Article, to be issued to the Bishop of Down
and Conner, whereby he gives power to him and his Officers, to apprehend any of
the Kings Subjects that appeared not upon Process out of his Ecclesiastical
Courts, expressly contrary to Law; and your Lordships have heard how miserably
the Kings Subjects were used by this Warrant, as has been proved by a
Gentleman of Quality, Sir James Mountgomery: And howsoever he pretends it was
called in, it was three whole years in execution, before it was called in; and
though he pretends his Predecessors did ordinarily grant Warrants of that
nature, yet he proves no such thing.

My Lord Primate was examined, and he says, that Bishop Mountgomery did tell
him there was such a Warrant, and one Witness more speaks of one Warrant, and
that is all the Witnesses produced, and that but to be a Copy too. Your
Lordships have heard how he exercises his jurisdiction and power over
particulars, and that in a numerous manner; now your Lordships shall find it
universal, and spread over the face of that Kingdom that was under his
jurisdiction, and that is in the tenth Article, which concerns the Customs:
where he does impose upon the Kings Subjects a Rate and Tax against Law, and
enforces them to pay it, or else punishes them for it; which is expressly an
arrogating to himself of a jurisdiction above the Law.

My Lords, in his answer he pretends that this is rather a matter of fraud than
otherwise: in truth and so it is, and that a great one too. But as it is a
fraud, a dis-service, and deceit to His Majesty, so it is likewise an exercise
of a Tyrannical Jurisdiction over his Subjects. That it is a fraud to His
Majesty, it plainly appears, for the King lost exceedingly by it; whereas
before the Rent afforded the King was 11050. l. there was improved by the new
Lease, that my Lord of Strafford took but 1350 l. and I beseech your Lordships
observe how much the King lost by it; for my Lord had comprehended in his new
Lease the Impost of Wine, for which the King before that time received 1400 l.
a year; and likewise the Custom of Londonderry, Colerane, and Knockfergus, for
which the King had reserved 1700 l. a year, besides the moity of the seizures:
so here is 5000 l. that the King lost of the old Rent expressly: and if your
Lordships please, observe the gain and benefit my Lord of Strafford made by it;
in one year he and his sharers received 39000 l. and in the last year 51000 l.
and that expressly proved upon two accounts: and if this be his dealing, where
is his service to the King in his pretense to advance the Customs?

It is true, he says, The King has five eighth parts, but it was but within
these two years, the King had it not before. And I would very gladly have heard
whether the King received his part of an account of 55000 l. if he had received
it, I believe we should have heard of it.

My Lords, There is something more; here is a new imposition on the Kings
people without Law, and yet I will do my Lord of Strafford no injury: but I
tell you how the proof stands; It was a Book of Rates framed before he came to
the farm, for the Book of Rates was in March, and the Date of his Assignment
was in April following; and therefore my Lord says, It could not be for his
benefit. But, my Lords, all this while my Lord of Strafford was in England, and
in agitation for the procuring of it, and they come one upon the heels of
another, and I beseech you observe cui bono; the Book of Rates was procured
within a month of the Patent, but God knows whether it were not within the
compass of his intentions to take the Patent; and therefore whether he were not
the Instrument of raising Rates, it rests in your Lordships judgment, and all
that hear me; I am sure the benefit redounded to himself: and so here is an
Arbitrary Government in imposing and forcing to pay, for that I desire your
Lordships to take with you; and he might as well have raised nineteen shillings
on a pound, as nine pence or three pence, by the same rule of Law.

The next Article in number was the Eleventh, and I would be glad my Lord had
not mentioned it; it concerns the Pipe-staves, wherein he pretends he did the
King great service, and that, he says, was the reason of our passing over it:
but that was not the reason; it had been a foul business if we had opened it;
but having enough besides, we made not use of it: for the substance of the
proofs by multiplicity of Witnesses had been, that the parties themselves that
bought the Pipe-staves for four pound odd money, were fain to sell them to his
Instruments for six pounds, and after to buy them again for ten pounds, else
there must be no License to export them: but that I would not have mentioned,
if he had let it slip over.

I come to the Twelfth Article, and that is concerning the Tobacco, wherein he
pretends the Kings service, and if my memory fail me not, the desire of the
Parliament, that he should take this into his hands for the King.

My Lords, Therein, under his favor, he has mis-recited the Evidence, and
spoken that he cannot justify; for he can show no such desire of the
Parliament. It is true, there was a desire of the Parliament, that the King
would be pleased to take his Customs into his hands, for the advancement of his
Revenue, that it might go to maintain himself, and he might not be abused, and
others live by it; but to take the Tobacco into his hands, he never did, nor
can produce a witness to prove such their desire; and therefore, under favor,
he fixes a wrong upon the Parliament, and injures your Lordships by his
reciting that he neither did nor can make good; for there was no such thing.

But if you observe the course he takes, he makes Proclamation to hinder the
importing of Tobacco into Ireland; that if it be imported, it must be sold to
him at his own rate; and by this means he first hinders the liberty of the
Subject from doing what the Law allows him, and so takes on him an Arbitrary
Power; And Secondly, he ingrosses this commodity to himself, deceiving His
Majesty, to whom he professes so much fidelity; for whereas there is 5000 l.
Rent to the King, he, by the computation of Merchants, receives near 14000 l. a
year: And because their computations are not always true, I do not care if I
allow him 40000 l. mistaken, and then he will gain near 100000 l. so that if he
intends the Kings benefit, it is wonder he told not His Majesty of the great
profit that might thereby have risen, and let him partake of it, as in Justice
he should have done, according to the Trust reposed in him: but you have heard
of no such matter. And surely my Lord of Strafford would not have omitted it,
if it had been for his advantage, especially in this presence, where he omits
nothing to clear himself, or to insinuate with His Majesty.

Now I come to the Thirteenth Article, the Article concerning Flax, which I
know is fresh in your Lordships memories, and I believe will be so in the
memories of the Subjects of Ireland for many years, how he engrossed it into
his hands, and interrupted the Trade of the poor People, whereby such miseries
and calamities befell many of that Nation, that as you have heard it proved,
thousands dye in ditches for want of Bread to put in their mouths. And whereas
he pretends that this was proved but by one witness, and that man to be
imprisoned, and of no credit, though he was his own instrument; your Lordships
remember Sir John Clotworthy his testimony, and another, and his own Warrant
produced, and acknowledged here to justify the execution of it, and such a
thing was thereby taken into his own hands, that I profess I never heard the
like, that the poor people should be constrained to use their own as he
pleased, and that pleasing of himself laid an impossibility on the people to
execute his pleasure, which was a bondage exceeding that of the Israelites
under the Egyptians; for there was not laid so much upon the Children of
Israel, but there was a possibility to perform; they might with much labor
perchance get stubble to burn their Brick, but the Natives here must have a
charge laid upon them without possibility to perform, and the disobedience must
cost them no less than the loss of their Goods, which drew with it even the
loss of their lives for want of bread. This was not proved by only one witness,
but by many. And your Lordships remember the remonstrance of that Parliament of
Ireland, which declares it to a greater height than I have opened it.

The Fifteenth Article, is that of Levying War upon the Kings Subjects,
expressly within the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. and 18 H. 6. Your Lordships have
heard the Warrant proved by the party himself, to whom it was directed; whereby
Power was given to lay Soldiers upon any party, that did not obey my Lord of
Straffords Orders at the Council Table, but not to circumscribe him to a
certain number; but the Sergeant at Arms and his Ministers, might lay as many
as they would. It is true, this Warrant was not it self produced, but a copy
was offered, which was not read; and therefore I will not offer it to be
proved, but the party that executed the Warrant it self, proves it to be under
the Hand and Seal of my Lord of Strafford, he proves the express authority of
it, which was to the effect I opened; three or four more, who saw and read it,
proved the same: and that it was under the Hand and Seal of my Lord of
Strafford, that accordingly it was executed upon diverse of the King's Subjects;
it was proved by three witnesses expressly in the point, how by color of this
Warrant the Sergeant at Arms, and his Officers, sent Soldiers to lie in the
Houses and Lands of the Kings Subjects; how the Owners were thereby forced out
from their own Habitation; how their Goods were wasted and devoured, their Corn
and Victuals eaten up, and the Soldiers never left them, as long as any part of
their Estates remained to maintain them.

My Lord of Straffords defense is, That it has been used before his time in
Ireland; wherein he has again mis-recited; for he did not offer a proof, nor a
particle of a proof, that ever any man did know Soldiers laid upon any party,
for refusing to appear to a Warrant, or for other contempt at Council Table,
before himself did it; but he offered to prove, That formerly Soldiers were
sent against Rebels, and that after they were declared to be Rebels, and that
justly too; and he proved an use and custom to force men to pay
Contribution-money, due to the King, but that was by consent of the people, who
granted a Contribution of 20000 l. a year, for increase of the Kings Revenue;
and that it might not be upon Record in the Exchequer, and so claimed as due in
time to come, they consented, that Soldiers should be laid upon them that
refused it; and the word (Consent) is within the Statute of 18 H. 6. Again, did
he prove all manner of Rents were levied by Soldiers? no such thing; but such
Rents as were designed for the payment of the Army: he proved by Sir Arthur
Terringham, the laying of Soldiers once for the payment of a fum of Money; but
Sir Arthur being demanded whether it were the King's Rents, or comprehended
within the same general Rule, he could make no answer thereunto.

Your Lordships remember, he says He did not know it, and therefore probably it
was the Kings Rents; and doubtless it was so.

But if he had produced Precedents, it could not be an authority for Treason,
that if people did not appear to his Orders, he must levy War against the Kings
Subjects; and for his extenuation of the War, that the same was of no great
danger, there being not above five or six Soldiers laid at a time. I would to
God, the people oppressed by it, had cause to undervalue it: I am sure four or
six Musketeers are as strong to oppress a man, as four thousand; so the matter
of Fact is strongly and expressly proved. Besides, though there came not above
four or five to a house, yet the authority given to the Sergeant was general;
he might have brought more if he had listed: and in truth, he brought as many
as the Estate of the party would maintain,

And as to the not producing of the Warrant, I have already answered it. If it
were in the case of a Deed wherein men call for witnesses, it were something;
but God forbid that the Treason should be gone, and the Traitor not
questionable, if his Warrant can be once put out of the way.

The next Article which is laid to his charge, is, For issuing out a
Proclamation, and Warrant of restraint, to inhibit the Kings Subjects to come
to the Fountain, their Sovereign, to deliver their complaints of their wrongs
and oppressions. Your Lordships have heard how he has exercised his
jurisdiction, and now he raises a battery to secure and make it safe. If he do
wrong, perhaps the complaint may come to the Gracious Ears of a King, who is
ready to give relief, and therefore he must stop these cries, and prevent these
means, that he may go on without interruption; and to that end he makes
Propositions here, That the Kings Subjects in Ireland should not come over to
make complaint against Ministers of State, before an address first made to
himself. It is true, he makes a fair pretense and show for it, and had just
cause of approbation, if he intended what he pretended; But as soon as he came
into Ireland, what use made he of it? he ingrosses the proceedings of almost
all the Courts of Justice into his own hands, and so pre-possesses the King by
a colorable proposition, and prevents their coming over before they had made
their address to himself, and then he becomes the wrong doer, and issues
Proclamations for the hindering of the King's Subjects to seek redress without
his leave; which is as great a proof of his design, and as great an injury to
the people, governed under a Gracious Prince, as a heart can conceive. And what
his intention was in exhibiting this Proposition, it will appear in the
sentence of a poor man, one David, who was censured, and most heavily Fined for
coming over into England to prosecute complaint against my Lord of Strafford.
It is true, that this was not the cause expressed, but this was the truth of
the matter. Your Lordships remember a clause in the Order at Council Board,
whereby is set forth the cause wherefore the party is not sentenced, which I
never saw in an order before, nor should now, but that my Lord foresaw there
was danger in it, that he might be charged in this place for the fact; and
therefore puts in negatively, why the party was not censured. Clausula
inconsulta inducit suspitionem. And how defends he this Article? he says, his
predecessors issued Proclamations to hinder the Kings Subjects from going over,
lest they should join with O-Neal, and Tirconnell beyond Sea, and so it might
be dangerous to the State; but because they may join with Foreigners, shall
they therefore not come to the King to make just complaint? What this argument
is, I refer to your Lordships judgments.

Then he pretends a former precedent, affirming that the like instructions were
given to my Lord of Faulkland; but was there any, that none should come to
their Sovereign, to make their just appeal if injured? Surely there was never
any such Instruction before, and I hope never will be again.

The next Article is the Nineteenth: and now when he had so plentifully
exercised his Tyranny over the Lives, the Liberty, and the Estates of the
King's Subjects; A man would think he could go no further: But see a Tyranny
exercised beyond that, and that is over the Consciences of men: hitherto he
dealt with the outward man, and now he offers violence to the inward man, and
imposes an Oath upon the Kings Subjects, and so exercises a Tyranny over the
Consciences of men.

And setting aside the matter of the Oath, if he has authority and power to
impose such an Oath as he shall frame, he may by the same power impose any Oath
to compel Consciences.

He pretends a Warrant from His Majesty to do it, but the Kings Ministers are
to serve the King according to Law; and I dare be bold to say (and we have good
reason to thank God for it) if any of the Kings Ministers tell him, that any
Command he gives is against Law, there is no doubt but in his Goodness and
Piety, he will withdraw his Command, and not enforce execution; and therefore
if there were an error, the King is free, and the Ministers to be justly
charged with it.

But there was no Command from the King to compel and enforce them to take the
Oath by the power of the Star Chamber, to commit them to prison, to impose
heavy Fines, and tyrannize over them; all which he did in the Case of Steward.

And now one would have thought he had acted his part, when he had acted as
much as lay in his own power; and yet he goes beyond this, he was not content
to corrupt all the streams (which was not a diverting of the course, as he
spoke in his answer; for he not only turned the course of the water, but
changed the nature of it, converted it into poison, a legal and just proceeding
into a Tyrannical and Arbitrary Government, which is not turning, but
corrupting of the clear and crystal streams to bitterness and death.) But yet
the Fountain remains clear, and perhaps when his hand is taken off, you shall
have the streams run as pure and incorrupt as ever they did. This is it
troubles him, remove but this obstacle, and the work is perfect; and therefore
now he will go about to corrupt the streams: if he can but infuse his poison
into the Kings heart, which is the Fountain, then all is done; and now he
attempts that, and approaches the Throne, endeavors to corrupt the Kings
Goodness with wicked Counsels; but God be thanked he finds there too much Piety
to prevail.

And therefore the next Article is that, that charges him to be an Incendiary
to the War betwixt the two Kingdoms: and now I shall be bold to unfold the
mystery, and answer his objection: To what purpose should he be an Incendiary?
were it not better to enjoy his Estate in peace and quietness, than have it
under danger of a War? Now your Lordships shall have the Riddle discovered.

The first thing he does after his coming into England is, to incense the King
to a War, to involve two Nations of one faith, and under one Sovereign, to
imbrue their hands in each others Blood, and to draw Armies into the field.

That he was this Incendiary, give me leave to revive your Lordships memories
with the proofs which will make it plain; and first give me leave to note unto
your Lordships, that His Majesty, with much wisdom, did in July 1639. make a
pacification with His Subjects, and even at the very heels of this
pacification, when all things were at peace, upon the tenth of September, which
was the next month but one, your Lordships remember the Sentence of Steward in
the Star Chamber of Ireland, for not taking the Oath; your Lordships may call
to mind the language my Lord of Strafford was pleased to use to the Scots: when
all was in quietness, he then calls them no better than Traitors or Rebels, if
you will believe what the witness testifies, whom my Lord is pleased to call a
Schoolmaster: And truly admit he were so, because he is a Schoolmaster,
therefore not to be believed, is a non sequitur. And another Witness, one
Loftus speaks to the words, though not in the same manner; but I say, the Tenth
of September, when things were at peace and rest, when the King was pleased to
be reconciled to them by that pacification, what boiled in his breast then, to
the breaking forth of such expressions, I know not, unless it were an intention
to be an Incendiary.

My Lords, I must say and affirm, and he has not proved it to the contrary,
that all this while (I am confident) there was not any breach of the
pacification on either side, and it lies on his part to prove there was: But
the Parliament of Scotland then sitting, and making preparation for their
demands in pursuance of the Articles of pacification, he coming over into
England in September, immediately upon the pacification answers, That he found
things so distracted here, that it was fit the Scots should be reduced by
force, if they could not be otherwise: yet no breach appears, no War was
denounced, there was no intention of a War: but see what harbored in his
breast all the while?

The fourth of December following, my Lord Traquaire made his relation to the
Council of the Scots proceedings: and all this while there was no Demands
brought by the Scots themselves, nor reason of their Demands brought by others,
though they were not prepared; yet you have heard his advice was for an
offensive War, and that the Demands were a just cause of the War. And though he
pretends he said no more than what the rest of the Lords of the Council
concurred with him in, I will join in issue with him in that, and if some of
your Lordships be not satisfied, you have many noble Lords among you, from whom
you may be satisfied that it is not so; I am sure he proves it not. It is true,
in the proposition of the Demands, some of the Lords of the Council did say,
That these Demands hypothetically, if the Scots did not give satisfaction by
their reasons, were a just cause of War; but not any Lord of the Council was of
that opinion, that the very Demands, positively, without hearing of the
reasons, were a just cause of War, but himself; and I believe the Noble Lords
of the Council, their Consciences can tell them, and I believe will deliver it
to the rest of the Peers, that I speak truth.

For the offensive War, he pretends a concurrence of the rest, but it was
disapproved; many were for it upon these terms, If they did not give reasons,
and show just cause for their Demands; and many were against an offensive War
upon any terms, and therefore herein he fixes that upon the Lords of the
Council, which he cannot make good.

All this while his intentions are discovered by a matter precedent, but after
the breach he discovers his anger further toward the Scottish Nation, and
makes it his design to incense the King to this War.

My Lords, he is not at end yet, for he confesses himself that he advised the
King to call a Parliament; and now I come to his work of merit, but it was to
his destruction, and serves to prove this Article directly; for to what purpose
was this Parliament called? Exitus acta probat; it was no sooner set, but
within three weeks a proposition is made for supply toward a War against the
Scots: Who was the cause of calling the Parliament? himself; and therefore who
was the cause of this Proposition but himself? and so the calling of the
Parliament is a concurring evidence of his being an Incendiary to put on the
War; and it shall appear anon absolutely, that he was the occasion of it,
though he thinks there be no proof of it.

Did not he go over into Ireland, and by his solicitation there, Subsidies
were granted by the Parliament, only, to maintain this War, and to show their
engagement in it? and who was the occasion of drawing them on, I referr to your
Lordships judgments, by the circumstances precedent.

Your Lordships heard his good opinion of the Scots, when he began to discourse
with the Citizens touching Money, and their affording of the King supply, and
seizing the Mint, by giving them no better expositions than Rebels; for, says
he, you are more forward to help the Rebels here, than to pay the King his own:
I know not who he meant, but certainly the Scots were in his thoughts; so that
from the beginning he incensed the War against them: First, he exclaimed
against them during time of peace. He alleges in his Answer, That things were
found in such distraction, that it was fit the Scots should be reduced by
force: he gave advice precipitately without hearing the reasons, and not
concurrent to the Council, for an offensive War; and putting all together, I
refer it your Lordships judgment who is the Incendiary; for how can it be
proved more clearly, unless it should appear under his Hand and Seal, proved by
two or three witnesses?

Now, My Lords, how comes this to be his design? here the Mystery comes to be
unfolded. Having thus incensed to the War, and engaged the King to the
uttermost, and having a Parliament now dissolved without supply, he sets up an
Idol of his own creation, as a means to draw on his design, and that was
necessity; necessity, is it that must enforce the King: what to do? to levy
Money, to use his Prerogative, to raise supplies upon His Subjects without
their consent, against their Will, necessity must be his Argument, and this War
must be the occasion of that necessity, and without that, he cannot suggest to
the Kings ear, or advise this necessity, till this be brought to pass.

And now he has brought it to pass, he began in the One and twentieth, Two and
twentieth, and Three and twentieth Article, to persuade the King, that
necessity has surprised him, by the Parliaments deserting of him; that the
Parliament had forsaken the King, in denying supply, and having tried the
affections of His people, he was loose, and absolved from all rules of
Government; and had an Army in Ireland which he might employ, to reduce this
Kingdom.

That he spoke these words to the King, part is proved by two concurrent
Witnesses, that is, that having tried the affections of his people, he was now
loose and absolved from all rules of Government; which words are proved by two
witnesses of eminent quality, that is, my Lord of Northumberland, and Sir Henry
Vane: and truly, howsoever my Lord in his speech pretends, that the most
material words are proved but by one witness (it seeming that he held it not a
material charge, that he counseled the King that he was absolved from all
Rules of Government) for my part, if your Lordships be satisfied those words
were proved, I could willingly satisfy my own conscience in it, and make no
great matter to quit the rest; for I know not how he could express it in higher
terms, than that the King was absolved from all rules of Government, for then
he might do what he would.

It is true, the latter words, touching the Irish Army, are expressly proved but
by one witness, Mr. Secretary Vane; but are fortified again with such
circumstances as make up more than one, yea, more than two other witnesses, if
your Lordships will have the patience to have it represented, as it is proved.

For howsoever it be slighted by him, if your Lordships will call to mind the
words of Sir George Ratcliffe, his bosom friend (to whom he had contributed
without question, his advice in all causes) the said Sir George Ratcliffe
expressed it before, and told some of his friends (supposing that he never
should be called in question, and that the power of my Lord of Strafford had
been enough to protect any thing he had done, and out of the abundance of the
heart his mouth spoke) the King must now want no money; if he did, no body
would pity him, now he had his sword in his hand.

Sir Robert King proves it so. My Lord Ranalagh discovered the smoke of the
fire that he had just cause to suspect, and on good grounds, I am sure; and if
the Commons of England had not just cause to suspect him (as I believe he is
convinced they had good cause) what is the reason this suspicion should be
entertained at that time, my Lord of Strafford being not then questioned for
it? and yet my Lord Ranalagh should say, Shall we turn our Swords upon our own
bowels? Shall we bring this Army to turn the points of our blades upon that
Nation from whence we were all derived? and that was before any conference with
Mr. Secretary Vane.

Sir William Penniman himself, his own witness and friend, says, at York,
before my Lord of Strafford was questioned, that there was a common fame of
bringing the Army into England, and there is something in that surely; and
after all this, to produce one witness that expressly proves the very words
spoken in terminis, as they be charged, if your Lordships put the whole
together, see whether there be not more than one witness.

And, under favor, my Lord Cottington, if you call to mind his testimony, I
must justify, he did declare, That he heard my Lord of Strafford tell the King,
That some reparation was to be made to the Subjects property; which must
infer, he had advised an Invasion upon the property; else by no good
coherence should a reparation be made. And that he testifies this, I must
affirm, and most here will affirm it; and I think your Lordships well remember
it: and that is an addition to it; for if your Lordships cast your eye upon the
Interrogatory administered to my Lord Admiral, and my Lord Cottington, that very
question is asked; so that his own conscience told him, he had advised something
to invade upon the people, when he advised to a restitution after things should
be settled: and so I refer it to your Lordships consideration, whether here be
not more than one witness by far.

It is true, he makes objections to lessen this testimony; First, That this
Army was to be landed at Air in Scotland, and not here; and this was declared
to Sir Thomas Lucas, Mr. Slingsby, Sir William Penniman, and others. Secondly,
That others that were present when the words are supposed to be spoken, did not
hear any such words.

For the first; Perhaps the Army might be originally intended for Scotland, and
yet this is no contradiction, but he might intend it afterward for England;
surely this is no Logic, that because it was intended for one place, it could
never be intended for another place; so his allegation may be true, and the
charge stand true likewise.

Beside, that it was intended originally for Scotland, what proof makes he? He
told several persons of the design, but I will be tried by himself, he told
some, it was for Scotland, he told others it was for England; and why you
should believe his telling on one side, more than on the other side I know not;
though he pretends a reason of his several allegations, that the world should
not know his design, but if you will not believe him one way, why should he be
believed the other way? and if not the other way, why the first way?

For the Second, Several persons were present, when the words were spoken
touching the Irish Army, and they were examined, and remember not the words;
but one man may hear, though twenty do not hear; and this is no contradiction
at all: for those persons whom he examined, the Lord Treasurer, Marquis
Hamilton, my Lord Cottington did not hear the words that are proved by two
witnesses, concerning the Kings being loose and absolved from rules of
Government: and if they did not hear those words, no marvel they did not hear
the other: and therefore that which he himself pretends to be a convincing
testimony, is nothing at all; so that his objections are clearly taken away,
and the single testimony fortified with testimonies that make above one
witness, and so the words are fully proved.

But to fortify the whole, I shall handle all these Articles together; This
design to subvert the Law, and to exercise an Arbitrary power above the Law in
this Kingdom will (upon the proofs putting them altogether, and not taking them
in pieces as my Lord of Strafford has done) appear to have been harbored in
his thoughts, and settled in his heart long before it was executed.

You see what his Counsels were, That the King having tried the affections of
his people, was loose and absolved from all rules of Government, and might do
every thing that power would admit; and His Majesty had tried all ways, and was
refused, and should be acquitted of God and Man; and had an Army in Ireland,
wherewith if he pleased he might reduce this Kingdom: so there must be a trial
of his people, for Supply that is denied, which must be interpreted, a
Defection by refusal, and this refusal must give advantage of necessity, and
this necessity must be an advantage to use his Prerogative against the rule of
the Law, and consent of the People; this is his advice, which shows that this
very thing that happened, did harbor in his thoughts long before the breach of
the Parliament, and the occasion of the Army.

Your Lordships have heard it confessed by himself, That before this last
advice, he had advised the calling of a Parliament: To the Parliament a
proposition of Twelve Subsidies was made for supply, and (which may be spoken
with great assurance) before they had consulted, or given any resolution to
that proposition, the Parliament was dissolved, upon a supposal that the Supply
was denied. Now that this was pre-designed by my Lord of Strafford himself, I
beseech you observe these things following, that is, The words in the Two and
twentieth Article, That His Majesty was first to try the Parliament, and if
that did not supply him, then he would serve the King any other way.

His words are proved by Mr. Treasurer, That if the Parliament supplied him
not, he would serve him any other way; and this is before the Parliament set:
now if your Lordships hear the proofs of my Lord Primate, (which my Lord of
Strafford slights taking it singly) My Lord Primate before the Parliament was
called, when my Lord of Strafford was in Ireland, and not yet come into this
Kingdom, testifies, my Lords, saying, That if the Parliament will not supply
His Majesty, the King was acquitted before God and Man, if he took some other
course to supply himself, though against the will of the Subjects. I beseech
your Lordships, observe how he prophesies these things must come to pass, and
advised them accordingly.

My Lord Conway testifies, that before the Parliament sat, my Lord of
Strafford said, that if the Parliament would not supply His Majesty, the King
was acquitted before God and Man, if he took another course to supply himself,
though it were against the will of the Subject, and he doubts not but the
Parliament would give, What? Twelve Subsidies: and your Lordships very well
remember, Twelve were propounded; but I beseech you, observe the coherence of
all; the Parliament must be called, they must be tried, if they deny there is
necessity, and this necessity is a Warrant for the King to proceed; so that my
Lord of Strafford must be judged to be either a Prophet, or to have this design
beforehand in his thoughts.

Now the Parliament being broken before answer to the Demand given, he vents
his Counsel in the Three and twentieth Article, and how far it is proved, your
Lordships have heard. Now comes the Bullion to be seized, the Copper-money to
be advised, and now comes he to tell the King, that the Aldermen of London must
be put to Fine and Ransom, and laid by the heels, and no good would be done
till some of them be hanged, so you hear his advice; I beseech your Lordships
observe what success this advice took; Four Aldermen were instantly committed,
and then the Counsel of the Three and twentieth Article is fomented.

First, He foments the War, then there is a necessity, the defection of the
Parliament must set the King loose from rules of Government, and now see
whether the occasion of the War, the calling of the Parliament, the dissolving
of it, be not adequate to what he propounded to himself, namely, to set up an
Arbitrary Government.

Your Lordships remember how fresh my Lord of Bristols memory is, touching my
Lord of Straffords opinion upon the dissolution of the Parliament; how he
declared unto my Lord of Bristol instantly within three or four days after,
That the King was not to be mastered by the frowardness of his people, or
rather of some particular persons; and your Lordships remember Sir George
Wentworths words spoken the very day of dissolving the Parliament; which may be
very well applied as a concurrent proof to his intentions of bringing the Army
into England. He was my Lords own Brother, that knew much of his Counsel, and
his words are, That the English Nation would never be well till they were
conquered over again. So my Lords; put all together, if he declared his own
intentions, if actions, in executing this Tyrannical and Arbitrary Power, if
Counsels of as dangerous consequence, in as high a strain as can be, be not a
sufficient Evidence to prove an intention, and desire to subvert the Law, I
know not what can prove such an interpretation: and now I refer it to your
Lordships judgments, whether here be not a good proof of the Article laid to
his chage,

My Lords, in the Seven and twentieth Article, he is charged with levying of
War upon the Kings people, by forcing them in Yorkshire to pay Money; to prove
they were so forced, you have heard by two witnesses, that Sergeant Major
Yaworth, by Musketeers, four together in the Town,, and one by one out of the
Town, did compel them to pay the fortnights contribution, else they were to
serve in person: That he did this by Warrant is likewise confessed by Sir
William Pennyman: and whether this were an authority derived from, or commanded
by my Lord of Strafford, that is the question; and my Lords, it is plainly
proved, that it was commanded by my Lord of Strafford, for Sir William Pennyman
himself being examined, alleged that the Warrant was made in pursuance of the
relation, and direction made by my Lord of Strafford.

Your Lordships heard what my Lord of Strafford did say beforehand, as is
proved by two witnesses, (Sir William Ingram and Mr. Cholmley) that this Money
should be paid, or levied on the Subjects Goods; Then his Declaration to Sir
William Pennyman, (in pursuance of which he made his Warrant) That it was the
assent of the Lords of the great Council, that this Money should be levied; and
taking all together, whether it fixes it not upon him to be the Author and
Instrument, it rests in your judgments in point of fact: and so I suppose the
Seven and twentieth Article rests on him, and so I shall conclude the Evidence
produced on the behalf of the Commons.

And now give me leave to put your Lordships in mind of some Evidences offered
by my Lord Strafford himself in his Answer, and in the passages of his Defense,
for his clearing and justification, but tending directly to his condemnation,

I will enter upon some passages he mentioned to day, and often before; When he
is charged with invading the Estates of the Peers of the kingdom of Ireland,
and determining them upon Paper Petitions in an Arbitrary way: your Lordships
have heard him speak it before, and repeat it this day, That he did it out of
compassion, for the more expeditious proceeding on behalf of the poor against
these mighty: But then my Lords, I beseech you, compare some other part of his
proceedings. Your Lordships remember the business of the Flax, which concerns
the poor wholly and universally; and if compassion had been the rule and
direction of his actions toward the poor, surely this would have been a just
cause to have commiserated them in this case; but he exercised his power over
them, and over them wholly, and over them universally: and therefore it shows,
it is not his compassion to the poor, nor respect to the rich, or mighty, that
will any way restrain or obstruct his ways, to his own Will. And thefore you
may see what truth there is in his answer, by comparing one part of the charge
with another, when the business of the Flax brought that calamity upon the
Kings Subjects, that thousands of them perished for lack of Bread, and dyed in
Ditches.

Secondly, Your Lordships have often heard him use a Rhetorical insinuatian,
wondering that he should be charged with words, and they strained so high as to
be made Treason, to question his Life and Posterity, though the words might be
spoken unadvisedly, or in discourse, or by chance: Your Lordships remember the
Fifth Article, touching his proceedings against my Lord Mountnorris, where
words were spoken in an ordinary discourse at dinner, and slight ones, God
knows, of no consequence at all, such as another man would scarce have harkened
after, and yet my Lord extends them to the taking away of my Lord Mountnorris
his life; gets a sentence of death against him, and that against Law, with a
high hand, in such a manner, as I think your Lordships have not heard the like;
and therefore I beseech you, compare one part of his Answer with another, and
see how ready he is to make use of any thing that may excuse himself; and yet
when he comes to act his power, you see his exercise of it.

You have heard how he magnifies his Zeal for advancing the Kings Benefit and
Revenue, and his care of his Service, and would shelter and protect himself
under it, to justify an exorbitant action: but if your Lordships call to mind
the business of the Customs for Tobacco, (which in truth were the Kings right
and due, and a great profit was thereby advanced; and he trusted to advance
it.) The King must loose of his former Rents in the case of Custom, and
received a small Rent in the case of Tobacco, my Lord himself in the mean time
imbursing such vast sums of Money: where is then the discharge of his Trust?
where is his care to advance the Kings Rents? to increase his Revenue? Compare
that part of his Answer with this, and see what credit is to be given to his
affirmation.

My Lords, throughout the passages of his discourse he insinuates, (and never
more than this day) with the Peers of the Realm, magnifying them almost to
Idolatry; and yet my Lords, when he was in his Kingdom in Ireland, and had
power over them, what respect showed he then to the Peers of the Kingdom, when
he judged some to death, trampled upon others in misery, committed them to
prison, and seized on their Estates; where then was the Peerage he now
magnifies?

And to show it was an insinuation for his own advantage, you may remember,
when there was an unlawful Act to be committed, that is, the levying of Money
in the North, What regard had he then to the Peers of the Kingdom, when he
comes to justify and boulster up High Treason it self, under the name and
authority of the Great Council, where most of the Peers of the Realm then were?
and so by this time I know what credit your Lordships give to his words spoken,
when he lies under your Mercy and Power: but what do I speak of the Peers of
the Kingdom, and his using of them? My Lords, he spared not his Sovereign, His
Majesty in His whole Defense; for being charged with offenses of a high nature,
he justifies those offenses under the pretense, and under the authority of His
Majesty, our Gracious King and Sovereign, even Murder it self, in the Case of
Denwit, and my Lord Mountnorris. Treason it self in the Fifteenth Article by a
Command in Ireland, and in the Seven and twentieth, by a pretended authority
from His Majesty in the face of His People; he justifies my Lord Mountnorris
his sentence by a Letter from His Majesty, Denwits Sentence by a Commission
from His Majesty, and he read three or four clauses to that purpose.

My Lords, my Lord of Strafford does very well know (and if he does not know
it, I have a Witness to produce against him, which I will not examine, but
refer it to his own Conscience, that is, The Petition of Right) that the Kings
Servants are to serve him according to Law and no otherwise: he very well knew
if an unlawful act be committed, especially to a degree of Treason and Murder,
the Kings Authority and Warrant produced, is no justification at all. So then,
my Lords, to mention the Kings name, to justify an unlawful act in that way,
can do him no good; and his own understanding knows, it may do the King harm,
if we had not so Gracious a King, that no such thing can do harm unto.

But, my Lords, to produce the Kings Warrant to justify his actions under his
Patent and Command, what is it else, but so far as in him lies, in the face of
his people, to raise a cloud, and exhale a vapor? To interpose betwixt the
King and his Subjects whereby the splendour of his Glory and Justice cannot be
discovered to his people?

My Lords, what is it else, when the people make complaint against the
Ministers (that should execute justice) of their oppression and slavery, and
bondage? For the Minister, when he is questioned to justify this under the
Kings Authority, what is it, I say, but as much as in that Minister lies, to
fix this offense, to fasten this oppression upon the King himself, to make it
to be believed, that the occasion of these their groans proceeded from His
Sacred Majesty? yet God be thanked the strength of that Sun is powerful enough
to dispel these vapors, and to disperse the cloud that he would have raised;
but in the mean time, my Lord is nothing to be excused.

My Lords, he may pretend zeal to the Kings Service, and affection to His
Honor, but give me leave not to believe it, since, when he is questioned by all
the Kings people, and in the face of his people, and offenses laid to his
charge, which himself now confesses to be against Law; he should justify it
under the Kings authority; that savours not of a good servant: I will say no
more.

My Lords, he is charged with exercising a tyrannical power over the Kings
people, and in his Defense your Lordships have often heard (and I may not omit
it) that he shelters himself under the protection of the Kings Prerogative,
though he be charged with Tyranny of the highest nature that may be: see then
how foul and malignant an aspect this has. My Lords, what is it else, but to
endeavor, as much as in him lies, to infuse into the Kings heart an
apprehension, that His Prerogative is so bottomless a Gulf, so unlimited a
Power, as is not to be comprehended within the rules of Law, or within the
bounds of Government? for else why should he mention the Prerogative, when he
is charged to exceed the Law? What is it else, but as far as in him lies, to
make the people believe (for I may not forget the words he has used) by his
magnifying of the Prerogative, that it has a special stamp of Divinity on it;
and that the other part of the Government that God pleases to put into the
Kings hands, had not that stamp upon it? as if any thing done by one, was to be
justified by authority derived from Heaven, but the other not.

These expressions your Lordships remember; and I may not omit to put your
Lordships in mind of them; and I can expound them no otherwise than, as much as
in him lies, to make the subject believe and apprehend, that which is the
buckler and defense of his protection, to be the two-edged sword of his
destruction, according to the Doctrine he Preached; and that that which is the
Sanctuary of their Liberty, is the snare and engine of their slavery. And thus
he has cast a bone of contention, as much as in him lay, betwixt King and
People, to make the Subjects loath that glorious Flower of his Crown, by fixing
a jealousy in them, that it may be a means of their bondage and slavery.

But there is so much Piety and Goodness in the Kings heart, that I hope, upon
fair understanding, there will be no such occasion; but no thanks to the party,
that so much advanced the Prerogative in the case and condition he stands in,
to justify that which is laid to his Charge of High Treason.

My Lords, I beseech you give me leave; there is no greater safety to Kings and
People, than to have the Throne incircled with good Counselors; and no greater
danger to both, than to have it encompassed with wicked and dangerous ones; and
yet I beseech you call to mind, how he has attempted to deprive the Subject of
all means to discover this danger, by insinuating to your Lordships, what a
dangerous thing it were, if Counselors should be called in question for giving
of Counsel: for who then (says he) would be a Counselor? where is your
safeguard? where is the Kings service? Is not this, as much as in him lies, to
deprive the people of the means whereby they must make themselves happy, and
whereby the King must be happy, that is, by his having good Counselors about
him? and yet he infuses that venom, that the questioning of Counselors is
dangerous both to King and Peers, if it should be brought into example. My
Lords, for many years bypast, your Lordships know an evil spirit has moved
amongst us, which in truth has been made the Author and ground of all our
distractions, and that is necessity and danger: this was the bulwark, and the
battery that serves to defend all exorbitant actions; the ground and foundation
of that great invasion of our Liberties and Estates, the judgment in the
Ship Money, and the ground of the Counsel given of late to do any thing, and to
persuade the King, that he was absolved from all rules of Government; and yet
your Lordships have observed in the course of his defense, how often he has
raised this spirit, that God be thanked has been laid, to the great comfort of
King and Kingdom, by your Lordships, and all the Commons in Parliament. And
when he stands under this question, and goes about to justify his exorbitant
actions, how often has he created this Idol again? and therefore I am afraid
he discovers too much his own heart in it.

My Lords, I may not omit some other passages in his Defense, How he has cast
scandals upon three Nations in this place; that is, in his first day of
Defense, when the Irish Remonstrance, made by all the Commons of Ireland, was
produced by the Commons of England; he expressed in a passion, that things were
carried against him by faction and correspondence, and (if he had time he would
make it appear) with a strong conspiracy. Here is a scandal cast upon the
Parliament of Ireland, with a reflection on the Commons of England; howsoever,
it is true, your Lordships may remember the recantation he made that day, which
I will not omit, desiring not to lay any thing to his charge but what is true;
but it is the reflection of a scandal that I cannot omit to put your Lordships
in mind of; and the rather, because this Remonstrance, presented from the
Parliament of Ireland, did bear date before my Lord of Strafford was charged
here, which is very remarkable, viz. the 7th of November; and therefore, though
he pretends a correspondence, certainly there could be none then, for he is not
charged here till the Tenth.

And the same day, justifying a Sentence in the Castle-Chamber, your Lordships
remember he affirmed, that unless a strict hand were kept upon the Nation
there, they would find it hard to prevent perjury, one of the most crying sins
in Ireland. Now to lay an aspersion upon the Subjects of Ireland, being under
the Government of the same King with us, how fit this is to be done by a man in
that condition that my Lord of Strafford is, I referr to your consideration.

Another passage I remember, whereby in his Defense he fell upon that Nation;
in answer of which, I may not omit to do the service I owe to the Commons, for
whom I am trusted, and that is, that talking of an Arbitrary and Tyrannical
Government, in reference to some Orders of the Commons-House in Ireland, he
used words to this purpose: You talk of an Arbitrary Government, look upon
these Orders, here is an Arbitrary Government: and yet when he produced the
Orders, they appeared to have so much justice and discretion in them, that he
can lay nothing to the charge of them, though in a passion he is not backward
to asperse them.

My Lords, If this Lion (to use his own language) now that he is chained and
muzled, under the restraint and question of High Treason, will here take the
boldness to vent this Language, and express this Malignity; How would he do if
he were unchained? How would he devour? How would he destroy? etc.

My Lords, Something concerns your Lordships; your Lordships remember, that he
was not backward in his own answer, to fix a Charge of High Treason upon the
Lords of the Great Council; and howsoever he has affirmed this day, I must
open it again, That the Charge of the Seven and twentieth Article he fixes in
his Answer, to be by consent of the Lords of the Great Council, though he has
since recanted it; and yet you have heard him allege, that he will stand and
fall by the truth of his answer.

My Lords, I am now at an end. You have my Lord of Strafford here questioned
for High Treason, for going about to subvert the Fundamental Laws of both
Kingdoms, in defense whereof, your noble Ancestors spent their Lives and
Bloods. My Lords, you are the Sons of those Fathers, and the same Blood runs in
your veins, that did in theirs; and I am confident you will not think him fit
to live, that goes about to destroy that which protects your Lives, and
preserves your Estates and Liberties.

My Lords, You have the complaints of Three Kingdoms presented before you
against this great person; whereby your Lordships perceive that a great storm
of distemper and distraction has been raised, that threatens the ruin and
distraction of them all.

The Commons with much pain and diligence, and to their great expense, have
discovered the Jonas, that is, the occasion of this Tempest.

They have still, and will discharge their Consciences, (as much as in them
lies) to cast him out of the Ship, and allay this Tempest.

They expect, and are confident your Lordships will perfect the work, and that
with expedition, lest with the continuance of the storm, both Ship, and
Tackling, and Mariners, both Church, and Commonwealth be ruined and destroyed.

Saturday, May 1. 1640.
The King came to the House of Lords, and sent for the Commons thither, and
made this Speech to both Houses.
I Had not any intention to speak of this business, which causes me to come
here to day, which is the great Impeachment of the Earl of Strafford; But now
it comes to pass, that of necessity I must have part in that Judgment: I am
sure you all know that I have been present at the Hearing of this great
business, from the one end to the other; that which I have to declare unto you
is shortly this.

THAT in my Conscience I cannot condemn him of High Treason, It is not fit for
me to argue the business, I am sure you will not expect it. A Positive Doctrine
best comes out of the mouth of a Prince; Yet I must tell you Three great
Truths, which I am sure no body can know so well as my self. 1. That I never
had any intention of bringing over the Irish Army into England, nor ever was
advised by any body so to do. 2. There never was any Debate before me, neither
in public Council, nor at private Committee, of the Disloyalty, and
Disaffection of my English Subjects, nor ever had I any suspicion of them. 3. I
was never Counseled by any, to alter the least of any of the Laws of England,
much less to alter all the Laws; Nay, I must tell you this, I think no body
durst be ever so impudent to move me in it, for if they had, I should have put
a Mark upon them, and made them such an example, that all Posterity should know
my intention by it; for my intention was ever to Govern according to the Law,
and no otherwise.

I desire to be rightly understood, I told you in my Conscience I cannot
Condemn him of High Treason; yet I cannot say I can clear him of misdemeanor:
Therefore I hope that you may find a way, for to satisfy justice and your own
fears, and not to press upon my Conscience. My Lords, I hope you know what a
tender thing Conscience is. Yet I must declare unto you, that to satisfy my
People I would do great matters. But in this of Conscience, no fear, no respect
whatsoever, shall ever make me go against it. Certainly, I have not so ill
deserved of the Parliament at this time, that they should press me in this
tender point, and therefore I cannot expect, that you will go about it.

Nay, I must confess for matter of misdemeanor, I am so clear in that, that
though I will not chaulk out the way, yet let me tell you, that I do think my
Lord of Strafford, is not fit hereafter to serve me or the Commonwealth in any
place of Trust, no not so much as to be a High-Constable: Therefore I leave it
to you my Lords, to find some such way as to bring me out of this great
straight, and keep your Selves and the Kingdom from such Inconveniences.
Certainly, he that thinks him guilty of High Treason in his Conscience, may
Condemn him of Misdemeanor.

The House of Commons as soon a they returned, seemed to be much The House of
Commons Adjourned upon this Speech of the Kings, in some dissatisfaction.
discontented with what the King had spoken, and immediately Adjourned till
Monday following, on which day being the Third of May Mr. Pim makes known to
the House, that there are diverse Informations given of desperate Designs, both
at home and abroad, against the Parliament and the Peace of the Nation, and
that the persons engaged in it, are under an oath of Secrecy, that there is an
endeavor to disaffect the Army, not only against the proceedings of the
Parliament, but to bring them up against May the 3. the Commons having a Plot
discovered, fall into the Debate thereof.
the Parliament: That there is a design upon the Tower, that there is an
endeavor for the Earl of Strafford to escape; That those Combinations at home,
have a Correspondency with practices abroad; and that the French are drawing
down their Forces in all have to the Seaside, and that there is cause to fear
their intent is upon Portsmouth; That diverse persons of Eminency about the King
(as by good Information appears) are deeply engaged in the Plot: That it is
necessary the Ports be stopped; and that His Majesty be desired to Command, that
no person attending upon the King, Queen, or Prince, do depart without leave of
His Majesty, with the humble Advice of His Parliament.

The Commons hereupon fell into serious debate of this matter, and the And the
same day Resolve upon a Protestation.
same day came to a Resolution of taking a Protestation, which was accordingly
taken by the Speaker, and about 300 Members then present, Man by Man.

WE the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons-House in The Preamble
to the Protestation.
Parliament, finding to the grief of our hearts, that the Designs of the
Priests and Jesuits, and other Adherents to the Sea of Rome, have of late been
more boldly and frequently put in practice than formerly, to the undermining
and danger of the true Reformed Protestant Religion, in His Majesty's Dominions
established: And finding also, that there has been, and having just cause to
suspect there still are, even during the Sitting in Parliament, endeavors to
subvert the Fundamental Laws of England and Ireland, and to introduce the
exercise of an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government, by most pernicious and
wicked Counsels, Practices, Plots, and Conspiracies; and that the long
intermission, and unhappier breach of Parliaments, has occasioned many illegal
Taxations, whereby the Subjects have been prosecuted and grieved. And that
diverse Innovations and Superstitions have been brought into the Church,
Multitudes driven out of His Majesty's Dominions, Jealousies raised, and
fomented between the King and his people: A Popish Army levied in Ireland, and
two Armies brought into the Bowels of this Kingdom, to the hazard of His
Majesty's Royal Person, the Consumption of the Revenue of the Crown, and the
Treasure of this Realm. And lastly, finding the great causes of jealousy, that
endeavors have been, and are used, to bring the English Army into a
misunderstanding of this Parliament, thereby to incline that Army by force to
bring that Army to pass those wicked Counsels; have therefore thought good to
join our Selves in a Declaration of our united affections and Resolutions, and
to make this ensuing Protestation.

The Protestation.
I A. B. Do in the presence of God Promise, Vow, and Protest, to maintain and
Defend, as far as lawfully I may with my Life, Power, and Estate, the true
Reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of
England, against all Popery, and Popish Innovation within this Realm, contrary
to the said Doctrine, and according to the Duty of my Allegiance, I will
Maintain and Defend His Majesty's Royal Person, and Estate.

As also the Power and Privilege of Parliaments, the lawful Rights and
Liberties of the Subjects; And every Person that shall make this Protestation,
in whatsoever he shall do, in the lawful pursuance of the same; And to my
power, as far as lawfully I may, I will oppose, and by all good ways and means
endeavor, to bring to condign punishment all such as shall by Force,
Practice, Counsels, Plots, Conspiracies, or otherwise do any thing to the
contrary in this prsent Protestation contained. And further, That I shall in
all Just and Honorable ways endeavors to preserve the Union and Peace betwixt
the Three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and neither for Hope,
Fear, or any other Respects, shall relinquish this Promise, Vow, and
Protestation.

This Protestation was read by Mr. Mainard. Here follows the Names of the
Members of the House of Commons, who took the same, May 3. 1640. viz.

WIll. Lenthal, Esquire Speak. Edward Hide. George L. Digby. Lord Faulkland. Sir
John Culpepper. John Seldom. Orlando Bridgeman. Sir William Pennyman. Sir Henry
Herbert. Sir Tho. Fanshaw. Sir William Widdrington. Sir Fredreick Cornwallis.
Robert Holborne, Esquire Tho. Chicheley, Esquire Sir George Wentworth. William Mallory,
Esquire Io. Bellasis, Esquire Sir Guy Palms. Edm. Waller, Esquire Sidney Godolphin, Esquire:
Sir Nich. Slany. Sir Hen. Slingsby. Tho Iermin, Esquire Sir Tho. Peyton. Sir Philip
Musgrave. Sir Patricius Curwin. Sir John Stowel. Sir John Strangwayes. Sir John
Paulet. Sir Rich. Wynn. Tho. Tomkins, Esquire Arthur Capel, Esquire James L. Compton.
Sir Ralph Hopton. Geofrey Palmer, Esquire Io. Vaughan, Esquire Edw. Montague, Esquire Geo.
Montague, Esquire Will. Plydell, Esquire Sir John Paulet. Charles Price, Esquire Herbert
Price, Esquire Sir Ralph Sidenham. Fitzwilliam Cognisby, Esquire Baptist Noel, Esquire Sir
Roger Palmer. John Coventry, Esquire Edw. Seymor, Esquire Sir Arthur Ingram. Sir Tho.
Ingram. Sir Edw. Verney. Sir Ralph Verney. Eranics Newport, Esquire Ben. Weston,
Esquire Lord Mansfield. Sir William Carnaby. Sir Nicholas Slaning. Io. Craven, Esquire
William Constantine, Esquire Sir Edw. Deering. Sir Geo. Dalston. Sir Tho. Bowyer.
Io. Hamden, Esquire Henry Pelham, Esquire Sir Tho. Widdrington. Sir Henry Herbert. Sir
Edw. Bainton. James Cambel, Esquire Sir Tho. Heal. Sir Henry Anderson. Sir
Harbottle Grimston: Sir Robert Pie, Senior. Ferd. L. Fairfax. Sir Henry
Mildmay. Sir William Armyn. Sir Roger North. Sir Walter Deaveraux. Tho.
Hatcher, Esquire Sir Chr. Yelverton. William L. Russel. Sir Philip Stapleton. Sir
Henry Cholmly. Sir John Hotham. John Pym, Esquire Sir Ben. Rudyard. Herbert, Esquire
Digby, Esquire Sir Gilbert Gerrard. Lord Ruthen. Sir Nevil Pool. Denzil Hollis, Esquire
John Maynard, Esquire Sir Robert Harly, John Glyn, Esquire Sir Tho. Barrington. William
Stroud, Esquire Nathan. Fines Esquire Henry Martin, Esquire John Bodvil, Esquire Sir Fran.
Knoles. Rich. Shettleworth, Esquire John Moor, Esquire Sir Simon D'Ewes. Sir John Wray.
Sir Chr. Wray. Sir Martin Lomly. Herbert Morly, Esquire Tho. L. Gray, Rog.
Burgoine, Esquire Sir Edw. Hungerford. Sir John Curson. Will. Perepoint, Esquire John
Marstal, Esquire Hugh Owen, Esquire Norton Knatchbold, Esquire Sir Ed. Hales. Sir Ed.
Master -- John Cowcher, Esquire Sir William Strickland. Sir Edw. Boys. Sir Tho.
Walsingham. Sir Peter Wrath. Tho. Maleveror, Esquire Edw. Bainton, Esquire Oliver
Cromwell, Esquire Sir Gilbert Pickering. Will. Whittaker, Esquire Mich. Oldsworth, Esquire
Sir John Harrison. Sir Hugh Cholmley. Isaac Penington, Esquire George Peard, Esquire
Sir Io. Howard. Henry Vaughan, Esquire Ed. Kirton, Esquire Ed. Bagshaw, Esquire Sir Walter
Smith. Rich. Harding, Esquire Bulstred Whitlock, Esquire Will. Price, Esquire Henry Lucas,
Esquire Gilbert Willington, Esquire Sir Tho. Huchinson. Sir Will. Morly. Sir Henry
Bellingham. Sir John Frankland. Sir John Clotworthy. Sir Edw. Munford. Will.
Kage, Esquire John Northcot, Esquire Sir Tho. Middleton. Sir John Salisbury. Sir To.
Nappier. Tho. Lower, Esquire Fran. Gerrard, Esquire Perigrin Pelham, Esquire Tho. Fountain,
Esquire Hen. Vernon, Esquire Lord Lisle. Ed. Dawx, Esquire To. Scowen, Esquire Sir Dudly North.
Lawrance Whitaker, Esquire Sir Humphry Tufton. Henry Heyman, Esquire Tho. Hiblethwait,
Esquire Arthur Jones, Esquire Will. Bell, Esquire Io. Harvy, Esquire Io. Ash, Esquire Geo. Gallop,
Esquire Io. Nash, Esquire Edw. Ash, Esquire Rich. Seaburn, Esquire Cornelius Holland, Esquire Edm.
Dunch, Esquire Rich. Barwis, Esquire Humph. Hook. Esquire To. Trelawny, Esquire Rich. Weston,
Esquire John Goodwin, Esquire Nath. Stephen, Esquire Io. White, Esquire Sir Ed. Griffin. Rich.
Albrough, Esquire Dr. Sam. Turner. Ral. Snead, Esquire Ed. Patridge, Esquire Sir Peter
Temple. Poynings Moore, Esquire Sir Will. Lewis. Peter Venebles, Esquire Hen.
Killagrew, Esquire John Harris, Esquire Io. Moston, Esquire Peter Leigh, Esquire Dr. Tho.
Eaden. Will. Glanvil, Esquire Arthur Goodwin, Esquire Edw. Owner, Esquire Tho. Toll, Esquire
John Polwhil, Esquire Simon Thelwal, Esquire Oliv. St. John Regis Sol. Sir Will.
Allynson. Io. Crew. Rich. Catelin, Esquire To. Goodwy, Esquire Io. Blakeston, Esquire Sir
Will. Brereton. Miles Corbet, Esquire Phil. Smith, Esquire Sir Rich. Vivion. --
Ravenscroft, Esquire Sir Tho. Middleton. Rich. Kingsly, Esquire Ralph Ashton, Esquire Will.
Fitzwilliams, Esquire Henry Bellasis, Esquire Sir Edw. Ascue. Sir Edm. Fowel. Sir Io.
Price Rich. Boil, Lord Dungarven. Edw. Pool, Esquire Roger Hill, Esquire Sir Io.
Eveling. Edw. Prideaux, Esquire Giles Green, Esquire Dennis Bond, Esquire Roger Mathews,
Esquire Zouch Pate, Esquire Io. White, Esquire Rich. Moore, Esquire Rich. Reeves, Esquire Tho.
Pewry, Esquire Will. Pewrifoy, Esquire Will. Spurs^ow, Esquire Simon Snow, Esquire Rich.
Ferris, Esquire Ed. Thomas, Esquire Serj. Wild. Humphrey Salway, Esquire Tho. Leeds, Esquire
Will. Harrison, Esquire Gervis Clifton. Will. Herbert, Esquire John Woogan, Esquire Henry
Brett, Esquire John Trevanion, Esquire Walter Lloyd, Esquire Sir Rich. Leigh. Sir Tho.
Ingram. Sir To. Crane. John Upton, Esquire John Arundel, Esquire Iona. Rashly, Esquire
Rich. Arundel, Esquire John Woddon, Esquire John Pearsival, Esquire Sir Will. Portman.
Theobald Gorge, Esquire Tho. Smith, Esquire Sir Martin Lister. Sir Tho Che^k. Tho.
Hayle, Esquire Anthony Beding field, Esquire Sir Tho Smith. Ralph Ashton, Esquire John
Potts, Esquire Francis Rowse, Esquire Pierce Edcomb, Esquire Sir Walter Earl. Sir Will.
Masham. John Gourdon, Esquire John Role Esquire Tho. Arundel, Esquire Joseph Jane, Esquire Sir
Philip Parker. Arthur Ains^ow, Esquire Geo. Hartnal Esquire Edw. Wingate, Esquire Robert
Sicil Esquire Sir William Litton. Sir John Iennings. Sir Oliv Luke. Sir An.
Nichols. John Broxam, Esquire John Allured, Esquire Geo. Buller, Esquire James Fines, Esquire
Nich. Weston, Esquire Sir Beauchamp St. John. Sir Richard Ans^ow. Sir Io. Corbet.
Sir Alex. Denton. Sir Io. Parker. Sir To. Parkhurst. Sir Ambrose Brown. Sir
Sam. Owfield. Sir Rich. Buller. Alex. Carew, Esquire Sir Nath. Barnadiston. Sir
Harvy Baggott. Simon Norton, Esquire Samson Evers, Serj. at Law. Philip Sidney,
Lord Lisle. John Alford, Esquire Sir Chapter Williams. Rich. Herbert, Esquire Sir Edw.
Alford. Sir William Plaitor. Francis Gamull, Esquire Sir Ioh. Stepney. Sir Io.
Brook. Io. Fenwick, Esquire Will. Chadwell., Esquire Alex. Lutterell, Esquire Io. Burlace,
Esquire Sir Io. Cook. Tho. Cook, Esquire Tho. May, Esquire Sir Richard Lewison. John
Griffith, Esquire Matthew Davis, Esquire John Fettiplace, Esquire Geo. Lo, Esquire Rich.
Edgcomb, Esquire Sir Ed. Redny. Sir Arth. Ha^welrig. Sir Fran. Barnham. Sir Tho.
Gervis. To. Wallop, Esquire James Rivers, Esquire Will. Haveningham, Esquire Will. Cawly,
Esquire John Button, Esquire Tho. Gervis Esquire Sir Hen. Worsly. Hen. Darly, Esquire Valentine
Walton, Esquire Sam. Vassal, Esquire Hen. Campion, Esquire Io. Merrick, Esquire Herbert Price,
Esquire Tho. Earl, Esquire Will. Marlet, Esquire Will. Drake, Esquire Sir Ed. Littleton. Sir
And. Ludlow. Rich. Harman, Esquire Rich. Shettleworth, Esquire Sir John Draidon. Will.
Ellis, Esquire Will. Thomas, Esquire Io. Pine, Esquire Will. Iepson, Esquire John Hotham, Esquire
Tho. Hodges, Esquire Tho. Moore, Esquire Godfrey Boswell, Esquire Antho. Staply, Esquire Io.
Moyle, Esquire Will. Hay, Esquire Ferdinando Stanhop, Esquire Harbottle Grimston, Esquire John
Craven, Esquire Rob-Crooke, Esquire Edw. Philips, Esquire Rob. Reynolds, Esquire Sir Tho.
Pelham. Ben. Valentine, Esquire Sir Tho. Fanshaw. Matthew Cradock, Esquire -- Lloyd,
Esquire Sir Will. Dalson. Sir Tho. Woodhouse, Francis Godolphin, Esquire Framlingham
Gaudy, Esquire Anthony Irby, Esquire Lord Wenman. John Lowry, Esquire Sir Tho. Danby. John
Eveling, Esquire -- Long, Esquire George Parry, Esquire Will. Morgan, Esquire Walter Kirk, Esquire
Sir Tho. Parker. -- Grantham, Esquire -- Tailor, Esquire John Trenchard, Esquire Rob.
Sutton, Esquire John Whistler, Esquire An. Hungerford, Esquire Tho. Eversfield, Esquire George
Searl, Esquire Cha. Baldwin, Esquire Rich. Whitehead, Esquire Gerrard Napier, Esquire Hen.
Garton, Esquire Mich. Noble., Esquire Sergeant Creswel. Sir John Holland. Sir Will.
Ogle. Sir Charles Gross. Sir Geo. Stonehouse. To. Hurst, Esquire Will. Basset, Esquire
Ralph Godwin, Esquire To. Nichols, Esquire Sir Er. Knowles. Nathan. Hollow, Esquire Ambros
Mannaton, Esquire To. Walker, Esquire Sir Rich. Brown.
A Message was immediately sent to the Lords to acquaint them, that The Commons
send a Message to the Lords, concerning the Plot.
the Commons had just cause and ground to suspect, that there has been, and
still is a secret practice, to discontent the Army with the proceedings of the
Parliament, to engage them in some design of dangerous consequence to the
State, and by some mischievous ways, to prevent the happy success and
conclusion of this Assembly, and to desire their Lordships, that a Select
Committee might be appointed to take the Examinations upon Oath, concerning
this desperate Plot and Design, in the presence And desire a Select Committee
to take Examinations upon Oath. And that no Servant of the King or Queens
Majesty, departs the Kingdom till they be examined. And sent a Letter to the
Army, to assure them of the Parliaments care of them. The Commons past several
Resolves.
of some of the Commons, and to move His Majesty in the name of the Parliament,
that upon this great and weighty occasion, no Servant of His Majesty, the
Queen, or Prince, may depart the Kingdom without leave of his Majesty, with the
Advice of His Parliament, until they appear and be examined. And the Commons
immediately agreed upon a Letter to the Army, and sent it away by an Express,
to assure them of the care the Parliament took, to provide Moneys for them, and
did not doubt but the Army will give a fair testimony of their affections to
the Parliament, notwithstanding the evil deportments of some persons, who have
endeavored to discontent them.

At the same time the Commons passed several Resolves, in order to the security
of the Nation, viz. That strict enquiry be made what Papists, Priests, and
Jesuits, be now about the Town; That the 1500 Barrels of Powder going to
Portsmouth may be stayed. That the Forces in Wiltshire and Hampshire be drawn
toward Portsmouth. And the Forces in Kent and Sussex toward Dover: And they
did declare, that whosoever should give Counsel or Assistance, or join any
manner of way, to bring any Foreign Force into the Kingdom, unless it be by
Command from His Majesty, with consent of both Houses of Parliament, shall be
adjudged and reputed as public Enemies to the King and Kingdoms.

These Resolves the Commons made known to the Lords for their concurrence,
These Resolves and the Protestation commuicated to the Lords.
and also desired them to move His Majesty for the stop of the Ports; and that
the Lord Admiral should place such Trusty Commanders in the Ships, for the
security of the Nation, as they could confide in; in all which, the Lords did
most readily concur.

The Commons did further communicate unto the Lords, the Protestation which
they had taken in their house, desiring the Lords it might also be taken by
every Member of their House: It was sent to the House of Lords by Mr. Hollis,
who at the delivery thereof, did (amongst other passages) express himself to
this effect;

MY LORDS,

THe Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons, having Mr.
Hollis his Speech in a Message to the Lords about the Plot.
taken into their serious Consideration, the present State and Condition of
this Kingdom; they find it surrounded with variety of pernicious, and
destructive Designs, Practices and Plots against the well being of it, Nay, the
very Being of it, and some of those designs hatched within our own Bowels, and
Viper-like, working our own destruction.

They find Jesuits and Priests conspiring with ill Ministers of State, to
destroy our Religion; they find ill Ministers conjoined together, to subvert
the Laws and Liberties; they find obstructions of Justice (which is the Life
and Blood of every State) The Parliament of late years have been like the
Fig Tree in the Gospel, without Efficacy, without Fruit, commonly taken away,
as Elias was with a whirlwind, never coming to any maturity.

The same ill Councils which first raised that storm, and almost shipwrackt the
Commonwealth, do still continue, they blow strong like the East wind, that
brought the Locusts over the Land; Is it not time then my Lords, that we should
unite and concentrate our selves, and defeat the Counsels of these Achitophels,
which would involve us, our Religion, our King, our Laws, our Liberties, all
that can be near and dear unto an honest Soul, in one universal and general
desolation, to defeat I say, the Counsels of such Achitophels, the Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons (knowing themselves to be
specially entrusted with the preservation of the whole, and in their Conscience
persuaded, that the dangers are so eminent, as they will admit of no delay)
have thought fit to declare their united affections, by entering into an
Association amongst themselves, by making a Solemn Protestation and Vow unto
their God, that they will unanimously endeavor to oppose and prevent the
Counsels and Counselors, which have brought upon us all these Miseries and the
Fears of greater, to prevent the ends, and bring the Authors of them to
condign punishment, and thereby discharge themselves the better before God and
Man.

Here the Protestation was read unto the Lords, together with the Grounds and
Reasons which induced the House of Commons to make it, which are prefixed
before it, by way of Preamble.

The Kings Speech on Saturday last to both Houses, being publicly Multitudes
of people flock to Westminster crying Justice, Justice, etc.
known in the City, rumors were spread abroad, concerning desperate Plots and
Designs against the Parliament, which occasioned multitudes of people to resort
the Monday following being May 3. to both Houses of Parliament, in such a
Confluence as has not been usual; they tendered Petitions to both Houses,
crying Justice, Justice against the Earl of Strafford, and when the Houses
arose, they departed.

Tuesday the 4th of May, the Lords desired a Conference with the Commons, The
people assemble again in multitudes, which the Lords communicate to the Commons
at a Conference.
which was managed by the Lord Privy Seal, who spoke to this effect:

That the occasion of the Conference was so visible, that he should not need to
say more of it, the multitudes without bespake the business and matter of it;
That which he had to say was by Command from the King to the Peers, to be
communicated to both Houses of Parliament; That His Majesty takes notice, that
the People do assemble in such unusual numbers, that the Council, and Peace of
the Kingdom may be thereby interrupted,, and therefore as a King that loves
Peace, and takes care, that all proceedings in Parliament may be free and in a
peaceable manner, he desires that these Interruptions may be removed; and
wishes both Houses to devise a course, how the same may be done.

At the same time the Lord Privy Seal communicated to the Commons, And
communicates the Petition of the multitude, as follows.
a Petition, which the Lords had the day before received, from the multitude of
people that flocked together in the Palace-yard, which was to this effect:

THat whereas your Petitioners did yesterday petition, for the redress of many
Grievances, and for the execution of Justice upon the Earl of Strafford, and
other Incendiaries, and to be secured from Desiring Justice and Execution upon
the Earl of Strafford. To be secured against Plots. And against a Garrison
newly put into the Tower. To make way forth Earl of Straffords escape.
some dangerous Plots and Designs on foot, to which your Lordships have this
day given Answer, that you have the same under present consideration; Your
Petitioners do render humble thanks: But forasmuch as your Petitioners
understand, that the Tower of London is presently to receive a Garrison of Men,
not of the Hamblets, (as usually they were wont to do) but consisting of other
persons, under the Command of a Captain, a great Confident of the Earl of
Straffords, which does increase their fears of the sudden destruction of King
and Kingdom; wherein your Lordships and Posterity are deeply interessed, and
this is done to make a way for the escape of the Earl of Strafford, the grand
Incendiary.

They humbly pray that instant course may be taken for the discovery thereof,
and that speedy execution of Justice be done upon the Earl of Strafford.

Whereupon the Lords sent six Peers of their House to the Tower, to understand
what truth there was in this Information, and to demand of the The Lords send
Six Peers to the Tower, to inquire of this business. The Lieutenant said, he
had His Majesty's Command to receive 100 men
Lieutenant who chose those men to be lodged in the Tower, whether he was privy
to it himself, and what Order he had to receive them, and what Captain was to
Command them? To the two first, he said he was wholly ignorant, and for the
Third he said, he had His Majesty's Command, to receive One hundred men into
the Tower, and Captain Billingsly to Command them, and to receive only such men
as he should bring unto him; but now understanding their Lordships Order, he
did promise, that no other Guard should come into the Tower, unless it were the
Hamblet-men. The Lords did further declare at the Conference, that they were
drawing to a conclusion of the Bill of Attainder of the Earl of Strafford, but
The Lords at the Conference declared, That the Tumults hindered their proceeding
upon the Bill of Attainder. The Lords took the Protestation.
were so encompassed with multitudes of People, that their Lordships might be
conceived not to be free, unless they were sent home, whose flocking hither was
the only hindrance to the dispatching of that Bill: and therefore desired the
Commons to join with their Lordships, to find out some way how this Concourse
about both Houses might be avoided. And then they debated the Protestation, and
passed it, and took the same.

After that the Commons returned to the House, Doctor Burgess was desired And
the multitudes departed.
to acquaint the Multitude with the Protestation, which both Houses had taken,
which being read by him, and also made known unto them, that the Parliament
desired, that they would return home to their houses, they forthwith departed.

The said Protestation was afterward tendered to the whole Kingdom, with this
intimation, that whosoever refused to take it, should be noted as disaffected
to the Parliament.

The Commons forthwith ordered the bringing in of a Bill, for the A Bill for
the continuance of the present Parliament, twice read.
continuance of this present Parliament, that it might not be Dissolved without
the consent of both Houses, which was read the First and Second time, and
committed.

That day the Earl of Strafford writ this ensuing Letter to His Majesty.
May it please Your Sacred Majesty,
IT has been my greatest grief in all these Troubles, to be taken as a person
which should endeavor to represent and set things amiss between Your Majesty
The Earl of Straffords Letter to the King.
and Your People, and to give Counsels tending to the disquiet of the Three
Kingdoms.

Most true it is, (that this mine own private Condition considered) it had been
a great madness, (since through Your Gracious Favor I was so provided) as not
to expect in any kind to mend my fortune, or please my mind more, than by
resting where Your bounteous Hands had placed me.

Nay, it is most mightily mistaken; for unto your Majesty it is well known, my
poor and humble Advices concluded still in this, That Your Majesty, and Your
People could never be happy, till there were a right understanding betwixt You
and them; and that no other means were left, to effect and settle this
happiness, but by the Counsel and Assent of Your Parliament, or to prevent the
growing Evils of this State, but by entirely putting Your Self in this last
resort, upon the Loyalty and good Affections of Your English Subjects.

Yet such is my misfortune, that this Truth finds little credit; yea, the
contrary seems generally to be believed, and my self reputed as one who
endeavored to make a separation between You and Your People; under a heavier
censure than this, I am persuaded no Gentleman can suffer.

Now I understand the minds of Men are more and more incensed against me,
notwithstanding Your Majesty has Declared, That in Your Princely opinion I am
not Guilty of Treason, and that You are not satisfied in Your Conscience, to
pass the Bill.

This brings me in a very great straight, there is before me the ruin of my
Children and Family, hitherto untouched in all the Branches of it, with any
foul crime: Here are before me the many ills, which may befall Your Sacred
Person and the whole Kingdom, should Your Self and Parliament part less
satisfied one with the other, than is necessary for the preservation both of
King and People: Here are before me the things most valued, most feared by
mortal men, Life or Death.

To say Sir, that there has not been a strife in me, were to make me less man,
than, God knows, my Infirmities make me; and to call a destruction upon my
self and young Children, (where the intentions of my heart at least have been
innocent of this great offense) may be believed, will find no easy consent from
Flesh and Blood.

But with much sadness I am come to a Resolution of that, which I take to be
best becoming me, and to look upon it, as that which is most principal in it
self, which doubtless is the prosperity of Your Sacred Person, and the Common
wealth, things infinitely before any private man's interest.

And therefore in few words, as I put my self wholly upon the Honor and Justice
of my Peers, so clearly, as to wish Your Majesty might please to have spared
that Declaration of Yours on Saturday last, and entirely to have left me to
their Lordships; So now to set Your Majesty's Conscience at liberty, I do most
humbly beseech Your Majesty for prevention of evils, which may happen by Your
refusal to pass this Bill; and by this means to remove (praised be God) I
cannot say this accursed (but I confess) this unfortunate thing, forth of the
way toward that blessed agreement, which God I trust, shall ever establish
between You and Your Subjects.

Sir, My Consent shall more acquit you herein to God, than all the World can
do besides; To a willing man there is no injury done, and as by Gods Grace I
forgive all the World, with a calmness and meekness of infinite contentment to
my dislodging Soul: So Sir, to you I can give the life of this world, with all
the cheerfulness imaginable, in the just acknowledgment of your exceeding
favors; and only beg, that in Your Goodness, You would vouchsafe to cast Your
Gracious regard upon my poor Son, and his Three Sisters, less or more, and no
otherwise than as their (in present) unfortunate Father, may hereafter appear
more or less guilty of this death. God long preserve Your Majesty.

Tower, May 4. 1641. Your Majesty's most Faithful, And Humble Subject, And
Servant, STRAFFORD.


WEdnesday the 5th of May there happened to be a strange Hubbub in the City,
upon a false Alarm, That the Parliament House was A great Hubbub in the City.
beset, and on fire, and all their lives in danger, which occasioned such
running up and down in a confused manner, to come to protect them, that the
like has scarce been seen. This Hubbub and Alarm happened upon this occasion,
Sir Walter Earl was making a Report to the House of some Plot and Design to
blow up the House of Commons; Whereupon, some Members in the Gallery stood up,
the better to hear the Report, and Mr. Moyle of Cornwall, and Mr. Middleton of
Sussex, two persons of good bigness, weighed down a board in the Gallery, which
gave so great a crack, that some Members thought that it was a Plot indeed; and
Sir John Wray speaking out, he smelt Gunpowder, hastening back out of the
Gallery; some Members and others in fear, running out of the House, frighted
people in the Lobby, who ran into the Hall, crying out, The Parliament House
was falling, and the Members were slain, and the people running in a hurry
through the Hall, Sir Robert Mansel drew his Sword, bid them stand for shame;
he saw no Enemy to hurt the Parliament, nor heard no noise of the fall of the
Parliament House; but some of them hastened by Water from Westminster, and
carried the Alarm into London, which occasioned so great a resort of People in
multitudes to Westminster, to save the Parliament, and one Regiment of
Trained-Bands, Commanded by Colonel Manwaring, upon beat of Drum, were
instantly Armed, and marched as far as Covent Garden (beyond their Liberties)
to secure the Parliament, but finding the Alarm false, they returned again. The
same day the Commons passed the Bill for the continuance of the present
Parliament, and carried the same up to the Lords.

The House of Commons commanded all their Members to attend the House, and not
to depart the Town.

The next day the Committee appointed to join with the Lords, for taking
Examinations concerning the Plot, did acquaint the House, that Conspirators
fled.
6 or 8 of the chief Conspirators were fled, of which Mr. Henry Iermin, and Mr.
Henry Piercy, Members of the House, were two, and that they were gone toward
Portsmouth; Upon which Report, present Information came, that the Queen was
preparing to go to Portsmouth, thereupon both The Queen desigas to go to
Portsmouth.
Houses had a Conference, and agreed to move Her Majesty to stay Her journey
for the security of Her Person, Her Majesty not knowing what danger she might
be exposed to in those parts: In the mean time, One Lord and Two Commoners were
dispatched to Portsmouth, with private Instructions, to propose certain Queries
to the Governor there, and to take further care for the security of the Place
and Haven of such Importance, and they took an Oath of Secrecy, as those Lords
and Commons had done, who were appointed to examine the Plot.

His Majesty was desired by both Houses, to issue out a Proclamation,
Proclamation to call in the Conspirators.
for the calling in Mr. Peircy, and Mr. Iermin within a time limited, which was
accordingly granted. And the Lords were desired by the Commons, to hasten the
Bill of Attainder of the Earl of Strafford.

To prevent further discontents in the Army, this Letter was sent by Order, to
Sir Jacob Ashly, and Sir John Coniers, to be communicated to the Army in the
North.

WHereas there has been just cause of jealousy, that there has A Letter to
prevent the design to engage the Army against the Parliament. sent to Sir Jacob
Ashly, and Sir John Conyers.
been some secret Attempt and Practices, to infuse into the Army a mistake of
this Parliament, to some dangerous intent and purpose againk this State; and
that now the matter is grown to strong presumption upon further discoveries,
and by reason that some of those which were suspected to have been active
therein, are fled upon the first stirring thereof, before ever they were once
named. It pleases this House to Declare, That notwithstanding they intend to
search into the bottom of this Conspiracy, yet purposing to proceed, especially
against the principal Actors therein, this House has resolved, whereunto the
House of Peers has likewise consented, that for such of the Army as the
Conspirators have endeavored to work upon, if they shall testify their
Fidelity to the State, by a total discovery of that which they know, and can
testify therein; they shall not only be free from all punishment, but also
shall be esteemed to have done that, which is for the service of the State, in
the discovering so dangerous a Plot, and for such of the Army as are and shall
be found no ways tainted with the Design, or knowing any thing thereof, shall
make such discovery as aforesaid, as this House shall no ways doubt of their
Loyalty and Fidelity, so it will have a special care, not only to satisfy all
such Arrears, as this House has formerly promised to discharge, but also give
a fair testimony of the sense they have of their present and past wants; And it
is ordered by this House, that immediately after the receipt hereof, you should
communicate this their Declartion unto all the Officers and Members of the
Army, under your Command.

This Plot consisted of Three Heads, the first was the design upon the Tower;
The Plot consisted of three heads.
The Second, to engage the Army; The Third, to bring in foreign Forces. For the
Tower it appeared to be thus, Captain Billingsly being examined upon oath,
confessed that he was acquainted with Sir John Suckling, Capt. Bilingsly his
Examination, that he had Orders to get 100 men into the Tower.
that the said Sir John lately offered him employment in one of the Kings Ships
then at Portsmouth; afterward employment for Portugal; That this Deponent
having notice to meet at the Privy Lodgings at Whitehall, did there receive
Orders to get 100 men to serve in the Tower under him, and if he did fail, he
should answer it with his life: and afterward meeting with Sir John Suckling,
and acquainting him therewith, he told him he would furnish him with the said
number. Sir Will. Bellfower, Lieutenant of the Tower being examined, said, That
he had a Command to receive Capt. Billingsly with 100 Men into the Tower, who
should be under his Command. That the Earl of Strafford at that time,
expostulating with him about his escape, told him he would attempt nothing in
The Earl expostulates about his escape.
that kind without his privity, and that he should have the Kings Warrant for
his Indemnity, and that the Warrant should be to Command him to remove the said
Earl of Strafford from the Tower to some other Castle, and he would then take
his opportunity to escape; That the Lieutenant of the Tower not giving any
complying Answer thereunto, the said Earl sent again to entreat him to come to
him, and would have persuaded him to let him make an escape; saying, without
your concurrence it cannot be done, and if you will consent thereunto, I will
make you present payment of Twenty two thousand pounds, besides, you shall have
a good Marriage for your Son. To which the Lieutenant of the Tower replied, he
was so far from concurring therein, that he was not to be further moved in such
a thing; thus much the Lieutenant delivered upon Oath.

Three other Witnesses were examined, who did Depose, That being desirous to
see the Earl of Strafford, they were carried to the back door Examination of
three Witnesses more, as as to the Earls escape.
of the Gallery where his Lodgings were, and heard the Earl of Strafford
discourse, as he was walking with Mr. Slingsby (as afterward they understood
his name to be) about his escape, as they conceived it, for they heard him say,
Where is your Brothers Ship? to which he answered, in such a place, and that he
might be there in three hours, if the Lieutenant of the Tower were sure to him.
And heard the Earl further say, That if the King could have done any thing, His
Majesty would by His Warrant have done it before now, and have sent for him to
be removed; but now there was nothing to be thought upon but an escape; And
also heard the said Earl say, If this Fort could be guarded two or three
months, there would aid enough come.

The Plot concerning the Army was thus.

Col. Goring upon his Examination in the House of Commons, did confess Col:
Gorings examination about the Plot.
that Sir John Suckling was the first Person that ever made any overture unto
him concerning the Armies marching toward London; afterward being in the
Queens Lodgings, he met with Mr. H. P. which was about the beginning or middle
of Lent last, and Mr. P. told him, there was a Consultation of Officers to be
had, concerning the good of the Army, and desired him to go along with him to
his Chamber, where the meeting was to be; there were present at the same
meeting Comissary Wilmott, Col. Ashburnham, Capt. Pollard, Sir John Berkly,
Dan. O-Neal, Mr. Iermin and himself. That Mr. P. said, there were Propositions
to be made, which were of great concernment, and that it was necessary there
should be an Oath of Secrecy taken, before any thing was propounded; That the
Oath should be to this purpose, that we should neither directly nor indirectly
discover any part of the Consultation, nor ever to think our selves dissolved
from that Oath, by any other Oath, which might be imposed upon us hereafter.
which Oath was read out of a Paper, when it was tendered unto them, and that
thereupon they were sworn by laying their hands upon the Bible, That he and
Iermin were sworn together, for the rest had taken the Oath before.

Then three Propositions were made unto them, being the same in substance,
expressed in Mr. P. Letter.

He further said, That the whole number there met, were of opinion, that the
Army should not march toward London, till a Declaration had been first sent up
to the Parliament. That he the said Goring answered, it was a nice point to
interpose in the proceedings of the Parliament, and did propound some
difficulties to allay the business, to divert Comissary Wilmot, and those other
persons from so dangerous a business, and said, that he did think it was a
design of Folly to undertake it, for they must think that the Scots would take
the advantage upon the Armies removal Southwards, whose correspondency was so
great with the City, and for them to begin to show their Teeth, and not be able
to bite, would argue little prudence. That they should either undertake it so,
as to go thorough with it, or to let it alone; That he did ask them, What
Ammunition they had to accommodate so great an Army, and whether they could
command the Ammunition in the Tower. That Wilmot, Pollard, and Ashburnham, then
made answer, they had no purpose to go to London, for to surprise the Tower,
was to conquer the Kingdom. That this amongst other passages, was part of the
discourse at the first meeting.

That shortly after, there was another meeting of the same persons, and in the
same place in Mr. Peircies Chamber, where there were Propositions of another
nature, Desperate and Impious on the one hand, and foolish on the other: and
that he endeavored by Argument to divert them, by propounding an impossibility
to effect the same: For how could the Army lodged in several Quarters, unpaid,
and at such a distance, march on a sudden to London, and surprise what they had
in Design?

That Mr Iermin was the person that first proposed the marching of the Army
toward London; That he for his part, declared himself absolutely against it:
That Mr. Iermin replied to him in private; You do not dislike the Design, for
you are as ready for any wild mad undertaking, as any man I know, but you
dislike the temper of those persons who are engaged in the business.

He did further confess, That he propounded, that Suckling might also be
admitted to the Consultation, but Wilmot, Ashburnham, and Pollard would not
hear of it; and they three did then declare themselves against the Armies
marching toward London.

Then he took occasion to say, That he did acquaint some Members of both
Houses, whom he could name, that there were some of the Army whom they did not
think so well of, were more faithful and serviceable to the Parliament, than
they were aware of, which time would produce, and named them; and they did
accordingly give testimony of his Integrity, so far as general Terms could
discover the design: He confessed, that Mr. Iermin did make some offers unto
him, to relinquish the Government of Portsmouth, upon some other terms of
advantage; but he said, he did not conclude any thing, for he would first see
the performance of what was offered, so had no further discourse with him
concerning that business, but he does believe that Suckling and Iermin did
confer together about the Design; he said, they did desire his opinion about a
General; some were for Essex, some for Holland, but he with Iermin, were for
Newcastle.

Being again examined upon his Oath, before the Committee of Lords and Commons,
and pressed more particularly to answer questions not before proposed unto him;
He did confess, that meeting with Mr. Iermin in the Queens Drawing-Chamber, Her
Majesty came and told him, the King would speak with him, and meeting with His
Majesty, he told him, he was minded to set His Army into a good posture, being
advised thereto by the Earl of Bristol (as he said) and His Majesty then
Commanded him to join with Mr. Peircy, and some others in that business.

As for the Designs from beyond Seas, the Committee did make Report to the
House, that it was cleared unto them, that Iermin endeavored to have got the
possession of Portsmouth; That the King of France had drawn down great Forces
to the Seaside; That the Governor of Calice had examined some Englishmen,
whether the Earl of Straffords Head was yet off? and this was in point of time
the First of May, according to the English style, and Sir Philip Cartwright,
Governor of Guernsey, wrote Letters also, which came in great haste; That he
understood the French had a Design upon that Island, or some part of England.
It also appeared to the Committee by diverse of the Letters, which were opened
coming from beyond Sea, that they expected the Earl of Strafford there, and
that they hoped the Horseleeches should be starved for want of Blood; and in
some of those Letters, there was advice to the Cardinal, to bestir himself
betimes, to interrupt the height of the proceedings here in England. Also
examination of some Priests were taken in Lancashire, and sent up to London,
which were there taken the 3 of May, which did testify, That the Priests did
say, The Parliament should be suddenly Dissolved, for the Army was to march up
thither with all speed, and they would be seconded by Forces out of France; and
that Mountague did write out of France to Mr Peircy (which was also
intercepted) That if he did perform what he had undertaken, he would be made a
Knight of the Garter

Mr. Peircys Letter to the Earl of Northumberland, and by him presented to the
Parliament
WHat with my own Innocence, and the Violence I hear is against Mr. Peircy his
better against the Plot.
me, I find my self much distracted; I will not ask your Counsel, because it
may bring prejudice upon you, but I will with all Faithfulness and Truth tell
you, what my part has been, that at least it may be cleared by you, whatsoever
becomes of me.

When there was 50000 l. designed by the Parliament for the English Army, there
was (as I take it) a sudden Demand by the Scots at the same time, of 25000 l,
of which there was 15000 l. ready; this they pressed with much necessity, so as
the Parliament did (after an Order made) think it fit for them to Reduct 10000
l. out of the 50000 l. formerly granted, upon which, the Soldiers in our House
were much scandalized, amongst which was one, and sitting by Wilmot and
Ashburnham, Wilmot stood up and told them, If that the Scots could procure
Money, he doubted not but the Officers of the English Army might easily do the
like; but the first Order was reversed notwithstanding, and 10000 l, given to
the Scots, this was the cause of many discourses of dislike among us, and came
to this purpose, That they were disobliged by the Parliament, and not by the
King, this being said often to one another, we did Resolve, that Wilmot,
Ashburnham, Pollard, O-Neal, and my Self, to make some expressions of serving
the King in all things he would Command us, that were Honorable for Him and
us, being likewise agreeing to the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, that so far
we would live and dye with him. This was agreed upon with us, not having any
communication with others, that I am coupled now with all; and further, by
their joint consent, I was to tell His Majesty thus much from them, but withal,
I was to order the matter so, as the King might apprehend this as a great
Service done unto him at this time, that when affairs were in so ill a
condition, and they were most confident they would engage the whole Army thus
far, but further, they would undertake nothing, because they would neither
infringe the Liberty of the Subjects, nor destroy the Laws; to which I and
every one consented; and having their sense, I drew the Heads up in a Paper,
which they all approved of when I read it, and then we did by an Oath, promise
one another, to be constant and secret in all this, and did all of us take this
Oath together; then I said, Well Sirs, I must now be informed, what your
particular desires are, that so I may be the better able to serve you, which
they were pleased to do; and so I did very faithfully serve them therein, as
far as I could: This is the Truth, and all the Truth, upon my Soul. In
particular discourses after that, we did fall upon the petitioning to the King
and Parliament for Moneys, there being so great Arrears due to us, and so much
delays made in the procuring of them, but that was never done.

The Heads were these.
1. Concerning the Bishops Functions and Votes. 2. The not disbanding of the
Irish Army, until the Scots were disbanded to. 3. The endeavoring to settle
His Majesty's Revenue to that proportion it was formerly.
And it was resolved by us all, if the King should require our assistance in
those things, that as far as we could, we might contribute thereunto, without
breaking the Laws of the Kingdom. And in case the King should be denied, those
things being put to them, we would not fly from him: all these persons did Act
and Concur in this as well as I. This being all imparted to the King by me from
them, I perceived he had been Treated with by others, concerning some things of
our Army which agreed not with what was proposed by me, but tended to a way
more sharp and high, not having limits, either of Honor or Law. I told the King
he might be pleased to consider with himself, which of the ways it was fit for
him to hearken unto? for us, we were resolved not to depart from our grounds;
we should not be displeased whosoever they were, but the particular of the
Designs, or the Persons, we desired not to know, though it was no hard matter
to guess at them; In the end, I believe the danger of the one, and the justice
of the other made the King tell me, he would cast off all thoughts of other
Propositions but ours, as things not practicable, but desired notwithstanding,
that Goring and Iermin, who were acquainted with the other proceedings, should
be admitted amongst us; I told him, I thought the other Gentry would never
consent to it, but I would propose it, which I did, and we were all much
against it, but the King did press it so much, as at the last it was consented
unto, and Goring and Iermin came to my Chamber there: I was appointed to tell
them, after they had sworn to Secrecy, what we had proposed, which I did; But
before I go into the Debate of the way, I must tell you, Iermin and Goring were
very earnest Suckling should be admitted, which we did all decline, and was
desired by all our men to be resolute in it, which I was, and gave many
Reasons; whereupon Mr. Goring made answer, he was engaged with Suckling, his
being employed in the Army; but for his meeting with us, they were content to
pass it by: Then we took up again the ways that were proposed, which took great
debate, and theirs differed from ours in Violence and Height, which we all
protested against, and parted disagreeing totally, yet remitted it to be spoken
of by me and Iermin to the King, which we both did, and the King constant to
his former Resolutions, told them these ways were all vain and foolish, and
would think of them no more. I omit one thing of Mr. Goring, he desired to know
how the Chief Commands were to be disposed of, for if he had not a Condition
worthy of himself, he would not go along with us; We made answer, That no body
thought of that; we intended, if we were sent down, to go all in the same
capacity we were in, he did not like that by any means, and by that did work so
with Mr. Chidley, that there was a Letter sent by some of the Commanders, to
make him Lieutenant General; and when he had ordered this matter at London, and
Mr. Chidley had his Instructions, then did he go to Portsmouth, pretending to
be absent when this was a working; we all desired, my Lords of Essex or Holland
to be General, but Goring and Iermin were for Newcastle. They were pleased to
give Report, that I should be General of the Horse, but I protest, neither to
the King, nor any else, did I so much as think of it; My Lord of Holland was
made General, and so all things were laid aside: and this is the Truth, and all
the Truth I knew of these proceedings; and this I will, and do protest unto you
upon my Faith, and Wilmot, Ashburnham, and O-Neal, have at several times
confessed and sworn; I never said any thing in the business, they did not every
one agree unto and justify. This Relation I sent you, rather to inform you of
the truth of the matter, that you may the better know how to do me good, but I
should think my self very unhappy to be made a betrayer of any body; what
concerned the Tower, or any thing else, I never meddled withal, nor ever spoke
with Goring, but that night before them all, and I said nothing but what was
consented unto by any party; I never spoke one word with Suckling, Carnarvan,
Davenant, or any other creature. Methinks, if my Friends and kindred knew the
Truth and Justice of the matter, it were no hard matter to serve me in some
measure.


Afterward was read Father Philips's Letter to Mr. Mountague, as follows;
THe good King and Queen are left very naked; the Puritans, if Father Philips
his Letter against the Parliament.
they durst, would pull the good Queen in pieces. Can the good King of France,
suffer a Daughter of France, his Sister, and her Children to be thus affronted?
Can the wise Cardinal endure England and Scotland to unite, and not be able to
discern, in the end, it is like they will join together, and turn head against
France? A stirring active Ambassador might do good here; I have sent you a Copy
of the Kings Speech on Saturday last, at which time he discharged his
Conscience concerning the Earl of Strafford, and was advised to make that
Speech by the Earl of Bristol, and the Lord Savile.

This Speech did much operate to the disadvantage of the Earl of Strafford, for
the Commons were thereby much incensed and inflamed against him, and this
brought forth the next day, being Monday, a Protestation which was taken in
both Houses of Parliament of the same nature, but rather worse than the Scotch
Covenant.

The Londoners, who are very boisterous, came upon Monday, 5 or 600, and were
so rude, that they would not suffer the Lords to come and go quietly and
peaceably to their House, but threatened them, that if they had not Justice,
and if they had not his Life, it should go hard for all those that stood for
him; following them up and down, and call^g for Justice, Justice, Justice.

There was in the House of Commons Fifty six that denied to pass the Earl of
Straffords Bill; their Names were taken, and they were fixed upon Posts in
diverse parts in London, and there was written over head, These are
Straffordians, the Betrayers of their Country.

By this means it came to pass, that the Lords and Judges were much affrighted,
and the most of his friends in the Lords House forsook him, all the Popish
Lords did absent themselves, the Lords of Holland and Hartford were absent, so
was Bristol and others; Savil and the Duke only stuck close and faithfully to
him, and some few other Lords; God knows, the King is much dejected, the Lords
much affrighted, which made the Citizens and the House of Commons show their
heads; some have braved little less than to Unthrown His Majesty, Who, if He
had but an ordinary Spirit, might easily quash and suppress these people. Our
good Queen is much afflicted, and in my conscience, the Puritans, if they
durst, would tear her in pieces. This cannot be for the Honor of France, to
endure a Daughter of that Nation, to be oppressed and affronted.

The Earl of Holland is made General of the Army, whither he is gone Earl of
Holland General of the Army.
down; the Earl of Newport, Master of the Ordinance; Ballfower, Lieutenant of
the Tower, has proved an errand Traitor to the King, who Commanded him upon
his Allegiance, to receive a Captain and 100 Men into the Tower, which he most
Traitorously refused to do.

There was a Report in London, that the Parliament House was on fire, whereupon
there were many thousands of people very suddenly gathered together; whereby
you may easily see the height and violence of the peoples affections,

May the 6th. Ann. Dom. 1641.

Upon the reading of this Letter, and exceptions taken to his expression, That
the Puritans would tear the Queen in pieces, and to other passages Father
Philips to be sent for.
in the Letter; and upon Information also given, of his endeavoring to seduce
the Kings Subjects to the Popish Religion: it was ordered he should be sent for
to be examined; who thereupon applied himself to His Majesty, and the King told
him, he would know what the business was before he should go, as Philips told
the Sergeant, and so refused to come with him; Hereupon the House of Commons
desired Mr. Treasurer to acquaint His Majesty, That they had some cause to
examine Francis Philips, a Romish Priest, and to that end sent him a Summons,
which he does refuse to obey, and makes His Majesty's House a Sanctuary in case
of High Treason; That in respect to His Majesty, the House does forbear to take
further course herein, till His Majesty be further acquainted with it.

Hereupon Father Philips appeared, and was called to the Bar of the He appears
House, where he first kneeled, and afterward stood up, and being demanded the
reason, wherefore he appeared not? He answered, because the Warrant was to
apprehend Francis Philips, and his name was Robert Philips, and that the Queen
wished him to stay till he had spoken with the King, and the King told him, the
House may send for him, when they call for any of his Servants, till then he
need not go; and the Letter before mentioned, being produced unto him, he
confessed the same to be his own Handwriting. The further examination of this
business, was referred to the Committee for the Popish Hierarchy, who drew up
this Impeachment following,

The Impeachment, and Articles of Complaint against Father Philips, the Queens
Confessor, lately committed to the Tower by the Parliament.

I. THat the said Father Philips has been observed to be a great cause, both
in himself and his Adherents, of a great part of the unquietness of this State.

II. He, with Parsons, and others their Assistants, were the only cause that
the Pope was stirred up to some Breves to these Kingdoms of England and
Scotland, to hinder the Oath of Allegiance, and lawful Obedience of the
Subjects to Our Gracious King, that so they may still fish in troubled waters.

III. The damnable Doctrine which he and other Jesuits have taught, to Destroy,
and Depose Kings, has been the cause of the Civil Wars, like to befall these
Kingdoms, if God in his mercy do not prevent it.

IV. They have been the cause of the Monopolies projected in this Kingdom,
especially concerning Soap, the Forest of Dean, and marking of Butter-Cask,
where all the Parties were Partners, and Confederates with them, as Sir Basil
Brook, Sir John Winter, and a Brother-in-law of the said Sir John, that lived
in Worcestershire, and Mr. Ployden, whose Servant named Baldwin, has been seen
to deliver to Captain Read, a Substitute of the Jesuits, an hundred pound at a
time to one Jesuit.

V. Father Philips has been a great Actor with the Superior of the Capuchins,
who is a most turbulent Spirit, and was sent thither by Cardinal Richlieu of
France, to be a spy at this Court for the French Faction: And has therefore
labored by all means to breed dissentions; for the French aim at nothing more,
then to make a Schism betwixt the English and the Scots, that this State might
so be weakened, and made unable to withstand them, that so they might have an
opportunity to conquer these Kingdoms; these unquiet Spirits having access to
Her Majesty, may importune things not fit for the State.

VI. The said Father Philips has been guided by a Gray Friar, who by degrees
has intruded himself to be a Clerk of Her Majestys Chapel, and Chaplain
Extraord. in time of progress, who when he is out of London, goes by the name
of Mr. Wilson, but his true name is Will. Thomson Dr. of Divinity, as some
Jesuits have affirmed; but a most furious Spirit, and unquiet, and therefore by
Nickname, is by some called Cacafugo, that is as much as if in English you
should say Shit-fire; by whom Father Philips has been so led, that he has
been very officious to perform whatsoever he would have done. These two have
ruled all the business concerning the two Kingdoms on the Papists parts, and
for the most part of Rome also.

VII. The said Father Philips has placed many unfit persons about Her Majesty,
viz. Sir John Winter to be Her Majesty's Secretary, Signior Georgeo come late
Agent from the Pope, his Brother was by his means admitted to be Servant
Extraordinary to the Queen, a man altogether unfit for that place, a most
scandalous person, having three Wives, all now alive.

VIII. Sundry persons by the said Father Philips have been admitted to be the
Queens Servants Extraordinary, by some supposed Office or other, as Mr. Laburn,
Geo. Gage, (Brother to Col. Gage) have both Oratorian Priests, the one of the
French Faction very seditious, the other of the Spanish, whose Brother is now
left Resident at Rome for them, by his Master Mr. William Hamilton late Agent
at Rome; Penrick is sworn Servant Extraordinary to Her Majesty, who is a sworn
Spaniard, and Intelligencer for Rome, in respect his Brother is Agent here by
Father Philips; these and many others, who are factious and turbulent spirits,
have by Father Philips his means, received protection from the Queens Majesty.

IX. The said Philips has been much ruled by Sir Toby Mathews, Sir John
Winter, and Mr. Walter Mountague.

X. He was very forward with his Accomplices, for the breaking of the Ice to
begin the Treaty here for the Popes Honors sake, and when Sir Robert Douglas,
and Signior Georgio were nominated, whom he thought most fit, Cardinal Richlieu
was thought fittest to be the man who should direct him to begin the
correspondency between the Pope and the Queen, and therefore he was sent to
France with many Letters, and from thence he was dispatched for Rome by the
Cardinal, where he was received with great respect; and after a Viatick, he was
dispatched again for England with some few small Gifts, as Pictures, Crosses,
Agnus Dei's, and such like Popish stuff, to Father Philips.

XI. The said Father Philips was the chief Agent in correspondency with, and
bringing in of Signior Georgio Parsons, the Oratorian Priest, by whose
direction this Priest, being at Paris, left wearing of Priests Clothes, and
went in the Habit of a Gentleman; and because he had a shaven Crown, therefore
he wore a Periwig, and Father Philips directed all those that sent to write to
him, as to an Italian Gentleman, desirous to see these Kingdoms, and by Father
Philips's direction, he afterward came hither, who did here contrive for the
space of two years, practicing great and dangerous Innovations from place to
place, and then having dispatched his business, returns to Rome with great
Presents from the Catholics of the greater sort.

XII. Whereas it has pleased God to bless us with a hopeful Prince, to the
comfort of our King and Kingdom, yet the said Father Philips has attempted to
traduce his tender years to Popery; but God has prevented him of his purpose,
and let us pray to God to preserve that Royal Race from Popery, and the whole
Land from all Innovations, that Our Gracious King may rule Gloriously, and the
whole Land live in peace to the Honor of God, and Comfort of us all, Amen.

Resolved, That Mr. Henry Peircy in the Months of March and April last, Several
Votes against Ar. Peircy about the Plot.
in the Parish of St. Martins, in the County of Middlesex, did compass, Plot,
and Conspire with others, to draw the Army together, and employ the same
against the Parliament, and by force and dread thereof, to compel the
Parliament to agree to certain Propositions by them contrived, and to hinder
and interrupt the Proceedings of the Parliament; The like Resolution in the
same words concerning Mr. Iermin, Sir John Suckling, etc.

Resolved, That in pursuance of the said Design, the said Henry Peircy by the
Plot and Combination aforesaid, did endeavor to persuade diverse Members of the
House of Commons of the said Parliament and others, being Officers of the said
Army, that is to say, Wilmot, Ashburnham, Berkley, Pollard, and Daniel O-Neal,
that they were disobliged by the Parliament, thereby to incense them, and to
affect them against the Parliament, and did hold diverse consultations with the
said parties, to effect the said wicked and dangerous Design; and to that
purpose, did set down in Writing certain Propositions to the effect as
follows, viz. The preserving of Bishops in their Functions and Votes; The not
Disbanding of the Irish Army, until the Scots were Disbanded; And the
endeavoring to settle the Kings Revenue to the proportion it was formerly.

Resolved, That the said Henry Peircy did in pursuance of the Plot and
Combination aforesaid, and for the more secret carriage thereof, administer to
the said parties a wicked and unlawful Oath, whereby they did swear upon the
Holy Evangelists, not to reveal any thing, that was spoken concernig the
business, that was in Consultation, directly or indirectly, nor to think
themselves absolved by any other Oath that should be after taken by them, from
the Secrecy enjoined by the said Oath.

Resolved, That the said Henry Peircy at the time of the said Oath was taken,
and at diverse other times did propound and endeavor to persuade the persons
before-named, and other Officers of the said Army, to put the said Army into a
Warlike posture, and to bring them up to London, and likewise to make
themselves sure of the Tower, and so by force to compel the Parliament to
conform to their Will, and he with Suckling, etc. did endeavor to work a
belief in the said Army, that the King and Parliament would disagree, and so to
persuade them to adhere to His Majesty against the Parliament; and said, that
all the French about the City of London would assist them, and to the great
scandal of the King, That the Prince and the Earl of Newcastle were to meet the
Army at Nottingham, with a Thousand Horse; and that Suckling to encompass the
Design of gaining the Tower, did contrive, that 100 Men under Capt. Billing
sley should be designed for that purpose, when the opportunity was offered.

To the end the City of London should not be able to make any resistance, when
the said Army should come up, according to the forementioned Design; and
Suckling by the means and Plot aforesaid, did thereby endeavor, that the Earl
of Strafford, then Prisoner in the Tower, might the better incompass his escape.

That Berkley and O-Neal being questioned, did fly for the same. Barkley and
O-Neal are fled. Mr. Peircy charged with High Treason.


Resolved, That upon the whole matter, Mr. Pierce shall be charged with High
Treason, the like for Iermin and Suckling.

That 3000 l. of the Pole Money be paid to Col. Goring, for the use of the
Garrison of Portsmouth.

Resolved, That Col. Goring in his Depositions concerning this Discovery, A
Vote to vindicate Col. Goring.
has done nothing contrary to Justice and Honor, but has therein deserved
very well of the Commons of this House.

Friday the 7th of May, the Lords passed the Bill of Attainder, as also Bill of
Attainder, and for continuance of the Parliament, passed Message to the Lords
to move the King for His Consent to pass the Bill of Attainder.
the Bill for the Continuance of this present Parliament.

Saturday the 8th of May, Mr. Hotham was sent with a Message to the House of
Lords, to desire their Lordships to join with them, to move His Majesty for his
Consent to the Bill of Attainder, in regard, the peace of the Ringdom does so
much depend upon the execution of that Bill, which had passed both Houses; and
accordingly a certain number of the House of Peers were sent unto His Majesty,
to acquaint him therewith; and also with the Bill for the Continuance of this
present Parliament.

The House being informed, That Ships were ready to be put to Sea, but that
Mariners could not be got. It was the same day Resolved, That a To Press
Mariners.
Bill should be drawn to enable the Pressing of Mariners for a certain time,
the House being very tender of bringing the way of Pressing into example The
King, Judges, and Bishops consult about Strafford. The King gives Warrant for a
Commission to give His Assent to the Bill for execution of the Earl of
Strafford. The Royal Assent given this day, and the Bill passed.
by a Law.

Sunday the 9th of May, the King called His Privy Council together at
Whitehall, and propounded several scruples unto them concerning that Bill, some
of the Judges and Bishops were present also, to whom His Majesty imparted his
doubts, and had their opinions therein. In Fine, His Majesty gave Order for a
Commission to empower the Earl of Arundel, the Lord Privy Seal, and two other
Lords, to give his Assent to the Bill, for the Execution of the Earl of
Strafford upon Wednesday following; as also to the other Bill for the
continuance of this present Parliament.

Monday the 10th of May, the Commission passed the Great Seal accordingly, and
the Commons were sent for to the House of Lords, to be present at the giving
the Royal Assent to both those Bills.

The same day His Majesty sent a Message to both Houses, that the Irish The
King consents that the Irish Army should be instantly disbanded. Thanks
returned to His Majesty.
Army should be instantly disbanded, and that he would that night dispatch an
Express for the expediting thereof.

It was hereupon moved, That Mr. Treasurer be desired by the House of Commons
to return their Humble thanks to His Majesty, and to assure him, that they
would make him as Glorious a Potentate, and as rich a Prince, as any of His
Predecessors, His Majesty continuing still to take the advice of His Great
Council the Parliament along with him, in the management of the great affairs
of the Kingdom.

The Earl of Strafford understanding that His Majesty had passed the Bill, did
Humbly Petition the House of Peers.

SEEing it is the good Will and pleasure of God, that your Petitioner is now
shortly to pay that Duty which we all owe to our frail Nature; The Earl of
Strafford's Petition to the House of Peers.
he shall in all Christian Patience and Charity, conform and submit himself to
your Justice, in a comfortable assurance of the great hope laid up for us, in
the Mercy and Merits of our Savior blessed for ever.

Only he humbly craves to return your Lordships most Humble thanks for your
Noble Compassion toward those Innocent Children, whom now with his last
blessing, he must commit to the protection of Almighty God, beseeching your
Lordships to finish his pious intentions toward them, and desiring that the
reward thereof may be fulfilled in you, by him that is able to give above all
we are able to ask or think; Wherein I trust the Honorable House of Commons
will afford their Christian Assistance.

And so beseeching your Lordships Charitably to forgive all his Omissions and
Infirmities, he does very heartily and truly recommend your Lordships to the
Mercies of Our Heavenly Father, and that for his Goodness he may perfect you in
every good Work,

Amen.
THO. WENTWORTH.

WHereas the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons The Bill
of Attainder.
in this present Parliament Assembled, have in the name of themselves, and of
all the Commons of England, Impeached Thomas Earl of Strafford of High Treason,
for endeavoring to subvert the Ancient and Fundamental Laws and Government of
His Majesty's Realms of England and Ireland, and to introduce an Arbitrary and
Tyrannical Government against Law in the said Kingdoms, and for exercising a
Tyrannous and exorbitant Power over, and against the Laws of the said Kingdoms,
and the Liberties, Estates, and Lives of His Majesty's Subjects; and likewise
having by his own Authority Commanded the Laying and Assessing of Soldiers upon
His Majesty's Subjects in Ireland, against their consents, to compel them to
obey his unlawful Summons and Orders made upon Paper-Petitions in Causes
between Party and Party, which accordingly was executed upon diverse of His
Majesty's Subjects in a Warlike manner, within the said Realm of Ireland; and
in so doing, did Levy War against the Kings Majesty and His Liege People in
that Kingdom; And also for that he, upon the unhappy Dissolution of the last
Parliament, did slander the House of Commons to His Majesty, and did Counsel
and Advise His Majesty, That he was loose and absolved from the Rule of
Government, and That he had an Army in Ireland, by which he might reduce this
Kingdom; for which he deserves to undergo the Pains and Forfeitures of High
Treason.

And the said Earl has been an Incendiary of the Wars between the two Kingdoms
of England and Scotland; all which Offenses have been sufficiently proved
against the said Earl upon his Impeachment.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, and by the Lords
and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the
same, that the said Earl of Strafford, for the Heinous Crimes and Offenses
aforesaid, stand, and be adjudged and attainted of High Treason, and shall
suffer such Pain of Death, and incurr the Forfeitures of his Goods and
Chattels, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of any Estate of Freehold, or
Inheritance in the said Kingdoms of England and Ireland, which the said Earl,
or any other to his use, or in trust for him, have or had the day of the first
sitting of this Parliament, or at any time since.

This Proviso has occasioned the common discourse and opinion that this
Judgment against the Earl was Enacted never to be drawn into President.
Provided, that no Judge or Judges, Justice, or Justices whatsoever, shall
adjudge or interpret any act or thing to be Treason, nor hear or determine any
Treason in any other manner than he or they should, or ought to have done
before the making of this Act, and as if this Act had never been had or made;
Saving always unto all and singular Persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate,
their Heirs and successors, others then the said Earl and his Heirs, and such
as Claim from, by, or under him all such Right Title and Interest of, in, and
to all and singular such of the said Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, as he,
they, or any of them had before the first day of this present Parliament, any
thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided, That the passing of this present Act, or His Majesty's Assent
thereunto, shall not be any determination of this present Sessions of
Parliament; But that this present Sessions of Parliament, and all Bills and
Matters whatsoever depending in Parliament, and not fully Enacted or
Determined, and all Statutes and Acts of Parliament, which have their
continuance until the end of this present Session of Parliament, shall remain,
continue, and be in full force as if this Act had not been.

The day following, the King wrote this Letter to the Lords on the behalf of
the Earl of Strafford, and sent it by the Prince.

My Lords,
I Did yesterday satisfy the Justice of the Kingdom, by passing the Bill of
Attainder The Kings Letter on behalf of the Earl of Strafford.
against the Earl of Strafford; but Mercy being as inherent and inseparable to
a King as Justice, I desire at this time in some measure to show that likewise,
by suffering that unfortunate Man to fulfill the Natural Course of his Life in a
Close Imprisonment; Yet so, if ever he make the least offer to escape, or offer
directly, or indirectly to meddle in any sort of public business, especially
with me, either by Message or Letter, it shall cost him his Life, without
further Process; This if it may be done without the Coffeehouse of my
People, will be an unspeakable contentment to me; to which end, as in the first
place, I by this Letter do earnestly desire your Approbation, and to endear it
more, have chosen him to carry it, that of all your house is most dear to me;
So I desire that by a Conference, you will endeavor to give the House of
Commons Contentment, assuring you that the Exercise of Mercy is no more
pleasing to me, than to see both Houses of Parliament Consent for my sake, that
I should moderate the severity of the Law in so important a Case.

I will not say, that your Complying with me in this my intended Mercy, shall
make me more Willing, but certainly 'twill make me more Cheerful, in Granting
your Just Grievances. But, if no less then his life can satisfy my people, I
must say, Fiat Justitia. Thus again, recommending the Consideration of my
Intention to you, I rest,

Your unalterable and affectionate Friend, Charles R.
Whitehall, 11th of May, 1641. If he must dye, is were Charity to Reprieve him
till Saturday.




This Letter, all Written with the Kings own Hand, and delivered by the Hand of
the Prince, was twice Read in the House, and after serious and sad
Consideration, the House resolved presently to send 12 of the Peers Messengers
to the King, humbly to signify, That neither of the Two Intentions, Twelve
Lords sent to the King.
expressed in the Letter, could, with duty in them, or without danger to
Himself, his dearest Consort the Queen, and all the Young Princes their
Children, possibly be Advised; all which being done accordingly, and the
Reasons showed to His Majesty, He suffered no more words to come from them:
but, out of the fullness of His heart, to the observance of Justice, and for the
Contentment of His People, told them, That what He intended by His Letter was,
with an (if) if it might be done without Coffeehouse of His People; if that
cannot be, I say again, the same I Writ, Fiat Justitia: My other Intnetion
proceeding out of Charity for a few days Respite, was upon certain Information,
that his Estate was so distracted, that it necessarily required some few days
for settlement thereof.

Whereunto the Lords Answered; Their purpose was to be Suitors to His Majesty,
for favor to be showed to his Innocent Children; and if himself had made any
provision for them, the same might hold.

This was well-liking unto His Majesty, who thereupon departed from the Lords:
At His Majesty's parting they offered up into His hands the Letter it self
which He had sent; but He was pleased to say, My Lords, What I have Written to
you, I shall be content it be Registered by you in your House; In it you see my
mind, I hope you will use it to my Honor.

This, upon return of the Lords from the King was presently Reported to the
House by the Lord Privy Seal, and Ordered that these Lines should go out with
the Kings Letter, if any Copies of the Letter were dispersed.

The House being informed, That the Queen Mother apprehending Her self in some
danger, by reason that diverse words were scattered among the QueenMother
Tumultuous Assembly, as if they had some design upon Her Person, and those
Priests which she had for Her own Household, desired a Guard for Her Security,
Concluded, that as to the Security of Her own Person, they were bound in honor
not to suffer any Violence to be done unto Her, and so referred it to a
Committee, to consider what was fit to be done in order thereto: Which being
Reported by Mr. Henry Martyn, he declared, That the Committee had duly
considered Her Majesty's just Fears, and therefore should agree to all good
ways and means, that might conduce to the safety of her Person. But fearing
that the said means may notwithstanding prove ineffectual for Her Protection,
That therefore the House would entreat the Lords to join with them, humbly to
beseech His Majesty, That the Queen Mother may be moved to depart the Kingdom,
the rather for the Quieting of those Jealousies in the Hearts of His Majesty's
well-affected Subjects, occasioned by some ill Instruments about the said
Queens Person, by the flocking of Priests and Papists to Her House, and by the
Use and Practice of the Idolatry of the Mass.

Wednesday the 12th of May.
THe Earl of Strafford was brought from the Tower to the Scaffold upon
Tower Hill, where the Bishop of Armagh, the Earl of Cleeveland, The Earl of
Strafford brought to the Scaffold.
Sir George Wentworth, Brother to the said Earl of Strafford, and others of
his Friends, were present, to take their Leaves of him. But before he fitted
himself to Prostrate his Body to Execution, he desired patience of the People
to hear him speak a few words, which the Author took from his Mouth, being then
there on the Scaffold with him, viz.

MY Lord Primate of Ireland, and my Lords, and the rest of these Noble
Gentlemen, It is a great Comfort to me to have your His Speech.
Lordships by me this day, because I have been known to you a long time, and I
now desire to be heard a few words.

I come here, my Lords, to pay my last Debt to Sin, which is Death; And through
the Mercies of God to rise again to Eternal Glory.

My Lords, if I may use a few words, I shall take it as a great Courtesy from
you; I come here to submit to the Judgment that is passed against me; I do it
with a very quiet and contented Mind; I do freely forgive all the World; a
forgiveness not from the Teeth outward (as they say) but from my heart; I speak
in the presence of Almighty God, before whom I stand, that there is not a
displeasing thought that arises in me against any Man: I thank God I say
truly, my Conscience bears me Witness, that in all the Honor I had to serve
His Majesty, I had not any Intention in my heart, but what did aim at the
Joint and Individual prosperity of the King and His People; although it be my
ill hap to be misconstrued; I am not the first Man that has suffered in this
kind: It is a Common Portion that befalls men in this Life, Righteous Judgment
shall be hereafter; here we are subject to Error, and Misjudging one another.

One thing I desire to be heard in, and do hope, that for Christian Charities
sake I shall be believed; I was so far from being against Parliaments, that I
did always think Parliaments in England to be the happy Constitution of the
Kingdom and Nation, and the best means, under God, to make the King and His
people happy: As for my Death, I do here acquit all the World, and beseech God
to forgive them; In particular, I am very glad His Majesty conceives me not
meriting so severe and heavy a punishment, as the utmost Execution of this
Sentence; I do infinitely rejoice in it, and in that Mercy of His, and do
beseech God to Return Him the same, that He may find Mercy when He has most
need of it. I wish this Kingdom all prosperity and happiness in the World: I
did it Living, and now Dying it is my Wish.

I profess heartily my apprehension, and do humbly recommend it to you, and
wish that every Man would lay his hand on his heart, and consider seriously,
Whether the beginning of the peoples Happiness should be Written in Letters of
Blood? I fear they are in a Wrong Way; I desire Almighty God, that no one drop
of my Blood rise up in judgment against them; I have but one word more, and
that is for my Religion.

My Lord of Armagh, I do profess my self seriously, faithfully, and truly to be
an obedient Son of the Church of England; In that Church I was born and bred,
in that Religion I have lived, and now in that I dye; Prosperity and Happiness
be ever to it.

It has been said I was inclined to Popery, if it be an Objection worth the
answering, let me say truly from my heart, that since I was Twenty one years of
age unto this day, going on 49 years, I never had thought or doubt of the truth
of this Religion, nor had ever any the boldness to suggest to me the contrary,
to my best remembrance.

And so being reconciled to the Mercies of Jesus Christ my Savior, into whose
bosom I hope shortly to be gathered, to enjoy Eternal Happiness, which shall
never have an end; I desire heartily to be forgiven of every Man, if any rash
or unadvised Words or Deeds have passed from me; and desire all your Prayers;
and so my Lord farewell; and farewell all things in this world.

The Lord strengthen my Faith, and give me Confidence and Assurance in the
Merits of Christ Jesus; I trust in God we shall all meet to live Eternally in
Heaven, and receive the accomplishment of all Happiness, where every Tear shall
be wiped from our Eyes, and sad thoughts from our Hearts; And so God bless this
Kingdom, and Jesus have Mercy on my Soul.

Then turning himself about, he saluted all the Noblemen, and took a solemn
leave of all considerable persons on the Scaffold, giving them his Hand.

And after that he said, Gentlemen, I would say my Prayers, and I entreat you
all to pray with me, and for me: Then his Chaplain laid the Book of Common
Prayer upon the Chair before him, as he kneeled down, on which he prayed almost
a quarter of an hour, then he prayed as long or longer without a Book, and
ended with the Lords Prayer: then standing up, he spyed his Brother Sir George
Wentworth, and called him to him, and said, Brother, We must part, remember me
to my Sister, and to my Wife, and carry my blessing to my eldest Son, and
charge him from me, that he fear God, and continue an obedient Son of the
Church of England, and that he approve himself a faithful Subject to the King,
and tell him, that he should not have any private Grudge or Revenge toward any
concerning me, and bid him beware to meddle not with Church Livings, for that
will prove a Moth and Canker to him in his Estate, and wish him to content
himself to be a Servant to his Country, as a Justice of Peace in his County,
not aiming at higher preferments: Carry my Blessing also to my Daughter Ann,
and Arrabella, charge them to fear and serve God, and he will bless them, not
forgetting my little Infant, that knows neither good nor evil, and cannot speak
for it self, God speak for it, and bless it. Then said he, I have nigh done;
One stroke will make my Wife Husbandless, my dear Children Fatherless, and my
poor Servants Masterless, and separate me from my dear Brother, and all my
Friends, but let God be to you and them all in all.

After, that, going to take off his Doublet, and to make himself unready, he
said, I thank God I am no more afraid of Death, nor daunted with any
discouragements arising from any fears, but do as cheerfully put off my Doublet
at this time, as ever I did when I went to Bed; Then he put off his Doublet,
and wound up his Hair with his Hands, and put on a white Cap.

Then he called, Where is the man that should do this last Office? (meaning the
Executioner) call him to me; When he came and asked him forgiveness, he told
him, he forgave him and all the World; then kneeling down by the Block, he went
to Prayer again himself, the Bishop of Armagh kneeling on the one side, and the
Minister on the other; to the which Minister after Prayer he turned himself,
and spoke some few words softly, having his Hands lifted up, the Minister
closed his Hands with his; then bowing himself to the Earth, to lay down his
Head on the Block, he told the Executioner, that he would first lay down his
Head to try the fitness of the Block, and take it up again, before he laid it
down for good and all, and so he did; and before he laid it down again, he told
the Executioner, That he would give him warning when to strike by streatching
forth his Hands, and then laid down his Neck on the Block, stretching out his
Hands, the Executioner struck off his Head at one blow, then took the Head up
in his Hand; and showed it to all the People, and said; God save the King.

A Copy of the Paper containing the Heads of the Lord Straffords last Speech,
written by his own Hand, as it was left upon the Scaffold.
1. I Come to pay the last debt we ow to Sin. 2. Rise to Righteousness. 3. Dye
willingly. 4. Forgive all. 5. Submit to what is voted Justice, but my
intentions innocent from Subverting, etc. 6. Wishing nothing more than great
Prosperity to King and People. 7. Acquit the King constrained. 8. Beseech to
Repent. 9. Strange way to write the beginning of Reformation, and Settlement of
a Kingdom in Blood on themselves. 10. Beseech that Demand may rest there. 11.
Call not Blood on themselves. 12. Dye in the Faith of the Church. 13. Pray for
it, and desire their Prayers with me.
GIve me leave here to add two pretty passages more: The first is when My L. of
Strafford, the night before the day of Execution, had sent for the Lieutenant
of the Tower, and asked him, Whether it were possible he might speak with the
Archbishop; The Lieutenant told him, he might not do it without Orders from the
Parliament. Master Lieutenant (said he) you shall hear what passes betwixt us;
it is not a time either for him to plot Heresy, or me to plot Treason. The
Lieutenant answered, that he was limited, and therefore desired his Lordship,
that he would petition the Parliament for that favor: No, (said he) I have
gotten my dispatch from them, and will trouble them no more; I am now
petitioning an Higher Court, where neither Partiality can be expected, nor
Error feared. But my Lord, said he, (turning to the Primate of Ireland then
present) what I should have spoken to my Lords Grace of Canterbury, is this,
You shall desire the Archbishop to lend me His Prayers this night, and to give
me his Blessing when I go abroad to morrow, and to be in his Window, that by my
last farewell, I may give him thanks for this, and all other his former Favors.

My Lord Primate having delivered the Message without delay, the Archbishop
replied, That in Conscience he was bound for the First, and in Duty and
Obligation to the Second; but he feared his Weakness and Passion would not lend
him Eyes to behold his last departure.

The next morning at his coming forth, he drew near to the Archbishops
Lodgings, and said to the Lieutenant, Though I do not see the Archbishop, give
me leave I pray you to do my last observance toward his Rooms: In the mean
time, the Archbishop advertised of his approach, came out to the Window, then
the Earl bowing himself to the ground, My Lord (said he) Your Prayers, and your
Blessing; the Archbishop lift up his Hands and bestowed both, but overcome
with Grief, fell to the ground in Animi diliquio; the Earl proceeding a little
further, bowed the Second time, saying, Farewell my Lord, God protect your
Innocence.

The next is, When he was marching to the Scaffold, more like a General at the
Head of an Army, as many of the spectators then said, to breath Victory, than
like a Condemned man, to undergo the Sentence of death; The Lieutenant desired
him to take Coach, for fear the people should rush in upon him and tear him in
pieces; No (said he) Master Lieutenant, I dare look death in the Face, and I
hope the People too; have you a care that I do dot escape, and I care not how I
dye, whether by the hand of the Executioner, or the madness and fury of the
people, if that may give them better content, it is all one to me.

He left these Three Instructions for his Son in Writing.

FIrst, That he should continue still to be brought up under those Governors,
to whom he had committed him, as being the best he could pick out of all those
within his knowledge, and that he should not change them, unless they were
weary of him; that he should rather want himself, than they should want any
thing they could desire.

Secondly, If his Prince should call him to public Service, he should
carefully undertake it, to testify his obedience, and withal, to be faithful
and sincereto his Master, though he should come to the same end that himself
did.

Thirdly, That he foresaw that ruin was like to come upon the Revenues of the
Church, and that perhaps they might be shared amongst the Nobility and Gentry,
but I charge you never to meddle with any of it, for the curse of God will
follow all them that meddle with such a thing, that tends to the destruction of
the most Apostolical Church upon Earth.

A brief Account of some Interlocutory passages in Parliament, in which my Lord
of Strafford so discovered his Wit and Temper, that the Court took particular
notice of him.
IN the month of September, 1626. The King having special occasions, to be
furnished with Money, suitable to the importance of his undertakings, for the
relief of the King of Denmark, His Majesty came to this Resolution: That the
urgency of affairs not admitting the way of Parliament, the most speedy, equal,
and convenient means were by a general Loan from the Subject, according as
every man was Assessed in the Rolls of the last Subsidy.

Upon which Result, the King forthwith chose Commissioners for the Loan, and
caused a Declaration to be published, wherein he alleged for this course of
Supply, the Reasons set down at large in his late Declaration, touching the
Dissolution of the Parliament 2o Car. adding farther, That the urgency of the
occasion would not give leave to the calling of a Parliament.

In the said year 1626. Sir Thomas Wentworth having a Privy Seal sent unto him
about the Loan-money, and to advance the sum of 40 l. to the King, he (amongst
other things in the County of York) refused to lend the same, as being a Demand
contrary to the Right and Property of the Subject, to part with their Money,
but by consent of Parliament.

The Non-Subscribers of high Rank, and Rate in most Counties, were bound over
by Recognizance, to tender their appearance at the Council Table, and diverse of
them were committed to prison; but others also of Quality, were appointed to
several Confinements, not in their own, but in remote Counties.

Sir Thomas Wentworth and Geo. Ratcliffe, Esquire (afterward Sir George) were sent
by Messengers from the Council, and removed out of the County of York into the
County of Kent, and there secured by Confinement, and during this Restraint and
Confinement, a Parliament was called, which was to meet March 17. 3 Car. 1627.

In the month of July, before the calling of this Parliament, the Lord Conway,
Secretary of State, brought a Message from the King to Archbishop Abbot, that
it was His Majesty's pleasure, he would withdraw from his Houses at Lambeth and
Croydon, and go to Canterbury, and reside there.

What is my fault (said the Archbishop) that brings this message of Removal
and Confinement upon me? Although (said the Secretary) I have no Commission to
tell you, it is for a Book you would not License for the Kings Service; and
afterward the Archbishop understood more particularly, that besides that, it
was because Sir Thomas Wentworth made resort to the Archbishops House, at
times of Dinner and Supper.

As for Sir Thomas Wentworth, he had good occasion to send unto me, and
sometimes to see me, because we were joint Executors to Sir George Savile, who
married his Sister, and was my Pupil at Oxford, to which Son also, Sir Thomas
Wentworth and I were Guardians, as may appear in the Court of Wards, and many
things passed between us in that behalf; yet to my remembrance, I saw not this
Gentleman but once these three quarters of a year last past, at which time he
came to see his Brother-in-law the Lord Clifford, who was then with me at
Dinner at Lambeth.

Saturday, March the 22th.
THe time of the House was spent in opening the Grievances, and State of the
Kingdom, as Billeting of Soldiers, Benevolencies, and Privy Seals, and the
imprisoning certain Gentlemen, who refused to lend upon that account, etc. Sir
Francis Seymor spoke first, and said,

THis is the great Council of the Kingdom, and here (if not here alone) His
Majesty may see, as in a true Glass, the State of the Kingdom, etc. We are
called hither by His Majesty's Writs, to give him faithful Council, such as may
stand with His Honor; but this we must do without flattery, we are sent hither
by the Commons to discharge the Trust reposed in us, by delivering up their
just Grievances, and this we must do without fear: Let us not therefore be like
the Cambyses Judges, who being demanded of their King, Whether it were not
lawful for him to do what in it self was unlawful, they (rather to please the
King than to discharge their own Consciences) Answered, That the Persian Kings
might do what they listed, etc. Flattery tends to mischief, being fitter for
reproof than imitation, and as Flattery, so Fear takes away the Judgment; let
us not then be possessed with Fear or Flattery, of corruptions the basest: For
my own part, I shall shun both these, and speak my Conscience with as much Duty
to His Majesty as any man, but not neglecting the Public, in which His
Majesty and the Commonwealth have an interest: but how can we show our
Affections, whilst we retain our Fears? or how can we think of giving
Subsidies, till we know whether we have any thing to give or no? For if His
Majesty be persuaded by any to take from His Subjects what He will, and where
it pleashim, I would gladly know what we have to give?

After Sir Francis Seymor had ended his Speech, Sir Thomas Wentworth stood up
and said,

THis Debate carrys a double Aspect, toward the Soverign and the Subject,
though both be innocent, both are injured, and both to be cured: Surely in the
greatest humility I speak it, these illegal ways are punishments and marks of
indignation, the raising of Loans strengthened by Commission, with unheard of
Instructions and Oaths; the Billeting of Soldiers by the Lieutenants, and
Deputy Lieutenants, have been as they could have persuaded Christian Princes,
yea, Worlds, that the right of Empires, had been to take away by strong Hands,
and they have endeavored as far as possible for them to do it: This has not
been done by the King (under the pleasing shade of whose Crown, I hope we shall
ever gather the Fruits of Justice) but by Projectors, who have extended the
Prerogative of the King, beyond the just Symetry, which makes a sweet harmony
of the whole: They have brought the Crown into greater want than ever, by
anticipating the Revenues; and can the Shepherd be thus smitten, and the Sheep
not scattered? They have introduced a Privy Council, ravishing at once the
Spheres of all ancient Government; imprisoning us without Bail or Bond; They
have taken from us, (what shall I say indeed, what have they left us?) all
means of supplying the King, and ingratiating our selves with him, taking up
the root of all Propriety, which if it be not seasonably set again into the
ground by His Majesty's own Hands, we shall have instead of Beauty, Baldness.
To the making of those whole, I shall apply my self, and propound a remedy to
all these Diseases: by one and the same thing have King and People been hurt,
and by the same must they be cured; To vindicate which, shall we propound new
things? No, our ancient vital Liberties by enforcing the ancient Laws made by
our Ancestors, by setting forth such a Character of them, as no Licentions
Spirit shall dare to enter upon them, will do the business; and shall we think
this is a Way to break a Parliament? No, our desires are Modest and Just, I
speak truly, both for the interest of King and People; if we enjoy not these,
it will be impossible for to relieve him.

Therefore let us never fear, they shall not be accepted by his goodness,
wherefore I shall shortly descend to my Motions, consisting of four Parts, two
of which have relation to our Persons, two to the propriety of Goods for our
Persons; First, the Freedom of them from employment abroad, contrary to the
ancient Customs: For our Goods, that no Levies be made, but by Parliaments.
Secondly, No Billeting of Soldiers: It is most necessary, that these be
resolved, that the Subject may be secured in both.

Monday, March 24.
SEcretary Cook renewed the Motion of Supply for His Majesty; yet so, that
Grievances be taken into Consideration; We all think (said he) that both these
go hand in hand together: but let me put you in mind of that which concerns
the King, let him have the Precedence of Honor, if not of Time; Let Heads of
the Kings Supply be first propounded: No King is more ready to hear the
complaints of His Subjects; and withal, you know, no King is more sensible of
all reproaches which touch his Honor: Would it not be fit to grant him this
Honor to have the Precedence, this will have good Aspect abroad, it will
prevent Divisions at home, etc.

The first sower of Seeds of Distractions amonst us, was an Agent from Spain
(Gundemore) that did his Master great service here and at home; since that, we
have other Ministers that have blown the fire; the Ambassador of France, who
told his Master at home, that he had wrought divisions here between King and
People, and he was rewarded; Whilst we sat here in Parliament, there was
another intended Parliament within a mile of this place; this was discovered by
Letters sent to Rome, and the place of their meeting is now changed; I desire
the meanest judgment will consider what may follow in giving precedence to His
Majesty; in so doing, we shall put from our selves many Imputations; This
matter coming to no resolution this day, Secretary Cook the next day tendered to
the House certain Propositions from the King, touching Supply. viz.

Wednesday, March 26. 1628.
THe Propositions tendered the day before by Secretary Cook from His Majesty,
were now Received and Read, but the Debate thereof His Majestys Propositions
tothe House of Commons touching Supply.
was referred to another day: the Propositions were these, viz.

1. To furnish with Men and Victuals, Thirty Ships to guard the narrow Seas,
and along the Coasts. 2. To set out 10 other Ships for the relief of the Town
of Rochelle. 3. To set out 10 other Ships for the preservation of the Elbe, the
Sound, and Baltic Sea, etc. See page in the First Part of Historical
Collections.

Wednesday, April 2. 4. Car. 1.
The business of Confinement came into Debate in the House of Commons,
whereupon Sir Francis Seymour spoke to this effect.

That it is said, the greatest Grievance is want of Supply, but I hold it a
greater Grievance, that His Majesty is brought into these necessitys,
especially, considering the Supplys that of late have been given to the King,
of two Subsidies in Parliament, besides Privy Seals; and that the late Loan,
whereby Five Subsidies were forcedly, and unadvisedly taken; that it is not
then what the Subjects do give, unless His Majesty do employ men of integrity
and experience; otherwise, all that we give, will be as cast into a bottomless
Bag.

Upon this occasion Sir Thomas Wentworth stood up and spoke as follows;

I Cannot forget that Duty I owe to my Country; unless we be secured as to our
Libertys we cannot give: I speak not this to make diversions, but to the end,
that giving, I may give cheerfully. As for the Propositions made to induce us
to give, and to be considered of, I incline to decline them, and to look upon
the State of our Country, whether it be fit to give or no. Are we come to an
end for our Countries Libertys? have we entrenched on the right of the
Deputy Lieutenants? are we secured for time future?

Whereupon Mr. Seldom speaking also upon this occasion of the Confinement of
Sir Tho. Wentworth, etc. said,

THat though Confinement is different from Imprisonment, yet it is against the
Law that any should be Confined to his House or elsewhere. I know not what you
can call a punishment, but here is some grounds of it, or mention thereof in
Acts of Parliament, Books of Records, but for this Confinement I find none;
Indeed Jews have been Confined in former times to certain places, as here in
London to the Iewry, now called the Old Iewry, etc.

Hereupon Sir Tho. Wentworth spoke briefly as to Sir Peter Heymans enforced
Employment beyond Seas; That if any man ows a man a displeasure, and shall
procure him to be put into Foreign employment, it will be a matter of high
Concern in the Effect. We know the Honor and Justice of the King, but we know
not what his Ministers, or the mediation of Ambassadors may do, to hold their
own wrath upon any man.

April 11. 4 Car. 1.
MR. Secretary Cook moved for expediting of Subsidys, and turning of the Votes
into an Act (saying) We have Finally and Cheerfully given the King Five
Subsidies, but no time is appointed, and Subsidy without time is no Subsidy,
let us appoint a time.

To which Sir Dudly Diggs spoke thus; We have (said he) freely concluded our
Libertys; we have offered Five Subsidys, His Majesty has given us Gracious
Answers, and nothing is done that the King can take notice of, etc.

Hereupon Sir Tho. Wentworth proposed a middle way, (viz.) That when we set
down the time, be sure the Subjects Libertys go hand in hand together with the
Kings Supply; then to resolve of the time, but not to report it to the House
till we have a ground, and a Bill for our Liberties; This is the way to come
off fairly, and prevent jealousies; Hereupon the Committee of the whole House
Resolved, That Grievances and Supply go hand in hand.

May 1. 4 Car.
MR. Secretary Cook delivered a Message from His Majesty, viz. To know whether
the House would rely on His Royal Word or no, Declared to them by the Lord
Keeper? which if they do, the King assured them it should be Royally performed.

Sir Robert Phillips of Somersetshire spoke upon this occasion, and said; That
if the words of Kings strike impressions in the Hearts of Subjects, to speak in
a plain Language, said he, We are now come to the end of our journey, and the
well disposing of an Answer to this Message, will give Happiness or Misery to
this Kingdom; Let us set the Commonwealth of England before the Eyes of His
Majesty, that we may justify to the world, that we have demeaned our selves, as
dutiful Subjects to His Majesty.

Hereupon Sir Thomas Wentworth stood up and concluded the Debate, saying,

That never House of Parliament trusted more in the goodness of their King, for
their own private, than the present; but we are ambitious, that His Majestys
goodness may remain to Posterity, and we are accountable to public Trust, and
therefore seeing there has been a public violation of the Laws by His
Ministers, nothing will satisfy him but a public Mends; and to our desire
vindicate the Subjects Rights by Bill, is no more than is laid down in former
Laws, with some modest provision for Restriction, Performance, and Execution;
and this so well agreed with the sense of the House; that they made it the
subject of a Message to be delivered by the Speaker to His Majesty.

Whilst the Lords afterward were in Debate of the Petition of Right, they were
pleased at a Conference to propose to the Commons, this following addition to
the Petition of Right, viz.

1. We present this our Humble Petition to Your Majesty, with the care, not
only of preserving our own Liberties, but with due regard to leave entire the
Sovereign Power, wherewith Your Majesty is trusted for the Protection, Safety,
and Happiness of the People.

Upon this, Sir Edward Cook spoke, saving, This is Magnum in Parvo, This is
propounded to be a conclusion of our Petition; it is a matter of great weight,
and to speak plainly, it will overthrow all our Petition, it trenches on all
parts of it. Look into the Petition of former times, they never Petitioned,
wherein there was a saving of the Kings Sovereignty; I know the Prerogative is
part of the Law, but Sovereign Power is no Parliamentary word etc.

Sir Thomas Wentworth spoke next, and said,

IF we do admit of this Addition, we shall leave the Subjects worse than we
found them, and we shall have little thanks for our labor when we come home;
let us leave all Power to His Majesty to punish Malefactors, but these Laws are
not acquainted with Sovereign Power, we desire no new thing, nor do we offer to
trench upon His Majestys Prerogative, we may not recede from this Petition,
neither in part or in whole; To add a saving is not safe, doubtful words may
beget an ill construction, and the words are not only doubtful words, but words
unknown to us, and never asked in one Act or Petition before.

2. Now he began to be more generally taken notice of by all men, and his Fame
to spread abroad, where public Affairs, and the Criticismes of the times were
discoursed by the most refined Judgments; those who were infected with
popularity, flattering themselves, that he was inclined to support their
inclination, and would prove a Champion upon that account; but such discourse,
as it endeared him to his Country, so it begot to him an interest in the bosom
of his Prince, who, (having a discerning Judgment of Men) quickly made his
observation of Wentworth, that he was a person framed for great affairs, and
fit to be near His Royal Person and Councils.

About this time, in the heat of so general a report of him; Sir Richard
Weston, then Lord High Treasurer after Earl of Portland, a person also eminent
for his acute and clear parts, coveted acquaintance with this Gentleman; and
there not being wanting discreet Agents to accomplish what my Lord Treasurer
desired, it was soon effected. After the first view a familiarity was begotten,
and next a deep friendship. It happened, that in some Conferences, they touched
upon the popular Humor (as they termed it) then appearing in the House of
Commons, and the present ways they were in as tending to no good, he proposed
the most rational and plausible mediations that could be, for the present
juncture of affairs, in so much, that his judgment in things was much valued and
followed.

In some time after he was made Baron Wentworth, and had so gained His
Majesty's opinion, that he was also created Viscount Wentworth of
Wentworth-Woodhouse, made one of His Majestys Privy Council, Lord Lieutenant of
the County of York, and Lord-President of the North; In this Trust he Governed
himself with such skill, especially in those high contested points then in
consultation, that he pleased his Prince, and improved His Majesty's Revenue.

His frequent appearance at the Council Board, quickly gave occasion to that
Great Prelate Archbishop Laud (then Bishop of London) and himself, to discern
one another parts, begetting a right understanding betwixt them, which grew
into so inviolable a friendship, that nothing but the inevitable stroke of
death could separate them, who, whilst they lived, constantly united their
great Hearts and Understandings, for the advancing the Church, and the service
of their Prince.

The Cedar was still growing, though perhaps, to the dislike of some Emulators,
yet to the general satisfaction of all such as had ability enough to judge of
his Parts.

His next advance was to be Lord-Deputy, and Chief Governor of Ireland: The
affairs of that Realm being in much disorder by the temper of the Popish party
there, who did not with moderation, make use of the Kings Clemency to them, in
relaxation of the rigor of some penal Statutes.

He began with the Church, in the Reformation of his Kingdom, and first
procured of the King, by the joint mediation of the Archbishop, That all the
Impropriations then in the Crown, would be restored to the Church in that
Nation, though to some diminution of the Royal Revenue, and advanced Learned
men, whose Judgments were for Episcopacy.

He raised in Ireland Eight Regiments for the Kings service, each consisting of
1000 men, in Ten Companies, besides Two more, which he intended to be raised in
the nearest part of Wales.

Before this Army already raised, was dispersed into their several quarters,
all which were in the Province of Ulster, near the Sea, in sight of Scotland,
the Lord Lieutenant returned into England by His Majesty's Command, where an
Army-Royal was Levied, in opposition to the Scottish design, leaving an
Honorable person Mr. Christopher Wandesford, Master of the Rolls, Lord-Deputy;
the Command of General of that Royal Army in England, was given to the Earl of
Northumberland, then Lord-Admiral of England, upon whose sickness the Earl of
Strafford was made Lieutenant General, who having undertaken the Command of
this Army, signified by Letter from Dublin to the Archbishop Laud, that he
durst venture (upon peril of his Head) to drive the Scots out of England, but
that he did not hold it proper, as the case then stood for him to advise that
course; but if any of the Lords would advise the King to try his fortune in
Battle, he doubted not of sending them home in more have than they came; but
this severity and indiscretion of his against that Kingdom when things were
ripe, did much hasten his ruin and destruction, as may be seen by the
following Impeachment.

The Charge of the Scottish Commissioners against Thomas Earl of Strafford.
IN our Declarations we have joined with Canterbury, the Lord Lieutenant The
Charge of the Scotch Commissioners presented to the Parliament.
of Ireland, whose Malice has set all his Wits and Power on work, to devise,
and do mischief against our Kirk and Country. No other cause of his malice can
we conceive, but, First his Pride, and Supercilious disdain of the Kirk of
Scotland, which in his opinion, declared by his Speeches, has not in it almost
any thing of a Kirk, although the Reformed Kirks, and many worthy Divines of
England, have given ample testimony to the Reformation of the Kirk of Scotland.

Secondly, Our open opposition against the dangerous Innovation of Religion
intended and very far promoted in all His Majesty's Dominions, of which he has
showed himself in his own way, no less zealous than Canterbury himself, as may
appear by advancing of his Chaplain, Dr. Bramhal, not only to the Bishopric of
Derry, but also to be Vicar General of Ireland; a man prompted for exalting of
Canterburian Popery, and Arminianism, that thus himself might have the power of
both Swords, against all that should maintain, the Reformation, by his bringing
of Dr. Chapel, a man of the same Spirit, to the University of Dublin, for
poisoning the Fountains, and corrupting the Seminarys of the Kirk.

Thirdly, When the Primate of Ireland did press a new ratification of the
Articles of that Kirk in Parliament, for barring such Novations in Religion, he
boldly menaced him with the burning by the hand of the Hangman, all of that
Confession, although confirmed in former Parliaments.

When he found that the Reformation began in Scotland did stand in his way, he
left no means unassaied to rub disgrace upon us, and our Cause. The Pieces
printed at Dublin, viz. Examen conjurationis Scotianae, the Ungirding of the
Scottish Armor: and the Pamphlet, bearing the counterfeit name of Lisimachus
Nicanor, all three so full of Calumnies, Slanders, Scurril^ys against our
Country, and Reformation, that the Jesuits in their greatest spite, could not
have said more, yet not only the Authors were countenanced and rewarded by him,
but the Books must bear his Name, as the great Patron both of the Work and
Workman.

When the National Oath and Covenant warranted by our general Assemblies, was
approved by Parliament, in the Articles subscribed in the Kings Name, by His
Majesty's High Commissioner, and by the Lords of the Privy Council, and
commanded to be sworn by His Majesty's Subjects of all ranks, and particular,
and plenary information was given unto the Lieutenant, by men of such quality,
as he ought to have believed of the Loyalty of our hearts to the King, of the
lawfulness of our proceedings, and innocence of our Covenant, and whole course,
that he could have no excuse: yet his desperate malice made him to bend his
Craft and Cruelty, his Fraud and Forces against us. For first, he did craftily
call up to Dublin some of our Countrymen, both of the Nobility and Gentry,
living in Ireland, showing them that the King would conceive, and account them
as Conspirers with the Scots in their rebellious courses, except some remedy
were provided; and for remedy, suggesting his own wicked invention, to present
unto him, and his own wicked invention, to present unto him and his own wicked
Council, a Petition, which he caused to be framed by the Bishop of Rapho, and
was seen and corrected by himself, wherein they petitioned to have an Oath
given them, containing a formal renunciation of the Scottish Covenant, and a
deep assurance, nenever so much as to protest against any of His Majesty's
Commandments whatsoever.

No sooner was this Oath thus craftily contrived, but in all have it is sent to
such places of the Kingdom, where our Countrymen had residence; and Men,
Women, and all other persons above the years of Sixteen, constrained either
presently to take the Oath, and thereby renounce their National Covenant, as
Seditious and Traitorous, or with violence and cruelty to be haled to the Jail,
Fined above the value of their Estates, and to be kept close prisoners, and so
far as we know, some are yet kept in prison, both Men and Women of good
quality, for not renouncing that Oath which they had taken 40 years since, in
the obedience to the King, who then lived. Besides, a cruelty ensued, which may
parallel the pesecutions of the most unchristian time: for weak Women dragged to
the Bench to take the Oath, dyed in the place both Mother and Child, hundreds
driven to hide themselves, till in the darkness of the night they might escape
by Sea into Scotland, whether thousands of them did fly, being forced to leave
Corn, Cattle, Houses, and all they possessed, to be a prey to their persecuting
enemies, the Lieutenants Officers. And some Indicted and Declared guilty of
High Treason, for no other guiltyness, but for subscribing our National Oath,
which was not only impiety and injustice in it self, and an utter undoing of
His Majestys Subjects, but was a weakening of the Scotch Plantation, to the
prejudice of that Kingdom, and His Majesty's Service, and was a high scandal
against the Kings Honor, and intolerable abuse to His Majesty's Trust and
Authority, His Majesty's Commission, which was procured by the Lieutenant,
bearing no other penalty, than a certification of Noting the names of the
refusers of the Oath.

But this his restless Rage, and insatiable Cruelty against our Religion and
Country, could not rest here, nor be kept within the bounds of Ireland, but
proceeded further, so that by this means a Parliament is called, and although
by the Six Subsidies granted in Parliament not long before, and by the base
means which himself and his Officers did use (as is contained in a late
Remonstrance) that Land was extremely impoverished, yet by his Speeches full of
Oaths and Asseverations, that we were Traitors and Rebels, casting off all
Monarchical Government, etc. He extorted from them four new Subsidies, and
indicta causa, before we were heard, procured that a War was undertaken, and
Forces should be levied against us, as a rebellious Nation, which was also
intended to be an example and precedent to the Parliament of England, for
granting Subsidies, and sending a joint Army for our utter ruin.

According to his appointment in Parliament, the Army was gathered, and brought
down to the Coast, threatening a daily invasion of our Country, intending to
make us a conquered Province, and to destroy our Religion, Liberties, and Laws,
and thereby laying upon us, a necessity of vast charges, to keep Forces on foot
on the West Coast, to wait upon his coming.

And as the War was denounced, and Forces levied before we were heard; So
before the denouncing of the War, our Ships and Goods on the Irish coast were
taken, and the owners cast in prison, and some of them in Irons. Frigates were
sent forth to scour our Coasts, by which they did take some, and burn others of
our Barques.

Having thus incited the Kingdom of Ireland, and put his Forces in order there
against us, with all have he comes to England.

In his parting, at the giving up of the Sword, he openly avowed our utter
ruin and desolation, in these or the like words, If I return to that
Honorable Sword, I shall leave of the Scots neither root nor branch.

How soon he comes to Court, as before he had done very evil Office against
our Commissioners, clearing our proceedings before the point; So now he uses
all means to stir up the King and Parliament against us, and to move them to a
present War, according to the precedent, and example of his own making in the
Parliament of Ireland. And finding that his hopes failed him, and his designs
succeeded not that way, in his nimbleness he takes another course, that the
Parliament of England may be broken up, and despising their Wisdom and
Authority, not only with great gladness accepts, but uses all means that the
conduct of the Army in the expedition against Scotland, may be put upon him;
which accordingly he obtains as General Captain, with power to invade, kill,
slay, and save at his discretion, and to make any one or more Deputies in his
stead, to do, and execute all the Power and Authorities committed to him.

According to the largeness of his Commission, and Letters Patents of his
devising, so were his deportments afterward; for when the Scots, (according to
their Declarations sent before them) were coming in a peaceable way, far from
any intention to invade any of His Majesty's Subjects, and still to supplicate
His Majesty for a settled Peace, he gave order to his Officers to fight with
them on the way, that the two Nations once entered in Blood, whatsoever should
be the success, he might escape Trial, and censure, and his bloody designs
might be put in execution against his Majesty's Subjects of both Kingdoms.

When the Kings Majesty was again inclined to hearken to our Petitions, and to
compose our differences in a peaceable way, and the Peers of England convened
at York, had, as before, in their great wisdom and faithfulness, given unto His
Majesty Counsels of Peace, yet this Firebrand still smoaketh, and in that
Honorable Assembly, takes upon him to breath out threatenings against us as
Traitors, and enemies to Monarchical Government; and threatened that we be sent
home home again in our blood, and he will whip us out of England.

And as these were his Speeches in the time of the Treaty appointed by His
Majesty at Rippon, that if it had been possible, it might have been broken up.
So when a cessation of Arms was happily agreed upon there, yet he cease not,
but still his practices were for War; his Underofficers can tell who it was
that gave them Commission to draw near in Arms beyond the Teese, in the time of
the Treaty at Rippon.

The Governor of Berwick and Carlisle can show from whom they had their
Warrants for their Acts of hostility, after the cessation was concluded. It may
be tried how it comes to pass, that the Ports of Ireland are yet closed, our
Countrymen for the Oath still kept in Prison, Traffic interrupted, and no
other face of affairs, then if no cessation had been agreed upon.

We therefore desire, that your Lordships will represent to the Parliament,
that this great Incendiary upon these and the like offenses, not against
particular persons, but against Kingdoms and Nations, may be put to a Trial,
and from their known and renowned Justice, may have his deserved punishment.

THis Noble Earl was in person of a tall stature, something inclining The
description of his Person and Family.
to stooping in his Shoulders, his Hair black and thick, which he wore short,
his countenance of a grave well composed Symetry, and good Features, only in
his Forehead he expressed more Severity than Affability, yet a very courteous
Person.

And as he went from the Tower to the Scaffold, his Countenance was in a Mild
posture, between dejection in contrition for Sin, and a high Courage, without
perceiving the least affection of disguise in him.

He saluted the People as he walked on foot from the Tower to the Scaffold,
often putting off his Hat unto them, sometimes to the right, and sometimes to
the left hand, being apparelled in a Black cloth Suit, having White Gloves on
his Hands.

And tho at this time there were gathered together on the great open place on
Tower Hill, where the Scaffold stood, a numerous crowd of people, standing as
thick as they could by one another, over all that great Hill; insomuch, as by
the modest computation, they could not be esteemed to be less than 100000
people; yet as he went to the Scaffold, they uttered no reproachful or
reflecting Language upon him.

He had Three Wives, the First the Lady Margaret Clifford, Sister to the Earl
of Cumberland, who left no issue. The Second, the Lady Arabella Hollis, Sister
to the Earl of Clare, who left him his only Son William, now Earl of Strafford,
and Two Daughters. The Third Wife, was Daughter to Sir Francis Rhodes of
Yorkshire, by whom he had one Daughter, an Infant at the time of his death.

On the First of December in the 17th year of the Kings Reign, by His Majesty's
Letters Patents, his Son William was restored to all his Fathers Dignities and
Titles, and was made Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, having
doubled his Paternal Glorys and his own, by marrying the worthy Daughter of two
incomparable Parents, Henrietta Maria, the Daughter of James Earl of Darby, and
Charlotte, Daughter of Claude, Duke de Temoille and Charlotte of Nassaw,
Daughter to William, Prince of Orange.

A brief Account of his Secretary Slingsby.
MR. Slingsby his Secretary, after the death of this Noble Lord, presently left
the Kingdom, and was received beyond the Seas into the Queens favor, and by
Her Majesty designed Secretary to the Prince of Wales (now Our Gracious
Sovereign) but in his zeal to the Kings service, and to enable himself to
attend Her Majesty upon Her Landing, he transported himself into Cleveland,
where he had but a small Estate, but so much a bigger Interest, that in a very
short time, he levied Eight hundred Foot, and Eighty Horse, with intention to
make up a full Regiment, and Troop to wait upon the Queen.

He made his Quarters at Gisborough in Cleveland, but before the Foot were
disciplined in the use of Arms, he was attacqued by Sir Hugh Cholmley with 1500
Horse and Foot, and some Brass Drakes, Mr. Slingsby (who was wholly educated in
Civil affairs, never in the active Military part) having timely notice of his
Adversaries approach, thought not of any retreat, but addresses himself and
party immediately, to draw out and fight the Enemy, notwithstanding the
inequality in number. At his first charge Mr. Slingsby (having seasoned old
Soldiers in his Troop, which he brought out of Holland) worsted their Horse,
and had some pursuit and execution, but being allarmed behind, by the noise of
an engagement, betwixt the Bodies of Foot, found his Regiment totally
dissipated, beyond all hopes of rallying; whereupon he employed his Courage
upon the Enemies Foot, in which Charge his Horse fell, and himself wounded with
many Case-shot, and became prisoner.

The relation of Blood moved Sir Hugh Cholmly to a generous regard and care of
him, he was carried back to Gisborough, where (in order to the saving of his
life) both his Legs were cut off above the knee, after which he lived three
days.

The Lady Slingsby his disconsolate Mother, hastened from York (betwixt hopes
of Life and fear of Death) to Gisborough, where she found the late hopes of her
Family, and support of her age lying dead; and Sir Hugh was as much concerned
as his Parent, for the loss of so accomplished a Gentleman.

His Body was carried to York, and there with very Honorable Solemnitys
interred in the Cathedral-Church, after a Sermon preached by Mr. Slingsby's
Interment.
Dr. Bramhall, then Bishop of Londonderry, and late Primate of Ireland, who
had a large experience of him.

He was eldest Son of Sir Guilford Slingsby, of the Family of Screuen, and
Red-House, in the County of York; his Fathers Estate did lie in Cleveland His
Extraction and Education.
in the said County; he was Educated first at the University at St. Andrews in
Scotland, and afterward studied some years in the University of Oxford.

Sir Guilford his Father dying, the Earl of Strafford received this Gentleman
in his Retinue, among other young Gentlemen of Quality, upon his going first
into Ireland, where his Deportment, after some time, made his Lord to promote
him to be Secretary, and afterward Lieutenant of the Ordinance, and
Vice Admiral of Munster. Lastly, his Lord made choice of him before all others,
to stand by him, and manage all his Papers, during his Confinement and Trial;
And immediately after the Bill of Attainder did pass both Houses, the Earl
wrote this ensuing Letter unto him.

A Letter from the Earl of Strafford to his Secretary Guilford Slingsby, Esquire
after the passing of the Bill of Attainder, under his own Hand.
I Would not, as the case now stands, for any thing, you should endanger your
self, being a person in whom I shall put a great part of my future Trust; and
therefore in any case absent your self for a time, yet so, as I may know where
you are, and therefore send your man back, that I may know whither to direct
any thing I have to impart to you, and that presently, and after that, let your
man come as little about this place as may be: your going to the King is to no
purpose, I am lost, my Body is theirs, but my Soul is Gods; there is little
trust in man, God may yet (if it please him) deliver me, and as I shall (in the
best way he shall enable me unto) prepare my self for him, so to him I submit
all I have; the person you were last withal at Court, sent to move that
business we resolved upon, which if rightly handled, might perchance do
something; but you know my opinion in all, and what my belief is in all these
things; I should by any means advise you to absent your self, albeit never so
innocent, as you are, till you see what becomes of me; if I live, there will be
no danger for you to stay, but otherwise keep out of the way till I be
forgotten, and then your return may be with safety. I mean indeed, to leave you
one in Trust for my Children, and thank you for your readiness to look after
it.

Time is precious, and mine I expect to be very short, and therefore no part of
it to be lost. God direct and prosper you in all your ways; and remember there
was a person whom you were content to call Master, that did very much value and
esteem you, and carried to his death a great stock of his affection for you, as
for all your services, so for this your care toward me all this time of my
Trial and Affliction; and however it be my misfortune to be decryed at present,
yet in more equal times, my friends (I trust) shall not be ashamed to mention
the Love to their Children, for their Fathers sake.

Your Affectionate Friend, STRAFFORD.


The Reflections of King CHARLES the I. upon the Earl of Straffords Death.
I Looked upon my Lord of Strafford as a Gentleman, whose great abilities might
make a Prince rather afraid, than ashamed to employ him, in the greatest
affairs of State.

For those were prone to create in him great confidence of undertakings, and
this was like enough to betray him to great errors, and many enemies: whereof
he could not but contract good store, while moving in so high a sphere, and
with so vigorous a Luster, he must needs (as the Sun) raise many envious
exhalations, which condensed by a Popular odium, were capable to cast a cloud
upon the brightest merit and integrity.

Though I cannot in my judgment approve all he did, driven (it may be) by the
necessities of times, and the temper of that people, more than led by his own
disposition to any height and rigor of Actions: yet I could never be convinced
of any such criminousness in him, as willingly to expose his life to the stroke
of Justice and Malice of his enemies.

I never met with a more unhappy conjuncture of affairs, than in the business
of that unfortunate Earl; when between my own unsatisfiedness in Conscience,
and a necessity (as some told me) of satisfying the importunities of some
people; I was persuaded by those, that I think wished me well, to choose rather
what was safe, than what seemed just: preserring the outward peace of my
Kingdoms with Men, before that inward exactness of Conscience before God.

And indeed, I am so far from excusing or denying that compliance on my part
(for plenary consent it was not) to his destruction, whom in my judgment I
thought not, by any clear Law guilty of death; that I never did bear any touch
of Conscience with greater regret: which, as a sign of my repentance, I have
often with sorrow confessed, both to God and Men, as an act of so sinful
frailty, that it discovered more a fear of man, than of God, whose Name and
Place on Earth no man is worthy to bear, who will avoid inconveniences of
State, by Acts of so high injustice, as no public convenience can expiate or
compensate.

I see it a bad exchange to wound a man's own conscience, thereby to salve State
sores; to calm the storms of popular discontents, by stirring up a Tempest in a
man's own bosom.

Nor has Gods Justice failed in the event and sad consequences, to show the
world the fallacy of that Maxim, Better one man perish (though unjustly) than
the people be displeased or destroyed.

For, in all likelihood, I could never have suffered with my people, greater
calamities (yet with greater comfort) had I vindicated Straffords innoncency,
at least by denying to Sign that destructive Bill, according to that justice
which my Conscience suggested to me, then I have done since I gratified some
men's unthankful importunities with so cruel a favor; and I have observed, that
those, who counseled me to Sign that Bill, have been so far from receiving the
rewards of such ingratiatings with the people, that no men have been harassed
and crushed more than they: he only has been least vexed by them, who
counseled me, not to consent against the Vote of my own Conscience; I hope God
has forgiven me and them the sinful rashness of that business.

To which, being in my Soul so fully conscious, those Judgments God has
pleased to send upon me, are so much the more welcome, as a means (I hope)
which his mercy has sanctified so to me, as to make me repent of that unjust
Act (for so it was to me) and for the future to teach me, that the best rule of
policy is to prefer the doing of Justice before all enjoyments, and the peace
of my Conscience, before the preservation of my Kingdoms.

Nor has any thing more fortified my resolutions, against all those violent
importunities, which since have sought to gain a like consent from me, to Acts,
wherein my Conscience is unsatisfied, than the sharp touches I have had for
what passed me, in my Lord of Straffords business.

Not that I resolved to have employed him in my affairs, against the advice of
my Parliament; but I would not have had any hand in his death, of whose
guiltlesness I was better assured, than any man living could be.

Nor were the crimes objected against him so clear, as after a long and fair
hearing, to give convincing satisfaction to the major part of both Houses;
especially that of the Lords, of whom scarce a third part were present, when
the Bill passed that House: And for the House of Commons, many Gentlemen
disposed enough to diminish my Ld. of Straffords Greatness and Power, yet
unsatisfied of his Guilt in Law, durst not condemn him to dye: who for their
integrity in their Votes, were, by posting their Names, exposed to the popular
Calumny, Hatred, and Fury, which grew then so exorbitant in their clamors for
Justice, (That is, to have both my Self, and the Two Houses Vote, and do as
they would have us) that many ('it is thought) were rather terrified to concur
with the condemning party, than satisfied, that of right they ought so to do.

And that after Act, vacating the Authority of the precedent, for future
imitation, sufficiently tells the world, that some remorse touched even his
most implacable enemies, as knowing he had very hard measure, and such as they
would be very loath should be repeated to themselves.

This tenderness and regret I find in my Soul, for having had any hand (and
that very unwillingly, God knows) in shedding one man's Blood unjustly (though
under the color and formalities of Justice and pretenses of avoiding public
mischiefs) which may, I hope, be some Evidence before God and Man, to all
posterity, that I am far from bearing justly, the vast Load and Guilt of all
that Blood which has been shed in this unhappy War; which some Men will needs
charge upon me, to ease their own Souls, who am, and ever shall be more afraid,
to take away any man's Life unjustly, than to lose my own.

An ACT for Reversing the Earl of Strafford's Attainder.
WHereas Thomas late Earl of Strafford, was impeached of High Treason, upon
pretense of endeavoring to subvert the Fundamental Laws, and called to a
public and solemn Arraignment, and Trial before the Peers in Parliament,
where he made a particular Defense to every Article objected against him;
insomuch that the turbulent party then seeing no hopes to effect their unjust
Designs, by any ordinary way and method of proceedings, did at last resolve to
attempt the Destruction and Attainder of the said Earl, by an Art of
Parliament, to be therefore purposely made to condemn him upon accumulative
Treason, none of the pretended crimes being Treason apart, and so could not be
in the whole, if they had been proved, as they were not; and also adjudged him
guilty of Constructive Treason (that is, of Levying War against the King)
though it was only the Commanding an Order of the Council Board in Ireland, to
be executed by a Sergeant at Arms, and three or four Soldiers, which was the
constant practice of the Deputies there for a long time: To the which end, they
having first presented a Bill for this intent, to the House of Commons, and
finding there more opposition than they expected, they caused a multitude of
tumultuous persons to come down to Westminster, armed with Swords and Staves,
and to fill both the Palace-yards, and all the approaches to both Houses of
Parliament, with Fury and Clamor, and to require Justice, speedy Justice
against the Earl of Strafford; and having by those and other undue practices,
obtained that Bill to pass the House of Commons, they caused the Names of those
resolute Gentlemen, who in a Case of innocent Blood, had freely discharged
their Consciences, being Fifty nine, to be posted up in several places about
the Citys of London and Westminster, and styled them Straffordians. and Enemies
to their Country, hoping thereby to deliver them up to the fury of the People,
whom they had endeavored to incense against them, and then procured the said
Bill to be sent up to the House of Peers, where it having some time rested
under great deliberation; at last, in a time, when a great part of the Peers
were absent, by reason of the tumults, and many of those who were present,
protested a against it, the said Bill passed the House of Peers; and at length
His Majesty, the late King CHARLES the I. of Glorious Memory, granted a
Commission for giving His Royal Assent thereunto, which nevertheless was done
by His said Majesty, with exceeding great sorrow then, and ever remembered by
him with unexpressible grief of Heart, and out of His Majestys great Piety, he
did publicly express it, when His own Sacred Life was taken away by the most
detestable Traitors that ever were.

For all which Causes be it Declared and Enacted by the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, by, and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, That the Act
Entitled, An Act for the Attainder of Thomas Earl of Strafford of High
Treason, and all and every Clause and Article, and thing therein contained,
being obtained as aforesaid, is now hereby Repealed, Revoked, and Reversed.

And to the end that Right be done to the memory of the deceased Earl of
Strafford aforesaid; Be it further Enacted, That all Records and Proceedings of
Parliament, relating to the said Attainder, be wholly Cancelled, and taken off
the File, or otherwise Defaced, and Obliterated, to the intent, the same may
not be visible in after ages, or brought into example, to the prejudice of any
person whatsoever.

Provided, That this Act shall not extend to the future questioning of any
person or persons, however concerned in this business, or who had any hand in
the tumults, or disorderly procuring the Act aforesaid, Any thing herein
contained to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

THE TABLE.
A.
ABstract of the Earls Answer to the 28 Articles, Pa. 22. to 30 Account
Introductive of several Passages previous to the Trial of Thomas Earl of
Strafford. p. 1. Accusation of High Treason, of Thomas Earl of Strafford, p. 3.
Accusation of Sir George Ratcliffe, p. 4. Act of Attainder at large, 756. Mr.
St. John's Argument of Law, concerning the same, 675. to 705. It is read a
Second time, 47. Lord Digby's Speech to that Bill, 50. Exceptions taken thereat
by some Members, 55 Act of Attainder, as also the Act for continuance of this
present Parliament past the Lords, 755 A Message to the Lords to send to His
Majesty for His consent to the Bill of Attainder, and the continuance of this
present Parliament, 755. Act of Reversal of this Bill of Attainder, 778
Adjournment of the Commons upon the Kings Speech, May 1. 735. Answer of the
Earl read, containing 200 sheets of Paper, 22. Army in Ireland new levied, to
be disbanded, 18 and 42 Eight Articles against the Earl in maintenance of his
Accusation, 8, 9. Articles of High Treason voted against Sir George Ratcliffe,
17. Twenty eight Articles against the Earl, sent up to the Lords, 20. They are
at large inserted, 61. Article II. read, charging the Earl with words, saying
The Kings little finger should be heavier than the loins of the Law, etc. 149.
Names of Witnesses, their Evidence, Exception taken, Interlocutory Passages,
Defense and Reply, as to that Article, 149 to 155. Artice III. read, charging
him with words, saying, That Ireland was a conquered Nation, that the King
might do with it as he pleased, 155 Names of Witnesses, their Evidence,
Exception taken, Interlocutory passages; Defense and Reply as to that Article,
156 to 172 Artic. IV. read, charging him with words, that he would make all
Ireland know, That any Act of State there made, should be as binding as an Act
of Parliament, 173. Names of Witnesses, their Evidence, Exceptions taken,
Interlocutory passages, Defense and Reply as to that Article, 174 to 185.
Article V. read, charging him, that he did procure to be given against the Lord
Mountnorris sentence of death in a Council of War, 186, and the sentence read
187. Names of Witnesses, their Evidence, Exceptions taken, Interlocutory
passages, Defense and Reply as to that Article, 188 to 204. Article VI. read,
charging him with putting the Lord Mountnorris out of possession of his
Freehold, upon a Paper-Petition, 205. Names of Witnesses, their Evidence,
Exceptions taken, Interlocutory passages, Defense and Reply, as to that Aticle,
205 to 213. Article VIII read, Charging him with causing the Lord Loftus, Lord
Chancellor of Ireland, to be close prisoner, 221. Names of Witnesses, their
Evidence, Exceptions taken, Interlocutory passages, Defense and Reply as to
that Article, 222 to 235. Article IX. read, Charging him with assuming a Power
above Law, to give a general Warrant to the Bishops Officers, to Arrest the
Body of such as do not obey Ecclesiastical Decrees, Sentences, etc. and to
commit them, and a Copy produced, 236 237. Passages Interlocutory, Defense and
Reply, 238 to 240. Article X. read, Wherein he is charged with procuring the
Customs to be Farmed to his own use; and did procure the Native Commodities of
Ireland to be rated in the Book of Rates for the Customs, 241 The Case stated
by Mr. Maynard, 242 Names of Witnesses, their Evidence, Exceptions taken,
Interlocutory passages, Defense and Reply as to that Article, 243 to 250
Article XI, Agreed for the present to be laid aside, 252 Article XII. read,
Charging him with making a Monopoly of Tobacco, getting the whole Trade into
his hands, 401 Names of Witnesses, their Evidence, Exceptions taken,
Interlocutory passages, Defense and Reply as to that Article, 402 to 412
Article XIII. read, Charging him with getting great quantities of Flax into his
hands, enjoining the working thereof into Yarn and Thread, etc. 416 Names of
Witnesses, their Evidence, Exceptions taken, Interlocutory passages, Defense
and Reply as to that Article, 416 to 428 Article XIV. Laid aside for the
present, 425 Article XV. read, Charging the Earl with imposing great sums of
Money upon people without Warrant or color of Law, and causing the same to be
levied by Troops of Soldiers, 426 The Charge opened by Mr. Geoffrey Palmer, 427
Names of Witnesses, their Evidence, Exceptions taken, Interlocutory passages,
Defense and Reply as to that Article, 427 to 454, etc. Article XVI. read,
charging him with putting forth a Proclamation, commanding the Nobility, etc.
not to depart that Kingdom without his License, 460 The Article opened by Mr.
Palmer, who proceeded to manage the Evidence, 461 Names of Witnesses, their
Evidence, Exceptions taken, Interlocutory passages, Defense and Reply as to
that Article, 462 to 481 Interlocutory passages after the Reply, 484 to 487
Article XIX. read, Charging him, that he did with his own Authority, contrive
and frame a new and universal Oath against the Scots in Ireland, 489 The
Article opened by Mr. Whitlock, 490 The Oath tendered to the Scots, read, 494
Names of Witnesses, their Evidence, Exceptions taken, Interlocutory passages,
and Defense. 494 to 498 More Interlocutory passages, 499 to 502 The Oath
tendered to some of the Scotch Nation refident in England, 503 The Reply to the
Earls Defense, 508 Article XX. read, Charging him with endeavoring to
persuade, and provoke His Majesty to an Offensive War against His Subjects of
Scotland, etc. 515 Article XXI. read, Charging him with compelling His Majesty
to call a Parliament in England, with design to break the same, and by Force
and Power to raise Money, 516 Article XXII. read Charging him to have procured
the Parliament in Ireland, to declare their assistance in a War against the
Scots, and to raise an Army of 8000 Foot, and 1000 Horse, for the most part
Papists, tending to the subversion of the Fundamental Laws in England, 517
Article XXIII. read; Wherein he is changed with Words, That His Majesty having
tried the Parliament, he was loose and absolved from all Rules of Government,
and was to do every thing that Power would admit. etc. 518 Article XXIV. Read,
charging him, that he declared that the Parliament had forsaken the King, in
denying to supply him; and that the King was not to suffer himself to be
mastered by the frowardness of the People, 519 Names of Witnesses, their
Evidence, Exceptions taken, Interlocutory passages, Defense and Reply, as to
that Article, 520 to 581 Article XXV. read, Charging the Earl, that the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen refusing to certify the Names of such Citizens as were able
to lend Money, he said they deserved to be put to Fine and Ransom, and some of
the Alderm. hanged up, 582 The Charge opened by Mr. Maynard, 583 Names of
Witnesses, their Evidence, Exceptions taken, Interlocutory passages, Defense
and Reply as to that Article 583 to 587 Article XXVI. read, Charging him, that
he did approve of two wicked Projects, to seize upon the Bullion and Money in
the Mint. and embase His Majestys Coin with a mixture of Brass, etc. 589 The
Charge opened by Mr. Maynard, 590 Names of Witnesses, their Evidence,
Exceptions taken, Interlocutory passages, Defense and Reply, 590 to 597 etc.
Article XXVII. read, Wherein the Earl is charged, that he did by his own
Authority, impose a Tax on His Majestys Subjects for the payment of the
Soldiers, and caused the same to be levied by force, 600 The Article opened by
Mr. Maynard 601 The Petition of the Gentry of York read, as Evidence, 602 Names
of Witnesses, their Evidence, Exceptions taken, Interlocutory passages, Defense
and Reply, as to that Article, 603 to 627 More passages Interlocutory 629 to
632 Attainder, see Act and Bill. Bill brought in for continuance of the
Parliament, 743 Bill of Attainder, and Bill for Continuance of the present
Parliament, passed the Lords House, 755 Bill to be drawn up for the Pressing of
Mariners, 755 A. Bishop of Canterbury settles an inviolable friendship with the
Earl, 769 The Bishops decline giving their Suffrages in matters criminal, 41
Bishops enabled in Ecclesiastical affairs, by Warrant from the Earl of
Strafford, see Art. 9. 236 Bishops, Judges, etc. sent for to attend the King at
Whitehall, the day before His Majesty consented to pass the Bill of Attainder,
756 Bullion in the Mint to be seized, see Art. 26. 589
C.
CLosets placed in Westminster Hall, whither the King, Queen, and Prince
retired, 41 Commissioners of Scotland to bring in their proofs against the
Earl, 18 Commissions granted to the Earl of Worcester and his Son, for levying
of Horses, to be drawn into the Charge against the Earl of Strafford, 19
Committee appointed to be present at the private Examination of Witnesses, 6
Committee touching the Examination of Members named, 14, 15, 16 A select
Committee of both Houses, appointed to meet at a Conference concerning the
Trial of the Earl, 33 Commons House approves of the Petition delivered by
certain Peers to the King at York, for the calling of a Parliament, 6 Right of
the Commons in the proceedings in the Lords House, in Cases of Impeachment, to
be considered of by a Committee, 21 The Commons to meet only as a Committee of
the whole House at the Trial of the Earl; and in the House constantly at two of
the clock in the afternoon, during the time of Trial, 42 Names of the Members
of the House of Commons, who are desired to be present as Witnesses at the
Trial of the Earl, 44 Conference, That all the Ports in Ireland be open, 4.
Conference about sending for Sir George Ratcliffe, a Member of Parliament in
Ireland, 4 Conference about disbanding the new levied Irish Army. 18 Conference
to Sequester the Earl from his Offices, 20 Conference as to place of Trial, as
to the persons present, as to Conncil and management of the Evidence, 34 to 37
Conference is desired with the Lords, to know to what purpose the Earls Council
should be heard, 47 Council of the Earl, concerning matters of Law, to be to
morrow heard in Westminster Hall, 47 In Criminal matters the Bishops decline
giving their Suffrages, 41. Interlocutory passages, about admitting Sir Pierce
Crosby to be examined, 109 Customs Farmed for the Earls use, see Art. 10. 241
D.
LOrd Digby goes up to the Lords to desire a free Conference concerning
Articles against the Earl, 9 His Speech to the House of Commons to the Bill of
Attainder, 50 Sir Kenelm Digby to be removed from Court 42 Lord Dillon's Case
of Ireland, to be reported by the Committee 19
E.
LOrd Viscount Ely his Case in Ireland to be reported by the Committee, 19 The
Evidence against the Earl, to be managed by a Committee of the House of
Commons, 32 Evidence offered by the House to the Committee, to corroborate the
latter part of the 23 Article, 45 Evidence for the Earl to be recollected by
him to morrow, which done, the managers are to state their Evidence, 47
Examinations taken before the Lords, to be delivered to the Commons appointed
to draw up the Charge against the Earl, 19 Examination of the Lord Primate of
Ireland debated, 44 Exceptions by the Earl, and other unnecessary delays, to be
prevented, 43 Exceptions taken by some Members to the Lord Digby's Speech, 55
F.
FIne and Ransom to be put upon those who refuse to lend Money, see Art. 25
582. Flax, a great quantity thereof in the Earl of Straffords hands, etc. see
Art. 13. 416 Forces made use of to Levy Money, see Art. 25. 426 Forces in
Wiltshire, Hampshire, Kent and Sussex, be drawn toward Portsmouth and Dover,
740
G.
MR. Glyn's Reply, 706 to 733 Gondamore, an Agent from Spain, a sower of Seeds
of Distraction among us, 765 Col. Goring his Examination, 746 His Vindication
by Vote of the House, 755
H.
EArl of Holland General of the Army, 751 Lord Hollis his Speech to the Lords,
to promote the taking a Protestation, 741 Hubub in the City, that the House was
beset, and in danger,
I.
IMpeachment against the Earl read, 101 He is declared an Incendiary of the War
with Scotland, see Art. 20. 515 The Introductive Speech of Mr. Pym, as to the
Preamble of the Earls Answer. 102 to 109 Petitions and Complaints from Ireland
there reported by Mr. Whistler, 10 Irish Affairs to be considered of by a
Committee of the whole House, 1 Irish Remonstrance reported by Mr. Whistler, 7
Irish Remonstrance read, 11, 12, 13 New levied Irish Army, a Conference about
disbanding them, 18, 42 Irish Army consented by the King to be disbanded, 756
Irish Army, words spoken, etc. tending to the bringing the same into England,
46, 725
E.
EArl of Kildare his Case of Ireland, to be reported, 19 The King declares the
Ports in Ireland to be open, 6. King, Queen, and Prince come to their private
Closets, placed in Westminster Hall during the Trial, 41 King's little finger
heavier than the loins of the Law, see Art. 2. 149 King's Letter on behalf of
the Earl, 757 Sir Robert King, a Member of Parliament in Ireland, sent for as a
Witness against the Earl, 4.
L.
LEtter to Sir Jacob Ashley, and Sir John Conyers, to prevent a Design to
engage the Army against the Parliament, 745 Letter from the King, to moderate
the severity of the Law against the Earl, 755 Letter from the Earl to his
Secretary Slingsby before his death, 774 Loftus, Lord Chancellor, made a close
prisoner, see Art. 8. 221 Twelve Lords send to His Majesty, to show favor to
his innocent Children, 758
M.
MAriners, a Bill to be drawn to enable the pressing of them, 755 Members of
Parliament in Ireland sent for by the Commons, 4, 5, 6. A Committee, touching
the Examination of Members of both Houses named, 14, 15, 16 Members make a
protestation of Secrecy, 16 Four Members, viz. Mr. Seldom, Palmer, Maynard,
and Whitlock, added to the Committee for the Earl, who made their Protestation
of Secrecy, 32 Members appointed to view the place of Trials, 39 Members
desired by the Earls Petition, to be heard as Witnesses, 40 Some Members of the
Lords House desired by the Commons to be made use of as Witnesses, 44 Members
names of the House of Commons, whom the House desires to be present at the
Trial as Witnesses, 44 Message from the Lords for a Conference by a Committee
of Thirty of their House, with a proportionable number of this House, touching
the examination of Members, etc. 10 Message to the Lords about disbanding the
new levied Irish Army, 42 Message to the Lords, to appoint a day for the Earl
to conclude his Trial; 44 Both Houses agree, that if the Earl come not to
morrow, the House of Commons may sum up their Evidence and conclude, 45 Message
to acquaint the Lords, that the Proceedings by Bill, stand in no way of
opposition to what has been already done, 48 Moneys without Parliament to be
raised by force, see Art. 21. 516 Monopoly made of Tobacco, see Art. 12. 402
Sir Walter Montague, Sir Toby Mathews etc. to be removed from Court, 42 Lord
Montnorris his Case of Ireland, to be reported by the Committee. Montnorris
sentence of death pronounced against him, see Art. 5. 186 Sentence read, 187
Concerning his being put out of possession of his Freehold, see Art. 6. 205
Multitudes of people assembled in Westminster, 742 Petition from them, desiring
Justice against the Earl, communicated to the Commons, ibid. They depart upon
the Lords taking the Protestation. 742
N.
LYsimachus Nicanor, his scandalous Pamphlet Printed, 770 Earl of
Northumberland made General of the Royal Army in England, upon whose sickness,
the Earl of Strafford was made Lieutenant General, Anno 1640. 769 Earl of
Northumberland communicates Mr. Percies Letter to the Peers, 748 Earl of
Northumberland Lord High Admiral of England, 769
O.
OAth contrived against the Scots in Ireland, see Art. 19. 489 The like to the
Scots in England, 503 Offensive War against the Scots, urged by the Earl, see
Art. 20. 515 A Troop of Reformed Officers to be disbanded, 15 Officers, etc.
Warrant to them, see Art. 9. 236
P.
PAper posted up at Sir William Brunkards House in the Old Palace-yard,
declaring the names of many persons to be enemies of Justice, 59 Parliament in
Ireland declare against the Scots, see Art. 22. 517 People assemble in
multitudes at Westminster, 742 Petitions, Orders, and Books of Entries of
Impositions, etc. sent for out of Ireland, 8 Petitions and Complaints of
proceedings in Ireland reported, 10 Petition of the Parliament of Ireland to
the King, read 15 Petition of the Earl, to examine some Members of this House,
read 40 Two Petitions of the Citizens of London, read, 55 One of them
concerning Grievances inserted, 56 Petition from a multitude of people at
Westminster, desiring Justice against the Earl, communicated to the Commons 742
A discovery in the Petition of Soldiers, to be brought into the Tower, ibid.
Father Philips's Letter to Mr. Walter Montague read, 751 He is called to the
Bar, and is impeached, 752 Mr. Piercy's Letter concerning the Plot, 748 to 750
Mr, Piercy, and Sir John Suckling voted to be guilty of High Treason, 754 Plot
discovered in England, 735 Upon which the House resolves on a Protestation,
ibid. Preamble thereunto, ibid. The Protestation read, 736 Names of the
Protestors, 736 to 740 The Plot still suspected to be carried on, 740 Ports in
Ireland to be open, 46 1500 Barrels of Powder gone to Portsmouth to be stayed,
740 Lord Primate of Ireland his Examination debated, 44 Proceedings by way of
Bill, no way in opposition to what has been already done, 48 Proclamation to
issue out against Sir George Ratcliffe, if he appear not at the day limited, 16
Proclamation by the Earl, commanding the Nobility to reside in Ireland, see
Art. 16. 460. Protestation of Secrecy taken by the Members 16 The same taken
by the four Members added to the Committee for the Earl, 32 Protestation of the
Lords, denying that they did approve of the Earls raising Money in Yorkshire,
37, 38 Protestation resolved on by the House, upon the discovery of the Plot in
England, 735 Carried up to the Lords, to take the same, 741 Mr. Hollis's Speech
to the Lords, to promote the taking thereof, 742 The Protestation taken by the
Lords, and the multitude depart, ibid.
Q.
THe Queen came to her private Closet in Westminster Hall, during the Trial, 41
Queen Mother apprehending her self in danger of the Multitude, Mr. Martyn moved
the House that she may depart the Kingdom, 758
R.
LOrd Ranelaghs, debate about his Examination, 174 Not to be examined, 175 Sir
George Ratcliffe not to speak with, or write to the Earl of Strafford, 15 A
Proclamation to issue out against him, if he appear not at the day limited, 16
Articles of High Treason voted against him, 17 Records of Attainder, a
Committee appointed to search those Cases in the King's Bench, 7
Reformado-Officers to be disbanded 15 Remonstrance of Ireland reported by Mr.
Whistler, 7 Remonstrance of the House of Commons in Ireland read, 11, 12, 13,
114. No Replication to be put in to the Earls Answer, 32
Strafford.
A Committee of Irish Affairs, of the whole House designed in order to his
Accusation. 1 He is in a great Dilemma in the North 2 His intended Impeachment
of some Members disappointed, ibid. He is accused of High Treason; 3 Sequestered
from the Parliament, and Committed to the Black Rod, ibid. Examination of
Witnesses to be taken, previous to his Trial in the presence of some of the
Commons, 6 Records of Attainder in the Kings Bench to be searched, in order to
a Bill of Attainder, 7 Irish Remonstrance reported, which reflected on his
proceedings in Ireland, 7 and 10 Petitions, Orders, and Books of Proceedings
upon Paper-Petitions, and of Entries relating to the Custom-House in Ireland
sent for, 7, 8 Articles, in maintenance of the Accusation of the said Earl, 8,
9 Free Conference concerning the said Articles, 9 A select Committee agreed
upon for the Examination of Witnesses concerning him, 10 Members of both Houses
to be examined concerning him, 14, 15, 16 Parliament of Ireland, their Petition
to the King against him, 15 Sir George Ratcliffe not to speak with him, 15
Scotch Commissioners to bring in their charge, and Proofs against him, 18 See
the Charge 769 Conference to Sequester him from his Offices, 20 Debate about
admitting him Council at his Trial, 21 His Answer read, containing 200 sheets
of Paper, 22 Abstract of his Answer to the 28 Articles, 22 unto 30 The Evidence
against him to be managed by a Committee of the House of Commons, 32 No
Replication to be put in unto his Answer, ibid. The Commons aver the Charge
against him, and will manage the Evidence by Members of their own; the Names of
the Members to that purpose appointed, 33 A Committee of 48 of the Commons,
appointed to meet a Committee of 24 of the Lords, at a free Conference
concerning his Trial, 33 Conference as to place of Trial, Persons present,
Council, and management of Evidence against him, 34 unto 37 Protestation entered
in the Lords House, denying that they did approve of his raising Money in
Yorkshire, 37, 38 Resolved that the Commons be present, as a Committee of the
whole House, at his Trial, etc. 38 Some Members appointed to view the place for
his Trial, 39 His Petition to examine some Members of this House read, 40 The
manner of his coming to his Trial in Westminster Hall, 41 The manner of
bringing him into the Hall, the Ax not being suffered to be carried before him
till after Trial, 41 Suffrages in matters criminal declined to be given by the
Bishops, entering their Protestation, etc, 41 The House to meet at Two in the
afternoon, constantly during the Trial 42 His Exceptions, and frequent
Adjournment of the Lords House, occasioned thereby, with other unnecessary
delays reported, how to prevent the same, 43 A Peremptory day to be appointed
for him to conclude his Trial, 44 Both Houses agree, that if the Earl come not
to morrow, the Commons may sum up their Evidence, and conclude, 45. Resolved by
the Lords, that to morrow be recollect his Evidence, which being done, the
Managers are to state theirs, 47 The Act of Attainder read a Second time, and
referred to a Committee of the whole House. ibid. The Council appointed by the
Lords to be here to morrow morning, concerning matter of Law, 47 Resolved, that
it is sufficiently proved that he has endeavored to subvert the ancient and
Fundamental Laws of the Realms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and to
introduce Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government against Law, 48 Lord High
Steward, his Speech unto him the first day of Trial, 101 The Impeachment
against him read, 101 The-Speech Introductive of Mr. Pym, concerning the
Preamble to his Answer, 102 Lord Digby's Speech to the Bill of Attainder, 50
Names of Witnesses, their Evidence, Exception taken, Interlocutory Passages,
Defense and Reply, 109, etc. Sentence against the Lord Montnorris read, 187
Some Interlocutory Passages and Speeches in the Petition of Right made by him
in Parliament; much notice thereof being taken by the Court, 763 His
Confinement in Kent for refusing Lone-Money, 763 Complained of at Court, for
frequenting Archbishop Abbots Table with Sir Dudly Digs, etc. 764 Sentence
against the Lord Montnorris read, 187 Earl of Straffords Summary Account of his
Evidence, 633 to 660 The Speech of Mr. Pym thereupon, 661, to 674 Mr. Glyn's
Reply, to the Earls Summary of his Evidenee, 706 to 733 King's Speech in favor
of the Earl, 734 The Earls Letter to him, to set His Majesty's Conscience at
Liberty, 743 Concerning an endeavor for the Earl to escape out of the Tower,
746 Sir John Suckling voted Guilty of Treason, 754 The Earl brought to the
Scaffold, his Speech then, 759 Copy of the Paper, containing the heads of his
last Speech, written with his own Hand, and left on the Scaffold, 760 He
desires before he dies, to speak with the Archbishop of Canterbury, but
refused, 762 He sees the Archbishop the next morning at his window, as he was
going to the Scaffold, and desires his Blessing, 762 He went to the Scaffold
more like a General at the Head of an Army, after obtaining Conquest in Battle,
than like a man going to execution by Death, 762 His Instructions to his Son in
Writing, ibid. A Description of his Person, and an account of the Noble
Relations to his Family, 772 A brief Account of his Secretary Mr. Slingsby; and
of his death, by having his Legs cut off above the knees, 773 His Letter to his
Secretary before his death, 774 The King's Reflections upon the Earls death,
775
T.
TAx imposed on the Subjects, see Art. 27, 598 Tobacco made a Monopoly, see
Art. 12. 402 Westminster Hall the place of Trial, appointed to be viewed by
Members, 39 The fitness thereof reported by Sir John Culpeper, ibid. The First
day of Trial, March 22. 1640. 101, 102, etc. The manner of his coming to Trial,
41
U
ULster the place of Rendezvous for the Irish Army in fight of Scotland, 769
Ungirding of the Scotch Army, 770
W
SIr Christopher Wandesford, made Lord Deputy of Ireland, by the Earl, 769
Warrant given to Officers of the Ecclesiastical Courts to Attach and commit
persons, see Art. 9. 236 Warrant produced, 237. Sir Richard Weston, Lord
Treasurer, first courted the Earl after the Dissolution of the Parliament, 4
Car. 1. 768 Sir John Winter to be removed from Court, 42 Some Lords desired to
be made use of as Witnesses, 49 Earl of Worcester and his Sons Commission for
levying of Forces, to be drawn into the charge of the Earl of Strafford, 19
Words spoken, tending to the bringing of the Irish Army into England, 46, 725
Words wherewith the Earl was charged in several Articles of Impeachment, see
Art.
FINIS.

