A True RELATION of the Storming BRISTOLL, AND The taking the Town, Castle,
Forts, Ordnance, Ammunition and Arms, by Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX'S Army, on Thursday
the 11. of this instant September. 1645.

Together with several Articles between Prince RUPERT, and General FAIRFAX,
before the delivering up of the CASTLE.

Sent in several Letters to the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire Speaker of the
Honorable House of Commons, and Read in the said House.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Relation with the
Articles, be forthwith printed and published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
Sept. 13. 1645.

A TRUE RELATION OF The Storming Bristol, and the taking the Town, Castle,
Forts, Ordnance, Ammunition and Arms, by Sir Tho Fairfax's Army.
TO THE HONORABLE William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable House of
COMMONS.
SIR,
I Send you here enclosed, an Account of the last passages about Bristol; I
have done it in haste; I desire it may not be much published till you hear more
(which will not be long) from

Your Servant, I. R.
Sept. 7. 12 at night.
For His Highness Prince Rupert.
SIR, For the Service of the Parliament I have brought their Army before the
City of Bristol, and do Summon You in their Names, to Render it with all the
Forts belonging to the same into my hands, to their use.

Having used this plain language, as the business requires, I wish it may be
as effectual with you, as it is satisfactory to my self, that I do a little
expostulate with you about the Surrender of the same, which I confess is a way
not common, and which I should not have used, but in Respect to such a Person;
and to such a place: I take into consideration Your Royal Birth and Relation
to the Crown of England, Your Honor, Courage, the virtues of Your Person, and
the strength of that place, which You may think Your self bound, and able to
maintain.

SIR, The Crown of England is and will be where it ought to be, we fight to
maintain it there; But the King mis led by evil Counselors, or through a
seduced heart has left His Parliament, and His People, under God, the best
assurance of His Crown and Family; the maintaining of this Schism, is the
ground of this unhappy War on Your part: And what sad effects it has produced
in the three Kingdoms, is visible to all men: To maintain the Rights of the
Crown and Kingdom, jointly, (a principal part whereof, is, That the King in
Supreme Acts concerning the whole State, is not to be advised by men of whom
the Law takes no notice, but by His Parliament, the great Council of the
Kingdom, in whom as much as man is capable of, He hears all His people, as it
were at once advising him, and in which multitude of Counselors lies His
safety, and His peoples Interest) and to set him right in this, has been the
constant and faithful endeavor of the Parliament, and to bring these wicked
Instruments to Justice, that have misled Him, is a principal ground of our
fighting.

SIR, If God makes this clear to You, as he has to us, I doubt not but he will
give You a heart to deliver this place; Notwithstanding, all the other
considerations of Honor, Courage, Fidelity, etc. because of their consistency
and use in the present business, depends upon the right or wrongfulnesse of
this that has been said: And if upon such Conviction You shall Surrender it,
and save the loss of blood, or hazard of spoiling such a City, it would be an
occasion glorious in it self, and joyful to us, for the restoring of You to
the indeared affection to the Parliament and people of England, the truest
Friend to Your Family it has in this world.

But if this be hid from your eyes, and through your wilfulness this so great,
so famous and ancient a City, and so full of people, be by your putting us to
force the same, exposed to ruin, and the extreamities of war (which yet we
shall in that case as much as possible, endeavor to prevent) then I appeal to
the righteous God, to be Judge between you and us, and to require the wrong:
And let all England judge, whether the burning of its Towns, ruining its
Cities, and destroying its people, be a good requital from a person of your
family, which has had the Prayers, Tears, Purses, and Blood of its Parliament
and people; and (if you look on either, as now divided) has ever had that same
party both in Parliaments, and amongst the people most zealous for their
assistance and restitution, which you now oppose and seek to destroy, and whose
constant grief has been their desires to serve your Family, have been ever
hindered or made fruitless by that same party about his Majesty, whose Council
you act, and whose interest you pursue in this unnatural War.

I expect your speedy Answer to this Summons, with the return of the Bearer
this evening, and remain

Your Highness humble servant, THO: FAIRFAX.
Sept. 4. 1645.
Prince Ruperts Answer.
SIR,
I Received yours by your Trumpeter: I desire to know, whether you will give me
leave to send a Messenger to the King, to know his pleasure in it. I rest

Your Servant, RVPERT.
Sept. 5. 1645.
Sir Thomas Fairfax's Answer to the Princes Message.
SIR, Your overture of sending to the King to know his pleasure, I cannot give
way to, because of delay: I confess your Answer does intimate your intention,
not to surrender without his Majesty's consent: Yet (because it is but
implicit) I send again to know a more positive Answer from your self, which I
desire may be such, as may render me capable to approve my self,

Your Highness humble Servant, Tho: Fairfax.
Sept. 5. 1645. September 6. seven in the morning, the Trumpet went in, and was
detained all that day and night; every thing was prepared for a Storm; the
Soldiers had their faggots on their backs, and leaped for joy they might go
on: Yet about ten at night, it was held fit to give Orders to put off the
business till Monday morning two of the clock.

Lords day, Sept. 7. in the forenoon, the Trumpet was returned with these
Propositions from Prince Rupert, which I send herewith.



Prince Ruperts Propositions, to General Sir Thomas Fairfax.
SIR, Whereas I Received Your Letter for the delivery of the City, Forts, and
Castle of Bristol, and being willing to join with You for the sparing of blood,
and the preserving of His Majesty's Subjects: I have upon those grounds and
none other, sent You these following Propositions:

1. That my self, all Noblemen, Commanders, Officers, Gentlemen, and Soldiers
of Horse and Foot, that have served, either His Majesty or Parliament in
England or elsewhere: As likewise all persons whatsoever, men or women, now
resident in this City of Bristoll, Castle and Forts thereof, shall have free
liberty to march away out of the said City, Castle and Forts, with their Arms,
flying Colors, Drums beating, Trumpets sounding, Pistolls cocked, Swords
drawn, Matches lighted at both ends, Bullets in their mouths, and as much
Powder and Match as they can carry about them; with all their Bag and Baggage,
Horses, Arms and other Furniture, Ten pieces of Canon, Fifty barrels of Powder,
Match and Bullet proportionable.

2. That neither mine own person, nor the person of any Nobleman, Commander,
Officer, Gentleman or Soldier, or any other of mine or of their retinues, be
searched, molested or troubled upon what pretense soever, but left to their
liberties to depart or stay, as it shall be most convenient for them.

3. That none of your Army whatsoever, shall entice or persuade any Officer or
Soldier of mine from their Regiments or Celours, with any promise of
preferment or reward.

4. That all such Officers and Soldiers that are hurt and sick, and cannot now
march out of this City, Castle and Fort, shall have liberty to stay until they
be recovered, and then have safe Conducts to go wheresoever they please, either
to any of His Majesty's Armies or Garrisons, or their own houses, where they
may live quiet, and that in the interim those being sick and hurt, may be
protected by you, and have civil usage.

5. That all prisoners taken on both sides since the beginning of this Siege,
be forthwith set at liberty.

6. That my self, and all those above mentioned, may not be required to march
further in a day, then what conveniently we may; and that a day or two of rest
be allowed upon our march, if we shall find it requisite; and that we be
accommodated with free Quarter during our march, and a sufficient Convoy to any
of the Kings Armies or Garrisons, which I shall name, to secure us in our march
from all Injury and Incivility that shall any ways be offered unto us: And
likewise, that there be One hundred and fifty carriage Horses, and Forty Wains,
with sufficient Teams provided for Cariages of all sorts.

7. That no person here in these Articles mentioned, shall be in their March,
Randevouz, or Quarters, searched or plundered, upon any pretense whatsoever:
And that two Officers be appointed by you; the one, for Accommodation of free
Quarters for Officers, Soldiers, and others; and the other, for providing of
Horses and Carriages for our Baggage and Train.

8. All Noblemen, Gentlemen, Clergymen, Citizens, Resiants, or any other
person within this City, Suburbs, and Liberties thereof, shall at any time
when they please, have free liberty to remove themselves, their Goods and
Families, and to dispose of them at their pleasures, according to the known and
enacted Laws of the Land; either to live at their own houses, or elsewhere; and
to enjoy their Houses, Lands, Goods, and Estate, without any molestation, and
to have protection for that purpose; and this Article to extend to all those
whose Estates are sequestered or not sequestered; and that they may rest quiet at
their abodes, and travel freely and safely upon their Occasions: And for their
better removal, they may have Letters of safe conduct, with Horses and
Carriages at reasonable Rates, upon demand.

9. That all persons abovementioned may have free liberty to pass to any
parts beyond the Seas any time within three months, as their occasions shall
require.

10. That the Lines, Forts, Castle, and other Fortifications about or in the
City of Bristol, be forthwith slighted, and the City stated in the same
condition it was before the beginning of this unnatural War: And that hereafter
the Parliament, during this War, place no Garrison in it.

11. That no Churches be defaced: That the several Members of the Foundation
of this Cathedral, shall quietly enjoy their Houses and Revenues belonging to
their Places; and that the Ministers of this City may likewise enjoy their
Benefices without any trouble.

12. That no Oaths be imposed upon any person now in this City, Suburbs, and
Liberties, other then such as are required by the ancient and enacted Laws of
the Land.

13. That the Mayor, Sheriffs, Aldermen and Citizens within his Corporation of
the City of Bristol, shall be free in their persons and estates, and enjoy all
their Privileges, Liberties, and Immunities, in as full and ample manner as
formerly at any time they did, before the beginning of this War; and that they
shall have freedom of Trade both by Land and Sea, paying such Duties and
Customs as formerly they have done, to his Majesty: and that no Mulct of Fine
be imposed upon any person mentioned in this Article, upon any pretense
whatsoever; or questioned for any act or thing done or committed before the day
of our Marching forth: That no free Quarters shall be put upon them without
their own consents.

14. That all other persons whose dwellings are in this City, and now absent,
may have the full benefit of these Articles, as if they were present.

15. That all Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others, who have goods in this City,
and are now present or absent, may have liberty at any time within three
months to dispose of their goods as they please.

16. That there be no Plundering, or taking away of any man's person, or any
part of his estate, under what pretense soever; and that Justice, according to
the known Laws of the Land, be administered to all persons within this City by
the Civil Magistrates.

17. And for the performance of these Articles, I expect such Hostages to be
given as I shall accept of. And hereunto I desire your speedy Answer.

Sir, by this you may evidently perceive my Inclination to Peace; and you may
be assured that I shall never desire any thing more then the Honor of the
King, and Safety of the Kingdom, and that I may become,

SIR, Your Servant, RUPERT.
September. 7. 1645.
The Generals Answer to Prince Ruperts Propositions.
SIR,
I Have perused your Propositions, wherein some things are doubtfully
expressed; other things inconsistent with the duty I owe to them I serve.
Notwithstanding, to the end I may give assurance, that I earnestly desire to
save effusion of blood, and the ruin of a City and People, that may in time be
so serviceable to the Crown and Kingdom: If it please your Highness that
Committees may treat between us, concerning the accommodating of things, I hope
to make it evident to the world, that what shall respect the honor of a
Soldier, due civility to all men, the good and welfare of the People of that
City, both in passing by what is past, and restoring them to the Privileges of
all other Subjects, and to the immunities of their City, will readily be
condescended unto by me. And to the end no time may be lost, I have
hereinclosed sent you the Names of Committees, who upon the return of hostages
of equal condition unto me, shall attend your Highness sufficiently
instructed, to conclude on my part: provided the said Treaty be ^nded by nine
of the clock this night. And to this, I desire your Answer within the space of
an hour, and remain

Your Highnesse's humble Servant, T. FAIRFAX.
Sept. 7. 1645.

This Answer being returned presently after dinner by the same Trumpeter, he
was detained till eight at night, and then he brought this Answer from the
Prince, or to this effect, in writing:

THat he hoped his Propositions had been such as need no explanation; yet,
because some doubts were made, he was willing to have the exceptions set down
in writing, and his Highness would return Answer.

So this night also, though eight men were drawn out and appointed to their
several posts, the storming was put off; and to morrow a certain hour will be
set the Prince peremptorily for his positive Answer.

There can be but two things, in my opinion, induces the Prince to offer
Conditions; either he is not able to defend the place, and in fear of Sir Lewis
Dives conditions, if he be driven for refuge into the Fort Royal; or else, he
does it to gain time, till his Counter-scarfes and Inner-lines be finished,
which he is very active in making day and night; or that he expects aid from
the King, or Goring, neither of which are moving this way, as our Intelligence
is; and therefore (on that reason) one days time longer is given. No man knows
how this business may work, especially with the Townsmen: if the Generals
Answer be made known to them, or if a Treaty be embraced, the noise of it, and
the sight of Committees, will make men greedy of Conditions, or unwilling to
resist, if on the Princes part it be broken off.

Truly, I think, some good will come of the Proposition, which I rather wish
then by storm; though by the latter, we shall reduce them to more extremities.
God by his providence will order things for the best: I doubt not of good
success, which way soever is taken: For the Articles that are point of honor,
I believe will not be much insisted on, as to grant four piece of ordinance,
where ten is desired, and so proportionably of other things; and all demands of
civility. The essential Articles are: Exemption from sequestration: Cathedral
men to continue; against which there is an Ordinance: The works to be
demolished, and no Garrison hereafter; which may be inconvenient: These Articles
will receive dispute; if they will agree, the Fort and Castle may have a
reasonable Garrison, the Town perhaps will be exempted.

By to morrow night I shall acquaint you more: In the mean time I desire you
these may not be too public, till you hear further from the General himself,
who is so busied he cannot write, neither to your self, nor the Committee of
both Kingdoms.

Sept. 7. past 12 at night.

SIR,
BEfore I descend to the particulars of Bristol, I shall humbly beg leave to
offer a word or two, to vindicate the Army for coming hither after the taking
of Sherborn-Castle, because some endeavors have been, to persuade a belief,
that for respect to some particular men, or other self-end, the Army was drawn
to decline the West, and come hither: Me thinks it should be sufficient to
convince any (reasonable) man, That to adventure naked bodies against an Army
defended with Stone-walls, Strong-works, and a Castle, and to bring them into
apparent danger of being visited with the Plague, (for that they must quarter
where the sickness was very rife) was an argument of little self-respect; and
when the City was gained, little could our security be to remain there, where
120 died weekly of the Plague. Surely Sir, it was God that put it into the
heart of the General and his Officers to come before this place, and a regard
they had unto the public: And indeed God has appeared to own our coming
hither, in preserving this Army from the Infection of the Plague, considering
that the Soldiers (do what we can to prevent it) run daily into infected
houses; and to this day, not a man in the Army dead thereof, that I can hear
of, but one. For the reasons inducing this Army to come before this place,
rather then at that time, to advance further West, had I time, I believe I
should make it evident unto you, That to come before this City, was most for
the service of the Kingdom, and the safest and most secure course that could
have been taken, to reduce the West to a through obedience to the Parliament:
And this might be laid for a ground, That this Army could not (having a regard
to the safety of other parts of the Kingdom, on any emergent occasion or
accident, and to its own security) march from Sherborne into Cornwall, (as in
all probability the Army must have done, if the enemy had drawn there together
in a Body) leaving Bristol a Garrison on our backs, and Prince Rupert at
liberty, with near 1000. Horse, and 1000. Foot, besides the addition of other
Forces that might be joined to his, to range all over Wiltshire and
Dorsetshire, and draw to them the assistance of the ill affected Club-men (we
being not able to leave strength to secure Bathe, Bridgewater, and other
Garrisons,) and sufficient power to balance his Forces. But this place being
reduced, there is no Garrison in the West of England left behind us, that can
secure or countenance the raising of any considerable force: Besides, the
reputation in the gaining of this place, may operate so much among men (that
are not void of reason or sense) as (perhaps) without many blows more, to
reduce the West of England, and put fair to settle England too, which was once
very low when this place was first lost. Also, the Club-men are hereby engaged,
who have declared to assist this Army against the enemy. The example whereof,
may do much elsewhere, especially in Wales, where (by our gaining of Bristol
and Kings-Road) the people will undoubtedly be our friends. Craving pardon for
this digression, I now come to the business of besieging and storming of
Bristol.

Saturday the 23. of August, the Army encompassed the City round, both on
Gloucestershire and Somershireside, our Horse having been there some days
before, to prevent the burning of the Towns and Villages adjacent, whose
seasonable coming, saved the burning of Stapleton, Hanham, and other Towns,
which the enemy had sent out Parties of Horse with Fireballs to set them on
fire, but that our Horse repulsed them; but Bedminster, Clifton, and other
places, they consumed by fire. From that time, till the 3. of September, the
weather was so extreme wet, that both man and Horse with hard duty grew weak,
and died in the Field: during that unseasonable weather, the Army was unfit for
Assault. The weather no sooner changed, but our Soldiers (being refreshed with
the warm beams of the Sun) were impatient of falling on, being not out of
action the time before, having had several skirmishes with the enemy, where
they took Sir Barnard Ashley, and others; besides, the taking in of Ports-head
Point Fort, and fix piece of Ordnance. The General (with Lieutenant General
Cromwell) having taken, full, and exact views of the Line and Works, and what
places most fit to enter on, called a Council of War (having first set a day a
part for the Army to seek God by Prayer and Fasting, to direct them in what
they were to undertake:) At which Council, it was resolved on, to storm the
place, as most necessary to the timely reducing of it, and of having the Army
timely in a condition to oppose an enemy that should advance toward us: Laying
this for a Ground.

That if all the City and Forts were not carried at first, yet so much would
be gained (by Gods blessing) as a small strength with the assistance of the
Clubmen, would keep them in, in a narrow compass, and the rest of the Army
would be at liberty, to meet an enemy; Hereupon, and other weighty ^easons, a
Summons and friendly advise, was September. 4. sent from the General to Prince
Rupert (of which I sent you a Copy formerly) And September 5. returned answer,
that he desired to know, if the General would give him leave to send it to the
King: who returned Answer, he could not, (because of delay) give way unto it:
And fearing lest the Prince intended by this overture of a Surrender, to gain
time, rather then otherwise: The manner of Storming was agreed on, which was to
be after this manner: Colonel Weldon, with his Brigade, consisting of the
four Taunton Regiments, Viz-Collonel VVeldon, Colonel Twooldsbies, Col.
Fortescues, and Col. Herberts Regiments, (whose Posts were to make good
Somersetshire side) was ordered to storm in three place, viz. two hundred men
in the middle, two hundred on each side, (as forlorn hopes) to begin the
storm, twenty Ladders to each place, two men to carry each Ladder, and to have
five shillings a piece, two Sergeants that attend the service of the Ladder, to
have 20 shillings a man; each Musquettier that follows the Ladder, to carry a
faggot, a Sergeant to command them, and to have the same reward; 12 Files of
men, with fire, arms, and pikes, to follow the Ladders to each place, where
the storm is to be, those to be commanded each by a Captain, and Lieutenant;
The Lieutenant to go before with five Files, the Captain to second him, with
the other seven Files: the two hundred men that are appointed to second the
storm, to furnish each party of the, twenty Pyoneers, who are to march in
their Rear. The two hundred men, each to be commanded by a Field-officer, and
the Pioneers each by a Sergeant. Those Pyoners are to throw down the Line, and
make way for the Horse: the party that is to make good the Line, to possess
the Guns, and turn them. A gentleman of the Ordnance, Gunners and Matrosses, to
enter with the parties, the Drawbridge to be let down, two Regiments and a
half of Horse, to storm in, (after the foot) if way be made: Much after this
manner was the Generals Brigade under Col^onel Monta^ues Command, (Consisting
of the Generals, Col. Montagues, Col. Pickerings, and Sir Hardresse Wallers
Regiments) to storm on both sides of Lawfords Gate, both to the river Avon, and
the (lesser) river Froome. The Bridge over Froome to be made good against Horse
with Pike, or to break it down. Colonel Rainsboroughs Brigade (consisting of
his own, Major General Skippons, Col. Hamonds, Col. Birches, and Col. Barkleys
Regiments) to storm on this side the river Froome, beginning on the right hand
of the sally Port, up to Pryors Fort, and to storm the Fort it self, as the
maine business, two hundred of this Brigade to go up in Boats with the
Seaman, to storm VVaterfort, (if it be to be attempted) one Regiment of Foot,
and one of Horse to be moving up and down in the Closes before the Royal Fort,
and to ply hard upon it, to Alarm it, with a Field officer to command them.
The Regiment of Dragoones with two Regiments of Horse, to carry Ladders with
them, and to attempt the Line and Works, by Clifton and VVashingtons Breach;
The manner of storm being thus agreed on (though its probable some more
certain information might change the attempts from some place to another) the
Soldiers were drawn out, to try their inclination, in whom more courage, joy,
and resolution could not appear in men. The General to make good his promise,
to reward them for the service at Bridgewater, ordered them six shillings a
man, which by the care of the Commissioners of Parliament, was immediately paid
unto them, and put a great obligation upon the Soldier. On the last Lords day,
Prince Rupert, being pressed by the General for a positive Answer to his
summons, sent Propositions of surrender: the answering of which, and Replies on
both sides, spent time til Tuesday five in the afternoon, and then the Prince
appeared in his proper colors, to be a man that pretended one thing, and
intended another; delatorie proceedings, you will the better discern, by all
the Letters and Answers, which time will not now give me leave to repeat. The
Prince, Noblemen, Soldiers, and Citizens, being left inexcusable, for refusing
such honorable Conditions as was offered them, and being guilty of that blood
that should be spilt. The same night, after the Treaty broke off, Tuesday
September 9. at 12 at night, all the Army, Horse and Foot, round the City,
were set in a posture to fall on; The signs were to be, to give notice when
the storm should begin, by kindling a fire of straw, and shooting off sour
great Guns. The Word during the storm, was David: the word after the Line was
entered, was The Lord of Hosts: About two of the clock in the morning the storm
begun, the Soldiers shouted for joy, the service was very hot for a time,
especially with Colonel Rainsboroughs Brigade, who with a party of his force,
spent almost three hours in the storming of the Pryors Fort, a place of great
advantage; Which piece of service was as bravely performed, as ever thing was
done by man: In re^ard they were put to the utmost, by scaling Ladders to win
the Fort, they cut in pieces most of the forces in the Fort, and made the rest
unserviceable, they gave no quarter to Major Price in the Fort. This Brigade
took four great Pieces in this Fort, and two more in a Redoubt; and Colonel
Montagues Brigade took sixteen Pieces in the several Works, and half
Moons, which they gained by storming.

The other Brigade under Colonel Welden, fell on on S^mmerset-shire side, with
a great deal of Resolution but when the Ladders were set to the Works, they
were to short, the Moat being very deep, so they only alarmed the Enemy: The
Clubmen they fell on at Bedminster, and much terrified the enemy: Our loss of
men was inconsiderable, not credible almost, I assure you, that in Col.
Rainsboroughs and Colonel Montagues Brigade, not forty men are lost, our
Horse entered with the Foot. The Pyoneers having thrown down the Line, and beat
off the enemies Horse, and took Col Tailor, formerly a Member of Parliament,
being mortally wounded: we had on our part Capt. Ireton sore wounded, a Captain
of Horse, an honest and stout man, Major Bethel slightly wounded: Major
Saintleger, and two Majors more of the enemy, and diverse others are prisoners:
we are now planting Pieces against the Castle, which in 24 hours we hope to
have. The Enemy has fired the City in three places.

I am Sir your servant I. R.
Sept. 10. eight in the morning, Lawfords gate.
SIR,
SInce the writing of this enclosed at eight in the Morning; The Prince sent
out for a parley, which by six at night produced these enclosed Articles. You
see how much God works for us, beyond expectation. I have writ continually
unto you, that I was even well assured of success upon this place, there is
that seeking of God, by our Commanders and Soldiers, by prayer and fasting,
and that unity of spirit amongst them, and by facile undertaking their
dessignes, that a blessing attends their Counsels and attempts, there is not
that striving here, who shall receive most honor, but who is most humble in
what success soever God pleases to give, here is Colonel Murrey and another
Knight, come to the Generals quarters, as Hostages for the performance of the
Articles, and Sir Robert Pie, and Sir Hardress Waller to go as Hostages to the
Prince, pardon the extreme have Sir of.

Your most humble servant J. R.
September tenth, 1645. eight at night.
Articles of agreement between the Commissioners appointed on the behalf of
his Highness Prince Rupert, And his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax For the
Surrender of the City of Bristoll. September the tenth 1645.
THat his highness Prince Rupert and all Noblemen, Commanders, Officers,
Gentlemen, and Soldiers, and all other persons whatsoever now residing in the
City of Bristoll, the Castle and Forts thereof, shall march out of the said
City, Castle, and Forts thereof, with Colors, Pikes, and Drums, bag and
baggage. The Prince his highness, all Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Officers in
Commission, with their Horse and Arms, and their servants with their horses,
and Swords, and Common-souldiers with their Swords. The Prince his life Guard
of Horse, with their Horse and Arms, and two hundred and fifty Horse besides
to be disposed by the Prince, and his life guard of Firelocks, with their
Arms and each of them one pound of powder, and a proportion of Bullet let, and
that none of the persons who are to march out on this Article, shall be
plundered, searched, or molested.

That such Officers and Soldiers as shall be left sick or wounded in the
City, Castle or Eorts, shall have lib^rty to stay till their recovery, and then
have safe conducts to go to his Majesty, and in the interim to be protected.

That the persons above mentioned, who are to march away, shall have a
sufficient Convoy, provided for them to any such Garrison of the Kings as the
Prince shall Name, not exceeding fifty miles from Bristoll, and shall have
eight days allowed for their March thither, and shall have free quarter by the
way, and shall have two Officers to attend them for their accommodation, and
twenty wagons for their baggage, if they shall have occasion to use the same.

That all the Citizens of Bristoll, and all Noblemen, Gentle men, Clergymen,
and all other persons, residing in the said City and Suburbs of the same, shall
be saved from all plunder and violence, and be secured in their persons and
estates, from the violence of the Soldier, and shall enjoy those Rights and
Liberties, which other Subjects enjoy under the protection and obedience of the
Parliament.

That in consideration hereof the City of Bristoll, with the Castle and all
other Forts and Fortifications thereof without any slighting or defacing
thereof, and all the Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, and all other furniture, and
provisions of War. Excepting what is before allowed, shall be delivered up to
Sir Thomas Fairfax, to morrow being thursday the eleventh day of this instant
September by one of the clock in the afternoon without any deminution or
imbezelment, his highness Prince Rupert, then Nameing to what Army or Garrison
of the Kings be will March.

That none of the persons who are to March out on this agreement, shall plunder
hurt or spoil the town, or any person in it, or carry out any thing, but what
is property their own.

That upon signing these Articles, Colonel Okey and all persons, now in prison
in the City of Bristoll, the Castle or Forts of the same, shall immediately be
set at liberty.

That sufficient Hostages be given to Sir Thomas Fairfax, such as he shall
approve this night, who are to remain with him, until the City be delivered.

That neither the convoy nor Officers, sent with the Prince shall receive any
injury, in their going or coming back and shall have seven days allowance for
their return.

That upon the delivering of the town, sufficient hostages be given for
performance of the Articles on both parts.

Signed by us the Commissioners on the behalf of his Highness Prince Rupert.
Io. Mynn, W. Tillyer, William Valuasor.
Signed by us the Commissioners appointed on the behalf of his Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax, Edw. Montague, Tho. Rains-borough, Io. Pickering.
FINIS.

