TO THE SUPREME AUTHORITY OF THIS COMMONWEALTH, THE PARLIAMENT OF ENGLAND.
The PETITION of JOHN Earl of RUTLAND.
HVMBLY SHOWS,
THat whereas his principal House Belvoir Castle, is lately pulled down, by
Order from the Council of State, to his great inconveniency for living in the
Country; And being Tenant in possession of Wallingford House, having a just
Title thereunto under the State, at least unto Lady day next; As may appear by
the Case annexed, though the Commissioners for compounding refuse to confirm
it: The Lord Howard pretending Title thereunto also, endeavors by his power to
disturb, and by threats of force to dispossess your Petitioner thereof;
contrary to the Law, and your late Act for ordering estates of Delinquents:
Prays to be protected from force, and that the Lord Howard may be left to his
Legal course, to whom your Petitioner will appear gratis; or else that it will
please you to determine the Controversy your selves, to whose judgments your
Petitioner shall submit.

And pray, etc.
The Case betwixt the Earl of RUTLAND and the Lord HOWARD, is as follows.
1 THe Earl of Rutland was certainly Tenant in possession of Wallingford House,
at the time of the Lord Edward Howards pretended Lease from the Committee of
Advance. 2 That the said Lease to the Lord Howard, at 40 l. per annum, with the
abatement of a fifth part for discovery, was upon pretense of his being a
discoverer; though incapable of a Lease, being a Member of the said Committee.
3 That the discovery, if any were, was before that time made by another person
to the Comissioners of Sequestrations for Westminster, to which it did properly
appertain. 4 That the Earl of Rutland, upon supposal of a Right in the Lord
Howard, promised possession of Wallingford House; But the aforesaid pretended
Title of the Lord Howard, was afterward annulled by the Commissioners for
compounding, and waved by the Lord Howard himself; by his taking a New Lease to
commence within his former pretended Term, and all this, before such time as
the said Earl was to deliver him possession; whereby the Lord Howard's supposed
Right was extinct; and by consequence, the Earl of Rutland's engagement of
rendering possession absolutely discharged. 5 That before this new Lease of the
Lord Howards, from the Commissioners for compounding, the Earl of Rutland had
agreed with the Commissioners for Sequestrations, to continue in the said
Wallingford House, till Lady day next, at the Rent of 136 l. 13 s. 4 d. besides
all Taxes and Repairs, which is more then was yet offered by any other (being
also willing to give the same or a greater Rent, for the term of 7 years) the
said Commissioners for sequestrations having power by instructions, to continue
the Tenants in possession till Lady day next. 6 The Earl of Rutland is advised
by Counsel, that the Lord Howard's new Lease is void, for that it is not made
pursuant to the directions set forth in your Act of the 25 of January 1649, it
neither being let for the best Rent offered, nor upon any contract made by the
Commissioners for Sequestrations. Lastly, It was Ordered by this Honorable
House as follows;
Die Martis 8. Decembr. 1646.
REsolved by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That no Member of either
House shall have any Sequestrations whatsoever, either by Lease or Grant.


