THE LAST LEGACY OR, Affectionate and Pious Exhortation, AND Admonitions of the
Late William Lord Russel, to his Virtuous Lady, and dear Children, summed up by
him during his confinement, and left them for their advantage after his Death,
and for the good of all Christian Families.
My Dearest Wife.
SINCE while the providence of God has been pleased in great Mercy, to
continue us together as happy Yoak-fellows and Partners in each others
felicity, we did still live in all godly amity and friendship as became us
being so nearly united, I having still the same Bowels of compassion now in
this time of adversity as ever I had, I cannot tell how to show that real
Affection and tender care due to my other-self's (as I may truly and really
call you, and that young Offspring that God has given us, you being as a
Fruitful-Vine, and they even as so many delicious Olive-branches standing round
about our Table) then by bestowing my little time given me here, or at least
some hours (separated from the great employment that I am about, to prepare for
Death and my happy State in another World) to give you some cordial
instructions that you may think upon when I am Dead and gone, and some Grave
and serious Exhortations that may be fixed on your Spirit because coming from
your dear, tho now departing Husband. That so tho Death that King of Terrors
may separate us for a while, yet when it shall please the Almighty of his
fatherly Goodness to remove you out of this miserable Vale of Tears, that then
we may meet in those Everlasting Regions of Light, where the Malice of men
c^nnot reach us, where are Rivers of pleasure for evermore.

First Therefore, my Advice to you is, that as your constancy to me in
performing the duty of the relation in which you stood in toward me has been no
way blameable (abiding with, Comforting, Cherishing, and Condoling the sad
Estate of me your nearest and dearest alliance, never departing from me
unnecessarily even to the last Moments of my Life) so you would not be in this
time of sad Affliction too much cast down and dejected, but walk even as a
Child of Light, remain constant in your duty to God, especially in the great
parts of his Divine Worship incumbent on all.

I. Let your private Prayers and Accesses to the Throne of Grace be often, be
no stranger at the gate of Mercy while there is an Ear of favor open, and be
encouraged, since God hears the Cry of the Widow to defend her from all
dangers.

II. Be also frequent in Reading and consulting the Holy Scripture, they are
the Oracles of truth, and there you may find the Treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, thence you may suck promises, that will be as Milk flowing from the
Breasts of true Consolations; Oh! I can say it truly that from those Fountains
have Streamed such Cordials into my Soul as now enable me to go through with
this great and sharp Suffering with Patience, knowing from thence that no
strange thing has happened to me.

III. Be no stranger to the Ordinances of God as hearing the word for your
Edification, and receiving the Sacraments for your Confirmation, and be sure
neglect not the private Duties of your Family, let your House be a little
Sanctuary and let your Children and your Servants be allways present at the
times of Prayer and Reading the word, so that it may be said by you as by Good
Joshuah of Old. As for you and your House you will serve the Lord: I shall
only urge that of the Apostle, Pray without ceasing, and be allways abounding
in the work of the Lord, because you shall find your Labor will not be in vain
in the Lord.

IV. That I may speak more particulary to thy present sad condition, tho it be
sad, yet Oh! Be sure murmur not at our heavenly Fathers dispensation, he knows
what is allways best for us, Oh! remember that he has told us, Light is sown
for the righteous and gladness for the upright in Heart, and when you find your
Spirit sinking then support it with reflection on the former great Gracious
goodness of God; Oh! think what things he has done for others, and for thee,
and believe he is able to make up the Loss to thee, and be better then Ten
Husbands; possess thy Soul in Patience and a quiet submission to his will, and
while thou art tossed with troubles in this World, believe that the rest will be
more sweet to which thou art going, tho the way be strowed with Thorns, through
which I must now Pass before thee.

These are the Duty's I most ardently press thee to as to thy self, but as thou
now Stand in the relation of a Mother to Fatherless Childdren, they are left
Young and left among many Temptations and when they grow up will be liable to
many Corruptions and it is your part to bring them up in the Nurture and Fear
of the Lord. That so we may all Rejoice in the enjoyments of Blessings of the
New Jerusalem, so you will discharge the p^rt of a Religious Mother, by
Dedicating those the Lord has lent you to his Service. And in Order to this,

I. Be not over indulgent, let not thine Eye pity the correction of thy Son,
nor thy Soul spare for his Crying, be ready to give all instructions with
Gravity and Kindness, that so thy Love may seem to melt them to make them fit
for the impressions of Counsel.

II. Be sure to give them that Education that may be fit for them under good
Governors that you may not neglect upon all occasions to Instill into them the
principles of true Religion, and that you may by no means suffer the growth of
Sin or corruptions in them, but repress it in the Budd and First Motions of it,
and allways consider that if you Train up a Child in the way he should go, when
he is Old he will not depart from it.

Then for thy Servants, be sure that they that abide in thy House may be such
as are of honest conversation, that in their Lives they may Adorn the Doctrine
of God our Savior in all things, and be sure thy own example may be a
direction to them, and reproof also if they do amiss. This I thought fit to
leave for thy direction in the relation of a Mother and Governess of thy
Family. But because the words of a Father Deceased may have some influence on
my dear Babes, to them, therefore I shall leave some thing as a Fathers Legacy
among them.

To My Children.
My Dearest Children,
I May well Style you Son and Daughters of Affliction you are now deprived of a
Father on Earth, and as yet by reason of your tender Age you may not be
sensible of it, you have a Mother to Govern you, and to her I charge you to be
Obedient in all her lawful Commands, and grieve her not, add not to her present
Bonds but by your dutyful carriage support her Spirit.

To thee my Son in Particular, tho yet tender, yet when thou shall come to
years of discretion then think of and put in practce thy Dying Fathers Command.
First, Resolve to keep thy self from Ill Company that may Debauch thy younger
Years, and from such as may bring thee to evil practices in thy riper; And
allways appear for, and countenance the Religion of the Country in which thou
wast Born; stand by, own and countenance the Protestant Interest; favor all
true professors of it; be Eyes to the Blind; Feet to the Lame; Clothes to
those that are Oppressed with Cold, lay not thy Talent up in a Napkin, but
improve it to the Glory of God. and it will be to the comfort of thy Soul.

And to you my Daughters behave your selves with Modesty that you may be a
comfort to her that bare you, and Honor to your Sex; bear patiently all and
every one of you, all Injurys and Wrongs that may be offered, and live in Love
one with another; which that you may do, your Fathers Blessing rest upon you,
and the Allmighty keep, defend and direct you, till he having guided you by his
Spirit, bring you to those Regions of Light and Immortality, is the Prayer for
you all,

Of Your tender Dying Father, W. R.

His PRAYER.
O Merciful God, and Loving Father, O Blessed Son our Savior, O Holy Ghost our
Comforter, be with me, and hear me, and grant my Petitions. Pardon, Good God,
both my Sins of error, and Presumptiousness, all my known, and secret Sins, and
let the Blood of thy dear Son make Atonement for all. Sanctify these thy
afflictions to me, support me in all my bitter conflicts, carry me through the
agonies of Death with a Holy resolution; Give me the Assistances of thy Spirit,
Direct and Guide me in my last Moments; And afterward receive me into thy
Glorious Habitation, amongst Angels and the Spirits of just men made perfect,
that with them I may sing praises to my God. And to the Lamb for evermore,

Amen.
LONDON, Printed by George Croom, in Thames Street, over against Baynard's
Castle, 1683.


