PRINCE ROBERTS MESSAGE, to my Lord of ESSEX: With an Answer to his desires
touching the construction of the Laws, and certain other Points to the great
satisfaction of all People. Wherein is Declared his wicked Resolutions, masked
under the pretention of Loyalty unto his Uncle (our Kings Majesty) Together
with his desire of a Pitch-field in Duns^ore-Heath, with the true relation of
his wicked and Tyrannical proceedings where (...). Also the true Relation of a
Challenge he gave unto his Excellency, etc. Together with the Entertainment
he and his Brother (Prince MAVRICE) found in Shrewsbury by the Trai^ed Bands,
and other pious people there inhabiting. ALSO, The wonderful mercy of God
showed toward his EXCELLENCY, in delivering his Honor from a fatal
Conspirary pretended against his Person at Worcester.

London, Printed for THO: BANKS, October. 6. 1642.

The discovery of a wonderful (...) powder plot pretended against his
Excellency, at St. Peter's Church at Worcester.
Certain of Sir John Byrons Cavaleers having intelligence of my Lord of Essex
his coming to Worcester, and withal knowing his Piety to be such as that he
seldom neglect Gods divine Service, thought there to have undermined his
Person, making the Church the place and Sanctuary of their wicked Actions, for
there was a certain Vault under the Church, where they had conveyed three
Barrels of Powder, upon which they laid (...) heap of dead men's Bones for to
blow that side of the Church where my Lord was to Seat himself, (but see the
wonderful mercy of God, who was a watch eye still on his beloved) no sooner
was my Lord in his Coach coming to the Church but that the Sexton came running
to his Excellency and said that he feared some mischief to be hatch^ against
his Person, alleging that there were three men that did often frequent the
Church Vault, but he knew not their Intentions, and that the Key of the Vault
door was stole from him, which made the suspicion the more, on his words my
Lord cause^ the door to be broke open, and at their entrance they saw three
men stand in Armor, whom they took and ap^rehended, and after further search,
they found as aforesaid, ^ Barrels of Powder under a heap of Bones with great
store of Pla^ there hidden, all which my Lord caused to be taken away, ^ding
the three men up to be censured by the Honorable Houses of Parliament.

PRINCE ROBERTS Message to my Lord of ESSEX.
Here am I feign to speak of a Prince that deserves not the title of a
Subject, one who pretends Piety in his tongue, but carries I fear mere
Irreligion in his heart, and if his future Actions be correspondent or any way
equivalent to his former exploits, I shall greatly doubt whether I speak of a
Christian or no, it requires an Age nere upon to uncase the whole story of his
wicked proceedings acted here on our Brittish-shore; therefore I will (...) of
his late (...) those that were (...) of his Message to my (...) was to this
effect, That (...) General of the Parliaments Army, without the consent of his
Sovereign, but rather to confront and oppose his Majesty's Person; that
therefore, he might with as just Grounds (though being a ^orraig^e) by the Law
of (...) assist (...) Majesty against any such person, that (...) any occasion
should disobey His Royal Command, ^ging that a King though he reign ^ever so
Tyrannical, impose an unjust Tax on the Subjects be (...) so heavy, yet
notwithstanding are they by the Laws of God not to withdraw their Duty and
Obedience from him. To this I answer, That the sacred Writ binds a Subject to
obey a good Sovereign, not (as I think) to hear with a (...) one; rather to
procure abatement in rigor Authority, than to su^ a continual perseverance of
a worse [ (...) ^^edientiam] it is true [ So^ h^c Condition, si legitime
Imper^t Magistratus non Tyrannice.] We promise obedience to a Magistrate no
farther then his actions are done legally, according to the accusto^ry laws of
the Land and the right meaning thereof, not according to his own Constructions
and Inventions; so suppose there should be a double construction in some
particular points of Law, who more fitter to decide them then they that made
them, who more fitter to Correct and abate the rigor of the (...) of the
fundamental Spring from whence they flow, and shall (...) Parliaments there are
the chief founders of Laws be exempted from Construing them (heavens forbid)
withal concerning the Taxes he mentions it is not a little known to the great
grief of many a poor Subject, the strickt Monopolyes and quotidian taxations
this Kingdom of England is said for a long time has been sheckled and
fettred in, but if the corruption of La^yers and Judges be such as to maintain
illegal proceedings in a common wealth by their unjust exactions, yet may good
Subjects (and that with a clear Conscience) neglect a willing performance of
the same; Tributs may well be denied where unjustly exacted, (according to the
common and true proverb) and though the Cavaleers allege the Law for all
their Actions, it is willingly granted both to His Majesty then, and all his good
Subjects, so far it it is executed and grounded upon Justice, but no farther;
and I could heartily wish it were in full execution upon all such demanders
that require Justice from others, when (in all their Actions) who more unjust
then themselves why call they not for Justice upon those that pillage poor
peoples houses without any right or reason for the same, why not for those that
Ravish all they meet with, firing and destroying all in their way, murdering
poor Infants that scarce have the discretion to call for succor or aid: no,
they expect that their own Tyrannical Actions must s^pe Scot-free; He pleads
likewise for the Prorogative of the King (not regarding the privilege of the
Subject) alleging that in the behalf of his V^ he is Resolved to live and
dye: To this, I ask what Prerogative is debarred from His Majesty, ^ought that
remained for the safety, and honor of his person, and the good of this his
Kingdom; but I truly suppose that he makes this but a cloak for his
proceedings, for it is well known there is no Prerogative for him allotted in this
Realm, for the pillaging of Towns, and firing of Houses.

The true COPPIE and form of his Message was as follows.
MY LORD,
I Hear you are General of an Army, sent by the agreement of both Houses of
Parliament (under the pretense of Subduing some Malignant persons unto th^se
parts) but we greatly fear you (...) at some higher power, namely your own
Sovereign, if your intents are such, give but the least notice thereof, And I
shall be ready in His behalf to give you an encounter in a Picht field, at
Dunsmore-heath, the 10. day of October next, and if you think it too much
labor and expenses to draw your Forces thither, I shall as willingly for my
own part expect private satisfaction at your hands for the same here, and that
performed by a single Duel; which proffer if you please to accept, you shall
not find me backward in performing what I have said or promised, I know my
cause to be so Just that I need not, for what I do is agreeable both to the
^es of God and man, in the defense of true Religion, a Kings Prerogative, and
Uncles right, and a Kingdoms safety; Think it therefore not strange that a
Foreign should take footing upon your English shore with intention to draw
the Sword, when the Law of Arms promps him on to that Resolution, you cannot
tax your King of ought, without too much clemency and goodness showed
toward his people, when that his Person is thus molested by his own Subjects,
suppose that He had swayed his Scepter with a strict hand, raining in the
Bridle of Authority with harsh Taxations and Tyranny (which it is too well
known he did ever abhor as infectious to his Sacred ^son) yet I say were it
so, the Subjects are not thereupon to withdraw their Obedience and Duty neither
by the Laws of God nor the Laws of man, for they are however or at leastwise
should be still his Subjects; for these reasons and diverse others that I could
allege, I am resolved in the defense of so just a Cause to hazard my life and
being, and endeavor the destruction of all those that shall any way oppose my
Resolution therein. Now have I said all, and what more you expect of me to be
said shall be delivered in a larger field then a small sheet of Paper, and that
by my Sword and not my Pen, in the interim I am your friend till I meet you
next.


But before this Message was delivered unto his Excellency, news was brought
that Prince Robert had received a dangerous wound in the head by (...) Sands in
a (...) within three miles of W^ that this matter (...) their Consideration.

This Prince had (...) great mischief to many (...) this Kingdom, likewise
he and all his followers (...) ever they go, leave not a house in their way
(...) they took from one Mr. Hambury a Gentleman of ^cestershire, seven
hundred pound in money beside (...) and other spoils they took from his
House. This P^ with his Brother Prince Maurice, being drove from ^cester by
Colonel Fines his Soldiers, betook the with all their forces toward
Shrewsbury, where they (...) such hot Entertainment that they were quickly
(...) take a flight through Severne for their safety, for S^bury is so environed
with water, that there is but (...) for passage unto the Town, which the
Townesm^ knowing their advantage did guard that with the (...) Bands, so that
the Prince being likewise pursued (...) Rear by Colonel Fines, was feign to
take water (...) his followers.

FINIS.
A CONTINVATION Of certain Special and Remarkable passages from both Houses of
PARLIAMENT, and diverse other parts of the Kingdom, from Wendnesday the 5. of
October till the Eight of October. 1642. Containing these particulars, viz. 1.
A true Relation of the taking of a Ship at Yarmouth coming from Holland with
great store of Ammunition, 150. Commanders, and 400. barrells of Powder and
other provisions. 2. The intercepting of certain Letters in the said ship by
an accident, and their bringing to the Parliament, by which it was informed
that there is another Ship coming from the Queen with great store of
provisions and Moneys, And an Order sent to the Earl of Warwick to use all
possible means to intercept the same. 3. A true Relation of the Kings sending
for the Masters of the Mint from the Tower, with an Order of Parliament against
their going. 4. A true relation of his Majesty's sending of the Lord Faulkland
into Ireland, with a Relation of the Parliaments proceedings concerning the
Earl of Leicester. 5. A vote of the House of Commons for the expelling of one
of their members. 6. Of the Commitment of one Master Price to the Gatehouse for
speaking of words against the Parliament. 7. A True Relation of Sir Ralph
Hopton and some other of his confederates possessing themselves of Sir Nicholas
Slanies Castle in Cornewell. 8. Of the Bill agreed upon by the Parliament for
the Synod to meet by the fifth of November next. 9. Of the Parliamens sending
into Ireland for the Earl of Antrim taken prisoner by the Scotts in the Noth
of Ireland. 10. A true relation of the Earl of Stanfords securing of Hereford
with 500. horse and 2000. foot. 11. A certain relation of the Kings
fortifying of Shrewsbury, and sending of Prince Rober with his maine forces to
Bridge North and some further proceedings of that Army. 12. Of Captain
Stradlings making escape into Ireland. 13. The bringing of the High sheriff of
Lincoln to the Parliament. 14. The Examination of the keeper of the Gatehouse,
concerning Captain Legs escape. 15. A relation of certain Letters to the
Parliament from Holland.


A CONTINVATION OF Certain Special and Remarkable passages from both Houses
of Parliament and diverse other parts of this Kingdom, From Wednesday the fifth
of October, till Saturday the Eight of October 1642.
Thurseday the 6. of October.
THere came Letters to both Houses of Parliament by one Captain Johnson from
Yarmouth, Informing them that they have there taken a ship coming from
Holland with great store of Ammunition about 400. barrells of Powder, ten pieces
of Ordnance and 150. of the Prince of Oranges chief Officers and Soldiers,
and some Treasure and other Arms which the Queen had procured to assist his
Majesty, and they intended to have landed there at Newcastle, but the ship
sprang a leake at Sea, and so was forced to come into into Yarmouth, upon the
first taking of the ship they pretending they had brought those provisions
for the Parliament, but upon further examination it appeared otherwise, however
by good providence they are now likely to be employed for the service of the
Parliament: The ship being ordered to be safely conveyed up to London by the
Earl of Warwick, and the Prince of Oranges Commanders, also to come (...)
Master thereof and company having certain Letters which they brought from the
Queen; tied them up in a piece of Sail cloth, and with a cord tied a great
Cannot bullet to the end thereof to make it sincke, and so threw it into the
Sea by the side of the ship to prevent discovery.

But the Letters being found were also brought to the Parliament and broake
open, but the wett had so defaced the writing they could scarsely be read,
only thus much was informed by them, that the Queen has provided another
ship with great store of Ammunition and moneys to come speedily after this
ship to Newcastle to relieve his Majesty's forces.

But the Parliament upon consideration of this business have sent to the Earl
of Warwick to desire him that withal possible vigilency he would guard the
Coasts from Holland, whereby that ship may be also intercepted in her passage
to Newcastle.

There was a certain report made to the Parliament, that the King has sent to
his Coyners of the Mint at the Tower to bring their coining mould and other
implements, and come (...) to his Army at Shrewesbury, but the Parliament have
sent ^der Order to the Masters of the Mint that they shall not go.

There was also certain information given to the houses by letters that his
Majesty has sent the Lord Faulkland his chief Secretary over into Ireland,
with some private instructions concerning the Army, but the full end, and
intent thereof cannot as yet be learned.

However the Parliamen have ordered that Master Goodwin, and Master Reynolds
members of their house appointed for that service shall have their speedy
dispatches and be sent over to Ireland, but the Earl of Leicester it is much
feared will scarsely be permited to go over at all, for that he refused to
show to the Parliament his instructions which he had from his Majesty for the
ordering of the affairs of Ireland whereby the Parliament have a great
Jealousy of him.

Captain Price a member of the House of Commons has been very busy there
abouts in putting the Commission of Array in Execution, and does give out great
threats against such as refuse to obey it, where upon it was voted by the
Commons that he should be expelled the house, and a another to be chosen in his
room.

There was also one Master Price a Suffolk man brought before the Commons and
committed to Prison for saying that the Earl of Pembrooke was an Ass, A knave,
and a fool, and that the Parliament men, were noe better then a company of
beggarly fellows, chosen out of the very scume of the people etc.

The houses received certain information by letters out of Cornewell that Sir
Ralpeh Hopton and some other of the Marquis of Hartfords chief Confederates,
that left the Marquis to My^ard for that they could not get passage wiih him
over the Sev^, have been at Plymouth and have pillaged, and spoiled diverse
honest men there abouts, and that he and his company are now marched into
Cornwell and have possessed them selves of a very strong Castle there belonging
to Sir Nicholas Sla^y, who is also one of their Confederates, but the Marquis
of Hartford is (...) Cardife Castle in Wales.

The Parliament have resceived the bill for the assembly of the Clergy to
consider of the settling of Religion and Ceremonies and they have added to the
List diverse Scotch Ministers* that are sent over by the Kingdom of Scotland,
to join with our Assembly for the settling of an uniformitie in Religion in
both Kingdoms and it is ordered that the meeting shall begin by the 5. of
November next.

The houses of Parliament have took Order for the sending to the Scotch forces
in Ireland that they would send up to the Parliament the Earl of Antrim an
Arch-Rebell whom they touke prisoner in the North of Ireland, that he may be
hear examined concerning the Rebels proceedings.

It was informed the houses by letters from Hereford-shire that Coun^y do much
repent themselves for their Malignancie against the Parliament for that so the
c^ring^ of the Kings Cavaliers tends to nothing but destruction, and therefore
they have sent 400. Volunteers to the Earl of Essex, and his Excellency has
sent the Earl of Stanford with 500. horse and 2000 (...) to Hereford, and that
they have possessed them selves of that City and fortify it for the
Parliament.

It was also informed the houses that the Earl of Bath is (...) by the Earl
of Bedfords Troops in Devonshire and that he and diverse others of the Marquis
of Hartfords Cavalliers are bringing up to the Parliament.

The Marguis of Hartfords Steward was upon Thursday last brought up to the
parliament, and Committed to the Gateho^

There came more Letters to the Houses from Shrewesbury informing that his
Majesty makes great provisions for the ce^ing of Shrewesbury, but Prince
Robert with the maine force is marched to Bridge North a place of special
Eminency, where they intend to place them selves for a pitched battle, the
King (...) to stay at Shrewsbury and has reserved a part of his forces for a
Garrison there, his Majesty has caused all the houses without the Walls of the
Town to be taken down that so he may with more Conveniencie plant his
Ordnance to secure the Town, but the Townsmen do not relish these
proceedings and are much troubled at it.

Upon Friday last the Parliament received further information by Letters from
Shrewesbury, that Prince Robert with his Majesty's maine forces is matched from
Bridge North, and go^ more near to the Lord Generals Army, and that he is
now within 15 miles of Worcester, and that some sudden attempt is expected
betwixt the two Armies: It is boasted that the Kings Forces is 20000 strong,
but it is thought he wants a quarter of the number.

It was also informed the Houses that upon the Earl of Warwickes taking of the
two ships before Newcastle Captain ^stradling Made escape from his ship in
his long boat, and that he is now gone into Ireland.

As also it was informed that the Lord Paukt is of certain gone over into
Ireland with the Lord Faulkeland, and that the intent of their going is to wast
over a Regement or two of the forces, there to assist his Majesty.

This afternooe Sir Robert Hern High Shreiffe for the County of Lincoln who
was lately apprehended by the Parliaments Forces in that Crunty for his great
delinquency in opposing the County in their yealding obedience to the
Parliament, and a chief Array man, who upon his first apprehending was so
unruly, that the Country was enforced to tie him in a Cart, and carry him to
Boston prison, was this day brought with a strong guard to London, and
committed prisonor to the Tower, till the further leisure of the Parliament to
examine him.

Also the under Keeper of the Gate House that had charge of Captain Leg, was
that after-noune brought before the Commons and examined cencerning Captain
Legs escape, but would not confess any thing concerning the same only that
the chief Keeper has also absented himself, and as it is conjectured is gone
a long with Captain Leg to his Majesty.

Where upon it was Ordered that the under keeper should be Committed to the
Sergeant at Arms, and a more strict course to be taken for his Examination.

There came also Letters to the Houses from Master Srickland at the Hague,
informing the fair correspondency which the State desire to hold with the
Parliament, and that with there permission, there shall be no supplies sent from
thence to his Majesty, But the Queen by underhand dealing, and by the means
of the Prince of Orange has procuredsome provisions which she intends to
bring along with her into England, there being 14-sail of Ships that lie
ready for her Transportation.

FINIS.

