Historical Collections OF Private Passages of STATE. OF Weighty Matters in
LAW. OF Remarkable Proceedings in Five Parliaments.


BEGINNING The Sixteenth Year of KING JAMES, ANNO 1618. And ending the Fifth
Year of KING CHARLES, ANNO 1629. Digested in Order of TIME, And now Published By
JOHN RUSHWORTH of Lincoln's Inn, Esquire

Prima est Historiae lex, ne quid falsi dicere audeat; deinde, ne quid very non
audeat: ne qua suspicio gratiae sit in scribendo, ne qua simultatis.

M.T. Cicer. de Orat. London, Printed by Tho. Newcomb for George Thomason, at
the Sign of the Rose and Crown in St Paul's Churchyard. 1659.

A. This Paw points out the Caledonian Iarres,
Sad Harbingers to our intestine Wars.
B. The Lion passant gardant wonders much
The Paw should da^ presume his Chief, to touch.
C. Strange, y^ from Stools at Scottish Prelates (...)
Bellona's dire Alarm's should rouse the World*
D. The Lion, and ye Paw bent to engage*
Make Peace at Tweed, so change ye Scene, and Stage.
E The double-headed- Eagle wide does Spread
Her Wings, to fan the Coals, y^ seemed as dead.
F. And makes y^ Lioness ^n Instrument
To break that Peace, and a fourth Parl'ament.
G. The Paw invades y^ Lion at Tine Flood;
They fight, make Truce, and stop from shedding Blood.
H. The British Notes sound flat, to those more sharp
Divisions, Echoed from the Irish Harp.
I. The Parl'ament convened, the Lion tried
By Charging Five, The Members to divide.
K. First Justice, next no Bishop, Privilege last
Cry Multitudes, who to the Houses haste.
L. The Lions third Roar, prooving fatal, drew
Such Woes, as rarely former Ages knew.
M It Was a Cursed Cow kicked down ye Milk she gave:
Let us old Englands Laws, and Freedom hau^!
N. Caelestiall Manna! thy Spiritual Food.
O.P. Fed Them with Peace, and Plenty, all that is Good.
Q. A blazing Comet thy Backsliding shows,
R Predicteth Ruin, and presents woes.
S. The Faithful build them Churches, but are stopped
By Papists, who at the Aurea Bulla mocked.
T. Great Caesar to y^ Romans Crown does (...)
His Stately Nephew, and creates him King
V Prague gives ye Crown in Frederick and (...)
His Sword to assert the Germans, and their (...)
W. Then from high Windows, vnnawares were (...)
The Emperors Council, ere the Charge was (...)
X.Y. The Blow near Prague was struck, The People (...)
Like Iehu out. War ^ sweet before 't is (...)
Z What Decollations then! What Blood! What (...)
Outacted Tragic Scenes ensued that (...)


TO HIS HIGHNESS England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and
Territories thereunto belonging.
May it please your Highness,
THe Poor Widow came far short of others in her offers Highness any thing of my
own. Highness Aspect.

Its not amiss for Princes to hear of, and read the Actions or Miscarriages of
Princes, nay of lesser persons: Indeed they can hardly set more useful Books
before their Eyes. It is hard for the Pilot to escape, unless he has first
discovered those Shelves and Rocks, upon which others have been split: What is
that we call Prudence or Policy, but a Systeme of Observations and Experiences
deducted from other

As to the matter contained in this Story, relating to Arbitrary courses, given
way unto by former Princes, I shall make bold to use the expression of an
eminent Parliament at the Trial of the Earl Strafford, who speaking of an
endeavor that had been used to subvert the Laws, and to introduce Arbitrary
Government, has (among other Passages) this Observation, There is in this Crime
a Seminary of all Evils hurtful to a State, Thus far that Gentleman: Your
Highness will find here the mention of a great Prince, who was wont to say, He
was an old experienced King, and to him belonged the Calling, Sitting, and
Dissolving of Parliaments; and he publicly said (I speak in his own phrase)
That yet at last he did comply with his last Parliament; and said, He saw he
should be in love with Parliaments, having understood many things by them,
which otherwise he should never have known.

Moreover here You will have in view a succeeding Prince, who also broke Three
Parliaments, one after another, and how fatal that was to him succeeding times
have abundantly declared. The Observation is not mine, but of much more ancient
date, those Princes who did most consult with their People in Parliament,
Common Council of the Nation) have most prospered in their courses, there being
both Safety and Love gained from such Counselors and Councils. And Parliaments
in the nature of them, are good Physic to cure and redress the Diseases Body
Politic, which mostly grow and overflow in the Intervals of them; yet many
think Parliaments are but an ill constant Diet, which certainly moved Queen
Elizabeth, of famous Memory, who was well acquainted with the Constitution of
the Body of this Nation, to call Parliaments frequently, but to continue none
very long. By this means she wrought her self into the good opinion of her
People, and by becoming the Mistress of their Affections, she also became in
some sort the Nation; but the Help and Aid which comes from the People by
strains, contrary to the Laws of the Nation, and Liberties of the People, being
drawn from them through fear, wants the perfume of a willing Heart, and has no
longer continuance then whilst the impression of that fear lasts. But few words
are best to Princes; vouchsafe Your Highness Pardon to him who thus presumes
Oblation at so high an Altar; Your good Acceptance will be the greatest Honor
to it, and to

Your Highness JOHN RUSHWORTH.

THE
MY Business in this ensuing Work, is to render a faithful account of several
Traverses of State, Prerogative and Liberty: the Civil War; a War, fierce,
unnatural, and full of wonderful coincidences, both in the Causes and
Consequences of it, Humanum est humanis casibus ingemiscere. Infandum renovare
dolorem, to consider indifferently how we came to fall out among our selves,
and so Miseries, the strange Alterations and Revolutions; with the Characters
of diverse eminent Persons, the Mutability of Councils, the Remarkableness of
Actions, the Subtilty of Pretentions, the Drifts of Interests, the Secrets of
State, and (which are the words of an Act of Parliament) the deportment of a
Prince, wisely dissimulating with his People. From such premises, the best
Deduction which can be made, is, to look up to, and acknowledge God, who only
is unchangeable, and to admire his Wisdom and Providence even in Humane
Miscarriages: For Empires, and Kingdoms, and Commonwealths every where in the
World have their Periods, but the Histories thereof remain God.

I find an Expression in Sir Walter Raleighs Preface to his History of the
World, which seems to suit well with these Collections. I shall make so

It is not the least debt (says he) which we ow unto History, that it has
made us acquainted with our Consciences.

And though it has pleased God to reserve the art of reading men's thoughts to
himself; yet as the Fruit tells the name of the Tree, so do the outward Works
of men, so far as their Cogitations are acted, give us

And although Religion (says he) and the truth thereof be in every man's mouth,
what is it other then Beatitudo non est divinorum cognitio, sed vita divina.
There is nothing more to be admired, nothing more to be lamented, then the
private contention, the passionate dispute, the (says he) become Comedians in
Religion; For, Charity, Justice, and Truth, have but their being in Terms

In the close of his Preface, he advises the Reader to take heed how he
follows Truth too close at the heels, lest it strike out his teeth. I hope this
Story begins with a distance of time, not so far Fundamentals to the History of
these Times. It has been observed by

I know very well, the Collections which I publish will receive no advantage
nor commendation from the Collector: And that it may likewise receive no
prejudice, I am as ready to confess, as any man in the world is to object, my
wants and inabilities; Characters, Speeches and Passages at Conferences in
Parliament, and from the with many such Contrivances, to abet a Party or
Interest. Pudet haec opprobria. Such practices, and the experience I had
thereof, and the impossibility for any man in After-ages to ground a true
History, Collection; and whilst things were fresh in memory, to separate Truth
from Falsehood, things real from

If you demand why my Collections commence so Nov. 3. 1640. But after I had
perused, ordered, and compared my Printed and Manuscript-Relations of the
Spain, touching a Marriage, and Restitution of the Palatinate; and so engaged
the Father in a War, which the Son was by him left to prosecute. And this
Consideration put me upon a further enquiry concerning the aforesaid Treaties,
the causes and grounds of the War in the Palatinate, and how far the same
concerned England, and the oppressed Germany: And finding those proceedings to
have their rise in the Year 1618. (in which Year the Blazing-Star appeared) I
resolved that very Instant should be the Ne plus ultra of my Retrospect.

I allow and accept it* as a good Memento, which That most Writers now adays
appear in Public, not crook-backed, (as it is reported of the Jews) but
crook-sided, warped, and bowed to the right, or to the left. For I have Party,
and yet not partial. If any one engaged on the King's side, come forth in Print
with the like moderation, fairness and indifferency, without heat and personal
reflections,

I pretend only in this Work to a bare Narrative of matter of Fact, digested
in order of time; not interposing my own Opinion, or interpretation of Actions.
I infuse neither vinegar nor gall into Names and Dignities are altered, yet I
use the Language of that Time of which I write, speaking as the then
Parliaments spoke, and not robbing any man of the Honor or Epithet which they
then

And lastly, where I doubted, I perfected my Intelligence Germany, Spain, and
Italy.

Here you will have an intermixture of Secrets of State useful for Statesmen,
and of matters of Law,

A great part of the Work is filled up with remarkable Transactions in
Parliament, and the Course and Proceedings thereof, wherein you will find, not
only great wit and wisdom, but choice Eloquence, and excellent Orators, Diggs,
Wentworth, and others not much inferior to the Roman Demagogue. I durst not
presume to contract them to an Epitomie or Abridgement, lest by essaying that,
I might trespass too much upon the Soil of other men's Inventions Alterius sic
Altera poscit opem Domus and consultat amice) and Resolutions of Parliaments,

I have but a word to say to my good and worthy Friends of the Army, and it
must be by way of Apology, that this Treatise contains not what the War, you
shall see their Courage and Magnanimity, setting a higher value upon the Rights
and Liberties of the Nation, then upon their own Lives.

Whom therefore, when I come in order of time Double Honor.

In the second Part of my Collections (which is to follow, according to the
entertainment which this finds abroad) I shall write with the more confidence,
Star Chamber, Court of Honor, and Exchequer-Chamber, when all the Judges of
England met there upon extraordinary Berwick, at the Fight at Newborn, at the
Treaty at Rippon, at the great Council at York, and at the meeting of the Long
Parliament. The Observations I made during all the said time, shall be further
known, if I be encouraged to proceed, and that this Forlorn be not repelled and
defeated.

Thus have I (good Reader) acquainted thee in plain English, with the Lines and
rude Draughts of what has been, and what is like to be, multorum annorum opus;
in which, as I never did approve, so neither could I persuade my self to tread
in their Steps, who intermingle their Passion with their stories, and are not
content to write of, unless they write also for a Party, or to serve an
Interest; and so Advocates then Historians^^. I profess, that in singleness of
heart, I aim at truth, which to me has always seemed hugely amiable, even
without the tires and advantages of Wit and Eloquence: And therefore, in order
Altum alii teneant.) And so irresistible is the force of Truth, and the Divine
Providence so great, that howsoever all possible diligence may have been used
to carry things in secret, and to act by colorable Pretenses Satis est
Historiae, si sit vera; quae ut reliqua habeat omnia, si veritatem non habet,
obtinere nomen suum non potest.

J. RUSHWORTH.

(...).
(...),
(...)
(...),

(h.e.)
Anglorum leges, Suadam, consulta Senatus,
ausaque, cuncta loquor, tempore quaeque suo.

pluribus invideas Zoile, nemo tibi.
The Printer to the Reader.
BEing obliged to get this Book finished against the ensuing Term, I was
constrained to make more haste then ordinary; so that possibly some Faults have
escaped, which I request the Courteous Reader to Pardon and Amend as they shall
be

VALE.
The right high and most mighty Monarch ^AMES by the Gra^ce of God King of
great Britain France and Ireland etc Defendor of the Faith.


Historical Collections.
James, King James much desired to match his Son Henry with a daughter of Spain.
was the Spanish Match, which had the Kings heart in it, overruled all his
Counsels, and had a mighty influence upon the Universal State of Christendom:
This King affecting the name of a King of Peace, and Peacemaker, Europe, and
the reconciling of all Parties; and professed, that if the Papists would leave
their King-killing, and some other grosser Errors, he was willing to meet them
half way; moreover, he was ever zealous for the honor and height of regal
Majesty,

There had been a Treaty of Marriage between the late Prince Henry and a
Daughter of Spain, After Prince Henry's death the King propounded a match with
France.
which on the Spaniards part was found a mere Complement, carried on by the
accustomed gravity and formality of that Nation. For Cecil Earl of Salisbury,
the great Statesman of that time, pursued and drove the matter to that point,
that the Duke of Lerma, finding no evasion, disclaimed the being of a Marriage
Treaty. Nevertheless the Spanish Ambassador, to acquit himself to this State,
and to clear his own honesty, at a full Council produced his Commission,
together with his Letters of Instruction given under the Duke's hand: Such
manner of dealing might have been sufficient Cause of just Indignation against
any future motion of this Alliance.

After death of Prince Henry, the King set his thoughts upon a Daughter of
Henry the Fourth, late King of France, as the fittest Charles, and by Sir
Thomas Edmonds his Legier Ambassador, endeavored to know the mind of that
State, but could not discern their affections, and was not willing to discover
his own: At length taking occasion to send the Lord Hayes Extraordinary
Ambassador to the French King, to Congratulate his Marriage with Anne the
Infanta of Spain, he resolved to make a through Trial: The matter was put forth,
and in appearance well taken, but proved of no effect. For the Duke of Savoy
was beforehand, and prevailed for his Son the Prince Piedmont.

During this Negotiation of Alliance with France, In this interim the Spaniard
gives the overture of a match.
the Duke of Lerma frequently intimated unto Sir John Digby Ambassador,
Resident in Spain, an extraordinary desire in the King his Master, not only to
maintain Peace and Amity with the King of great Britain, but to lay hold on all
means that might be offered for the nearer uniting of their Majesty's, and
their Crowns; as also a disposition in this regard, to match his second
Daughter to the Prince of Wales: The Ambassador replied, that His Majesty had
little reason to give ear to this overture, having not long since, in the
Treaty for the late Prince, received such an unexpected Answer, and Demands so
improper and unworthy; and that there needed more then ordinary assurance, to
induce him to believe that there was now so great a change, and the match
desired in good earnest, and not propounded merely to divert the match with
France: wherefore he expected Lerma promised a further Conference. But by
reason of a strong report that the Match with France was absolutely concluded,
and within few days to be published, the business lay asleep, until Sir John
Digby, going for England, was desired by the Duke to give him notice of the
state of this Affair: From hence Digby gives him to understand, that there was
no cause of despair concerning this new overture, unless the difficulty of the
Conditions should make John Digby's arrival at the Court of Spain, he protested
to him solemnly, that the King desired it, and swore for himself, that he
desired nothing more: Hereupon Digby debated with him, That the remembrance of
their former Demands was yet unpleasing in England; the difference of Religion,
the Opinions of Divines, and the Cases of Conscience were still the same;
insomuch, that his Majesty and his Servants had just cause to cease for ever
from all thoughts this way. Nevertheless, they did not slight nor disrelish an
Spain; for many of the greatest eminency in England judge it equally valuable
with any other of Christendom, though it be esteemed a matter of infinite
difficulty. Here the subtle Spaniard might perceive our forwardness, though our
Ambassador seemed to speak aloof off, and with reservation. The debate had this
result, that the difficulties should be digested into certain Heads, and select
Persons appointed for Conference; but the Intent thereof was, that the Kings on
either side should not be interessed, nor their names Toledo, and the Kings
Confessor, and one Father Frederick a learned Jesuit, having the repute of a
Moderate man.

Upon the review of these proceedings, Sir John Digby advised the King not to
suffer his other resolutions to be interrupted by this Overture, Sir John
Digby's advice to the King in that matter.
Spain in the business of Cleves and Iuliers, which still remained
uncompounded; nevertheless, he might be pleased for a while to suspend the
conclusion of the Match with France, and entertain this motion; and to this end
he desired from him not a formal Commission to treat, but only a private
Instruction for his Direction and Warrant.

Such remote Conferences made way for that solemn slow-paced Treaty of the many
years following, Gondomar mannages the Treaty on the Spaniards part.
wherein the advantage lay on the Spaniards side, who were indeed very formal
and specious in it, but no way vehement and vigorous, if we might suppose them
in any sort real: But the King of England having a prevalent inclination this
way, when Conde Gondomar, who was exquisitely framed for it, and by facetious
ways, taking the King in his own humor, prevailed mightily.

The King removes all blocks that lie in the way of this Darling Design, and
studies all the ways of rendering himself acceptable to Spain.

The Wall of this Island the English Navy, The English Navy neglected.
once the strongest of all Christendom, now lies at road unarmed, and fit for
ruin: Gondomar [as was the common voice] bearing the King in hand, that the
furnishing of it would breed suspicion in the King his Master, and avert his
mind from this alliance: Moreover the Town of Flushing, the Castle of Ramakins
in Zealand, and Brill in Holland, which were held by way of caution from the
united Provinces, to insure their dependency upon England, The Cautionary Towns
rendered to the Hollander.
as being merely cautionary, and none of his Propriety: He rid his hands of
those places to prevent requests and Propositions from the King of Spain, who
claimed the propriety in them, and Gondomar put hard for them, being accounted
the Keys of the Low Countries: Such was the Kings care and contrivance to keep
faith with those Confederates, and not offend Spain: And to render this a
politic action, it was urged that the advantage of those Holds was
countervailed by the vast expense in keeping them. Howbeit James and the United
Provinces, which appeared in latter times, and was nourished by Bernevelt the
head of the Arminian Faction, and a Pensioner of Spain, is now increased by the
discovery and observation of these late Spanish compliances.

But the King of Spain and his Ministers had given but slender proof of any
great affection, The Spaniard proceeds not sincerely in the Treaty.
yea or of sincere intention and upright dealing John Digby received certain
Articles in matter of Religion after a Consultation had with their Divines,
which appeared very unworthy, and were utterly rejected by him: Yet afterward
upon a private Conference between him, and some others to whom the cause had
been committed, a Qualification was therein conceived, though not delivered as
a matter there approved. And the same Speeches after his return into England,
proceeded between him and Gondomar, and were brought to that Issue, that the
King thought John Digby by Commission under the Great Seal, was authorized to
treat and conclude the Marriage; and because the matter of Religion was in
chief debate, those qualified Articles that were brought out of Spain were sent
back signed with the Kings hand, who added something to them by way of clearer
explanation: They were to this effect: Articles of Religion agreed upon between
the Kings of England and Spain.
THat the Popes Dispensation be first obtained by the mere Act of the King of
Spain.

That the Children of this Marriage be not constrained in matter of Religion,

That the Infanta's Family being Strangers may be Catholics, and shall have a
decent place appointed for all Divine Service according to the use of the
Church of Rome; and the Ecclesiastics and Religious persons may wear their
proper Habits.

That the Marriage shall be celebrated in Spain by a Procurator according to
the Instructions of the Council of Trent; and after the Infanta's arrival
England, such a solemnization shall be used, as may make the Marriage valid,
according to the Laws of this Kingdom.

That she shall have a competent number of Chaplains, and a Confessor, being
Strangers, one whereof shall have power to govern the Family in Religious
matters.



In the allowing of these Articles, the King thus expressed himself: Seeing this
Marriage is to be with a Lady of a different Religion from us, it becomes us
to be tender, as on the one part to give

The people of England averse from the march: The Catholics desirous of it.
The People of England having yet in memory the intended Cruelty of 88. and
hating the Popish Religion, generally loathed this Match, and would have bought
it off at the dearest rate, and what they durst, opposed it by speeches,
counsels, wishes, prayers; but if any one spoke louder then his fellows, he was
soon put to silence, disgraced, and Spain and Flanders, Books were penned, and
Pictures printed to disgrace the King and State: For which the English
Ambassadors sought satisfaction, but in vain: The Roman Catholics desired the
Match above measure, hoping for a moderation of Fines and Laws, perhaps a
Toleration, yea, a total Restoration of their Religion; for they gained more
and more Indulgence by the long-spun Treaty: The Articles of Religion were long
hammered upon the Spanish Anvil, enlarged and multiplied by new Demands without

Gondomar contrives the death of Sir Walter Rawleigh an enemy to Spain.
The Conde Gondomar, an active subtle Instrument to serve his Masters ends,
neglected no occasion tending thereunto, which he mainly showed in the
particular of Sir Walter Rawleigh, wherein he put forth all his Strength to
destroy him, being one of the last Sea-Commanders then living, bred under Queen
Elizabeth, and by her fleshed in Spanish blood and ruin. He did first
under-work his Voyage to Guienna, which seemed to threaten loss and danger to
the spreading power of Spain in the West Indies, years imprisonment, Sir Walter
Rawleigh, desirous of liberty and action, propounded an American voyage upon
the assurance of gaining a Mine of Gold in Guienna. The King hearkened to him,
and gave him power to set forth Ships and Men for that Service, but commanded
him upon his Allegiance, to give under his hand, the number of his Men, the
burden and strength of his Ships, together with the Country and River which he
was to enter. All this was done, and came so timely to Gondomars Spain, and
thence to the Indies, before this English Fleet departed out of the Thames. The
Action proved unfortunate, and the Mine was inaccessible; the Spaniards at St.
Thomas opposed their passage up the River, and this engaged them to assault the
Town, which they took, sacked and burnt. Gondomar hereat incensed, with a
violent importunity demanded the reparation of this wrong: And the Spanish
Faction urged, that this irruption might make a breach both of the Match and
Peace with Spain. The Kings fears Rawleigh knowing nothing but that he might
appear in England with safety, put in at Plymouth, and was no sooner landed,
but by secret intimation, understanding his danger, sought to escape beyond
Sea, but was taken in the attempt, brought to London, and recommitted to the
Tower; and at length his life was offered up a Sacrifice for Spain, but not
upon such grounds as the Ambassador had designed; for he desired English an
acknowledgment of his Masters right in those places, and hereafter both stop
their mouths, and quench their heat and valor. But the late voyage was not
brought in question, only his former Condemnation was revived; his Araignment
at Winchester many years before was now laid open, and he at the Kings Bench
demanded, why Execution should not be done upon him according to the Sentence
therein pronounced. Rawleigh answered, That the This Plea was not accepted, but
the former Judgment took place, and accordingly he lost his Head upon a
Scaffold erected in the Old Palace at Westminster.

Whilst Spain and England were thus closing, A War begins in Germany.
the fire brake out in Germany between the States and Princes Protestant, and
the House of Austria: These commotions involved and drew along the affairs of
most Potent Kings now in Treaty. The Catholic Cause, and the Lot of the House
of Austria, engaged the King of Spain who was the strongest Branch of that
Stock. King James must needs be drawn in, both by common and particular
Interest; the Religion which he professed, and the State of his Son in Law the
Elector Palatine, who became the principal part in those Wars, and the most
unfortunate. It was an high business to the whole Christian World, and the
issue of it had main dependence upon the King of England, being Mightiest
Prince of the Protestant Profession: But this Kings proceedings were wholly
governed by the unhappy Spanish Treaty. Both parties, Protestant and
Catholics, grow jealous, and each enter into League.


The clouds gather thick in the German sky; jealousies and discontents arise
between the Catholics, and the Evangelicks, or Lutherans of the Confession of
Ausburge. Both parties draw into Confederacies, and hold Assemblies; the one
seeking by the advantage of power to incroach and get ground, the other to
stand their ground, and hold their own. The potency of the House of Austria, a
House devoted to the Persecution of the Reformed Religion, The Emperor Matthias
Adopts his Cousin-German Ferdinand.
became formidable. The old Emperor Matthias declared his Cousin German the
Archduke Ferdinand to be his adopted Son and Successor, and caused him to be
chosen and crowned King of Bohemia and Hungary, yet reserving to himself the
sole exercise of Kingly power during his life.

For joy of this Adoption, the Catholics keep a Jubilee and the Protestants
another in memory of Luther.
The Jesuits triumph in their hopes of King Ferdinand; the Pope Saxony called to
mind, that it was then the Hundredth year complete since Martin Luther opposed
the Popes Indulgences, which was the first beginning of Protestant Reformation.
Whereupon he ordained a Solemn Feast of three days for Thanksgiving, and for
Prayer to God, to maintain in peace the purity of the Word, and the right
administration of the Sacraments. The Professors of the Universities of Lipsick
Wittemberg, the Imperial Towns of Franckford, Worms, and Noremburg, yea, the
Calvinists also observed the same days of Jubilee against the Romish Church;
and much Gold and Silver was cast abroad in memory of Luther, whom they called
Blessed.

In these times the Emperor wrote Letters, both to the Elector Palatine, and to
the Protestant Provinces, and States of the Empire then assembled at Hilbrun,
advising them to acquiesce in what was done touching the designation of his
adopted Son to the Empire, to observe the Golden Bull, (the Magna Charta of the
Empire) and the matter of it concerning the Electoral Bonds, and to dissolve
their League. The Protestants in their Answer acknowledged the good will of the
Emperor their Chief, and showed that the Catholics had oppressed them contrary
to the Pacification; and having sought Redress in vain, they were compelled to
use means of preserving Public Tranquillity according to the Laws. That their
League and Union consisting only of Protestant Germans, was a known practice
in the Empire, and not against the Golden Bull, and

An Assembly of the Protestants and States of Bohemia at Prague.
The Count of Thurne, and other Defenders Evangelick, with the Estates of
Bohemia, assembled at Prague to advise of public safety, and conservation of
privileges. The Emperor required his Council held at the Castle of Prague, to
oppose and hinder this Assembly, which he said was called to raise Sedition,
and to plot against his person and Government. Evangelicks prayed to God to
confound the Emperors enemies, and to grant him long to live and reign over
them in Peace and Justice.

The first occasion of the troubles of Bohemia.
The Bohemian troubles took their first rise from the breach of the Edict of
Peace concerning Religion, and the Accord made by the Emperor Rodolph, whereby
the Protestants retained the free exercise of their Religion, enjoyed their
Temples, Colleges, Tithes, Patronages, places of Burial, and the like, and had
liberty to build new Temples, and

On the Twenty third of May, the chief of the Evangelicks went armed into the
Castle of Prague, entered the Council Chamber, and opened their Grievances, A
Riot committed by the Protestants in the Castle of Prague.
but enraged by opposition, threw Slabata the Chief Justice, and Smesansius one
of the Council, and Fabritius the Secretary, from an high Window into the
Castle Ditch; others of the Council temporising in this Tumult, and seeming to
accord with their demands, were peaceably conducted to their own houses.
Hereupon the Prague with new Guards; likewise to appease the people, and to
take an Oath of Fidelity. They chose Directors, Governors and Counselors
Provincial to govern affairs of State, and to consult of raising forces against
the enemies of God, and the King, and the Edicts of his Imperial Majesty. They
banished the Jesuits throughout all Bohemia: Moreover to defend their own
cause, and to give an account of their late proceedings, and present posture, a
Declaration was drawn up and sent with Letters to the Estates Moravia, Silesia,
and Lusatia, and to all the Princes and States, their Allies, throughout the
Empire, with request of aid in case of need. They declare to this effect.

THat they had endured infinite Injuries and Afflictions, The Protestants put
forth a Declaration.
by certain Officers, Ecclesiastic and Civil, and by the Jesuits above all
others, who sought to bring them under the yoke of Popery, reviled them with
the names of Heretics, heaved them out of places Roman Catholics. The
Senators of Prague, who were Evangelicks, were evil-intreated, and diverse
persons persecuted for Religion, under pretense of Civil Offenses. And whereas
in case of difference touching the Agreement and Edict of Peace, the Estates of
both parties were to hear and judge; their Enemies procured Commands from the
Emperor to bear them down before a due hearing:

This Declaration they sent likewise to the Emperor, The Emperor disgusted with
the Declaration.
with a submissive Letter, asserting their own Fidelity, and praying for the
removal of those evil Counselors that threaten so much danger to his Majesty,
and his Kingdoms. The Emperor herewith was no way pacified, but charged

This prevailed nothing, He publishes a Manifesto.
but the breach grows wider. The Emperor published a Manifesto in Answer to the
Apology of the Bohemian States, and wrote Letters to the Electors, Princes, and
States of the Empire, with high Aggravations of the violence offered at Prague
to his principal hearing, without summoning, without any form of Process, yea,
without giving a moment of time to Repent, or make Confession, or receive the
Sacrament, which is never denied to the worst offenders.

Forthwith a pernicious War, and all confusion breaks out. The Emperor raised
forces under the conduct of diverse Commanders, of whom the chief were Count de
Buquoy, Both Parties Arm.
and Count de Ampiere. The Evangelicks raised two Armies under Count de Thurne,
and Count Mansfelt. Moravia, Silesia, and Lusatia, with all the Estates
Protestant, Germans and Neighbors of Bohemia, (very few excepted) assist the
Evangelicks with Counsel, Men, and Money: Likewise the Prince of Orange, and
the States of the United Provinces promised to aid them with their Bohemians,
whose Country the Imperialists destroy with Fire and Sword, persuade the
Emperor to stop the rage of Civil War; the success whereof is doubtful, and the
end ever miserable. The Emperor propounded an Arbitration of these differences
by the Elector of Mentz, and the Duke of Bavaria, Princes Catholics, and by
the Electors Palatine, and of Saxony, Princes Protestants, and Pilsen should be
the place of Treaty: The Evangelicks consent to the Arbitration, but dislike
the place, where Directors had designed the besieging of it. New Actions of War
made the overtures of peace more difficult: Several Armies were now raising
throughout Bohemia, and the Neighboring Provinces: As yet the Elector of Saxony
stood Neutral; the Duke of Bavaria cast in his lot with the Emperor, whose
estate was then every where imbroiled.

A Comet appears at this time.
At this time there appeared a Comet which gave occasion of much discourse to
all sorts of men; among others a Learned Knight, our Countreyman That such
persons were but abusers, and did but flatter greatness, who gave their
verdict, that that Comet was effectual, as some would have it, or signal, as
others judge it, only to Africa; whereby they laid it far enough from England:
When this Knight out of the consideration of the space of the Zodiac which
this Comet measured, the inclination of his Sword and Blade, and to what place
both the head and tail became Vertical, together with other secrets.] Said,
That not only all Europe, to the elevation of Fifty two degrees, was liable to
its threatenings, England especially; yea, That person besides, in whose fortune
we are all no less embarked, then the Passenger with the Ship is in the Pilot
that guides the same; the truth whereof, said he, a few years will manifest to
all men.

And it was observed by Dr. Bainbridge, a famous Astronomer, that toward the
Declination of it, the Eleventh of December it past over London in the morning,
and so hasted more Northwards, even as far as the Orcades.

King James ingages not in these troubles, flattering himself with the
Spaniards seeming forwardness to effect the Match.
Amidst these distractions, the House of Austria made no small improvement of
their interest in the King of Great Britain, who in the hot pursuit of the
Spanish Match, was earnest to oblige them. And the Spaniards made show, that on
their part nothing under Heaven was more desired then this Alliance; and in
their Discourses magnified the King, Queen, and Prince of England. For the
state of their Affairs did press them hard, if not to close really, yet at
least to fain a pressing toward it. For the French administered cause of
discontent; the Truce with the United Provinces was near expiring; but above
all they took to heart the Bohemian War, and resolved to set the main stock
upon it: Wherefore the King of Spain gave commandment, that his Treasure should
be gathered together for the Infanta's vast portion, being no less then Two
Millions, and gave hopes of the payment of half a Million beforehand, as was
desired, and with himself all Dispatches seemed to pass freely. But his
Ministers gave not the same satisfaction, and proceeded so slackly in the
business, that they were suspected either not to intend it at all, or not so
soon as was pretended: Besides, the wiser here observed and repined, that all
difficulties, hazards, and odious passages, must rest on the English side,
which Spain did little value. That King James did that to gratify the
Spaniard, which rendered him disgusted by his Subjects; but Spain, it was not
without design to engage him in his own Service. Which resentments may be
collected from a Letter written by a great Minister of State, to Mr.
Cottington, his Majesty's then Agent in Spain; which for clearer satisfaction
you have here at large.

GOod Mr. Cottington, A Letter from a great Minister of State to Mr. Cottington.
I doubt not but that before these come to your hands, you will have heard of
the Receipt of all your former Letters: These are October, wherein you
advertise of the arrival of the Conde Gondomar, at Lerma, and of his
entertainment by that Duke. It seems unto us here in England, that he has
gone but very slowly in his journey; and diverse (seeing how long time he has
spent in the way) do make conjecture, That it proceeds from the small
affection that he judges to be there, toward the effecting of the main
business; saying, If the Ambassador were assured that his Master did so really
desire the speedy effecting thereof, as is pretended, he would have made more
haste homeward; and that it has Honor, Religion, or Moral honesty in them, the
Protestations and Professions which I have so often heard them make, and you
likewise daily advertise hither, are sufficient to persuade a man Infidels, to
expect sincere dealing in the business; and whenever I shall perceive that
they go about to do otherwise, I must confess my self to have been deceived, as
I shall ever be on the like terms; while I deal with inmost care; but withal, I
shall judge them the most unworthy and persidious people of the World, and the
more, for that his Majesty has given them so many testimonies of his sincere
intentions toward them, which he daily continues, as now of late, by the
causing Sir Walter Rawleigh to be put to death, chiefly for the giving them
satisfaction; whereof his Majesty Declaration, showing the Motives which
induced his Majesty to recall his mercy, through which he had lived these many
years a condemned man. In the mean time, I think it ^it, that to the Duke of
Lerma, the Confessor, and the Secretary of State, you do represent his
Majesty's real manner of proceeding with that King and State; and how for the
advancing of the great business, he has endeavored to satisfy them in all
things, letting them see how in many actions of late of that nature, his
Majesty has strained upon the affections of Walter Rawleigh, who died with a
great deal of courage and constancy; and at his death moved the common sort of
people to much remorse, who all attributed his death to the desire his Majesty
had to satisfy Spain.

Further, you may let them know how able a man Sir Walter Rawleigh was to have
done his Majesty service, if he should have been pleased to employ him; yet to
give them content, he has not spared him, when by preserving him, he might
have given great satisfaction to his Subjects, and had at command, upon all
occasions as useful a man as served any Prince in Christendom; and on the
contrary, the King of Spain is not pleased to do any thing which may be so
inconvenient unto him, as to lessen the affections of his people, or to procure
so much as murmuring or distractions amongst them: And therefore it is to be
expected, that on his part, they answer his Majesty at least with buen termine
that is to be observed betwixt great Princes, will hardly admit of Threats or
Revenge for a Wooing Language; but this I know falls into so discreet a hand,
that I little fear the handsome carriage of it. And I hope, that before these
Letters arive with you, we shall hear from you, in such a style, that this
advice of mine shall be of no use. I pray you be very earnest with the Conde
Gondomar, that he will not forget to negotiate the liberty of Mr. Mole, for
whom I hope (now my Lord Ross is dead) for that which you and I know, it will
not be so difficult to prevail. You Baldwills liberty was granted unto him,
although he could not absolutely promise Mr. Moles release, yet he then
faithfully protested he would use the mediation of the Duke of Lerma, and of
the Kings Confessor, and of that King if need were; and that he would try the
best friends he had for the procurement of his enlargement, wherein you may
desire him to deal effectually, for that there is great expectance that he
should proceed honorably and really therein. I my self likewise will use all
the means I can for his relief; for it is a thing which is very much desired
here, and would give a great deal of satisfaction.

As touching Osulivare, it is very fit that you let them know, that the report
of the honor they did him, has come unto his Majesty's ears, and that although
they will allege, that in the time of Hostility betwixt England and Spain, it
may be he did them many services, and may then have deserved well at their
hands; for which they have just cause to reward him: Yet since by his Majesty's
happy coming to these Crowns, those differences have had an end, and that there
is a perfect League and Amity betwixt them, his Majesty cannot choose but
dislike that they should bestow upon him any title or dignity, which Irish have
any kind of dependence on that State.


Nov. 17. Queen Anne dies.
Queen Anne died this year at Hampton Court, and was thence brought to her
Palace at Denmark-house in the Strand: The common Bohemia, and others parts of
Germany.

IN the beginning of the year One thousand six hundred and n^neteen, the
Emperor Matthias died; but immediately before his death, to engage Persons of
Honor in the Service of the Empire, he instituted Knights of several Orders for
the defense of the Catholic Religion; Matthias the Emperor dies.
who were bound by Oath to be faithful to the Apostolic Sea, and to
acknowledge the Pope their chief Protector. The Count Palatine Rhine, who in
the interregnum is chief Vicar of the Empire, published his right by the Golden
Bull, to govern in chief till a new Emperor be chosen, and by Advice assumed
the Power, requiring the people to demean themselves peaceably under his
Government.

King Ferdinand in his broken Estate, A Cessation of Arms proposed by Ferdinand
is refused.
propounded a Cessation of Arms, and offered fair terms of peace, but was not
answered, for the breach would not be made up. The Bohemians declared that
their Kingdom was Elective not Hereditary, that the States General ought to
have Bohemia: That Ferdinand took the Government upon him by virtue of his
Coronation in the Emperors life time, and had thereby made the Kingdom a
Donative. The Evangelicks in the Upper Austria demanded equal Privileges with
the Catholics, and resolved to make union with the Bohemians. The Protestant
States of Moravia, Silesia, and Hungaria, banish the Jesuits. The Bohemians
prospered in these beginnings, but the Austrian party received vigor by
supplies out of Hungary Flanders, and were able to stand their ground; and the
Emperor capitulated with the Duke of Bavaria to levy forces to his use; for the
expense of which service, he engaged part of his Country to him.

The War grows to a great height, King James interposes by his Ambassador the
Viscount Doncaster.
and the King of England interposed in these differences, and sent the Viscount
Doncaster Extraordinary Ambassador to mediate a Reconciliation. His constant
love of Peace, and his present fear of the sad issue of these Commotions, and
the request of the King of Spain, moved him to take this part in hand. It
Spaniards policy to make him a Reconciler, and by that means to place him in a
state of Neutrality, and so frustrate the hopes of that support, which the
Princes of the Union might expect from him by the Interest of the Count
Palatine: For which cause the King of Spain speaks out large promises, That he
should be the sole and grand Arbiter of this Cause of Christendom. Nevertheless
his Mediation was slighted by the Catholic Confederates, and his Ambassador
shufled out of the business: And at the same time, Mr. Cottington being very
sensible of their Spain, professed, That his most useful service and best
complying with his own Conscience, would be to disengage the King his Master.

The Archbishop of Ments, the Representers of the Duke of Saxony, and the other
Electors, Brandenburgh, Cullen, and Tryers, met at Franckford to choose the
Emperor.

Upon the Eighth day of August, The Elector Palatine sends an Ambassador to
oppose the Election of Ferdinand. The Bohemians choose the Palatine for their
King.
Ferdinand was chosen King of the Romans; and upon the Nineteenth of September
had the Imperial Crown Palatine came to oppose Ferdinand, but were denied
entrance at Franckford: The Bohemians disclaimed the said Election, and being
assembled for that purpose, with the consent of their Confederates, elected for
their King, Count Frederick Palatine of Rhine.

At that time Bethlem Gabor, Prince of Transylvania, made known to the
Directors Evangelick, his great sense of their condition since those troubles
began, desired union with them, and offered to come in with an Army, Bethlem
Gabor makes a union with the Protestants.
hoping for the Great Turks consent to peace, during the time of that Service.
The Directors return their thanks, accept the offer, and Prince Bethlem
immediately entered Hungary, to the Emperors great vexation, danger, and
detriment; marching with an Army even to the Walls of Vienna.

The Palatine craves the advice of King James, touching his accepting the Crown.
The Count Palatine Elected King of Bohemia, craved advice to his Father in Law,
the King of Great Britain, touching the acceptance of that Royal Dignity:
When this important business was debated in the Kings Council, Archbishop
Abbot, whose infirmities would not suffer him to be present at the
Consultation, wrote his mind and heart to Sir Robert Nanton, the Kings
Secretary.

That God had set up this Prince, his Majesty's Son in Law, as a Mark of
Bohemians had just cause to reject that proud and bloody man, who had taken a
course to make that Kingdom not Elective, in taking it by the Donation of
another. The slighting of the Viscount Doncaster in his Embassage, Bohemians,
honor the Palsgrave, strengthen the Princes of the Union, draw on the United
Provinces, stir up the King of Denmark, and the Palatines two Uncles, the
Prince of Orange, and the Duke of Bouillon, together with Tremouille, a rich
Prince in France, to cast in their shares. The Parliament is the old and
honorable way for raising of Money, and all that may be spared is to be turned
this way. And perhaps Tower by the Mother, for the preservation of the
Daughter, who like a Noble Princess has professed that she will not leave her
self one Jewel, rather then not maintain so religious and righteous a Cause.
Certainly if countenance be given to this Action, many brave Spirits will offer
themselves: Therefore let all our Spirits be gathered up to animate this
business, that the World may take notice that we are awake when God calls.


The Life and Zeal of these Expressions from a Person of such Eminency,
Anti-Spanish party in the Court of England. But the King was engaged in those
ways, out of which he could not easily turn himself. Besides, it did not please
him, that his Son should snatch a Crown out of the Fire: And he was used to
say, That the Bohemians made use of him as the Fox did of the Cats foot, to
pull the Apple out of the Fire for his own eating. In the mean while before the
King could answer, the Palsgrave desiring advice in that behalf, the Bohemians
had wrought and prevailed with him to accept of their Election; Before answer
came he had accepted it.
England, excusing the suddenness of the Action; for that the urgency of the
cause would admit of no deliberation. King James disavowed the Act, and would
never grace his Son in Law with the style of his new Dignity. But Sir Richard
Weston and Sir Edward Conway were sent Ambassadors into Bohemia, to close up
the breach between the Emperor, and the Elector Palatine.

The King being not a little troubled and jealous, King James disavows the Act*
and ^^^ars himself of it to the King of Spain^
that the Palatines nearness to him might give cause of suspicion to his
Brother of Spain, that this Election had been made by his procurement or
correspondence with the German Protestants, commands his Agent Cottington to
give that King plenary Information of all proceedings; As, That his Ambassador
Bohemians to the quiet obedience of the Emperor, instead of finding the Emperor
so prepared, and such a way made for his Mediation as was promised and
expected, received answer, That the business was already referred to four of
the Electors, insomuch, that no place was left for his Authority to interpose.

Of this exclusive answer, as he had just cause to be sensible, considering
that he had entered into that Treaty merely at the instance of the Spain, and
his Ministers; so there followed a further inconvenience, That the Bohemians
having long expected the fruit and issue of this Mediation, and finding little
hope by this means, did instantly, as out of desperation, Elect the Count
Palatine for their King: Wherefore being tender of his own honor and
reputation, especially in the opinion of the King of Spain, he would not have
it blemished by the least misunderstanding. And for that end, he tendered to his
view, such Letters as from time to time he had written to the Princes of the
Union, and Palatine himself, whereby he might plainly see his dislike of the
Bohemians engaging against their King, and his industry to contain those
Princes in peace and quietness, and to make a fair Accord between the
disagreeing parties.

Reply was made, as touching the answer given to the Viscount Doncaster, That
he was admitted a Compounder in such form as was possible, the Arbitration
having been committed by the late Emperor into the hands of three of the
Electors, and the Duke of Bavaria; that Bohemians to the acceptance of any
reasonable conditions: The King of Spain testifies his resentment of Viscount
Doncasters proceedings in Germany.
But he presently, to the Emperors great disservice, labored to suspend the
Election of the King of the Romans, till the Bohemian Controversy were first
compounded, which was absolutely to defeat King Ferdinand of that Crown, and to
disturb and put in danger Liege, when the Count Palatine was made King of
Bohemia. As touching the Kings integrity in the whole business, the
satisfaction tendered was received with great applause; and it was further said,
That it would gain the more authority and estimation if he should continue to
disclaim that which had been done so contrary to his opinion, and against his
Friends and Allies, as are all the Princes of the House of Austria.

Germany, and for the Palsgrave there was no going back; The King of Poland
aids the Emperor.
forces pour in a main on both sides. The King of Poland aided the Emperor in
Hungary, to bound and check the incursions of Prince Bethlem; the Duke of
Saxony did not brook his Fellow Electors advancement to Regal Majesty, and
condemned his joining with Bethlem Gabor; Who, says he, came in with the Turks
consent to make a desolution in the Empire.

King Frederick visited the several parts of his Kingdom to confirm the people
to him, and to receive the Oath of Fidelity: And the Emperor published a
Proscription against him, Ferdinand publishes a Proscription against the
Palatine.
wherein he proclaims him guilty of High Treason, excludes him out of the
public peace, and declares his resolution to prosecute him as the public
Enemy of the Empire, and a contemner of his Imperial Majesty, and absolves all
his Subjects from their Oaths and Duties to him, and commands all persons
whatsoever to abandon him and his adherents. Prince Anhalt Generalissimo of the
Bohemians.
Christian, Prince of Anhalt, was appointed Generalissimo of the Bohemian
Forces, and governed all affairs, which was some eclipse and discontent to
Thurne and Mansfet, who had hitherto stood the shock of the Imperial Armies.
The Princes of the Union raised forces for the defense of the Palatinate,
Marquess Ansbach commands the forces of the Princes of the Union.
and their own interest, under the Marquess Ansbach. The Evangelicks were put
to the worst by General Buquoy in several encounters, and were much terrified
by the Duke of Bavaria, who marched with an Army of Fifteen thousand Horse and
Foot, and a Train of Artillery proportionable; Hungary, between the Emperor and
the Prince of Transylvania.

In Spain they make all possible preparations for this War; only the King of
England will not take the Alarm, abhorring War in general, and distasting the
Palsgraves cause, as an ill president against Monarchy, and fed with hopes of
composing all differences by the success of the Spanish Treaty. Kings James
will not engage in the War, sends Sir Walter Aston Ambassador into Spain to
negotiate the March, and Gondomar returns.
For which purpose Sir Walter Aston was then sent Ambassador into Spain, and
Gondomar returned into England, there to abide Infanta and her Family, were
greatly enlarged by the Commissioners designed for the Treaty, and were allowed
by the King of England; but without a dispensation from Rome, the transactions
between the two Kings were but Nullities. And for this cause it was expected,
that our King should propound such conditions for the increase and great
advantage of the Roman Catholic Religion, that the Pope may deliberate whether
they be of that nature as may persuade Spain, That he had done as much in favor
of the Catholics as the times would bear, and promised in the word of a King,
Great immunities promised by King James to the Catholics.
That no Roman Priest or other Catholic should thenceforth be condemned upon
any capital Law. And although he could not at present rescind the Laws,
inflicting only pecuniary mulcts; yet he would so mitigate them as to oblige
his Catholic Subjects to him. And if the Marriage took effect, his Daughter in
Law should find him ready to Iunto of Canonists, Lawyers, and Divines, to
persuade the Pope to act his part.

18 Jacob. 1620.

A great Army levied in Flanders under the command of Spinola.

A Regiment under the command of Sir Horati^ Vere sent from England.


IN the mean while an Army of Thirty thousand was levying in Flanders, under the
command of Marquess Spinola. The King of England sent to know the cause of so
great preparations. The Marquess gave answer, Palatinate. Yet no more then one
Regiment under the Command of Sir Horatio Vere could be obtained from him,
though two more were promised: When Spinola had his Rendevouz where he mustered
Six and twenty thousand Foot, and Four thousand Horse, he opened his
Commission, which required him to make War against all those which should be
confederate with the Bohemian Rebels; and he communicated the same to the
Ambassador of Great Britain. At the same time the English began their march;
as brave a Regiment as has appeared in any age, consisting most of Gentlemen
under a most worthy Oxford and Essex, persons innobled as well by their own
virtues, as by their Progenitors. Other Commanders in this Regiment were Sir
Edward Sackvile, Sir Gerard Herbert, Sir Robert Knolles, Captain Stafford,
Captain Wilmot, Captain William Fairfax, Sir John Burlacy, Cap. Buroughs, Cap.
Robert Knightly, etc.

This handful of men reached the Palatinate with some difficulty, by the aid
and conduct of Henry Prince of Nassau.

The Protestant States of Austria renounce the confederacy of the Bohemians.
The States Protestant of the Upper and Lower Austria, upon the approach of the
Bavarian Army, seeing nothing but manifest ruin, renounce their Confederacy
with the Bohemians, and submit to the Emperor, saving to themselves their
Rights and Privileges in Religion: Whereupon the Bohemians and their King
being but Twenty thousand strong, besides an addition of Ten thousand
Hungarians from Bethlem Gabor, and fearing least Bavaria and Buquoy joining
Bohemia, thought it best to fortify the Frontiers, and to defend their
Country, which they conceived they might well do, if the Elector of Saxony
would continue in his Neutrality. The Emperor sent to the said Elector to
execute his Ban or Declaration of Treason against the Count Palatine, and the
Bohemian Rebels. The Bohemians by their Ambassadors requested him, if he would
not own their Cause, The Elector of Saxony assists the Emperor, and executes
the Ban against the Palatine.
yet at least to remain Neutral. The Duke of Saxony replied to King Frederick,
That he had often represented to him what ruin Spinola's advance to subdue the
Palatinate, but this did nothing move him. He entered Lusatia with some forces,
and quickly reduced a part of that Province.

In the Palatinate, Spinola having got the start of the English, by means of a
far shorter march, had no sooner arived, but he took in diverse Spinola prevails
much in the Palatinate.
and prevailed greatly over a spiritless people; yet he warily declined the
hazard of Battle with the Princes of the Union: Neither was the Marquess
Ansbach very forward to engage, or to seek or take advantages. The Dutch
slowness was not excusable, howbeit the great access of strength to the
Emperors party, and this slender aid from the King of Great Britain, to
preserve his Childrens Patrimony, must needs dishearten the German Princes, The
Armies take up their Winter Quarters.
and help to dissolve the Union. After a while, the season of the year drew
them into their Winter Quarters; Horatio Vere commanded in Manheim, Sir Gerard
Herbert in Heidelborough, and Captain Buroughs in Frankendale, having only
power to preserve themselves within those Walls, whilst the enemy ranged round
about them.

A Letter written from the Marquess of Buckingham to Conde Gondomar, discovered
the bent of the Kings mind and will touching the German War, That he was
resolved to continue Neuter for Conscience, A Letter of the Duke of Buckinghams
to Gondomar touching King James his bent to the German War.
Honor, and Examples sake. In regard of Conscience, judging it unlawful to
inthrone and dethrone Kings for Religions sake; having a quarrel against the
Jesuits for holding that opinion: Besides he saw the World inclined to make
this a War of Religion, which he would never do. In point of Honor; for that
when he sent his Ambassador into Germany to treat of Peace, in the interim
Example sake; holding it a dangerous president against all Christian Princes to
allow a sudden translation of Crowns by the Peoples Authority. Nevertheless he
could not sit still, and see his Children dispossessed of their Hereditary
Rights, and hopes his Son in Law will make Overtures of Peace, which if
slighted by the Emperor, he will not lose the season to prepare for the defense
of the Palatinate. But if his Son will not hearken to his advice, he shall be
enforced to leave him to his proper Counsels.

Notwithstanding this open, wary and tender proceeding with all care and
patience to observe the Spanish humors, our State Ministers that were most
addicted to Spain, discerned their trifling with us, which they did not spare
to censure, and resolved to use a freer Language; yet still discovered a
willingness to wait their further leisure, for the English Patience seemed
invincible. In the mean time the Privy Council having an eye to the support of
the Palatinate, began the raising of Moneys by way of free gift, and directed
Letters of the tenor following, to diverse

October. 25.
YOu may formerly have heard how the Palatinate being the ancient Heritage of
the Count Palatine, his Majesty's Son in Law, and to descend to his Majesty's
Grandchildren, is now invaded by a Foreign Enemy; many principal Towns are
surprised, a great part of the Country in the possession of strangers, and the
inhabitants forced to take an Oath against their Natural Prince. Whereupon
Auxiliary War for the defense and recovery of the same; the occasion being so
weighty and pressing, has moved his Majesty by the general advice of us his
Council, to think of some course for provision of that nature, as may serve as
well to the maintenance and preserving of the present succors already sent, as
for the reinforcing them out of those Countries, as the occasion of the War
shall require: And for that the swiftness of the occasion would not permit a
supply by other means for the present, so readily as was gift unto his Majesty,
for the advancement of the present occasion* nothing doubting, but that your
Lordship being a Peer of the Kingdom, will cheerfully and readily follow the
example of us begun. And if there were much alacrity and readiness found in the
Nobility, and others, to contribute at the motion of his Majesty's Sons
Ambassador, at what time the Palatinate was not invaded, neither had his
Majesty declared himself, you will much more and in a better proportion do it
now these two weighty Motives do concur; and so nothing doubting etc.

To the Marquess of Winchester, To the Earl of Cumberland, To the Earl of
Darby, To the Earl of Northumberland, etc.

Also a Letter of the same form was written to the Lord Major of London.

But the short Reign of King Frederick was near its period: The Imperial Forces
under Bavaria, Buquoy, and D. Balthazar, advance toward Prague; and the
Bohemians quit their Garrisons, to make their Army the more complete: Yet
neither Count Mansfield nor the English Forces were there. On the Eighth day of
November, being the Lords day, both Armies met for the fatal decision of the
great Controversy. The Bohemians stood upon the advantage-ground betwixt the
Imperialists and Prague: Frederick's Forces totally routed in the Battle at
Prague.
But the Enemy breaking through, scattered and ruined their whole Army, and
pursued the Victory. The King and Queen surprised with this Discomfiture, among
a wavering people in a City not very defensible, were constrained to ^lie the
next morning.

Diminution of Honor was added to the Calamity of this Prince; His calamity
joined with loss of Honor.
because he suffered his Soldiers to mutiny for Pay, when he had a mass of
Money by him, which was left behind to augment the Enemies Conquest. Neither
was Anhalt the General a fit person for the high trust reposed Mansfield, whom
Anhalt slighted, and closed not with him to bring him up to this Fight, made
good his fidelity, and with his Flying Army became a continual vexation to the
Emperor, harasing his Countries and forcing Contribution.

King James, upon the news of the Palsgrave's overthrow, and upon a Narration
of the state of Affairs in those parts made unto His Majesty Oxford and Essex
newly returned from the Palatinate, was pleased to call a full Council together
to consider of this great and weighty affair. The Order ensuing relates the
particulars.

At the Court at Whitehall, Jan. 13. 1620.
Present, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury Lord Chancellor Lord Treasurer Lord
Privy Seal Lord Steward Lord M. Hamilton Lord Chamberlain Earl of Arundel Earl
of Kelly Lord V. Doncaster Lord V. Falkland Lord Carew Lord Digby Mr. Treasurer
Mr. Secr. Naunton Mr. Secr. Calvert Mr. Chanc. of the Exchequer Master of the
Rolls Master of the Wards.


HIs Majesty being resolved to make some Royal preparations for the Recovery
and Protection of the Palatinate, An Order at the Council Table for recovering
the Palatinate.
being the ancient Inheritance of his Majesty's Son in law, and Grandchildren,
did in his high wisdom think meet to appoint some persons of knowledge and
Oxford and the Earl of Essex, the Earl of Leicester, the Lord Uiscount Wilmot,
the Lord Danvers, the Lord Calfield, Sir Edward Cecyl, Sir Richard Harrison
Knights, and Captain Danbingham were called to the Table, and made acquainted
with His Majesty's pleasure, That they, or any Five or more of them, together
with Sir Horace Vere, and Sir Edw. Conway Knights (if they return into England
while this Committee does continue) shall undertake this service, and have
their meetings and assemblies in the whole Council Chamger here in Whitehall
touching the affairs abovementioned: And that for their better assistance they
call unto them such others of experience, whose advice and opinion they shall
think fit to make use of in their several Consultations,

The Particulars offered to their Consideration, are these;

First, What proportion or number of men, as well Horse as Foot, with Munition,
Victuals, Shipping, and Treasure, will be sufficient for that

And secondly, By what time it will be meet that their Forces be in readiness;
And where the Arms, Munition, and Victuals may best be provided; with such
other Circumstances as are incident to any of these Heads.

For the better direction herein, Mr. Secretaries will acquaint them with such
Intelligences as they have received touching the strength of the Enemies Forces
now in the Palatinate.

Moreover, The King to encourage the Princes of the Union, and Edward Villers
into Silesia to fetch the Palsgraves Submission to the Emperor, upon Conditions
to be conceived according to equity and conveniencie.

The Spaniards flatter the King.
Never did the Spaniards more flatter King James, then after the Defeat at
Prague. They affirm that he shall ordain according to his pleasure in the
Palsgrave's Restitution, and be obeyed; That the Infanta's Portion was
preparing, and that the Pope was obliged to grant the Dispensation, Cottington
the Agent in Spain now attested the Honesty of Gondomar's Dispatches hither,
and cried him up for a Cordial man, and well deserving His Majesty's favor.

This notable Spanish Engine had so wrought himself into the Kings affections,
that he gained the accoss of a Favorite rather then of an Ambassador from a
Foreign Prince.

Some in the English Court were then suspected to be Pensioners to Spain; as
may be gathered from the Spanish Ambassadors Instructions received from the
King his Master.

Private Instructions to the Spanish Ambassador into England.
BEsides that which I enjoin you in your General Instructions given you for
England, whither I send you to reside, I thought good to advertise you apart by
themselves of the chiefest things of Importance which you shall there
negotiate, and endeavor to further and advance.

It is well known, that I have desired and endeavored to favor the Cause of the
Catholics of that Kingdom, and to further it to their best advantage, as well
in the time of the Queen deceased who did so much prosecute and oppress them,
as since the time that the present King has succeeded; yet that calamity still
continues upon them, by reason of the ill offices done unto them by the
Puritans and Protestants (of whom the greater part of that Kings Council does
consist:) Howbeit because it is a thing that I could not well urge or press,
without breeding jealousies, and so cause thereby a greater harm to the
Catholics, I have proceeded on my part with that wariness and dissimulation as
is fit.

D.A. shall inform you of what has passed in this matter, as also Catholics
by whose means the business of the rest is undertaken, that they will be
secret; notwithstanding lest any Heretic shall come in the name or show of a
Catholic only to make some discovery; It shall be fit, that in all speeches
you shall have with them Elizabeth put them, and that God would inspire the
Kings heart that he may reduce himself to the obedience of the Roman Catholic
Church: And advise them to endeavor to win the King unto them, by showing
themselves good and loyal and obedient Subjects, in temporal duties, and not to
meddle any thing against his State; that by their deeds he may see what
security may be expected from them, and D. A. concerning those with whom you
may deal confidently, and how far you may trust the Negotiants for the
Catholics; though you shall do well always to proceed with the aforesaid
caution and wariness.

You shall understand from the said D.A. what Pensions are allotted to certain
Ministers of that King, and to other persons: It will be necessary Persons and
Pensions to serve your self of them, and to make the best use of them in all
occasions that shall be most behoveful for your better direction in the
Businesses given you in charge, and all others that may be offered of
consequence, seeing the said Pensions were appointed to that end.

Whatsoever of the said Pensions you shall find unpaid for the time past, D. A.
is to discharge, and you shall undertake for the time to come; telling every
one what his Pension is, to the end they may be deceived of no part thereof by
the Third person who conveys it unto them; and let it be punctually paid at the
days, that their good payment may bind them to persevere and do their service
punctually; for the which you shall be furnished with all that shall be
necessary. And have a special care to advertise me how such persons employ
themselves D.A. does.

Above all, You must take great care to dive into the estate of the affairs of
that King: What his Treasure is; In what Estimation he is with his Subjects,
and what Correspondeneie and good meaning there is betwixt them; How the
English, Scotch and Irish stand affected among themselves and one toward
another, and toward their Neighbors, and how they are bent against me and my
Common Estates, or any of my France, and with the Neutrals of Holland and
Zealand, and with the Venetians, and upon what causes it is founded, what
matters they treat of, what designs they have in hand. All which is very
necessary to be known; for the attaining of which D.A. will open unto you some
ways which you must follow, besides those which your self shall discover: And
you shall advertise me of whatsoever you shall understand the learn,

These were the Arts of Spain, to corrupt diverse in the Court of England.

Buckingham and his Dependants followed the Kings inclinations: The Duke of
Lenox, Marquis Hamilton, and William Earl of Pembroke disliking the Kings
course, did not contest with him, but only intimated

It was said of Gondomar, That when he returned into Spain, he gave in his
Account of Disbursments for Pensions given in England, (amongst others) To Sir
Robert Cotton 1000 l. a person of great Integrity, and one who was ever averse
to the House of Austria. Which Sir Robert getting notice of by the English
Agent then in Spain, demanded reparation, which was obtained, but with a salvo
to the Ambassadors honor, the error being said to be committed by a Dependent
upon the Ambassador, and not

The King being jealous of uncomptrolled Sovereignty, and impatient of his
Peoples intermedling with the Mysteries of State, had fallen into a great
dislike of Parliaments, and for many years before had given way to Projects and
Monopolies: And many of his Ministers perhaps fearing an enquiry into their own
actions, might suggest to him, that he might better furnish himself by those
ways, and the Match now in treaty, then by Subsidies, usually accompanied with
the redress of Grievances. The King calls a Parliament.
he was now minded to call a Parliament, conceiving it might be of special use:
For he observed the affections of the People to be raised for the Recovery of
the Palatinate; and then concluded, that those affections would open their
purses to the supply of his wants; and the Treaty with Spain would effect the
business without the expense and troubles of War, and the good accord between
him and his people would quicken the Spaniard to conclude the Match. And
accordingly Writs were issued forth to assemble them the 30. of January. In the
calling of this Parliament he recommended to his Subjects the choice of such
Members as were of the wisest, gravest, and best affected people, neither
superstitious, nor turbulent, but obedient Children to this their Mother Church.

Germany, The Protestant Union declines in Germany.
the Protestant Union continually declined by the gradual falling away of the
several partakers. The Elector of Saxony reduced the remainder of Lusatia. The
Province of Moravia, upon the approach of Buquoy, seeing the Count de Latiere
came not in to their succor, prayed that they might enjoy their Privileges in
matter of Religion, and be received into the Emperors grace and favor: which
submission was well received at Vienna. Likewise the States of Silesia failing
of assistance from the Elector Palatine, were constrained

Then the Palatine propounded to the Elector of Saxony an Overture of Peace,
The Palatine propounds a Peace to the Elector of Saxony.
declaring, That he took the Crown upon him to preserve the Protestants in the
free exercise of their Religion. The Saxon replied, That he had no way to make
his Peace, but to renounce the Kingdom of Bohemia, and the Provinces
Incorporate, and to beg the Emperors pardon. Afterward the Elector Palatine
goes to Brandenburgh, and then to Segenburgh, where there was an Assembly of
Princes and States Protestant Spinola. In the mean while Count Mansfield stirs
in Bohemia, pillages several Towns, and the Goods of all those that cried, God
save King Ferdinand!

The relation of England to these affairs of Foreign States, The King puts
forth a Proclamation forbidding discourse of State Affairs.
had caused a general liberty of discourse concerning matters of State: which
King James could not bear, but by Proclamation commanded all from the highest
to the lowest, not to intermeddle by Pen or Speech with State-concerments and
secrets of Empire, either at home or abroad; which

On the Thirtieth day of January the Parliament began to sit, and the King came
in person and made this Speech.

MY Lords Spiritual and Temporal, The Kings Speech to the Parliament.
and you the Commons! Cui multiloquio non deest peccatum. In the last
Parliament I made long discourses, especially to them of the Lower House: I did
open the I have piped to you, and you have not danced; I have mourned, and you
have not lamented. Yet as no man's actions can be free, so in me God found some
spices of vanity, and so all my sayings turned to me again without any success.
And now to tell the reasons of your calling, and this meeting, apply it to your
selves, and spend not the time in long Speeches. Consider that the Parliament
is a thing composed of a Head and a Body, The Monarch and the Two Estates; It
was first a Monarchy, then after Venice, the Netherlands, and other Free
Governments there are none. The Head is to call the Body together: And for the
Clergy, the Bishops are chief; for Shires, their Knights; and for Towns and
Cities, their Burgesses and Citizens. These are to treat of difficult matters,
and to counsel their King with their best advice to make Laws for the
Commonweal. And the Lower House is also to petition their King, and acquaint
him with their Grievances, and not to meddle with their Kings Prerogative. They
are to offer supply for his Necessity, and he to distribute in recompense
thereof Justice and Mercy. As in all Parliaments it is the Kings office to make
good Laws, (whose fundamental cause is the Peoples ill manners) so at this
time, that we may meet with the new Abuses and the incroaching Craft of the
times: Particulars shall be read hereafter.

As touching Religion, Laws enough are made already. It stands in two points,
Persuasion and Compulsion: Men may persuade, but God must give the blessing.
Jesuits, Priests, Puritans and Sectaries, erring both on the right hand and
left hand, are forward to persuade unto their own ends; and so ought you the
Bishops, in your example and preaching: But Compulsion to obey, is to bind the
Conscience.

There is talk of the Match with Spain: But if it shall not prove a Furtherance
to Religion, I am not worthy to be your King: I will never

For a Supply to my Necessities: I have reigned Eighteen years, in which time
you have had Peace, and I have received far less supply than has been given to
any King since the Conquest: The last Queen of famous memory, had one year with
another above a Hundred thousand pounds per annum in Subsidies; And in all my
time I have had but Four Subsidies and Six Fifteens. It is Ten years since I
had a Subsidy; in all which time I have been sparing to trouble you: I have
turned my self Buckingham.
Young man, whose honesty and integrity I knew, whose care has been to appoint
under him sufficient men, to lessen my Charges, which he has done.

Touching the miserable dissentions in Christendom, I was not the cause
thereof; For the appeasing whereof I sent my Lord of Doncaster,

First for Religion's sake, as not holding with the Jesuits disposing of
Kingdoms; rather learning of our Savior to uphold, not to overthrow them.

Secondly, I was not Judge between them, neither acquainted with the Laws of
Bohemia. Quis me Judicem fecit?

Thirdly, I have treated a Peace, and therefore will not be a Party; Yet I left
not to preserve my Childrens Patrimony: For I had a Contribution of my Lords
and Subjects, which amounted to a great sum; I borrowed of my Brother of
Denmark Seven thousand five hundred pounds to help him, and sent as much to him
as made it up Ten thousand; and Thirty thousand I sent to the Princes of the
Union, to hearten them. I have lost no time: Had the Princes of the Union done
their parts, that handful of men I sent had done theirs. I intend to send by
Qui cito dat, bis dat. I will engage my Crown, my Blood, and my Soul in that
Recovery.

You may be informed of me in things in course of Justice; but I never sent to
any of my Judges to give sentence contrary to Law. Consider the Trade, for the
making thereof better; and show me the reason why my Mint for these eight or
nine years has not gone. I confess I have been liberal in my Grants; but if I
be informed, I will amend all hurtful Grievances: But who shall hasten after
Grievances, and desire to make himself popular, he has the spirit of Satan: If
I may know my Errors, Undertakers, a dozen of whom undertook to govern the last
Parliament, and they led me. I shall thank you for your good office, and desire
that the World may say well of our agreement.

In this Parliament the Commons presented Sir Tho. Richardson for their Speaker.

The King minded his former engagements, The Lo. Digby sent Ambassador into
Flanders, and Mr. Gage to Rome.
and in the beginning of John Digby, now made Lord Digby, into Flanders to the
Archduke Albertus, to gain a present Cessation from War, and to make way for a
Treaty of Peace with the Emperor. And also about the same time he sent Mr.
George Gage to Rome, to join with Padre Maestre the Spanish Agent in
negotiating the Popes Dispensation. The Archduke at Bruxels assented to a
Reconciliation in favor of our King, and obtained from Marquis Spinola a
suspension of all hostility against the Country and Subjects of the Elector
Palatine, which continued till the death of Albert, who died 17o Iulii
following. So the Lord Digby returned into England, bringing the Cessation of
Arms, about the same time that Sir Edward Villers brought the Palsgrave's
Submission. But the Twelve years Peace between Spain and the United Provinces
at this time expiring, Spinola returned into Flanders, and left the Palatinate
to the Imperial Forces.

After the Assembly at Segenburgh, The Palatine and his Princess go into
Holland.
the Palatine and his Princess took their journey into Holland, where they
found a refuge and noble entertainment Orange, who gave a high testimony of
honor to the Electress at her first arrival, for her magnanimous carriage in
Bohemia.

The Embassage of Weston and Conway prevailed little. The Emperor proceeds
severely with the Bohemians.
The Emperor went on in a severe Reformation, and frequent Executions among
that vanquished people: He destroyed most of their ancient Laws, and made new
Ordinances; declaring a sovereignty over them, not as an Elected King, but as a
Lord by right of Conquest.

Imperial Protestant Towns reconcile themselves to the Emperor, and intercede
for the Palatine, but in vain.
The Imperial Protestant Towns, Strasburgh, Worms, and Nuremburgh, subscribe to
Conditions of Peace. The reconciled Princes and States intercede for the
Elector Palatine; but their motion displeased the Emperor, who alleged, that
the Palatine did not acknowledge his faults nor sue for Pardon, but made Levies
in Holland and elsewhere, to renew the War in the Empire. For the King of
Denmark, the United Provinces, and diverse German Princes did adhere to the
Palsgrave's cause, and stickle

But to return to the Parliament in England. They petition the King for the due
execution of Laws against Jesuits, Seminary Priests and Popish Recusants.
Likewise they take in hand to redress the Peoples Grievances by illegal Patents
and Projects, and chiefly that of Inns and Alehouses, Grievances proposed in
Parliament.
for which there was a great Fine, and an Annual Revenue throughout the
Kingdom; and the Monopoly of Gold and Silver-thread, whereby the People were
abused with base and counterfeit Wares. But the examination of these Abuses was
accompanied with the grant of Two Subsidies, Sir Giles Mompesson imprisoned,
but escapes beyond Sea.
which was very acceptable to the King. Sir Giles Mompesson was convented
before the House of Commons for many heinous offenses

The Commons at a Conference with the Lords offered to prove, That the Patents
of Gold and Silver-Thread, of Inns and Alehouses, and of power to Compound for
obsolete Laws, of the Price of Horse-meat, Starch, Cords, Tobacco-pipes, Salt,
Train-oil, and the rest, were

19 Iac. An. 1621.
Hereupon the King came to the House of Lords, and there made a Speech.

The Kings Speech to the Lords.
MY Lords, The last time I came hither, my errand was to inform Giles
Mompesson, who though he were fled, yet my Proclamation pursued him instantly:
And as I was earnest in that, so will I be to see your Sentence against

Two reasons move me to be earnest in the execution of what ye are no sentence
at this time.

First, That duty I owe to God who has made me a King, and tied me to the care
of Government by that Politic Marriage betwixt me and my People: For I do
assure you in the heart of an honest man, and by the faith of a Christian King,
(which both ye and all the world know me to be) had these things been
complained of to me before the generally reported to be) that it was not my
good fortune to be the only Author of the Reformation, and punishment of them
by some Ordinary Courts of Justice. Nevertheless, since these things are new
discovered by Parliament, which before I knew not of, nor could so well have
discovered otherwise, in regard of that Representative Body of the Kingdom
which comes from all parts of the Country, I will be never a whit the slower
to do my part for the execution: For

The second Reason is, That I intend not to derogate or infringe England, as I
have done, and will ever be ready to do. And whatsoever I shall say, and
deliver unto you as my thought; yet when I have said what I think, I will
afterward freely leave the Judgment wholly to your House. I know you will do
nothing but what the like has been done before: And I pray you be not jealous
that I will abridge you of any thing that has been used; For whatsoever
Parliament that ever was in England.

House of Commons at this time, have showed greater love, and used me with more
respect in all their proceedings, then ever any House of Commons have hitherto
done to me, or I think to any of my Predecessors. As for this House of yours, I
have always found it respective to me, and accordingly do I, and ever did favor
you, as you well deserved. And I hope it will be accounted a happiness for you,
that my Son does now sit among you, who when it shall please God to set him in
my place, will then remember Member of your House, and so be bound to maintain
all your lawful Privileges, and like the better of you all the days of his
life. But because the World at this time talks so much of Bribes, I have just
cause to fear the whole Body of this House has bribed him to be a good
Instrument for you upon all occasions: He does so good Offices in all his
Reports to me, both for the House in general, and every one of you in
particular. And the like I may say of one that sits there, Buckingham, he has
been so ready upon all occasions of Arundel has already witnessed unto you, in
his Report made unto you of my Answer touching the Privileges of the Nobility,
how earnestly he spoke unto me of that matter.

Now, my Lords, the time draws near of your Recess; whither formality will
leave you time for proceeding now to Sentence against all, or any of the
persons now in question, I know not; but for my part, since both Houses have
dealt so lovingly and freely with me, in giving me a free gift, Two Subsidies,
in a more loving manner than has been given to any King before, and so
accepted by me: And since I cannot yet retribute by a General Pardon (which
has by Form usually been reserved to the end of a Parliament) the least I can
do, (which I can

1. That of the Inns and Hosteries. 2. That of Alehouses. 3. That of Gold and
Silver Thread.
My purpose is to strike them all dead; and that time may not be lost, I will
have it done presently: That concerning Alehouses I

I hear also there is another Bill among you against Informers. I Star Chamber;
and it will be the greatest ease to me, and all those that are near about me at
Court, that may be: For I remember that since the beginning of this Parliament,
Buckingham has told me, he never found such quiet and rest, as in this time of
Parliament, from Projectors and Informers,

And now I confess, that when I looked before upon the face of the Government,
I thought (as every man would have done) that the people were never so happy as
in my time: For even as at diverse times I have looked upon many of my Coppices,
riding about them, and they appeared on the outside very thick and well-grown,
unto me; but when I turned into the midst of them, I found them all bitten
within, and full of Plains, and bare spots; like an Apple or Pear, fair and
smooth without, External Government being as good as ever it was, and I am sure
as Learned Judges as ever it had, and I hope as honest Administering Justice
within it; and for Peace, both at home and abroad, I may truly say, more settled
and longer lasting then ever any before; together with as great plenty as ever.
So as it was to be thought that every man might sit in safety under his own
Vine and Fig Tree: Yet I am ashamed (and it makes my hair stand upright) to
consider,

Now, my Lords, before I go hence, since God has made me the Great Judge of
this Land under him, and that I must answer for the Justice of the same: I will
therefore according to my place, remember you of some things, though I would
not teach you; For no man's Knowledge can be so good, but their Memories will be
the better to be refreshed. And now because you are coming to give Judgment,
(all which moves from the King) that you may the better proceed, take into your
care two things, 1. To do Bonum. 2. To do it Been.

Bonum, when all is well proved whereupon ye Judge; for then ye build upon a
sure Foundation. And by Been, I understand, that ye proceed with all Formality
and Legality, wherein you have fit occasion to advise with the Judges, who are
to assist you with their Opinions in cases of that nature; and woe be to them,
if they advise you not well. So the ground being good, and the form orderly, it
will prove a course fitting this High Court of Parliament.

In Sentence ye are to observe two parts: First, To recollect that

There is yet one particular that I am to remember you of. I hear that Sir
Henry Yelverton (who is now in the Tower upon a Sentence given in the
Star Chamber against him, for deceiving my trust) is touched concerning a
Warrant Dormant which he made while he was my

And this is all I have to say unto you at this time, wishing you to proceed
justly and nobly, according to the Orders of your House; and I pray God to
bless you, and you may assure your selves of my assistance.

The Lords pronounced Sentence upon Sir Giles Mompesson, who was fled beyond
Sea.

1. THat he shall be degraded of the Order of Knighthood, Sentence given
against Sir Giles Mompesson.
with reservation of the Dignity of his Wife and Children. That he shall stand
perpetually in the degree of his person, Outlawed for Misdemeanor and Trespass.
3. That his testimony be received in no Court, nor he to be of any Inquisition
or Jury. 4. That he shall be excepted out of all General Pardons to be
hereafter granted. 5. That he shall be imprisoned during life. 6. That he shall
not approach within Twelve miles of the Court, or Prince, nor of the Kings High
Court usually held at Westminster. 7. And the Kings Majesty shall have the
profit of his Lands for life, and all his Goods and Chattels so forfeited; and
that he shall undergo Fine and Ransom, which was set at Ten thousand pounds.
8. Disabled to hold or receive any Offce under the King, or for the
Commonwealth. 9. That he shall be ever held an infamous person. 10. And his
Majesty added thereunto perpetual Banishment.
And Sir Francis Michel his Compartner in Projects.
Sir Francis Michel, a Projector, and Mompessons Compartner, was fined One
thousand pound, degraded and imprisoned in the same place in Finsbury Fields,
which he had prepared for others: For the Tower was thought too honorable for
such a person. He rode likewise from Westminster London with his face to the
Horse-tail. Likewise the King revoked his Letter Patents, Commissions, and
Proclamations concerning Inns and Alehouses, and the Manufactures of Gold and
Silver Thread.

To these Reformations the King gave encouragement by his Third Speech in
Parliament, wherein he declared much against Corruption and Bribery in
Judicatures; professing, That no person should be preferred before the public
good, and that no offender should go unpunished. In Palatine; how the sums
granted by the Act of Subsidy were taken up beforehand for the defense of the
Palatinate, and the maintenance of his Children expelled out of their Country,
and for the raising of an Army for that recovery: That he had procured a short
Truce, and did hope to obtain a general peace. But the charges of sending
Ambassadors over Christendom, or an Army into the Palatinate, in case a peace
were not

Lord Chancellor Bacon accused and convicted of Bribery.
Soon after the Lord Chancellor Bacon was proceeded against, and a Conference of
both Houses was held concerning him: Where, first, the Commons observed his
incomparable good parts, which they highly commended; secondly, They magnified
the place he held, from whence Bounty, Justice, and Mercy, were to be
distributed to the Subjects; whither

After this the Marquess of Buckingham, Lord Admiral, declared to the House of
Lords, That he had received a Letter from the Chancellor, expressing, that he
was indisposed in health, but whither he lived or died, he would be glad to
preserve his Honor and Fame as far as he was worthy, desiring to be maintained
in their good opinions without prejudice, till his cause was heard; that he
should not trick up Innocence with cavillation, but plainly and ingenuously
declare what he knew or remembered; being happy, that he had such Noble Peers,
and Reverend Prelates to discern of his Cause: That he desired no privilege of
greatness for subterfuge of guiltiness, but meaned to deal fairly and plainly
with their Lordships, and to put himself upon their Honors and Favors.



May it please your Lordships,
I Shall humbly crave at your hands a benign interpretation of that which I

This being moved (and as I hope obtained of your Lordships) as a protection to
all that I shall say, I shall go on; but with a very strange entrance, as may
seem to your Lordships at first: For in the midst of a state of as great
affliction as I think a mortal man can endure (Honor being above Life) I shall
begin with the professing of gladness in some things.



The next, That after this example, it is like that Judges will fly from any
thing in the likeness of Corruption (though it were at a great distance) as
from a Serpent; which tends to the purging of the Courts of Justice, and
reducing them to their true honor and splendour. And in these two points (God is
my witness) though it be my fortune to be the Anvile upon which these two Job.
For after the clear submission and confession which I shall now make unto your
Lordships, I hope I may say and justify with Job in these words, I have not
hid my sin as did Adam, nor concealed my faults in my This is the only
justification which I will use.

It rests therefore, That without Fig Leaves I do ingenuously confess and
acknowledge, that having understood the particulars of the Charge, not formally
from the House, but enough to inform my conscience and memory: I find matter
sufficient and full, both to move me to desert my Defense, and to move your
Lordships to condemn and censure me. Neither will I trouble your Lordships by
singling these particulars which I think might fall off. Quid te exempta juvat
spinis de pluribus uva? Neither will I prompt your Lordships to observe of the
Charge, here and there, as God shall put into your mind, and so submit my self
wholly to your Piety and Grace.

And now I have spoken to your Lordships as Judges, I shall say a few words
unto you as Peers and Prelates, humbly commending my Cause to your noble
minds, and magnanimous affections.

Your Lordships are not simply Judges, but Parliamentary Judges; you have a
further extent of Arbitrary power then other Courts; and if you be not

Titus Manlius took his Sons life for giving battle against the Prohibition of
his General: Not many years after the like severity was pursued by Papitius
Cursor, the Dictator, against Quintus Maximus; who being upon Livie makes this
grave and gracious observation, Neque minus firmata est Disciplinae Militaris
periculo Quinti Maximi, quam miserabili supplicio Titi Manlii. The Discipline
of War was no less established by the questioning of Quintus Maximus, then by
the punishment of Titus Manlius; and the same reason is in the Reformation of
Justice. For the questioning of men in eminent places, has the same terror,
though not the same rigor with the punishment. But my Cause stays not there;

Therefore if Mercy and Mitigation be in your Lordships power, and no way cross
your ends, Why should I not hope of your favor and commiseration? Your
Lordships will be pleased to behold your chief pattern, the King our Sovereign,
a King of incomparable Clemency, and whose heart is instructable for Wisdom and
Goodness; And your Lordships will remember there sat not these Hundred years
before, a Prince in your House, and never such a Prince, whose presence

Neither will your Lordships forget, that there are Vitia temporis, as well as
Vitia hominis; and the beginning of Reformation has the contrary power
Bethesda; for that had strength to cure him only that was first cast in, and
this has strength to hurt him only that is first cast in; and for my part I
wish it may stay there, and go no further.

Lastly, I assure my self, your Lordships have a noble feeling of me, as a
member of your own Body, and one that in this very Session had some taste of
your loving affections, which I hope was not a lightning before the death of
them, but rather a spark of that grace which now in the conclusion will more
appear: And therefore my humble suit to your Lordships, is, That my penitent

The Parliament not satisfied with this general Acknowledgment, do require the
Chancellor either to confess the particulars of the Charge, or they would
descend to proof against him. Hereupon he came to an express and plain
Acknowledgment, even to confess his Servants receipt of a dozen of Buttons, as
a gift in a Cause depending before him; and put himself upon their Lordships
Mercy. And he further said, That he was never noted for an avaritious man; and
the Apostle says, Coveteousness is the root of all evil; and hoped their
Lordships did find him The Lords afterward pronounced him guilty of the
Charge exhibited against him, and in the presence of the Commons gave Sentence,
That he should undergo Fine and Ransom, and be made incapable to bear office,
etc.



About the same time Sir Henry Yelverton was accused by the Commons; Sir Henry
accused by the Commons.
who by charging him, rendered him the less offender; and he thereby had the
opportunity to speak that at the Bar, which he durst not say in the Tower,
where he was yet a prisoner upon a late Sentence in the Star Chamber, for
passing some Clauses in the City Charter, when he was Quo Warranto's were
granted by him touching the Patents of Inns, and Exchequer, touching the Gold
and Silver Thread, but did not prosecute the same.

Which Charge being read unto him, he said, He thought himself happy in the
midst of His Majesty's disfavor, that His Majesty was pleased to cast the Grace
upon him, as to send him to this Honorable House; That Innocence has her
present Answer, but Wisdom requires time. Therefore he made it his humble suit,
for time to give his further Answer;

The King being informed of this passage in his Speech, came in person to the
House of Peers, took notice thereof, saying, It seemed strange unto him, that
Sir Henry Yelverton should be questioned here upon any thing, save the Patent
of Gold and Silver Thread: For His Majesty did not conceive that any matter was
complained of against him touching the Inns and Osteries, whereof he was also
examined: Touching which Patent Mompesson had made complaint to His Majesty,
that Yelverton refused to send any Process of Quo Warranto against a multitude
of Yelvertons modest Answer, That he misliked those proceedings against his
Subjects. His Majesty to clear himself, did lay open the many former just
mislikes which he had against Sir Henry, and his gentle proceedings against him
for the same. And when His Majesty intended to question him, Buckingham, Lord
Admiral, besought him not to think of any private wrongs done to his Lordship;
His Majesty added, That in the Examination of the business touching the Charter
of London, Yelverton had first justified himself by His Majesty's London from
him; yet at length he made a good Submission in the beginning, but in the end
he said he had not wronged His Majesty in his Prerogative. And since that now
Yelverton does tax His Majesty, that he suffered for his good service done His
Majesty, requires the Lords who are able to do him Justice, to punish Yelverton
for his slander.

Sir Henry Yelverton coming shortly after before the Lords, gave his particular
Answer to each particular charge in serie temporis, and spoke

I Cannot but present my self this day before Your Highness, and my Lords, with
much fear, with more grief; for I am compassed with so many terrors from His
Majesty, as I might well hide my head with Adam. His Lordships (meaning
Buckingham) displeasure wounds me more, then the conscience of any these facts;
yet had I rather die, then the Commonwealth should so much as receive a scrach
from me. I viz. Sir Edward Villers and Sir Giles Mompesson) did depend, much
less would I fear them who were but his shadow. But my most Noble Lords knowing
that my Lord of Buckingham was ever at His Majesty's hand, ready upon every
occasion to hew me down, out of the honest fear of a Servant not to offend so
gracious a Master as His Majesty has ever been to me, I did commit them (
videlicet) the Silkmen.

And speaking concerning the Patent of Inns, he said, I cannot

When Sir Giles saw I would not be wooed to offend His Majesty in his
direction, I received a Message by Mr. Emmerson, sent me from Sir Giles, That I
would run my self upon the Rocks, and that I should not Giles himself, and like
an Herald at Arms, told me to this effect, He had a Message to tell me from
the Lord of Buckingham, that I should not hold my place a month, if I did not
conform my self in better measure to the Patent of Inns; for my Lord had
obtained it by his Favor, and would maintain it by his Power: How could I but
startle at this Message, for I saw here was a great assuming of power to
himself, to place, and displace an Officer; I saw my self cast upon two main
Rocks, either treacherously to forsake the standing His Majesty had set me in,
or else to endanger my self by a by blow, and so hazard my Fortune.

I humbly beseech your Lordships: Nature will struggle when she Giles spoke
true. Yet I resolved in this to be as stubborn as Mordecai, not to stoop or
pass those gracious Bounds His Majesty had prescribed me.

Soon after I found the Message in part made good; for all the profits almost
of my place were diverted from me, and turned into an unusual Channel, to one
of my Lords Worthies, That I retained little

Howbeit, I dare say if my Lord of Buchingham had but read the Articles
exhibited in this place against Hugh Spencer, and had known the danger of
placing (...) displacing Officers about a King, he would not have pursued me
with such bitterness. But my opposing my Lord in this Patent of Inns, in the
Patent of Alehouses, in the Irish Robert Nantons Deputation of his place in
the Court of Wards: These have bin my overthrow, and for these I suffer at this
day in my Estate and Fortune (not meaning to say, I take it, but as I know) and
for my humble oppositions to his Lordship) above Twenty thousand pounds.

The King hearing of this Speech, commanded the Lord Treasurer to acquaint the
House of Lords, That he understood that Yelverton being Buckingham; saying, He
suffered for the Patent of Inns, or to that effect: That he was so far from
excusing or extenuating of his Offense the last day here, that he has
aggravated the same. Wherefore His Majesty's pleasure is, That himself will be
judge of what concerns His Majesty; for that which concerns the Lord of
Buckingham, his Lordship has besought His Majesty that that might be left to
the House, and

The Lords made an humble Return to His Majesty, That forasmuch as he was once
pleased to make their House Judge of those words formerly spoken by Sir Henry
Yelverton, which touched His Majesty's Honor, that His Majesty will be pleased
not to resume the same out of their hands, but so far to tender the Privileges
of their House, as to continue his first resolution, which afterward the King
condescended unto.

The Lords first examining Emerson (who varied in the matter he Henry
Yelverton, not upon the Charge exhibited against him by the Commons, but for
the words spoken by the by; and declared, That the said Sir Henry Yelverton for
his Speeches uttered here in the Court, which do touch the Kings Majesty his
Honor, shall be fined to the King in Ten thousand Marks, be imprisoned during
the Kings pleasure, and make a Submission unto His Majesty. And for the scandal
committed in these words of his against the Lord Marquess of Buckingham, That
he should pay him Five thousand Marks, and make his Submission.

As soon as the Judgment was pronounced against him, the Lord Marquess of
Buckingham stood up, and did freely remit him the said* Five thousand marks;
for which Sir Henry humbly thanked his Lordship, and the House of Peers agreed
to move His Majesty to mitigate Sir Henry Fine, and the Prince his Highness
offered to move His Majesty therein; which accordingly was done, and Sir Henry
was set at liberty, the Duke reconciled to him; he afterward preferred to be a
Judge, and was esteemed a man Valde eruditus in Lege.

Gondomar reviled and assaulted in London streets.
But the Treaties with the Emperor and the King of Spain were much disrelished;
Gondomar had raised the peoples fury, and was reviled and assaulted in London
streets: Whereupon the day following the Privy Council commanded the Recorder
of London to be careful in the strict Devil or words to that purpose, it was
His Majesty's pleasure that that fellow without any further delay, on the
morrow in the forenoon, be publicly and sharply whipped through London, beginning
at Algate, and so through the streets, along by the

The people were enraged at Gondomar, through a persuasion that he abused the
King and State to advance the designs of Spain.

By means of his power with the King, he had transported Ordinance and other
warlike Provisions to furnish the Spanish Arsenals; and it was believed that he
underhand wrought the sending of Sir Rob. Mansel into the Mediterranean Sea,
Sir Rob. Mansel sent into the Mediterranean Sea.
to fall upon the Pirates of Algier. The Merchants of this Spain left at
liberty to assist in subduing the Palatinate.

In the mean while our Kings Affairs in Germany, notwithstanding the

The Emperor calls in question the Authors of the Commotions in Bohemia.
In Bohemia the Emperor having well nigh subdued and settled the Country,
proceeded to the Trial and Execution of the Authors of the late Commotions;
some were condemned to perpetual imprisonment, and others to death; and the
Heads of many eminent persons were fixed on the Towers in Prague, and their
bodies quartered. After this the Emperor began both in Austria and Hungaria to
imprison diverse that assisted the Bohemians, and caused Process to be made
against them. The Marquess Iagerndorfe who stirred in the County of Glatsburgh,
and raised forces by Commission from the Elector Palatine, published Letters
against the Executions in Bohemia, as cruel and barbarous.

The Emperor put forth an Answer, and said, That the Marquess published those
things maliciously; forasmuch as in Bohemia was the Original sedition, and the
head that infected the members: That some few persons, Authors of the troubles,
not in hatred of their Religion, but for their Rebellion, have been punished by
the hand of Justice. And he declared further, That the like exemplary Justice
should not be done in other places, but that the Articles of the Peace should
be observed.

By this time the Parliament having sat about four months, The King intends
to adjourn the Parliament.
King James was desirous to give them a time of vacancie. The Lord Treasurer

The Commons were troubled at this Message, The Commons take it not well.
and desired a Conference with the Lords, and moved them to petition the King
to forbear the Adjournment. The King takes notice of it; and the Treasurer
acquainted the Lords, that a Petition of this nature could not be pleasing to
his Majesty, it seeming to derogate from his Prerogative, who alone has power
to call, adjourn, and determine Parliaments. The Commons, at a further
Conference, declared their hearty sorrow and passionate grief

The Lords sitting in their Robes, the King came and made a Speech, takes
notice of his Message to both Houses, and gave their Lordships thanks for
obeying the same, and acknowledging his power to call, adjourn, and dissolve
Parliaments, and for refusing to join with the Commons in the Petition for
Non-adjournment. And whereas some had given out, that no good had been done
this Parliament; He put them

The King resents it.
he told them how ill he took it, that the Commons should dispute his reasons
of Adjournment; all power being in him alone to call, adjourn, prorogue, and
dissolve Parliaments. And on June 4. he declared for an Adjournment till
November following; And that he will in the mean time of his own authority
redress Grievances. And his Majesty as General Bishop of the Land, did offer
his prayers to God for both the Houses; and admonished them, That when they go
into the Country, they give his

The House of Commons immediately before their recess, taking to heart the
miseries of the Palatinate, resolved that the drawing back in so good a Cause
should not be charged on their slackness; And thereupon drew up this following
Declaration with an universal consent.

The Commons Declaration touching the Palatinate.
THe Commons assembled in Parliament taking into most serious consideration the
present state of the Kings Children abroad, and the generally afflicted estate
of the true Professors of the same Christian Religion professed by the Church
of England, in Foreign parts; And being touched with a true sense and fellow
feeling of their distresses, as Members of the same Body, do with unanimous
consent in the name of themselves, and the whole body of the Kingdom (whom they
represent)

The King by Proclamation reforms the late grievances handled in Parliament.
After the recess of Parliament, the King by Proclamation declared

Puts forth another Proclamation against Talking of State Affairs.
Moreover, a second Proclamation was issued forth against Excess of Licentious
speech touching State Affairs: For notwithstanding the strictness of the Kings
former Command, the Peoples inordinate liberty of unreverend speech increased
daily. Wherefore the King threatened severity as well against the Concealers of
such Discourses, as against the boldness of Audacious Tongues and Pens.

On the Tenth of July, John Williams Doctor of Divinity, and Dean of
Westminster, The King is solicited from Spain to enlarge his favors toward
Catholics.
was sworn Keeper of the Great Seal of England.

The King was plied from Spain and Rome, to enlarge his favors to Popish
Recufants: For, reports were then brought to Rome, That the Catholics of
England, Scotland, and Ireland were cruelly used. And besides this there went a
rumor, that King James in a Speech in Parliament had declared, That
notwithstanding the Marriage with Spain, the English Catholics should not be
one jot in better condition. But the King said no more then this, That if any
of that party did grow insolent, let his People count him unworthy to reign, if
he gave not extraordinary punishment. Thus was the King entangled in the ways
which he had chosen: For it was not possible for him at once to please his
People, and

About the same time the Lord Digby, The chief heads of the Lord Digby's
Embassy to the Emperor.
who was sent Ambassador to the Emperor, had Audience at Vienna. The principal
heads of his Embassy were these. That the Elector Palatine, and the Children
of the King of Great Britain his Master, might be received into the Emperors
favor, and restored to all their Hereditary Goods, and the Prince Elector
himself to the Title which he enjoyed before the troubles of Bohemia: That the
Ban Imperial published against him should be revoked, and the execution thereof
suspended; Great Britain will undertake that the Palatine shall render due
obedience to his Imperial Majesty, and submit to Conditions meet and honest.

To these Demands he received Answer, The Emperors Reply to those Demands.
That the Emperor had a very good will to gratify the King of Great Britain,
and those other Kings and Princes that had made the same request for the
Palatine: But he could not grant it, because the Palatine to this hour uses
the Counsels of many of the Electors and Princes, in opposition to the Emperor;
Great Britain, and had ordered the suspending of all Hostility in the Lower
Palatinate, at the same time the Palatine gave Commission to raise Forces and
do acts of Hostility, which was put in execution by Count Mansfeld and Marquis
Iagerndorf, to begin new troubles in Bohemia, Silesia, and Moravia.
Nevertheless the Emperor having appointed an Assembly to meet at Ratisbone,
will there make known the desires of the King of Great Britain, who shall know
what Palatine.

Albert Archduke of Flanders, at the request of King James, had made
intercession for the Palsgrave. After his decease, the Archduchess his wife
continued the same mediation by Letters to the Emperor. And withal, the Kings
Ambassador further proposed these Conditions for a Cessation of Arms, The L.
Digby's second Proposal to the Emperor.
and a Suspension of the Ban Imperial; That Mansfeld and Iagerndorf shall
observe the Agreement, otherwise the Prince Palatine shall revoke their
Commissions, and declare them his Enemies, Bohemia shall be rendered to the
Emperor.

The Emperor answered the Archduchess, The Emperors Answer.
That the Archduke her husband in his lifetime had exceedingly recommended the
Interposition of the King of Great Britain, and the great prudence of that King
in not approving the Actions of the Palatine: Which Recommendation, as to a
Treaty and Cessation of Arms, he shall entertain, and consult thereupon with
the Deputies of the Electors and Princes of the Empire.

The English Ambassador departed from Vienna to the Duke of Bavaria, The
English Ambassador goes to the Duke of Bavaria.
Upper Palatinate, and had published the Emperors Declaration against Mansfeld
and his Adherents, and exhorted the States and Princes there to execute the
same; and the rather, for that he had not heard of any King, Elector, Prince or
State, no not so much as the King of Great Britain, that had approved the
seditious Revolt of the Bohemians, except some few States and Princes who for
interest did countenance the same. The Ambassador found the Bavarian acting
hostility and committing great spoils in the Country, and resolving to reject
all Propositions of Peace or Cessation. Nor could the Emperor agree upon any
Truce without the Duke of Bavaria: First in respect of his agreement neither to
make War or Peace without the consent of the said Duke; which happened, because
upon the former Truce made with the Archduke, the Soldiers that were in the
Lower Palatinate, and wanted employment, came up into the Higher Palatinate to
Count Mansfeld, and Bavaria. Secondly, in regard the Duke of Bavaria had a
great part of Austria in pledge for his satisfaction. Thirdly, because the
Emperor was barred from all other passages but through Bavaria, by Bethlem
Gabor, Jagerndorf, and Budiani. And the Duke, upon receipt of the Emperors
Letter touching the Truce, sent the Lord Digby a deriding Answer; That there
was no need to labor for a Truce, for the Wars were at an end, in that he
agreed with Count Mansfeld; nor did he doubt of keeping both Palatinates in
peace, till the Emperor and Palsgrave were agreed. Digby's Embassy to the
Emperor for the restoring of the Elector Palatine. But the Emperors full
meaning in the business may be found at large in his own Letter to Don Baltazar
de Zuniga, a prime Councellor of State in Spain, to be by him represented to
the King his Master, to this effect.

The Emperors Letter to Don Baltazar de Zuniga.
THat beholding the admirable providence of God over him, he is bound to use
that most notable Victory to the honor of God, and the extirpation of
Calvinists; lest that Judgment which the Prophet threatened the King of Israel
should fall upon him; Because thou have dismissed a man worthy of death, thy
soul shall be for his soul. The Palatine keeps now in Holland, not only exiled
from the Kingdom which he rashly attempted, but despoiled almost of all his own
Territories, expecting as it were the last cast of Fortune: whom if by an
impious kind of commiseration, and his subtle petitioning, he shall be
persuaded to restore, and nourish in his bosom as a trodden half-living snake,
what can Austria, and all other Catholic Princes.

Wherefore firmly casting in his mind, that the Palatine cannot be restored,
He has freely offered the Electorate to the Duke of Bavaria, a most eager
Defender of the Catholic cause; by which means the Empire will always remain
in the hand of Catholics, and so by consequence in the House of Austria:
Palatine, and those that solicit so importunately for his restitution; And it
is to be hoped that the Lutheran Princes, especially the Duke of Saxony, will
not so far disallow this translation as to take up Arms, seeing Charles the
Fifth upon a far lighter cause deprived John Frederick Duke of Saxony of the
Electorate, and conferred it on Maurice this Dukes great Uncle: Besides, no
less is the Lutherans hatred of the Calvinists, then of the Catholics.


Such were the effects which the Kings Treating had wrought with

The Parliament that was to meet November the Fourteenth, the King by
Proclamation adjourned to the Eighth of February, and expressed the cause to be
the unseasonableness of the time of the year. But this long Recess was
shortened, and the King declared, That upon Important Reasons he had altered his
former Resolutions, and did adjourn it for no longer time then from the
Fourteenth to the Twentieth of this instant November.

Upon which day it Reassembled, The Parliament begins again, Nov. 20.
and the King being absent by reason of his indisposition in health, commanded
a Message to be delivered to both Houses, by the Lord Keeper, the Lord Digby,
and the Lord

In the first place he acquainted the Two Houses with His Majesty's
indisposition of health, The Substance of the Lord Keepers Speech.
which was the occasion of his absence at the opening of the Parliament, yet he
could not say he was absent, so long as he was represented by a Son, who was as
dear to the Kingdom as to His Majesty. As to the occasion of calling the
Parliament by way of Antecedent, he took notice of several effects of His
Majesty's gracious Recess of the Parliament in His Majesty's answering several
Petitions concerning Trade, Importation of Bullion, Conservation of Coin in the
Land, and prohibiting the Transportation of Iron Ordinance; and that His
Majesty by His Proclamation reformed Thirty six or thirty seven several matters
complained of as Public Grievances, all of them without the least Trucking or
Merchandising with the People, a thing usual in former times. He further said,
That His Majesty did principally fix the occasion of Palatinate; yet withal his
Lordship gave an account how His Majesty was since the last Parliament,
encouraged to travel a little longer in his pious endeavors to procure a peace
by way of Treaty, and that the Lord Digby was sent Ambassador upon that
occasion, and since returned, but not with such success as was to be hoped for.
He minded both Houses of one Heroical Palatinate, which otherwise had been
dissolved before this Parliament could be assembled: And that unless the
Parliament take further resolution, and imitate rather Ancient then Modern
principles, and be expeditious in what they do, the Army in the Palatinate will
fall to the ground. And lastly, Told them that His Majesty did resolve that
this Parliament should continue till seven or eight days before Februa^^ to
continue for the Enacting of Laws and Perioding of things of Reformation, as
long as the necessity of the State shall require the same.

After the Lord Keeper had done, Lord Digby's Speech.
the Lord Digby (having received a Command from His Majesty to that purpose)
gave a brief account of his Negotiation with the Archduke about the Treaty of
Peace; how the Archduke consented thereunto, and writ accordingly to the
Emperor and the King of Spain of his proceedings; who also writ to Spinola for
a Germany; but the Duke of Bavaria would not consent thereunto; and the Lord
Digby informed the two Houses, that by the carriage of the Duke of Bavaria, and
by other circumstances, he did evidently discover, That from the beginning that
Duke affected to get unto himself the Palatinate, and the Title of Elector. He
further declared, That if Count Mansfield was not speedily supplied, he could
not keep his Army together. Then he gave an account, how bravely Sir Horatio
Vere had behaved himself in the Palatinate, and that by his wisdom and valor,
there was kept from the enemy, Heidelburg, Mainheim, and Frankendale; the last
of which places had then endured a months siege. He also spoke Honorably of
Capt. Buroughs, and concluded, That the fittest Redress was to furnish and
keep up the Army already there; which must be done by supplies of Money, and
more Forces must be prepared against the next Palatinate, and encouragement of
the Princes of the Union.

Lord Treasurer's Speech.
Then the Lord Treasurer spoke, and acquainted both Houses; how empty the Kings
Coffers were, and how he had assisted the Palatine, and Princes of the Union,
with great sums which had exhausted his Treasure, and that His Majesty was much
in debt.

Nevertheless, though the King declared for War, he pursued Peace, and resolved
to close with Spain, hoping to heal the Breach by that Alliance. Petition and
Remonstrance, which laid open the distempers of those times, with their causes
and cures.

Most Gracious and Dread Sovereign,
The Commons Petition and Remonstrance to the King.
WE Your Majesty's most Humble and Loyal Subjects, the

I. The Uigilancy and Ambition of the Pope of Rome, and his dearest Son, the
one aiming at as large a Temporal Monarchy, as the other at a Spiritual
Supremacy.

II. The Devilish Positions and Doctrines, whereon Popery is built and taught
with Authority to their Followers, for advancement of their Temporal ends.

III. The distressed and miserable estate of the Professors of true Religion in
Foreign parts.

IV. The Disasterous accidents to Your Majesty's Children abroad, expressed
with rejoicing, and even with contempt of their persons.

V. The strange Confederacy of the Princes of the Popish Religion, aiming
mainly at the advancement of theirs, and subverting of ours, and taking the
advantages conducing to that end upon all occasions.

VI. The great and many (...) raised, and maintained at the charge of the King
of Spain, the (...) of that League.

VII. The expectation of the Popish Recusants of the Match with Spain, and
feeding themselves with great hopes of the consequences thereof.

VIII. The interposing of Foreign Princes and their Agents, in the behalf of
Popish Recusants, for connivance and favor unto them.

IX. Their open and usual resort to the Houses; and which is worse, to the
Chapels of Foreign Ambassadors.

X. Their more then usual concourse to the City, and their frequent

XI. The education of their Children in many several Seminaries and Houses of
their Religion in Foreign parts, appropriated to the English Fugitives.

XII. The Grants of their just Forfeitures intended by Your Majesty as a Reward
of Service to the Grantees; but beyond Your Majesty's intention, transferred or
compounded for, at such mean rates, as will amount to little less then a
Toleration.

XIII. The Licentious Printing and dispersing of Popish and Seditious Books,
even in the time of Parliament.

XIV. The swarms of Priests and Jesuits, the Common Incendiaries of all
Christendom, dispersed in all parts of your Kingdom.

And from these causes as bitter Roots, we humbly offer to Your Majesty, That
we foresee and fear there will necessarily follow very dangerous effects, both
to Church and State. For,

I. The Popish Religion is incompatible with ours, in respect of their
Positions.

II. It draws with it an unavoidable dependency on Foreign Princes.

III. It opens too wide a gap for Popularity, to any who shall draw too great
a party.

IV. It has a restless spirit, and will strive by these Gradations; if it once
get but a connivancy, it will press for a Toleration; if that

The Remedies against these growing Evils, which in all Humility we offer unto
Your most Excellent Majesty, are these.

I. That seeing this inevitable necessity is fallen upon Your Majesty, which no
Wisdom or Providence of a peaceable and pious King can (...), Your Majesty
would not omit this just occasion, speedily and

II. That once undertaken upon so honorable and just grounds, Your Majesty
would resolve to pursue, and more publicly avow the aiding of those of our
Religion in Foreign parts, which doubtless would reunite the Princes and States
of the Union, by these disasters disheartened and disbanded.

III. That Your Majesty would propose to Your Self to manage this War with the
best advantage, by a diversion or otherwise, as in Your deep judgment shall be
found fittest, and not to rest upon a War in these parts only, which will
consume Your Treasure, and discourage Your People.

IV. That the bent of this (...) and point of Your S^^^d, may be against that
Prince (whatsoever opinion of potency he has) whose Armies and Treasures have
first diverted, and since maintained the Palatinate.

V. That for securing of our Peace at home, Your, Majesty will be pleased to
review the parts of our Petition formerly delivered unto Your Majesty, and
hereunto annexed, and to put in execution by the care of choice Commissioners
to be thereunto especially appointed, the Laws already, and hereafter to be
made for preventing of dangers by Popish Recusants, and their wonted evasions.

VI. That to frustrate their hopes for a future age, our most Noble

VII. That the Children of the Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom, and of
others ill-affected and suspected in their Religion, now beyond the Seas, may
be forthwith called home by your means, and at the charge of their Parents or
Governors.

VIII. That the Children of Popish Recusants, or such whose Wives are Popish
Recusants, be brought up during their Minority

IX. That Your Majesty will be pleased speedily to revoke all former Licenses
for such Children and Youth to travel beyond the Seas, and not grant any such
License hereafter.

X. That Your Majesty's Learned Council may receive Commandment from Your
Highness, carefully to look into former Grants of Recusants Lands, and to avoid
them, if by Law they can; and

This is the sum and effect of our humble Declaration, which we (no ways
intending to press upon Your Majesty's undoubted and Regal Prerogative) do with
the fullness of our Duty and Obedience, humbly submit to Your most Princely
consideration: The glory of God whose cause it is; the zeal of our true
Religion, in which we have been born, and wherein (by Gods grace) we are
resolved to die; the safety of Your

And seeing out of our duty to Your Majesty we have already resolved to give at
the end of this Session, one entire Subsidy, for the present relief of the
Palatinate only, to be paid in the end of February next, which cannot well be
effected but by passing a Bill in a Parl^^mentary Christmas; We most humbly
beseech Your Majesty (as our assured hope is) that You will then also vouchsafe
to give life by Your Royal Assent to such Bills as before that time shall be
prepared for Your Majesty's honor, and the general good of Your people: And
that such Bills may be also accompanied (as has been accustomed) with Your
Majesty's Gracious Pardon, (which proceeding from Your own mere Grace, may by
Your Highness direction be drawn to that Latitude, and Extent, as may best sort
with Your Majesty's bounty and goodness. And that not only Felons and Criminal
Offenders may take benefit thereof, but that Your good Subjects may receive
ease thereby. And if it shall so stand with Your good Oustre le Maine before
the first Summons of this Parliament, and of concealed Wardships, and not suing
of Liveries, and Oustre le Maines before the Twelfth year of Your Majesty's
Reign. Which gracious Favor would much comfort Your good Subjects, and ease
them from vexation, with little loss or prejudice to Your own profit.



The House had sufficient cause to set forth the danger of true Religion, and
the Miseries of the Professors thereof in Foreign parts; Germany, and the
cruelties of the prevailing House of Austria, At this time the Protestants are
ill treated in France.
the Protestants in France were almost ruined by Lewis the Thirteenth, being
besieged at once in several places, as in Montauban by the King, and in Rochel
by Count Soysons, and the Duke of Guise: And for their relief, the King of
England prevailed nothing by sending of Sir Edward Herbert, since Baron of
Cherbury, and after him the Viscount Doncaster, Ambassador for Mediation.

The King having Intelligence of the former Remonstrance, wrote his Letter to
the Speaker.

To Our Trusty and Welbeloved Sir Thomas Richardson Knight, Speaker of the
House of COMMONS.
Mr: Speaker,
WE have heard by diverse Reports, The Kings Letter to Sir Tho. Richardson.
to our great grief, That our distance from the Houses of Parliament, caused by
our indisposition of health, has imboldned the fiery and popular Spirits of
some of the House of Commons, to argue and debate publicly of the matters far
above their reach and capacity, tending to our high dishonor, and breach of
Prerogative Royal. These are therefore to command you to make known in our Name
unto the House, Spain, nor to touch the honor of that King, or any other our
Friends and Confederates: And also not to meddle with any man's particulars,
which have their due motion in our ordinary Courts of Justice. And whereas we
hear they have sent a Message to Sir Edwin Sandis, to know the reasons of his
late restraint, you shall in our Name resolve them, That it was not for any
misdemeanor of his in Parliament; but to put them out of doubt of any question
of that nature that may arise among them hereafter, you shall resolve them in
our Name, That we think our self very free and able to punish any man's
misdemeanors in Parliament, as well during their sitting as after: Which we
mean not to spare hereafter, upon any occasion of any man's insolent behavior
there that shall be ministered unto us: And if they have already touched any of
these points, which we have forbidden, in any Petition of theirs which is to be
sent unto us, it is our pleasure that you shall tell them, That except

Dated at New Market, 3 Dec. 1621.

Hereupon they drew up another Petition, which they sent accompanied with the
former Remonstrance.

Most Dread and Gracious Sovereign,
The Commons send the Remonstrance accompanied with another Petition.
WE your most humble and loyal Subjects, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses,
Assembled in the Commons House of Parliament, full of grief, and unspeakable
sorrow, through the true sense of your Majesty's displeasure, expressed by your
Letter lately sent to our Speaker, and by him related and read unto us: Yet
Declaration and Petition (resolved upon by the Universal voice of the House,
and proposed with your gracious Favor to be presented unto your Sacred Majesty)
does contain. Upon what occasion we entered into consideration of those things
which are therein contained, with what dutiful respect to your Majesty, and
your service, we did consider thereof, and what was our true intention thereby.
And that when your Majesty shall thereby truly discern our dutiful affections,
you will in your

And we humbly beseech your Majesty, that you will not hereafter give credit to
private Reports, against all or any of the Members of our House, whom the whole
have not censured, until your Majesty have been truly informed thereof from our
selves: And that in the mean time, and ever, we may stand upright in your
Majesty's grace and good opinion, than which, no worldly consideration is, or
can be dearer unto us.

When your Majesty had Reassembled us in Parliament by your Royal Commandment,
sooner then we expected, and did vouchsafe by the mouths of three honorable
Lords, to impart unto us the weighty occasions moving your Majesty thereunto;
and from them we did understand these particulars.

That notwithstanding your Princely and pious endeavors to procure peace, the
time is now come that Janus Temple must be opened.

That the voice of Bellona must be heard, and not the voice of the Turtle.

That there was no hope of peace, nor any truce to be obtained, no not for a
few days.

That your Majesty must either abandon your own Children, or engage

That the Lower Palatinate was seized upon by the Army of the King of Spain, as
Executor of the Ban there in quality of Duke of Burgundy, as the Upper
Palatinate was by the Duke of Bavaria.

That the King of Spain at his own charge, had now at least five Armies on foot.

That the Princes of the Union were disbanded, but the Catholic

That the estate of those of the Religion in Foreign parts was miserable; and,
that out of these considerations we were called to a War, and forthwith to
advise for a supply for keeping the forces in the Palatinate from disbanding,
and to foresee the means for raising and maintaining the Body of an Army for
the War against the Spring. We therefore out of our zeal to your Majesty and
your Posterity, with more alacrity Spain, as they have relation to Popish
Recusants at home, to the Wars by him maintained in the Palatinate against your
Majesty's Children, and to his several Armies now on foot, yet as we conceived
without touch of dishonor to that King, or any other Prince your Majesty's
Confederate.

In the Discourse whereof, we did not assume to our selves any power to
determine of any part thereof, nor intend to incroach or intrude Royal
Posterity, and of the flourishing estate of our Church and Commonwealth) did
resolve out of our Cares and Fears, truly and plainly to demonstrate these
things to your Majesty, which we were not assured could otherwise come so fully
and clearly to your knowledge; and that being done, to lay the same down at
your Majesty's feet, without expectation of any other Answer of your Majesty
touching these higher points, then what at your good pleasure, and in your own
time should be held fit.

This being the effect of that we had formerly resolved upon, and these the
Occasions and Reasons inducing the same, Our humble suit to your Majesty and
confidence is, That your Majesty will be graciously pleased to receive at the
hands of these our Messengers, our former humble Declaration and Petition, and
vouchsafe to read and favorably to interpret the same; and that to so much
thereof as contains our humble Petition concerning Jesuits, Priests, and
Popish Recusants, the Passage of Bills, and Granting your Royal Pardon, you
will vouchsafe

And whereas your Majesty by the general words of your Letter, seems to
restrain us from intermedling with Matters of Government, or Particulars which
have their motion in the Courts of Justice, the generality of which words in
the largeness of the extent thereof, (as we hope beyond your Majesty's
intention) might involve those things which are the proper Subjects of
Parliamentary occasions and discourse.

And whereas your Majesty does seem to abridge us of the Ancient Liberty of
Parliament for Freedom of Speech, Jurisdiction, and Just Censure of the House,
and other proceedings there (wherein we trust in God we shall never transgress
the bounds of Loyal and Dutiful Subjects) a Liberty which we assure our selves,
so Wise and so Just a King will not infringe, the same being our ancient and
undoubted Right, and an Inheritance received from our Ancestors; without which
we cannot freely debate, nor clearly discern of things in question Speaker has
wrought upon us.

So shall we your loyal and loving Subjects ever acknowledge your Majesty's
Justice, Grace, and Goodness, and be ready to perform that

The King having rejected the first Petition, gave to the later this Answer
following.

The Kings Answer to the later Petition.
WE must here begin in the same fashion that we would have done, if the first
Petition had come to our hands before we had made a stay thereof, which is to
repeat the first words of the late Queen of famous memory, used by her, in
answer to an Insolent Proposition made by a Polonian Ambassador unto her; that
is, Legatum expectabamus, Heraldum accipimus. For we had great reason to expect
that the first Message from your House should have been a Message of
Thanksgiving for our continued gracious behavior toward our people, since your
last Recess; not only by our Proclamation of Grace, wherein were contained Six
or seven and thirty Articles, all of several points of Grace to the people; but
also by the Canterbury, and likewise for the good Government of Ireland, we are
now in hand with, at your request; but not only have we heard no news of all
this, but contrary, great complaints of the danger of Religion within this
Kingdom, tacitly implying our ill Government in this point. And we leave you
to judge, whether it be your duties that are the Representative Body of our
people,

Now whereas in the very beginning of this your Apology you tax us in fair
terms of trusting uncertain Reports, and partial Informations concerning your
proceedings, we wish you to remember that we are an old and experienced King,
needing no such Lessons, being in our Conscience Protestatio contraria facto;
for in the Body of your Petition, you usurp Spain, urging us to a present War
with that King; and yet in the conclusion, forsooth, ye protest ye intend not
to press upon

And whereas ye pretend, That ye were invited to this course by the Speeches of
Three honorable Lords; yet by so much as your selves repeat of the Speeches,
nothing can be concluded, but that we were resolved by War to regain the
Palatinate, if otherwise we could not attain unto it. And you were invited to
advise forthwith upon a Supply for keeping the forces in the Palatinate from
disbanding, and to foresee the means for the raising, and maintenance of the
Body of an Army for that War against the Spring. Now what inference can be made
upon this, that therefore we must presently denounce War against the King of
Spain, break our dearest Sons match, and match him to one of our Religion, let
the World judge: The difference is no Scotland bring all kind of causes within
the compass of their jurisdiction, saying, That it was the Churches office to
judge of slander; and there could no kind of crime or fault be committed, but
there was a slander in it, either against God, the King, or their Neighbor, and
by this means they hooked into themselves the cognizance of all causes: Or like
Bellarmines distinction of the Popes power over Kings, in Ordine ad
Spiritualia, whereby he gives them all Temporal Jurisdiction over them.

But to give you a direct Answer to the matter of War, for which you are so
earnest. We confess we rather expected you should have given us thanks for the
so long maintaining a settled Peace in all our Dominions, when as all our
Neighbors about are in miserable combustion of War; but dulce bellum
inexpertis. And we indeed find by experience, that a number of our Subjects
are so pampered with Peace, as they are desirous of change, though they knew
not what.

It is true, that we have ever professed (and in that mind with Gods Spain,
and the Arch-Dutches, and her Husband now with God, we Palatinate one whole
year from any further conquering in it, which in eight days space, in that time
might have easily been swallowed up by Spinola's Army without any resistance.
And in no better case was it now at our Ambassador the Lord Digbies coming
through Heidelburgh, if he had not extraordinarily succored it.

But because we conceive that ye couple this War of the Palatinate with the
Cause of Religion, we must a little unfold your eyes herein.

The beginning of this miserable War, which has set all Christendom on fire,
was not for Religion, but only caused by our Son-in-law his hasty and harsh
resolution, following evil Counsel, to take to himself the Crown of Bohemia.

Venice, that his accepting of the Crown of Bohemia had no reference to the
Cause of Religion, but only by reason of his right of Election (as he called
it.) And we would be sorry that that aspersion should come upon our Religion,
as to make it a good pretext for dethroning of Kings, and usurping their
Crowns; And we would be loath that our people here should be taught

And upon the other part, We assure our self so far of your charitable thoughts
of us, that we would never have constantly denied our Son in law both the Title
and assistance in that point, if we had been well persuaded of the justice of
his quarrel. But to conclude; This unjust usurpation of the Crowns of Bohemia
and Hungaria

And whereas you excuse your touching upon the King of Spain, upon occasion of
the incidents by you repeated in that place, and yet affirm that it is without
any touch to his honor; We cannot wonder enough that ye are so forgetful both
of your words and writs:

And touching your excuse of not determining any thing concerning the Match of
our dearest Son, but only to tell your Opinion, and lay it down at our feet:
First we desire to know how you could have presumed to determine in that point,
without committing of High Treason? And next you cannot deny but your talking
of his his Match after that manner, was a direct breach of our commandment
Spain; and wished you to have that confidence in our Religion and Wisdom, that
we would so manage it, as our Religion should receive no prejudice by it: And
the same we now repeat unto you, professing that we are so far engaged in that
Match, as we cannot in honor go back, except the King of Spain perform not such
things as we expect at his hands. And therefore we are sorry that ye should
show to have so great distrust in us, as to conceive that we should be cold in
our Religion; Otherwise we cannot imagine how our former public Declaration
should not have stopped your mouths in this point.

And as to your request, That we would now receive your Spain, nay with any
other Popish Princess, and also

These are unfit things to be handled in Parliament, except your King should
require it of you: For who can have wisdom to judge of things of that nature,
but such as are daily acquainted with the particulars of Treaties, and of the
variable and fixed connection of affairs of State, together with the knowledge
of the secret ways, ends and Ne Suitor ultra crepidam. And besides, the
intermedling in Parliament with matters of Peace or War, and Marriage of our
dearest Son, would be such a Diminution to us and to our Crown in Foreign
Countries, as would make any Prince neglect to treat with us either in matters
of Peace or Marriage, except they might be assured by the assent of Parliament.
And so it proved long France, who upon a Trick procuring his States to dissent
from some Treaty which before he had made, was after refused Treating with any
other Princes to his great reproach, unless he would first procure the assent
of his Estates to their Proposition. And will you cast your eyes upon the late
times, you shall find that the late Queen of famous memory was humbly
petitioned by a Parliament to be pleased to marry: But her Answer was, That she
liked their Petition well, because it was simple, not limiting her to place or

Now to the points in your Petition whereof you desire an Answer, as properly
belonging to the Parliament; The first and the greatest point is, that of
Religion: Concerning which at this time we can give you of Religion through all
the World at once, (which how hard and dangerous a task it may prove, you may
judge.) But this puts us in mind, how all the World complained the last year of
plenty of Corn; and God sent us a Cooling-card this year for that heat: And so
we pray God, that this desire among you of kindling Wars (showing your
weariness of peace and plenty) may not make God permit us to fall into the
miseries of both. But as we already said, Ireland, so will we be well pleased
to pass any good Laws that shall be made either now, or at any time hereafter
to this purpose.



But for the Pardon, ye crave such particulars in it, as we must be well
advised upon, lest otherwise we give you back the double or treble of that we
are to receive by your entire Subsidy, without Fifteens. But the ordinary
course we hold fittest to be used still in this case is, That we should of our
free grace send you down a Pardon from the

But we cannot omit to show you how strange we think it, that ye should make so
bad and unjust a Commentary upon some words of our former Letter, as if we
meant to restrain you thereby of your ancient privileges and liberties in
Parliament. Truly, a Scholar would be ashamed so to misplace and misjudge any
sentences in another man's book. For whereas, in the end of our former Letter,
we discharge you to meddle Spain; by which particular denominations we
interpret and restrain our former words; And then after we forbid you to meddle
with such things as have their ordinary course in Courts of Justice: Ye couple
together those two distinct sentences, and plainly leave out these words, Of
Mysteries of State; so as ye err a been divisis ad male conjuncta: For of the
former part concerning Mysteries of State, we plainly restrain our meaning to
Edward Cook's foolish business. And therefore it had well became him,
especially being our Servant, and one of our Council, to have complained unto
us, which he never did, though he was ordinarily at Court since, and never had
access refused unto him.

And although we cannot allow of the style, calling it Your ancient and
undoubted Right and Inheritance; but could rather have wished that ye had said,
That your Privileges were derived from the grace and permission of our
Ancestors and Us, (For most of them grow from Precedents, which shows rather a
Toleration then Inheritance:) Yet we are pleased to give you our Royal
assurance, that as long as you contain your selves within the limits of your
duty, we will be as careful to maintain and preserve your lawful Liberties and
Privileges, as Newmarket the Eleventh day of December, 1621.

The Lord Keepers judgment touching the Kings sharp Answer.
The Lord Keeper Williams advised, That the harshness of this Answer should be
mitigated with a Letter from his Majesty to the Houses. For (said he) his
Majesty rightly inferrs, That their Privileges which they claim to be their
Natural birthrights, are but the favors of former Kings: Now the Kings
assertion and their Claim may easily be reconciled, if men were peaceably
disposed, and affected the dispatch of Common business.

These Privileges were originally the favor of Princes; neither does February.
This latter course is fitter for further Advice; but the former, to express a
just indignation.

The Lo. Digby to the Peers.
The Lord Digby minded the Peers, That this Session was called for the present
support of the Palatinate, as was declared by the Message from his Majesty to
both Houses in the beginning thereof. He reported also, That he had received
many great Advertisements of that Countries Bavaria; and that the Army of
Mansfeld who came in for defense, if he be not speedily supplied with moneys,
is in a possibility of deserting the service: For he has fair offers of making
his Peace; but nothing will take with him, being in hopes of relief from
England.

But the Parliament thought it their duty as well to advise his Majesty, as to
supply his wants.

December 19. The Prince delivered to the Clerk the Commission February: Which
discontented the Commons and good people of England, foreseeing a Dissolution
by Gondomar's means.

Before the Adjournment, in vindication of their Parliamentary rights and
Privileges, the Commons made and entered this Protestation following.

THe Commons now assembled in Parliament, being justly occasioned thereunto
concerning sundry Liberties, The Commons Protestation.
Franchises and Privileges of Parliament amongst others here mentioned, do
make this Protestation following. That the Liberties, Franchises, Privileges
and Jurisdictions of Parliament, are the ancient and undoubted Birthright and
Inheritance of the Subjects of England; And that the arduous England, and the
maintenance and making of Laws, and redress of mischiefs and grievances which
daily happen within this Realm, are proper subjects and matter of Council and
Debate in Parliament; And that in the handling and proceeding of those
businesses, every Member of the House of Parliament has, and of right ought to
have freedom of speech, to propound, treat, reason and bring to conclusion the
same; And that the Commons in

But how the King was moved by the Protestation of the House of Commons, will
appear by this Memorial.

Whitehall, December. 30. 1621.
HIs most Excellent Majesty coming this day to the Council, the Prince his
Highness, and all the Lords and others of His Majesty's Privy Council sitting
about him, and all the Judges then in London, which were six in number, there
attending upon His Majesty; the Clerk of the Commons House of Parliament was
called Protestation concerning sundry Liberties, Privileges, and Franchises of
Parliament; with which form of Protestation His Majesty was justly offended.
Nevertheless His Majesty in a most gracious manner there expressed, That he
never meant to deny that House of Commons any lawful Privileges that ever they
had enjoyed; Protestation of the Commons House so contrived and carried as it
was, His Majesty thought fit to be razed out of all Memorials, and utterly to
be annihilated, both in respect of the manner by which it was gained, and the
matter therein contained. For the manner of getting it, First in respect of the
time: For after such time as His Majesty out of his Princely grace, and to take
away all mistakings, had directed his Letters to Secretary Calvert dated at
Royston 16 Decembris, and therein had so explained himself in the point of
maintaining the privileges of the House of Commons, as that most of the said
House rested fully satisfied, and freed from any scruple of having their
liberties impeached; December, being Tuesday, His Majesty at the humble suit of
the House of Commons, condescended to make this Meeting a Session before
Christmas, and for that purpose had assigned Saturday following. Now upon this
very Tuesday, and while the Messengers from the House of Commons were with His
Majesty at Theobalds to return thanks unto His Majesty, and therewith an excuse
from them not to make it a Session in respect of the strait of time whereunto
they were February next, which was the first day formerly appointed by His
Majesty for the meeting together of the Parliament: And whilst their messengers
were with His Majesty, and had received a gracious Answer to return unto their
House; even that afternoon, a Committee was procured to be made for taking
their Liberties into consideration: And this afternoon a Protestation was made
(to whom appears not) Protestation was brought into the House by the Committee,
and at that time of night it was called upon to be put to the Question, there
not being the third part of the House then present; whereas in all matters of
weight, their usual custom is to put nothing of importance to the Question,
till the House be full; And at this time many of them that were present
expected the Question would have been deferred to another day, and a fuller
House, and some then present stood up to have Protestation, it is penned in
such ambiguous and general words, as may serve for future Times to invade most
of Rights and Prerogatives annexed to the Imperial Crown; the claim of some
privileges being grounded upon the words of the Writ for assembling the
Parliament, wherein some words, viz. Arduis Regni, are cunningly mentioned; but
the word quibusdam, which restrains the generality to such particular Cases
as His Majesty

The King takes the Protestation out of the Journal Book with his own hand.
These things considered, His Majesty did this present day in full assembly of
his Council, and in the presence of the Judges, declare the said Protestation
to be invalid, annulled, void and of no effect: And did further manu sua
propria take the said Protestation out of the Iournal-book of the Clerk of the
Commons House of Parliament, and commanded an Act of Council to be made
thereupon, and this Act to be entered in the Register of Council-causes.

In the mean time the King dissolves them.
On the Sixth of January the King by Proclamation dissolved the Parliament;
showing that the assembling, continuing, and dissolving of Parliaments does so
peculiarly belong unto him, that he needs not give an account thereof unto any:
Yet he thought fit to declare, That in this Dissolution he had the advice and
uniform consent of his whole Council. And that some particular Members of the
House of Commons took inordinate liberty not only to treat of his high
Prerogatives, and sundry things not fitting to be argued in Parliament, but
also to speak with less respect to Foreign Princes: That they spent the time in
disputing Privileges, descanting upon the words and syllables of his Letters
and Messages: And that these Evil-tempered spirits sowed tares among the corn,

The King was highly displeased with some of the Commons House, Some Eminent
Members of the Parliament in Prisoned.
whom he called Ill-tempered spirits. Sir Edward Cook, Sir Robert Philips
Seldom, Mr. Pym, Mr. Mallery to other Prisons and Confinements. Order was given
for the sealing up the locks and doors of Sir Edward Cooks Chambers in London
and in the Temple, for the seizing of his Papers; and the Council debating
about the General Pardon that should have passed this last Parliament, had
consulted about the ways of excluding him from that benefit, either by
preferring a Bill against him before the publication of the Pardon, or by
exempting him by name, whereof they said they had presidents.

Dudley Diggs, Others sent for punishment into Ireland.
Sir Tho. Crew, Sir Nathaniel Rich, and Sir James Perrot for punishment were
sent into Ireland, joined in Commission with others under the Great Seal of
England, for the enquiry of sundry matters concerning his Majesty's service, as
well in the Government Ecclesiastical and Civil, as in point of his Revenue and
otherwise, within that Kingdom.

Proclamations had formerly issued out against the Peoples too liberal speaking
of matters above their reach: The Council write to Judges concerning such as
speak of State Affairs.
Which at this time occasioned

The King still walked in his beaten path of Solicitations and Treaties, The
Palatine spoiled of his hereditary dominions.
his Son in law was despoiled of his Hereditary patrimony by the Emperors
commandment; who after the suspension of the Ban or Proscription, commanded the
taking up of Arms again in the Lower Palatinate, the Upper Palatinate being
already subdued. Which misery King James acknowledged to be the fruit of his
own patience, delays, and doubtfulness. Nevertheless he cease not to pursue
the favor of an implacable Enemy: He wrote to the Emperor Ferdinand, declaring
The terms which King James desires the Emperor to accept in behalf of the
Palatine.
and his ardent zeal for Peace from the beginning; and expressed the Terms
which he had prescribed to his Son in law: As, That he shall for himself and
his Son renounce all pretense of Right and Claim to the Crown of Bohemia; That
he shall from henceforth yield all constant due devotion to the Imperial
Majesty, as do other obedient Princes Electors of the Empire; That he shall
crave pardon of the Imperial Majesty; That he shall not hereafter any manner of
way demean himself unfittingly toward the Imperial Majesty, nor disturb his
Kingdoms and Countries; And that he shall upon reasonable Conditions reconcile
himself to other Princes and States of the Empire, and hold all good
correspondence with them; And he shall really do whatsoever like things shall
be judged reasonable and necessary.

King James requested of the Emperor the acceptance of these Conditions
Austria. But if these his just Demands and well-willed Presentations shall not
find acceptance, or be slightly waved by some new tergiversation, or a pretense
of that long and tedious way of Consultation with the Princes of the Empire, he
is resolved to try his utmost power for his Childrens relief, judging it a foul
stain to his Honor,

The Emperors Answer to King James, Ian. 14. 1621.
The Emperor replied and confessed, That in this exulcerate business, so much
moderation and respect of justice and equity has shined forth in the King of
Great Britain, that there is not any thing that he should refuse to render
thereunto, reserving his Cesarean authority, and the Laws of the Empire: Yet
that Person whom it most concerns, has given no occasion by the least sign of
repentance to a condescension to this Treaty Iagerndorf and Mansfeld, and other
cruel disturbers of the public peace, to call up Hell rather then to
acquiesce in better counsels, and desist from the usurped Title of a Kingdom.
Howbeit, in favor of the King of Great Britain he shall consent to a Treaty to
be held at Bruxels, wherein he would devolve his power upon the Illustrious
Elizabetha Clara Eugenia Infanta of Spain.

The appointment of the Treaty at Bruxels was accepted by King James, whither
he sent his Ambassador Sir Richard Weston Chancellor of the Exchequer. In the
mean while misfortune and misery overran the Palatinate: The Enemy having
prevailed in several grand encounters, proceeded to subdue the Country, without
regard to the Treaty of Peace at Bruxels. Which was more easily effected, the
Commotions in Hungaria, Bohemia, Silesia, Moravia being now ended in a Treaty
of Peace between the Emperor and Bethleem Gabor, the Emperor having made use of
the Palsgrave's submission, and resignation of the Crown of Bohemia, to
accelerate

About this time Philip the Third, King of Spain, departed this life; and the
Lord Digby was sent Extraordinary Ambassador into Spain, as well to condole his
death, as ^o advance the Match, and by all means possible to bring it to a
final conclusion. To which end he was accompanied with Letters from his
Majesty, and the Prince, to that King, as also a private Letter to Don Baltazar
de Zuniga.

MOst Serene and Potent Prince, Kinsman, and dearly beloved Friend, when we
heard of the Death of your Majesty's Father, King James to Philip the Fourth of
Spain.
Philip the Third, with whom we had great Amity, and by our Amity, managed very
important Matters, which he being dead, could not but of necessity be
interrupted: It was no less grief to us, then if he had been our own natural
and most intimate Brother: Which grief we have certified both to your Majesty
by John Digby, our Counselor and Vice-Chamberlain, adjoining unto the rest of
his Instructions, this our wish, That your Serenity may rule your Fathers
Kingdoms, which you have received under a most prosperous Star, with his and
your Ancestors Prudence, and that we may really find that love, which always
passed between

Given at our Palace of Theobalds, Mar. 14. 1621. Your Majesty's most Loving
Brother I. R.


Jacobus, etc.
Serenissimo and Potentissimo Principi ac Domino Philippo Quarto, etc.
SErenissime and Potentissime P. Frater, Consanguinee and Amice Charissime:
Quum aliquot abhinc Carolum P. Walliae and Illustrissimam Infantem Dominam
Mariam (Serenitatis vestrae sororem natu minorem) contrahendo; quod Philippo
Tertio, (felicissimae memoriae) Patre vestro, eo per gradus devectum erat, ut
ille si non expirasset, hoc multo antehac consummatum iri spes esset, nunc
denuo, Serenitatem vestram interpellandam duximus, jam tandem ut velit operi
been inchoato felicissimus illuceret dies, quo cernere liceret posterorum etiam
amicitiam optato hoc affinitatis foedere constrictam. Misimus itaque ad
Serenitatem vestram Legatum nostrum Extraordinarium, Praenobilem virum Iohannem
Digbeum, Baronem de Sherbone, Consiliar^um Austriacae honor been meritum, cui
una cum Legato nostro Ordinario quicquid reliquum est hujus Negotii,
tractandum, transigendum, absolvendumque Commisimus. Quicquid illis illic
videbitur, Palatinatu Sollicitudo, de ^ilia and genero and insontibus eorum
liberis ex avito jam extorribus Patrimonio. Quam vellemus vestiae Potissimum
Serenitati beneficium

Serenitatis vestrae Frater Amantissimus Jacobus R.
Dat. e Regia nostra Theobald, 14 Die Martii, An. Dom.
James, etc.
To the most Serene and most Potent Prince and Lord, Philip the Fourth, etc.
MOst Serene and Potent Prince, King James his Letter to the King of Spain.
Kinsman, and Wel-beloved Friend; Forasmuch as some years ago (for our nearer
Alliance, and the good of the whole Christian World) we had resolved to make a
Marriage between our Wel-beloved Son Charles, Prince of Wales, and the most
Illustrious Infanta, the Lady Mary, your Serenities youngest Sister, which in
the life time of your Father, King Philip the Third, of most happy memory, was
so far advanced, That if he had not died, it had been brought to perfection
long ere now: We have therefore thought good to Treat now again with your
Serenity, that at length you would put a period to a work so well begun, and
crown our bypast Deliberations with an expected issue. The age of our Son
arived now to maturity, and he our only Son (besides the condition of the
times and our affairs) does require him to marry. And we being at the brink of
old age, it would rejoice us to see the day wherein our Posterities Friendship
should be bound up in this most desired Bond of Affinity. We have therefore
sent unto your Serenity our Extraordinary Ambassador, the Right Honorable the
Lord Digby, Baron of Sherborne, our Counselor, and Vice-Chamberlain, who has
formerly deserved well of this Alliance, and the honor of the House of Austria;
unto whom, together with our Ordinary Ambassador, we have entrusted the
remainder of this business, to be treated, transacted, and finished, and shall
be ready to ratify and approve here, what ever they shall agree upon. We wish
likewise, that your Serenity out of your goodness would ease our other care,
touching the Palatinate, which concerns our Daughter and Son in Law, and their
innocent Children, banished from their Ancestors Inheritance. How gladly would
we ow this good turn solely to your Serenity, who have already done us so many
friendly offices in that business! No Oblivion shall ever blot out of our
mind, the acknowledgment of so great a favor, and we will endeavor to transmit
to our Posterity, that Hereditary good will wherewith we have ever affected
your Serenity, and your Royal Father of most worthy memory, and shall ever
affect you. One thing remains, That if this our Ambassador shall propose any
other matter touching what business soever, your Serenity will be pleased to
give him Credence, as if we our self were present. The most gracious and great
God ever preserve your Serenity in safety.

Your Serenities most Loving Brother J. R.
Given at our Palace of Theobalds, 14 March. 1621.
Prince Charles to the King of Spain.
MOst Serene and Potent Prince, Prince Charles to the King of Spain.
and wel-beloved Kinsman, some years ago our most Serene Parents begun to treat
about a Match between us Mary, your Majesty's most honored Sister. The
condition and success of which affair and treaty, our most Serene and Honored
Lord and Father, out of his Fatherly affection toward us, was pleased upon all
occasions, so much the more willingly to impart unto us, by how much greater
propension and apparent signs of true affection he discovered in us thereunto;
For which cause the Baron Digby, his Majesty's Vice-Chamberlain and
Extraordinary Ambassador, and one of our Privy Chamber, being now bound for
Spain, with most ample Instructions to Digby

The most great and good God preserve your Majesty long in safety.

C. P.
Given at Our Palace of Saint James, 14 Martii, 1621.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Balthazar Zuniga.
Right Honorable and Wel-beloved Friend,
BEcause we have diverse times been informed by your Friends of your singular
propension and zeal toward our Affairs, King James his Letter to the Lord
Balthazar of Zuniga.
we neither will, nor ought to leave you unsaluted at this time, you have so
well deserved of us: But it will be no small accession of your good will, if
you continue as you have John Digby will be able to direct you, to whom we have
entrusted the residue of that matter. And if during his residence there, he may
make use of your singular Humanity and Favor with the King in his Negotiation,
it will be most acceptable to us, and render us, who were by your deservings
already forward to oblige you, most forward for the future to deserve well of
you; which we shall most willingly testify, as occasion offers, not only in
word but in deed.

J. R.
Given at our Palace of Theobalds, March 14. 1621.

Sir Walter Aston, the Leiger Ambassador, had managed that Treaty by directions
received from Digby, and now Digby remained at large in it, and had
communication of the Passages from him. The Spaniards proceed in the Match with
a very formal appearance; for at this very time the Emperors Ambassador in
Spain had discoursed of a Marriage between his Masters Son and the Infanta; but
was presently answered, That the Kings hands were tied by a Treaty on foot with
the King of Great Britain; and in this particular they seemed (as said the
English

The Privy Council by the Kings command issue out an Order for raising Money
for the defense of the Palatinate.
In the mean time the Privy Council by the Kings Commandment consulted about the
raising of Moneys to defend the Palatinate. They appointed the Keeper of the
Records in the Tower, to search for all such writings as concerned the Levies
of Men at the Public charge of the Country, from the time of King Edward the
Third, until this present.

Likewise they directed Letters of the tenor following to the Justices
Westminster, and to the Barons of the Exchequer.

WHat endeavors his Majesty has used by Treaty, and by all fair and amiable
ways to recover the patrimony of his Children in Germany, now for the most part
withholden from them by force, is not unknown unto all his loving ^ubjects,
since his Majesty was pleased to communicate to them in Parliament his whole
proceedings in that business: Of which Treaty, being of late frustrate, he was
enforced to take other resolutions; namely, to recover that of this business)
will be a special motive to incite and persuade them thereunto. Nevertheless,
if any persons shall out of obstinacy or disaffection, refuse to contribute
herein, proportionably to their Estates and Means, you are to certify their
names unto this Board.

And so recommending this service to your best care and endeavor, and praying
you to return unto us Notes of the names of such as shall contribute, and of
the sums offered by them, We bid, etc.


Letters to the same effect were directed to the High Sheriffs and Justices of
Peace of the several Counties; and to the Majors and Bailiffs of every City and
Town-Corporate within the Kingdom, requiring them to summon all of known
Abilities within their Jurisdictions, and to move them to a cheerful
contribution according to their Means and Fortunes in some good measure,
answerable to what others well-affected had done before them. And to make
choice of meet Collectors of the

About this time George Abbot, Archbishop Abbot not relished at Court, an
advantage taken against him.
Archbishop of Canterbury, began to fall into disgrace at Court; his enemies
taking the advantage of a late sad misfortune, for shooting at a Deer with a
Cross-bow in Bramzil Park, Spain, That in regard of his eminent rank in the
Church, it might administer matter of Scandal; which was aggravated by such as
aspired unto his place and dignity. The Bishop of Lincoln, then Lord Keeper,
informed the Marquess of Buckingham, That by the Common Law of England, the
Archbishops whole estate was forfeited to the King; and by the Common Law,
which is still in force, he is made irregular ipso and so suspended from all
Ecclesiastical Function, until he be restored by his Superior, which was the
Kings Majesty, in this rank and order of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. To add
affliction to the afflicted ( said he) will be against his Majesty's nature;
yet to leave a man of Blood, Primate, and Patriark of all his Churches, is a
thing that sounds very harsh in the Old Councils and Cannons, and the Papists
will not spare to censure it.

The King made choice of the Lord Keeper, the Bishops of London, and Exeter,
Sir Henry Hobart, Justice Doderidge, Sir Henry Martin, and Doctor Stuart, to
inform him of the nature of this cause, and the scandal that might arise
thereupon; and to certify what the same may amount unto, whither to an
irregularity, or otherwise; and what means may be found for redress. However
this consultation was managed, the Archbishop was not deprived; but a Plant was
growing up that over-topped him whilst he lived, and after his decease obtained
the Primacy.

Laud who was first chosen to the Bishopric of St. David's, by the Mediation of
the Lord Keeper Williams, and was consecrated by the Bishops of London,
Worcester, Chichester, Ely, Landaff, and Oxon; the Archbishop in the mean time
was not thought irregular for the Casual Homicide.

This Bishop, Doctor Laud, was looked upon in those times as an Arminian, and a
fierce opposer of Puritans; and while he lived in Oxford, suspected to incline
to Popish Tenants, as may appear by his Letter of Complaint sent to his Patron,
Bishop Laud suspected to incline to Popish Tenants while he was of Oxford, as
appears by a notable passage.
Doctor Neal, then Bishop of Lincoln, against a Sermon preached by Robert
Abbot, Doctor of the Chair in Oxford; in which Letter he enclosed this (amongst
other Passages) of the Doctors Sermon, viz.

That men under pretense of Truth and Preaching against the Puritans, strike at
the heart and root of Faith and Religion now established Parsons and Campions
counsel, when they came into England to seduce young Students: And when many of
them were afraid to lose their places, if they should professedly be thus, the
counsel they then gave them was, That they should speak freely against the
Puritans, and that should suffice. And they cannot intend that they are
accounted Papists, because they speak against the Puritans. But because they
indeed are Papists, they speak nothing against them. If they do at any

I Came time enough ( says Mr. Laud) to be at the rehearsal of this Sermon,
upon much persuasion, where I was fain to sit patiently, and hear my self
abused almost an hour together, being pointed at as I sat. For this present
abuse, I would have taken no notice of it, but that the whole University apply
it to me, Abbot in his own. Nevertheless in a business of this kind, I will
not be swayed from a patient course; only I desire your Lordship to vouchsafe
me some direction what to do, etc.

The Arminians begin to be favored by the King, by means of Bishop Laud.
The Arminian Sect opposed by King James, and by his special concurrence lately
broken in the Netherlands, by the beheading of Barnevalt the chief of them,
began in his latter times to spring up in England, and Buckingham: The Kings
main design then not suffering the suppressing of that way which in common
judgment was inclined to Popery; or he thought to recover all his losses, and
to salve all misfortunes by the Spanish Match. Favors showed to Recusants by
the Kings Order.
And for this cause he released multitudes of Priests and Popish Recusants then
imprisoned, which the Spaniards professed to be a great demonstration of the
Kings sincere affection, to confirm the correspondence and amity between the
Williams, Bishop of Lincoln.

Iacobi 20. 1622.
THat whereas he had formerly given order for the release of Recusants by
removing them from the several Goals of this Kingdom, to be bailed before the
Justices of his Bench: And finding that this course will be troublesome to the
poorer sort of them, he does now require that

THat the King having upon deep Reasons of State, and in expectation of the
like correspondence from Foreign Princes to the Professors of our Religion,
resolved to grant some Grace to the imprisoned Papists, had commanded him to
pass some Writs under the Broad Seal for that purpose: Wherefore it is his
Majesty's pleasure, that they make no niceness or difficulty


But a general offense was taken at this Indulgence to Papists, and the Lord
Keepers Letter to the Judges, which, how the Keeper endeavored to renounce, may
be seen in his Letter written to a Person of

AS the Sun in the Firmament appears unto us no bigger then a Platter, The Lord
Keepers Letter excusing the Kings favor toward Papists.
and the Stars are but as so many Nails in the Pummel of a Saddle, because of
the enlargement and disproportion between our eye and the object: So is there
such an unmeasurable distance between the deep resolution of a Prince, and the
shallow apprehensions of common and ordinary people; Europe, which were
unreasonable, if he did now execute the rigor of his Laws against the Roman
Catholics.

Our Viperous Countrymen, the English Jesuits in France, had many months
before this favor granted, invited the French King, by writing a malicious
Book, to put all the Statutes in execution against the Protestants England
against the Papists, and (as they falsely informed) severely executed. Besides,
these Papists are no otherwise out of prison, then with their shackles about
their heels, sufficient Sureties, and good Recognizances to present themselves
at the next Assizes; and their own demeanor, and the success of his Majesty's
Negotiations must determine whether they shall continue in this Grace.

But to conclude from the favor done to the English Papists, that the King
savors the Romish Religion, is a composition of Folly and Malice,

As for his own Letter to the Judges, he said it recited only four kinds of
Recusancy capable of the Kings clemency, not so much to include them, as to
exclude many other Crimes bearing the name of Recusancy, as, using the Function
of a Romish Priest, seducing the Kings Leige-people from the established
Religion, aspersing the King, Church, or State, or the present

All which Offenses, being outward practices, and no secret motions of the
Conscience, are adjudged by the Laws of England to be merely Civil and
Political, and are excluded by the Letter from the benefit of those Writs.


But because the peoples mouths were open, and some Preachers were too busy,
and the Puritan party increased, the King gave directions for the regulation of
the Ministry, in his Letters to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

The Kings Letter to the Archbishop for regulating the Clergy.
MOst Reverend Father in God, Right trusty and entirely beloved Counselor, we
greet you well. Forasmuch as the abuses and extravagancies of Preachers in the
Pulpit, have been in all times suppressed in this Realm by July, in the
Nineteenth year of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, our Noble Predecessor:
And whereas at this present diverse young Students by reading of late Writers,
and ungrounded Divines, do broach many times unprofitable, unsound, seditious,
and dangerous Doctrines, to the scandal of the Church, and disquiet of the
State and present Government. We upon humble Representations unto us of

Given under our Signet at our Castle of Windsor, etc.

Directions concerning Preachers sent with the Letter.
Directions concerning Preachers.
I. THat no Preacher under the Degree and Calling of a Bishop or Articles of
Religion set forth One thousand five hundred sixty and two; or in some of the
Homilies set forth by Authority of England: Not only for a help for the
Non-Preaching, but withal for a pattern and boundary (as it were) for the
Preaching Ministers. And for their further Instructions for the performance
hereof, that they forthwith read over and peruse diligently the said Book of
Articles, and the two Books of Homilies.

II. That no Person, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer, shall Preach any Sermon or
Collation hereafter, upon Sundays and Holidays in the afternoon, in any
Cathedral or Parish Church throughout the Kingdom; but upon some part of the
Catechism, or some Text taken out of the Creed, Ten Commandments, or the Lords
Prayer, (Funeral Sermons only excepted.) And that those Preachers be most
encouraged, and approved of, who spend the Afternoons Exercise in the
Examination England.

III. That no Preacher of what Title soever under the degree of a Bishop or
Dean at the least, do from henceforth presume to Preach in any Popular
Auditory, the deep points of Predestination, Election, Reprobation, or of the
Universality, Efficacy, Resistibility, or Irresistibility of Gods Grace, but
leave those Themes rather to be handled by the Learned Men, and that Moderately
and Modestly

IV. That no Preacher of what Title or Denomination soever, from henceforth
shall presume in any Auditory within this Kingdom, to declare, limit, or bound
out, by way of Positive Doctrine in any Lecture, or Sermon, the Power,
Prerogative, and Jurisdiction, Authority or Duty of Sovereign Princes, or
otherwise meddle with

V. That no Preacher of what Title or Denomination soever, England from the
aspersions of either Adversary, especially where the Auditory is suspected to
be tainted with the one or the other infection.

VI. Lastly, That the Archbishops and Bishops of the Kingdom England (a new
body severed from the Ancient Clergy, as being neither Parsons, Vicars, nor
Curates) be Licenced hence-forward in the Court of Faculties, by Recommendation
of the party, from the Bishop of the Diocese under his Hand and Seal, with a
Fiat from the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, a Confirmation under the Great
Seal of England. And that such as do transgress any one of these Directions, be
suspended by the Bishop of the Diocese, or in his Default by the Archbishop of
the Province, Ab officio and beneficio, for a year and a day, until his Majesty
by the Advice of the next Convocation shall prescribe some further punishment.

These Directions were warily communicated by the Archbishop of Canterbury to
the Bishops within his Province.

The new K. of Spain, Philip the Fourth, procures the Popes assent to the Match.
The King lost no time in pursuing the Match with Spain; but the Dispensation
from Rome, which was the Key of the business, had long lain in a kind of
Dead-Palsie, till the new King of Spain had by a Letter quickened the Pope;
whereupon there ensued a Congregation of Cardinals to determine the matter, and
afterward the Popes assent: And then the Court of Spain declared such an
entire Agreement for the Alliance England, that King James was satisfied, and
could expect no further difficulty.

The Infanta cools in the Palsgraves business.
But his intelligence from Bruxels, and all other parts of the World, did
quickly cool, and almost quench his hopes. Sir Richard Weston was a man
approved by Gondomar, who commended the Kings wisdom in the Election of so fit
a Minister for the Treaty at Bruxels; yet the man so well disposed and suited
to the Kings designs, wrote desperate Letters of the Infanta's cold and
unworthy manner of Treating in that important Palsgrave.

The pretended Obstacles of the Treaty removed.
Whilst the King of Englands proceedings were so just and clear, the Count
Palatine was retired to Sedan, and there sojourned with his Uncle the Duke of
Bouillon, and his Partisans, Duke Christian of Brunswick, and Count Mansfield,
the pretended obstacles of the Treaty, were removed, and had taken another
course. Mansfield went for Holland, where the States intended to use him for
the raising of the siege of Bergen, by cutting off the Convoys between Antwerp
and the Spanish James had lately offered, That in case the forces of Mansfield
and Brunswick would not rest, but still perturb the Treaty, he would join with
the Emperor, and the Arch-Dutchess, to quiet them: And the English Companies in
the Palatinate being penned up in Garrisons, could not cause disturbance.

In the mean while, that miserable Country was burnt and sacked in the sight
of the English Ambassador. Heidelburgh besieged.
And now the Imperial and Bavarian forces fall to the besieging of Heidelburgh.

When the Ambassador at Bruxels complained of these proceedings, he received
frivolous Answers mixed with Recriminations. All that Weston obtained, was,
only Letters of entreaty from the Infanta to the Emperors Generals to proceed
no further, though she had before acknowledged a full power from the Emperor to
conclude the desired Cessation: But they pretended that they would restore all,
when all was taken.

For this cause Sir Richard Weston acquainted the Marquess of Buckingham, that
he could not discern how the weak Hopes given him at Bruxels, could agree with
those strong Assurances given by the Lord Digby from the Court of Spain.

Moreover to protract the Palsgraves business, the Emperor takes occasion to
appoint a Diet at Ratisbone, contrary to his own promise, as himself
acknowledged.

New Conditions demanded of the King before the Pope gives a Dispensation.
Mr. Gage returned from Rome, with no better fruit of his Agency; for the
Dispensation cannot pass, till the King give satisfaction to a number James had
yielded, were concealed from the Pope by the Ministers of the King of Spain.

The Court then devised to put a good face upon an ill Game, and good Sauce to
an unsavory Dish: For all the World expecting that Gage should bring the
Dispensation at his first arival, they made him give out, That it was passed in
Rome, and sent from thence to Spain.

But the King made a close pursuit, and resolved they should not escape him.
The Popes Demands superadded to the Articles of Marriage

To the Demand of a Public Church in London, The Kings Answer to the said
Demands.
besides a Domestic Chapel, assigned to the Infanta and her Family, the King
made Reply,

That it was more then was assumed by himself, or his Son the Prince, That the
Chapel allowed was not a private Oratory, but in effect a Church, where the
World might take notice of the Religion Infanta professed in public manner.

To another Demand, That the Superior Minister having Ecclesiastical Authority,
be in Ordine Episcopali; he answered, That he would leave it to the King of
Spain to appoint as he shall judge expedient.

But whereas the Pope required, That the Ecclesiastics be subject to no Laws
but of their own Ecclesiastical Superiors; his answer was, That exemption
seemed strange, as not allowed in all States and Countries that were of the
Roman Religion.

Spain judge indifferently (said the King) how unfit it were for us to declare
to the World, That we engaged our self to permit our Grandchildren to be
brought up unto years of Marriage, in a Religion which we profess not, and
which is not publicly professed in our Kingdom. And further then we have
already assented in general, to leave the Children under the Mothers tuition
for a longer or shorter time, according to their constitution and health,
(which may possibly Spain think it fit to limit the time to a certainty.

And whereas the Pope expected some larger offers for the general good of the
Roman Church; the King showed, That the Articles of Religion agreed upon
between himself, and the late King of Spain, were accounted so satisfactory in
the judgment of the Learned, and greatest Clergy of Spain, That they declared
their opinion, that upon the

And he said further, That the Pope was satisfied, that he of his own Authority
could not grant a general Liberty of exercising the Roman Religion; And what is
it that they would have? For setting that aside, he had in a manner done
already all that was desired, as all the Roman Catholics have found, out of
his gracious Clemency toward them, and will no doubt acknowledge.

Spain (for he would not seem to Treat with Rome) and therewith this Letter to
the Lord Digby, now made Earl of Bristol.

Right Trusty and Welbeloved,
The King sends his Resolution to Digby in Spain, now made Earl of Bristol.
OUr pleasure is, that immediately you crave Audience of that King, and
represent unto him the merit that we may justly challenge to our self, for our
sincere proceedings with the Emperor and him: Notwithstanding the many
Invitations and Temptations, we have had to engage our self on our Son in Laws
part. That we have both from the Emperor, and from Austria; that in case our
Son in Law would not be governed Palatinate, and Electoral Dignity to our Son
in Law, as it has been often times intimated from Spain. Yet our meaning is to
carry all things fair with that King, and not to give him any cause of distrust
or jealousy, if you perceive that they intend to

We have thought fit to let you know, how far we are pleased to enlarge our
self concerning those points demanded by the Pope: And further then that, since
we cannot go without much prejudice, inconvenience, and dishonor to our Spain
will bring it instantly to an issue without further delay, which you are to
press with all diligence and earnestness: But if respite of time be earnestly
demanded, and that you perceive it not possible for them to resolve until an
answer come from Rome, We then think it fit, that you give them two months
time after your Audience, that we may understand that Kings final Resolutions
before Christmas next at the furthest.


Likewise the Conde Gondomar who was lately called home, is roused by a Letter
from England, on this manner.

HEre is a King, and a Prince, and a faithful Friend and Servant, Buckingham,
Likewise a Letter was ^ent to ^ondomar, (...) recalle^ into Spain.
besides a number of other Friends, to whom every day seems a year, till the
Match be accomplished; all things are prepared on our parts, Priests and
Recusants are at liberty, and the Prisons are filled with zealous Ministers:
Orders are published for the Universities and Pulpits, that none shall
hereafter be meddling, but that all

His Majesty never looked to the rising or falling hopes of his Son in Laws
fortunes, but kept in the same course that seems most agreeable to Honor and
Justice, and the Peace of Christendom. And Gondomar did beseech the King to
suffer himself once to be deceived by Spain, and promised when the Match was
first moved, and the King persuaded to break with France, That he should be
pressed to nothing, but what might stand with Conscience and Honor, and the love
of his

And whereas the Pope would know what Bonum Publicum will be granted, We remit
it to your Conscience, whither the favors daily granted to Catholics, which
the King resolves to continue, if not to increase, be not a real public good,
considering if the Match break off, his Majesty will be importunately urged by
his people, to whose assistance he must needs have recourse, to give life and
execution to all Penal Laws, now hanging over the heads of Catholics.


According to the Kings direction, The Answer to the Memorial presented by the
Earl of Bristol to the Spanish King.
the Earl of Bristol presented a Memorial to the King of Spain, and from him
and his Ministers received this return.

That for the accomplishing of the Match on their part, there should not one
day be lost; for the dispatch thereof imported them no less then the King of
Great Britain: And for the Palatinate, they will seek his entire satisfaction;
and they refer it to his own just judgment, whether Palatinate, with an evil
intention, or merely for the defense of Flanders, which otherwise had been put
in great hazard by Count Mansfield: That the besieging of Heidelburgh was no
way by their consent, or knowledge, but was generally disapproved by them. And
if it should be taken, and the Emperor refuse to restore it, or to condescend
to such Accommodation as should be adjudged reasonable, the King of Great
Britain shall be infallibly assisted with the Arms of Spain for the restoring
of the Palatine.

Bristol gives the King hope of the Match.
Bristol seemed so confident as to declare to the King his Master, That he
should not willingly give his Majesty hope upon uncertain grounds; so he would
not conceal what the Spanish Court professed, which was to give his Majesty
both real and speedy satisfaction. And he affirmed, If they intended it not,
they were falser then all the Devils in Hell, for deeper Oaths and
Protestations of Sincerity could not be made.

But in the mean while, Heidelburgh taken.
the Town and Castle of Heidelburgh were Edward Herbert the Governor was slain,
after he had broken four Pikes in charging the Enemy. The King provoked, sends
his former Resolutions with anew dispatch into Spain.
The besieging of Manheim, and the blocking of Frankendale, followed the loss
of Heidelburgh.

King James provoked by the continual progress of these Indignities, was
impatient of staying for a Reply from Spain to his former Letters, but seconded
those Resolutions with a vehement new dispatch, the Third of October, in a
peremptory style, as it well became him; Commanding the Earl of Bristol, to let
that King understand how sensible he was of the Emperors proceedings toward
him; and withal, not a little troubled to see that the Infanta at Bruxels,
having an absolute Commission from the Emperor, to conclude a Cessation and
Suspension of Arms, should now at last, when all Objections were answered, and
the former solely pretended Obstacles removed, not only delay the Conclusion
of the Treaty, but refuse to lay her Commands upon the Emperors Generals for
Bruxels, as also the Lord Chichester, whom he intended to have sent unto the
Emperor to the Diet at Ratisbone.

He further enjoined his Ambassador, That having delivered his sense of things,
he should demand of the King of Spain a promise under his Heidelburgh shall be
delivered to the Palatine within seventy days after the Audience, and the like
for Manheim and Frankendale, if they be taken. That within the said term of
seventy days a Suspension of Arms in the Palatinate be concluded upon the
Conditions last propounded by Sir Richard Weston at Bruxels; and that a general
Treaty shall be again set on foot upon such honorable terms as were tendered to
the Emperor in November last. But if these particulars be refused or delayed by
the Emperor, that the King of Spain Britain, for the recovery of his Childrens
Honors and Patrimony. And if he cannot give assistance, that he will at least
allow him a free and friendly passage through his Territories for the forces to
be employed in that service.

Of these points distinctly, if the Ambassador should not receive a direct
assurance, he was to take his leave of that King, and to return into his
Masters presence. But the King annexed this private Instruction, That in case a
Rupture happened, it might be managed to the best advantage. Wherefore he
should not instantly come away, but send him secret

Immediately upon these Demands, an Order was sent from Spain to Bruxels, In
the mean time Manheim is taken.
for the relief of Manheim, but it came too late; for before the arival
thereof, the Town was yielded into the hands of Tilly: But had it come in
season, the effect thereof might be guessed by Tilly's Reasons presented to the
Arch-Dutchess against raising the siege of Manheim, and the restoring of
Heidelburgh, to this purpose.

That he could not do it without the Emperors express consent, Manheim was to
be hastened to prevent the machinations of evil Neighbors, who were plotting new
Commotions in favor of the Count Palatine, and especially to obviate the
designs of Count Mansfield.

And lastly, That the Emperor and the Catholic League, having settled all
Germany, might give the Law to their Opposites, and settle a peace upon their
own terms.

The Emperors Intentions to King James not good,
How little the Emperor attributed to the Kings Humanity, and upright Ratisbone,
his promise of translating the Palatine Electorate to the Duke of Bavaria, as a
thing irrevocable.

Moreover, the King of Spain, the Fifth of November, 1622. in the height of
those Professions made to the English Ambassador, touching the Marriage, wrote
on this manner to his Grand Favorite, the Conde Olivares.

THe King my Father declared at his Death, Nor the King of Spains, witness his
Letter to Conde Olivares.
That his intent never was to marry my Sister, the Infanta Donna Maria with the
Prince of Wales, Don Balthazar understood, and so treated this Match ever with
intention to delay it; notwithstanding it is now so far advanced, that
considering all the aversness unto it of the Infanta, it is time to seek some
means to divert the Treaty, which I would have you find out, and I will make
it good whatsoever it be. But in all other things procure the satisfaction of
the King of Great Britain (who has deserved much) and it shall content me, so
that it be not in the Match.


Olivares wrote a Letter deliberative, the Eighth of November, 1622. and
propounded an Expedient to the King of Spain, in these words.

SIR, Olivares Answer.
Considering in what estate we find the Treaty of Marriage between Spain and
England, and knowing certainly how the Ministers did understand this business
that Treated it in the time of Philip the Third, that is in Heaven, that their
meaning was never to effect it, but by enlarging the Treaties and Points of the
said Marriage, to make use of the Friendship of the King of Britain, as well in
matters of Germany, as those of Flanders: And imagining likewise that your
Majesty is of the same opinion (though the Demonstrations do not show so)
joining to these Suppositions; that it is certain the Infanta Donna Maria is
resolved to put her self into a Monastery the same day that your Majesty shall
press her to this Marriage: I have thought fit to represent unto your Majesty,
that which my good zeal has offered me in this occasion, thinking it a good
time to acquaint your Majesty withal, to the end you may resolve of that which
you shall find most convenient, with the advice of those

The King of Great Britain does find himself at this time equally engaged in
two businesses; the one is this Marriage, to which he is moved by the
conveniences he finds in your Majesty's friendship, by making an Agreement
with those Catholics that he thinks are secretly in his Kingdom; and by this
to assure himself of them, as likewise to marry his Son to one of the House of
Austria, knowing, that the Infanta Donna Maria is the best born Lady in the
World. The other business is, the restitution of the Palatinate, in which he is
more engaged;

I do not dispute whither the King of Great Britain be governed in this
business of the Palatinate by Act or Friendship; I think a man might say he
used both, but as a thing not precisely necessary to this Discourse, I omit it.
I hold it for a Maxim, that these two Engagements in which he finds himself,
Palatinate.

This being supposed, Having made this Marriage in that form as it is Treated,
your Majesty shall find your self, together with the King of Great Britain,
engaged in a War against the Emperor and the Catholic League: A thing which to
hear, will offend your godly ears, or declaring your self for the Emperor, and
the Catholic League, as certainly your Majesty will do, then you will find
your self engaged in a War against the King of England, and your Sister married
with his Son; with the which, all whatsoever reasons of Convenience that were
thought upon in this Marriage, do cease. If your Majesty shall show your self
Neutral, as it may be some will propound; That, first, will cause very great
scandal, and with just reason, since in matters of less opposition, then of
Catholics against Heretics, the Arms of this Crown have taken the godly part,
against the contrary party; and at this time the Frenchmen fomenting

It will oblige your Majesty, and give occasion to those of the League to make
use of the King of France, and of other Catholic Princes ill-affected to this
Crown; for it will be a thing necessary for them to do so: And those even
against their own Religion, will foment and assist the Heretics for hatred to
us. Without doubt they will follow the other party, only to leave your Majesty
with England will remain offended and enraged, seeing that neither interest,
nor helps do follow the Alliance with this Crown, as likewise with Pretext of
particular resentment, for having suffered his Daughter and Grandchildren to
be ruined for respect of the said Alliance.

The Emperor though he be well-affected and obliged to us in making the
Translation at this time, as businesses now stands, (the Duke of Bavaria being
possessed of all the Dominions) although he would dispose all according to our
Bavaria for himself alone, will pay more then all the rest joined together; the
which does show his power and intention, which is not to accommodate matters,
but to keep to himself the Superiority of all in this broken time, the Emperor
is now in the Diet, and the Translation is to be made in it.

The Proposition in this estate, is by considering the means for a Conference,
which your Majesty's Ministers will do with their Capacities, Zeal, and Wisdom;
and it is certain they will herein have enough to do. For the difficulty
consists to find a way to make the present estate of affairs straight again,
which with lingering, as it is said, Both the power and time will be lost. I
suppose the Emperor, as your Majesty knows by his Ambassador, desires to
marry his Daughter with the King of Englands Son. I do not doubt but he will be
likewise glad to marry his Second Daughter with the Palatines Son: Then I
propound that these two England full satisfaction in all his Propositions for
the more strict Union and Correspondency, that he may agree to it. I hold for
certain, that all the Conveniences that would have followed the Alliance with
us, will be as full in this* and the Conveniences in the great Engagement are
more by this; for it does accommodate the matter of the Palatinate, and
Succession of his Grandchildren with Honor, and without drawing a Sword, and
wasting Treasure. With this Interest, the Emperor with the Conveniences of the
King of England and the Palatinate, the only means in my way of understanding
to hinder those great dangers that do threaten, may accommodate the business,
and not sever himself from the Conveniences and Engagements of Bavaria; and
after I would reduce the Prince Elector, that was an enemy, to the obedience of
the Church, by breeding his Sons in the Emperors Court with Catholic Doctrine.

The Business is great, the Difficulties greater perchance then have been in
any other case. I have found my self obliged to present this unto your Majesty,
and shall show, if you command me, what I think fit for the disposing of the
things, and of the great Ministers which your Majesty has. I hope, with the
particular Notes of these things, and all being helped with the good zeal of
the Conde Gondomar, it may be, God will open a way to it, a thing so much for
his, and your Majesty's


Such Consultations had the Catholic King in his Cabinet-Council, whilst he
pretended so much zeal to a Closure with England: Insomuch that King James
professed to have taken great contentment in the Dispatches of the Earl of
Bristol, as full and satisfactory. And though the Order sent to the Archduchess
for the Relief of Anheim arrived too late, yet he acknowledged it to be an
argument of that Kings sincere

But the Kings hopes were still deferred, and these Delays were palliated by
the stop of the Dispensation, till the Pope were further satisfied in the time
of the Childrens education under the Mothers government, and the exemption of
Ecclesiastical persons from all Secular jurisdiction. And the Spaniards did not
spare to stretch the Kings ductile spirit: For he was willing to stand obliged
by a private Letter, that the Children should be kept under the Mothers wing
till the age of Nine years; but

But this Enlargement would not satisfy; He must come up to the allowance of
Ten years, which was the lowest of all to be expected; and so he was brought at
length to wave his Honor, and to insure this Concession by a Public
Ratification. And for the Exemption of Ecclesiastics from the Secular power;
thus far he yielded, That the Ecclesiastical Superior do take notice of the
offense

Bristol's importunate Negotiation procured this Answer from the King of Spain.
Bristols Answer from the King of Spain*
First, touching the Marriage, being desirous to overcome all difficulties that
might hinder this union, he had endeavored to conform himself with the
Resolutions given by the King of Great Britain to the Popes Propositions, and
had dispatched a Post to Rome;

As touching the Palatinate, by his late Dispatches into Flanders, due course
is taken to settle all things as may be desired: But until it be known what
effects the same has wrought, and what the Emperor

Moreover, The Popes Demands signed by the King and Prince.
the Popes Demands to which King James took exceptions, being now accommodated
by the King of Spain, were sent into England, and presently signed by the King
and Prince, without the change of a word.

King James having strong assurance that the Dispensation must needs be granted
speedily, appointed his Agent Gage, who was now again at Rome, to present to
the Pope and certain Cardinals those Letters which lay in his hand to be
delivered at a fit season. The Kings Letter to the Pope, gave him the style of
Most Holy Father. Likewise he directed the Earl of Bristol to proceed to the
Temporal Articles, and to consummate the whole business.

Frankendale blocked up by Papenheim.
But while the King had so much zeal and confidence in his Applications Spain
and Rome, the Palatinate is left at random, upon the Spaniards loose and
general promises: For, Colonel Papenheim had blocked up Frankendale, the only
Hold whereby the Palsgrave kept a footing in his ruined Country. The
Imperialists laughed to think that the English Garrison should expect Relief by
the Orders sent from Spain to Bruxels: And when the King had made an offer to
sequester the Town of Frankendale into the Infanta's hands, upon the same
assurance from her which herself had offered before the loss of Manheim, (which
was

The King writes to Bristol.
In this state of affairs, the King wrote thus to his Ambassador in the Spanish
Court. Concerning the unfortunate knotty affair of the Palatinate, to say the
truth, as things now stand, we cannot tell what you could have done more then
you have already done. Moreover he showed, That the Bruxels while Heidelburgh
was taken, and Manheim beleaguered: As also Gages coming from Rome, and in
stead of the Dispensation, presenting him with new demands to engage him in a
Dispute or Treaty with the Pope, which he said he never intended. Wherefore at
the instance and persuasion of his Council, he was moved to urge the matter so,
as to bring it to a sudden period: Not but that the precisest of them were
always of opinion, That Frankendale by way of sequestration, upon condition of
restoring it in the case as now it stands, whether the Peace succeed or not.

The Electorate conferred upon the Duke of Bavaria in the Diet at Ratisbone.
But in the Diet held at Ratisbone, the Emperor declared the Palatine to be the
Cause and groundwork of all those Wars and miseries; and Bavaria, who in this
Cause and service had spent his Treasure, and hazarded his blood against his
own Nephew the Palsgrave.

The Protestant Princes plead for the Palatine's restitution.
The Protestant Princes desired the Emperor to consider, That in so high a Cause
as the disposing of an Electorate, and so principal a Person in the College of
Electors, who uncited, unheard, and without all knowledge of the Cause has
been condemned, and against were necessary in the first place to remove the
Obstacles, those extreme Executions in Bohemia, which may make that people
desperate, and which the Lutheran States following the Augustane Confession
have their eyes upon. And though it be given out, that the severity there
exercised is merely for private Justice, yet it is so linked with the Public
Cause, that unless it be speedily ended, and the two Churches in Prague again
opened, and the free exercise of Religion permitted, they can see no sure
Peace, but Palsgrave's person does exclude his Children, who by the providence
of their Ancestors, before this act of their Father, had an hereditary right
thereunto: Or whether that Palatine, who have been quiet hitherto upon
confidence of the Emperors clemency; But perceiving all hopes of recovering
the Electoral Dignity to their Family taken away, must needs have recourse to
Arms. They further added, That the Palatine was young, and abused by evil
Counsels, and no way the Author of the stirrs in Bohemia. Wherefore they give
their advice, That his restoring

The Catholic Princes answered, The Catholic Princes reply
That the Palatinate being devolved upon the Emperor, he may bestow it
according to his own pleasure; And that he cannot safely hold any terms of
Amity with the Palatine: That the impunity of so great an Offender, will
encourage others to offend: And as for bypast sufferings, there has been
little Mansfeld his General is yet in the Field, and prosecutes his Cause by
force of Arms.

The other Party replied, The Protestants reassume the argument.
That the security of the Imperial Dignity and the safety of the Empire
consisted in the Concord between the Emperor and the Princes Electors; And if
his Imperial Majesty shall use this rigor, the Princes of Lower Saxony are of
opinion that there can be no Peace established: But this desired Reconciliation
will give the Palatines Sons and Brother are passed by in the translation of
the Electorate; and the King of Great Britain cannot but take it ill, to see
his endeavors produce no better effect, but that his only Daughter and her
Children are left in Exile.

The Emperor takes up the debate, The Emperor takes up the debate.
and shows, That before the Palatine; which some that now dispute it, did
then declare to be legal and necessary: And this proscribed Enemy he will not
restore to the Electoral Dignity, nor yet defer to complete the number of
Electors.

Thus have we good words from Spain, and miserable usage from all the rest of
the House of Austria. Sir Dudley Carlton Ambassador Resident at the Hague, Sir
Dudley Carlton Resident at the ^^gue, sends his judgment of the matter to the
Marquis of Buckingham.
assured the Marquis of Buckingham, That though the Spanish Ambassador D' Ognat
in public opposed the Emperor in transferring the Electorate, yet the
judgment generally made upon it was this, That it was a mere Patelinage with a
secret understanding to abuse King James his goodness. Likewise the Emperor not
content to have chased the Palsgrave out of Germany, in the Propositions of the
former Palatine. Nevertheless King James resolved to wait upon the Match with
Spain, as the only means to consolidate these public fractures in
Christendom.

The Prince and the Marquis of Buckingham go to Spain.
And now behold a strange Adventure and Enterprise! The Prince and the Marquis
of Buckingham, accompanied with Cottington and Endimion Porter, Post in
Disguise to Spain to accelerate the Marriage. The February they went privately
from Court, and the next day came to Dover, where they imbarqued for Boloign,
and from thence rode Post to Paris, where they made some stop. The Prince,
shadowed under a bushy Peruque, beheld the splendour of that Court, and had a
full view of the Princess Henrietta Maria, who was afterward his Royal
Consort. For besides the great privacie of the Journey, they had so laid the
English Ports, that none should follow or give the least advertisement, until
they had gotten the start of Intelligencers, and passed the bounds of France.
Spain from Don Carlos Coloma was even at their heels before they arrived at
Madrid.

The Prince and Buckingham being in the Territories of Spain, to make but
little noise, rode Post before their Company. The 7. of March they arrived at
Madrid the Royal residence, and were conveyed with much secrecy into the Earl
of Bristols house. Buckingham visits Olivares, and by him is conducted to the
King.
The next morning the Earl acquainted Gondomar with the arrival of the Marquis
of Buckingham: Olivares Bristol, Sir Walter Aston, and Conde Gondomar, and met
this great Conde in a place near the Palace, and after some Converse was led by
a back-way into the Kings quarter, and had private Audience of the King; who
received him with extraordinary courtesies, and expressions of so great joy,
that might signify he was not ignorant of the Princes arrival also: Insomuch
that the Conde Olivares having procured Buckingham and kissed the Princes hands.

Orders for the Prince's entertainment.
After this, the King and State devise how to give his Highness the most
honorable reception. Instantly they decree, That upon all occasions of meeting
he shall have the precedencie of the King; That he shall make his entrance into
the Royal Palace in that form of State which is used by the Kings of Spain on
the day of their Coronation, and that one of the chief quarters in the Kings
house shall be prepared for his Lodgings;

The Common sort did magnify this brave Adventure, and express his Welcome by
shouts and acclamations of joy, and presently they marry him to the Infanta as
it were by public voice. And the King, to please him with a sight of his
Mistress, went abroad to visit a Monastery, with the Queen, the Infanta, and
his Brothers Don Carlos and the Infant-Cardinal: The Prince sees the Infanta.
So that his Highness had the happiness of a full View in several places.

The King in person gave him several Visits, Is entertained honorably by the
King.
and forced him to take the hand and place of him. Diverse Grandees and prime
Officers of State came to present their service, and as yet none did visit him
but by the Gondomar, to whom he ascribed his great contentment and honor
received by his Highness's presence; That he had made the Conde (whom he was
pleased to term an Englishman) one of his Council of State, to the end that
his Highness might be confident of their Proceedings, and privy to all their

The Prince, Makes his entrance publicly into Madrid.
on the day of Public Entrance, was attended in the morning by the Conde
Gondomar, and diverse Counselors of State, to S. Ierom's Monastery, the place
whence the Kings of Spain are wont to make their solemn entrance into Madrid on
the day of their Coronation: There the Prince was feasted, and served by diverse
great Officers of State waiting bare-headed. After dinner, the King came to
conduct his Highness through the Town to the Royal Palace, having prepared all
things

The King setting the Prince on his right hand, they rode in great glory under
a Canopy of State supported by the Regidors of the Town, who were arrayed in
Cloth of Tissue: The Nobility and Grandees of Spain attended by their several
Liveries, all very rich and costly, went before; And after came the Marquis of
Buckingham, and the Conde Olivares, executing their places of Masters of the
Horse; After them followed the Earl of Bristol and Sir Walter Aston,
accompanied with diverse

And being alighted at the Palace-gate, the King led the Prince to the Queens
quarters, where having entered her chamber, he was met and received by her with
great respect, in manner becoming the state of great Princes; three Royal seats
were placed, the Queen sat in the middle, the Prince on her right hand, and
the King on the left. His Highness was thence conducted by the King to the
Lodgings prepared for him; where after they had conversed a while, the King
left him.

The King sends the Prince two Golden Keys.
the Queen by her Major-domo gave him a further and very noble Welcome with
sundry rich Presents, as Perfumes and costly Wearing-Linen. The King sent him
two Golden Keys, which would open all his Privy-lodgings and his Bedchamber,
giving him to understand that he had free access unto him at all hours.

The Counselors of State presented themselves to let him know, The Grandees
are commanded to attend his Highness.
That by the Kings express command they were to obey his Highness as exactly as
the King himself. He was constantly attended and served with Grandees and
Tituladoes, and was entertained with many Shows and Triumphs, and several daily
Pastimes. And one day running at the Ring in company of diverse of the Nobility,
his Higness was the only Person that bore the Ring away, and that in presence
of the Infanta his Mistress, which was interpreted a good Omen at the beginning
of his Achievement. In fine, there wanted nothing which the wit of man could
devise for the height of outward glory: The Governors of the Town presented the
Marquis of Buckingham with the rich Cloth of State which was borne over the
King and Prince in the great Solemnity, as a Fee belonging to the Place which
he then executed.

The Marquis of Buckingham made Duke.
From the Court of England many Lords and Gentlemen went after the Prince, that
by a splendid Train and Retinue of his own People he might appear as the Prince
of England. And the Marquis of Buckingham was then made a Duke, by a Patent
sent from England.

The people talk, that the Prince is come to change his Religion.
This magnificent Entertainment, and the universal Joy in Spain, was grounded on
the hope of the Prince's turning Catholic: For the voice of the people went,
That he was come to be a Christian: And the Conde Olivares, when he gave him
the first Visit, did congratulate his Arrival with these expressions; That the
Match should be made presently, and that the Kings of Spain and England should
divide the World between them; For that he did not question, but he came
thither to be of their Religion. Whereunto the Prince answered, That he came
not thither

Endeavors to make the Prince change his Religion.
But there wanted no endeavors to reconcile the Prince, and by him the British
Dominions to the Sea of Rome. Gregory the Fifteenth, then Pope, Quare
Apostoli^is literis hortamur Catholicam Majestatem, ut eum Principem redigere
suaviter conetur sub Romanae Ecclesiae ditionem, cui veteres Magnae Britanniae
Domini, coronatum caput, and imperii fasces (Coelo plaudente) submiserunt.

Quare te monemus, ut ad Catholicum Regem religiosus Consiliarius accedas,
easque rations despicias quibus insigne aliquod beneficium Britanniae Regnis
and Romanae Ecclesiae in praesenti rerum opportunitate comparetur. Res ipsa
magna atque gravissima est; quare eum verbis amplificare non debemus; Regnum
Coelorum Britanniae Principi patefacere, Regnum Britanniae sedi Apostolicae
restituere incipiet, qui Regii istius Adoloscentis animum Catholicae Religionis
studio inflamaverit, atque haeriticae impietatis odio impleverit, etc.


exhorted the Bishop of Conchen Inquisitor-General of Spain, to improve the
opportunity: And he sought to charm the Prince, by writing a very smooth Letter
to him: Yea, he condescended to write to Buckingham his Guide and Familiar, to
incline him to the Romish religion. And the Pope also wrote a Letter to the
Prince, the tenor whereof

The Pope's Letter to the Prince of Wales.
MOst Noble Prince, We wish you the health and light of Gods grace. Forasmuch as
Great Britain has always been fruitful in virtues, and in men of great worth,
having filled the one and the other World with the glory of her renown, She
does also very often draw the thoughts of the Holy Apostolical Chair to the
consideration of her praises. And indeed, the Church was but then in her
infancy, when the King of Kings did choose her for his inheritance, and so
affectionately, that it is believed the Roman Eagles were hardly there before
the Banner of the Cross. Besides that, many of her Kings instructed Great
Britain adorned and furnished with Moral virtues which might serve to support
the charity we bear unto her, and be an ornament to the name of Christianity,
if

Moreover, it being certain that Gregory the Great of most blessed memory has
introduced to the people of England, and taught to their Kings the law of the
Gospel, and the respect of Apostolical authority; We, as inferior to him in
holiness and virtue, but equal in name and degree of dignity, think it very
reasonable, that we following his blessed footsteps, should endeavor the
salvation of those Provinces, especially at this time when you design (most
Noble Prince) elevates us to the hope of an extraordinary advantage. Therefore
as you have Spain toward the Catholic King, with desire to ally your self to
the House of Austria, We do commend your design, and indeed do testify openly
in this present business, that you are he that takes principal care of our
Prelacy: For seeing that you desire to take in marriage the Daughter of Spain,
from thence we may easily conjecture, that the ancient seeds of Christian piety
which have so happily flourished in the hearts of the Kings of Great Britain,
may (God prospering them) revive again in your soul. And indeed it is not to be
believed, that the same man should love such an Alliance, that Great Britain,
in possession of that most noble Heritage which your Ancestors purchased for
you, to defend the authority of the Sovereign High Priest, and to fight against
the Monsters of Heresy. Remember the days of old, enquire of your Fathers, and
they will tell you the way that leads to Heaven, and what way the Temporal
Princes have taken to England, who came from England to Rome accompanied with
Angels, did come to honor and do homage to the Lord of Lords, and to the Prince
of the Apostles in the Apostolical Chair; their actions and their examples
being as so many voices of God, speaking and exhorting you to follow the course
of the lives of those, to whose Empire you shall one day attain.

Is it possible that you can suffer that the Heretics should hold them for
Britain for the defense of Kingdoms, and for a Divine Oracle. The which will
easily come to pass, and that without difficulty, if you open your heart to the
Lord that knocks; upon which depends all the happiness of that Kingdom. It is
from this our great charity, that we cherish the praises of the Royal Name, and
that Great Britain.

This is it we hope for, trusting in the goodness of God, in whose hands are
the hearts of Kings, and who causes the people of the earth to receive
healing, to whom we will always labor with all our power to render you
gracious and favorable. In the interim take notice by these Letters of the care
of our charity, which is none other then to procure your happiness: And it will
never grieve us to have written them, if the reading of them stir but the least
spark of the Catholic faith in the heart of so great a Prince; whom we wish to
be filled with long continuance of joy, and flourishing in the glory of all
Virtues.

Given at Rome in the Palace of S. Peter, the 20. of April, 1623. in the Third
year of our Popedom.


Gregorius P. P. XV. Duci Buckinghamiae.
NObilis Vir, Salutem and lumen Divinae gratiae. Authoritas qua Nobilitatem
tuam in Britanna Regia florere accepimus, non modo meritorum praemium, sed
virtutis patrocinium habetur. Egregium plane decus, atque adeo dignum, cui
populi illi addi cupiant diuturnitatem. Verum vix dici potest quantus ei
cumulus gloriae in orb terrarum accederet, si (Deo favente) foret Catholicae
religionis praesidium; facultatem certe nancisceris, qua te eorum Principum
conciliis inserere potes, qui nominis immortalitatem adepti ad coelestia regna
pervenerunt. Hanc tibi a Deo tributam, and a Pontifice Romano commendatam
occasionem, ne elabi patiare, Nobilis vir. Non te praeterit, regalium
consiliorum conscium, quo in loco Britanna res hac aetate sit, quibusque
Spiritus sancti loquentis vocibus, Principum tuorum aures quotidie personent.
Quae gloria esset nominis si te hortatore ac suasore, Anglicani Reges coelestem
illius gloriae haereditatem recuperarent quam Majores eorum amplissimam in iis
regnis reliquerunt, divini cultus incrementa curando, and Pontificiae
authoritatis ditione, non solum tuenda, sed etiam propaganda! Multi fuerunt,
atque erunt in posterum, quos benevolentia Regum perituris divitiis
locupletavit, and invidiosis titulis auxit; atque ut id Nobilitas tua
consequatur, non ideo sempiternis laudibus nomen tuum memor posteritas colet;
at enim si consilia tua potentissimos Reges populosque ad Ecclesiae gremium
reducerent; scriberetur nomen tuum in libro viventium quos non tangit tormentum
mortis ac te Historiarum Monumenta in eos sapientes referrent in quorum
splendore Reges ambulaverunt* Quibus autem te praesentis vitae solatiis and
futurae praemiis remunetaretur Deus ille, qui dives est in mise^icordia, omnes
facile provident quibus nota est ars, and vis, qua Regnum Coelorum expugnatur.
Tantae te saelicitatis compotem fieri ut cupiamus efficit non solum Pontificia
Charitas, ad cujus curas totius humani generis salus pertinet, sed etiam
genetricis tuae pietas, quae cum te mundo peperie Romanae etiam ecclesiae quam
ipsa matrem suam agnovit iterum parere cupit: Proin cum in Hispanias
profectionem paret dilectus Filius religiosus vir Didacus de la Fuente, qui
gravissima principum tuorum negotia in urbe fapienter Administravit, ei
mandavimus ut Nobilitatem tuam adeat atque has Apostolicas literas deferat
quibus Pontificiae Charitatis magnitudo and salutis tuae cupido declaretur. Cum
ergo audire poteris sententiae nostrae interpretem, atque iis virtutibus
instructum quae exterarum Nationum amorem Catholico etiam and Religioso
Sacerdoti conci^lare potuerunt. Ille quidem ea do te in hac orbis Patria
praedicavit, ut dignus sit quem singulari affectu complectaris and Authoritate
tua Munias Britannorum Regum populorumque saluti and gloriae inservientem nos
quidem Patrem Misericordiarum Orabimus ut Nobilitati tuae coelestis Regni fores
patefaciat and frequentia praebeat Clementiae suae documenta.

Datum Romae apud sanctam Mariam Majorem sub Annulo Piscatoris, die 19 Maii.
1623, Pontificatus nostri Tertio.
Pope Gregory to the D. of Buckingham.
RIght honorable, we wish you health and the light of Gods grace. The authority
which we understand you have in the Court of England, is accounted Rome.
England are in this our Age, and with what voices of the Holy Ghost speaking --
the ears of your Princes daily tingle. How greatly would you be renowned, if by
your persuasion and admonition the King of England should obtain with
everlasting praises: But if your advice should reduce Potent Kings and Nations
to the Lap of the Church, your name would be written in the Book of the Living,
whom the pangs of death assault not, and the Records of Historians would number
you among Rome, whom she Didacus de la Fuente our beloved Son, a Friar, who
has prudently managed the most important affairs of your Princes here in Rome,
being to go to Spain, we have commanded him to wait upon your Honor, and to
deliver you those Apostolical Letters to evidence Britain. We will pray the
Father of Mercies, that he would open the doors of the Kingdom

Given at Rome apud sanctam Mariam Majorem sub Annulo Piscatoris, 19 Maii,
1623. being the First year of our Reign
The Prince of Wales returned this following Answer to the Popes Letter
(according to a Copy preserved by some then in Spain at the Treaty.)

CAROLVS Princeps Gregorio P.P. XV.
Sanctissime Pater,
There is another Copy of the Princes Letter to the Pope, published by several
hands, somewhat different from this.
BEatitudinis vestrae Litteras non minore gratitudine and observantia accepimus,
quam exigat ea qua novimus exaratas insignis benevolentia, and pietatis
affectus. Atque illud imprimis gratum fuit, nunquam satis laudata Majorum
exempla inspicienda Nobis a vestra Sanctitate atque imitanda fuisse proposita:
Qui licet multoties omnium fortunarum and vitae ipsius discrimen adiverint, quo
fidem Christianam latius propagarent, haud tamen alacriori animo in
infestissimos Christi hosts, Crucis Christi vexilla intulerunt, quam nos omnem
opem and operam adhibebimus ut quae tam diu exaltavit pax and unitas, in
Christianam Rempublicam postliminio reducatur. Cum enim Discordiarum Patris
malitia inter illos ipsos qui Christianam profitentur Religionem tam infelicia
seminarit dissidia, hoc vel maxim necessarium ducimus ad Sacrosanctam Dei and
Salvatoris Christi gloriam faelicius promovendam. Et minori nobis honori
futurum existimabimus, tritam Majorum Nostrorum vestigiis insistentes viam, in
piis ac Religiosis susceptis illorum aemulos atque imitatores extitisse, quam
genus nostrum ab illis atque originem duxisse. Atque ad idem nos istud plurimum
in^lammat perspecta no^is Domini Regis ac Patris nostri voluntas, and quo
flagrat desiderium ad tam Sanctum opus porrigendi manum auxiliatricem, tum qui
Regium pectus exedit dolor, cum perpendit quam saevae exoriantur strages, quam
deplorandae calamitates ex principum Christianorum dissensionibus. Judicium
vero quod Sanctitas vestra tulit de nostro cum domo ac Principe Catholico
Affinitatem and Nuptias contrahendi desiderio, and Charitati vestrae est
consentaneum, nec a sapientia invenietur alienum. Nunquam tanto quo ferimur
studio, nunquam tam arcto and tam indissolubili vinculo ulli Mortalium conjungi
cuperemus, cujus odio Religionem prosequeremur. Quare Sanctitas vestra illud in
animum inducat, ea modo nos esse semperque futuros moderatione, ut quam
longissime abfuturi simus ab omni opere quod odium testari possit ullam
adversus Religionem Catholicam Romanam: Omnes potius captabimus occasiones quo
leni benignoque rerum cursu sinistrae omnes suspiciones e medio penitus
tollantur. Ut sicut omnes unam individuam Trinitatem, and unum Christum
Crucifixum confitemur, in unam fidem unanimiter coalescamus: Quod ut
assequamur, labores omnes atque vigilias, Regnorum etiam atque vitae pericula
parvi pendimus. Reliquum est ut quas possumus maximas, pro literis quas
insignis muneris loco ducimus, gratias agentes, Sanctitati vestrae omnia
prospera and faelicitatem aeternam comprecamur.

Datum Matriti, 20 Iunii. 1623.
Prince Charles to Pope Gregory XV.
Most Holy Father,
WE have received your Letter with no less thankfulness and respect, then is
due to the singular good will and godly affection wherewith we know it was
written. agreeable both to your Wisdom and Charity; for we would never desire
so vehemently to be joined in a strict and indissoluble Bond with any Mortal
whatsoever, whose Religion we hated. Therefore your Holiness may be assured,
That we are, and always will be of that Roman Catholic Religion; we will
rather embrace all occasions whereby through a gentle and fair procedure all
sinister suspicions may be taken away; That as we all confess one Individual
Trinity, and one

Dated at Madrid. 20 Iunii, 1623.
Orations, Processions, and pompous shows were made in Spain, to allure the
Prince to Popery; Allurements to make the Prince change his Religion.
Popish Books were dedicated, and Popish Pictures presented to him. They
carried him to the most Religious places, and to persons famous for pretended
Miracles. And they show him of what importance his Conversion is, to the
gaining of a large entrance into the Infanta's affection, and a smooth path to
this Catholic Marriage. England should follow his change of Religion, they
offer an Army to subdue the Rebels.

But the Prince remained steadfast in his Religion; The Prince steadfast in his
Religion,
neither did he express any show of change.

But as to the interior carriage of Affairs, notwithstanding his splendid
entertainment to the height of Princely State, yet in the main business he was
meanly dealt with, and in his Addresses to the Infanta, unworthily restrained
and undervalued.

Is not well dealt with in his Address to the Infanta. The Dispensation is at
last procured.
The Dispensation sticks long in the Birth, but after a tedious Travel, it was
brought forth: Mr. George Gage advertised the King from Rome, That the
Cardinals made mention of him in most honorable Language, and had a firm
opinion, that the former Rigor toward Catholics, has risen from others, but
the Graces vouchsafed to them from himself; and they were now confident that
such potent intercessions

Furthermore, he assured the King, That such difficulties as were already
spent, and were yet to come, have been laid hold on by the Cardinals; neither
to frustrate, nor prolong this Treaty, but ou^ of an opinion, that otherwise
they could not secure their Consciences, proceed upon a just and valuable
ground, and satisfy the judgments of such discreet

The Dispensation comes clogged.
So the long solicited Dispensation came from Pope Gregory the Fifteenth, to the
Court of Spain. But whereas it was expected full and absolute, it came with a
Clog, a Clause thrust in of purpose to retard the proceedings.

That whereas there were certain Articles condiscended unto by the King of
England, in favor of the Roman Catholics in his Dominions, England. But this
would not satisfy, unless some Sovereign Catholic Prince would stand engaged
for them. Hereupon the frame of things was like to fall a sunder, and a rumor
went, that the Prince intended to get away covertly.

Olivares proposes ways of Accommodation.
Amidst the heats of this dispute, Olivares (whither in a humor or Charles should
become Catholic. The second, That the Infanta should be delivered to him upon
the former security, without further condition. The third was, to bind him as
fast as they could, and not trust him with any thing. And of these three ways,
he said, The two former were good, but the last was a bad one.

The King of Spain proffers to engage himself on the behalf of the King of
England and the Prince.
At length the King of Spain proffered to engage himself by Oath on the behalf
of the King and Prince for the performance of the Articles. England, if the
Roman Catholics received not satisfaction in the enjoyment of the Freedom
promised. Besides he would form a party in these Dominions to a Dependence upon
his Protection.

His Ghostly Fathers approve his intentions.
A Iuncto of Divines were called to determine upon the Case, and England fail to
execute what was stipulated, the King of Spain was to vindicate his Oath, and
right himself by the Sword.

Then was the Match declared publicly, and the Prince had frequent access to
the Infanta, yet always in a public manner, and in the Kings presence. The
Match is declared publicly.


Whilst these things were forging in Spain, there were not wanting such as
warned the King, and tendered safer Counsels. The Archbishop of Canterbury was
bold to press him close in this serious Letter.

May it please Your Majesty,
I Have been too long silent, and am afraid by my silence I have neglected the
duty of the place it has pleased God to call me unto, The Archbishops Letter
to the King against Toleration of Popery.
and your Majesty to place me in: But now I humbly crave leave, I may discharge
my Conscience toward God, and my duty to your Majesty; and therefore I beseech
you freely Rome, the Whore of Babylon: How hateful it will be to God, and
grievous to your good Subjects, the Professors of the Gospel, That your Majesty
who has often disputed, and learnedly written against those Heresies, should
now show your self a Patron of those wicked Doctrines which your Pen has told
Spain without consent of your Council, the Privity and Approbation of your
People: And although you have a Charge and Interest in the Prince, as Son of
your Flesh; yet have the people a greater, as Son of the Kingdom, upon whom
next after your Majesty are their Eyes fixed and welfare depends; and so
tenderly is his going apprehended, as (believe it) however his return may be
safe; yet the drawers of him into this Action, so dangerous to himself, so

Thus in discharge of my duty toward God, to your Majesty, and the place of my
Calling, I have taken humble leave to deliver my Conscience. Now Sir, do what
you please with me.


The King would not admit any Motion of drawing back, but in going forward, he
would yield to all demands, and was accordingly scrued

So at last the Difficulties in Rome and Spain were all surmounted; and then
these following Articles [Stiled by the Cardinals, Propositions for the right
Augmentation and Weal of the Roman Catholic Religion] were sworn unto by the
King, Prince and Privy Council.

I. THat the Marriage be made by Dispensation of the Pope, but that to be
procured by the endeavor of the King of Spain. Articles sworn to by the King,
Prince, and Privy Council.


II. That the Marriage be once only celebrated in Spain, and ratified in
England, in form following. In the Morning after the most Gracious Infanta has
ended her Devotions in the Chapel, she and the most Excellent Prince Charles,
shall meet in the Kings Chapel, or in some other Room of the Palace, where it
shall seem most expedient; Spain; and as well the most Excellent Prince, as the
most Excellent Infanta, shall ratify the said Marriage celebrated in Spain,
with all solemnity necessary for such an Act; so as no Ceremony or other thing
intervene, which shall be contrary to the Roman Catholic Apostolic Religion.

III. That the most Gracious Infanta, shall take with her such Servants and
Family as are convenient for her service; which Family, Britain, without his
will and consent.

IV. That as well the most Gracious Infanta, as all her Servants and Family,
shall have free use and public Exercise of the Roman Catholic Religion, in
manner and form as is beneath capitulated.

V. That she shall have an Oratory and Decent Chapel in her Palace; where, at
the pleasure of the most Gracious Infanta, Masses London, or wheresoever she
shall make her abode, a Public and Capacious Church near her Palace, wherein
all Duties may be solemnly celebrated, and all other things necessary for the
Public Preaching of Gods Word, the Celebration and Administration of all the
Sacraments of the Catholic Roman Church, and for burial of the Dead, and
Baptizing of Children. That the said Oratory, Chapel, and Church, shall be
adorned with such decency as shall seem convenient to the most Gracious
Infanta.

VI. That the Menservants and Maidservants of the most Gracious Infanta, and
their Servants, Children, and Descendents, and all their Families of what sort
soever serving her Highness, may be freely and publicly Catholics.

VII. That the most Gracious Infanta, her Servants and Family, may live as
Catholics in form following. That the most Gracious Infanta shall have in her
Palace, her Oratory and Chapel so spacious, that her said Servants and Family
may enter and stay therein; in which there Infanta may have a passage into the
said Chapel, where she and other as abovesaid may be present at Divine Offices.

VIII. That the Chapel, Church, and Oratory, may be beautified with decent
Ornaments of Altars, and other things necessary for Divine Service, which is to
be celebrated in them according to the custom of the Holy Roman Church; and
that it shall be lawful for the said Servants and others, to go to the said
Chapel and Church at all

X. That the care and custody of the said Chapel and Church shall be committed
to such as the Lady Infanta shall appoint, to whom it shall be lawful to
appoint Keepers, that no body may enter into them to do any undecent thing.

XI. That to the Administration of the Sacraments, and to serve in Chapel and
Church aforesaid, there shall be Four and twenty Priests and Assistants, who
shall serve weekly or monthly, as to the Infanta shall seem fit, and the
Election of them shall belong to the Lady Infanta, and the Catholic King.
Provided, That they be none of the Vassals of the King of Great Britain, and if
they be, his will and consent is to be first obtained.



XIII. That this Bishop or Superior Minister, may Correct and Chastise all
Roman Catholics who shall offend, and shall exercise upon them all
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical: And moreover also the Lady Infanta shall have
power to put them out of her service, whenever it shall

XIV. That it may be lawful for the Lady Infanta and her Servants, to procure
from Rome, Dispensations, Indulgences, Jubilees, and all Graces, as shall seem
fit to their Religion, and Consciences, and to get and make use of any manner
of Catholic Books whatsoever.

XV. That the Servants and Family of the Lady Infanta, who shall come into
England, shall take the Oath of Allegiance to the King Britain: Provided, That
there be no clause therein which shall be contrary to their Consciences, and
the Roman Catholic Religion; and if they happen to be Vassals to the King of
Great Britain, they shall take the same Oath that the Spaniards do.

XVI. That the Laws which are or shall be in England against Religion shall not
take hold of the said Servants; and only the foresaid Superior Ecclesiastical
Catholic may proceed against Ecclesiastical persons, as has been accustomed
by Catholics: And if any Secular

XVII. That the Laws made against Catholics in England, or in any other
Kingdom of the King of Great Britain, shall not extend to the Children of this
Marriage; and though they be Catholics, they shall not lose the right of
Succession to the Kingdom and Dominions Britain.

XVIII. That the Nurses which shall give suck to the Children of the Lady
Infanta, (whither they be of the Kingdom of Great Britain, or of any other
Nation whatsoever) shall be chosen by the Lady Infanta, as she pleases, and
shall be accounted of her Family, and enjoy the privileges thereof.

XIX. That the Bishop, Ecclesiastical and Religious persons of the Family of
the Lady Infanta, shall wear the Vestment and Habit of Rome.

XX. For security that the said Matrimony be not dissolved for any cause
whatsoever: The King and Prince are equally to pass the Word and Honor of a
King; and moreover, that they will perform whatsoever shall be propounded by
the Catholic King for further confirmation, if it may be done decently and
fitly.

XXI. That the Sons and Daughters which shall be born of this Marriage, shall
be brought up in the company of the most Excellent Infanta, at the least, until
the age of Ten years, and shall freely enjoy the right of Successions to the
Kingdoms as aforesaid.

XXII. That whenever any place of either Manservant, or Maidservant, which
the Lady Infanta shall bring with her (nominated by the Catholic King her
Brother) shall happen to be void, whether by death or by other cause or
accident, all the said Servants of her

XXIII. For security that whatsoever is capitulated, may be fulfilled, The King
of Great Britain, and Prince Charles are to be bound by Oath; and all the Kings
Council shall confirm the said Treaty under their hands: Moreover the said King
and Prince are to give their Faiths in the Word of a King, to endeavor, if
possible, That whatsoever is capitulated, may be established by Parliament.

XXIV. That conformable to this Treaty, all these things proposed,

The Oath taken by the King and Prince, was as follows.

WE Ratifying and confirming the aforesaid Treaty, and all The Oath.
and specified in the same, do approve, applaud, confirm, and ratify of our
certain knowledge, all and every of these things in as much as they concern our
Selves, our Heirs, or our Successors: And we promise by these presents in the
word of a King, to keep, fulfill, and observe the same; and to cause them to be
kept, fulfilled and observed inviolably, firmly, well and faithfully,
effectually, Bona fide, without all exception, and contradiction. And we
confirm the same with an Oath, upon the Holy in the presence of the Illustrious
and Noble John de Mendoza, Charles de Colona, Ambassadors of the most Gracious
Catholic ^ing, residing in our Court.

In Testimony and Witness of all and every the premises, we have caused our
Great Seal to be put to those Articles subscribed by our Hands there, in the
presence of the most Reverend Father in Christ, George Archbishop of
Canterbury, Primate of all England, and the Reverend Father in Christ, John
Bishop of Lincoln, Lord Keeper of England, Lionel Cranfield, Chief Treasurer of
England, Henry Uiscount Mandevil, President of our Council, Edward Earl of
Worcester, Keeper of the Privy Seal, Lewis Duke of Richmond, and Lenox Lord
Steward of our Household, James Marquess Hamilton, James Earl of Carlisle,
Thomas Earl of Kelly, Oliver Uiscount Grandeson, etc. and George Calvert,
Knight, one of our Chief Secretaries of State, and all of our Privy Council.

Given at our Palace of Westminster, etc.

JACOBUS Rex.

After this the King did swear to certain private Articles, in favor of
Papists, and for the advancement of the Roman Religion.

JAMES by the grace of God of Great Britain King, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all to whom this present-writing shall come, greeting. Inasmuch as among
many other things which are contained within the Treaty of Marriage between our
most dear Son Charles Prince of Wales, and the most renowned Lady Donna Maria
Sister of the most renowned Prince and our welbeloved Brother Philip the Fourth
King Spain, It is agreed, That we by our Oath shall approve the Articles
under-expressed to a word: 1. That particular Laws made against Roman
Catholics, Private Articles sworn to by the King in favor of Roman Catholics.
under which other Vassals of our Realms are not comprehended, and to whose
observation all generally are not obliged; as likewise general Laws under which
all are equally comprised, if so be they are such which are repugnant to the
Romish religion, shall not at any time hereafter by any means or chance
whatsoever directly or indirectly be commanded to be put in execution against
the said Roman Catholics; and we will cause 2. That no other Laws shall
hereafter be made anew against the said Roman Catholics, but that there shall
be a perpetual Toleration of the Roman Catholic Religion within private houses
throughout all our Realms and Dominions, which we will have to be understood as
well of our Kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland as in England; which shall be
granted to them in manner and form as is capitulated, decreed and granted in
the Article of the Treaty concerning the Marriage. That neither by us, nor by
any other interposed person whatsoever, directly or indirectly, privately or
publicly, will we treat (or attempt) any thing with the most renowned Lady
Infanta Donna Maria, which shall be repugnant to the Romish Catholic religion;
Neither will we by any means persuade her that she should ever renounce or
relinquish the same in substance or form, or that she should do any thing
repugnant or contrary to those things which are contained in the Treaty of
Matrimony. 4. That We and the Prince of Wales will interpose our authority, and


MOreover I Charles Prince of Wales engage my self (and promise that the most
Illustrious King of Great Britain, my most honored Lord and Father, shall do
the same both by word and writing) That all those things which are contained in
the foregoing Articles, and concern as well the suspension as the abrogation of
all Laws made against the Roman Catholics, shall within three years infallibly
take effect, and G. Britain my father, that the ten years of the education of
the children which shall be born of this marriage, with the most illustrious
Lady Infanta their mother, accorded in the 23 Art. (which term the Pope of Rome
desires to have prorogued to twelve years) may be lengthened to the said term*
And I promise freely and of my own accord, and swear, That if it so happen that
the entire power of disposing of this matter be d^volved to me, I will also
grant and approve the said term.

Furthermore I Prince of Wales oblige my self upon my faith to the Catholic
King, That as often as the most illustrious Lady Infanta shall require that I
should give ear to Divines or others whom her Highness shall be pleased to
employ in matter of the Roman Catholic religion, I will hearken to them
willingly without all difficulty, and laying Charles Prince of Wales promise and
take upon me in the word of a King, that the things above promised and treated
concerning those matters, shall take effect and be put in execution as well in
the Kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland, as of England.

The Privy-Councellors Oath was this: I A.B. do swear, That I will truly and
fully observe, as much as belongs to me, all and every of the Articles which
are contained in the Treaty of Marriage between the most gracious Charles Prince
of Wales, and the most gracious Lady Donna Maria, Infanta of Spain. Likewise I
swear, that I will neither commit to execution, nor cause to be executed either
by my self, or by any inferior Officer serving me, any Laws made against any
Roman Catholic whatsoever, nor will execute any punishment inflicted by any of
those Laws, but in all things which belong

A difficulty concerning the Popes title on the Kings part.
But in the taking of the solemn Public Oath, it is said there arose a
difficulty between the King and the Spanish Ambassadors concerning the Popes
title, Most holy; which the King refused to pronounce openly in the Chapel at
Whitehall, alleging that it was repugnant to his Religion, and might be an
impeachment to his honor: But the Ambassadors would proceed no further, till
the King had yielded to give him that Title.

Another on the Ambassadors part concerning prayers in the Kings Chapel.
There was another rub, which the King soon removed. The Ambassadors had heard,
that in the Kings Chapel when they should come to see the swearing of the
Articles, they should be present at such Prayers and Singing as were used in
the Protestant Church; whereunto they declared that they could not yield, since
the end of their coming thither was to maintain and warrant the Catholic,
Apostolical, and Roman Church. Whereupon the King commanded, that nothing
should then be sung, but what was chanted when the Constable of Castile did
swear the Peace between

A titular Bishop of Calcedon sent into England.
At that time England had swarms of Priests and Jesuits, who were busy in
drawing the people from the Protestant religion: And a titular Bishop of
Calcedon privately came to London, to exercise Episcopal jurisdiction over the
Catholics of this Kingdom.

Preparations for conducting the Infanta into England.
It Is said that King James had now so much confidence of the Match, as to say
openly in the Court, That now all the Devils in hell could not break it. In
Spain the Infanta was styled the Princess of England, and was kept no longer in
her Virgin-retirements. In England a Chapel was S. James, and Don Carlos de
Colona laid the first stone: Her Picture was everywhere to be seen, and a
Fleet was prepared for her passage: And the greatest Enemies to this Alliance
submitted to the Kings will. But in all this Capitulation between the two
Crowns, hitherto the Restitution of the Palatinate was laid aside; the King
conceiving that the Consummation of the Match would overrule and settle that
affair to his entire satisfaction. No mention made in the Capitulations of
restoring the Palatine.


In the height of the Spanish Treaty, there was a notable Letter writ from Mr.
Alured to the Duke, persuading him not only to endeavor the breaking off the
Match with Spain, but also the preventing of any Match with a Princess of a
different Religion.

THe Parable in the Gospel (said he) tells of a great King that married his
Son, Mr. Allured his Letter to the Duke.
and bade many thereunto; yea, upon the excusal of some, and re^usal of others,
all of whatsoever condition, as well out of the highways (as the high places)
were called and invited. As every true Christian has an interest in the
Marriage of that Kings Son of Heaven, so every good Subject, as well as every
great Subject, has an interest in the Marriage and welfare of the Kings Son
here on Earth. Which occasions so many (and me the Spain, since the motioning
of that Match makes a general fear, that it can neither be safe for the Kings
person, nor good for his Church and Commonwealth, because that thereby there
may be an inlet to the Romish Locusts, who like the Cankerworm may in an
instant smite our Gourd, under whose shadow we sit safe.

To address this poor discourse to your Lordships more particular: Kings have
almost ever used to have their Favorites: Alexander had long since Ephestion,
and Henry the Third of France of late his Espernon, and Philip of Spain had
since his Lermas. Yea, the best Princes have not wanted them: For after the
reckoning of David's great Officers, Hushai the Archyte is called the Kings
Friend, and Ira the Iarite is set down to have been Chief about David. Which
stands to Reason, and agrees with Nature: For every private man is left to
affect as he likes; neither can Affection be forced. Now to disallow or confine
that in a King, which is left at liberty in the meanest Subject, were
preposterous and injurious: For though they command Nations as Christ, the
rather to show himself a Natural man, expressed so much ^he more his Passion in
his often weeping, and his Affection to diverse particulars, but especially to
S. John, if I may not say his Favorite, certainly the Disciple whom Jesus loved
more then any of the rest. It is Gods blessing, and your happiness, if you
account it so, to be the Kings Favorite. As Peter therefore not presuming to
ask Christ who it was he spoke of, Eliezar of Damascus, whom Abraham had meant,
had he died childless, to have made his heir; and we read not of any service he
did Abraham Isaac. Among the Servants of our Patriarch, the Defender of our
Faith, we observe none better respected then your self; For the King has
manifested, he loves not your person only, but takes care for your soul, and
labors to make you as good as great, and as happy in another world, as high in
this: Yet we know not wherein you can do him better service, then with Eliezar
to help to choose a Rebeccah for our hopeful Prince.

We have not heard (said he) of any Protestant King that ever married with a
contrary Religion, save the last Henry of Navar with the last Margaret of
France: which Marriage so unfortunate to the parties (having never Issue) and
being afterward divorced, was also so fatal to our Religion, that there was
more Blood spilt at those Nuptials, then Wine spent: For while the Protestants
dreamed of the glory and security they should have by the Match, they were most
miserably massacred. And who doubts but what the French Papists committed in
their own Country upon that color and occasion, the Spanish Papists would be
glad to see done in this Kingdom upon the like? For without breach of charity
we may doubt of their sincere meaning, though there be a Treaty of a Match:
since in Eighty Eight, even while there was a Treaty of Peace, their Armado
came upon us.

Again, we shall find it was forbidden in the best people in the world, to
marry with a differing Religion. The injunction, the reason, and the effect are
laid down in Deuteronomy to the Jews.

And if we descend to our own Books and Chronicles, we shall find that God
Black Prince: Yet our Chronicle records, that going into Spain to settle Don
Pedro in that Kingdom, besides the monstrous ingratitude and peafidiousness of
the Spaniard, who failed in the performance of those Conditions he had
promised, which caused the miserable Revolt in France to the

Moreover he beseeched his Lordship to observe, that all the Marriages which
the Heirs and Princes of this Crown have made in England for these last
six-score years, except the several second Matches of Henry the Eight, have
been only and nowhere else but with Spain; which how little God has blessed,
the success shows. Prince Arthur married the Spanish Kings daughter: We know
God took him away suddenly within a very small time, and without any issue.
Henry (afterward King) married the same daughter: But doubtless God was less
pleased with that Match, which was less lawful; and therefore God took away all
the male-children of it, and left only a daughter, in whose short Reign was
shed more blood for the true Religion in six years, then for the false in these
succeeding sixty years. We made then a third Adventure and Marriage with Spain,
Queen Mary with King Philip: which was so discontenting to the People, that it
caused Wyats Rebellion; so discomfortable to the Queen, that it Spaniards sake,
we having no difference at all with France, we lost Calis in six days, which
had been above two hundred years in our possession.

He added lastly, Though I have not so much judgment, nor so little wit as to
presume to advise where to match; yet I assume so much, as to think, a Match at
home cannot be held any ways inconvenient. We find the first and the last of
our Kings that ever matched with their Subjects, were Ed. 4. and Hen. 8. From
which two Matches, God (as it were to show, the less we rely upon others
Elizabeth's, two such Queens, then which there were never two more blessed
Instruments of Gods glory and this Kingdoms good, by establishing Peace in the
Land, and Religion in the Church, until his Majesty's happy coming who brought
both with him.


The French were very jealous of the Conjunction between Spain and England, and
thought it the safest way to make peace at home, and employ their strength to
bound the Encroachments of Spain and the House of Austria: The French jealous
of this conjunction.
By which means a bitter Persecution ceased in that Kingdom; The Protestants of
France were permitted to call home their banished Ministers, to build their
ruined Temples, and to enjoy their liberty Spain procure to a people almost
ruined.

But after all the Kings concessions, the Spaniards contrived new delays, and
proposed harder terms. The Pope had obliged the Catholic King to see the
Conditions performed, and to protract the Marriage, till matters in England
were in perfect execution. Whereupon the Divines advise that King, that the
Promises of Marriage be made presently, but the Consummation thereof and the
delivering of the Infanta be deferred May the year following. And the death of
Pope Gregory did strengthen this contrivance: For the Spanish Ministers
pretended, that in regard there was no Contract, but a Treaty only on foot, the
Dispensation which lay in the Nuncio's hands was by the Popes death suspended,
and a Ratification from the new Pope was requisite before any further progress
could be made.

Cardinal Barberine was chosen Successor to Gregory the Fifteenth, and took the
name of Urban the Eight. Soon after his election, he wrote these ensuing
Letters, the one to King James, the other to Prince Charles.

Serenissimo IACOBO Magnae Britanniae Regi Illustri, URBANUS P.^. VIII.
SErenissime Rex, salutem and lumen Divinae gratiae. Scotiae regnum verti videt
ad extraneos, damnique sui magnitudinem Britannorum Regum laudibus istarumque
Provinciarum gloria metitur. Id vero praeter caetera dolendum orbi Christiano
videtur, Jacobum regem Catholicorum regum prolem, and sanctissimae Parentis
filium, a Pontifice Maximo atque a Majoribus suis in Religionis cultu
dissentire. Si enim sublime istud ingenium, quod literarum studiis and
prudentiae artibus Rex celeberrimus excoluisti, affulgenti Patri luminum
assentiretur, facile conjicit Christiana Respublica quanto publicae concordiae
bono factum esset, ut Nationes istas Insulasque, aut montium claustris, aut
Oceani gurgitibus dissitas, Scoticus rex imperio conjungeres. Videtur enim
Majestas tua ob eam rem facta esse tot Provinciarum domina, ut ab eo, cui
parent, facilius celeriusque Regna ista medelam ac salutem acciperent. Quare
assiduis precibus jam tum eum venerabamur, qui dat salutem Regibus, ut to
Divinae clementiae beneficia, quibus in conspectu Potentium admirabilis es, ad
Britanniae incolumitatem and Ecclesiae gaudium conferret. Affulsit autem nobis
non ita pridem beata spes oriens ex alto, cum te Austriacae affinitatis cupidum
cognovimus, ex Catholica matre progigni exoptantem eos, qui tuam haereditatem
adire, populosque istos ditione tenere debent. Proin vix dici potest, quod
nobis solatium obtulit sanctissimae recordationis Pontifex Gregorius XV.
Praedecessor noster, dum nos in eorum Cardinalium coetum ascivit quos Anglicani
matrimonii causam cognoscere voluit. Enituit in nobis tantum negotium
disserentibus singularis quaedam propensio in Majestatem tuam, cujus cum
faveremus laudibus, felicitati etiam consultum cupiebamus. Nunc autem cum per
Apostolici senatus suffragia ad hanc stationem pervenimus, ubi pro omnibus
terrarum regibus excubandum est, non satis explicare possumus quanta nobis cura
and desiderium sit Magnae Britanniae, ac tanti Regis dignitas. Divinitus vero
accidisse videtur, ut primae literae quae nobis in B. Petri sede regnantibus
redderentur, eae fuerint quas Praedecessori nostro Nobilissimus Carolus Walliae
Non diffidimus adesse jam tempus Divini beneplaciti, quo illiqui Britannicae
religionis lauds monumentis consignant, non semper alterius seculi facta
loquentur, sed praesentis etiam Principatus decora consequentibus aetatibus
proponere poterunt ad imitandum. Majores illi tui te vocant, qui tibi tantae
claritudinis and potentiae haereditatem reliquerunt, qui coelestis regni fores
Pontificiis clavibus generi humano patefieri crediderunt. Certe fieri non
potest, ut Majestas tua tot saeculorum fidem, and Regum de te praeclare
meritorum, judicium aut contemnere audeat, aut condemnare. Nonne vides
sententia Majestatis tuae iis omnino coelum eripi, qui tibi Regnum reliquerunt,
dum eos in Religionis cultu aberrasse contendis? Ita fieret, ut quos universa
Ecclesia cives coeli and cohaeredes Christi in aeterna patria dominari credit,
tu exipsorum sanguine prognatus tuo suffragio e coelo detraheres, atque in
errorum abyssum, and poenarum carcerem detruderes. Non sentis tanti cogitatione
facinoris ingrati animi tui viscera perhorrescere? Nonne ejusmodi consiliis
Regalis ingenii indoles reclamitat? quam tamen tot Europae Nationes, dum ab
Apostolica sede dissentit, reprehendere coguntur. Alliciat oculos tuos tantae
gloriae splendour, quae tibi e coelo caput ostentat, and manum porrigit, in
Sanctuarium Dei Britannos Reges per te reductura, comitantibus Angelis,
hominibusque plaudentibus. Jacebat olim in orb terrarum deformata aerumnis
Christiana religio tyrannorum minas expavescens. Eam vero non solum e latibulis
eduxit, sed ad imperium etiam vocavit Imperator ille, quem Magnae Britanniae
debemus, Constantinus Magnus, Pontificiae authoritatis Propugnator, and Romanae
fidei assertor: Hic aptum Majestatis tuae Regalis imitationis exemplar, non
Reges illi qui sunt transgressi dissipantes foedus sempiternum: In ejus gloriae
Societatem nos ex hac terrarum specula te vocamus, exoptissime Fili. Impone
praeteritis annis diem unum, grata totius posteritatis memoria celebrandum.
Impone Mitram capiti tuo honoris aeterni, ut te rerum potiente dicere cum
Sancto Apostolo possimus, Vidi in Britannia Coelum novum and Civitatem novam
descendentem de coelo, and super muros ejus Angelorum custodiam. Id si
continget, Pontificatus nostri tempora generi humano faelicia affulsisse
arbitrabimur. Coeterum tibi Sollicitudinem hanc nostram adeo gratam fore
existimamus, ut omnino speremus te his literis acceptis statim Catholicorum
isthic degentium commoda aucturum. Quod si praestiteris, and nos tibi mirum in
modum devinxeris, and Majestati tuae tanti beneficii debitorem delegabimus
ipsum Regem Regum; qui dum Regalem istam Domum illustri aliqua faelicitate
sospitabit, Romanae Ecclesiae votis annuet, and Sacrorum Antistitum gaudio
consulet.

Datum Romae apud Sanctum Petrum sub annulo Piscatoris, die XV Oct. MDCXXIII.
Pontificatus 1o.
To the most Illustrious Prince JAMES King of Great Britain.
MOst serene King, Pope Urban to K. James.
We wish you health, and the light of Gods grace. When the Kingdom of Scotland
which has brought forth famous Kings to earth, and most holy Citizens to
heaven, was under our protection whilst we were yet Cardinal, it afforded us
plentiful matter of joy and sorrow. We were exceeding joyful when we
considered, that the faith of the Roman Church has happily triumphed in that
Country which the Roman Armies could never conquer; and that there was never
yet King of Scotland, who died an Enemy to the Popes authority. But our harp
was turned into mourning, when we cast our eyes flowing with tears upon the
miseries of the present times; For you seem (while the Father of discords is
active) to have forgotten him who nourished you, and to have made sad your
nurse Jerusalem. Wherefore the Apostles seat which brought forth that people to
Christ, is pierced with sorrow, while it beholds so famous an inheritance to be
given away to strangers, and measure the greatness of its loss by the praises
of the British Kings, and the glory of those Dominions. But this above all
ought most to be lamented by the Christian world, that King James, the
offspring of Catholic Kings, and the Son of a most holy Mother, should Rome,
and from his own Ancestors in point of Religious worship. For if those eminent
parts which you a most famous Prince have polished with Learning and Arts of
Prudence, would assent to the Father of lights illuminating the Christian
world, We easily apprehend how much Scotland, you should join in one Kingdom
those Nations and Islands divided either by the bars of the Mountains, or by
the depths of the Ocean. For your Majesty seems for that very reason to be made
Lord of so many Provinces, that they might more easily Britain, Gregory the
Fifteenth of blessed memory, our Predecessor, brought us, when he made us one
of the Congregation of those Cardinals whom he would have to take cognizance of
the English Match: While we discoursed of a matter of so great importance, we
expressed a singular propension we are to watch and ward for all earthly
Monarchs, we cannot sufficiently declare what a care and desire we have of
Great Britain, and the honor of so great a King. It seems to have been a
special providence of God, that the first Letters which we received reigning in
the seat of S. Peter, were those which the most noble Charles Prince of Wales
wrote to our Predecessor, as a testimony of his affection to the Popes of Rome.
And since we now desire that this venerable Marriage should by the blessing of
God be perfected, we resolved to write unto you, without expecting Letters
first from you; for Charity is the honor of the Papal Empire; and although most
powerful Kings do homage to us in this seat, yet we account it glorious
(charity so persuading) to descend to humble prayers, so that we may gain souls
to Christ. First therefore we desire you to persuade your self, that there is
no Prince in the Christian world, from whom you can expect more evidence of
fatherly affection then from the Pope, who desires to embrace you a most
desired Son with the arms of Apostolical charity. We know with what a Letter
Gregory the Fifteenth excited you to obtain so great a glory; And since we have
succeeded him, we will not only imitate his inclinations toward you, but will
exceed them. We hope we shall shortly have news out of England, that your
Majesty is favorable to the Catholic interest; and that the Catholics who
live there, whom the Father of mercies has vindicated into the liberty of the
sons of God, being freed from the fear of punishment, enjoy your Royal
protection. He who is rich in mercy, will reward such a purpose with some
signal happiness: The Kingdoms of the Earth will applaud your Majesty, and the
Host of Heaven will wage war for you: Though sinners gnash their teeth, and
Impiety powerful to raise sedition threaten, yet Europe hopes she shall see
King James triumphing in the Roman Church, and increasing the example of his
Ancestors by new works of Piety. We do not distrust that the time of Gods good
pleasure is now at hand, when they who recommend to History the praises of the
British Religion, shall not always speak of the deeds of another Age, but may
be able to propose the present Government as a pattern of imitation to the Ages
following. Your Europe are forced to reprehend, while it dissents from the Seat
of the Apostles. Let the splendour of so great glory allure your eyes, which
looks out of Heaven upon you, and Britain into the Sanctuary of God, with the
conduct of Angels and acclamations of men. A long time ago, Christian religion
lay all along in the world squalid and deformed with anguish, affrighted with
the threats of Tyrants: But that Great Britain, Constantine the Great, the
Defender of the Popes authority, and the Avoucher of the Roman Faith, did not
only bring her out of her lurking places, but called her to an Empire. He is a
fit pattern of imitation for your Majesty; not those Kings who have
transgressed and dissipated the Everlasting Covenant. We call you, O most
wished for Son, from this Watchtower of the World, into the Society of his
Britain, and a new City descending from Heaven, Roman Church, and bring joy to

Dated at Rome at St. Peter's, sub annulo Piscatoris, 15 October. 1623.
Nobilissimo Viro Carolo Principi Walliae, Urbanus Papa Octavus.
Pope Vrbans Letter to Prince Charles.
NObilissime Princeps, salutem and lumen Divinae gratiae. Primae literae, quae
Nobis ad Apostolatus solium elatis redditae sunt, illae fuerunt quas ad
Sanctissimae memoriae Gregorium Decimum-quintum Praedecessorem nostrum ex
Hispania misisti. Manus ad coelum sustulimus, and Patri mise^icordiarum gratias
egimus, cum in ipso nostri Regiminis exordio Pontificem Romanum eo Officii
genere colere Britannus Princeps inciperet. Singulari nostri quadam animi
propensione rei Anglicanae jamdiu favemus, quo factum est, ut in hoc
Antistitum* Conventu, and Nationum Patria, Scoti tui, dum Cardinalem ageremus,
se in nostram potissimum Fidem ac clientelam contulerint. Patrocinium autem tam
splendidae Provinciae suscipientes, identidem majorum tuorum res gestas, and
Britannicarum Insularum lands contemplabamur. Eos antem quo illustriores orbi
terrarum anteactae aetates ostentabant, eo* nos impensius cupiebamus
consimilibus Christianae pietatis triumphis haec tempora illic insigniri. Cum
autem Magnae Britanniae Rex, Pater tuus, non minorem ex disciplinarum fama,
quam ex potentiae vigloriam concupierit, optavimus semper, supra quam dici
potest, ei divinitus insignem aliquam offerri occasionem generis humani
demerendi, and coelestis haereditatis adipiscendae. Nunc autem advenisse tempus
credimus quo votis nostris frui liceat, cum ad tantum decus potentissimo
parenti aditum patefacere in praesens videaris, Filius in maximarum rerum spem
genitus. In ea enim sententia sumus ut arbitremur, tantum quo ^lagras,
Catholici conjugii desiderium, quandam Dei te vocantis, and suaviter omnia
disponentis, vocem esse. Nam opus Omnipotenti non est tonare semper voce
magnitudinis suae, quia ipsa arcana consilia dirigentia mortales in viam
salutis, verba sunt quibus aeterna sapientia loquitur, and jubentis Numinis
mandata declarat. Quare omni semper studio elaboravimus, ut conjugium hoc
honorabile, benedicente Domino, perficeretur. Hinc conjicere potes, non
potuisse alium ad sacrum hoc rerum humanarum fastigium provehi, a quo plura
sperate possis documenta benevolentiae and beneficentiae fructus. Te enim
Principem Nobilissimum Pontificiae charitati commendant majores tui, Haereticae
Impietatis domitores, and Romanae Hierarchiae non cultores modo, sed vindices.
I^ en^m cum dogmatum novorum portenta in ea Septentrionalis Oceani propugnacula
irrumperent, impiorum conatus salutaribus armis compescuerunt, nec
commutaverunt veritatem Dei in mendacium. Quod si, ut scribis, reipsa magis
gloriaberis de avitae imitatione Religionis, quam de Regii sanguinis
Haereditate, facile prospicimus quantam ejusmodi verba, in libro viventium
exaranda, Romanae Ecclesiae laetitiam, and Britannicis Regnis faelicitatem
polliceantur. Haec a te beneficia desideratissime Fili, exigit atque expectat
venerandum illud Regum Scotorum Concilium, quorum facta absque dubio condemnat
qui ab illorum Religione desciscit. Hoc a te Catholici totius Europe Reges
^^agitant; quomodo enim eorum concordia potest votum esse solicitudinis tuae,
donec ab eis in maxima re, id est, in Sacrorum cultu dissentias? Romana
Ecclesia, quam Magistram veritatis Anglia tam diu coluit, cujus fidem tibi non
invisam esse fateris, cupit tibi coelestis Regni fores quam primum patefacere,
and te in Majorum tuorum possessionem reducere. Cogita te nunc in Hispania
Regia spectaculum esse factum Deo and hominibus, semperque fore desiderium and
curam Pontificatus nostri. Cave ne consilia eorum, qui terrenas rations
coelestibus anteferunt, obdurent cor tuum, nobilissime Princeps laetifica
tandem Militiam Coelestis exercitus, in tuis castris demicaturam, ac faventibus
Angelis, hominibusque plaudentibus, redi, Fili exoptatissime, ad Ecclesiae te
cupientis amplexus, ut in Matrimonio tuo gestientes gaudio canere possimus,
Dominus regnavit, and decorem indutus est. Omnino qui Catholicae Virginis
nuptias concupiscis, Coelestem etiam illam sponsam tibi assumere debes, cujus
forma se captum fuisse Solomon ille Regum sapientissimus gloriatur. Haec enim
sapientia est, per quam Reges regnant, cujus dos est splendour gloriae, and
Principatus sempiternus. Eam vero a terrarum contagione secretam, atque in sinu
Dei recubantem, in Romanae Ecclesiae Sanctuario Majores tui quaesiverunt. Qui
tibi has hortationes conscribimus, and benevolentiam Pontificiam testamur,
cupimus perpetuis Historiarum Monumentis nomen tuum commendari; atque in eos
Principes referri, qui praeclare merentes in terra de Regno Coelesti, fiunt
posteritati virtutis exemplar and votorum mensura. Oramus Patrem luminum, ut
beata haec spes, qua nobis tanti Principis reditum, deducente Spiritu Sancto,
pollicetur, quam primum ferat fructus suos, and Magnae Britanniae salutem,
totique orbi Christiano pariat laetitiam.

Datum Romae apud Sanctum Petrum sub annulo Piscatoris, Die 15 October. 1623.
Pontificatus nostri Anno Primo.
To the most Noble Prince Charles, Pope Urban the Eight.
MOst Noble Prince, we wish you health and the light of Gods Grace. The first
Letters which were delivered to us after we were preferred to the Throne of the
Apostleship, were those which you sent out of Spain to Gregory the Fifteenth of
famous memory, our Predecessor. We Rome. We have been a long time favorable to
England by a natural bent and inclination, whence it came to Britain, for we
are of opinion, that your so vehement desire of a Catholic marriage, is a
certain voice of God calling you, and disposing all things sweetly. For it is
not necessary that the Omnipotent should always thunder with the voice of his
greatness; Roman Hierarchy, do recommend you a most Noble Prince to the Papal
Charity: For when Monsters of new Opinions broke into the Bulwarks of the
Northern Ocean, they bridled the endeavors of the wicked with wholesome arms,
and did not change the truth of God into a lie. And if you, Rome and how great
felicity to the British Kingdoms these words do promise, which deserve to be
written in the Book of Life. Such Scottish Kings exacts and expects from you;
whose actions without doubt he condemns, who revolts from their Religion. The
Catholic Kings of all Europe require this of you; for how can their Concord be
the Vow of your Roman Church which England reverenced long ago, as the Mistress
of Truth, whose belief you confess you hate not, desires forthwith to open unto
you the Gates of the Heavenly Kingdom, and to bring you back into the
possession of your Ancestors. Think that now in Spain you are become a
spectacle to God and Men, and that you shall always be the desire and care of
our Reign. Take heed most Noble Prince, Solomon the wisest of Kings, boasts
himself to have been enamored. For this Roman Church, severed from the
contagion of the World, and reposing in the Wisdom of God. We who write to you
this Exhortation, and testify our Britain, and joy to all the Christian World.

Dated at Rome at St. Peter's die 15 October. 1623. in the First year of our
Reign.
Notwithstanding this great business of State began to look with an ill aspect,
by the concurrence of various Passages tending to a Rupture of the Treaty. The
Treaty begins to tend to a rupture.
In England the Spanish Ambassadors demands grew high and peremptory; yet the
King to give them content, directed the Lord Keeper and other Commissioners to
draw up a Pardon of all Offenses past, with a Dispensation for those to come,
to be granted to all Roman Catholics obnoxious to any Laws against Recusants;
and then to England: The one to all Judges and Justices of Peace; and the other
to all Bishops, Chancellors, and Commissaries, not to execute any Statute
against them.

The General Pardon was passed in as full and ample manner as themselves could
desire, The Prohibition to the Judges and Bishops, in behalf of the Catholics
suspended.
or pen it: But to that vast Prohibition to the Judges and Bishops, some stop
was made by the Advice of the Lord Keeper, for these Reasons.



Secondly, Because to forbid the Judges against their Oaths, and the

The two Ambassadors with much ado consented, That the matter should rest till
the end of Six Months, or the Infanta's arival; yet they did it with a show of
discontent, as if the King performed nothing. The disaffection of these
Ministers was supposed to be one rub in the way of this Alliance. Some of the
English in Spain, dislike the Match and Religion.
And on the other side, some of the Princes followers in Spain, being zealous
of the Protestant Religion, disliked the Match, and showed their aversness to
it. Sir Edmund Verney struck an English man, a Sorbon Doctor, a blow under the
Ear, for visiting and laboring to pervert one of the Princes Pages, who was
sick of a mortal Fever. Diverse derided the Popish Ceremonies, and Spanish
Garb, and slighted the Country, and some committed irreverent actions in the
Kings own Chapel. Hereupon they began to disgust the English, and to rail at
Gondomar for informing the King and State, That the Prince might be Spain, did
no good offices; and the French and Venetian Ambassadors in that Court, were
conceived not to be idle: But there were greater things then these. The Duke
disgusted in Spain.
The Duke of Buckingham, the Princes Companion and Guardian, was much
disrelished by the Court of Spain. His French garb, the height of his spirit,
and his overgreat familiarity with the Prince, were things opposite to the
way, and temper of that grave, sober, and wary people. And the Council of Spain
took Bristol, who had laid the first stone in that building: Whereupon his
power was called in question, and found imperfect, in regard it was not
confirmed by the Council of England: Moreover, the Duke lay open to some
affront, which enraged him sore against the Conde Olivares; and things grew to
that extremity between the Duke and that Kings Ministers, that they did not
stick to say, That they would rather put the Infanta headlong into a Well, then
into his hands. Nevertheless, in the Prince himself they observed an
extraordinary well staid temper and grave comportment.

Buckingham and Bristol run different ways.
In the present action, Buckingham and Bristol ran different ways with great
animosity: Bristol had the advantage in Spain, yea, in the Court of England he
had gained a great esteem and powerful party, and had England were very
different: By the people in general who loathed the Match, he was favored for
his care of his King, Prince, and Country; but by the Court he was much
maligned and censured, as the occasion of those delays, by diverting and
changing the ways wherein they began to treat: But the King himself was very
reserved, either still loving the Duke, or overawed by his intimacy and power
with the

The Palatine by his Secretary labors to engage the Prince against the Marriage.
And Buckingham well observed, that he had little obligation to Spain, and had
reason to seek some surer props to uphold his greatness. And to draw him
further off, the Secretary of the Prince Palatine coming to Madrid, Palatine
could not rely on the new overture of Marriage between his Eldest Son, and the
Emperors youngest Daughter, it being a labyrinth out of which no Thread would
guide him, were the Proposals already granted: For being an act of so many
various parts, as the Pope, the Emperor, the King of Spain, the Duke of
Bavaria, and diverse others, it must needs be full of tedious intricacies. What
Money or other conditions Bavarian, for quitting his conquest to an
irreconcilable Neighbor? What Foreign Alliance is able to persuade the Emperor,
who has changed all Tenures of Election into Succession, and shaken the
ancient Freedom of the German Princes, that he should revive his Enemies dead
forces to the prejudice of all that he enjoys, or aspires unto? Would the Pope
be won to suffer Heidelburgh, which he accounted the most dangerous Nest of
Heretics after Geneva, to return Palsgraves Son in the Emperors Court, and the
Sequestration of his Country, during his Sons Nonage, would be required as
necessary to that Conjunction.

The Spaniard continues new delays.
By this time the King must needs be full of jealousies, and the Princes
patience well nigh spent by the Spaniards intricate proceedings; for the
Divines insisted stiffly, That the Consummation of the Marriage, and the
delivering of the Infanta, should be deferred to the next year; which Christmas
following, i^ the Prince would continue there so long. But the resolution
touching the delivering of the Infanta, was unalterable.

The English Papists perplexed.
The English Papists apprehending that a Rupture was like to follow, were much
perplexed: A great Stickler, Sir Toby Matthews by name, did press his Catholic
Majesty to give the Prince some foot of ground, upon which he might be able to
stand with honor, in complying with that extraordinary affection which he
bears to the Infanta. Moreover he protested to him, That if the Catholics of
these Dominions should grow liable to persecution or affliction by the occasion
of this breach, through the disgust of the King and his Council, or through the
power

Now the Prince is thinking to leave the Court of Spain, The Prince ready to
depart from the Court of Spain, leaves a Proxy with the Earl of Brist^l.
and they say he wrote to his Father a Letter of high Despair, wherein was this
passage, You must now Sir look upon my Sister and her Children, never thinking
Whereupon King James sent swift dispatches to hasten his return. The King and
Council of Spain seemed to be startled at these Resolutions, and his Majesty
importuned the Prince, That having staid so many years for a wife, he would
stay some few months longer: And if he pleased to give way that the Infanta's
journey might be put off till the following Spring, he would give him a Blank
to write his own Conditions touching the surrender of the Palatinate. But when
his Highness urged Reasons for his Rome: To which purpose the Prince made a
Procuration to the King of Spain, and Don Carlos his Brother, to make the
Espousals in his Name, and left it in the Earl of Bristols hands. Nevertheless
he left in the hand of one of the Dukes Creatures, a private Instrument, with
Instructions to be delivered to the Earl Bristol, to stay the delivery of the
Proxies, till further direction from him, pretending, That the Infanta might
retire into a Cloister, and defraud him of a Wife. But these Instructions were
to be concealed from the Earl till the Ratification came from Rome.

The Duke not regarding a Ceremonious Farewell at Court, The Duke and Olivares
part not Friends.
departed hastily a little before the Prince, pretending to prepare the English
Navy that lay at the Port of St. Andrew for the Princes transportation.
Olivares and he had but a harsh parting; for he told Olivares, That he was
obliged Infanta, in an eternal tie of gratitude; and that he would be an
everlasting Servant to them, and endeavor to do the best Offices for concluding
the Match, and strengthening the Amity between the Crowns: But as for himself,
he had so far disobliged him, that he could not without flattery make the least
profession of friendship to him. The Conde replied short, That he accepted of
what he had spoken. The Duke departing with so little satisfaction, the
Spaniards concluded, that he would endeavor by all means possible to hinder the

But the Prince for his part had gained an universal love, The Prince
universally ^steemed.
and was reported by all, to be a truly Noble, discreet, and well-deserving
Prince; his grave comportment suited with the very genius of that Nation, and
he carried it from the first to the last with the greatest affability, gravity,
and constancy; and at his farewell, with unparalled bounty; and he left
behind him Gems of inestimable value for the Infanta and several Grandees.

His departure solemn.
His departure from Madrid, being the Twelfth of September, was very solemn, the
Queen and the Infanta were prepared in great magnificence with a Train of
Grandees, and Ladies, to receive his farewell: And among other passages, this
one was taken to be an Argument of the Infanta's real love to the Prince, That
she caused many divine duties to be performed for the safety of his return into
England. The King brought

The Prince feasted the Dons aboard his Ship, and bringing them back again to
the shore, a storm surprises them.
From thence he was attended with a Train of Spanish Courtiers to the English
Navy, where he feasted the Dons aboard his own Ship; and when he was bringing
them back to shore, there arose a furious storm wherewith the Barge was so
driven, that it could neither fetch the Land, nor make to the Ships again. The
night came on, and the tempest and darkness meeting, made their condition
desperate; till at length espying

It was observed, That the first words his Highness spoke after he was
embarked, were, That it was a great weakness and folly in the Spaniard, after
they had used him so ill, to grant him a free departure.

Expressions of joy for the Princes safe return into England.
The Prince arived at Portsmouth, October the Fifth, and no sooner was he
landed, but it appeared, that he was the Kingdoms darling, the peoples London,
the Bonfires which the peoples universal joy had kindled, seemed to turn the
City into one flame.

Immediately after the Princes departure from the Court of Spain, a rumor was
spread that the Ratification was come from Rome, and that it came plenary and
absolute. By which means the Princes private Instructions Bristol; for the
Iuncto pretended full Warrant to proceed, and summoned the Earl of Bristol to
attend them, and earnestly pressed him, That the Articles might speedily be
engrossed and signed. Hereupon the party in whose hands the Prohibition left by
the Prince, lay dormant, either conceiving the Ratification to be come indeed,
or apprehending that it was the Princes meaning to prevent the sudden
concluding of matters, delivered to Bristol that Letter of private
Instructions, Private Instructions delivered to Bristol, contrary to the Proxy.
the very day that the Prince arived at Andero. In reading it, the Earl was
troubled exceedingly, and said to the other, That it must for a time be
concealed, lest the Spaniards coming to the knowledge of it, should give order
to stay the Prince.

It vexed Bristol, that his building of so many years should at once be pulled
in sunder. He resolves to wave this private Order, and if the Ratification
came, to deliver the Proxies, and to support himself by his Public Warrant
under the Great Seal of England. Now the Prince and Duke being jealous that
Bristol would counter-work them, left Sir Walter Aston joined in Commission
with him, and acquainted Aston, that the Princes meaning was never to Match
there, without the restitution of the Palatinate, and the conservation of his
Honor in all respects entire.

Bristol sent dispatches into England, Bristol in a Letter gives the Prince a
good account of the business.
laboring to satisfy the King and Prince in all things touching the Marriage:
And showing, that he had exactly set down the Case, how a Woman betrothed, may
before the consummation of Marriage, betake her self to a Religious life, and
all the sorts of Security for the preventing of such a course; and that the
King of Spain, his Sister, and all his Ministers do offer all security that may
stand with decency and honor, for the performance of the whole agreement. And
though the point of portion Consulto's of the last King, the Iuncto found it to
be no less then Two Millions, they resolved to make it good; notwithstanding
they alleged that this sum was four times as much as ever was given in Money
with any Daughter of Spain. Moreover he did woo the Prince by argument, That as
the King his Father, so himself had thought this to be the fittest Match in all
the World: And though the Spaniards had committed many Errors, yet he had
already passed them by, and overcome Infanta's person, who for her birth and
portion, was no where to be matched; and for her virtue and settled affection to
his Highnesses person, deserved him better then any Woman in the World: That
the Match was sure, the Portion and Temporal Articles now settled, but the delay
of the Desponsorios will grieve the Princess, and bring a cloud of distrust and
jealousy upon the whole business. The personal distastes of Ministers
indiscreet and passionate carriages should not hazard that

But the Prince and Buckingham made haste to engage the King, King James falls
off, and for a Condition of the Marriage, demands the Restitution of the
Palatinate.
and Spaniards delays, and Bristols miscarriages, drew him to alter the whole
state of the Treaty. Hereupon the King sends an express command to Bristol, to
deliver his thanks to the King of Spain for the high entertainment, personal
kindness, respect, and favor, received by his Son the Prince, who was returned
so well satisfied, as that he was not able to magnify it sufficiently. And
further to let him know, That to make a firm and indissoluble union between
their Families, Nations, and Crowns, and withal Palatinate; that he always
understood and expected that upon the effecting of this Marriage, he should
obtain the restoring of his Son-in-law, both to his Country and Dignity; and
that the Emperor, either by sinding out some great Title, or by increasing the
number of the Electoral Styles, might satisfy the Duke of Bavaria. And for
these Reasons the King commanded Bristol instantly to procure from that King, a
punctual Answer touching the course he resolves to take, for the restitution of
the Palatinate, and Electorate, and what assurance shall be given for his
contentment, if the Emperor or Duke of Bavaria should oppose any part of the
expected restitution. Moreover, he gave direction, and signified his special
desire, that the Espousals should be made in Christmas Holidays, because that
holy and joyful time would best become an action so notable and blessed.

Bristol and As^^n demur upon the new Instructions.
The Earl of Bristol, with the Concurrence of Sir Walter Aston, took boldness to
demur upon these new Instructions; and yet again to represent to his Majesty
the state of these affairs, they inform him, that by deferring the Epousals
till Christmas, the powers were made altogether useless and invalid, there
being a Clause in the body of them, That they shall remain in force till
Christmas, and no longer. And the suspending of Spain and England will cost
much time. As concerning the Prince Palatine, it was the care of the Infanta's
coming into England: For they say, that otherwise they might give a Daughter,
and a War presently follow. Besides, the Instructions given under his Majesty's
hand, were indeed to insist upon the restoring of the Prince Palatine, yet not
so to annex it to the Treaty, as thereby to hazard the Match: For he seemed to
be confident, that the one would never grow to a conclusion, without a settled
resolution to effect the other: And the Prince and Duke during their being in
Spain, Palatinate affairs have relation to many great Princes interessed
therein, and cannot be ended but by a formal Treaty, which will require a great
length of time; and if the conclusion of the Match should depend thereon, the
Prince may be long enough unmarried, for the advancement of their interest who
desire he should so continue, or not match with Spain.

The preparations for the Marriage go on cheerfully, the Popes Dispensation is
hourly expected, with an intention to demand the powers immediately, Christmas
Holidays? But that is impossible, for the powers are then expired. Shall we
urge the restoring of the Palatine? This was not made a condition, but was
treated as a business a part. The delay of the Desponsario's will put a scorn
upon the Infanta, and upon the King of Spain, who has called himself the
Infanta's Desponsado. And this cannot stand with that exact and honorable
dealing which his Majesty has hitherto

Thus did the Earl of Bristol endeavor to restore the business; and the better
to bring it on, Sir Walter Aston labored to reconcile the Duke to Spain by this
manner of Insinuation: Sir Walter Aston endeavors to reconcile the Duke to
Spain.
He believed that his Grace was infinitely provoked to be an enemy to this
Match, and might have many Reasons suggested, how much it concerned him to
break it with all the force he has; yet he could not believe that the Error of
one Man, can make him an enemy to that which carries in it so much content to
the Infanta being duly informed, must needs acknowledge him to be the person
unto whom, in that behalf, she is most

But these Motions incensed Buckingham: And now having the Prince linked to
him, he could overruled the King, and bear down all his Adversaries. The Prince
and the Duke began to take a popular way, and to close with those of the Privy
Council and the Nobility that were opposite to Spain, and best liked of by the
Puritan party: They projected also the calling of a Parliament to consult the
Nation, and to clear the Kings integrity, and to gain to themselves a great
esteem in the hearts

And some there were that suggested to the King, Advice to the King touching
the Duke.
that the Dukes design was to prevent the Princes Marriage, not only with
Spain, but any where else, that his own greatness might still be absolute. For,
say they, were it love to his Country that led him to a breach and War with
Spain, there was as much reason for a breach of the Match and Peace, when the
Parliament urged it, as now there is. And they said, That the approaching
Parliament was to marry the Duke to the Commonwealth, that he

But the Earl of Bristol was straightly commanded to follow the new
Instructions; The Earl of Bristol is commanded by the King to follow the new
Instructions.
namely, before he deliver the Powers, or move to the Contract, to procure from
the King of Spain, either by Public Act, or by Answer, under his Hand and
Seal, a direct Engagement for the Restitution of the Palatinate, and the
Electoral Dignity; by Mediation, or by Spain, because the Berkstrot in the
Palatinate, the prime flower of his Son-in-laws Revenue, was taken by the Arms
of Spain, and put into the possession of a Spanish Garrison, or under their
command; and the Country or Revenue thereof, was contrary to the Contract with
the Infanta at Bruxels; Mentz, being none of those to whom Interest or
Mediation had been formerly used, or thought of; who were only the Emperor,
the King of Spain, and the Duke of Bavaria.

And concerning the Marriage Portion, he absolutely rejected both Jewels and
yearly Revenue, as contrary to the first Agreement, and expected the Total sum
in specie, at reasonable times of payment. As touching the Espousals, he
commanded the Suspension of the Powers left, and sent the Powers renewed by the
Prince, for a larger time, that no blame might light on him, or his Son, in
case that King could not give satisfaction in so short a time, as that where in
the former powers would become invalid. In the mean while he said he was ready
to propound good ways to satisfy the Duke of Bavaria in point of Title and
Honor, and to continue the Negotiation for Matching the Palatines Eldest

The Earl of Bristol had a difficult part to act in Spain, and in England the
Duke set all his strength to crush him. The Surrender of the Palatinate to the
Kings contentment was not probable, after it was ransacked and alienated, and
as a common Booty shared in parcels to several Princes.

King James puts the Palatine in hope, by Proposal of new terms.
Nevertheless as yet the King hoped by Treaty to compose the whole business, and
to satisfy the several Interests. And having by his continued Palatine these
terms of hope. In the first place, That he make a due submission to the Emperor
under convenient Limitations, which shall first be granted in Conformity to
that which is Noble, with Assurance requisite for the free and safe going and
return of his Person and Train. And that this being done, a Present and full
Restitution of all the Palatinate shall be made to the person of his Son, and
that he himself shall be his Administrator during Bavaria, his Son shall be
established in the Electoral Dignity. Moreover, if the Marriage between his
eldest Son, and one of the Emperors Daughters should take effect, it would
ensure the enjoyment of all according to the present Contract, and make way for
the bettering of the Conditions to his own person. In Contemplation of which
Marriage, the other party have approached a degree nearer, to wit, That the
Electorate shall return to his own person after the death of the Duke of
Bavaria. And as touching the many Hague, nor in the Emperors Court, but with
his own Son, the Prince of Wales, and in the presence of the Infanta of Spain,
after her arival in England. Upon these Overtures the King advises his
Son-in-law to have recourse to his own Wisdom, and after mature deliberation,
to make a choice agreeable to the honor and safety of his estates. And he
delivered his own opinion, That

Upon the tender of these Proposals, Letters of Consultation were sent to the
King from his Son-in-law, and from Sir Dudley Carlton to the Duke of
Buckingham; who, for the greatness of his power, was to be courted and made a
friend in all transactions.

The Palatines Answer to those Terms proposed by the King.
To the submission in the first place required, reply was made, That in natural
order, the Restitution which was material and substantial, ought to precede the
same, which was but a point of Ceremony, or at least, it is necessary that all
things be resolved, and settled in such assurances as shall be held convenient,
otherwise a submission might be yielded, and the Restitution never follow.
Besides, if the Emperors intentions be sincere, and real, and without any aims
to take advantage upon the Palsgraves person (as the Emperor, Charles the Fifth,
did upon the Landgrave of Hessen, under the subtle distinction of a syllable
in the safe conduct) the Submission might as well be made by a Deputy; by which
means he might be freed from those apprehensions, which the Executions at
Prague, and other cruelties used by the Imperialists, might Bavaria, will
prejudice his cause for ever: For the Electors of Saxony and Brandenburgh, who
have always protested against the Translation, and the other Princes of Germany
who have like-feeling, will disavow their own Protestations in regard of him
who shall abandon his own pretensions; and instead of favoring him, may be made
his enemies. The experience of things may show what issue is like to follow a
consent to the like Conditions; for the

First, The Instrument signed for the Conditional Resignation of the Crown of
Bohemia, in the year One thousand six hundred twenty and one, served the
Emperor to accelerate the Treaty then on foot with Bethlem Gaber. Secondly, The
Ratification of the Suspension of Arms the last Summer, served to intimidate
the Electors of Brandenburgh and Saxony, that they may not undertake any thing
against the Emperor. For both the one, and the other, were for these very ends
divulged by the Emperor Gaber, and to continue the intimidation of the Princes
of Germany. Furthermore, in this Submission it were necessary to take care that
his undue Proscription and Banishment, being to the prejudice of the
Constitutions of the Empire, and held by the Electors of Saxony and
Brandenburgh of no validity, may not be approved, and a mark of Infamy set upon
the Palatine and his posterity. And lastly, shame and disgrace Saxony by Charles
the Fifth, an Emperor not worse then this; the heir of which House, being one
of the worthiest Princes in Germany, is now in hard conditions before the eyes
of the exiled Palatine.

Unto the second point, the exclusion of the Palsgraves person, and the settling
upon his Son, it was thus replied, That Spain had always given hope, and the
Earl of Bristol great assurance, even when the Marriage Austria, from whom we
have ever new Overtures in Winter, and new Ruptures in Summer: For the Emperor
wants but two or three years leisure, which he will easily gain by a Treaty
of Marriage to establish in Germany the Translation of the Electorate and
Palatinate without any hope of Recovery:

The Palatines pretentions were not prejudiced by a long interposition of time,
the memory of the undue proceedings in the Ban, and the Translation, and the
seizure of his Inheritance are fresh in the minds of the Princes, who by their
own Interests are moved to a greater compassion. As for the hope of Restitution
from the Match with Spain, there is little reason to put a difference between
the Spaniards and the Imperialists, who have with joint consent conspired the
ruin of the Palatinate, with the same Forces, Counsels, and Designs: And
whilst things have been some times upon terms, and always in talk of an
Accommodation, the Electorate is given to the Duke of Bavaria, and avowed by a
Congratulatory Message from the Arch-Dutchess; the Upper Palatinate is settled
in the Bavarians possession, and a Portion allowed the Duke of Newburgh for his
contentment. A principal part of the Lower Palatinate is given to the Elector
of Mentz, by the consent of those at Bruxels, and the rest is promised to be
parcelled among other Princes.

Now for the hopes of a surer way to regain an happy settlement, by the
Concurrence of the King, his Allies and Confederates, and the whole Protestant
party in Europe; let these Matters be weighed in the Balance of Common
Judgment. The Electors of Saxony and Brandenburgh, and Germany depends upon the
restoring of the Palatine: Besides, the Levies which they made in the beginning
of the last Summer, though by the unfortunate accident of Duke Christian of
Brunswick, they were soon dismissed, do testify the same affections still
remaining in them, and the same Resolutions to embrace any good occasion for
recovering the liberty of Germany. The number of those that have this conjoined
Interest, is great and mighty, yea, the greater part of the people, both
Austria: The King of Denmark being a Prince full of circumspection, and being
unwilling to enter into play alone, made answer to all instances, That as other
Princes have their eyes on him, so he has his eyes on the King of Great
Britain. Wherefore, although for these two Europe, even when counter-ballanced
by the other two, does demonstrate what may be done by the joint forces of all
three together, especially Palsgraves Counsels dissent from our Kings Proposals.

And there were not wanting, both of the Kings Counsel at home, and of his
Agents in Foreign parts, such as frequently warned him of the disappointment
and dishonor that would follow those ways of Treating with implacable, though
flattering Enemies; and showed him the sure and honorable way of reestablishing
his Children in their Patrimony; not by their Enemies courtesy, but by the
united strength of the Protestant The Netherlands appear ready to embrace the
ancient Union with England.


In the languishing, and almost expiring Condition of the Spanish Treaty, the
United Provinces in the Netherlands, appeared ready to embrace the opportunity
of renewing the ancient Union with England, in all mutual confidence, and
strong assurance. And the King was moved to return to those old Confederates,
the surest supports of his Crowns and Family: For it happened that in latter
times, a distrust and strangeness had grown betwixt them. Bernevelt and the
Arminian Faction had drawn the States to new Alliances, and commonly procured
Answers to be given to King James, and his Ministers, in a harsh and peremptory
style. In like manner the King did not care to own them fully, esteeming them
Arminius and Vorstius, and the rest of that sort, who caused great distractions
in the Belgic Church and State: Nay, he was thought to have done more then
requisite, in rendering the Cautionary Towns, and in conniving with too much
patience at the insolences and misdemeanors of their Mariners. But the Prince
of Orange expressed good will to an entire friendship with England, and assured
the English Hague, That whenever the King would be to those Provinces, as
Queen Elizabeth was in her time, they would be the same to him, as they had
been to Queen Elizabeth: But as yet they keep themselves reserved, because they
suspect that the Introductions, and Tentatives to a Union with them, have been
to no other end, but to indear the English Merchandise, and to inhaunce its
price to the King of Spain: For they conclude, that Spain will never Match with
England, but for hope, or fear; hope of reducing those Provinces by the Match,
or Spain; and in either of these cases they hold the Match as made: As for
themselves, they represent this assurance of a firm Conjunction; for that
instead of giving an ear to Overtures and Concessions, which from day to day
were presented to them, they have put themselves to the Offensive, by preparing
a strong Fleet, which is ready to set sail to the West Indies, to the end they
may at least interrupt the peaceable Annual return of the Gold and Silver of
those parts, Austria do continually advance their greatness. And this
preparation, together with their Voyages into the East Indies, will make them
irreconcilable to Spain.

These enterprises were commended to the King, as approved by all good men, to
be a principal means to cast down the fearful power of Spain: Only it was too
vaste a design for that little Country; but if the King were pleased
thoroughly to close with them, their Affections and constant interest would so
bind them to him, that he might absolutely Europe. And the present state of
the Provinces might incite the King to this Conjunction. For the last Summer,
if the Imperialists had joined with the Spaniards, they had undoubtedly made an
irruption into the borders of that State; and they are like to break in this
next year, except some notable Turn shall intervene; and then our best Link for
a Bond of Friendship is broken, and those Provinces of a strong Staff will
become a broken Reed. The Ratifi^^^ication come from the new Pop^; and when all
is ready for the E(...)ls, th^n is the Ma^ch dashed by order from England.
Such England; but the Counsels then prevailing were not propense to this
Conjunction, and Interest, although we were then breaking with Spain, and the
House of Austria.

About the beginning of December, when the Ratification came from the new Pope,
Bonfires were made throughout all Spain, and the great Ordnance thundered out
reports of joy: And that King to satisfy his Oath made to the Prince of Wales,
prepared for the Espousals, and a day was prefixed, and all things appointed
for the Solemnity, according to the Magnificence of that Court. The Infanta's
Family was settled, her Officers distinguished, and the beginning of March was
the time for her journey into England. From the Princes departure, she had
applied herself to the learning of the English Tongue. The English Ambassadors
carried themselves like Subjects toward her, as being their Masters Wife, or
Spouse. Many rich presents had she prepared for her future Bristol had provided
many costly Liveries for his Attendants in the Solemnity of the Espousals. But
all things were instantly discomposed by the opening of the new commands from
England to the Earl, which were to procure an entire surrender of the
Palatinate and Electorate, before he move one step further toward the Contract.

In the Court of Spain there was great resentment of these new delays, and they
discerned a breach toward: The Infanta gave over the England; but to the
Demands from England, the King of Spain replied, That if a Treaty be set on
foot, and the Emperor, and Duke of Bavaria, will not come to Terms of
Conformity, he will join Arms with England, to recover the Palatinate: The
Spaniards confessing the Demand just, but unseasonable, professed, the
Desponsorio's past, the Infanta on her knees should have been a Suitor to the
King to restore the Palatinate, making it thereby her act, and drawing the
Obligation wholly to her. These Bristol was called home, and all was dashed to
pieces.

It was an amazement to the Christian World, that when the Match was brought to
such perfection, the motion should be rejected by that side which pursued it
with so much eagerness, and patience, as being the masterpiece of all their
designs.

In the latter part of this long tedious act, the Spaniard appeared real, but
in the former part their reality was questionable: For our parts, the Riddle
and Mystery.

Bristol sends his Apology to K. James for having demurred upon the new
Instructions.
The Earl of Bristol having demurred upon the new Instructions, to prevent (as
he desired) the embroiling of the whole Treaty, was to make his Apology to the
King his Master, and for himself he thus pleaded, That he understood the
Infanta was his young Masters wife, or Spouse at least, and that both the King
and Prince infinitely desired the Match. The powers were drawn by the
intervention of both parties, the King of Spain* accepting them, and the Prince
legally delivering them, and they Britain, with a Public Declaration, how and
when he was to deliver them; and this was drawn into an Instrument by the
Secretary of State: According to this state of things, he appeals to any
Censure which were the more prudent, honest, and dutiful way; whether to put a
disgrace upon so great and worthy a Princess, who was to be his Masters Wife,
and a scorn upon the King of Spain, by nominating a day for the Marriage, when
the powers would be expired, and not at all to insist upon Infanta, by
deferring the Marriage, and of the indignity offered to the King of Spain, and
the danger of the whole Treaty, by the detention of the Powers without the
pretense of some emergent cause: And after all this, when his Majesty had
declared his pleasure, there was ready an exact obedience. Wherefore in the
confidence of his own innocence, he professes as great a confidence of his
Majesty's accustomed grace and favor.

Bristol being called home, acquainted the Conde Olivares with the Letters of
Revocation, and desired withal to have a day assigned him to Olivares
answered, That he had much to say to him by his Majesty's order; and spoke to
this effect in the presence of Sir Walter Aston, Olivares offers Bristol large
Preferments in the Kings name, when he was to take his leave.
and the Conde Gondomar: That the King had received large advertisements with
what malice and rancor his Enemies did prosecute him, and how powerful they are
in England; And in regard that the Envy which was drawn upon him proceeded from
his earnest endeavors to accomplish the Match, and that the particular fault
laid to his charge was in point of delivering the Proxies deposited in his
hands, that Great Britain, and send a particular Ambassador, if it be needful,
to mediate for him; for that he had served his Master with that exactness and
fidelity, which deserved not only to be assisted by all good offices, but to be
rewarded and published: And his Majesty, for the example of his own Subjects,
and for the encouragement of all such as should serve their Princes with the
Bristol, was for the fidelity wherewith he had served his own Master.

Bristols Answer to those Profers.
That he was sorry and much afflicted to hear such language; And desired that
they should understand, that neither this King nor Spain were beholding to him;
For whatsoever he had done, he thought the same to be fittest for his Masters
service and his own honor, having no relation to Spain; and that he served a
Master, from whom he was assured both of justice and due reward; And nothing
doubted but his own Innocence would prevail against the wrong intended by his
powerful Adversaries: And were he sure to run into imminent Spain: And that
with this resolution he would employ the utmost of his power to maintain the
Amity between the two Kings and their Crowns, and to serve his Catholic
Majesty.

After he had taken his leave and was ready to come away, he had another Profer
made unto him in private of Ten thousand Crowns to take viz. the Earl of
Bristol himself, and it would make him not so clear in his own heart as now he
was; and so he refused the offer.

The Match was now truly broken, but as yet the breach was not declared, nor
the Treaty quite fallen to the ground, but continued after a languishing manner
in the hands of Sir Walter Aston. The Spaniards prepare for a War with England.
The Spaniards by all Advertisements from England were advised to expect a War,
and accordingly they went seriously to work, and prepared themselves for what
might happen; And Aston being there upon the place, conceived it high time that
King James should resolve upon some course to allay the storm arising, or to go
hand in hand with them in equal preparations. All that England brought no
better Answer to their last Offer concerning the Palatinate, then such as they
had hither to received, they will return the Jewels, and declare the Marriage
broken. For by this time they had received intelligence of the Princes treating
a Marriage with a Daughter of France, the Lady Henrietta Maria. And so it was,
that King James had lately sent the Lord Kensington, afterward Holland, to
enquire covertly whether the Match were feasible, before he would enter into a
Public Treaty.

The L. Kensington sent Ambassador into France to feel the pulse of that Court
touching a Match, renders an account of his acceptance.
The Lord Kensington returned this Account of his Negotiation: That there
appeared in the face of that Court an extraordinary sweetness, smoothness and
clearness toward an Alliance with England; The Princess herself was observed
seldom to have put on a more cheerful countenance, then she had done the first
night of his appearance in that Court; The Queen, though a Daughter of Spain,
wished this Match more then French observe the aspiring of the King of Spain to
the Monarchy of Christendom, and his approaches to the Kingdom of France, and
his encompassing it on all sides; And they discern that an Alliance with
England is the surest way to oppose the mightiness of that King: And upon the
same account they promised brave assistance to the United Provinces, gave great
encouragement Mansfield and Duke Christian of Brunswick; A Gentleman of the
Religion was sent to Liege to offer them the Kings protection, if that Town
will seek it. Nevertheless they have not directly embraced this Overture of
Marriage, because we have not as yet wholly abandoned the Treaty with Spain;
lest they should lose the Friendship of a Brother-in-law, to gain another which
may possibly fail them. But they say that their hearts are not capable of more
content, then to see this Motion upon a Public Commission, and all that may
touch upon the Spain dissolved. Neither are they like to strain us to
unreasonable Conditions in favor of the Roman Catholics in his Majesty's
Dominions: For in that matter their Pulse beats so temperately, as to promise a
good Crisis therein: And in case his Majesty be drawn to banish the Priests and
Jesuits, and to quicken the Laws against other Catholics, to keep a good
Intelligence with his Parliament, yet they say, they hope he will not tie his
hands from some moderate favor to flow hereafter from the mediation of that
State, which is all they pretend unto

Thus the Lord Kensington having rendered an account of his diligence, advised
to go on roundly with the Match, lest otherwise, though never so well affected,
they be altered with the Arts of Spain: For (says he) undoubtedly the King of
Spain will resolve, if possible, to oblige one side; And as the French do think
he may please England with the restitution of the Palatinate, so we may think
he will please the French with rendering of the Valtoline. The King advised to
call a Parliament.
But without the assistance of Parliament, and compliance with the people, the
King could not go through with those weighty works which he was now to take in
hand. Now the things which troubled the People, were set forth to the King in
three particulars: As, That for the Subsidies Hereupon some of his nearest
Council persuaded him to begin the work by removing the peoples Jealousies; and
to cast away some crumbs of his Crown amongst them, and those crumbs would work
miracles and satisfy many thousands. And whereas the aim of the former
Treaties was the settling of an universal peace in Christendom, Lion has teeth
and claws; Next, that he embrace and invite a strict association and friendship
with those, whom neighborhood, alliance, and common Interest of State and
Religion had joined to him. Feb. 19. the Parliament began at Westminster: The
King being set in the Throne, spoke thus.

I Have assembled you at this time, The Kings Speech to the Parliament.
to impart to you a secret and matter of great importance as can b^ to my
State, and the State of my Children; wherein I crave your best and safest
advice and counsel, according as the Writ whereby you were assembled imports,
That the King would advise with you in matters concerning his Estate and
Dignity. And as I have ever endeavored by this and the like ways to procure and
cherish the love of my people toward me, so do I hope, and my hope is exceeded
by faith; Match of my Son: wherein, as you may know, I have spent much time,
with great cost, in long Treaties, desiring always therein (and not without
reason hoping to have effected my desires) the advancement of Spain, and for
his more safety sent Buckingham (in whom I ever reposed most trust of my
person) with him, with this command, continually to be present with him, and
never to leave him till he returned again fafely unto me. Which he performed,
though not with that effect in the business that I expected, yet not Qui
versatur in generalibus, is easily deceived, and that Generality brings nothing
to good issue; but that before any matter can be fully finished, it must be
brought to particulars: For when as I thought the affair had been before their
going, produced to a narrow point, relying upon their general propositions, I
found when they came there the matter proved to be so raw, as if it had never
been treated of; the generals giving them easy way to evade, and affording
them means to avoid the effecting of any thing.

The particulars that passed in the Treaty, I mean not now to discover to you,
the time being too short; I refer you to Charles and Buckingham, and the
Secretaries Reports, who shall relate unto you all the particulars. And after
that, super totam materiam, I desire your best assistance to advise me what is
best and fittest for me to do for the good of the Commonwealth, Palatine. And
of our estate I know you cannot but be sensible, considering that your welfare
consists in ours, and you shall be sure to have your share in what misery shall
befall us: And therefore I need to urge no other Argument to you in this
behalf, in offering me your wisest and surest Counsel and Furtherance. And I
assure you in the faith of a Christian King, that it is res integra presented
unto you, and that I stand not bound nor either way engaged, but

To plant is not sufficient, unless like good Gardiners you pluck up the weeds
that will choke your labors: And the greatest weeds among you, are Jealousies;
root them out. For my Actions, I dare avow them before God; but Jealousies are
of a strange depth. I am the Husband, and you the Wife, and it is subject to
the Wife to be jealous of her Husband: Let this be far from you! I can truly
say, and will avouch it before the seat of God and Angels, that never King
governed with a

It has been talked of my remisness in maintenance of Religion, and suspicion
of a Toleration: But as God shall judge me, I never thought nor meant, nor ever
in word expressed any thing that savored of it. It is true, that at times, for
reasons best known to my self, I did not so fully put those Laws in execution,
but did wink and connive at some

Therefore I would have you, as I have in this place heretofore told you, as S.
Paul did Timothy, avoid Genealogies and curious Questions, and nice Querks and
Jerks of Law, and idle Innovations; And if you minister me no just occasion, I
never yet was, nor never shall be curious or captious to quarrel with you: But
I desire you to avoid all doubts and hindrances, and to compose your selves
speedily and quietly to this weighty affair I have proposed; for that I have
found already, delays have proved dangerous, and have bred distraction of this
business; and I would not have you by other occasions to neglect or protract
it. God is my Judge, I speak it as a Christian King, Never any waifaring man
that was in the Deserts of Arabia, and in danger of death for want of water to
quench his thirst, more desired water, then I thirst and desire

Feb. 21. The Commons presented Sir Thomas Crew for their Speaker, who prayed
an Excuse; which being denied, he made this Speech.

SInce I cannot bring an Olive Branch in my mouth, The King approves Sir Tho.
Crew for Speaker, who made this Speech.
as a sign of my peace, and that God (in whose hands are the hearts of Kings)
without whose providence a sparrow does not fall to the ground, whom no man can
resist, has inclined your Majesty to cast your eye of grace on me, and to
confirm me in this place; I am taught in the best School, that Obedience is
better then Sacrifice; And will only say with a learned Father, Da Domine quod
jubes, and jube quod vis. Otherwise Ahashuerus did, to sustain me in my
fainting.

Your Majesty is Princeps Haereditarius, descended from both the Roses, and
has united both the Kingdoms: At your first entrance you wrought a wonder in
the Tumult of our Cares, and Cloud of our Fears happening upon the death of the
late Queen, by the bright beams of Mira cano, sol occubuit, nox nulla secuta
est. There was a David in Hebron, and no Ishbosheth to disturb your peaceable
entrance, but the Acclamations of all your Subjects and Commons concurring to
express their great contentment. This was no sudden flash of joy, but a
constant blessing by the continuance of the Gospel and true Religion, maugre
the malice and hellish invention of those who would have blown up all at once;
but God laughed them to scorn, and they fell into their own trap. These things
I leave Non est dignus dandis, qui non agit gratias pro datis.

Since my designment to this place, I called to mind these Statutes of late
times, and find two of especial note: The first of 32 H. 8. which was called
Parlamentum doctum, for the many good Laws made for the settling of Possessions:
The other 39 Eliz. which by a reverend Divine Parlamentum pium, because the
Subjects thereby were enabled to found Hospitals without License of Mortmain,
or Ad quod damnum; And other charitable Laws which I omit, being not perpetual.
And I likewise called to mind many glorious offers made by your Majesty, and
other good Provisions at the two last Meetings. Now your Majesty has stretched
forth your Scepter to call us to you again, and has made a Declaration, that
all jealousies and distractions might be removed, and the memory of
Parliament-Nullities might be buried. And my desire is, that your Majesty's
influence may distill upon us, and you proceed in such a sweet harmony and
conjunction, that Righteousness and Peace may kiss each other, and that Mercy
and Truth may meet; and the World may say, Ecce quam bonum and quam jucundum
Regem and Populum convenire in unum!

And for perfecting of this work, the good Bills against Monopolies, Felix,
Doctum, and Pium; which will be good to your Subjects, and no diminution to
your Revenue, or derogation to your Prerogative, which in your Majesty's hands
is as a Scepter of gold, but in others hands is a Rod of iron. I need not speak
in the praise of the Fundamental Common-Laws: Veritas temporis filia, Time has
sufficiently justified them. Monarchy is the Ajax his Shield, a weight rather
then a defense. Their desire is, that the good Laws for Religion may be
confirmed; and that the generation of Locusts, the Jesuits and
Seminary-Priests, which were wont to creep in Elizabeth lived and died in
peace; the Pope cursed her, but God blessed her: And so shall your Majesty,
having God to your Friend, find safety in the Ark of true Religion, and when
you are old and full of days, land you in Heaven; And then our hopeful Prince
which sprang out of your own loins, shall sway that Scepter, which you must
leave, to enjoy a Crown celestial: And God in his due time will restore the
distressed Cato was wont to say, Hoc sentio, and Carthago destruenda est: But I
say, Hoc sentio, and Palatinatus recuperandus est.

The question was put to a Lacedemonian, Why their City wanted Walls? Who
answered, Concord was their Walls. Your Majesty under Jerusalem, It is a City
at unity within it self. Neither is your Government confined within the limits
of this Kingdom, but extends it self to Ireland, where your Majesty's care and
pains in our late Imploiment gave diverse provident Directions for the setting
forth of Religion, the reforming of Courts of Justice, and inflicting
punishment on the Disturbers of the Ocularis testis, that you have made these
ample Endowments of Churches out of your own Excheated Revenue, as will be to
your honor in all posterity. But my desire is, as well in the beginning, as in
all other our proceedings, our words may be vera, pauca, and ponderosa.

Therefore with your Gracious Favor, according to ancient Presidents, we are
humble Suitors, That you would be pleased to allow our ancient Privileges. And
that for our better Attendance, our Persons, Goods, and necessary Attendants
may be free from Arrests; and that we may have liberty of free Speech, not
doubting but we shall confine our selves within the limits of Duty. And because
this great business may give us occasion often to resort to your Majesty, That
upon our

Lastly, That I may not only be a Speaker, but an humble Suitor, protesting by
the great God, by whom Kings do reign, That whatsoever I have said, has
proceeded from a Loyal Heart, I therefore desire that may be covered with the
vail of your Gracious Construction, or acquitted by your Gracious Pardon.

The King having referred the whole business of the Spanish Match to the Advice
of Parliament, the Duke of Buckingham made to both Houses in the Palace at
Whitehal, a long Narration of all the Transactions in Spain, which was
accompained with the Princes Attestation.

Grace observed Six distinct and several parts. The Dukes Narrative.
The first was, the Motives of the Prince his Journey to Spain. The second, the
Treaty of the Marriage set on foot in Spain, severally and by its self. The
third, the Treaty of the Marriage and Restitution, united together by a
Reciprocal Subordination. The fourth, the Prince his Highness return from
Spain. The fifth, his Majesty's subsequent proceedings in both the Treaties,
since the return. The last was, the stating of the Question, super totam
materiam, wherein Grace spoke very distinctly and orderly.

I. The Motives to the Princes Journey to Spain.
THe Negotiation of Master Chancellor of the Exchequer with the Spaniards
indirect dealing with this State: Then was read the aforementioned Letter of
the Third of October, 1622. from the King to the Earl of Bristol, wherein
Bristol was required to let the King of Spain know, how sensible King James was
of the Emperors proceedings toward him; and that he should demand of the King
of Spain a promise under Hand and Seal, that Heidelburgh should be delivered
within Seventy days after Audience, Manheim and Frankendale, if they be taken;
and if this be denied, to press to have leave to march through the King of
Spains Territories with an Army, for the recovery of his Childrens Patrimony;
and that the King of Spain should assist us with his Forces.

The Duke desired the Houses to take for truth what ever he should say* granted
and attested by the Princes presence; and declared, That this Letter was not
put home to the uttermost by Bristol. Hereupon a Dispatch was sent away to my
Lord of Bristol, expressly commanding him to press his Directions more home then
yet he had done, and in case he should be denied or delayed by the King of
Spain, then to take his leave, and come away: This was not so fully exacted by
my Lord of Bristol.

Porter that carried these Letters was commanded not to stay above Ten days,
who after he had been there some Four or five days, and saw Conde Olivares
(having been his Creature) and desired him that he would speed his Dispatch;
Olivares asked him what he would have? who replied, No more then what had been
formerly promised; that in case the Emperor should deny the Restitution of the
Palatinate, the King of Spain should assist our King by Arms to recover it, or
else give way to our Forces to March thither, through his Country. Olivares
replied, That this was a preposterous demand; What to assist with Arms against
the Kings Uncle, and Porter speaking to him of the Marriage of our Prince with
the Infanta of Spain, he told him, That he understood not a word of it.

Porter acquainting Bristol herewith, he said, He would call Olivares to an
account, if he held this Language with him, and would make him understand, That
an Earl of England, was as good a man as a Conde of Spain. But sending for
Porter the next morning, he changed his resolution, and concluded to carry the
business more calmly, and said the Conde Conde was angry with Porter for
communicating what he said to Bristol. Mr. Porter returned with a Dispatch
fraught with Generalities, without any one particular or certainty at all made
in relation to the Prince's Highness; who thereupon took his resolution to go
in person to Spain, and gave himself these Reasons for the enterprise.

He saw his Fathers Negotiation plainly deluded, Matters of Religion A
desperate disease, must have a desperate remedy.

Hereupon the King commanded the Duke to accompany his Highness in his Journey.

II. The Treaty of the Marriage severed, and
WHen the Prince had arived at Madrid, the Conde gave him a visit, magnified
exceedingly the Princes journey, amplified the Obligations his Highness had put
upon that King; and said, That now without all peradventure it must be a Match,
and we must part and divide the

The next day the Conde taking the Duke into his Coach, and Mr. Porter, for his
Interpreter, falling into discourse of the Match, he said unto the Duke, Let us
dispatch this Match out of hand, and strike ^ up without the Pope: The Duke
answered, He liked the manner very w^ll, but desired to understand the Means.
The Means, quoth the Conde, is very easy; it is but the Conversion of the
Prince; which we cannot conceive but his Highness intended upon his Resolution
for this Journey.

The Duke answered forthwith, That with freedom they came thither, and with
freedom they would return again; they were no Juglers, neither came they to
Spain to make new bargains: That the Prince was settled in his Religion; his
Conscience was troubled with no scruples in Conde, there is no way but to send
to Rome to hasten the Dispensation; to which the Duke assented. Hereupon the
Conde wrote his Letter to the Cardinal Lodovisia, the Popes Nephew; which being
showed to the Duke, seemed to him to be very heavy; the Duke therefore desired
to quicken it with this Postscript, That now the Prince being arived, must not
be sent back without a Wife; that delay to a Suitor, is a kind of refusal;
that Clogging Instructions would amount to a The Conde fell into Choler, said
directly it could not be done. This the Prince affirmed to be acted in his
presence: But the Earl of Bristol made a more benign construction thereof, the
Duke a right-down conclusion, That this people never intended either Match or
Restitution; and so wished his Highness fairly at home again: However the
Messenger was dispatched to Rome.

Four or five days after his Highness was placed to see his Mistress in her
passage through the streets, as she made her visits from Church to Conde salved
this up with a Complement, That if the Dispensation were once returned, he
should lie with her even that very night; nay, have her he should upon any
terms. If he could not be

Soon after riding in a Coach, it was urged by the Conde; That the Infanta was
of a tender Conscience, and if she should come into England, and find the
Prince an enemy to her Religion, it would quite dishearten her. His Highness
consented to hear her upon this subject, because he was as like to convert her,
as she was to pervert him. A Conference with Divines was pressed upon his
Highness, which he refused, and said, If after Disputation with them, they
should not prevail against a young man,

Six weeks after the Princes arival came the Dispensation; but his Highness
understood from Rome by Mr. Gage, that the Dispensation was returned much
clogged in Matter and Manner, especially with the annexed new Condition. The
King of Spain before the receiving of the Dispensation, was to take an Oath to
see all the Articles performed, whereupon England.

His Highness signified his Resolution unto them, that he neither could nor
would add or alter any thing of the first Articles sent to England.

A Iuncto of Divines are appointed to meet and consider, whether the King might
safely take the Oath. By this time the Prince had gone through all the
Articles, sitting in person with the Committee; only leaving three
undiscussed, That of the Church, that of the Nurse, and that of the Education
of the Children; which his Highness reserved till he should speak with the
King. Then said the Conde, Now the business is in a better way then ever it
was, a Match, and without more ado she was his Wife.

But the next day came Gondomar and spoke unto the Prince of the same Match, as
of a new thing, and told him plainly, That unless his Highness Rome, clearly
and entirely, nothing would be done; for they had no power to remove or alter a
word of false Latin. Whereupon his Highness was justly distasted, and offered
to break. Then they pressed the Prince, that he would be pleased to stay twenty
days, until the King of Spain might receive an Answer from England. The Prince
resolved to stay, upon condition that Sir Francis Cottington might be
dispatched away within two days, and some Messenger that might overtake him
with

The Articles being at last sent to England, the Iuncto of Divines delivered
their opinions, that the Infanta could not be sent over before the Spring; at
which his Highness was offended, but the Conde prevailed with him to stay until
their Ambassadors should certify out of England, that the Articles were
assented unto by King James, and put in execution,

The Bishop of Segovia was pleased to say to the Duke, That he had heard
something of the State of our Kingdom, and had received it from good hands;
That our King could not make a Toleration without a Rebellion, and easily
believed it; because the King of Spain is not able in his Dominions to effect
the like enterprise, without incurring the like danger; therefore he concluded,
it was unsafe to send the Lady thither at this time, because we having granted
as much in effect as a Toleration, Gondomar hereupon said, That for his part,
he did not hold it fit to send the Infanta thither, before the Articles be
perfectly put in execution. And Gondomar privately infused to the Prince his
Highness, being incensed against the Duke, That the Duke was in heart, (as he
said all his Kindred were) a Roman

About this time it was reported that the Prince intended to steal away,
whereupon they laid in wait to intercept him: Hereupon the Duke was sent to
tell them, That although they had stolen thither out of love, they would never
steal thence out of fear.

About this time the Prince sent a Message to his Father, That if he should
receive any Advertisement, that he was detained by that State as a Prisoner, he
would be pleased for his sake, never to think upon him any longer as a Son, but
reflect upon the good of his Sister, and the safety of his own Kingdoms.

III. The Treaty of the Match and Restitution, reciprocally subordinated.
IT is fit to observe this passage, which is the thing whereupon all his
Highness subsequent Actions are turned and moved. He had never Spain; he had
never left any Proxy with Bristol; he had never taken any Oath at the Escurial;
or ever so much as written a Letter of Complement to the Lady; but that he had
still before his eyes, as his Cynosure, the Promise made by the Co^de, for the
Restitution of the Palatinate.

To hasten the Delivery of the Lady, the Duke presented unto the Conde, how his
Master was now in years, the Prince his only Son; and he would suffer in Honor
and Reputation, to return home without his Conde consented hereunto, and
desired the Prince would name a day for his departure.

This news came to the Infanta, who seemed to be Apprehensive of the Princes
going away, and prevailed with his Highness to return this Complement unto her,
That rather then he would give her Alteza any disgust, he would stay for her
seven years.

By this time Sir Francis Cottington is arived with all things perfected by the
King, and Letters from the Ambassadors of full satisfaction, and a

Now began the Conde to enter into the Treaty for the Restitution of the
Palatinate, saying, The Lady should by no means go to England, before that
business was accommodated. And it was projected, That there should be a
Restitution of the Land to the Prince Palatine, upon a Condition of Marriage
with the Emperors Daughter, and that he should be bred in the Emperors Court.
The Prince demanding of the Conde, Conde answered Negatively, because they had
a Maxim of State, that the King of Spain must never fight against the Emperor;
for they would not employ their forces against the House of Austria.

Hereupon his Highness made his Protestation to the Conde; Look to it Sir, for
if you hold your self to that, there is an end of all; for without this you may
not rely upon, either Marriage or Friendship.

Spain, so that they will scarce bestow a visit upon him, and the Conde came
very seldom to him: And two Letters came to the Dukes hands, which showed, that
all that the Conde did, was nothing but slashes and lightning; notwithstanding
he seemed at this time to be in a good humor, and told the Duke, That now
certainly it must be a Match, and the Devil could not break it: The Duke
replied, He thought so, and the Match had need be very firm and strong, it had
been seven years in Soadering. The Conde denied, and said plainly, it had not
been really intended seven months; and said, I will fetch that out of my Desk,
that shall assure you thereof; and so produced two Letters, the first was
written with the King of Spains own hand, Dated the Fifth of November, 1622.
And the other from the Conde Olivares of the Eighth of November, 1622. Both
which Letters are mentioned before.

IV. The Princes return from Spain.
ANd now the Prince returning for England, being engaged to leave his Proxy,
did de^osite the same in the hands of the Earl of Bristol, who was to keep it,
and use it as his Procurator; that is, As he should receive his Highness
Direction from time to time: His words for the present Rome clear and entire,
(which it did not) then within so many days he should deliver it to the King of
Spain.

The second Direction sent to him, was by a Letter which his Highness sent him,
between his departure from the Escurial, and coming to the Sea side, to this
effect, That for fear a Monastery should rob him of his Wife, he should stay
the delivery of the Powers until the doubts were cleared; and that his Highness
would send him in the Premises some further Bristol in his Letter of the First
of November, 1623. does press so vehemently the Prince his Highness concerning
this Proxy, and the Prince vowed openly before both Houses, that he had never
by Oath or Honor engaged himself not to revoke the Powers, more then by the
clause De non revocando Procuratore inserted in the Instrument it self, and
that he conceived the clause to be matter of Form; and although Essentially of
no binding power, yet usually thrust into every such Instrument; and that the
Civilians do hold, De non revocando Procuratore inserted in it. Therefore as to
this point the Duke concluded, That the Earl of Bristol in charging this matter
so highly on the Prince, had much forgot himself.

V. The Subsequent proceedings of his Majesty
THe Prince by the Mercy of God came to Royston, and made his Relation to the
King of all that had passed. His Majesty was glad, and told him, That he had
acted well the part of a Son; and now the part of a Father must come upon the
Stage, which was to provide with all circumspection, Bristols hands, until he
had some better assurance of the Restitution of the Palatinate.

Then was read his Majesty's Letter to the Earl of Bristol, dated the Eighth of
October, 1623. wherein the Earl of Bristol was positively required by the King,
That before he deliver the Powers, or move to the Contract, to procure from the
King of Spain a direct Restitution of the Palatinate, and the Electoral
Dignity, or to assist with Arms within a time limited.

You would perceive that by this Dispatch, Bristol would lay hold on all hints
and emergent occasions to put off the Desponsorios without this

For first, the Confirmation came from Rome clogged and mangled; and instead of
challenging thereupon, he labors with no small strength of wit to hide and
palliate the same.

Secondly, In the Temporal Articles, the Portion was altered, Six hundred
thousand pounds in ready cash, to some Eighty thousand pounds in money, and a
few Jewels, and a Pension of Two thousands pounds per annum. Instead of
quarrelling this main alteration, he seems to approve and applaud the payment.

Thirdly, For the Assurance of Restitution of the Palatinate, the main
Foundation both of Match and Friendship, he is so far from providing for it
before (which was the Method prescribed him by the King) that he leaves it to
be mediated by the Infanta after the Marriage.

Lastly, Instead of putting off the Contract, as any man in the world (upon the
Dispatch from Royston) would have done, he comes to prefix a Desponsorios.

Now from this rash fixing of the day for the Desponsorios in Spain, which was
controlled again by an Express, from hence issued an unnecessary discourtesie
put upon the King, and in a manner upon the Infanta by the Earl of Bristol:
From that proceeded a greater affront put upon the Prince, the taking away the
title La Princesa from the Infanta, and the debarring of our Ambassadors from
any further Access to her person.

Spain to the Memorial of the Ambassador, implying a Refusal to assist by Arms
for the recovery of the Palatinate, in case the Emperor consent not to a
Restitution, which we have inserted in series of time:

VI. The Stating of the Question Super totam Materiam.
THis Question the Duke stated on this manner, Whether this being the full
effect and product of all the Negotiation, which I have opened unto you, be
sufficient, Super totam Materiam, for his Majesty to rely upon with any
safety; as well for the Marriage of his only Son, as for the relief of his
only Daughter: Or, that these Treaties set aside, his Majesty were best to
trust in his own strength, and to stand upon his own



The Prince was present at this Narration, and assisted the Duke of Buckingham
therein, and certified many particulars thereof; and it being reported the same
day to the House, his Highness approved thereof there also.

The Spanish Ambassador took great offense at the Dukes Relation, as reflecting
upon his Masters Honor, and demanded his Head for satisfaction.

The House of Lords by a general Vote acquitted the Duke from the Accusation of
the Spanish Ambassador, and justified his Relation, and intended to signify as
much to his Majesty by a Committee of the whole

Both Houses of Parliament justify the Duke in his Narrative.
YOur Majesty's most Loyal Subjects, the Lords, Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses, Assembled at this time in both Houses of Parliament, being informed
of a Complaint made unto your most Excellent Majesty against the Duke of
Buckingham, That in the Narrative, which by your Majesty's command, he made
unto both Houses, the Four and twentieth of February last, he should let fall
some passages, grievous to the Honor of the King of Spain, and inferred to be
of so high a nature, as if the same had been delivered by any Subject of that

First, Concerning that King, they do with an unanimous Vote of

For the second, That concerns my Lord, they do in the like humility attest
unto your most Sacred Majesty, That if my Lord the Duke had omitted any matter
represented unto them that day, he had for so much failed in the performance of
that duty and fidelity which he owes unto your Majesty, and to the business,
and unto both Houses.

For the last, which concerns themselves, they make bold in

To which Representation his Majesty returned this Answer.

MY Lords and Gentlemen all, I might have reason to speak nothing in regard of
the person whereof you spoke; His Majesty's Answer to that Justification.
but in regard of your Motion, it were not civil: For if I be silent, I shall
wrong neither my self, nor that Nobleman which you now spoke of, because he is
well known to be such a one, as stands in no need of a Prolocutor, or
Fidejussor, to undertake for his fidelity, or well carrying Errand, whom I was
not resolved to trust for the carriage thereof, were a fault in my discretion
scarce compatible to the love and trust I bear him. It is an old and true
saying, That he is a happy man that serves a good M^ster; and it is no less
truth, That he is a happy Master that enjoys a faithful Servant.

The greatest fault (if it be a fault) or at leastwise the greatest error, I
hope he shall ever commit against me, was his desiring this Justification

First, Because he being my Disciple and Scholar, he may be assured. I will
trust his own Relation.

Secondly, Because he made the same Relation unto me, which he did afterward
unto both Houses; so as I was formerly acquainted both with the matter and
manner thereof: And if I should not trust him in the carriage, I was altogether
unworth^ of such a Servant. He has

I have noted in his Negotiation these three remarkable things, Faith,
Diligence, and Discretion, whereof my Son has borne record unto me; yet I
cannot deny, but as he thought to do good service to

The Lords having debated those high Matters of State, which the Palatinate; in
which Vote, the Commons concurred with them.

And in this manner both Houses Addressed themselves to the King.

May it please your most Excellent Majesty,
Both Houses of Parliament concur, that the King may not honorably proceed in
the Treaty of the Prince's Marriage, and the Palatinate.
WE are come unto you, employed from your most faithful Subjects and Servants,
the Lords and Commons assembled in this present Parliament.

And first, They and we do give most humble and hearty thanks

And secondly, We acknowledge our selves most bound unto your Majesty, that you
have been pleased to require the humble Advice of us your obedient Subjects in
a Case so important as this is, which hitherto depends between your Majesty
and the King of Spain. Which we no one person there dissenting or disagreeing
from the rest. And it is upon mature consideration, and weighing many
particulars of sundry natures, that finding so much wan^ of Sincerity in all
their Proceedings, We super totam materiam present this our humble Address unto
your Majesty; That the Treaties both for the Marriage and the Palatinate may
not any longer be continued with the honor of your Majesty* the safety of your
People, the welfare of your Children and Posterity, as also the assurance of
your ancient

Reasons were also presented, to fortify this Vote.

Whereas the Propositions of the Match were at the first no more then Liberty
of Conscience to the Infanta and her Family, which the King might in honor
grant; The Spaniards taking advantage of the Prince's being in Spain,
importuned a General Connivence of Religion, Secular Priests, and some with the
Jesuits, they are united; which is a matter of great consequence, considering
they do as well depend on Spain for Temporal Rome for Spiritual: And they
cannot be suppressed, as long as the Treaty holds.

They have by this Treaty devoured our Allies, and the Protestant party in
Germany and elsewhere, to the decay of true Religion, and to the jealousy of
our Friends beyond the Seas. During this Treaty of Love, they have spoiled his
Majesty's Son-in-law of his Lands and Honors; and notwithstanding promises of
Restitution, still invaded his Rights, and at length turned pretended
Difficulties into apparent Impossibilities. King, and offered indignity to our
Prince, by importuning him again and again to a Conversion, contrary ^o the Law
of Hospitality, and the Privilege of Princes.

The Insincerity of their Proceedings is to be seen by that former Overture of
Marriage for the late Prince Henry, which after many specious Motions, was
followed with a disavowing of their own Ambassador, and a scornful Proposition
made to the King, of the Prince's altering his Religion. As also by the Treaty
of Bruxels, where the Lord Weston found nothing but Delays, and Deceit; and
after diverse peremptory Commands from Spain for his Majesty's satisfaction, it
wrought no other effect then the Besieging and taking of Heidelburgh; insomuch
that the Ambassador was forced to protest, and

To these things were added, the Translation of the Electorate to the Duke of
Bavaria, and the Letter of the King of Spain to Conde Olivares, with the
Conde's Answer, which imported that the Match was never intended. As also after
the Prince had taken a hazardous Journey, they devised a shift by a Iuncto of
Divines, to let him come home without the Lady.



My Lords and Gentlemen all,
The Kings Speech (...) Parliament perswa^^^^ him to break off the two Treaties
of the Match and of the Palatinate.
that my Speech which I delivered in Parliament has taken so good effect
amongst you, as that with an unanimous consent you have freely and speedily
given me your Advice in this great Business, for which I also thank you all as
heartily as I can.

I also give my particular thanks to the Gentlemen of the Lower House, for that
I heard when some would have cast Jealousies and Doubts between me and my
people, they presently quelled those motions, Match, as the Palatinate: And now
give me leave, as an old King, to propound my Doubts, and hereafter to give you
my Answer.

First it is true, that I who have been all the days of my life a peaceable
King, and have had the honor in my Titles and Impresses to be styled Rex
Paci^icus, should be loath without necessity to imbroil my self with War, far
from my Nature, and from my Honor which I have had Malum necessarium, I should
be loath to enter into it. And I must likewise acquaint you, that I have had no
small hope given me of obtaining better Conditions for the Restitution of the
Palatinate, and that even since the sitting down of the Parliament: But be not
Parable uttered by our Savior, after I have resolved of the Necessity and
justness of the Cause, to consider how I shall be enabled to raise Forces for
this purpose.

As concerning the Cause of my Children, I am now old; and as Moses saw the
Land of Promise from an high mountain, though he had not leave to set his foot
in it, so it would be a great comfort to me, that God would but so long prolong
my days, as if I might not see the Restitution, yet at least I might be assured
that it would be; That Simeon say, Nunc dimittis Servum tuum, Domine, etc.
Otherwise it would be a great grief unto me, and I should die with a heavy and
discomforted heart. I have often said, and particularly in the last Parliament,
and I shall ever be of that mind, That as I am not ambitious of any other men's
Goods or Lands, so I desire not to enjoy a Furrow of Land in England, Scotland
or Ireland, without Restitution of the Palatinate: And in this mind I will live
and die.

But let me acquaint you a little with the Difficulties of this Cause. He is an
unhappy man, that shall advise a King to War; and it is an unhappy thing to
seek that by Blood, which may be had by Peace. Besides, I think your intentions
are not to engage me in War, but withal you will consider how many things are
requisite thereunto.

I omit to speak of my own Necessities, (they are too well known:) Sure I am, I
have had the least help in Parliament of any Spain, which I was at, for his
honor, and the honor of this Nation: By sending of Ambassadors, by maintaining
of my Children, and by assisting of the Palatinate, I have incurred a great
Debt to the King of Denmark, which I am not able yet to pay.

The Low Countries, who in regard of their nearness are fittest to help for the
Recovery of the Palatinate, are at so low an ebb, that if Germany that should
do me any good, are all poor, weak and disheartened, and do expect assistance
from hence. For Ireland, I leave it to you, whether that be not a backdoor to
be secured. For the Navy, I thank God, it is in a better case then ever it was,
yet more must be done; and before it can be prepared as it ought to be, it will
require a new Charge as well for its own strength, as for the securing of the
Coasts.

My Children, I vow to God, eat no bread but by my means; I must Customs are
the best part of my Revenues, and in effect the substance of all I have to live
on; All which are farmed out upon that condition, That if there be War, those
Bargains are to be disannulled, which will enforce a great defalcation.

Subsidies ask a great time to bring them in: Now if you assist me that way, I
must take them up beforehand upon credit, which

My Treasurer, to whose Office it appertains, shall more at large inform you of
those things that concern my Estate. Thus freely do I open my heart unto you:
And having your hearts, I cannot want your helps; for it is the heart that
opens the purse, not the purse the heart. I will deal frankly with you: Show
me the Means how I may do what you would have me, and if I take a Resolution by
your Advice to enter into a War, then your selves by your own Deputies shall
have the disposing Weapons bode

Your kind carriage gives me much content; And that comforts me, which my Lord
of Canterbury said, That there was not a Contrary voice amongst you all; like
the Seventy Interpreters, who were led by the breath of God. I am so desirous
to forget all rents in former Parliaments, that it shall not be in my default,
if I am not in love with Parliaments, and call them often, and desire to end my
life in that intercourse between me and my people, for the making of good

Hereupon the House of Commons immediately took into consideration the matter
of Supply: And Sir Edward Sackvile, afterward Earl of Dorset, spoke thus to
that Subject.

SInce Supply unto his Majesty is now in question, Sir Edw. Sackvile's Speech.
of which I hope there will be no question, I humbly ask leave of this
Honorable Assembly to speak my Opinion; assuring you, That when a Treaty of
Grievances shall be on foot, it shall appear I will not sit silent, if I find
my self able to say any thing that may lend a hand to unload my Country of that
heavy burden it now groans under by reason of Monopolies, which like so many
Incubusses and Succubusses exhaust the Vital spirits, and so press down those
Parts which ought to enjoy free respiration, as without some speedy remedy is
like to run to extreme hazard. But this I refer to its proper time, and reserve
my self for it, and now proceed to the matter in hand.

Sure, I do think there are very few that serve in this House (if there be any)
who do not confidently believe, that the chief Motive which induced his Majesty
at this time to assemble this Parliament, was a mere Necessity to be by us
enabled for the Recovery of the Patrimony belonging to the King of Bohemia, now
almost traversed from him, and in the possession of a powerful Enemy. If there
be any who doubt of this truth, I hope he may easily rest satisfied, when I
shall assure him (out of my own knowledge) that many days before this Session,
his Palatinate, and protect it from a second Invasion. These according to his
Majesty's good pleasure diverse days met together at one appointed place, and
there contributed their best endeavors: At least they have finished their task;
advised the King of the Number of Soldiers; they have estimated the

The first I will now inform you; And for the last Point, because of a greater
Charge and Consequence, I will allow more time of Consideration. Twenty five
thousand Foot, and Five thousand Horse, is the portion they all agree on; and
less they could not consider to be sent, considering they were to combat with
an Enemy so far from hence, Orange; after whom to be esteemed second, is the
highest praise: I say, all these respects duly weighed, there could not in
their judgments be abated of this proportion: And this Army was framed on that
mould which the Secretaries of State gave them of the Enemies

The issue of Battles is in the hands of God: The eyes of Humane providence
cannot see beyond its horizon; It cannot ascertain future Contingents, it can
only judge of what seems fit to be done, guided by the Rules of Probability and
Reason. Events happen often contrary, and never more contrary then in matters
of Warfare: Yet admit a sinister success to happen, a Counsel wisely taken
ought not therefore to lose the due commendations.

Sirs, I have told you the Number; You now expect to know the present Charge,
in which I shall deal most truly with you. Believe me, His Majesty must
disburse Thirty thousand pounds for provision of Necessities to furnish such an
Army to be sent; The most part of the Provisions must be made beyond the Seas,
for there Arms are best, and best cheap: This Army must (if such an Army) go by
the end of April.

It was God that said, Let there be light, and it was so: Kings Holy War (as I
may justly style it) would not as willingly and as heartily contribute the
service of their persons, as the assistance of their purses. I know I speak the
Language of all your Hearts, let us show our Faith by our works: Time was to
have done much better then now we can; time is that we may do well; but if we
attend somewhat longer, time will be past: So as all we do then will be so out
of season, as it can produce neither any great, nor any good effect. But stay,
methinks I hear Palatinate should be restored. I confess I heard so to; and
Heaven be pleased to crown his actions with success, as the piousness of his
intentions deserves. But I must be excused, if I doubt it, if I fear it, if I
despair of it: For it is no article of my Faith to believe in Miracles. But
suppose this might be brought to pass, what then, shall this gift of ours be
lost, or cast away? No sure, it will be well bestowed, if as a Sacrifice of our
thankfulness we offer it unto his Majesty, by bis dat qui cito dat) freeness in
giving graceth the gift; dimidium facti qui been coepit habet. We have a long
journey to go, and to set forward is half the way. How pressing the occasion
is, my Tongue faints to tell, (Vox faucibus haeret) The Foxes have Holes, and
the Birds of the Air have Nests; but the Daughter of our King and Kingdom
scarce knows where to lay her head, or if she do, not

Lastly, When we had no other object in our Contemplations, but the memory of
her virtue (which remains in durable Characters in the heart of every honest
man) what a forwardness and ferventness did we express in these our voluntary
contributions, notwithstanding that some base, sordid, and avaritious men who
adored their Mammon, deterred men from that noble and pious work. They were
then but Panick terrors, clouds cast before the Sun which now shines out so
bright, as this Net? Now if ever, now is the time to effect it. And to arive at
this blessing, methinks I discover a plain and easy way; let us please the
King first, and I speak it with Faith, He will be graciously pleased to reward
us: Prove rich Merchants, and make a brave return. Great and generous spirits
are then most apt to make requests, when first they have obtained their own. In
the Region of Kings, the way to conquer is to submit; and nothing more obliges
an honest heart to perform what is expected, then to believe and trust in him.

This is the way to make his Majesty not only love, but fall in love with
Parliaments: This is the way to recall them home from exile, and again render
them frequent amongst us: This is the way to fix this, until we have purchased
present ease, and future happiness to our Country. Let his Majesty have hearts
ease amongst us, and we shall receive from his Royal Hand that Dictamum which
must expel these Arrows that hang in the sides of the Commonwealth.

Thus have I delivered my opinion, which if it be not the same

He that would take another course, and have Grievances first preferred; Optime
sentit Cato, sed nocet interdum Reipublicae: But if there be any other who out
of a corrupt and imposthumate heart, looking to false and foreign ends, would
endeavor to put a Partition Wall between the King and his people, this man I
dare pronounce neither good Subject, nor good Englishman, nor good Christian;
but the Agent of base and beggarly Promoters, needy and greedy Projectors, and
a friend

I have no more to say, but that God would be pleased to incline our hearts to
do that which may be most for his glory, next for the

SInce Supply unto his Majesty is now in question, Sir Edw. Sackvile's Speech.
of which I hope there will be no question, I humbly ask leave of this
Honorable Assembly to speak my Opinion; assuring you, That when a Treaty of
Grievances shall be on foot, it shall appear I will not sit silent, if I find
my self able to say any thing that may lend a hand to unload my Country of that
heavy burden it now groans under by reason of Monopolies, which like so many
Incubusses and Succubusses exhaust the Vital spirits, and so press down those
Parts which ought to enjoy free respiration, as without some speedy remedy is
like to run to extreme hazard. But this I refer to its proper time, and reserve
my self for it, and now proceed to the matter in hand.

Sure, I do think there are very few that serve in this House (if there be any)
who do not confidently believe, that the chief Motive which induced his Majesty
at this time to assemble this Parliament, was a mere Necessity to be by us
enabled for the Recovery of the Patrimony belonging to the King of Bohemia, now
almost traversed from him, and in the possession of a powerful Enemy. If there
be any who doubt of this truth, I hope he may easily rest satisfied, when I
shall assure him (out of my own knowledge) that many days before this Session,
his Palatinate, and protect it from a second Invasion. These according to his
Majesty's good pleasure diverse days met together at one appointed place, and
there contributed their best endeavors: At least they have finished their task;
advised the King of the Number of Soldiers; they have estimated the

The first I will now inform you; And for the last Point, because of a greater
Charge and Consequence, I will allow more time of Consideration. Twenty five
thousand Foot, and Five thousand Horse, is the portion they all agree on; and
less they could not consider to be sent, considering they were to combat with
an Enemy so far from hence, Orange; after whom to be esteemed second, is the
highest praise: I say, all these respects duly weighed, there could not in
their judgments be abated of this proportion: And this Army was framed on that
mould which the Secretaries of State gave them of the Enemies

The issue of Battles is in the hands of God: The eyes of Humane providence
cannot see beyond its horizon; It cannot ascertain future Contingents, it can
only judge of what seems fit to be done, guided by the Rules of Probability and
Reason. Events happen often contrary, and never more contrary then in matters
of Warfare: Yet admit a sinister success to happen, a Counsel wisely taken
ought not therefore to lose the due commendations.

Sirs, I have told you the Number; You now expect to know the present Charge,
in which I shall deal most truly with you. Believe me, His Majesty must
disburse Thirty thousand pounds for provision of Necessities to furnish such an
Army to be sent; The most part of the Provisions must be made beyond the Seas,
for there Arms are best, and best cheap: This Army must (if such an Army) go by
the end of April.

It was God that said, Let there be light, and it was so: Kings Holy War (as I
may justly style it) would not as willingly and as heartily contribute the
service of their persons, as the assistance of their purses. I know I speak the
Language of all your Hearts, let us show our Faith by our works: Time was to
have done much better then now we can; time is that we may do well; but if we
attend somewhat longer, time will be past: So as all we do then will be so out
of season, as it can produce neither any great, nor any good effect. But stay,
methinks I hear Palatinate should be restored. I confess I heard so to; and
Heaven be pleased to crown his actions with success, as the piousness of his
intentions deserves. But I must be excused, if I doubt it, if I fear it, if I
despair of it: For it is no article of my Faith to believe in Miracles. But
suppose this might be brought to pass, what then, shall this gift of ours be
lost, or cast away? No sure, it will be well bestowed, if as a Sacrifice of our
thankfulness we offer it unto his Majesty, by bis dat qui cito dat) freeness in
giving graceth the gift; dimidium facti qui been coepit habet. We have a long
journey to go, and to set forward is half the way. How pressing the occasion
is, my Tongue faints to tell, (Vox faucibus haeret) The Foxes have Holes, and
the Birds of the Air have Nests; but the Daughter of our King and Kingdom
scarce knows where to lay her head, or if she do, not

Lastly, When we had no other object in our Contemplations, but the memory of
her virtue (which remains in durable Characters in the heart of every honest
man) what a forwardness and ferventness did we express in these our voluntary
contributions, notwithstanding that some base, sordid, and avaritious men who
adored their Mammon, deterred men from that noble and pious work. They were
then but Panick terrors, clouds cast before the Sun which now shines out so
bright, as this Net? Now if ever, now is the time to effect it. And to arive at
this blessing, methinks I discover a plain and easy way; let us please the
King first, and I speak it with Faith, He will be graciously pleased to reward
us: Prove rich Merchants, and make a brave return. Great and generous spirits
are then most apt to make requests, when first they have obtained their own. In
the Region of Kings, the way to conquer is to submit; and nothing more obliges
an honest heart to perform what is expected, then to believe and trust in him.

This is the way to make his Majesty not only love, but fall in love with
Parliaments: This is the way to recall them home from exile, and again render
them frequent amongst us: This is the way to fix this, until we have purchased
present ease, and future happiness to our Country. Let his Majesty have hearts
ease amongst us, and we shall receive from his Royal Hand that Dictamum which
must expel these Arrows that hang in the sides of the Commonwealth.

Thus have I delivered my opinion, which if it be not the same

He that would take another course, and have Grievances first preferred; Optime
sentit Cato, sed nocet interdum Reipublicae: But if there be any other who out
of a corrupt and imposthumate heart, looking to false and foreign ends, would
endeavor to put a Partition Wall between the King and his people, this man I
dare pronounce neither good Subject, nor good Englishman, nor good Christian;
but the Agent of base and beggarly Promoters, needy and greedy Projectors, and
a friend

I have no more to say, but that God would be pleased to incline our hearts to
do that which may be most for his glory, next for the

To the Doubts which the King propounded, the Parliament gave Solution by a
Committee of both Houses, in the Declaration following, delivered by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, with this Introduction.

May it please your Sacred Majesty,
The Parliaments Answer to the Kings Speech.
WE are come to you again, from your most Faithful Subjects and Loyal Servants,
the Lords and Commons assembled in this present Parliament.

And first, We humbly let your Majesty know, how much we hold our selves
bounden unto Almighty God, that he has sent a King to rule and reign over us;
who is pleased in the greatest and weightiest causes, to speak and to be spoken
to in Parliament by his good and loving people, which causes the King to
understand them, over whom he bears rule, and them again to understand him:
And is a true Bond that tieth the heart of the Sovereign to the Subject, and of
the Subject reciprocally to their Liege Lord and Sovereign. And next, we
rejoice Spain, with whom of late you have had a double Treaty; and of the
indignities offered by them unto your Blessed Son, the Prince, and to your
Royal Daughter. And that your Kingly heart is filled with an earnest desire to
make Reparation to her noble Consort, and her self, of the Palatinate their
Patrimonial Possession, which is agreeable to Justice, and to all Laws of God
and Man.

For the effecting whereof, to certify with what alacrity, with what

Most Gracious Sovereign,
WE your Majesty's most humble and Loyal Subjects, The Parliament offers his
Majesty Three Subsidies and Three Fifteens, if he break off both Treaties.
the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, Do first render to
your Sacred Majesty our most dutiful thanks, for that to our unspeakable
comfort, you have vouchsafed to express your self so well satisfied with our
late Declaration made unto your Majesty, of our general Resolution, in pursuit
of our humble Advice to assist your Majesty in a Parliamentary way with our
persons and abilities.

Palatinate, in pursuit of our Advice therein, and toward the support of that
War which is likely to ensue, and more particularly for those Four Points
proposed by your Majesty; namely, For the Defense of this your Realm; the
securing of Ireland; the assistance of your Neighbors; the States of the United
Provinces, and other your Majesty's Friends and Allies, and for the setting
forth of your Royal Navy, We will grant for the present the greatest Aid which
ever was given in Parliament: That is to say, Three entire Subsidies, and three
Fifteens, to be all paid within the compass of one whole year, after your
Majesty shall be pleased to make the said Declaration, the Money to be paid
into the hands and expended by the direction of such Committees or
Commissioners, as hereafter shall be agreed

And we most humbly beseech your Majesty to accept of these first fruits of our
hearty Oblation, dedicated to that work which we infinitely desire, may prosper
and be advanced. And for the future to rest confidently assured, That we your
loyal and loving Subjects will never fail in a Parliamentary way to assist your
Majesty in so Royal a design, wherein your own honor, and the honor of your
most Noble Son, the Prince, the ancient renown of this Nation, the welfare and
very subsistence

Herunto his Majesty replied.

My Lords and Gentlemen all,
His Majesty's Reply.
I Have nothing to say to the Preamble of my Lord of Canterbury, but that he
intimated something in it which I cannot allow of: For whereas he said I have
showed my self sensible of the insincerity of those with whom I had lately to
deal, and of the indignity offered to my Children: In this you must give me
leave to tell you, that I have not expressed my self to be either sensible or
insensible of the good or bad dealing. It was Buckinghams Relation to you which
touched upon it; Jupiter speak that which Jupiter speaks not: For when I speak
any such thing, I will speak it with that reason, and back it with that power
which becomes a King. As for the matter of the Declaration unto my Demands,
which you have couched in that Paper, which I now heard read unto me, I confess
it is without example that any King has had such an offer. And with your favor
I need fear nothing in this World, having so much the hearts of my people. For
the large offer of assistance, I hold it to be more then Millions I have used
with you

But my Lords and Gentlemen, you must give me leave on the one side, to
consider the possibility of the action: For in this case I must do as a man
that makes a Fortification, which must have Outworks and Inworks; so I must
not deal only with mine own people, but with my Neighbors advice to assist me
in so great a business for recovery of the Palatinate. And in this case it is
not sufficient to have the hearts of I must resort to particular means, and
follow the Counsel of our Savior Christ in the Gospel, before I begin a War,
to see how I can maintain it. God knows it is a longsome work, yet I desire
with Moses, as I said before, but to see the Land of Promise, though I live not
till it be recovered. But unless particular means be discovered, it is little
to the point: Therefore since you give me such fair general promises, I will
deal freely with you, I will tell you in particular, the way I will propose,
either by way of Subsidies or otherwise; which being done in Parliament, is a
Parliamentary I would require you to be pleased to bestow upon me Five
Subsidies and Two Fifteens to every Subsidy for the War: And for mine own
necessities, my crying debts are so heavy, that no man can bear them with a
greater grief of heart, and sting of Conscience, then I have done and do. And I
now growing old, would be glad to see a means for the satisfying of my debts,
before I go out of the World. And for this end, I desire you would give me one
Subsidy and two Fifteens yearly, until my debts be paid.



The Prince said, That the Duke of Buckingham in his absence has moved this
doubt unto the King.

Whereupon the Duke affirmed, That speaking with the King about it, his Majesty
was pleased to say, If we would add one Subsidy and two

The King proceeded. If this may be done, or that I may see a fair way for it,
I will follow your Advice; for I would never have asked your Advice to reject
it, or to put a scorn upon you: For the levying of these Subsidies and
Fifteens, I would have you consider how to clear these two difficulties. If you
levy them too suddenly, it may be

Here again the Prince, said he, had spoken with his Father, to know of him
whether he were satisfied in Honor and Conscience, that he might in this case
undertake a War; and that his Majesty answered, He was already

Then the Duke of Buckingham said, the reason why his Majesty used these words,
was, That having formerly spoken of his Honor and Conscience, if he should now
have left them out, it might have been thought that money only had drawn him
to it: But the King said, He was already satisfied, and resolved, yet would
have your Advice for the manner of declaring of it.

The King again proceeded. I told you before, that this was the way to make me
in love with Parliaments, and to show mine inclination to continue them still.
My Resolution is to make this a Session for the passing of as many good Laws,
as in convenient time may be prepared; and at Michaelmas, or within a few days
after to have a new Session, and

The King declares his Resolution to dissolve the Treaties.
So the King resolved and declared his Resolution to dissolve the Treaties.
Hereupon Bonfires were made in London, and the Bells rung for joy.

Then the Parliament made haste to pass the Act for the grant of three
Subsidies, and three Fifteens, to be employed for the use aforesaid; and by the
same Act, Treasurers were appointed to receive and disburse the Moneys, and a
Council of War to manage the Design.

The King made the ensuing Declaration to both Houses of Parliament.

The King accepts the aid proffered him.
MY Nobles and Gentlemen, the last time I spoke to you anent this great
business, I told you what in my opinion was necessarily required to the
beginning of it. The Reasons whereof you have truly set down out of my last
Speech, wherein I showed you what good it would do, and what harm it might free
us from; to express particular Aids at I think the hearts of all my loving
Subjects will testify for me, I never did stick for Money, but only desired
you to clear your selves by particulars, that I may see how I may be able to go
through so great a matter, at least to make a good beginning of the War; for
what the end will be, God knows.

So on the other part, I gave you thanks for your general offer, by which you
did engage your selves in your Lives and Estates, which is more then Forty
Subsidies, if you had named them, and more worth then a Kingdom; for the
strength of a King, next under the protection of God, stands in the hearts of
his people. And I must needs say in this particular, it is without example,
that ever any Parliament for a beginning, gave to a King so great a supply to
be levied in so short a time: This may well serve for a preparation. And for my
part, first, considering to so loving and dutiful a people. I thank you for
your offer, and do accept it.

I told you before, that I would never have craved your Advice to reject it,
and so to put a scorn upon you: Think me not the Man.

It is true, I think no wise King can undertake so great a bargain, but he must
well be-think himself beforehand: And I account it better that a King advise
well before he take a Resolution, then advise Palatinate: so on the other part,
I assure my self, you will make good what you have said, That what you advise
me unto, you will assist me with your Wisdom, and Council, and Forces, if need
require.

I pray you have a charitable opinion of me, as you are to have of a King who
has so long ruled and governed over you, (and I may vaunt Palatinate for my
Children. It is true, I have been so long delayed, and paid with generals, that
I dare not trust longer unto that which made me err. The Duke of Buckingham
made a particular relation unto you, of all that business; and I am sure such
an account was never before given in Parliament, that thereby you may know what
to trust

My Lords, in the late Parliament I then declared it unto you, that I was
resolved without respect of Friendship, or Match, or whatsoever, to have the
Palatinate one way or other: I hope you remember it.

God is my Judge and Savior, I never had any other end, and it is pity I
should live to have any other end; and for my part, except by Palatinate, I
could wish never to have been born. I am old, but mine only Son is young, and I
will promise for my self and him both, that no means shall be unused for the
recovery of it; and this I dare say, as old as I am, if it might do good to the
business, I would go in mine own person, and think my labor and travel well
bestowed, though I should end my days there. For if I should spare any means
possible for the recovery of it, then let me not be thought worthy to Reign
over I never resolved to live with other mind; and I will say more, there was
never any Enemy of my Son-in-law, with whom I talked on of the business, or any
that I ever spoke with of the same; which did not say, and confess I had reason
to have the Palatinate, one way or other: And when they say that it is good
reason, and themselves allow it, it is a good spur to me to think on it.

My Lords and Gentlemen, thus far assure your selves, I will go cheerfully
about it, to prepare all things possible for it; and as you have given the
means, so will I employ them toward it.

I protest to God, a penny of this Money shall not be bestowed but upon this
Work, and by your own Committees; and I assure my self, you will think of me
for a double Reason. My Customs are likely to fall, by occasion of the War, and
my Charges increase; but undertaking the War, I must go through with it one way
or other, though I sell my Jewels and all.

In the next Session you will consider how this has been husbanded; and
according to that, think what is next to be done; and it will spur you the more
to enable me for the rest, whereof I spoke to you before.

His Majesty further said,

I will clear you in some things; for I will Necks three of Parliaments, one
after another, I hope that in this Parliament you shall be so resolved of the
sincerity of my heart, and of your duties and affections, that this shall be a
happy Parliament, and make me greater and happier then any King of England ever
was.

In my last Speech I promised you, that if I accepted your offer, I would
follow your Advice, and would not after hearken to any Treaty Bavarian or
Emperor, you must leave that to your King.

Assure your selves; my delay hitherto was upon hope to have gotten it without
a War. I held it by a hair, hoping to have gotten it by a Treaty; but since I
see no certainty that way, I hope that God who has put it into your hearts
thus to advise me, and into my heart to follow your Advice, will so bless it,
that I shall clear my Reputation from obliquy; and in despite of the Devil,
and all his Instruments, show

After this, the King purposing to signify to the King of Spain, That his
Parliament had advised him to break off the Treaties, and to recover the
Palatinate by War: The notice of a sharp Petition against Popish Recusants
framed by the House of Commons, and sent up to the Conway.

King James his Letter to Secretary Conway, touching a Petition against the
Papists.
I Doubt not but you have heard what a stinging Petition against the Papists,
the Lower House have sent to the Higher House this day, that they might jointly
present it unto me. Ye know my firm resolution not to Coney-catched by my
people, I pray you stay the Post that is going to Spain, till I meet with my
Son, who will be here to morrow morning: Do it upon pretext of some more
Letters ye are to send by him; and if he should be gone, hasten after him to
stay him upon some such pretext; and let none living know of this, as you love
me. And before two in the afternoon to morrow, you shall without fail hear from
me, Farewell.

James R.


The Petition which the King called a stinging one, was intended to be
presented to his Majesty from both Houses in form as follows.

May it please your most Excellent Majesty,
WE your Majesty's most humble and Loyal Subjects, The Petition.
the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, having to our
singular Comfort received your Princely Resolution upon our humble Petition, to
dissolve the two Treaties of the Match, Palatinate; and having on our parts
with all alacrity and readiness humbly offered our assistance to your Majesty,
to maintain the War which may ensue thereupon: Yet withal sensibly finding what
Seditious and Traitorous Positions those Incendiaries of Rome, and professed
Engines of Spain, the Priests and Jesuits, infuse into your natural born
Subjects; what numbers they have seduced, and do daily seduce, to make their
dependence on the Pope of Rome and King of Spain, contrary to their Allegiance
to your Majesty their London; what boldness, yea, what insolency they have
discovered out of the opinion conceived of their foreign Patronage; what
public resort to Masses, and other Exercises of the Popish Religion, in the
houses of foreign Ambassadors there is daily, to the great grief and offense of
your good Subjects; Spain, sit for an Invasion, the bent whereof is as probable
to be upon some part of your Majesty's Dominions, as upon any other place; what
encouragement that may be to your Enemies, and the Enemies of your Crown, to
have a party, or but the opinion of a party within your Kingdoms, who do daily
increase and combine themselves together for that purpose; what disheartening
of your good and loving Subjects, when they shall see more cause of fear from
their false-hearted Countrymen

I. That all Jesuits and Seminary Priests, and all others, having Rome, may by
your Majesty's Proclamation be commanded forthwith to depart out of this Realm,
and all other your Highness 's. Dominions; and neither they, nor any other to
return or come hither again, upon peril of the severest penalty of the Laws now
in force against them; and that all your Majesty's Subjects may hereby also be
admonished not to receive, entertain, comfort or conceal any of that viperous
brood, upon penalties and forfeitures which by the Laws may be imposed upon
them.

II. That your Majesty would be pleased to give straight and speedy charge to
the Justices of Peace in all parts of this Kingdom, that (according to the Laws
in that behalf made, and the Orders taken by your Majesty's Privy-Councel
heretofore for policy of State) they do take from all Popish Recusants legally
convicted, or justly suspected;

III. That your Majesty will please to command all Popish Recusants, and all
other who by any Law or Statute are prohibited to come to the Kings Court,
forthwith under pain of your heavy displeasure London, to their several
dwellings, or places by your Laws appointed, and there to remain confined
within five miles of their dwelling places, according to the Laws of this your
Realm: And for that purpose to discharge all Bypast Licenses granted unto them
for their repair hither; And that they presume not any time hereafter to repair
to London, or within ten miles of London, or to the Kings Court, or

IV. That your Majesty would forbid and restrain the great resort and concourse
of your own Subjects, for the hearing of Mass, or other Exercises of the
Romish Religion, to the houses of foreign Ambassadors, or Agents, residing here
for the service of their several Princes or States.

V. That where of late in several Counties in this Realm some have been trusted
in the places of Lord-Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants,

VI. That your Majesty would be pleased generally to put the Laws in due
Execution, which are made, and stand in force against Popish Recusants; And
that all your Judges, Justices, and Ministers of Justice, to whose care these
things are committed, may by your Majesty's Proclamation be commanded to do
their duty therein.

VII. That seeing we are thus happily delivered from that danger hearts of your
good Subjects by the engagement of your Royal word unto them; that upon no
occasion of Marriage or Treaty, or other request in that behalf from any
foreign Prince or States whatsoever, you will take off, or slacken the
Execution of your Laws against the Popish Recusants.

To which our humble Petitions, proceeding from our most loyal and dutiful
affections toward your Majesty, our care of our Countries

This Petition, after a Conference between both Houses, was reduced to another
form, and so presented to the King.



My Lords and Gentlemen of both Houses,
I Cannot but commend your zeal in offering this Petition to me, His Majesty's
Answer to the Petition.
yet on the other side, I cannot but hold my self unfortunate, that I should be
thought to need a spur to do that which my Conscience and duty I am of, my
Books do declare, my profession and behavior does show; and I hope in God I
shall never live to be thought otherwise; surely I shall never deserve it; and
for my part, I wish it may be written in Marble, and remain to Posterity as a
mark upon me, when I shall swerve from my Religion; for he that does dissemble
with God, is not to be trusted with men.

My Lords, for my part, I protest before God, that my heart has bled when I
have heard of the increase of Popery; God is my Judge it I have been, and shall
be from turning another way. And my Lords and Gentlemen, you shall be my
Confessors, that one way or other it has been my desire to hinder the growth
of Popery; and I could not be an honest man if I should have done otherwise.
And this I may say further, that if I be not a Martyr, I am sure I am a
Confessor; and in some sense I may be called a Martyr, as in the Scripture
Isaac was persecuted by Ishmael by mocking words: Tongues then I have done, and
I am sure for no cause; yet I have been far from persecution; for I have ever
thought that no way more increased any Religion then persecution, according to
that saying, Sanguis Martyrum est Semen Ecclesiae.

Now my Lords and Gentlemen, for your Petition, I will not only grant the
substance of what you crave, but add somewhat more of my own; for the two
Treaties being already annulled (as I have declared them to be) it necessarily
follows of it self, that which you I do declare by Proclamation (which I am
ready to do) that all Jesuits and Priests do depart by a day; but it cannot be
as you desire by our Proclamation to be out of all my Dominions; for a
Proclamation here extends but to this Kingdom.

This I will do and more, I will Command all my Judges when they go their
Circuits, to keep the same courses, for putting all the Laws in Execution
against Recusants, as they were wont to do before these Treaties; for the Laws
are still in force, and were never dispensed with by me: God is my Judge they
were never so intended by me; but as I told you in the beginning of the
Parliament, you must give me leave as a good horseman, sometimes to use the
Reins, and not always to use the Spurs: So now there needs nothing but my
Declaration for the disarming of them, that is ready done by the Laws, and
shall be I will take order for the shameful disorder of the resorting of my
Subjects to all foreign Ambassadors; for this I will advise with my Council how
it may be best reformed. It is true, that the houses of Ambassadors are
privileged places; and Major though they cannot take them out of their houses,
yet the Lord and Mr Recorder of London, may take some of them as they come from
thence, and make them examples; another point I will add concerning the
education of their children, of which I have had a principal Canterbury, and
the Bishop of Winchester, and other Lords of my Council can bear me witness,
with whom I have advised about this business; for in good faith it is a shame
their Children should be bred here, as if they were at Rome. So I do grant not
only your desire, but more. I am sorry I was not the first mover of it to you,
but had you not done it, I would have done it my self.

Now for the second part of your Petition, you have here given me intercession
of other Princes: and therefore assure your selves that (by the Grace of God) I
will be careful that no such conditions be foisted in upon any other Treaty
whatsoever; for it is fit my Subjects should stand or fall to their own Laws.

This Petition was furthered by the Duke of Buckingham, who still Spain, and
the Spanish Ambassador being netled thereat, accused him to the King, not
without some reflection upon the Prince himself; with some difficulty they
procured a secret intercourse with the King, and suggested unto him matters of
near and high concernment to his Royal dignity and person. The Spanish
Ambassadors accuse Buckingham to the King of matters of high concernment.
They tell him, that being besieged, and closed up by the Dukes Servants and
Vassals, he was no more a freeman: That he was to be confined to his
Countrey-house and Pastimes, the Prince having years and parts answerable
Oxford, Southampton, Essex, Say, and others, and sought to raise an opinion of
his own greatness, and to make the King grow less; and that all looked toward
the rising Sun. Hereupon they advise the King to free himself from this
Captivity, and eminent Danger, and to cut off so ungrateful an affecter of
Popularity, and greatness, and so he should show himself to be as he was
reputed, the oldest and wisest King in Europe.

These secrets were quickly blown abroad, and brought to the Dukes Ear. But
whatsoever impression the King received from them, the thing whereupon he
insisted openly, was, the demand of particular proofs. But all their Answers
consisted of Arguments against declaring the names of the Conspirators;
whereupon the Kings Privy-Counsellors, and other principal Subjects were
examined upon oaths, and Interrogatories most pertinent to the Accusation were
propounded to them; but this examination discovered nothing. The King turned
again to the Ambassadors with new instances to make a clear discovery, but they
still resolved to conceal the Authors.

And it was alleged by their Partakers, and intimated to the King, that the
things were such as could not be evidenced by Legal proofs, because Buckingham;
an example (say they) unusual with other Kings, and never to be taken well,
except when the King is weak in judgment, and wants experience, and a man wise
and circumspect supplies his place. But here (said the Ambassador,) is a
prudent King, and a Favorite young, rash, and heady, whose continual presence
did argue guilt Palatinate was by him taken out of the hands of the Kings
Council, and referred to the Parliament; that he did arrogate to himself the
thanks of all things acceptable, and was styled the Redeemer of his Country;
and he would have it believed, that he has a dominion over the Kings and
Princes will. And things standing thus, though many may be found that will
speak against the King, yet none will appear to speak against the Duke:

But these dark Intelligences had no other issue, The issue of those
Accusations.
then the moving of King James to represent to the King of Spain the
miscarriages of his Ambassadors, remitting the cause unto him, with a demand of
Justice and reparation, for that the Information was sufficient to put
impressions in him of perpetual jealousies of the Duke. Hereupon when the
Ambassadors Spain, Buckinghams name was odious, and the Princes honor of little
value, and the Kings reputation at a low ebb: diverse particular Enmities were
already begun between the Subjects of both Crowns, the English Merchants were
oppressed in the Spanish Ports.

Notwithstanding the Dukes vast power and popularity, The Earl of Bristol
protests against the Dukes Narration, is imprisoned in the Tower.
the Earl of Bristol refused to bow before him. The Earl, though his charge
were Narration of the Spanish Affairs, and was committed to the Tower, being
not admitted into the Kings presence, nor to plead his Cause before him. He was
to the Duke a stout and dangerous Enemy; insomuch, that he was said to violate
the rules of the prudent Mariner, who in a Storm and foul weather, is
accustomed rather to pull down, then to hoise up Sails.

Saturday the 29 of May, the King being come to the House of Peers, Thomas Crew
Speaker, being come to the Bar, and the Commons present, he made this Speech.

The Speakers and the Kings Speech at the Adjournment of the Parliament.
THat God to his own great glory had brought this Session of the Parliament so
happily begun, to so happy an end, that both Houses and every particular Member
thereof had given their willing assent even with one voice, unto the Advice
which his Majesty was pleased so low to descend as to demand of them. As there
was not an hammer heard in the building of the House of God, so in this great
Business there was not a Negative voice, nor any jarring among Recusants; some
to redress the Enormities of the Commonwealth; others of his Majesty's grace
and bounty to his people; and some concerning the Prince's Highness touching
his own Lands, and others to settle strife in particular Estates; all which do
wait for and humbly desire his Majesty's Royal assent.

He showed also what great joy they all received for the Dissolution of the two
Treaties with Spain; and that Commissioners are required to see the Edicts
performed against Recusants and Jesuits, the Locusts of Rome, wherein will
consist his Majesty's chiefest safety. And they do render him humble thanks for
their ancient Privileges, which they fully enjoyed this Parliament, and their
so often access unto his Majesty's presence; and more especially for his
Majesty's general, large, liberal and free Pardon, showing the benefit thereof,
and reciting the particulars. Subsidies, and Three Fifteens and Tenths granted
this Session, and declared the cheerfulness of the grant thereof: And making
his earnest prayers unto Almighty God to direct his Majesty's heart to make his
own Sword his Sheriff to put his Son-in-law in possession of his Palatinate,
the ancient Inheritance of his Royal Grandchildren, he ended, humbly craving
pardon for himself and his own errors committed this Session.

Unto which his Majesty presently made answer, beginning with the last of the
Speakers Speech touching their Freedom, which he promised to continue unto them
in as large a manner as ever they enjoyed the same. And for the Restitution of
his Son-in-law, protested his continual care thereof, and his great grief if he
should not see an assured hope before he died; and vowed that all the
Subsidies, for which he heartily thanked them, though it had not been so tied
and limited, should have been bestowed that way. His Majesty remembered them,
Session the beginning of Winter. He acknowledged the obedience and good respect
of the Commons in all things this Parliament, for which (as he was pleased to
say) he thanks them heart^ly and without complement; and if they please to
continue the same at their next meeting, it will make this the happiest
Parliament that ever was.

His Majesty spoke also of the Grievances presented unto him yesterday by the
Commons at Whitehall, promising them a full Answer at their Grievances at their
next meeting, and to hunt after none, nor to present any but those of
importance: He promised to go over them all, and to give a free answer, such as
should be good for his People, not respecting any Creature whatsoever, and that
he will advise herein with his Council and Judges. At this time his Majesty
said, he would show them his grievances; first, that they grieve at the
Reformation of Building about London with Brick, which he intends only for
the Beauty and more ^afety of the City, therefore he will go through with it;
and if the Commissioners offend herein, let the party aggrieved complain, and
he will redress it; that the form of proceedings used by the Commons Aynan; his
Majesty said their oath of Supremacy forbids them to meddle with Church
matters: besides they complain against him, and never heard him Touching their
complaint against the Apothecaries, his Majesty protested his care therein to
be only for his peoples health; it is dangerous for every one to meddle with
Apothecaries ware, and the Grocers have

His fourth grievance is, that Seditious Books are so frequently printed, which
he will be careful to prevent hereafter.

Fifthly, for calling in so many Patents, appointing the Patentees to wait so
many days with their Council, and never to hear them; wherefore his Majesty
warned them to call for no more hereafter, unless they first knew them to be
grievous to the people; and so his Majesty concluded with thanks for the
Commons good carriage toward him and

Then the Lord Keeper spoke to the particulars of the Speakers Speech, and by
his Majesty's command approved them all, alluding the general consent of both
Houses to the Septuagint directed by the Holy Ghost; and touching the Speakers
desire for the Kings assent to the Bills past both Houses, he said the royal
assent is proper to the Lawgiver; and showed, that it is best for the people;
that this is in his Majesty's power, and not in themselves; for the King
knows what is best to be granted Bathsheba made to King Solomon, to give unto
Adonijah Abishag to wife, which had Solomon granted, he had given Adonijah
means to usurp the Kingdom, contrary to Bathsheba's meaning; and such is his
Majesty's intent this day for such Bills which he will not pass. That his
Majesty had given his consent to all the Bills of Grace, and to the Bill of the
continuance of some Statutes, and repeal of others, so necessary, and for the
good of the people. That his Majesty accepts in good part their thanks for
his general Macrobius of one who had all his debts paid, and instead of thanks
answered, mihi nihil; though this be given to the Palatinate, his Majesty
interprets it as given to himself, and renders to you all hearty thanks for
the same.

The Lord Keeper having ended his Speech, the Clerk of the Crown stood up, and
read the title of the Bills passed both Houses; and the Clerk

At the Parliament holden at Westminster by Prorogation, the Nineteenth day of
February, Anno Regis Iacobi Angliae, Franciae and Hiberniae vicesimo primo, and
Scotiae quinquagesimo septimo,
1. AN Act for making perpetual an Act made Anno 39 Eliz. Entitled, An Act for
the Erecting of Hospitals and Workhouses for the Poor. 2. An Act for the quiet
of the Subject against Concealments. 3. An Act concerning Monopolies, and
Dispensations with 4. An Act for ease of the Subjects concerning Informations
upon Penal Statutes. 5. An Act, That Sheriffs, their Heirs etc. having a
Quietus est, shall be discharged of their Accounts, with the Judges opinion
therein. 6. An Act concerning Women convicted of small Felonies. 7. An Act to
repress Drunkenness, and to restrain the haunting of Inns, etc. 8. An Act to
punish Abuses in procuring Supersedeas of the Peace out of the Courts at
Westminster, and to prevent the Abuses in procuring Writs of Certiorari out of
the said Courts, etc. 9. An Act for the Free Trade of Welsh Clothes, etc. in
England and Wales. 10. An Act to repeal a Branch of the Statute An. 34 H. 8.
Entitled An Act for certain Ordinances in the Kings Dominions, and
Principality of Wale. 11. An Act for Confirmation of a Judgment given for his
Majesty in a Scire facias against Henry Heron, and for Declaration of the
Letters Patents therein mentioned to be void. 12. An Act to make perpetual the
Act for ease in pleading against troublesome Suits prosecuted against Justices
of the Peace, Mayors, etc. 13. An Act for the further reformation of Jeofails.
14. An Act to admit the Subject to plead the General Issue in Informations of
Intrusion brought on the Kings behalf, and to retain his Possession 15. An Act
to enable Judges and Justices to give restitution of Possession in certain
cases. 16. An Act for Limitation of Actions, and for avoiding of Suits in Law.
17. An Act against Usury. 18. An Act for the Continuance of a former Statute
made 4o Iac. Entitled, An Act for the true making of Woollen Clothes. 19. An
Act for the further Description of a Bankrupt, and relief of Creditors against
such as shall become Bankrupts, and for inflicting of Corporal punishment upon
them in some Cases. 20. An Act to prevent Swearing and Cursing. 21. An Act
concerning Hostlers and Inholders. 22. An Act explaining a Statute An. 3, 4,
and 5 E. 6. concerning the Traders of Butter and Cheese. 23. An Act to avoid
Delays by removing of Actions out of Inferior Courts. 24. An Act for relief of
Creditors against such as die in Execution. 25. An Act for relief of Patentees,
Tenants and Farmers of Crown Lands and Duchy-Lands. 26. An Act against such as
shall levy any Fine, suffer any Recovery, 27. An Act to prevent the murdering
of Bastard-children. 28. An Act to continue diverse Statutes, and repeal others.
29. An Act to enable Prince Charles to make Leases of Lands parcel of the Duchy
of Cornwall, or annexed to the same. 30. An Act to assure York-House and other
Lands to the King, and to assure the Manors of Brighton, Santon, and other
Lands to the Archbishop York, etc. 31. An Act for the good Government of the
Makers of Knives in Hallam-shire in the County of York. 32. An Act to make the
Thames Navigable from Bercot to Oxon. 33. An Act for the Subsidies of the
Clergy. 34. An Act for Three Subsidies, Three Fifteens and Tenths granted by
the Temporalty, with the Judges opinions. 35. An Act for the Kings General
Pardon.
Private Acts.
36. An Act for the Confirmation of Wadham-Colledge in Oxon, and the
Possessions thereof. 37. An Act for the Naturalizing of Philip Burlemacchi. 38.
An Act for the Naturalizing of Giles Vandeput. 39. An Act to enable William
Earl of Hereford, and Sir Francis Seymor Knight, to sell Lands for the paiments
of Debts, and establishing 40. An Act for the Naturalizing of Sir Robert
Anstrother, Sir George Abercromy Knights, and John Cragge Doctor of Physic.
41. An Act to confirm the Copiholders Estates of Stepney and Hackney, according
to a Decree in Chancery between the Lord of the Manor and the said Copiholders.
42. An Act to confirm an assurance of Lands sold by Sir Thomas Beaumont Knight
and his wife, to Sir Thomas Cheek Knight. Lincolnshire. 44. An Act to enable
Martin Calthorp to sell Lands for preferment of younger Children, and payment
of Debts. 45. An Act for settling the Manor of Goodneston and other Lands of Sir
Edward Ingram Knight. 46. An Act to enable Dame Alice Dudley wife of Sir Robert
Dudley Knight, to assure the Manor of Killingworth and other Lands to Prince
Charles. 47. An Act to confirm an Exchange of Lands between Prince Charles and
Sir Lewis Watson Knight and Baronet. 48. An Act for the settling of the Lands of
Anthony Vicount Montague, for payment of his Debts and raising of Portions. 49.
An Act to enable Sir Richard Lumley Knight to sell Lands for the payment of his
Debts and preferment of Children. 50. An Act to confirm a Decree in Chancery
made by the consent of the Lord of Painswick in Com. Glouc. and his Customary
Tenants there. 51. An Act for the Naturalization of Sir Francis Steward Knight,
Walter Steward, James Maxwell, William Car, and James Levingston, Esquires. 52.
An Act for the Naturalization of John Young Doctor of Divinity. 53. An Act for
the Naturalizing of Jane Murrey Widow, and William Murrey Esquire. 54. An Act
to make good a Conveyance of Little Munden made from Sir Peter Vanlore Knight,
and Sir Charles Caesar Knight, unto Edmond Woodhall Esquire and his heirs. 55.
An Act to enable Vincent Low to sell Lands for payment of his 56. An Act to
enable Toby Palyvicine to sell Lands for the payment of Debts and preferment of
Children. 57. An Act for Naturalizing of Sir Robert Car Knight. 58. An Act to
confirm the Manor of New-Langport and Seavans, and other Lands late being the
Inheritance of Sir Henry James Knight in a Praemunire convicted, unto Martin
Lumley Lord Mayor of London, Alice Woodriff widow, and Edward Cropley, etc. 59.
An Act for Naturalizing of Sir Stephen Leisure. 60. An Act for Naturalizing of
James Marquis of Hamilton. 61. An Act for Naturalizing of Sir William
Anstrother Knight, Doctor Balcanqual, and Patrick Abercromy. 62. An Act to
confirm the Sale of Lands made by Sir Edward Heron Knight unto Bevel Moulsworth
Esquire, and to enable the said Sir Edward to sell other Lands for payment of
Debts, and to settle other Lands upon Robert and Edward Heron. 63. An Act for
the Naturalizing of Abigal Little, and William Little her son. 64. An Act for
the etablishing of Lands upon John Mohun Esquire son of Sir Rowland Mohun
Knight and Baronet, according to the Agreements made between them. 65. An Act
to enable Edward Alco^k to fell the Manor of Rampton and other Lands. 66. An
Act to explain a Statute made Anno 13 Eliz. for assuring of per annum to the
Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield for ever, out of Manors and Lands thereby
assured to Edmund Fisher and his heirs. 67. An Act for the establishing of
Three Lectures in Divinity, according to the Will of Thomas Wettenhall Esquire.
68. An Act for the repairing of the River running to Colchester, and paving of
the Town there. 69. An Act to enable Francis Clerk Knight to sell Lands for the
70. An Act for altering of Gavelkind-Lands, being late the Lands of Thomas
Potter Esquire, Sir George Rivers Knight, and Sir John Rivers Baronet, and to
settle the Inheritance of them upon Sir John Rivors and his heirs. 71. An Act
to make the Lands of Thomas Earl of Middlesex subject to the payment of his
Debts. 72. An Act for the Sale of the Manor of Abbots-Hall, late the
Possessions of Sir James Pointz deceased, that the Moneys thereby raised may be
distributed amongst his Creditors according to his Last Will. 73. An Act for
the Naturalizing of Elizabeth Vere and Mary Vere, the Daughters of Sir Horatio
Vere Knight.
United Provinces, to be employed against the Emperor, under the Command of
four Noble Colonels, the Earls of Oxford, Essex, and Southampton, and the Lord
Willougby.

The Town of Frankendal having been sequestered into the hands of the
Archduchess Isabella Clara Eugenia Infanta of Spain, Kings James demands the
Town of Frankendal deposited in the Archduc^hess hands.
for the term of Eighteen months, and that time now growing to an end, being
to expire about the middle of October next; The King commanded those Infanta
having accorded in Spain's Low Countries; The King approved and resolved to
follow the Advice, and gave Order to the Council of War to consider and discuss
the manner of demanding the Town, and the way and means of raising the men, and
conducting them thither, and of maintaining and supplying the Garrison with
Munition and all things necessary.

On the day that Frankendal was to be redelivered, Spinola marches out of the
Town, and immediately Reenters.
Spinola with his Forces marches out of the Town; and finding none of the King
of Great Forces ready to enter it, instantly reenters and takes possession,
pulls down the King of England's Arms, and sets up the King of Spain's. Yet did
the Noble Spaniard leave standing the Monument of two Brothers, fighting and
stout Enemies of theirs, in opposition of whose valor the Spaniard had gained
much honor, but overcame them at last. The Monument is standing in the Dutch
Church in Frankendal upon a fair Tomb, with this Inscription, Gulielmi Fairfax
Anglo-Britanni, Honoratissimi Domini Thomae Fairfax de Denton in Com. Ebor.
Equitis Aurati filii, Cohortis Anglicani Ducis insignis; Qui annis natus
circiter XXVI. post animi plurima Joanne fratre suo juniore, in obsidione
Francovalenti, hic facta eruptione arreptus, ille ictu bombardae percussus,
occubuere. Anno M.DC.XXI. This Monument was erected by the Town of Frankendal,
in memory of those two Brothers, who were Uncles to that Valiant, Victorious,
and Self-denying General, THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX, late Commander in Chief of the
Parliaments Armies in England.

King James very desirous of a Match with France.
In France, the Marriage-Treaty was not so fair, smooth and plausible in the
progress, as in the entrance. King James, admiring the Alliance of mighty
Kings, though of a Contrary Religion, as also fearing the disgrace French well
perceived, and abated of their forwardness, and enlarged their Demands in favor
of Papists (as the Spaniards had done before them) and strained the King to the
Concession of such Immunities, as he had promised to his Parliament, that he
would never grant upon the mediation of Foreign Princes.

The Cardinal Richlieu being in the infancy of his favor, and appointed to the
managing of the Treaty, assured the Catholics of Great that the most Christian
King remembering that he was born and raised up no less for the propagation of
the Catholic Cause, then for the enlarging of his own Dominions, was resolved
to obtain honorable Terms for Religion, or never to conclude the Match: And for
his own part, such was his compassion toward them, that if he might work their
deliverance, or better their condition, not only with Counsel, interest and
authority, but with his life and blood, he would gladly do it.

The Match with France concluded.
However, this Treaty held fewer months, then the years that were Spain.
Indeed, the Motion from England had a braver expression, seeing a Wife was here
considered as the only object of the Treaty; whereas that of Spain was
accompanied with a further expectation, to wit, the rendering of the Palatinate
to King James his children. In August the Match was concluded, and in November
the Articles were sworn unto by King James, Prince Charles, and the French
King. The Articles concerning Religion were not much short of those for the
Spanish Match. The Conclusion of the Treaty was seconded in France with many
outward expressions London, requiring the like to be done here.

Count Mansfield arrrives in England; 12000 Foot and 200 horse raised to go
under his command.
This year Count Mansfield arrived in England, whose reception was splendid and
honorable: He was entertained in the Prince his House in S. James's, and served
in great state by some of the Kings Officers. A Press went through the Kingdom
for the raising of Twelve thousand Foot, with two Troops of Horse, to go under
his Command for the Recovery of the Palatinate. These Forces were intended to
pass through France into Germany, the French having promised as well an
Addition of Strength, as a free passage.

In the mean while there were those that secretly solicited the King to return
into the way of Spain, and raised suspicions of Mansfields Enterprise, saying
he was the Palsgraves Scout and Spy; And if the Puritans desired a Kingdom,
they did not wish it to the most illustrious Prince Charles, his Majesty's best
and true Heir, but to the Palatine. That it was the Dukes Plot, and the
Parliaments Fury, to begin a War with Spain; Blessed be the Peacemakers) might
even ^o the last be verified of him in the letter, and be propounded for
imitation to the most illustrious Prince, and that the experience of his happy
Government should carry the Prince in a connatural motion to the same Counsels
of Peace.

And at the same time, the more circumspect party in the Spanish Court, held it
fit to continue the state of things in a possibility of an Accommodation with
the King of Great Britain, and Gondomar was coming again for England to procure
a Peace; notwithstanding the Duke of Bavaria used all diligence, to combine
himself with that Crown, offering to depend wholly thereon, so that he may be
thereby protected in his new acquired Dignity. But in these Motions the Elector
of Saxony with many Germany, and with much instance besought him not to destroy
that ancient House of the Palatinate.

Count Mansfield was at this time in England, and the Forces raised in the
several parts of the Kingdom for the recovery of the Palatinate, were put under
his Command; and Marching to their Rendezvous at Dover, committed great Spoils
and Rapines in their passage through the Counties. At that Rendezvous the
Colonels and Captains were assigned

A List of some of the Regiments of Foot designed for that Expedition.
I. EArl of Lincoln, Colonel. Lieut. Col. Allen. Sergeant Major Bonithon. Sir
Edward Fleetwood. Captain Wirley. Capt. Reynolds. Babbington. Sir Matthew
Carey. Capt. Barlee. Capt. Cromwell.
II. Viscount Doncaster, Colonel. Sir James Ramsey, Lieut. Colonel. Alexander
Hamilton, Sergeant Major Archibald Duglas. Capt. Zouch. Capt. John Duglas.
Capt. Pell. Capt. William Duglas. Capt. George Kellwood. Capt. Andrew Heatly.
Lord Cromwell, Colonel. Lieut. Col. Dutton. Sergeant Major Gibson. Capt.
Basset. Capt. Lane. Capt. Vincent Wright. Capt. Ienner. Capt. Vaughan. Capt.
Owseley. Capt. Crane.
IV. Sir Charles Rich, Colonel. Lieut. Col. Hopton. Sergeant Major Killegrew.
Sir Warham St. Leiger. Sir W. Waller. Capt. Burton. Capt. Francis Hammond.
Capt. Winter. Capt. Goring. Capt. Fowler.
V. Sir Andrew Gray, Colonel. Lieut. Col. Boswel. Sergeant Major Coburne. Capt.
David Murray. Capt. Murray. Capt. Forbois. Capt. Carew. Capt. Ramsey. Capt.
Williams. Capt. Beaton.
VI. Sir John Borrough, Colonel. Lieut. Col. Bret. Sergeant Major Willoughby.
Capt. William Lake. Capt. Roberts. Capt. Webb. Capt. Skipwith. Capt. Thomas
Woodhouse. Capt. George. Capt. Mostian.

The Duke of Buckingham, Lord Admiral, was required to employ Dover.

Count Mansfield received his Commission from King James, bore date the Seventh
of November, One thousand six hundred twenty and four, and was to this effect,
That his Majesty at the Request of the Prince Elector Palatine, and the Kings
Sister his Wife, does empower Count Mansfield to raise an Army for the
recovering of the Estate and Dignity of the Prince Elector, and appoints that
the Forces so raised should be Mansfield, for the end aforesaid. And his
Majesty further declares, by way of Negative, That he does not intend that the
said Count shall commit any spoil upon the Countries or Dominions of any of his
Majesty's Friends and Allies; and more particularly, He does require the said
Count not to make any invasion, or do any act of War against the Country or
Dominion, which of right appertain and are in truth, the just and lawful
possession of the King of Spain, or the Lady Infanta Isabella: And in case any
such Hostility Mansfield, his Majesty does declare to be void; and that all
payments shall cease: That on the contrary, if Obedience be given hereunto, the
King wishes the Count all good success for the recovery of the Palatinate, and
reestablishment of the Peace in Germany against the Duke of Bavaria, and those
that are the troublers of the Peace.

And for the performance hereof, the King caused Count Mansfield to Terminis of
what is before expressed.

This Army consisting of Twelve Regiments, was intended to Land in France; but
being ready for Transport, the French notwithstanding their Promise, and the
Treaty of Marriage, demurred (yet not plainly denied) their passage. Scarce the
third part of Count Mansfields Army came safe to Land.
Nevertheless, the whole Army was shipped, and put over to Calice; and after a
tedious stay in hope yet to land and pass Zealand. Neither were they suffered
to land there, coming so unexpectedly upon the States, and in a hard Season for
Provision of Victuals.

Thus they were long pent up in the Ships, and suffered the want of all
Necessaries, by which means a Pestilence came among them, and raged extremely;
so that they were thrown into the Sea by Multitudes; insomuch, that scarce a
Third part of the men were landed, the which also afterward mouldred away, and
the Design came to nothing.

Richard Smith made Bishop of Calcedon, and sent into England with Episcopal
Jurisdiction.
The Papist formerly danted by the Breach of the Spanish Match, was now again
revived by the Marriage-Treaty with France. And at this time upon the Death of
William, Titular Bishop of Calcedon, most of the English Secular Priests did
Petition the Pope, that another Bishop might be sent over into England, there
to Ordain Priests, give Confirmation, and exercise Episcopal Jurisdiction.
Among others, Matthew Kellison and Richard Smith were presented.

And though the Regulars were opposite to the Seculars in this matter, yet
those of the Order of St. Benedict joined with the Seculars, and Rudesin Barlo
President of the English Benedictines at Doway, wrote a Letter in their behalf
to the Congregation at Rome, named of the Propagation of the Faith. Dated the
Twelfth of December, One thousand six

In which Letter was this passage, That there were above Sixty Benedictine
Monks in England; and that it is not to be doubted (said he) [For that it is
already seen the good success under the First Bishop.] That another Bishop
being Constituted, there would be more joyful fruits within one two years in
the English Mission, then hitherto has been for Sixty years now elapsed.

But not long after, the Episcopal party prevailing, Pope Urban the Richard
Smith Bishop of Calcedon, and sent him into England with Episcopal Authority
over the Priests within the English Dominions.

King James after he had been troubled with a Tertian Fevor four Weeks, finding
himself near the end of his days, called unto him Charles Prince of Wales, his
only Son, to whom he recommended the Protection of the Church of England,
advised him to love his Wife, but not her Religion; and exhorted him to take
special care of his Grandchildren, Palatine, by his Daughter; and to employ
the power he left him, to reestablish them in the Estate and Dignities of their
Father: And lastly, he recommended to him his Officers who had faithfully
served him, and on the Seven and twentieth of March gave up the ghost.

And shortly after Bishop Laud delivered to the hands of the Duke of
Buckingham, brief Annotations or Memorables of the Life and Death of King
James, (viz.) I. HE was a King almost from his Birth. II. His great Clemency
that he should Reign so long, and so moderately, that knew nothing else but to
Reign. III. The difficult times in Scotland, during his Minority, as much
perplexed with Church as State Factions. IV. His admirable Patience in those
younger times, and his Wisdom to go by those many and great difficulties, till
God opened him the ways to his just V. His peaceable Entry into this Kingdom,
contrary to the fears at home, and the hopes abroad, not without Gods great
blessing both on him and us. VI. His Ability as strong in Grace as Nature, to
forgive some Occurrences. VII. The continuance of full Two and twenty years
reign all in Peace, without War, from Foreign Enemy, or Rebellion at home.
VIII. The infinite advantage, which people of all sorts might have IX. Gods
great mercy over him in many deliverances from private Conspirators, and above
the rest, that which would have blown up his Posterity and the State by
Gunpowder. X. That in all this time of his Reign of England, he took away the
life of no one Nobleman, but restored many. XI. That the sweetness of his
nature was scarce to be paralleld by any other. XII. It is little less then a
Miracle, that so much sweetness should be found in so great a heart, as besides
other things, sickness and death it self showed to be in him. XIII. Clemency,
Mercy, Justice, and holding the State in Peace, have XIV. He was not only a
preserver of Peace at home, but the great Peacemaker abroad; to settle
Christendom against the common enemy the Turk, which might have been a glorious
work, if others had been as true to him, as he was to the common good. XV. He
was in private to his Servants, the best Master that ever was, and the most
free. XVI. He was the justest Man that could sit between parties, and as
patient to hear. XVII. He was bountiful to the highest pitch of a King. XVIII.
He was the greatest Patron to the Church which has been in many Ages. XIX. The
most Learned Prince that his Kingdom has ever known for matters of Religion.
XX. His integrity and soundness in Religion, to write and speak, believe XXI.
His tender love to the King his Son, our most gracious Sovereign that now is,
and his constant Reverence in performance of all duties to his Father, the
greatest Blessing and greatest Example of this, and many Ages. XXII. The
Education of his Majesty whom we now enjoy (and I hope and pray we may long and
in happiness enjoy) to be an able King as Christendom has any, the very first
day of his Reign; the benefit whereof is ours, and XXIII. His sickness at the
beginning more grievous then it seemed, a sharp melancholy humor set on fire,
though ushered in by an ordinary Tertian Ague. XXIV. He was from the beginning
of his sickness scarce out of an opinion that he should die; and therefore did
not suffer the great Affairs of Christendom to move him more then was fit, for
he thought of his end. XXV. His devout receiving of the Blessed Sacrament.
XXVI. His Regal Censure of the Moderate Reformation of the Church of England,
and particularly for the care of retaining of Absolution, the comfort of
distressed Souls. XXVII. His continual calling for Prayers, with an assured
confidence in Christ. XXVIII. His death as full of patience as could be found
in so strong a death. XXIX. His Rest, no question is in Abraham's Bosom, and
his Crown


Another writes thus of that King in the Book entitled the Reign of King
Charles.

IN the style of the Court he went for Great Britains Solomon; nor is it any
Excursion beyond the Precincts of Verity to say, That neither Britain nor any
other Kingdom whatsoever, could ever since Solomon's days glory in a King (for
recondite Learning and abstruse Knowledge) so near a Match to Solomon, as he.
And though he was an Universal Scholar, yet did he make other Sciences (their
most proper employment) but Roman See. Nor did his Theological Abilities more
advantage the Cause of Religion abroad then at home, they keeping the
newfangled Clergy aloof, and at distance, as not daring to infuse into so
solid a Judgment their upstart and erroneous Fancies, no nor disquiet the
Churches peace with Heterodox Opinions. A stout Adversary he was to the
Arminians and Semipelagians, whom he called as Prosper before him, The Enemies
of And as slender a Friend to the Presbytery, of whose Tyrannical and
Antimonarchical Principles, he had from his Cradle smart experience. He was an
excellent Speaker, the Scheme of his Oratory being more stately then pedantick,
and the Expressions argued him both a King and a Scholar. In his Apparel and
Civil Garb, he seemed naturally to affect a Majestic carelessness, which was so
Hectic, so Habitual in him, as even in Religious Exercises, where the Extern
Demeanor is a grand part of that Sacred Homage, he was somewhat too incurious
and irreverent. Palatinate: For had he had the least scintillation of Animosity
or Majestic Indignation, would he have so long endured Austrian Faction (to
his great dishonor) cajoled and kept him in delusory Chat with specious
fallacies? would he in those several Negotiations of Carlisle, Bristol,
Belfast, and Weston, have trifled away so vast sums, the Moity whereof, had
they been disposed in Military Levies, would have Modelled an Army able (when
Heidelburgh, Manheim, and Frankendale defended themselves) to have totally
dissipated all the Forces of the Usurpers, to have mastered the Imperious
Eagle, enforcing her to forego her Quarry, Palsgrave? would he so shamefully
have Courted the Alliance of Spain, to the very great regret of his Subjects
whom his Predecessors had so often baffled, and whom England ever found a worse
Friend then Enemy? What stronger evidence can be given in of a wonderful defect
of Courage? As this lipothymie, this faint-heartedness, lost him the reputation
and respects of his people; so his heavy pressures upon them, and undue Levies
by Privy Seals, and the like, alienated their Affections, especially
considering how those Moneys were mis-employed, Spain and Germany, and the
Consequential Entertainments; and partly in Largesses upon his Minion
Buckingham. Between this disaffection and contempt in his people, there was
generated a general disposition to turbulent and boisterous Darings and
Expostulations, even against his Darling Prerogative: And though those dismal
calamities which befell his Son, were doubtless ampliated by a superfetation of
Causes; yet was their first and main existency derivative from those
seminalities. Let Court-Pens extol the calmness of his Halcyonian Reign with
all artifice of Rhetoric, yet can they never deny but that admired Serenity
had its set in a Cloud; and that he left to his Successor, both an empty Purse
and a Crown of Thorns.

Sir Francis Bacon when King James was living, gave this Character

WHerefore representing Your Majesty many times unto my mind, and beholding
you not with the eye of Presumption to discover that which the Scripture tells
me, is inscrutable; but with the observant eye of Duty and Admiration, leaving
aside the other parts of your Virtue and Fortune, I have been touched, yea, and
possessed Philosophers call Intellectuals, [The largeness of your Capacity, the
faithfulness of your Memory, the swiftness of your Apprehension, the
penetration of your Judgment, and the facility and order of your Elocution.]
And I have then thought, that of all the persons living that I have known, Your
Majesty were the best instance to make a man of Plato's opinion, That all
Knowledge is but Remembrance, and that the Mind of Man by Nature knows all
things, and has but her own Native and Original Such a Light of Nature I have
observed in your Majesty, and such a readiness to take flame and blaze from the
least occasion presented; or the least spark of another Knowledge delivered.
And as the Scripture says of the wisest King, That his heart was as the Sand
of the Sea, which though it be one of the largest Bodies, yet it consists of
the smallest and finest Portions: So has God given your Majesty a composition
of Understanding admirable, Cornelius Tacitus says of Augustus Caesar, Augusto
pros^uens and quae Principem deceret Eloquentia fuit: For if we mark it well,
Speech that is uttered with labor and difficulty; or Speech that savoreth of
the affectation of Arts and Precepts; or Speech that is framed after the
imitation Imitating none, and inimitable by any, etc. And there seems to be
no little contention between the excellency of your Majesty's gifts of Nature,
and the universality and perfection of your Learning; for I am well assured of
this, that what I shall say is no amplification That there has not been since
Christ's time, any King or Temporal Monarch, which has been so learned in all
Literature and Erudition, Divine and Humane: For let a man seriously and
diligently revolve and peruse the Succession of the Emperors of Rome, of which
Caesar the Dictator, who lived some years before Christ, and Marcus Antonius,
were the best learned; and so descend to the Emperors of Graecia, or of the
West, and then to the Lines of France, Spain, England, Scotland, and the rest,
and he shall find this Judgment truly made: For it seems much in a King, if
by the compendious extractions of other Men's Wits and Learning, he can take
hold of any superficial Ornaments and shows of Learning; or if he countenance
or prefer Learning and Learned Men. But to drink indeed Hermes, The Power and
Fortune of a King, the Knowledge and Illumination of a Priest, and the Learning
and Universality of a Philosopher. This Propriety inherent and individual
Attribute

Memoria Iusti cum laudibus, and impiorum nomen putrescit. Great Britain, thus
expresses himself concerning King James.

HE was a King in understanding, and was content to have his Subjects ignorant
in many things; as in Curing the Kings Evil, which he knew a device to
ingrandize the virtue of Kings when Miracles were in fashion; but he let the
World believe it, though he smiled at it

He had pure Notions in Conception, but could bring few of them into action,
though they tended to his own preservation; for this was one of his Apothegms
which he made no timely use of, [ Let that Prince that would beware of
Conspiracies, be rather jealous of such whom his extraordinary favors have
advanced, then of those whom his displeasure has discontented. ] Ambition to
rule is more vehement then Malice to revenge: Though the last part of this
Aphorism he was thought to practice too soon, where there were no causes for
prevention and neglect too late when time was full ripe to produce the Effect.

Some paralleld him to Tiberius for Dissimulation, yet Peace was maintained by
him, as in the time of Augustus, and Peace begot Plenty, and Plenty begot Ease
and Wantonness, and Ease and Wantonness begot Poetry, and Poetry swelled to
that bulk in his time, that it begot strange monstrons Satyrs against the Kings
own person, that hanted both Court and Country; which expressed, would be too
bitter to leave a sweet perfume behind him. And though bitter ingredients are
good to imbalm and preserve dead Bodies, yet these were such as might endanger
to kill a living Name, if Malice be not brought in with an Antidote.

But alas good King! Here was an end of his Earthly Empire, and little did he
imagine that the last period to Great Britains Monarchy, should

There is a Book said to be writ by a Knight of Kent, and entitled King James
Court, which renders a further Character of that King; we forbear to
particularize any thing thereof (no name being put to the Book) but leave the
Reader to his freedom.

The Bishop of Lincoln, then Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, in his
Sermon at King James Funeral, speaking of Solomon and King James, (his Text
being 1 Kings 11.41, 42, 43.) has these Expressions.

I Dare presume to say, you never read in your lives, of two Kings more fully
paralleled amongst themselves, and better distinguished from Solomon is said to
be Unigenitus coram Matre sua, the only Son of his Mother, Prove. 4.3. So was
King James. Solomon was of Complexion white and ruddy, Cant. 5.10. So was King
James. Solomon was an Infant-King, puer parvulus, a little Child, 1 Chronicles.
22.5. So was King James a King at the Age of Thirteen Months. Solomon began
his Reign in the life of his Predecessor, 1 Kings 1.32. So, by the force and
compulsion of that State, did our late Sovereign King James. Solomon was twice
crowned and anointed a Chro. 29.22. So was King James. Solomon's Minority was
rough through the quarrels of the former Sovereign; so was that of King James.
Solomon was learned above all the Princes of the East, 1 Kings 4.30. So was
King James above all Princes in the Universal World. Solomon was a Writer in
Prose and Verse, 1 Kings 4.32. So in a very pure and exquisite manner was our
sweet Sovereign King James. Solomon was the greatest Patron we ever read of to
Church and Churchmen; and yet no greater ( let the House of Aaron now confess)
then King James. Solomon Kings 4. ult. And so you know was King James. Solomon
was a main improver of his home Commodities, as you may see in his trading with
Hiram, 1 Kings 5.9. And God knows it was the daily study of King James. Solomon
was a great maintainer of Shipping and Navigation, 1 King. 10.14. A most proper
Attribute to King James. Solomon beautified very much his Capital City with
Buildings and Waterworks, 1 Kings 9.15. So did King James. Every man lived in
peace under his Vine and his Fig Tree, in the days of Solomon, 1 Kings 4.25.
And so they did in the blessed days of King James. And yet toward his end,
King Solomon had secret enemies, Razan, Hadad, and Jeroboam, and prepared for a
War upon his going to his Grave, as you may see in the Verse before my Text.
James. Lastly, Before any Hostile Act we read of in the History, King Solomon
died in peace, when he had lived about Sixty years, as Lyra and Tostatus are of
opinion; and so you know did King James.

And as for his words and eloquence, you know it well enough; it was rare and
excellent in the highest degree. Solomon speaking of his own faculty in this
kind, divides it into two several heads; a ready Invention, and an easy
Discharge and Expression of the same. God has granted 7.15. And this was
eminent in our late Sovereign. His Invention was as quick as his first
Thoughts, and his Words as ready as his Invention. God had given him to
conceive; the Greek word in that place is (...), that is, to make an Enthymem
or a short Syllogism; and that was his manner. He would first wind up the
whole substance of his discourse into one solid and massy Conception; and then
spread it and dilate it to what compass he pleased; Prosluenti and quae
Principem deceret eloquentia Tacitus said of Augustus) in a flowing and a
Princely kind of Elocution. Those Speeches of his in the Parliament,
Star Chamber, Council Table, and other Public Audiences of the State (of
which, as of Tullies Orations, Ea semper optima, quae maxima, the longest still
was held the best) do prove him to be the most powerful Speaker that ever
swayed the Scepter of this Kingdom. In his Style you may observe the
Ecclesiastes, in his Figures the Canticles, in his Sentences the Proverbs, and
in his whole Discourse Reliquum verborum Solomonis, all the rest Solomon.

How powerfully did he charge the Prince with the care of Religion and Justice,
the two Pillars (as he termed them) of his future Throne? How did he recommend
unto his love, the Nobility, the Clergy, and the Communalty in the general? How
did he thrust, as it were, into his inward bosom, his Bishops, his Judges, his
near Servants, and that The Duke of Buckingham.
Disciple of his whom he so loved in particular? and concluded with that
Heavenly Advice to his Son, concerning that great act of his future Marriage,
To marry like himself, and marry where he would: But if he did marry the
Daughter of that King, he should marry her Person, but he should not marry her
Religion.

Having in our Collections met with the Transcript of a Letter from King James
to Pope Clement, dated Anno 1599. We have thought fit (though it be not placed
in order of time) to conclude his Reign with it, Drummond who was sent with the
same to Rome.

Iacobus Rex, Clementi Papae.
BEatissime Pater, cum variis ad nos perlatum fuisset rumoribus, quam
diligenter nostrae sortis aemuli saepius egissent, ut authoritatis vestrae
acies in nos distringeretur, quaque constantia id pro vestra prudentia hactenus
fuerit recusatum: Committere noluimus quin accepti memores beneficii gratias
ageremus, opportunam nacti occasionem, cum lator praesentium, natione nostras,
vester ascriptitius, in fines ditionis vestrae reverteretur; quem pro sua
indole vestris ornatum beneficiis vestrae Sanctitati Commendamus, ut eum in iis
quae nostro nomine habet impartienda, audire placide non dedignetur: Et quia
adversus malevolorum calumnias, qui nostras in Catholicos injurias
commemorando, nobis invidiam, and ipsis gratiam conciliant, nullum tutius
remedium agno^cimus, quam ut e nostratibus aliqui, veritatis studiosi,
quan^umvis a Religione quam nos a prima hausimus Infantia, abhorrentes,
honestam in curia Romana demorandi occasionem semper haberent, ex quibus vestra
Sanctitas certo possit, in quo statu res nostrae sint, ediscere; hoc nomine
Episcopum Vazionensem vobis commendamus, qui ut sortis suae qualecunque
incrementum vestrae Sanctitati duntaxat refert acceptum, ita Cardinalatus
honorem prioribus beneficiis, nostra praesertim gratia, adjici obnixe rogamus.
Sic Inimicorum cessabunt Calumniae, praesentibus qui rerum gestarum veritatem
possint adstruere. Nec actionum nostrarum ullam aequos rerum aestimatores
cupimus latere, qui in ea Religionis, quam profitemur, puritate enutriti, sic
semper statuimus nihil melius tutiusque quam citra fucum in iis promovendis,
quae Divini Numinis gloriam serio spectant, pie contendere, and remotis
invidiae stimulis, non tam quid Religionis inane nomen, quam verae pietatis
Sacrosancta tessera requirat, charitatis semper adhibito fomento, diligenter
considerare. Sed quia de his copiosius cum latore praesentium, viro non
inerudito, and in rebus nostris mediocriter versato, disseruimus, longioris
Epistolae taedio censuimus abstinendum.

Beatudinis vestrae obsequentissimus Filius I. R.
E Sancta Cruce, 24 Sept. 1599.
King James Letter to Pope Clement.
MOst Holy Father, having understood by several Reports Roman by Adoption, was
returning unto your Dominions; we recommend him to your Holiness (to whom for
his good parts you have already been beneficial) that you would attentively
hear him in those things which he shall deliver in our Name: Rome, from whom
your Holiness may be certainly informed of the state of our Affairs. In this
regard we recommend unto you the Bishop of Vazion, who as he does impute
whatsoever increase of his condition determined that there is nothing better
and safer, then piously and without ostentation, to endeavor the promoting of
those things which really belong to the glory of Gods Name, and laying aside
the goa^ds of Envy, and applying the warmth and fomentation of

Your Holiness most dutiful Son J. R.
From Holy Rood, 24 Sept. 1599.
SUmma mandatorum Edwardi Drummond Jurisconsulti, Instructions to Mr Drummond.
quem ad Pontificem Maximum, Ducem Etruriae, Ducem Sabaudiae, caeterosque
Principes and Cardinales ablegamus.

Salutabis imprimis nostro nomine quam potes officiosissime, Pontificiem
Maximum, caeterosque Principes and Cardinales; datisque nostris literis
fiduciariis significabis,

Capere nos vehementer eum, quem decet, amoris and benevolentiae modum cum iis
conservare, omnemque removere non suspicionem modo, sed and suspicionis
levissimam quamcunque occasionem.

Quod quamvis in ea persistimus Religione, quam a teneris hausimus annis, non
tamen ita esse Charitatis expertes, quin de Christianis omnibus been sentiamus;
modo in officio primum erga Deum Optimum Maximum, deinde erga Magistratus,
quorum subsunt imperio, permanserint.

Nullam nos unquam saevitiam contra quoscunque Catholicos Religionis ergo
exercuisse.

Et quia plurimum interest nostra ut pari diligentia qua malevoli mentiuntur,
nos per amicos and subditos veritatem possimus adstruere; idcirco inniteris in
hoc totis viribus ut Pontifex Maximus tam rogatu nostro quam precibus
Illustrissimorum Principum, quos per literas nostras ad hoc rogavimus, ad hoc
induci possit ut Episcopus Vazionensis in Cardinalium Collegium adsciscatur; in
quo si profeceris, ut de eo redditi fuerimus certiores, ulterius progrediemur.
Cavebis ne in hoc negotio ad Pontificem Maximum, aut Illustrissimos Cardinales,
ulterius progrediaris, nisi prius subsit certa spes optati eventus.

This Letter was conveyed by Edward Drummond the Lawyer, whom the King sent to
the Pope, the Duke of Tuscany, the Duke of Savoy, and other Princes and
Cardinals.

First, You shall most respectively

That we exceedingly desire to reserve with them the measure of Love, and good
Will, which is sitting to remove not only all suspicion, but any

That although we persist in the Religion which we sucked in from our Infancy,
yet we are not so void of Charity, but to think well of all Christians if so be
they continue in their duty,

That we never exercised any cruelty against the Catholics, for Religion sake.

And because it does very much concern us, that we may be able to assert the
truth by our Friends and Subjects, with the same diligence that slanderers lie;
therefore you shall endeavor to the utmost to persuade the Pope, as well at our
entreaty, as for the desire of these most Illustrious Princes, whom Vazion
Cardinal, wherein if you be successful, as soon as we shall be certified
thereof, we will proceed further. You must be cautelous not to proceed any
further in this business, either with the Pope or the most Illustrious
Cardinals, unless

The High and mighty Monarch Charles by the grace of God King of Great
Britain France and Ireland Defender of ye Faith.


Historical Collections. Primo CAROLI.
ON the same day when King James departed this life at Theobalds, The
Privy-Counsellors present themselves to King Charles.
the Lord President of the Council, and the Lord Marshal of England, were
immediately sent by the Body of the Council to Prince Charles, who Charles,
which was forthwith published at the Court-Gate at Theobalds; which being done,
the King signified his pleasure, King Charles proclaimed at Theobalds.
that the Lord Keeper, the Lord Treasurer, the Lord President, the Lord
Chamberlain, the Treasurer of the House, and the Comptroller should attend him;
they all came and rendered up their Offices and Places to him, which his Majesty
presently restored to them again. The Privy-Counsellors gave notice to the Lord
Major of London, that he and all the Ludgate, whither the Lords and others
would repair, to proclaim King Charles: Accordingly, the Lords went from
Theobalds to the Palace of Whitehall, where the Nobility then about London were
gathered together.

At Whitehall-Gate the King was proclaimed by sound of Trumpet, At Whitehall.
all the Nobility, Privy-Counsellors and Gentry being on Horseback, went
thence, and proclaimed the King at Charing Cross, Denmark-house, Temple Bar, at
the great Conduit in Fleetstreet, and thence they rode up Ludgate, where the
Lord Major and Aldermen were on Horseback, expecting within the Gates, In
London.
and the Lords and others entered and proclaimed him there, and then they rode
all to Cheapside-Cross, where they proclaimed the King again; and the Lords
returning thence, left order with the Lord Major to go on with the Proclamation
in other parts of the City.

The same day King Charles removed from Theobalds, and came to St James's in
the Evening, and the Corpse of the deceased King remained at Theobalds, attended
by all the Servants in Ordinary.

The old Privy Council new sworn.
the Privy-Counsellors to the late King, with all the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal then about London, were in the Council Chamber at Whitehall by Eight
of the Clock in the morning, ready to go together, and present themselves to
his Majesty; but there came in the mean a Commandment from the King, by the
Lord Conway and Sir Albertus Morton, Principal Secretaries of State to the
deceased King; that the Lord Keeper of the Great-Seal should be sworn of his
Majesty's Privy Council, and that he should give the Oath to the Lord
President, by whom all the rest of the late Kings Council should be sworn
Counselors to his present Majesty: The Lord Keeper of the great Seal, the Lord
President, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Treasurer of England,
the Lord Privy Seal, the Duke of Buckingham Lord Admiral of England, the Earl
of Pembrook Lord Chamberlain, the Earl of Montgomery, the Earl of Kellye, the
Earl of Arundel Earl Marshal of England, the Lord Viscount Grandison, the Lord
Conwey, the Lord Brook, Mr Treasurer, Mr Comptroller, the Master of the Wards,
Mr Secretary Morton, Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer, and the Master of the
Rolls, were this day sworn accordingly; the Lord Keeper did take an Oath apart,
as Lord Keeper of the Great Seal; the Lord Treasurer, as Lord Treasurer of
England; the Lord President, as Lord President of the Kings Privy Council, and
the Lord Conwey, and Sir Albertus Norton, as principal James's, and presented
themselves to the King, and kissed his hand.

The Councils advice to the King.
The Council sat immediately, and advised of the most important and pressing
matters to be offered to the King for his present service, and resolved upon
these particulars.

That a Commission be granted to authorize the Great-Seal, Privy Seal, and
Signet, till new ones be prepared; also Commissions for England, be sent into
Scotland; that Commissions be renewed into Ireland, to the Deputy and Officers

This being done, the whole Council attended the King at St James's,
Proclamation concerning Persons in Office, etc.
a Proclamation issued forth, signifying his Majesty's pleasure, that all
persons whatsoever, who at the decease of the late King were invested in any
Office or Place of Government Civil or Martial within the Realms of England and
Ireland, and namely, Presidents, Lieutenants, Vice-Presidents, Judges, Justices
Sheriffs, Deputy Lieutenants, Commissaries of Musters, Justices of Peace shall
continue in their several Offices, till his Majesty's pleasure were further
known. In another Proclamation of the same date, Proclamation of Government.
the King took notice of his Fathers death, and that he being his only Son,
and undoubted Heir, is invested and established in the Crown Imperial of this
Realm, and all

Resolution taken by the King concerning King James Funeral, and his own
Marriage.
that his Fathers Funeral might be solemnized within five weeks, and within a
few days after the Ceremonial Nuptials in France, and before the Parliament
began in England: These Resolves the Lord President represented unto the King,
who accepted of the advices, and said, he would follow them. Moreover, he
summoned a Parliament to begin the seventeeth of May; A Parlamen^ summoned.
but by the advice of his Privy Council, Prorogued it to the one and thirtieth
of May, afterward to the thirteenth June, and then to the eighteenth of the
same month; which Prorogations were occasioned by the Kings going to Dover to
receive the Queen.

April 23. King James Funeral.
The Body and Hearse of King James was brought from Theobalds to London, being
conducted by the Officers of the Guard of the Body, all in Mourning, every one
having a Torch, and attended by all the Lords of the Court, and great numbers
of other persons of quality, and was placed in Denmark-House in the Hall of the
deceased Anne.

The seventh of May was the day of Burial, the Body and Hearse were taken from
the said Hall of State, and brought in great Pomp and Solemnity to
Westminster, where the Kings of England use to be interred: The new King, to
show his Piety toward his deceased Father, was content to dispense with
Majesty; he followed in the Rear, having at his right hand the Earl of Arundel,
at his left the Earl of Pembrook, both Knights of the Garter; his Train was
born up by twelve Peers of the James, who lived in Peace, and assumed the title
of Peacemaker, was peaceably laid in his Grave in the Abbey at Westminster.

King Charles in his Fathers life time was linked to the Duke of Buckingham,
Duke of Buckingham continues Favorite to King Charles.
and now continued to receive him into an admired intimacy and dearness, making
him Partaker of all his Counsels and Cares, and Chief Conductor of his Affairs;
an Example rare in this Nation, to be the Favorite of two succeding Princes.

The Public State of Religion, Religion considered.
and the steering of Church Matters, Laud, who, in King Iame's life time had
delivered to the Duke a little book about Doctrinal Puritanism, now also
delivered to the Duke a Schedule, wherein the names of Ecclesiastical persons
were written under the letters O and P, O standing for Orthodox, and P for
Puritans; for the Duke commanded that he should thus digest the names of
eminent persons to be presented unto the King under that Partition.

A general Muster.
King Charles in the entrance of his Reign proceeds with preparations for a War,
begun in his fathers time; the Militia of the Kingdom, through the long
continued Peace was much decayed, and the Musters of the Trained-bands were
slight and seldom taken, and few of the Commons were expert in the use of Arms;
wherefore the Lords Lieutenants were commanded, by order of the Council, to
make a general Christendom stand upon such uncertain Terms; and more
particularly, that the Maritine Towns be well manned, and their men duly
exercised; and the King declared his will and pleasure, that the Lord
Lieutenants of the several Shires, should have the nomination of their Deputy
Lieutenants.

Soldiers levied for the Palatinate.
In the beginning of May Warrants were issued forth for a Leavy of Soldiers, to
be employed in the service of his Majesty's Brother and Sister, the Prince and
Princess Palatine, whereof eight thousand were pointed to Rendezvous at
Plymouth by the five and twenty of this Month, and the charge of Coat and
Conduct was ordered to be disbursed by the Country, and the Country to be
repaid out of the Kings Exchequer, after the President of former times; in like
manner, two thousand men were appointed to Rendezvous at the Port of Hull, to
be transported into the Netherlands for the service of the United-Provinces,
and two thousand were to be returned thence into England for his Majesty's
present service; the mingling of a good proportion of old Soldiers and
Officers, with the new raised Companies, was the ground of this exchange.

Proclamation against disorders committed by Soldiers.
The remembrance of the late violence committed by Count Mansfield's Army in
their passage to Dover, occasioned a Proclamation to repress and prevent the
like attempts of Soldiers, as they now passed through Plymouth, or the parts
adjoining, a Commission was sent, impowering

The consummation of King Charles his Marriage with Henrietta Maria, Articles
of the marriage with France, signed by the King.
Daughter of France, was near at hand. The Treaty had proceeded far in his
Fathers life time, but was not in all points concluded; the Articles were
signed the year before by King James on the eleventh of May, and by the French
King on the Fourteenth of August. On the Thirteenth of March this present year,
(the Earls of Carlisle and Holland being then Ambassadors and Commissioners in
France for this Marriage) King Charles signed the Articles.

Besides the general, Private Articles in favor of the Catholics.
there were other private Articles agreed upon in favor of the Papists of this
Kingdom.

That the Catholics, as well Ecclesiastics as Temporal, imprisoned since the
last Proclamation which followed the Breach with Spain, should all be set at
liberty.



That the Goods of the Catholics as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal, that were
seized on since the forementioned Proclamation, should be restored to them.

And on the Tenth of May, as the first fruits of this promised Indulgence and
favor, the King granted unto Twenty Roman Priests a special Pardon of all
Offenses committed against the Laws then in force against

The Dispensation being come from Rome about the beginning of May, The Marriage
solemnized in France.
the Espousals were made in Paris by Cardinal Richelieu: The Ambassadors having
first presented to the King the Contract of Marriage, which was read openly by
the Chancellor, and his Majesty of France agreed thereunto; The Duke of
Chevereux likewise showed his Procuration of power which the King of England
had given him concerning the said Marriage.

Paris pretended that it belonged to him to perform this Solemnity; but the
Cardinal carried it, as well for the eminency of his Dignity, as for that he
was chief Almoner and prime Curate of the Court.

Sunday following, the day appointed for these Nuptials, the Bride went from
the Louure about Nine in the morning, to be dressed in the Archbishops house;
and afterward the King, Queen, and Princesses, and all the Court in rich
Attire, parted likewise from the Louure, and Nostre-Dame: The Duke of Chevereux
had Black habit, lined with Cloth of Gold, and beset with Diamonds; The Earls
of Carlisle and Holland, Ambassadors, were both clad in Beaten-Silver, and went
on each side of the Duke of Chevereux: A Canopy being placed upon the Scaffold,
the King of France and Monsieur his Brother consigned the Queen of Great
Britain their Sister into the hands of the Duke of Chevereux, and the

Which being performed, they went in the same order and solemnity to
Nostre-Dame, the Duke of Chevereux going before the King. When they came to the
door of the Quire, they made great Reverence to the King and Queen; and then
the Ambassadors retired into the Bishops house, while Mass was said in the
Church.

The Mass being ended, the Duke of Chevereux and the Ambassadors Great Britain
at his left hand, and the Queen Mother at his right; the Duke of Chevereux sat
next the Queen of England, and the Earls of Carlisle and Holland next to the
Duke.

To the intent that all sorts of persons might partake of the Public Joy,
Prisoners for Debts were set at liberty, and Pardon was granted to several
Criminals, as an earnest of the Kings respect and love to his Sister, after
this new Alliance.

The Duke sent into France for the Queen.
The Duke of Buckingham was sent into France to his Christian Majesty, to send
away the Wife to the King of Great Britain, and to be her Paris the 24. of May,
with the Earl of Montgomery and other English Lords, and was lodged in the
Palace of the Duke of Chevereux, who with his Lady was to conduct the Queen
into England, there to render her to the King her Husband. During the seven
days stay which the Duke made at Park, the Feastings and Rejoicings were
renewed and multiplied, Bonfires shining and Canons playing; but none did
equalize the Feast that was made by the Cardinal of Richelieu.

The Second of June was the time appointed for our Queens departure: France
sent to the Towns in her way, to render her Majesty all due honors, as if it
were to himself.

A Royal Navy sent to Bol^ign to transport the Queen.
The King of England having notice that the Queen was gone from Amiens, sent a
Royal Navy to Boloign to transport her; the Fleet saluted the Town with a
hundred piece of Canon. Among other great Ladies, the Duchess of Buckingham was
sent to kiss the Queens hands as from the King her Husband, desiring her to
take her own time of coming over with most conveniencie to her own person.

The 22. of June (New Style) the Queen imbarqued at Boloign, and within Twenty
four hours arrived at Dover: And as the King was preparing to receive her, she
sent to his Majesty to desire him not to come till the morrow, because she had
been somewhat indisposed at Sea. She passed that night at Dover, and the next
day about Ten of the clock the King was there with the Flower of the Nobility,
and after some Complements past, caused everybody to retire, and they were
half an hour together in the Closet.

The Marriage consummated at Canterbury.
Thence his Majesty conducted the Queen to Canterbury, and the same evening the
Marriage was there consummated.

Then the Queen, in testimony of her respect and love to the King her Husband,
made it her first suit, (as afterward the King made known) That he would not
be angry with her for her faults of Ignorance, before he had first instructed
her to eschew them; For that she being young, and coming into a strange
Country, both by her years, and ignorance of the Customs of the Nation, might
commit many Errors: And she desired

The Trained Bands of Kent commanded to attend the Queen.
The Knights and Gentlemen of Kent, together with the Trained Bands, were by
Order of the Council commanded to attend and receive the Queen at the most
convenient places as she passed, in such solemn manner and equipage as beseemed
the dignity of his Majesty, and the

The King and Queen come to London.
On the Sixteenth of June, the King and Queen came both to London: Great
preparations were made and intended for her Majesty's reception; but the Plague
then increasing, those Ceremonies were laid aside.

A Chapel at Somerset House was built for the Queen and her Family, A Chapel
built at Somerset House for the Queen.
with Conveniences thereunto adjoining for Capuchin-Friers, who were therein
placed, and had permission to walk abroad in their Religious habits.
Thence-forward greater multitudes of Seminary-Priests and Jesuits repaired
into England out of Foreign parts.

A great Plague in London.
the Pestilence raged in London. At the entrance of the late King there was a
great Plague in the City, but this was far greater, and the greatest that ever
was known in the Nation: For which cause a great part of Trinity-Term was
adjourned from the First Return to the Fourth, by the advice of the
Privy Council and the Justices of the Courts at Westminster; and some few days
in the beginning and ending thereof were holden for the better expediting and
continuing of Causes and Suits, and the returning and suing out of Processes,
and such like

On the Eighteenth day of June, The Parliament opened.
the Parliament began at Westminster. The King being placed in his Royal
Throne, the Lords sitting in their Robes, the Commons also being present, his
Majesty spoke thus.

The Kings Speech in Parliament.
that the Business to be treated on at this time is of such a nature, that it
needs no Eloquence to set it forth; For I am neither able to do it, neither
does it stand with my Nature to spend much time in words. It is no new
business, being already happily begun by my Father of blessed memory, who is
with God; therefore it needs no Narrative: I hope in God you will go on to
maintain it, as freely as you advised my Father to it. It is true, He may seem
to some to have been slack to begin so just and so glorious a work; but it was
his wisdom Germany, the Fleet that is ready for action, with the rest of the
Preparations which I have only followed my Father

My Lords and Gentlemen, I hope that you do remember that you were pleased to
employ me to advise my Father to break off those two Treaties that were on
foot; so that I cannot say, that I came hither a free unengaged man. It Is true,
I came into this business willingly and freely like a Young man, and
consequently rashly; but it was by your interest, your engagement: So that
though it were done like a Young man, yet I cannot repent me of it, and I think
none can blame me for it, knowing the love and fidelity you have borne to your
King, having I needed not to have said this, but only to show what care and
sense I have of your Honors and mine own. I must entreat you likewise to
consider of the Times we are in, how that I must adventure your lives (which I
should be loath to do) should I continue you here long; and you must venture the
Business, if you be slow in your resolutions. Wherefore I hope you will take
such grave Counsel, as you will expedite what you have in hand to do: Which
will do me and your selves an infinite deal of honor; You, in showing your love
to me; and

Last of all, Because some malicious men may, and as I hear, have given out,
that I am not so true a Keeper and Maintainer of the true true Religion that I
profess; I assure you that I may with S. Paul say, that I have been trained up
at Gamaliels feet; And although I shall be never so arrogant as to assume unto
my self the rest, I shall so far show the end of it, that all the World may
see, that none has been,

Now because I am unfit for much speaking, I mean to bring up the fashion of my
Predecessors, to have my Lord Keeper speak for me in most things: Therefore I
have commanded him to speak something unto you at this time, which is more for
formality, then any great matter he has to say unto you.

The Lord Keepers Speech in Parliament.
Then the Lord Keeper Coventry declared,

That the Kings main reason of calling the Parliament, besides the beholding of
his Subjects faces, was to mind them of the great Engagements for the Recovery
of the Palatinate, imposed on his Majesty by the late King his Father, and by
themselves who brake off the two Treaties with Spain. Also to let them
understand, That the succeeding Treaties and Alliances, the Armies sent into
the Low Countries, the repairing of the Forts, and the Fortifying of Ireland,
do all meet in one Center, The Palatinate;

First, The Time; All Europe being at this day as the Pool of Bethesda, the
first stirring of the waters must be laid hold on: Wherefore his Majesty
desires them to bestow this Meeting on him, or rather on their Actions; and the
next shall be theirs, as soon, and as long as

Secondly, Supply: If Subsidies be thought too long and backward, his Majesty
desires to hear, and not to propound the way.

Thirdly, The Issue of Action; which being the first, does highly concern his
Majesty's Honor and Reputation, for which he relies upon their Loves with the
greatest confidence that ever King had in his Subjects; witness his Royal
Poesy, Amor Civium Regis Munimentum: And he doubts not but as soon as he shall
be known in Europe to be

June 21. The Commons presented Sir Thomas Crew Knight and Sergeant at Law for
their Speaker, Sir Tho. Crew Speaker.
(who was also Speaker in the last Parliament of King James) and his Majesty
approved the Choice.

After the House of Commons had settled their General Committees, there were
various Debates amongst them: Some insisted upon the Grievances mentioned,
Debates in the House of Commons.
but not redressed by King James in the last Parliament; others pressed for an
account of the last Subsidies granted for recovery of the Palatinate; others
for the putting of Laws in execution against Priests and Jesuits, and such as
resorted to Ambassadors Houses, and the questioning of Mr. Richard Montague,
for his Book entitled An Appeal; which (as they said) was contrived and
published to put a jealousy between the King and his well-affected Subjects,
and contained many things contrary to the Articles of Religion established by
Parliament; and that the whole frame thereof was an encouragement to Popery.

Others again declared, how the King no sooner came to the Crown, but he
desired to meet his people in Parliament, it being the surest way to preserve a
right understanding between him and them; that since he

The Commons moved the Lords to join in a Petition to the King for a Public
Fast, A Fast.
whereunto their Lordships readily concurred; and the King consenting, a
Proclamation was issued forth for a Fast throughout the Kingdom.

Several particular Committees were appointed. Committees chosen.
One to enquire of the Subsidies given the last Parliament, another to consider
of Tonnage and Poundage. The Imposition on Wines was Voted upon the Merchants

Sir Edward Cook went to the House of Peers with a Message from the Commons,
Message to the King, touching Religion and his Answer.
desiring their concurrence in a Petition concerning Religion, and against
Recusants; which being agreed unto and presented to the King, his Majesty
answered, That he was glad that the Parliament was so forward in Religion, and
assured them they should find him as forward; that the Petition being long,
could not be presently answered.

Mr. Richard Montague was brought to the Bar of the Commons Mr. Montague
brought to the Bar.
This Cause began in the One and twentieth of King James, when he had published
a former Book which he named A New Gagg for an Old Goose, in answer to a Popish
Book, entitled A Gagg for the New Gospel. The business was then questioned in
Parliament, and committed to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and ended in an
Admonition given to Montague.

Afterward the Bishops of the Arminian Party, The Arminian party assert his
cause.
consulting the Propagation of the Five Articles condemned in the Synod of
Dort, concluded that Mr. Montague being already engaged in the quarrel, should
publish Francis White, whom they left to appear alone in the Testimony, as
himself ofttimes complained publicly. The Archbishop disallowed the Book, and
sought to suppress it; nevertheless, it was Printed and Dedicated unto King
Charles, whereby that party did endeavor to engage him in the beginning of his
Reign. The House appointed a Committee to examine the Errors therein, and gave
the Archbishop thanks for the admonition given to the Author, whose Books they
Voted to be contrary to the Articles established by the Parliament, to tend to
the Kings dishonor, and disturbance of Church and State, and took Bond for his
appearance.

The King takes Montagues busin^^^ into his own hand.
Hereupon the King intimated to the House, that the things determined Mountague
without his Privity did not please him; for that he was his Servant and
Chaplain in Ordinary, and he had taken the business into his own hands, whereat
the Commons seemed to be much displeased.

Two Subsidies presented to the King.
Howbeit, to take away all occasion of disgust from the King at the entrance of
his Reign, both Houses did humbly present two Subsidies granted to his Majesty
as the first fruits of their love, whereof they craved acceptance.

The King accepts them, and desires more.
The Lord Conway, Secretary of State, signified to the House of Lords (the
Commons being present) the Kings gracious acceptance of the Bill of Two
Subsidies; Yet that the necessities of the present Affairs were not therein
satisfied, but required their further Counsels: He reminded them, that the late
King was provoked beyond his nature to undertake a War for the recovery of his
Childrens Ancient Patrimony: The charges of this War appeared by Computation to
amount unto Seven hundred thousand pounds a year to support the Netherlands,
and to prevent the Germany, (utterly to exclude the Palsgrave) he levied an
Army under Count Mansfield. The Kings of Denmark and Sweden, and the Princes of
Germany levied another; France, Savoy, and Venice, joined together for a War of
Diversion; and to uphold the Netherlands, the charges of Mansfield and Denmarks
Army must yet continue.

A short Answer to the Petition touching Religion.
After this the Lord Keeper delivered a short Message from the King to both
Houses, That to the Petition of the Lords and Commons touching

The Houses were preparing several Acts, as against giving and taking of Bribes
for places of Judicature; about pressing of Soldiers, and Tonnage and Poundage,
The Parliament adjourned to Oxford.
etc. But by reason of the great increase of the Plague, as appeared that week
by the Bill of Mortality, the King being moved by the Houses to grant a short
Recess, adjourned the Parliament to Oxford, August following.

The Exchequer removed to Richmond.
And for the same reason, the receipt of the Kings Exchequer was removed from
Westminster to Richmond, and all Fairs within Fifty miles of London were
prohibited to prevent a more general contagion.

The Vantguard and seven other Ships employed against Rochel.
In the time of this Recess, the Vantguard, a principal Ship of the Royal Navy,
with seven Merchant Ships of great burden and strength, were lent to the French
King, and employed against Rochel, which was thus brought about. King James in
his life time, being in Treaty for a Spain, and his Allies in Italy and the
Valtoline, had passed some Promise for the procuring or lending of ships to the
French King, upon reasonable Conditions; but in no wise intending they should
serve against Rochel, or any of our Religion in France: For the French
Ministers pretended, that the Ships should be employed only against Genoa; but
afterward the Protestants in France intimating their suspicion, that the
design for Italy was a mere pretense to make up an Army to fall upon the
Rochellers and others of the Religion, King James willing to perform his
promise, and yet to secure the Protestants, directed, that the greater number
of those that served in the Ships should be English, whereby he might keep the
power in his own hands.

France: Nevertheless there wanted a sufficient care to prevent the abusing and
inslaving them to the designs of the French King. Captain John Pennington, the
Admiral of this Fleet, was much unsatisfied, and presented to the Duke of
Buckingham, Lord High Admiral, his Exceptions to the Contract between his
Majesty and that King, and chiefly for that the Companies were bound to fight
at the French Kings Command, against any Nation except their Deep, but the rest
lingered behind; for, the Companies understanding that the French design was to
surprise the Ships and to block up the Harbor of Rochel, resolved to sink
rather, then go against those of their own Religion. Captain Pennington
received Letters from the Duke, and a Warrant from Secretary Conway in the
Kings Name, to command him to deliver up the Ships to the hands of such
Frenchmen as his Christian Majesty shall appoint,

These Orders were delivered unto him by the hands of the French Ambassador,
together with a Letter from the French King, which willed him to receive his
Soldiers, and his Admiral, the Duke of Montmorance, Pennington after much
dispute, although he were promised an ample reward in Money to be given him at
the Surrender, and of a Royal Pension during his life, came to this resolute
Answer; That without an express and clear Warrant he would not surrender nor
discharge a England, saying, They would rather be hanged at home, then
surrender the Ship or be Slaves to the French, and fight against their own
Religion.

Pennington did not gainsay nor oppose; but when they came to Anchor in the
Downs, he advertised the Duke of all that had happened, and craved further
direction, but complained of the Bondage of this Engagement, assuring him, That
the Mariners would rather be hanged, then return again into France: So in all
the rest of the Ships, the Captains and Companies utterly refused the Service,
and protested against it, though they were tempted with Chains of Gold, and
other Rewards.

All this while the Body of the Council were ignorant of any other design then
the of Genoa; then diverse persons came over from the Duke of Rohan, and the
Protestants of France, to solicit the King and Council against lending of the
Ships, and received fair Answers from them both. But the King sent an express
and strict Order to Pennington, requiring him without delay to put his former
Command in Execution, for the consigning Vantguard, with all her furniture,
into the hands of the Marquess D' Effiat, assuring the Officers of the Ships,
that he would provide for their Indemnity; and further commanding him to
require the Seven Merchants Ships in his name, to put themselves into the
Service of the French King, and in case of backwardness or refusal, to use all
means to compel them thereunto, even to their sinking.

Upon this Pennington went back to Deep, and put the Vantguard Pennington shot,
they came in again, but Sir Ferdinando Gorge came away with the Ship called the
Neptune: The Companies unanimously declined the Service, and quitted the Ships,
all but one Man, who was a Gunner; and Pennington hasted to Oxford where the
Parliament was Reassembled,

The Parliament meets again at Oxford.
On the First of August the Parliament Reassembled at Oxford, whether the news
of the Ships lent to the French against the besieged Rochellers, did quickly
fly, and exasperate the spirit of that great Assembly against the Duke of
Buckingham.

Grievances.
The Grievances insisted upon, were the mis-spending of the Public Treasure,
the neglect of guarding the Seas, insomuch that the Turks James, for the
Recovery of the Palatinate, and they prepared to assault the Duke. Mr. Montague
Summoned to appear.
Also Mr. Richard Montague was summoned to appear according to the Condition of
his Bond, and a Committee was appointed to proceed in the further Examination
of that business.

His Cause recommended by the Bishops to the Duke.
Mr. Montagues Cause was recommended to the Duke by the Bishops of Rochester,
Oxford, and St. David's, as the Cause of the Church of England. They show that
some of the Opinions which offended many, were no other then the resolved
Doctrine of this Church, and some of them are curious Points disputed in the
Schools, and to be left to the liberty of Learned Men to abound in their own
sense, it being the great fault of the Council of Trent, to require a
Subscription to School Opinions, and the approved Moderation of the Church of
England, to refuse Rome; but not to be over-busie with Scholastical Niceties.
Moreover in the present case, they allege, that in the time of Henry the
Eighth when the Clergy submitted to the Kings Supremacy, the Submission was so
resolved, That in case of any difference in the Church, the King and the
Bishops were to determine the Matter in a National Synod; and if any other
Judge in Matters of Doctrine be now allowed, we depart from the Ordinance of
Christ, and the continual practice of the Church. Herewithal they intimated,
That if the Church be once brought down below her self, even Majesty it self
with soon be impeached. They say further, That King James in his rare wisdom
and judgment approved all the Opinions in this Book; and that most of the
contrary Opinions were debated at Lambeth, Elizabeth, and so continued, till of
late they received countenance at the Synod of Dort, which was a Synod of
another Nation; and to us no ways binding, till received by Public Authority.
And they affirm boldly, That they cannot conceive what use there can be of
Civil Government in the Commonwealth, or of External Ministry in the Church, if
such fatal Opinions as some are, which are opposite to those delivered by Mr.
Montague, be publicly taught and maintained.



At Oxford in a late Divinity Disputation held upon this Question, The Appeal
to Caesar disputed.
Whether a Regenerate Man may totally and finally fall from Grace? The Opponent
urging the Appeal to Caesar, the Doctor of the Chair handled the Appellator
very roughly, saying, He was a mere Grammarian, a Man that studied Phrases more
then Matter; That he understood neither Articles nor Homilies, or at least
perverted both; That he attributed he Dignus Cruce qui asserit; and concluded
with an Admonition to the Juniors, That they should be wary of reading that and
the like Books.

On the Fourth of August, the Lords and Commons were commanded to attend his
Majesty in Christs-Church Hall in Oxford, where he spoke unto them in manner
following.

MY Lords, The Kings Speech in Christ-Church.
and you of the Commons, We all remember that Spain that were then in hand:
Well you then foresaw, that as well for regaining my dispossessed Brothers
Inheritance, as home defense, a War was likely to succeed; and that as your
Councils had led my Father into it, so your assistance in a Parliamentary-way
to pursue it, should not be wanting. That aid you gave him by Advice, was for
succor of his Allies, the guarding of Ireland, and the home part, supply of
Munition, preparing and setting

It pleased God at the entrance of this Preparation (by your Advice begun) to
call my Father to his Mercy, whereby I entered as well to upon credit taken up
and aforehand disbursed, and far short as yet to set forth that Navy now
preparing; as I have lately the estimate of those of care, and who are still
employed about it, whose particular of all expenses about this preparation
shall be given you, when you please to take an account of it.

Lord Conway and Secretary Cook, by the Kings Command, declare the present
slate of Affairs.
His Majesty having ended his Speech, commanded the Lord Conway, and Sir John
Cook, more particularly to declare the present state of Affairs;

THat our Sovereign Lord King James of Famous Memory, at the Suit of both
Houses of Parliament, and by the powerful operation of his Majesty that now is,
gave consent to break off the Two Treaties with Spain, touching the Match and
the Palatinate, and to vindicate the many wrongs and scorns done unto his
Majesty and his Royal Children: Besides, if the King of Spain were suffered to
proceed Spain; and wherein his Majesty Bavaria by Force and Contract had the
Palatinate in his own possession, most of the Electors and Princes of Germany
were joined with him. The Estates of the other Princes most likely to join in a
War of Recovery, were seized and secured, and all by a Conquering Army:
Besides, the Emperor had called a Diet, in which he would take away Palatinate;
thus it stood in Germany. And in France the King there chose to sheath his
Sword in the Bowels of his own Subjects, rather then to declare against the
Catholic Cause. In the Low Countries the Sect of the Arminians prevailed much,
who inclined to the Papists rather then to their own safety, notwithstanding
that the Enemy had a great and powerful Army near them; so that his Majesty was
enforced to Protect and Countenance them with an Army of Six thousand from
hence, France, by a Match for his Royal Majesty that now is, thereby to have
Interest in that King, and to make him a Party. The last consideration was his
Majesty's own Honor, who had labored with the two Kings of Denmark and Sweden,
and the German Princes, from whom he received but cold Answers; they refusing
to join, unless they first saw his Majesty in the Field. But of this he was
very tender, unless the League were broken, or he first warred upon. The Forces
of Invasion or Diversion: The Charges thereof appeared in Parliament to be
Seven hundred thousand pounds a year; besides, Ireland was to be fortified, the
Forts here repaired, and a Navy prepared; he thought it feasible to enter into
a League with the French King, and the Duke of Savoy and Venice.

Hereupon an Army was committed to Count Mansfield, the charge whereof came to
Seventy thousand pounds a Month for his Majesty's part; also he commanded the
preparing of this great Fleet: All which so heartned the Princes of Germany,
that they sent Ambassadors to the Kings of Denmark and Sweden; and those two
Kings offered a greater Army both of Horse and Foot, to which his Majesty was
to pay a proportion. Count Mansfields Army (though disastrous) produced these
German Princes gained new courage to defend themselves, and oppose their
Enemies. Thirdly, The King of Denmark has raised an Army, with which he is
marched in person as far as Minden. Moreover, the Confederates of France and
Italy have prosecuted a War in Milan, and Peace is now made by the French King
with his own Subjects; so that by this means breath is given to our Affairs.

This Parliament is not called in mere Formality upon his Majesty's Plymouth,
expecting their Commanders. His Majesty's Honor, Religion, and the Kingdoms
safety, is here engaged; besides, he is certainly advised of Designs to infest
his Dominions in Ireland, and upon our own Coasts, and of the Enemies increase
of

Then the Lord Treasurer added, Lord Treasurer proceeds in that subject.
That the late King when he died, was indebted to the City of London 120000 l.
besides Interest, and indebted for Denmark and the Palatinate 150000 l. and
indebted for his Wardrobe 40000 l. That these debts lie upon his Majesty that
now is, who is indebted upon London 70000 l. That he has laid out for his Navy
Mansfield. And for Mourning and Funeral expenses for his Father 42000 l. For
expenses concerning the Queen 40000. The Navy will require to set it forth in
that Equipage as is requisite for the great Design his Majesty has in hand, and
to pay them for the time intended for this Expedition, 300000 l.

After this Conference, Debates in the House of Commons, touching the present
state of Affairs.
the Commons fell into high Debates, alleging, That the Treasury was
mis-employed; that evil Councels guided and that it is was not usual to grant
Subsidies upon Subsidies in one Parliament, and no Grievances redressed. There
were many Reflections upon the Dukes miscarriages; likewise they reassumed the
Debate concerning Montague; and they resolved, That Religion should have the
first place in their Debates; and next unto it, the Kingdoms Safety, and then
Supplies. Other particulars were likewise insisted on, That the King be desired
to Answer in full Parliament to the Petition concerning Religion, and that his
Answer be Enrolled with the force of an Act of Parliament: Palatinates Cause
with his own Estate; that the time of the year was too far spent for the Fleet
to go forth in Service; that inquiry be made, whether the Duke brake not the
Match with Spain, out of Spleen and Malice to Conde Olivares; whether he made
not the Match with France upon harder terms; Rochel were not maintained with
the Subsidies given for the relief of the Palatinate; that an Advised Counsel
for the Government of the present Affairs, and to look into the Kings Estate,
is necessary; that his Majesty be desired to give his Answer concerning the
Imposition on Wines; and Select Committees draw out these Heads at large to be
presented to the King: The doing whereof, they said was no Capitulation with
his Majesty, but an ordinary Parliamentary course: Without which, the
Commonwealth could never supply the King,

Soon after the Commons had a Conference with the Lords, desiring their
Concurrence in presenting to the King, these Matters following.

Complaints against Papists favored, notwithstanding the Kings Answer to the
Petition against them.
That notwithstanding the Lords and Commons at their last Meeting this Session,
did Petition his Majesty for the advancing of Gods true Religion, and the
suppressing of Popery; unto which his Majesty vouchsafed as well from his own
Mouth, as by the Lord Keeper, to return such Answer as assured them of his
Royal performance: yet at this Meeting July last his Majesty granted a Pardon
unto Alexander Baker a Jesuit, and unto Ten other Papists, which (as the
Commons have been informed) was gotten by the importunity of some Foreign
Ambassador, and passed by immediate Warrant, and was recommended by the
Principal Secretary of State, without the payment of the ordinary Fees. And
further, That diverse Copies of Letters and other Papers being found in the
house of one Mary Estmonds in Dorsetshire, by two Justices of Peace, who
thereupon tendered her the Oath of Alleagiance,

Upon these Passages the Commons made Observations; first, upon the date of the
Pardon, which was the next day after his Majesty's Answer by the Lord Keeper to
their Petition concerning Religion; secondly, That the Pardon dispensed with
several Laws, as of the 21 and 27 of Queen Elizabeth, and of the Third of King
James, provided to keep proud and insolent, and to the discouragement of the
High Court of Parliament: All which they humbly desire his Majesty to take into
due consideration, and to give effectual and speedy Redress therein.

The Lord Conway principal Secretary of State, being called to give an Account
of this business, answered, That he ever hated the Popish Religion; That the
Pardon was granted before the King answered their Petition, though it bore not
date till afterward; That the King commanded Dorset-shire, and what he did
therein was to take off all scandal from the King, though it lighted upon
himself.

This Conference no sooner ended, but both Houses were ordered to meet at
Christ-Church, to receive an Answer to their Petition concerning Religion; To
every Clause whereof his Majesty answered in a Parliamentary way. The Petition,
Remedies, and the Kings Answer we give

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
IT being infallibly true, The Petition concerning Religion, together with his
(...)
that nothing can more establish the Throne, and assure the peace and
prosperity of the people, then the unity and sincerity of Religion; We your
most humble and loyal Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons
of this present Parliament assembled, hold our selves bound in conscience and
duty to represent the same to your Sacred Majesty, together with the dangerous
Consequences of the increase of Popery in this Land, and what

The Dangers appear in these particulars.
I. In their desperate ends, being both the subversion of Church and State; and
the restlesness of their spirits to attain these ends, the Doctrine of their
Teachers and Leaders persuading them that therein they do God good service. II.
Their evident and strict dependencie upon such Foreign Princes as no way affect
the good of your Majesty and this State. III. The opening a way of Popularity
to the Ambition of any who shall adventure to make himself Head of so great a
Party.
The principal Cause of the Increase of Papists.
I. The want of the due execution of Laws against Jesuits, Seminary Priests,
and Popish Recusants; occasioned partly by the II. The interposing of Foreign
Princes by their Ambassadors and agents, in favor of them. III. Their great
Concourse to the City, and frequent Conferences and Conventicles there. IV. The
open and usual resort to the Houses and Chapels of Foreign Ambassadors. V. The
Education of their Children in Seminaries and Houses of their Religion in
Foreign parts, which of late have been greatly multiplied and enlarged for
entertaining of the English. VI. That in some places of your Realm, your people
be not sufficiently instructed in the knowledge of true Religion. VII. The
licentious printing and dispersing of Popish and Seditious VIII. The employment
of men ill-affected in Religion in places of Government, who do, shall, or may
countenance the Popish party.
The Remedies against this outrageous and dangerous disease, We conceive to be
these ensuing.
I. That the Youth of this Realm be carefully educated by able and Religious
Schoolmasters, and they to be enjoined to Catechize and instruct their Scholars
in the grounds and principles of true Religion. And whereas by many Complaints
from diverse parts of the Kingdom it does plainly appear, That sundry Popish
Scholars dissembling their Religion, have craftily crept in and obtained the
places of Teaching in diverse Counties, and thereby infected and perverted their

His Majesty's Answer.
This is well allowed of; And for the better performance of what is desired,
Letters shall be written to the two Archbishops, and from them Letters to go to
all the Ordinaries of their several Provinces to see this done; the several
Ordinaries to give account of their doings herein to the Archbishops
respectively, and they to give account to his Majesty of their proceedings
herein.

II. That the ancient Discipline of the Universities be restored, being

Answ. This is approved by his Majesty; and the Chancellor of each University
shall be required to cause due execution of it.

III. That special care be taken to enlarge the Word of God throughout all the
parts of your Majesty's Dominions, as being the most powerful means for
planting of true Religion, and in these needful and dangerous times; And that
Nonresidencie, Pluralities and Commendams may be moderated. Where we cannot
forbear most humbly to thank your Majesty for diminishing the number of your
own Chaplains; not doubting of the like Princely care for the wellbestowing of
the rest of your Benefices, both to the comfort of the people, and the
encouragement of the Universities, being full of grave and able Ministers
unfurnished of Livings.

Answ. This his Majesty likes well, so as it be applied to such Ministers as
are peaceable, orderly, and conformable to the Church Government. For
Pluralities and Nonresidencies, they are now so moderated, that the Archbishops
affirm, there be now no Dispensations for Pluralities granted; nor no man now
is allowed above two Benefices, and those not above thirty miles distant: And
for avoiding Non-residence, the Canon in that case provided shall be duly put
in execution. Commendams, they shall be sparingly granted, only in such case
where the exility and smalness of the Bishopric requires. Also his Majesty
will cause that the Benefices belonging to him shall be well bestowed. And for
the better propagating of Religion, his Majesty recommendeth to the House of
Parliament, that care may be taken and provision made, That every Parish shall
allow a competent maintenance for an able Minister; And that the Owners of
Parsonages Impropriate would allow to the Vicars, Curates and Ministers in
Villages and places

IV. That there may be strict provision against transporting of English
Children to the Seminaries beyond the Seas, and for the recalling of them who
are already there placed, and for the punishment of such your Subjects as are
Maintainers of those Seminaries, or of the Scholars; considering, that besides
the seducing of your people,

Answ. The Law in this case shall be put in execution: And further, there shall
be Letters written to the Lord Treasurer, and also to the Lord Admiral, That
all the Ports of this Realm, and the Creeks and Members thereof be strictly
kept, and strait Searches made to this end: A Proclamation shall be to recall
both the Children of Noblemen, and

V. That no Popish Recusant be permitted to come within the Court, unless your
Majesty be pleased to call him upon special occasion, agreeable to the Statute
of 3 Jac. And whereas your Majesty for the

Answ. If his Majesty shall find or be informed of any Concourse of Recusants
to the Court, the Law shall be strictly followed: And his Majesty is pleased,
that by Proclamation the British and the Irish Subjects shall be put in the
same case. And as his Majesty has provided in his Treaty with France, so his
purpose is to keep it, That none of his Subjects shall be admitted into his
service, or into the service of his Royal Consort the Queen, that are Popish
Recusants.

VI. That all the Laws now standing in force against Jesuits,
Seminary-Priests, and others having taken Orders by Authority derived from the
Sea of Rome, be put in due execution. And to the intent they may not pretend to
be surprised, That a speedy and certain Day be prefixed by your Majesty's
Proclamation for their departure out of this Realm, and all other your
Dominions, and not to return upon the severest Penalties of the Law now in
force against them; And that all your Majesty's Subjects may be thereby
admonished not to

Answ. The Law in this case shall be put in execution, and a Proclamation shall
be to the effect desired; And such Restraint shall be made, as is desired; And
no man that is justly suspected of Popery, shall be suffered to be Keeper of
any his Majesty's Prisons.

VII. That your Majesty be pleased to take such Order as to your Princely
wisdom shall be expedient, That no natural born Subject, Rome, confer any
Ecclesiastical Orders to exercise any Ecclesiastical Function whatsoever,
toward or upon your Majesty's natural Subjects within your Dominions.

Answ. This is fit to be ordered according as is provided, And it shall be so
published by Proclamation.

VIII. That your Majesty's Learned Council may receive Order and commandment to
consider of all former Grants of Recusants lands, that such of them may be
avoided as are made to the Recusants use or interest, out of which the Recusant
receives any benefit, which are either void, or voidable by they Law.

Answ. The King will give order to his Learned Council to consider of the
Grants, and will do according as is desired.

IX. That your Majesty will be likewise pleased strictly to command all your
Judges and Ministers of Justice, Ecclesiastical and Temporal, to see the Laws
of this Realm against Popish Recusants to be duly executed; And namely, that
the Censure of Excommunication be declared and certified against them; and that
they be not absolved but upon public satisfaction by yielding to Conformity.

Answ. His Majesty leaves the Laws to their Course, and will order in the
point of Excommunication as is desired.

X. That your Majesty will be pleased to remove from places of

Answ. This his Majesty thinks fit, and will give order for it.

XI. That present order be taken for disarming all Popish Recusants, legally
convicted, or justly suspected, according to the Laws

Answ. The Laws and Acts in this Case shall be followed, and put in due
execution.

XII. That your Majesty be also pleased in respect of the great resort of
Recusants, to and about London, to command forthwith upon

Answ. For this the Laws in force shall be forthwith executed.

XIII. And whereas your Majesty has strictly commanded and taken order, that
none of the natural born Subjects repair to the hearing

Answ. The King gives assent thereto, and will see that observed which herein
has been commanded by him.

XIV. That all such Insolences, as any that are Popishly affected have lately
committed, or shall hereafter commit to the dishonor of our Religion, or to the
wrong of the true Professors thereof, be exemplarily punished.

Answ. This shall be done as is desired.

XV. That the Statute of 1 Eliz. for the payment of Twelvepence every Sunday by
such as shall be absent from Divine service in the Church without a lawful
excuse, may be put in due execution, the rather for that the penalty by Law is
given to the poor, and therefore not to be dispensed withal.

Answ. It is fit that this Statute be executed, and the Penalties shall not be
dispensed withal.

XVI. Lastly, That your Majesty would be pleased to extend your Princely care
also over the Kingdom of Ireland, that the like courses may be there taken for
the restoring and establishing of true Religion.

Answ. His Majesty's cares are, and shall be extended over the

And thus (most gracious Sovereign) according to our duty and zeal to God and
Religion, to your Majesty and your safety, to the Church and Commonwealth, and
their peace and prosperity, we have made a faithful Declaration of the present
Estate, the causes and remedies of this increasing disease of Popery; humbly

The Petition and Answer being read, it was further intimated to the Commons,
That as his Majesty took well their minding him of the care of Religion, so he
would have done and granted the same things, though they had never petitioned
him; neither does he place his Answer to this Petition, as a wheel to draw on
other affairs and designs, but he leaves them to move in their own Sphere; and
what he has done in this particular comes from these two Fountains,
Conscience, and Duty

The Duke renders an account to both Houses of the Fleet.
At the same time the Duke signified to both Houses, that by the Kings command,
he was to give an account of the Fleet, and the preparations thereof; and said,
that the first and last time he had the happiness to speak in that Auditory, it
was of the Spanish Treaty, and then he was so happy, as to be honored and
applauded by both Houses of Parliament; and he made no question, but speaking
now with the same heart,

And he made this request to the House of Commons, to believe, that if any has
spoken, or shall speak in discharge of his conscience, his zeal of Reformation,
any thing which may seem to reflect upon some particular persons, he shall be
the last man that will apply this to himself, because he is confidently assured
of two things: first, that they are just not to fall upon him without cause;
and secondly, that himself shall do nothing that unbecomes a faithful
Englishman.

He speaks by way of Objection and Answer.
And for the Method of his ensuing* Discourse, he chose rather to speak by way
of Objection and Answer, then in one continued Speech, as a speedier means to
give the Commons satisfaction.

Object. 1. By what Counsel those Designs and Actions of War were carried and
enterprised?

Answ. By the Counsel of the Parliament appointed according to the Act of both
Houses, the 23. of March 1623. by those Counsels his Majesty was guided, and
applied himself accordingly for the defense of the Realm, the securing of
Ireland, the assisting of our Neighbors and others our Friends and Allies, and
for the setting forth the Navy-Royal. Christendom, he found that of most
necessity: Hereupon his Majesty of famous memory did him ( viz. the Duke) the
honor, as to write from Newmarket to him at London a Letter to this effect;
That looking into the Affairs of Christendom, he found it necessary, that a
Royal-Fleet should be prepared and set in readiness, but that he had no Money;

Upon this Letter, the Duke said, he leaped into the Action with all alacrity,
and having received all he had from his Majesty, was most desirous, and held it
a happiness to pour it out upon his service and occasions, Conway, the Lord
Chichester, Lord Grandison, Lord Carew, Sir Robert Mansel, and Sir John Cook.

Their last consultation was of the War, next of the means; but both one and
the other was justified by more then himself; he never did

And Sir John Cook justified the showing and the approving of these Accounts at
the Council Table; the Accounts consisted of long particulars

He proceeded yet further, and showed, that he was so Religious to guide these
great Affairs by Council, as that at his journey into France, which fell out
about this time, he desired his Majesty to recommend the business to a select
Council, which his Majesty did, who in his absence took care of the same.

Object. 2. Why did not his Majesty declare the Enemy presently upon

Answ. His Majesty considered the State of Christendom at that Season, and
found it full of danger to declare the Enemy for three Reasons: First, because
the great Enemy would be more prepared; secondly, Spain being the Enemy, our
Merchants goods would be imbarged which are now drawing home; thirdly, our
Friends finding us so long unprepared after our Declaration, would never
believe any reality in our intentions.

Object. 3. Whether a considerable sum of money be yet required?

Answ. Forty thousand pounds is yet necessary, but our Master is exhausted, his
Treasure anticipated, his Lands pawned, his Plate offered to be pawned, but not
accepted, and yet his Majesty must be maintained.

Object. 4. Why was not this want of Money foreseen, but now only thought upon
unexpectedly, and dangerously considering the sickness?

Answ. It was foreseen before, but interrupted by unfortunate accidents; the
death of the late King; the Funeral, which for decency could follow no sooner;
the Journey into France, and the Marriage, which procured more delay then was
expected, but necessary.

At the opening of the Parliament his Majesty did declare this Necessity, and
told the House plainly, that this sitting must not be for Counsel, but
Resolution; and when he understood the grant of two Subsidies, he conceived
that money to be a matter of Custom to welcome him to the

Object. 5. Who gave counsel to his Majesty so suddenly when the sickness was
so dangerously spread, to convene this Parliamant?

Answ. His Majesty commanded him (the Duke) to say, that it was the business it
self that gave this counsel, and the necessity of it, else his Majesty would
not have hazarded the two Houses nor the rest of the Kingdom, if he had been
able any way without the Parliaments Supply to set out the Navy.

Object. 6. Is not the time of the year too far spent for the Navy to go forth?

Answ. The King answered this formerly, better half the Navy perish then the
going thereof should be stayed; it would argue such want of Counsel, Courage
and Experience in the Design, such beggerliness in being not able to go through
with it, that it may not be diverted, the season of the year suiting with the
Design, as could be demonstrated, if the Design might not be published thereby.

Object. 7. Whether those Eight Ships lent to the French King, which were
employed against the Rochellers, were not paid with the Subsidy-money?

Answ. Those Eight Ships were employed at the charge of the French King:
Secondly, it is not always fit for Kings to give account of their Counsels;
judge the thing by the event.

Object. 8. Whether the Duke, having been our Servant to break the Match with
Spain, made not a worse Match with France; and upon harsher terms?

Answ. I hope the contrary will appear by the Answer to your Petition.

Object. 9. Did not the Duke serve us in breaking the two Treaties with Spain,
out of spleen and malice to Conde Olivares?

Answ. There was no cause to hate Olivares, who was the means to make him
happy; for out of his hands came those papers by which the Duke gained the love
of this Nation, which before thought not so well of him; he was not vindicative
in his Nature; he can forgive those which Olivares had; neither does the Duke
love that any man should be an instrument by ill means to do a good Action, as
Olivares intended to serve his Master and Kingdom by indirect means; and he
could make a proof, that he was not vindicative, he can forgive one of our own
Nation that concurred with Olivares, but he was minded to leave that business
asleep, which if it should awake, would prove a Lion to devour him, who (as he
said) he meant one of our The Earl of Bristol.
Nation, who cooperated with Olivares.

Object. 10. It will be objected, That hitherto the Duke speaks of immcense
charges, which the Kingdom is not able to bear; as to assist the King of
Denmark with Thirty thousand pounds per Month, Count Mansfield with Twenty per
Month, the Low Countries with Eight thousand pounds per Month, and Two
thousand six hundred pounds per Month for Ireland?

Answ. Make the King Chief of the War by a diversion, and he will give a
greater advantage to all his Allies, then by allowing of them Fifty thousand
pounds, nay, a Hundred thousand pounds per Month. What is it for his Allies to
scratch with the King of Spain, to take a Town to day, and lose it to morrow?
for it is almost impossible to hope for a Conquest in this kind, the King of
Spain being so able by Land; but let

Object. 11. But where is the Enemy?

Answ. Make the Fleet ready to go out, and the King bids you name the Enemy
your selves; put the Sword into his Majesty's hands, and he will improve it to
your honor, and the good of Religion; as you issue nothing that is loss, so you
will bring home something that is gain, and henceforward maintain the War by
the perquisites thereof; make but once an Entrance, it may afterward be
maintained with profit; when the Enemy is declared, you may have Letters of
Mart, none shall be denied: I have not been so idle, but I shall make
Propositions of

August 9. 1625.
After the Commons returned from the House of Lords, The Dukes Relation
accasioned variety of Opinions in Parliament.
they made Report of this Business unto the House, which occasioned variety of
Opinions: Some were for giving the King present Supply, who had made so
gracious an Answer to the Petition for Religion, and given direction that

Others were of a contrary mind, and said, It was requisite to present to his
Majesty the means how he may live glorious at home, and how he may be feared
abroad, by having his Designs better managed, and an Enemy Declared: Then may
spurs be added to the Seahorse, and the Spain infested at a lesser charge, and
we better secured from Papists at home, whose hearts are knit with the
Spaniard, and whose Estates may liberally contribute to the War; and the great
Sums given for Honors and Offices, would go far in setting forth a Fleet at
Sea, and the Subject not be always importuned for Supply. But the further
Debate of this Business was put off till the next day being Wednesday the Tenth
of August.



The next day the King sends a Message to the Commons, wherein he takes notice,
The Kings Message to the Commons.
that the House intended to enter into Consideration of diverse heads concerning
the King and the Commonwealth, that he was pleased with their good intentions,
but desired them to consider his Affairs, which require a speedy dispatch; the
season of the year was far spent, yet the time not unseasonable for the Design;
that if the Plague should happen in the Navy, the Action would be lost; that if
any of the House should be touched with the sickness, much inconvenience would
ensue

Debates upon the Kings Message.
Hereupon some earnestly pressed the giving of two Subsidies, and two Fifteens,
his Majesty's honor, and the Necessity of his Affairs requiring it, as it
appeared out of Considerations already frequently represented.

Others replied, that Necessity is a dangerous Counselor, and is a continual
Argument of Supplies in all Parliaments; that those Counselors who have put
the King and Kingdom into such a Necessity and hazard, ought to answer for it,
whosoever they be; that if the State of things Henry the third, there was one
punished for pressing of more Subsidies, when Subsidies had been granted before
in that Parliament. In the end it was proposed, that a Report be made to the
King, that they have regard to his Honor, Necessity and Safety, and the safety
of the Kingdom, and that they will assist his Majesty in any honorable Action,
grounded upon sound Councils; and that something

The Commons Declaration.
WE the Knights Cittzens and Burgesses of the Commons House of Parliament, being
the Representative body of the whole Commons of this Realm, abundantly
comforted in his Majesty's late gracious Answer touching Religion, and his
Message Charles; and that we will be ready in convenient time, and in a
Parliamentary way freely and dutifully to do our utmost endeavors, to discover
and reform the Abuses and Grievances of the Realm and State, and in like sort
of afford all necessary Supply to his most Excellent Majesty, upon his present,
have; and to account all such as slanderers of the peoples affections, and
Enemies to the Commonwealth, that shall dare to say the contrary.

This Declaration was sent to the King by such of the Privy Council as were
Members of the House.

Notwithstanding, The Parliament dissolved.
the King perceiving the House resolved against Supply, without Redress of
Grievances, and in their Debates to reflect August sent to the House of Peers a
Commission, directed to several Lords, for the Dissolution of the Parliament;
whereupon the Gentleman Usher was commanded to signify to the Speaker of the
House of Commons, that the Lords had received his Majesty's Commission, which
was read unto both Houses; whereupon the Commons with their Speaker went up
presently to the Lords, heard the Commission read, and the Parliament declared
to be dissolved.

At this Parliament begun and holden by Prorogation at Westminster the 18th day
of June, Anno Regis Caroli Primo, 1625. these Acts were passed.
1. AN Act for the punishing of diverse Abuses committed on the Sunday. 2. An
Act to enable the King to make Leases of Lands, parcel of the Duchy of
Cornwall. 3. An Act for the ease of obtaining Licenses of Alienation, and in the
pleading of Alienations with license, or of Pardons of Alienations without
license in the Court of Exchequer or elsewhere. 4. An Act to restrain Tippling
in Inns and Alehouses. 5. An Act for the Subsidy of the Clergy. 7. An Act that
this Session of Parliament shall not determine by his Majesty's assent to this
and some other Acts. 8. An Act to confirm an Agreement between the King and the
Copyholders of Macclesfield, in Com. Cestr. etc. 9. An Act for he settlement
of an Agreement of the Tenants of Chelvenham, and Ashby, alias Charleton,
between the King and Sir Giles Grival Knight.
The Parliament being dissolved, The King follows his Design of War.
the King followed his Design of War, and resolved that the Fleet should
speedily put out to Sea; he also entered into a League with the
United-Provinces, against the Emper or and King of Spain, for restoring the
Liberties of Germany; the States by their Ambassadors sought this Union, and
the Duke of Buckingham, with the Earl of Holland were sent to the Hague to
conclude the same, as also to comfort the Kings distressed Sister with hopes of
a Restitution.

The Kings Proclamation to recall home children of Recusants.
whereby he commanded the return, within limited time, of all such children of
Noblemen, and others his natural Subjects, who were now breeding up in Schools
and Seminaries, and other houses of the Popish Religion beyond the Seas: That
their Parents, Tutors, and Governors take present order to recall them home, and
to provide that they return by the day prefixed, at the utmost severity of his
Majesty's Justice; and he commanded further, That no Bishop, Priest, or any
other person having taken Orders under any Authority derived from the Sea of
Rome, do presume to confer Ecclesiastical Orders, or exercise Ecclesiastical
Function or Jurisdiction toward any of his natural Subjects in any of his
Dominions; and that all Statutes in force be put in due execution against
Jesuits, Seminaries, and others in Popish Orders, prefixing a day for their
departure out of his Dominions, not to return again upon the

In the time of the late King, very many of the natural Subjects of these
Dominions had by public permission betaken themselves to the service of the
Emperor, the King of Spain, and Archdutchess of the Low Countries, and by this
means they fought against others of their Countrymen that were employed by the
States of the United-Provinces, and on the behalf of the exiled Palatine: But
now the King foreseeing how improper and unnatural it were, that his own
natural Spain or Archdutchess, speedily to return to their Native Countries,
where they should be received and employed, as occasion served, according to
their several qualities.

The dissolution of the Parliament preventing the Act of Subsidies,

Right Trusty and Welbeloved, etc.
The Kings Letter to the Lieutenants for the Loan of Money upon Privy-Seals.
IT has been so usual a thing for Kings and Princes of this Realm to make use
of their Subjects good affections, by borrowing some such competent Sums of
Money of Persons able to lend, as might supply those present occasions for
Public Service, which cannot attend that length of time wherein it can be
raised by contribution by the generality of our Sujects: As we have not only
present occasion to make the like Trial, by borrowing from some private
Gentlemen and others, but also of your sincerity and endeavors in furtherance
of the service; that is to say, in taking some course either out of your own

And for your further instruction in this Case, on whose Trust we do so much
repose, we wish you to advise herein with your Deputy Lieutenant, as those from
persons that are known to be men of wealth and ability, and not merely
subsisting upon those Livings, which in most places are far inferior to that
Maintenance we could wish them. By which course and consideration of ours,
though you may perceive how much we desire to procure this Loan without
inconvenience to any, which is only intended for the service of the Public,
yet must we assure you, that we had no greater cause at any time then now to
make use of your integrity and industry in respect of your election of the
Lenders, and of your

Given at, etc.

The Comptroller of the Kings Household, by the Councils Order,

Trusty and Welbeloved, etc.
HAving observed in the Presidents and Customs of former Times, Privy-Seals
issued forth to certain Persons.
that all the Kings and Queens of this Realm upon extraordinary occasions


The Collectors of this Loan were appointed to pay into the Exchequer the Sums
received, and to return the Names of such as discovered

Amidst the preparations for War with Spain, the Privy Council issued out
Warrants for the disarming of Popish Recusants, grounding their Order upon the
Petition of the late Parliament.

Warrants for disarming Recusants.
HIs Majesty and we of his Council having received information from so many
several parts, of the bold and impudent speeches used by many Romish Catholics
of this Realm, declaring how much they are offended with the gracious
satisfaction given by his Majesty to the Lords and Commons in Parliament in the
points concerning the Conservation of true Religion, as it is at this day by
England; And having just cause to doubt, that many violent Papists, through the
instigation of Iesuited Priests, may be inclined to take part with such as we
well understand at this time practice with the Kings Subjects to raise stirs
and tumults, which they do not only foment by persuasions and instigations, but
with promise of assistance and seconding them with Arms, their pretext being
Religion, but their ends Conquest, pushed thereunto by an unlimited Ambition to
a General Monarchy, of which we have

Letters directed to Lords Recusants.
This Design proceeded, and the Council directed their Letters to viz. The
Marquis of Winchester and the Lord St. John his son, Lord Viscount Mountague,
Lord Viscount Colchester, Lord Peter, the Earl of Castlehaven, Lord Morley,
Lord Vaux, Lord Eures, Lord Arundel of Warder, Lord Tenham, Lord Herbert, Lord
Windsor; requiring them to render their Arms and Furniture thereunto belonging,
together with all their Habiliments of War, to be removed into places
convenient, and to remain there till the King shall determine otherwise.

Concourse of Papists prevented.
Moreover the Privy Council having received information from the
Lords-Lieutenants in diverse parts of the Kingdom, That there was great and
unaccustomed Resort to the houses of Papists, and that other Courses justly to
be suspected were held among them, Authorized the Lords-Lieutenants to examine
the truth and reason of such Assemblies and Entertainment, and of the
conveyance and intercourse of Letters; as also to enquire and search if there
were any preparation of Men or Arms, or Practice of Arms, or endeavors of
Alteration among persons discontented

Viscount Wimbleton Commander in Chief in the Voyage to Cadez.
In the mean time the Fleet was ready, and Ten brave Regiments were designed for
this Expedition. The Duke not going in person, Sir Edward Cecil was created
Lord Viscount Wimbleton, and made Commander in Chief.

In the Choice of the Officers for this service, Sir Robert Mansel an
experienced Sea-Commander was neglected, which much disgusted the Mariners.

The Common Censure that passed both upon the Duke and this Enterprise, may be
known by the Lord Cromwels free language to the Duke in this Letter.

Lord Cromwels Letter to the Duke touching the Fleet.
the Fleet goes not this year; And that of necessity shortly a Parliament must
be, which when it comes, sure it will much discontent you. It is wondered at,
that since the King did give such great Gifts to the Duchess of Chevereux, and
those that then went, how now a small Sum in the Parliament should be called
for at such an unseasonable time: And let the Parliament sit when it will,
begin they will where they ended. They say, the Lords of the Council knew
nothing of Count Mansfield's Journey, or this Fleet; which discontents even the
best sort, if not all. They say, it is a Conway. All men say, if you go not
with the Fleet, you will suffer in it: because if it prosper, it will be
thought no act of yours; and if it succeed ill, they say it might have been
better, had not you guided the King.


But whilst the English Fleet was preparing for this Voyage, The Earl of
Warwick secures Langer-Point in Essex.
great Reports were given out, that the Spaniard would land Forces upon the
Coast of Essex. Wherefore the Earl of Warwick was commanded with Three thousand
of the Trained Bands of Essex to secure the Port of Harwich, and Langer-Point;
which service he performed with much readiness: But Dunkirk with Ships
belonging to the English and to the States of the United Provinces, his
Lordship was ordered to dismiss his men.

Presently after, English and Dutch Fleet before Dunkirk dispersed by a storm.
Advertisements came to the Council, That both the English and Dutch Ships
designed to block up Dunkirk, whilst our Fleet was gone to Spain, were
dispersed by a sudden storm; and that Two and twenty Ships of Dunkirk, Men of
War, having Four thousand Land-soldiers, were at liberty to rove up and down
and do mischief at Sea. Hereupon Dunkirkers intended to land their Four
thousand men in Ireland, in case their design failed as to England; Letters
were expedited to the Lord Deputy of Ireland to guard those Seacoasts; for that
it were alike mischievous, if they should land in either Kingdom.

In the beginning of October, the Fleet consisting of Eighty Ships great and
small, the Anne-Royal a Ship of Twelve hundred Tun being Admiral, put forth
from Plymouth for the Coasts of Spain, with these Regiments aboard the Fleet,
according as we find it mentioned in an old List, viz. The Duke of
Buckingham's, The Lord Wimbleton's, Sir William St. Leger's
(Serjeant-Major-General) and Colonel Burrough's Regiments were shipped in the
Admirals Squadron, which carried 2093 Seamen, and 4032 Land-soldiers. The Lord
Valentia's Regiment, The Earl of Essex's, and Colonel Harwood's -- -- were
shipped in the Vice-Admirals Squadron, carrying 1765 Seamen, and 3008
Land-soldiers. The Earl of Essex was Vice Admiral, and commanded this Squadron.
Sir Charles Rich his Regiment, Sir Edward Conway's, and Colonel Regiments were
shipped in the Rear-Admirals Squadron, carrying 1833 Mariners, 2998 Soldiers.


The Fleet, after four days sail, was encountered with a furious storm, which so
dissipated the Ships, that of Fourscore no less then Fifty were Spain, where
they found a Conquest ready, the Spanish Shipping in the Bay of Cadez, the
taking whereof was granted feasible and easy, and would have satisfied the
Voyage both in point of honor and profit: This was either neglected, or
attempted preposterously. Then the Army landed, and Sir John Buroughs took a
Fort from the Spaniard; but the Soldiers finding good store of Spanish Wines,
abused themselves, and hazarded the ruin of all, (had the Enemy known in what
condition they West Indies: But the evil condition of his Men, by reason of a
general Contagion, enforced him to abandon the hopes of this great Prize. So
the English having effected nothing, returned home with dishonor in November
following.

The General examined before the Council.
It gave no small occasion of clamor, That a Fleet so well provided Spain's
Ships pass without fighting them according to Order: They on the other hand

The Soldiers commanded not to disband
Upon the Fleets return to Plymouth in December, and Consideration of the
present use of the Soldiers therein employed, a Proclamation issued forth to
command that no Soldiers of the Fleet should depart from their Colors, or be
discharged of their Service, till the King shall signify his pleasure, how and
when he will use their further Service. So the Forces that returned from Cades
were kept on foot, and dispersed into several parts of the Kingdom.

There was also a strict Commandment, Trade prohibited with Spain.
That no Subject of this Realm of England shall have intercourse of Trade with
any of the Dominions Spain, or the Arch-Dutches of Flanders, upon pain of
Confiscation both of Ships and Goods that shall be found upon Voyage of Trade
into any of the said Dominions. Moreover, in regard of the Subjects apparent
danger, and the encouragement of the Enemies of this State, by putting Ships to
Sea, being weakly manned and ill furnished, the King ordained that none should
set forth any Ship or Pinnace of the burden of Threescore Tuns or upwards,
unless they furnish the same with serviceable Muskets and Bandaliers,
sufficient for the arming of half

Furthermore, Trained Bands exercised.
for the instructing and exercising of the Trained-Bands, as well Officers as
Soldiers, by men experienced in Military Exercises, The King gave Commandment,
that diverse Low Country Soldiers should be assigned to the several Counties,
and that the Trained-Bands should be ready at the times appointed, for their
Direction in their Postures and use of Arms.

London and Westminster, Part of Michaelmas Term adjourned.
and the places near adjoining, the King to prevent a general infection, had
adjourned a part of Michaelmas Term from the Utas thereof, to the Fourth
Return, and afterward to the Fifth, and then the residue of the Term from the
City of Westminster; as also the Receipt of the Revenue from Richmond to the
Town of Reading in Berkshire. The Term at Reading.
In which Term, a Commission issued forth under the Great Seal, for executing
the Laws against Recusants, according to the Petition of the late Parliament,
which was read Reading: Which Commission, together with Pricking of Sir Edward
Cook, Hopes of a Parliament.
and certain other Gentlemen, Sheriffs, who had appeared the last Parliament
against the Duke, and being Sheriffs, could not be chosen Parliament Men, gave
occasion of discourse, and hopes of a new Parliament.

At Hampton Court in December following, this
WHereas Four Articles concerning the Oath used to be taken by the High
Sheriffs of Counties, Sir Edward Cook High Sheriff, his exceptions to the
Sheriffs Oath.
were this day presented unto the Board, unto which Articles Sir Edward Cook
Knight, at this present High Sheriff of the County of Bucks, Did upon tender of
the Oath unto him, take Exceptions, and sent his Exceptions Attorney General,
who by direction of the Board, did attend all the Judges of England, to receive
their Advice thereupon; and the said Judges having advised thereof, did with
one unanimous consent Resolve and so Report to the Lord Keeper, That they found
no cause to alter the said Oath, but only in one of the said Articles
hereafter mentioned. It is thereupon this day Ordered by their Lordships,
according to the unanimous Advice of all the Judges of England, and his
Majesty's pleasure signified therein, That the First Article propounded, viz.
[You shall do all your pain and diligence to destroy and make to cease, all
manner of Heresies and Errors, commonly called Lollaries, within in your
Bayliwick from time to time, to all your power, and assist and be helping to
all Ordinaries and Commissioners of the Holy Church, and favor and maintain
them as oftentimes as you shall be required] shall be left out in the Oath to
be Edward Cook, and shall ever hereafter be left out in all Oaths to be given
to the High Sheriffs of Counties hereafter. And their Lordships do likewise
Order, according to the unanimous Advice of all the Judges of England, That the
other three Articles doubted of, shall stand in the said Oath to be ministered
to the said Sir Edward Cook, and to all other High Sheriffs, as heretofore has
been accustomed; and that the Lord Keeper do* give order to such Officers and
Clerks in the Court of Chancery, to whom it appertained, to

The expectation of a Parliament, gave encouragement to the Bishop of Lincoln
(who yet retained the name of Lord Keeper, The Seal taken from Bishop Will^ams,
sequestered formerly, and given to Sir Thomas Coventry.
notwithstanding his Sequestration several months before from the presence of
the King, the Council Table, and the custody of the Seal) to make an Address to
his Majesty for a favorable interpretation of his actions: But his carriage
Oxford was fresh in memory, where the Bishop told the Duke in Christ-Church,
upon the Dukes rebuking him, for siding against him, That he was engaged with
William Earl of Pembroke, to labor the Redress of the Peoples Grievances, and
was resolved to stand upon his own Legs. If that be your resolution (said the
Duke) Look you stand fast, and so they parted; and shortly after that he was
sequestered, though the Seal was not disposed from him till the Thirtieth of
October; at which time it was given to Sir Thomas Coventry Hampton Court, who
was that day sworn of the Privy Council, and sat there and sealed some Writs,
and afterward came to the Term at Reading, and sat there as Lord Keeper and
heard Causes.

A Parliament Summoned.
The King being pressed with his own Necessities, and the Cry of the Nation
against the Fruitless Voyage of Cadiz, summoned a Parliament to meet in
February; and before the time of meeting, his Majesty enjoined the Archbishops
and Bishops in both Provinces, to proceed against Popish Recusants by
Excommunication, Recusants to be Excommunicated.
and other Censures of

This Command was seconded by a Proclamation, requiring, That all Convicted
Papists should according to the Laws of this Realm, remain

The King resolved to leave Mr. Montague to the Parliament.
Immediately before the Parliament, Bishop Laud procured the Duke of Buckingham
to sound the King concerning the Cause, Books, and Tenets of Mr. Richard
Montague; and understanding by what the Duke collected, That the King had
determined within himself to leave him to a Trial in Parliament, he said, I
seem to see a Cloud arising and threatening the Church of England, God for his
Mercy dissipate it.

About the same time, Preparations for the Kings Coronation.
the King declared his purpose to celebrate the Solemnity of his Coronation on
Candlemas-day at the Palace of Westminster; and required all persons, who by
reason of their Offices and Tenures, were bound to perform any Duties at the
Solemnity, to give England, Sir Thomas Coventry Lord Keeper of the Great Seal,
James Lord Say High Treasurer of England, Edward Earl of Worcester Keeper of
the Privy Seal, Thomas Earl of Arundel and Surrey Earl Marshal of England,
William Earl of Pembroke Lord High Chamberlain, Edward Earl of Dorset, and Sir
Randol Crew Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, were authorized to receive

And the more to credit the Solemnity, the King resolving to make certain of
his Servants and other Subjects, in regard of their Birth, good Service, and
other Qualities, Knights of the Bath, Authorized Thomas Earl of Arundel and
Surrey, and Earl Marshal of England, William Earl of Pembroke Lord Chamberlain,
to perform in his Majesty's Name and behalf, all the Rites and Ceremonies
belonging thereto.

England, A Proclamation for all that have Forty pound per annum to come and
receive the Order of Knighthood.
and Dominions of Wales, commanding them to make Proclamation, That all such as
had Forty pounds a year or more, of Lands or Revenues in their own hands, or
the hands of Feoffees, for their use for the space of Three years, and are not
yet Knights, do at their perils prepare to present themselves in his Majesty's
Presence by the One and thirtieth of January, to receive the Order of
Knighthood.

Upon the asswaging of the great Pestilence, A Thanksgiving for the Plagues
ceasing.
through the Mercy and January, being the Lords day, in the Cities of London
and Westminster, and the places adjacent; and on the Nineteenth of February in
all other places of the Kingdom; the manner and form whereof, was prescribed by
a Book composed by the Bishops according to his Majesty's special Direction.

London from resorting to Fairs for a time, was taken off.

The number of those that died this year within and without the Walls of the
City of London, Number of those who died of the Plague.
and in the Liberties and Nine out Parishes, from the Sixteenth of December 24.
to the Fifteenth of December 25. Was in Total Fifty four thousand two hundred
sixty and five, whereof of the Plague Thirty five thousand four hundred and
seventeen.

Candlemas-day King Charles was Crowned; The Ceremonies at the Kings Coronation.
Bishop Laud had the chief hand in compiling the Form of the Coronation, and
had the honor to perform this Solemnity, instead of the late Lord Keeper
Williams, who (through the Kings disfavor) was sequestered from this Service,
which belonged to his place as he was Dean of Westminster. Mr. John Cosens (as
Master of the Ecclesiastical Ceremonies) kneeled behind the Bishop when the
Prayers were read, and directed the Quire when to answer. The Ceremony in going
to, and all the Coronation, was briefly thus.

THe King went that day from Westminster Hall to the Abbey Church, attended by
the Aldermen of London, Eighty Knights of the Bath in their Robes, the Kings
Sergeants at Law, Solicitor and Attorney Generals, the Judges, Barons, Bishops,
Viscounts, and such of the Earls (who bore no particular Office that day) in
their Parliament Robes, going two London carried the short Scepter; two Bishops
carried, the one the Golden Cup, and the other the Plate for the Communion.
Next before his Majesty went the Earl of Arundel as Earl-Marshal of England,
and the Duke of Buckingham as Lord High-Constable of England for that day. The
King being clothed in White Satin, went under a rich Canopy, supported by the
Barons of the Cinque Laud delivered into the Kings hands the Staff of King
Edward the Confessor, with which the King walked up to the Throne; then the
Archbishop of Canterbury presented his Majesty to the Lords and Commons there
present, East, West, North, and South, who gave their consent to his
Coronation, as their lawful Sovereign. After Sermon was done, the King went to
the Altar Old Crucifix amongst other Regalia stood; as also the Ointment
consecrated by a Bishop) to take the Coronation Oath, which (as is said) was
performed in this manner, viz.

Archbish. P.P.
SIS (says the Archbishop) will You grant and keep, and by Your Oath confirm to
the People of England, the Laws and Customs to them granted by the Kings of
England, Your Lawful and Religious Predecessors, and namely the Laws, Customs,
and Franchises, St. Edward Your Predecessor, according to the laws of God, the
true Profession of the Gospel established in this Kingdom, agreeable to the
Prerogative of the Kings thereof, and the Ancient Customs of the Realm?

The Kings Answer.
I grant and Promise to keep them.

Sir, will You keep Peace and Godly Agreement (according to Your Power) both to
God, the Holy Church, the Clergy and the People?

I will keep it.

Sir, will You (to Your Power) cause Law, Justice, and Discretion to Mercy and
Truth, to be executed to Your Judgment?

I will.

Sir, will You grant to hold and keep the Laws and Rightful Customs which the
Communalty of this Your Kingdom have; and will You defend and uphold them to
the honor of God, so much as in you lies?

I grant and promise so to do.

Then one of the Bishops read this Passage to the King.

Our Lord and King, we beseech You to Pardon, and to Grant, and to Preserve
unto us, and to the Churches committed to Your Charge, all Canonical
Privileges, and do Law and Justice; and that You would Protect and Defend us,
as every good King to His Kingdoms ought to be Protector and Defender of the
Bishops, and the Churches under their Government.

The King answers.

With a willing and devout Heart I promise, and grant my Pardon; and that I
will preserve and maintain to you, and the Churches committed

Then the King arose and was lead to the Communion Table, where he takes a
Solemn Oath in sight of all the People, to observe all the Premises, and
laying his hand upon the Bible, said,

The things which I have here promised, I shall perform and keep. So help me
God, and the Contents of this Book.

After the Oath, the King was placed in the Chair of Coronation, and was
Anointed by the Archbishop with a costly Ointment, and the Ancient Robes of
King Edward the Confessor was put upon him, and the Crown of King Edward was
put upon his Head, and his Sword girt about

[ Stand and hold fast from henceforth the place, to which You have been Heir
by the Succession of Your Forefathers, being now delivered to You by the
Authority of Almighty God, and by the hands of us, and all the Bishops and
Servants of God: And as You see the Clergy to come nearer to the Altar then ]

Afterward the Nobility were sw^rn to be Homagers to the King, and some other
Ceremonies were performed; which being done, the Lord Keeper by the Kings
command read a writing unto them, which declared the Kings free Pardon to all
his Subjects who would take the

The Ceremonies of the Coronation being ended, the Regalia were offered at the
Altar by Bishop Laud in the Kings Name, and then reposited.

The Bishop of Lincoln fallen into disgrace by the displeasure of the Duke of
Buckingham, had not received his Writ of Summons which he represented to the
King with Submission to his Majesty's pleasure Also, that in his absence in
this Parliament, no use might be made of his Majesty's Sacred Name to wound the
Reputation of a poor Bishop, who besides his Religion and Duty to that Divine
Character which his Majesty bears, has affectionately honored his very
person above all Objects in this World, as he desired the Salvation of the
World to come: And he craveth no Protection against any other Accuser or
Accusation whatsoever.

A Second Parliament meets.
On Monday the Sixth of February, began the Second Parliament of

The King being placed in his Royal Throne, the Lords in their Robes, and the
Commons below the Bar, it pleased his Majesty to refer them to the Lord Keeper
for what he had to say.

The Lord Keepers Speech.
My Lords,
The Lord Keepers Speech.
ANd you the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons, you are
here assembled by his Majesty's Writs and Royal Authority to hold a new
Parliament, the general Ancient and Powerful Council of this Renowned Kingdom;
whereof if we consider aright, and think of that incomparable distance between
the Supreme height and majesty of a Mighty Monarch, and the submissive Major or
Melior, a greater King, or a better Man; and of whom you have had so much trial
and experience, That he does as affectionately love, as he does exactly know
and understand the true use of Parliaments; witness his daily and unwearied
Access to this House, before his Access to the Crown; his gracious readiness to
all Conferences of Importance; his frequent and effectual Intercession to his
Blessed Father of never dying Memory, for the with his Privy Council, was
resolved to meet his People in Parliament: And no sooner did the heavy hand of
that Destroying Angel forbear those deadly strokes, which for some time did
make this place inaccessible, but his Majesty presently resolved to recall it,
and has now brought you together, and in a happy time, I trust, to treat and
consult with uniform Desires and united Affections, of those things that
concern the general good.



This is the sum of that charge which I have received from his Majesty to
deliver unto you, wherein you see his Majesty's intent to the Public: And
therefore his desire is, That according to that convenience of time which his
Affairs may afford, you will apply your selves to dispatch the business of this
Parliament.

The Wednesday following the Commons presented Sir Hennage Finch Knight, Sir
Hennage Finch chosen Speaker.
Sergeant at Law and Recorder of London, for their Speaker; who having made the
accustomed Excuses, and acknowledged his Majesty's Approbation, made this
Speech.

His Speech.
SInce it has pleased your Majesty not to admit my humble Excuse,

If we behold the frame and the face of the Government in general, we live
under a Monarchy, the best of Governments, the nearest resemblance unto the
Divine Majesty which the Earth affords, the most Primam Materiam. The Laws by
which we are governed, are above any value my words can set upon them; time
has refined and approved them; they are equal at least to any Laws Humane, and
so curiously framed and fitted, that as we live under a temperate climate, so
the Laws are temperate, yielding a due observance to the Prerogative Royal, and
yet preserving the Right and Liberty of the Subject; Tacitus says of two of
the best Emperors, Res olim insociabiles miscuerunt, imperium and libertas, and
so far is this from the least diminution of Sovereigns, that in this your
Majesty is truly styled Pater Patriae, and the greatest King in the World, that
is King of such and so many Freeborn Subjects, whose persons you have not
only power over, but, which is above the greatest of Kings, to command their
hearts. If time or corruption of manners breed any Mists or Grievance, or
discover any defects in the Law, they are soon reformed some of a greater, some
of a lesser magnitude, full of light and beauty, and acknowledging to whom they
owe their luster; and by a choice number of worthy Knights and Gentlemen that
represent the whole body of your Commons. But to leave generals; We live not
under a Monarchy only the best of Goverments, and under a Government the best
of Monarchies, but under a King the best of Monarchs. Your Royal Person, and
those eminent graces and virtues which are inherent in your Spain, Public
Humiliation when Gods hand lay heavy upon us, and the late Public Thanksgiving
to Almighty God for removing his hand, both commanded and performed in person
by your Majesty, is a work in piety not to be forgotten, and I trust the Lord
will remember them and reward Quod faciunt, praecipiunt: Of your Majesty both
are true, and a Proposition made convertible. We have received a most gracious
Answer from your Majesty to all our late Petitions concerning Religion,
seconded with a Public Declaration under the Great Seal, and Enrolled in all
the Courts of Justice, for your Royal pleasure and memory will never die; and
that horrible matchless Conspiracy, the Powder Treason, the Masterpiece of
the Devil. But God that preserved her and your Royal Father against all their
treacherous Conspiracies, and has given you a heart to honor him, will honor
and preserve you: Religion will more truly keep your Kingdoms, then the Seas do
compass them: It is the joy of heart to your Majesty's loyal and well-affected
Subjects, and will ever be the honor of your Regal Diadem, and the Crown of
your Crown. The Spanish Invasion in Eighty Eight I hope England, with thankful
acknowledgment to God for so great a deliverance: And I assura my self it is
remembered in Spain, but with another mind, a mind of Revenge; they are too
constant to their Counsels, to acquit their Resolutions and Purposes that drew
on that Attempt. It was long before discovered, and since printed not without
their liking, That they affect an Universal Monarchy. Videor mihi vidore (says
Lipsius of their State) Solemn orientem ab Occidente; a Monster in Nature. And
one of their own, speaking of Luminare majus presidens urbi and orbi; and the
King of Spain, Luminare minus ut subdatur urbi and dominetur per totum orbem: A
great flattery, and a bold and impudent elusion. But I trust, as God has put
it into the heart of your blessed Father, by that matchless Book of his written
to all Christian Monarchs and Princes, (a Work by which he raised a Monument to
himself more lasting then Marble) to denounce War to that Adversary of God and
Kings, the Pope; so he has set Spain, to reduce it to their proper current and
channel; who under the title of Catholic King, makes his pretense to more
Countries and Kingdoms then his own; and by color of disguised Treaties he
invades the Palatinate, and dispossesseth that Incomparable Lady your Royal
Sister, and the Children of this Kingdom, of their right and their ancient
Patrimony Amen.

But I may weary your Majesty, and lose my self, and forget for whom I am a
Speaker. Custom gives me the privilege as an humble Suitor on the behalf of
the House, to present their few Petitions unto your Majesty.

1. The first, That for our better attending this Public and important
service, our selves and our necessary Attendants may with your Majesty's tender
allowance be free both in our persons and goods from Arrests and troubles,
according to our ancient Privileges.

2. The next; That since for the preparing and drawing to conclusion such
Propositions as shall be handled in the House, Debate and Dispute will be
necessary, and by variety of opinions Truth is oftentimes best discerned, your
Majesty will likewise according to your ancient usage

3. That when occasions of moment shall require, your Majesty upon our humble
suit, and at such times as may best sort with your occasions, will vouchsafe us
access to your Royal person.

4. That the Proceedings of the House may receive a favorable Interpretation at
your gracious hands, and be free from misconstructions.

The Houses began their work with rendering thanks to the King for his gracious
Answer to their late Petition for Religion.

An Act was tendered and read, To administer an Oath for the rendering

The Commons further fell into Examination of the Public Grieveances,
Grievances taken into consideration.
and the Carriage, or rather Miscarriage of the Fleet to Cadiz; The Evil
Counselors about the King; Misgovernment and Misimployment of the Kings
Revenue; An Account of the Subsidies and Three Iacobi; And resolved of a
Committee for secret Affairs, and another for Grievances, to sit every Friday
and Wednesday during the Parliament. And Mr. Whitby was commanded to the Chair
for the Committee for Grievances; where were delivered these ensuing
Consultations.

I. [ The State of the King in the Constant Revenue of the Crown. Grievances
laid open.
]

1. What it was, and how for the Introitus and Exitus they are

2. What now it is, either in clear, or by Lands, by Customs and Impositions,
or by Casualties.

3. The means how it is abated, By gifts of Lands ex mero motu, and no valuable
consideration, and this may be revoked.

By grants of Pensions, now 120000 l. before but 80000 l. Good Times have
resumed them, or contracted them upon Necessity.

By increase of Household from 45000 l. to 80000 l. the Purveyors

By fruitless Ambassadors, with larger allowance then formerly: To reduce them
to the Ordinary of the late Queen.

By treble increase of the Privy-Purse.

By double increase of the Treasury of the Chamber and Great Wardrobe.

In all by not using the best course of Assignments, whereby the Creditors are
delayed in the payment, and the King surcharged in the price;

II. [ The Condition of the Subject in his Freedom.]

1. Formerly in Taxes by Parliaments, as by Subsidies and Fifteens, spent only
on Defense of the State, or Aid of our Allies; by Tonage and Poundage, employed
in Guard of the Seas; Loans rarely, and those employed entirely for the
Public; Imposition by Prerogative of old Customs, rated easily by the Book of
Rates, if any, either limited to

2. New Impositions and Monopolies multiplied, and settled to continue by
Grants, Customs Inhannced by the new Book of Rates.

Tonage and Poundage levied, though no Act of Parliament, nor Seas guarded; the
Times, the Ways, and the Persons that induce these.

3. The Imploiment or Waste of the Treasure: What Sums have been granted for
the Defense of the State, the last Three years; How in particular spent, and
where; By what Advice, as by the direction of the Council of War appointed by
Parliament, by full Order of the Council, by any other then those, and by whom.

First, Public Treasury is to be examined.

Secondly, The Kings Subjects, how many, and when transported and employed as
to the Palatinate, Count Mansfields Land-soldiers in the

Thirdly, In Ships and Munition our own, The Number and Quantity employed
severally; the Number imbarqued in those Ships; and what prejudice and
discouragement of Trade; the Council that directed such Imploiments; the
several success, as at Algier and Cadiz. Strangers, and those Ships either of
Allies or Enemies: Allies hired by Contract to France and Germany, whereby our
Merchants are at a stand; The number and true value of the Goods, the Account
thereof made to his Majesty or his Officers; the dismissing and discharging any
of them, or the Goods, viz. by whom, the Directions, the Pretense, the Value of
the Goods, the Place whither they went.

Honor of the King; which, as in all other things, consists in what formerly
has been done: How formerly we stood a Nation feared, renowned, victorious: We
made the Netherlands a State, when they were none; Recovered Henry the Fourth
of France his Kingdom, when he had nothing left but the Town of Diep; Conquered
the Invincible Navy of Spain, in Anno 1588. Took Towns in Portugal the Year
following, and marched One hundred miles upon the Firm ground; Fired or brought
away the Spanish Navy before Cadiz, and sacked the Town, took the West Indies,
never losing but one ship during the Spanish War; reducing the Condition of
that King from a Fifth Monarchy to so low an Ebb, that in one Year he paid Two
thousand five hundred Millions of Ducats for Interest; so as after he was
enforced to beg Treaties of Peace and low Terms at the last Queen-Regents hands.

III. [ The Cause of the good Success then.]

A Carriage and readiness to assist their Sovereign in purse and person; A
Wisdom and Gravity of Council, who ordered nothing but by public Debate, and
then assisted with the Military Professors either by Land or Sea of the best
repute, and such only employed.

IV. [ In what Condition we now stand.]

By the loss of Reputation, by the ill success in the Voyage for Algier, in the
Palatinate, in the Expedition with Mansfield, in the last Cadiz.

The Reasons are,

The uncheerfulness we have either to adventure our purses or persons,
occasioned by a distrust we have of the success, the want of the like Courses
and Councils that were formerly used.

It was wished, that for every of the Four Heads there were a particular
Committee to examine and prepare a Report for the Houses; and the House upon
every Report to put it self into a Committee of the whole Assembly, and after a
full and deliberate Debate, to order a Model or Form for a Conference with the
Lords, and so together humbly to present to his Majesty a Remonstrance of their
Labor; offering withal a second Consultation and Debate amongst themselves for
finding out the

Also a Committee was named concerning Religion, and the Growth o^ Popery; and
Montague's [Appeal to Caesar] was again brought in

This Book the Commons referred to the Committee for Religion, from whom Mr.
Pym Reported to the House the several Erroneous Op^nions therein contained; and
the House passed their Votes thereupon, That Mr. Montague endeavored to
reconcile England to Rome, and to alienate the Kings affections from his
well-affected Subjects.

The Articles exhibited against him were these.

Richard Montague Clerk.
THat he the said Richard Montague, Articles against Mr Montague.
in or about the 21. year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lord King James of
famous memory, has caused to be Printed, and in his name to be Published, one
Book called, An Answer to the late Gagg of Protestants; and in or about Anno
22. A Treatise of the Invocations of Saints; and likewise in the First year of
his Majesty's Reign that now is, he procured to be Printed, and in his name to
be Published another Book, Entitled, An Appeal to Caesar: In every of which
Books he has maintained and confirmed some Doctrine contrary or repugnant to
the Articles agreed by the Archbishops and Bishops of both Provinces, and the
whole Clergy, holden in the Convocation at London, Anno Domini 1562. according
to England, for avoiding Diversity of Opinions, and for establishing Consent
touching true Religion: All which appears in the places hereafter mentioned;
and in diverse other places and passages of the same Books; And by his so doing
has broken the Laws and Statutes of this Realm in that Case provided, and very
much disturbed both the Peace of Church and Commonwealth.

I. Whereas in the Five and thirtieth Article of the Articles aforementioned,
Rome, as it is at present, and has been for the space of Nine hundred years
and odd, is so far wide from the nature of a True Church, that nothing can be
more: He, the said Richard Montague, in several places of his said Book,
called, The Answer to the Gagg, and in his other Book, called, The Appeal, does
advisedly maintain and affirm, That the Church of Rome is and ever was a True
Church since it was a Church.

II. Whereas in the same Homily it is likewise declared, That the Church of
Rome is not built upon the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles; and in the
Eight and twentieth Article of the said Articles, That Transubstantiation
overthrows the nature of a Sacrament; and Rome, are not to be accounted
Sacraments; yet contrary and repugnant hereunto, he, the said Richard Montague,
does maintain and affirm in his Book aforesaid, called, The Answer to the Gagg,
That the Church of Rome has ever remained firm upon the same Foundation of
Sacraments and Doctrine instituted by God.

III. In the nineteenth of the same Article, it is further determined, Rome
has erred, not only in their living and matters of Ceremony; but also in
matters of Faith. He the said Richard Montague, speaking of those Points which
belong to Faith and good manners, Hope and Charity, does in the said Book,
called, The Gagg, affirm and maintain, That none of these are controverted in
their Points, meaning the Protestants and Papists; and notwithstanding that in
the One and thirtieth Article, it is resolved, That the Sacrifice of Masses, in
which, as it is commonly said, the Priest did offer Christ for the Quick
England and the Church of Rome. The said Richard Montague in his Book, called
The Gagg, does affirm and maintain, That the controverted Points are of a
lesser and inferior nature, of which a man may be ignorant without any danger
of his Soul at all, a man may resolve to oppose this or that without peril of
perishing for ever.

IV. Whereas in the second Homily, Entitled, Against Peril of Idolatry,
contained in the aforesaid Book of Homilies, approved by the Seven and
thirtieth mrticle aforementioned; It is declared, That Images teach no good
Lesson, neither of God nor Godliness, but all Error and Wickedness: He the said
Richard Montague, in the Book of Gagg aforesaid, does affirm and maintain, That
Images may be used for the instruction of the Ignorant, and excitation of
Devotion.

V. That in the same Homily it is plainly expressed, That the attributing the
defense of certain Countries to Saints, is a spoiling God of his honor, and
that such Saints are but Dii tutelares of the Gentiles Idolators: The said
Richard Montague has notwithstanding in his said Book, Entitled, A Treatise
concerning the Invocation of Saints, affirmed and maintained, That Saints have
not only a Memory, but a more peculiar Charge of their Friends; and that it
may be admitted, That some Saints have a chosen in Christ out of mankind, and
to bring them by Christ to everlasting Salvation; wherefore they which be
endued with so excellent a benefit of God, be called according to Gods purpose,
working in due season, they through Grace obey the Calling, they be justified
freely, walk Religiously in good works, and at length by Gods mercy attain to
everlasting felicity: He, the said Richard Montague, in the said Book, called
The Appeal, does maintain and affirm, That men justified may fall The Appeal,
endeavoring thereby to lay a most wicked and malicious England, as if he did
herein differ from the Reformed Churches of England, and from the Reformed
Churches beyond the Seas, and did consent to those pernicious Errors, which are
commonly called Arminianism, and which the late famous Queen Elizabeth, and
King James of happy memory, did so piously and diligently labor to suppress.

That the said Richard Montague, contrary to his Duty and Allegiance has
endeavored to raise great Factions and Divisions in this Commonwealth, Puritans
upon such his Majesty's loving Subjects as conform themselves to the Doctrine
and Ceremony of the Church of England, under that name laying upon them diverse
false and malicious Imputations, so to bring them into jealousy and
displeasure with his most Excellent Majesty, and into reproach and ignominy
with the rest of the people, to the great danger of Sedition and Disturbance in
the State, if it be not timely prevented.

That the Scope and end of the said Richard Montague in the Books Rome; All
which he laboreth by subtle and cunning ways, whereby Gods True Religion has
been much scandalized, those Mischiefs introduced which the wisdom of many Laws
has endeavored to prevent, the Devices and Practices of his Majesty's Enemies
have been furthered and advanced, to the great peril and hazard of our
Sovereign Lord the King, and of all his

That the said Richard Montague has inserted into the said Book, called The
Appeal, diverse passages dishonorable to the late King, his Majesty's Father of
famous memory, full of bitterness, railing and injurious Speeches to other
persons, disgraceful and contemptible to many worthy Divines both of this
Kingdom, and of other Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, impious and profane in
scoffing at preaching, meditating and conferring, Pulpits, Lectures, Bible, and
all show of Religion; all which England, and of other his Majesty's Realms and
Dominions. The Commons assembled in Parliament, do hereby pray, That the said
Richard Montague may be punished according to his Demerits, in such exemplary
manner, as may deter others from attempting so presumptuously to disturb the
Peace of Church and State, and that the Book aforesaid, may be suppressed and
Burnt.

Whether an Answer was made to these Articles by Mr Montague, we cannot tell,
for upon search we can find none.

People prohibited for going to Mass at Ambassadors Houses.
About the same time his Majesty being informed that there was great
Durham-house in the Lodgings of a Foraign Ambassodor; the Privy Council taking
notice thereof, and accounting it scandalous to this Church, and of ill example
to be suffered at any time, but much more in this time of Parliament, required
the Bishop of Durham to apprehend such of his Majesty's Subjects as should be
present at the Mass, and to commit them to Prison.

There was also a Letter sent from the Attorney General to the

The Atturney's Letter to the Judges concerning Recusants.
THat their Lordships will not omit to publish the Kings Gracious and Religious
Determination, to go on really and constantly in this way, and that out of his
bounty and goodness he has published his Resolution under the Great Seal of
England, That whatsoever Revenue or Benefit shall arise hereby, from Purses of
Popish Recusants, shall be set apart from his own Treasure, and be

2. That their Lordships will be pleased at their first coming into every
County within their Circuit, to command the Clerk of Assise, and Clerk of the
Peace, to be careful for the Indictment of Popish Recusants, without respect
of Persons, of what Degree of Honor or Office soever; and that they neither
make, nor suffer to be made any omission, or mistaking in their Indictment, or
viz. the Attorney) a note in writing, who stand indicted of new, and that they
fail not to certify the Recusants convicted into the Exchequer by that time.

That at their Lordships first coming into the County they call the Justices of
Peace then present, and the Grand-Iury men to give their Lordships true
Information of the Recusants of any Note or Name in that Country; and that
thereupon their Lordships will be pleased to take care that the Grand-Iury men,

3, That there be special care taken of Schoolmasters and Teachers of any
kind, who are Popish, that they be presented and proceeded against.

4. That their Lordships give knowledge to the Counties where they sit, that 10
l. a month, and that it must be executed.

Your Lordships ready to be commanded, ROB. HEATH.
Inner Temple, Mar. 7. 1625.

The Commons proceeded in the Examination of Grievances, and had a Report made
unto them, That the reason wherefore our Merchants Ships and Goods were seized
in France, was by reason of Sir James Bagg, Vice Admiral for Cornwall, and other
men's dealings toward the French in seizing upon their goods in several Ports
in England, and particularly the seizing of the Ship called the Peter of
New Haven, and brought into Plymouth by order from the Lord Francis Steward
delivered to the Lord Duke; the Duke having notice hereof, said, he would
justify the stay of the Ship by order from the King.

Palatinate, The Council of War for the Palatinate, questioned in the House of
Commons.
were called into the House of Commons, and this Question was propounded unto
them; Whether their Advice was followed which they gave for the four Ends
mentioned in the Act of Parliament 21 Iacobi, for which the moneys given by
that Act were to issue? Lord Carey Earl of Totnes, and Lord Brook desired to be
excused from answering; the Lord Vere said, He had been much absent in the
Low Countries, and could say little; Grandison said, that since July last they
had seldom met; Sir Robert Mansel, and Sir John Oil desired a Copy of the
Question, and that they might all confer together before they gave Answer to a
Question of this Concernment: Afterward the same persons (except the Lord
Vere) were called in again, who gave unsatisfactory answers, when they were
pressed to deal clearly and fully in the business; It was answered by some of
them, That they conceived by the Act of Parliament they were bound to make
Robert Mansel declared his readiness to give a clear and full Account.

While matters were thus debated, Mr Secretary Cook delivered a Message from
the King to the Commons, declaring his Majesty's occasion for Supply.

The Earl of Pembroke at a Conference presses Supply.
desired with the Commons; where William Earl of Pembrook represented the
Affairs of Christendom, how they stood before the breach of the Treaties with
Spain, and how at that present; showing, That the condition of the Palatinate
was nothing bettered; That Count Mansfiels Army was raised for the diversion of
the League Catholic in Germany; That the King of Denmark had thereupon engaged
himself to stand or fall in this Quarrel, in case of Supplies; That the Swedes
were

The Commons not thinking fit to take into consideration the matter of Supply
at present, call for a Report from the Committee appointed to consider of the
Causes and Remedies of Evils, Reports from the Committee concerning Evils and
Remedies.
which being made by Mr Wandesford; it was resolved, That the Diminution of the
Kingdom in strength and honor, is a general Evil which we suffer under; a
second, the increase and countenancing of Papists; a third, the not guarding of
the narrow Seas; a fourth, Plurality of Offices in one hand; a fifth, sales of
Honors and places of Judicature; a sixth, delivery etc. And they further
ordered, That the Duke whom these Misdemenors especially reflected on, have
notice that the Commons House intend suddenly to resume the debate of these
things, and Mr Clement Cook said openly, That it were better to die by an
Enemy, then to suffer at home.

A Committee of the Lords House, to consider of the safety of the Kingdom;
The Lords at that time, more readily complying with the Kings desires,
appointed a Committee to consider of the safety and defense of

The Committee of Lords made haste and reported their advice to the House,
comunicated to the Commons.
That one Fleet be presently set to Sea against the King of Spain to annoy him,
and to prevent the Invasion of this Kingdom: That another be set out to defend
our own Coasts, and the Merchants Denmark and Count Mansfield; but the House
would give no opinion thereupon, till they had Conference with the House of
Commons, which was desired upon this occasion.

Not well resented.
To which Message the Commons only returned this Answer, That they desire to
have a good correspondency with their Lordships, and will be ever careful of
the safety and defense of the Kingdom, and maintain their own privileges, as
is fitting, and immediately proceed with the debate Richard Weston touching
Supply.

King Charles to the Speaker.
Trusty and Welbeloved, etc.
The Kings Letter to the Speaker.
HAving assembled the Parliament early in the beginning of the year, for the
more timely help and advice of our People in our great and important Affairs;
and having of late, not only by Message, but also of our self, put our House
of Commons in mind of our pressing occasions, and of the present Estate of
Christendom, wherein they have equal interest with us, as well in respect of
their own former engagements, as of the common Cause; we shall not need to tell
them with what care and patience we have in the and their promises; wherein, as
we press for nothing beyond the present state and condition of our Subjects, so
we accept no less then is proportionable to the greatness and goodness of the
Cause; neither do we press them to a present Resolution in this, with a purpose
to precipitate their Counsels, much less to enter upon their Privileges, but
to show, that it is unfit to depend any longer upon uncertainties; whereby the
whole weight of the Affairs of Christendom may break in upon us upon the
sudden, to our dishonor and the


The Heads of Sir Richard Westons Message for drawing a more speedy resolution
from the House, besides that formerly understood concerning the King of
Denmark, Count Mansfield and his Majesty's Army in the Low Countries, were
these.

I. THat his Majesty's Fleet being returned, Sir Richard Westons Message.
and the victuals spent, the men must of necessity be discharged, and their
wages paid, or else an assured mutiny will follow, which may be many ways
dangerous at this time.

II. That his Majesty has made ready about forty ships to be set

III. That the Army which is appointed in every Coast must presently be
disbanded, if they be not presently supplied with victuals and clothes.

IV. That if the Companies of Ireland lately sent thither be not

V. That the season of providing healthful victuals will be past if this
Month be neglected.

And therefore his Majesty commanded me to tell you, that he desired to know
without futher delaying of time, what supply you will give him for these his
present occasions, that he may accordingly frame

Which Message produced this Answer from the Commons.

Most gracious Sovereign,
The Commons Answer to the Kings Message by Sir Richard Weston.
YOur Majesty's Dutiful and Loyal Subjects the Commons now assembled in
Parliament, in all humility present unto your Royal wisdom this their Loyal
Answer to the Message which your Majesty was pleased by the Chancellor of your
Exchequer to send unto them, desiring to know without any further deferring of
time, what Supply

They therefore, in confidence and full assurance of Redress therein, do with
one consent propose (though in former time such Course has been unused) that
they really intend to assist and supply your Majesty in such a way, and in so
ample a measure, as may make you safe at home, and feared abroad; for the
dispatch whereof they will use such diligence, as your Majesty's pressing and
present occasions shall require.


His Majesty makes this Reply to the Commons Answer.

Mr Speaker,
The Kings Reply.
THe Answer of the Commons delivered by you, I like well of, and do take it for
a full and satisfactory Answer, and I thank them for it, and I hope you will
with all Expedition take a Course for performance thereof, the which will turn
to your own good redress Grievances, and not to enquire after Grievances. I
must let you know, that I will not allow any of my Servants to be questioned
amongst you; much less such as are of eminent place, and near unto me: The old
question was, What shall be? but now it has been the labor of some, to seek
what may be done against him whom the King thinks fit to honor. I see you
specially aim at the Duke of Buckingham; I wonder what has so altered your
affections toward him; I do well remember that in the last Parliament in my
Fathers time, when he was an Instrument to break the Treaties, all of you (and
yet I cannot say all, for I know some of you are changed, but yet the House of
Commons is always the same) did so much honor and respect him, that all the
honor conferred on him was too little; and what he has done since to alter or
change your minds, I wot not; but can assure you, he has not meddled, or done
any thing concerning the Public or Commonwealth, but by special directions and
appointment, and as

Afterward the Commons fell upon the Duke, as the chief Cause of all Public
Miscarriages. Doctor Turner a Physician propounded in the House these
Questions, which were then commonly called Queries against Buckingham, and were
grounded upon Public Fame.

1. Whether the Duke being Admiral, Doctor Turners Queries against the Duke.
be not the Cause of the loss of the Kings Royalty in the Narrow-Seas? 2.
Whether the unreasonable, exorbitant and immense Gifts of Money and Lands
bestowed on the Duke and his Kindred, be not the Cause of impairing the Kings
Revenue, and impoverishing of the Crown? 3. Whether the Multiplicity of Offices
conferred upon the Duke and others 4. Whether Recusants in general, by a kind
of Connivencie, be not borne out and increased by reason of the Dukes Mother
and Father-in-law, being known Papists. 5. Whether the Sale of Honors, Offices,
and Places of Judicature and Ecclesiastical Livings and Promotions, (a scandal
and hurt to the Kingdom) be not through the Duke? Whether the Dukes staying at
home, being Admiral and General in the Fleet of the Sea, and Land-Army, were
not the Cause of the bad success and overthrow of that Action; And whether he
did give good direction for that Design? (All these are famed to be so.)
Hereupon two Questions were moved in Parliament.

1. Whether the Six Heads delivered by Doctor Turner to be the Cause of the
Evils that were grounded upon Common Fame, be to be debated in Parliament? 2.
Whether an Accusation upon Common Fame by a Member of this House, be a
Parliamentary way?
It was declared by Sir Tho. Wentworth, Mr. Noy, and other Lawyers in the
Debate, That there was a difference between Common Fame and Rumor: For the
General voice (Vox populi) is Common Fame: And if Common Fame might not be
admitted as an Accuser, Great men would be the only safe men; for no Private
person dare adventure

So the House came to this Resolution; That Common Fame is a good ground of
Proceeding for this House, either by Enquiry, or presenting the Complaint (if
the House finds cause) to the King or Lords.

The Commons the next day proceeding in that Debate, Sir Richard Weston
delivered to the House this Message from his Majesty.

Another Message from the King by Sir Richard Weston.
THat his Majesty had taken notice of a seditious Speech uttered in the House by
Mr. Clement Cook: The words are said to be to this effect; That it were better
to die by an Enemy, then to suffer at home. Yet his Majesty in his wisdom has
forborne to take any course therein, or to send to the House about it, not
doubting but the House Turner; who on Saturday last, without any ground of
knowledge in himself, or Proof tendered to the House, made an Enquiry of sundry
Articles against the Duke of Buckingham, as he pretended, but indeed against
the Honor and Government of the King and his late Father. This his Majesty
says is such an Example, that he can by no means


Dr. Turners Explanation.
Upon this Message, Doctor Turner made a short Explanation of himself, desiring
to know wherewith he was charged: What he said, he said the House can witness;
and what he said, he spoke for the general good of the Commonwealth, and not
upon the least reflection of any in particular. This he thought a Parliamentary
way warranted by ancient Presidents. To accuse upon Common Fame, he finds
warranted first by the Suffolk in the time of King H. 6. who was accused upon
Fame. And lastly (he said) Mr. Chancellor himself did present the Common
Undertakers upon Particular Fame; and why he should not have as ample
privilege in this place, he knew no reason to the contrary.

The Commons having appointed another day for the Debate of this Business, in
the mean time came this Letter from Doctor Turner to the Speaker.

SIR,
Dr. Turners Letter to the Speaker.
THese Lines first Petition you to signify to the Honorable House of Commons,
That my desires are still the same to have made my personal appearance before
you, but my ability and strength to perform it are Vox populi) I chose out some
few, not because they were greater, or more known Grievances, but because they
did seem to direct us to find out the Griever, or the first Cause: For I did
think it was then full time to agree the Agent and the Actions, and that it was
time also to leave considering Grievances in Arbitration. I do now also agree
unto you that which has been reported unto you by Mr. Wandesford; and by that,
if you shall think sit, will put my self unto your Censure: hoping and assuring
my self, that you will find my design to include nothing else within it but
duty

Your dutiful and humble Servant, SAMUEL TURNER.
To the Honorable Sir Henage Finch, Speaker of the House of Commons.

The Monday following, Sir W. Walters opinion of the Cause of Grievances.
Sir W. Walter (if the Name be not miswritten in our Collections) represented
to the House, That the Cause of all the Lewis the Eleventh King of France) All
the Kings Council rides upon one horse. And therefore the Parliament was to
advise his Majesty, as Iethro did Moses, to take unto him Assistants with these
qualities.

1. Noble from among all the People; not Upstarts, and of a Nights growth. 2.
Men of Courage; such as will execute their own Places, and not commit them to
base and undeserving Deputies. Fearing God; who halt not betwixt two opinions,
or incline to False worship in respect of a Mother, Wife or Father. 4. Dealing
truly; for Courtship, Flattery and Pretense become not Kings Counselors, but
they must be such as the King and Kingdom may trust. 5. Hating Covetousness; No
Bribers nor Sellers of Places in Church or Commonwealth, much less Honors and
Places about the King, and least of all such as live upon other men's ruins.
many, set over Thousands, Hundreds, Fifties and Tens, (one Man not engrossing
all.) Where there is abundance of Counsel, there is Peace and Safety. 7. They
must judge of small matters; the greater must go to the King himself, not all
to the Council, much less any one Counselor must alone manage the whole
weight, but Royal actions must be done only by the King. 8. Lastly, Moses chose
them Elders, not Young men* Solomon by
Sir John Elliot continued the Debate, and thus spoke.

Sir John Eliot pursues the Argument against the Duke.
WE have had (says he) a representation of great fear, but I hope that shall not
darken our understandings. There are but two things considerable in this
business: First, the Occasion of our Meeting; and secondly, the present State
of our own Country. The first of these we all know, and it has at large been
made known unto us, and therefore needs no dispute. The latter of these we
ought to make known, and draw and show it as in a Perspective in this House:
Mansfield's Actions were so miserable, and the going out of those men so ill
managed, as we are scarce able to say they went out. That handful of men sent
to the Palatinate, and not seconded, what a loss was it to all Germany? We know
well who had then the Kings ear. I could speak of the Action of Algier, Vendere
jure potest, emerat ille prius. Tully in an Oration against Verres notes, That
the Nations were Suitors to the Senate of Rome, that the Law De pecuniis
repetundis might be recalled: Which seems strange, that those that were Suitors
for the Law, should seek again to repeal it; but the reason was, it was
perverted to their ill. So it is now with us; besides inferior and subordinate
persons that must have

I shall to our present Case cite two Presidents. The first is 16 H. 3. The
Treasure was then much exhausted, many Disorders complained on, the King
wronged by some Ministers; many Subsidies were then demanded in Parliament, but
they were denied: And then the Lords and Commons joined to desire the King to
reassume the Lands which were improvidently granted, and to examine his great
Officers, and the Causes of those Evils which the People then suffered. This
was yielded Hugo de Burgo was found faulty and was displaced, and then the
Commons in the same Parliament gave Supply. The second President was in the
Tenth year of Richard the Second: Then the Times were such, and Places so
changeable, that any great Officer could hardly sit to be warmed in his Place:
Then also Moneys had been formerly given, and Supply was at that Parliament
required; but the Commons denied Supply, and complained that their Moneys were
misimployed, That the Earl of Suffolk then overruled all; and They could not
give: And they petitioned the King, that a Commission might be granted, and
that the Earl of Suffolk might be examined. A Commission at their request was
awarded, and that Commission recites all the Evil then complained of; and that
the King upon the Petition of the Lords and Commons had granted that
Examination should be taken of the Crown Lands which were sold, of the Ordering
of his Household, and the Disposition of the Jewels of his Grandfather, and
Father. I hear nothing said in this House of our Jewels, nor will I speak of
them, but I could wish they were within these walls. We are now in the same
case with those former Times; we suffer alike, or worse: And therefore unless
we seek redress of these great Evils, we shall find disability in the wills of
the People to grant.

In the heat of these Agitations, Three Subsidies and Three Fifteens, Voted.
the Commons notwithstanding remembered June, and the last of October next
following; and that the Act be brought in as soon as Grievances are presented
to, and answered by the King. And the Commons the same day resumed the Debate
again concerning the Duke, Debate concerning the Duke, resumed.
and Misgovernment and Misimployment of the Revenue, etc. Ordered the Duke to
have notice again thereof.

Whitehall, (and in the mean time all Proceedings in the House and Committee to
cease.) Where his Majesty made this ensuing Speech.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Have called you hither to day, The Kings Speech, March 29.
I mean both Houses of Parliament; My Lords, you of the Upper House, to give
you thanks for the Care of the State of the Kingdom now; and not only for the
Care of your own Proceedings, but for inciting your Fellow-House of the Commons
to take that into their consideration. Therefore (my Lords) I must not only
give you thanks, but I must also avow, that if this Parliament do not redound
to the good of this Kingdom, (which I pray God it may) it is not your faults.
And you Gentlemen of the House of Commons, I am sorry that I may not

Then the Lord Keeper, by the Kings command, spoke next.

The Lord Keepers Speech.
and you the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons: You are
here assembled by his Majesty's commandment, to receive a Declaration of his
Royal pleasure; which although it be intended only to the House of Commons, yet
his Majesty has thought meet, the matter being of great weight and importance,
it should be delivered in the presence of both Houses, and both Houses make one
General Council: And his Majesty is willing that the Lords should be Witnesses
of the Honor and Justice of his Resolutions. And therefore the Errand which by
his Majesty's direction I must deliver, has relation to the House of Commons.
I must address my self therefore to you Mr. Speaker, and the rest of that House.

And first his Majesty would have you to understand, That there

Next his Majesty would have you know of a surety, That as never any King was
more loving to his People, nor better affectioned

This being set down in general, his Majesty has commanded me to relate some
particular passages and proceedings whereat he finds himself agrieved.

First, Whereas a seditious speech was uttered amongst you by Mr. Cook, the
House did not, as they ought to do, censure and correct him. And when his
Majesty understanding it, did by a Message by Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer
delivered to the House, require Justice of you, his Majesty has since found
nothing but protracting and delays.

Secondly, Whereas Doctor Turner in a strange Unparliamentary way, without any
ground of knowledge in himself, or offering any particular proof to the House,
did take upon him to advise the House to enquire upon sundry Articles against
the Duke of Buckingham, as he pretended, but in truth to wound the Honor and
Government of his Majesty, and of his renowned Father; And his Majesty first
out of any end to offer such a Sacrifice so unworthy of a King, or a good
Master: Yet for all this, you have been so far from correcting the Insolency
of Turner, that ever since that time your Committees have walked in the steps
of Turner, and proceeded in an Unparliamentary Inquisition, running upon
generals, and repeating that whereof you have made Fame the groundwork. Here
his Majesty has cause to be exceeding sensible, that upon every

Concerning the Duke of Buckingham, his Majesty has commanded me to tell you,
That himself does better know then any man living the sincerity of the Dukes
proceedings; with what cautions of weight and discretion he has been guided in
his public Employments from his Majesty and his blessed Father; what Enemies
he has procured at Spain. And therefore his Majesty cannot believe that the
aim is at the Duke of Buckingham, but finds that these Proceedings do
directly wound the Honor and Judgment of himself, and of his Father. It is
therefore his Majesty's express and final commandment, That you yield obedience
unto those Directions which you have



Next I am to speak concerning your Supply of Three Subsidies and Three
Fifteens, which you have agreed to tender to his Majesty. You have been made
acquainted with the greatness of his affairs both at home and abroad, with the
strong Preparation of the Enemy, with the Importance of upholding his Allies,
strengthening and securing both England and Ireland, besides the encountering
and annoying the Enemy by a powerful Fleet at Sea; and the Charge of all: This
having been calculated unto you, you have professed unto his Majesty by the

And now his Majesty having erected a proceeding suitable to this engagement,
he does observe that in two days only of twelve, this

And for the measure of this supply, his Majesty finds it so far from making
himself safe at home and feared abroad, as contrariwise it exposes him both to
danger and disesteem; for his Majesty cannot expect without better help, but
that his Allies must presently disband, and leave him alone to bear the fury of
a provoked and powerful Enemy: Saturday next return your final Answer, what
further Supply you will add to this you have already agreed on, and that to be
without condition, either directly or indirectly for the supply of these great
and important Affairs of his Majesty, which for the reasons formerly made known
unto you, can endure no longer delay; and if you shall not by that time resolve
on a

His Majesty has commanded me to add this, That therein he does expect your
cheerful obedience, which will put a happy issue to

Last of all, his Majesty has commanded me in explanation of the gracious
goodness of his Royal intention, to say unto you, that he does well know, that
there are amongst you many wise and well tempered men, well affected to the
Public and to his Majesty's service, and that those that are willingly faulty,
are not many; and for the rest his Majesty doubts not, but after his gracious
Admonition, they will in due time observe and follow the better sort; which, if
they shall do, his Majesty is most ready to forget whatsoever is past.



I must withal put you in mind a little of times past; The King proceeds.
you may reremember, that in the time of my blessed Father, you did with your
counsel and persuasion persuade both my Father and me to break off the
Treaties; I confess I was your Instrument, for two reasons; one was, the
fitness of the time; the other, because I was seconded by so great and worthy a
body, as the whole body of Parliament; then there

Mr Cook told you, It was better to be eaten up by a Foreign Enemy, then to be
destroyed at home; Indeed, I think it is more honor for a King

Remember that Parliaments are altogether in my power for their Calling,
Sitting, and Dissolution; therefore, as I find the fruits of them good or
evil, they are to continue or not to be; And remember, that if in this time,
instead of mending your Errors, by delay you persist in your Errors, you make
them greater and irreconcilable: Whereas, on the other side, if you do go on
cheerfully to Christendom, and the Affairs of the Kingdom as it lies now by
this great Engagement; you will do your selves honor, you shall encourage me to
go on with Parliaments; and I hope all Christendom shall feel the good of it.

The Commons upon the Debate of what fell from his Majesty and the Lord Keeper,
turned the House into a Grand Committee, ordered

His Majesty being informed that some things in his own Speeches and the Lord
Keepers Declaration were subject to misunderstanding; commanded the Duke to
explain them at a conference of both Houses in the Painted-Chamber, held for
that purpose.

The Duke at a Conference explains the Kings late Speech and the Lord Keepers
Declaration.
that to prefix a day to give, or to break, was an unusual thing, and might
express an inclination in the King to break; to remove this, as his Majesty was
free from such thoughts he has descended to make this Explanation.

That as his Majesty would not have you condition with him directly or
indirectly, so he will not lie to a day, for giving further Supply; but it was
the pressing occasion of Christendom that made him to pitch upon a day.

His Majesty has here a Servant of the King of Denmark, and another from the
Duke of Weymer, and yesterday received a Letter from his Sister the Queen of
Bohemia; who signified, that the King of Denmark has sent an Ambassador with
Power to perfect the Contract Hague; so it was not the King, but time and the
things themselves that pressed a time.

Therefore his Majesty is pleased to give longer time, hoping you will not give
him cause to put you in mind of it again, so that you have a greater*
Latitude, if the business require to think further of it.

I am commanded further to tell you, that if his Majesty should accept of a
less sum then will suffice, it will deceive your expectations, disappoint his
Allies, and consume the Treasure of the Kingdom: whereas Christendom.

But while we delay and suffer the time to pass, others abroad will take
advantage of it, as the King of Spain has done by concluding a Peace, as it is
though, in Italy for the Vatoline, whereby our work is become the greater,
because there can be no diversion that way.

As it was a good Rule to fear all things and nothing, and to be Liberal was
sometimes to be Thrifty; so in this particular, if you give largly,

Another Explanation I am commanded to make touching the grievances, wherein
his Majesty means no way to interrupt your Proceedings, but hopes you will
proceed in the ancient ways of your

I am further commanded to tell you, That his Majesty intends to elect a
Committee of both Houses, whom he will trust to take the view of his Estate,
the Defects whereof are not so fit for the Eyes of a Multitude; and this
Committee will be for your ease, and may satisfy you without casting any ill
odor on his Government, or laying open any weakness that may bring shame upon
us abroad. That which is proposed

The Duke then made his Address to them in his own behalf.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
YOu were all witnesses yesterday how good and gracious a Master I serve; The
Duke renders an account of his Negotiation in the Low Countries.
and I shall be likewse glad that you be witnesses how thankful a heart I have.



And however I lie under the burden of the same, it lies in your hands to make
me happy, or not; and for my part, I wish my heart and

When I had with some hazard waited on my Master into Spain, it is well known
what Testimony I gave of my Religion; and no man that comes to a true and near
view of my action, can justly charge me. Let me be excused, If I give account
of this particular when I should speak of the general; for this goes near my
heart, and to dissemble with my Conscience, no ends of Fortunes in the World
can make me Spain, as might have tempted me.

If I would have been converted my self, I might have had the Infanta to put in
my Masters Bed; and if my discontent should have risen here, I might have had
an Army to have come with me: But I thought the offer foolish, ridiculous, and
scornful, in that point of Religion.

I will now take the boldness to speak a little in the general business;

I shall not need to reflect so far back as to the beginning of those Counsels
which engaged my Master into the War, they are well known; only I will so far
touch it, as to say, That the last years preparations were not Voluntary, or
out of Wantonness, but out of Necessity.

Spains eye was maliciously bent this way, which had been pursued accordingly,
if the employment of the Low-Countrymen to the Bay of Todos los Santos had not
diverted it.

Now for the Counsel which was used for sending out the Fleets, I will refer
you to the Relation of the Lord Conway, who as well in this as other
Resolutions, can tell you, That nothing was carried with single Councils: And
for my self, I know that in all those actions no Conway keeps.

I confess all Councils were not ever as your selves would, nor have wished
they should; if you had known them as my Master did, in whom the former Affairs
of State had bred such affections, that the business being altered, they were
not to be trusted with the Change.

I will now give you an account of all my Negotiations, since my being at
Oxford, both at home and abroad; and because there it was charged, that those
things were carried with single Counsels, I was more careful to advise the King
to have his Counsel with him in the Country, being to enter into War with an
Active King.

And for my part I did diligently wait on the Council, left all Recreations,
Woodstock generally advised the going out of the Fleet. And though it were
objected that the Season were not fit, yet the action showed the contrary, for
they all arived in safety. And for what was also objected, that the Provision
was not good, experience tells you the contrary; for the preparations were all
good in quality and proportion.

And if the Success were not such as any honest man could wish, I Denmark,
Sweden, and the States.

And though the Success (as I said) of the Fleet were not answerable to the
desires of honest men; yet it had these good effects, first, It put our Enemy
to great charge in fortifying his Coasts; secondly, Flanders suffered much; And
lastly, They could carry no Treasure out to pay their Forces in Flanders.

And for Omissions of what more might have been done, I leave that to its
proper place and time, and let every man bear his own burden.

From Oxford the Council went to Southampton, where the States Ambassadors did
wait often on the King and Council, and a League

For as before he only assisted them, his Majesty's care now used Arguments to
draw them to Contribution; so that they bear the fourth part of the charge of
the War at Sea, according to such Conditions as by the Lord Chamberlain you
have heard.

This League being perfected betwixt the States and us, his Majesty England,
France, and Germany; I had Latitude of Commission to make the League with most
advantage I could.

Now I had discovered from Monsieur B. The French Ambassador here, that a
League Offensive and Defensive would be refused; and I found the King of
Denmark shie, and loath to enter into such a League against the King of Spain;
and so partly out of Necessity, and partly out of Reason of State, I was forced
to conclude the League in general Terms, for the restoring of the Liberty of
Germany, without naming the King of Spain, or the Emperor, that other Princes
might come in; Conway said was to end in September next.

Also by this Treaty it is conditioned with the King of Denmark, France may be
drawn in, of which there is great hope (though he has now made peace in Italy)
for that the policy of France may not give way unto the greatness of the House
of Austria, and ambition of Spain, whose Dominions do grasp him in on every
side. And if the business be well carried, his Engagement to the King of
Denmark may draw him in; so there is great possibility of easing our

But all is in the discreet taking of the time; for it not, we may think the
King of Denmark will take hold of those fair Conditions which are each day
offered him; and then the Enemies Army will fall upon the River of Elve, and
(the Lord Conway added) upon East-Friezland, from whence they would make such
progress, as (in my poor experience) would ruin the Low Countries.

And thus I think I have satisfied all of you, or at least given an Denmark,
Sweden, and the rest.

I should be glad before I end, to say somewhat of my self, but I shall request
your favorable construction, for I have been too long already; but I fear I
shall offend, and therefore I will restrain my self to generals.

If in any of these employments, my Errors may be showed me, I shall take him
for my best friend that will manifest them in particulars; I

My Journey into Spain, was all at mine own charge; my Journey into France, was
at my Masters charge; my Journey into the Low Countries, was all at mine own
charge.

Spain, I have always had Twelve Ships on the Coasts, and allowance but for
Four, the rest my own care supplied. And for the Office of Admiral, when I came
first to it, I found the Navy weak, not neglected by my Noble Predecessor (for
I cannot speak of him, but with honor; and I shall desire to go to my Grave
with the honor he carried hence) but by the not paying of moneys in time, there
were such defects his care could not prevent; that if the War had then broken
out, there would have been found few Ships, and those unserviceable. I was
first persuaded to take this Office by persuasion of Sir Robert Munseld, and
though I objected I was young, and unexperienced, yet he said that by my favor
with my Master, I might do more good in procuring payment for that charge. And
because I per annum; we built every year two Ships, and when so many were built
as were requisite, we brought it to Two and twenty thousand pounds per annum,
which comes not to my hands, but goes into its proper streams, and issues from
the Officers to

Now if any can show me a Project, how to maintain War against Spain, Flanders,
and the Turkish Pirates, with less charge, he shall do a great work and good
service: I have had sometimes Twenty, sometimes Thirty Ships, though sometime
disastred by Tempest, which dispersed the Hollanders Ships, and caused them to
cut their Masts, and forsake their Anchors.

There are now Twelve Ships victualled for two Months; and

There are Thirty Ships more at Plymouth, victualled for six Months, and Ten
more ready, so soon as they may be victualled: I have been so frugal of making
use of the old remain, that there is no need of Ammunition, or other
necessaries.

Besides all these, there are Twenty Ships to come from the Low Countries;

And therefore if any have blamed me, I do not blame him, but think he has
done well; but when you know the truth, and when all this shall appear, I hope
I shall stand right in your opinions.

Gentlemen, It is no time to pick quarrels one with another; we have enemies
enough already, and therefore more necessary to be well united at home.

Follow not examples, at least not ill examples of Gondomar and Ynojosa, who
would have had my head, when you thought me worthy of a salute. Now though I
confess there may be some Errors, I will not justify my self; yet they are not
such gross defects, as the World would make them appear. I desire they may be
admitted Cum Nota.

They are no Errors of Wilfulness, nor of Corruption, nor oppressing of the
People, nor Injustice, but the contrary; and then may I say, for what good done
by me, do I suffer?

And now I might Answer more particulars, but I have been long, and so will
forbear; and will conclude, if your Supply answer not your Promises and
Engagements to my Master; you will make this place which has been in Peace
when others were in War, the Seat of War when others are in Peace.

Now Gentlemen, You that were Ancient Parliament Men when this Council was
first given, strive to make good your own Engagement, for the Honor of your
King, and your own safety. Let Religion, in which I would be glad to be more
watchful and industrious then any, unite your hearts both at home and abroad;
and you that are young men, may in these active times gain honor and reputation,
which is almost sunk, and gain the Ancient Glory of your Predecessors: And
remember

I have nothing more, but to entreat your charitable opinion of me and my
actions.

For the further vindicating of the Duke, the Lord Conway stood up and said,

THat whereas diverse jealousies have been raised in the House, The Lord Conway
vindicates the Duke.
that the Moneys have been expended unusefully and without Council; himself who
was the only Secretary, and had the hand in guiding the business, could best
give an account of it.

When King James of glorious Memory, at the Request of both Houses, had broken
both the Treaties, he considered how to maintain the War; for he saw that the
King of Spain was awaked, and that the Palatinate must be got by the Sword, and
that Spain would oppose it with all the power they could; and computing the
charges, found the Subsidies granted too short; for that it could not be done
without an Army of Five and twenty thousand Foot, and Five thousand Horse,
which would amount to Six hundred thousand pounds for the Armies yearly, and
Three hundred thousand pounds for the Navy; but finding all his means short,
and as the Proverb is, Not knowing of what Wood to make his Arrows to hit the
Mark withal, Count Mansfield stirred up by his Denmark, Sweden, Venice, Savoy,
the Cantons of the Switzers perhaps, and some other German Princes, and raise a
War in Alsatia, of great consequence to make a Diversion.

Now about this time the Council of Austria resolved to call a Diet, and
exclude the Count Palatine, and put in a Popish Elector; and for that end
offered a general Peace in Germany, and so left not a crevice to look Palatine,
he should be out of the Peace.

The King accepts Mansfields offer, conditionally that he draw in the French
King: So Mansfield went over into France, and the King by Advice of his Council
sent Ambassadors into France, Denmark, Venice, Savoy, and Cantons of the
Switzers, from whom he received cold Answers; for King James had stood so long
on terms of Peace, as they doubted he would not be brought to enter into War.
But Count Mansfield France to Contract to receive our Troops, with promise to
enter into the War, upon condition it might be regulated by the Council of the
French King and England. This favor to Count Mansfield, That France agreed that
his Armies should join with the Kings Troops, wrought the Princes of Germany to
believe, that the King would enter into a War. Thereupon the Imperialists left
their Diet, and sent Tilly to Friezland, and to take up the River of Embden;
which if he had obtained, they would have trampled the Low Countries under
foot, and would have become Governors of the Sea.

Upon this the King of Denmark sent to our King, and offered to raise an Army
of Thirty thousand men, if our King would allow Thirty thousand pounds a
Month, and said, He would admit no time of respite; for if Tilly had not been
presently met and headed, all had

Thereupon the Duke asked the Question, Whether any thing was done by single
Council.

To which the Lord Conway answered, No. For the Treaty of Denmark, Project of
Count Mansfield, Treaties with France, and the business of the Navy, were done
all by the King himself; and who can say it was done by single Council, when
King James commanded it, whose Council every man ought to reverence, especially
in matters of War, whereunto that King was not hasty?

The Total of Moneys paid by Warrants of the Treasurers of the Subsidy Money.
A List of Moneys disbursed for the War.
IN Toto for the Four Regiments of the Low Countries, from the Thirtieth of
June, 1624. till the One and twentieth of July, 1624. 99878 l. 00 s. 06 d. For
the Navy, from the Thirteenth of July, 1624. till the Three and twentieth of
December. 37530 l. 08 s. 04 d. For the Office of the Ordinance and Forts in
England, from the Twentieth of July, 1624. till the Fifteenth of June, 1625.
47126 l. 05 s. 05 d. To defray Charges for Forts in Ireland, about October,
1624. 32295 l. 18 s. 04 d. For the Service under Count Mansfield; for
Provisions October, 1624. till the Tenth of December, 1624. 61666 l. 13 s. 04
d. Sum Total 278497 l. 04 s. 11 d.

MEmorandum, That over and above the several Services before specified, and the
several Sums issued, and to be issued by our Warrants for the same, We did long
since resolve and order accordingly, viz.

In full of the Supply of all the Forts and Castles beforementioned (Surveyed
per Sir Richard Morison, Sir John Ogle, Sir John Kay, in September, 1613.) with
all sorts of Munitions according to several Proportions and Warrants for the
same -- 4973 l.

In full for the Reparations of all the said Forts and Castles according to the
said Survey -- 10650 l. 06s. 08 d.

But the said Subsidies being not like to afford means to perform these so
necessary Works, We humbly commend the supply of what shall be wanting for the
same unto your Majesty's Princely consideration.

Whilst the Commons were inquiring into Public Grievances, the Lords
represented to the King a Grievance to their own Order in this following
Petition.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
In all humility shows;
England, The Lords Petition touching Precedence, challenged by Scots and Irish
Nobles.
have heretofore in Civility yielded as to strangers Precedence, according to
their several degrees, unto such Nobles of Scotland and Ireland, as being in
Titles above them, have resorted hither. Now diverse of the natural born
Subjects of those Kingdoms resident here with their Families, and having their
chief Estates among us, do by reason of some late created Dignities in those
Kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland, claim Precedence of the Peers of this Realm,
which tends both to the disservice of Your Majesty, and these Realms,

I. It is a novelty without president, that men should inherit Honors where
they possess nothing else. II. It is injurious to those Countries from whence
their Titles are derived, that they should have a Uote in Parliament, where
they have not a foot of Land. III. It is a grievance to the Country where they
inhabit, that IV. It is a shame to Nobility, that Persons dignified with the
Titles of Barons, Viscounts, etc. should be obnoxious and exposed to arrest,
they being in the view of the Law no more then mere Plebeians.
We therefore humbly beseech your Majesty, That you will be pleased

To this Petition the King gave Answer, That he would take order therein.

The Earl of Bristol who continued under Restraint, and was debarred Access to
his Majesty ever since his return out of Spain, had been examined touching his
Negotiation there, by a Committee of Lords appointed by the King. Certain
Propositions were tendered unto him in order to his Release, and composing of
that Affair, concerning which he had written to the Lord Conway, and about this
time received the ensuing

The Lord Conway to the Earl of Bristol.
My Lord,
The Lord Conways Letter to the Earl of Bristol.
I Received a Letter from your Lordship, dated the Fourth of this Month,
written in Answer to a former Letter which I directed to your Lordship by
Spain, and enjoy the benefit of the late gracious Pardon granted in Parliament,
whereof you may have the benefit: Or whether for the clearing of your Innocence
(whereof your self and your friends

Thus much I have in Commandment to write to your Lordship, and to require your
Answer clearly and plainly by this Messenger sent on purpose for it,

Whitehal, 24 March. 1625. Your Lordships humble Servant Edw. Conway.


My Lord,
The Earl of Bristols Letter to the Lord Conway.
I Have received your Letter of the Four and twentieth of March, the Twenty
eighth; and I am infinitely grieved to understand that my former Answer to
yours of the Fourth of March, has not satisfied His Majesty, which I will
endeavor to do by this, to the best of my understanding; and to that end shall
answer to the particular points of your present Letter, with the greatest
clearness I am able.

First, Whereas you say in your Letter, that the Question propounded to me was
plain and clear, viz.

Whether I would choose to sit still without being questioned for any Errors
past in my Negotiation in Spain, and enjoy the benefit of the late gracious

First, Your Lordship may be pleased to remember, that your last Proposition
was, Whether I desired to rest in the Security I was in, which you now express,
Whether I will choose to sit still?

Secondly, Your Proposition was, Whether I would acknowledge the gracious Favor
of his Majesty that now is, who had been pleased not to question

But now your Proposition is, Whether I will now choose to sit still without
being further questioned for Errors past, whereas before it was required I
should acknowledge that I had not been questioned at all, which is a different

That understanding by the Security I am in, and sitting still, and not being
further questioned, I am restored to the bare Freedom and Liberty of a Subject
and Peer (For a man being called in question by his Majesty, if after his
Majesty shall be pleased out of his goodness, that he rest quiet and 21 Jac.
Regis, nor by the Pardon of his Majesty's Coronation; and am so far from

As for the second part of your Letter, wherein you say, That if I desire to
make use of that Pardon, his Majesty expects that I should at least forbear to
magnify my Services; or out of an opinion of my own Innocence cast an
aspersion upon his Majesty's Justice. To this point I answer, That as I hope I
shall never err in that sort of immodesty of valuing my Services, which I
acknowledge to have been accompanied with infinite weaknesses and disabilities;
so I trust it shall not displease, that I make use to mine own comfort, and the
honor of my Posterity, of those many Written Testimonies which my late most
Blessed Master has left me, of his gracious Acceptance of my Services for the
space of Twenty years. So likewise I hope the modest avowing of mine Innocence
will not be thought to cast any aspersion upon his Majesty's Honor or Justice.
I most freely confess unto your Lordship, I am much afflicted to see Inferences
of this nature made, both in your Lordships last Letter, and in this. For if it
Clark.

I shall conclude by entreating your Lordships favor, That I may understand
from you, as I hope for my comfort, that this Letter has given his Majesty

Your Lordships humble Servant, BRISTOL.


The Earl of Bristol petitions the House of Lords.
The Earl of Bristol petitions the House of Lords, showing, That he being a Peer
of this Realm, had not received a Summons to Parliament, and desires their
Lordships to mediate with his Majesty, that he may enjoy the Liberty of a
Subject, and the Privilege of his Peerage, after almost two years restraint,
without being brought to a Trial. And if any Charge be brought in against him,
he prays that he may be tried

The Petition referred to the Committee of Privileges.
The business is referred to the Committee of Privileges, and the Earl of
Hartford reported from that Committee, That it is necessary that their
Lordships humbly beseech his Majesty, that a Writ of Summons may be sent to the
Earl of Bristol; as also to such other Lords whose Writs are stopped, except
such as are made incapable to sit in Parliament, by Judgment of Parliament, or
some other Legal Judgment.

Hereupon the Duke signified to the House, That upon the Earl of Bristols
Petition to the King, His Majesty had sent him his Writ of Summons: And withal,
he showed to the Lords the Copy of a Letter written from the King unto the said
Earl, being as follows.

WE have received your Letter addressed unto us by Buckingham, The Kings Letter
to the Earl of Bristol.
and cannot but wonder, that you should through forgetfulness make request to
us of favor, as if you stood evenly capable of it, when you know what you
behavior in Spain deserved of us, which you are to examine by the observations
we made, and know you well remember; how at our first coming into Spain, taking
upon you to be so wise as to foresee our intention to Spain, did what was in
our power against them, which you said they very well knew: And last of all,
your approving of those Conditions, that our Nephew should be brought up in the
Emperors Court; to which Sir Walter Ashton then said, that he durst not give
his consent, for fear of his head; you replying unto him, that without some
such great Action, neither Marriage nor Peace could ^e had.


Bristol again Petitions the House of Lords, and annexes to his Petition the
Lord Keepers Letter, and his own Answer thereto, and desires to be heard in
accusation of the Duke.

The humble Petition of John Earl of Bristol.
Humbly showing unto your Lordships,
THat he has lately received his Writ of Parliament, The Earl of Bristol
Petitions the Lords upon receipt of his Writ.
for which he returns unto your Lordships most humble thanks, but jointly
with it a Letter from my Lord Keeper, commanding him in his Majesty's name to
forbear his personal attendance; and although he shall ever obey the least
intimation of his Majesty's pleasure, yet he most humbly offers unto your
Lordships wise considerations,

He further humbly Petitioneth your Lordships, That having been for the space
of two years highly wronged inpoint of his Liberty, Buckingham, to keep him
from the presence of his Majesty and the Parliament, l^st he should discover
many crimes concerning the said Duke.

He therefore most humbly beseeches, That he may be heard both in the point of
his Wrong, and of his Accusation of the said Duke: wherein he will make it
appear how infinitely the said Duke has both abused their Majesty's, the
State, and both the Houses of Parliament. And this he is most confident will
not be denied, since the Court of Parliament never refuses to hear the poorest
Subject seeking for redress of Wrongs, nor the Accusation against any, be he
never so powerful: And herein he beseeches your Lordships to mediate to his
Majesty for the Suppliants coming to the House in such sort as you

The Lord Keeper to the Earl of Bristol, 31. 1626.
My very good Lord,
BY his Majesty's commandment I herewith send unto your Lordship your Writ of
summons for the Parliament; but withal signify his Majesty's pleasure herein
further, that howsoever he gives way to the awarding of the

Your Lordships assured Friend and Servant, THO. COVENTRY, C.S.
Dorset-Court, March 31. 1626.

His Answer to the Lord Keeper.
May it please your Lordship,
I Have received your Lordships Letter of the 31 of March, and with it England.
In the other, as in a Letter missive, his Majesty's pleasure is intimated by
your Lordship, that my personal attendance should be forborne; I must crave
leave ingenuously to confess unto your Lordship, that I want judgment rightly
to direct my self in this Case; as likewise that I am ignorant how far this
England: On the other side, if the Letter be not obeyed, a Peer may De facto be
committed upon a Contempt, in the interim, and the Question cleared,
afterward; so that in this case it is above mine abilities. I can only answer
your Lordship, that I will most exactly obey; and to the end I may understand
which obedience will be in all kinds most suitable to my duty, I will
presently repair to my private Lodging at London, and there remain, until in
this and other Causes I shall have petitioned his Majesty, and understand his
further pleasure. For the second part That his Majesty's meaning is not thereby
to discharge any former directions for restraint of your Lordships coming
hither, but that you continue under the same restriction as before, so that
your Lordships personal attendance here is to be forborne: I conceive your
Lordship intends this touching my coming to Parliament only; for as touching
my comning to London, I never had at any time one word of prohibition, or
colorable pretense of restraint; but on the contrary, having his late
Majesty's express leave to come to London to follow my affairs, Buckingham, I
forbore to come until I might know whether my coming would not be disagreeable
unto them; whereunto his Majesty was pleased to answer both under the hand of
the Duke, and of Mr Secretary Conway, That he took my respect unto him herein
in very good part, and would wish me to make use of the leave the King had
given me: since which time I never received any Letter or Message of restraint;
only his Majesty by his Letter bearing date June the last, commands me to
remain as I was in the time of the King his Father, which was London to follow
mine own affairs as I pleased, as will appear unto your Lordship, if you will
afford me so much favor as to peruse them. I have writ this much unto your
Lordship, because I would not through misunderstanding fall into displeasure by
my coming up, and to entreat your Lordship to inform his Majesty thereof: And
that my Lord Conway, by whose Warrant I was only restrained in the late Kings
time of famous memory, may produce any one word. that may have so much as any
colorable pretense of debarring my coming up to London. I beseech your
Lordship to pardon my desire to

BRISTOL.
Sherborn, April 12. 1626.

Hereupon the Lord Keeper delivered this Message from the King to the House of
Lords.

Bristol, A Message from the King to the House of Lords.
so void of duty and respects to his Majesty, that he has great cause to
punish him; That he has also heard with what duty and respectfulness to his
Majesty their Lordships have proceeded therein, which his Majesty conceives to
have been upon the knowledge they have, that he has been restrained for
matters of State; and his Majesty does therefore give their Lordships thanks
for the same, and is resolved to put the Cause upon the honor and justice of
their Lordships and this House. And therefore his Majesty commanded him (the
Lord Keeper) to signify to their Lordships his Royal pleasure, That the Earl
of Bristol be sent for as a Delinquent to answer in this House his Offenses,
committed in his Negotiations before his Majesty's being in Spain, and his
Offenses since his Majesty's coming Spain, and his scandalizing the Duke of
Buckingham immediately, and his Majesty by reflection, with whose privity and
by whose directions the Duke did guide his Actions, and without which he did
nothing. All which his Majesty will cause to be charged against him before
their Lordships in this House.

The Lords appointed a Committee to attend the King, and to present their
humble thanks to his Majesty for the trust and confidence he had

The Marshal of Middlesex's Petition touching Priests.
About this time the Marshal of Middlesex petitioned to the Committee of the
House of Commons, touching his resistance in seizing of Priests goods.

A Warrant was made by Mr Attorney General to John Tendering Marshal of
Middlesex, and other therein named, to search the Prison Clink, and to seize
all Popish and Superstitious matters there found.

A Letter also was directed to Sir George Paul a Justice of Peace in Surrey, to
pray him to take some care and pains to expedite that service. On Good Friday,
April 7. Sir George Paul was ready by six a clock in the morning, five or six
Constables being charged, and about an hundred persons to aid and assist them.
The Marshall being attended with the persons named in the Warrant, and diverse
others of his own servants, and George Paul, came to the Clink, and finding a
door open without any Porter or Doorkeeper at all, entered without resistance
at the first appearing: But immediately upon discovery of his purpose, the
Concourse of people without, and his unexpected entrance giving occasion
thereto, the Porter steps up, shuts the door, and keeps the Marshal and some
few that entered together with him, within, and his Aid without, resisting them
that would enter, their Warrant being showed notwithstanding, until by force
another door was broken open,

Being within, the Marshall gave direction to his followers to disperse
themselves into several parts of the House, to the end, that whilst he did
search in one part, the other parts and places might be safely guarded, and so
he proceeded in his search; in the prosecution whereof he found viz. Preston,
Cannon, Warrington, Prator. Preston was committed to the Clink about 16 years
since, and discharged of his imprisonment about 7 years ago, yet remained there
in the Prison still, attended with two women servants, and one man servant,
who, as it was suspected, had continued with him ever since the Gunpowder
Treason, 1605. The keeping there by himself apart from the Keeper of the
Prison, and had for his Lodging three or four several Chambers, part of the
Bishop of Winchesters House, into which there was a passage made through the
Prison yard, no other entrance in or out of the same being discovered; and he
affirmed, That he had a Warrant or License from the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury for his residence there, with liberty freely for himself and all
Company that would resort to him thither.

Edm. Bower and Sir George Paul Knights, Justices of Surrey; wherein it was
said, that Preston is either licenced, warranted, or protected by the Bishop of
Canterbury, Durham or Winchester, to that effect. There were also found two
Altars l. lay thrown up and down in his Desk; abundance of Manuscripts, and a
Packet of Letters bound up together with a thread.

In Cannon's Chamber was found an Altar ready furnished with many Preston's
Chamber, to a great value, and a private altar furnished for Mass, his Hallowed
bread ready fitted, and his Holy water, which Cannon himself cast out into the
chimney. In another Study of Cannon's were found great store of curious Tools
and Engines to work withal, three Swords Elizabeth, King James, Queen Anne, and
King Charles; the taking whereof, being set apart with other stuff to be
removed, did exceedingly move the Priest to impatience. Of whom also it is to
be noted, that he had in his custody all the Keepers Warrants for Commitment of
his Prisoners, which were found in his Chamber, together with some store of
Plate, which he said was by him kept for the Keepers wife.

Warrington's Chamber were found Books, Beads, Boxes of Oil for Extreme
Unction, and such like trash; but the wall thereof was broken down into another
house adjoining to the Prison, through which it is conceived that all the rest
of Warrington's Provision was conveyed away, in the interim of the search made
in the two former Chambers.

The fourth Priest named Prator, was first committed to Gloucester-Goal, being
suspected to be the Archbishop of those parts, and lay there till Lent-Assizes
last drew on; but for fear of the severity of the Laws (as Davison Gloucester
to the Clink, where he was found a Prisoner. It was informed by the Keeper,
that this Prator brought up from Gloucester a Gentlewoman who lies in a Chamber
next adjoining to his Lodging, and that he paid Two shillings six pence a week
for her Chamber, and maintained a Maidservant to attend her: It is supposed
that this Prison is her protection from the lawful proceedings that might be
had against her in the Country for Recusancie.

In the Porters Chamber were found seven or eight Popish Books.

In the Keepers Lodging was found a Closet or Study, wherein store of Writings,
Letters, and long Catalogues of Books were found, with their several prices,
one rich Picture or Crucifix, a Picture of Mary Magdalen; of which two the
Keeper affirmed, that one of them cost thirty pounds; and also many other rich
Pictures, amongst which one was a Picture of Collington, of whom Cannon
affirmed in scoffing manner, that that man's beard had done King James more hurt
then an Army of ten thousand men could have done. Prestons servants being one
man, two maids, the Gentlewoman that came from Gloucester, and her servant, and
the Keeper himself, and Robert Davison his man, were all examined before the
said Justices. During the Marshals tarrying in the Clink, it was observed, that
both Preston and Cannon used all the means they could to have notice of the
matter then in hand given Canterbury, and were very pensive until they
perceived he had notice of it. Whereupon they expressed much joy, being
assured, as they said, that then there should be nothing removed out of the
house. And it came to pass accordingly: For whilst the Marshal and his
servants were in the search of the third Chamber, and had locked up diverse
other Chambers, wherein as it was informed there was store of Wealth,
Church-stuffe, Books, and other matters, which would have been found if the
search had been prosecuted; A countermand was brought from

The Keeper and his wife, and the Priests did grievously threaten the Marshal,
and all his Assistants with very high terms, especially with Arrests and
Imprisonments for their attempt in this service; one of them saying, that they
should be imprisoned, as once one Harrison a Messenger, who for performing the
like service in the Clink, was committed to the Marshalsey, and kept there
three years, until in the end he was discharged by an Order in the Parliament,
as is credibly reported. Furthermore it is also humbly informed by the said
Marshal, That upon the twenty second of March last by a like Warrant from the
Lord Conway, he did search the Bishops Prison, called the New Prison in
Maiden-lane in London, where he found six several Priests Prisoners in several
Chambers, an Altar with all Furniture thereto belonging; with Church-Books and
stuff, which were as much as three Porters could carry away, and it is now in
the hands of Conway; of which service if this Honorable House will call for a
more particular Account, the Marshal is ready to give further satisfaction.

He humbly prays the Honorable favor of this House for his encouragement
and further abilities to the like services.

Archbishop of Canterbury's Letter in behalf of the Priests in the Clink,
directed to Master Attorney General.
Good Mr. Attorney,
I Thank you for acquainting me what was done yesterday at the Clink: But I am
of opinion, that if you had curiously enquired upon the Gentleman who gave the
Information, you should have found him to be a Disciple of the Jesuits; for
they do nothing but put tricks on these poor men, who do live more miserable
lives then if they were in the Inquisition in many parts beyond the Seas. By
taking the Oath of Allegiance, and writing in defense of it, and Preston as he
passed the Thames, and to have shipped him into a bigger Vessel, and so to have
transported him into Flanders, there to have made a Martyr of him. In respect
of these things, King James always gave his protection to Preston and
Warrington, as may be easily showed. Cannon is an old man well-affected to the
Cause, but medleth not with any Factions or Seditions, as far as I can learn.
They complain their

I leave the things to your best consideration; and hope that this Deed of
yours, together with my Word, will restrain them for giving offense hereafter,
if so be that lately they did give any. I heartily commend me unto you, and

Your very loving Friend, G. Canterbury.


By this time the Commons had prepared an Humble Remonstrance to the King, in
Answer to his Majesty's and the Lord Keeper's

Most Gracious Sovereign,
WHereas your Majesty has been pleased of late at sundry times and by several
means to impart unto us your Royal pleasure touching some passages and
proceedings in this present Parliament; The Commons Remonstrance to the King in
Answer to his Majesty's, and the Lord Keepers Speech.
We do first with unspeakable joy and comfort acknowledge we acknowledge your
Majesty's goodness shining at the very entrance of your glorious Reign, in
commanding the Execution of the Laws established to preserve the true Religion
of Almighty God, in whose service consists the happiness of all Kings and
Kingdoms.

Yet let it not displease your Majesty, that we also express some sense of just
Grief intermixed with that great Joy, to see the careful proceedings of our
sincere Intentions so misreported, as to have

First, touching the Charge against us in the matter concerning Mr. Cook, We
all sincerely protest, That neither the words mentioned in your Majesty's
Message, nor any other of seditious effect were spoken by him, as has been
resolved by the House without one Negative voice. Howsoever, in a Speech
occasionally uttered, he let fall some few words which might admit an ill
construction; whereat the House being displeased at the delivery of them, as
was expressed by a general

The like interruption did also befall us in the Case of Doctor Turner; wherein
the Question being formerly stated, a Resolution was ordered to have been taken
that very day, on which we received your

But for our own proceedings, We humbly beseech your Majesty to be truly
informed, That before that Overture from Doctor Turner, (out of our great and
necessary care for your honor and welfare of your Realm) We had taken into
serious Consideration the Evils which now afflict your people, and the Causes
of them, that we might apply our selves unto the fittest remedies: In the
pursuit whereof our Committees

And although the grievous Complaints of the Merchants from all parts, together
with the Common service of the Subjects well-affected to those who profess our
Religion, gave us occasion to debate some businesses that were partly Foreign,
and had relation to affairs of State; yet we beseech your Majesty to rest
assured, it was exceeding far from our intention either to traduce your
Counselors, or disadvantage your Negotiations.

And though some examples of great and potent Ministers of Princes heretofore
questioned in Parliament have been alleged, yet was it without paralleling
your Majesty's Government, or Councils to any Times at all, much less to Times
of Exception.

Touching the Letter of Your Majesty's Secretary, it was first alleged by your
Advocate for his own Justification, and after by direction of the Committee
produced to make good his Allegation.

And for the search at the Signet Office, the Copy of a Letter being divulged
as in your Majesty's Name, with pregnant cause of suspicion, both in the Body
and Direction thereof to be supposititious, the Committee out of desire to be
cleared therein, did by their Order

But touching Public Records, we have not forborne as often as our businesses
have required, to make search into them, wherein we have done nothing
unwarranted by the Laws of your Realm, and the constant usage of Parliaments.
And if for the ease of their Labors, any of our Committees have desired the
help of the Officers,

Now concerning Your Majesty's Servants, and namely, the Duke of Buckingham, We
humbly beseech Your Majesty to be informed by us your Faithful Commons, who can
have no private end but your Majesty's Service, and the good of our Country,
That it has been the ancient, constant, and undoubted Right and Usage of
Parliaments,

Lastly, We most humbly beseech Your Majesty graciously to conceive, that
though it has been the long Custom of Parliaments to

To. which, if Addition may be made of other great things for

With like humility we beseech your Majesty not to give ear to the officious
reports of private persons for their own ends, which has occasioned so much
loss of time, nor to judge our proceedings whilst they are in agitation, but to
be pleased to expect the issue and conclusion of our labors, which we are
confident will manifest and justify to your Majesty the sincerity and Loyalty
of our hearts, who shall ever place in a high degree of happiness the
performing of that duty and service in Parliament, which may most tend to your
Majesty's Honor

The House* adjourned for a week.
Unto this Remonstrance the King said, He could give no present answer, but
desired the House to adjourn for a week as the Lords had done; and they
adjourned accordingly.

Private advice given to the Duke.
In the interim it was intimated in Writing to the Duke, that he should procure
his Majesty to signify to a certain number of Lords, that he has endeavored
to divert the Charge against the Duke, because his

That his Majesty may let them know, that he is now pleased to reveal some
secrets and mysteries of State. That the King his Father finding the Palatinate
more then in danger to be lost, and his Majesty being in Spain, and there
deluded, and his abode and return both unsafe, it was a necessity of State to
sweeten and content the Spaniard with the hope of any thing which might
satisfy and redeem those Engagements.

Upon the same ground, though not in so high a degree, the sending of the Ships
to Rochel may be excused. Touching the vast Creation of Nobility, his Majesty
may declare that his Father who was born a King, France and Spain, etc. though
I am not satisfied in this opinion. And if it be said, the King should have had
the money which the Duke took to his own use, I believe this last (may the King
say) is more then any man can prove; Neither will I deliver what I know
therein, only this I will say, I know the Dukes particular service, and
affection toward me, and that he and his will lay down themselves and all they
have at my feet.

Is it for a King to use his Servant and Instrument as he does his Horses, and
being by hard riding in his service foundred and lame, to turn them out to
Grass or to the Cart? I must therefore (may the King say) in right of the King,
my Fathers Honor, protect a man (though justly seeming guilty, yet) in my own
knowledge innocent: Will you therefore deny the King to favor whom he pleases,
which the King never denied to you that are his Subjects? Well, commend me to
my Lords, and tell them that if any thing has been formerly done amiss by
others, I have power and will to redress it, and to prevent the like.

At this time the King commanded all the Bishops to attend him, The Bishops
commanded to attend the King.
and when they were come before him, being fourteen in number, he reprehended
Bristol and Buckingham, their Consciences being their Guides, they should
follow only proofs, and not rumors.

The Commons sent again to the Duke by Sir John Epsley, to let him know that
they were passing Articles against him, and that they had

This the Duke signified to the Lords, who did not think fit that he should
answer, as appears by the ensuing Report made by Sir John Epsley.

The Dukes answer to a Message from the Commons reported.
(after he had moved the Lords) that he should with great care make all due
acknowledgment of your respect and favors in giving him this notice, which
though it do invite him to render unto you such a satisfaction that he hopes
may acquit and restore him to your good opinion, and might prevent your
proceedings, which otherwise by a Parliamentary course are like to follow; Yet
according to his duty, having moved the Lords of the Upper House, upon your
notice given him, they would by no means, as for them their desire. In this
zeal he was desirous to have appeared unto you ever since the beginning of this
Parliament, and in this zeal he does now present himself unto you. But to
return to the main point, he, lest we should be mistaken, gave us occasion in
plain words to remember you, that it is not he that does refuse to answer, but
the Lords commanded him not to answer, which he the cheerfullier obeyed, in
respect of his fidelity to prefer the Universal Weal before his own particular.
And in the mean time he desires the charitable opinion of this Noble

Whilst the Duke stood ready to be impeacht, his Grace propounded to the Lords
of the Council to have it moved to the King, that in regard of the important
services by Sea, the usual pay to the Sailers might be raised from Fourteen to
Twenty shillings a Month, which was as much as they ordinarily received for
Merchants wages: The King

There was a great Debate in the House of Commons, Whether the Committee of
Twelve (where Mr. Glanvile had the Chair) shall consider of any new matter not
heretofore propounded in the House against the Duke? And it was resolved in the
Affirmative.

Mr. Glanvile reports from the Committee the Examination concerning a Plaster
and a Posset applied and given to King James in his sickness, Glanviles report
from the Committee.
when the Kings sworn Physicians had agreed upon other Directions. Hereupon it
was resolved, That this should be annexed to the Charge against the Duke, as a
transcendent Presumption of dangerous consequence.

Hereupon his Majesty sent this Message to the Commons.

The Kings Message touching new matter against the Duke.
THat he having given way to Enquiry about the Duke of Buckingham, and hearing
that there is new matter intended to be brought against him, nevertheless
leaves the House to their own way to present the business to him, or to the
Lords; withal advises them to consider of the season of the year, and to avoid
all loss of time.

It was Ordered, That thanks should be returned to his Majesty for this
Message.

The Earl of Bristol brought to the bar of the Lords House.
On Monday the First of May, the Gentleman Usher brought the Earl of Bristol to
the Bar, according to their Lordships Order; and the Lord Keeper acquainted
him, That the King had commanded his Attorney General to charge the Earl of
Bristol before their Lordships with High Treason, and other Offenses and
Misdemeanors of a very high nature, that they might proceed in a Legal course
against him, according to the Justice and usual proceedings of Parliament.

I. Offenses done and committed by the Earl of Bristol, before His Majesty's
going into Spain, when he was Prince.
I. THat the said Earl being trusted and employed by the said late King as his
Ambassador to Ferdinando, Articles against the Earl of Bristol.
then and now Emperor of Germany; and to Philip the Fourth, then and now King
of Spain, in Annis 1621.22. and 23. And having Commission, and particular and
special Direction to Treat with the said Emperor, and the King of Spain, for
the plenary restoring of such parts of the Dominions, Territories, and
Possessions of the Count Palatine of Rhine, who married Elizabeth his now Royal
Consort, the only Daughter of the said late King James; which were then
wrongfully and in hostile manner taken, and possessed with and by the Armies of
the said Emperor, and King of Spain, or any other; and for preserving, and
keeping such other parts thereof as were not then lost, but were then in the
protection of the said late King James, and to the use of the said Count
Palatine and his Children: And also to Treat with the said King of Spain for a
Marriage to be had between the most High and Charles, then Prince of Wales, the
only Son and Heir Apparent of the said King James, and now our most Sovereign
Lord, and the most Illustrious Lady Donna Maria the Infanta of Spain, Sister to
the now King of Spain: He the said Earl contrary to his duty and Alleagiance,
and contrary to the trust and duty of an Ambassador, at Madrid in the Kingdom
of Spain, to advance and further the designs of the said King of Spain against
our said Sovereign Lord, his Children, Friends, and Allies; falsely, willingly,
and traitorously, and as a Traitor to our Madrid in the years aforesaid unto
King James, and his Ministers of State of England; did confidently and
resolutely, inform, advise, and assure the said late King, That the said
Emperor, and King of Spain, would really, fully, and effectually make
restitution and plenary restoration to the said Count Palatine, and his
Children of the said Dominions, Territories, and Possessions of the said Count
Palatine, and of the said Electoral Dignity. And that the said King of Spain
did Spain, or either of them, never really intended such restitution as
aforesaid. And whereas the said King of Spain never really intended the
Marriage according to those Articles propounded, but the said Emperor and King
of Spain, intended only by those Treaties, to gain time to compass their own
ends and purposes, Bristol neither was nor could be ignorant.) The said late
King James by entertaining those Treaties, and continuing them upon those false
Assurances given unto him by the said Earl, as aforesaid, was made secure, and
lost the opportunity of time, and thereby the said Dominions, Territories, and
Possessions of the said Count Palatine, and the Electoral Dignity became
utterly lost; and some parts thereof were taken out of the actual possession of
the said King James, unto whose protection and safe keeping they were put, and
committed by the said Count Palatine; and the most Excellent Lady Elizabeth his
Wife, and their Children, are now utterly dispossessed and bereaved thereof, to
the high dishonor of our said late Sovereign Lord King James, to the disherison
of the said late Kings Children, and their Posterity, of their Ancient
Patrimony, and to the disadvantage and discouraging of the rest of the Princes
of Germany,

II. That the said Earl of Bristol being Ambassador for his late Majesty King
James, as aforesaid, in Annis supradictis, and having received perfect, plain,
and particular Instructions and Directions from his said late Majesty, That he
should put the King of Spain to a speedy and punctual Answer, touching the
Treaties aforesaid: And the said Earl well understanding the effect of those
Instructions and Directions so given unto him, and taking precise knowledge
thereof; and also knowing how Spain unto particular Conclusions, according to
his Majesty's Directions, as aforesaid; and so the said Earl intended to have
continued the said Treaties upon Generalities, and without reducing

III. That the said Earl of Bristol being Ambassador for his said late Majesty
as aforesaid, in the years aforesaid, to the intent to discourage the said late
King James, for the taking up of Arms, entering into Hostility with the said
King of Spain, and for resisting him and his Forces, from Spain having long
thirsted after an Universal Monarchy in these Western parts of the World, has
many times both by words and Letters to the said late King and his Ministers,
extolled and magnified the greatness and power of the said King of Spain, and
represented unto his said late Majesty, the supposed dangers which would ensue
unto him, if a War should happen between them; and affirmed and insinuated
Bristol did cunningly and traitorously strive to retard the Resolutions of the
said late King, to declare himself an enemy to the said King of Spain, (who
under color of Treaties and Alliances, had so much abused him) and to resist
his Arms and Forces, to the loss of opportunity of time, which cannot be
recalled or regained, and to the extreme danger, dishonor, and

IV. The said Earl of Bristol upon his dispatch out of this Realm of England,
in his Embassage aforesaid, having communication with diverse persons in London,
within this Realm of England, before his going into Spain, in and about his
Embassage concerning the said Treaty: For the Negotiating whereof, the said
Earl purposely was sent; and he the said Earl being then told, That there was
little probability that these Treaties would or could have any good success, he
the said Earl acknowledged as much; and yet nevertheless, contrary to his duty
and alleagiance, and to the faith and truth of an Ambassador, he the said Earl
said and affirmed, That he cared not what the success thereof would be; for he
would take care to have his Instructions, and to pursue them punctually;

V. That from the beginning of his Negotiation, and throughout the whole
managing thereof, by the said Earl of Bristol, and during his said Embassage,
He the said Earl contrary to his faith, and duty to God, the England, and the
Peace of this Church and State, did intend and resolve, that if the said
Marriage so treated of as aforesaid, should by his Ministry be effected, that
thereby the Romish Religion and Professors thereof should be advanced within
this Realm, and other his Majesty's Realms and Dominions, and the true Religion
and Professors thereof discouraged and discountenanced: And to that end and
purpose, the said Earl during the time aforesaid, by Letters unto his late
Majesty, and otherwise, often counseled and persuaded

VI. That by the false Informations and Intelligence of the said Earl of
Bristol, during the time aforesaid unto his said late Majesty, and to Spain,
that thereby he might either speedily conclude those Treaties, or perfectly
discover; that on the Emperors and King of Spains part, there was no true and
real intention to bring the same to conclusion, upon any fit and honorable
terms and conditions, and did absolutely and speedily break them off. By which
journey, the person of the said Prince being then Heir-Apparant to

II. Offenses done and committed by the said Earl, during the time of the
Princes being in Spain.
VII. THat at the Princes coming into Spain, during the time aforesaid, the
Earl of Bristol, cunningly, falsely, and traitorously moved and persuaded the
Prince, being then in the power of a foreign King of the Romish Religion, to
change his Religion, which was done in this manner. At the Princes first coming
to the said Earl, he asked the Prince for what he came thither, the Prince at
first not conceiving the Earls meaning, answered, You know as well as I. The
Earl replied, Sir, Servants can never serve their Master industriously,
although they

VIII. That afterward during the Princes being in Spain, the said Earl having
conference with the said Prince about the Romish Religion, he endeavored falsely
and traitorously to persuade the Prince to change his Religion, and to become a
Romish Catholic, and to become obedient to the usurped Authority of the Pope
of Rome: And to that end England never did any great thing, but when they were
under the obedience of the Pope of Rome, and that it was impossible they could
do any thing of note otherwise.

IX. That during the time of the Princes being in Spain, the Prince consulting,
and advising with the said Earl, and others, about a new offer made by the King
of Spain, touching the Palatinates Eldest Son to marry with the Emperors
Daughter, but then he must be bred up in Walter Aston then present, falling
into some passion, said, That he durst not for his head consent to it; the Earl
of Bristol replied, That he saw no such great inconvenience in it, for that he
might be bred up in the Emperors Court in our Religion. But when the extreme
danger, and in a manner the impossibility thereof, was pressed unto the said
Earl, he said again, That without some great Action, the Peace of Christendom
would never be had; which was so dangerous, and so desperate a Counsel, that
one so near the Crown of England should be poisoned in his Religion, and become
an unfriend to our State, that the consequences thereof, both for the present
and future times, were infinitely dangerous; and yet hereunto Austria, lead him.

III. Offenses done and committed by the said Earl after the Princes coming
from
X. THat when the Prince had clearly found himself and his Father deluded in
these Treaties, and hereupon resolved to return from the Court of Spain; yet
because it behoved him to part fairly, he left the powers of the Desponsories
with the Earl of Bristol, to be delivered upon the return of the Dispensation
from Rome, which the King of Spain insisted upon; and without which, as he
pretended, he would not Desponsories, the Infanta that should then be his Wife,
might be put into a Monastery, wrote a Letter back to the said Earl from
Segovia, thereby commanding him not to make use of the said Powers, until he
could give him assurance that a Monastery should not rob him of his Wife; which
Letter the said Earl received, and with speed returned an Answer thereto into
England, persuading against this Direction, yet promising Obedience thereunto.
Shortly after which, the Prince sent Spain, discharging him of his farther
command. But his late Majesty by the same Messenger sent him a more express
direction, not to dispatch the Desponsories until a full Conclusion were had of
the other Treaty of the Palatinate, with this of the Marriage; for his Majesty
said, That he would not have one Daughter to laugh, and leave the other
Daughter weeping. In which Dispatch although there were some mistaking, yet in
the next Bristol tied to the same Restriction, which himself confessed in one
of his Dispatches afterward, and promised to obey punctually the Kings command
therein; yet nevertheless, contrary to his Duty and Alleagiance, in another
Letter sent immediately after, he declared, That he had set a day for the
Desponsories, without any Assurance, or so much as treating of those things
which were commanded to him as Restrictions; and that so short a day, that if
extraordinary diligence with good success in the Journey had

XI. Lastly, That he has offended in a high and contemptuous manner in
preferring a scandalous Petition to this honorable house, to the dishonor of
his Majesty of blessed memory deceased, and of his sacred Majesty that now is,
which are no way sufferable in a Subject toward his Sovereign; and in one
Article of that Petition specially, wherein he gives his now Majesty the Lie,
in denying, and offering to falsify that Relation which his Majesty affirmed,
and thereunto added many things of his own remembrance to both Houses of
Parliament.

ROBERT HEATH.

The Earl of Bristol upon the Attorney Generals accusing him of high Treason,
thus expressed himself.

The Earl of Bristols expressions at the time of his Accusation.
THat he had exhibited his Petition to the House April 19, that he might come up
and be heard in his Accusation of the Duke of Buckingham, and that thereupon he
being a Peer of this Realm is now charged with Treason. That he had heretofore
in^ormed the late King of the Dukes unfaithful service, and thereupon the Duke
labored that he might be clapped up in the Tower presently upon his return out of
Spain: That he importuned the late King, that he might be heard before himself,
and his Majesty promised it; I pray God (said Conway, and not to invalid his
Testimony against them by the Kings Charge against him; and that he might not
be impeached, till his Charge of so high a nature be first

So he tendered to the House the Articles against the Duke, which the Clerk
received, and he withdrew, and his Petition exhibited the 19 of April was read;
and the Lords resolved upon the Question, That the said Earls Charge against
the Duke of Buckingham and the Lord Conway should be presently read.

The Earl being shortly after called in again to the Bar of the Lords House,
concerning his Articles against the Duke, made this speech.

The Earl of Bristols speech at the Bar of the Lords House at the delivery of
his Articles against the Duke.
FIrst, he craved pardon of their Lordships for his earnest Speeches the other
day, confessing them to have been in passion, saying, That unexpected
accusation of Treason would warm any honest heart, but would hereafter amend
it. Then he rendered their Lordships humble thanks, for their manner of
proceeding against him; and desired

Then the Earl desired to know of Mr Attorney, who was the Relator to his
Charge, and that he might understand who was his Accuser: Mr Attorney answered,
That the King himself out of his own mouth had given him directions for his own
Relation against him, and corrected many things that were added: Unto which the
Earl answered, That he would not contest with the King, neither did it beseem
him so to do; neither esteemed he his life or his fortunes so much, as to

These were his humble Petitions which he besought their Lordships to present
unto his Majesty, and to take into their considerations Spain against the
State; or the receipt of Ten or Twenty thousand pounds, for Flushing, the
Brill, or the like; or for being the means of lending the Kings Ships to a
Foreign Nation, and that against those of our own Religion; or for revealing his
Majesty's highest Secrets, which none above two or three dares know; or for
treating the greatest affairs, as it were by his own Authority, without formal
Instructions in the points; or for having taken Rewards, or

Then he desired their Lordships that he might have a Copy of his Charge in
writing, and time allowed him for his Answer, and Counsel assigned him to plead
his Cause; and said, there was a great difference between the Duke of
Buckingham and

And as touching the Lord Conway, in as much as he had given in Articles
against him, he desired his Lordship might not meddle in that particular
business, nor use the Kings name against him ex officio; he also besought their
Lordships to be Suitors to his Majesty on his behalf, that all the particular
dispatches of his own Ambassages, and Sir Walter Ashtons might be brought
thither, and that he might make use of them for his defense, as his Evidence;
then he desired their Lordships not to think it tedious for him to proceed and
lay open his

He lays open his Case to the Parliament.
HE said that he had the honor to serve the late King his Master of happy
memory, for the space of twenty years, and a long time as a Counselor, and in
seven Foreign Ambassages: In all which time, in point of his Negotiation he had
never received one check or rebuke, until the return of the Duke of Buckingham
out Spain, and therefore from thence he would begin his present Narration.

The very day that his Majesty departed from Spain, he was pleased to tell him,
That he had no ways offended him, but did him the honor to trust him with the
custody of the powers for his Marriage, and after his return into England,
wrote unto him some Letters, which did in no kind express any distrust or
displeasure against him. About Spain, and his Ministers, and the Duke of
Buckingham, would disorder and utterly overthrow all his affairs, if his wisdom
prevented it not, hinc illae lacrymae: The Duke of Buckingham got a sight and
knowledge of the Letters, and fearing lest the Earl at his return Spain, he
resolved, That his access to the King was no ways to be admitted, and
therefore labored and endeavored that he might be committed to the Tower
presently upon his arrival; and conceiving That the Lord Maquess Hamilton in
regard of his Friendship with the Earl and the Alliance which was then intended
between them, might oppose this course, he earnestly pressed him therein, and
moved him to deal with my Lord Chamberlain to the same purpose, vowing, That

The Lord Chamberlain attests the truth of what the Earl had said.
This Design of the Duke not taking, he fell upon other things, indeed to have
frightened the Earl out of his Country and honor, and thereupon laid some great
and sinister aspersions upon him in both Houses of Parliament, thinking thereby
to have terrified him that he should not return, saying, That if he kept not
himself where he was, and laid hold of those great offers which he heard were
made unto him in Spain, it would be worse with him.

Then the Earl of Bristol proceeded and said, That the knowledge of these
aspersions cast upon him in the Parliament, The Earl proceeds.
came first unto him at Bordeaux in France, where he was coming home at leisure
in the company of his wife and family, having formerly Conway, to know if his
speedy return would be any way useful to his Majesty's service: Who answered
him, That he might very well return at leisure with his family. And in the mean
time he was fallen upon by the Duke of Buckingham in Parliament, in such sort
as your Lordships well remember; of whose Declaration he said he would boldly
affirm unto their Lordships, that there was scarce any one thing concerning him
in it, which was not contrary to, or different from the truth.

Bordeaux the Earl took Post, making haste, for that he hoped to clear his
Honor in Parliament before it should break up; and being arrived at Calis, he
sent over to have one of the Kings Ships, for which there was public Order
given; but although both wind and weather were as fair as could be, and the
Kings Ships lay at Boloign, having carried over Count Mansfield, and might
every day within three hours have been with him, yet the Ship came not in eight
days expectance; so that the Earl fearing the Parliament would be dissolved,
was enforced

Upon his landing at Dover, hoping that if his Arrest should have been deferred
until his coming to London, he might have gotten directly to the Kings
presence, which the Duke resolved was by no means to be admitted; The Earl was
there by a Letter of the Lord Conway's delivered unto him by a Servant of his,
in his Majesty's name, commanded to retire himself to his House, and not to
come to the Court

He still continued his solicitation to be admitted to the Kings presence; Who
sent him word, and confirmed it by oath, That as soon as he should have
answered the Questions which the Commissioners were to propound to him, he
would both see him, and hear him, and wondered that he should so much doubt
thereof. He then solicited with all earnestness to have the Questions sent
unto him, which was promised should be within few days. In the interim his
Majesty being desirous that the business should have been accommodated, sent
secretly to him by a Gentleman (who is ready to depose it) this Message; That
he should write a fair Letter to the Duke, and leave the rest to Him. Hereupon
the Duke sent a Gentleman (one Mr. Clark) with fair Propositions, offering to
procure him whatsoever he could reasonably pretend; only he must not be
admitted to the Kings presence for Vice-chamberlains Place, having been therein
formerly engaged. The Earl told the Gentleman, That to condescend to any such
Course, were jointly to confess himself faulty in some kind, which he would not
do for any respect in the world; and let him know the great wrong that the Duke
had already done him, and therefore it would be more honorable for him to
procure him some reparation, then to press him further. Moreover, not by way of
message, but by way of information of the Clark, he let him know, how fit it
were for the Duke not to press these things, who could not but be conscious of
his own Faults, and knew his Innocence; and withal showed him a Paper that he
had made ready for the King, containing the Particulars wherein the Duke had
disparaged him.

Mr. Clark making the Duke acquainted herewith, the Duke wrote a Letter the
next day to the Earl, bearing date 7 Iulii, telling him, That he had willingly
intended the accommodation of his affairs; but Clark, he was disobliged, unless
he should be pleased to relent it. Whereupon the Earl answered with that
directness he thought befitting him in point of Honor. The Course of Mediation
was interrupted, and the Duke so far incensed, that he swore he would have him
questioned for his life. In the interim, (which the Earl desired might be known
to the Lords) His late Majesty was so far from thinking him a Delinquent, or
any way dishonest, that he was often heard to say, and swear, That he held him
an honest man, and Padre Maestre, as is best known to my Lord Conway, by whose
Letter he received his Majesty's leave in that particular.

Then he resumed the state of his business where he left it, which was in the
hands of the Commissioners, and they were to frame Interrogatories for him; the
which although he had promised should be sent him within a few days, yet such
art was used, that six or seven weeks were spent in the framing of them, to the
end that his Majesty's Progress beginning, there might be no means for the
further clearing of the business: And so supposing that for the answering of
the Twenty Interrogatories of so high a nature, the Earl would take some time,
they in persona, though it were in the nature of a Delinquent. Unto which his
Majesty answered most graciously, That out of his favor, and for that he would
not do him wrong, he would not admit of it, but that he should send his Answer,
and he would instantly put an end to his businesses; as will appear by Letters.
Hereupon the Duke was put into a great strait how to keep him any longer from
his Majesty, but desired that only a few Questions more might be asked of him;
which the King upon great urging and instance condescended unto, so that the
Questions might be presently sent him: But herein were such Artifices used,
that the bringing of any was delayed Conway sent him word, That he had Order
indeed for the sending of him some more Questions, but out of his affection to
him he forbore the sending of them, unless he should press for them. Whereupon
the Earl instantly wrote unto him, that they might be sent unto him. My Lord
Conway made him answer by his Letter, That he wished rather the course of
Mediation might be pursued, for that would but further exasperate; but if he
would needs have the Questions, they

So likewise the Earl having sent his Answer to all the Commissioners, who most
of them made not nice to declare that they were fully satisfied, and when it
was perceived that the Commissioners would

After the Progress was ended, he began again to solicit his Majesty, and
wrote particularly unto the Duke of Buckingham. Whereupon the Duke was pleased
to send four or five Propositions, which he desired It is an assertion not
granted, that the Earl of Bristol by his Answer had satisfied either the King,
the Prince, or me of his Innocence. A presumptuous commination for any Subject.

But these Propositions were so unjust, that he wrote unto the Duke, that in
stead of an Acknowledgment he had sent him an Answer unto them; unto which if
either himself or any man living was able to reply, he would submit himself to
any thing that should be demanded. But this no way satisfied the Duke, although
it did his late Majesty, I were to be accounted a Tyrant, to enjoin an Innocent
man to confess faults of which he was not guilty. And thereupon sent him word,
That he should make his Answer, but acknowledge nothing he was not faulty in.
And although he received this Message from the Kings own mouth, as will be
deposed, yet the Duke at the same time wrote unto him, That the conclusion of
all that had been treated with his Majesty, was, That he should make the
Acknowledgment in such manner as was set down in this paper. And at this time
likewise it was that his Majesty sent him word, That he would hear him
concerning the Duke of Buckingham, as well as he had heard the Duke concerning
him. And this was not long before his Majesty's sickness: And in the interim,
as he had heard by several ways, the King suffered much, and was infinitely
pressed by the Duke concerning the said Earl and his affairs; and this he said
was the suffering

The Earl craved leave of their Lordships to specify some other particulars,
whereby it should appear that his Majesty was in no kind ill opinioned of him
till his dying day, viz. That several persons will depose, that they have heard
his Majesty say, that he esteemed him an honest man; And that he was pleased to
accept of Toys by way of Present from him graciously and in good part; and at
last was likewise pleased to give him leave to come to London and to follow his
own London, intimated to the Duke his intention of going to his Lodging in
Whitehall; but the Duke was therewith incensed again, and said he mistook the
Kings meaning, which was, that he might privately follow his own business. And
this he said was the true State and Condition, when it pleased God to take unto
his mercy his late most gracious Majesty.

Upon his Majesty's coming to the Crown, he said he wrote a most Maii 1625.
That the resolution was to proceed against him, without a plain and direct
Confession of the Point which he had formerly required him to acknowledge; and
in a Courtly manner of menace tells him, That he would take the freedom to
advise him to bethink himself in time what will be most for his good. But in
the interim his Majesty was graciously pleased that his Writ of Parliament May
in this manner: I have acquainted his Majesty with your requests toward him
touching your Summons to the Parliament, which he takes very well, and would
have you rather make excuse for your absence notwithstanding your Writ, then to
come your self in person. Whereupon he sent humbly to desire a Letter of leave
under his Conway an absolute Prohibition, and to restrain and confine him in
such sort as he has been in the late Kings time: And although he was indeed
absolutely set free, he could never get cleared by the Lord Conway, though he
sent him all the Papers to examine; and when he could make no further reply, he
said he conceived he was under restraint, and that his liberty expired with the
late Kings death; when indeed Restraint may expire, but Liberty is natural.
After this he continued for the hereof he never made the least complaint: But
against the time of his Majesty's Coronation, he thought it fit to lay hold of
that occasion, when Princes do Acts of grace and favor, to be a most humble
Suitor to his Majesty for his grace and goodness; and addressed his Letters
unto the Duke of Buckingham, from whom he received a Letter all written in his
own hand, and therein a Letter enclosed from his Majesty, so different from
some gracious Message which he had received from his England, upon the occasion
of a great sickness; and likewise from his speeches several times delivered to
his Wife, to wit, That he had never offended him, and that for his faults, he
no ways held them criminal, but to be expiated by any easy acknowledgment:
That he confessed he knew not what judgment to make of the said Letter, neither
has presumed hitherto to make any Answer thereto; although by reducing the
occasions of speeches, and circumstances to his Majesty's memory, he no ways
doubts but he

After this he said, that his Writ of Parliament was detained; whereupon he
addressed himself to the Lord Keeper, that he would be a Suitor to his Majesty
for him in that behalf: which diligences not taking effect, by Petition he
became a Suitor to their Lordships for their Honorable mediation to his
Majesty, and thereupon his Writ of Parliament Buckingham upon that took
occasion, as he had published Copies of the said Letter over all the Kingdom,
to read it likewise in that Honorable House, as was best known unto their
Lordships, and the Writ was accompanied with a Prohibition from the Lo^d
Keeper; whereupon he addressed himself for Justice to that Honorable House,
(being possessed of his Cause by his Petition) for both redress of his own
wrongs, and likewise of Complaints against the Duke for many Crimes: And that
Honorable House being possessed

Then the Lords asked him, When he would bring in his Answer? He promised to
answer as soon as might be, but knew not how far he should have occasion to use
his ancient Dispatches. The Lord Keeper told him, that Mr. Attorney might help
him by letting him know it: The Attorney said, that his Charge should in
nothing look further back then to the year 1621. Which he desired might be
recorded.

Maxwell the Gentleman Usher, in whose house and custody he remained.



Then were read the Earls Articles against the Duke and the Lord Conway, viz.

Articles of the Earl of Bristol, whereby he charge the Duke of Buckingham,
bearing Date the First day of May, 1626.
The Earl of Bristols Articles against the Duke.
I. THat the Duke of Buckingham did secretly combine with the Gondomar
Ambassador for the King of Spain, before his the said Ambassadors last return
into Spain, in the Summer An. 1622. To carry his Majesty (then Prince) into
Spain, to the end he might be informed and instructed in the Roman Religion,
and thereby have perverted the Prince, and subverted the true Religion
established in England: From which misery this Kingdom (next under Gods mercy)
has by the wise, religious, and constant carriage of his Majesty been almost
miraculously delivered, considering the many bold and subtle attempts

II. That Mr. Porter was made acquainted therewith and sent into Spain; and
such Messages at his return framed, as might serve for a ground to set on foot
this Conspiracy; The which was done accordingly, and thereby the King and
Prince highly abused, and their Consents thereby first gotten to the said
Journey, that is to say, after the return of the said Mr. Porter, which was
about the end of December, or the beginning of January 1622. whereas the said
Duke had plotted it many months

III. That the said Duke, at his arrival in Spain, nourished the Spanish
Ministers not only in the belief of his own being Popishly affected, but did
(both by absenting himself from all Exercises of Religion constantly used in
the Earl of Bristols house, and frequented by all other Protestant English, and
by conforming himself to please the Spaniards in diverse Rites of their
Religion, even so far as to kneel and adore their Sacrament) from time to time
give the Spaniards hope of the Prince his Conversion: Bristol and Sir Walter
Aston settled and signed under their Majesty's hands, with a Clause in the King
of Spain's Answer of December. 12. 1622. That they held the Articles agreed upon
sufficient, and such as ought to induce the Pope to the granting of the
Dispensation.

IV. That the Duke of Buckingham having several times in the presence Bristol
moved and pressed his late Majesty, at the instance of the Conde of Gondomar,
to write a Letter unto the Pope, and to that purpose having once brought a
Letter ready drawn, wherewith the Earl of Bristol by his Majesty being made
acquainted, did so strongly oppose the writing of any such Letter, that during
the abode of the said Earl of Bristol in England the said Duke could not obtain
it; yet not long after the Earl was gone, he procured such a Letter to be
written from his late Majesty unto the Pope, and to have him styled [
Sanctissime ]

V. That the Pope being informed of the Duke of Buckingham's inclination and
intention in point of Religion, sent unto the said Duke a particular Bull in
parchment, for to persuade and encourage him in the perversion of his Majesty
then Prince.

VI. That the said Dukes behavior in Spain was such, that he thereby so
incensed the King of Spain and his Ministers, as they would admit of no
reconciliation, nor further dealing with him. Whereupon the said Duke seeing
that the Match would be now to his disadvantage, he endeavored to break it, not
for any service to the Kingdom, nor dislike of the Match in it self, nor for
that he found (as since he has pretended) that the Spaniards did not really
intend the said Match, but out of his

VII. That after he intended to cross the Marriage, he put in practice diverse
undue courses; as namely, making use of the Letters of his Majesty (then
Prince) to his own ends, and not to what they were intended; as likewise
concealing diverse things of high importance from his late Majesty, and thereby
overthrew his Majesty's purposes, and advanced his own ends.

VIII. That the said Duke, as he had with his skill and artifices formerly

IX. As for scandal given by his personal behavior, as also the employing of
his power with the King of Spain for the procuring of Favors and Offices, which
he bestowed upon base and unworthy persons for the recompense and hire of his
Lust; These things, as neither fit for the Bristol to speak, nor indeed for the
House to hear, he leaves to your Lordships wisdom how far you will be pleased
to have them examined; It having been indeed a great infamy and dishonor to
this Nation, that a Person of the Dukes great quality and employments, a
Privy-Counsellor, an Ambassador, eminent in his Masters favor, and solely
trusted with the Person of the Prince, should leave behind him in a Foreign
Court so much scandal, as he did by his ill behavior.

X. That the Duke has been in great part the Cause of the ruin and Palatine
and his Estates, in as much as those Affairs had relation unto this Kingdom.

XI. That the Duke of Buckingham has in his Relations to both Houses of
Parliament wronged the Earl of Bristol in point of his Honor by many sinister
aspersions which he has laid upon him, and in point of his Liberty by many
undue Courses through his power and practices.

XII. That the Earl of Bristol did reveal unto his late Majesty both by

Articles of the Earl of Bristol against the Lord Conway, bearing Date 1 Maii
1626.
The Earl of Bristols Articles against the Lord Conway.
I. THat the Lord Conway is so great a Servant of the Duke of Buckingham's, that
he has not stuck to send the Earl of Bristol plain

II. That the said Lord Conway professes himself to be a Secretary of the Duke
of Buckingham's creation, and so acknowledges it under his own hand: And
although that he be the Kings Secretary of State, and a Privy-Counsellor, he
usually begins his Letters to the Duke, [ Most ]

III. That as a Creature of the said Dukes, the said Lord Conway has been made
the Instrument of keeping the Earl of Bristol from the Kings presence, and of
imprisoning of him by Warrants only under his own hand; for which he cannot (as
the Earl conceives) produce any sufficient Warrant.

IV. That by the space of Twelve months last past, the said Lord Conway has
been the Cause of the Earls restraint, only by misinforming

V. That the Earl of Bristols Mother lying sick upon her deathbed, desired for
her comfort to see her Son, and to give him her last blessing: Whereupon the
Earl wrote to the Lord Conway, to desire him to move

VI. That having the businesses of the Earl of Bristols in his hands, and the
Earl being commanded by the King to address himself in his occasions unto his
Lordship, He would never deliver any Message from the said Earl, without
acquainting the said Duke and receiving his directions, and in a noble manner
of freeness stuck not to send him word.

VII. That the Earl of Bristol having received from the Lord Conway Twenty
Interrogatories in his late Majesty's name, drawn up by a Commission of the
Lords appointed to search into the Proceedings and Imploiments of the said
Earl, in which search there was more then two months spent, diverse of the said
Interrogatories involving Felony and Teason; And his Majesty having been
pleased to assure the said Earl both by Message and Letters, that upon
satisfaction given to himself, and the Commissioners by his Answers, he would
presently put an end to the Earl of Bristol's Business: The Earl of Bristol
having so fully answered as would admit of no reply; and that many of the
Commissioners declared themseves to be fully satisfied: The said Lord Conway
(being the Secretary in the Commission, to whom it properly belonged to call
the Lords to assemble) Bristol was like to be cleared, never moved for any
further meeting, neither have they ever been permitted to meet until this day,
whereby the troubles of the Earl of Bristol have been kept on foot till this
present, and the said Earls Imprisonment has been enlarged Twenty months; And
by the Artifices of the said Duke of Buckingham and the said Lord Conway (as
shall be made appear) the said Earl has been insensibly involved and stauked
into the troubles he is now in, which he doubts not but your Lordships will
judge to be a very considerable

VIII. That for a color of keeping the Earl from his late Majesty's presence,
it being pretended after the Answer to the twenty Interrogatories, that there
were some few Questions more to be added; whereunto when he should have
answered, his Majesty swore solemnly, that without any delay he should be
admitted to his presence, and that within two or three days he should have the
said Questions sent unto him; the Lord Conway, notwithstanding he acknowledged
under his hand, that he

IX. That the Earl of Bristol being set free by his late Majesty, to come to
London to follow his own Affairs as he pleased, and thereupon having his Writ
of Parliament sent unto him, without any Letter of Prohibition; but the Earl of
Bristol, out of his great desire to conform all his Buckingham, That he took in
ve^^ good part the said Earls respect unto him; but wished him to make some
excuse for the present: The which accordingly he did, and moved, That he might
have a Letter under the Kings hand to warrant his absence; but under color of
this Letter of leave, upon the Earl of Bristol's own motion and desire, the
Lord Conway sent a Letter from his Majesty absolutely forbidding his coming to
Parliament; and therein likewise was inserted a Clause, That the Earl should
remain restrained, as he was in the time of his late Majesty; and so thereby a
color of restraint under his Majesty's hand was gotten, which could never be
procured in his late Majesty's time; whereby the Earl of Bristol has been
unduly restrained ever since, without being able to procure any redress, or to
make the Lord Conway willing to understand his Case, although he sent him all
the Papers, whereby he

X. That the Lord Conway, knowing that the Match for the marrying of the King
of Bohemia's eldest Son with the Emperors Daughter, and being bred in the
Emperors Court, was allowed and propounded by his late Majesty: And that his
Majesty by his Letters unto his Son-in-law, declares, That he thinks it the
fairest and clearest way for the accommodation of his Affairs, and that he will
take sufficient care for his breeding in true Religion. And notwithstanding
that the said Earl received a Copy of the said Letter by the late Kings order,
with other Papers, setting down all that had been done in the said business,
and his Majesty's assent thereunto from the Lord Conway himself; yet Bristol,
both in the twentieth Interrogatory, and in his Majesty's last Letter, that he
should consent to the breeding of the young Prince in the Emperors Court. And
further in the Interogatory he alleges it as an aggravation against the said
Earl, That the breeding of the said Prince in the Emperors Court inferred to
the perversion of his Religion, when he knew that his said breeding was never
thought nor spoken of by the King, nor any other, but with that express Clause
and Condition, That he should

XI. That the Lord Conway has been the cause of all the Earl of Bristol's
Troubles, by his dubious and intrapping Dispatches, and in^erring, That the
said Earl has failed in his Directions, when it shall be made appear, that his
Dispatches contained no such Directions as he has alleged were given.

The House not being satisfied to commit the Earl to the Tower, let him remain
where he was before, with the Gentleman Usher; and further ordered, That the
Kings Charge against the Earl of Bristol be first heard, and then the Charge of
the said Earl against the Duke; yet so that the Earls Testimony against the
Duke be not prevented, prejudiced, or impeached.

The day following the Lord Keeper delivered a Message from the

A Message from the King to the Lords concerning Bristol's Articles against the
Duke.
THat his Majesty takes notice of the Articles exhibited against the Duke of
Buckingham by the Earl of Bristol; and he observes that many of them are such,
as himself is able to say more of his own knowledge then any man for the Dukes
sincere carriage in them: That one of them, touching the Narrative made in
James, trencheth as far upon himself as the Duke; for that his Majesty went as
far as the Duke in that Declaration; and that all of them have been closed in
the Earls own breast now for these two years, contrary to his Duty, if he had
known any crime of that nature by the Duke; and now he vents it by way of
recrimination against the Duke, whom he knows to be a principal Witness to
prove his Majesty's Charge.

And therefore, That his Majesty gave them thanks, that they gave Bristol's
unreasonable motion, of putting the Duke under the same restraint that they had
put the Earl, thereby eschewing what the Earl aims at, to alter their
dutiful Procedings toward his Majesty: That thereby they had made his Majesty
confident, that as they have, so they will put a difference between his
Majesty's Charge against one that appears as a Delinquent, and the
recrimination of the Earl of Bristol against his Majesty's Witness; and they
will not equal them by a proceeding Pari Passu.

At this time there was an endeavor to take the Earls Cause out of the House,
and to proceed by way of Indictment in the King's Bench:

I. IT was ordered, The Reasons.
That in all Causes of moment, the Defendants shall have Copies of all
Depositions both pro and contra after publication, in convenient time, before
hearing, to prepare themselves; and if the Defendants will demand that of the
House in due time, they shall have their learned Council to assist them in
their defense: And

II. The Earl of Bristol by his Petition to the House complained of his
restraint, desiring to be heard here, as well in points of his wrongs, as in
his accusations against the Duke; whereof his Majesty April the 20, That his
Majesty was resolved to put his Cause upon the honor and justice of this House;
and that his pleasure was that the said Earl should be sent for as a Delinquent
to answer the offenses he committed in his Negotiation before his Majesty's
going into Spain, whilst his Majesty was there, and since his coming thence;
and that his Majesty would cause these things to be charged against him in this
House; so as the House is fully possessed of the Cause, as well by the viz.

1. He can have no Counsel. 3. He cannot know what the Evidences against him
will be, in a convenient time to prepare for his Defense; and so the Innocent
may be condemned, which may be the Case of any Peer. 4. The Liberties of the
House will be thereby infrigned, the Honor and Justice thereof declined,
contrary to the Kings pleasure expressly signified by the Lord Keeper.



5. The Earl being indicted, it will not be in the power of the House to keep
him from Arraignment, and so he may be disabled to make good his Charge against
the Duke.
Therefore the way to proceed according to the Directions and true meaning of
the Order, and the Kings pleasure already signified, and preserve the Liberties
of the House, and protect one from injury, will be

First, To have the Charge delivered into the House in writing, and the Earl to
set down his Answer to it in writing; and that the Witnesses may be examined,
and Evidences on both sides heard, by such course and manner of proceedings as
shall be thought fit by the House; and 1. It appears that the Earl, in the
space of two years (till now he complained) has not been so much as questioned
for matter of Treason. 2. He has been examined upon twenty Interrogatories,
and the Commissioners satisfy that his Answer would admit of no Reply. 3. The
Lord Conway by several Letters has intimated, That there was nothing against
him but what was pardoned by the Parliament. Pardon of 21 Iac. And signified
his Majesty's pleasure, That he might rest in that security he was, and sit
still.


His Majesty has often declared both to the Countess of Bristol and others,
That there was neither Felony nor Treason against him, nor ought

Some Cases happened in Parliament 1 and 2 Caroli; wherein the Judges opinions
were had; viz.

THis Question was put to all the Justices; Whether a Peer impeached for
Treason shall be tried in Parliament? And the chief Justice, in the name of all
the Justices, delivered his opinion that the course Steward; vide 10 Edward
4.6. or by Bill, and an Act of Parliament to attaint the Party. An Order was
made in the Upper-House of Parliament 21 Iac. That any Peer shall have Counsel
in case Criminal or Capital; and upon the Accusation of the Earl of Bristol in
Parliament, he made a motion for Counsel; which matter was commended to the
King by the Lords, with voucher of the said former Order: The King returned
Answer that this was contrary to the Fundamental Laws Bristol to have his
Counsel, with protestation that he would advise in the general; and the same
Order was made without his privity, and without hearing the Justices or his
Counsel. And upon the Trial of the Lord Middlesex, in a Case Criminal and not
Capital, afterward, that is to say Friday after, upon the assembly of all the
Justices, the Attorney of the King, by commandment of the King,

The Lords by Order referred to the Justices this Question; Whether the King
may be a Witness in case of Treason? Secondly, Admit that this be for Treason
done, when he is privy: Whether in this case he may be a Witness, or not? and
before the Resolution, this Message and Command came from the King to the
Justices, that in this general Question they do not deliver any opinion; but if
any point come in particular, they upon mature deliberation may give their
advice. And this was declared

Sitting this Parliament, the Duke of Buckingham was deputed Procurator by
several Peers, whose Votes on any occasion, he had power to make use of, viz.
By the Earls of Bath, Exeter, Cumberland, Northumberland, Lord Teinham,
Colchester, Tunbridge, Evers, Darcy, Meynel, Noel, St. John of Basing,
Mansfield, and Roberts. Whereupon the House of Peers made an Order, That after
this Session, no Lord of this House

About a fortnight after, the Charge was given in against the Earl of Bristol,
the Earl gave in his Answer, which we have chosen to insert here for the
Readers more convenience, though a little out of time. And having the Answer in
his hand, ready to deliver to their Lordships, he did crave leave, that by way
of Introduction he might speak a few words, and began thus.

I Am not insensible upon what disadvantages I come to trial in this Cause: The
Earl of Bristols Speech by way of Introduction, before he gave in his Answer.
For first, I am fallen into this Majesty's heavy displeasure, and am to
encounter with a potent Adversary highly in favor, and am accused for Treason;
for which, all Counsel and Friends abandon me as a man infected with the
Plague; I am become bound and under restraint, whereas a man who is to
encounter for his life and honor, and

But as to the Matter, I find my self charged with diverse Articles of High
Treason; but looking into them with the eyes of my best understanding, with the
opinion also of my Council lately assigned me, and taking them apart one
Article from another, I find not any thing in them like Treason, or that has
so much as the show or countenance of a fault, either in act or words; only by
laying all things together, and by wresting the wrests with a strained
Construction, directly contrary to viz. Ill affection to Religion, and too much
affection to Spain; which if I shall clear, the Inference grounded upon these
props, will fall of it self.

Therefore I crave leave of your Lordships, before I give my Answer to the
Charge, that I may give you an account of these two particulars;

And first for Religion, I was in my Childhood bred in the Protestant Religion,
and rather after the stricter manner then otherwise. When I grew in years fit,
I traveled into France, Italy, and Rome it self: In all which Travels, I can
produce some that I consorted withal, who will witness with me, that I ever
constantly used the Religion I professed, without the least prevarication; no
man being able to charge me, that so much as out of curiosity I ever was
present at any of the exercises belonging to the Roman Religion, or did the
least act of Conformity to any of their Rites or Ceremonies.

Secondly, After my return home I was received into the service of his late
Majesty of Blessed Memory, whom I served some years as a

Thirdly, In that time of my youth, not to avoid idleness, but out of affection
to Religion, I translated that excellent Book of our Faith, and great Points of
our Religion, Written by Monsieur Moulins; which his late Majesty having
sometimes after seen, approved so well, that he would needs have it Printed;
which accordingly was Sampford, my Chaplain, to whom I gave the honor: But it
was my own act, as Mr. Sampford will not deny, though to this hour I had never
before spoken of it.

Fourthly, About Seven or eight and twenty years of my age, I was employed
Ambassador into Spain in that great business of the Treaty of the Marriage; and
whereas others before me, carried with them but one Chaplain, I had two, viz.
Mr. Sampford and Mr. Boswel; and at my arival at the Court of Spain, I caused
it to be published, that De Lerma and other the great Ministers of Spain took
offense, and told me* they might well perceive I brought no good affection to
the business I came about, that would so publicly and avowedly in that Court,
where never the like was done, proclaim there a Communion; and with high
expression persuaded me to decline it. Whereunto I answered, I came to do my
Master service, which I would heartily Spain; the like I did in Germany in the
Emperors Courts in his Embassage thither.

Fifthly, I had in my several employments into Spain and Germany above Five
hundred persons of all qualities attending upon me, and

Sixthly, A foul-mouthed Shimei railed against our late King and Religion in
Spain; how I caused that to be revenged by a near Kinsman of my own, is well
known.

Seventhly, One of the English dying in the Town of Madrid, of that the
Inquisitors and other Officers would come, and fetch him out, and bury him
after their manner: I stood upon it, and that it was the King of Englands
House, and openly protested, that whosoever should come thither with such
intent, I would shoot at him with a Piece; and exhorted all my people, That if
such an attempt should be, they should rather then suffer such a dishonor to
our Religion, die with me in that quarrel, and hoped such English as were in
the Town would do the like.

Madrid before my coming thither, and the English Arms set up, I labored to
suppress it, and having written thereof to the late King, his Majesty advised
me not to run my Head against the Rock; for it was an impossible thing for me
to do: Yet I undertook it, and it pleased God so to bless my endeavors, That I
absolutely dissolved and overthrew it. For which, the Bishop of Winchester,
Montague (now with God) wrote unto me by his Majesty's direction, a Letter of
his Majesty's Good Fortune Digby, your good luck in your Service well deserves
that style.

Ninethly, In all Negotiations in Spain, in point of Religion, I ever
straightned my Instructions.

Tenthly, The Match with Spain was not moved by me, I ever advised Spain then
France, so as good Conditions might be made for Religion; as appears by a
Letter I wrote and delivered to the Prince, at his first going upon the
employment; for which I had like then to have been ruined for being a Puritan,
as I am now for being a Papist, and all by one and the same hand.

Eleventhly, And I appeal to the Testimony of Dr. Mason and Dr. Wren, the Kings
Chaplains with me in Spain, and to Mr. Sampford, Boswel, and Mr. Frewen, my own
Chaplains there. And that such Papists as have been my ancient Acquaintance and
Friends, being men of worth, well known to many of their Lordships, may be
examined upon Oath, Whether I have not in all places as well in Spain as in
England, and at all times upon fit occasions, avowed my self a Protestant,
without the lest prevarication? Or whether I did ever any the least act that
was not suitable to the same Profession? And that Mr. Frewen, Mr. Wake, my own
Chaplains, may give their Testimonies, whether in the Spain, I wonder from
whence that opinion should grow, since I was there hated and shamed, as the man
whom of all others they desired to have the least to do withal; having stood
ever stricter in point of Religion, then by my Instructions I might have done;
as after the Capitulation concluded on, they understood by some intelligence,
which caused their hatred toward me.

Sure I am, I showed it not by the service I did them; for diverse years
together there was not a Letter sent by that King to any other State, that the
King my Master had not a Copy of before, or by that time it came to the place
whither it was directed. There was not any great action on foot, whereof I had
not the private Instructions, and sent them hither; not any expedition by Sea
or Land, wherein I had

There was not a Port in Spain that I had not caused the depth of it to be
sounded, nor a Fort whereof I knew not the strength, both for the Garrison,
Munition, and other matters of advantage and disadvantage; insomuch as if it
should please the King to appoint a Committee of the Lords to take account of
me, I should by the stores I gathered there, and brought with me, make it
appear I was as useful a Servant to Spain the powers for the Desponsories were
to be deposited in some man's hands; and the Duke upon pretense of doing me
honor, but intending to break my Neck by it, moved, they might be left with me,
and the King of Spain was contented; and so they were put into my hands, not as
an Attorney only for the Prince: But the King of Spain having taken the
substitution of them by his Secretary of State entered in Legal form; whereby
that King was then become interessed Instrumentum stipulatum, wherein they were
both interessed, they were deposited in my hands, as an indifferent person
trusted between the King of Spain and the Prince, with a Declaration of the
Trust. And now the Duke was returned out of Spain, he plotted my ruin, and put
it in execution in this manner. He concealed that the powers were to expire at
Christmas, and procured his Majesty to write a Letter, (not a direct
Commandment) but expressing a desire Desponsories should not be till one of the
days in Christmas, intending thereby to draw me into a Dilemma, That if I
proceeded in the Match, this Letter should, as now it is, have been enforced
against me, as a breach of Instructions: If I had not proceeded, then I had
broken my trust between the Prince and King of Spain, overthrown the Marriage
so long sought and labored, it being the main scope of my Embassage, contrary
to express Warrant, and that upon a Letter I must needs know to be a mistake.
And when I had written into England England, committed to the Tower, before I
should ever come to speak with the King; which the Spanish Ambassador here in
England, having gotten private notice of, gave advertisement thereof to that
King: Who thereupon foreseeing my danger, and consulting with his Council, and
Divines, what were fit for him in Honor and Conscience to do in that Case, they
resolved, That seeing my Sufferings grew by being an honest man, and
endeavoring to perform the trust reposed in me by that King as well as the
Prince; That King was bound both in Honor and Conscience, not only to preserve
me from ruin, but to make me a Conde de Olivares told me what was plotted
against me in England; and in respect of the danger, by reason of the greatness
of my Adversary, p^rswaded me to stay there; and in his Masters Name made an
offer, not in secret, but in the presence of Sir Walter Aston.

Here he repeated those offers of Reward, Honor, and Preferment, which we have
mentioned before in order of time, and at present pass it

Upon what grounds and hope came I to encounter with those dangers? Not upon
hope of my greatness in Court, and strength of Friends, there to bolster out an
ill Cause; no sure, my strength was too weak, and my adversaries too powerful:
But I knew my Conscience was clear, and my Cause was good, and trusted in God
Almighty. And to him now, and to their Lordships judgments, recommended my
self, and my Cause.

Lord Keeper asked him, Whether he desired to say any more then he had done? he
answered, That he had something more to say, but knew not the order, or whether
Mr. Attorney would speak first; but he being desired to speak, He desired their
Lordships he might put them in mind of what he conceived they had already
promised, which was, That the Duke whom he accused in that House of

He put their Lordships in mind, that it was a strange manner of proceeding,
that upon a displeasure, a Peer of the Kingdom complaining of appear, which
perhaps would not be every man's hereafter; and so many an honest heart in a
good cause distracted with fears, and abandoned of Friends, might perish
through the malice of a potent Adversary.

The Lords again asked him whether he had any thing more to say; he answered
No, but desired leave only to explain himself in two things; one in his Speech
now spoken, and the other when he was first brought to the House. That in his
Speech this day, was, where he affirmed he had like to have been ruined in his
Negotiation: First, For being a Puritan, Papist, and both by one hand; he
explained it to be by the hand of the Duke of Buckingham. And the other when he
first came to the House, saying there, For Redress of former sufferings, and
meeting on the sudden with Treason charged upon him, he spoke in Passion,
expressing the Wrongs and Injuries done him by the Duke; and told their
Lordships, he had used means to convey part of his Sufferings to the late King
his Master, who in the Dukes hearing, swear he would (after he had heard the
Duke against him) hear him also against the Duke; for

The Answer of the Earl of Bristol to the Articles of several High Treasons,
James of Blessed Memory, deceased, and our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty
that now is; wherewith the said Earl is charged by his Majesty's
Attorney General, on his Majesty's behalf, in the most High and Honorable Court
of Parliament, before the King and the Lords there. And not acknowledging any
the supposed Treasons, Crimes, Offenses, and Contempts, wherewith he is charged
in, and by the said Articles to be true; and saving to himself all

His Service to the Palatinate when he was Ambassador to the Emperor.
I. THe First Article he denies; and because the Matters contained in the said
Article consist of several parts, viz. The loss of the said Palatinate, and the
Match with the said Lady of Spain, and of the several Employments; as of one
Extraordinary Embassage to the Emperor, and another to the King of Spain, in
the years 1621.22. and 23. He humbly craves leave of this most Honorable Court
to separate the businesses, and distinguish the times.

And beginning with the Palatinate first, to give an account of his Embassage
to the Emperor, and so to make as brief a Deduction as he could of the whole
carriage in that business, from the beginning of his employment to the time he
left it in his Embassage to the Emperor, he propounded all things faithfully
according to his Instructions, and the Answers which he returned to his late
Majesty of Blessed Memory, were the very same and no other, then such as were
given by the Emperor under his Hand and Imperial Seal; the which, according to
his duty, he faithfully sent unto his said Majesty, and withal did honestly and
truly advertise his said Majesty what he understood and thought then upon the
place; but was so far from giving to his Majesty any ill-grounded hopes in that
behalf, that he wrote unto the Lords of the Council here in England Vienna, 26
July, 1624. in such sort as follows.

I Am further to move your Lordships, That there may be a Dispatch made
presently into Spain to his Majesty's Ambassador, and Mr. Cottington, that they
deal effectually for the repairing and ripening of the business against my
coming; that they use some plain and direct Language, letting the Ministers
there know, That the late Letter sent by the King of Spain to the Emperor, was
colder and more reserved then his Master had reason to expect. I shall conclude
Robert Mansels Fleet upon the Coasts of Spain; which, in case his Majesty
should be ill used, will prove the best Argument we can use for the Restitution
of the Palatinate.

And this his Advice, he says, was wholly intended by his Actions, by being
the cause as he returned homeward out of Germany, to bring down Count
Mansfield, whereby the Town of Frankendale was relieved by supplying of his
Majesty's Army then in great distress, with Moneys and Plate, to the value of
10000 l. merely out of his zeal and affection to the good of the King and his
Children, having no Warrant or Order, but that his heart was ever really bent
in effects more then in shows, to Bohemia, in these words following.

My Lord,
HAving understood from Heidelburgh, how you have showed your affection to the
King and me in all things, and in the help of Money you have

Your very affectionate Friend ELIZABETH.


Which Letters were seconded with others about the same time, both from the
King of Bohemia and Council of Heidelburgh, to the same effect: And how much
satisfaction his late Majesty received in that behalf, and touching that
business, will plainly appear several ways, and particularly by his Speech in
Parliament. And the said Earl likewise appealeth to both Houses of Parliament,
to whom by his late Majesty's Order, he gave a just and true account of that
employment, with what true zeal he proceeded; and how he pressed, that single
Treaty and Promises Buckinghams under his own hand, bearing date the Eleventh
of October, 1621. may be produced, being as follows.

My Lord,
I Am exceeding glad that your Lordship has carried your self so well in this
employment, that his Majesty is infinitely pleased for your Service you have
done; for which he commanded me to give your Lordship thanks in his Name, until
he see you himself. You of all men have cause to commend his Majesty's choice
of such a man, that unless your heart had gone with the business, you could
never have brought it to so good a pass. Amongst other things, Infanta of such
difficulty as you seem to fear in your Letter, seeing my Brother Edward has
brought with him a Letter from his Majesty's Son in Law, whereby he puts
himself solely to his Majesty's advice and pleasure for his Submission, as you
will perceive by the Copy of the Letter it self, which I here send your
Lordship; wherein though there be many things impertinent, yet of that point
you may Mansfields Composition, and the Conformity of his Majesty's Son in Law
to this Submission. For the Money your Lordship has so seasonably laid forth,
his Majesty will see you shall sustain no loss, holding it very unconscionable
you should suffer by the care of his Service; which you have showed so much to
his contentment, to the great joy of your Lordships faithful Servant.

Geo. Buckingham.


His Service to the Palatinate before his Ambassie to the Emperor.
Having given this Account of his employment with the Emperor, he humbly craveth
leave to make it known in what sort before this his employment he endeavored to
serve the Prince Palatine and his Cause, which Francis Nethersole to the Prince
Palatine; at which time his Majesty being out of his Royal and just heart,
desirous to do a faithful Servant right, commanded Sir Francis Nethersole to
let the Prince Palatine understand how good a Servant the said Earl had been
unto him, and how Active in his Affairs, as will best appear by a Dispatch of
Sir Francis Nethersole, written all with his own hand to Sir George Calvert,
dated in Prague August 11. 1620, and sent by his late Majesty to the said Earl
for his comfort, being as follows.

Right Honorable,
THat you may be the better assured, that I have neither forgotten nor
neglected the Commandments received from his Majesty by your Honor; you will be
pleased to have the patience to hear me report what I said to this King upon
the delivery of my Lord Deputies Letters to his Majesty; which was, That the
King my Master, whose Justice is so renowned over the World, did use to show it
in nothing more then in vindicating his Servants from wrongful Opinions,
whereof he knew noble hearts more sensible then of Injuries done to Digby
mistaken by some of his own people at home, by occasion of his being by him
employed in the Affairs with Spain, having thereupon conceived a jealousy that
the same noble Lord might be also misreported, hitherto his Majesty's hands in
that respect gave me a particular commandment to assure his Majesty, he had not
a more truly affectionate Servant in England: And for proof thereof, to let his
Majesty understand, That whereas the Baron of Doncaster, now his Majesty's
Ambassador for England, had since his coming hither obtained but three great
Boons for his Majesty's service; viz. The Loan of Money from the King of
Denmark, the Contribution in England of the City and Countries, and the sending
Ambassadors to the contrary parties, that my Lord Digby had been the first
propounder of all those to the King my Master, before his Majesty's Ambassador,
or any other of his servants in England; although his Lordship were contented
that others who were but set on should carry away the thanks and prayers,
because his Lordship being known to be the first mover therein might possibly
Spain, and to render himself the more valuable to serve both his own Master and
his Majesty; in which respect I humbly prayed his Majesty to keep this to
himself.


By which testimony it may appear, as the said Earl conceives, how he the said
Earl bestowed himself before his Embassage, and in his said Embassage with his
said late Majesty's approbation thereof. Now

As Soon as he came into England, he discovered unto his Majesty and the Lords
of the Council, in what great wants he had left the Forces in the Palatinate,
and solicited the present sending away of money; thereupon Thirty thousand
pound was borrowed of Sir Peter Vanlore, Sir Baptist Hicks, and Sir William
Cortine, and presently sent unto the Palatinate, Palatinate.

Now in the interim betwixt his return from the English Coasts, which was in
November 1621, and his going into Spain in May 1622, he first gave his Account
as aforesaid of his Embassage to both Houses of Parliament, and moved them as
effectually as was possible for the supplying of his Majesty, and that the
money might wholly be employed for the Succor of the Palatinate.

The Parliament being dissolved, he solicited with great care and industry the
settling of some Course for the supplying of the Palatinate, and his Majesty was
persuaded to maintain Eight thousand Foot and Sixteen hundred Horse under his
own Standard, and at his own purse in the Palatinate, Chichester was upon the
said Earls motion sent for out of Ireland, and the said Earl by his Majesty's
command took order for his Dispatch. In this estate the said Earl left his
Affairs at his departure toward Spain in May 1622, nothing doubting but that
all things would have effectually constantly been pursued, according to the
order which was settled and resolved on at his departure.

At his arrival at the Court of Spain he presently proceeded according
Palatinate as effectually as he could, His arrival in Spain and behavior there.
and faithfully labored and effected from time to time (as far as to the point
of Negotiation) all particulars that were given him in charge, as it will
appear by his late Majesty's Letters upon every particular occasion; and if by
the accidents of War for that Summer, the Marquess of Baden, the Count
Mansfield, and the Duke of Brunswick received each of them an overthrow, (the
ordering of whose Affairs his Majesty so far complained of to his Son-in-law,
as to give order for the June 1622, and also by his Letters unto Sir Horace
Vere, and the Lord of Chichester of the same date, if there were not a speedy
redress) if by any of those accidents those businesses have miscarried, the
said Earl hopes he shall not be liable to the blame, it having no relation to
him, or to his employment, having so far and so honestly with his best
affections employed his care and utmost services in the businesses, as his
Majesty was pleased by many several Letters upon several Actions to signify
November 24. 1622. written as follows; Viz.

Your Dispatches are in all points so full, and in them we receive so good
satisfaction, as in this we shall not need to enlarge any further, but only
tell you, we are well pleased with this diligent and discreet employment of
your endeavors, and all that concerns our service; so are we likewise with
the whole proceedings of our Ambassador Sir Walter Aston. Thus we bid you
heartily

Newmarke^, November. 24* 1622.

And afterward his Majesty was likewise pleased in his Letters of 8 January
1622. a little before our gracious Sovereign Lord the King, then Prince, his
coming into Spain; Viz. as follows.

Concerning that knotty and unfortunate Affair of the Palatinate, to say the
truth, as things stand, I know not what you could have done more then you have


And whereas it is objected, the Palatinate should be lost by the hopes he the
said Earl gave by his Letters out of Spain, it is an Objection of
impossibility; for there was nothing left but Mainheim and Frankendale when his
first Letters out of Spain could possibly come to his late Majesty's hands; for
he did not begin to Negotiate that business until August 1622. and about that
time Heidelberg, and all but Mainheim and Frankendale was lost; and Mainheim he
had saved by his industry, had it not been so suddenly delivered, as is by his
Majesty acknowledged by Letters of 24 November 1622. written thus; Viz.

Mainheim arrived too late, and after the Town was yielded to Tilly; yet must
we acknowledge it to be a good effect of your Negotiation, and an Argument of
that Kings sincere and sound intention.


And Frankendale being by the said Earls means once saved, was again the second
time saved merely by the said Earls industry; and procuring a Letter from the
King of Spain, dated the second of February 1623. whereupon followed the Treaty
of Sequestration, which has since continued* Buckingham arrived at the Court
of Spain, they found the Business of the Palatinate in so fair a way, that the
Spanish Ministers told them, the King should give his late Majesty a Blank, in
which we might frame our own Conditions; and the same he confirms unto us
now; and the like Buckingham in his Speech in Parliament, after the return of
his Majesty out of Spain. And it will appear by the Testimony of Sir Walter
Aston, and by his and the said Earls Dispatches, that the said Earl wanted not
industry, and zeal in the business; insomuch as the last Answer the said Earl
procured herein from the King of Spain, was fuller then he the said Earl was
ordered by his late Majesty's latest Letters to insist upon. So as by that
Palatine in this Cause: And for assurance in that Affair, he had all that could
be between Christian Princes; and if in the said Assurances there has been any
deceit, as by the said Article is intimated, which he never knew nor believed,
he referred it to God to punish their wickedness: For betwixt Princes there can
be Walter Aston were so confident that the business would be ended to his late
Majesty's satisfaction, that in a joint Dispatch to his late Majesty of 24
November 1623. after his now Majesty's return into England, they wrote as
follows; Viz.

We hope that your Majesty may, according to your desire signified to me
Bristol by the Letters of October 8, give to your Majesty's Royal Daughter this
Christmas the comfortable news of the near expiring of her great troubles and
sufferings, as unto the Prince your Son the congratulation of being arrived to
a most excellent Princess.


And having thus given your Lordships an Account of his Proceedings touching
the Palatinate, he will by your Lordships good favors proceed to the other part
of that Charge concerning the Marriage.

His carriage concerning the Match.
And first touching his hopes and assurances that he is charged to have given to
his late Majesty and Ministers of State here in England, of the Spaniards real
proceedings in the said Match, when he said he knew they never meant it: He
says, he never gave any hopes of their proceedings, Match, as the other of the
Palatinate, his Advertisements were grounded upon all the Assurances both of
Words and Writing, that could possibly pass between Christians; as will be made
evidently appear by his Dispatch of 9 September 1623; which he humbly desires
may be read, if the length Spain, that he really intended the Match. And the
causes why the Conde Olivares pretended to the Duke of Buckingham, that the
Match was not formerly meant, was only thereby to free himself from Treating
any longer with the said Earl, to the end that he might treat for larger
Conditions in point of Religion with the said Duke: The said Conde Olivares
taking advantage of having the Person of his Majesty, then Prince, in his
hands. Spain before he sent it.

And by this Dispatch the Earl doubts not but that it will appear to this
Honorable Court, that whilst the Treating of this business was in hand, he
proceeded in that, not only with care and industry, but with some measure of
vigilance. And for clearing an Objection that has been alleged, that the
Match was never meant before the Dukes coming into Spain, nor after; the Earl
craveth leave to set down some few Reasons Means to show that the Match was
intended by the Spaniard.
which caused him to believe that the said Match was, and had been really
meant, and that it was so conceived by both their Majesty's, and the King of
Spain, and their Ministers on both sides.

For first, The Duke of Buckingham certified his late Majesty, that the
business of the Marriage was brought to a happy Conclusion; whereupon his late
Majesty was pleased to give order to the Duke and Earl to proceed in the
Business, which his said Majesty would not have Treated till the said Marriage
was concluded, as will appear by a Buckingham and the said Earl, of the 23
July, 1623.

Secondly, It will appear by Letters of the said Lord Conway to the Duke of
Buckingham, bearing date September 4. 1623. That the said Duke had good
assurance of the Conclusion of the said Match; and upon this confidence were
all things put in due execution in England, as had been Capitulated; And the
Lord Conway and others faithfully agreed, and settled all the Points of Immunity
and Liberty for the Roman August 9. 1623. hereafter mentioned in the Answers to
the Fifth Article of this Charge.

Thirdly, the very day his now Majesty and the Duke of Buckingham departed from
the Escurial in Spain toward England, the said Duke solemnly swore the Treaty
of the said Marriage, and the furtherance of it all that should be in his
power, upon the holy Evangelists, in the presence of the said Earl and Sir
Walter Aston.

Fourthly, The Treaty of the said Marriage had been formerly signed, sealed,
and solemnly sworn by the King of Spain: And when his Majesty and that King
took their leaves, he did solemnly in the words of a King faithfully and
punctually protest to perform all that had been capitulated in the Treaty of
Marriage; and thereupon embraced his Majesty at his Spain to make the Marriage,
as by Mr. Attorney is pretended, yet certainly the Earl has not been slightly
deceived; neither can it be, as he conceives, any fault in him, since not only
his late Majesty, but also his Majesty that now is Buckingham being then both
upon the place, did confidently believe, and that upon other grounds then
misinformations, suggestions and persuasions of the said Earl, that the
Marriage was really intended: And to that effect both his late Majesty of
blessed memory, and his most Excellent Majesty that now is, after his return
into England, wrote unto him the said Earl several Letters, assuring him that
their intents and pleasures were to have the said Match proceeded in, and
thereupon the Proxies of his Majesty then Prince were again enrolled and sent
unto the said Earl. So that the said Earl having so many, and so great

II. To the Second Article, He directly denies all the supposed Offenses

First, as to the continuing the Treaties upon Generalities, That the Temporal
Articles were by Agreements on both sides not to be treated or settled, until
such time as the Articles of Religion were fully agreed on; For that it was
held most proper and honorable for both sides, first to see if the Difficulty
of Religion might be removed, before they passed England by Mr. Gage, were not
signed nor condescended unto by his late Majesty, nor his Majesty that now is,
then Prince, until Ian. 5. 1622. and were then sent away in Post out of England
to the said Earl by Mr. Simon Digby, who arrived with them at Madrid in Spain
about the 25. of the same month. But the Earls care was such to have no time
spent in the settling of the Temporal Articles; that before he would condescend
so much as de been esse unto the Rome, he procured the King of Spain to
promise, That within the time limited for procuring the Desponsories, which was
by March or April following the furthest, all the Temporal Articles should be
settled and agreed, to the end that the Infanta might be delivered at the
Spring; as by the King of Spain his Answer in writing, was declared to be the
Kings intention. And accordingly Sir Walter Aston and the said Earl did not
deal in general, but did most industriously labor to settle all in particular,
viz. That the Portion should be Two Millions, it appearing that it was so
agreed by the late King of Spain: That the Dispensation coming, the
Desponsories should be within Forty days after; And that Don Duarte de Portugal
should be the man that should attend the Infanta in the Journey. And all other
Particulars necessary for the Conclusion of the said Treaties, were by Sir
Walter Aston and the said Earl, and the Spanish Commissioners, Martii 1623.
stilo vet. the Conde Gondomar, and the Secretary Don Andreas de Prada, were
appointed to come home to the house of the said Earl, to signify unto Sir
Walter Aston and himself, as they did, That the King of Spain had declared his
resolution in all the Particulars, and given them order to come to a speedy
Conclusion with them in all things: And that Kings Answer to that Conclusion
the Earl saw, and read all written with the King of Spain's own hand.

On the seventh day of the said month of March 1623. the Kings* Majesty, then
Prince, and the Duke of Buckingham arrived at Madrid; And then the Spaniards
took new laws, and the Negotiation was put into a new form. So that whereas it
is objected against the Earl, that he entertained and continued the Treaties so
long upon Generalities; He conceives it is not meant upon the Spiritual
Articles, for they were such as were sent from Rome into England, and from
thence they came to the Earl: Simon Digby, being about the 25. of January.
There were but six weeks until March 7. following, when his Majesty then Prince
arrived in Madrid; and in the interim all the abovementioned Particulars were
settled: And the time that has been spent in this Treaty viz. The Wars of
Bohemia, the death of two Popes and of the late King of Spain, without the
least fault of the said Earl, as is acknowledged by his late Majesty of blessed
memory, in the said Earl his Instructions on the 14. of March 1621.

Bristol not the cause of the Delays in Spain.
Neither could any delay herein be attributed unto him the said Earl; Germany
and Flanders, and Sir Walter Aston and Sir Francis Cottington for the space of
three or four years were resident in Spain; from whence the hopes they gave
were upon all the discreet grounds that Ministers can expect from a State: But
the Earl reassumed this business six months before his Majesty's coming into
Spain; and he was so desirous to see his Majesty then Prince bestowed, that he
pressed nothing so much both to the King and Prince, as that the Prince might
lose no more time, and rather to break the Match with Spain then suffer any
further delays; as will appear by his Dispatches from his first arrival at the
Court of Spain, until his Majesty's then Prince his coming. For in his Letters
of June 20. 1622. being the first he wrote after his first Audience, he was so
desirous that no time might be lost, that in them he craveth leave of his
Majesty, that in case he should find any Delays in Spain, he might without
expecting any Order take his leave and come home.

Upon the return of Sir Francis Cottington, in September following, he wrote
both to the King, and his Majesty then Prince. To the King as follows.

I Shall presume to add to that which Mr. Cottington shall deliver unto your


And to the Prince at the same wrote in these subsequent words, viz.

THat which will be necessary for his Majesty presently to do on his Majesty's
part, is to declare himself how far he will be pleased to yield in point of
Religion, as Mr. Cottington will approve unto your Highness: And that he set a
prefixed time to break or conclude the Match, either with the Dispensation, or
without the same. For the rest, it may be left to my Negotiation:


And the said Earl says, That having received from his said late Majesty his
resolution in point of Religion, and a limited time according to his desire, he
was so precise and punctual therein, that although the making or breaking of
the Marriage depended upon it, he would not give one months respite longer
time for the procuring of the Dispensation, October. 25. 1622. as follows.

RIght Trusty and welbeloved Cousin and Counselor, We greet you heartily well.
Whereas by your last Letter written to our Secretary, dated Sept. 29. you are
desirous to have our pleasure signified unto you under our own hand, Whether we
will be content or not to grant a Months time longer for the coming Rome, then
we have already limited unto you, in case they shall there conclude all things
else to our contentment, with a Resolution to send the Infanta hither the next
Spring: We do hereby declare unto you, that in that case you shall not break
with them for a Months longer delay. We also wish you not to trouble your self
with the rash Censure of other men, in case your business should not succeed;
resting in that full assurance of our Justice and Wisdom, that we will never
judge a good and faithful Servant by the effect of things so contingent and
variable. And with this assurance we bid you heartily farewell.


And he further says, That when he had agreed to the Articles of Religion, and
that a certain time was set for the coming of the Dispensation, and a
Conclusion of the Match, although he would bind himself to nothing without his
Majesty's approbation, yet for that no time might be lost, he agreed to the
Propositions De been esse, sent by Mr. Porter December. 10. 1622. to the end the
Articles might immediately be sent to Rome, without losing so much time as to
hear first from England: And humbly moved; that in case his Majesty should like
of the said Articles, he would send his Approbation directly to Rome for the
gaining of time; which his Majesty was pleased to do. And at the same time he
wrote both to his said late Majesty, and his Majesty then Prince, as follows,
viz. To his Majesty.

This is the true state of the business as it now stands. If your Majesty
approve of what is done, I hope it will be a happy and a short Conclusion: If
your Majesty think it not fit to allow and condescend to the said Articles, I
have done the uttermost of my endeavors, and shall humbly persuade your Majesty
not to lose a day longer in the Treaty, so much it imports your Majesty and
your Kingdoms, that the Prince were bestowed.


And to the Prince in Letters of the like date in this sort.

I have presumed to write to his Majesty, that which I think my duty to say to
your Highness; That in case you shall not approve of what is now conditionally
agreed, you permit not a day more to be lost in this Treaty: For it is of so
great consequence that your Highness were bestowed, that it imports almost as
much that you were speedily, as ^itly matched. But I hope his Majesty and your
Highness will in such sort approve of this last Agreement, as you will speedily
bring this long Treaty to a happy conclusion. I am out of hope of bringing
things to any better terms; therefore I deal clearly with your Highness, and


All which things being considered, the Earl most humbly submits himself to
the Judgment of that most high and honorable Court, whether the Delays which
accidents have brought forth in this business can be Spain to as speedy a
conclusion, as the uttermost terms of fair Negotiation and good manners would
bear. And whereas it is pretended that the Spaniards should take occasion by
entertaining the said Treaties to abuse his said late Majesty, (which he
knows not) yet he Spaniards all the assurances by oaths, words and writings,
which could be expected from Christians; the which, without adding or
diminishing, he faithfully presented unto his said late Majesty; and his said
late Majesty was pleased in those times to conceive upon those assurances, that
they dealt really with him: And he conceives that his Majesty that now is,
then Prince, and the Duke of Buckingham were pleased to write as much to the
late Kings Majesty at their first coming Spain, and that all which the said
Earl had written touching that imploiment was there avowed by the Conde
Olivarez and Conde Gondomar to the said Prince and Duke, at their arrival at
Madrid; and he hops that if that Dispatch may be perused, it will as well
appear and be adjudged that he served his Majesty with some measure of
vigilancie, as well as fullness of fidelity.

III. To the Third Article the said Earl says, That he did not either by words
or by Letters to his late Majesty or his Ministers, extol, or magnify the
greatness and power of the King of Spain, nor represented to his late Majesty
the supposed dangers that might ensue unto him, if a War should happen between
him and the King of Spain, nor affirmed nor insinuated the same, as in the said
Article is mentioned; Spain, or represented any danger to his said late Majesty
that might ensue by entering into Hostility with the said King of Spain, it was
as a faithful Counselor and Servant to his Majesty by way of his advice and
opinion, which he ever delivered sincerely, faithfully, and truly, according to
the present occasion, and in no wise with such as intent as in the said Article
is mentioned, nor to any other evil intent and purpose whatsoever.

He never dissuaded the King to take Arms.
that he has upon all just occasions advised, that all fitting preparations
for War might be made, as beginning with the year 1621. from which time he is
only charged, will appear by his Speech in Parliament presently after his
return out of Germany; and that he hoped his Majesty would no longer rely upon
single Treaties, but make all fitting preparations for War; and that the
Parliament would enable his Majesty thereunto; and by the care he took before
his going again upon his Embassage Spain, that the establishment of an Army
under his Majesty's own Standard, of Horse and Foot, and under his own pay,
might be settled and provided for; as likewise his advice to the Lords of the
Council, that his Majesty might have a curb upon the King of Spain upon all
occasions, by continuing of Sir Robert Mansfields Fleet upon the Coasts of
Spain, as will appear by his Letter written from Vienna, 26 July, 1621.
mentioned in the Answer to the first Article. By all which it appears, That
he labored and endeavored as much as in him lay, that his Majesty Spain, or for
resisting of him and his Forces, from attempting the Invasions of his late
Majesty's Dominions, or the Dominions of his late Majesty's Confederates,
Friends, or Allies, as by the said Article is charged against him; neither
remembers that he had any Spain, or the power thereof, it may have been to his
late Majesty, or his Majesty that now is, by way of discourse, speaking of the
solidness of the Spanish proceedings, of their serious and deliberate debating
of business before they resolve on them, of the constant pursuing of them when
they are once resolved, wishing that England and other Nations would therein
imitate them: For he supposes the right way to impeach their greatness, was to
grow as wise as they, and to beat them at their own Weapons. England
well-ordered, need to take little terror at the power of Spain, having almost
in all attempts and enterprises won honor upon them. And as for the preventing
of dangers that might ensue upon a War, though he knew not what is aimed at in
that particular; yet he is most confident out of the Integrity of his own
Conscience, That he neither said, nor advised any thing but what befitted a
faithful Counselor and an Ambassador, which was truly to deliver his opinion
as he understood it upon the present occasion: And as for affirming that his
Majesty's quiet should be disturbed, and he not to be permitted to Hawk or to
Hunt, he remembers not what discourse he may have had, or written to any
person, how fit it might be upon the being broiled in a great War, seriously to
intend it, and to make it our

IV. To the Fourth Article the said Earl says, That he did not any thing
contrary to his duty and alleagiance, or contrary to the faith and duty of an
Ambassador, as by this Article is alleged, but did intend the service and
honor of his late Majesty, and no corrupt and sinister ends of his own
advancement, as by this Article is also alleged. And as for the Conferences
which is pretended he should hold concerning the Treaty, Henry's He advised
both King and Prince to a Protestant Match.
That in the first place he wished and advised a Protestant Match, but in the
duty of a Servant understanding that both their Majesty's desired the Match
really with Spain, he did really and faithfully intend the service and honor of
their Majesty's, and effectually endeavored to procure Anno 1621. and ever
since of that rank and quality, both in regard of his Employments, Fortunes,
and his Majesty's favors, that he assures himself he did not, and dares Answer
so far for his discretion, That it was impossible for him to hold so mean and
unworthy discourse.

V. To the Fifth Article he says, That what is therein alleged, is so far
from being so, that contrarily upon all occasions to the uttermost of his
power, he did labor to prevent all the inconveniences in point of Religion that
might come by matching with a Princess of a different Religion, as well
appears by the Paper of his opinion, that his Majesty should marry with a
Lady of his own Religion, hereafter mentioned in his Answer to the Seventh
Article. And for further proof thereof, he says, That in the whole Treaty with
Spain he stood more strict in points of Religion, then by his Instructions he
needed to have done, as will appear by the Testimony of Sir Walter Aston, and
his Dispatches of the December, 1622. and other Dispatches, which he desires
may be read. He never moved his Majesty to set Priests at liberty.
And as for concealing or persuading to set at liberty the Priests or Jesuits,
he utterly denies to have done any such thing, as before he has answered.
Although it be true, that the Embassage in Spain be far different from the
employment in other places, where there is a Body of our Reformed Religion, and
whereby his Majesty has Kindred and Allies; whereby his Majesty's Ministers may
be informed of the necessary Occurrents of State, without the helps of Priests
or Jesuits. Spain there being none but Roman Catholics, nor any manner of
correspondency or intelligence but by them, the Ambassadors must make use of
all sorts of people, especially of Jesuits and Priests, and to that end
Ambassadors sent thither have a large and particular Warrant under the Kings
hand, to treat, and make use of Priests and Jesuits, and all other sorts of
men, unless it be such as are proclaimed Rebels: And diverse times the Ministers
employed in Spain, to gratify some whom there they employed for the Kings
service, have as he believes, at their partiticular Roman Catholic, and
imprisoned in England; and that he remembers to have happened to others, but
does not remember himself to have written to his late Majesty in that kind:
And as concerning his advice and counsel, to set at liberty Jesuits and
Priests, and the granting to the Papists a Toleration, or the silencing of the
Laws against them, he said, that his late Majesty was engaged by the Treaty of
Madrid, 1617. in diverse matters concerning Religion; likewise by promise to
Conde Gondomar, and his Letters to the Spain, 17 April, 1620. wherein he is
pleased to promise some particulars in favor of Roman Catholics, as by the
said Letters will appear: And notwithstanding the said Earl had sufficient
Warrant under the Kings own hand, to assure the King of Spain whatsoever was
agreed in the said Article, or in the said Letters, his Majesty would sincerely
perform; yet the said Earl was so cautious in that point, that when for the
conclusion of the Match the other Articles of Religion being allowed, Roman
Catholick-Subjects should acknowledge this Grace to have come from the Kings
Majesty's mercy and goodness: Yet the said Earl would not condescend hereunto
De been esse, as by his Letters to Master Secretary Calvert, 8 October, 1622.
will appear, hereby to give his Majesty time to have recourse unto his second
Consultation, and to January, 1622. to that effect to the King of Spain, as by
the said Letters will appear. Neither did the said Earl by Letters, or
otherwise, ever counsel or persuade his late Majesty, to grant or allow unto
the Papists or Professors of the Roman Religion a free Toleration, and
Silencing of the Laws made and standing in force against them, but ever
protested against any such Toleration; and when any such Provision has been
offered to be made in Spain, he ever refused so much as to give ear to it, or
to suffer it to be propounded; although it be true, that he has since seen a
Paper touching Pardons, Suspensions, and Dispensations for the Roman
Catholics, bearing date the Seventh of August, 1623. signed by the Lord
Conway, and others, which in effect is little less then a

Salisbury, 7 August. 1623. The Declaration touching the Pardons, Suspensions,
Roman Catholics.
A Declaration signed by my Lord Conway in behalf of Roman Catholics.
FOr the satisfaction of their Excellencies, the Marquess of Ynojosa, and Don
Carlos de Colonia, the Lord Ambassadors for the King of Spain; and to the end
it may appear that his Great Britain will presently and really put in execution
the Grace promised and intended to the Roman Catholics his Majesty's Subjects,
and of his own Grace more then he is tied to by the Articles of Treaty of
Marriage.

We do declare in his Majesty's Name, That his Majesty's will and pleasure is,
that a Legal and Authentical Pardon shall be passed under the Great Seal,
wherein shall be freely pardoned all those Penalties, Forfeitures, and
Seisures, Indictments, Convictments, Roman Catholics are liable or have been
proceeded against, or might be, as well Priests, as others, for matters of
Conscience only, and to which the rest of his Majesty's Subjects are not
liable. And to the end his Majesty may make himself clearly understood, where
it shall happen that any of those Forfeitures and Pecuniary Mul^s have been
given away under his Majesty's Great Seal, his Majesty will not hide that it is
not in his power so to make void those Letters Patents, Roman Catholics may in
these Cases plead in Law, if they find it good, and shall have equal and legal
Trial. And his Majesty is likewise pleased that his General Pardon shall remain
in being Five years, to the end, all that will may in that time take it out;
and his Majesty will give order for the comfort of the poorer sort, that the
Pardon shall not be costly, but such like course shall be taken as was in a
like occasion at his majesty's coming England; and that it shall be lawful to
put as many as can be possible into one Pardon.

And we do further Declare, That his Majesty's will and pleasure is, to the end
the Roman Catholics his Majesty's Subjects, may have a present and a free
fruition of as much as is intended them by the Articles of Treaty of Marriage,
to cause a present Suspension under his Majesty's Seal of all those Penal Laws,
Charges, and Forfeitures, whereunto the Roman Catholic Subjects of his Majesty
have heretofore been subject, and to which the rest of his Majesty's Subjects
have not been liable; and in the same Grant and under the same Seal, to give a
Dispensation and Toleration to all the Roman Catholics his Majesty's Roman
Catholics, but that for the manner of priviledging, and freeing Roman
Catholics his Majesty's Subjects, and make them inviolable in the fruition of
all that is intended and promised by his Majesty in the Articles of Marriage,
and his Majesty's further Grace.

And we do declare, That his Majesty's further will and pleasure is, for the
better satisfaction and discharge of the care and endeavor of their
Excellencies the Ambassadors, that it shall be lawful Roman Catholics, and
sure making of the said

And we do further declare, That his Majesty's pleasure is, to make a Dispatch
into Ireland un^o his Deputy there, by the hands of the Lord Treasurer and
Secretary of State, Sir George Calvert, for the present confirming and sealing
the things concerning the Roman Catholics answerable to the Articles of
Treaty, his Royal Promise and Proceedings here. And for Scotland, That his
Majesty according to the constitution of his Affairs there, and Roman
Catholics his Subjects, conformable to the Articles of Treaty of Marriage.

But this Declaration, the said Earl says and affirms was the effect of the
Duke of Buckinghams Negotiation, and treated and concluded by the Lord Conway
with the Spanish Ambassador here, whilst the Prince was in Spain; neither was
his privity or advice in it: For if he had known it, he should have protested
against it. All which, together with the difference betwixt the Conditions of
Religion agreed at the Treaty of Madrid, 12 December, 1622. by the said Earl,
and the said Sir Walter Aston, being by their Lordships considered, the said
Earl doubts

VI. To the Sixth Article the Earl says, That the Assurances which he gave his
late Majesty, and his Majesty that now is, concerning the Treaties, were such,
That it had been dishonesty and breach of his duty Spain, and their Ministers,
upon as great Assurances as can pass between Ministers of Princes in the like
case. And for the Delays of Spain, they could be never so ill, and with so
little color complained of, as at the time of his Majesty's coming thither;
for that a certain time was before then prefixed for the coming of the
Dispensation, viz. in April, 1623. at the furthest, which was the next month
after the Princes arival at Madrid; the Desponsories Infanta to begin her
journey into England twenty days after: So as three months patience longer
would have showed the issue of the business without putting of the person of
the Prince, being Heir-Apparant to the Crown, in so eminent a hazard for the
trying of an experiment. And it is an argument of great suspicion, because the
Spaniards were suspected to have dealt falsely, and so the less to be trusted
with the person of the Prince, to be put into their hands to try conclusions:
But the truth is, though that were made Spain, but other Motives that were the
original cause of his Majesty's said journey, as shall be sufficiently made
apparent in due time. And the said Earl having got an inkling of it by
something that was let fall from the Conde Gondomar to that purpose, instantly
dispatched away Mr. Grisley to his late Majesty to have this journey prevented;
who upon the Confines of France, met with his Majesty and the Duke of
Buckingham on his journey Spain, and told them as much. So that although he
confesses what is laid in the Charge to be true, viz. That by the said
journey, the person of the Prince, the peace and safety of the Kingdom did
undergo further danger (at the remembrance thereof the hearts of all good
Subjects do tremble) yet the blame is due to the Authors and Advisers of the
same journey, and not to the said Earl: And although it pleased God, to the
exceeding great joy and comfort of the said Earl, and of all good men, to send
his gracious Majesty home with safety; yet

VII. To the Seventh Article the said Earl says, That he did not move or
persuade his Majesty, then Prince, to change his Religion, neither in the
manner in the said Article mentioned, nor in any other manner whatsoever:
Neither does he conceive, that the charge in it self as it is laid, will in any
reasonable construction bear any such inference as is made therein; so as he
conceives he needs not make any further or other Answer thereunto. Yet that
it may appear that the manner he used to the said Prince, was not traitorously,
falsely, or cunningly, nor without ground, Spain, whilst he had that great honor
to have his Majesty lodged in his House, He persuaded not the Prince to change
his Religion.
and to have so Royal a Guest, finding by the Spanish Ministers, That there was
a general opinion, that his Majesty's coming thither was with an intention to
become a Roman Catholic; and the Conde Gondomar having that very morning
pressed the Buckinghams assistance therein, his Majesty being all alone in a
withdrawing Room in the said Earl his House, the said Earl kneeled unto him,
and told him, That he had a business to impart unto him, which highly imported
his Majesty to know, so that he might be assured his boldness therein might be
pardoned; which his Majesty graciously promised. And thereupon the said Earl
told his Majesty, That the general opinion of that Court was, that Spain, was
with an intention to be a Roman Catholic, and there to declare it. And he
confesses, That at the same time in regard of those things he had heard, he
humbly besought his Majesty to deal freely with him as a Servant, of whose
fidelity he might be confident, or words to that effect: But he was so far from
persuading his Majesty to be a Roman Catholic, that without respecting his
Majesty's Answer, he declared himself to be a Protestant, and so should always
continue; yet he said he should always serve his Majesty, and labor to
Spaniards, nor do any thing that might give them hope therein, alleging, That
it was impossible the Marriage could be without a Dispensation; and so long as
the Spaniards, who were to procure the Dispensation, should have hope of his
Majesty's Conversion, they would never content themselves with a part; to which
they were tied by the Articles agreed upon with the said Earl and Sir Walter
Aston. At which time his Majesty was pleased to approve of his opinion, and
Andrews to Rome to hasten it; and the next day the said Earl dealt very roundly
with the Conde Olivares and Gondomar, telling them it was a discourteous manner
of proceeding to press his Majesty to further Conditions then were formerly
agreed upon in point of Religion, and to make his Conditions the worse, for the
great Obligation he had put upon them by putting himself into their hands;
whereat they took such great offense, that they estranged themselves from him
for a long time after. And that the said Earl did thus proceed with the said
Condes, and that it was not a new framed Answer to satisfy present Objections;
but that which really, and indeed passed, will really appear by his Dispatches
unto his late Majesty of Blessed Memory; and before his Majesty that now is
came out of Spain, they were there showed unto his Majesty, bearing date the
Nineth of September, 1623. So that although it be true, That Spaniards might
not for any respect be longer held in hopes of that point. And because point of
Religion is that which all men of honor and honesty should chiefly desire to
clear, especially having an imputation of that nature laid upon them, as the
said Earl has in the said Article, He Spain for the Treaty of this Marriage,
1617. his late Majesty having commanded him to give an account thereof unto his
Majesty that now is, he at his departure toward Spain, presumed to give unto
his Majesty that now is, his opinion in Writing, signed with his own hand to be
kept as a testimony of future Actions, the Copy whereof is this as follows.

SIR,
He advised both King and Prince, if they will Match with a Catholic, rather
to Spain then France, but chiefly to a Protestant Princess.
THe Opinion which I have ever presumed humbly to offer unto his Majesty
concerning your Highness Marriage, has been, that both in regard of Conscience
France, or Spain, or any other Catholic, either for that the present time
affords no Protestant Princess, who is for years or Blood suitable for your
Highness, or that can in any considerable measure by the portion, supply his
Majesty's present wants, I then conceive that the Match by which this State
shall suffer least inconveniency and cumbers, and whereby his Majesty's
necessities shall by the greatness of the Portion be the most relieved, is with
Spain, is such a Match may be made with such Conditions of Religion, as other
Catholic Princes will contract themselves withal.

Thus much I thought sit humbly to present unto your Highness, for that I see
my Employment liable to the Censure of many worthy Persons, with whom though I
concur in my Opinion, yet I seem much to differ from them many ways; For that
it is more proper to me to be true to Spain, upon such Conditions in point of
Religion and Portion, as to his Majesty shall seem fit.


Besides which Declaration of his Opinion, He constantly professed the
Protestant religion.
He has all the days of his life, and in all places, lived and allowed himself
to be a Protestant, Ireland had been bred Papists. And he humbly desires the
Testimony of Doctor Mason and Doctor Wren, his Majesty's Chaplains, who were
with his Majesty in Spain, and of Master Sampford one of the Prebends of
Canterbury, Master Boswell Laurence in London, and Master Frewen
Divinity-Reader in Magdalen-Colledge in Oxford, and now one of his Majesty's
Chaplains, who were his Majesty's Chaplains in Spain; as well for the frequent
use of the Sacrament, as constant profession and exercises of Religion, and the
testimony of such Catholics as are known to have been his ancient Acquaintance
and Friends, to examine them upon oath, Whether publicly or privately in
Spain, or in England; they had known him in any kind to make show, or so much
as to Frewen and Mr. Wake may be also examined, Whether in extremity of several
sicknesses whereinto he has of late years fallen, he has not ever settled his
Conscience withthem toward God, and made a Confession of his Faith, resolving
as be-fitting a Protestant or good Christian.

VIII. To the Eighth Article the Earl says, That he did not at any Rome;
Neither did the said Earl to that end and purpose, or otherwise, use unto his
Majesty then Prince, the words in the Article mentioned. But the said Earl
acknowledges, that upon occasion of a Letter that came to his Majesty then
Prince, putting his Majesty in mind of the great actions of his Royal
Progenitors in the Holy War, that the great Kings of those times did not only
employ their Forces, but in their persons went into the Holy Land; The Earl
believes that by way of discourse only, and not otherwise, he may have said,
That in regard of the difference in Religion, it was of more difficulty to
undertake such great actions now, then in former Ages; and it might well be
instanced in the present Treaty of the Marriage, wherein the Popes consent was
to be obtained. And to this effect, and upon the like grounds, he is confident
there were very

But the said Earl says, He never alleged any such thing to any other
purpose, then to show that only Conscience and love to Truth, (in which

Besides, he conceives by way of Answer thereunto the said Question may be
asked, which his Majesty was pleased to ask of the Earl in the Seventh Article,
viz. What the said Earl saw in his Majesty, that he should So why should it be
thought, that being more fit to undertake great actions in the world (being a
mere moral and temporal respect) should be an argument to persuade in
conscience so religious and wise a Prince, and so well instructed as his
Majesty is; as though the soul of a Christian Prince was to be wrought upon in
point of Truth and Belief, by temporal and worldly respects of Conveniences
and Greatness? It were necessary for the proving that the said Earl persuaded
his Majesty

IX. To the Ninth Article the said Earl says, That there was a Discourse in
Spain of the way of accommodating the Prince Palatine his affairs; and by way
of discourse it was moved, That the Marriage of his eldest Son with a Daughter
of the Emperor, and his Son to be bred in the Emperors Court, would be the
fairest way for the pacifying of, and accommodating those businesses. And the
Earl by way of discourse, and not otherwise, did say, That he thought his late
Majesty could not be adverse either to the said Match, or to the breeding of
the Prince Palatine Religion: For so his late Majesty has often declared
himself to the said Earl, and wished him to lay hold on any occasion for the
entertaining of any such Proposition. And otherwise then so, and upon the terms
aforesaid, and by that way of Conference and discourse only, he delivered not
any Opinion to his Majesty at his Majesty's being in Spain: For the said Earl
is very confident that his Majesty was returned out of Spain, before any
Proposition was made for the said Marriage, other then by way of Calvert and
the Ambassador of the King of Spain, October. 2. 1628. His late Majesty, upon a
relation made unto him by a Letter of Mr. Secretary Calvert, approved of the
said Proposition, and declared the same to be the only way, as he conceived,
to accommodate with honor those great businesses: And wrote to that purpose to
his Son-in-law the Prince Palatine, by his Letters dated 9 November. 1623. A Copy
of which he, together Calverts Relation, and the Lord Conway by his late
Majesty's commandment, sent unto the said Earl; the Tenor of which translated
out of French, is as follows.

WE have thought good, King James proposes a Match to the Prince Palatine,
between his eldest son and the Emperors daughter.
that we may provide best and most soundly for your Affairs, not only to
procure, but also to assure your Peace, were to cut up by the very roots that
Evil which has been settled in the heart of the Emperor, Spain with us in the
business, who we trust will lend us his helping Infanta. And therefore seeing
there is no Inconvenience at all that may cause your aversness or backwardness
in this business,


By which Letter after his Majesty's coming out of Spain, it appears to your
Lordships that there was no Proposition of the Marriage betwixt the Son of the
Prince Palatine and the Emperors Daughter, when that Letter was written; For
therein his Majesty says, he was determined to interess the King of Spain in
the business, before any such Proposition should be made to the Emperor. And it
will also thereby appear, that his late Majesty's opinion was of the
Conveniencie thereof; which the said Earl hops will acquit him, if by way of
discourse only he declared Walter Aston made upon that discourse which he then
delivered, nor what replies the said Earl made; but sure he is, whatsoever the
said Earl said, or what answer or reply soever was made, as it was by way of
discourse, and not otherwise, so it was according to that which he truly
conceived to be the best and easiest way to accommodate the business, and to be
his Majesty's pleasure, (which the said Sir Walter Aston may Austria, as by the
said Article is intimated: For he did not conceive the breeding of the Prince
Palatine's Son with the Emperor, having a Governor appointed by his late
Majesty and his Father, and he and his Domestics to have free use of their own
Religion, to be a matter of impossibility, or such dangerous consequence in
point of Religion, as to imply his Conversion, as by the Article is intimated;
well knowing that Great Britain, should be matched, and no care taken to
capitulate for the use of his Religion, being ever granted to the meanest
Prince that is bestowed. And his Majesty's special care in this point is fully
seen in the said Letter.

X. To the Tenth Article he says, That by comparing of this Article of his too
much Forwardness, with the Second Article, whereby he is charged with
continuing the Treaty upon Generalities, without reducing them to Certainties
and direct Conclusions, Your Lordships will perceive how impossible it was for
him to avoid an Exception. But for direct Answer to the present Charge he
says, That he did not presumptuously, nor yet to his knowledge, break his
Instructions, nor set any day Desponsories; but was therein merely passive, in
admitting the day nominated by the King of Spain according to the Capitulation
before made: Nor did he presumptuously, wilfully, or willingly disobey any
Commandment or Direction of his Majesty that now is, then Prince, which he
could understand not to be countermanded either by present or future
Instructions otherwise explained.

And for the better manifestation of the truth of his proceedings in and
concerning the same, he says, That on the day of the departure of Escurial in
Spain, his Highness delivered unto him in presence of the Commissioners his
Proxies powers, with public Declaration taken in writing by the Secretary to
the King of Spain, of the Prince his pleasure, and how the said Earl should use
them, viz. That he should deliver them to the King of Spain upon the coming of
the Dispensation cleared from Rome, according to that which had been agreed,
which was to be within ten days after the coming of the Dispensation. And he
further says, That it is true that the Prince afterward by his Letters sent
by one Mr Clark, commanded him the said Earl not to deliver the said Proxies
till he should have received security that the Infanta after her being
betrothed should not enter into any Religious Order, and that before he
proceeded he should send to his Majesty, then

Whereupon the said Earl, as became a faithful Servant, presented unto his
Majesty that now is, then Prince, such Assurances as were offered unto him for
securing of that point, together with such Reasons as he conceived were fit to
be offered to their considerations; which gave unto his late Majesty, and his
Majesty that now is, then Prince, such satisfaction, as they were pleased to
dispatch a Post presently unto him, absolutely October 8. 1623. will appear as
follows.

We have received your Letters by Grisley, and the copy of them to our dear
Son; and we cannot forbear to let you know how well we esteem the dutiful,
discreet and judicial Relation and humble advice to our Son: Whereupon, having
ripely deliberated with our-self, and communicated with our dear Son, we have
resolved, with the good liking of our Son, to rest upon that security Infanta's
taking a Religious Order, which you in your judgment shall think meet.


And by that other Letter of his Majesty that now is, then Prince, as
follows; Viz. Your Letters to the King and me concerning that doubt I made
after I came from St Laurence, has so satisfied us both, that we think it fit
no longer to




Whereby he was absolutely freed of that command; and being so freed thereof,
he then remained under the Order which his Majesty, then Prince, had left with
him at his departure, which was to proceed according to the Capitulations, and
his Highness Declaration when he delivered the said Proxies unto him: And so he
intended to have done, till by his November 13. 1623. he was directly commanded
the contrary; which Commandment he most readily and punctually obeyed.

And for such his intentions, The Earls Reasons why he was forward to
consummate the Match, til warrant came to the contrary.
till he was countermanded, he conceives he had not only sufficient warrant,
but had highly offended if he had done otherwise. For first, for his
proceedings to consummate the Match, he had warrant and instruction under his
late Majesty's hand. Secondly, It was the main scope of his Embassage. Thirdly,
He was enjoined touching the Infanta's entering into Religion, that they
intended to proceed in the Marriage, as by his Majesty's Letters October 8.
1623. will appear. Seventhly, The Proxies were to that end left in his hands,
and after again renewed after his Majesty's return into England. Eighthly, He
had overthrown the Marriage without order: For although Sir Walter Aston and
himself used all possible means for the gaining of time, and deferring the
Desponsories; yet the King of Spain caused it to be protested, that in case he
the said Earl should insist upon the deferring of the Spain should have
condescended to have prolonged the Desponsories until one of the days of
Christmas, as by the Letter was required; yet the Prince's Proxies had been
before that time expired, and he durst not without a precise Warrant put such a
scorn upon so noble a Lady, whom he then conceived was likely to have been the
Prince his wife, as to nominate a day of marriage when the Proxies were out of
date, and he Spain, leading and directing the use of them, and the same being
then instrumentum stipulatum, wherein as well the King of Spain was interessed
by the acceptance of the substitution, as the Prince by granting of the
Proxies, he could not in honesty fail the public Trust without November 13.
1623. which he readily and punctually obeyed, he had not under favor broken his
Instructions, or deserved any blame for lack of assurance of the restitution of
the Palatinate and Temporal Articles.

And first of the Palatinate, his said Majesty did not send to the said Earl
express Directions not to dispatch the Desponsories until a full conclusion
were had of the other Treaty of the Palatinate, together with October 8.
required the said Earl so to endeavor, that his Majesty might have the joy of
both at Christmas. Whereas his Instructions of May 14. 1621. were express, that
he should not make the business of the Palatinate a condition of the Marriage.
And his late Majesty's Letters of December 30. 1623. were fully to the same
effect. Yet did the said Earl, according to what was intimated by the said
Letters of October 8. so carefully provide therein, as Palatinate, The
restitution of the Palatinate, promised by the King of Spain and Olivarez.
the same should be really restored according to his late Majesty's desire; and
the Conde Olivarez, both in his Majesty's name, and in his own, desired the
said Earl and Sir Walter Aston that they would assure his Majesty of the real
performance of the same, and entreated, if need were, they should engage their
honor and life for it, as by their joint Dispatches of November 23. 1623. will
appear; and so much the said Sir Walter Aston and the said Earl agreed should
be delivered to them in writing, before they would have delivered their
Proxies, and so the said Earl declared it; the which Answer in writing should
have been the same which since was given them of January 8. 1623. And both Sir
Walter Aston and the said Earl were confident therein, November 23. wrote to
his late Majesty as follows; Viz.

That his Majesty might, according to his desire signified to the said Earl by
his Letters of October 8. give as well to his Majesty's Daughter that Christmas
the comfortable news of the expiring of her great troubles and sufferings, as
to his Son the Prince the Congratulation of being married to a most worthy and
excellent Princess.


By which it will evidently appear, he meant not to leave the business of the
Palatinate loose, when he intended to proceed to the Marriage; but he confessed
that he was ever of opinion, that the best pawn and assurance his late Majesty
could have of the real proceedings of the Palatinate, was, That they proceeded
really to the effecting of the Match; and of the same opinion was his late
Majesty also, and the Lords Commissioners here in England, as appears by his
Instructions dated March 14. January 7. 1622. And as for the Temporal Articles,
the said Earl says, when the Desponsories were formerly appointed to have
been, as he remembers on Friday August 29. before the departure of his
Majesty, then Prince, out of Spain, which was only hindered by the not coming
of the Dispensation, the Prince appointed him and Sir Walter Aston to meet with
the Spanish Commissioners, and they drew up the heads of the Temporal Articles,
wherewith the Prince Buckingham were acquainted; and in case the Dispensation
had come, and the Desponsories been performed on that day, there had been no
other provision made for them before the Marriage; but presently upon the
Prince his departure, he the said Earl caused them to be drawn into form, and
sent them to his late Majesty September 27. 1623. desiring to understand his
Majesty's pleasure with all speed, especially if he disapproved any thing in
them; but never received notice of any dislike thereof, until the aforesaid
Letters of November 13. 1623. Infanta entering into Religion, or before
convenient assurance as well for the restitution of the Palatinate, as
performance of the Temporal Articles, that he deserves, as he conceives under
favor, no blame, so much as in intention; but if he had erred in intention
only (as he did not) the same being never reduced into Act, the Fault (as he
conceives) was removed by his obedience came from Rome, without a direct
breach of the Match so long labored in, and so much desired; yet he and Sir
Walter Aston having used all possible industry to discover how the motion of
deferring the Match would be taken; and finding an absolute resolution in the
King of Spain to proceed punctually, and to require the Proxies according to
the Capitulations, within ten days after the coming of the Dispensation; and
that time also getting advertisement from Rome, that the Dispensation was
granted, and would presently be there; he, the said Earl, to the end in
November 1. with all diligence unto his Majesty, letting his Majesty know that
it could not be possible for him to protract the Marriage above four days,
unless he should hazard the breaking, for which he had no warrant.

But that this was no new Resolution, nor the King so straightened in time, as by
the said Article is pretended, will appear by the said Earls Dispatch of
September 28. 1623. In which upon scruple that was then Infanta's entering into
Religion, he wrote to the same effect; Viz. That if the Dispensation should
come, he knew no means how to detain the Proxies above twenty or twenty four
days. So that although difficulty happened until the midst of November 1623.
yet it was foreseen that it must of necessity happen whenever the
Dispensation should come; and then was warning of two months given thereof;
viz. from September 24. until November 29. which was the time appointed for the
Desponsories.

So as he most humbly submits himself unto your Lordships which of the two
ways was the safer or dutifuller for him to take; whether upon inferences and
conjectures to have overthrown so great a business; or on the otherside, first
to have presented unto his Majesty the truth and sincerity as he did, the true
estate of his Affairs, with his humble opinion therein, with an intimation,
that if his Majesty should resolve to break the Match, that for the said Earl
his honest discharge of the public Trust reposed in him when the Proxies were
deposited in his

And as to the evil Consequences which are pretended would have Christendom;
that the King of Spain had engaged himself for restitution of the Palatinate;
for which the said Earl conceived a daughter of Spain, and Two Millions had
been no ill pawn, besides England: The advantages of the Spanish Match to
England.
Whereas on the contrary side, he foresaw that the Prince would be kept a year
longer unmarried, a thing that so highly concerns these Kingdoms; he doubts
that the recovery of the Palatinate from the Emperor and Duke of Bavaria by
force would prove a great difficulty, and that Christendom was like to fall
into a general Combustion: So that desiring that his Majesty should have
obtained his ends, and have had the honor and happiness, not only to have
given peace, plenty, and increase unto his own Subjects and Crowns, but to have
compounded the greatest differences that had been these many years in
Christendom: And by his Piety and Wisdom, to have prevented the shedding of so
much Christian Blood, as he feared would ensue, if these businesses

XI. To the Eleventh Article the said Earl says, That the Article is grounded
upon a Petition by him preferred to this Honorable House, supposed to be
scandalous; which your Lordships (as he conceives) according to the Customs
and Privileges of the House of Peers, would have been pleased first to have
adjudged so to have been, either for matter appearing in it self, or upon
hearing the said Earl; for if

Having thus offered to this High and Honorable Court, such Proofs and Reasons,
as he hops shall in your Lordships W^sdom Westminster, Anno Vicesimo of
Blessed Memory, he humbly prays allowance of the Pardons, and the benefit
thereof (with this Clause, That he does and will aver that he is none of the
persons excepted out of the same) although he is very confident he shall not
need the help of any pardon, having received many significations as well from
his Majesty's own mouth, that he had never offended his Majesty, as lately by
several Letters from the Lord Conway, that he might rest in the security he was
in, and sit still, and should be no further questioned. But he hopes your
Lordships will not only find him so far from blame, but that he has served
his late Majesty of Blessed memory, and his most gracious Son, the Kings
Majesty that now is, with that fidelity, care, and industry, that your
Lordships will take such course as you in your wisdoms shall think fit, not
only for the upholding the Honor and Reputation of a Peer of this Realm, after
so many employments,

The Eighth of May, the Commons brought up their Charge against the Duke, which
was delivered at a Conference of both Houses, and spun out two days time. It
was managed by Eight Members and Sixteen Dudley Diggs, Mr. Herbert, Mr. Seldom,
Mr. Glanvile, Mr. Pym, Mr. Sher^and, Mr. Wandesford, and Sir John Elliot.

Sir Dudley Diggs by way of Prologue, made this Speech.

My Lords,
THere are so many things of great importance to be said in very little time to
day, that I conceive it will not be unacceptable to your Lordships, if (setting
by all Rhetorical Affectations) I only in plain Country Language, humbly pray
your Lordships favor to include many excuses necessary to my manifold
infirmities in this one word, I am Commanded by the Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses of the Commons House, to present to your Lordships their most
affectionate thanks for your ready condescending to this Conference; which, out

The House of Commons by a fatal and universal Concurrence of Complaints, from
all the Sea-bordering parts of this Kingdom, did find a great and grievous
interruption and stop of Trade and Traffic: The base Pirates of Sally
ignominiously infesting our Coasts, taking our Ships and Goods, and leading
away the Subjects of this Kingdom France, in Spain, in Holland, and every
France, none in Denmark, none in Germany, no Friend in Italy; Scotland (to say
no more) ununited, Ireland not settled in peace, and much less security at home;
when Spain was as ambitious as it is now under a King ( Philip the Second) they
called their Wisest; the House of Austria as great and potent, and both
strengthened with a malicious League in France, of persons ill-affected, when
the Low Countries had no Being; yet by constant Councils, and old English ways,
even then that Spanish pride was cooled, that greatness of the House of
Austria, so formidable to us now, was well resisted; and to the United
Provinces of the Low Countries such a beginning, growth, The Duke of Buckingham.

Dudley Diggs made a little stop, and afterward read the Preamble to the
Charge, viz.

The Commons Declaration and Impeachment against the Duke of Buckingham.
England now grievously suffers, and of late years has suffered; and to the
honor and safety of our Sovereign Lord the King, and of his Crown and Dignity;
and to the good and welfare of his people, The Commons in this present
Parliament by the Authority of our said Sovereign Lord the King assembled, Do
by this their Bill show and declare against George Duke, Marquess and
Buckingham, Earl of Coventry, Viscount Villers, Baron of Whaddon, Great Admiral
of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and of the Principality of Wales, and
of the Dominions and Islands of the same, of the Town of Calais, and of the
Marches of the same, and of Normandy, Gascoigne, and Guienne, General-Governor
of the Seas and Ships of the said Kingdom, Lieutenant General Admiral,
Captain General and Governor of his Majesty's Royal Fleet and Army lately set
forth, Master of the Horse of our Sovereign Lord the King, Lord Warden,
Chancellor and Admiral Dover Castle, Justice in Air of all the Forests and
Chases on this side the River Trent, Constable of the Castle of Windsor,
Gentleman of his Majesty's Bedchamber, one of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council in his Realms, both in England, Scotland, and Ireland, and Knight
of the most Honorable Order of the Garter; The Misdemeanors, Misprisions,
Offenses, Crimes, and other Matters, comprised in the Articles following; and
him the said Duke do accuse and impeach of the said Misdemeanors, Misprisions,

My Lords,
THis lofty Title of this Mighty Man, methinks does raise my spirits to speak
with a Paulo Majora Canamus; and let it not displease your Lordships, if for
Foundation, I compare the

Now (my good Lords) if that glorious Sun, by his powerful Beams of Grace and
Favor, shall draw from the Bowels of this Earth, an exhalation that shall take
Fire, and burn and shine out like a Star, it needs not be marvelled at, if the
poor Commons gaze and wonder at the Comet; and when they feel the effects,
impute all to the incorruptible matter of it: But if such an imperfect mixture
appear, like that in the last age in the Chair of Cassiopeia, among the sixed
Stars themselves, where Aristotle and the old Philosophers conceived there was
no Buckingham to be; against whom, and his irregular ways,

1. The Offices of this Kingdom, that are the Eyes, the Ears, and the Hands of
this Commonwealth, these have been engrossed, bought and sold, and many of the
greatest of them holden even in the Dukes own hands; which severally gave in
former ages, sufficient content Kings intention, employed to the prejudice
(almost to the ruin) of Friends of our own Religion.

2. Next Honors (those most precious Jewels of the Crown) a Treasure
inestimable, wherewith your Noble Ancestors (my Lords) were well rewarded for
eminent and public Service in the Commonwealth at home; for brave exploits
abroad, when covered all with dust and blood, they sweat in service for the
honor of this Crown. England (as among the Romans) the way to the Temple of
Honor, was through the Temple of Virtue. But I am commanded to press this no
further, then to let your Lordships know, one instance may (perhaps) be given
of some one Lord compelled to purchase Honor.

3. As diverse of the Dukes poor Kindred have been raised to

4. The last of the Charges which are prepared, will be an injury offered to
the person of the late King of Blessed memory, who is with

And therefore, only to the Lord Duke, and his procurement, by
mis-informations, these faults complained of by the Commons, are to be imputed.

And for our most Gracious Sovereign that lives, whose name has been used, and
may perhaps now be for the Dukes justification, the Commons know well, That
among his Majesty's most Royal Laws of England teach us, That Kings cannot
command ill or unlawful things, when ever they speak, though by their Letters
Patents, or their Seals. If the things be evil, these Letters Patents are void,
and whatsoever ill event succeeds, the Executioners of such Commands must ever
answer for them.

Thus, my Lords, in performance of my duty, my weakness has been troublesome
unto your Lordships; it is now high time, humbly to entreat your pardon, and
give way to a learned Gentleman to begin

Then were read the First, Second, and Third Articles, viz.

The Commons Articles against the Duke.
1. THat whereas the great Offices expressed in the said Dukes Style and Title,
heretofore have been the singular Preferments of several Persons eminent in
Wisdom and Trust, and fully able for the His engrossing many Offices.
Trust, and Ability: And others also that were employed by the Royal
Progenitors of our Sovereign Lord the King in places of less Dignity, were much
encouraged with the hopes of advancement. And whereas diverse of the said places
severally of themselves, and necessarily require the whole care, industry, and
attendance of a most provident, Plurality of Offices.
and most able person; He the said Duke being

His buying of Offices.
II. Whereas by the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom of England, if any person
whatsoever, give or pay any sum of Money, Fee, or Reward, directly or
indirectly, for any Office or Offices, which in anywise touch or concern the
Administration or Execution of Justice, or the keeping of any of the Kings
Majesty's Towns, Castles, or Fortresses, being used, occupied, or appointed for
places of strength and defense; the same person is immediately upon the same
Fee, Money, or Reward, given January in the Sixteenth year of the late King
James of Famous memory, give and pay to the Right Honorable Charles, then Earl
of Nottingham, for the Office of Great Admiral of England and Ireland, and the
Principality of Wales, and for the Office of General-Governor of the Seas and
Ships of the Nottingham, being then Great Admiral of the said Kingdoms, and
Principality, and General-Governor of the Seas and Ships, to the intent the
said Duke might obtain the said Offices to his own use, the sum of Three
thousand pounds of lawful Money of England; and did also about the same time,
procure from the said King a further Reward for the Surrender of the said
Office to the said Earl, of an Annuity of One thousand pounds by the year, for
and during the life of the said Earl; and by the procurement of the said Duke,
the said late King of Famous memory, did by his Letters Patents dated the Seven
and twentieth of January, in the said year of his Reign, under the Great Seal
of England, grant to the said Earl the said Annuity; which Nottingham did in
the same Month surrender unto the said late King, his said Offices and his
Patents of them; and thereupon, and by reason of the premises, the said
Offices were obtained by the Duke for his life, from the said King of Famous
Memory, by Letters Patents made to the said Duke, of the same Offices, under
the Great Seal of England, January, in the said Sixteenth year of the said late
King. And the said Offices of Great Admiral and Governor as aforesaid, are
Offices that highly touch and concern the Administration and Execution of
Justice, within the provision of the said Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom;
which notwithstanding, the said Duke has unlawfully ever since the first
unlawful obtaining of the said Grant of the said Offices, retained them in his
hands, and exercised them against the Laws and Statutes aforesaid.

III. The said Duke did likewise in or about the beginning of the Month of
December, His buying the Cinque (...) the Lord Zouch.
in the Two and twentieth year of the said late King James of Famous memory,
give and pay unto the Right Honorable Edward late Lord Zouch, Lord Warden of
the Cinque Ports, and of the Members thereof, and Constable of the Castle of
Dover, for the said Offices, and for the Surrender of the said Offices of Lord
Warden of the Cinque Ports, and Constable of the said Castle of Dover, to be
England; and then also granted an Annuity of Five hundred pounds yearly to the
said Lord Zouch, for the life of the said Lord Zouch; to the intent that he the
said Duke might thereby obtain the said Offices to his own use. And for, and by
reason of the said sum of Money so paid by the said Duke, and of the said
Annuity so granted to the said Edward Lord Zouch, he the said Lord Zouch the
Fourth day of December, in the year aforesaid, did surrender his said Offices,
and England, dated the Sixth day of December, in the said Two and twentieth
year. And the said Office of Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, and of the
Members thereof, is an Office that does highly touch and concern Administration
and Execution of justice; and the said Office of Constable of the Castle of
Dover, is an Office that highly concerns Dover, which is and has ever been
appointed for a most eminent place of strength and defense of this Kingdom;
which notwithstanding, the said Duke has unlawfully ever since this first
unlawful obtaining of the said Office, retained them in his hands, and
exercised them against the Laws and Statutes aforesaid.

The first Article enlarged by Mr. Herbert.
These Three Articles were discoursed upon by Mr. Herbert, and touching
Plurality of Offices, he observed, That in that vast power of the Duke (a young
unexperienced man) there is an unfortunate complication of Danger and Mischief
to the State, as having too much ability, if he be false, to do harm, and ruin
the Kingdom; and if he be faithful, and never so industrious, yet divided
amongst so many great places (whereof every one would employ the industry of an
able and provident man)

The second and third enlarged by him.
To the Second and Third, namely, The buying the Office of Admiralty and
Cinque Ports (both which he comprised in one) he said, That to set a price upon
the Walls and Gates of the Kingdom, is a Crime which requires rather a speedy
remedy than an aggravation, and is against the express Law of 5 Edw. 6. upon
this foundation, That the buying of such And in the Parliament of 12 Edw. 4. it
is declared by the whole Assembly, That they who buy those places (these are
the express words) bind themselves to be Extortioners and Offenders; as if
they pretended it warrantable, or as if they did lay an Obligation upon
themselves to sell again. And though the buying of such places be not against
any particular Law enjoining a penalty for them (the breach whereof is a
particular Offense) yet as far as they subvert the good, and welfare, and
safety of the people; so far

His neglect of guarding the Seas.
IV. Whereas the said Duke by reason of his said Offices of Great Admiral of the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and of the Principality of Wales, and of
Admiral of the Cinque Ports, and General Governor of the Seas and Ships of the
said Kingdoms; and by reason of the trust thereunto belonging, ought at all
times since the said Offices James of Famous memory (that is to say) the space
of Two years last past, neglected the just performance of his said Office and
Duty, and broken the said Trust therewith committed unto him: And has not
according to his said Offices, during the time aforesaid, safely kept the said
Seas, insomuch that by reason of his neglect and default therein, not only the
trade and strength of this Kingdom of England has been during the said time
much decayed, but the same Seas also have been, during the same time,
ignominiously England) is thereby also in most eminent danger to be utterly
lost.

V. Whereas about Michaelmas last past, a Ship called the St Peter of Newhaven,
(whereof John Mallerow was Master) laden with diverse Goods, His taking a Ship
called St Peter of Newhaven.
Merchandise, Moneys, Jewels and Commodities, to the value of Forty thousand
pounds or thereabouts, for the proper account of Monsieur de Villieurs, the
then Governor of Newhaven, and other Subjects of the French King, being in
perfect Amity and League with our Sovereign Lord the King, was taken at Sea by
some of the Ships of his Majesty's England, as by the Authority of the
extraordinary Commission which he then had for the command of the said Fleet,
and was by them, together with her said goods and lading brought into the Port
at Plymouth, as a prize among many others, upon probabilities that the said
Ship or Goods belonged to the Subjects of the King of Spain: And that diverse
parcels of the said goods and lading were there taken out of the said Ship of
St Peter; (that is to say) Cocheneal, Eight Bags of Gold, Twenty three Bags of
Silver, two Boxes of Pearl and Emeralds, a Chain of Gold, Jewels, Moneys and
Commodities to the value of Twenty thousand pounds or thereabouts, and by the
said Duke were delivered into the private custody of one Gabriel Marsh, servant
to the said Duke; and that the said Ship with the residue of her goods and
lading was from thence sent up into the River of Thames, and there detained;
whereupon there was an arrest at Newhaven in the Kingdom of France on the
seventh day of December last, France, to the Lords and others of his Majesty's
most honorable Privy Council; after which (that is to say) on the 28 day of the
said month, his Majesty was pleased to order, with the advice of his
Privy Council, that the said Ship and Goods belonging to the Sucjects of the
French King should be redelivered to such as should re-claim them, and
accordingly intimation was given unto his Majesty's Advocate in the chief Court
Io. Cook Knight, one of his Majesty's principal Secretaries of State, for the
freeing and discharging of the said Ship and Goods in the said Court of
Admiralty: And afterward, that is to say, on the Six and twentieth of January
last, it was decreed in the said Court by the Judge thereof, with the consent
of the said Advocate, That the said Ship with whatsoever Goods so seized or
taken in her, (Except Three hundred Mexico Hides, Sixteen Sacks of Ginger, one
Box of gilded Beads, Five Sacks of Ginger more mentioned in the Allen Appesly,
Sir John Worstenholme, and others, for the due execution thereof: The said
Duke, notwithstanding the said Order, Commission and Decree, detained still to
his own use the said Gold, Silver, Pearls, Emeralds, Jewels, Moneys and
Commodities so taken out of the said Ship as aforesaid: And for his own
singular avail and covetousness, on the sixth day of February last, having

The fourth Article enlarged by Mr Seldom.
These were enlarged by Mr Seldom, who said, That by nature of his Office the
Duke as Admiral ought to have guarded the Seas: By his Patent he is made Magnus
Admirallus Angliae, Hiberniae and Walliae, Normaniae, Aquitaniae, Villae
Calesij, and Marchiarum ejusdem, and praefectus generalis classium Marium
dictorum regnorum. The Seas of England and Ireland are committed to the
Admiral, as a part of the Demesne and Possessions of the Crown of England; not
as if he should thereby have Jurisdiction only, as in case of France or Spain.
The State of Genoa, Catalonia, and other Maritine parts of Spain, the Sea-Towns
of Almain, Zeland, Holland, Friezland, Denmark, Norway, and diverse other parts
of the Empire, show, That the Kings of England, by reason that their said Realm
has used, time out of mind, to be in peaceable possession, are Lords of the
Seas of England, and of the Islands belonging to them. And though Grotius that
Hollander wrote of purpose to destroy all Dominion in the East-Ocean; yet he
speaks nothing against the Dominion of our English Seas, howsoever he Meta
Britanicis littora sunt oris; the utmost limits of the Demesne of the Crown of
England, are the Shores of the neighboring Countries; the whole Sea, or the
Territorium maximum that intervenes, being parcel of the possession of the
Crown: the keeping and safeguard of these committed to the Lord Admiral by the
name of the Praefectus Marium and Admirallus, being but the same anciently:
Before the use of the word Admiral came in, which was under Edw. 1. the
Admirals had the Titles of Custodes Maris.

And this Praefectura or Custodia, or Office of safe-guarding the Seas, binds
him to all care and perpetual observance of whatsoever conduces to that
safeguard, as in Custos sigilli, Custos Marchiarum, Custos portium, and custos
comitatuum, agreeable to the practice of former times.

1. In certifying yearly to the King, and his Council, the many Forces both of
the Kings ships, and ships of Merchants, the names of the owners, the number of
Mariners, etc. That the King and his Council may always know his force by Sea.

2. In showing wants of ships etc. for the safe-guarding of the Seas, with the
Estimates of the Supply, that so they might be procured. In personal attendance
upon the service of guarding the Seas upon all occasions of weight: In 7 H. 4.
Nich. Blackborn, and Rich. Cliderowe one of the Knights of Kent were made
Admirals for keeping the Seas, upon consideration had of it in Parliament, and
the other Knight being Robert Clifford, it was agreed in Parliament that he
should have the voices of both, because the other must of necessity be absent:
And they both amongst other things petitioned Le Council ne pent fair.

Then he estimated the nature of the offense, by the consequences which follow
the not guarding of the Seas, viz. 1. The losses already showed. 2. The
prevention of Trade, which gives life to the wealth of the Kingdom. Rich.. 2.
the Commons opened the two chief and almost whole Causes of the weakening the
Kingdom at that time; the neglect of Chivalry and eminent virtue not regarded
nor rewarded; the decay of Trade since the Navy was grown weak, besides all the
loss of quiet possession of so large a Territory as the Seas of England and
Ireland, by the free use of which the ancient glory and greatness of the Crown
of England has so constantly subsisted.

Then he instanced in Michael de la Pool, Lord Chancellor, who in 9 Rich. 2.
misspent Subsidies given pro salva custodia maris, as appears in the Roll, and
was adjuged in Parliament (though for other offenses, because some other Lords
of the Council had been trusted with him, and it sans les companions) they
taking it for a crime without question fit to be complained of.

Secondly, in William Duke of Suffolk, who for the same fault, being Admiral
only in the right of Henry Earl of Exeter his Ward, was by the King
extraordinarily commanded into banishment.

Then he brought examples of such who had been put to death, and confiscated
for not safe-guarding Towns, and Castles, and Forts, which are of like nature
with not safe-guarding the Seas, and with losing the possession

To the Fifth he said, The Fifth Articles enlarged by Mr Seldom.
The staying of the ship called the Peter of Newhaven, and detaining part of
the goods, was against the Marine Laws of England, against the Common Laws,
against the Laws of Merchants, and consequently the Law of Nations.

By the Marine Laws agreeable to the Civil Laws, sentence given by any Subject
or other against the King, may upon new proof be revoked, but not without new
proof. He made by his Patent a Judge of all Maritine juxta leges nostras
civiles and Maritimas, and accordingly to hear all Causes, and generally to
proceed ex officio mero mixto and promoto secundum leges nostras Civiles and
Maritimas.

Against the Common-Laws,

All Justices and all other deputed to do Law or Right, are commanded by Act of
Parliament to permit the course of ordinary Justice; and although they be
commanded to do the contrary, that they do execution

Against the Law of Nations.

Against what is agreed by the Leagues between us and Forain Nations, That the
Subjects of Nations in Amity with us shall be well used, and permitted without
Molestation, for what cause or occasion soever, according to the Laws and
Customs of the places where they shall be.

Celerem justitiam.

The Consequences of this Offense are;

1. Great damage to our English Merchants, that have suffered by reason of it
in Forain Parts, as they allege. 2. It is a discouragement to those that are
Subjects to the Marine Jurisdiction. 3. An example that may serve hereafter to
justify all absolute Authority in the Admiral, without Law or Legal course,
over the ships and good of all Merchants whatsoever, and so no security to
Merchants. Lastly, He instanceth in the Duke of Suffolk, who was adjudged in
Parliament for Treason, and among other offenses it was laid to his charge,
that he took to his own use goods Piratically taken, and expressly against the
Order determined by the Lord Protector and the whole Council, whereunto his
hand had been for the restitution of them.

Next were read the Sixth, Seventh and Eighth Articles; viz.

VI. Whereas the honor, wealth, and strength of this Realm of England is much
increased by the Traffic, chiefly of such Merchants as employ and build great
warlike Ships, a consideration that should move all Counselors of State,
especially the Lord Admiral to cherish and maintain such Merchants.

The said Duke abusing the Lords of the Parliament in the One and twentieth
year of the late King James of famous memory, with pretense of serving the
State, did oppress the East- India Merchants and extorted

About February in the year aforesaid, he the said Duke hearing some good
success that those Merchants had at Ormus, in the parts beyond the Seas, by his
Agents cunningly in or about the month aforesaid in the year of the said late
King, endeavored to draw from them some great sum of money, which their
poverty, and no gain by that success at Ormus made those Merchants absolutely
to deny; whereupon he the said Duke perceiving March then following, in the
said year of the said late King, did move the Lords then assembled in the said
Parliament, whether he should make stay of any Ships which were then in the
Ports, (as being high Admiral he might) and namely, those ships prepared for
the East- India voyage, which were of great burden March following, when the
then Deputy of that Company, with other of those Merchants, did make suit to
the said Duke for the release of those Ships and Pinaces; he the said Duke,
said he had not been the occasion of their staying, but that having heard the
motion with much earnestness in the Lords House of Parliament, he could do no
less then give the order they had done; and therefore he willed them to set
down the reasons of their Tilbury. And the tenth of March following an unusual
joint action was by his procurement entered in the chief Court of Admiralty, in
the name of the said late King and of the Lord Admiral, against them for
Fifteen thousand pound taken Piratically by some Captains of the said Merchants
ships, and pretended to be in the hands of the East- India Company; and
thereupon the Kings Advocate in the name of Advocate for the then March
following; whereupon the said Merchants, though there was no cause for their
molestation by the Lord Admiral, yet the next day they were urged in the said
Court of Admiralty to bring in the Fifteen thousand pounds, or go to prison:
wherefore immediately the Company of the said Merchants did again send the
Deputy aforesaid and some others to make new suit unto first be moved. The said
Merchants therefore being in this perplexity, and in their consultation, the
three and twentieth of that month, even ready to give over that Trade, yet
considering that they should lose more then was demanded by unlading their
ships, besides their voyage, they resolved to give the said Duke Ten thousand
pounds for his unjust demands. And he the said Duke by the undue means
aforesaid, and under color of his Office, and upon false pretense of Rights,
unjustly did exact April following the discharge of those Ships, which were not
released by him till they the said Merchants had yielded to give him the said
Duke the said Ten thousand pounds for the said Release, and for the false
pretense of Rights made by the said Duke as aforesaid.

VII. Whereas the Ships of our Sovereign Lord the King, His delivering Ships
into the hands of the King of France.
and of England, Governor-General and Keeper of the said Ships and Seas, and
thereof ought to July last, in the first year of our Sovereign Lord the King,
did under the color of the said Office of Great Admiral of England, and by
indirect and subtle means and practices, procure one of the principal Ships of
his Majesty's Navy-Royal called the Vantguard, then under the Command of
Captain John Pennington, and six other Merchants Ships of great burden and
value, belonging to several Persons inhabiting in London, the Natural Subjects
of his France, to the end that being there, they might the more easily be put
into the hands of the French King, his Ministers and Subjects, and taken into
their possession, command and power; And accordingly the said Duke by his
Ministers and Agents, with menaces and other ill means and practices, did there
without order of Justice, and without the consent of the said Masters and
Owners, unduly compel and enforce the said Masters and Owners of the great loss
and prejudice of the said Merchants, and against the liberty of those Subjects
of our Sovereign Lord the King that are under the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty.

Those ships to be used to his knowledge against Rochel.
VIII. The said Duke, contrary to the purpose of our Sovereign Lord the King,
and his Majesty's known zeal for the maintenance and advancement of the true
Religion established in the Church of England, Rochel and elsewhere in the
Kingdom of France, did procure the said Ship Royal, and compel as aforesaid the
said six other Ships to be delivered unto the said French King, his Ministers
and Subjects as aforesaid, to the end the said Ships might be used and employed
by the said French King in his intended War against those of the said Religion
in the said Town of Rochel and elsewhere within the Kingdom of France: And the
said Ships were and have been Oxford in August

These three Articles were aggravated by Mr. Glanvile.

Mr. Glanvile enlarges the Sixth Article.
MY Lords (said he) In this great business of Impeachment against Buckingham, I
am commanded by the Commons in Parliament to bear a part of some importance.

The Articles allotted to my Charge are three, the Sixth, Seventh, and Eighth;
which I shall open with as much brevity and perspicuity as I may: The substance
of several Cases concerning the same; The Evidence to make them good, together
with such Observations as naturally arise out of the matter; whereby your
Lordships may the better discern wherein the Dukes faults do consist, and what
punishment may

The Sixth Article is a distinct Charge different from the other two; wherefore
I will handle it, with the Incidents thereof, by it self. The Seventh and
Eighth Articles being of one nature and subject, are indeed several parts of
one Charge, rather then several Charges, and have such a connection in
themselves, that with your Lordships leaves I will handle them both together
without dividing them, which I hold will be the shortest and fittest way to do
right to the Cause, and to your

The Sixth Article gives me occasion (my Lords) thus to enlarge my self. In a
Treaty the 18. of August 1604. between our late Sovereign King James of
glorious memory, and Philip the Third King of Spain, It was agreed, That there
should be perfect Amity and Peace to endure for ever by Land, Sea, and
Fresh-waters, between these Kings, their Heirs and Successors, their Dominions,
Liege-men and Subjects then being, or which should be; And that either party
should then after abstain from all depradations, offenses and spoils, by Sea,
Land, and Fresh-waters, in what Dominions or Government soever of the other,
and should cause restitution to be made of all depradations which then

James by his Highness Letters Patent bearing date the 14. of September, An.
13. of his Reign, did grant unto the Governors of the Merchants of London
trading into the East Indies, and to their Successors, in case they be justly
provoked or driven thereunto, in defense of their persons, goods or ships, by
any disturbance or hinderance in their quiet Course of Trade, or for recompense
or recovery of the persons, ships or goods of any of his Majesty's Subjects
that had been formerly in, East Indies, or for any other just cause of their
defense, or recompense of losses sustained; That then the Captains or principal
Commanders of the said Company, or any other under their government, should or
might attempt, surprise, or take the persons, ships and goods of any Prince or
State, by whose Subjects they should sustain any wrong or loss in manner as
aforesaid, as by the said Letters Patent appears: Some years after the
granting of these Letters Patent, under pretext that the said Treaty was
broken, there was some interruption Spain's Subjects in the Ports of East India
to the Merchants of the East India Company trading into those parts, whereby
they were much damnified; and thereupon suspecting that it might be in vain to
complain for redress in an ordinary course of Justice in the East India, or in
default thereof to return into Spain to make complaint to that purpose, where
nothing was likely to be done till they had sent from thence again into the
East Indies, and received an answer; And after all this, upon denial of Justice
in Spain, Portugals in the East Indies, Subjects to the King of Spain; and
afterward being commanded by the King of Persia to transport certain Forces of
his in Ormus an Island situate in the Country of Persia, some goods of
Portugals subjects to the King of Spain were there taken by Captain Blithe and
Captain Wedel, and others of their Company, being servants and in pay under the
East India Company.

In July 1623. Two ships called the Lion and the Jonas, being part of a Fleet
belonging to the said Company, returned from Ormus Downs richly laden with
goods and merchandise lawfully belonging to the said Company, and estimated to
the value of One hundred thousand pounds. The Duke of Buckingham, in or about
October 1623. being advertised thereof, well knowing the Company to be rich,
and apprehending in himself a probable ground how he might exact and extort
some great sum of money from the said Company out of the profit of these ships
and their lading, by color of his Office of Lord Admiral England, and out of
his power and greatness, his Office being used for a groundwork of his design
therein, did thereupon pretend that the lading of the said ships was for the
most part with goods Pyratically taken at Sea in the parts about Ormus
aforesaid, and that a Tenth part or some other great share thereof did belong
to him in the right of his said Office of Lord Great Admiral of England, and by
virtue of his Letters Patent and Grant from his late Majesty in that behalf;
alleging withal, howsoever the said Company might peradventure November,
December, January and February then next following, he had diverse times
Treaties by himself and his Agents with the the then Governor and others of the
said

And whereas the said Duke by this time finding that he could not Great James,
the Jonas, the Star, and the Eagle, and two Pinaces called the Spy and the
Scout, the said Ships and Pinaces, with their Victuals, Store and Ordnances,
were

These Ships and Pinnaces were well near ready to set sail for a Voyage into
the East Indies by the first day of March, in the One and twentieth year of his
said late Majesty's reign; and he well-knowing how great a hinderance it would
be to the said Company, if the said Ships and Pinnaces should be stayed for any
long time, the rather in regard if they did not set sail about that time of the
year, or within Twenty days after, they had utterly lost their voyage for that
year; Mansounds, which are constantly six months Easterly, and six months
Westerly every year at their set times in those parts of Africa, about the Cape
of Bona Speranza; (for of those Winds, all Ships going from hence into the
East Indies, are to make their use in the usual and due time, which yet cannot
be done, if men take not their opportunity by coming to the Cape in their
proper and due season, and in so long and dangerous a voyage wherein the
Equinoctial Line is twice to be passed, England, who is Custos marium domini
Regis, and has jurisdiction of all Foreign parts super altum mare be admitted
to pretend himself ignorant of this Secret, or of any other particulars
belonging to the Seas and Voyages.) The Duke therefore apprehending and well
weighing how great a hinderance, or rather what an absolute loss it would be to
the company if March, 1623. to effect his designs upon the said Company, and to
get that by circumvention and surprisal, which in a legal and due course of
Justice he had not hopes to obtain: Not thinking it sufficient, that the sense
of his displeasure lying over the Company as an ominous cloud threatening a
storm, if March, he put your Lordships sitting in Parliament in mind, touching
the great business likely to ensue upon dissolution of the then Treaties with
Spain, and that a speedy resolution thereof was necessarily required, for that
the Enemy would pretermit no time; and if we East-Indian Voyage, which were of
great burden, well furnished, and fit to guard our own Coasts: Which motion
was generally approved of the whole House, knowing nothing of the Dukes secret
designs and private intentions. And the same day a Motion was made Edward
Seymour Knight, the Vice Admiral to the Duke of the County of Devon; which, in
respect of the time when, and person by whom it was propounded, is very
suspicious, that it issued all from one Spirit, and that he was set on by the
Duke, or some of his Agents; the truth whereof, your Lordships may be pleased
to search out and examine as you shall see cause. By color of this Order of
the Lords House of Parliament, the Duke caused John Pexal, Marshal of the
Admiralty, to make stay to be made of the said Ships and Pinnaces; howbeit,
notwithstanding all the occasion pretended for the defense of the Realm, there
were not any other Ships staid at this time.

The Company perceiving by the course of things, from whence their Evils moved,
upon the Fifth of March, 1623. became earnest Suitors to the said Duke for a
Releasement of their said Ships and Pinnaces, Theobalds to give leave for the
Ships and Pinnaces Tilbury, there to attend such further Directions as should
be given unto them, with leave so to signify by word of mouth to the Sergeant
of the Admiralty, for that the Duke had then no Secretary with him. Thus some
while by threatening of strong oppositions and terrors, and other while by
intimating hopes of favor, and good assistance, the Duke sought to accomplish
his purpose, yet prevailed not; and so the Tenth of March, 1623. the Kings
Advocate, Mr. Dr. Reeves. as Advocate for the King, and Lord Admiral, made
Allegation in the Blithe, and Wedel, and their Accomplices upon the Sea near
Ormus, and in other parts within the jurisdiction of the Admiralty, was come
into the Possessions of the Treasurers of the East India Company, and remained
in their hands, and prayed it might be attached; and the said Treasurers be
monished to appear the Wednesday then next following, and there to bring in the
150000 l. to remain

The same Tenth of March a Warrant issued forth accordingly, directed to the
Marshal of the said Court; and upon the said next Wednesday the Seventeenth of
March, the same Warrant was returned by the said Marshal, That the day before
he had attached the said Moneys in the hands of Mr. Stone, then present in the
Court, and had admonished him, and Mr. Abbot the Deputy Governor of that
Company, and diverse others then present, to bring in the same into Court. Upon
Stone and all that had an interest in this money, might be pronounced as in
Contumacy, and therefore be arrested and detained until 150000 l. were brought
into the Register. Hereupon Sentence of Contumacy was pronounced, but the
payment thereof was respited until Friday following. Upon which Seventeenth of
March this Sentence being pronounced, Mr. Stone, Mr. Abdy, and others, Officers
of the said Company then present, informed how the Governor was their
Imprisonment; but the Judge took time to consider of it. The Company finding by
these extraordinary and extreme courses, the drift of the Duke, whose greatness
and power seemed unresistable, and his mind implacable without satisfaction to
his own content, and withal observing what a straight they were cast into by
reason of the stay of their Ships; which, if it were much longer, they must
needs lose their Voyage utterly for this year, and the very unloading of them
would Spain, while yet the Peace and Treaty between his late Majesty, and the
King of Spain, were not broken or dissolved.

The said Company being entangled by the Dukes subtilty, and overcome at last
by the terror of his power and greatness, was drawn to make offer of Six
thousand pounds to the said Duke, which was rejected as a base offer: And now
the time pressing them on very hard, some consultations were had amongst them,
Whether it were better March, 1623. they agreed to give him the said Ten
thousand pounds, which he accepted; and forthwith moving the Lords of
Parliament, Downs. And afterward upon the Fifth of April, 1624. the Duke
signified unto the Lords House of Parliament, That his Majesty at the humble
Petition of the East India Company, had commanded him to discharge the
East-Indian Ships, which he had once stayed according to the order of this
House, made the First day of March then last past, March, out of his Book,
which was done accordingly, and afterward the said Ten thousand pounds was
paid unto the said Duke; which he received and accepted accordingly. And upon
the Eight and twentieth of April aforesaid, suffered a colorable Sentence in
the Admiralty to be given against him for their discharge, in such sort, as by
the same Sentence appears. And for a color he sealed March last, That the
said King had Ten thousand pounds of the said Company by occasion of this
business. The House of Commons have been very careful in their proceedings in
this, as in all other things they have, and ever shall be, to do nothing which
may reflect upon the Honor of their Kings: And in this particular, by that
which has been here at first declared of the manner and occasion of the said
Goods and Moneys taken from the said Portugals, and receiving the same as
aforesaid, while the said Peace was continuing, and the said Treaties
indissolved; it appears, that Oliver, the Dukes servant, but find not any
Record, by which it does appear unto us, that ever it came Amboyna in the
East Indies, by means of the Dutch, which might have moved a Noble mind rather
to pity, then punish the Company after such a Distress so lately suffered.

Having now finished the Narrative part belonging to this Charge, I shall
observe unto your Lordships upon the whole matter, the nature East India
Company against their wills by color of his Office. Yet as offenders in this
kind, have commonly some color to disguise and mask their Corruptions, so had
he: His color was the Release of his pretended right to the Tenth part, or
some other share of the Goods, supposed to be Piratically taken at Sea by the
Captain, and their Servants of the

For the former, I will rely upon the substance of two noteable presidents of
Judgments in Parliament, the one ancient in the 10 Rich. 2. At which time the
Commons preferred diverse Articles unto the Lords in Parliament against Michael
de la Pool, Earl of Suffolk, Lord Chancellor England, accusing him amongst
other things by the first Article of his Charge, That while he was Lord
Chancellor he had refused to give Livery to the chief Master of St. Anthonies,
of the profit pertaining to that Order, till he had security from them, with
Sureties by Recognisance of Three thousand pounds, for the payment of One
hundred pounds per annum to the Earl, and to John his Son, for their lives. The
Earl by way of Answer, set forth a pretended Title in his Son, to the chief
Mastership of that Order, and that he took that One hundred pound per annum, as
a Composition for his Sons right. The Commons replied, showing amongst other
things, That the taking of Money for that which should have been done freely,
was a selling of the Law, and so prayed Judgment. In conclusion, the pretended
right of his Son

The other President of like nature, is more Modern in the Case of the Earl of
Middlesex, late Lord Treasurer of England, who was charged by the Commons in
Parliament, and transmitted to your Lordships for taking of Five hundred pounds
of the Farmers of the Great Customs, May, in the Two and twentieth year of his
late Majesty's reign, Adjudged by your Lordships in Parliament (which I think
is yet fresh in your Memories) That the Earl for this, amongst other things,
should undergo many grievous Censures, as appears by the Records of your
Lordships house, which I have lately seen and perused.

And now being to prove, that the said Duke had no title to any part of the
Goods by him claimed against the East India Company, I shall easily make it
manifest, if his Lordships pretense by his own Allegation

1. For that the parties from whom the same were taken, ought to have
restitution, demanding it in due and reasonable time; and it were an injury to
the intercourse, and Law of Nations, if the contrary should

2. Secondly by Law; for so are the Statutes of this Kingdom, and more
especially in 27 Edw. 3.13. whereby it was provided, That if any Merchant,
privy or stranger, be robbed of his Goods upon the Sea, and the same come
afterward into this Realm, the owner shall be received to prove such Goods to
be his, and upon proof thereof, shall have the same restored to him again.

Likewise, 1, 2, 3 Edw. 6.18. in the Act of Parliament, touching Sir Thomas
Seymour, Great Admiral of England, who therein amongst diverse other things is
charged with this, That he had taken to his own use Goods Piratically taken
against the Law, whereby he moved almost all Christian Princes to conceive a
grudge and displeasure, and by open War to seek remedy by their own hands: And
therefore for this, amongst other things, he was attainted of High Treason, as
appears by that Act wherein the Law is so declared to be as before is
expressed.

But if it should be admitted, that the Duke had a right in this case, for
which he might compound; yet the manner of his seeking to try and recover such
his right, is in it self an high Offense, and clearly unlawful in many
respects, whereof I will touch but a few. As in making the most Honorable House
of Parliament an Instrument to effect his private ends for his profit: In
proceeding to arest and stay the Ships of

Then he read the Seventh and Eighth Articles, which he handled jointly, as
being not two Charges, but two sevearl parts of one and the same Charge; and
when he had read them, he went on speaking further to their Lordships, as
follows.

Mr. Glanvile inlarges the Seventh and Eighth Articles.
YOur Lordships may have observed how in handling the former Articles, I have in
my Discourse used the method of time, which I hold to be best for the discovery
of the truth: I shall therefore by your Lordships patience, whereof now I have
had some good experience, use the like order in my enlargment upon these later
Articles; touching which, that which I have to say, is thus.

In or about the Two and twentieth year of the reign of our late James of
famous memory, there being then a Treaty between our said late Sovereign and
the French King, for a Marriage to be had between our then most Noble Prince
(now our most gracious King) and the French Kings Sister (our now Queen) and
for entering into an Active War against the King of Spain, and his Allies in
Italy, and the Valtoline. Our said late Sovereign passed some promise to the
French Kings Ambassador here, the Marquess D' Effiat, for procuring or lending
some Ships to be employed by the French in Rochellers, or any others of our
Religion in France: For it was pretended by the French Kings Ministers to our
King, That the said Ships should be employed particularly against Genoa, and
not otherwise. But afterward some matter of Suspicion breaking forth from
those of our Religion in France, that the Design for Italy was but a pretense
to make the Body of an Army fall upon the Rochellers, or other of our Religion
in that Kingdom;

And the Duke of Buckingham then and yet Lord Great Admiral of England, well
knowing all this to be true, pretended he was and would be very careful, and
proceed with art to keep the said Ships in the hands of our King, and upon our
own Coasts; and yet nevertheless under hand he unduly intended, practiced, and
endeavored the contrary: For afterward by his direction or procurement in or
about the Two and twentieth year aforesaid, a Ship of his Majesty's called the
Vantguard,

Neptune, whereof Sir Ferdinando Gorge was Captain. 2. The Industry, of the
burden of Four hundred and fifty Tuns, whereof James Moyer was Captain. 3. The
Pearl of Five and forty Tuns, Anthony Tench was Captain. 4. The Marigold of
Three hundred Tuns, Thomas Davies Captain. 5. The Loyalty of Three hundred
Tuns, Jasper Dare Captain. 6. The Peter and John of Three hundred and fifty
Tuns, John Davies Captain. Gift of God of Three hundred Tuns, Henry Lewen
Captain.
Also about the same time a Contract was made by and between Sir John Cook,
and other the Commissioners of his Majesty's Navy, as on behalf of his Majesty
for his said Ship the Vantguard, and on behalf of the Captains, Masters, and
Owners of the said Seven Merchants Ships, but without their privity or
direction for the service of the French King, upon conditions to be safe and
reasonable for our King, this John Cook drew the Instructions for the
Direction of the said Contract, which Instructions passed and were allowed by
the King, and such of the Council, as were made acquainted therewith, and used
in this business. In which Instructions, as Sir John Cook has since alleged
in the House of Commons, there was care taken for provision to be made, that
the said Ship of his Majesty called Vantguard, should not Rochel, or those of
the Religion in France, nor take into her more men of the French then she could
from time to time be well able to command and master. But whether the
Instructions for the Merchants Ships, and the Kings said Ship were all one, is
not yet cleared unto the Commons, howbeit it appears not, but that the intent
of our King and State, was to be a like careful for both. Nevertheless a Form
of Articles dated the Five and twentieth day of March, in the Three and
twentieth year of his said late D' Effiat the Ambassador, on the one part, and
the several Owners of the said Merchants Ships respectively on the other part,
viz. A several Writing or Instrument for every of the said Ships respectively,
whereby amongst other things, as by the same appears, it was covenanted and
agreed, by and on the part and behalf of the owners, to and with the said
Marquess D' Effiat, to this effect, namely.

1. That their said Ships respectively, with a certain number of men for every
of them limited, with Ordnance, Munition, and other necessaries, should be
ready for the French Kings service, the Thirteenth of April then next
following.

2. That they should go on in that Service under a French General, to be as
Captain in every of the said Merchants Ships respectively; of the appointment
of the French King, or his Ambassador.

3. That they should serve the French King against any whomsoever, but the King
of Great Britain.

4. That they should take in as many Soldiers into their said several Ships, as
they could stow or carry, besides their Victual and Apparel.

5. That they should continue six months or longer in the Service,

6. That they should permit the French to have the absolute Command of their
Ships, for Fights and Voyages.

And it was amongst the said Articles, besides other things, Covenanted and
agreed by the said Marquess D' Effiat; as, for and on the behalf of the French
King, to this effectly, namely.

I. That there should be paid to every owner a months freight in March.

II. And that the Ships should be ready in a certain form prescribed at the end
of the Service.

When all things were in a readiness for circumvention and surprisal of the
Owners, Captains, and Masters of the said Ships, then and

But there were private Instructions given to Captain John Pennington, Captain
of the Kings Ship, the Vauntguard; as for him and the whole Fleet, that he
should observe the first Instructions, to wit, Not to serve against those of
the Religion, and to take into his Ship no more Frenchmen then they could
master. The pretense for Genoa, and these Pennington, were but a further
Artifice of the Dukes to draw the Ships into France, and to conceal the
breaking forth of the matter here in England: And the more to endear them, and
confirm them in an opinion of right intention, they were commanded to conceal
these private Instructions, as if the Duke and his Agents have trusted them
more then they did the Ambassadors. By these and other like cunning and undue
proceedings of the said Duke, the said Marquis d' Effiat sealed one part, and
the Owners of the said Merchants ships respectively sealed the other parts of
the said pretended Articles, trusting they should not be bound to the strict
performance thereof, by reason of the said private Instructions to the contr^^.
After the passing of these Articles, the said ships being formerly ready, the
said Duke May 8. etc. there to expect Directions of the Party that should be
Admiral of the said Fleet so prepared, with a requiry of all Officers to be
assistant hereunto.

All things being now in readiness, Captain Pennington being Admiral of this
whole Fleet, in May 1625. went with the Kings said Vantguard, and the seven
Merchants ships aforesaid to Diep in France: There instantly the Duke of
Memorancy, Admiral of France, would have put Two hundred French Soldiers
aboard the ship called the Industry, being no more men then she could stow, but
a far greater proportion of men then her proper Company was able to command or
master; and offered also to do the like to every one of the said ships; telling
the said Captain Pennington, and other the said English Captains and Owners,
and their Companies in direct terms, that they were to Rochel, and against
those of our Religion: whereunto they all showing themselves unwilling, there
were Chains of Gold, and other Rewards offered unto some of the Captains,
Masters and Owners, to induce them: All which they utterly refused, protesting
unanimously against the Design, and would not take in above a fit number of
men, such as they might be able to command.

Also the Company of the Kings ship did there inform Captain Pennington of this
Overture made to go against Rochel, and exhibited a Petition to him against the
same, subscribing their names to the Petition in a Circle or Compass, that it
might not appear who was the beginner of the same, and then they laid it under
his Prayer Book, where he found and read it. Whereupon Captain Pennington and
the rest consulted more seriously of the matter, and by a general assent
returned all back to the Downs, where they arrived about the end of June, or
beginning of July 1625. From thence Captain Pennington sent a Letter to
Buckingham by one Ingram, with the said Petition, and employed him to become a
Suitor to get a discharge from serving against Rochel: Ingram delivered the
Letter to the Duke, and saw him read it, together with the said Petition;
whereby, as by other former and later means, he had full notice of the Design,
and intent of the French to go against the Rochellors: James Moyer also about
the same time came to the Court, and had conference with my Lord Conway and Sir
John Cook, (now Secretary) acquainting them what had passed at Diep, praying
John Cook. The Duke of Chevereux and Monsieur de Villocleer being now come into
England, as extraordinary Ambassadors from the French King, they and the said
Marquis d' Effiat, more especially d' Effiat, solicited and got a Letter from
the Lord Conway by the Dukes means, dated July 1O.1625. directed to Captain
Pennington, whereby he took upon him to express and signify his Majesty's
pleasure to be, That his Majesty had left the command of the ships to the
French King, and that now Captain Pennington should receive into them so many
men as that King should please for the time contracted, and recommended his
Letter to be as a sufficient Warrant in that (...) All this while the King or
Body of the Council were never made acquainted with any other design then that
of Genoa, nor heard any thing of the passages at Diep, nor of the design for
Rochel, Conways was sent by Parker from Hampton Court unto Pennington, being
now about the Downs, and was not long after delivered into his hands. About
this time Monsieur de la Touch, and others, as from the Duke de Rohan, and
others of the Protestant party in France, solicited our King and Council
against the going of the ships, and had good words and hopes from both, but
from the Duke the contrary, who told them, the King his Master was obliged,

The ships remained still in the Downs, and afterward, viz. about July 15.
1625. there was a Treaty at Rochester between the three Ambassadors
Extraordinary of France, and James Moyer, and Anthony Touchin for themselves
and other English Captains and Masters of ships, etc.

The said Moyer and Touchin being by Message commanded to attend the Duke of
Buckingham at Rochester, for conclusion and settlement to be had of this
business, the said Ambassadors did there proffer and offer Moyer and Touchin an
Instrument in French purporting thus; viz.

1. That the said English Captains and their Companies should consent and
promise to serve the French King against all, none excepted but the King of
great Britain, in conformity of the Contract formerly passed between d' Effiat
and them.

2. That they should consent and agree, in consideration of the assurance March
25. 1625. whereby the French King should be made Master of the said ships by
indifferent Inventory; that then they should by him be warranted against all
hazards of Sea Fight, and if they miscarried, then the value thereof to be paid
by the French King, who would also confirm this new Proposition within fifteen
days after the ships should be delivered to his use by good caution in London.

3. That if the French King would take any men out of the said ships, he might,
but without any diminution of freight for or in respect

The said James Moyer having gotten the French Instrument interpreted,
answered, 1. they would not go to serve against Rochel; 2. nor send their
ships, without good warrant for their going; and 3. not without sufficient
security to their liking for payment of their freight, and reddition of their
ships, or the value thereof; for the Ambassadors security was by them taken not
to be sufficient, and they protested against it, and utterly refused this
peraffetted Instrument: Here also Sir John Epsley and Thomas Love dissuaded the
Duke from this enterprise, telling him, he could not justify nor answer the
delivery of the ships to the French.

The Lord Duke being at Rochester, and there acquainted with all these
proceedings, commanded the said Moyer and the rest, before these Ambassadors,
that they should obey the Lord Conways Letter, and return to Diep to serve the
French, and that so was our Kings pleasure; howbeit herein his Majesty's
pleasure appeared not, but the contrary: yet privately at the same time the
Duke told them, that the security offered or formerly given by the Ambassador,
was insufficient, and that though they went to Diep, yet they might and should
there keep their ships in their own power till they had made their own
conditions July 16. 1625. The Duke of Chevereux and Monsieur Villocleox finding
that they could not accomplish their designs at Rochester, but they must be
fain to defer the getting thereof till the coming of the ships back again to
Diep, where it was thought that better opportunity and more advantage for their
ends would be had, did to that purpose make and ordain the Marquis d' Effiat
their Deputy to contract with the Captains and Masters of the English ships for
the French Kings service, as effectually as themselves might do, thereby d'
Effiat, who intended to go over to Diep forthwith about this business. The Duke
of Buckingham having thus the second time dealt with the Captains and Masters
to go to Diep, and armed and prepared d' Effiat how and in what manner there to
circumvent them, sent over to Diep privately, and underhand, his Secretary Mr
Edward Nicholas, together with d' Effiat. Mr Nicholas at and before the going
over, had Instructions from the Duke by word to see the execution of the Kings
pleasure signified Conway, and to procure the Captains and Masters of the said
Merchants ships to deliver over their ships into the hands of the French, upon
the security peraffetted at Rochester by the three French Ambassadors, and by
them delivered to the Duke of Buckingham, who committed the same to the said Mr
Nicholas, as the security which in that behalf he was to take and accept. Mr
Nicholas according to those Instructions, went to Diep with d' Effiat, and was
there very urgent to get the ships delivered to Diep: d' Effiat entered a Suit
and Protest against our Captains and Masters, and their original Articles, the
better to enforce them to perform the same, without respect to the Dukes verbal
pretenses or Allegations made to the Captains and Masters at Rochester, and in
other places formerly to the contrary.

The Captains and Masters came over again to Diep about July 20. where they
found themselves in a strait by reason of the said Protest Nicholas using the
Kings name with threatening words, was there very earnest from day to day, and
very vehemently pressed them to deliver over their ships before security given
to their content, contrary to the former Proposition, ( viz. the Lord Dukes
word to them at Rochester) which they refusing to yield unto, Advertisement
thereof was speedily sent to the Duke of Buckingham, England, and Mr Nicholas
continued still at Diep about his former Negotiation.

July 27. 1625. Sir Ferdinando Gorge, Anth. Touching, James Moyer Henry Lewen,
Tho. Davies, Jasp. Dard, and James Davies, as owners and Captains of the said
seven English ships hired for the French, did express in writing, that they
held it fit they should not quit ships their till they had made their own
reasonable conditions, and were freed from the questions, and troubles they
were in; and in particular,

1. They prayed to be free of the said Protest, that they might the better
treat of their affairs.

2. If the the French King would have delivery of their ships into his power
and possession, that then they might have security by money deposited in
London, without Revocation for satisfaction of

3. Because their ships being Fortresses of this Kingdom, and the delivery of
them over into the hands of a Foreign Prince without good warrant, concerns
even their very lives, that they might have a warrant in that behalf under the
Great-Seal of England before they should be bound to deliver them over.

4. To be free of their bonds entered into for not selling their Ordnance, and
also free of punishment in that behalf, and they showed how they were more
cautious herein, for that Commissioners drew the first Articles, which were now
wholly broken, and these Articles were to be done by themselves.

And this writing they sent from their ships by one Mr Basset Cole, to present
on shore to the Marquis d' Effiat at Diep, appointing the said Mr Cole to treat
for a speedy conclusion according to these Articles; Buckingham, whereby the
Duke promised his endeavors to get the Marquis's turn served touching these
ships.

The next day, viz. 28 July 1625. Mr Nicholas came aboard the Neptune, and
declared in writing under his hand, how and why he was sent over by the Duke of
Buckingham, as before, and craved the Captain and Masters Answer in writing
under their hands, whether they Conways Letter, and to the Instrument
peraffetted at Rochester, for delivery over of the said ships, yea or no,
offering to procure them a sufficient discharge to their contentment for their
so doing.

The same day also Sir Ferdinando Gorge and the rest, by writing under their
hands subscribed, did declare as follows; namely,

That they were willing to obey our King, but held not the security peraffetted
Rochester by the three Ambassadors to be sufficient (though honorable) and so
they absolutely refused to deliver their ships upon that security, desiring
better caution in that behalf.

1. By Merchants of Paris. 2. To be transferred to London. 3. Irrevocable. 4.
And such as might not be protected by Prerogative; and to have this under the
Hands and Seals of both Kings.
All this while our King or body of the Council knew nothing in certain of any
other design of the French, then only of their pretense against Genoa, and
believed that all the Articles and Instruments that had passed between the
French and us, or the Captains, Masters, and Owners of the English ships had
been penned and contrived with full and good Cautions accordingly, for
p^evention of all dangers that might grow to the contrary. Also the same 28
July, the Captains and Masters taking notice of Mr. Nicholas pressing them to
deliver their ships before security given to their content, contrary to former
Propositions, which they held unreasonable, did make answer unto the Marquis in
writing, That until they should have security to their contentment, they would
not quit the Nicholas (save only for the security by money deposited) saying,
that for all the rest they durst not proceed otherwise.

Lastly they prayed for a speedy Answer, that the delay in this business may
not seem to be in them.

D' Effiat being confident of the Duke of Buckingham's Letters, promises, and
proceedings aforesaid, would not consent to these reasonable demands of the
Captains and Masters of the English ships, protracting the time till he might
hear further from the said Duke out of England.

While these things were thus in handling both in France and in England, there
were written over out of France into England Letters of advertisement, how and
upon what ground, or by what act or means Larking a servant to the Earl of
Holland, and a kind of Agent, a person some way employed by our State, or under
some of our Ambassadors or Ministers in France; That the Peace was concluded
with those of our Religion in France, and that within fourteen days the War
would break forth or begin in Italy, with a Design upon Genoa, a matter of
great importance for annoying the Spaniard.

This Letter of Larking came to the English Court at Richmond July, when the
Duchess of Chevereux Child was there Christened, and the Contents thereof (as
has been alleged) were confirmed by the Ambassadors of Savoy and Venice: By
the advantage and color whereof the Duke of Buckingham drew the King (who all
this while knew nothing of the Design upon Rochel or those of our Religion, but
thought the ^ormer Articles had been safe and well penned both for him and his
Subjects (according to the most religious and politic intention, and
Instructions in that behalf originally given by his late Richmond the same 28
July directed to the said Captain Pennington to this effect, viz.

His Majesty did thereby charge and command the said Captain Pennington without
delay to put his Highness former Command in execution, for consigning the
Vantguard into the hands of the Marguis D'Effiat for the French, with all her
Furniture, assuring her Officers his Majesty would provide for their Indemnity;
And to require the seven Merchants ships in his Majesty's name to put
themselves into the

This Letter was sent by Captain Thomas Wilbraham to Captain Pennington, who
was yet in the Downs. In the beginning of August 1625. Captain Pennington went
over again to Diep, carrying with him the said Letters of his Majesty, and
certain Instructions in writing from the Duke of Buckingham to Mr. Nicholas,
agreeable in substance to the former verbal Instructions given by the Duke to
him at Rochester, as the said Nicholas alleges; who also affirms, that in
all things what he did touching that business, he did nothing but what was
warranted by the Dukes Instructions to him; which if it be true, then the Duke
of Buckingham who commanded and employed him therein Nicholas. If there be any
subsequent act or assent of Council, or of some Counselors of State for the
going of these ships to the French, or for putting them into their power, it
was obtained only for a color, and was unduly gotten by misinforming the
Contents of the sealed Articles, and concealing the Truth, or by some other
undue means: Neither can any such latter act of Council in any sort justify
the Dukes proceedings, which by the whole current of the matter appears
Pennington's coming over to Diep the second time, Mr. Nicholas did in his
speeches to the Captains and Masters of the seven Merchants ships threaten and
tell them, That it was as much as their lives were worth, if they delivered not
their ships to the French as he required; which put them in such fear as they
could hardly sleep: And thereupon two of them were once resolved to have come
again away with the ships; and because the former threats had made them
England, therefore to have brought and left their ships in the Downs, and
themselves for safety of their lives to have gone into Holland.

Captain Pennington being the second time come into Diep, there forthwith
delivered and put the said ship the Vantguard into the absolute power and
command of the French King, his Subjects and Ministers, to the said French
Kings use, to be employed in his service at his pleasure; and acquainted the
rest of the Fleet with the effect Pennington went on shore at Diep, and there
spoke with D'Effiat the Ambassador, and shortly after returned aboard, and gave
England.

Then the said Masters and Captains prepared to be gone, and weighed anchor
accordingly. Whereupon Captain Pennington shot at them, and forced them to come
again to anchor, as yielding themselves for fear to his mercy and disposal.
Upon this, Captain Pennington and the Frenchmen that now commanded the
Vantguard, came aboard the Diep: Whereupon they all went ashore except Sir
Ferdinando Gorge, who with his ship the Great Neptune adventured to come away,
as not liking these new and unreasonable Propositions. At their coming ashore
they spoke with Mr. Nicholas, and there by his enforcement came to a new
Agreement to accept the Security of the Town of Diep, upon certain hard
Conditions; namely, The said Marquis d' Effiat as Extraordinary Ambassador in
England, and as having power by deputation from the Duke of Chevereux and
Villocleer, on or about August 15. 1625, did agree and promise to the said
Moyer, Touchin, Thomas Davies, Dard, John Davies, Lewen, as Captains and
Industry, the Pearl, the Marigold, the Loyalty, the Peter and John, and the
Gift of God, then being in the Road of the Town of Diep, That the French King
should give and furnish to the said Owners (they being present, and accepting
it in this Town) this sufficient security, That within fifteen days after the
said French King should be in possession of the said ships, he should give
sufficient caution in London, for the sum of Two hundred and thirteen thousand
Livres, whereat the said ships were estimated, viz. Fifty thousand pounds. And
in or about the same 15 August, 1625. the Commonalty of the said Town of Diep
entered security, and bound the goods of their Commonalty to the said English
Captains and Owners, That the said French King and his Ambassadors should
furnish the security within the City of London within the time, and for the sum
aforesaid.

On or about August 16. 1625. the said Marquis d' Ef^iat, as well Moyer,
Touching, etc. to give and furnish to them (they being present, and requiring
it in the Town of Diep) sufficient security in the City of London, within
fifteen days after the French King should be in peaceable possession of the
said ships, for the sum of Two hundred and thirteen thousand Livres Turnoys,
whereat the said ships were valued, namely, for the said ship called the
Industry, and so a several sum for every ship, which security March 25. 1625.
Albeit, because the said Ambassadors had found it good now to discharge the
English Mariners out of the said ships, that therefore the freight agreed upon
by the said former Contract should not be wholly paid, but only for the space
of Chevereux and Monsieur Villocleer for the performance hereof, as by the said
Article it self; reference being thereunto had, amongst other things more fully
appears.

This Article being passed and recorded at Diep, all the said Great-Neptune,
who was gone away in detestation of the action intended by the French were
forthwith delivered into the absolute possession, power, and command of the
French King, and of his said Ambassador d' Effiat, and other the Ministers and
Subjects of the French King, to be employed by him in his service at his
pleasure, and not one of all the English Company, Man or Boy, (other then one
only man, a Gunner as it should seem) would stay in any of those ships, to
serve against the Rochellors, or those of our Religion.

As soon as these ships were thus delivered into the possession and power of
the French, the said Ambassador then moved them, and dealt earnestly with them
for the sale of their ships. Mr Nicholas having finished the work he went for,
at his coming from Diep he recei-a Diamond-Ring worth Fifty pounds, and a
Hatband set with Sparks Nicholas his quality, for less service done) yet was it
more then so ill an office as he was employed in could in any sort deserve.

The said Captain Pennington returned speedily into England, and took his
journey toward the City of Oxford, where the Parliament Westminster thither,
and there several Propositions were taken into debate for the good of our
Religion, and the supply of his Majesty's occasions: For the well resolving and
settling whereof the true knowledge how, and upon what occasions and terms the
several ships were sent, delivered, employed, and to be employed, was very
requisite. Afterward neverthertheless upon or about August 6. 1625. at a
meeting and conference between both the Houses of Parliament in
Christchurch-Hall, after the reading there of his Buckingham well knowing all
the passages which I have now related to your Lordships to be true, did not
only cautelously conceal the same, but also much boldly and untruely, by
color of a Message delivered from his Majesty to both the Houses, affirm unto
them touching those ships to this effect; That it was not always fit for
Rochel; willing and advising the said Lords and Commons to judge the things by
the event, to which he seemed to refer the matter. By which cunning Speeches
the Duke intended, and accordingly did make the Lords and Commons then to
believe, That the said ships were never meant, or any way in danger to be
employed against the Rochellors, or those of our Religion France; and herein he
did great injury and disservice to his Majesty, to the great scandal and
prejudice of our Religion and Affairs, and highly abused both the Lords and
Commons by this cautelous and subtle Speech and Insinuation, and thereby gave
both Houses occasion to forbear Petitioning or suing to his Majesty for Redress
in this Business, while the time was not then passed; for the ships were not as
then actually employed against the Rochellors, albeit in truth they were then
delivered into the

And the same time before the Parliament was dissolved, Captain Pennington, who
could have opened the whole truth of the business for the Service of the King
and the Realm, came to Oxford, but was there drawn to conceal himself by means
of the Duke, and not to publish in due time his knowledge of the Premises, as
was there shortly after reported. The truth whereof the Lords in this
Parliament may be pleased to examine, as they shall see cause; the Parliament
at Oxford being shortly after, viz. Aug. 12. unhappily dissolved.

In or about September 1625. The said ships were actually employed against the
Rochellors and their Friends, to their exceeding French, that the Vantguard,
she mowed them down like grass: To the great dishonor of our Nation, and the
scandal of our Religion, and to the disadvantage of the great affairs of this
Kingdom, and all Christendom.

Also the Ships themselves were in eminent peril to be utterly lost, for lack
of sufficient Cautions. If they be come home since this Parliament sat down,
long after the matter was here expounded and French with him, to color out the
matter; which the Lords may examine as they see cause. The one and only
Englishman that presumed to stay in one of the Ships, and serve against the
poor Rochellors of our Religion, at his return was slain in charging a Piece of
Ordnance not by him well sponged.

In February last 1625. Monsieur de la Touch having speech with Thomas
Sherwell a Member of the Commons House of Parliament, at Salisbury, as he was
coming up to the Parliament, and Monsieur de la Touch going down into
Somersetshire to Master John Pawlets to Monsieur Sobysa; He told Master
Sherwell, in the hearing also of one Master John Clements of Plymouth, who is
now in Town, the words that the Duke had spoken to him the last Summer touching
these Ships; and thereupon used these words, Ce Duque est un meshant homme.

Upon this whole Narration of the Fact touching the manner of Delivery of the
Ships to the French, diverse things may be observed wherein the Dukes offenses
do consist: As, In betraying a Ship of the Kings Royal Navy unto a Foreign
Princes hand, without good Warrant for the same; The dispossessing the Subjects
of this Realm of their Ships and Goods by many artifices and subtilties, and in
conclusion with high hand and open violence against the good will

For the proof of some parts thereof, which are not the least, I offer to your
Lordships consideration the Statute of the 2 and 3 E. 6. touching the Duke of
Somerset; wherein is recited, That amongst other things, he did not suffer the
Piers called the Newhaven and Blackerst in the parts beyond the Seas, to be
furnished with victuals and money, whereby the French were encouraged to invade
and win the same; And for this offense amongst others, it was Enacted, That a
great part of his Land should be taken from him. And if Nonfeazance in a matter
tending to lose a fixed Castle belonging to the King, be an high offense; then
the actual putting of a Ship Royal of the Kings into the hand of a Foreign
Prince, which is a moveable and more useful Castle and Fortress of the Realm,
must needs be held a greater offense.

I will forbear to cite any more Presidents of this kind, because some of those
who have gone before me have touched at diverse Presidents of this nature, which
may be applied to this my part. Only, because the abuse of the Parliament,
which is the chiefest Council of State and Court of Judicature in the Realm, is
not the least offense in this business, I shall desire your Lordships to take
into consideration the Statute of Westminster. 1. cap. 30. whereby such as seem to
beguile Courts of Justice, are to be sore judged in the same Courts, and
punished, as

So he concluded, and left the Duke to their Lordships equal Justice.

The Ninth and Tenth Articles were read next.

IX. Whereas the Titles of Honor of this Kingdom of England were wont to be
conferred as great Rewards, upon such virtuous and R. Baron of T. who by
practice of the said Duke and his Agents was drawn up to London, in or about
October in the Two and twentieth year of Reign of the late King James of famous
memory, and there so threatened and dealt withal, January, in the Two and
twentieth year of the said lake King, procured the Title of Baron R. of T. to
the said Lord R. In which practice, as the said Lord R. was much wronged in his
particular, so the Example thereof tends to the prejudice of the Gentry, and
dishonor of the Nobility of this Kingdom.

X. Whereas no Places of Judicature in the Courts of Justice of our Sovereign
Lord the King, nor other like Preferments given by the Kings of this Realm,
ought to be procured by any Subject whatsoever for any Reward, Bribe, or Gift;
He the said Duke in or about the month of December in the Eighteenth year of
the Reign of the late King James of famous memory, did procure of the said King
the Office of High Treasurer of England to the Lord Vicount M. now M. Which
Office at his procurement was given and granted accordingly to the Lord Vicount
M. And as a Reward for the said procurement of the same Grant, he the said Duke
did then receive to his own use of and from the said Lord Vicount M. the sum of
20000 l. of lawful money of England. And also in or about the month of January
in the sixteenth year of the Reign of the said late King, did procure of the
said late King of famous memory the Office of Master of the Wards and Liveries
to and for Sir L. C. afterward Earl of M. which Office was upon the same
procurement given and granted to the said Sir L.C. And as a reward for the same
procurement, he the said Duke had to his own use, or to the use of some other
person by him appointed, of the said Sir L.C. the sum of Six thousand pounds of
lawful money of England, contrary

These, as also the Eleventh Article, were enlarged and aggravated by Mr. Pym,
in this manner.

My Lords,


The first entrance into my service must be reading the Articles. Mr. Pym
enlarges the 11. Article.


My Lords, This Charge for matter of Fact is so notorious and apparent, that it
needs no proof that these Honors have been procured: And therefore I will only
insist upon the Consequence. First I will show, That by this fact the Duke has
committed a great Offense: And secondly, That this Offense has produced a
great

First to prove it a fault or an offense, I must prove that there was a duty;
for every fault presupposes a duty: And in this case the first work is to
show, that the Duke was bound to do otherwise: For which I need to allege
nothing else, then that he is a sworn Servant and suprema lex, Salus populi.

2. By this late Law, whoever moves the King to bestow Honor, which is the
greatest reward, binds himself to make good a double proportion of Merit in
that Party who is to receive it; The first of value and excellence; the second
of continuance and durableness. And as this Honor sets men up above others, so
they should be eminent in virtue beyond others: As it is perpetual, not ending
with their persons, but descending upon their posterity; so there ought to be
in the first root of this Honor some such active merit in the service of

He said, he would for bear to urge this point further, out of a modest respect
to those persons whom it did collaterally concern, professing his Charge to be
wholly against the Duke of Buckingham.

3. From the consideration of Honor, together with the price of Money: The
which being compared together, may be reduced to Romans: And so I conclude by
prescription, that Honor is a divine thing; for the Scripture calls Kings Gods;
and then those that are about Kings must

4. Lastly, Honor is a Public thing, it is the reward of Public Deserts.

And thus your Lordships have seen, that the sale of Honor is an offense
unnatural against the Law of Nature. Now what an offense this is, your
Lordships may discern, considering the kinds of the offense,

1. It extremely de^lowers the Flowers of the Crown; for it makes them cheap to
all beholders. 2. It takes from the Crown the most fair and frugal Reward of
deserving Servants: For when Honor comes to be at so mean a rate as to be sold,
there is no Great man will look after it. 3. It is the way to make a man more
studious for lucre and gain, 4. It introduces a strange confusion, mingling
the meaner with the more pure and refined metal. 5. Lastly, It is a prodigious
scandal to this Nation, (as the House of Commons think.)
For Examples and Presidents, I am confident there are none; and your Lordships
can look for none, because it is not paralleled to any President. But certainly
it is now a fit time to make a President of this man, this great Duke, that
has been lately raised to this transcendent height in our Sphere; who thinks
he cannot shine enough, unless he dim your Lordships Honors in making the same
contemptible through the sale of it, by the commonness of it.

Yet I am commanded further to observe another step of Unworthiness in this
Gentleman, who has not only set Honor to sale by his Agents, but compelled men
likewise unwilling to take Titles of Honor upon them. For the particular, that
Noble Gentleman that this concerns, I am commanded to say of him from the House
of

And I must here observe to your Lordships by the direction of the House of
Commons, That it seems strange to them, that this Great Liberty of Freewill,
though somewhat mollified; That a man embracing these Tenets should not admit
of Liberty in Moral things: And that he should compel one to take Honor and
Grace from a King whether he will or no, what is that but to add Inhumanity
and Oppression to Injury and Incivility?

H. 5. There was Martin and Babington, and others, which were chosen to be
Sergeants, and they did decline from it out of their modesty, and doubted that
their Estates were not answerable to their Place: yet upon the Charge of the
Warden of England, they accepted it and appeared to their Writs. Likewise there
is a Writ in the Register, That many by reason of the Tenure of their Lands may
be compelled to be made Knights.



And thus (my Lords) I have done with the first Article allotted to my Charge,
and so I proceed to the next.

My Lords, Before I enter into the enforcement of this Article, I shall by way
of Protestation from the House of Commons do in this as I did in the other
Article. The 10. Article enlarged.
And first for the Kings Majesty under whom we are now happily governed and
placed, I must by their direction say for his honor, and our comfort, and with
humble acknowledgment confess, That since his coming to the Crown there have
been men of as great parts and learning advanced into Places in Church and
Commonwealth, as any have been heretofore. And then for the

Now to the matter of this Article, which is the Sale of Places of Judicature,
being an offense: And to prove this, is all one as to make the glass clear by
painting of it. The grounds whereon I shall Magna Charta cap. 29. The words are
these; Nulli vendemus, nulli negabimus Justitiam. It may be said, this comes
not close to my purpose: Yet by your Lordships favor I shall make it good that
it does, and I shall begin with the latter of the two first, Nulli negabimus:
For if any that has power or favor with the King, should procure him to delay
the making of Judges, when there were Judges to take it, it will not be denied
that they do their best endeavor to make the King break his word; For if any
use their favor about

I shall open the evil Consequences that depend upon the sale of Places of
Judicature, or any Places of great trust.

1. By this means unable men shall be sure of the precedence unto Places; For
they being conscious of their own want of Merits, they must be made up by the
weight in Gold. 2. It must needs hence follow, that Suits, Contentions, Brawls
and Quarrels shall be increased in the Commonwealth: For when men come to seats
of Judicature by purchase, they must by increase of Suits increase their own
profit. 3. Men will not study for sufficiency of Learning to be able to
discharge their Places, but how they may scrape together Money to purchase
Places. 4. It will follow, that those that have the best Purses, though worst
5. It will follow, that when they be preferred for money to those Places, they
are tied to make the best of those Places viis and modis: And then the Great
man that sold those Places to them, must uphold them in their Bribery; and he
is tied to it, because they are his Creatures; nay further he is tied to
support them in their Bribery, to advance their Places upon the next remove. 6.
And lastly, when good men and well deserving come to any
Upon these and the like reasons, this fact of selling and buying Places and
Offices of Trust, has not only been declaimed against by Christians, but also
by Moral Pagans. Aristotle in his 5 lib. of Ethics cap. 8. gives it as a
Caveat, That no man amongst the Thebans was to take upon him any Place of
Government in the Commonwealth if that he were a Merchant, unless there were
ten years distance between. And the reason is this; Because Merchants are used
to buying and selling, It is their Trade and Art to to (...) Money, so that
their fingers are accustomed to that which they cannot leave when they come to

Next to the Pagans, the Popes, a Generation full of Corruption, yet they by
their Bulls are full of Declamation against such. And this is plain by a Bull
of Pius Quintus, who lays the Penalty of Confiscation of Goods of any that do
for money acquire any Offices, and condemns Gregory the Thirteenth condemns the
like.

And now to come nearer home, to come to that which will principally lead your
Lordships, which are the Judgments of your Ancestors in Parliament; wherein it
appears by the Statute of 5 H. 6. that the same Statute condemns the Seller and
Receiver, as well as the Buyer and Giver. It further appears by the Preamble of
that Statute, that such offenses were against the Law, and they foresaw the
Corruptions and 3 E. 6. which was likewise cited in the Case of the Duke of
Somerset, by which he was to forfeit his Estate, that one thing was for selling
of Places in the Commonwealth for money. And certainly, with your Lordships
favor, it is most just and probable, that they that profess themselves to be
Patriots, and show by their actions that they aim at their own lucre, and labor
to hinder the distributing of Justice, it is most just

And so, my Lords, craving Pardon of you for my boldness, confusion and
distractions in going through this business, I humbly leave my self to the
judgments of your favors and charities, and this Great man the Duke to your
wise Censure and Justice.



XI. That he the said Duke has within these ten years last past procured
diverse Titles of Honor to his Mother, Brothers, Kindred and Allies; as the
Title of Countess of Buckingham to his Mother, while she was Sir Thomas
Compton's wife; the Title of Earl of A. to his younger Brother Christopher
Villiers; the Titles of Baron of M. P. Vicount F. and Earl of D. to his Sisters
Husband Sir W. F. the Titles of Baron of S. and Vicount P. to Sir John Villiers
elder Brother unto the said Duke; and diverse more of the like kind to his
Kindred and Allies: whereby the Noble Barons of England, so well deserving in
themselves and in their Ancestors, have been much prejudiced, and the Crown
disabled to reward extraordinary Virtues in future times with Honor; while the
small Estates of those for whom such unnecessary Advancement has been
procured, ar^ apparently likely to be more and more burthensom unto the King,
notwithstanding such Annuities, Pensions, and Grants of Lands annexed to the
Crown, of great value, which the said Duke has procured for those his Kindred
to support these their Dignities.

His imbezling and engrossing the Kings money and Lands.
XII. He the said Duke (...) contented with the great Advancement formerly
received from the late King of famous memory, by his procurement and practice
in the Fourteenth year of the said King, for the Lancaster, to the yearly value
of One thousand six hundred ninety seven pounds two shillings halfpenny
farthing of the old Rent, with all Woods, Timber, Trees, and Advowson; part
whereof amounting to the sum of Seven hundred forty seven pounds thirteen
shillings four pence, was rated at Two and thirty thousand pounds, but in truth
of a far greater value. And likewise in the Sixteenth year of the viz.) that no
Perquisites of Courts should be valued, and that all Bailiffs Fees should be
reprised in the particulars upon which those Lands were rated; whereby a
president has been introduced, which all those who since that time have
obtained any per annum; in consideration of which surrender, he procured diverse
other Lands of the said late King to be sold and contracted for by his own
Servants and Agents, and thereupon has obtained grants of the same to pass
from his late Majesty to several persons of this England and Ireland; The said
Duke has likewise by his procurement and practice received into his hands, and
disbursed to his own use exceeding great sums, that were the moneys of the late
King of famous memory, as appears also in the said Schedule hereunto annexed:
And the better to color his doings in that behalf, has obtained several
Privy-Seals from his late Majesty, and his Majesty that now is, warranting the
payment of great sums to persons by his named, causing it to be recited in such
Privy-seals, as if those sums Majesty he has gotten into his hands great sums,
which were intendded by his Majesty to be disbursed for the preparing,
furnishing and victualling of his Royal Navy; by which secret and colorable
devices, the constant and ordinary course of the Exchequer has been broken,
there being no means by matter of Record to charge either the Treasurer or
Victualler of the Navy with those sums which ought to have come to their hands,
and to be accounted for to his Majesty; James of famous memory, and to the
detriment of the whole Kingdom.

Sherland entered to open and enlarge upon the Twelfth Article, he discoursed in
general concerning Honors, mentioned in the preceding Article, and spoke as
follows.

My Lords,
IT has pleased God (who has the disposing even of all things in Honor, and
Justice, two great Flowers of the Crown: I confess my self exceeding unfit and
unable to speak of these Points before so great an Assembly of such Persons of
so great Honor, and such Superior Judges of this Kingdom; but I must take

May it please your Lordships, the parts of this Charge, as you discern upon
the reading of it, are two; the one general, the other particular: The general
is, perverting the ancient and noble course of attaining to the Titles of
Honor. 2. The other, the compulsion or inforcement of men unwilling to purchase
Honor.

For the first by way of Protestation, I am commanded by the House of Commons,
Mr Sherland enlarges the Ninth Article.
to say, that they repine not at their advancement upon whom those Honors were
conferred, but they think them worthy thereof; yet they wish for their sakes,
and the safety of this Nation, their virtues had solely raised them, and that
they had not been forced and constrained to contribute to this bottomless Gulf

They complain again of this unworthy way brought in by this great man, they
fall upon this in this manner, and found the Evils under which the Commonwealth
suffers, and the Causes of them being two principal Evils, which are the decay
and stopping of the Trade, and the Determination of Honor. In examination of
which second Evil, the Trade and Comerce of Honor, we have, as the Commons do
conceive, confitentem reum: For he endeavoring to color the matter,

1. And first that it is an Offense, I shall draw my first Argument Nature of
Honor; Honor is a Beam of Virtue; now this Honor can be no more fixed upon an
undeserving Person for Money, then Fire can be struck out of a Stick.

2. From the Suject of Honor, which is Merit, for the which no price ought to
be paid to any great man (by any undeserving) person for the same, but their
own merit and desert.

Then he passed to the Grievances which are caused by the selling of Titles,
and they are Three.

1. First it is prejudicial to the Noble Barons of this Kingdom. 2. To the
King, by disabling him to reward extraordinary virtues. 3. To the Kingdom which
comprehends both King, Lords, and people.
For the first, He said, he would not trouble their Lordships with England has
longer upheld that Dignity, and does yet retain a greater height then in any
other Nation; they are great Judges, a Court of the last resort, they are great
Counselors of State, and not only for the present, but as Lawmakers,
Counselors for the time to come; and this not by Delegacy and Commission, but
by Birth and Inheritance: Wine, as it receives spirit and strength from the
Wine, so it does impart some degrees of its own infirmity and coldness to the
Wine.

Secondly, It is prejudicial to the King; not that it can disable him from
giving Honor (for that is a power inseparable) but by making Honor ordinary, it
becomes as an incompetent Reward for extraordinavertue; when men are made
noble, they are taken out of the Press of

Thirdly, It is prejudicial to the Kingdom; the Stories and Records are full of
the great assistance which the Crown has received from the Barons, both in
Foreign and Domestic Actions, not only by their own persons, but by their
Retinue and Tenants, and therefore they are called by Bracton, Robur Belli; how
can we now expect the like from such as have no Tenants, and are hardly able to
maintain themselves?

But this is not all; for the prejudice grows not primitively by defect of that
assistance which they might give the State, but positively they have been a
great burden to the Kingdom by Gifts and Pensions already received, and yet
stand in need of more for the future support of their Dignities. This makes the
Dukes offense the greater, that in this weakness and consumption of the
Commonwealth, he has not been contented alone to consume the qublick Treasure,
(which Henry 6. in the Complaint against the Duke of Suffolk, in the One and
thirtieth Article of that Complaint, this was one of his Charges, That he
William de la Pool Duke of Suffolk, had procured one who had married his Niece
to be made Kendal, and obtained for him One thousand pounds per annum in the
Duchy of Guienne; and yet this Party was the Son of a Noble and well deserving
Father. So you see this is no new thing for the House of Commons to complain,
that those that are near the King should raise their Kindred to an unnecessary
Honor; and if that were worthy of punishment for advancing of one, then what
punishment is he worthy of that has advanced so many?

The second President is 17 Edw. 4. There passed an Act of Parliment, John
Nevil, Marquis Montague, and Duke of Bedford; the reason expressed in the Act
is, because he had not a Revenue sufficient for the maintaining of that
Dignity; to which is added another reason of that nature, that when men of mean
birth are called to a high Estate, and have not livelihood to support it, it
induces great poverty, and causes briberies and extortions, imbraceries and
maintenance.

And now my Lords, how far these Reasons shall lead your Judgments

Then he read the Twelfth Article, He enlarges the Twelfth Article.
being the second part of his Charge; the Title whereof was, The Exhausting,
Intercepting and Misimploying the Kings Revenues.

My Lords, This Article consists of several Clauses, which in some respects may
be called so many distinct Charges; for though they all tend to one end and
scope, the diminishing the Kings Treasure, yet it is by diverse ways, so that
every Clause is a particular Branch. Therefore he desired to break it into
parts, and to select the most material, either in point of offense or
grievance, inten^ing to pass through them with this order; first, to declare
the state of the proof, and then to add such reasons and inforcements as he did
conceive most

He made two main Branches of this Article. The first concerns Lands obtained
from the Crown; the second concerns Money in Pensions, Gifts, Farms, and other
kind of profit.

Touching the Lands he observed four Things.

1. The sum of Three thousand thirty five pounds per annum of old Rent, besides
the Forest of Layfield, of which we have no value, and we can find no Schedule
granted by the late King to my Lord of Buckingkham within ten years past, as
appears by the several Grants vouched in the Schedule annexed; and it was in
it self a great grievance, That in a time of such necessity, when the Kings
Revenues are not able to support such a great charge, that so much Land should
be conveyed

And because the Commons aim not at Judgment only, but at Reformation, he
wished, That when the King should bestow any Land for support of Honors, that
the caution which was wont to be carefully observed might again return into
use; that is, to annex those Lands to the Dignity, lest being obtained and
wasted, the Party repair

He said he would not trouble their Lordships with repetition of the Laws
heretofore made for preventing the alienation of the Kings Lands, and for
resuming those that had been alienated, nor of the Ordinances made in this high
Court for the same purpose, and Fines set upon those that presumed to break
such Ordinances; he

2.

His second Point was, the unusual Clauses which the Duke by his greatness has
procured to be inserted into the Warrants for passing of those Lands, of which
two were mentioned; the first, That the casual profits should not be rated in
the particulars; the second,

First, That it was a mark of Ingratitude and Insatiableness in the Duke, thus
to strain the Kings Bounty beyond his intention; and that he would not receive
this Bounty by the ordinary way, but by the way of Practice.

Secondly, It argued Unfaithfulness in him, that being a sworn Counselor, he
should put the King into such Courses of so much prejudice, deceitfully, in
concealing the value of that which he bought; so that the King gave he knew not
what; For under the proportion of Two thousand pounds, he gives it may be Four
thousand pounds. And

Thirdly, The King is hereby not left Master of his own Liberality, neither in
proportion, nor certainty; for it might so fall out, that the Quantity passed
from him, might be treble to that he intended.

3. The third was, The Surrender of diverse Parcels of these Lands back to the
King, after he had held them some years, and taking others from the King in
exchange. Where he noted,

That the best of the Lands and most vendible being passed away, the worst lay
upon the Kings hand; that if he shall have occasion to raise money by sale of
Lands, that Course is not like to furnish him. Besides, that in the mean time
betwixt the Grants and the Surrenders, opportunity was left to the Duke to cut
down Woods, to infranchise G. in Lincolnshire being dismembered, and Seventeen
pounds of the old Rents sold out of it, was by a Surrender turned back upon his
Majesty.

l. 16 s. 8 d. Whence he observed,



Secondly, That this was a Device thought upon to prevent the wisdom of
Parliament; for by this means the Grant seems to have the face of valuable
purchases, whereas they were indeed free gifts.

Thirdly, If the Title of those Lands should prove questionable, it appearing
by Record as if the King had received the money, he was bound in honor to make
restitution, and yet the Duke had the

But it may be said, This was the Purchasors desire for their own security. Of
which objection he made this use, That the Subjects generally took notice of so
much Lands given to the Duke, that there is good cause (...) expect a
Resumption.

In the second general branch of this Article concerning Money, the first point
observed was, the Total sum received by him in Ten years space, amounting to
162995 l. besides the Grant he has of the Overplus above Three thousand pounds
per annum to be made of the Third imposed upon Strangers goods, and besides the
Moyetie of Seven thousand pounds out of the Customs of Ireland, which he is
bound to pay to the King; but whether it has been paid, or no, is doubtful.

This he delivered as a Sum Estimative, yet so computed as it may be more, but
not less. And this Total arises by free gifts, by Pensions to himself; else by
profit of Farms, by Pensions to others; For Offices, whereof he received the
profit, as the Admiralty, and Mastership of the Horse. All which appear by a
Schedule annexed to this Charge.

The Grievances consist in this; That the Commonwealth has been bereaved of
the use and employment of so Public Treasure, in a

The second point observed in this branch, was, That the Duke under pretense of
secret services, has procured great sums of money to be issued by Privy-seals
to sundry persons named by himself, but afterward employed to his own use.
Hereof two instances are propounded: The one of Eight thousand pounds paid to
Sir Robert Pie, 12 Aug. Burleigh, and Sir Robert Pie discharged by another
Privy Seal, 4 Iunii following. The second instance is of Sixty thousand pounds
paid to Burlimach by a Privy Seal, in September 1625. Which time he rather
noted, because the Parliament at Oxford was broken up a little before out of
discontent that the King was not supplied for the setting out of the Fleet,
which would have been done with a less sum. For the proof of that, the House of
Commons will offer to your Lordships Witnesses.

The quality of this offense he left to their Lordships judgment; yet
propounding some things by way of enquiry, from whence it might receive measure
and proportion. 1. Whether it had not affinity with the Crime in the Civil Law,
called Crimen peculatus; which was, when a man did unjustly turn to his own use
that money which was either sacra, dedicated to Gods service religiously; or
religiosa, used about Funerals and Monuments of the dead; or publica, of which
kind the matter now in question is? And this offense by that Law was Death, and
Confiscation Crimen falsi, and is defined to be when a man shall imitatione
very suum compendium alieno dispendio per dolum facere, by semblance of truth
make gain to himself of other men's losses: Which in the case of a Bondsman was
Death, and in case of another man Banishment and Confiscation, or otherwise
very penal, as the Judges should find cause of moderation, or rigor, in the
nature and circumstances of the Fact. 3. Whether their Lordships will estimate
it according to any Sentences in the Star Chamber, which have been very
frequent in cases Covin, and make it vitiate ordinary and lawful actions. Or
lastly, whether they will measure it by that Judgment which the Duke has
passed against himself in the guilt of his own Conscience? (Direct Actions are
not afraid to appear open-faced; but Injustice and Fraud desire to be masked
with Subtilty and Closeness.) It were offense enough, if there were no more but
a cunning concealing of unthankfulness to hide his Majesty's bounty, or guilt
of Malum culpae: Or else that other kind of guilt which proceeds from Malum
poenae, the fear of punishment, foreseeing this Inquisition into his actions,
and hoping under this disguise of Public service to escape their Lordships
censure.

The third point in this branch is, That he has received sundry sums of money
intended for the maintenance of the Navy: whereof there l. the other of 30000
l. both in January 1624. By Privy Seal, by the which these sums are issued,
they appear to be Free gifts: But by the affirmation of some in answer for the
Duke, it has been said, He was only the hand to convey them to the Treasury of
the Navy. If the truth be according to the Privy Seal, they are to be added to
the former Total as parcel of his own gain: If according to that allegation, it
may prove a president of greater damage to the King, then the money is worth;
for by this way his Eliz. whereby Accomptants Lands are made liable to the
payment of their Debts to the King, and in many cases may be sold for his
Majesty's satisfaction. The Treasurer of the Navy is a worthy man; but if he
should die, the King loses the benefit.

The fourth point of this branch is, That he has caused so great a

By the wisdom of the Law in the constitution of the Exchequer, there be three
Guards set upon the Kings Treasure and Accounts. The first is a legal
Impignoration, whereby the Estates personal and and Certainty, not for the
present time only, but for perpetuity; because the King can neither receive, or
pay, but by Record.

All these Guards have been broken by the Duke, both in the Cases next before
recited, and in these which follow. The Custom of the Exchequer is the Law of
the Kingdom, for so much as concerns the Kings Revenue. Every breach of a Law
by a particular offense, is punishable; but such an offense as this, being
destructive of the Law itself, is of a far higher nature.

The fifth point of this second branch, is concerning two Privy-seals of
Release; the one 16, the other 20 Iac. whereby this Duke is discharged of
diverse sums secretly received to his Majesty's use, but by virtue of these
Releases to be converted to the support of his own Estate: The proof hereof is
referred to the Privy-seals themselves. From which he made one observation, of
the subtilty he used to wind himself into the possession of the Kings money,
and to get that by M. his Fine, which cannot be discovered whether part or all
be converted to the Dukes benefit, and yet it appears by a Privy Seal to be
clearly intended to the Kings own service for the Household and Wardrobe, till
by the Dukes practice it was diverted into this close and by-way.

Another instance in this, is, His endeavor to get the money which should be
made of Prize-goods into his own hands: And for Gabriel Marsh might receive it;
and when it was thought fit some Partner should be joined with him, trial was
made of diverse, but none of any credit would undertake the Charge with such a
Consort. And the Commons have reason to think there was good cause of this
refusal; for he is so ill an Accomptant, that he confessed in their House
(being examined) that by authority from the Duke he received diverse bags of
gold and silver out of the S. Peter of Newhaven, which he never told.

When this practice of employing his own man would take no effect, then he
procured a Commission from Sir William Russell, who is indeed without exception
an able and worthy Officer; but that is not enough for the Kings security; For
howsoever he was to receive the money, it was to be disbursed by and to the
Dukes warrant and profit. Which Clause has been altered since this was
questioned in Parliament; and now it is to be issued from an immediate Warrant
from his Majesty: But as it was before, it may be noted as an incroachment
William was but a safeguard of the money for the Duke himself. And this I must
note of some guilt in the very act of it.

The last point upon this whole Charge, was a reduction of the value of the
Land, together with the money into one total, and to that purpose, he rated the
Land, being valued at a reasonable value, at forty years purchase, for although
some of it was sold for thirty, yet a great part was worth more then a hundred
years purchase, so as forty years is conceived to be an easy Medium; at this
rate 3035 l. amounts to 121400 l. which being added to the total of the money
received 162995 l. l. besides the Forest of Leyfeild, and besides the profit
made out of the thirds of Strangers goods, and the Moyetie of the profit made
out of the Customs of Ireland.

This is a great sum in it self, but much greater by many Circumstances; if we
look upon the time past, never so much came into any private man's hands out of
the public purse; if we respect the time present, the King never had so much
want, never so many foreign occasions, England and Ireland; or if it be
compared to his profusion, it will appear but a little sum. All these gifts,
and other ways of profit notwithstanding, he confessed before both Houses l. If
this be true, how can we hope to satisfy his prodigality? if false, how can we
hope to satisfy his Covetousness? and therefore their Lordships need not
wonder if the Commons desire, and that earnestly, to be delivered from such a
Grievance.

That this complaint and proceedings of theirs may appear to be suitable to the
proceedings of their Predecessors in like Cases; he alleged three Presidents,
which he said were Presidents in kind, but

The first 10 Rich. 2. in the Complaint against Michael de la Pool, Earl of
Suffolk; out of which he took Three Articles, the first, That being Chancellor
and sworn to the Kings profit, he had purchased diverse Lands from the King,
more then he had deserved, and at an under rate; yet this was thought to be an
offense against the State.

The second, That he had bought of one Tydman an Annuity of Five hundred pound
per annum; which Grant was void by the Laws,

The third, Whereas the Master of St. Anthonies being a Schismatic, had
forfeited his Possessions into the Kings hand; this Earl took them in Farm at
Twenty Marks a year, converting the overplus which was One thousand Marks to
his own profit, which should have come to the King.

The next President II Rich. 2. in the Judgment against Robert de Vere of
Oxford, and others; out of which, he took two Articles, the Fifth and the
Seventh: The Fifth was for taking Manors and Lands annexed to the Crown,
whereby they themselves were enriched, and the King made poor; the Seventh was
for intercepting the Subsidies granted for the defense of the Kingdom.

The third President is that of 28 Hen. 6. in the Parliament Roll, out of the
Complaint against William de la Pool, Duke of Suffolk, Article 29. That he
being next and primest of Council to the King, he had procured him to grant
great Possessions to diverse persons, whereby the King was much impoverished,
the expense of his House unpaid, Wages, Wardrobe, Castles, Navy, Debts
unsatisfied; and so by his subtle Council, and unprofitable Labor, the
Revenues of the Crown and the Duchy of Lancaster, and other the Kings
Inheritances

The fourth was, That the Kings Treasure was mischievously distributed to
himself, his friends, and well-willers; so that for lack of Money, no Army, nor
Ordnance could be provided in time; and because these great persons were not
brought to judgment upon these Articles alone, but for other misdemeanors, he
made this observation, That ravening upon the Kings Estate is always accounted
with other

Then he said he had done with that which had been left to him; and so he left
the Duke to their Lordships Justice, That as he had exceeded others in this
Offense, so he might not come behind them in punishment. And so he humbly
desired their Lordships to be pleased to pardon his Delivery, and to give a
favorable censure of him.

Lastly, The Thirteenth Article was read.

XIII. Whereas especial care and order has been taken by the Laws of the
Realm, to restrain and prevent the unskilful Administration of Physic, whereby
the health and life of men may be much endangered. And whereas most especially,
the Royal Persons of the Kings of the Realm, in whom, we their Loyal Subjects,
humbly challenge a great interest, are and always have been esteemed by us so
sacred, that nothing James of Blessed memory, attending March, in the Two and
twentieth year of his most glorious Reign, in the times of his sickness, being
an Ague, did in due and necessary care of, and for the recovery of his health
and preservation of his Person, upon and after several mature Consultations in
that behalf had and holden, at several times in the same month, resolve and
give directions, That nothing should be applied or given unto his Highness, by
way of Physic or Diet, during his said sickness, but by and upon their general
advice and consents, and after good deliberation and for the coming of his Fit
in the said Ague, nor during the continuance thereof, nor afterward, until his
cold Fit were past. The said Duke of Buckingham being a sworn Servant of his
said late Majesty, of and in his Majesty's said Bedchamber, contrary to his
duty and the tender respect which he ought to have had of his Majesty's most
Sacred Person; and after the Consultations, Resolutions, Directions, and
Warning aforesaid, did nevertheless without any sufficient warrant in that
behalf, March, in the Two and twentieth year aforesaid, when his Majesty by the
judgment of his said Physicians, was in the declination of his Disease, cause
and procure the said Plasters to be applied

After which said Plasters, and Drink or Potion, applied and given unto, and
taken and received by his said Majesty as aforesaid, great distempers and
diverse ill symptoms appeared upon his said Majesty, insomuch, That the said
Physicians finding his Majesty the next morning much worse in the estate of his
health, and holding a Consultation thereabout, did by joint consent send to the
said Duke, praying him not to adventure to minister to his Majesty any more
Physic,

The Thirteenth Article enlarged by Mr. Wandesford.
Mr. Wandesford deputed to enlarge and aggravate upon the Thirteenth Article,
commended the charity and providence of that Law, which makes it penal for
unskilful Empyricks, and all others, to exercise and practice Physic upon
common persons, without a lawful Calling and Approbation, branding them that
thus transgress, as Improbos, Ambitiosos, Temerarios, and Audaces homines: But
he that without skill and calling shall direct a Medicine, which upon the Hen
6. where John Arundel, and others, the Kings Physicians and Surgeons,
thought it not safe for them to administer any thing to the Kings Person,
without the assent of the Privy Council first obtained, and express License
under the Great Seal of England.

This Medicine found his Majesty in the declination of his desease, (and we all
wish it had left him so) but his better days were shortly turned into worse;
and instead of health and recovery, we hear by good testimony (that which
troubles the poor and loyal Commons of England) of great distempers, as
Droughts, Raving, Fainting, an intermitting Pulse, strange effects to follow
upon the applying of a Treacle Plaster. But the truth is, Testimony tells us,
That this Plaster had a strange smell, and an invective quality striking the
malignity of the disease inward; which No, no, said his Majesty, it is that
which I had from Buckingham. And though there be no President (said he) of an
act offered to the Person of a King, so insolent as this, yet is it true that
diverse persons, as great as this, have been questioned and condemned for less
offenses against the Person of Somerset, for carrying Edward the Sixth away in
the night time out of his own head but from Hampton Court to Windsor; and yet
he was trusted with the Protection of his person: Presidents failing us in this
point, the Common Law will supply us. The Law judges a deed done in the
execution of an unlawful act, Manslaughter, which otherwise would but have
been Chance-medley; and that this act was unlawful, the House of Commons do
believe, as belonging to the Duty and Vocation Stanford says, If a Physician
take one into his Cure, and he die under his hands; it is not Felony, because
he did it not Feloniously. Yet it is Mr. Bractons opinion, That if one that is
no Physician or Surgeon undertake a Cure, and the party die under his hands,
this is Felony. And the Law goes further, making Physicians and Surgeons
themselves accomptable for the Death of their Patients, if it appear they have
transgressed the Rules of their own Art; that is, by undertaking a thing
wherein they have no experience, or having yet failed in the care and diligence.



The several Articles being thus enlarged and aggravated by the said respective
Members, Sir John Elliot was appointed to make the Epilogue

My Lords,
YOur Lordships have heard in the Labors of these two days spent in this
Service, Sir Ioh ^ll^^^^ speech concluding the Dukes Impeachment.
a Representation from the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons
House of Parliament, of their Buckingham, so clearly and fully, as I presume
your Lordships expect I should rather conclude, then add any thing to his
charge.

Your Lordships have heard how his Ambition was expressed in procuring, and
getting into his hands, the greatest Offices of strength and power of this
Kingdom; by what means he had attained them; and how Money stood for Merit.



This I need not further to press, but from hence my Observation must descend
to his other Virtues, and that by way of Perspective: I shall give it so near
and short, as rather to exercise your Lordships Memory, then to oppress your
patience.

Stellionatus; a Beast so blur'd, so spotted, so full of foul lines, that they
knew not what to make of it: So do we find in this man's practice, who first
inveagled the Merchants, drawing them to Deep to be inchralled; then dealt
deceitfully with the King, to color his Offenses, his design being against
Rochel, and the Religion: Next with the Parliament, to disguise his

Next I present to your Lordships, the Dukes high oppression, and that of
strange latitude and extent, not to Men alone, but to Laws and Statutes, to
Acts of Council, to Pleas and Decrees of Court, to the pleasure of his Majesty;
all must stoop to him, if they oppose or stand in his way. This has been
expressed unto you in the Ship called the St. Peter, and those of Deep, nay, he
draws on the color of his Majesty's great Name to shadow his design.

It had been his duty, nay, the trust of his place, not to have translated them
into the hands of strangers; that had his Majesty yielded in that point, the
Duke should have opposed it by his continual Prayers and Intercessions, making
known unto his Majesty the Inconveniences likely to ensue, and not to rest
there, but to have reported

I heard the Ships were returned, but I know it not; but if I knew so, this
neither excuses, nor qualifieth the Dukes offense.

The third head is, The Dukes extortion in exacting from the East India
Company, without right or color, Ten thousand pounds, exquisitely expressed,
and Mathematically observed by the Gentleman (you know by whom employed) who by
his Marine experience,

Here one of the Lords interposing privately, It was the King that employed
him; Sir John Elliot in the Name of the Commons makes this Protestation.

Far be it from them to lay any Odium or Aspersion on his Majesty's

Next to foul Extortion, is Bribery and Corruption in the Sale of Honor and
Offices of Command. That which was wont to be the crown of Virtue and Merit, is
now become a merchandise for the greatness of this man, and Justice it self
made a prey unto him. All which particulars your Lordships have heard opened
and enforced with Reasons and Proofs, what in themselves they are, and
therefore I spare further

In the fifth place, I observe a wonder in Policy and in Nature, how this man
so notorious in evil, so dangerous to the State in his immense greatness, is
able to subsist of himself, and keep a Being? To this I answer, That the Duke
has used the help of art to prop him up: It was apparent, That by his skill he
has raised a party in the Court, a party in the Country, and a main party in
the chief places of Government in the Kingdom: So that all the most deserving
Offices Kingdoms Revenues, the Fountain of Supply, and the Nerves of the Land.

He intercepts, consumes, and exhausts the Revenues of the Crown, not only to
satisfy his own lustful desires, but the Luxury of others; and by emptying the
Veins the Blood should run in, he has cast the Body of the Kingdom into a high
Consumption.

Infinite sums of Money, and mass of Land, exceeding the value Cicero did in a
like case, Ne gravioribus utar verbis quam rei natura fert, aut levioribus quam
causae necessitas postulat.

Your Lordships have an Idea of the Man, what he is in himself, what in his
affections. You have seen his power, and some I fear have felt it; you have
known his practice, and have heard the effects. It rests then to be considered,
what (being such) he is in reference to the King and State? how compatible or
incompatible with either? In reference Sejanus, who is thus described by
Tacitus, Audax, sui obtegens, in alios criminator, juxta adulator and superbus.

Sejanus that he did Clientes suos Provinciis adornare. Does not this Man the
like? Ask England, Scotland, and Ireland, and they will tell you. Sejanus pride
was so excessive, as Tacitus Imperatoris laborum socius. How lately, and how
often has this Man commixed his Actions in Discourses with ACtions of the
Kings?

My Lords, I have done, you see the Man; only this which was conceived by the
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, should be boldly

I conclude by presenting to your Lordships, the particular Censure of the
Bishop of Ely, reported in the 11 Rich. 1. and to give you a short view of his
faults. He was first of all noted to be Luxurious; secondly, He married his own
Kindred to Personages of highest rank and places; thirdly, No man's business was
done without his help; fourthly, He would not suffer the Kings Council to
advise in Matters of State; fifthly, He grew to such a height of Pride, that no
man was thought worthy to speak unto him; and lastly, His Castles and Forts
obscuris and ignotis hominibus tradere; his doom was this, Per totam insulam
public proclamatur, periat qui perdere cuncta festinat, opprimatur ne omnes
opprimat.

Sir John Elliot and Sir Dudley Diggs committed to the Tower.
Sir Dudley Diggs having made the Prologu^, and Sir John Elliot the Epilogue, in
the Impeachment of the Duke, they were both by the Kings Command committed to
the Tower.

Upon the Impeachment of the Duke, a Paper was privately conveyed Private
Suggestions to the King, in behalf of the Duke.
THat this great opposition against the Duke, was stirred up and maintained by
such as seek the destruction of this free Monarchy. Because they find it not
yet ripe to attempt against the King himself, they endeavor it through the
sides of the Duke. The persons agreeing in this one mischief, are of diverse
sorts and humors. First, Meddling and busy persons, who love popular Speeches:
Secondly, Govetous Landlords, Inclosers, Depopulators,

That since the time of Henry the Sixth, these Parliamentary discoursings might
never be suffered, as being but certain symptoms of Subsequent Rebellions,
Civil Wars, and the dethroning of our King, and no one Patriot daring to oppose
them, least he incur the reputation of a Fool or Coward in his Countries

His Majesty therefore strengthened himself ever with some Favorite, as whom he
might better trust, then many of the Nobility, tainted with this desire of
Oligarchy,

It behooves without doubt his Majesty to uphold the Duke against them, who if
he be but decourted, it will be the Corner Stone, on which the demolishing of
his Monarchy will be builded: For if they prevail with this, they have hatched
a thousand other demands to pull the Feathers of Royalty.

They will appoint him Counselors, Servants, Alliances, Limits of Expenses,
and account of his Revenue; chiefly if they can, they will now dazzle him in the
beginning of his reign.

Lastly, King James and King Charles are the Dukes Accusers, in all the
Aspersions that are laid upon him. King James for the Money destined for the
Wars in his time, spent in Treaties, etc. And his Majesty can testify for the
things done in his time. And all these, though actions of the King, are imputed
to the Duke: Who if he suffer for obeying his Sovereign, the next attempt will
be to call the King to account for any thing he undertakes, which does not
prosperously succeed, as all men would desire it.

If it please his Majesty to remove and set aside all these disadvantages, he
shall find the Charge against the Duke very empty and of small moment:



May 11. The King came to the Parliament, and spoke to the House of Peers as
follows.

My Lords,
THe cause, Kings Speech concerning the Duke.
and only cause of my coming to you this day, is to express the sense I have
of all your Honors; for he that touches any of you, touches me in a very
great measure. I have thought fit to take order for the punishing some insolent
speeches lately spoken. I have been too remiss heretofore in punishing such
speeches as concern Buckingham through his importunity would not suffer me to
take notice of them, lest he might be thought to have set me on, and that he
might come the forwarder to his Trial. And to approve his innocence as
touching the matters against him, I my self can be a Witness to clear him in
every one of them.

I speak not this to take any thing out of your hands; but to show the reason
why I have not hitherto punished those insolent speeches

And so his Majesty was pleased to depart.

The same day this following Message was brought from the Commons to the Lords,
by Sir Nathanael Rich.

THe Commons taking into serious consideration the many mischiefs and
inconveniences which this renowned Kingdom does now suffer, The Commons Message
by Sir Nath. Rich to seeure the Duke.
threatening apparent danger to the King and Commonwealth, have by search and
disquisition into the Causes thereof, found that they do principally flow from
the exorbitant power and abusive carriage of the Duke of Buckingham, whereof he
has this Parliament been impeached before their Lordships by the Commons,
besides Liberty, hold so great a part of the strength of the Kingdom in his
hands, sit as a Peer in Parliament, and be acquainted with the Counsels
thereof, whereby inevitable mischief may suddenly fall upon the Kingdom.
Wherefore they have thought it their duty to recommend this their unanimous
desire to their Lordships, as agreeable to Law and reason, That they would be
pleased forthwith to commit the person of the said Duke to safe Custody.

Whereupon the Duke made this Speech in the Lords House.

My Lords,
The Dukes Speech against the Commons.
IF I should hold my peace, it would argue guilt; If I should speak, it would
argue boldness, being so foully accused. Your Lordships see what Complaints are
made against me by the House of Commons.

I will not speak any thing to cast dirt at those, who have taken etc.

The Commons discontented at the imprisonment of their Members.
The Commons upon the Imprisonment of their Members, and the offense taken by
the King at the words spoken by those two Gentlemen in impeaching the Duke,
resolved to proceed in no other business till they were righted in their
Liberties, and ordered that the House be turned into a Grand Committee
presently to sit and consider of the best way and means to effect the same, and
that no Member be suffered to go forth. At which time Sir Dudley Carlton
observing that unusual, and as he termed it, sullen silence of the House, made
this Speech.

Sir Dudley Carleton's Speech.
I Find by a great silence in this House, that it is a fit time to be heard, if
you please to give me the patience. I may very fitly compare the heaviness of
this House unto some of my misfortunes by Sea in my Travels: For as we were
bound unto Marseillis, by oversight of the Mariners we mistook our Course, and
by ill fortune met with a Sand; That was no sooner overpast, but we fell on
another; and having escaped this likewise, we met with a third, and in that we
stuck fast. by going in upon such a point we were brought into that straight;
wherefore we must take a new point to rectify and bring us out of danger.

This House of Parliament may be compared to the Ship; the Sands, to our
Messages; and the Commitment, to the Sands that the Ship did stick fast in; and
lastly the Compass, to the Table where the Book of Orders does lie. Then I
beseech you, let us look into the

I beseech you Gentlemen, move not his Majesty with trenching upon his
Prerogatives, lest you bring him out of love with Parliaments.

And indeed you would count it a great misery, if you knew the Subject in
Foreign Countries as well as my self; to see them look not like our Nation,
with store of flesh on their backs, but like so many Ghosts, and not men, being
nothing but skin and bones, with some

This good Correspondencie being kept between the King and his people, will so
join their love and favor to his Majesty with liking of Parliaments, that his
Prerogative shall be preserved entire to himself without our trenching upon it;
and also the Privilege of the Subject (which is our happiness) inviolated, and
both be maintained to

As for Sir Dudley Diggs his part, that was the Prologue, and in that his
Majesty does conceive that he went too far beyond his Commission, in pressing
the death of his ever blessed Father in these words, That he was commanded by
the House, concerning the Plaster applied to the King, That he did forbear to
speak further in regard of the Kings Honor, or words to that effect; this his
Majesty conceives to be to his dishonor, as if there had been any underhand
dealing by his Majesty, in applying of the Plaster, and this may make his
Subjects jealous of his John Elliot, his over bitterness in the Aggravation
upon the whole Charge, and specially upon some of the heads of it: For if you
please to remember, when I moved for putting of the St Peter of Newhaven out of
the Charge against the Duke of Buckingham, and showed my reasons for that
purpose, you know how tender Sir John Elliot was of it, as if he had been a
child of his own, and so careful in the handling thereof occulum in Cauda: And
I must confess, I was heartily sorry when he delivered his Aggravation to the
Lords, to see his Tartness against the Duke; when as he had occasion to name
him, he only gave him this Title of This man, and The man; whereas the other
observed more respect and modesty in their Charges against so great a Person as
the Duke is, rectus in Curia. Lastly, for pressing the death of his late
Majesty, you know that the Sense of the House concluded, That it is only an Act
of Presumption; nay, some of them expressly said, Nay God forbid that I should
lay the death of the King to his Charge. If he without warrant from the House
insisted upon the Composition of the Plaster, as if there were Aliquid latet
quod non patet; This was beyond his Commission from our House, and this is that
which his Majesty does except against; And this I Tower.

Sir Dudley Diggs being charged for saying in the matter of applying the
Plaster to his late Majesty, That he did forbear to speak further of that in
regard of the Kings honor, or words to that effect; There passed a Protestation
of every man in particular for himself; and it was Ordered in the House, That
they that were sick in the Town, should have three

The Commons Protestation touching words imputed to Sir Dudley Diggs.
I Protest before Almighty God and this House of Parliament, That never gave
consent that Sir Dudley Diggs should speak these words that he is now charged
withal, or any words to that effect; And I have not affirmed to any that he
did speak such words, or any to that effect. Sir D. Diggs released out of
prison, protests he never spoke the words charged on him.
Within few days after Sir Dudley being released out of Prison, came into the
House, and made Protestation concerning the Passage whereat his Majesty had
taken offense, That speaking of the Plaster applied to the Body of the late
King, he said, He would forbear to speak any further of it, in regard of the
Kings honor, He protested, that this was far from his words, and that it never
came into his thoughts. And he gave the House great thanks for their respect
unto him, and said, That he had received from his Majesty a gracious testimony
of his satisfaction.

And the King himself signified to the House by the Vice-Chamberlain, The King
is satisfied that the words were not spoken.
That he understood out of some Notes which were taken at the Conference, that
Sir Dudley Diggs had spoken the words wherewith he The Duke dissatisfied.
the Duke affirmed to the House of Peers, that some words were spoken at this
late Conference by Sir Dudley Diggs, which so far did trench upon the Kings
Honor, that they are interpreted Treasonable; and that (had he not been
restrained by order of the House) he would then have reprehended him for the
same: He therefore earnestly desired, for that diverse constructions have been
made of those words, and for that they have been

This matter was much debated, and the House of Peers often put into a
Committee, Thirty six Lords protest they heard not the words supposed to be
spoken at a Conference.
and reassumed again, but they came to no resolution therein. In fine, these
Lords following, (to the number of thirty six) made this voluntary Protestation
upon their Honors; That the said Sir Dudley Diggs did not speak any thing at
the said Conference, which did or might trench on the Kings Honor; and if he
had, they would presently

The Lord President affirmed, That he had reported the words in the same sense
they were delivered unto him by the party himself, and though the connection of
them require to be explained, yet he agreed with the rest of the Lords, for the
Parties good meaning, and made the same Protestation.

viz.
The Earl of Mulgrave. Earl of Cleveland. Earl of Westmerland. Earl of
Bullingbrook. Earl of Clare. Earl of Denbigh. Earl of Cambridge. Earl of Devon.
Earl of Warwick. Earl of Northampton. Earl of Bridgewater. Earl of Montgomery.
Earl of Nottingham. Earl of Lincoln. Earl of Essex. Earl of Her^ford. Earl of
Kent. Earl of Oxon. Lord Gray of Warke. Lord Noell. Lord Montague. Lord Russel.
Lord North. Lord Cromwell. Lord Vaux. Lord Dudley. Lord Morley. Lord Piercy.
Lord Bishop o^ Sarum. Lord Bishop of Landaffe. Lord Bishop of Chester. Lord
Bishop of Cov. and Lich. Lord Bishop of Worcester. Lord Bishop of Norwich. Lord
Vicount Say and S. Lord Vicount Rocheford.
Not long after Sir John Elliot also was released out of the Tower, and sent
for to come into the House. Then the Vice-Chamberlain stood up, and by way of
Explanation of his former Speech, said, S^r John Elliot is released out of the
Tower.
That he intended not to charge him, but to give him an occasion to discharge
himself. First, That all the others had used respective words in the
Conference; but for the manner of his Speech, he conceived it was too tart and
harsh to the person of the Duke; and that in representing Is charged by Sir
Dudley Carlton for his Speech against the Duke.
as if they were ignorant of the return of the ships out of France, he said,
They say they are come, but I know it not; when the House knew it full well.
That speaking of the Duke, he said, That man, which phrase in all Languages is
accounted a great indignity to persons of Honor: That he made scandalous
comparisons between the Duke and Sejanus, and the Bishop of Ely, which was
likewise besides Cicero, as if something else might be which was not yet
discovered.



He discharges himself.
Sir John Elliot thanked the Vice-Chamberlain for dealing so plainly with him,
and giving him occasion to clear himself: And to the particular charged against
him, he answered, First, considering the Dukes plurality of great and different
Offices, together with his deceit and fraud, in persuading the Merchants to go
to Diep, there to entrap them; in coloring the Designs to the King, which he
had plotted to serve against those of his Religion; in abusing the Parliament
at Oxford, and disguising his purpose, as if the ships were to go to Rochel.
These particulars being so various, and of such a nature, he called by the name
of Stellionatus, from a beast discolored, uncertain, and doubtful, that they
knew not by what

Secondly, as to his saying, He knew not the ships were come; he answered, he
did not know it then, and as yet he knew it not, though it was true that he had
heard it.

Thirdly, he denied not, that speaking of the Duke, he sometimes used this
word, that man, though at other times he was not wanting Caesar, call him Ille
Caesar, and that the same is usual in all Languages; nor did he think the Duke
to be a God.

Fourthly he con^^ssed, That he paralleled him with the Bishop of Ely and
Sejanus; and though there were many particular censures of that Bishop, yet he
produced none but such as were within the compass of his Charge; nor did he
apply the Veneries and Venefices of Sejanus to the Duke, but excluded them.

Lastly, touching the Physic of the King, he said, he brake off so abruptly in
aggravation of the Dukes offense, who not content with the injury of Justice,
the wrong of Honor, the prejudice of the State, nor that of the Revenue, his
attempts go higher, even to the person of the King, making on that his practice
in such a manner, to such an effect, that he said, he feared to speak, nay, he
doubted to think; in which regard he left it, as Cicero did another thing, Ne
gravioribus, etc.



It was then resolved on the Question, That Sir John Elliot has not exceeded
the Commission given him in any thing that passed from him, in the late
Conference with the Lords: The like for Sir Dudley Diggs, Seldom, Mr Herbert,
Mr Glanvile, Mr Sherland, Mr Pym, and Mr Wandesford, who were also managers at
that Conference.

The King in the time of this Parliament had committed the Earl of Arundel to
the Tower, but the cause of his Commitment was not expressed; yet it was
conceived to be about the Marriage of the Lord Maltravers, the Earls eldest
son, to the young Duke of Lenox his sister, which was brought about by the
contrivance of the Countess of Arundel Lenox. The Lords were highly
discontented at his commitment in time of Parliament; concerning whose
Liberties and their own Privileges, they had presented several Petitions to
his Majesty, but receiving no satisfactory answer thereto, agreed on this
ensuing Petition occasioned by the release of Sir Dudley Diggs.

May it please your Majesty,
The Lords Petition to the King about the Earl of Arundel, imprisoned in the
time of Parliament.
(as at first we did) is because we observe that the House of Commons have
speedily received a Member of theirs who was committed: We the Peers, ambitious
to deserve of your Majesty, and to appear to the eye of the world as much
respected in our Rights and Privileges, as any Peers or Commons have ever
been, acknowledging you a King of as much goodness as ever King was; do now
Arundel, a Member of our House, may be restored to us; it so much concerning us
in point of Privilege, that we all suffer in what he suffers in this Restraint.

In March last when the Earl of Arundel was committed, the House of Lords
purposed to take the same into their considerations, and so to proceed therein,
as to give no just cause of offense to his Majesty, and yet preserve the
Privileges of Parliament.

viz.

That the Earl of Arundel was restrained for a misdemeanor which was personal
to his Majesty, and lay in the proper knowledge of his Majesty, and had no
relation to matters of Parliament.

Whereupon the House was put into a Committee; and being resumed,

The Lords Committees for Privileges, etc. were appointed to search for
Presidents Concerning the commitment of a Peer of this Realm during the time of
Parliament; and the Lord Chief Justice, Mr Justice Doderidge, and Mr Justice
Yelverton, were appointed to attend their Lordships in that behalf.

The day following the Lord Teasurer delivered another Message from the King in
haec verba.

The Kings Message to the Lords touching the Earl of Arundel.
WHereas upon a Motion made by one of your Lordships, the Lord Keeper did
yesterday deliver a Message from his Majesty, that the Earl of Arundel was
restrained for a misdemeanor which was personal to Majesty, and lay in the
proper knowledge of his Majesty, and had no relation to matters of Parliament:

And because the Committee appointed yesterday to search for Presidents, etc.
had not yet made any Report to the House; therefore the

Not long after the Earl of Hertford made report to the House, That the Lords
Committees for Privileges met on Monday last; The first Question that arose
amongst them was, Whether those Proxies were of any validity which are deputed
to any Peer, who sits not himself in Parliament? And it was conceived that
those Votes were lost: Whereupon the Committee found this House to be deprived
of five suffrages by the absence of the Earl of Arundel, unto whom they were
entrusted: Winchester in the Book-Case, in the Third year of Edw. 3.

The Lords resolved to maintain their privileges.
Hereupon the House was moved to give power to the Lords Sub-Committees for
Privileges, etc. to proceed in the search of Presidents of the Commitment of a
Peer of this Realm during the time of Parliament; and that the Kings Council
might show them such Presidents as they have of the said Commitment; And that
the said Sub-Committee

All which was granted and agreed unto, and these Lords were called unto the
said Sub-Committee; viz. The Lord Treasurer. Lord President. Duke of
Buckingham. Earl of Dorset. Earl of Devon. The Earl of Clare. The Vicount
Wallingford. Vicount Mansfield. Lord North.


And the Kings Council were appointed to attend the Lords.

The Lord President reported the Proceedings of the said Sub-Committees for
Privileges, etc. upon Commitment of the Earl of Arundel; viz.

That the Kings Council had searched and acquainted the Lords Sub-Committees
with all that they had found in Records, Chronicles, and Stories, concerning
this matter: Unto which the said Lords Sub-Committees had given full Answer,
and also showed such Presidents

The Presidents being read, (which for the length we forbear to mention) It was
resolved upon the Question by the whole House, Nemine dissentiente,

That the Privilege of this House is, That no Lord of Parliament, the
Parliament sitting, or within the usual times of Privileges of Parliament, is
to be imprisoned or restrained without Sentence or Decree of the House, unless
it be for Treason or Felony, or refusing

And it was thereupon ordered, That the said Lords Sub-Committees for
Privileges, etc. or any five of them, shall meet this afternoon to consider of
a Remonstrance and Petition of the Peers concerning the Claim of their
Privileges from Arrests and Imprisonments during the Parliament. Which was
conceived by the Lords Sub-Committees for Privileges, according to the Order
of the House, and was read openly, viz.

May it please your Majesty,
WE the Peers of this your Realm assembled in Parliament ^inding the Earl of
Arundel absent from his place, A Remonstrance and Petition of the Peers in
behalf of the Earl of Arundel.
that sometimes in this Parliament sat amongst us, his presence was therefore
called for: But thereupon a Message was delivered Arundel was restrained for a
misdemeanor which was personal to your Majesty, and had no relation to matters
of Parliament. This Message occasioned us to enquire into the Acts of our
Ancestors, and what in like cases they had done, that so we might not err in
any dutiful respect to your Majesty, and yet preserve our right and privilege
of Parliament. And after diligent search both of all Stories, Statutes and
Records that might inform us in this case, We find it That no Lord of
Parliament, the Parliament sitting, or within the usual times of Privilege of
Parliament, is to be imprisoned or restrained, without Sentence or Order of the
House, unless it be for Treason or Felony, or for refusing to give Surety for
the Peace. And to satisfy our selves the better, we have heard all that could
be alleged by your Majesty's Council learned at the Law, that might any way
weaken or infringe this claim of the Peers; And to all that can be showed or
alleged, so una voce consented, That this is the undoubted Right of the Peers,
and has unviolably been enjoyed by them.

Wherefore we your Majesty's Loyal Subjects and humble Servants, the whole body
of the Peers now in Parliament assembled, most humbly beseech your Majesty,
that the Earl of Arundel, a Member of this Body, may presently be admitted with
your gracious favor to come, sit, and serve your Majesty and the Commonwealth
in the great Affairs of this Parliament. And we shall pray, etc.

This Remonstrance and Petition to this Majesty was approved by the whole
House, who agreed that it should be presented by the whole House to his
Majesty; and it was further agreed, That the Lord President, Steward, the Earl
of Cambridge, and the Lord Great-Chamberlain should presently go to the King to
know his Majesty's pleasure when they shall attend him.

These Lords returning, the Lord President reported, that his Majesty had
appointed that day, between two and three of the clock, for the whole House to
attend him with the said Remonstrance and Petition in the Chamber of Presence
at Whitehall.

And it was agreed, That the Lord Keeper should then read the same

The Twentieth of April, the Lord President reported the Kings Answer unto the
Remonstrance and Petition of the Lords, to this effect:

The Kings first Answer to the Remonstrance and Petition.
That their Lordships having spent some time about this business, and it being
of some consequence, his Majesty should be thought rash if he should give a
sudden Answer thereto; and therefore will advise of it, and give them a full
Answer in convenient time.

The 21. of April 1626. It was ordered, That the House should be called on
Monday next, being the 24. of April.

The King promises to answer the said Remonstrance
Which was done accordingly: And the Earl of Arundel being called, the Lord
Keeper signified unto the House, That his Majesty had taken into consideration
the Petition exhibited by their Lordships the 19. of April concerning the Earl
of Arundel, and will return an Answer thereunto with all expedition.

The Lords are urgent for an Answer.
The 2. of May it was ordered, That the Lord Keeper should move his Majesty from
the House for a speedy and gracious Answer unto the Petition on the Earl of
Arundels behalf.

The King returns another Answer to the Lords touching the Remonstrance.
The 4. of May 1626. the Lord Keeper signified unto their Lordships, That
according to the Order of the 2. of May, he had moved his Majesty from the
House on the behalf of the Earl of Arundel: Who answered,

It is a Cause wherein he has had a great deal of care, and is

The 9. of May 1626, the House being moved to petition the King touching the
Earl of Arundel, certain Lords were appointed to set down viz.

May it please your Majesty,
WHereas the whole body of the Peers now assembled in Parliament, Another
Petition to the King touching the Earl of Arundel.
did the 19 day of April exhibit to your Majesty an humble Remonstrance and
Petition concerning the Privilege Arundel, whereupon we received a gracious
Answer, That in convenient time we should receive a fuller Answer, which we
have long and dutifully attended: And now at this time so great a business
being in handling in the House, we are pressed by that business to be humble
suitors to your Majesty for a gracious and present Answer.

Which being read, was approved of by the House, and the said

The 11 of May the Lord President reported the Kings Answer to the said
Petition,

That he did little look for such a Message from the House; The King takes
exception at the Petition.
That himself had been of the House, and did never know such a Message

The Lord President further Reported, The Lords desire to know of his Majesty,
to what part of the Petition he takes exception.
That the Lords Committees appointed to deliver the Petition to the King, did
thereupon withdraw, and required him humbly to desire his Majesty to be pleased
to let them know, unto what point of the said Petition he takes this Exception;
viz.

The Exception the King takes, is at the peremptoriness of the Term, To have a
Present Answer; And the King wonders at their impatience, since he has
promised them an answer in convenient time.

Hereupon the House altered their former Petition, The Petition presented
again, and the word (present) left out.
leaving out the Present, and appointed the former Committee humbly to deliver
the same to his Majesty.

The 13 of May the Lord President reported the Kings Answer to the Petition;
viz.

It is true, The Kings answer to the Petition so ordered.
the word ( Present) was somewhat strange to his Majesty, because they did not
use it from one House to another; but now, that his Majesty knows their
meaning, they shall know

The Lords having agreed on another Petition to the King, wherein they
acknowledged him to be a Prince of as much goodness as ever King was.

The 19 of May the Lord Chamberlain signified to their Lordships, That his
Majesty being acquainted therewith, is pleased that this House attend him at
two of the Clock this day in the Afternoon at Whitehall.

On which day the Lords delivered the Petition to his Majesty; who upon the 20
May returned this Answer.

My Lords,
The Kings Answer to the Petition.
I See that in your Petition you acknowledge me a King of as much goodness as
ever King was; for which I thank you, and I will endeavor, by the Grace of God,
never to deserve other: But in this I observe that you contradict your selves;
for if you believe me to be such, as you say I am, you have no reason to
mistrust the sincerity of my Promises:

In this, My Lords, by your favor you are mistaken, for the Causes do no way
agree; for that he that was committed of the House of Commons was committed for
words spoken before both Houses, which Arundel's fault was directly against my
self, having no relation to the Parliament; yet because I see you are so
impatient, I will make you a fuller Answer then yet I have done, not doubting
but that you will rest contented therewith.

It is true, I committed him for a cause which most of you know, and though it
had been no more, I had reason to do it; yet, my Lords, I assure you, that I
have things of far greater importance to lay to his charge, which you must
excuse me for, not no tell you at this time, because it is not yet ripe, and it
would much prejudice my service to do it; and this, by the word of a King, I do
not speak out of a desire to delay you, but as soon as it is possible, you
shall know the cause, which is such as I know you will not judge to be any
breach of your Privileges: For,


This Answer being read, it was ordered, That the Committee for Privileges
should meet, and consider how farther to proceed with dutiful respect to his
Majesty; and yet so, as it may be for the preservation of the Privileges of
the Peers of this Land, and the Liberties of the House of Parliament.

Another Petition of the Lords touch^ the Earl of Arundel.
The 24 of May the Lord President reported the Petition agreed on by the Lords
Committees for Privileges etc. to be presented to the King, which was in haec
verba.

May it please your most Excellent Majesty,
WHatever our care and desire is to preserve our right of Peers, yet it is far
from our thoughts either to distrust, or to press any thing that stands not
with the affection and duty of most dutiful and loyal Subjects: And therefore
in all humility we cast our selves

The Petition was generally approved, and ordered to be presented to his
Majesty by the whole House; and the Earl of Carlisle and the Lord Carlton to go
presently to know the Kings pleasure when they shall

The 25. of May, the Lord Keeper delivered the Kings Answer unto the said
Petition, to be read in haec verba, viz.

My Lords,
YOur often coming to me about this matter, The Kings Answer to this Petition.
made me somewhat


This being read, The Lords adjourn in disgust till the morrow.
the House was moved the second time, That all businesses might be laid aside,
and that Consideration might be had how

The 26. of May, the Lord Keeper delivered this Message from the King to the
House of Lords, viz. THat his Majesty has willed him to signify unto their
Lordships, His Majesty's Message to the Lords.




Whereupon it was ordered, Upon this Message the Lords adjourn for a
seven-night.
That all businesses be adjourned till that day seven night.

Buckingham signified unto their Lordships his desire to have the Kings Council
allowed him to plead his cause: But the Lords would not hear him, because they
would entertain no business: And so the House was adjourned to the second of
June. At which time the House sitting again, the Lord Keeper delivered this
Message from the King to the House of Lords, viz. Another Message to the Lords
from his Majesty concerning the Earl of Arundel.
HIs Majesty has commanded me to deliver unto your Lordships a Message touching
the Earl of Arundel; That his Majesty has thought of that business, and has
advised of his great and pressing affairs, which are such as make him unwilling
to enter into dispute of things doubtful: And therefore to give you clear
satisfaction touching that Cause, whereby you may more cheerfully proceed in
the business of the House, he has endeavored as much as may be to ripen it,
but June, he will either declare the Cause, or admit him to the House. And
adds further upon the word of a King, That if it shall be sooner ripe, which
he has good cause to expect, he will declare it at the soonest. And further,
That if the occasion does enforce to stay to the time prefixed, yet he does not
purpose to set such a short end to the Parliament, but that there shall be an
ample and good space between that, and the end of the Sessions,



The Lords adjourn again.
This Message being delivered, the House was adjourned ad libitum, and put into
a Committee; And being resumed, it was agreed, That all businesses should
cease, but this of the Earl of Arundel's concerning the Privileges of the
House; and the House to meet thereon to morrow morning, and to be put into a
Committee to consider thereof. And so the House was adjourned to the next day,

Then the Lord Keeper delivered this Message from the King, Viz. Another
Message from the King to the Lords concerning the Earl of Arundel.
THat in the matter concerning the Earl of Arundel, his Majesty has been very
careful and desirous to avoid all jealousy of violating the Privileges of
this House; that he continues still of the same mind, and does much desire to
find out some Expedient which



Hereupon the Lords agreed, That the Lord Keeper do render unto his Majesty
from the House their humble thanks for his gracious respect unto their
Privileges.

Then the Lord Keeper demanded of the Lords, whether their Lordships would
adjourn the House till Thursday next? Whereupon it was agreed by the Lords, and
the House was so adjourned.

On Thursday June 8. the Lord Keeper delivered this Message to the Lords from
his Majesty, viz. THat on Saturday last his Majesty sent word to the House,
Another Message to the Lords from his Majesty.
That by this day he would send them such an Answer concerning the Earl of
Arundel, as should satisfy them in point of Privilege. And therefore to take
away all dispute, and that their Privileges may be in the same estate as they
were when the Parliament began, his Majesty has taken off the restraint of the
said Earl, whereby he has liberty



The Earl of Arundel being returned to the House, The Earl of Arundel released
comes to the House.
did render his humble thanks unto his Majesty for this gracious favor toward
him; and gave their Lordships also most hearty thanks for their often
intercessions for him unto the King, and protested his Loyalty and faithful
service unto his Majesty.

Much about this time, Mr. Moor a Member of the House of Commons, viz. That he
said, We were born free, and must continue free, if the King will keep his
Kingdom: Adding these words, Thanks be to God, we have no occasion to fear,
having a just and pious King. The House for these words committed Mr. Moor to
the Tower of London; And his Majesty shortly after sent a Message, That he had
passed by his offense. Whereupon he was released.

The Duke chosen Chancellor of Cambridge during his Impeachment.
the Chancellorship of Cambridge became void by the death of the Lord Howard
Earl of Suffolk, who died on Whitsonday the 28. of May 1626. The University
having understood by several hands, That it was the Kings express will and
pleasure that the Duke should be chosen in his stead, were ambitious and
forward to express their obedience to his Majesty in that behalf; well knowing,
that in regard of their multitude, and worthy Judgment and wisdom, that is
esteemed and ought to be in those Electors, this was

Letters were pretended to be sent from his Majesty, to the intent to
disencourage all opposers: But though the pretense of Letters served mainly to
effect their ends, yet the producing of them would have prejudiced the chief
intendment of the Election, namely the honor of the Trinity-Colledge alone (the
Master whereof was Doctor Maw, one of the Kings Chaplains) supplied the Duke
with Forty three Votes, the third part of those which served the turn, for he
had in all One hundred and eight.

He was chosen the Thursday following the death of his Predecessor, were entire
against the Duke. For notwithstanding all the industry that could be employed
on his behalf, there was a Party so diligent and resolute, that the same
morning the Choice was made, they jointly pitched upon the Lord Thomas Howard,
second Son to the late deceased Chancellor, and Earl of Berkshire; though they
had no Head appearing for him, nor one man in the Uniuersity that was known to
have any reference to him, excepting one Mr. Granado Chester, who was either
his Chaplain or otherwise interessed in him: And notwithstanding all
disadvantages,

The Earl of Berkshire being afterward acquainted with the intentions of the
University toward him, wrote this Letter to Mr. Chester, a Divine related to
his Lordship.

Mr. CHESTER,
The Earl of Berk-shire's Letter to Mr. Chester touching Votes conferred upon
him in the Choice of the Chancellor of Cambridge.
THe infinite obligation which I owe to the University of Cambridge for the late
most ample Testimony of their great love and affection toward me, imboldens me
to borrow your help to make known unto them my unfeigned thankfulness: Wherein I
confess that the love and favor which they have expressed unto me, joined with
the fashion of it, does far exceed the weak expression of so feeble a Style as
mine is. For they have been pleased out of their abundant

I must therefore entreat you to disperse this my thankful Acknowledgment to
all my worthy Friends there, who have so freely bestowed their Voices, and
unsought for Favors upon me. And this labor I do the rather lay upon you,
Cambridge, so I will live and die

The true Servant of the University, Bershire.
S. James, 2 Junii 1626.

The Commons being informed of the aforesaid Proceedings in Cambridge, directed
a Letter to be written to that University to signify the Houses dislike
thereof. Whereupon the King signifies to the House his pleasure by Sir Richard
Weston, that they forbear to send any such Letter,

THat they do acknowledge they were about to Write to the University, The
Commons Answer.
because that the very Election it self, whereby the University is committed to
the Government of one that is charged, and publicly complained of by the
Commons in Parliament, whereof the Electors are a part, is in it self a very
great Grievance, and prejudicial in example; whereof they have Reason to be the
more sensible,


Whereunto his Majesty replied by the said Sir Richard Weston.

HIs Majesty says, His Majesty's Reply.
That Cambridge and all Corporations derive there right and privilege from
him; and that he has reason to esteem the Universities above any other, and is
resolved to defend them against any, which either wilfully, or by chance, shall
go about to infringe their Liberties. Concerning the Election it self, his
Majesty is far from conceiving it a Grievance; for he never heard that Crimes
objected, were to be taken as proved; or, that a man

But whereas you say in the manner of carriage of the Election, there were many
passages done in it to the contempt of the House. His Majesty is well pleased,
that you enquire and punish the Offenders, if there be any that have
mis-behaved themselves in that respect. But for the Election it self, or the
Form of it, his Majesty does avow his first Message.


The Duke returned this Acknowledgment to the University.

MAster Vice Chancellor, The Dukes Letter of Acknowledgement to the University
of Cambridge.
and Gentlemen of the University of Cambridge, There is no one thing that
concerns me more near, then the good opinion of Good and Learned honest Men:
Amongst which number, as you have ever held the first rank in the estimation of
the Commonwealth,

I beseech you, as you have now made your choice with so many kind and noble
Circumstances, as the Manner is to me as acceptable and grateful as the Matter;
so to assure your selves, That you have cast your Votes upon your Servant, who
is as apprehensive of the time you have showed your affection in, as of the
Honor you have given him.

And I earnestly request you all, that you would be pleased, not to judge me
comparatively by the success and happiness you have had in your former choice
of Chancellors; who as they knew better perhaps by advantage of education in
your University, how to value the deserts of men of your qualities and degrees,
so could they not be more willing to cherish you then my self, who will make
amends for my want of Schollarship, in my love to the Professors of it, and to
the source from whence it comes; having now most just cause more chiefly to
employ my utmost endeavors, with what favor I enjoy from a Royal Master, to

And since I am so far engaged to you, I will presume upon a further courtesy,
which is, That you will be pleased to supply me with your advice, and suggest a
way unto me (as my self likewise shall not fail to think on some means) how we
may make Posterity remember you had a thankful Chancellor, and that both really
loved you, and your University: Which is a resolution writ

Your faithful Friend and humble Servant George Buckingham.


Also the King was pleased to write to the University of Cambridge, in
approbation of the said Election.

Trusty and Well-beloved, We greet you well.
The Kings Letter to the said University.
WHereas upon Our pleasure, intimated unto you by the Bishop of Durham, for the
choice of your Chancellor, you have with much duty, Buckingham worthy of this
your Election, so shall you find the fruits of it. For We that have found him
a faithful Servant to Our dear Father of Blessed memory, and Our Self, cannot

Given under Our Signet at Our Palace of Westminster, the Sixth of June, in
the Second year of Our Reign.

June 8. Before the Duke gave in his Answer on that day unto the

My Lords,
IN a case of pressure considered by it self, The Duke of Buckinghams Speech to
the Lords House, before he gave in his Answer.
I have a fair beginning, it is a due debt to your Lordships for this Honorable
Favor in leaving it to my choice, whether I would answer to the particulars in
the

I was also grieved that my business should be a cause of the loss of this year
from foreign attempts, and the hindrance of those resolutions that would have
comforted our Friends abroad, and secured our selves at I am at peace with all.

I shall only for the present, apply my self to the clearing of my Reputation,
and for the future, of those actions and endeavors which

For first, Who accused me? Common Fame. Who gave me up to your Lordships? The
House of Commons.

The one is too subtle a Body, if a Body; the other too great for me to
contest with; and I am confident, when my cause shall be

But as Fame is subtle, so it is often and especially in accusations false;
therefore the House of Commons have not wronged me: Yet I am confident it will
at length be found, that Common Fame has abused both them and me.

I presume the House of Commons have proceeded against me out of an hearty and
zealous affection, to do their King and Country service, I hope out of
Christian Charity to punish and amend my faults (if fame could have proved
them) and not to envy my Reputation, or destroy my Fortune. I shall never call
such proceedings wrong, if seeking to cure my errors, give me opportunity to
clear and publish my innocence: For the State it self, I have little to say, it
is but a little, I will not abuse your Lordships patience. I was born and bred
in it, I

And could there be the least alienation hereafter in my heart from the service
of the State, for any thing that has past, I should be the ungratefullest man
living; should but such a thought stain my heart, I should be content it were
let blood. If my Posterity should not inherit

The humble Answer and Plea of George Duke of Buckingham, to the Declaration
and Impeachment made against him, before your Lordships, by the Commons House
of Parliament.
His Answer and Plea to the Impeachment of the House of Commons.
THe said Duke of Buckingham being accused and sought to be impeached before
your Lordships, of the many Misdemeanors, Misprisions,

The Charge touching Plurity of Offices.
To the first, His Charge touching Plurality of Offices.
which concerns Plurality of Offices which he holds, he answers thus,
That it is true that he holds those several Places and Offices, which are
enumerated in the preamble of his Charge, whereof only three are worthy the
name of Offices, viz. The Admiralty, the Wardenship of the Cinque Ports, and
Mastership of the Horse;

And the Duke denies, that he obtained these places, either to satisfy his
exorbitant ambition, or his own profit or advantage, as is objected against
him: And he hops he shall give good satisfaction to the contrary in his
particular Answers ensuing, touching the manner of his



But the integrity of his own Heart and Conscience, being the most able and
most impartial witnesses, not accusing him of the least thought of disloyalty
to his Sovereign, or to his Country, does raise his spirits again to make his
just defense before your Lordships, of whose Wisdom, Justice, and Honor, he is
so well assured, That he does with confidence, and yet with all humbleness
submit himself and his cause to your Examinations

The Charge consists of Thirteen several Articles, whereunto the Duke, saving
to himself the usual benefit of not being prejudiced by any words or want of
form in his Answer; but that he may be admitted to make further explanation and
proof, as there shall be occasion, and saving to him all Privileges and Rights
belonging to him, as one of the Peers of the Realm, does make these several and
distinct Answers following, in the same order they are laid down unto him.

For his buying of the Admirals place, the said Duke makes this clear and true
Answer.
His Charge touching his buying the Admirals place.
That it is true, that in January, in the Sixteenth year of his late Majesty's
Reign, his late Majesty did by his Letters Patents under the Great Seal of
England, grant unto the Duke the Office of Admiralty for his life; which Grant,
as he well knows it, was made freely and without Edw. 6. mentioned in this
Article of his Charge, or for any other cause whatsoever: For he says the true
manner of his obtaining this Office, and of all the passages thereof, which he
is ready to make good by Proof, was thus, That Honorable Lord, the late Earl of
Nottingham, the Lord Admiral, being grown much in years, and finding that he
was not then so able to perform that which appertained to his place, as in
former times he had done to his great Honor; and fearing lest his Majesty's
service, and the Commonwealth, might suffer by his defect, became an humble and
earnest Petitioner to his late Majesty, to admit him to surrender his Office.
His late Majesty was at the first unwilling unto it, out of his Royal Affection
to his Person, and true Judgment of his worth: But the Earl renewed his
Petitions, and in some of them nominated the Duke to be his Successor, without
the Dukes privity

These Reasons persuaded his late Majesty, and upon his Majesty's own motion,
persuaded the Duke to take the charge upon him: And thereupon the Earl
voluntarily, freely, and willingly, and upon his own earnest and often suit,
surrendered the place without any President* Contract, or Promise whatsoever;
which might render the Duke in the least honorable memory of his deserts to
him, and the Crown of England, did grant him a Pension of One thousand pounds
per annum for his life; which in all Ages has been the Royal way of Princes,
wherewith to reward ancient and well-deserving Servants in their elder years;
when without their own faults they are become less serviceable to the State:
And the Duke also voluntarily and freely, and as an argument of his noble
respect toward so honorable a Predecessor, whom to his death he per annum, and
yet the Ships were very much decayed, and their Provisions neglected, the
charge was returned to Thirty thousand pounds per annum, and with that charge,
the Ships per annum. And now he dare boldly affirm, that his Majesty's Navy is
in better state by much, then ever it was in any precedent time whatsoever.

For his buying the Wardenship of the Cinque Ports, he makes this plain,
That in December, The Charge touching his buying the Wardenship of the Cinque
Ports.
in the Two and twentieth year of his late Majesty's Reign, he obtained the
Office of Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, and Constable of the Castle of
Dover, (being one entire Office) upon the Surrender of the Lord Zouch, then
Lord Warden.

The manner of obtaining whereof, was thus, The Lord Zouch being grown in
years, and with his almost continual lameness being grown Richmond, and Richard
Earl of Dorset, deceased; but he was not willing to part with it without
recompense. Notice whereof coming to the Duke, by an offer made from the Lord
Zouch, he finding by experience how much, and how many ways both the Kings
service might, and many times did suffer; and how many inconveniences did arise
to the Kings Subjects in their Goods, Ships, and Lives, by the intermixture of
the Jurisdictions of the Admiralty and

1. Where the Admiral-Jurisdiction extends generally to all the Narrow Seas;
the Warden of the Cinque Ports has and exercises Admiral-Jurisdiction on all
the Sea Coasts, from Show-Beacon in Essex, to the Red Noor in Sussex; and
within those Limits there have been continual differences between the Lord
Admiral, and the Lord Warden, whether the Lord Wardens Jurisdiction extends
into the main Sea, or only as far as the low Water Mark, and so much further
into the Sea, as a man on Horsback can reach with a Lance, which occasioneth
Questions between those chief Officers themselves.

2. There are many and continual differences in executing of Warrants against
offenders; the Officers of the one, refusing to obey or assist

3. Merchants and Owners of Goods questioned in the Admiralty, are often
enforced to sue in both Courts, and often enforced for their peace to compound
with both Officers.

4. The Kings service is much hindered for the most usual and ordinary Rendevouz
of the Kings Ships, being at the Downs, and that being within the Jurisdiction
of the Lord Warden, the Lord Admiral or Captains

5. When the Kings Ships, or others, be in danger on the Goodwins, and other
places within the view of the Portsmen, they have refused to help with their
Boats, lest the Kings Ships should command them on board, whereby many Ships
have perished, and much Goods have been lost.

6. When Warrants come to press a Ship at Road for the Kings service,

7. When the Kings Ships lie near the Ports, and the men come on shore, the
Officers refuse to assist the Captains to reduce them to the Ships without the
Lord Wardens Warrant.

8. If the Kings Ships, on the sudden, have any need of Pilots for the Sands
Coasts of Flanders, or the like, wherein the Portsmen are best experienced,
they will not serve without the Lord Wardens, or his Lieutenants Warrant, who
perhaps are not near the place.

9. When for great occasions for the service of the State, the Lord Admiral and
Lord Warden must both join their Authority; if the Officers for want of true
understanding of their several Limits and Jurisdictions, mistake their
Warrants, the service which many times can endure no delay, is lost, or not so
effectually performed.

For these and many other Reasons of the like kind, the Duke not being led,
either with ambition or hope of profit as has been objected (for it could be
no increase of Honor to him, having been honored before with a greater place;
nor of profit, for it has not yielded him in any matter any profit at all, nor
is like to yield him above Three hundred pounds per annum at any time) but out
of his desire to make himself the more able to do the King and Kingdom service,
and prevent all differences and hundred pounds per annum, in respect of his
Surrender, he not being willing to leave his place without such consideration,
nor the Duke willing to have it without his full satisfaction; and the occasion
why the Duke of Buckingham gave that consideration to the Lord Zouch, was,
because the Duke of Richmond in his life time had first agreed to give the same
consideration for it; and if he had lived, he had had that place upon the same
terms: And when the said Duke of Richmond was dead, his late Buckingham to go
through for that place, and for the Reasons beforementioned, to put both these
Offices together, and to give the same consideration to the said Lord, which
the Duke of Richmond should have given, and his late Majesty said he would
repay the money. And how far this act of his, in acquiring this Office,
accompanied with these Circumstances, may be within the danger of the Law, the
King being privy to all the passages of it, and encouraging and directing it,
he humbly submits to your judgment; and he humbly leaves it to

To this Article, The Charge touching his not guarding the Seas.
whereby the not guarding of the Narrow Seas in these last two years by the
Duke, according to the trust and duty of an Admiral, is laid to his charge;
whereof the consequence, supposed to have been merely through his default, are
the ignominious infesting of the Coasts with Pirates and Enemies, the
endangering of the Dominion of

The Duke makes this Answer, That he doubts not but he shall make it appear
to the good satisfaction of your Lordships, that albeit there has happened much
loss to the Kings Subjects within the said time of two years by Pirates and
Enemies, yet that has not happened by the neglect of the Duke, or want of care
and diligence in his place: For whereas in former times the ordinary Guard
allowed for the Narrow Seas has June, 1624. there has never been fewer then
Five of the Kings Ships, and ordinarily Six, besides Pinnaces, Merchants Ships,
and Drumblers; and since open hostility, Eight of the Kings Ships, besides
Merchants of greater number and Pinnaces and Drumblers; and all these well
furnished and manned, sufficiently instructed and authorized for the service.
He says, he has from time to time, upon all occasions acquainted his Majesty,
and the Council-Bord Dunkirk was blocked up, and so should have continued, had
not a sudden storm dispersed them, which being the immediate hand of God, could
not by any policy of man be prevented; at which time, they took the
opportunity to Rove abroad, but it has been so far from endangering the
Dominion of the Narrow Seas thereby, as is suggested, That his Majesty's Ships
or Men of War, were never yet mastered, nor encountered by them, nor will they
endure the sight of any of our Ships; and when the Duke himself was in person,
the Dunkirkers run into their Harbors. But here is a necessity, that according
to the fortune of Wars, interchangeable losses Sallie, and those parts, he
says, it is but very lately that they found the way into our Coasts, where, by
surprise, they might easily do hurt; but there has been that provision taken
by his Majesty, not without the care of the Duke, both by force and treaty to
repress them for the time to come, as will give good satisfaction. All which he
is assured will clearly appear upon proof.

The Charge touching the unjust stay of the Ship of Newhaven, called the St.
Peter, after Sentence.
To this Article the Duke makes this Answer, That about September last, this
Ship called the St. Peter (amongst diverse others) was seized on as lawful prize
by his Majesty's Ships, and brought into Plymouth, as Ships laden by the
Subjects of the King of Spain; in the end of October, or beginning of November,
they were all brought to the Tower of London, all of them were there unladen;
but the Peter and the bulk of her Goods was not stirred, because they were
challenged by the Subjects of the November, Allegations were generally put in
against them all in the Admiralty Court, to justify the seizure, and all the
Pretendants were called in upon these proceedings, diverse of the Ships and
Goods were condemned, and diverse were released in a legal course; and others of
them were in suspense till full proof made. The Eight and twentieth day of
December, complaint was made on the behalf of some Frenchmen at the
Council Board concerning Newhaven called the Peter, and the Goods in her, and
all such other Goods of the other prizes, as should be found to appertain to
his Majesty's own Subjects, or to the Subjects of his good Brother the French
King, or the States of the United Provinces, or any other Princes or States in
Friendship or Alliance with his Majesty, should be delivered: But this was not
absolute, as is supposed by the Charge, but was thus qualified, so as they

According to this just and honorable Direction, the Kings Advocate proceeded
upon the general Allegations formerly put in the 26 of January, after there was
a Sentence in the Admiralty, that the Peter should be discharged, and the Kings
Advocate not having then any knowledge of further proof, consented to it. But
this was not a Definitive Sentence, but a Sentence Interlocutory, as it is
termed in that Court. Within few days after, this Ship prepared her self to be
gone, and was falling down the River, then came new intelligence to the Lord
Admiral, by the Lieutenant of the Tower, That all those Ships were laden by the
Subjects of the King of Spain; that the Amirantasco wasted them beyond the
Peter; and thereupon the Duke instantly gave order for her final discharge, and
she was discharged by order of Court accordingly.

By which true Narration of the Fact, and all the proceedings, the Duke hops
it will sufficiently appear, That he has not done any thing was taken out of
the Ship, was first publicly showed to his Majesty himself, and then committed
to the custody of Gabriel Marsh, in the Article mentioned, by Inventory, then
and still Marshal of the Admiralty, by him to be safely kept; whereof the money
was employed for the Kings immediate service, and by his direction, and the
rest was left in safe keeping, and are all since delivered and reimbursed to
the owners, or pretended owners thereof, and not a penny profit thereof, or
thereby, has come to the Duke himself, as shall be made good by proof. And
whereas the France, he says, that is utterly mistaken, for diverse of their
Goods were imbarged before this happened; and if in truth, the French had therein
received that as either they pretend or is pretended for them; yet the
imbarguing of the Goods of the English upon that occasion, was utterly illegal
and unwarrantable: For by the mutual Articles between the two Kings, they ought
not to have righted themselves before Legal Complaint, and a

The Charge touching his Extortion of Ten thousand pounds from the East India
Company, with the abuse of the Parliament.
To this Article, which consists of two main Points, the one of the East India
Company; the other, admitting the Duke had a right as Lord Admiral, the
compassing it by undue ways, and abusing the Parliament, to work his private
ends, the Duke gives this Answer, wherein a plain Narration of the Fact, he
hops, will clear the Matters objected; and in this he shall lay down no more
then will fully appear upon Proof.

About the end of Michaelmas Term, 1623. the Duke had information given him by
a principal Member of their own Company, that the East India, and other parts
of Asia and Africa, by rich prizes gotten there forcibly from the Portugals,
and others; and a large part thereof was due to his Majesty, and to the Duke as
Admiral by the Law; for which, neither of them had any satisfaction. Whereupon
directions were given for a legal prosecution in the Court of Admiralty, and to
proceed in such Matter as should be held fittest by the Advice of Council.

In the Months of December and January, in that year diverse Witnesses March,
1623. an Action was commenced in the Court in the joint names of his Majesty,
and the Admiral, grounded upon the former proceeding; this was prosecuted by
the Kings Advocate, and the demand at first was Fifteen thousand pounds. The
Action being thus framed in both their names, by Advice of Council, because it
was doubtful in the judgment of the Council, Whether it did more properly
April, 1624. the Judicial Agreement and Sentence passed thereupon in the
Admiralty Court, wherein the Companies consent, and their own offer, plainly
appears; so that for the second part of the right, it were very hard to
conclude that the Duke had no right, contrary to the Companies own consent, and
the sentence of the Court, grounded on their Agreement, unless it shall fully
appear, That the Company was by strong hand enforced thereto, and so the money
extorted.

Therefore to clear that scruple, That as the matter of the Suit was just, or
at least so probable as the Company willingly desired it for their peace, so
the manner was as just and honorable; your Lordships are humbly Tilbury, by his
late Majesty's direction to speed their Voyage the better, whilst they might be
accommodated for this Voyage, without prejudice to the public safety, they
were discharged when there was an Accommodation propounded and allowed, which
was, That they should forthwith prepare

To this Article, which is so mixed with Actions of great Princes, as that he
dares not in his duty publish every passage thereof, The Charge touching his
putting the Ships into the hands of the French.
he cannot for the present make so particular an Answer as he may, has, and
will do, to the rest of his Charge. But he gives this general Answer, the
truth whereof he humbly prays may rather appear to your Lordships by the
Proofs, then by any Discourse of his; which in Reason of State, will happily be
conceived fit to be more privately handled.

Since the Dukes Answer delivered into the House, he has himself openly
declared to their Lordships, That for the better clearing of his Honor and
Fidelity to the State, in that part of his Charge which is objected against him
by this Seventh Article, he has been an earnest and humble Suitor to his
Majesty, to give him leave in his Proofs, to unfold the whole Truth and Secret
of that great Action, and has obtained his Majesty's gracious leave therein;
and accordingly does intend to make such open and clear Proof thereof, that he
nothing doubts but the same when it shall appear, will not only clear him
from blame, but be a Testimony of his care and faithfulness in serving the
State.
That these Ships were lent to the French King at first, without the Dukes
Privitie: That when he knew it, he did that which belonged to an Admiral of
England, and a true English man: And he does deny, that by menace, or
compulsion, or any other indirect, or undue practice, or means, he by himself,
or by any others, did deliver those Ships, or any of them, into the hands of
the French, as is objected against him: That the Error which did happen, by
what direction soever it were, was not in the intention any ways injurious, or
dishonorable, or dangerous to this

The Charge touching his practice of the employment of them against Rochel.
To this Article wherewith he is taxed to have practiced for the employment of
the Ships against Rochel, he answers.

That he was so far from practicing or consenting that the said Ships should so
be employed, that he shall make it clearly to appear, that when it was
discovered, that they would be employed against those of the Religion, the
Protestation of the French King being otherwise, and their pretense being, That
there was a Peace concluded with those of the Religion, Genoa, which had been
an action of no ill consequence to the Affairs of Christendom: The Duke did by
all fit and honorable means, endeavor to divert that course of their employment
against Rochel. And he does truly and boldly affirm, That his endeavors under
the Royal care of his most Excellent Majesty, has been a great part of the
means to preserve the Town of Rochel, as the Proofs, when they shall be
produced, will make appear. And when his Majesty did find that beyond his
intention, and contrary to the faithful Promises of the French, they were so
misemployed, he

And whereas it is further objected against him, That when in so unfaithful a
manner he had delivered those Ships into the power of a foreign State, to the
danger of the Religion, and scandal and dishonor of our Oxford, in affirming
before the Committees of both Houses, That the said Ships were not, nor should
be so used or employed; he says, (under the favor of those who so understood
his words,) That he did not then use those words which are expressed in the
Charge to have been spoken by him, but there being then a jealousy of the
mis-employing of those Ships, the Duke having no knowledge thereof, and knowing
well what the promises of the French King were, but was not then seasonable to
be published; he hoping they would not have varied from what was promised,

That the Duke did compel the Lord R. to buy his Title of Honor, The Charge
touching the compelling the Lord R. to buy Honor.
he utterly denies; and he is very confident, that the Lord R. himself will
not affirm it, or any thing tending that way: Neither can he, nor R. was before
willing to have given a much greater sum, but could not then obtain it; and he
did now obtain it by solicitation of his own Agents.

For the selling of places of Judicature by the Duke, The Charge touching his
selling of places of Judicature.
which are specially instanced in the Charge, he answers, That he received
not, or had a penny of either of those sums to his own use; but the truth is,
the M. was made Lord Treasurer by his late Majesty without contracting for any
thing for it; and after that he had the Office conferred upon him, his late
Majesty moved him to lend him Twenty thousand pounds upon promise of repayment
at the end of a year; the Lord M. yielded to it, so as he might have the Dukes
word that it should be repayed unto him accordingly: The Duke gave his word for
it; the Lord M. relied upon it, and delivered the said sum to the hands of Mr.
Porter then attending upon the Duke, by the late Kings appointment, to be
disposed as

And afterward when the Lord M. left that place, and his money was not repayed
unto him, he urged the Duke upon his promise; whereupon the Duke being jealous
of his Honor, and to keep his word, not having money to pay him, he assured
Lands of his own to the Lord M. Spain, the Lord M. obtained a promise from his
late Majesty of some Lands in Fee-farm, to such a value, as he accepted of the
same in satisfaction of the said money, which were afterward passed unto him;
and at the Dukes return, the Lord M. delivered back unto him the security of
the Dukes Lands which had been given unto him as aforesaid.

And for the Six thousand pounds supposed to have been received by the Duke,
for procuring to the Earl of M. the Mastership of the Wards, M. did disburse
Six thousand pounds about that time; and his late Majesty bestowed the same
upon Sir Henry Mildmay, his Servant, without the Dukes privity, and he had it
and enjoyed it, and no penny thereof came to the said Duke, or to his use.

To this Article the Duke answers, That it is true that his late Majesty out
of his Royal Favor unto him, The Charge touching his procuring of Honors for
his poor Kindred.
having honored the Duke himself with many Titles and Dignities of his bounty;
and as a greater argument of his Princely Grace, did also think fit to honor
those who were in equal degree of Blood with him, and also to ennoble their
Mother who was the Stock that bare them:

The Title of the Countess of Buckingham bestowed upon the Mother,

The Titles bestowed on the Viscount P. the Dukes Elder Brother, were conferred
on him, who was a Servant of the Bedchamber to his now Majesty, then Prince,
by his Highness means; the Earl of A. was of his late Majesty's Bedchamber,
and the Honors and Lands conferred on him, was done when the Duke was in Spain.

The Earl of D. has the Honors mentioned in the Charge, but

But if it were true, That the Duke had procured Honors for those who are so
near and so dear unto him; the Law of Nature, and the Kings Royal Favor, he
hops will plead for his excuse; and he rather believes he were worthy to be
condemned in the opinion of all generous minds, if being in such Favor with
his Master, he had minded only his own advancement, and had neglected those
who were

The Charge touching his exhausting, intercepting and mis-employing the Kings
Revenue.
To this Article his Answer is, That he does humbly, and with all thankfulness
acknowledge the bountiful hand of his late Majesty unto him; for which he owes
so much to the memory of that deceased King, his most Excellent Majesty that
now is, and their Posterity, that he shall willingly render back whatsoever he
has received, together with his life, to do them service. But for the immense
sums and values which are suggested to have been given unto him, he says,
There are very

To this Charge, which is set forth in such an expression of words as might
argue an extraordinary guiltiness in the Duke, The Charge touching his
transcendent presumption in giving Physic to the King.
who by such infinite bonds of duty and thankfulness was obliged to be tender
of the life and health of his most dread and dear Sovereign and Master, he
makes this clear and true Answer: That he did neither apply nor procure the
Plaster or Posset Drink, in the Charge termed to be a Potion, Warwicks
Physician had ministered a Plaster and Posset Drink to him; and the chief thing
that did him good was a Vomit, which he wished the King had taken in the
beginning of his sickness. The King John Baker the Dukes servant, and with his
own mouth commanded him to go for it: Whereupon the Duke besought his Majesty
not to make use of it but by the advice of his own Physicians, nor until it
should be tried of James Palmer of his Bedchamber, who was then sick of an
Ague, and upon two Children London; and in the mean time in his absence the
Plaster and Posset Drink was brought and applied by his late Majesty's own
command. At the Dukes return, his Majesty was in taking of the Posset Drink,
and the King then commanded the Duke to give it him, which he did in the
presence of some of the Kings Physicians, they then no ways seeming to dislike
it, the same Drink being first tasted of by some of them, and diverse others in
the Kings They are worse then Devils that say it. So far from the truth it was,
which now notwithstanding (as it seems) is taken up again by some, and with
much confidence affirmed. And here the

This being the plain, clear and evident truth of all those things which are
contained and particularly expressed in his Charge, (the rest being in general
requiring no Answer) He being well assured that he has herein affirmed nothing
which he shall not make good by proof in such way

He humbly refers it to the judgment of your Lordships, how full of danger
and prejudice it is to give too ready an ear and too easy a belief unto
Reports or Testimony without Oath, which are not of weight enough to condemn
any. He humbly acknowledges how easy it was for him in his younger years and
unexperienced, to fall into thousands of errors in those ten years wherein he
had the honor to serve so great and open-hearted a Sovereign and Master: But
the fear of Almighty God, his sincerity in the true Religion established in the
Church of England, (though accompanied with many weaknesses and imperfections,
which he is not ashamed humbly and heartily to confess) his awfulness not
willing to offend so good and gracious a Master, and his love and duty to his
Country have restrained him and preserved him (he hops) from running into
heinous and high misdemeanors and crimes. But whatsoever upon examination
England granted the said Duke, bears date the 10. day of February now last
past, and here is shown forth unto your Lordships, on which he does most humbly
rely: And yet he hops your Lordships in your Justice and Honor, upon which
with confidence he puts himself, will acquit him of and from those
misdemeanors, offenses, misprisions and crimes wherewith he has been charged;
And he hops, and will daily pray, that for the

The Duke having put in this Answer, earnestly moved the Lords to send to the
Commons to expedite their Reply; and the Commons did as earnestly desire a Copy
of his Answer.

The next day his Majesty wrote this Letter to the Speaker.

The Kings Letter to the Speaker touching speedy supply to his Majesty.
TRusty and Welbeloved, We greet you well. Our House of Commons cannot forget
how often and how earnestly we have called upon them for the speeding of that
Aid which they intended us for our great and weighty affairs, concerning the
safety and honor of us and our Kingdoms: And now the time being so far spent,
that unless it be presently concluded, it can neither bring us Money nor Credit
by the time which themselves have prefixed, which is the last of this Month,
and being further deferred would be of little use, we being daily advertised
from all parts of the great preparations of the Enemy unto them, and by
requiring their timely help and assistance in these Actions wherein we stand
engaged by their own Councels. And we will and command you that this Letter be
publicly read in the House.


About this time there happened, at three a clock in the afternoon, a terrible
storm of Rain and Hail in and about the City of London, and with it a very
great Thunder and Lightening: The graves were laid Andrews Churchyard in
Holborn, by the sudden fall of the Wall which brought away the Earth with it,
whereby many Coffins and the Corpse therein were exposed to open view, and the
ruder sort would ordinarily lift up the lids of the Coffins to see the posture
of the dead Corpse lying therein, who had been buried of the Plague but the year
before.

At the same instant of time there was a terrible Storm and strange Spectacle
upon Thames by the turbulencie of the waters, and a Mist that York-House, (the
then habitation of the Duke of Buckingham) beating against the stairs and wall
thereof: And at last this round Circle (thus elevated all this while above the
water) dispersed it self by degrees like the smoke issuing out of a Furnace,
and ascended higher and higher till it quite vanished away, to the great
admiration of the beholders. This occasioned the more discourse among the
Vulgar, in that Doctor Lamb Thames, to whose Art of Conjuring they attributed
that which had happened. The Parliament was then sitting, and this Spectacle
was seen by many of the Members out of the windows of the House.

The Commons agreed upon this ensuing Petition to his Majesty, concerning
Recusants.


YOur Majesty's most obedient and loyal Subjects the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, The Commons Petition to the King concerning Recusants.
do with great comfort remember the many Testimonies which your Majesty has
given of your sincerity and zeal of the true Religion established in this
Kingdom, and in particular your gracious Answer to both Houses of Parliament at
Oxford, upon their Petition concerning the Causes and England, and Dominion of
Wales.

The Right Honorable Francis Earl of Rutland, Lieutenant of the County of
Lincoln, Rutland, Northampton, Nottingham, and a Commissioner of the Peace, and
of Oyer and Terminer in the County of York, and Justice of Oyer from Trent
Northwards. His Lordship is presented to be a Popish Recusant, and to have
affronted all the Commissioners of the Peace within the North Riding of
Yorkshire* by sending a License under his Hand and Seal unto his Tenant Thomas
Fisher, dwelling in his Lordships Manor of Helmsley in the said North Riding
of the said County of York, to keep an Alehouse, soon after he was by an Order
made at the Quarter Sessions discharged from keeping an Alehouse, because he
was a Popish convict Recusant, and to have procured a Popish Schoolmaster,
namely, Roger Conyers to teach Scholars within the said Manor of Helmsley,
that formerly had his License to teach Scholars taken from him, for teaching
Scholars that were the children of Popish Recusants, and because he suffered
these children to absent themselves from the Church whilst they were his
Scholars; for which the said Conyers was

The Right Honorable Vicount Dunbar, Deputy Justice in Oyer to the Earl of
Rutland, from Trent Northward, and a Commissioner of Sewers, and a Deputy
Lieutenant within the East Riding of Yorkshire; his Lordship is presented to be
a Popish Recusant, and his Indictment removed into the King's Bench, and his
Wife, Mother, and the greatest part of his Family are Popish Recusants, and
some of them convicted.

William Lord Eury in Commission for the Sewers in the East Riding, a convict
Popish Recusant, Henry Lord Abergaveney, John Lord Tenham, Edward Lord Wotton
in Commission for Sewers, justly suspected for Popery; Henry Lord Morley
Commissioner of Sewers in Com. Lanc. himself suspected, and his wife a
Recusant, John Lord Mordant Commissioner of the Peace, Sewers, and Subsidy in
Com. Northampton.

John Lord St John of Basing, Captain of Lidley Castle in Com. Southampton,
indicted for a Popish Recusant.

Em. Lord Scroop, Lord President of his Majesty's Council in the North, Lord
Lieutenant of the County and City of York, and Com. Eborac. and Ville Kingston
super Hull, presented the last time, and continuing still to give suspicion of
his ill-affection in Religion.

1. By never coming to the Cathedral Church upon those days wherein former
Presidents have been accustomed.

2. By never receiving the Sacrament upon Common days, as other Presidents
were accustomed, but publicly departing out of the Church

3. By never or very seldom repairing to the Fasts, but often publicly riding
abroad with his Hawks on those days.

4. By causing such as are known to be firm on those days in the Religion
established, to be left out of Commission, which is instanced in Henry Alured
Esquire, by his Lordships procurement put out of the Commission of Sewers* or
else by keeping them from executing their places, Hudson, Doctor in Divinity,
to whom his Lorship has refused to give the Oath being appointed.

5. By putting diverse other ill-affected persons in Commission of the Council
of Oyer and Terminer, and of the Sewers, and into other Places of Trust,
contrary to his Majesty's gracious Answer to the late Parliament.

6. In October last 1625. being certified of diverse Spanish ships of War upon
the Coasts of Scarborough, his Lordship went thither, and took with him the
Lord Dunbar, Sir Thomas Metham and William Alford, and lay at the house of the
Lord Eury, whom he knew to be a convict Recusant, and did notwithstanding
refuse to disarm him, although he had received Letters from the Lords of the
Council to that effect; and did likewise refuse to show the Commissioners who
were to be employed for

7. By giving Order to the Lord Dunbar, Sir William Wetham, and Sir William
Alford, to view the Forts and Store of Munition in the Town of Kingston upon
Hull, who made one Kerton a convict Recusant, and suspected to be a Priest,
their Clerk in that service.

8. By denying to accept a Plea tendered according to the Law by William
Hilliard Defendant, against Isabel Simpson Plaintiff, in an Action of Trover,
that she was a convict Popish Recusant, and forcing him to pay costs.

9. By the great increase of Recusants since his Lordships coming to that
Government in January 1619. It appearing by the Records of the Sessions, that
there are in the East Riding only One thousand six hundred and seventy more
convicted then were before, which is conceived to be an effect of his favor and
countenance toward them.

William Langdale Esquire convict of Popish Recusancy; Jordan Metham, Henry
Holm, Michael Partington, Esquires, George Creswell, Thomas Danby,
Commissioners of the Sewers, and put in Commission by procurement of the Lord
Scroop, Lord President of the North, and who have all Popish Recusants to their
wives; Ralph Bridgeman a Non-Communicant.

Nicholas Girlington, whose wife comes seldom to Church; Sir Marmaduke Wycel
Knight and Baronet, presented the last Parliament, his

Sir Thomas Metham Knight, Deputy Lieutenant made by the Lord Scroop in
Commission of the Council of the North; and of Oyer and Terminer, and other
Commissions of Trust; all by procurement of the same Lord President since the
Kings Answer; never known to have received the Communion; his two only
Daughters brought up to be Popish, and one of them lately married to Thomas
Doleman Esquire, a Popish Recusant.

Anthony Vicount Montague, in Commission of the Sewers in Com. Sussex, his
Lorship a Recusant Papist.

Sir William Wray Knight, Deputy Lieutenant, Colonel to a Regiment, his wife a
Recusant; Sir Edw. Musgrave, Sir Tho. Lampleigh Justices of Peace and Quorum;
Sir Thomas Savage Deputy Lieutenant and Justice of Peace, his wife and children
Recusants; Sir Richard Egerton a Non-Communicant.

Thomas Savage Esquire, a Deputy Lieutenant, a Recusant, and his William
Whitmore Commissioner of the Subsidy, his wife and children Recusants; Sir Hugh
Beeston Commissioner of the Subsidy, his Daughter and many of his Servants
Recusants; Sir William Massy Commissioner for the Subsidy, his Lady indicted
for Recusancy, and his children Papists; Sir William Courtney Knight,
Vice-Warden of the Stannery, and Deputy Lieutenant, a Popish Recusant, Sir
Thomas Ridley Knight, Justice of the Peace, his wife a Popish Recusant, and
eldest son.

Sir Ralph Conyers Knight, Justice of Peace, his wife a Popish Recusant; James
Lawson Esquire, a Justice of Peace, and one of the Captains of the
Trained-band, his children Popish Recusants, and servants Non-Communicants.

Sir John Shelley Knight and Baronet, a Recusant; William Scot Esquire a Recusant;
John Finch Esquire, not convict, but comes not to Church, Sewers.

These are all convicted Recusants, or suspected of Popery.

Sir William Mollineux Deputy Lieutenant and Justice of Peace, his wife a
Recusant; Sir Richard Honghton Knight Deputy Lieutenant, his wife and some of
his daughters Recusants; Sir William Norris Captain of the general Forces, and
Justice of Peace, a Recusant; Sir Gilbert Ireland Justice of Peace, a Recusant;
James Anderton Esquire, Justice of

Edward Rigby Esquire, Clerk of the Crown, Justice of Peace, himself a good
Communicant, but his wife and daughters Popish Recusants.

Edward Criswell Esquire, Justice of Peace, his wife a Popish Recusant.

John Parker Gentleman, Muster-Master for the County, suspected for a Popish
Recusant.

George Ireland Esquire, Justice of Peace, his wife a Popish Recusant.

John Preston Esquire, Bow-bearer for his Majesty in Westmorland Forest, a
Recusant.

Thomas Covill Esquire, Jailer, Justice of Peace and Quorum, his Daughter a
Recusant married.

Sir Cuthbert Halsal Justice of Peace, his wife a Recusant. Richard Sherborn
Esquire, Justice of Peace, himself Non-resident, his wife and son Recusants.

Sir George Hennage Knight, Sir Francis Metcalf Knight, Robert Thorall Esquire,
Anthony Mounson Esquire, William Dallison Esquire, in Commissioner of the
Sewers, and are justly suspected for Popish Recusants.

Sir Henry Spiller Knight in Commission of Peace for Middlesex and Westminster,
and Deputy Lieutenant; Valentine Saunders Esquire, one of the six Clerks, both
which are justly suspected to be ill-affected in Religion according to the Acts
of State.

Charles Jones Knight, Deputy Lieutenant, and Justice of Peace; George Milburne
Esquire, Justice of Peace, Edward Morgan Esquire, their wives are all Popish
Recusants.

William Jones Deputy Lieutenant, Justice of Peace, his wife suspected to be a
Popish Recusant.

John Vaughan Captain of the Horse, suspected for Recusancy.

Benedict Hall Receiver and Steward of the Duchy of Lancaster, he and his wife
are Popish Recusants.

Sir Thomas Brudenel Knight and Baronet, Deputy Lieutenant, a Popish Recusant.

Cuthbert Herone Esquire, now Sheriff of Northumberland, Justice of the Peace,
his wife a Recusant.

Sir William Selby Junior, Knight, Justice of Peace, his wife a Recusant.

Sir John Canning Knight, Justice of the Peace, his wife a suspected Recusant.

Sir Ephraim Widdrington Knight, Justice of Peace suspected to be a Recusant.

Sir Thomas Riddall Knight, Justice of Peace, his wife and eldest son are
Recusants.

John Widdrington Esquire, who came out of the same County before London
attending the Council Table by Commandment, and yet not dismissed.

Sir Robert Pierpoint Esquire, Justice of Peace, his wife a Recusant.

Sir Anthony Brown Knight, Justice of Peace, thought to be a Recusant, but not
convict.

Sir Henry Beddingfield Knight, Deputy Lieutenant, and Justice in Oyer and
Terminer, and in Commission of Sewers, Justice of Peace, and Captain of a foot
Company, his wife nor any of his children, as is

Thomas Sayer Captain of the Horse, his wife comes not to Church.

Sir William Yelverton Baronet, and Justice of Peace, not suspected himself,
but his eldest son and one of his daughters are known Recusants.

Sir Henry Minne Knight, Justice of Peace and Quorum, neither he his wife or
daughters can be known to have received the Communion, and have been presented
at the Sessions for Nonconformity.

Robert Warren Clerk, a Justice of Peace, justly suspected, and that

1. He being in trust for one Ratcliff of Bury, deceased, for the educating of
his son; he took him from the School at Twelve years old, and sent him beyond
the Seas, to be brought up there in a Popish Seminary, where he has remained
six or seven years, as was generally reported.

2. One of his Parishioners doubted in some points of Religion, being sick, and
desired to be satisfied by him, who confirmed him in the Religion of the Church
of Rome, which he told to his brothers before his

3. There being Letters directed to four Knights of that County to call the
Ministers and other officers before them, and to cause them to present all such
as absented themselves from the Church, and were Popishly affected, he was
desired to present those within his Parish Church of Welford, which he
accordingly did, but left out at the least one half; and being asked, why he
did so, he answered, that he was no Informer:

4. He having a brother dwelling in Sudbury that was presented for not coming
to the Church, he came to one of the Ministers, and told him, that he took it
ill they presented his brother, who answered, he did it not, but if he had
known of it, he would; whereupon

5 One of his Parish, named Fage, having intelligence, that there was one in
the said Parish, that could inform of a Private place, where Arms were in a
Recusants House in the Parish, came to some of the Deputy Lieutenants in
Commission for a Warrant to bring the same in form before them, to be examined
concerning the same, and the said Fage delivered the Warrant to the Constable,
he carried him before the said Mr Warren, who rated the said Fage for that he
did not come to him first, telling him, that he was a factious fellow, and laid
him by the heels for two hours, which the said Fage is ready to affirm.

Sir Benjamin Titchburne Knight and Baronet, Justice of Oyer and Terminer,
Justice of Peace, and Deputy Lieutenant, and in Commission for the Subsidue,
his wife, children and servants indicted for popish Recusancy.

Sir Richard Tichburne Knight, Justice of Peace, his wife presented the last
Sessions for having absented her self from the Church for the space of two
months.

Sir Henry Compton Knight, Deputy Lieutenant, Justice of Peace, and
Commissioner for the Sewers; Sir John Shelly Knight and Baronet, himself and
his Lady Recusants.

Sir John Gage Knight and Baronet, a Papist Recusant.

Sir John Guilfor Knight, Their Ladies come not to Church.

Sir Edward Francis Knight, Their Ladies come not to Church.

Sir Genet Kempe Knight, some of his children come not to Church.

Edward Gage Esquire a Recusant Papist Commissioners of the Sewers.

Tho Middlemore comes not to Church Commissioners of the Sewers.

James Rolls, William Scot, Commissioners of Sewers, both Recusants Papists;
Robert Spiller comes not to Church.

Sir Henry Guilford in Commission for Piracies, and for the Sewers, and John
Thatcher Esquire, Commissioner for the Sewers, they are either

Sir Richard Sandford Knight, Richard Brewthwait Esquire, Gawen Brewthwait
Esquire, their wives are Recusants.

Sir William Ambrey Knight, Justice of Peace, a Recusant,

Rees Williams a Justice of Peace, his wife a convict Recusant, and his
children Popishly bred, as is informed.

Sir John Coney Knight a Justice of Peace, and Deputy Lieutenant, his wife a
Popish Recusant.

Morgan Voyle Esquire, Justice of Peace, his wife presented for not coming to
Church, but whether she is a Popish Recusant is not known.

John Warren Captain of the Trained-band, one of his sons suspected to be
Popishly affected.

Wherefore they humbly beseech your Majesty not to suffer your loving Subjects
to continue any longer discouraged by the apparent sense of that increase both
in number and power, which by the favor England, contrary to the Acts and Law
of State in that behalf.

A Committee was appointed to prepare an Answer to his Majesty's Letter, which
was engrossed and allowed of, but the Copy thereof we cannot find; yet the
Substance was delivered by the Speaker Sir Henage Finch, in these words.

Most gracious and dread Sovereign,
ACcording to that liberty of access, The Commons Answer to his Majesty's
Letter by the Speaker
and liberty of speech which your Majesty and your Royal Progenitors have ever
vouchsafed to your House of Commons, your Majesty's most humble and Loyal
Subjects, the Commons now assembled in Parliament

And out of their consideration of the nature, and of the weight and importance
of the business, they have thought the attendance of the whole house with their
Speaker, not too solemn; and yet they have not thought fit barely to commit
those words, which express their thoughts, to the trust of any man's Speech, but
are bold to present them in writing to your gracious hands, that they may not
vanish, but be more lasting then the most powerful words of a more able
Speaker

I have much to read, and shall therefore, as little as I can, weary your
Majesty with Speeches.

This Parchment contains two things, the one by way of Declaration, to give
your Majesty an account and humble satisfaction of their clear and sincere
endeavors and intentions in your Majesty's service; and the other an humble
Petition to your Majesty for the removal of that great person the Duke of
Buckingham from access to your Royal

For the first, They beseech your most excellent Majesty to believe, that no
earthly thing is so dear and precious to them, as that your Majesty should
retain them in your grace and good opinion; and it is a grief to them beyond my
expression, that any misinformation, or misinterpretation should at any time
render their words or proceedings offensive to your Majesty.

It is not proper for any to hear the Echo of a voice, that hears not the
voice; and if Eccho's be sometimes heard to double and redouble,

I need not make the Application, words misreported, though by an Echo, or but
an Echo of an Echo, at a third or fourth hand, have often a louder sound then
the voice it self, and may sound disloyalty, though the voice had nothing
undutifull, or illoyal in it.

Such misinformations they fear have begot those interruptions and diversions
which have delayed the ripening and expediting of those

I pass from that to the Petition in which my purpose is not to urge those
Reasons which your Majesty may hear expressed in their own words in the
language of the people.

I am only directed to offer to your great wisdom and deep judgment, that
this petition of theirs is such as may stand with your Majesty's honor and
justice to grant.

Sheba once said to the wisest King, may without flattery be said to your
Majesty, Happy are those Servants which stand continually before you.


But the Relations by which your Majesty stands in a gracious aspect toward
your people, do far transcend, and are more prevalent and binding, then any
relation of a Master toward a Servant; and to hear and satisfy the just and
necessary desires of your people, is more honorable, then any expression of
grace to a servant.

To be a Master of a Servant is communicable to many of your Subjects; to be a
King of people, is Regal, and incommunicable to Subjects.

Your Majesty is truly styled with that name which the greatest Emperors,
though they borrowed names and titles from those Countries which they gained by
conquest, most delighted in, Pater Patriae; and desires of children are
preferred before those of servants, and the servant abides not in the house
for ever, but the son abides ever.

The Government of a King was truly termed by your Royal Father, a Politic
Marriage between him and his People; and I may safely say, there was never a
better union between a married Pair, then is

Afterward the Commons made what haste they could to perfect a Remonstrance or
Declaration against the Duke, and concerning Tonage and Poundage taken by the
King since the death of his Father, without consent in Parliament, which was no
sooner finished, but they had intimation the King would that day dissolve the
Parliament; whereupon they ordered every Member of the House to have a Copy of
the Remonstrance.

And at the same time the Lords prepared this ensuing Petition to stay his
purpose in dissolving the Parliament.

May it please your Excellent Majesty,
WE your faithful and loyal Subjects the Peers of this Kingdom, having
received this morning a Message from

The Lords sent the Vicount Mandevile Earl of Manchester Lord President of his
Majesty's Council, the Earl of Pembrook, the Earl of Carlisle, and the Earl of
Holland to entreat his Majesty to give audience to in haec verba.

CAROLUS Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Rex, Fidei
Defensor, etc. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri and fideli Consiliario nostro
Georgio Archiepisc. Cantuar. totius Angliae Primati and Metropolitano: Ac
perdilecto and fideli Consiliar. nostro Thom^e Coventry militi, Dom. Custod.
Magni Sigilli nostri Angliae: Ac etiam Reverendiss. in Christo Patri Tobiae
Archiep. Ebor. Angliae Primati and Metropolitano: Nec non charissimis

Cum nuper pro quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotiis, Nos statum and
defensionem Regni nostri Angliae and Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernentibus,
praesens hoc Parliamentum nostrum apud Civitatem nostram Westmonasterii sexto
die Februar. Anno Regni nostri primo inchoari and teneri ordinaverimus, a

EDMONDS.

This Commission being read, and the Commons present, the Parliament was
dissolved on the Fifteenth day of June 1626.

The intended Remonstrance was as follows.

Most Gracious Sovereign,
WE your loyal and faithful Subjects the Commons assembled

In the first Parliament of the first Year of your Majesty's most happy Reign
over us, the Commons then assembled, after they had cheerfully presented to
your Majesty as the first fruits of their affections Two entire Subsidies, were
exceedingly pressed by the means of Buckingham, and for his own ends, as we
conceive, to enlarge that Supply: which when he conceived would not be there
effected, he procured for the same ends from your Majesty an Adjournment of the
Parliament to the City of Oxford; where the Commons then taking into just
consideration the greatest mischiefs which this Kingdom variously has
suffered, and that chiefly by reason of the exorbitant power and frequent
misdoings of the said Duke, were entering year that followed, to the end that
they might have all been precluded from being chosen Members of the present
Parliament, lest they should again have therein questioned him; and by the like
practice also (as we are persuaded) he procured soon after the said dissolution
another Mr Glanvile.
Member of the said House, because he had justly professed himself against his
Ends, to be sent as Secretary of your Majesty's last Fleet, hereby indeed to
punish him by such drawing him from his

It pleased your Majesty afterward in February last, to call this present
Parliament, wherein (though none of those whom the said Duke had so procured to
be made high Shiriffs have sit as Members; yet) we finding in our selves the
like affection, first to the Service of your Majesty, and next to the good of
the Commonwealth, we took into serious Consideration several Propositions, how
for the ^afety and happiness supposed to have been spoken by Sir Dudley Digs
and Sir John Elliot Knights, two of the Members of our House, in their service
of the transmitting of the said Charge, both of them having been especially
employed in the Chairs of Committees with us, about the examination of the said
matters and offenses, they were both by your Majesty's command committed to
close imprisonment in the Tower of London, and their Lodgings presently
searched, and their papers there found presently taken away; by reason whereof,
not only our Conway gave the said Messengers, (as they affirmed) an express
command, contrary to the said Warrants, that they should not go to their
Lodgings, but to the House of Commons, and there take them; and if they found
Cambridge; whereas the same University having two Burgesses in Parliament, did
by the same Burgesses a few weeks before, consent with us in the Charge against
him for his ambition for procuring such a plurality of Offices; such was his
ambition to sue for it, such was his power to make them give it him contrary to
what themselves had agreed in Parliament with all the Commons of England. And
he procured also the same Office by the special labors and endeavors (as we are
informed) of a Factious party, who adhereth to that dangerous Innovation of
Religion, published in the seditious Writings of one Richard Montague Clerk; of
whom it is thence also,

These Actions of the said Duke have thus among us hindered the service of your
Majesty, by reason both of the interruptions that have so necessarily
accompanied them, and of the prevention of our cheerfulness, which otherwise
had long since been most effectually showed in us, that have nothing else in
our cares next to our duty to God, but the loyal service of your Majesty, the
safety of your Kingdom, and the England, but also in Ireland, as they have been
made friends or adverse to the said Duke, have been either so commended, or
mispresented by him to his Sovereign, and by his procurement so placed, or
displaced, that he has always herein, as much as in him lay, made his own ends
and advantage the measure of the good or ill of your Majesty's Kingdoms.

But now at length, may it please your most excellent Majesty, we have received
from the Lords a Copy of the said Dukes Answer to

In the times also (most gracious Sovereign) of these Interruptions which came
amongst us, by reason of the procurement of two of our Members committed, A
gracious Message was formerly received from your Majesty, wherein you had been
pleased to let us know, That if you had not a timely Supply, your Majesty would
betake your self to New Counsels: which we cannot doubt were intended by your
most excellent Majesty to be such as stood with Justice and the Laws of this
Realm. But these words New Counsels were remembered in a Speech made amongst us
by one of your Majesty's Privy Council, and lately a Member of us, who in the
same Speech New Counsels; That in his consideration of them, he remembered that
there were such kinds of Parliaments anciently among other Nations, as are now
in England; That in England he saw the Country People live in happiness and
plenty, but in these other Nations he saw them poor both in persons and habit;
or to that effect: Which state and condition happened (as he said) to them,
where such New Counsels were taken, as that the use of their Parliaments ended.

This intimation, may it please your Majesty, was such as also gave us just
cause to fear there were some ill Ministers near your Majesty, that in behalf
of the said Duke, and together with him, who is so strangely powerful, were so
much against the Parliamentary Course of this Kingdom, as they might perhaps
advise your most excellent Majesty such New Counsels as these, that fell under
the memory and consideration of that Privy-Counsellor. And one especial reason
among others has increased that fear amongst us, For that Tonnage and
Poundage, which determined upon the death of your most Royal Father our late
Sovereign, and were never payable to any of your Majesty's Ancestors but only
by a special Act of Parliament, and ought not to be levied without such an Act,
yet ever since the beginning of your Majesty's happy Reign over us, the said
Subsidies have been levied by some of your Majesty's ministers, as if they were
still due; although also one Parliament has been since then begun, and
dissolved by procurement of the said

These, and some of these things, amongst many other, (Most gracious Sovereign)
are those which have so much prevented a right understanding between your
Majesty and us, and which have possessed the hearts of your people and loyal
Commons with unspeakable sorrow and grief, finding apparently all humble and
hearty endeavors misinterpreted, hindered, and now at last almost frustrated
utterly, by the interposition of the excessive and abusive power of one

Give us then leave, most dear Sovereign, in the name of all the Commons of
this your Kingdom, prostrate at the feet of your Sacred Majesty, most humbly to
beseech you, even for the Honor of Almighty

But no sooner shall we receive redress and relief in this, (which of all
others is our most insupportable grievance) but we shall through Gods blessing,
as you are the best, so shall you ever be the best beloved, and greatest
Monarch that ever sat in the Royal Throne of this famous Kingdom.

The Grounds and Causes which the King held forth for dissolving of this, and
the former Parliament, appear in the ensuing Declaration.

The Kings Declaration of the Causes of assembling and dissolving the two last
Parliaments.
THe Kings most Excellent Majesty, since his happy access to the Imperial Crown
of this Realm, having by his Royal Authority summoned and assembled two several
Parliaments; the first whereof was in August last by Adjournment held at
Oxford, and there dissolved; and the other begun in February last, and
continued June, and then to the unspeakable grief of himself, and (as he
believes) of all his good and well-affected Subjects, dissolved also: Although
he well knows that the Calling, Adjourning, Proroguing, and Dissolving of
Parliaments, being his great Council of the Kingdom, do peculiarly belong unto
himself by an undoubted Prerogative inseparably united to his Imperial Crown;
of which, as of his other Regal actions, he is not bound to give an Account to
any but to God only, whose immediate

When his Majesty by the death of his dear and Royal Father of ever blessed
memory first came to the Crown, he found himself engaged Treasure, he found how
ill provided he was to proceed effectually with so great an Action, unless he
might be assured to receive such Supplies from his loving Subjects, as might
enable him to manage the same.

Hereupon his Majesty being willing to tread in the steps of his Royal
Progenitors, for the making of good and wholesome Laws for the better Government
of his people, for the right understanding of their true Grievances, and for
the Supply of moneys to be employed Spain, and to effect it had used the
mediation of his now Majesty being then Prince, and a Member of the Parliament,
and had promised in Parliament their uttermost assistance for the enabling of
his late Majesty to undergo the War which they then foresaw might follow) would
assuredly have performed it to his now Majesty, and would not have suffered

This Parliament (after some Adjourment (by reason of his Majesty's unavoidable
occasions interposing) being assembled on the Eighteenth day of June, It is
true, that his Commons in Parliament taking into their due and serious
Consideration the manifold Occasions which at his first entry did press his
Majesty, and his most important Affairs which both at home and abroad were then
in action, did with London and Westminster, where the Lords and the principal
Gentlemen of quality of his whole Kingdom were for the time of this their
service lodged and abiding, did so much increase, that his Majesty, without
extreme peril to the lives of his good Subjects, which were dear unto him,
could not continue the Parliament any longer in that place.

His Majesty therefore on the eleventh day of July then following, adjourned
the Parliament from Westminster, until the first day of August then following,
at the City of Oxford. And his Highness was so careful to accommodate his Lords
and Commons there, that as he made choice of that place being then the freest
of all others from the danger of that grievous Sickness, so he there fitted the
Parliament Men with all things convenient for their entertainment: And his

That Parliament being now ended, his Majesty did not therewith cast off his
Royal care of his great and important affairs; but by the advice of his
Privy Council, and of his Council of War, he continued his preparations, and
former resolutions; And therein not only expended those moneys which by the two
Subsidies aforesaid were given unto him for his own private use, whereof he had
too much occasion

These things being thus acted, and God of his infinite goodness beyond
expectation asswaging the rage of the Pestilence, and in a manner of a sudden
restoring health and safety to the Cities of London and Westminster, which are
the fittest places for the resort of his Majesty, his Lords and Commons to meet
in Parliament; His Majesty in the depth of winter, no sooner descried the
probability of a safe assembling of his people, and in his princely wisdom and
providence foresaw, that February last, a new Parliament was begun. At the
first meeting his Majesty did forbear to press them with any thing which might
have the least appearance of his own interest, but recommended unto them the
care of making of good Laws, which are the ordinary Subject for a Parliament.

His Majesty believing that they could not have suffered many days, much less
many weeks to have passed by, before the apprehension and

The Commons House after this, upon the 27 of March last, with one unanimous
consent at first agreed to give unto his Majesty three entire Subsidies, and
three Fifteens for a present supply unto him, and upon the 26 of April after,
upon second Cogitations they added a June. Upon this, the King of Denmark and
other Princes and States being engaged with his Majesty in this common Cause,
his Majesty fitted his occasions according to the times which were appointed
for the payment of those Subsidies and Fifteens, and hasted on the Lords
Committees, and his Council at War, to perfect their Resolutions for from his
own Ministers and Sujects in Foreign parts, but from all parts of Christendom,
of the great and powerful preparations of the King of Spain, and that his
design was upon this Kingdom, or the Kingdom of Ireland, or both, (and it is
hard to determine which of them would be of worst consequence) He acquainted
the House of Commons therewith, and laid open unto them truly and clearly, how
the state of things then stood, and yet stand, and at several times, and upon
several occasions reiterated the same: But that House being June 1626.

Notwithstanding which Letter read in the House, being a clear and gracious
Manifest of his Majesty's Resolutions, they never so much as admitted one
Reading to the Bill of Subsidies, but instead thereof they prepared and voted a
Remonstrance or Declaration, which they intended to prefer to his Majesty,
containing (though palliated with glossing terms) as well many dishonorable
aspersions upon his Majesty, and upon the sacred memory of his deceased Father,
as also dilatory excuses for their not proceeding with the Subsidies,

These passages his Majesty has at the more length and with the true
Circumstances thereof expressed and published to the world, effect then at the
first can be well apprehended; and his Majesty being best privy to the
integrity of his own heart, for the constant maintaining of the sincerity and
unity of the true Religion professed in the Church of England, and to free it
from the open contagion of Popery, and secret infection of Schism, of both
which by his public Acts and Actions he has given good testimony, and with a
single heart, as in the presence of God, who can best judge thereof, purposes
resolutely; Joab has been in this disaster, that the common Incendiaries of
Christendom have subtly and secretly insinuated those things which unhappily
(and as his Majesty hops, beyond the intentions of the Actors) have caused
these diversions and distractions: And yet notwithstanding, his most excellent
Majesty, for the comfort of his good and well-affected Subjects, in whose loves
he does repose himself Spain, who has long thirsted after an Universal
Monarchy, nor their Consciences to the yoke of the Pope of Rome: And that at
home he will take that care

And in the mean time his Majesty does publish this to all his loving Subjects,
that they may know what to think with truth, and speak with duty, of his
Majesty's actions and proceedings in these two last dissolved Parliaments.

Given at his Majesty's Palace at Whitehall this Thirtieth day of June, in the
second year of his Majesty's Reign of Great Britain, France and Ireland.
Moreover the King published a Proclamation, taking notice of a Remonstrance
drawn by a Committee of the late Commons House, The King takes notice of the
intended Remonstrance in a Proclamation.
and by them intended to have been presented to him, wherein he said are many
that intended Declaration, thereby to detract from their Sovereign. Wherefore
his Majesty for the suppressing of this insufferable wrong to himself, does
command upon pain of his indignation and high displeasure, all persons of
whatsoever quality, who have, or shall have hereafter any Copies or Notes of
the said Remonstrance, or shall come to the view thereof, forthwith to burn the
same, that the memory thereof may be utterly abolished, and may never give
occasion to his Majesty to renew the remembrance of that, which out of his
grace and goodness

Another Proclamation against preaching or disputing the Arminian
Controversies, pro or con.
In another Proclamation the King declaring his Religious care of the Peace of
this Church and Commonwealth of England, and other his Dominions, and taking
notice that in all ages great disturbances both to Church and State, have
ensued out of small beginnings, when the seeds of contention were not timely
prevented; and finding that of late some Questions and Opinions seem to have
been broached in matters of Doctrine and Tenants of our Religion, at first
only intended against England; and also to declare his full and constant
resolution, that neither in Doctrine nor Discipline of the Church, nor in the
Government of the State, he will admit of the least innovation, but by Gods
assistance will so guide the Scepter of these England and Ireland, of what
degree soever, especially these who are Churchmen, from henceforth to carry
themselves so wisely, England, (...) by Authority. And enjoyneth his reverend
Archbishops and Bishops in their several Diocesses speedily to reclaim and
repress all such spirits, as shall in the least degree attempt to violate this
bond of Peace; And all the Ministers of Justice were required to execute his
Majesty's pious, Commonwealth, may bless God for his Majesty's pious,
religious, wise, just and gracious Government.

The effects of this Proclamation how equally soever intended, became the
stopping of the Puritans Mouths, and an uncontrouled Liberty to the Tongues and
Pens of the Arminian party.

Shortly after an Information was preferred by the Kings special command
Star Chamber, The King commands an Information to be preferred against the Duke
in Star Chamber.
against the Duke of Buckingham, for high Offenses and Misdemeanors; wherein he
was charged (amongst other things) with the particulars mentioned in the last
Article exhibited against him, by the House of Commons, concerning the Plaster
applied to King James. To which, the Duke put in his Answer, and diverse
Witnesses were examined. But the cause came not to a judicial hearing in the
Court, as it is afterward expressed.

And now the King taking into consideration the present streights The King
forbids to solicit any Suit prohibited in the Book of Bounty.
into which the Revenue of the Crown was fallen; and the pressing necessity of
his Affairs, did by the advice and instance of his Council, resolve and
declare, That all men of what quality and condition soever, shall from
henceforth upon pain of his displeasure, forbear for two years space to present
or solicit any Suit for any thing prohibited in the Book of Bounty, published
in King James his time, or any other things that shall import the Diminution of
his Majesty's Revenue.



The Privy Council declared, The Council order all Customs to be paid.
That it has been constantly continued for many ages, and is a principal and
most necessary part of the Revenue of the Crown, and that in the two last
Parliaments it has been thought upon, but could not be settled by their
Authority by reason of their dissolution, before the matters therein treated
could be brought to perfection: Nevertheless,

Whereupon they Ordered, That all such Duties and Merchandises shall be levied
and paid: And they advised the King, That the Attorney General prepare for his
Majesty's Signature, an Instrument which may pass under the Great Seal of
England, to declare his pleasure therein, until by Parliament, as in former
times, it may receive an absolute settlement:

The Forfeitures arising to the Crown by the execution of the Laws against
Priests, And Forfeitures arising from Recusants.
Jesuits, and Popish Recusants, were dedicated to the vast and growing charge
of the Designs in hand. And Complaint being made against Inferior Officers,
whose service was herein employed, that they had misdemeaned themselves, to the
oppressing of Recusants, without advantage to the King. Commissioners of
honorable Quality were appointed for the regulating of these proceedings, yet
no Liberty

The King therefore Grants a Commission under the Great Seal, A Commission to
compound with Recusants.
directed to the most Reverend Father in God, Toby, Archbishop of York, Sir
John Savile Knight, Sir George Manners, Sir Henry Slingsby, Sir William Ellis
Knights, and to diverse other Knights and Gentlemen, and therein recites,

THat his Majesty has received credible Information of the great loss and
damages which the Kings Subjects living in Maritime Towns, especially in the
Northern parts, do suffer by depredations, attempts, and assaults at Sea from
Foreign Enemies, whereby Trade from those parts are interrupted, and the City
of London much endamaged Newcastle upon Tine: For redress of which evil, his
Majesty does think fit to appropriate and convert all such Debts, sums of
Money, Rents, Penalties, and Forfeitures of all Recusants inhabiting in the
Counties of York, Durham, Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmorland, Lancaster,
Nottingham, Derby, Stafford, and Chester, which at any time have grown due
since the Tenth year of King James, and are not yet satisfied, or which
hereafter shall grow North-East point of the Sea, unto the mouth of the River
of Thames, his Majesty further expressing in the said Commission, That his
Subjects who are owners of Coal^Pits, the Oast-men of Newcastle upon Tine,
Owners of Ships, and Merchants, Buyers and Sellers of Newcastle Coals, have
been James for their Recusancy, in not going to Church to hear Divine Service,
according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, under such Condition and
Immunities, as they or any four of them shall see meet and convenient,
according to such Instructions as his Majesty has or shall give for that
purpose; his Majesty rather desiring their Conversion then Destruction. And
such Leases his Majesty does declare, made to the said Recusants themselves, or
to any persons for

And by the said Commission Sir John Savile was appointed Receiver of all such
sums of Money as shall be paid upon these Leases; and Mr. Alexander Davison of
the Town of Newcastle upon Tine, Merchant Adventurer, was appointed to receive
out of the voluntary and free will Contribution of the Owners, Buyers, and
Sellers of Coals, the Six pence per Chaldron of Coals. In pursuance of this
Commission, the Recusants

A Proclamation to make the Kings Revenue certain.
A Proclamation was published, declaring the Kings Resolution to make his
Revenue certain, by granting his Lands, as well holden by Copy, as otherwise,
to be holden in Fee-farm.

To the Nobles, the King sent particularly to let them know, That according to
the Presidents of former times, wherein the Kings and Queens of England, The
King sends to the Nobles to lend him liberally.
upon such extraordinary occasions, have had recourse to those Contributions
which arose from the Subjects in general, or to the private helps of some that
were well affected; he does now expect from them such a large and cheerful
testimony of their Loyalty, as may be acceptable to himself, and exemplary to
his people.

London the Loan of an Hundred thousand pounds. He demands of the City, the
Loan of One hundred thousand pounds.
But the peoples excuses were represented to the Council Table by the
Magistrates of the City: Immediately the Council sent a very strict command to
the Lord Major and Aldermen, wherein they set forth the Enemies strong
preparations as ready for an Invasion, and the Kings great necessities,
together with his gracious and moderate Proposals in the sum required, and the
frivolous pretenses upon which they excuse themselves: Wherefore they require
them, all excuses being

Moreover, The Port Towns are to furnish Ships.
a peculiar charge was laid upon the several Ports and Maritime Counties to
furnish and set out Ships for the present service. The Spain or Flanders, by
arming as well the Ships of his Subjects, as of his own Navy, made a
distribution to every Port, that with the Assistance and Contribution of the
Counties adjoining, they prepare so many Ships as were appointed to them
severally; and in particular the City of London was appointed to set forth
Twenty of the best Ships that lay in the River, with all manner of Tackle,
Sea-stores, and Ammunition, Manned and Victualled for Three

The Deputy Lieutenants, The Ports of Dorsetshire send an excuse.
and Justices of the Peace of Dorset, having received the Kings Commandment for
the setting forth of Ships from the Ports of Pool, Weymonth, and Lime, with the
assistance of Contribution from the Counties adjoining, presented to the
Council Table an excuse in the behalf both of the Ports and County, and
pleaded, That the Case was without President.

The Council gave them a check, for that instead of Conformity they

In like manner the Lord Major and Commonalty of London petitioned the Council
for an Abatement of the Twenty Ships rated upon them, The City of London desire
an Abatement of their Ships.
unto Ten Ships and two Pinnaces, alleging disability; whereunto the Council
gave this following Answer, Are checked by the Council.
That the former Commandment was necessary, the preservation of the State
requiring it; and

And whereas they mention Presidents, they might know, that the Presidents of
former times, were Obedience, not Direction; and that Presidents were not
wanting for the punishment of those that disobey his Majesty's Commands,
signified by that Board, which they hope shall have no occasion to let them
more particularly understand.

Hereupon the Citizens were glad to submit, and declared their consent to the
Kings Demands, and by Petition to the Council had the favor to nominate all the
Officers of those Twenty Ships, the Captains England.

Privy Seals issued out.
Then there were likewise issued forth Privy Seals to several persons, to others
the way of Benevolence was proposed.

And because the late Parliament resolved to have given the King Four Subsidies
and Three Fifteens, the sums which the King required, were according to that
proportion. And to prevent misunderstandings, it was declared unto the
Country, That the Supplies now demanded were

The Justices of Peace in the several Counties were directed by the Privy
Council to send for persons able to give, and to deal with them singly, by
using the most prevailing persuasions.

A Fast observed.
Amidst these Preparations, the Kingdom being exposed to dangers, both Foreign
and Domestic; a general Fast was observed on the Fifth of July, in the Cities
of London and Westminster, and places adjacent; and on the Second of August
throughout the Kingdom, to implore a blessing upon the endeavors of the State,
and the diverting of those judgments which the sins of the Land deserve and
threaten.

Commissions to Deputy Lieutenants to Muster, Try, and Array men.
And for the defense of this Realm, threatened with a powerful Invasion,
extraordinary Commissions were given to the Lords Lieutenants of the several
Counties, to Muster the Subjects of whatsoever degree or dignity, that were apt
for War, and to try and array them, and cause

And in case of Invasions, Insurrections, Rebellions, and Riots, without the
limits of their respective Counties, to repair to the places

Inhabitants withdrawn from Ports and Sea Towns, required to return.
In like manner, lest the deserting of the Coasts, Ports, and Sea Towns, should
expose those places to become a prey, and invite the Enemy to an Invasion, the
Inhabitants and those that had withdrawn themselves to Inland places, were
required to return with their Families, and Retinues, and there to abide during
those times of Hostility and

Ships sent to the River of Elbe.
And for securing of the Coasts from Spain or Flanders, some of the Kings Ships
were employed in the River Elbe, to prevent the furnishing of Spain from those
parts with materials for shipping, which occasioned a great discontent in those
of Hamburgh; for that their Neighbors of Lubeck, and other Towns of the East
Sea, were free from this restraint, insomuch that they resolved to force their
passage by a Fleet of Fifty or threescore sail of Ships.

Whereupon the Lord Admiral informed the Council, that his Majesty's charge at
Hamburgh was expended to little purpose, except also the Sound could be shut up
against all shipping that should carry prohibited Commodities, especially since
the Hamburgers send their Commodities Lubeck, to be transported from thence
into Spain; and that the States, and the King of Denmarks Ships are departed
from the Elbe, and have left the English alone.

Moreover the King prepared a Royal Fleet, A Fleet prepared.
which was now at Portsmouth, ready to put to Sea under the command of the Lord
Willoughby, and given out to be designed for Barbary.

The King of Denmark having put forth a Declaration of the Causes and Grounds
wherefore he took up Arms against the Emperor, The King of Denmarks Declaration
why he takes up Arms against the Emperor.
declared FOrasmuch as the Elector Palatine by the procurement of the King of
Great Britain, and him the King of Denmark had offered his Submission to his
Imperial Majesty, and to crave Pardon; and thereupon was in hopes to have his
Patrimony with the Dignities of his Ancestors restored: Yet notwithstanding the
Emperor did still commit great spotles and acts of hostility in his Country,
giving no regard to the said Submission, and had much damnified the Lower
Saxony by Tilly.

Whereupon (he says) the Princes of the Lower Saxony have desired the aid and
assistance of him the King of Denmark, to settle the Peace and Liberty of
Germany, who was resolved to take up Arms, and with whom he was resolved for to
join, having the like assurance from the King of Great Britain, who had deeply
engaged to assist in this War, for the restitution of the Elector Palatine.

Therefore the King of Denmark declares, That seeing all Prayers,



In the beginning of the year, A Battle between the Dane and the Emperor.
diverse Towns were taken by the King of Denmark, and some retaken by Tilly, but
the Seven and twentieth of August decided the Controversy; on which day, the
King of Denmark Tilly, (desiring to decline battle with the Emperors old
Soldiers, many of his own men being new levied Soldiers) endeavored to make his
retreat; but Tilly followed so close his Rear-guard, that he kept them in
continual action, till the King of Denmark saw no remedy, but that he must
either fight, or lose the Rear of his Army and Train of Artillery. Whereupon
his Commanders advised him to resolve of a place of advantage, and face about,
and give battle; which accordingly they did, and both Armies drew up near
Luttern; the Denmark Tilly being much scanted in the Rear of his Army, for want
of ground to place his Reserves in. The Dane stood to the shock a while, but
was presently put to his Retreat, and all his Infantry dispersed, Train of
Artillery taken, and Two and twenty pieces of Cannon. He lost many great
Commanders in the fight, and many were taken prisoners.

In the Month of September, the King being informed of the disaster that had
befaln his Uncle (and principally also) the King of Denmark, The overthrow of
the King of Denmark, an Inducement to the raising of Moneys by Loan.
whose engagement was chiefly for the cause of the Elector Palatine, commanded
his Council to advise by what means and ways he might fitly and speedily be
furnished with moneys suitable to the importance of the undertaking.

Hereupon, after a Consultation of diverse days together, they came to this
Resolution, That the urgency of Affairs not admitting the way

A Declaration concerning Loan-Money.
Upon which Result, the King forthwith chose Commissioners for the Loan, and
caused a Declaration to be published, wherein he alleged for this course of
Supply, the Reasons set down at large in his late Declaration touching the
Dissolution of the Parliament. Adding further, That the urgency of the occasion
would not give leave to the calling of

Private Instructions to the Commissioners for the general Loan.
Private Instructions were given to the Commissioners, how to behave themselves
in this Negotiation.

As first, That they should themselves, for a good example to others,

Secondly, To take for their guide those Rates at which men were assessed in
the Book of the last Subsidy, and to require the Loan of so much money, as the
entire rate and value comes to, at which they are rated, and set; as (namely)
he that is set at a Hundred pounds in Goods, per rata for a greater or lesser
sum.

Thirdly, To use all possible endeavors to cause every man willingly and
cheerfully to lend, opening unto them the necessity and unavoidableness of this
course, the Honor and Reputation of the Nation, the true Religion, and common
safety of Prince and People, of our Friends and Allies engaged in the common
Cause; that there is no time now of disputing,

Fourthly, That they appoint the days of payment to be within Fourteen days,
and persuade such as shall be able, to pay it at one entire payment, the better
to accommodate his Majesty's occasion, otherwise to accept of the one half at
Fourteen days, and the other to be paid before the Twentieth of December, now
next coming.

Fifthly, That they Treat apart with every one of those that are to lend, and
not in the presence or hearing of any other, unless they see cause to the
contrary. And if any shall refuse to lend, and shall make delays, or excuses,
and persist in their obstinacy, That they examine such persons upon Oath,
whether they have been dealt withal to deny, or refuse to lend, or to make an
excuse for not lending? Who has dealt so

Sixthly, That they show their discretion and affections by making choice of
such to begin with, who are likely to give the best examples; and when they
have a competent number of hands to the Roll or List of the Leaders, that they
show the same to others to lead them in like

Seventhly, That they endeavor to discover, whether any publicly, or
underhand, be workers or perswaders of others to dissent from, or dislike of
this course, or hinder the good disposition of others. And that, as much as
they may, they hinder all discourse about it, and certify to the Privy Council
in writing the names, qualities, and dwelling places of all such refractory
persons with all speed, and especially if they shall discover any Combination
or Confederacy against these proceedings.

Eighthly, That they let all men know whom it may concern, that his Majesty is
well pleased upon lending these sums required, to remit all that which by
Letters in his name was desired upon the late Benevolence for free Grant; and
what ever has been already paid upon that account, shall be accepted for part
of this Loan; and if it exceed the sum desired, that the overplus shall be
repaid without Fee or Charge; so likewise for Privy Seals, if any have been
already paid: But if not, that

Ninethly, That they admit of no Suit to be made, or Reasons to be given for
the abating of any sum, the time and instant occasion not admitting any such
dispute, which would but disturb and protract the Sheriff.

Lastly, The Commissioners were required and commanded upon their Faith and
Allegiance to his Majesty, to keep secret to themselves,

To the Imposition of Loan, Billeting of Soldiers.
was added, The burden of Billeting of Soldiers formerly returned from Cadiz,
and the Moneys to discharge their Quarters were for the present levied upon the
Country, to be repaid out of sums collected upon the general Loan.

The Companies were scattered here and there in the Bowels of the Kingdom,
Commissions for Martial Law.
and governed by Martial Law: The King gave Commissions to the Lords
Lieutenants and their Deputies, in case of Felonies, Robberies,

Nevertheless, the Soldiers brake out into great disorders; they mastered the
people, disturbed the peace of Families, and the Civil Government of the Land;
there were frequent Robberies, Burglaries, Rapes, Rapines, Murders, and
Barbarous Cruelties: Unto some places they were sent for a punishment; and
where ever they came, there was a general outcry. The Highways were dangerous,
and the Markets unfrequented; they were a terror to all, and an undoing to many.

The Lords to advance the Loan.
Diverse Lords of the Council were appointed to repair into their Sir Randolph
Crew removed from his place for not furthering the Loan.
But Sir Randolph Crew showing no zeal for the advancing thereof, was then
removed from his place of Lord Chief Justice, and Sir Nicholas Hide succeeded
in his room: A person, who for his parts and abilities, was thought worthy of
that preferment,

This business of the Loan occasioned a Complaint to the Lords of the Council,
against the Bishop of Lincoln, for publicly speaking

Whereupon Sir John Lamb, and Dr. Sibthorpe, informed the Council to this
purpose, That many were grieved to see the Bishop of Lincoln give place to
unconformable Ministers, when he turned his back to those that were
conformable; and how the Puritans ruled all with him, and that diverse Puritans
in Leicestershire being Convented, his Lordship would not admit proceedings to
be had against them.

Informations sent to the Council Table against the Bishop of Lincoln.
That Dr. Sibthorpe being desired to stay at Leicester this year, as Commissary
for the High Commission there, the Country being much overspread with
Puritanism, Sir John Lamb and the said Doctor, did inform the Bishop of
Lincoln, then at Bugden, what Factious Puritans there were in the County, who
would not come up to the Table to receive the Communion kneeling; and that
there were unlawful Fasts and Meetings kept in the County; and one Fast that
held from nine in the Forenoon, till eight at night; and that Collections for
moneys were Palatinate: And therefore they desired leave from the Bishop to
proceed against those Puritans Ex Officio. The Bishop refuses to proceed Ex
Officio against the Puritans.
The said Bishop replied, He would not meddle against the Puritans, for his
part he expected not another Bishopric; they might complain of them, if they
would, to the Council Table; for he was under a Cloud already, and he had the
Duke of Buckingham for his Enemy; and he would not draw the Puritans upon him,
for he was sure they would carry all things at last: Besides, he said, the King
in the Puritans Meaning the Petition against Recusants at Oxford.
.

It appeared also by the Information of others who were present at the
Conference at Bugden, That Sir John Lamb, and Dr. Sibthorpe, did
notwithstanding the Bishops aversness, again press the Bishop to proceed
against the Puritans in Leicestershire; the Bishop then asked them what manner
of people they were, and of what condition? For his part he knew of none.
Puritans described by Sir John Lamb.
To which Sir John Lamb replied (Dr. Sibthorpe being present) That they seem to
the World to be such as would not Swear, Whore, nor Drink, but yet would Lie,
Cozen, and Deceive: That they would frequently hear two Sermons a day, and
repeat the same again too; and afterward pray, and sometimes fast all day
long. Then the Bishop Puritans were, did lend money freely upon the Collection
of the Loan? To which Sir John Lamb and Dr. Sibthorpe replied, That they did
generally resolve to lend freely: Then said the Bishop, no man of discretion
can say, That that place is a place of Puritans: For my part (said the Bishop)
I am not satisfied to give way to proceedings against them. At which Dr.
Sibthorpe was much discontented, and said, He was troubled to see that the
Church was no better regarded.

Information in Star Chamber against the Bishop of Lincoln.
were ordered to be sealed up and committed to the Custody of Mr. Trumbal, one
of the Clerks of the Council; nevertheless, the Bishop of Lincoln used such
means as he got a Copy of them.

For which, and some other matters, an Information was afterward preferred
against him in the Star Chamber. Of which more at large, when we come in our
next Volume to treat of the great and high proceedings of that Court.

Laud, not long before this Passage with the Bishop of Lincoln, was informed,
That the Bishop of Lincoln endeavored to be reconciled to the Duke; Bishop Laud
his Dream.
and that night that he was so informed, he dreamed, That the Bishop of Lincoln
came with Iron Chains, but returned freed from them: That he leaped upon a
Horse, departed, and he could not overtake him.

The Interpretation of this Dream may (not unfitly) be thus applied. The
interpretation thereof.
His Chains might signify the imprisonment of the Bishop of Lincoln Tower; his
returning free, to his being set at Liberty again at the meeting of the
Parliament; his leaping on Hors-back, and departing; to his going into Wales,
and there commanding a Troop in the Parliaments Service; and that Bishop Laud
could not overtake him, might portend that himself should become a Prisoner in
the same place, and be rendered thereby incapable to follow, much less to
overtake him.

At this time the King had Six thousand Foot Soldiers in the Service United
Provinces, Six thousand English in the Service of the United Provinces.
under the Command of Sir Charles Morgan, Sir Edward Herbert, Sir John Burlacy,
Sir James Leviston, etc. for the assistance of the States, against the
increasing power of Spinola. Upon the present occasion, these Forces were
called off from the States services, to join with the King of Denmark, under
the Command of Sir Charles Morgan, against the common enemy, the King of Spain,
and his adherents.

Some few months after, Sir Charles Morgan General of the English forces.
One thousand three hundred foot more Hull, to be transported by Captain
Conisby to the Town of Stoad in Germany, and there to be delivered over to the
charge of the aforesaid Sir Charles Morgan, General of the English Forces in the
service of the King of Denmark; a person of known Valor, and fit for conduct of
an Army.

But the Assessment of the general Loan did not pass currantly with the people;
Some do refuse the Loan, though others offered to lend the refusers money, so
they would but subscribe.
for diverse persons refused to subscribe their names, and to lend after the
rate propounded; and among others, certain of the Parish of Clement Danes, the
Savoy, the Duchy, and other parts within the Liberties of Westminster, who
first alleged poverty: Whereunto reply was made, That if they would but
subscribe, their ability should be enquired off before any thing were levied
upon them; and in case they were found unable, they should be discharged,
notwithstanding what They are ordered to be pressed for Soldiers.
to impress these men to serve in the Ships ready to go out in his Majesty's
service.

The Non-Subscribers of higher Rank and Rate, in all the Counties, were bound
over by Recognisance, The Refusers to lend were severely deal with.
to tender their appearance at the Martins in the Fields, before the Lieutenant
of the Tower of London, by him to be there enrolled, among the Companies of
Soldiers; that they who refused to assist with their Purses, should serve in
their Persons for the common Defense.

The same Loan being demanded of the Societies and Inns of Court, the Benchers
of Lincolns Inn received a Letter of Reproof, from the

An. 1627. Dr. Sibthorps Sermon concerning the Loan.
ANd for the advancement of the said Loan, Doctor Sibthorpe now publishes in
Print, a Sermon Preached by him at Northampton, February the Two and twentieth,
One thousand six hundred twenty and six, at Lent Assizes, entitled, Apostolic
Obedience. This Book was Licenced by the Bishop of London, who did approve
thereof, as a Sermon learnedly

His Text was Romans 13.7. Render therefore to all their dues. Among other
passages he had this, And seriously consider, how as Jeroboam took Rehoboam and
his Subjects, to bring Idolatry into Israel: So the Papists lie at wait, if
they could find a Rent between our Sovereign and his Subjects (which the Lord
forbid) to reduce Superstition into England. I speak no more then what I have
heard from themselves, whilst I have observed their forwardness to offer double
according to an Act of Parliament so providing, yea, to profess, That they
would depart with the half of their Goods. And how, or why can this forwardness
be in them, but in hope to cast the imputation of frowardness upon us? and

Also the said Sermon holds forth, That the Prince who is the Head, and makes
his Court and Council, it is his duty to direct and make Laws, Eccles. 8.3 and
4. He does whatsoever pleases him. Where the word of the King is, there is
power; and who may say unto him* What do thou?

And in another place, he says, If Princes command any thing which Subjects
may not perform, because it is against the Laws of God, or of Nature, or
impossible: Yet Subjects are bound to undergo the punishment, without either
resistance, or railing, or reviling, and so to yield a Passive Obedience where
they cannot exhibit an active one.

I know no other case, says he, but one of those three, wherein a Subject may
excuse himself with Passive Obedience, but in all other he is bound to Active
Obedience.

It is not our purpose to repeat his Sermon, the Reader may at leisure inform
himself more fully by the Printed Copy.

Doctor Roger Manwaring promoted the same business in two Sermons Preached
before the King and Court at Whitehal, Dr. Manwaring in two Sermons promotes
the Loan.
wherein he delivered for Doctrine to this purpose.



The Papists at this time were forward and liberal on this occasion, insomuch,
that it was said in those times, That in the point of Allegiance then in hand,
the Papists were exceeding Orthodox, and the Puritans were the only Recusants.

England and France, Distastes and jealousies between England and France.
which seemed to have risen from Disputes and Differences about the Government
of the Queens family. By the Articles of Marriage it was agreed, That the Queen
should have a certain number of Priests for her Household Chaplains, together
with a Bishop who should exercise all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in matters of
Religion.

These with other Romish Priests within this Realm, began to England had no
power to intermeddle therein, because he was an Heretic, the Pope threatening
to declare those to be Apostates that should seek their establishment from the
King. Likewise the Queen insisted to have the ordering of her family, as her
self pleased, and the naming of her Officers and Servants; and being therein
crossed, did somewhat distaste the King, and unkindness grew between

These things the King represented to his Brother of France, imputing the same
to the Crafty and Evil Counsels of her Servants, rather then to her own
inclination; And so declared, he could no longer bear with those that were the
known causes and fomenters of these disturbances, but would presently remove
them from about his Wife, if there were nothing more then this, That they had
made her go to Tiborne in devotion to pray there. Which action (as it was
reported, his Majesty said) can have no greater invective made against it, then
the bare relation; yet his Majesty acknowledged, That the deportment of some of
them, was without offense; but others of them had so much abused his patience,
and affronted his Person (reflecting most upon Madam Saint George) that he was
resolved no longer to endure

The French dismissed.
So the King dismissed and sent back into France the Queens Retinue of French
(first paying all that was due for Wages or Salaries) and gave the King of
France an account of the action by the Lord Carlton, for the preserving of
their mutual Correspondency and Brotherly Affection.

Ill resented in France.
But this Dismission was ill resented in France, and Audience denied to the Lord
Carlton, and the matter was aggravated high at the

And those persons who returned into France (being for the most part
yonger-brothers, and had parted with their Portions at home, in expectation of
raising their Fortunes in the service of the Queen of England) did heighten the
discontent.

This jarring with France, breaks forth to a public War, and King Charles is
at once engaged against Two Great and Mighty

Private Transactions to engage in a War against France.
It is not our purpose to relate the particulars of those private transactions
which were here in England, concerning the preparing of a Fleet and Army, nor
how the same was managed at first by an Abbot, who had relation to the Duke of
Orleance, and had been disobliged by Cardinal Richlieu.

This Man was full of Revenge against the Cardinal, and labored much (and at
last effected) the dismissing of the French about the Queen; Richlieu, and
withal to heighten the differences between the Two Crowns of England and
France; to which purpose he remonstrated to the Duke of Buckingham, the
Commotions and Discontents that were in France, and how hardly the Protestants
there were treated, notwithstanding the Edict of Peace procured by the
Mediation of the King of Great Britain.

This Abbots Negotiation with the Duke, procured the sending of Devic from the
King of England to the Duke of Rhoane, who was France, but not before.

This private transaction was also managed by Mr. Walter Montague, but in
another capacity: The Duke of Sobiez and Monsieur St. Blanchard, contributed
their endeavors also to hasten the Fleet, and the raising of the Army in
England against the French, for the relief of those of the Reformed Religion
there.

The King of Great Britains Declaration concerning a War with France.
The King declared as a ground of his War with France, That the House of Austria
(conspiring the ruin of all those of the Reformed Religion throughout
Christendom, as (he said) plainly appeared in the affairs of Germany) had such
an influence upon the Council of France, as to prevail with them to obstruct
the landing of Count Mansfields Army, contrary to promise, with whom the French
should have joined forces, for the relief of the Palatinate and the German
Princes; which failer of performance in them, proved the ruin of that Army,
the greatest part whereof perished, and was by consequence the loss of the
whole Protestant Party in Germany.

His Majesty further declared, That having by his Mediation prevailed for a
Peace between the French King and his Protestant Subjects, and France contrary
to the said Articles, blocked up their Towns, Garrisons, and Forts, and had
committed many spoils upon them, when they had done nothing in violation of the
Edict of Peace. And that the King of France had committed an example of great
injustice in full Peace, to seize upon One hundred and twenty English Ships,
with all their Merchandise and Artillery; for which Reasons, the King was
resolved to send a powerful Army and

The Duke of Buckingham was made Admiral of this Fleet, The Duke of Buckingham
Admiral and General.
and Commander in chief of the Land forces, and had a Commission to that
purpose, wherein it is expressed,

That his Majesty has taken into his Princely consideration, His Commission.
the distressed estate of his dear Brother-in-law, and only Sister, the Prince
and Princess Elector Palatine, and their Children, and finding himself in
Nature and Honor nearly bound unto them; At their request, and Buckingham to be
Admiral, Captain General, and Governor of his said Royal Fleet, with such
Soldiers and Landforces as shall be conveyed therein, for the accomplishment
of such execution and employment as they shall be designed unto, according to
such private Instructions as his Majesty shall give unto the said Duke. His
Majesty by the said Commission giving to the Duke power to lead and conduct the
said Navy and Army, and with them to fight against his said Brother-in-law, and
England; and to advance to the Order of Knighthood, such persons employed in
the Fleet, Forces, and Supplies, as by their Valor, Desert, and good Service in
this Expedition shall be thought fit in his the said Dukes discretion to merit
the same, and as to the Office of Captain General does appertain.

On the Seven and twentieth of June the Duke set fail from Portsmouth, The Duke
sets ^ail with the Fleet and Army.
(in order to the Relief of the Palatinate) with the Fleet, consisting July he
appeared with his Fleet before Rochel, The Rochellers are fearful to admit the
English.
who once much longed for their coming, but now shut their Gates at their
appearance.

Hereupon the Duke of Sobiez went a shore with Sir William Beecher from the
Duke of Buckingham, (Sir William Beecher being also accompanied with a Letter
of Credence from his Majesty of Great Britain) they were at last admitted into
the Town; and the Magistrates called an Assembly, Yet call an Assembly and
heard Sir William Beechers Message.
and there Sir William Beecher declared unto them, That the Duke of Buckingham
was come with a great Fleet and Army to their assistance, which his Master had
sent out of a fellow-feeling of their sufferings, and to require from the King
of France a performance of the Englands Mediation, on the behalf of the
Protestants in France. And further declared unto them, That if they do now
refuse to give their assistance, by joining forces with the English, he said he
would, and did protest before God and Man, in the name of the King his Master,
That his said Master was fully acquit of his engagement of Honor and Conscience
for their Relief.

The Rochellers still timorous.
But notwithstanding this Declaration, and Sobiez his earnest solicitation and
endeavor, The Magistrates and wealthier sort of People in France his Army, then
upon a march against them; and there being a Court party also prevalent in the
Town) could be drawn to give no other answer at that time, but this, That they
did render all humble and hearty thanks to his Majesty of Great Britain for the
care he had of them; and to the Duke, for his forwardness and readiness to do
his best service for their good; but said, They were bound by Oath of Union, to
do nothing but by the common and unanimous consent of the rest of the
Protestant France: And therefore prayed the King of Great Britain to excuse
them, in that they did suspend the Conjunction of Forces, till they had sent to
the rest of the Protestant Towns, who were of the Union with them: And in the
mean time, their Prayers and Vows should be for the happy progress of such
actions as the Fleet and Army should undertake.

A well affected party in Rochel.
Notwithstanding this Answer, Sobiez had strong assurance from a well-affected
party in the Town, That they could and would be able to

The Duke communicates his design to Sobiez.
When Sobiez went from the Fleet into Rochel, with Sir William Beecher, the Duke
of Buckingham was pleased to communicate his design to Sobiez, by reason of his
knowledge of the Country, as well as for his interest in that Kingdom, to
raise forces; that his full purpose and intention was to land his Army in the
Isle of Oleran, near unto Rochel, and not at the Isle of Rhee, being a little
further distant: Which Sobiez Rhee (as he said to the Duke) was furnished with
a considerable force, both of Horse and Foot, which would make the landing
there very difficult; and besides, they had a Citadel well fortified to
retreat unto.

The Duke lands his Army at the Isle of Rhee.
The Duke not staying for Sobiez his return from Rochel, alters his Rhee, (
Toras the Governor thereof having before taken the alarm by the sight of the
Fleet at Sea) marches with his forces to impede their landing, but maugre their
opposition, and the Fort La Pry. Sir John Buroughs, Sir Alexander Bret, Sir
Charles Rich, together with Monsieur St. Branchard, and other brave Commanders
land first ashore, and after them about Twelve hundred men, A ^ore ^ight at the
landing
who were presently encountered with the French horse and foot, and a sore fight
happened thereupon, being a long time well maintained on both sides, and many
Commanders fell, both of the English and French, few of the English were
unwounded; but at last the English forced their way, the enemy was constrained
to retreat, and to permit the whole Army to land.

St. Blanchard was slain, whose loss was much lamented by the Protestant party
in France, Sir William Heyden, and some hundreds of the English were slain. The
foot which engaged on both sides were much equal in number, but in horse the
French had a great advantage.

The Victory was not pursued by a speedy march after Toras, The Army stays five
days after the fight.
who retreated to his Citadel at St. Martins with his wounded men; for five
days time was spent before the Army moved, whereby Toras got not

The Fort La Pry, A Fort neglected to be taken in.
near unto the landing place, and meanly Victualled and Manned, was all this
while the Army staid neglected, omitted, or contemned, as inconsiderable; the
gaining whereof (as was said) would have secured a retreat for the English, and
impeded Martins.

This landing of the English was a great astonishment in the Court of France;
The French astonished at the landing of the English.
and if the taking of the Fort had immediately followed, there would have
appeared a great change of Affairs; for the King fell sick about the same time,
and great discontent there was at Court, and the King sent his Resolution, to
give the Protestants honorable terms, if they will not join with the English;
sent to the Duke of Rhoan

The Duke in two days march came with his Army before St. Martins, The Duke
comes before the Fort at St. Martins.
and published a Manifesto, justifying his Masters taking up of Arms against
the King of France, declaring (amongst other Reasons) as one cause thereof, the
Frenches employing of the English Ships against Rochel contrary to promise, and
lodges his Army at the Burgh of St. Martins, at Rhee, which (upon the approach
of the Duke) the enemy quit, and retreated into the City, and quit a Well which
was about thirty paces from their Counterskarf; which being not at first coming
of the Army, made totally unserviceable to the enemy, they presently drew a
work unto it, and so secured the same for their use; by which they subsisted,
during all the time of the siege.

The Duke blocks up the Citadel, Blocks up the Citadel.
draws his forces round about it in

But whilst the Duke employs his time in drawing a Line of Circumvallation, and
raising of Bulwarks and Batteries, let us see what they are doing in England.

Gentlemen secured and confined for refusing to part with money upon the Loan.
Those Gentlemen who stood committed for not parting with moneys upon the
Commission for Loans, were appointed to several Confinements not in their own,
but Foreign Counties.

Sir Thomas Wentworth, afterward Earl of Strafford, and George Ratcliff Esquire
afterward Sir George, Yorkshire Gentlemen, were sent for by Messengers, and
removed out of the County of York into the County of Kent, and there secured by
Confinement.

Sir Walter Earl, and Sir John Strangwayes, who were Dorsetshire men, were
secured in the County of Bedford.

Sir Thomas Grantham, and some others of the County of Lincoln, were removed
and secured in the County of Dorset.

Sir John Heveningham, and others of the County of Suffolk, were secured in the
County of Somerset.

Richard Knightly Esquire and others of the County of Northampton, were secured in
the County of Southampton and Wiltshire.

Sir Nathaniel Barnardiston of the County of Suffolk, and William Coriton Esquire
of the County of Cornwall, were secured in the County of Sussex.

Sir Harbotle Grimston of the County of Essex, and Sir Robert Points,
Northamptonshire.

John Hampden Esquire and others, of the County of Bucks, were secured in
Hampshire; and the like course was taken with the Gentry of other Counties who
refused the Loan.

And the Council ordered that all those Refractory persons beforenamed (for so
they are called in the Order) who are appointed by his Majesty's command to
their several Commitments, shall presently obey the Order of the Board sent
with their Messenger in that behalf, or be committed

Many of those Gentlemen were afterward sent for by Pursevants out of those
Counties where they were confined by Order of the Council, and committed to
several Prisons; some to the Fleet, some to the Marshalsey, and Gatehouse, and
others remained in the custody of the Messengers: And from the Gatehouse Sir
John Elliot sends this Petition to his Majesty.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. The humble Petition of Sir John Elliot
Knight, Prisoner in the Gatehouse, concerning the Loan.
Shows,
THat your poor Suppliant affected with sorrow and unhappiness, Sir John
Elliots Petition to the King concerning the Loan.
through the long sense of your Majesty's displeasure, willing in every act of
Duty and Obedience to satisfy your Majesty of the loyalty of his heart, then
which he has nothing more desired, that there may not remain a jealousy in
your Royal Breast, that stubbornness and will have been the motives of his
forbearing to condescend to the said

The Rule of Justice he takes to be the Law, impartial Arbiter of Government
and Obedience, the support and strength of Majesty, the observation of that
Justice by which Subjection is commanded. This and Religion (added to this
Power not to be resisted) binds up the Conscience

In this particular therefore of the Loan, being desirous to be satisfied how
far the Obligation might extend, and resolving where he was left Master of his
own, to become Servant to your Will, he had recourse unto the Laws, to be
informed by them; which in all humility he submits to your most Sacred view
in the Collections following.

In the time of Edward the First, he finds that the Commons of

That for no business such manner of Aids, Taxes, nor Prizes, should be taken,
but by common assent of the Realm, and for the common profit thereof.

The like was in force by the same King, and by two other Laws again Enacted,

That no Tallage or Aid should be taken or levied, without the good will and
assent of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights, Burgesses, and
other Freeman of the Land.

And that Prudent and Magnanimous Prince, Edward the Third, led by the same
Wisdom, having granted,

That the greatest gift given in Parliament for the Aid and speed of his
matchless undertaking against France, should not be had in Example, nor fall to
the prejudice of the Subject in time to come; did likewise add

And more particularly upon this point, upon a Petition of the Commons
afterward in Parliament, it was established,

That the Loans which are granted to the King by diverse persons, be released,
and that none from henceforth be compelled to make such Loans against their
Wills, because it is against Reason and the Franchises of the Land, and
Restitution be made to such as made such Loans.

And by another Act upon a new occasion, in the time of Richard the Third, it
was ordained,

That the Subject in no wise be charged with any such Charge, Exaction, or
Imposition, called a Benevolence, nor such like Charge; and

Such were the Opinions of these times, for all these Aids, Benevolences,
Loans, and such like Charges exacted from the Subject not in Parliament, which
they held to be Grievances contrary to their Liberties, and illegal; and so
pious were their Princes in Confirmation of their Liberties, as having secured
them for the present by such frequent Laws and Statutes, they did likewise by
them provide for their Posterity; and in some so strictly, that they bound the
Observation Edw. 1. And also under pain of Excommunication; as by the other of
the Five and twentieth of the same King, which was to be denounced against all
those that violate or break them; which Act extends to us.

And these Reasons he presents to your Majesty as the first Motive taken from
the Law.

There are others also, which in his humble apprehension he conceived from the
Action it self, which he likewise tenders to your most

First, That the Carriage and Instructions accompanied with the Authority of
the Great Seal, imported a Constraint, such Requests to Subjects being tacit
and implied Commands, and so preventing that readiness and love which in a free
way would have far exceeded those Demands, whereas the wonted Aids given to
your happy Ancestors were Ex spontanea voluntate, and charitate populi, whereby
they made that Conjunction of their Hearts at home, which wrought such

Whereas the firmest Obligation of that readiness and love, is the benignity of
Princes, giving and preserving to their People, just and decent Liberties,
which to this Kingdom are derived from the Clemency and Wisdom of your
Progenitors, to whom there is owing a Sacred Memory for them: He could not as
he feared, without pressure to these immunities, become an actor in this Loan,
which by imprisonment and restraint, was urged, contrary to the Grants of the
Great Charter,

Though we were well assured by your Majesty's Royal Promise, whose words he
holds as Oracles of Truth, that it should become a president, during the
happiness of your Reign (the long continuance

And these being the true Grounds and Motives of his forbearance to the said
Loan, showing such inconveniences in Reason, and representing it an Act
contradicting so many of your Laws, and most of them by the most prudent and
happiest of our Princes granted which could not without presumption beyond
pardon in your Suppliant, in taking to himself the Dispensation of those Laws,
so piously Enacted, by him be violated or impeached.



Notwithstanding the said Petition, he still continued a prisoner in the
Gate House, till the general Order of Discharge came.

Peter Hayman refusing to part with Loan-money, was called before the Lords of
the Council, who charged him with refractoriness, and with an unwillingness to
serve the King; and told him, if he did not pay, he should be put upon service.
Accordingly they commanded him to go upon his Majesty's service into the
Palatinate; and having first settled his estate, he undertook and performed the
journey, and afterward returned into England.

Archbishop Abbot having been long slighted at Court, Archbishop Abbot in
disfavor.
now fell under Sibthorps Sermon, as he was commanded, entitled, Apostolical
Obedience, and not long after he was sequestered from his Office, and a
Commission was granted to the Bishops of London, Durham, Rochester, Oxford, and
Doctor Laud, Bishop of Bath and Wells, to execute Archiepiscopal Jurisdiction.
The Commission as follows.

CHARLES by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To the Right Reverend Father in God, George, Bishop
of London; and to the Right Reverend Father in God, Our Trusty and Welbeloved
Counselor, Richard, Lord Bishop of Durham; and to the Right Reverend Father in
God, John, Lord Bishop of Rochester; and John, Lord Bishop of Oxford; to the
Right Reverend Father in God, Our Right Trusty and Welbeloved Counselor,
William, Lord Bishop of Bathe and Wells, Greeting.
WHereas George, The Commission to Sequester Archbishop Abbot from all his
Ecclesiasti^al Offices.
now Archbishop of Canterbury, in the right of the Archbishopric has several
and distinct Archiepiscopal, Episcopal, and other Spiritual and Ecclesiastical
Powers and Jurisdictions, to be exercised in the Government and Discipline of
the Church within the Province of Canterbury, and in the Administration of
Justice in Causes Ecclesiastical within that Province, which are partly
executed by himself in his own person, and partly, and more generally by
several persons nominated and authorized by him, being learned in the
Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm, in those several places whereunto they are
deputed and appointed by the said Archbishop: Which several places, as We are
informed, they severally hold by several Grants for their several lives, as
namely, Henry Martin Knight, has and holds by the Grants of the said
Archbishop, the Offices and places of the Dean of the Arches, and Judge, or
Master of the Prerogative Court for the Natural life of the said Sir Henry
Martin.

Sir Charles Caesar Knight, has and holds by Grants of the said Archbishop,
the places or Offices of the Judge of the Audience, and Master of the Faculties
for the term of the Natural life of the said Sir Charles Caesar.

Sir Thomas Ridley Knight, has and holds by the Grant of the said
Archbishop, the place or Office of Uicar-General to the said Archbishop.

And Nathaniel Brent, Doctor of the Laws, has and holds by Grant of the said
Archbishop, the Office or place of Commissary to the said Archbishop, as of his
proper and peculiar Diocese of Canterbury.

And likewise the several Registers of the Arches, Prerogative, Canterbury,
hold their places by Grants from the said Archbishop respectively.

Whereas the said Archbishop in some or all of these several places and
Jurisdictions, does or may sometimes assume unto his personal and proper
Judicature, Order, or Direction, some particular Causes, Actions, or Cases at
his pleasure. And forasmuch as the said Archbishop cannot at this present, in
his own person, attend these Services Canterbury, he might and ought in his own
person to have performed and executed in Causes and Matters Ecclesiastical, in
the proper Function of Archbishop of that Province, We therefore, of Our Regal
Power, and of Our Princely Care and Providence, that nothing shall be defective
in the Order, Discipline, Government, or Right of the Church, have thought fit
by the Service of some other Learned and Reverend Bishops, to be named by Us,

Know ye therefore, That We reposing special Trust and Confidence in your
approved Wisdoms, Learning, and Integrity, have nominated, authorized, and
appointed, and do by these presents, nominate, authorize, and appoint you the
said George, Lord Bishop of London; Richard, Lord Bishop of Durham; John, Lord
Bishop of Rochester; John, Lord Bishop of Oxford; and William, Lord Bishop of
Bathe and Wells, or any four, three, or two of you, to do, execute, and perform
all and every those Acts, Matters, and things any way touching, or concerning
the Power, Jurisdiction, or Authority of the Archbishop of Canterbury, in
Causes or Matters Ecclesiastical, as amply, fully, and effectually, to all
intents and purposes as the said Archbishop himself might have done.

And We do hereby Command you and every of you, to attend, perform, and execute
this Our Royal Pleasure, in and touching the premises, until We shall declare
Our Will and Pleasure to the contrary.

Canterbury, quietly, and without interruption, to permit and suffer you the
said George, Bishop of London; Richard, Bishop of Durham; John, Bishop of
Rochester; John, Bishop of Oxford; and William, Bishop of Bathe and Wells, any
four, three, or two of you, to execute and perform this Our Commission
according to Our Royal Pleasure thereby signified.

And We do further Will and Command all and every other person

Nevertheless We do hereby declare Our Royal Pleasure to be, That they the said
Sir Henry Martin, Sir Charles Caesar, Sir Thomas and Nathaniel Brent, in their
several Offices and places aforesaid, and all other Registers, Officers, and
Ministers, in the several Courts, Offices, and Jurisdictions, appertaining to
the said Archbishop, shall quietly, and without interruption, hold, use, occupy
and enjoy their several Offices and places, which they now hold by the Grant of
the said Archbishop, or of any other former Archbishop of Canterbury, in such
Manner and Form, and with those Benefits, Privileges, Powers, and Authorities,
which they now have, hold, George, Bishop of London; Richard, Bishop of Durham;
John, Bishop of Rochester; John, Bishop of Oxford; and William, Bishop of Bathe
and Wells, or to any four, three, or two of you, in all things according to the
Tenor of this Our Commission, as they should or ought to have been to the said
Archbishop himself, if this Commission had not been had or made.

Westminster, The Nineth day of October in the Third year of Our Reign.

Per ipsum Regem.

Edmonds.



Archbishop ABBOT his NARRATIVE.
Pars Prima.
The Archbishops Narrative concerning his disgrace at Court.
IT is an Example, so without Example, that in the Sunshine of the Gospel, in
the midst of Profession of the true Religion, under a Gracious King, whom all
the World must acknowledge to be blemished with no Vice; a man of my place and
years, who have done some service in the Church and Commonwealth, so deeply
laden with some furious infirmities of Body, should be removed from his
ordinary Habitation, and by a kind of deportation should be thrust into one
end of the Island (although I must confess into his own Diocese) that I hold

Which Declaration notwithstanding, I intend not to communicate to any, but to
let it lie by me privately, That it being set down impartially, whilst all
things are fresh in memory, I may have recourse to it hereafter, if Questions
shall be made of any thing contained in this Relation.

His Age when this befell him.
And this I hold necessary to be done, by reason of the strangeness of that,
which by way of Censure was inflicted upon me, being then of the James, who
rests with God, had both a searching Wit of his own to discover his Servants
whom he put in trust, whether they took any sinister courses, or no; and wanted
not some suggesters about him to make the worst of all men's actions whom they
could misreport: Yet this Innocence and good Fame to be overturned in a month,
and a Christian Fabula Vulgi, to be tossed upon the Tongues of Friends and
Foes, of Protestants and Papists, of Court and Country, of English and
Foreigners, must needs in common opinion, presuppose some Crime, open or
secret: Which being discovered by the King, albeit not fully appearing to the
World, must draw on indignation in so high a measure.

His indisposition kept him from Court, and exposed him to censure.
I cannot deny, that the indisposition of my Body kept me from Court, and
thereby gave occasion to Maligners to traduce me, as withdrawing

It is true, that in the turbulency of some things, I had no great invitements
to draw me abroad, but to possess my Soul in Patience, till God sent fairer
weather: But the true ground of my abstaining from solemn and public places,
was the weakness of my Feet, proceeding from the Gout; which disease being
hereditary unto me, and having possessed I was to come.

And although I was often remembered by the wisest of my Friends, that I might be
carried as the old Lord Treasurer Burleigh was, yet I did not think my service
so necessary for the Commonwealth, as his Lordships by long experience was
found to be. I did not value my self at so high a rate, but remembered that it
was not the least cause of overthrow to Robert Earl of Essex, that he prized
himself so, as if Queen Elizabeth and the Kingdom could not well have stood, if
he had not supported

Now for me thus enfeebled, not with Gout only, but with the Stone also and
Gravel, to wait on the King or the Council Table, was by me held a matter most
inconvenient. In the Courts of Princes, there is little feeling of the
infirmities belonging to old age, they like them that be young and gallant in
their actions, and in their clothes, they love not that men should stick too
long in any room of greatness. Change and alteration brings somewhat with it.
What have they to do with Kerchiefs I had work enough for the strongest man in
England, being weak in my Feet, and coming to Whitehal to see things in a
readiness against the next day; yet notwithstanding the Stone and Gout, I was
not altogether an inutile servant in the Kings Affairs, but did all things in
my house that were to

These Relations which are made concerning me, be of certain truth, but reach
not to the reason wherefore I was discarded.

To understand therefore the verity, The Duke offended with the Archbishop, for
not stooping to him.
so it is, That the Duke of Buckingham being still great in the favor of the
King, could endure no man that would not depend upon him; among other men had
me in his I that had learned a Lesson, which I constantly hold, To be no man's
servant but the Kings (for mine Old Royal Master, which is with God, and mine
own Reason, did teach me so) went on mine own ways, although I could not but
observe, That so many as walked in that path, did suffer for it upon all
occasions, and so did I, nothing wherein I moved my Master, taking place; which
finding so clearly, as if the Duke had set some ill character upon me, I had no
way but to rest in patience, leaving I might. But this did not serve the turn,
his undertakings were so extraordinary, That every one that was not with him,
was presently against him; and if a hard opinion were once entertained, there
was no place left for satisfaction or reconciliation.

What befell the Earl of Arundel, and Sir Randal Crew, and diverse others, I need
not to report, and no man can make doubt but he blew the Coals.

The Archbishop is foretold of the Dukes displeasure.
there is a Gentleman called Sir H. S. who gave the first light what should
befall me: This Knight being of more livelihood then wisdom, had married the
Lady D. Sister to the now Earl of E. and had so treated her, that both for
safeguard of her Honor, blemished by him scandalously, and for her Alimony or
maintenance (being glad to get from him) she was enforced to endure a Suit in
the High Commission Court: So to strengthen his party, he was made known to the
Duke, and by means of a Dependant on his Grace, he got a Letter from the King,
That the Commissioners should proceed no further in hearing of that Cause, by
reason that it being a difference between a Gentleman and his Wife, the Kings
Majesty would hear it himself. The Solicitor for the Lady finding that the
course of Justice was stopped, did so earnestly; by Petition, move the King,
that by another Letter there was a relaxation of the former restraint, and the
Commissioners I was enforced for the Honor of the Court, and Reputation of the
High Commission, to tell him openly, That if he did not carry himself in a
better fashion, I would commit him to Prison.

This so troubled the young Gallant, that within few days after being at Dinner
or Supper, where some wished me well, he bolted it out, That as for the
Archbishop, the Duke had a purpose to turn him out of his place, and that he
did but wait the occasion to effect it. Which being brought unto me constantly,
by more ways then one, I was now in expectation what must be the issue of this
great man's indignation, which fell out to be as follows.

Sibthorps Sermon for Loan Money.
There was one Sibthorpe, who not being so much as a Batchellor of Arts, as it
has been credibly reported unto me; by means of Doctor Pierce, Dean of
Peterborough, being Vice Chancellor of Oxford, did get to be conferred upon him
the Title of a Doctor.

This man is Vicar of Brackley in Northamptonshire, and has another Benefice
not far from it in Buckinghamshire. But the luster of his Honor did arise from
being the Son-in-law of Sir John Lamb, Chancellor of Peterborough, whose
Daughter he married, and was put into the Commission of Peace.

When the Lent Assizes were in February last at Northampton, the man that
Preached before the Judges there, was this worthy Doctor; where magnifying the
Authority of Kings, (which is so strong in the Scripture, that it needs no
flattery any ways to extol it) he let fall diverse Speeches which were
distasteful to the Auditors; and namely, That they had power to put Poll-Money
upon their Subjects heads, when against those challenges, men did frequently
mourn.

The Dukes design in having this Sermon sent to the Archbishop to License it.
He being a man of a low Fortune, conceived that the putting his Sermon in
Print, might gain favor at Court, and raise his Fortune

Out of this Fountain flowed all the Water that afterward so wet: In
rehearsing whereof, I must set down diverse particulars, which some man may
wonder how they should be discovered unto me. But let it suffice once for all,
that in the word of an honest man, and of a Bishop, I recount nothing, but
whereof I have good warrant, God himself working means.

The matters were revealed unto me, Mr Murrey sent from the King with the
Sermon to the Archbishop to have it Licenced by himself.
although it be not convenient William Murrey, Nephew (as I think) unto Mr.
Thomas Murrey, sometimes Tutor unto Prince Charles; and the young man now of the
Kings Bedchamber, is sent unto me with the Written Sermon, of whom I must say,
That albeit he did the King his Masters business, yet he did use himself
temperately and civilly unto me. For avoiding of inquit and inquam (as Tully
says) I said this, and he said that, I will make it by way of Dialogue, not
setting down every days conference exactly by it self, but mentioning all
things of importance in the whole, yet distinguishing of times; where for the
truth of the Relation, it cannot be avoided.

Murrey. My Lord, The discourse by way of Dialogue, between the Archbishop and
Mr. Murrey on that occasion.
I am sent unto you by the King, to let you know that his pleasure is, That
whereas there is brought unto him a Sermon to


Archb. I was never he that authorized Books to be Printed; for it is the work
of my Chaplains to read over other men's writings, and what is fit, to let it
go, what is unfit, to expunge it.


Murrey. But the King will have you your self to do this, because he is minded
that no Books shall be allowed, but by you and the Bishop of London: And my
Lord of London authorized one the other day ( Cousens his Book) and he will
have you do this.


Archb. This is an occupation that my old Master King James did never put me
to, and yet I was then young, and had more abilities of body then now I have; so
that I see I must now learn a new lesson, but leave it with me; and when I have
read it, I shall know what to say unto it, a day or two hence you shall
understand my mind. When I had once or twice perused it, I found some words
which seemed unto me to cross that which the King intended, and in a sort to
destroy it; and therefore upon his return, a day or two after I expressed my self


Mr. Murrey. I conceive that the King intends that this Sermon shall promote
the service now in hand about the Loan of Money, but in my opinion it much
crosses it; for he lays it down for a rule, and because it should not be
forgotten, he repeateth it again,

That Christians are bound in duty one to another, The Archbishops Reasons why
he could not License it.
especially all Subjects to their Princes according to the Laws and Customs of
the Kingdom wherein they live.

Out of this will men except this Loan, because there is neither Law England.

Secondly, In my judgment there follows a dangerous Speech, Habemus
necessitatem vindicandae libertatis. For this was all that was then quoted out
of Calvin, no mention being made of any the other words which are now in the
Printed Copy: For when by the former Rule he has set men at liberty, whether
they will pay or no, he imposes upon them a necessity to vindicate this
Liberty, and Vindicare may be extended to challenge with violence cum vi. But
for my part I would be most unwilling to give occasion to Sedition and Mutiny
in the Kingdom.

Again, here is mention made of Poll-Money, which as I have heard has already
caused much distaste where the Sermon was Preached.

Moreover, what a Speech is this, That he observes the forwardness of the
Papists to offer double, according to an Act of Parliament so providing, Anno 1
Caroli; the Act for the Subsidy of the Layty, whereby Popish Recusants were to
pay double; when indeed there is no such Act.

And in the fifth place it is said in this Sermon, that the Princes of Bohemia
have power to depose their Kings, as not being Hereditary, which is a great
question. Such a one as has cost much blood, and must not in a word be
absolutely defined here, as if it were without controversy.


Murrey. I will faithfully deliver these things to the King, and then you shall
hear further from me.


His Majesty returns Answer by Mr. Murrey to those Reasons of the Archbishop.
Some two or three days after he returns again unto me, and tells

Archb. I think that to be a mistaking, for I fear there will be found no such
President. King Henry the Eighth, as the Chronicle shows, desired but the
Sixth part of men's estates, Ten groats in the pound; our Henry, although he
were a powerful King, yet for that Taxation there began against him little less
then a Rebellion; so that he held it wisdom to desist, and laying the blame
upon Cardinal Wolsey, professed, That he knew nothing of the matter.


Murrey. Secondly, The King says for the words Habemus necessitatem
vindicandae libertatis, he takes them to be for him; and he will stand

Thirdly, For Poll-money he thinks it lawful.

Fourthly, It is true, there was no such Act passed, and therefore it must be
amended (and yet in the Printed Book it is suffered still to stand. Such
slight, and I may say, slovenly care was had by them that published this
Sermon.)

And fifthly, For that of Bohemia, he has crossed it out of the Book.

Some other matters there were, against which I took exception, but Mr. Murrey
being a young Gentleman, although witty and full of good behavior, I doubted
that being not deeply seen in Divinity, he could not so well conceive me, nor
make report of my words to his Majesty: And therefore I being lame, and so
disabled to wait on the King, did move him, That he would in my name humbly
beseech his Majesty to send the Bishop of Bathe and Wells unto me, and I would
by his means make known my Scruples; The Archbishop desires Bishop Laud may be
sent to him to treat of that Sermon.
and so I dismissed Mr. Murrey, observing with my self, that the Answers to my
Five Objections, especially to two or three, were somewhat strange: As if the
King were resolved, were it to his good or to his harm, to have the Book go
forth.

After one or two days more, the young Gentleman comes to me Bathe unto me; but
he expects I should pass the Book. In the mean time had gone over one High
Commission day, and this Bishop who used (otherwise) very few days to fail, was
not there, which being joined to his Majesty's Message, made me in some measure
to smell, that this whole business might have that Bishops hand in it,
especially I knowing in general the disposition of the man.

The minds of those that were Actors for the publishing of the

So eager he was, That either by my Credit his undertakings might be
strengthened, or at least I might be contemned and derided as an unworthy fellow.

Murrey, was in some degree minatory, That if I did not dispatch it, the King
would take some other course with me.

When I found how far the Duke had prevailed, The Archbishop sends his
Objections to the Court in writing against the Sermon.
I thought it my best way to set down in writing many Objections, wherefore the
Book was not fit to be published; which I did modestly, and sent them to the
King. The words were these which I culled out of the Written Sermon.

1. Page 2. Those words deserve to be well weighed, And whereas the Prince
pleads not the Power of Prerogative.

2. Page 8. The Kings duty is first to direct and make Laws. There is no Law
made till the King assent unto it; but if it be put simply to make Laws, it
will make much startling at it.

3. Page 10. If nothing may excuse from active obedience, but what is against
the Law of God, or of Nature, or impossible. How does this agree Page 5. That
all Subjects are bound to all their Princes according to the Laws and Customs
of the Kingdom wherein they live.

This is a fourth Case of Exception.

4. Page 11. The Poll-Money, mentioned by him in St. Matthew, was imposed by
the Emperor as a Conqueror over the Jews, and the execution of it in England,
although it was by a Law, produced a terrible effect in King Richard the
Second's time, when only it was used, for ought that

5. Page 12. It is in the bottom, view the Reign of Henry the Third, and
whether it be fit to give such allowance to the Book, being surreptitiously put
out?

6. In the same Page, let the largeness of those words be well considered, Yea
all Antiquity to be absolutely for absolute Obedience to Princes in all Civil
and Temporal things. For such cases as Naboths Vineyard may f^ll within this.

7. Page 14. Sixtus Quintus was dead before the year One thousand five hundred
and eighty.

8. In the same Page weigh it well, How this Loan may be called a Tribute, and
when its said, We are promised it shall not be immoderately imposed? How that
agrees with his Majesty's Commission and Proclamation which are quoted in the
Margent?

Bishop Laud is employed to Answer these Objections
It should seem that this Paper did prick to the quick, and no satisfaction
being thereby accepted, Bishop Laud is called, and he must go to answer to it
in writing: This man is the only inward Counselor with Buckingham, sitting
with him sometimes privately whole hours, and feeding his humor with malice and
spite.

His life in Oxford was to pick quarrels in the Lectures of the Public
Readers, and to advertise them to the then Bishop of Durham, that James with
discontents, against the honest men that took pains in their places, and settled
the truth (which he called Puritanism) in their Auditors.

He made it his work to see what Books were in the Press, and to look over
Epistles Dedicatory, and Prefaces to the Reader, to see what faults might be
found.

It was an observation what a sweet man this was like to be, that the first
observable act that he did, was the marrying of the Earl of D. to R. When it
was notorious to the World, that she had another Husband; and the same a
Nobleman, who had diverse Children then living by her. King James was a long
time offended with Bishop Laud.
King James did for many years take this so ill, that he would never hear of
any great preferment of him, insomuch, that the Bishop of Lincoln, Doctor
Williams, who takes upon him to be the first promoter of him, has many times
said, That when he made mention of Laud to the King, his Majesty was so averse
from it, that he was constrained oftentimes to say, That he would never desire
to serve that He was advance by Bishop Williams.
to get him to the Bishopric of St. David's; which he had not long enjoyed, but
he began to undermine his Benefactor, as at this day it appears. The Countess
of Buckingham told Lincoln, that St. David's was the Man that undermined him
with her Son; and verily, such is his aspiring nature, that he will underwork
any man in the World, so that he may gain by it.

This Man who believes so well of himself, framed an Answer to my Exceptions.
But to give some countenance to it, he must call in three Durham, Rochester,
and Oxford, tried men for such a purpose, and the whole style of the Speech
runs, We and We.

Bishops of Durham and Bathe sworn of the Privy Council.
This seemed so strong a confutation, that for reward of their service, as well
as for hope, that they would do more, Doctor Neal, Bishop of Durham, and the
Bishop of Bath, were sworn of the Privy Council.

The very day being Sunday, Mr. Murrey was sent unto me with a Writing, but
finding me all in a sweat by a fit of the Stone which was then upon me, he
forbore for that time to trouble me, and said, That on the morrow he would
repair unto me again. I got me to Bed, and lying all that night in pain, I held
it convenient not to rise the next day: And on the Monday Mr. Murrey came unto
me, which was the Eighth time that he had been with me, so uncessantly was I
plied with this noble work. Mr. Murrey brings the Answer to the Archbishops
Objections.


I had showed it before to a friend or two, whereof the one was a Learned
Doctor of Divinity, and the other had served many times in Parliament with
great commendation. We all agreed, That it was an idle work of a Man that
understood not Logic, that evidently crossed himself,

Mr. Murrey coming to my Bedside, said, That he was sent again by the King,
and had a Paper to be showed unto me.


Archb. You see in what case I am, having slept little all this last night, but
nevertheless since you come from the King, I will take my Spectacles and read
it.


Murrey. No my Lord, you may not read it, neither handle it; for I


Archb. How then shall I know what it is?


Murrey. Yes, I have order to read it unto you, but I may not part with it.


Archb. I must conceive, that if I do not assent to it, his Majesty will give
me leave to reply upon it, which I cannot do, but in my Study, for there are my
Books.


Murrey. I must go with you into your Study, and sit by you till you


Archb. It is not so hasty a work, it will require time, and I have not been
used to Study, one sitting by me, but first read it I pray you. The young
Gentleman read it from the one end to the other, being two or three sheets of
Paper.


Archb. This Answer is very bitter, but gives me no satisfaction, I pray you
leave the Writing with me, and I shall batter it to pieces.


Murrey. No, my Lord, I am forbidden to leave it with you, or to suffer you to
touch it.


Archb. How comes this about? The Archbishop is not suff^red to see the
Writing, but Mr. Murrey reads it.
Are the Authors of it, afraid of it, or ashamed of it? I pray you tell his
Majesty that I am dealt with neither Manly nor Schollar-like. Not Manly,
because I must fight with Adversaries that I know not; not Shollar-like,
because I must not see what it is that must confute me. It is now Eight and
forty years ago that I came to the University, and since that time I have ever
loved a Learned


Before I go further, it shall not be amiss to touch some particulars of that
which I sent in writing to the King.

The first was Page 2. Those words deserve to be well weighed, And whereas the
Prince pleads not the Power of Prerogative.

To this Mr. Murrey said, The King does not plead it: But my Reply was, By what
then does he coerce those Refractories; for I have not heard of any Law whereby
they are imprisoned, and therefore I must

To the second Page 8. The Kings duty is first to direct and make Laws. There
is no Law made till the King assent unto it; but if it be put simply to make
Laws, it will cause much startling at it.

To this I remember not any material thing answered, neither to the third.

Page 10. If nothing may excuse from active obedience, but what is against the
Law of God, or of Nature, or impossible: How does this agree Page 5. That all
Subjects are bound to all their Princes according to the Laws and Customs of
the Kingdom wherein they live.

This is a fourth Case of Exception.

And here before I go to the rest, the Doctor did truly hit upon a good point,
in looking to the Laws and Customs, if he could have kept him to it; for in my
memory, and in the remembrance of many Lords, Haresenet, the then Bishop of
Chichester, and now of Norwich, in Parliament time Preached a Sermon at
Whitehal, (which was afterward burned) upon the Text, Give unto Caesar, the
things that be Caesar's. Wherein he insisted, That Goods and Money were Caesar's*
and therefore they were not to be denied unto him.

At this time, when the whole Parliament took main offense thereat, King James
was constrained to call the Lords and Commons into the Banqueting House at
Whitehal, and there his Majesty calmed all by saying, The Bishop only failed
in this, when he said the Goods were Caesar's; he did not add, They were his
according to the Laws and Customs of the Country wherein they did live.

So moderate was our Caesar then, as I my self saw, and heard, being then an
eye and ear witness, for I was then Bishop of London.

To the fourth, The Poll-Money, in St. Matthew, was imposed by the Emperor, as
a Conqueror over the Jews, and the execution of it in England, although it was
by a Law, produced a terrible effect in King Richard the Second's time, when
only it was used, for ought that appears.

Here the Bishop in the Paper excepted diverse things, as, That sometimes among
us by Act of Parliament, strangers are appointed to pay by the Poll, which
agrees not with the Case; and that it was not well to bring examples out of
weak times, whereas we live in better; but that it was a marvelous fault, the
blame was not laid upon the Rebels of that Age.

Those are such poor things, that they are not worth the answering.

But my Objection in truth prevailed so far, that in the Printed Book it was
qualified thus. Poll-Money, other persons, and upon some occasions; where
obiter I may observe, That my refusing to sign the Sermon, is not to be judged
by the Printed Book, for many things are altered in one, which were in the other.

To the fifth, Page 12. It is in the bottom, view the Reign of Henry the
Third, whether it be fit to give such allowance to the Book being surreptiously
put out.

To this it was said, That being a good passage out of a blameworthy Book,
there was no harm in it.

Sibthorps Treatise, the Bishop of Bathe himself being with me, found much
fault with that Treatise, as being put out for a scandalous Parallel of those
times.

To the sixth in the same Page, Let the largeness of those words be well
considered, Yea, all Antiquity to be absolutely for absolute Obedience to
Princes, in all Civil or Temporal things: For such Cases (as Naboths Vineyard)
may fall within this.

Here the Bishop was as a man in a rage, and said, That it was an odious Ahab,
and there must be a Iezabel, and I cannot tell what: But I am sure my Exception
stands true, and reviling, and railing, does not satisfy my Argument, All
Antiquity takes the Scripture into it; and if I had allowed that proportion
for good, I had been justly beaten with my own Rod.

If the King the next day had commanded me to send him all the Money and Goods
I had, I must by mine own rule have obeyed him; and if he had commanded the
like to all the Clergymen in England, by Sibthorps proportion, and my Lord of
Canterburies allowing of the same, they must have sent in all, and left their
Wives and Children in a miserable case. Yea, the words extend so far, and are
so absolutely delivered, That by this Divinity, if the King should send to the
City of London, and the Inhabitants thereof, commanding them to give unto him
all the wealth which they have, they were bound to do it: I know our King is so
gracious, that he will attempt no such matter; but if he do it not, the defect
is not in these flattering Divines, who if they were Meum and a Tuum, in
Christian Commonwealths, and according to Laws and Customs, Princes may dispose
of it, that saying being true, Ad Reges potestas omnium pertinet, ad singulos
proprietas.

To the seventh, Page 14. Pius Quintus was dead before the year One thousand
five hundred and eighty.

They make no Reply, but mend it in the Printed Book, changing it into Gregory
the Thirteenth.

Tribute; and when it is said, We are promised shall not be immoderately
imposed.

How that agrees with his Majesty's Commission and Proclamation which are
quoted in the Margent, they make no Answer; but in the published Sermon
distinguishes a Tribute from a Loan or Aid, whereby they acknowledge it was
not well before, and indeed it was improper and absurd, worthy of none but Dr.
Sibthorpe.

I have now delivered the Grounds whereupon I refused to authorize this Book,
being sorry at my heart, that the King, my Gracious Master, should rest so
great a building upon so weak a Foundation, the Treatise being so slender, and
without substance, but that it proceeded from a hungry man.

If I had been in Council when the Project for this Loan was first handled, I
would have used my best Reasons to have had it well grounded; but I was absent,
and knew not whereupon they proceeded, only I saw it was followed with much
vehemence: And since it was put in execution, I did not interpose my self to
know the Grounds of one, nor of the other.

It seemed therefore strange unto me, That in the upshot of the business, I was
called in to make that good by Divinity, which others had Sibthorps
contemptible Treatise. I imagined this for the manner of the carriage of it, to
be somewhat like unto the Earl of Somersets Case, who abused the Wife of the
Earl of Essex, must have her divorsed from her Husband, and must himself marry
her: And this must not be done, but that the Archbishop of Canterbury must
ratify all judicially. I know the Cases are different, but I only compare the
manner of the carriage.

Sibthorps Sermons Licenced by the Bishop of London.
When the Approbation of the Sermon was by me refused, it was London, who gave
a great and stately allowance of it; the good man being not willing that any
thing should stick which was sent unto him from the Court, as appears by the
Book which is commonly called The Seven Sacraments, which was allowed by his
Lordship with all the Errors, which since that time have been expunged, and
taken out of it.

But before this passed the Bishops File, there is one accident which fitly
comes in to be recounted in this place. My Lord of London has a Worral by
name, who is Scholar good enough, but a kind of free Fellow-like man, and of
no very tender Conscience. Doctor Sibthorps Sermon was brought unto him, And
hand over head (as the Proverb is) he approved it, and subscribed his name unto
it. But afterward being better advised, he sends it to a learned Gentleman
of the Inner Temple, Mr. Seldom.
and writing some few lines unto him, craveth his opinion of that which he had
done, the Gentleman read it: But although he had promised to return his
Judgment by Letter, yet he refused Worral would come himself; which being done,
he spoke to this purpose, What have you done, you have allowed a strange Book
yonder; which if it be true, there is no Meum or Tuum, no man in England has
any thing of his own: If ever the Tide turn, and Matters be called to a
Reckoning, you will be hanged for publishing such a Book. To which the Doctor
answered, Yea, but my hand is to it, what shall I do? For that the other
replied, You must scrape out your name, and do not suffer so much as the sign
of any Letter to remain

But what the Chaplain well-advised would not do, his Lord without sticking
accomplished; and so being unsensibly hatched, it came flying into the World:
But in my opinion, the Book has persuaded very few understanding men, and has
not gained the King six pence.

Pars Secunda.
HItherto I have declared at length all Passages concerning the Sermon, and to
my remembrance I have not quitted any thing that Canterbury, and confined
there. I kept this silently, and expected Gods pleasure, yet laying it up still
in my mind, esteeming the Duke to be of the number of them, touching whom
Tacitus observes, That such as are false in their love, are true in their
hate. But Iacula praevisa minus feriunt. The Duke presses his Majesty to have
the Archbishop sent away before he set to Sea.
The Duke at the first was earnest with the King, That I must be presently sent
away before his going to Sea: For, says he, if I were gone, he would be every
day at Whitehal, and at the Council Table, and there will cross all things that
I have intended. To meet with his Objection, I got me away to Croyden a month
sooner then in ordinary years I have used to do; but the Term was ended early,
and my main fit of the Stone did call upon me to get me to the Country,

The Duke hastened his preparations for the fleet, but still that comes in for
one Memorandum, That if he were once absent, there should no day pass over, but
that the Archbishop would be with the King, and infuse things that would be
contrary to his proceedings. What a miserable and restless thing Ambition is,
when one talented, England hang at his Girdle (which the wife Queen Elizabeth
would never endure in any Subject yet stands in his own heart in such tickle
terms, as that he fears every shadow, and thinks that the lending of the
Kings ear unto any grave and well-seasoned Report, may blow him out of all;
which in his estimation he thinks is settled upon no good foundation, but the
affection of the Prince, which may be mutable, as it is in all men more or
less? If a man Buckingham might be free from blame, if any should be laid upon
any person. Hence it was, that after his going, there was new prosecution of
the Yorkshire-men, and the refusing Londoners were pursued more fervently then
before; and it is very likely, that the Arrow came out of the same Westminster
was driven back so suddenly to Bugden. Take heed of these things Noble Duke,
you put your King to the worst parts, whereof you may hear one day: So when
your Sovereign in the Parliament time had spoken sharply to both Houses,
commanding them to go together again, and to give more money, and commanding
them to meddle no more with the Duke of Buckingham; you came the next day and
thought to smooth all, taking the glory of qualifying disturbances to your
self; whereas, if you had read Books of true State Government, wherewithal you
are not acquainted, sweet things are personally to be acted by Kings and
Princes, as giving of Honors, and bestowing of noted benefits; and those things
that are sour and distasting, are to be performed by their Ministers, you go
the contray way.

But as before the whole House falls on fire, some sparks do fly out: So,
before the Message of the King was brought me by the Secretary, there were some
inklings that such a thing would follow. And upon the naming of me (by
occasion) it was said by a Creature of the Dukes, That it would not be long
before the Archbishop should be sequestered (that was the word) So well
acquainted are the Dukes followers with great actions that are likely to fall
out in State.

Accordingly on Tuesday the Fist of July, One thousand six hundred Conway came
unto me to Croyden before Dinner time, having traveled, as he said, a long
journey that morning, even from Oatlands thither, he would say nothing till he
had dined; then because he was to return to Oatlands that night, I took him
into the Gallery; and when we were both sat down, we fell to it in this manner.

MY Lord, I know you coming from Court, have somewhat to say

Secretary. It is true, my Lord, and I am the most unwilling man in the World
to bring unpleasing news to any person of quality to whom I wish well, and
especially to such a one as of whose Meat I have eaten, and been merry at his
House: But I come from the King, and must deliver his pleasure; I know who you
are, and much more, with very civil language.


Archb. I doubt not, my Lord, but you have somewhat to say, and therefore I
pray you in plain terms let me have it.


Secre. The Archbishop commanded to withdraw.
It is then his Majesty's pleasure that you should withdraw your self unto
Canterbury; for which he will afford you some convenient time.


Archb. Is that it, then I must use the words of the Psalmist, He shall not be
afraid of any evil tidings; for his heart stands fast, and believes in the
Lord. But I pray you what is my fault that brings this upon me.


Secre. The King says you know.


Archb. Truly I know none, unless it be that I am lame, which I


Secre. The King bad me tell you, That if any expostulation were used --


Archb. No, I will not use any expostulation, if it be his pleasure, I will
obey, I know my self to be an honest man, and therefore fear nothing: But my
Lord, do you think it is for the Kings service in this sort to send me away.


Secre. No, by God! I do not think it, and so yesterday I told the


Archb. I must say as before, He shall not be afraid of any evil tidings; for
his heart stands fast, and he believes in the Lord. But I pray you, my Lord,
is the King precisely set upon my going to Canterbury; there are questions in
Law between me and that Town, about the Liberties of my Archbishopric, which I
by my Oath am bound to maintain; and if I should be among them, I have many
Adversaries of the Citizens, I have there some Tenants, and the Dean and
Chapter are interessed in the Question, I would be unwilling that my Servants
and their people should fall together by the ears, while I Quo Warranto in the
Kings Bench, was stopped, Justice being denied me, which is not usual to be
denied to any Subject, and the King well knows by whose means it was stayed.
I have therefore another House called Foord, Five Miles beyond Canterbury, and
more out of the way, his Majesty may be pleased to let me go thither.


Secre.


Archb. I do not doubt but it shall be better managed then it has been by me:
And yet, my Lord, I will tell you that for these many


Secre. It is now Vacation time, and so consequently little to do, and by
Michaelmas his Majesty may set all in order.


Archb. I am sorry that the King proceeds thus with me, and lets me not
know the cause.


Secre. Although I have no Commission to tell you so, The Lord Conway tells the
Archbishop the reason why he is commanded to retire.
it is for


Archb. If that be it, when I am questioned for it, I doubt not but to give an
honest Answer.


Secre You will never be questioned for it.


Archb. Then am I the more hardly dealt withal, to be censured, and not called
to my Answer.


Secre. Well, my Lord, I will remember that of Foord, and will your


Archb. No, my Lord, but God be with you, only I end where I began with the
words of the Prophet, He shall not be afraid for any evil tidings; for his
heart stands fast, and believes in the Lord.


It comforted me not a little, that the word was now out: My confining must be
for not allowing of a Book! I had much ado to forbear smiling when I heard it,
because now it was clear, it was not for Felony Spaniards or French, nor for
Correspondency with Jesuits or Seminary Priests, or any other grievous crime,
I thank God for that. I had almost forgotten that among many other memorable
Speeches that passed between us, I used this one, That peradventure the King
might be offended at me, because I was no more present at the matter of the
Loan; but said I, my lameness hindered me therein, and I hoped thereby to do my
Master better service, because if ever course be taken to reconcile the King
and his people (which if it be not, this Kingdom will rue it in the end) I
would hope among many other, to be a good Instrument therein, since my hand
has not been in those bitternesses which have of late fallen out.

You say well says the Secretary, Would you that I should tell the King so
much? Yea, said I, if you please, I hold it not unfit that his

What he reported therein, I do not know, but matters proceeded in the former
course, as if there were no regard had of any such thing.

The Lord Conway being gone from me for two or three days, I expected to hear
the resolution, to what place in Kent I should betake my self; and receiving no
news, I tossed many things in my mind, as perhaps, that the King desired to
hear somewhat from the Duke how Secretaries return from Croyden, that which was
formerly concealed from them, might infuse some other Councils into the King.
These thoughts I revolved at last, not forgetting the courses of the Court, and
imprinting that into my heart, That there was no good intended toward me; but
that any advantage would be taken against me, I sent a man to Whitehal whether
the King was now come, for a night or two, and by him I wrote to the Lord
Conway, in these words.

My very good Lord,
The Archbishop writes to the Lord Conway, to know if his Majesty will give him
his choice of two houses to retire to.
I Do not forget the Message which you brought unto me on Thursday last, and
because I have heard nothing from you since that time, I send this Messenger on
purpose to know what is resolved touching the House, or Kent, one at
Canterbury, another Five Miles beyond called Foord, and a third on the side of
Canterbury, but two Miles of, the name whereof is Becksburn.

I pray your Lordship to let me know his Majesty's pleasure, Whether he will
leave the choice of any of those Houses to me to reside in: I have reason to
know the resolution hereof, because I must make my Provision of Wood, and
Coals, and Hey, for some definite place; and when I shall have brewed, it is
fit I should know where to put it, or else it will not serve

Your Lordships G. Cant.
Croyden, July 10. 1627.

He made my Servant stay, and when he had gone up to know the Kings further
pleasure, he returned me the Answer following.

May it please your Grace,
I Am ashamed and do confess my fault, The Lord Conway 's Answer.
that I wrote not to your Grace before I received your Reproof, though a
Gracious one; but in truth, I did not neglect, nor forget: But the continual
oppression of business, would not permit me to advertise to your Grace the
Kings Answer. His Majesty heard seriously your Professions and Answers, and
commanded me to signify unto you, That he knew not the present differences
between you and the Town; and if he had, he would not have cast you into that
inconvenience. He was Foord, and said, He did not expect when the Question was
ended between your Grace and the Town, that you should go to Canterbury.

And he further said, He would not tie you to so short a time as might be any
way inconvenient, but does expect that your Grace will govern it so, as his
Majesty shall not need to warn you a second time.

I will not fail to move his Majesty to give you Liberty to choose either of
your Houses you name, and give you knowledge of his pleasure, and in

Your Graces most humble Servant Conway.
Whitehal, July 10. 1627.

I could not but observe therein that passage, That the King does expect that
your Grace will govern it so, as his Majesty shall not need to warn you a
second time; I needed no Interpreter to expound those Foord to see the House
ready.

While Necessaries were caring for, and I lay for some days at Croyden, and
afterward at Lambeth, the City of London was filled with the Report of my
confining, (for so they did term it) and diverse men spoke diversely of it. I
will not trouble my self to mention some idle things, but some other of them
require a little consideration. The reason why the Duke was thought to be
offended with the Archbishop.
A main matter that the Duke was said to take in ill part, was, the resort
which was made to my

My Answer unto that is, The Archbishop accustomed to Hospitality.
That by Nature I have been given to keep a House according to my Proportion,
since I have had any means, and God has blessed me in it. That it is a
property by Saint Paul required in a Bishop, That he should be given to
Hospitality; that it is another of his Rules, Let your Conversation be without
Covetousness; and those things I had in mine eyes. Besides I have no Wife, nor
Child; and as for my Kindred, I do that for them which I hold fit; but I will
not rob the Church, nor the Poor for them.

Again, It is so rare a fault in these days, that men not feeding on the Kings
Meat, but of their own charge, should frankly entertain their Friends when they
come unto them, that I deserve to be pardoned for it.

King James enjoined the Archbishop to live like an Archbishop.
When King James gave me the Bishopric, he did once between him and me, and
another time before the Earl of Salisbury, charge me that I should carry my
House Nobly (that was his Majesty's word) and live like an Archbishop; which I
promised him to do: And when Men came to my House, who were of all civil sorts,
I gave them friendly entertainment, not sifting what exceptions the Duke made
against them; for I knew he might as undeservedly think ill of That a Man who
is guilty of one Evil to himself, thinks that all men that talk together, do
say I do not envy him that happiness, but let it ever attend him.

As for other men of good sort, but of lesser quality, I have heard some by
name, to whom exception has been taken, and these are three, (I know from the
Court by a Friend, that my House for a good space of time has been watched,
and I marvel that they have not rather named sixty then three.)

The Duke was not pleased that Sir Dudley Diggs frequented the Archbishops
house.
The first of these is Sir Dudley Diggs, a very great Mote in the Dukes Eye, as
I am informed; for it is said, That this Knight has paid him in Parliament
with many sharp Speeches. If this be so yet what is that to me, he is of age to
answer for himself. But in the time of the late Parliament, when the Earl of
Carlisle came unto me, and dealt with me thereabout, I gave him my word, and I
did it truly, That I was not acquainted with these things; only being sick as
I was, I had in general given him advice, That he should do nothing that might
Dudley was last in the Fleet, committed from the Council Table, he was much
dealt withal, to know, Whether he was not instigated by me to accuse the Duke
in Parliament: The Knight with all the Protestations and Assurances, that could
come from a Gentleman, acquitted me of the part, and whole, wherein he did me
but right: And I do remember, when that man now so hated, was a great Servant
of the Dukes. So that if he have now lost him, it cannot but be presumed that
it is for

Moreover, How can I but imagine the words and actions of Sir Dudley Diggs have
been ill interpreted, and reported: When I my self saw the Duke stand up nine
times in a morning in the Parliament House to fasten upon him words little less
(if at all less) then Treason; when by the particular Votes of all the Lords
and Commons in both Houses, he was quit of those things, which the other would
have enforced upon him: And a little while before he was hastily clapped into the
Tower, and within a day or two released again, because nothing was proved
against him. And I assure you, I am so little interessed in his actions, That
to this day I could never learn the reason why he was imprisoned Fleet,
although he was kept there for Seven or eight weeks. I distinguish the King
from the Duke of Buckingham; the one is our Sovereign by the Laws of God and
Men; the other a Subject as we are: And if any Subject do impeach another,
though of different degrees, let the party grieved, remedy himself by Law, and
not by Power.

But to speak further for this Knight, I may not forget when he was publicly
employed; one time to the Hague, a second time to Muscovia, Ireland, about
Affairs of the State, such opinion was then held of his good endeavors. And for
mine own part ever since the days of Queen Elizabeth, I have been nearly
acquainted with him, The Archbishop was Tutor to Sir Dudley Digs at Oxford.
he was my Pupil at Oxford, and a very towardly one; and this knowledge each of
other, has continued unto this time. He calls me Father, and I term his Wife
my Daughter, his eldest Son is my God-son, and their Children are in love
accounted my Grandchildren.

The second that I have heard named, was Sir Francis Harrington, a Gentleman
whom for diverse years I have not seen, and who for ought I know, was never in
my house but once in his life.

The third was Sir Thomas Wentworth, The Duke was offended that Sir Thomas
Wentworth frequented the Archbishops House.
who had good occasion to send unto me, and some times to see me, because we
were joint Executors to Sir George Savile, who married his Sister, and was my
Oxford; to whose Son also, Sir Thomas Wentworth and I were Guardians, as may
appear in the Court of Wards, and many things passed between us in that behalf;
yet to my remembrance I saw not this Gentleman but once in these Three quarters
of a year last past; at which time he came to seek his Brother-in-law, the Lord
Clifford, who was then with me at Dinner at Lambeth.

For one of the punishments laid upon me, it was told me by the Lord Conway,
The Archbishop commanded to meddle no more in the High Commission.
That I must meddle no more with the High Commission;

To deliver therefore truly the state of this Question, Commendations of the
High Commission Court.
It cannot be denied, but that it was a great point of policy for the
establishing of Order in the Ecclesiastical, and consequently Civil Estate
also, to erect such a Court, whereby Churchmen that exorbitated in any
grievous manner, might be castigated, and rectified, and such sort of crimes in
the Layety might be censured as were of Ecclesiastical Cognizance. And verily
this is of great use in the Kingdom, as well for cherishing the Study of the
Civil Law, as otherwise: So that it be kept incorruptible, and with that
integrity, as so grave a Meeting and Assembly requires. That was principally
my care, who took much pains and spent much money, that in fair and commendable
sort, Justice was indifferently administered

These things were daily dispatched by me out of Duty, and more out of Charity,
no allowance being of pay from the King, or of Fee from the Subject, to us that
were the Judges: Nay, I may say more, the holding of that Court in such sort as
I did, was very expenceful to me out of my private Purse, in giving weekly
entertainment to the Commissioners; the reason whereof was this, King James
being desirous London, and some Divines, and Civilians, that by a good
presence, Causes might be handled for the reputation of the action, and willed
me therewithal to imitate therein, the Lord Archbishop Whitgift, who invited
weekly some of the Judges to dinner, the rather to allure them thither. This
advice proceeded from the Bishop of Durham that now is, which was not ill if it
came from a good intention.

The High Commissioners chargeable to the Archbishop.
I obeyed it singly, and did that which was enjoined: But whereas in those times
the Commissioners were but few, since that time there has been such an
inundation of all sorts of men into that Company, that without proportion, both
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Commissioners and not Commissioners, resorted
thither, and diverse of them brought so many of their men, that it was truly a
burden to me. I think it may by my Officers be justified upon Oath, That since
I was Archbishop, the

Now this being the true Case, if the Church and Commonwealth having before
surfeited so long of worldly shows, whereof nothing is truly gained temporally
but vexation of spirit; I have had enough of these things and do not dote upon
them: The world, I hope, has found me more stayed and reserved in my Courses.

Nevertheless, whatsoever was expedient for this, was dispatched by me while I
lived at Lambeth and Croyden, albeit I went not out of door.

Star Chamber, nor to the Council Table?

My pain or weakness by the Gout, The Archbishops infirmity permitted him not
to come to the Star Chamber, or Council Table.
must excuse me herein. When I was younger, and had my health, I so diligently
attended at the Star Chamber, that for full seven years I was not one day
wanting. And for the Council Table, the same reason of my Indisposition may
satisfy: But there are many other things that do speak for me. The greatest
matters there handled, were for Money, or more Attempts of War:

And concerning the Provisions for War, I must confess mine ignorance Denmark,
who was engaged by us into the Quarrel for the Palatinate and Germany, and
hazarded both his Person and Dominions in the prosecution of the Question.
These matters I thought upon, as one that had

Again, I was never sent for to the Council Table, but I went, saving one time,
when I was so ill, that I might not stir abroad.

Moreover, I was sure that there wanted no Counselors at the Board, the Number
being so much increased as it was. Besides, I had no great encouragement to
thrust my crasie Body abroad, since I saw what little esteem was made of me in
those things which belonged Venice, and understood of them but by some Gazette.

The Duke of Buckingham had the managing of these things, as it was generally
conceived: For, what was he not fit to determine, in Church, or Commonwealth;
in Court, or Council; in Peace, or War; at Land, or at Sea; at Home, or in
Foreign

Montague had put out his Arminian Book; I threee times complained of it, but
he was held up against me, and by the Duke magnified as a well-deserving man.

Cosens put out his Treatise, which they commonly call [ The Seven Sacraments;]
which, in the first Edition, had many strange things in it, as it seems: I
knew nothing of it, but as it pleased my Lord of Durham, and the Bishop of
Bath: So the World did read.

We were wont in the High Commission to repress obstinate and busy Papists: In
the end of King James his time, a Letter was brought me under the Hand and
Signet of the King, That we must not meddle with any such matter, nor exact the
Twelve-pence for the Sunday of those which came not to the Church, (with which
Forfeit we never Mary the Daughter of France.

After the death of King James, such another Letter was brought from King
Charles, and all Execution against Papists was suspended. But when the Term was
at Reading, by open divulgation in all Courts under the Great Seal of England,
We and all Magistrates are set at liberty to do as it was prescribed by Law:
And now our Pursuvants must have their Warrants again, and take all the Priests
they can, whereof Cross took fourteen or fifteen in a very short space. Not
long after, all these are set free; and Letters come from the King under his
Royal Signet, That all Warrants must be taken from our Messengers, because they
spoiled the Catholics, and carried themselves unorderly unto them, especially
the Bishops Pursuvants: Whereas we had in all but two; Cross my Messenger, for
whom I did ever offer to be answerable; and Thomlinson, for whom my Lord of
London (I think) would do as much. But the Caterpillars indeed, were the
Pursuvants used by the Secretaries,

But truth of Religion and Gods service, was wont to overrule humane Policies,
and not to be overruled; And I am certain that things best prosper, where those
courses are held. But be it what it may be, I could not tell what to make of
this variation of the Compass; since it was only commanded unto me to put such
and such things in execution, but I never understood any thing of the Council,
whereby I might give

For the matter of the Loan, I knew not a long time what to make of it: I was
not present when the Advice was taken; I understood not what was the Foundation
whereupon the Building was raised, neither did ever any of the Council acquaint
me therewith. I saw on the one side the Kings necessity for Money, and
especially it being resolved that the Wat should be pursued; And on the other
side I could not forget,

These Meditations I had with my self; and God knows I frequently in my
prayers did beg, That he whom these things did most concern, would seriously
think upon them. It ran in my mind, that this new Device for Money could not
long hold out; That then we must return into the Highway, whither it were best
to retire our selves betimes, the shortest Errors being the best. But these
thoughts I suppressed within my soul; neither did I ever discourage any man
from Lending,

At the opening of the Commission for the Loan, I was sent for from Croyden. It
seemed to me a strange thing; but I was told there, That howsoever it showed,
the King would have it so, there was no speaking against it. I had not heard,
that men throughout the Kingdom should lend Money against their will; I knew
not what to make of it: But when I saw in the Instructions, the Refusers should
be sent away Denmark, I began to remember Urias that was sent in the Forefront
of the Battle; and to speak truth, I durst not be tender in it. And when
afterward I saw, that men were to be put to their Oath, With whom they had had
Conference, and whether any did dissuade them? And yet further beheld, that
diverse were to be imprisoned: I thought this was somewhat a New world. Yet all
this while I swallowed my own spittle, and spoke nothing of it to any man. Nay,
when after some trial in Middlesex, the first Sitting was Surrey in my House at
Lambeth, and the Lords were there assembled with the Justices of the whole
County, I gave them entertainment in no mean fashion: And I sat with them,
albeit I said nothing; for the confusion was such, that I knew not what to make
of it: Things went on every day, and speech was of much Money to be raised out
of some Counties; yet afterward it was not so readily paid, as preferred; and
at length some refused even in London it self, and Southwark, besides many
Gentlemen of special rank, and some Lords, as it was said. And London
demonstrated that they were not a very few, but persons both of note and
number. The Judges besides concurring another way; That they could not allow
the Legality of the Demand, and the Enforcement that is used thereupon, did
somewhat puzzle me for being too busy in promoting of that, for which I might
one day suffer. Yet hitherto I remained silent, hoping that time would break
that off, which was almost come to an absolute period. But in stead of this, I
was called up to the King to look clearly into the Question. When the Allowance
of Sibthorp's Pamphlet was put upon me, I then had some reason out of the
grounds of that Sermon to fear, (and I pray God that my fear was in vain) that
the Duke had a purpose to turn upside down the Laws, and the whole Fundamental
Courses, and Liberties of the Subject; and to leave us not under the Statutes
and Customs which our Progenitors enjoyed, but to the pleasure of Princes; of
whom, as some are gentle and benign,

Besides now it came in my heart, that I was present at the Kings Coronation,
where many things on the Princes part were solemnly promised; which being
observed would keep all in order, and the King should have a loving and
faithful people, and the Commons should have a a kind and gracious King. The
contemplation of these things made me stay my Judgment; not any unwillingness
to do my Prince any dutiful service, whom I must and do honor above all the
Creatures in the world, and will adventure as far for his true good, as any one
whatsoever. But I am loath to plunge my self so over head and ears in these
difficulties, that I can neither live with quietness of conscience, nor depart
out of the world with good fame and estimation. And perhaps my Sovereign, if
hereafter he looked well into this Paradox, The hearts of Kings are in the hand
of God, and he can turn them as the rivers of water.

The Archbishops observation concerning the rise of the Duke.
I draw to a conclusion: Only repute it not amiss, (because so much falls in
here) to observe a few words of the Duke of Buckingham, not as now he is, but
as he was in his rising. I say nothing of his being in France, because I was
not present, and diverse others there be that remember it well; but I take him
at his first repair to Court. King James, for many insolences, grew weary of
Somerset; and the Kingdom groaning under the Triumvirate of Northampton,
Suffolk and Somerset, (though Northampton soon after died) was glad to be rid
of him. We could have no way so good to effectuate that which was the common
desire, as to bring in another in his room; One nail (as the Proverb is) being
to be driven out by another. It was now observed that the King began to cast
George Villiers, who was then Cup Bearer, and seemed a modest and courteous
Youth. But King James had a fashion, that he would never admit any to nearness
about himself, but such a one as the Queen should commend unto him, and make
some suit on his behalf; That if the Queen afterward being ill entreated,
should complain of this Dear one, he might make his answer, It is long of your
self, for you were the Party that commended him unto me. Our old Master took
delight strangely in things of this nature.

That Noble Queen (who now rests in Heaven) knew her Husband well; and having
been bitten with Favorites both in England and Scotland, was very shie to
adventure upon this request. King James in the mean time more and more loathed
Somerset, and did not much conceal it that his affection increased toward the
other. But the Queen would not come to it, albeit diverse Lords (whereof some
are dead, and some yet living) did earnestly solicit her Majesty thereunto.
When it would not do, I was very much moved to put to my helping hand; they
knowing Anne was graciously pleased to give me more credit then ordinary; which
all her Attendants knew she continued to the time of her death. I labored
much, but could not prevail: The Queen often saying to me; My Lord, You and the
rest of your Friends know not what you do: I know your Master better then you
all; For if this Young man be once brought in, the first persons that he will
plague must be you that labor for him, yea I shall have my part also; The King
will teach him to despise and hardly entreat us all, that he may seem to be
beholden to none but himself.

Notwithstanding this we were still instant, telling her Majesty that the
Change would be for the better: For, George was of a good nature, which the
other was not; And if he should degenerate, yet it would be a long time before
he were able to attain to that height of evil which the other had. In the end
upon importunity Queen Anne condescended, and so pressed it with the King, that
he assented thereunto: Which was so stricken while the Iron was hot, that in
the Queens Bedchamber the King Knighted him with the Rapier which the Prince
did wear. And when the King gave order to swear him of the Bedchamber,
Somerset, who was near, importuned the King with a message, that he might be
only sworn a Groom: But my self and others that were at the door, sent to
George went in with the King; but no sooner he got loose, but he came forth
unto me into the Privy-gallery, and there embraced me: He professed that he was
so infinitely bound unto me, that all his life long he must honor me as his
Father. (George) grace studiously to serve and please him. The second was, That
he should do all good offices between the King and the Queen, and between the
King and the Prince. The third was, That he should fill his Masters ears with
nothing but Truth. I made him repeat Tho. Murrey the Princes Tutor and I
standing together in the Gallery at Whitehall, Sir Geo. Villeirs coming forth
and drawing to us, he told Mr. Murrey how much he was beholden unto me, and
that I had given him certain Instructions; which I prayed him to rehearse, as
indifferently well he did before us; yea, and that he had acquainted the King
with them, who Tacitus has somewhere a note, That benefits while they may be
requited seem courtesies; but when they are so high that they cannot be repaid,
they prove matters of hatred.

Thus, to lie by me to quicken my remembrance, I have laid down the Kent, where
I remain at the writing of this Treatise: Praying God to bless and guide our
King aright; To continue the prosperity and welfare of this Kingdom, which at
this time is shrewdly shaken; To send good and worthy men to be Governors of
our Church: To prosper my mind and body, that I may do nothing that may give a
wound to my Conscience; and then to send me patience quietly to endure
whatsoever his Divine Majesty shall be Da quod jubes, and jube quod vis! And in
the end to give me such a happy deliverance either in life or death, as may be
most for his glory, and for the wholesome example of others, who look much on the
Actions and Passions of Men of my Place.

AMong those many Gentlemen who were imprisoned throughout England for refusing
to lend upon the Commission for Loans, only Five of them brought their Habeas
Corpus, viz. Sir Thomas Darnell, Sir John Corbet, Sir Walter Earl, Sir John
Heveningham, Sir Edward Hampden.

In Michaelmas Term 3 Caroli, a Return was made of their several Commitments.
[To instance only in one, all the rest being in the same

That Sir Walter Earl Knight named in the Writ, is detained in the Prison of
the Fleet in his Custody, by special Command of the King to him signified by
Warrant of several of the Privy Council, in these words:

Whereas Sir Walter Earl Knight was heretofore committed to your Custody, These
are to will and require you still to detain him, letting you know that both his
first Commitment, and direction for the continuance of him in

From Whitehall, November. 7. 1627. Tho. Coventry, etc.

Sir Thomas Darnell was the first that was brought to the Bar upon that Writ;
where the Kings Attorney General Sir Robert Heath did inform the Court, that
his Majesty told him, He heard that some of Habeas Corpus, lest they should not
move for another themselves, by reason the Warden of the Fleet had not returned
the first according to his duty.

To this Sir Thomas Darnell replied, That such words never came into his
thoughts: And did humbly pray they might make no impression upon the Court to
the disparagement of his Cause; for he was accused of Nicholas Hide Chief
Justice said, That he had made a fair and temperate Answer: And you may
perceive (said the Chief Justice) the upright and sincere proceedings which
have been in this business: You no sooner moved for a Habeas Corpus, but it was
granted you; you no sooner desired Council, but they were assigned you, though
any Council might move for you without being assigned, and should have had no
blame for it: The Kings pleasure is, his Law should take place and be executed,
and for that do we sit here;

Then the Court proceeded to hear the Arguments made in the Prisoners behalf.
Mr. Noy argued for Sir Walter Earl, Sergeant Bramston for Sir John Heveningham,
Mr. Seldom for Sir Edward Hampden, Mr. Calthrop for Sir John Corbet, who were
all assigned of Council with the Prisoners by the Court of King's Bench, upon a
Petition delivered by them to that purpose. After they had argued, Mr. Attorney
had a day appointed to argue for the King. It is not our intention to take up
the Readers time with the Arguments at large, either by the one side, or the
other: We shall only hint unto you some generals, chiefly concerning the form
of the Return of the Writ. The first Exception taken by the Council for the
imprisoned Gentlemen, was to the form of the Return.



2. The Keepers of the Prisons have not returned the Cause of the Commitment,
but the Cause of the Cause; which they held not to be good.

3. That the Return of the Commitment is imperfect, for that it shows only
the Cause of the detaining in Prison, and not the Cause of the first Commitment.

Lastly, That the Return is contradictory in it self: For that in the first per
speciale mandatum Domini Regis; And when the Warrant of the Lords of the
Council is shown, it appears that the Commitment is by the command of the
King signified by the Lords of the Council.

The second general Exception was to the matter of the Return; and that was
touching the Imprisonment, per speciale mandatum Domini Regis, by the Lords of
the Council, without any Cause expressed. Wherefore, said Mr. Seldom, by the
constant and settled Laws of this Kingdom (without Nullus liber homo capiatur
vel imprisonetur nisi per legem terrae, etc. And in the Charter of King John
there are these words, Nec eum in carcerem mittimus, We will not commit him to
Prison; that is, The King himself will not.

This right (said Sergeant Bramston) is the only means that a Subject

If upon a Habeas Corpus a Cause of Commitment be certified, then (said Mr.
Noy) the Cause is to be tried before your Lordships; but if no Cause be shown,
the Court must do that which stands with Law and Justice, and that is to
deliver the party. The Commons did complain in Ed. 3. his time, that the great
Charter and other Statutes were broken; They desired, that for the good of
himself and his people they may be kept and put in execution, and not infringed
by making any Arrest by special command, or otherwise. And the Answer which was
given them was this, That the said great Charter and other Statutes should be
put in execution according to the Petition, without disturbance of Arrests by
special command; And the King grants the Commons desire in the same words as
they were expressed in their Petition. And afterward If any man be grieved,
let him complain, and right shall be done. And forasmuch as it does not appear
to the Court, that there was any Cause of the Commitment of these Members, no
Charge against them, no Indictment or Process according to the Laws: Wherefore
Mr. Noy prayed they

Admit the Commitment of the Command of the King was lawful, yet, said Mr.
Calthorp, when a man has continued in prison a reasonable time, he ought to be
brought to answer, and not to continue still in prison without being brought to
answer; For that it appears by the Books of our Laws, that Liberty is a thing
so favored of the Law, that the Law will not suffer the continuance of a man in
prison for any longer time then of necessity it must: And therefore the Law
will neither suffer the Party, Test of an Original Writ, and the Return of the
same, where there is only a Summons, and no Imprisonment of the body; yet the
Law will not allow that there should be a Term between the Test of a Writ of
Capias, and the Return of the same, where the body of a man is to be
imprisoned; insomuch

Monday the 27. of November, the Attorney General argued for the King, That
this was a very great Cause, and has raised great expectation; and he was
afraid that those Gentlemen whom it concerns, have rather advised their
Councils, then their Councils them. For the first Exception, That the Return is
not positive, but has relation to some others; He did Quod detentus est sub
custodia mea per speciale mandatum Domini Regis: The other words [ mihi
significatum] they follow after, but are not part of the affirmation made
before it. And if they will have it as they seem to understand it, then they
must return the words thus; Quod significatum est mihi per Dominos Privati
Consilii, quod detentus est per speciale mandatum Domini Regis; And then it had
not been their own proper Return, but the signification of another, the Lords
of the Council. The turning of the sentence Logicians there are two Causes;
there is Causa causans, and Causa causata. The Causa causans here in this Case,
is not the Warrant from the Lords of the Council, for that is Causa causata:
But the primary and original Cause, which is Causa causans, is, Speciale
mandatum Domini Regis; the other is but the Councils signification, or
testification, or Warrant for him that made the Return. And for the other
Exception, The Cause is imperfect, because it shows only the Cause of detaining
in Prison, per speciale mandatum, etc. it had been good.

Then he proceeded to the matter of the Return, and to answer the Book-Cases
and Records that had been cited by the Council for the

Afterward Sir Nicholas Hide Chief Justice, Justice Dodderidge, Justice Jones,
and Justice Whitlock being upon the Bench, and Sir John Heveningham and the
forementioned Prisoners being brought to the Bar, Sir Nicholas Hide Lord Chief
Justice, by the consent and direction of the Judges, spoke to this purpose:

That the Court has seriously considered what has been spoken



And concluded, That that which is now to be judged by us, is this, Whether one
that is committed by the Kings authority, and no Cause shown of his Commitment,
according as here it is upon this Return, whether we ought to deliver him by
Bail, or to remand him back again? Where by the way you must know, that we can
take notice only of this Return; That when the Case appears to us no otherwise
then by the Return, we are not bound to examine the truth thereof, but the
sufficiency of the Return: We cannot judge upon rumors or reports, but

Mr. Attorney has told you, That the King has done it; And we trust him in
great matters: And we make no doubt but the King, if you seek to him, knowing
the cause why you are imprisoned, will have mercy; but we leave that, we must
not counsel you: If in Justice we ought to deliver you, we would do it; But
upon these grounds, Records, Presidents and Resolutions cited and produced, the
Court is of opinion

Various Reports concerning the Army at Rhee.
Whilst these Arguments about the Loan were in agitation, (which began in
October in Michaelmas-Term) various Reports and Advertisements came from the
Isle of Rhee: Sometime, That they were in a Treaty with the Duke to surrender
the Citadel unto him; Others wrote, That it was but a device of the Governor to
get time till Relief came: And many were dissatisfied with the Presents and
Complements Rhee, how all things went there -- The clean contrary way,

It has been observed, when things come to be Vox populi, it is Rhee; That the
business could not go well at the Isle of Rhee; That there must be a
Parliament; That some must be sacrificed, That Bishop Laud was as like as any.
The Bishop hearing of these speeches, and that they were doubled, being spoken
by several persons, he acquainted the King therewith; who replied unto him, Let
me desire you not to trouble your self with any reports, till you see me
forsake my other Friends, etc. And the Parliament Laud) sought his ruin, which
by the Kings sudden dissolution thereof was prevented, and the Kings other
Friends by that means not forsaken.

A further Supply preparing for Rhee, and to be conveyed thither by the Earl of
Holland.
Notwithstanding these reports, the King is resolved speedily to set to Sea
diverse Ships with a further supply of Soldiers to be sent to the Army in the
Isle of Rhee; and commands to press certain Companies of Soldiers and Mariners,
who were to rendevouz at Plymouth, and from thence to be imbarqued and disposed
as aforesaid. In order Charles L. Vicount Wilmot: But afterward his Majesty by
Commission did constitute and appoint the Earl of Holland to repair to
Plymouth, and there to take into his charge and under his command, the
oversight, rule, order and government of all the said Soldiers and Mariners
both at Sea and Land, and to see them, and all Provisions and Necessaries to be
shipped, and with all conveniencie to be transported and conducted to the Isle
of Rhee; and a Squadron of Ships was also appointed for their transportation,
and he was to deliver them under the command of the Duke of Buckingham Admiral
of England, and General of the Army.

But before the Earl of Holland set sail, let us see what they are doing Rhee.

The first news we meet with there, The Citadel at Rhee relieved.
is, That the French (notwithstanding our Army at Land, and a hundred Sail of
Ships at Sea) had got into the Harbor with relief of Provisions: And that Sir
John Buroughs, the 20. of September, Sir John Buroughs slain.
going to take a view of the Works, was shot with a bullet, whereof he
presently dyed; His death was much lamented, having been a great Honor to the
English Nation both at home and abroad.

Pierce Crossby, and some other Commanders, with about Sixteen hundred English
and Irish, which came as an Assistance to the Forces before Rhee. And now Toras
the Governor began to foresee want, notwithstanding his late supply, and to
study all ways and means how to give advertisement to the King of France of the
low condition he was reduced unto. Toras sends intelligence to the King of
France.
Sandgrein, a Frenchman, adventured out of the Citadel, and privately escaped
the Guards, and got with Intelligence to the King of France: Yet Toras fearing
left he might miscarry,

But the King of France was extremely alarmed by the advertisement from Toras,
and thereupon blocks up Rochel with his Army, as if he had Rochel, was thereby
to take the opportunity to be near at hand to land Forces under the favor of
the Little-Fort, so much neglected at first, and to put Victuals into the
Citadel at S. Martins, which was at that time reduced to a low condition. And
the same was effected time after time, and supplies of men and victuals got in,
notwithstanding the English Guards at Land and Sea, which now and then took
some of the Vessels; but nevertheless so much provision got in, as served their
occasion

Now the Rochellers, The Rochellers at last declare for England.
after they had in vain continued promises of obedience to the King of France,
and entettained a division among the Protestants, one Party crossing another,
and finding the evil consequence of the division, they put forth a Manifesto,
and declare for England; and the Duke of Rhoan having given Commissions to
raise Forces to assist the English, declares in preservation of the Edict of
two Peaces, and protests not to demand any thing but the observation of the
said Edicts. France declares and promises, That he will on his part observe
the said Edict: And further declares the Duke of Rhoan to be drawn to death;
and declares Sobiez a Traitor, and that he that should kill him, should be
accounted Noble.

By this time the French had got a great supply of Shipping from the Spaniard
for their assistance, which with their own made up above a hundred Sail, A
Treaty for Surrender between the Duke and Toras.
(exceeding the English Navy in number) yet did avoid engaging with the English
Fleet, exercising all their skill and art how to get in a good and round supply
of Provision into the Citadel; and Toras the Governor employed his wit to gain
time to that end, by entertaining a Treaty of Surrender upon honorable terms;
and prevails with the Duke that he may first send to the King of France, that
he might come off with Toras sent, and have a safe conduct through France to
pass into England. And so they both go to the Court of France, where the
English Gentleman was secured, but the Party whom Toras sent did his errand,
and no doubt gave the King of France a perfect account of their condition in
the Citadel; whilst the English Gentleman was detained that he could not do the
like service for the King of England, in delivering to him what he had Martins;
but by reason the English Gentleman was not permitted to go for England, the
Frenchman was not permitted to go again into the Citadel.

The Citadel relieved again*
Toras again renews the Treaty, pretending that if he had not Relief such a day
by such an hour, he would surrender: And spun out the time so long, that in
good earnest Relief got in both of men, victuals and ammunition, and the same
Vessels which brought the Relief, carried away Meadow-Castle, (a place also at
the first neglected, though then unmanned) And orders are given to draw out men
(leaving the Trenches unguarded) to encounter the French that were landed:
Which was performed with some reasonable

A Retreat resolved on.
This last refreshment of the Enemy (being about the middle of October) caused
the Duke to enter into Council, and to think of a resolution for a Retreat;
which he communicated to Sobiez, and tells him further, That the season is
past, his Army diminished, his Victuals consumed, Sobiez against it.
Sobiez answered the Duke, That the Earl of Holland's Fleet was coming with
Supplies; that the Relief given was not considerable; that the Retreat would
draw after it the loss of Rochel, and thereby make Sobiez guilty of the ruin
thereof; but above all, it would bring an irreparable prejudice and dishonor
upon his Master of Great Britain, that had made an Enterprise of so little
honor and profit. Upon this the Duke continues the Siege, and shortly after
resolves to storm the Citadel and Works; The Citadel stormed.
to which (it November. 6. a vain Attempt was made on all sides of the Citadel.
In short, we lost men and honor; for the Fort was unaccessible, besides well
manned with fresh supplies of men newly put in: And having left many dead and
hurt, we were forced to retire. This ill success, with the advice given that
the Troops of the other Forts did increase, (the French, notwithstanding our
Shipping, pouring their Forces amain into the Island) hastened the Duke to
raise the Siege and to retreat, to ship his men again for England.

November. 8. early in the morning the Drums beat, The Army retreats.
and the Army prepares for a March; but scarce had the Rearguard come out, but
the Troops of the Enemy appeared equal in number for Foot, and far stronger in
The Enemy engages the Rear of the Army.
and quickly put them to a retreat, who in that Narrow Causey disordered the
Foot, and the Enemy thereby took the advantage, followed close and did much
execution upon the English: Those who escaped the sword, were drowned in the
Salt Pits and Ditches; and the Crowd was so great on the Bridge, (the Enemy
pursuing them over) that many English were drowned in the River. Yet in this
discom^ited condition the English took courage, faced about, rallied their
Forces, made up a smart body that drew up to fight the Enemy;

November. 9. the Army was shipped, and the Duke promises the Rochellers to come
again to their relief, and presently after set sail for England, meeting with
the Earl of Holland as he was setting out of Plymouth coming

And now every man passes his censure upon this Expedition: Several opinions
concerning this Expedition to The.
Some laying the fault upon the Duke, (1) For being too slow in his march after
the first landing, whereby the Enemy got in provision and heartned his men. (2)
In being too remiss during the Siege, in not preventing provisions for going
into the Citadel, by doubling Guards at Land and Sea, when the wind stood fair.
(3) In omitting to take in the Little Fort, from whence (as it was said)
proceeded all the misery that afterward followed. (4) In Holland come with a
Supply of shipping, men and victuals, so soon as he might and ought to have
done, he had then without doubt so narrowly blocked up the Harbor to the
Citadel by Sea, that no Provision should have got into it. The Earl of Holland
answered for himself, That when he was ready to have gone aboard the Fleet at
Plymouth, the Ships with Provision were not come out of Chattam; and when the
Provisions were shipped, time was spent before he could get them to a Rendevouz;
and when they were come to a Rendevouz, and he ready to set sail with the whole
Fleet, the winds proved contrary. But some of the chief Commanders when they
came into England, spoke somewhat loudly of other Rhee, pleading much on the
behalf of the Council of War.

The misfortune of Rhee-Expedition, causes a clamor in the Nation.
And now when the unfortunate Action of Rhee was known and published throughout
the Nation, the cry of the People was so great, and the Kings necessities so
pressing, that it was in every man's mouth, A Parliament must needs be summoned:
For we have now provoked two potent neigbor Kings, and near Enemies; our Coasts
and Ports were unguarded, our able Commanders worn away or not employed: The
Mariners come in multitudes to the Court at Whitehall, in great disorder and
confusion

We give you here a brief Account of such Arrearages as were behind and unpaid
for Freight of Ships, Seamens Wages, and Materials for Shipping, in the Years
1625, 1626, and 1627.

A List of Arrearages for freight of ships and Sea-mens wages.
FOr freight of Merchants and Newcastle-Ships employed in his Majesty's service,
and for several Bills of provisions yet unpaid in the years 1625, and 1626,
according to the former Estimates and Privy-seals passed for the same l. 60000
s. 00 d. 00 For the freight of sundry Merchants and Newcastle-ships employed in
his Majesty's service to the Isle of Rhee and other places, in the year 1627
19560 12 04 For Seamens wages in the same year 1627, ending the last of this
month Anne-Royal. Repulse. Assurance. Nonsuch. Waltspite. Adventure.
61957 19 08 The repairing of the Hulls and Masts of the said Ships to make
them fit only for employment in the Narrow-Seas, together with repair, and for
setting forth of the Nostredame Sea-waller, two Prise-ships 05761 10 04
Triumph. Victory. S. George. S. Andrew. Rainbow, Vantguard. Red-Lion. S.
Esperite. Gard-Land. Convecline. Antelop. Entrance.
For repairing the said Ships mentioned in the margin, for their Hulls, Masts,
etc. at 1000 marks apeece 08000 00 00 For supply of 700 Tuns of Cordage taken
out of his Majesty's Stores, for furnishing to Sea of several Fleets, at 26 l.
13 s. 4 d. per Tun, being demanded upon several Estimates to be made good at
the end of each service, and yet unpaid 18666 13 04 Besides these Arrears,
there were Demands made by the Navy for supplying the Stores with Mast, Timber,
Plank, Deal, Sales, Ropes, Tar, Tallow, Iron, Anchors, etc. the Sum of 26000 00
00

The Rochellers, after the Dukes arrival in England, sent their Deputies to his
Majesty for succor and relief in their distressed condition, and presented
their Desires in nature of a Remonstrance to the King and the Lords of the
Council; wherein they gave his Majesty most humble thanks for the great
assistance and comfort they had received by the Fleet sent in July last,
whereof the Duke of Buckingham was Admiral, which would have been of greater
assistance unto them, had the season of the year permitted Denmark to propound
the making of a Peace between the two Crowns of England and France, a thing to
be wished (if really intended:) But the Proceedings of France with the Reformed
Churches there, has hitherto been such, as when they spoke most fair, and
nothing but Peace uttered, nothing less was intended, and great advantages
thereby have been taken

They did further remonstrate, That now the Forces of France are breaking down
apace about them totally to block them up by Land, and do intend to make a
Barracado cross the Channel, leaving a narrow passage for the flux and reflux
of the Sea, and by that means to stop all manner of Provisions by Sea; which
evidently remonstrates their further ruin, if they with all expedition have
not succor and help from his Majesty of Great Britain: For their necessities
and straits are very great already, England and Scotland, of such Buckingham at
his departure, that he would once more come in person to their assistance.

In this state of Affairs, it is said, Sir Robert Gotton being thereunto
called, presented his Advice to certain Lords of the Council in manner

AS soon as the House of Austria had incorporated it self with Spain, Sir
Robert Cotton's Advice touching the present state of affairs.
and by their new Discoveries gotten to themselves the Wealth of the Indies,
They began to affect, and have ever since pursued a Fifth Monarchy. The Emperor
Charles would lay the first Foundation of Italy, by surprising Rome: From this
he was thrust by force, and respect of Religion, Hen. 8. being made Caput
Foediris against him. He then attempted High-Germany, practicing by faction and
force to reduce them first to Petty States, and so to his absolute power: In
this Hen. 8. again prevented him, by laying the Lutheran Princes under this
Confederacy and assistance. His Son the Second Philip pursued the same
Ambition in the Netherlands of Germany, by reduction whereof he intended to
make his way further into the others. This the late Queen of England
interrupted, by siding France, to give the more reputation of assistance to
them, and security to it self.

Spain seeing his hopes thus fruitless by these Unions, and streights, began
first to break, if he might, the Amity of France and England: But finding the
Common danger to be a fast tie, he raises up a party in that Kingdom of his
own; by which the French King was so distressed, Spain had there removed that
next and greatest Obstacle of his Ambition.

His Council now tells him from these examples, That the way to his great work
is impossible, so long as England lay a let in his way; And advises him, that
the remove of that Obstacle be the first of his intents. This drew on those
often secret practices against the person of the Queen, and his open fury in
Eighty Eight against the body of the State: which she perceiving, following the
advice of a free Council, would never

Spain then, by the wisdom and power of that great Lady, despoiled so of his
means to hurt, though not of his desires, makes up with her Peaceful Successor
of happy memory that Golden League; That disarming Denmark by that quarrel;
diverted Sweden's assistance by the Wars with the Pole, and moving them now
with offer of France and us, as has made themselves by our quarrel of Religion
a fast Confederate, and us a dangerous Enemy. So as now we are left no other
assurance against their malice and ambition, but the Netherlands, where the tie
of mutual safety is weakened by daily discontents bred and fed between us by
some ill-affected to both our securities, that from the doubtfulness of
friendship as we now stand, we may rather suspect from our own domestic
Faction, if they grow too Rome in her growing (that held that equal safety,
honorable and more easy, dare regnum, then subjugare provinciam) considering
the power they have in their hands, then to give any friendly assistance to
save the present condition of a State. You may therefore see in what terms we
stand abroad, and I fear we are at home for resistance in no better state.
There must be to withstand a Foreign Invasion, a proportion both of Sea and
Landforces: For to give an Enemy an easy passage, and a Port to relieve him
in, is no less then to hazard all at one stake.

And it is to be considered, That no March by Land can be of that speed to make
head against the landing of an Enemy. Then that follows, That there is no such
prevention, as to be Master of the Sea. To this

For the Landforces, if it were for an Offensive War, the men of less
livelihood were the best spared; and we used formerly to make such War
Purgamenta reipub* if we made no further purchase by it. But for the safety of
a Commonwealth, the wisdom of all times did never entrust the Public Cause to
any other then to such as had a portion in the Public Adventure. And that we
saw in Eighty Eight, when the May, that they might be no long grievance to the
Public; such Discontentments being to us a more fatal Enemy, then any Foreign
forces.

The careful distributing and directing of their Sea and Landforces,

To make up this Preparation, there are requisite two things, Money, and
Affections; for they cannot be properly severed. It was well and wisely said of
that great and grave Councellor the Lord Burleigh in the like case, to the late
Queen; Win hearts, and you have their hands and And I find that of late,
Diffidence has been in the one, and has unhappily prevented the other.

In gathering then of Money for this present need, there are three things
requisite, Speed, Assurance, and Satisfaction; And the way to gather (as in
other like cases has been done) must be by the pathway formerly called Via
regia, being more secure and speedy: For by unknown and untrodden ways, it is
both rough and tedious, and never succeeds well. This last way, although it
took place as it were by a Supply at

If any will make the succession of times to produce an inevitable necessity to
enforce it if denied, whether in general by Excise or Imposition, or in
particular on some select persons, which is the custom of some Countries, and
so conclude it, as there, for the Public State, suprema lege; He must look for
this to be told him, That seeing Necessity must conclude always to gather
Money, it is less speedy or assured then that by a Parliament: The sucess
attends the humor of the heedless Multitude, that are full of jealousy and
distrust, and so unlike to comply to any unusual Course of Levy, but by force;
which if used, the effect is fearful, and has been fatal to the State. Whereas
that by Parliament rests principally on the Regal person, who may with ease

If a Parliament then be the most speedy assurance and safe way, it is fit to
conceive what is the fairest way to act and work that to the present need.

First for the time of usual Summons, Forty days, reputed to be too large for
this present Necessity, it may be by dating the Writs lessened, since it is no
positive Law; so that a care be had that there may a Countyday

The last and weightiest Consideration, if a Parliament be thought fit, is, How
to remove or comply the Differences between the King

Religion is a matter that they lay nearest to their Consciences, and they are
led by this ground of jealousy to doubt some practices against it. First, for
that though the Spanish Match was broken by the careful industry Buckingham,
out of his religious care (as he then declared) that the Articles there
demanded might lead to some such Sufferance as might endanger the quiet, if not
the state of the Reformed Religion here; yet there have (when he was an Actor
principal in the Conditions of France) as hard, if not worse to the
preservation of our Religion, passed, then those with Spain. And the suspect is
strengthened by the close keeping of this Agreement, and doubt in them of his
affection, in that his Mother and others, many his Ministers of

They talk much of his advancing men Popishly devoted, to Places in the Camp of
nearest service and chief Command; and that the Recusants have got these late
years by his power, more courage and assurance then before.

If to clear these doubts, (which perhaps are worse in fancy then in truth) he
take a course, it might much advance the Public service against the squeamish
humors, that have more of violent Passion then of

The next is, The late misfortunes and losses of Men, Munition, and Honor in
the late Undertakings abroad; which the more temperate spirits impute to want
of Council, and the more sublime Wits to Practice.

They begin with the Palatinate, and lay the fault of the loss thereof on the
imputed Credit of Gondomar, distrusting him for the staying of supply to Sir
Horatio Vere, when Colonel Cecil was cast on that employment; by which the King
of Spain became Master of the Kings Childrens Inheritance. And when Count
Mansfield had a Royal supply of Forces to assist the Princes of our party for
the recovety thereof, either Plot or Error defeated the enterprise for us to
Spains advantage. That Robert Mansfields Expedition to Algiers, should purchase
only the security and guard of the Spanish Coasts.

To spend many Hundred thousand pounds in the Cadiz-Voyage, against the Advice
in Parliament, only to warn the King of Spain to be in readiness, and so our
selves weakened, is taken for a sign of an ill affection amongst the Multitude.

The spending of much Munition, Victuals and Money, in my Lord Willoughbies
Journey, is counted an unthrifty error in the Director of

It was held not long ago a fundamental Rule of our Neighbors, and our
Security, by the old Lord Burleigh, That nothing can prevent the Spanish
Monarchy, but a Fastness of those two Princes, whose Amity gave countenance and
courage to the Netherlands and German-Princes to make head against his
Ambition. And we see, by this disunion, a fearful Defeat has happened to the
King of Denmark and that party, to the

And this waste of Public Treasure in fruitless Expeditions, will be an
important Cause to hinder any new Supply in Parliament.

Another fear that may disturb the smooth and speedy passage of the Kings
desires in Parliament, is the vast waste of the Kings livelihood; whereby is
like, as in former times, to arise this jealousy and fear, That when he has
not of his own to support his ordinary Charge, for which the Lands of the Crown
were settled unalterable, and called Sacrum patrimonium that then he must needs
of necessity rest upon those assistances of the people, which ever were only
collected and consigned for the Commonwealth; from whence it is like there will
be no great labor and stiffness, to induce his Majesty to an Act of Resumption;
since such desires of the State have found an easy way in the will of all
Princes, from the Third Henry unto the last.

But that which is like to pass the deepest into their Disputes and care, is
the late Pressures they supposed to have been done upon the

And these dangerous distastes to the people are not a little improved Eighty
eight, produced none such; And makes them in their distracted fears to
conjecture idly, it was raised wholly to subject their Fortunes to the will of
Power, rather then of Law; and to make good some further breach upon their
Liberties and Freedoms at home, rather then defend us from any force abroad.
How far such Jealousies, if they meet with any unusual disorder of lawless
Soldiers, are an apt distemper of the loose and needy Multitude, which will
easily turn away upon any occasion in the State that they can side withal, as
a glorious pretense of Religion and Public safety, when their true end will be
only rapine and ruin of all, is worthy a prudent and preventing care.

I have thus far delivered, with that freedom you pleased to admit, such
Difficulties as I have taken up amongst the Multitude, as may

Only I could wish to remove away a personal distaste of my Lord Duke of
Buckingham amongst the people: He might be pleased, if there be a necessity of
a Parliament, to appear first Adviser thereunto, and of the satisfaction it
shall please his Majesty of grace to give at such time to his people; which I
would wish to be grounded by president of his best Buckingham has of the
public unity and content. By which there is no doubt but he may remain not
only secure from any further quarrel with them, but merit a happy memory
amongst them of a zealous Patriot. For, to expiate the passion of the people,
at such times, with sacrifice of any of his Majesty's Servants, I have found it
-- as in Ed. 2. Rich. 2. Hen. 6. --

A resolution to call a Parliament.
These and such like Considerations being represented to the King, Ian. 29. A
Resolution is taken at the Council Table, to call a Parliament, to meet the 17.
of March following. And now Warrants are sent according to a preceding Order
made in this month, to all parts, to release the Imprisoned Gentry, and
confined Gentlemen, for the business of the Loan-money: And as fast as Writs
came to the Counties and

The Names of the Gentry, who about the time that Writs issued out for a
Parliament, were released out of Restraint and Confinement, appear by the
ensuing Order and List.

At Whitehall:
Present, The Kings Majesty,
Lord Treasurer, Lord President, Lord Admiral, Lord Steward, Lord Chamberlain,
Earl of Suffolk, Earl of Dorset, Earl of Salisbury, Earl of Morton, Lord
Viscount Conway, Lord Bishop of Durham, Lord B. Bath and Wells, Mr. Treasurer,
Mr. Comptroller, Master of the Wards, Mr. Secretary Cook, Mr. Chancellor of the
Exchequer, Mr. Chancellor of the Duchy.
IT is this day Ordered by His Majesty being present in Council, That the
several persons hereunder written, shall from henceforth be discharged and set
at liberty from any Restraint heretofore put upon them by His Majesty's
Commandment: Order of the Council to set at liberty the Gentry imprisoned for
the Loan-money.
And hereof all Sheriffs and other Officers are to take notice.

Knights Sir John Strangewayes Sir William Armin Sir William Massam Sir William
Wilmore Sir Erasmus Drailon Sir Edward Aiscough Sir Nathanael Barnardiston Sir
Robert Poyntz Sir Oliver Luke Sir Maurice Berkley Sir Thomas Wentworth Sir John
Wray Sir William Constable Sir John Hotham Sir John Pickering Sir Francis
Barrington
Esquires. William Anderson Terringham Norwood John Trigonwell Thomas Godfrey
Richard Knightley Thomas Nicholas John Hampden George Ratcliffe John Dulton
Henry Pool Nathanael Coxwell Robert Hatley Thomas Elmes
Gent. Thomas Wood John Wilkinson William Allen Thomas Holyhead
All these remained confined to several Counties.

Knights. Sir Walter Earl Sir Thomas Darnell Sir Harbotle Grimston
Esquire. George Catesby
Londoners. Edward Hooker Londoners. James Wooldrond Londoners. Henry Sanders
Londoners.
All Prisoners in the Fleet.

Knights. Sir John Corbet Sir John Elliot
Esquire. William Coriton
Londoners. John Stevens Thomas Deacon John Potter
In the Gate House.

Knight. Sir John Heveningham
Londoners. Samuel Vassal William Angel
In the Marshalsey.

Londoners. William Savage Mathanael Manesty In the New-Prison.


Londoners. Robert Lever John Peacock Edward Ridge John Oclabery Andrew Stone
William Spurstow John Pope James Bunch Thomas Garris James Waldron John Bennet
Ambrose Aylot Thomas Sharp Thomas Totham Augustine Brabrook Robert Pain Edward
Talston John Whiting Thomas Webb John Ferry
All in the Custody of a Messenger.

Orders issued also from the Council to the Lord Major and Aldermen of London,
To use moderation in the demanding of the Loan-money from those of the City of
London who deferred payment. And now Archbishop Abbot, the Earl of Bristol, and
the Bishop of Lincoln, notwithstanding the cloud they were under, A Parliament
summoned.
are had in consideration by the King and Council, and Writs are ordered to be
sent unto them to sit in the House of Peers the ensuing Parliament.

A Commission for Impo^itions.
After the Writs of Summons went forth, the King gave direction Thirty thousand
pounds paid to Burlemach to be returned by Bill of Exchange, to raise Foreign
Forces.
And at the same time ordered the Lord Treasurer to pay Thirty thousand pounds
to Philip Burlemac a Dutch Merchant in London, to be by him returned over into
the Low Countries by Bill of Exchange unto Sir William Balfour and John
Dalbier, for the raising of a Thousand Horse, with Arms both for Horse and
Foot. The supposed intent of which German Horse was, as was then feared, to
enforce the Excise

The Council also had then under consideration the Levying of Ship Money upon
the Counties, to raise the King a Revenue that way. But now that a Parliament
was called, the Council held it unfit and unseasonable to debate these matters
any further at that time.

Recusants taken at Clerkenwell.
A little before the Parliament assembled, a Society of Recusants was taken in
Clerkenwell: Diverse of them were found to be Jesuits, and the House wherein
they were taken was designed to be a College

Among their Papers was found a Copy of this Letter written to their Father
Rector at Bruxels, discovering their Designs upon this State, and their
Judgment of the temper thereof, with a Conjecture of the success of the ensuing
Parliament.

Father Rector,
A Letter from a Jesuit concerning the ensuing Parliament.
LEt not the damp of Astonishment seize upon your ardent and zealous soul,
Elizabeth's days.

You must know, the Council is engaged to assist the King by way of
Prerogative, in case the Parliamentary way should fail. You shall see this
Parliament will resemble the Pelican, which takes a pleasure to dig out with
her beak her own bowels.

The Election of Knights and Burgesses has been in such confusion of apparent
Faction, as that which we were wont to procure heretofore with much art and
industry (when the Spanish Match was in Treaty) now breaks out naturally as a
botch or boil, and spits and spues out its own rankor and venom.

You remember how that famous and immortal Statesman the Count of Gondomar fed
King James his fancy, and rocked him asleep with the soft and sweet sound of
Peace, to keep up the Spanish Treaty. Likewise we were Palatinate, and
advancing the Honor and Integrity of the Spanish Nation, and vilifying the
Hollanders; remonstrating to King James, That that State was most ungrateful
both to his Predecessor Queen Elizabeth, and his Sacred Majesty; That the
States were more obnoxious then the Turk, and perpetually injured his Majesty's
loving Subjects in the East Indies, and likewise they have usurped from his
Majesty the Regality and unvaluable profit of the Narrow-Seas in fishing upon
the English Coast, etc.

This great Statesman had but one principal means to further their great and
good designs, which was to set on King James, that none but the
Puritan-Faction, which plotted nothing but Anarchy, and his Confusion, were
averse

We have now many strings to our Bow, and have strongly fortified our Faction,
and have added two Bulwarks more: For when King James lived (you know) he was
very violent against Arminianism, and interrupted (with his pestilent Wit and
deep Learning) our strong Designs in Holland, Orange.

Now we have planted that Sovereign Drug Arminianism, which we hope will purge
the Protestants from their Heresy; and it flourishes and bears fruit in due
season.

The Materials which build up our Bulwark, are the Projectors and Beggars of
all ranks and qualities: Howsoever, both these Factions cooperate to destroy
the Parliament, and to introduce a new species and form of Government,

Those serve as direct Mediums and Instruments to our end, which is the
Universal Catholic Monarchy. Our foundation must be Mutation, and Mutation
will cause a Relaxation, which will serve as so many violent diseases, as the
Stone, Gout, etc. to the speedy distraction of our perpetual and insufferable
anguish of body, which is worse then death it self.

We proceed now by Council and mature deliberation, how and when to work upon
the Duke's Jealousy and Revenge; And in this we give the

There is another matter of Consequence, which we take much into our
consideration and tender care, which is to slave off the Puritans, that they
hang not in the Duke's ears, They are impudent subtle people.

And it is to be feared lest they should negotiate a Reconciliation between the
Duke and the Parliament: It Is certain, the Duke would gladly have reconciled
himself to the Parliament at Oxford, and Westminster; But now we assure our
selves we have so handled the matter, that both Duke and Parliament

For the better prevention of the Puritans, the Arminians have already locked
up the Duke's ears; And we have those of our own Religion, which stand
continually at the Duke's Chamber, to see who goes in and out: We cannot be too
circumspect and careful in this regard.

I cannot choose but laugh to see how some of our own Coat have accoutred
themselves; you would scarce know them, if you saw them: And it is admirable,
how in speech and gesture they act the Puritans. The Cambridge-Scholars
Puritans a little better then they have done the Jesuits: They have abused our
sacred Patron Saint Ignatius in jest, but we will make them smart for it in
earnest. I hope you will excuse my merry digression; For I confess unto you, I
am at this time transported with joy to see how happily all Instruments and
means, as well great as less, cooperate unto our purposes.

But to return unto the main Fabric: Our foundation is Arminianism; The
Arminians and Projectors, as it appears in the premises, affect mutation. This
we second, and enforce by probable Arguments. In the first place we take into
consideration the Kings honor, and present necessity; and we show how the King
may free himself of his Ward, as Lewis the Eleventh did. And for his great
splendour and luster, he may raise a vast Revenue, and not be beholden to his
Subjects; which is by way of Imposition of Excise. Then our Church-Catholicks
proceed to show the means how to settle this Excise, Germans, who will eat up
the Kings Revenues, and spoil the Country wheresoever they come, though they
should be well paid; What havoc will they make there, when they get no Pay, or
are not duly paid? They will do more mischief, then we hope the Army will do.

We are provident and careful, that this Mercenary Army of Two thousand Horse,
and Twenty thousand Foot, shall be taken on and in pay before the Excise Cadiz
was, West India Fleet, etc.


The Parliament being assembled the Seventeenth day of March, His Majesty began
with this Speech.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
THese Times are for Action: The King's Speech at the opening of the Parliament.
Wherefore for Examples sake, I mean not to spend much time in Words; expecting
accordingly that your (as I hope) good Resolutions will be speedy, not spending
time unnecessarily, or (that I may better say) dangerously; For, tedious
Consultations at this conjuncture of time, are as hurtful as ill Resolutions.

I am sure you now expect from me, both to know the cause of

Only let me remember you, That my duty most of all, and every one of yours
according to his degree, is, to seek the maintenance of this Church and
Commonwealth: And certainly, there never was a time in which this duty was more
necessarily required, then now.

I therefore judging a Parliament to be the ancient, speediest, and best way in
this time of Common danger, to give such Supply as to secure our selves, and to
save our Friends from imminent ruin, have called you together. Every man now
must do according to his conscience: Wherefore if you (as God forbid) should
not do your duties in contributing what the State at this time needs, I must in
discharge of my conscience use those other means which God has put into my

Take not this as a Threatening, for I scorn to threaten any but my Equals; but
an Admonition from him, that both out of nature and duty, has most care of
your preservations and prosperities: And (though I thus speak) I hope that your
demeanors at this time will be such, as shall not only make me approve your
former Councels, but lay on me such obligations as shall tie me by way of
thankfulness

I will only add one thing more, and then leave my Lord Keeper to make a short
Paraphrase upon the Text I have delivered you; which is, To remember a thing,
to the end we may forget it. You may imagine that I came here with a doubt of
success of what I desire, remembering the distractions of the last Meeting: But
I assure you that I shall very To maintain the unity of the Spirit in the bond
of Peace.

The Lord Keeper seconded his Majesty on this manner.

The Lord Keepers Speech.
to consult and conclude of the weighty and urgent Business of this Kingdom.
Weighty it is, and great; as great as the honor, safety, and protection of
Religion, King and Country; And what can be greater? Urgent it is; It is little
pleasure to tell or think how urgent: And to tell it with circumstances, were a
long work: I will but touch the sum of it in few words.

The Pope and House of Austria have long affected, the one a Austria, besides
the rich and vast Territories of both the Indies and in Africa joined together,
are become Masters of Spain and Italy, and the great Country of Germany. And
although France be not under their subjection, yet they have environed all
about it; The very Bowels of the Kingdom swayed by the Popish Faction: They
have gotten such a part and such intercession in the Government, that under
pretense of Religion, to root strict Alliance, that Treaty has been broken,
and those of the Religion have been put to all extremity, and undoubtedly will
be ruined, without present help. So as that King is not only diverted from
assisting the Common Cause, but has been misled to engage himself in hostile
acts against our King and other Princes, making way thereby for the House of
Austria, to the ruin of his own, and other Kingdoms.

Other Potentates, that in former times did balance and interrupt the growing
greatness of the House of Austria, are now removed and Turk has made Peace
with the Emperor, and turned himself wholly into Wars with Asia: The King of
Sweden is embroiled in a War with Poland, which is invented by Spanish
practices, to keep that King from succoring our part: The King of Denmark is
chased out of his Kingdom on this, and on that side the Zound; so as the House
of Austria is on the point to command all the Seacoasts from Dantzick to
Embden, and all the Rivers falling into the Sea in that great extent: So as
besides their power by Land, they

In the Baltique-Sea, they are providing and arming all the Ships they can
build, or hire; And have at this time their Ambassadors treating at Lubeck, to
draw into their service the Hans-Towns, whereby taking from us and our
Neighbors the Eastland-Trade, by which our Shipping is supplied, they expect
without any blow given to make themselves Masters of that Sea. In these Western
parts, Dunkirkers, and by the now French and Spanish Admiral, to the ruin of
Fishing (of infinite consequence both to us, and the Low Countries) they infest
all our Coast, so as we pass not safely from Port to Port. And that Fleet which
lately assisted the French at the Isle of Rhee, is now preparing at S. Andrews,
with other Ships built in the Coast of Biscay to reinforce it, and a great
Fleet is making ready in Lisbon; where besides their own, they do serve
themselves upon all Strangers Bottoms coming to that Coast for Trade: And
England or Ireland, as they shall find advantage, and a place fit for their
turn.

Our friends of the Netherlands, besides the fear that justly troubles them
lest the whole force of the Emperor may fall down upon them, are distracted by
their Voyages into the East, which has carried both Men and Money into another
World, and much weakened them at home.

Thus are we even ready on all sides to be swallowed up; The Emperor, France
and Spain being in open War against us, Germany overrun, the King of Denmark,
distressed, the King of Sweden diverted, and the Low-Country-men disabled to
give us assistance.

I speak not this to increase fear, unworthy of English courages, but to press
to provision worthy the wisdom of a Parliament: And for that cause his Majesty
has called you hither, that by a timely provision against those great imminent
dangers, our selves may be

And because in all Warlike preparations Treasure bears the name, and holds the
semblance of the nerves and sinews; And if a sinew be too short or too weak, if
it be either shrunk or strained, the part becomes unuseful: It is needful that
you make a good and timely supply of Treasure, without which all Councels will
prove fruitless. I might press many Reasons to this end; but I will but name
few.

First for his Majesty's sake, who requires it. Great is the duty which we owe
him by the Law of God; great by the Law of Nature, and our own Allegiance;
great for his own merit, and the memory

A War was advised here, Assistance professed, yea and protested here: I do but
touch it, I know you will deeply think on it; and the more, for the example the
King has set you; His Lands, his Plate, his Jewels he has not spared to
supply the War: What

Secondly for the Cause sake: It concerns us in Christian charity to tender the
distresses of our Friends abroad; It concerns us in Honor, not to abandon them,
who have stood for us. And if this come not close enough, You shall find our
Interest so woven and involved with theirs, that the Cause is more ours then
theirs. If Religion be in peril, we have the most flourishing and Orthodox

Lastly in respect of the manner of his Majesty's demand, which is in
Parliament, the way that has ever best pleased the Subjects of England. And
good cause for it: For, Aids granted in Parliament

This way, as his Majesty has told you, he has chosen, not as the only way,
but as the fittest; Not as destitute of others, but

Let me but add, and observe Gods mercy toward this Land above all others. The
Torrent of War has overwhelmed other Churches and Countries; but God has
hitherto restrained it from

And therefore it behooves all to apply their Thoughts unto Council and
Consultations, worthy the greatness and wisdom of this Assembly; To avoid
discontents and divisions, which may either distemper or delay; And to attend
that Unum Necessarium, the Common Cause; propounding for the scope and work of
all the Debates, the general good of the King and Kingdom, whom God has joined
together with an indissoluble knot, which none must attempt to cut or untie.
And let all, by unity and good accord,

His Majesty has given you cause to be confident of this you

I have but one thing more to add, and that is, As your Consultations

And therefore resolve of your Supplies, that they may be timely, and
sufficient, serving the Occasion: Your Council, your Aid, all is but lost, if
your Aid be either too little or too late: And his Majesty

Sir John Finch being chosen Speaker, made this Address to his Majesty,
Wednesday the Nineteenth of March.

Most Gracious Sovereign,
Sir John Finch being chosen Speaker, made this Speech to his Majesty.
YOur obedient and loyal Subjects, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses by your
Royal Summons here assembled, in obedience to your gracious direction,
according to their ancient usage and privilege, have lately proceeded to the
Choice of a Speaker; And whether sequestring their better Judgments for your

Their long knowledge of my unfitness every way to undergo a charge of this
important weight and consequence, gave me some hope they would have admitted my
just excuse: Yet for their further and clearer satisfaction, I drew the
Curtains and let in what light I could upon my inmost thoughts, truly and
really discovering to them what my self best knew, and what I most humbly
beseech your Royal Majesty to take now into your consideration that of so many
hundreds et impeditioris linguae sum, and the poor experience I have of that
Royal Assembly is so ill balanced with true Judgment, that every gust and
wave has power on me, whereby I shall not only suffer in my own particular,
but (which I apprehend with much more care and sorrow) do prejudice to their
common interest.



But his Majesty not admitting his excuse, approved of the choice.

Before the Commons had entered into any Debates, this following Letter,
touching the Inconveniences and Grievances of the State was A Speech without
doors.

To my noble friends of the Lower House of Parliament.
The Speech without doors.
I had now been made a Member of your Lower House, as formerly I have been in
sundry other Parliaments: But how unkindly soever she deals with me, I will
ever show my thankfulness to her, and deliver, by way of observation, what I
have heretofore learned in that grave and wise Assembly; for admonishment to
the elder, and a pathway for the younger to walk in.

Parliaments in my time have been wont to take up some space at unlawful
Elections; and in this point they never had greater cause to be circumspect,
then at this time: For by an Abuse lately crept in, there is introduced a
custom, which if it be not foreseen and prevented, will be a great derogation
to the Honor, and a weakening to the power of your House. Where the Law gives a
freedom to Corporations to elect Burgesses, and forbideth any indirect course
to be taken in their Elections; many of the Corporations are so base-minded,
and timorous, that they will not hazard the indignation of a Lord Lieutenants
Letter, who underhand sticks not to threaten them with the charge of a Musket
or a Horse at the Muster, if that he has not the Election of the Burgesses,
and not they themselves.

And commonly those that the Lords recommend, are such as desire it for
protection, or are so ignorant of the place they serve for, as

The next thing that is required, is, Liberty of Speech, without which
Parliaments have little force or power; Speech begets doubts, and resolves
them, and doubts in Speeches beget understanding; he that doubts much, asks
often, and learns much; and he that fears the worst, soonest prevents a
mischief.

This Privilege of Speech is anciently granted by the testimony of Philip
Comines a Stranger, who prefers our Parliaments, and the Freedom of the Subject
in them, above all other Assemblies; which Freedom, if it be broken or
diminished, is negligently lost since the days of Comines.

If freedom of Speech should be prohibited, when men with modesty make
repetition of the Grievances and Enormities of the Kingdom; when men shall
desire reformation of wrongs and injuries committed,

As it is no manners to contest with the King in his Election of

In this Case, what Subject dares complain? or what Subject dares contradict
the words or actions of such a servant, if it be not warranted by freedom of a
Parliament, they speaking with humility? For nothing obtains favor with a
King, so much as diligent obedience.

The surest and safest way betwixt the King and his people, which shall not be
admitted to excuses, he will cast your deserved malice against him, to your
contempt against the King, and seeking to lessen his Authority; and so will
make the Prince the Shield of his Revenge.

These are the sinister practices of such servants to deceive their Sovereigns,
when our Grievances shall be authentically proved, and made manifest to the
World by your pains to examine, and freedom to

When Justice shall thus shine, people will be animated to serve their King
with integrity: For they are naturally inclined to imitate Princes in good and
bad.

Cicero will then appear, That malicious and evil men make Princes poor; and
one perfect good man is able to make a Realm rich.

One Case I will instance that is common in the mouths of all men, and
generally, vox Populi vox Dei. One of quality in the last Expedition to the
Isle of Rhee, endeavored to conceal the number of men lost in the last
encounter, and confidently affirmed their number not to exceed three or four
hundred; till a Doctor of Physic, out of tenderness

The truth of these two Reports is easily determined by the Clerks of the Bands
of each Company, and is worthy to be discovered

The men slain are no less injured by concealing their Names, whose lives were
lost for King and Country. The Romans would have held it the highest Honor for
their friends and posterity so to die:

There is no remedy left for these misreports, but a freedom of Speech in
Parliament. For there is no wise man that speaks, but knows what, and when to
speak, and how to hold his peace. Whilst Subjects tongues are tied, for fear
they may reach him a rap whose conscience cries guilty; the King and his people
are kept from understanding

Diogenes being asked what beast bit sorest, answered, Of wild beasts, the
Back-biter; of tame, the Flatterer.

Now to descend to Grievances, which are of two kinds; some concerning the
Kingdom in general; some in particular, which have relation to the general.

The Grievances in general are so many in number, as will serve for every
Member of the House to present Two apiece to your views. And because I cannot
be admitted amongst you my self,

My first Complaint is of Titles of Honor; and in two kinds.

First, in respect of the Parties themselves, their Estates and Parentage.

Secondly, in respect of the manner of their attaining thereunto, which is
mercenary, base, and corrupt, which in reason should not hold: For by Law the
consideration is unlawful.

Trajanus commended Plutarch for his Precepts in School, when he taught that
men should labor to deserve Honor, but avoid the getting of it basely: For if
it were Reputation to have it by Desert,

Honor is not to be valued according to the vulgar opinion of men, but prized
and esteemed as the Surname of Virtue, engendered in the mind; and such Honor
no King can give, or money can purchase. He that will strive to be more
honorable then others, must abandon Passion, Pride, and Arrogance; that so his
Virtue may shine above others. For Honor consists not in the Title

There is one of three things, that commonly causes man's advancement, Desert,
Favor, and Power.

The first makes a man worthy of it, the other two are but abuses: For, Favor
is but a blind fortune, an ounce of which at Court, is better then a pound of
wisdom: Fortune never favoreth,

That Honor that is compassed by Power, takes unto it self Liberty, and desires
not to be governed by wisdom, but force. It knows not what it desires, nor
has a feeling of any Injury: It is neither moved with sweet words, nor
pitiful tears; such men leave not to do evil, because they have a desire to
it, but when their power fails to do it.

The true Honor among the honorablest is, where Fortune casts down, where there
is no fault: But it is Infamy where Fortune raises, where there is no Merit.

Examine the State and condition of men raised to Honor these 25 years past,
and whether it be desert, favor or power that has preferred them.

Enter into the mischief the Kingdom has suffered, and does suffer by it; and
the cause of his Majesty's great wants will soon appear: If you collect with
your selves how many hungry Courtiers have been raised to the highest top of
honor;

After this, examine their Princely expense in these Twenty five

The Character of a covetous man is, that he gets his goods with care, and
envy of his Neighbors, with sorrow to his Enemies, with travel to his body,
with grief to his Spirit, with scruple to his conscience, with danger to his
soul, with suit to his children, and curse to his heirs; his desire is to live
poor, to die rich: But as these vices are made virtues, even so is he honored
for them with Title of

When Philip the second King of Spain entered with Arms upon his Kingdom of
Portugal, and though with his sword he might have made fitting Laws; yet were
there some few Privileges which the Portugals besought they might enjoy; one
whereof was, That the King would make no unworthy person Noble, or without
their approbation, which was granted them, and to this day they hold that
Freedom, which keeps that Kingdom in

The second Grievance I will recommend to your views is, The carriage of our
Wars, the excessive charges vainly spent therein, the unworthiness of the
people employed, the grave and experienced neglected, the designs not warranted
by reason and discretion, and the executions worse performed, with many other
circumstances that depend upon

But before I proceed herein, I must crave leave to speak to two Points.

The one to declare the property and condition of Impostors and Deceivers of
Princes.

In the other I must clear the House of Parliament of an Imputation cast upon
it.

Abusers of Princes are they that persuade them to War; to become Socrates
says.

In the second I will clear the Parliament (in which I was a Member) of an
ungrateful aspersion cast upon it, that is to say, That the Parliament was a
cause to draw his Majesty into a War, and failed on their parts to contribute
to it.

These have been often repeated, and the Parliament accused; the contrary has
been as often reiterated, and the truth expressed how far the Parliament
proceeded therein. But to stop the mouths of such false Reports, and to free
the Parliament of such a calumniation, I must

At the Assembly of Oxford, the Parliament being Prorogued thither, Money was
required of us toward the furnishing of his Majesty's Fleet then preparing,
upon many reasons alleged, too tedious now to repeat, with one consent it was
refused.

Whereupon there was offer made by him that next the King, seem-to have best
Authority, That if they would but contribute Forty thousand pounds, they should
choose their Enemy.

Whereupon I infer, That before that Proposition there was no Enemy, and
therefore no Wars: The motion for Money being denied, the Parliament instantly
brake up; and seeing no Enemy was nominated, nor Money consented unto by us, I
see not how the House can be taxed for Peace-breakers, but rather the name to
be cast upon some young men; for youth by nature is prone to pride, especially
where experience wants; They are credulous in what they hear that pleases
them, and incredulous in what is told them by wise men; They are

Now to proceed: In October following the Fleet put to Sea, and what they did
is apparent by a Relation written by a their General at his Return.

The Voyage being ended, another followed the next Summer under the command of
that noble Lord, the Earl of Lindsey, which

The last and most lamentable, was that to the Isle of Rhee, which I likewise
refer to a man I have seen, and to the Books printed and extant.

These, with that to Algeir, to make up Mess of Island Voyages, I wish might be
referred to the examination of choice and experienced Soldiers by Land and by
Sea, to report their opinions of it, That so

Business of so great a consequence ought to be considered of with Counsel, and
not only of the necessity, profit and honor, but of the possibility that was
like to follow; for an Action well begun is half ended.

My experience in Discipline of War by Land and Sea can say no more then to
refer it to others; for it is a Course I never was bred to in my youth, and now
too late in mine age to practice: Only one thing I observe, that in the two
journeys of Cadiz and Rhee, in the first a Land Soldier commanded at Sea, who
knew not what belonged thereunto; and the other was carried by him that was
Soldier neither by Land nor by Sea, and the success proved accordingly

And it is no marvel, for according to the old saying, The best Fencer is not
always the best Fighter, the fairer Tilter not the best experienced Soldier,
nor the eye of a Favorite at Court the best General of an Host: And whosoever
takes upon him that command without knowledge, beholds himself in a false
glass, that makes him seem what he is not.



Of the Evils that followed upon these two voyages, your selves are sufficient
Witnesses, and can judge of them. As namely, the billeting of Soldiers in the
Country, and bringing their Ships into Harbors, not abating the entertainment
of the one, nor the wages of the other. And yet notwithstanding this needless
cost and charges, our

Were the carriage of things now answerable to the Prudence and Presidents of
former times, we cannot pretend a fear of invasion; because our Ships are
divided into several Harbors, and our Soldiers billetted in Inland Countries;
beside the season of the year gives no opportunity to an Enemy to attempt it.

Here is a mass of wealth curiously consumed, whether the King or

Their example of disorder encourages the other to follow their Liberty, People
that were wont to live poorly, yet safely, are now by these Fellows and their
Followers robbed and spoiled, and no remedy for Redress.

The rich stand upon their guard, and dare not resort to their

The Enemy gives a sudden attempt and returns, the others do every day rob
and spoil.

The Enemy surpriseth with fear, the others have neither fear nor shame.

The first lessening the greatness of the Roman Empire, was by the insolency of
Soldiers; and the first raising of the House of Ottoman was by permission and
conniving at his Army.

England that has seen, or what youth so young that ever thought to see
Scottish men and Irish men Garrisoned in England, and no Enemy appear against
us? Or who could have imagined he should ever have seen our own people
tyrannized over in our own Kingdom by these of our own Nation, and those
Scottish and Irish, and not dare so much as complain?

Would our forefathers have thought it safety or Policy to draw Two thousand
Scottish men and Irish men, into the Isle of Wight, for their defense against
France, when they of the Isle desired it not, nay when they opposed it?

Would they have thought it wisdom that Two thousand Mouths besides the
Inhabitants should live on the food of that Island, and so bring themselves
into want and penury of victuals, if they should in earnest be attempted by an
Enemy? Would they have thought fit

There is no place or part in England so remote from the Sea, but they might
have resorted to the Port assigned, before the Ships could be furnished or
drawn together. They would have thought it more wisdom to have retired to their
own Harbors, and to have had their men discharged, then to have continued this
needless and expencefull course that is taken. They would have judged it better
to have supplied the Isle of Weight with Two thousand men out of the Scotland,
and to keep them in continual entertainment. They would have thought it more
fit to have returned the barbarous Irish into the Country from whence they
came, then to make them a vexation to the places and parts where they remain,
seeing no shadow of reason can be pretended for it.

England wants no men, and has as good and able men as either of the other two
Nations, if his Majesty had occasion to use them.

England with small charge can raise what men his Majesty pleases to command,
and that suddenly, and discharge them again without trouble or charge as
quickly. The wise men of England would have thought Two or three hundred
thousand pounds better spared, then thus wastfully consumed, and disorders
committed; we may compute it to that sum, and yet keep our selves within
compass: And notwithstanding the want of Money, and the ways to exact it of
the Subject, is all the Song now sung; He that sees and complains

There is no Englishman but knows the heart of every other true heated
Englishman, and with one consent will all obey our Prince, and to his person we
owe all due reverence; and we may truly say no King is more happy in Subjects
for their love, nor no Subjects readier to serve their King with their purses
and persons; nor never people was better blessed with a King, who is endued with
all kind of

False Informers and Misguiders of good Kings are much more perilous, then if
Princes themselves were evil; for commonly as worms breed soonest in soft and
sweet wood, so are the best natures inclined to Honor, and Justice soonest
abused by false Flatterers.

The evil they commit under the Authority of good Princes, is accounted as done
by the Prince himself; but commonly such people in the end pay for it; for he
that desires not to do good cannot be wise, but will fall into Four thousand
Follies.

One of the first Propositions made to the House will be for Money to support
his Majesty's vast expense at this time; that the Enemy threatens thunder
against the Kingdom. Your often alarms

In this case you must give for your own sakes, that so you may be sure to
enjoy what is yours; for your Sovereigns sake, to maintain his greatness and
state; and for your Countries sake, to keep it from oppression of the Enemy;
but withal you ought to lay down the condition of the Kingdom, and to show
that your necessity cannot run parallel with your hearts and your desires; that
your minds will be carried with a willingness to give, but your hands will
keep back your hearts for want of ability to give.

Themistocles demanding Tribute of the Athenians, told them he

We may truly say, that God has so placed and seated this Isle of England,
that nothing but evil counsel can hurt it: But true it is, advice that is not
warranted from wise men, may prove more forcible and perilous then the power of
an Enemy.



A King of the Lacedaemonians asked how a Kingdom might ever stand, and was
answered, two ways, if a King take counsel of wise honest men, and they speak
freely; and do Justice uprightly.

There was never Censor that judged, Senator that ordered, Emperor that
commanded, Council that executed, Orator that persuaded,

St Gregory says, No man can give so faithful counsel as he who loves one
more then his gifts; Then who are or can be so true Counselors to our Noble
King, as a House of Commons that has no relation to a Kings gift, but only to
his Honor, flourishing estate and safety.

This is the time to amend evil Counsels past, and to let evil Counselors see
their Errors.



That you present to his Majesty in all humbleness, your willing minds and
hearts, to repair and fit to Sea his Majesty's Navy, your selves to have power
to make them able and serviceable, with the advice of experienced men that you
may call unto you. This is a matter of great importance at this present for the
safety of King, Realm, and Subject; for the strength of the Kingdom much
depends upon this Bulwark, which we may well term The Walls of England.

His Majesty shall find himself much eased by it, Businesses shall be carried
without his trouble or care, Money shall not be sought for to that end, but
provided by you, his Majesty may dispose of the rest of

By your frugality and husbandry his Majesty shall have occasion to judge of
things past, of yours in present, and hereafter it will serve for a President
to walk after; it will stop the mouths of Malignant tongues that inform his
Majesty of the unwillingness of the Subject to give; and it will make it
apparent, that their true grief is not in the matter of giving, but to see the
Evil employing of it when it is given.

If any man shall pervert this good meaning and motion of yours, it is a
derogation from his Honor, to yield to his Subjects upon Conditions: His
Majesty shall have good cause to prove such men's Eyes malicious and
unthankful, and thereby to disprove them in all their other Actions: For what
can it lessen the Reputation of a Prince whom the Subject only and wholly
obeys, that a Parliament which his Majesty does acknowledge to be his highest
Council should advise him, and he follow the advice of such a Council? What
dishonor rather were it to be advised and ruled by one Councellor

Marcus Portio says, That that Commonwealth is everlasting, where the Prince
seeks to get obedience and love, and the Subjects to gain the affection of the
Prince; and that Kingdom is unhappy where their Prince is served out of ends
and hope of Reward, and has no other assurance of them but their service.

Grand Committees settled.
Thursday the 20 of March the House settled their grand Committees

Most gracious Sovereign,
Petition for a fast.
WE your most humble and loyal Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in
this present Parliament assembled, upon a tender and compassionate sense of the
extreme Almighty God, and with humble and penitant hearts beseech him to remove
those miseries that lie upon us and our neighbor Churches, to avert those which
are threatened, to continue the favors we yet enjoy, and particularly to bestow
his abundant blessing upon your Majesty and this present Parliament, so that
all our Counsels and Resolutions being blessed by his Divine assistance, may
produce much honor and safety to your Majesty, your People and Allies.

Saturday the 22 of March was spent in opening the grievances and state of the
Kingdom, Debates touching Grievances.
as billeting of Soldiers, Loans by Benevolences and Privy Seal, and the
imprisoning certain Gentlemen who refused to lend upon that account, who
afterward bringing their Habeas Corpus were notwithstanding remanded to
prison; nor did the House incline to Supply his Majesty till these Grievances
were redressed: To which purpose Sir Francis Seimour thus began; Sir Francis
Seimour.


Cambyses Judges, who being demanded of their King, whether it were not lawful
for him to do what in it self was unlawful? They (rather Speaker, what greater
proof can there be of this, then the imprisonment of diverse Gentlemen for the
Loan, who if they had done the contrary for fear, their fault had been as great
as theirs that were the Projectors in it; and to countenance these Proceedings,
has it not been preached (or rather prated) in our pulpits, that all we have
is the Kings, Iure Divino? say these time-servers; they forsake their own
function, and turn ignorant Statesmen; we see how willing they will be to
change a Speaker) we see how easy it is for a Prince, how just and good
soever, to be abused, in regard he must see with other men's eyes, and hear with
other men's ears. Let us not flatter his Majesty, it is too apparent to all the
world, the King and people suffer more now then ever: His Majesty in his
Affairs abroad, and his People in their Estates at home: But will you know the
reason of all this, let us look back to the Actions of former Princes, and we
shall find that those Princes have been in greatest want and extremity that
exacted most of their Subjects and most unfortunate in the choice of their
Ministers, and to have failed most in their undertakings; happy is that Prince
that has those that are faithful of his Council: That which his Majesty wanted
in the management of his Affairs concerning France and Spain, I am clear was
his want of faithful Council to advise. The reason is plain, a Prince is
strongest by faithful and wise Council, I would I could truly say, such

In doing this we shall but tread the steps of our forefathers, who ever
preferred the Public Interest before their own right, nay, before their own
lives; nor can it be any wrong to his Majesty to stand upon them so as thereby
we may be the better enabled to do his Majesty's service; but it will be a
wrong to us and our posterity and our consciences, if we willingly forego that
which belongs unto us by the Law of God, and of the Land, and this we shall do
well to present to his Majesty; we have no cause to doubt of his Majesty's
gracious acceptance.

This Debate (said Sir Tho. Wentworth) carries a double Aspect toward the
Sovereign and the Subject, Sir Thomas Wentworth.
though both be innocent, both are injured, and both to be cured: Surely, in
the greatest humility I speak it, these illegal ways are punishment and marks
of indignation, the raising of Loans strengthened by Commission, with unheard of
Instructions and Oaths, the billetting of Soldiers by the Lieutenants, and
Deputy Lieutenants, have been as if they could have persuaded Christian
Princes, yea worlds, that the right of Empires, had been to take away by strong
hands, and they have endeavored as far as possible for them, to do it. This
has not been

Therefore let us never fear they shall not be accepted by his goodness;
wherefore I shall shortly descend to my motions consisting of four parts, two
of which have relation to our persons, two to the propriety of goods for our
persons; first, the freedom of them from imprisonment secondly, from employment
abroad, contrary to the ancient Customs: For our goods, that no Levies be made,
but by Parliament; secondly, no billetting of Soldiers: It is most necessary
that these be resolved,

Sir Benjamin Rudyard stands up as a Moderator, and spoke thus:

This is the Chrysis of Parliaments; we shall know by this if Parliaments live
or die, Sir Benjamin Rudyard acts the part of a Moderator.
the King will be valued by the success of us, the Councils of this House will
have opperations in all, it is sit we be wise, his Majesty begins to us with
affection, proclaiming, that he will rely on his peoples love; preservation is
natural, we are not now on the been esse, but on the esse; be sure England is
ours, and then prune it; Is it no small matter that we have provoked two most
Potent Kings? we have united Gilead? if the King draw one way, the Parliament
another, we must all sink: I respect no particular, I am not so wise to contemn
what is determined by the major part, one day tells another, and one Parliament
instructs another. I desire this House to avoid all contestations, the hearts
of Kings are great, it is comely that Kings have the beter of their Subjects;
give the King leave to come off, I believe his Majesty expects but the
occasion, it is lawful,

Sir Edward Cook spoke next.

Dum tempus habemus bonum operemur, I am absolutely to give Supply to his
Majesty, Sir Edward Cook.
yet with some caution: To tell you of Foreign dangers and inbred evils, I will
not do it; the State is inclining to a consumption, yet not incurable; I fear
not Foreign Enemies, God send us peace at home; for this disease I will propound
remedies, I will seek nothing out of mine own head, but from my heart, and out
of Acts of Parliament; I Loans go amongst Grievances, but I alone.

I Will begin with a noble Record, it cheers me to think of it, 25. E. 3. it is
worthy to be written in letters of gold; Loans against the will of the Subject
are against reason and the Franchises of the Land, and they desire restitution:
what a word is that Franchise? The Lord may tax his Villain high or low, but it
is against the Franchises of the Land, for freemen to be taxed but by their
consent in Parliament; Franchise is a French word, and in Latin it is
Libertas. In Magna Charta it is provided, that Nullus liber homo capiatur vel
impriso^etur aut disseisietur de libero tenemento suo, etc. nisi per legale
judicium parium suorum vel per legem terrae; which Charter has been confirmed
by good Kings above thirty times.

When these Gentlemen had spoken, Sir John Cook, Secretary of State took up the
matter for the King, and concluded for redress of Grievances, so that Supplies
take the precedence; And said,

Mr Secretary Cook.
I had rather you would hear any then me; I will not answer what has been
already spoken; my desire is not to stir, but to quiet, not to provoke, but to
appease: my desire is, that every one resort to his own heart to reunite the
King and the State, and to take away the scandal from us; every one speaks from
the abundance of his heart: I do conclude out of every ones Conclusion, to give
to the King, to redress Grievances; all the difference is about the manner; we
are all Inhabitants in one House, the Commonwealth, let every one in somewhat
amend his house, somewhat Necessity; Necessity has no Law, you must abilitate
the State to do; what you do, by Petition require. It is wished we begin with
Grievances, I deny not that we prepare them, but shall we offer them first:
will not this seem a Condition

Sir Robert Philips.
This days Debate (said Sir Robert Philips) makes me call to mind the custom
of the Romans, who had a solemn feast once a year for their Slaves, at which
time they had liberty (without exception) to speak what Rome to bury all
injuries, on purpose to recover them. It was said by a Gentleman We must so
govern our selves, as if this Parliament must be the Chrysis of all
Parliaments, and this the last. I hope well, and there will be no cause for the
King our Head to except against us, or we against him. The dangers abroad are
presented to us, he is no English man that is not apprehensive of them.

We have provoked two Potent Kings (the one too near) who are too strongly
joined together; the dangers are not Chimerical but real, I acknowledge it, but
it must be done in proportion of our dangers at home; I more fear the violation
of Public Rights at home, then a Foreign Enemy: Must it be our duties and
direction to defend Foreign dangers, and establish security against them, and
shall we not look at that which shall make us able and willing thereunto? We
shall not omit to confide and Sibthorp and Manwaring.
Sycophants have prated in the Pulpit to the contrary. Was there ever yet King
of England that directly ever violated the Subjects Liberty and Property, but
their actions E. 3. there went out a Commission to raise money in a strange
manner, the succeeding Parliament prayed redress, and till H. 8. we never heard
of the said Commissions again.

Another way was by Loan, a worm that cankered the Law, the Parliament did
redress it, and that money was paid again: The next little Engine was
Benevolence, what the force of that was, look into the Statute of R. 3. which
damned that particular way, and all other indirect ways.



I will here make a little digression: The Sommersetshire.
County I serve for were pleased to command me to seek the removal from them of
the greatest burden that ever people suffered. It was excellently said,
Commissionary Lieutenants do deprive us of all Liberty; if ever the like was
seen of the Lieutenancy that now is, I will never be believed more; They tell
the Decemviri in every County, and amongst that Decemviri there is some
Claudius Appius that seek their own revenges; we complain of Loans and
Impositions, but when Deputy Lieutenants may send warrants to imprison our
persons at pleasure, if we pay not what they sent for, it concern us to
preserve the Country in Freedom, and to necessity brought in for an argument,
all know that necessity is an armed man, and that necessity is an evil
Councellor, I would we had never known that Council; we are almost grown like
the Turks, who send their Janissaries, who place the Halberd at the door, and
there he is master of the house. We have Soldiers billetted, and warrants to
collect money, which if they do not, the Soldiers must come and rifle. The
Romans sending one into Spain, found no greater complaint then the discontent
that did arise from Soldiers placed amongst them. I would you would look into
Fortescue where he puts the Prince in mind, what misery he saw where Soldiers
were put upon the people: But says he, No man is forced to take Soldiers but
Inns, and they to be paid by them; I desire we resort to his Majesty for
redress, and to reduce all into bounds.

The other way of Grievance is a Judgment in a legal course of proceeding;
Scots.
Postnati Case, which people I honor; for we find many of them love us more
then we do our selves; I do not complain of it, but only mention it.

The other Judgment was for Impositions, which was given in the Exchequer, and
this House two times after damned that Judgment: how remiss our eyes are upon
that I grieve to see.

There is a Judgment, if I may so call it, a fatal Judgment against the
Liberty of the Subject, Mich. 3. Car. in Sir John Heveninghams case argued at
the Bar, and pronounced but by one alone; I can live, although another without
title be put to live with me; nay, I can live, although I pay Excises and
Impositions for more then I do; but to have my liberty which is the soul of my
life taken from me by power, and to be pent up in a Goal without remedy by Law,
and this to be so adjudged to perish in Goal, O Improvident Ancestors! Oh
unwise forefathers! to durante beneplacito, remediless: If this be Law, what do
we talk of our Liberties? why do we trouble our selves with the dispute of Law,
Franchises, Propriety of goods? It is the Summa totalis of all miseries; I will
not say it was erroneous, but I hope we shall speak our minds when that
Judgment comes here to be debated.

What may a man call his, if not Liberty? Having passed in some confusion
England were never more glorious then when they trusted their Subjects; let us
make all haste to do the Errand we shall give him our hearts, and give him a
new people raised from the dead: Then I hope this Parliament will be entitled,
The Parliament of wonders, and Gods judgments diverted, and these beams of
goodness shall give us life, and we shall go home to our Countries, and leave
our Posterity as free as our Ancestors left us.

But this day, as also the two next days Debate produced no Resolutions, the
time being spent in a general opening of Grievances from all

Monday 24 March Secretary Cook renewed the motion of Supplies for his Majesty,
yet so that Grievances be likewise taken into Consideration.

We all think fit (said he) that both these go hand in hand together; Secretary
Cook moves for Supply for his Majesty.
but let me put you in mind of that which concerns the King, let him have the
precedence of honor, if not of time, let the heads of the Kings Supply first be
propounded, this will be an honor to the King, and will do service to the
House; the end of this Parliament is the subsistence of the

Will it not be fit to grant him this Honor, to have the Precedence? It was the
Speech of an ancient Parliament man, Let us deal gently with Shiboleth, and we
shall consider of the Grievances Spain, Gondomar, that did his Master great
service here and at home.

Since that we have had other Ministers that have blown the fire: The
Ambassador of France told his Master at home, what he had wrought here the last
Parliament, namely, divisions between King and people, and he was rewarded for
it. Whilst we sit here in Parliament, there was another intended Parliament of
In Clerkenwel.
Jesuits and other well-willers, within a mile of this place; that this is
true, was discovered by Letters sent to Rome: The Joseph, it was called in the
Letter the Oriental day, and that was the day intended for their meeting. I
speak this to see Gods hand to work our union in their division; they are not
more rent from us, then they are from themselves. I desire the meanest
judgment to consider what may follow by giving precedence to his Majesty, and
by so doing, we shall put from our selves, many imputations. If we give any
occasion of breach, it is a great disadvantage; if otherwise it is an
obligation to his Majesty, which his Majesty will not forget.

Then he made a motion, that the same Committee may hear Propositions of
general heads of Supply, and afterward go to other businesses of the day for
Grievances. Others preferred the Consideration of Grievances, as a particular
root that invades the main liberty of the Subject. Gondomar did for Raleigh's
head. But the debates of this day came to no Resolution.

Thursday March 15. Mr Secretary Cook tenders Propositions touching Supply.
The day following Mr Secretary Cook tendered the House certain Propositions from
the King, touching Supply; and told them, That his Majesty

The House turned into a Committee.
Hereupon the House turned themselves into a Committee, and commanded Edward
Littleton Esquire unto the Chair, and ordered the Committee to take into
Consideration the Liberty of the Subject, in his Person, and in his Goods; and
also to take into Consideration his Majesty's Supply. In this Debate the
Grievances were reduced to six Heads, as to our Persons.

1. Attendance at the Council Board. 2. Imprisonment. 3. Confinement. 4.
Designation for Foreign Employment. 5. Martial-Law. 6. Undue Proceedings in
matter of Judicature.
Habeas Corpus and the Liberty of the Subject debated.
The first matter debated, was the Subjects Liberty in his Person; the
particular instance was in the Case of Sir John Heveningham, and those other
Gentlemen who were imprisoned about Loan-money, and thereupon had brought their
Habeas Corpus, had their Case argued, and were nevertheless remanded to Prison,
and a Judgment, as it was then said, was entered. Creswell of Lincoln's Inn spoke
to this purpose.

Justice (said he) is the Life and the Heart-blood of the Commonwealth: and if
the Commonwealth bleed in the master vein, Mr Creswel.
all the Balm in Gilead is but in vain to preserve this our Body of Policy from
ruin and destruction, Justice is both Columna and Corona Reipublicae; She is
both the Column and the Pillar, the Crown and the Glory of the Commonwealth;
this is made good in Scripture by the Judgment of Solomon, the wisest King
that ever Reigned upon Earth. For first, She is By Justice the Throne shall be
Established. Secondly, She is the Crown; for he says, That by Justice a Nation
shall be Exalted.

Our Laws which are the rules of this Justice, they are the ne plus ultra to
both the King and the Subject; and as they are the Hercules Pillar, so they are
the Pillar to every Hercules, to every Prince, which he must not pass.

Give me leave to resemble her to Nebuchadnezar's Tree, for she is so great,
that she does shade not only the Palace of the King and the House of Nobles,
but does also shelter the Cottage of the poorest Beggar.

Wherefore, if either now the blasts of indignation, or the unresistable
violater of Laws, Necessity, has so bruised any of the Branches of this Tree,
that either our Persons, or Goods, or Possessions have not the same shelter as
before, yet let us not therefore neglect the root of this Cor regis
inscrutabile; and that Kings, although they are but men before God, yet they
are gods before men. And therefore to my gracious and dread Sovereign (whose
virtues are true qualities, ingenerate both in his judgment and nature) let my
arm be cut off; nay, let my soul not live that day that I shall dare to lift up
my arm to touch that forbidden Fruit, those Flowers of his Princely Crown and
Diadem.

Eden, in this Garden of the Commonwealth, as there are the Flowers of the Sun,
which are so glorious, that they are to be handled only by Royal Majesty: So,
are there also some Daysies, and wholesome Herbs, which every common hand that
lives and labors in this Garden may pick and gather up, and take comfort and
repose in them: Amongst all which this Oculus Diei, this bona libertas is one,
and the chief one. I will now descend to the Question, wherein I hold with all
dutiful submission to better judgments, that these acts of Power, in
imprisoning

The first from the great favor which the Law does give unto, and the great
care which it has ever taken of, the Liberty and safety of this Kingdom.

To proceed therefore in maintenance of my first reasons. I find our Law does
so much favor the Subjects Liberty of his person, that the body of a
Marlebridge cap. 24. which was made 35 H. 3. who was the eighth King from the
Conquest, because Bailiffs would not render accounts to their Lords, it was
enacted, that their bodies should be attatched. And after E. 3.17. who was the
eleventh King after the Conquest, because men made no conscience to pay their
Debts, it was enacted, that their bodies should likewise be attached: But
before those Statutes, no man's body was subject to be taken or imprisoned,
otherwise then as aforesaid; whereby it is evident, how much the Common Law
favored the Liberty of the Subject, and protected his body from imprisonment.

Here he enforced the Reason by a Rule in Law, and mentioned some Cases in Law
upon that rule, and so proceeded to a second Reason, drawn a majore ad minus.

I frame it thus (said he) If the King have no absolute power over our Lands or
Goods, then a fortiori, not over our Persons, to imprison them, without
declaring the cause, for our persons are much more worth, then either Lands or
Goods; which is proved by what I have said already: And Christ himself makes it
clear, where he says, An non est corpus supra vestimentum? Is not the Body of
more worth then the Raiment? Nay, I may well say, that almost every leaf and
page of all the Volumes of our Common Law prove this right of Propriety, this
distinction of meum and tuum, as well between King and Subject, as one Subject
and another: And therefore my conclusion follows, that if the Prerogative
extend not neither to Lands nor to Goods, then a fortiori, not to the Person,
which is more worth then either Lands or Goods, as I said. And yet I agree,
that by the very Law of Nature, service of the Person of the Subject is due

3. My next Reason is drawn ab inutili and incommodo; for the Statute de
frangentibus prisonam made 1 E. 2. is, Quod nullus qui prisonam fregerit subeat
judicium vitae vel membrorum pro fractione prisonae tantum nisi causa whence
this conclusion is clearly gathered, that if a man be committed to prison
without declaring what cause; and then if either Malefactor do break the
Prison, or the Jailer suffer him to escape, albeit the Prisoner so escaping had
committed crimen laesae Majestatis; yet neither the Jailer, nor any other that
procured his escape, by the Law suffer any corporal punishment for setting him
at large; which if admitted, might prove in consequence a matter of great
danger to the Commonwealth.

4. My next Reason is drawn ab regis honor, from that great Honor the Law does
attribute unto Sovereign Majesty, and therefore the rule of Law is that Solum
Rex hoc non potest facere, quod non potest just agere. And Hussy chief
Justice, 1 H. 7. says, that Sir John Markham told King E. 4. he could not
arrest a man either for Treason or Felony, as a Subject might, because that if
the King did wrong, the party could not have an Action against him; and if the
Kings Writ under his Great-Seal cannot imprison the Subject, unless it contains
the cause; shall then the Kings

But I will conclude with that which I find reported of Sir John Davis, who
was the Kings Sergeant, and so by the duty of his place would no doubt
maintain, to his uttermost, the Prerogatives of the King his Royal Master: And
yet it was by him thus said in those Reports of his upon the Case of
Tavistry-Customs, That the Kings of England always have had a Monarchy Royal,
and not a Monarchy Seignoral: where, under The Subjects are Freemen, and have
Propriety in their Goods and Freehold, and Inheritance in their Lands: But
under the later, they are as Villains and Slaves, and have propriety in
nothing. And therefore said he, When a Royal Monarch makes a new conquest; yet
if he receives any of the Nations ancient Inhabitants into his Protection, they
and their heirs after them shall enjoy their Lands and Liberties according to
the Law. And there he vouched this President and Judgment following, given
before William the Conqueror; viz. That one Sherborn, a Saxon, at the time of
the Norfolk, the Conqueror gave the same to one Warren a Norman, and Sherborn
dying, the heir claiming the same by descent, according to the Law; it was
before the Conqueror himself adjudged for the heir, and that the gift thereof
by the Conqueror was void.

Upon this and other Arguments made in this Case of the Habeas Corpus, the
House referred the whole Business to a Committee to examine all the Proceeding:
Concerning which Mr Seldom afterward made report to the House, that Mr
Waterhouse a Clerk in the Crown Office, being examined before the Committee,
did confess, that by direction from Sir Robert Heath the Kings
Attorney General, he did write the draught of a Judgment in the Case before
mentioned, which was delivered to Mr Attorney. And Mr Keeling being examined
before the Committee, did confess, Mich: T^^m last the Attorney General wished
him to make a special Entry of (...) Habeas Corpus: To which he answered, he
knew no special Entry in those Cases, but only a remittitur: But said to Mr
Attorney, that if he pleased to draw one, and the Court afterward assent to
it, he would then enter it. The Attorney did accordingly make a draught, and
the Copy thereof Mr Keeling produced to the Committee. And further said, that
he carried this draught to the Judges, but they would not assent to a special
Entry: Nevertheless, the At. General diverse

Sir Robert Philips upon this Report gave his opinion, Sir Robert Philips.
That this intended Judgment in the Habeas Corpus was a draught made by some
man that desired to strike us all from our Liberties: but the Judges justly
refused it; but if the Judges did intend it, we sit not here (said he) to
answer the trust we are sent for, if we present not this matter to his Majesty.

Sir Edw. Cook proceeded and said, Sir Edward Cook.
This Draught of the Judgment will sting us, quia nulla causa fuit ostenta,
being committed by command of the King, therefore he must not be bailed: What
is this, but to declare upon Record, that any Subject, committed by such
absolute command, may be detained in Prison for ever? What does this tend to
but the utter subversion of the choice Liberty and Right belonging to

The Commons afterward upon further debates of this matter, desired, that the
Judges of the King's Bench might declare themselves concerning this business,
which was done accordingly, and though it be a little out of time; yet for
coherence sake, we bring it in here.

Whitlock spoke thus.

My Lords, Judge Whitlock in justification of the Proceedings in the
Upper-Bench upon the Habeas Corpus.
We are, by your appointment, here ready to clear any Aspersion of the House of
Commons in their late presentment upon the King's Bench, that the Subject was
wounded in the Judgment there lately given. If such a thing were, My Lords,
your Lordships, not they, have the power to question and judge the same. But,
My Lords, I say there was no Judgment given, whereby either the Prerogative
might be enlarged, or the Right of the Subject trenched upon. It is true, my
Mich: Term last, four Gentlemen Petitioned for a Habeas Corpus, which they
obtained, and Counsel was assigned unto them, the Return was per speciale
mandatum Domini Regis, which likewise was made known to us under the Hands of
Eighteen Privy-Councellors. Now, my Lords, if we had delivered them presently
upon this, it must have been, because the King did not show cause wherein we
should have judged the King had done wrong, and this is beyond our knowledge;
for he might have committed them for other matters then we could have imagined;
but they might say thus, they might have been kept in Prison all their days: I
answer, no, but we did remit them, that we might better advise of the matter;
and they the next day might have had a a new Writ, if they had pleased. But
they say we ought not to have denied bail: I answer, if we had done so, it must
needs have reflected upon the King, that he had unjustly imprisoned the^* And
it appears in Dyer, 2 Eliz. that diverse Gentlemen being comm^^^d, and requiring
Habeas Corpus, some were bailed, others remitted: whereby it appears, much is
left to the discretion of the Judges.

For that which troubles so much remittitur quousque This, my Lords was only
(as I said before) to take time what to do: and whereas they will have a
difference between remittitur and remittitur quousque My Lords, I confess, I
can find none; but these are new inventions to trouble old, Records. And
herein, my Lords, we have dealt with knowledge and understanding;

For endeavoring to have a Judgment entered (it is true) Mr Attorney pressed
the same for his Majesty's Servies: But we having sworn to do right between his
Majesty and his Subjects, commanded the Clerk to make no Entry, but according
to the old form; and the Rule was given by the Chief Justice alone. I have
spent my time in this Court, and

The Commons House do not know what Letters and Commands we receive; for these
remain in our Court, and are not viewed by them. For the rest of the matters
presented by the House of Commons, they were not in agitation before us,
whether the King may commit, and how long he may detain a man committed.
Therefore having answered so

Judge Doderidge the like.
Judge Doderidge, concerning the same Subject, said, It is no more fit for a
Judge to decline to give an account of his doings, then for a Christian of his
Faith. God knows, I have endeavored always to keep a good Conscience; for a
troubled one, who can bear? The Kingdom holds of none but God; and Judgments
do not pass privately in Chambers, but publicly in Courts, (where every one
Mich. Term their Cause received hearing, and upon consideration of the Statutes
and Records, we found some of them to be according to the good old Law of Magna
Charta; but we thought that they did not come so close to this Case, as that
bail should be thereupon presently granted. My Lords, the Habeas Corpus
consists Habeas Corpus and the Return, together with the opinion of the
Court, either a remittitur, or a traditur in Ballium. In this Case a remittitur
was granted, which we did, that we might take better advisement upon the Case,
and upon the remittitur. My Lords, they might have had a new Writ the next day,
and I wish they had, because it may be they had seen more, and we had been
eased of a great labor. And, my Lords, when the Attorney, upon the Remittitur
pressed an Entry, we all straightly charged the Clerk that he should make no
other Entry, then such as our Predecessors had usually made in like Cases. For
the difference between Remittitur and Remittitur quousque I could never yet
find any: I have now sat in this Court 15 years, and Omina habere in memoria,
and in nullo errare, Divinum potius est quam humanum.

The Lord Chief Justice Hide, and Justice Jones delivered their opinions much
to the same purpose. The House proceeded in further debate of the Liberty of
the Subject.

Mr Hackwel resumes the Debate of the matter concerning the Habeas

The late Judgment (said he) which lies in Bar, Mr Hackwel resumes the Debate
of the Habeas Corpus
is only an Award, and no Judgment; and in the L. Chief Justice his Argument
there was no word spoken, that the King might commit or detain without cause.

For the King to commit a man, is indignum Regi: Mercy and Honor flow
immediately from the King, Judgment and Justice are his too, but they flow
from his Ministers; the Sword is carried before him, but the Scepter in his
hands. These are true Emblems of a good King.

pro custodia, carceres non ad poenam, sed ad custodiam: Admit the King may
commit a man, yet to detain him as long as he pleases is dangerous, and then a
man shall be punished before his offense: Imprisonment is a Maceration of the
body, and horror to the mind, it is vita pejor morte.

Mr Seldom last of all produced the Statutes, Mr Seldom.
Presidents, and Book-Cases, which were expresse^ in point to the Question in
hand; and the Andersons Book, all of his own handwriting, to be openly read.

And for the President^ cited by the Kings Council, in 34 years of the Queen,
as the Opinion of all the Judges; certainly, there was a great mistake in it,
and the mistake was the greater, when it passed as current by the Judges of the
King's Bench, in the last Case of the Habeas Corpus. And that the truth of the
Opinion may clearly appear, let us read the words out of the Lord Chief Justice
Andersons Report, out of the Book written

Diverse persons fueront committes a several temps a several prysons sur
pleasure sans bon cause part de queux estiant amesnes en banck le Roy. Judge
Andersons Reports.
Et part en le Commune banck fuerunt accordant a le ley de la terre mise a
large and discharge de le imprisonment, pur que aucunt grands fueront offendus
and procure un commandment a les Judges que ils ne fera ainsi apres. Ceo nient
meins, les

We her Majesty's Justices of both Benches and Barons of the Exchequer, desire
your Lordships that by some good means some order may be taken, that her
Highness Subjects may not be committed or detained in prison by commandment of
any Noble man or Councellor against the Laws of the Realm; either else to help
us to have access to her Majesty, to the end to become Suitors to her for the
same: for diverse have been imprisoned for suing ordinary Actions and Suits at
the Common Law, until they have been constrained to leave the same against
their wills, and put the same to order, albeit Judgment and Execution have
been had therein to their great losses and griefs: for the aid of which persons
her Majesty's Writs have sundry times been directed to sundry persons having
the Custody of such persons unlawfully imprisoned, upon which Writs no good or
lawful London have been many times committed to Prison for lawful executing
Westminster, and thereby her Majesty's Subjects and Officers are so terrified,
that they dare not sue or execute her Majesty's Laws, her Writs and
Commandments: Diverse others have been sent for by Pursevants, and brought to
London from their dwellings, and by unlawful imprisonment have been
constrained, not only to withdraw their lawful suits, but have been also
compelled to pay the Pursevants so bringing such persons great sums of money.
All which upon complaint, the Judges are bound by Office and Oath to relieve
and help, by, and according to her Majesty's Ter. Paschae 34 Eliz. and
delivered one to the L. Chancellor, and another to the L. Treasurer: after
which time there did

Sir Edward Cook.
After the reading of this Report, Sir Edw. Cook said, That of my own knowledge
this Book was written with my L. Andersons own hand; it is no flying report of
a young Student. I was Solicitor then, and Treasurer Burley was as much against
Commitment as any of this Kingdom; It was the White Staves that made this stir.
Let us draw toward a conclusion: The Question is, whether a Feeman can be
imprisoned by the King without setting down the cause? I leave it as bare as
Aesops Crow; Humores moti and non remoti corpus destruunt. It is a Maxim, the
Common Law has admeasured the Kings Prerogative, that in no Case it can
prejudice the Inheritance of the Subjects; had the Law given the Prerogative to
that which is taken, it would have set some time to it, else mark what would
follow. I shall have an Estate of Inheritance for life, or for years in my
Land, or propriety in my Goods, and I shall be a Tenant at will for my liberty:
I shall have propriety in my own house, and not liberty in my person, Perspicue
vera non sunt probanda. The King has distributed his Judicial power to Courts
of Justice, and to Ministers of Justice, it is too low for so great a Monarch
as the King is, to commit men to Prison; and it is against Law, that men should
be committed, and no cause showed. I would not speak this, but that I hope my
Edw. Cook that speaks it, but the Records that speak it, we have a National
appropriate Law to this Nation diversis ab orb Brittannis: I will conclude
with the Acts of the Apostles, chap. 25. It is against reason to send a man to
Prison, and not to show the cause. It is now time to go to the Question.

Resolved upon the Question, Nemine contradicente:

I. That no Freeman ought to be detained or kept in Prison, Resolves touching
the Subjects liberty in his Person.
or otherwise restrained by the command of the King or the Privy Council, or
any

II. That the Writ of Habeas Corpus may not be denied, but ought to be granted
to every man that is committed or detained in Prison, or otherwise restrained,
though it be by the command of the King, the Privy Council, or any other, he
praying the same.

III. That if a Freeman be committed or detained in prison, or otherwise
restrained by the Command of the King, the Privy Council, or any Habeas Corpus,
granted for the said Party, then he ought to be delivered or bailed.

And then taking into consideration the Property of the Subject in his Goods,
they came to this Resolution, to which there was not a Negative; viz.

That it is the ancient and undubitable right of every Freeman, That

Wednesday, March 26.

The Propositions tendered the day before by Secretary Cook from his Majesty
were now received and read, The Kings Propositions to the House of Commons
touching Supply.
but the Debate thereof was referred to another day. The Propositions were
these; viz. 2. To set out ten other ships for the relief of the Town of Rochel.
3. To set out ten other ships for the preservation of the Elbe, the Sound and
Baltick-Sea. 4. To leavy Arms, Cloth, Victual, pay and transport an Army of
1000. Horse, and 10000. Foot, for Foreign Service. 5. To pay and supply 6000 l.
more for the service of Denmark. 6. To supply the Forts of the Office of
Ordnance. 8. To build 20 ships yearly for the increase of the Navy. 9. To
repair the Forts within the Land. 10. To pay the arrears of the Office of
Ordnance. 11. To pay the arrears of the Victuallers Office. 12. To pay the
Arrear of the Treasure of the Navy. 13. To pay the Arrears due for the freight
of diverse Merchants ships employed in his Majesty's Service. 14. To provide a
Magazine for Victuals for Land and Sea-service.


And the Commons having a Conference with the Lords about the Petition against
Recusants, Secretary Cook was appointed to manage the said Conference.

A Conference between the Lords and Commons, managed by Secretary Cook against
Recusants.


In the first place (he said) we acknowledge all due honor, both

And a little to awake the Zeal and Care of our learned and grave Fathers, it
is fit that they take notice of that Hierarchy which is already established in
competition with their Lordships; for they have a Bishop consecrated by the
Pope; This Bishop has his Subalternate Officers of all kinds, as
Vicars-General, Archdeacons, Rural-Deans, Apparators, and such like: neither
are these nominal or titular Officers alone; but they all execute their
Jurisdictions, and make their ordinary Rome, and hold correspondence with the
Nuntio's and Cardinals both at Bruxels, and in France.

Neither are the Seculars alone grown to this height, but the Regulars are more
active and dangerous, and have taken deep root; they have already planted their
Societies and Colleges of both Sexes, they

But now since his Sacred Majesty has extended his Royal arm, and since the
Lords of his Council have by their Authority caused this nest of Wasps to be
dug out of the Earth, and their Convocations to be scattered; And since your
Lordships join in courage and resolution, at least to reduce this people to
their lawful restraint, that they may

But now, my Lords, to come to the chief Errand of this our meeting, which is
to make known to you the Approbation of our House of that Petition to his
Majesty, wherein you are pleased to request our concurrence. The House has
taken it into serious consideration, and from the beginning to the end approve
of every word, and much commend England, and published in all our Courts of
ordinary Justice.

But these things we propound, not as our Resolutions, or as matters to raise
debate or dispute, but commend them only as our advice and desire, being ready
notwithstanding to join with your Lordships in the Petition, as now it is, if
your Lordships shall not find this Reason to be of weight.

This being agreed unto; on Monday the 31 of March, the aforesaid Petition was
presented by his Majesty to both Houses; at the delivery

Most Gracious Sovereign,
THe Lords Spiritual and Temporal, The Lord Keepers Speech at the presenting a
Petition from both Houses against Recusants.
and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, out of due care of the Glory
of Almighty God, and of the Honor and Safety of your Majesty, do with all
humbleness, and with one unanimous, consent present to your Royal hands, the
most Loyal desires of all their hearts; which is set down in a

After the reading thereof, his Majesty made this short speech.


I Do very well approve the Method of your proceedings in this Parliament; The
Kings Answer to the Petition.
A Jove principium; hoping that the rest of your Consultatious will succeed the
happier. And I like the Preamble of my Lord Keeper, otherwise I should have a
little suspected that you had thought me not so careful of Religion as I have,
and ever shall be, wherein I am as forward as you can desire. And for the
Petition, I answer first in general, Verbum sapienti sat est.

Afterward the Lord Keeper signified unto the House, That his Majesty had now
given his Answer unto the Petition exhibited by both Houses against Recusants,
and had commanded his Lordship to read the same Answer in this House; and Mr
Secretary to read it in the House of Commons. Whereupon the Clerk read the
first Article of the said Petition, and the Lord Keeper read his Majesty's
Answer unto the same, and so each Article thereof.

The which Petition with the Answers follow in haec verba.

Most Gracious Sovereign,
WE your most Loyal and obedient Sub^ects, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and Commons in Parliament assembled,

1. Article.
WE most humbly and ardently beg at the hands of your most Sacred Majesty, That
your Majesty will be pleased to give continual life and motion to all those
Laws that stand in force against Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and all that have
taken Orders by Authority Rome, by exacting a more due and serious execution of
the same: Amongst which number, those that have highly abused your Majesty's
clemency, by returning into the Kingdom after their vanishment, contrary to
your Highness express Proclamation, we humbly desire may be left to the
severity of your Laws, without admitting of any mediation or intercession for
them. And that such of your Majesty's unsound and il affected Subjects, as do
receive, harbor, or conceal any of their viperous Generation, may without delay
suffer such Penalties and

His Majesty's Answer unto the first Article of this Petition.
TO the first Point his Majesty answers, That he will according to your
desire give both life and motion to the Laws that stand in force against
Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and all that have taken Orders by Authority Rome:
and to that end his Majesty will give strict order to all his Ministers for the
discovering and apprehending of them, and so leave them being apprehended to
the trial of the Law. And in case, after trial, there shall be cause to respit
execution of any of them; yet they shall be committed (according to the example
of the best times) to the Castle of Wisbitch, and there be safely kept from
exercising their Functions, of spreading their Superstitious and dangerous
Doctrine; and the Receivers and Abettors they shall be left to the Law.

2. Article.
THat your Majesty would be pleased to command a surer and strait watch to be
kept in and over your Majesty's Ports and Havens, and to commit the care and
charge of searching of Ships for the discovery, and apprehension as well of
Jesuits and Seminary Priests brought in, as of Children and young Students,
sent over beyond the Seas, to suck in the poison of Rebellion and Superstition,
unto men of approved fidelity and Religion: And such as shall be convicted to
have connived or combined in the bringing in of the one, or conveying of the
other, that the Laws may pass upon them with speedy execution.

His Majesty's Answer to the second Article.
TO the second Article; His Majesty grants all that is in this Article; and
to this end will give Order to the Lord Treasurer, Lord Admiral, and Lord
Warden of the Cinque Ports, that in their several places they be careful to see
this Article fully executed, giving strict charge to all such as have place and
authority under them, to use all diligence therein. And his Majesty requires
them, and all other his Officers and Ministers, to have a vigilant eye upon
such as dwell in dangerous places of advantage

THat considering those dreadful dangers (never to be forgotten) which did
involve your Majesty's sacred Person, 3. Article.
and the whole London, and to your Majesty's Court, Your Majesty would be
graciously pleased to give speedy command for the present putting in practice
those Laws, that prohibit all Popish Recusants to come to the Court, or within
ten Miles of the City of London; as also those Laws that confine them to the
distance of five miles from their dwelling Houses; and that such bypast
Licenses not warranted by Law, as have been granted unto them for their repair
to the City of London, may be discharged and annulled.

His Majesty's Answer to the third Article.
TO the third; His Majesty will take Order to restrain the recourse of
Recusants to the Court; and also for the other points in this Article his
Majesty is well pleased that the Laws be duly executed, and that all unlawful
Licenses be annulled and discharged.

4. Article.
that infinite sums of moneys have within these two or three years last past
been extracted out of the Recusants within the Kingdom by color of
composition, and a small proportion of the same returned unto your Majesty's
coffers, not only to the sudden enriching of private persons, but to the
emboldning of Romish Recusants to entertain Massing Priests into their private
Houses, and to exercise all their Mimique Rites of their gross superstition,
without fear of control, amounting (as by their

His Majesty's Answer to the fourth Article.
TO the fourth Article; his Majesty is most willing to punish for the time
past, and prevent for the future, any of the deceits and abuses mentioned in
this Article; and will account it a good service in any, that will inform
Himself, his Privy Council, Officers of his Revenues, Judges, or learned
Council, of any thing that may reveal this mystery of Iniquity. And his

5. Article.
THat as the Persons of Ambassadors from forain Princes, and their Houses, be
free for the exercises of their own Religion, so their Houses may not be made
free Chapels and Sanctuaries unto Ut qui palam in luce peccant in luce
puniantur.

His Majesty's Answer to the fifth Article.
TO the fifth; his Majesty is well pleased to prohibit and restrain their
coming and resort to the Houses of Ambassadors, and will command a vigilant
watch to be set for their taking and punishing, as is desired.

6. Article.
THat no place of Authority and Command, within any the Counties of this your
Majesty's Kingdom, or any Ships of your Majesty's,

His Majesty's Answer to the sixth Article.
TO the sixth; his Majesty is persuaded that this Article is already observed
with good care; nevertheless, for the avoiding (as much as may be) all errors
and escapes in that kind, his Majesty will give charge to the Lord Keeper,
that at the next Term he call unto him all the Judges, and take Information
from them of the state of their several Circuits, if any such (as

THat all your Majesty's Judges, Justices, and ministers of Justice, unto whose
care and trust, 7. Article.
execution (which is the life of your Majesty's Laws) is committed, may by your
Majesty's Proclamation, not only be commanded to put in speedy execution those
Laws which stand in force against Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and Popish
Recusants, but that your Majesty would be further pleased to command the said
Judges and Justices of Assize, to give a true and

His Majesty's Answer unto the seventh Article.
To the seventh his Majesty does fully grant it.

8. Article.
and for the breeding and nursing up of a holy generation, and a peculiar
People sanctified unto the true worship of Almighty God, that until a
provisional Law may be made for the training and educating of the Children of
Popish Recusants in the grounds and principles of our holy Religion, which we
conceive will be of more power and force to unite your people unto you in
fastness of love, Religion and loyal obedience, then all pecuniary Mulcts and
Penalties that can possibly be devised: Your Majesty would be pleased to take
it into your own princely care and consideration, these our humble Petitions
proceeding

His Majesty's Answer to the eighth Article.
TO the eighth, his Majesty does well approve it, as a matter of necessary

ON Wednesday the second of April, Debates touching his Majesty's propositions.
the Propositions sent from the King, were mentioned, and several Gentlemen
expressed themselves severally on that subject.

IT is said, Sir Francis Seimor.
that the greatest grievance is want of supply; but I hold it a greater
grievance that his Majesty is brought into those necessities, especially
considering the supplies that of late have been given to the King,

SOme propositions we shall not meddle with, as a sovereign Army to be
transported, Sir Nath. Rich.
we are not fit for that yet, but we will not reject it, for great Princes, who
give out Rumors of raising great Armies, do put their Enemies to great fears;
then the defense of our Coasts, nothing is more necessary; but the bill of
Poundage is for that particular supply, and how far it may prejudice us for a
future Precedent, to give other supply, let us be advised.

Secr. Cook.
Mr. Secretary Cook, observing a distinction made upon the propositions, as if
some of them were to be omitted, I know (said he) you will do it upon
deliberation; some there are not possible to be omitted, as the Guarding of the
Seas, defense of the Elbe Rotchel, and those draw on all the rest: Ships must
have Men and Munition, and we cannot divide any of these. This House is tender
of the Country; the King will not lay a burden that cannot be born; We may
supply his Majesty without this, give we

Sir John Elliot.
INdeed there may be some necessity for a war offensive, but looking on one late
dysaster, I tremble to think of sending more abroad.

Let us consider those two great undertakings at Cales and Ree; at Cales
Spanish Ships, a satisfaction sufficient and fit for us, and this confessed by
some then employed, and never but granted by all, that it was feasible and
easy, why came this to nothing? After that opportunity lost, when the whole
Army was landed, with destruction of some of our men, why was nothing done? if
nothing was intended, why were they landed, and why were they shipped again? For
Rees voyage, was not the whole action carried against the judgment of the best
Commanders? Caesar never knew, the enriching of the Enemy by courtesies:
Consider what a case we now are in, if on the like occasion, or with the like
instruments, we shall again adventure another expedition. It was ever the
wisdom of our Ancestors here, to leave Forain Wars wholly to the State, and
not to meddle with them.

Sir Ed. Cook.
SIr Edw. Cook. When poor England stood alone, and had not the access of another
Kingdom, and yet had more and as potent Enemies as now it has, yet the King of
England prevailed.

In the Parliament Roll, in the 42. year of Edw. 3. the King and the Parliament
gave God thanks for his victory against the Kings of Scotland and of France, he
had them both in Windsor Castle as Prisoners. What was the reason of that
Conquest? four reasons were given. 1. The King was assisted by good Counsel. 2.
There were valiant men. 3. They were

3. R. 2. The King was environed with the Flemins, Scots and French, and the
King of England prevailed.

13. R. 2. The King was environed with Spaniards, Scots and French, and the
King of England prevailed.

17 R. 2. Wars were in Ireland and Scotland, and yet the King of England
prevailed, and thanks were given to God here; And I hope I shall live to give
God thanks for our Kings victories.

7 H. 4. One or two great men about the King so mewed him up, that he took no
other advice but from them, whereupon the Chancellor took this Text and Theme
in his Speech at the Parliament, Multorum consilia requiruntur in magnis, in
bello qui maxim timent sunt in maximis periculis. Solomon's Rule is, Qui
repetit separat, nay, separat foederatos: We are united in duty, etc. to the
King, the King has fourscore thousand pounds a year for the Navy, and to
scowre the Narrow-seas, it has been taken, and we are now to give it, and
shall we now give more to guard the Seas? besides, when that is taken of our
gift, it may be diverted another way.

It shall never be said we deny all supply, I think my self bound, where
commune periculum, there must be commune auxilium.

I Cannot forget that duty I owe to my Country, Sir Thomas Wentworth
and unless we be secured against our Liberties, we cannot give; I speak not
this to make diversions, but to the end that giving I may give cheerfully. As
for the Propositions to be considered of, I incline to decline them, and to
look upon the State of our Country, whether it be fit to give, or no: Are we
come to an end for our Countries Liberties? have we trenched on the

WE all desire remedies for our Grievances, Sir Henry Martin.
and without them we shall neither be willing nor able to give; for my part, I
heartily desire remedy, but which is the best and wisest way, that is the
question: As we have made some progress in our Grievances, so let us now go on
to supply; There is a Proverb, Non bis ad idem, dash not the Commonwealth twice
against one Rock. We have Grievances, we must be eased of Jacob, who wrestled
with the Angel, and would not let him go; I would we could wrestle with the
King in duty and love, and not to let him go in this Parliament, till he comply
with us: We must take heed of too much repetition and overbeating

THe House waving the Debate of the Propositions proceeded with Grievances by
Confinement, The House waves, etc.
and Designation for forain employment, in which points several Gentlemen
delivered their opinion.

COnfinement is different from Imprisonment, and it is against the Law that any
should be confined either to his House, Mr. Seldom.
or elsewhere: I know not what you can call a Punishment, but there is some
ground of it, or mention thereof in Acts of Parliament, Law Books, or Records,
but for this of Confinement, I find none: indeed Jews have been confined in
former times to certain places, as here in London to the old Jury: The
Civilians have perpetual Prisons and coercive Prisons, upon Judgments in
Carcer domesticus is a confinement for madmen.

Sir T. Hobby.
I Was employed in 88. in that service, it was then thought fit that Recusants
should be confined in strong places, but it was not held legal, and when the
Navy was dispiersed they were set at liberty, and the Parliament petitioned the
Queen for a Law, to warrant the Confinement: Hereupon it was resolved, That no
freeman ought to be confined by any command of the King or Privy Council, or
any other, unless it be by Act of

Sir Peter Hayman about foreign employment.
TOuching Designation to forain Employment, Sir Peter Hayman opened his own Case:

I have forgot my employment unto the Palatinate, I was called before the Lords
of the Council, for what I know not, I heard it was for not lending on a Privy
Seal, I told them if they will take my Nemo militat suis expensis; some told me
I must go, I began to think, What, must I? none were ever sent out in that
kind; Lawyers told me I could not be so sent: having that assurance I demanded
means, and was resolved not to stir upon those terms, and in silence and duty
I denied: upon this they having given me a Command to go, after some twelve
days they told me they would not send me as a Soldier, but to attend on an
Ambassador; I knew that stone would hit me, I settled my troubled estate, and
addressed my self to that

Mr. Hackwel
THis is a great Point that much concerns the Commonwealth, if the the King
cannot command a Subject to his necessary service; and on the other side, it
will be little less then an honorable banishment to the Subject, if he may. Our
Books say the King cannot compel any to go out of the Realm, and an action
brought against him, he cannot plead in Bar, that he is by command from the
King in foreign service, but the King E. 3. N. 9. in the Parliament Roll there
was an Ordinance whereby the King had power to send some to Ireland, it is
ordained, that such Sages of the Law and Soldiers, where need shall be, though
they refuse to go and excuse themselves, if their excuses be not reasonable,
the King may do to them according to right and reason: If the King by Law could
do this of himself, and send them to Ireland, his own Dominion, he would never
have taken power from his Parliament; and if men do not according to that Law,
there is no imprisonment prescribed.

NO restraint, Sir E. Cook.
be it never so little, but is Imprisonment, and forain employment is a kind of
honorable Banishment: I my self was designed Ireland, I was willing to go, and
hoped if I had gone, to have found some Mompessons there: There is a difference
when the Party is the Kings servant, and when not. 46 E. 3. this was the time
when the Law was in its height: Sir Richard Pembridge was a Baron, and the
Kings Servant, and Warden of the Cinque Ports, he was commanded to go to
Ireland, and to serve as Deputy there, which he refused: He was not committed,
but the King was highly offended, and having Offices, and Fees and Lands pro
servitio suo impenso, the King seized his Lands and Offices: I went to the
Parliament Roll, 47. E. 3. where I found another precedent for forain pro
consilio, or servitio impenso, if they refuse, those Lands and Offices so given
are seized, but no commitment.

IF any man owes a man displeasure, Sir Thomas Wentworth
and shall procure him to be put into forain employment, it will be a matter of
high concernment to the Subject: We know the Honor and Justice of the King, but
we know not what his ministers or the mediation of Ambassadors may do to work

IF you grant this Liberty, Sir John Elliot.
what are you the better by other privileges? what difference is there between
imprisonment at home, and constrained employment abroad? it is no less then a
temporal Bamishment, neither is it for his Majesty's service to constrain his
Subjects to employment abroad: Honor and Reward invites them rather to seek it,
but to be compelled, stands not with our Liberty.

These Debates, as to Confinement, produced this resolution, That no Freeman
ought to be confined by any command from the King, or Privy Council, or any
other, unless it be by Act of Parliament, or by other due course or warrant of
Law.

As for the matter of supply, the Debate was put off till Friday following.

Thursday 3. of April, Mr. Secretary Cook brought the House this Message from
the King.
HIs Majesty having understood that some rumors were spread abroad of a sharp
Message yesterday delivered by me, The King sends a Message to the House of S^.
Cook, touching some words said to be spoken by the Duke.
and of some malicious words, that the Duke should speak yesterday at the
Councel-board, he the first mover and perswader of this Assembly of Parliament
to the King. Esteem of the King according to his actions, and not these tales;
His Majesty takes notice of our purpose, that on Friday we will resolve upon
Supply, which his Majesty graciously accepts of, and that our free gift without
any condition should testify to the world, that we will be as far from
incroaching upon his Prerogative, as he will be to incroach upon our Liberties:
and this shall well appear, when we present our Grievances to him, and then we
shall know that he has no intention to violate our

Then he added a word of his own, Yesterday after dinner we attended his
Majesty, and he asked us what we had done: We said we had entered into the
consideration of Supply, and that the final resolution was deferred till
Friday; and that this was done for just reasons, to join the business

Debates on the Message.
UPon the delivery of this Message some stood up, and professed they never heard
of any such sharp Message or words the day before, or that any was so bold as
to interpose himself: They acknowledged his Majesty had put a threefold
Obligation on them; First, in giving them satisfaction; Secondly, in giving
them assurance (which is a great Law) that

Friday 4 April Secretary brings another Message from the King.
THe day following Mr. Secretary Cook delivered another Message from the King,
viz. His Majesty has again commanded me to put you you shall show in his grace
and goodness, the more you shall prevail to obtain your own desires.

Upon this occasion Mr. Pym spoke,
THat in business of weight dispatch is better then discourse; Mr. Pym.
We came not hither without all motives that can be toward his Majesty, had



That five Subsidies be given his Majesty; 5. Subsidies resolved on.
and Mr. Secretary Cook was appointed to acquaint his Majesty with the
Resolution of the House.

Monday the 7. of April,
Mr. Secretary Cook reported to the House the Kings acceptance of Mr. Secretary
Cook report the Kings acceptance of five Subsidies
and how his Majesty was pleased to ask, by how many voices they were gained? I
said, but by one; His Majesty asked, how many were against him? I said, none;
for they were voted by one voice, and one general consent. His Majesty was much
affected therewith, and called the Lords in Council, and there I gave them
account what had passed; besides, it gave his Majesty no small content, that
although five Subsidies be inferior to his wants, yet it is the greatest gift
that ever was given in Parliament; and now he sees with this he shall have the
affections

Upon the giving of the five Subsidies the Duke of Bucks made a Speech at the
Council Table, and
SIr, The Duke of Buckinghams Speech at the Council Table thereupon.
me thinks I behold you a great King, for love is greater then Majesty; opinion
that the people loved you not, had almost lost you in the opinion of the world;
But this day makes you appear as you are, a glorious King, loved at home, and
now to be feared abroad; this falling out so happily, to join with like love in
this great gift; for proportion, although it be less then your occasions may
ask, yet it is more then ever Subjects did give in so short a time; nor am I
persuaded it will rest there, for this is but as an earnest of their
affections, to let you see, and the world know what Subjects you have, that
when the honor and the good of the State is engaged, and Aid asked in the
ordinary way of Parliament, you cannot want: This is not the gift of five
Subsidies alone, but the opening of a Mine of Subsidies that lies in their
hearts. This good beginning has

Mr. Secretary Cook also at this time repeated the substance of the Kings
Answer to the Petition concerning Recusants. And after he had done, Sir John
Elliot expressed the great satisfaction which he apprehended, the House in
general, and himself in special, had received touching each particular of his
Majesty's gracious Answer; but showed his dislike that Mr. Secretary in the
close of his Relation, It is ill taken by Sir John Elliot that the Dukes name
was intermingled with the Kings by Secretary Cook.
made mention of another in addition

Is it (said he) that any man conceives the mention of others (of what quality
soever) can add encouragement or affection to us in our duties and loyalties
toward his Majesty, or give them greater latitude or extent, then naturally
they have? or is it supposed that the power or interest of any man can add more
readiness to his Majesty in his gracious inclination to us, then his own
goodness gives him? I cannot believe it.

But Sir, I am sorry there is this occasion, that these things should be
argued, or this mixture which was formerly condemned should appear again: I
beseech you Sir, let it not be hereafter; let no man take this boldness within
these Walls to introduce it, though I confess for my particular I shall readily
commend, nay, thank that man, whose endeavors are applied in such Offices, as
may be advantageable for the public! Yet in this matter so contrary to the
Customs of our Fathers, and the honor of our Times, I cannot without Scandal
apprehend it, nor without

Now let us proceed, said he, to those services that concern his Majesty and
the Subject, which (I doubt not) in the end will render us so real unto him,
that we shall not need more help to endear us to his favor.

The Commons having expressed their dutiful affections toward his Majesty, in
giving him so large a Gift as five Subsidies, and having also showed

Dudly Diggs began with this Introduction: Sir Dudly Diggs begins the
Conference by way of Introduction.


I am commanded to show unto your Lordships in general, that the Laws of
England are grounded on Reason, more ancient then Books, consisting much in
unwritten Customs, yet so full of Justice and true Equity, that your most
honorable Predecessors and Ancestors propugned them with a Nolumus mutari; and
so ancient, that from the Saxon days, notwithstanding the injuries and ruins
of time, they have continued in most part the same, as may appear in old
remaining Monuments of the Laws of Ethelbert, the first Kent, Ina the King of
the West Saxons, Osfa of the Mercians, and of Alfred the great Monarch, who
united the Saxon Heptarchie, whose Laws are yet to be seen published, as some
think, by Parliament, as he says to that end, ut qui sub uno rege, sub una lege
regerentur: And though the Book of Litchfield, speaking of the times of the
Danes, says, then Ius sopitum erat in regno, leges and consuetudines sopitae
sunt, and prava voluntas, vis and violentia magis regnabant quam Judicia vel
Justitia, yet by the blessing of God a good King Edward, commonly Edward, did
awaken those Laws; and as the old words are, Excitatas reparavit, reparatas
decoravit, decoratas confirmavit, which Confirmavit shows, that good King
Edward did not give those Laws which William the Conqueror and all his
Successors since that time have sworn unto.

And here my Lords, by many Cases frequent in our modern Laws strongly
concurring with those of the ancient Saxon Kings, I might, if time were not
more precious, demonstrate that our Laws and Customs were the

I will only entreat your Lordships leave to tell you, That as we have now,
even in those Saxon times they had their Court Barons, and Court Leets, and
Sheriffs Courts, by which as Tacitus says of the Germans, their Ancestors Iura
reddebant per pagos and vicos; and I do believe as we have now, they had their
Parliaments, where new Laws were made cum consensu Praelatorum, Magnatum and
totius Communitatis, or as another writes, cum consilio Praelatorum, Nobilium
and sapientium L^icorum; I will add nothing out of Glanvile, that wrote in the
time of Hen. 2. or Bracton, that writ in the days of Hen. 3. only give me
leave to cite that of Fortescue the learned Chancellor to Hen. 6. who writing
of this Kingdom, says, Regnum istud moribus nationum and regum temporibus,
eisdem quibus nunc regitur legibus and consuetudinibus regebatur. But my good
Lords, as the Poet said of Fame, I may say of our Common Law, Ingrediturque
solo, caput inter nubila condit.


Wherefore the cloudy part being mine, I will make haste to open way for your
Lordships, to hear more certain Arguments, and such as go on more sure grounds.

Be pleased then to know, that it is an undoubted and fundamental Point of this
so ancient Common Law of England, That the Subject has meum and tuum, that is
the nurse of Industry, and mother of Courage, and without which there can be no
Justice, of which meum and tuum is the proper object. But the undoubted
Birthright of true Subjects has lately not a little been invaded and
prejudiced by pressures, the more grievous, because they have been pursued by
imprisonment, contrary to the Franchises of this Land; and when according to
the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, redress has been sought for in a legal
way, by demanding Habeas from the Judges, and a discharge by trial according to
the Law of the Land, success has failed: that now inforceth the Commons in
this present Parliament assembled, to examine by Acts of Parliament, Precedents
and Reasons, the truth of the English Subjects liberty, which I shall leave to
learned Gentlemen to argue.

Mr. Littleton.
NExt after Sir Dudly Diggs, spoke Mr. Ed Littleton of the Inner Temple, That
their Lordships have heard that the Commons have taken England, first granted
in the 17th. year of King John, and renewed in the 9t^. year of Hen. 3. and
since confirmed in Parliament above 30. times, the words there are Chap. 29.
Nullus liber homo capiatur, vel imprisonetur, aut disseisietur de libero
tenemento suo vel liberis consuetudinibus suis, aut utlagetur, aut exuletur,
aut aliquo modo destruatar, nec super eum ibimus, nec eum mittemus, nisi per
legale judicium Parium suorum, vel per legem terrae.

He then proceeded to open, and argued learnedly upon the several Particulars
in the last recited Clause of Magna Charta; and further showed, That no
invasion was made upon this personal Liberty, till the time of King Ed. 3.
which was soon resented by the Subject, for in the 5. Ed. 3. Chap. 9. it is
enacted, That no man from henceforth shall be attached on Edw. 3. Chap. 4. it
is more full, and does expound the words of the grand Charter, which is thus;
Whereas it is contained in the grand Charter of the Franchises of England, that
none shall be Imprisoned nor put out of his Freehold, nor free Custom, unless
it be by the Law of the Land, it is awarded, assented and established, That
from henceforth none shall be taken Ed. 3. Chap. 3. it is more direct, Several
other Statutes were cited by him, in confirmation of this point of the Liberty
of the Subject.

The Kings Council afterward made Objections to the said Argument, per legem
terrae in Magna Charta, cannot be understood for process of Law and original
Writs; for that in Criminal proceedings no original Writ is usual at all, but
every Constable either for Felony or breach of the Peace, or to prevent the
breach

To this it was replied, That the Statutes were direct in Point, and though
some of them speak of suggestions of the Subjects, yet they are in equal reason
a commitment by command of the King, as when the King takes notice of a thing
himself: And for the words per legem terrae, original Writs only are not
intended, but all other legal process, which comprehends the whole
proceedings of the Law upon Cause other then trial by Jury, and the course of
the Law is rendered by due process of the Law, and no man ought to be imprisoned
by special command without indictment, or other due process to be made by the
Law. And whereas it is said there might be danger in revealing the Cause, that
may be avoided by declaring a general Cause, as for Treason, suspicion of
Treason, misprision of Treason, Felony, without expressing the particulars
which can

And as for the bayling of the party committed, it has ever been the
discretion of the Judges, to give so much respect to a commitment, by the
command of the King or the privy Council, which are ever intended to be done in
just and weighty Cases, that they will not presently set them free, but bail
them to answer what shall be objected against them Habeas Corpus, and if they
should be then remanded, they might be perpetually imprisoned without any
remedy at all, and consequently a man that had committed no offense might be in
a worse case then a greater offender, for the latter should have an ordinary
trial to discharge him, the other should never be delivered.

Mr. Seldom.
MAster Seldom of the Inner Temple argued next, first making this Introduction.

Your Lordships have heard from the Gentleman that last spoke, a great part of
the grounds upon which the House of Commons upon mature deliberation proceeded,
to that clear resolution touching the right of liberty of their persons: The
many Acts of Parliament, which are the written Laws of the Land, and are
expressly in the Point, have bin read and opened, and such Objections as have
been by some made unto them, and Objections also made out of another Act of
Parliament, have been cleared and answered: It may seem now perhaps (my Lords)
that little

The House of Commons taking into consideration, that in this question being of
so high a nature, that never any exceeded it in any Court of Justice
whatsoever, all the several ways of just examination of the Truth should be
used, have also most carefully informed themselves of all former Judgments or
Precedents concerning this great Point, either way;

This Point that concerns Precedents, the House of Commons have commanded me to
present to your Lordships, which I shall as briefly as I may, so I do it
faithfully and perspicuously: to that end, my Lords, before I come to the
particulars of any of those Precedents, I shall first remember to your
Lordships that which will seem as a general key for the opening and true
apprehension of all them of record, without which key no man, unless he be
verst in the entries and course of the Kings Bench, can possibly understand.



The Writ of Habeas Corpus, or Corpus cum causa, is the highest remedy in Law
for any man that is imprisoned, and the only remedy for him that is imprisoned
by the special command of the King, or the Lords of the p^ivy Council, without
showing cause of the commitment; and if any m^n be so imprisoned by any such
Command, or otherwise whatsoever though England, and desire by himself, or any
other in his behalf, this Writ of Hab. Corp. for the purpose in the Court of
Kings Bench, that cum causa detentionis, and sometimes cum causa captionis; and
he with his return filed to the Writ, brings the Prisoner to the Bar at the
time appointed, and the Court judges of the sufficiency or insufficiency of
the retu^n; and if they find him baylable, committitur Marescallo, the proper
Prison belongs to the Court, and then afterward traditur in ball. Habeas
Corpus it appear to the Court that the Prisoner ought not to be bayled, nor
discharged from the Prison whence he is brought, then he is remanded and sent
back again, to continue till by due course of Law he may be delivered; and the
ent^y of this is, remittitur quousque secundum legem deliberatus fuerit, or
remittitur quousque, etc. which is all one, and the highest award of Judgment
that ever was or can be given upon a Habeas Corpus.

Your Lordships have heard the resolution of the House of Commons,

He then proceeded, and said, The House of Commons desiring with all care to
inform themselves fully of the truth of the resolution of the Judges in the 34.
year of the Queen, cited in the case of Sir John Heveningham, by the Kings
Council, as Arguments against his not being bayled, have got into their hands a
Book of select Cases, collected by the reverend and learned Judge, Chief
Justice Anderson, all written with his own hand; which he caused to be read,
being the same which has been already mentioned in the Collections of this
Parliament; which Precedents, says he, do fully resolve enough for the
maintenance of the ancient and fundamental Hab. Corp. when any is imprisoned.

Then he concluded, that having thus gone through the charge committed to him
by the House of Commons, he should now, as he had leave and direction given
him, lest their Lordships should be put to much trouble and expense of time in
finding and getting Copies at large of those things which he had cited, offer
also to their Lordships Authentic Copies of them all, and so left them, and
whatever else he had said, to their Lordships

LAst of all Sir Edward Cook took up the Argument, Sir Edward Cook.
as to the rational part of the Law, and began with this Introduction,

Your Lordships have heard 7. Acts of Parliament in point, and 31. Precedents
summarily collected, and with great understanding delivered, which I have
perused, and understand them all thoroughly; 12. of the Precedents are in
terminis terminantibus, a whole Jury of Precedents, and all in the point; I
Corpus cum cansa, the freedom of an English man, not to be imprisoned without
cause shown, which is my part to show, and the reason and the cause why it
should be so, wherein I will not be prolix nor copious, for to guild Gold were
idle and superfluous. And after he had cleared some doubts made of the Statute
of Westminster, which says, That the Sheriffs and others in some Argumentum ab
authoritate, and Argumentum ab authoritate valet affimative; that is, I Neminem
oportet sapientiorem esse legibus. Now these two arguments being so well
pressed to your Lordships by my Colleagues; I think your Lordships may wonder
what my part may be; it is short, but sweet; it is the Reason of all those Laws
and Precedents, and Reason must needs be welcome to all men; for all men are
not capable of the understanding of the Law, but every man is capable of
Reason; and those

1. A re ipsa. 2. A minore ad majus. 3. From the remedies provided. 4. From the
extent and universality of the same. 5. From the infiniteness of the time. 6. A
Fine.
The first general Reason is a re ipsa, even from the nature of Imprisonment,
ex visceribus causae, for I will speak nothing but ad idem, be it close or
other Imprisonment; and this Argument is threefold, because an imprisoned man
upon will and pleasure is 1. A Bondman. 2. Worse then a Bondman. 3. Not so
much as a man, for mortuus homo non est homo, a Prisoner is a dead man.


1. No man can be imprisoned upon will and pleasure of any but he that Propria
quarto modo to villains; now Propria quarto modo, and the species are
convertible, Whosoever is a Bondman may be imprisoned upon will and pleasure,
and whosoever may be imprisoned upon will and pleasure is a Bondsman.

2. If free men of England might be imprisoned at the will and pleasure of the
King or his commandment, then were they in worse case then Bondmen or villains;
for the Lord of a villain cannot command another to Edw. 3. fol. 50. in the new
print, 348. old print. A Prior had commanded one to imprison his Edw. 3. title
Tresp. 253. in Faux imprisonment, it was of an Abbot, who commanded one to take
and detain his villain, but demanded his cause, he gives it, because he
refused, being thereunto required, to drive his Cattle.

Ergo free men imprisoned without cause shown, are in worse case then villains,
that must have a cause shown them why they are imprisoned.

perdit domum, familiam, vicinos, patriam, and is to live amongst wretched and
wicked men, Malefactors and the like.

And that death and imprisonment was the same, he proved by an Argument ab
effectis, because they both produce the like immediate effects; he quoted a
Book for this: If a man be threatened to a re ipsa, from the nature of
imprisonment, to which res ipsa consilium dedit.

The second general Reason he took also from his books, for he said he has no
Law but what by great pains and industry he learnt at his book, for at ten
years of age he had no more Law then other men of like age; and this second
reason is a minore ad majus, he takes it from Bracton, Minima poena corporalis,
est major qualibet pecuniaria.

But the King himself cannot impose a fine upon any man, but it must be done
judicially by his Judges, per justitiarios in Curia, non per regem in Camera,
and so it has been resolved by all the Judges of England; he quoted 3. R. 2.
fo. 11.

The third general Reason is taken from the number and diversity of remedies
which the Laws give against imprisonment. Viz. Breve de homine replegiando. De
odio and atia. De Habeas Corpus. An appeal of Imprisonment. Breve de
manucaptione.


The latter two of these are antiquated, but the Writ De odio and atia is
revived, for that was given by the Statute of Magna Charta, Cha. 26. and
therefore though it were repealed by Statute of 42. E. 3. by which it Magna
Charta are void; now the Law would never have given so many remedies, if the
free men of England might have been imprisoned at free will and pleasure.

The fourth general Reason is from the extent and universality of the pretended
power to imprison, for it should extend not only to the Commons of this Realm
and their Posterities, but to the Nobles of the Land and their progenies, to
the Bishops and Clergy of the Realm, and their Commune periculum commune
requirit auxilium. Nay, it reaches to all persons of what condition, or sex,
or age soever; to all Judges and Officers, whose attendance is necessary, etc.
without exception, and therefore an imprisonment of such an extent, without
reason, is against reason.

The fifth general Reason is drawn from the indefiniteness of time, the
pretended power being limited to no time, it may be perpetual during life, and
this is very hard; to cast an old man into prison, nay, to close prison, and no
time allotted for his coming forth, is a hard case, as any man would think

The sixth and last Argument is a Fine; and sapiens incipit a Fine, and he
wished he had begun there also; and this Argument he made threefold: Ab
honesto. This being less honorable. Ab utili. This being less profitable. A
tuto. This Imprisonment by will and pleasure being very dangerous for King and
Kingdom.


1. Ab honesto. It would be no honor to a King or Kingdom, to be a King of
Bondmen or Slaves, the end of this would be both Dedecus and Damnum, both to
King and Kingdom, that in former times has been so renowned.

Ab utili. It would be against the profit of the King and Kingdom, for the
execution of those Laws before remembered, Magna Charta, 5. Ed. 3. Ed. 3.28. Ed.
3. whereby the King was inhibited to imprison upon pleasure; You see (quoth he)
that this was vetus querela, an old question, and now brought in again, after
seven Acts of Parliament; I say the execution of all these Laws are adjudged in
Parliament to be for the common profit of the King and People; and he quoted
the Roll, this pretended power being against the profit of the King, can be no
part of his Prerogative.

He was pleased to call this a binding Reason, and to say that the wit of man
could not answer it; that great men kept this Roll from being Printed, but that
it was equivalent in force to the printed Rolls.

3. A Reason a tuto. It is dangerous to the King for two respects; first, of
loss, secondly, of destroying of the endeavors of men: First, if he be
Remittitur at the rising of the Court, for the Prisoner traditur in ballium
quod breve Regis non fuit susficiens causa, The Kings Command. He quoted
another famous Case, Commons in Parliament incensed against the Duke of Suffolk
desire Prescot and Fortescue, were two, delivered a flat opinion, that he ought
not to be committed without an especial Cause. He questioned also the name and
etymology of the Writ in question, Corpus cum causa; Ergo, the Cause must be
brought before the Judge, else how can he take notice hereof?

Lastly, he pressed a place in the Gospel, Acts 25. last verse, which Festus
conceives is an absurd and unreasonable thing, to send a Prisoner to a Hoc fac
and vives, and that was the first reason a tuto, that it was not safe for the
King in regard of Loss, to commit men without a Cause.

The second Reason is, That such commitments will destroy the endeavors of all
men; Who will endeavor to employ himself in any profession, either of War,
Merchandise, or of any liberal knowledge, if he be but Tenant at will of his
Liberty? for no Tenant at will will support or improve Ergo, to make men
Tenants at will of their Liberties, destroys all industry and endeavors
whatsoever.

And so much for these six principal Reasons: A re ipsa. A minore ad majus. A
remediis. From the extent and universality. From the infiniteness of the time.
A fine.
Loss of Honor. Loss of Profit. Loss of Security. Loss of Industry.


These were his Reasons.

Here he made another Protestation,

That if remedy had been given in this Case, they would not have meddled
therewith by no means; but now that remedy being not obtained in the Kings
Bench, without looking back upon any thing that has been done or omitted, they
desire some provision for the future only. And here he took occasion to add
four H. 6. tit. monstrance de faits 82. by the whole Court, the King in his
Presence cannot command a man to be arrested, but an action of false
imprisonment lies against him that arresteth; if not the King in his royal
Presence, then none others can do it, Non sic itur ad astra. 1. Hen. 7.4.
Hussy reports the opinion of Markham, chief Justice to Edw. 4. that he could
not imprison by word of mouth; and the reason, because the party has no
remedy; for the Law leaves every man a remedy of causless imprisonment: he
added that Markham was a worthy Judge, though he fell into adversities at last
by the Lord Rivers his means. Fortescue, Chap. 8. Proprio ore nullus Regum usus
est, to imprison any man, etc. 4. Eliz. Times blessed and renowned for Justice
and Religion, in Pl. 235. the common Major haereditas venit unicuique nostrum a
Jure and legibus quam a parentibus.

And these are the four Authorities he cited in this point: Now he propounded
and answered two Objections; First, in point of State; Secondly, in the Course
held by the House of Commons.

1. Obj.
May not the Privy Council commit without cause showed in no matter of State
where secrecy is required? would not this be an hinderance to his Majesty's
service?

Answ.
It can be no prejudice to the King by reason of matter of State, for the cause
must be of a higher or lower nature; if it be for suspicion of Treason,
misprision of Treason or Felony, it may be by general words couched; if it be
for any other thing of smaller nature, as contempt and the like, the particular
cause must be showed, and no individuum vagum, or uncertain

2. Obj.
Again, if the Law be so clear as you make it, why needs the Declaration and
Remonstrance in Parliament?

Answ.
The Subject has in this Case sued for remedy in the Kings Bench by Habeas
Corpus, and found none; therefore it is necessary to be cleared in Parliament.
And here ends his Discourse: And then he made a recapitulation of all that had
been offered unto their Lordships, That generally their Lordships had been
advised by the most faithful Counselors that can be;

1. Acts of Parliament, judicial Precedents, good Reasons. First, you have had
many ancient Acts of Parliament in the Point, besides Magna Charta, that is,
seven Acts of Parliament, which indeed are thirty seven, Magna Charta being
confirmed thirty times, for so often have the Kings of England given their
royal Assents thereunto.

2. Judicial Precedents of grave and reverend Judges, in terminis
terminantibus, that long since departed the world, and they were many in
number. Precedents being twelve, and the Judges four of a Bench, made four
times twelve, and that is forty eight Judges.

3. You have, as he termed them, vividas rations, manifest and apparent
Reasons: Toward the conclusion he declared to their Lordships, That they of
the House of Commons have upon great study and serious Consideration, made a
great manifestation unanimously, Nullo contradicente, capita rerum, Heads or
Briefs, for these compendia are dispendia; but the Records at large, in
terminis terminantibus: and so he concluded, that their Lordships are involved
in the same danger, and therefore ex congruo and condigno they desired a
Conference, to the end their Lordships might make the like Declaration as they
had done; Commune periculum commune requirit auxilium; and thereupon take such
further course, as may secure their Lordships and them, and all their
Posterity, in enjoying of

The two next days were spent in the Debate about Billeting of Soldiers upon
the Subject against Law.

THursday the 10. of April, His Majesty's Message for non-recess.
Mr. Secretary Cook delivered this Message from the King,

That his Majesty desires this House not to make any recess these Easter
Holidays, that the world may take notice how earnest his

THis Message for non-recess, The Message not approved.
was not well pleasing to the House.

SIr Robert Phillips first resented it, Sir To. Phillips.
and took notice, That in 12. and 18. Iac. upon the like intimation, the House
resolved it was in their power

Edward Cook spoke to the same purpose, Sir E. Cook.
and said, I am as tender of the Privileges of this House, as of my life, and
they are the Heartstrings of the Commonwealth. The King makes a Prorogation,
but this House adjourns it self. The Commission of Adjournment we never read,
but say, This House adjourns it self. If the King write to an Abbot for a
Corody, for a vallet, if it be ex rogatu, though the Abbot yield to it, it
binds not: Therefore I desire that it be entered, that this is done ex rogatu
Regis.

Hereupon a Message was sent to the King, That the House would give all
expedition to his Majesty's Service, notwithstanding their purpose of recess.
To which Message his Majesty returned this Answer, That the motion proceeded
from himself, in regard of his engagement in the affairs of Christendom, wished
them all alacrity in their proceedings, and that there be no recess at all.

FRiday the 11. of April, Sec. Cook to expedite Subsidies.
Secretary Cook moved the expediting of Subsisides, and turning of the Votes
into an Act: We have many Petitions to the King, said he, and they are
Petitions of Right, we have freely and bountifully given five Subsidies, but no
time is appointed, and Subsidy without time, is no Subsidy: let us appoint a
time.

SIr Dudley Diggs quickened his motion and spoke roundly: We have (said he)
freely concluded our Liberties, Sir Dudly Diggs.
we have offered five Subsidies, his Majesty has given us gracious Answers, we
have had good by our beginnings, what have we hitherto done for the King?
nothing is done that the King can take notice of; the world thinks that this
Parliament has not expressed that resolution that it did at the first, how
much does it concern the King that the world be satisfied with his Honor? Our

Sir Thomas Wentworth.
SIr Thomas Wentworth proposed a middle way, viz. That when we set down the
time, we be sure the Subjects Liberties go hand in hand together; then to
resolve of the time, but not report it to the House, till we have a Ground and
a Bill for our Liberties: this is the way to come off fairly, and prevent
jealousies.

Hereupon the Committee of the whole House resolved, That Grievances and Supply
go hand in hand.

Saturday 12. of April,
Mr. Secret. Cook delivers another Message concerning Supply.
Mr. Secretary Cook delivered another Message from the King ( viz.) His Majesty
having given timely notice to this House, as well of

I will discharge my duty, I shall humbly desire this honorable House not to
undervalue or overstrain this Message; if we conceive any thing in it to tend
as if his Majesty threatened to dissolve this Parliament, we are deceived; his
Majesty intends the contrary, and to put us in such a way that our business may
have speedy success. His Majesty takes notice of a notice is taken, as if this
House pressed not upon the abuses of Power only, but upon Power it self; this
touches the King and us, who are supported by that Power: Let the King hear of
any abuses of Power, he will willingly hear us, and let us not bend our selves
against the extention of his Royal Power, but contain our selves within those
bounds, that we meddle only with pressures and abuses of Power, and we shall
have the best satisfaction that ever King gave. I beseech you all concur this
way,

Being moved to explain what he meant by the word (Power) which (he said) we
did oppose, he answered,

I cannot descend to particulars, or go from that his Majesty gave me warrant
or power to deliver.

This Message was very unpleasing to the House, and many debates succeeded
thereupon. And

SIr Robert Phillips said, Sir Rob. Phillips.
he hoped their moderation would have given a

OThers proposed to find out a way by Gods providence to make this Message
happy to King and People, it concerning the Kings honor abroad, and our safety
at home, that this Parliament be happy, Let us prevent (say they) these
mischiefs, which by frequent messages thus obstruct us; let those Gentlemen
near the Chair see that we have endeavored to apply our selves to his Majesty's
service, notwithstanding this Message. Iac. a message of this nature produced
no good; nothing so endangers us with his Majesty, as that opinion that we are
Antimonarchically affected, whereas such is and ever has been our loyalty, if
we were to choose a Government, we would choose this Monarchy of England above
all Governments in the world.

ABout two days after Mr. Secretary Cook again did quicken the business of
supply, Secr. Cook.
alleging

that all negotiations of Ambassadors are at a stop

THis motion comes unexpectedly, Mr. Wandesford.
but it is fit to receive some satisfaction, the proceeding now with our
Grievances shall open the stop that hinders his Majesty's affairs.

Humphrey May added, That sweetness, trust and confidence are the only weapons
for us to deal with our King; Sir Humphry May.
and that coldness, inforcement and constraint will never work our ends: If we
compass all we desire, and have not his Majesty's heart, what will a Law or any
thing else do us good?

HEreupon it was ordered That a special Committee of eight persons shall
presently withdraw themselves, and consult together upon some Monday next, (if
the King please to give access) and at the same time to deliver the Petition
against billeting of Soldiers.

Master Speakers Speech to the King on Easter Monday.
Most gracious and dread Sovereign,
Mr. Speakers Speech to the King at the delivery of the Petition for billeting
of Soldiers.
YOur dutiful and loyal Commons here assembled, were lately humble suitors to
your Majesty for access to your Royal presence; the occasion that moved their
desires herein was a particular of importance, worthy your Princely
consideration, which, as it well deserves, should have been the only subject
of my Speech at this time.

But since your gracious answer for this access obtained by a message from your
Majesty, they have had some cause to doubt that your Majesty

And because no unhappiness of theirs can parallel with that which may proceed
from a misunderstanding in your Majesty of their clear and loyal intentions,
they have commanded me to attend your Majesty with an humble and summary
Declaration of their proceedings since this short

For this purpose they humbly beseech your Majesty to take into your Royal
consideration, that although by ancient right of Parliament the

This was their original order and resolution, and was grounded upon a true
discerning that these two considerations could not be severed, but did both of
them entirely concern your Majesty's service, consisting no less in enabling
and encouraging the Subject, then in proportioning a Present suiting to your
Majesty's occasions and their abilities; nay, so far have

And to be sure your Majesty's supply might receive no interruption by the
other, differing from usage and custom (in cases of this nature) sent up of
those that concern the Subjects by parcels, some to your Majesty, and some to
the Lords, to the end your Majesty might receive such speedy content, as suited
with the largest and best extent of their first order.

Sir, You are the breath of our nostrils, and the light of our eyes,

For rich and free Subjects as they are best governed, so they are most able to
do your Majesty service, either in peace or war, which next under God has been
the cause of the happy and famous victories of this Nation, beyond other
Kingdoms of larger Territories and greater number of People.

What information soever contrary to this shall be brought unto your

Having (by this that has been said) cleared our hearts and proceedings to
your Majesty, our trust is, that in your Royal Judgment we shall be free from
the least opinion of giving any necessary stop to our

We all most humbly beseech your Majesty to receive no information in this or
any other business from private relations, but to weigh and judge of our
proceedings by those resolutions of the House that shall be represented from
our selves.

blessed Parliament, for making perfect union between the best King and the
best People, that your Majesty may ever delight in calling us together, and we
in the comforts of your gracious favor toward us.

In this hope I return to my first errand, which will best appear by

Your Royal progenitors have ever held your Subjects hearts the best Garrison
of this Kingdom, and our humble suit to your Majesty is, that our faith and
loyalty may have such place in your Royal thoughts, as to rest assured that all
your Subjects will be ready to lay down their lives for the defense of your
sacred person and this Kingdom.

Not going our selves into our Countries this Easter, we should think it a
great happiness to us, as we know it would be a singular comfort and
encouragement to them that sent us hither, if we might but send them the news
of a gracious answer from your Majesty in this particular, which the reasons of
the Petition we hope will move your most excellent Majesty

The Petition concerning the billeting of Soldiers presented to the Kings most
excellent Majesty.
The Petition concerning billeting of Soldiers.
IN all humility complaining, shows unto your most excellent

1. The service of Almighty God is hereby greatly hindered, the 2. The ancient
and good government of the Country is hereby neglected, and almost contemned.
3. Your Officers of Justice in performance of their duties have been resisted
and endangered. 4. The Rents and Revenues of your Gentry greatly and generally
diminished; Farmers to secure themselves from the Soldiers insolence, being by
the Clamor of Solicitation of their fearful and injured Wives and Children,
enforced to give up their wonted dwellings, and to retire themselves into
places of more secure habitation. 5. Husbandmen, that are as it were the hands
of the Country, corrupted by ill example of the Soldiers, and encouraged to
idle life, give over work, and rather seek to live idly at another man's
charges, then by their own labors. 6. Tradesmen and Artificers almost
discouraged, and being enforced to leave their Trades, and to employ their time
in preserving themselves and their Families from cruelty. 7. Markets
unfrequented, and our ways grown so dangerous, that the People dare not pass to
and fro upon their usual occasions. 8. Frequent Robberies, Assaults, Batteries,
Burglaries, Rapes, Rapines, Murders, Barbarous Cruelties, and other most
abominable vices and outrages are generally complained of from all parts where
these Companies have been and had their abode, few of which insolences have
been so much as questioned, and fewer according
These and many other lamentable effects (most dread and dear Sovereign) have
by this billeting of Soldiers already fallen upon us your loyal Subjects,
tending no less to the disservice of your Majesty, then to their impoverishing
and destruction, so that thereby they are exceedingly disabled to yield your
Majesty those Supplies for your urgent occasions, which they heartily desire;
and yet they are further perplexed with apprehension of more approaching

For the second, we do most humbly beseech your Majesty to take into your
Princely consideration, that many of those Companies, besides their dissolute
dispositions and carriages, are such as do openly profess themselves Papists,
and therefore to be suspected, Spain, and Arch-Dutchess against your Majesty's
Allies; which, of what pernicious consequence it may prove, and how prejudicial
to the safety of your Kingdom, we leave to your Majesty's high and Princely
wisdom.

And now upon these, and many more which might be alleged, Subjects, and the
preventing of calamity and ruin both of Church and Commonwealth:

We your Majesty's most humble and loyal Subjects, the Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses of your House of Commons, in the name of all the Commonalty of your
Kingdom, who are upon this occasion most miserably disconsolate and afflicted,
prostrate at the Throne of your Grace and Justice do most ardently beg a
present remove of this insupportable burden, and that your Majesty would be
graciously pleased to

To the Speakers Speech and this Petition his Majesty made this reply,
Mr. Speaker and Gentlemen, when I sent you my last Message, I did

Wherefore I hope you will follow my example, in eschewing Disputations, and
fall to your important business. You make a Protestation of your

To be short, go on speedily with your businesses without any more Apologies,
for time calls fast on you, which will neither stay for you

For what concerns your Petition, I shall make answer in a convenient time.

FRom this time to the 25th. of the same Month, Martial Law debated.
the House in a grand Committee spent most of their time in Debate about
Martial Law, and part thereof in giving the Lords a meeting at two Conferences,
concerning Robert Heath and Sergeant Ashley the Kings Council, were permitted
to argue against the same; and Sergeant Ashley in his discourse, Serj. Ashley
questioned for some words.
said, The Propositions made by the Commons tended rather to an Anarchy then a
Monarchy: 2. That if they be yielded unto, it is to put a Sword into the Kings
hand with one hand, and to take it out with the other: 3. That they must allow
the King to govern by Acts of State, otherwise he is a King without a Council,
or a Council without a

Friday 25 of April, The Lords had a Conference with the Commons, where the
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury spoke as follows.
Gentlemen of the House of Commons,
Archbishops Speech at a Conference concerning the Petition of Right.
THe Service of the King and safety of the Kingdom, do call on my Lords to give
all speedy expedition, to dispatch some of these great and weighty Businesses
before us. For the better effecting whereof, my Lords have thought fit to let
you know, that they do in general agree with you, and doubt not but you will
agree with us, to the best of your powers to maintain and support the
fundamental Laws of the Kingdom,

We have resolved of nothing, designed or determined of nothing, but desire to
take you with us, praying help from you, as you have done from us.

My Lords have thought of some Proposions, which they have ordered to be read
here, and then left with you in Writing, That if it seem good to you, we may
uniformly concur for the substance; and if you differ, that

Then the Propositions following were read by the Clerk of the upper House.
Propositions tendered to the Commons by the Lords, touching the Petition of
Right
THat his Majesty would be pleased graciously to Declare, That the good old Law
called Magna Charta, and the six Statutes conceived to be Declarations and
Explanations of that Law, do still stand in force to all intents and purposes.

2. That his Majesty would be pleased graciously to Declare, That according to
Magna Charta, and the Statutes before named, as also according to the most
ancient Customs and Laws of this Land, every free Subject of this

3. That his Majesty would be graciously pleased to Declare, That it is his
Royal pleasure to ratify and confirm unto all and every his Loyal and faithful
Subjects, all their ancient, several, just Liberties, Privileges and Rights,
in as ample and beneficial manner to all intents and purposes, as their
Ancestors did enjoy the same under the best of his most noble Progenitors.

4. That his Majesty would be further pleased graciously to Declare, for the
good content of his loyal Subjects, and for the securing of them from

5. As touching his Majesty's Royal Prerogative, intrinsical to his
Sovereignty, and betrusted him withal from God, ad communem totius populi
salutem, and non ad destructionem, that his Majesty would resolve not to use or
divert the same, to the prejudice of any his loyal People in the

After the reading of the Propositions, the Archbishop said,
THis is but a Model to be added unto, altered, or diminished, as in your
reasons and wisdoms ye shall think fit, after ye have communicated the same to
the rest of the Members of the House.

To this Speech Sir Dudley Diggs, it being at a free Conference, made Reply;
MY Lords, Sir Dudley Diggs replies to this Speech.
it has pleased God many ways to bless the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses
now assembled in Parliament, with great England. And in their Consultations for
the service of his Majesty, and the safety of this Kingdom, our special
comforts and strong hopes have risen from the continued good respect, which
your Lordships so nobly from time to time have been pleased to show unto them,
particularly at this present in your so honorable profession to agree with them
in general, and desiring to maintain and support the fundamental Laws and
Liberties of England.



Another noble Argument of your honorable disposition toward them is expressed
in this, That you are pleased to expect no present answer from them, who are
(as your Lordships in your great wisdoms, they doubt not, have considered) a
great Body that must advise upon all new Propositions, and resolve upon them
before they can give answer, according to the ancient Order of their House. But
it is manifest in general (God be thanked for it) there is a great concurrence
of affection to the same end in both Houses, and such good Harmony, that I
entreat your Lordships leave

The Commons were not satisfied with these Propositions, which were conceived
to choke the Petition of Right, then under consideration, but demurred upon
them.

Monday 28 April. The Lord Keeper spoke to both Houses of Parliament by the
Kings command, who was then
MY Lords, The Lord Keepers Speech to both Houses, concerning supply, by the
Kings command.
and ye the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons, ye cannot
but remember the great and important Affairs concerning the safety both of the
State and Religion, declared at first from his Majesty's own mouth, to be the
causes of the Assembling of this Parliament; the sense whereof, as it does
daily increase with his Majesty, so it ought to do, and his Majesty doubts not
but it does so with

Yet his Majesty does well weigh, that this expense of time has been
occasioned by the Debate which has arisen in both Houses touching the Liberty
of the Subject; in which, as his Majesty takes in good part the purpose and
intent of the Houses, so clearly and frequently professed, that they would not
diminish or blemish his just Prerogative, so he presumes that ye will all
confess it a point of extraordinary Grace and Justice in him That he holds
the Statute of Magna Charta, and the other Six Statutes insisted upon for the
Subjects Liberty, to be all in force, and assures you, that he will maintain
all his Subjects in the just Freedom of their Persons, and safety of their
Estates: And that he will govern according to the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm: And that ye shall find as much security in his Majesty's Royal Word and
Promise, as in the strength of any Law ye can make; so that hereafter ye shall
never have cause to complain. The conclusion is, That his Majesty

The Commons being returned from the Lords House, Mr. Secretary Cook persuaded
them to comply with the King.

see how indulgent he is, that however the Affairs of Christendom are great,
yet he omits not this, nay he takes in good part our Proceedings and our
Declarations that we will not Impeach the Prerogative: Also his Majesty
presumes that we will confess that he has used extraordinary Grace, in that he
has endured dispute so long, he acknowledges it Justice to stand as we have
done.

Further, out of a Princely care of the Public, he is careful no more time be
lost; and because he sees some extraordinary course to be taken to satisfy He
is no King but a Tyrant, that governs not by Law; But this Kingdom is to be
governed by the Common Law, and his Majesty assures us so much; the
Interpretation is left to the Judges, and to his great Council, and all is to
be regulated by the Common Law; I mean not Magna Charta only, for that Magna
Charta was part of the Common Law, and Meum and tuum. And thus the general
Government of Cases, with relation to the common State London, and the Council
Board caused them to be brought forth and sold. In a time of Pestilence men may
be restrained: If a Schism be like to grow in a Church, the State will enquire
after the favorers of it: if there be fea^ of Invasion, and it be encouraged by
hope of a Party amongst us, it is in the power of Government to restrain

In the Composure of these things there is great difference: What differences
have been between the Courts of Chancery and Kings Bench? It is hard to put
true difference between the Kings Prerogative and our Liberties. His Majesty
saw expense of time would be prejudicial; it pleased God to move his Majesty by
a Divine hand to show us a way to clear all our difficulties; let us attend to
all the parts of it, there be Five Degrees, and there is more assurance then we
could have by any Law whatsoever. His Magna Charta and the other Statutes are
in force: This is not the first time that the Liberty of the Subject was
infringed, or was in Debate and confirmed; all times thought it safe, that when
they came to a Negative of Power, it was hard to keep Government and Liberty
together; but his Majesty stopped not there, but according to the sense of
these Laws, That he will govern his Subjects in their just Liberties, he
assures us our Liberties are just, they are not of Grace, but of Right; nay he
assures us he will govern us according to the Laws of the Realm, his Majesty
did see that the best way to settle all at unity, is to express his own heart:
The Kings heart is the best guarder of his own promise, his promise is bound
with his heart. What Prince can express more care and wisdom?

Lastly he says, That hereafter ye shall never have the like cause to
complain; May we not think the breach is made up? is not his Majesty engaged in
his Royal word?

The wrath of a King is like the roaring of a Lion, and all Laws with his wrath
are to no effect; but the Kings favor is like to the dew of the grass, there
all will prosper; and God made the Instruments to unite all hearts.

His Majesty having thus discharged himself, he prays us to proceed to the
business that so much concerns him. As his Majesty has now showed himself the
best of Kings, let us acknowledge his Majesty's goodness, and

But this motion was not received with general acceptance; and Sir Benjamin
Rudyard replied to it in these words.

WE are now upon a great business, Sir Ben. Rudyards Speech concerning that
motion.
and the manner of handling it may be as great as the business it self. Liberty
is a precious thing, for every man may set his own price upon it, and he that
does not England were of a contrary opinion, I am sure we should have heard of
him ere now; out of all question, the very scope and drift of Magna Charta was
to reduce the Regal to a Legal Power in matter of Imprisonment, or else it had
not been worthy so much contending for.

It is true, That the King ought to have a trust reposed in him, God forbid but
he should, and I hope it is impossible to take it from him; for it praeter
naturam, then contra naturam, propter bones fines: So the Kings Prerogatives
are rather besides the Law, then against it; and when they are directly to
their ends for the public good, they are not only concurring Laws, but even
Laws in singularity and excellency.

But to come nearer, let us consider where we are now, what steps we have gone,
and gained; The Kings learned Council have acknowledged all the Laws to be
still in force, the Judges have not allowed any Judgment against these Laws,
the Lords also have confessed, that the Laws

All this hitherto is for our advantage; but above all his Majesty has this
day (himself being publicly present) declared by the mouth of the Lord
Keeper, before both the Houses, That Magna Charta and the other six Statutes,
are still in force; That he will maintain his Subjects in the Liberties of
their Persons, and Proprieties of their Goods; That he will govern them
according to the Laws of the Kingdom; this is a solemn and binding
satisfaction, expressing his gracious readiness to comply with his people in
their reasonable and just desires. The King is a good Man, and it is no
diminution to a King, to be called so; for whosoever is a good Man shall be
greater then a King, that is not so. The King certainly is very tender of his
present Honor, and of his Fame hereafter: He will think

For mine own part, I shall be very glad to see that old decrepite Law Magna
Charta, which has been so long kept and lien bedridden as it were. I shall be
glad to see it walk abroad again with new vigor, and luster, attended and
followed with the other six Statutes: questionless it will be a great heartning
to all the people. I doubt not, but upon a debating conference with the Lords,
we may happily fall upon a fair, fit accommodation, concerning the Liberty of
our Persons, and Propriety of our Goods. I hope we may have a Bill, to agree in
the point, against imprisonment for Loans, or privy Seals: As for intrinsecal
power and reason of State, they are matters in the Clouds, where I desire we
may leave them, and

Now I will only remember you of one Precept, and that of the wisest man, Be
not over wise, be not over just: and he gives his reason, for why will thou be
desolate?

If Justice and Wisdom may be stretched to desolation, let us thereby

A Committee ordered to draw up a Bill in order to the Petition of Right
Upon this debate it was ordered, That a Committee of Lawyers do draw a Bill,
containing the substance of Magna Charta, and the other Statutes that do
concern the Liberty of the Subject: which business took up two whole days.

Thursday, the first of May.
Mr. Secretary Cook brings a Message to rely on the Kings Word.
MAster Secretary Cook delivers a Message from his Majesty, viz. to know whether
the House will rest on his Royal Word, or no, declared to them by the Lord
Keeper; which if they do, he assures them it shall be Royally performed.

Upon this there was a silence for a good space: Then Mr. Secretary Cook
proceeded. This silence invites me to a further Speech, and further to address
my self: Now we see we must grow toward an issue; for my part, how confident I
have been of the good issue of this Parliament, I have certified in this place,
and elsewhere, and I am still confident therein; I know his Majesty is resolved
to do as much as ever King did for his Subjects. All this Debate has grown out
of the sense of our Sufferings, and

Since this Parliament begun, has there been any dispense made of that which
has formerly been done? when means were denied his Majesty being a young King,
and newly come to his Crown, which he found engaged in a War, what could we
expect in such Necessities? His Majesty called this Parliament to make up the
Breach: His Majesty assures us we shall not have the like cause to complain: He
assures the Laws shall be established; what can we desire more? all is, that we
provide for Posterity, and

Sir Robert Philips hereupon spoke this:

That if the words of Kings strike impressions in the hearts of Subjects,
England before the eyes of his Majesty, that we may justify our selves that we
have demeaned our selves dutifully to his Majesty.

And so the day following they had further Debate upon that matter, the House
being turned into a Grand Committee, and Mr. Herbert in the

Some say, that the Subject has suffered more in the violation of ancient
Liberties within these few years, then in Three hundred years before, and
therefore care ought to be taken for the time to come.

Sir Edward Cook said, That that Royal word had reference to some Message
formerly sent; his Majesty's word was, That they may secure themselves any way,
by Bill or otherwise, he promised to give way to it; and to the end that this
might not touch his Majesty's Honor, it was proposed that the Bill come not
from the House, but from the King: We will and grant for us and our Successors,
and that we and our Successors will do thus and thus: and it is the Kings
Honor, he cannot speak but by Record.

Others desired the House to consider when and where the late promise was made,
was it not in the face of both Houses? Cruel Kings have been careful to perform
their promises, yea, though they have been unlawful, as Herod. Therefore if we
rest upon his Majesty's promise, we may assure our selves of the performance of
it: Besides, we bind his Majesty by relying on his word: we have Laws enough,
it is the execution of them that is our life, and it is the King that gives
life and execution.

Sir Thomas Wentworth
Sir Thomas Wentworth concluded the Debate, saying, That never House of
Parliament trusted more in the goodness of their King, for their own private,
then the present; but we are ambitious that his Majesty's

Which so well agreed with the Sense of the House, that they made it the
subject of a Message to be delivered by the Speaker to his Majesty.

The King gives notice to both Houses that he intends shortly to end this
Session.
AMidst those deliberations another Message was delivered from his Majesty by
Mr. Secretary Cook; That howsoever we proceed in this business we have in hand,
which his Majesty will not doubt but to be according to our constant
professions, and so as he may have cause to give us thanks; yet his resolution
is, that both his Royal care, and hearty and tender affection toward all his
loving Subjects, shall appear to the whole Kingdom and all the World, that he
will govern us according to the

That the weight of the Affairs of the Kingdom, and Christendom, do press him
more and more, and that the time is now grown to that point of maturity, that
it cannot endure long debate, or delay; so as this Session Tuesday come
sevennight, at the furthest: In which time his Majesty for his part will be
ready to perform what he promised; and if the House be not as ready to do that
is fit for themselves, it shall be their own faults.

And upon assurance of our good dispatch and correspondence his Majesty
declares, That his Royal intention is to have another Session of Parliament at
Michaelmass next, for the perfecting of such things as cannot now be done.

This Message was debated the next day, being Saturday May 30. whereupon Sir
John Elliot spoke to this effect.

The King, Sir John Elliot.
says he, will rank himself with the best of Kings, and therefore he would
have us to rank our selves with the best Subjects; we will not

Sir Miles Fleetwood continues the Debate, and said, That this business is of
great importance, we are to accommodate this: The breach of this Parliament

In conclusion, the Commons agree to an Answer to all the preceding Messages,
and present it to the King by the mouth of their Speaker.

The Speakers Speech to the King in Answer to several Messages.
Most Gracious and Dread Sovereign,
YOur Loyal and Obedient Subjects, The Speakers Speech to the King, in answer
to several Messages.
the Commons now Assembled in Parliament, by several Messages from your
Majesty, and especially

And whereas in one of those Messages delivered from your Majesty, there was an
expression of your desire to know whether this House would rest upon your Royal
Word and Promise, assuring them, that if they would, it should be royally and
really performed: As they again present their humble thanks for the seconding
and strengthening of your former Royal expressions, so in all humbleness they
assure your Majesty, that their greatest confi^^^ce is, and ever must be in
your Grace and Goodness, without which they well know, nothing that they can
frame or desire, will be of safety or value to them: Therefore are all humble
Suitors to

True it is, they cannot but remember the public Trust for which they are
accomptable to present and future times; and their desires are, That your
Majesty's goodness might in Fruit and Memory be the Blessing and Joy of
Posterity.

They say also, That of late there has been public violation of the Laws,
and the Subjects Liberties, by some of your Majesty's Ministers, and thence
conceive that no less then a public remedy will raise the dejected hearts of
your loving Subjects to a cheerful supply of your Majesty, or make them receive
content in the proceedings of this House.

From those considerations, they most humbly beg your Majesty's leave to lay
hold of that gracious offer of yours, which gave them assurance, That if they
thought fit to secure themselves in their Rights and Liberties,

The way how to accomplish these their humble desires, is now in serious
consideration with them; wherein they humbly assure your Majesty, they will
neither lose time, nor seek any thing of your Majesty, but that they hope may
be fit for Dutiful and Loyal Subjects to ask, and for a gracious and just King
to grant.

His Majesty's Answer was delivered by the Lord Keeper.
His Majesty's answer to the Speakers Speech.
Mr. Speaker, and you Gentlemen of the House of Commons, His Majesty has
commanded me to tell you, that he expected an Answer by your Actions, and not
delay by Discourse: ye acknowledge his Trust confidence in the Declaration his
Majesty made by me to both Houses; and your selves acknowledge, that your
greatest trust and confidence must be in his Majesty's Grace and Goodness,
without which nothing ye can frame will be of safety, or avail to you: Yet to
show clearly the sincerity of his Majesty's intentions, he is content that a
Bill be drawn for a confirmation of Magna Charta, and the other six Statutes
insisted upon for the Subjects Liberties, if ye shall choose that as the best
way, but so as it may be

Thus if you please you may be secured from your needless fears, and this
Parliament may have a happy wished for end: whereas by the contrary, if ye seek
to tie your King by new, and indeed impossible bonds, you must be accomptable
to God and the Country for the ill success of this meeting. His Majesty has
given his Royal Word, that ye shall have no cause to complain hereafter: less
then which has been enough to reconcile Great Princes, and therefore ought
much more to prevail between a King and his

Lastly, I am commanded to tell you that his Majesty's pleasure is, That
without further Replies or Messages, or other unnecessary delays, ye do what ye
mean to do speedily, remembering the last Message that Secretary Cook brought
you in point of time: His Majesty always intending to perform his Promise to
his power.

NOtwithstanding the intimation of his Majesty's good pleasure for a Mr.
Secretary Cook brings another Message to rely on the Kings Words.
Mr. Secretary Cook, Tuesday May 6. again pressed the House to rely upon the
Kings Word, saying, That he had rather follow others, then begin to enter into
this business: loss of time has been the greatest complaint, the matter fallen
now into consideration, is what way to take, whether to rely on his Majesty's
Word, or on a Bill: If we will consider the advantage we have in taking his
Majesty's Word, it will be of the largest extent, and we shall choose that that
has most Assurance: An Act of Parliament is by the consent of the King and
Parliament; but this Assurance

Whereunto it was replied by Sir John Elliot, Sir John Elliot.
That the proceeding in a

This being the general Sense, the House was turned into a Committee, to take
into consideration what was delivered to the King by the Speaker, and what was
delivered to them by the Lord Keeper, and all other Messages, and the Committee
was not to be bounded with any former order: the Key was brought up, and none
were to go out without leave first asked.

In the Debate of this business at the Committee, some were for letting the
Bill rest: Sir. E. Cook.
but Sir Edward Cooks reasons prevailed to the contrary, Was it ever known
(said he) that general words were a sufficient satisfaction to particular
grievances? was ever a verbal Declaration of the King verbum when grievances
be, the Parliament is to redress them: Did ever Parliament rely on Messages?
they put up Petitions of their Grievances, and the King ever answered them: the
Kings Answer is very gracious, but what is the Law of the Realm, that is the
question. I put no diffidence in his Majesty, the King must speak by a Record,
and in Particulars, and not in General: Did you ever know the Kings Message
come into a Bill of Subsidies? all succeeding Kings will say, Ye must trust me
as well as you did my Predecessors, and trust my Messages; but Messages of love
never came

On Thursday 8o Maii, the Petition of Right was finished, and the Clause of
Martial Law was added unto it, and it was delivered to the Lords at a
Conference for their Concurrence; the which Conference was managed by Sir
Edward Cook, and the same day, as to the matter of supply, ordered that the two
first Subsidies should be paid 10o of July, one more 12o of October, December.
and the last of 1o of March.

AT the Conference Sir Edward Cook thus expressed himself:

My Lords, it is evident what necessity there is, both in respect of your
selves and your Posterities, to have good success of this business: We have
acquainted your Lordships with the Reasons and Arguments, and after we have had
some conference, we have received from your Lordships Propositions; and it
behooves me to give your Lordships some reasons, 1. That his Majesty would
maintain all his Subjects in their just freedom, both of their Persons and
Estates; 2. That he will govern according to his Laws and Statutes; 3. That we
should find much confidence in the Royal Word, I pray 4. That we shall enjoy
all our Rights and Liberties, with as much freedom as ever any Subjects have
done in former times; 5. That whether we shall think it fit, either by Bill or
otherwise, to go on in this great Business, his Majesty would be pleased to
give way to it.


These gracious Messages did so work upon our affections, that w^ have taken
them into deep consideration. My Lords, when we had these Messages (I deal
plainly, for so I am commanded by the House of Commons) did consent with us) it
is the most ancient way of all, and that is, my Lords, via fausta, both to
Majesty, to your Lordships, and to our selves: for, my Lords, this is the
greatest Bond that any Subject can have in open Parliament, Verbum Regis, this
is an high point of Honor, but this shall be done by the Lords and Commons, and
assented to by the King in Parliament, this is the greatest Obligation of all,
and this is for the Kings Honor, and our Safety: Therefore my Lords we have
drawn a Form of a

Here the Petition of Right was read; but we forbear to insert it as yet,
because there were propositions for alteration; and it is not perfect, till the

From the Eighth to the Twelfth of May, all Public businesses were laid
aside. On Monday the Twelfth the Lords had a Conference with the Commons, where
the Lord Keeper made this Speech.

Gentlemen of the House of Commons,
MY Lords having a most affectionate desire to maintain that good concurrence,
Lord Keepers Speech, communicating a Letter from the King.


Concerning the Commitment by the King and the Council, without expressing the
cause, it was resolved by the Lords to debate it this morning, and as soon as
they should have debated it, they purposed. to have your concurrence with them
before they resolved it; but at instant when they thought to have debated it,
they received a Letter from his Majesty, which they conceive will give a
satisfaction to both Houses in the main point. My Lords desiring to keep that
good concurrence begun, desired

To the right Trusty and right well-beloved, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
of the higher House of Parliament.
Carolus Rex.

His Majesty's Letter.
WE being desirous of nothing more then the advancement of the Peace and
Prosperity of our People, have given leave to free Debate upon the highest
Points of our Prerogative Royal, which in the time of our Predecessors, Kings
and Queens of this Realm, were ever restrained as matters that they would not
have discussed; and in other things we have been willing so far to descend to
the desires of our good Subjects, as might fully satisfy all moderate minds,
and free them from all just fears and jealousies, which those Messages
Westminster, in a Legal and ordinary way of Justice, whereas the Causes may be
such as those Judges have not capacity Magna Charta, and those other Six
Statutes insisted upon, which we do take knowledge stand in full force, and
which we intend not to abrogate and weaken, against the true intention thereof.
This we have thought fit to signify, the rather to shorten any long Debate
upon this great question, the season of the year being so far advanced, and our
great Occasions of State not lending many more days for longer continuance of
this Session of Parliament.

Given under our Signet at our Palace at Westminster, 20o Maii the Fourth year
of our Reign.

The same day the Kings Letter was communicated to the House of Thomas
Wentworth said it was a Letter of Grace, but the people will only like of that
which is done in a Parliamentary way; besides, the Debate of it would spend
much time, neither was it directed to the House of Commons; and the Petition of
Right would clear all mistakes: For (said he) some give out, as if the House
went about to pinch the Kings Prerogative. But the further Debate of this
matter took up several days.

May 17. the Lords propounded at a Conference an Addition to be made THat
whereas at the late Conference of both Houses there were some things propounded
that came from their Lordships, The Lords Proposition at a Conference, about an
addition to the Petition of Right.
out of a desire the Petition might have the easier passage with his Majesty,
not intending to violate in any manner the substance of the Petition, but it was
then thought fit that there was another part of the Petition of as great
importance and weight: My Lords since the time of that Conference,

And after many deliberations, and much advice taken, my Lords have resolved to
represent to you something which they have thought upon, yet not as a thing
conclusive to them or you; and according to their desires (having mentioned it
in the beginning) have held it fit to

This being the determination of the Lords, that nothing that is now offered
unto you should be conclusive, yet they thought it convenient to present it
unto you.

This alteration (and not alteration) but addition, which they shall propound
unto you, to be advised and conferred upon, which is no breach

WE present this our humble Petition to your Majesty, The Lords addition to the
Petition of Right.
with the care not only of preserving our own Liberties, but with due regard
to leave entire that Sovereign Power wherewith your Majesty is trusted for the
Protection, Safety, and Happiness of the People.

This is the thing the Lords do present unto you, this subject of this
Conference concerning the adding of this in the conclusion of the Petition, and
that they know that this is new, and that you cannot presently give an answer
to it; therefore they desire that you do with some speed consider of it, and
their Lordships will be ready this afternoon.



This Addition produced several Speeches.

Mr. Alford.
LEt us look (said he) into the Records, and see what they are, what is
Sovereign Power? Bodin says, That it is free from any Condition, by this we
shall acknowledge a Regal as well as a Legal Power: Let us give

Mr. Pimme.
I Am not able to speak to this question, I know not what it is: All our
Petition is for the Laws of England, and this Power seems to be another
distinct Power from the Power of the Law: I know how to add Sovereign to his
Person, but not to his Power: Also we cannot leave to him Sovereign Power, we
never were possessed of it.

Mr. Hackwell
WE cannot admit of those words with safety, they are applicable to all the
parts of our Petition: It is in the nature of a Saving, and by it we shall
imply, as if we had incroached on his Prerogative; all the Laws we cite, are
without a Saving, and yet now after the violation of them, we must add a
Saving: Also I have seen diverse Petitions, and where the Subject claimed a
Right, there I never saw a Saving of this nature.

Sir Ed. Cook
THis is Magnum in parvo, this is propounded to be a conclusion of our Petition:
It is a matter of great weight; and to speak plainly, it will Magna Charta, and
all our Statutes; for they are absolute without any saving of Sovereign Power:
and shall we now add it, we shall weaken the Magna Charta is such a fellow,
that he will have no Sovereign: I wonder this Sovereign was not in Magna
Charta, or in the Confirmations of it: If we grant this, by implication we give
a Sovereign Power above all these Laws: Power in Law, is taken for a Power with
force: The Sheriff shall take the Power of the County, what it means here, God
only knows: It is repugnant to our Petition, that is a Petition of Right,
grounded on Acts of Parliament: our Predecessors could Salvo jure suo, no more
then the Kings of old could endure for the Church, Salvo honor Dei and
Ecclesiae: We must not admit of it, and to qualify it is impossible: Let us
hold our Privileges according to the Law; that Power that is above this, it is
not fit for the King and people to have it disputed further, I had rather for
my part have the Prerogative acted, and I my self to lie under it, then to have
it disputed.

Sir Thomas Wentworth
IF we do admit of this Addition, we shall leave the Subject worse then we found
him, and we shall have little thanks for our labor when we come home: let us
leave all power to his Majesty, to punish Malefactors: but these Laws are not
acquainted with Sovereign Power, we desire no new thing, nor do we offer to
trench on his Majesty's Prerogative, we may not recede from this Petition,
either in part, or in whole.

TO add a Saving is not safe, doubtful words may beget an ill construction,
and the words are not only doubtful words, Mr. Noy.
but words unknown to us, and never used in any Act or Petition before.

Mr. Seldom.
said Mr. Seldom: If there be any Objections, let any propound them, and let
others answer them as they think good: If it has no reference to our Petition,
what does it here? I am sure all others will say it has reference, and so must
we: how far it does exceed all examples of former times, no man can show me the
like: I have made that search that fully satisfies me, and I find not another
besides 28 of Eliz. We have a great many Petitions, and Bills of Parliament in
all ages, in all which we are sure no such thing is added: Edw. 1. it was not
in the Petition, but in the Kings Answer.

In Magna Charta there were no such Clauses, the Articles themselves are to be
seen in a Library at Lambeth, in a Book of that time, upon which the Law was
made. There was none in the Articles in King John's time, for these I have seen,
there is no Saving. In the Statutes of Confirmatio Chartarum, is a Saving les
ancients Aids, that is, for file maryer, and pur fair fitz Chivalier, and for
ransom: and in the Articles of King John, Edw. 3. there is a Petition against
Loans, there is no Saving, and so in others: As for that Addition in the 28. of
Edw. 1. do but observe the Petitions after Magna Charta, as 5 Edw. 3. they put
up a Petition, whereas in Magna Charta it is contained, That none be
imprisoned, but by due process of Law; those words are not in Magna Charta, and
yet there is no Saving; and so in the 28. of Edw. 3. and 36. and 37. and 42. of
Edw. 3. all which pass by Magna Charta, and yet no Saving.

For that that Mr. Speaker said, The King was our heart, and ever shall be, but
we then speak of the Kings Prerogative by it self, and we are bound to say so:
But speaking of our Rights, shall we say we are not to be imprisoned, Saving by
the Kings Sovereign Power? Say my Lands (without any Title) be seized in the
Kings hand, and I bring a Petition of Right, and I go to the King and say, I do
by no means seek your Majesty's Monstrance de droit, setting forth my own Right
and Title, and withal set down a Saving, that I leave entire his Majesty's
Right, it would be improper. It was objected, That in the 28. of Edw. 1. in the
end of Articuli super Chartas, which was a confirmation of Magna Charta, and
Charta de foresta, in the end there is a Clause, Savant le droit and Segniory,
the words are extant in that Roll that is now extant, but the original Roll is
not extant.

In the 25th E. 3. there was a confirmation of the Charter in 27 E. 3. savant,
but afterward it was put in: And to prove this, it is true, there is no
Parliament Roll of that year, yet we have Histories of that time: In the
Library at Oxford there is a Journal of a Parliament of that very year, which
mentions so much, also in the public Library at Cambridge there is a
Manuscript that belonged to an Abbey, it was of the same year 28 E. 1. and it
mentions the Parliament and the Petitions, and Articulos quos petierunt sic
confirmaverit Rex ut in fine adderet, Salvo jure Coronae regis, and they came
by Proclamation in London; when the people heard this clause added in the end,
they fell into execration for that addition; and the great Earls E. 3. there is
a Roll that recites it.

The Lords afterward at a Conference tendered Reasons to fortify their
addition: which were briefly reported; That the Lord Keeper said,

THat the Lords were all agreed to defend and maintain the just Liberties
Sovereign Power, as he is a King, he is a Sovereign, and must have Power; and
he said the words were easier then the Prerogative: As for the word (that)
which is a relative, and referred to that Power that is for the safety of the
People; and this, said he, can never grieve any man, being thus published, it
is not Sovereign Power in general; but now in confutation of our Reasons, he
says, Magna was not with a Saving; but said he, You pursue not the words in
Magna Charta, and therefore it needs an addition.

As for the 28 of E. 3. he said there was a Saving, and an ill exposition
cannot be made of this, and both Houses have agreed it in substance already;
the Commons did it in a Speech delivered by our Speaker, and that we said we
have not a thought to incroach on the Kings Sovereignty; and why may ye not add
it in your Petition?

Upon this Report Mr. Mason readily spoke his opinion in manner following.

IN our Petition of Right to the Kings Majesty, we mentioned the Laws and
Statutes, by which it appeared, That no Tax, Loan, or the like, ought to be
Levied by the King, but by common assent in Parliament: That no Freeman ought
to be imprisoned but by the Law of the Land: That no Freeman ought to be
compelled to suffer soldiers in

The Lords have proposed an addition to this Petition, in these words.

We humbly present this Petition to your Majesty, not only with a care of our
own Liberties, but with a due regard to leave entire that Sovereign Power
wherewith your Majesty is entrusted, for the Protection, Safety and Happiness
of your People.

And whether we shall consent unto this addition, is the subject of this days
discourse: and because my Lord Keeper at the conference declared their
Lordships had taken the words of the Petition apart, I shall do so too. The
word (Leave) in a Petition, is of the same nature as (Saving) in a Grant or Act
of Parliament, when a man grants but part of a thing, he saves the rest; when
he petitions to be restored but to part, he leaves the rest: Then in the end
of our Petition the word (Leave) will imply, that something is to be left of
that, or at least with a reference to what we desire.

The word (Entire) is very considerable, a Conqueror is bound by no Law, but
has power dare Leges, his Will is a Law; and although William the Conqueror,
at first, to make his way to the Crown of England Magna Charta, and other
Statutes mentioned in our Petition, do principally limit that Power. I hope it
is as lawful for me to cite a Jesuit, as it is for Doctor Manwaring to falsify
him; Suares, in his first Book de Legibus, Cap. 17. delivered his opinion in
these words: Amplitudo and restrictio potestatis Regum circa ea quae per se
mala vel injusta And he further expresses his opinion, that the King of Spain
was so absolute a Monarch, that he might impose Tribute without consent of his
people, until about Two hundred years since, when it was concluded between him
and his people, that without consent of his people by Proxies he should not
impose any Tribute. And Suares opinion is, That by that agreement, the Kings of
Spain are bound to impose no Tribute without consent.



The next word delivered by the Lords as observeable, is the particle

The next word is (Trusted) which is very ambiguous, whether it be ex pacto. In
this point I will not presume to adventure further, only I like it not, by
reason of the doubtful Exposition it admits. I have likewise considered the
Proposition it self, and therein I have fallen upon the Dilemma, that this
addition shall be construed either to refer unto the Petition, or not: if it do
refer unto the Petition, it is merely useless and unnecessary, and unbefitting
the King is trusted for the Protection, Safety and Happiness of his People.

That none ought to be compelled to sojourn or billet Soldiers, unless by the
same Sovereign Power, and so of the rest of the Rights contained in the
Petition: And then the most favorable construction will be, that the King has
an ordinary Prerogative, and by that he cannot impose Taxes or Imprison; that
is, he cannot impose Taxes at his will, to employ them as he pleases; but that
he has an extraordinary and transcendent

A Parliament, which is made a Body of several Writs, and may be dissolved by
one Commission, cannot be certain to decide this question. We cannot resolve
that, that the Judges shall determine the words of the Magna Charta binds the
King, it binds his Sovereign Power; and here is an Addition of Saving the
Kings Sovereign Power: I shall endeavor to give some Answer to the Reasons
given by the Lords.

The first is, That it is the intention of both Houses, to maintain the Just
Liberty of the Subject, and not to diminish the just Power of the King; and
therefore the expression of that intention in this Petition, cannot prejudice
us. To which I answer,

First, That our intention was, and is, as we then professed, and no man can
assign any particular in which we have done to the contrary; neither have we
any way transgressed in that kind in this Petition: and if we make this
addition to the Petition, it would give some intimation that we

By our Petition we only desire our particular Rights and Liberties to be
confirmed to us, and therefore it is not proper for us in it to mention
Sovereign Power in general, being altogether impertinent to the matter in the
Petition.

There is a great difference between the words of the Addition, and

The second Reason delivered by their Lordships was, That the King is
Sovereign; That as he is Sovereign, he has power, and that that Sovereign
Power is to be left: for my part, I would leave it, so as not to mention it,
but if it should be expressed to be left in this Petition, as it is proposed,
it must admit something to be left in the King of what we pray, or at least
admit some Sovergain Power in his Majesty, in these Privileges which we claim
to be our Right, which would frustrate our Petition and destroy our Right, as I
have formerly showed.

The third Reason given from this Addition was, That in the Statute Articuli
super Chartas, there is a Saving of the Seigniory of the Crown.

To which I give these Answers, That Magna Charta was confirmed above thirty
times, and a general Saving was in none of these Acts of Confirmation, but in
this only; and I see no cause we should follow one ill, and not thirty good
Precedents, and the rather because that Saving produced ill effects that are
well known.

That Saving was by Act of Parliament; the conclusion of which Act is, that in
all those Cases the King did well, and all those that were at Seigniory of the
Crown should be saved: By which it appears that the saving was not in the
Petition of the Commons, but added by the King; for in the Petition the Kings
will is not expressed.

In that Act the King did grant and depart with to his People, diverse Rights
belonging to his Prerogative, as in the first Chapter he granted, That the
People might choose three men which might have Power to hear and determine
Complaints, made against those that offended in any point Magna Charta, though
they were the Kings Officers, and to Fine and Ransom them: and in the 8.12.
and 19. Chapter of that Statute, the King departed with other Prerogatives; and
therefore there might be some reason of the adding of, that Sovereign, by the
Kings Council: But in this Petition we desire nothing of the Kings Prerogative,
but pray the enjoying of our proper and undoubted Rights and Privileges; and
therefore there is no cause to add any words which may imply a Saving of that
which concerns not the matter in the Petition.



To which I Answer, That that Declaration was a general Answer to a Message
from his Majesty to us; by which his Majesty expressed, That he would not have
his Prerogative straightened by any new Explanation of Magna Charta, or the rest
of the Statutes: and therefore that expression of our Speakers was then proper,
to make it have reference to this Petition, there being nothing therein
contained but particular Rights of the Subject, and nothing at all concerning
his Majesty's Prerogative.

Secondly, That Answer was to give his Majesty satisfaction of all our
proceedings in general, and no man can assign any particular, in which we have
broken it; and this Petition justifies it self, that in it we have not offended
against the Protestation: and I know no reason but that this Declaration

The last Reason given was, That we have varied in our Petition from the words
of Magna Charta; and therefore it was well necessary, that a Saving should be
added to the Petition.

I Answer, That in the Statute 5 E. 3.25 E. 3.28 E. 3. and other Statutes, with
which Magna Charta is confirmed: the words of the Statute of Explanation,
differ from the words of Magna Charta it self, the words of some of the
Statutes of Explanation being, that no man ought to be apprehended, unless by
Indictment, or due process of Law; and the other Statutes differing from the
words of Magna Charta, in many other particulars, and yet there is no Saving in
those Statutes (...) much less should there be any in a Petition of Right.
There are the Answers I have conceived to the Reasons of their Lordships, and
the Exposition I apprehend

The Commons afterward appointed Mr. Glanvile, and Sir Henry Martin, to manage
another Conference to be had with the Lords, concerning the said matter, and to
clear the Sense of the Commons in that point: the one argued the Legal, the
other the Rational part, and though the matter delivered

Mr. Glanviles Speech in a full Committee of both Houses of Parliament 23. May,
1628. in the Westminster.
Mr. Glanviles Speech at a Committee of both Houses concerning Sovereign Power.
MY Lords, I have in charge from the Commons House of Parliament, (whereof I am
a Member) to express this day before your Lordships some part of their clear
sense, touching one point that has occurred in the great Debate, which has so
long depended in both Houses.

I shall not need many words to induce or state the question, which I am

Your Lords may be pleased to remember, how that the Commons in this Parliament
have framed a Petition to be presented to his Majesty, a Petition of Right
rightly composed, relating nothing but truth, desiring

And because my following discourse must reflect chiefly, if not wholly,

The first concerns Levies of Moneys, by way of Loans or otherwise, for his
Majesty's supply, Declaring that no man ought, and praying that no man
hereafter be compelled to make or yield any Gift, Loan, Benevolence, Tax, or
such like Charge, without common consent by Act of Parliament.

3. The second is concerning that Liberty of Person, which rightfully belongs
to the Free Subjects of this Realm, expressing it to be against the (...) of
the Laws and Statutes of the Land, that any Freeman should be imprisoned
without cause showed; and then reciting how this

3. The third declares the unlawfulness of billeting or placing Soldiers or
Mariners to sojourn in Free Subjects houses against their wills, and prays
remedy against that grievance.

4. The fourth and last aims at redress touching Commissions, to proceed to
the Trial and Condemnation of Offenders, and causing them to be executed and
put to death by the Law Marshal, in times and places,

This Petition the careful House of Commons, not willing to omit any thing
pertaining to their duties, or that might advance their moderate and just ends,
did heretofore offer up unto your Lordships consideration, accompanied with an
humble desire, That in your Nobleness and Justice you would be pleased to join
with them in presenting it to his Majesty,

Your Lordships, as your manner is in cases of so great importance, were pleased
to debate and weigh it well, and thereupon you propounded to us some few
amendments (as you termed them) by way of alteration, alleging

In this the House of Commons cannot but observe that fair and good respect
which your Lordships have used in your proceedings with them, by your
concluding or Voting nothing in your House, until you had imparted it unto
them; whereby our meetings about this business have been justly styled Free
Conferences, either party repairing hither disingaged

And touching those propounded alterations, which were not many, your Lordships
cannot but remember that the House of Commons have yielded to an accommodation,
or change of their Petition in two particulars,

For the rest of your proposed amendments, if we do not misconceive your
Lordships, as we are confident we do not, your Lordships of your selves have
been pleased to relinquish them with a new overture, for one only Clause to be
added in the end or foot of the Petition, whereby the work of this day is
reduced to one simple head, whether that Clause shall be received or not?

This yielding of the Commons in part unto your Lordships, of other points by
you somewhat insisted upon, gives us great assurance that our ends are one,
and puts us in hope, that in conclusion we shall

The clause propounded by your Lordships to be added to the Petition is this.

WE humbly present this Petition to your Majesty, not only with a care for
preservation of our Liberties, but with a due regard to leave entire that
Sovereign Power wherewith your Majesty

A clause specious in show, and smooth in words, but in effect and consequence
most dangerous, as I hope to make most evident; however coming from your
Lordships, the House of Commons took it into their considerations, as became
them, and apprehending upon the first Debate, that it threatened ruin to the
whole Petition, they did heretofore deliver some Reasons to your Lordships, for
which they then desired to be

To these Reasons your Lordships offered some Answers at the last meeting;
which having been faithfully reported to our House, and there debated, as was
requisite for a business of such weight and importance, I must say truly to
your Lordships, yet with due reverence to your opinions, the Commons are not
satisfied with your Arguments; and therefore they have commanded me to
recollect your Lordships Reasons for this Clause, and in a fair Reply to let
you see the causes why they differ from you in opinion.

But before I come to handle the particulars wherein we dissent from your
Lordships, I will in the first place take notice yet a little further of that
general wherein we all concur; which is, That we desire not (neither do your
Lordships) to augment or dilate the Liberties and Privileges of the Subjects
beyond the just and due Bounds; nor to incroach upon the Limits of his
Majesty's Prerogative Royal; and as in this your Lordships at the last meeting
expressed clearly your own senses, so were your Lordships not mistaken in
collecting the concurrent sense and meaning of

My Lords, the Heads of those particular Reasons which you insisted upon the
last day where only these:

1. First you told us that the word (Leave) was of such nature, that it could
give no new thing to his Majesty.

2. That no just exception could be taken to the words (Sovereign Power) for
that as his Majesty is a King, so he is a Sovereign; and as he is a Sovereign,
so he has Power.



4. That this Clause contained no more in substance, but the like expressions
of our meanings in this Petition, which we had formerly signified unto his
Majesty by the mouth of Mr. Speaker, that we no way intended to

5. That in our Petition we have used other words, and of larger extent
touching our Liberties, then are contained in the Statutes whereon it is
grounded: In respect of which enlargement, it was fit to have some express, or
implied Saving, or Narrative, Declaratory for the Kings Sovereign Power, of
which Narrative ye allege this Clause to be.

6. Lastly, whereas the Commons, as a main Argument against the Clause, had
much insisted upon this, that is was unprecedented, and unparliamentary
Confirmatio Chartarum, and 28 E. 1. known by this name of Articuli super
Chartas, in both which Statutes there are Saving for the Kings.

Having thus reduced to your Lordships memories, the effects of your own
reasons; I will now with your Lordships favor come to the points of our Reply,
wherein I most humbly beseech your Lordships to weigh the Reasons

The Reasons that are now appointed to be presented to your Lordships are of
two kinds, Legal and Rational, of which these of the former sort are allotted
to my charge, and the first of them is thus.



We cannot think that your Lordships would offer us a vain thing, and therefore
taking it for granted, that if it be added it would refer to the Petition: let
me beseech your Lordships to observe with me, and with the House of Commons,
what alteration and qualification of the same it will introduce.

The Petition of it self, simply and without this Clause, declares absolutely
the Rights and Privileges of the Subject, in diverse points; and amongst the
rest touching the Levies of moneys, by way of Loans or otherwise for his
Majesty's supply, That such Loans and other charges unless they be warranted by
Sovereign Power, and that they cannot be commanded or raised without assent of
Parliament, unless it be by Sovereign Power; what were this but to admit a
Sovereign Power in the

Another part of this Petition is, That the free Subjects of this Realm ought
not to be imprisoned without cause showed: But by this Clause a Sovereign Power
will be admitted, and left entire to his Majesty, sufficient to control the
force of Law, and to bring in this new and dangerous Interpretation, That the
free Subjects of this Realm ought not by Law to be imprisoned without cause
showed, unless it be by Sovereign Power.

In a word, this Clause, if it should be admitted, would take away the effect
of every part of the Petition, and become destructive to the whole: for thence
will be the Exposition touching the Billeting of Soldiers and Mariners in free
men's houses against their wills; and thence will be the Exposition touching the
Times and Places for execution of the Law Marshal, contrary to the Laws and
Statutes of the Realm.

The scope of this Petition, as I have before observed, is not to amend our
Case, but to restore us to the same state we were in before; whereas,

My Lords, as there is mention made in the additional Clause of Sovereign
Power, so is there likewise of a trust reposed in his Majesty, touching the use
of Sovereign Power.

The word Trust is of great Latitude, and large extent, and therefore ought to
be well and warily applied and restrained, especially in the Case of a King:
There is a trust inseparably reposed in the Persons of the Kings of England,
but that trust is regulated by Law; for example, when mala in se, but only
mala quia prohibita, under certain forfeitures and penalties, to accrue to the
King and to the Informers, that shall sue for the breach of them: The Commons
must and ever will acknowledge a Regal and Sovereign Prerogative in the King,
touching such Statutes, that it is in his Majesty's absolute and undoubted
Power, to grant Dispensations to particular persons, with the Clauses of Non
obstante, to do as they might have done before those Statutes, wherein his
Majesty conferring grace and favor upon some, does not do wrong to others; but
there is a difference between those Statutes, and the Laws and Statutes whereon
the Petition is grounded: by those Statutes the Subject has no interest in the
penalties, which are all the fruit such Statutes can produce, until by Suit or
Information commenced, Magna Charta, which declares and confirms the
ancicient Common Laws of the Liberties of England: There shall your Lordships
also find us also to insist upon diverse other most material Statutes made in
the time of King E. 4. and E. 3. and other famous Kings, for explanation and
ratification of the Lawful Rights and Privileges belonging to the Subjects of
this Realm, Laws not inflicting in malis prohibitis, but Laws declarative or
positive, conferring or confirming ipso facto, an inherent Right and Interest
of Liberty and Freedom in the Subjects of this Realm, as their Birthrights and
Inheritance descendable to their Heirs and Posterity; Statutes incorporate into
the Body of the Common Law, over which (with reverence be it spoken) there is
no Trust reposed in the Kings Sovereign Power or Prerogative Royal to enable
him to dispense with them, or to take from his Subjects that Birthright or
Inheritance which they

But if this Clause be added to our Petition, we shall then make a dangerous
overture to confound this good destination touching what Statutes the King is
trusted to control by dispensations, and what not; and shall give an
intimation to posterity, as if it were the opinion both of the Lords and
Commons assembled in this Parliament, that there is a Trust reposed in the
King, to lay aside by his Sovereign Power in some amergent

Our next Reason is, That we hold it contrary to all course of Parliament, and
absolutely repugnant to the very nature of a Petition of Right consisting of
particulars, as ours does, to clog it with a general Saving or Declaration to
the weakening of the Right demanded; and we are bold to renew with some
confidence our Allegation, that there can be no Precedent showed of any such
Clause in any such

I shall insist the longer upon this particular, and labor the more carefully
to clear it, because your Lordships were pleased the last day to urge against
us the Statutes of 25 and 28 of E. 1. as arguments to prove the contrary, and
seemed not to be satisfied with that which in this point we had affirmed. True
it is, that in those Statutes there are such Savings as your Lordships have
observed; but I shall offer you a clear Answer to them, and to all other
Savings of like nature that can be found in any Statutes whatsoever.

First in the general, and then I shall apply particular Answers to the
particulars of those two Statutes, whereby it will be most evident, that those
examples can no ways suit with the matter now in hand. To this end it will be
necessary that we consider duly what that question is, H. 5. different from
that which ever since then has been used, and is still in use amongst us, and
by noting the times wherein these Statutes were made, which was about one
hundred years before 2 H. 5. besides the differences between these Savings and
this

Before the second year of King H. 5. the course was thus: When the Commons
were Suitors for a Law, either the Speaker of their House by word of mouth from
them, the Lords House joining with them, or by some Bill in writing, which was
usually called their Petition, moved the

To these Petitions the King made answer as he pleased, sometimes to part,
sometimes to the whole, sometimes by denial, sometimes by assent, sometimes
absolutely, and sometimes by qualification. Upon these Motions and Petitions,
and the Kings Answers to them, was the Law drawn up and Engrossed in the
Statute Roll to bind the Kingdom; but this inconvenience was found in this
course, that oftentimes the Statutes H. 5. finding that it tended to the
violation of their Liberty and Freedom, whose right it was, and ever had been,
that no Law should be made without their assent; they then exhibited a Petition
to the King, declaring their right in this particular, praying that from
thenceforth no Law might be made or Engrossed as Statutes, by additions or
diminutions to their Motions or Petitions, that should change their sense or
intent, without their

From this course, and from the time when first it became constant and settled,
we conclude strongly that it is no good Argument, because ye find Savings in
Acts of Parliament before the second of H. 5. that before those Savings were in
the Petitions that begat those Statutes; for

Thus much for the general; to come now to the particular Statute of 25 of Edw.
1. which was a confirmation of Magna Charta, with some provision for the better
execution of it, as common Law, which words are worth the noting.

It is true that Statute has also a Clause to this effect, That the King or
his Heirs from thenceforth should take no Aids, Taxes, or Prises of his
Subjects, but by common assent of all the Realm, Saving the ancient

This Saving if it were granted (which is not, nor cannot be proved) that it
was as well in the Petition, as in the Act; yet can it no way imply that it is
either fit or safe, that the Clause now in question should be added to our
Petition: for the nature and office of a Saving, or Exception, is to exempt
particulars out of a general, and to ratify the Rule in things not exempted,
but in no sort to weaken or destroy the general Rule it self.

Magna Charta; the Saving was only of Aids and Prises in particular, so well
described and restrained by the words, Ancient and Accustomed, that there could
be no doubt what could be the clear meaning and extent of that exception; for
the Kings Right to those ancient Aids, intended by that Stature to be saved to
him, was well known in those days, and is not yet forgotten.

John, dated at Runningmede the 15 of June in the 5th year of his Reign,
wherein they Nullum scutigium vel auxilium ponatur in Regno nostro, nisi per
commune Consilium Regni nostri, nisi ad Corpus nostrum redimendum, and
primogenitum filium nostrum militem faciendum, and ad filiam nostram
primogenitam semel maritandam, and ad hoc non siat nisi rationabile auxilium.



It is to take one Tun of Wine before the Mast, and another behind the Mast,
of every Ship bringing in above twenty Tuns of Wine, and here discharge them by
way of Merchandise.

But our Petition consists altogether of particulars, to which if any general
Saving or words amounting to one should be annexed, it cannot sub modo; not to
continue always, but only to take place when the King is pleased not to
exercise that Sovereign Power, wherewith this Clause admitted he is trusted for
the protection, safety, and happiness of his People: And thus that Birthright
and Inheritance, which we have in our Liberties, shall by our own assents be
turned into a mere Tenancy at will and sufferance.

Touching the Statute of 28 Edw. 1. Articuli super Chartas, the scope of that
Statute among other things, being to provide for the better observing and
maintaining of Magna Charta, has in it nevertheless two Savings for the King;
the one particular, as I take it, to preserve the ancient Prices, due and
accustomed, as of Wines and of other goods, the other

To these two Savings, besides the former Answers, which may be for the most
part applied to this Statute, as well as to the former; I add these further
Answers: The first of these two Savings, is of the same prisage of Wines which
is excepted in the 25 Edw. 1. but in some more clearness; for that here the
word (Wines) is expressly annexed to the word (Prices) which I take for so much
to be in Exposition of the former Law: And albeit these words ( and of other
goods) be added, yet do I take it to be Saving, or exception, which being
qualified with the words ( Ancient, due and accustomed) is not very dangerous,
nor can be understood of Prices or Levies upon Goods of all sorts at the Kings
will and pleasure, but only of the old and certain Customs upon Wool, Woolfels
and Leather, which were due to the Crown long before the making of this Statute.

For the latter of the two Savings in this Act, which is of the more unusual
nature, and subject to the more exception; it is indeed general, and Saving in
these and future times, may never breed the like disturbance: For from hence
arose a Jealousy, That Magna Charta which declared the ancient Right of the
Subject, and was an absolute Law in it self, being now confirmed by a latter
Saving; for the Kings Right in all things by the Saving was weakened, and that
made doubtful which was clear before: But not to depart from our main ground,
which is, that Savings in old Acts of Parliament, before 2 H. 5. are no proof
that there were the like Savings in the Petitions; for those Acts let me
observe unto your Lordships, and so leave this point, That albeit this
Petition, whereon this Act of 28 Edw. 1. was grounded, be perished; yet has it
pleased God that the very Frame and Context of the Act it self, as it is Saving
came in by the Kings Answer, and was not in the Original Petition of the Lords
and Commons; for it comes in at the end of the Act after the words ( le Roy
vent) which commonly are the words of the Royal assent to an Act of Parliament.
And though they be mixed and followed with other words, as though the Kings
Council and the rest who were present at the making of this Ordinance, did
intend the same Saving; yet is not that Conclusive, so long as by the

The next Reason which the Commons have commanded me to use, for which they
still desire to be spared from adding this Clause to their Petition, is this:
this offensive Law of 28 E. 1. which confirmed Magna Charta, with a Saving,
rested not long in peace, for it gave not that satisfaction to the Lords or
people, as was requisite they should have in a case so nearly concerning them:
and therefore about thirty three, or thirty four of the same Kings Reign, a
later Act of Parliament was made, whereby it was Enacted, That all men should
have their Laws and Liberties and free Customs, as largely and wholly as they
had used to have at any

This was the first Law which I call now to mind, that restored Magna Charta
to the original purity wherein it was first molded, albeit it has been since
confirmed above twenty times more by several Acts of Parliament, in the Reigns
of diverse most just and gracious Kings, who were most apprehensive of their
Rights, and jealous of their Honors, and always without Savings; so as if
between 28 and 34 E. 1. Magna stood blemished with many Savings of the Kings
Rights or Seigniory, which might be conceived to be above the Law; that stain
and blemish was long since taken away, and cleared by those many absolute
Declarations and Confirmations of that excellent Law which followed in after
ages, and so it stands at this day purged and exempted now from any such
Saving whatsoever.

I beseech your Lordships therefore to observe the circumstance of time wherein
we offer this Petition to be presented to your Lordships, and by Magna Charta
stands clogged with Saving? No, my Lords, but at this day when later and better
confirmations have vindicated and set free that Law from all exceptions; and
shall we now annex another and worse Saving to it by an unnecessary Clause in
that Petition, which we expect should have the fruits and effects of a Law?
Shall we our selves relinquish or adulterate that which cost our Ancestors such
care and labor to purchase and refine? No, my Lords, but as we should hold our
selves unhappy if we should not

Whereas it was further urged by your Lordships, That to insert this Clause
into our Petition, would be no more then to do that again at your Lordships
motion and request, which we had formerly done by the mouth of our Speaker; and
that there is no cause why we should recede from that which so solemnly we have
professed. To this I answer and confess, it was then in our hearts, and so it
is now, and shall be ever, not to

That was a general^ ^nswer to a general Message, which we received from his
Majesty, warning us not to incroach upon his Prerogative; to which, like
dutiful and loving Subjects, we answered at full, according to the integrity of
our own hearts; nor was there any danger in making such an Answer to such a
Message, nor could we answer more truly or Sovereign Power in the King, above
the Laws and Statutes mentioned in our Petition, or control the Liberties of
the Subject therein declared and demanded? No my Lords, it has no reference to
any such particulars; and the same words which in some cases may be fit to be
used, and were unmannerly to be omitted, cannot in other cases be spoken but
with impertinency at the least, if not with danger; I have formerly opened my
Reasons, proving the danger of this Clause, and am commanded to illustrate the
impertinency of adding it to the Petition by a familiar Case, which was put in
our House by a Learned Gentleman, and of my own Robe: The Case is this, Two
Manors or lordships lie adjoining together, and perchance intermixed, so as
there is some difficulty to discern the true bounds of either; as there may be
touching the confines where the Liberty

Why should we speak of leaving entire the Kings Sovereign Power, whereon we
incroach not, while we only seek to recover our own Liberties and Privileges,
which have been seized upon by some of the Kings Ministers? If our Petition did
trench actually upon his Majesty's Prerogative, would our saying that we
intended it not, make the thing otherwise then the truth?

My Lords, there needs no Protestation or Declaration to the contrary of that
which we have not done; and to put in such a Clause, cannot argue less then a
fear in us, as if we had invaded it; which we hold sacred, and are assured that
we have not touched either in our words, or in our intentions. And touching
your Lordships observation upon the word ( Leave) if it be not a proper word to
give any new thing to the King, sure we are, it is a word as dangerous in
another sense; for it may amount without all question, to acknowledge an old
Right of Sovereign in his Majesty, above these Laws and Statutes whereon only
our Liberties are founded; a Doctrine which we most humbly crave your Lordships
leaves freely to protest against. And ^or your Lordships proffering that some
Saving should be requisite for preservation of his Majesty's Sovereign Power,
in respect our Petition runs in larger words then our Laws and Statutes
whereon we ground it; what is this but a clear co^^ession by our Lordships,
that this Clause was intended by you to be Saving? for other Saving then this,
we find not tendered by you: And if it be such a Saving, how can it stand with
your Lordships other Arguments, that it should be of no other effect then our
former expression to his Majesty by the mouth of our Speaker? But I will not
insist upon Collections of this kind; I will only show you the Reasons of the
Commons, why this Petition needs no such Saving, albeit the words of these
Statutes be exceeded in the declaratory part of our Petition: Those things that
are within the equity, and true meaning of a Statute, are as good Laws as those
which are contained in the express Letter, and therefore the Statutes of the 42
Edw. 36 H. 3. Rot. Par. N. 12. and other the Statutes made in this time of King
Edw. 3. for the Explanati^n of Magna Charta, which has been so often vouched
this Parliament, Magna Charta, had no Saving annexed to any of them, because
they inacted nothing more then was contained in effect: In that good Law under
the words, per legale judicium parium suorum, aut per legem terrae, which by
these latter Laws are expounded to import, that none should be put to answer
without presentment, or matter of Record, or by due Process or writ Original,
and if otherwise, it should be void and holden for error.

It has not been yet shown unto us from your Lordships, that we have Magna
Charta in the subsequent Laws of Explanation whereon it is grounded, what
reason is there to add a Saving to this Petition more then to those Laws?
since we desire to transmit the fruits of these our labors to posterity, not
only for the justification of our selves in right

Sir Henry Martin took up the Argument, and proceeded as to the rational part
thereof.
IT is necessary to state the question rightly, Sir Henry Martins Speech, as to
the rational part of the matter of the Conference.
and to set down the true difference between your Lordships, and us. Now indeed
there is no difference in toto and qualibet part and qualibet syllaba, yea,
and were that the question, we should add to the Addition, and in stead of due
regard say we have had, have, and ever will have a special and singular regard,
where to leave entire Sovereign Power: but this were to intimate, as if we had
first cropped it,

To which purpose your Lordships may be pleased to remember that strict Oath
every Member of our House has taken this very Session, in these words, I (A.
B.) do utterly testify and declare in my conscience, That the Kings Highness
is the Supreme or Sovereign Governor of this Realm in all Causes, etc. and to
my utmost Power will assist and defend all jurisdictions, Privileges,
Preheminencies and Authorities, granted or belonging to the Kings Highness, or
united or annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, etc.

So that your Lordships need not to borrow from our Protestations any
Exhortations to us to entertain a Writing in assistance of the Kings Sovereign
Power, since we stand obliged by the most sacred Bond of a solemn Oath, to
assist and defend the same, if cause and occasion so required: viz.) we humbly
present this Petition, etc. with due regard to leave entire your Sovereign
Power, etc. do include manifestly an Exception to Exceptio est de regula, must
of necessity destroy the Rule or Petition, so far as to the case excepted:
Exceptio firmat regulam in casibus non exceptis, in casibus except is destruit
regulam: Then this Construction follows upon our Petition thus enlarged, that
after we have petitioned that no freeman should be compelled by imprisonment,
to lend or contribute money to his Majesty without his assent in Parliament,
nor receive against his will Soldiers into his house, or undergo a Commission
of Marshal Fallacia a been divisis ad male conjuncta. Horace the Poet gives an
instance to this purpose, in a Painter, who when he had painted the Hea^ of a
man according to Art, would then join to it the neck of a Horse, and so mar the
one and the other; whereas each by it self might have been a piece of right
good workmanship.

The second branch of my Lord Keepe^s rational part, was enforced out of the
last words of this addition, by which his Lordship said that they did etc. in
this place to be Terminum diminuentem, a Term of diminution or qualification,
and in that consideration might induce us to accept it. But under his Lordships
correction, we cannot so interpret it: For first, we are assured that there is
no Sovereign Power wherewith his Majesty is trusted, either by God or man, but
only that which is for the Protection, Safety and Happiness of Termini
adaugentis, to be a Term of important advantage, against our Petition, a Term
of restriction, and that wheresoever his Majesty's Sovereign Power should be
exercised upon us, in all and every the particulars mentioned in the Petition,
we should without further enquiry submit thereunto, as assuming and taking it
pro concesso, it induced to our Safety and Happiness, etc. Since therefore (as
the Petition is now conceived) it carries the form and face of a Picture,
which represents to the life the pressures and grievances of the people, with
the easy remedies; And therefore we hope that his Majesty casting upon it a
gracious eye, will compassionate his poor Loyal Subjects, and afford a
comfortable answer.

Expressio ejus quod tacit inest nihil operatur. And Sovereign Power, in cases
where it has place, and ought to be used, is always necessarily understood,
and though not expressed, yet supplied by reasonable intendment, or by the
opinion of all Learned men.

And therefore, as it neither is nor can be by us expressly included, especially
in this Petition, where the addition thereof would make such a confusion of the
whole sense and substance.

Res est solliciti plena timoris Amor.
But I humbly pray your Lordships to examine with us, the grounds of this your
solicitude and fear, which grounds needs must be laid either upon the words of
the Petition, or the intention of the Petitioners.

Prius and Posterius, but all things are held and taken as done at one time; if
so, what a strange Collection was this, that at the same time the House of
Commons should oblige themselves by a fearful adjuration to assist and defend
all Privileges and Prerogatives as we do believe that the Proposition of this
addition from your Lordships, was not only excuseable, but commendable, as
proceeding from your love: So now having heard our Reasons, your Lordships
would rest satisfied, that our refusal to admit them into our Petition,
proceeds from the conscience of the integrity and uprightness of our own
hearts, that we in all this Petition have no such end to abate or diminish the
Kings just Prerogative. And so much in reply to that Rational part whereby my
Lord Keeper labored to persuade the entertainment of this Addition.

This being done, it pleased the House of Commons to instruct and furnish me
with certain Reasons which I should use to your Lordships, to procure your
absolute conjunction with us in presenting this Petition, which albeit I cannot
set forth according to their worth, and the Instructions given me by the House,
yet I hope their own weight will so press down into your Lordships consciences
and judgments, that without further scruple you will cheerfully vouchsafe to
accompany this Petition with your right noble presence.

A personis. The first Argument wherewith I was commanded to move your
Lordships, was drawn from the consideration of the Persons which are
Petitioners, The House of Commons; a House whose temper, mildness and
moderation in this Parliament has been such, as we should be unthankful and
injurious to Almighty God, if we should not acknowledge his good hand upon us,
upon our tongues, upon our hearts, procured, no doubt, by our late solemn and
public Humiliation and Prayers.

This moderation will the better appear, if in the first place we may be
remembered in what passion and distemper many Members of this House arrived
thither, what bosoms, what pockets full of complaints and lamentable grievances
the most part brought thither, and those every day renewed by Letters and
Packets from all parts and quarters: You know the old Proverb, Ubi dolor ibi
digitus, ubi amor ibi oculus, it is hard to keep our fingers from often
handling the Parts ill affected, but yet our Moderation overcame our Passion,
our Discretion overcame our Affection.

This Moderation also will the better appear, if in the second place it be not
forgotten how our Ancestors and Predecessors carried themselves in Parliaments,
when upon lighter provocations less would not serve their turns, but new severe
commissions to hear and determine offenses against their Liberties, public
ecclesiastical Curses, or excommunications against the Authors or Actors of
such violations, accusations, condemnations, executions, banishments. But what
have we said all this Parliament? we only look forward, not backward: we
desire amendment hereafter, ex congruo and condigno? If a Worm being trodden
upon, could speak, a Worm would say, tread upon me no more I pray you: higher
we rise not, lower we cannot descend, and thus much we think in modesty may
well be spoken in our own commendation,

A tempore. Our next Argument is drawn a tempore, from the unseasonableness of
the time. The wise Man says, There is a time for all things under the Sun,
tempus suum, and if in the wise man's judgment, a word spoken in its due time
be precious as Gold and Silver, then an unseasonable time detracts as much from
the thing, or word, done, or spoken: We hold (under your favors) that the time
is not seasonable now for this Addition; it is true that of it self Sovereign
Power is a thing always so Sacred, that to handle it otherwise then tenderly,
is a kind of Sacrilege, and to speak of it otherwise then reverently, is a
kind of blasphemy; but every vulgar capacity is not so affected, the most part
of

To intermix with this Petition any mention of Sovereign Power, rebus sic
stantibus, when angry men say Sovereign Power has been abused, and the most
moderate wish it had not been so used, we hold it not seasonable, under your
Lordships correction.

A loco. Our next Argument is drawn a loco: we think the place where your
Lordships would have this Addition inserted ( viz.) in the Petition, no
convenient or seasonable place; your Lordships will easily believe, that tacit
veneration, not when it is profaned by public hearings or examinations.

Our last Argument is drawn from our Duty and Loyalty to his Majesty, in
consideration whereof we are fearful at this time to take this Addition into
our Petition, lest we should do his Majesty herein some disservice: with your
Lordships we make the great Council of the King and Kingdom; and though your
Lordships having the happiness to be near his Majesty, Reticentia, that is, to
insinuate and intimate more then I mean to speak: Our chief and principal end
in this Parliament, is to make up all Rents and Breaches between the King and
his Subjects, to draw them and knit them into our Petition, whereof (as we have
showed) the omission at this time can by no means harm the Kings Prerogative,
the expression may produce manifold inconveniences: and therefore since this
admittance of your Lordships Addition into our Petition, is incoherent and
incompatible with the body of the same; since there is no necessary use of it
for the saving of the Kings Prerogative; since the moderation of our Petition
deserves your Lordships cheerful conjunction with us; since this Addition is
unseasonable for the time, and inconvenient in respect of the place where your

Monday 26. of May, The Lord Keeper made this Speech at a Conference.
Gentlemen,
The Lords and Commons agreed touching the Petition of Right.
YE that are Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons, I have
many times this Parliament by Command from my Lords, declared the great zeal
and affection which my Lords have to maintain and nourish the good Concurrence
and Correspondency which has hitherto continued between both Houses, that
there might be a happy issue in this great business, for the common good of the
King and Kingdom. Now that which I have to say this day from my Lords, is to

The Lords have unanimously agreed with you in omnibus, and have voted that
they will join with you in your Petition, with the only alterations of the
word ( means) to be put in stead of the word ( pretext) and for unlawful) to be
put out, and in place thereof to add ( not warrantable by the Laws and
Statutes of the Realm) which two alterations your selves consented unto.

So that concerning this business there remains nothing now, but that ye having
the Petition in your hands will (if ye have not already) vote it as they have
done, and so prepare it for his Majesty, and my Lords will take order, that the
King be moved for a speedy access to present the same to his Majesty.

And after some pause he said,

There rests one thing which my Lords have commanded me to add, that in regard
this Petition touches upon certain Charges raised by the Lords Lieutenants,
and other Persons, many times for good use, for the service and safety of the
Kingdom, That ye take it into your Care and Consideration, and to provide a Law
for assessing of such Charges, as the occasion of the time shall require.

The Lords and Commons being thus happily accorded, the Petition, with the
aforesaid amendments, was read in the House two several times together: Then it
was Voted upon question, and that it should be engrossed, and read the third
time, and the House to sit in the afternoon till it was engrossed, and read,
and ordered to be presented to the King, to which there was not a negative
Vote: And the Bill of Subsidy was also read the second time, and committed.

Wednesday 28 May, the Lords and Commons had a Conference about the manner of
delivery of the Petition, and Sir Edward Cook reported, That their Lordships
were agreed that no Addition or Preface be used to the King, but that the
Petition be preferred to his Majesty by command of the Lords

About this time Mr. Rouse brought in a Charge against Doctor Ed. Manwaring,
which some days after was seconded with a Declaration.
Mr. Speaker,
I Am to deliver from the Committee a Charge against Mr. Manwaring, Mr. Rouse
against Dr. Ed. Manwaring.
a Preacher in Divinity; but a man so Criminous, that he has turned his Titles
into Accusations, for the better they are, the worse is he that dishonors them.

Here is a great Charge that lies upon him, it is great in it self, and great
because it has many great Charges in it; Serpens qui serpentem devorat fit
draco, his Charge having digested many Charges into it, becomes a Monster of

The main and great one is this Plot and Practice, to alter and subvert the
Frame and Fabric of this Estate and Commonwealth.

This is the great one, and it has others in it that gives it more light. To
this end,

1. He labors to infuse into the Conscience of his Majesty, the persuasion of a
power not bounding it self with Laws, which King James, of famous Memory, calls
in his Speech to the Parliament, Tyranny, yea, Tyranny accompanied with

2. He endeavors to persuade the Conscience of the Subjects, that they are
bound to obey Commands illegal, yea he damns them for not obeying them.

3. He robs the Subjects of the propriety of their Goods.

4. He brands them that will not lose this propriety with most scandalous
Speeches and odious Titles, to make them both hateful to Prince and People; so
to set a division between the Head and the Members, and between the Members
themselves.

To the same end not much unlike to Faux and his fellows, he seeks to blow up
Parliaments and Parliamentary Powers.

The fifth being duly viewed, will appear to be so many Charges, and they make
up all the great and main Charge, a mischievous Plot to alter and subvert the
frame and government of this State and Commonwealth.

And now though you may be sure, that Mr. Manwaring leaves us no propriety in
our Goods, yet he has an absolute propriety in this Charge, Quid dabitis?)
what will you give me, and I will betray this State, Kingdom, and Commonwealth?

But there are two Observations (I might add a third, which is like unto a
threefold Cord, which cannot be easily broken) will draw the Charge more
violently upon him.

The first is of the Time when this Doctrine of destruction was set forth; it
was Preached in the heart of the Loan, and it was Printed in the beginning of
that Term which ended in a Remittitur: So that you might guess there might be a
double Plot, by the Law and Conscience, to set on fire the frame and estate of
this Commonwealth: And one of these intailed Foxes was Mr. Manwaring.

Another note may be taken of the time, that is, the unseasonableness of it;
for this Doctrine of the Loan (in case of necessity) was the year after an
assent in Parliament to four Subsidies and three Fifteens, which might serve
for a sufficient stopple for the Doctors mouth, to keep in his Doctrine of
Necessity.

A second observation may be of the Means by which he seeks to destroy this
Commonwealth; his means are Divinity, yea by his Divinity he would destroy both
King and Kingdom.

The King: for there can be no greater mischief to a Prince, then to put the
opinion of Deity into his ears; for if from his ears ti should have passed to
his heart, it had been mortal: You know how Herod perished. Now this man gives
a participation of Divine Omnipotence to Kings, and though a part may seem to
qualify, yet all does seem again to fill up that qualification, and very
dangerously, if we remember that God says of himself, I am a jealous God.

He goes about to destroy the Kingdom and Commonwealth by his God is a God of
order, and not of confusion: and that the Son of God came to save, and not to
destroy. By which it seems he has not his Divinity from God, nor from the Son
of God: And that we may be sure he went to Hell for Divinity, he names sundry
Jesuits and Friars, with whom he consulted and traded for his Divinity. But not
to belie Hell it self, the Jesuits are honester then he: for if he had not
brought more hell unto them then he found with them, he had not found this

But for a conclusion, to give the true Character of this man whom I never saw,
I will show it you by one whom I know to be contrary to him: Samuel we know all
to be a true Prophet; now we read of Samuel, that he writ the Law of the
Kingdom in a Book, and laid it up before the Lord. And this he did, as one of
Mr. Manwarings own Authors affirms, that the Manwaring finding the Law of this
Kingdom written in Books, tears it in pieces, and that in the presence of the
Lord in a Pulpit, that the King may not know what to command, nor the People
what to obey.

Thus Mr. Manwaring being contrary to a true Prophet, must needs be a false
one, and the Judgment of a false Prophet belongs to him.

I have showed you an evil Tree, that brings forth evil fruit; and now it
rests with you to determine whether the following sentence shall Cut it down,
and cast it into the fire.

ABout this time the Mayor of Plymouth certified to the Burgesses serving for
that Town in Parliament, the Examination of Le Brun a Frenchman, Captain of the
Mary of Rotchel, taken the 16 of May 1628. viz. The Examinate says, That on
Sunday being the 17 of April last past, he departed from Plymouth Harbor in
company with the English Fleet, whereof the Earl of Denbigh is General: and on
the first day of May, then following, the said Fleet arrived and came at Anchor
at Charleboy in the Rode of Rotchel about four of the Clock in the afternoon;
where at the said arrival they found twenty sail of the King of France his
Ships, whereof six were Ships of about 300 Tuns, and the rest were small Sh^ps,
and forthwith May, in which time there was a Wherry sent from the Fleet into
Rotchel, wherein there were two English and one Frenchman, to inquire the state
of the May the said English Fleet weighed Anchor, and set sail to depart; and
four of the French great Ships weighed Anchor also, and came after them, and
shot diverse times at the said Fleet, and the said Fleet shot at them again, and
the said Examinate came in company with the said Fleet as far as Bell Isle,
where he departed from them on the tenth of this instant; and lastly Rotchel
shot to the King of France his Ships and Fort, but chiefly upon the arrival of
the said Fleet there.

This Examination being communicated to the Council Table, it procured this
ensuing Letter from the Privy Council to the Duke, dated the 30 of May, 1628.
viz.

WHereas it is his Majesty's pleasure, that the Earl of Denbigh shall return
Rotchel, with the Fleet under his Charge: We do therefore pray your Grace, to
signify this his Majesty's pleasure unto the said Earl, and to give him
special Charge and Direction so soon as the said Fleet, or the greatest thereof
shall be reassembled and joined together; then presently with the first
opportunity of wind, taking into his Charge also the Ships stayed and prepared
at Portsmouth and Plymouth, together with such fire Ships and other Vessels, as
shall be provided for this expedition, to return to Rotchel with all possible
diligence, and do his best endevor to relieve the same; Letting Denbigh do set
forward on his voyage toward Rotchel, before the whole Fleet shall be joined
with him, we pray your Grace to give him such Direction, that he may leave
order that the Ships which are behind shall follow him with all speed.


Monday 2 June. The King came to the Parliament, and spoke thus in brief to
both Houses.
Gentlemen,
I Am come hither to perform my duty, I think no man can think it long,

After this the Lord Keeper spoke as follows.
MY Lords, and ye the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House

The Petition Exhibited to his Majesty by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, concerning diverse Rights and
Liberties of the Subjects, with the Kings Majesty's Royal Answer thereunto in
full Parliament.
To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
HUmbly show unto our Sovereign Lord the King, the Lords Spiritual Edward the
first, commonly called, Statutum de Tallagio non concedendo, That no Tallage or
aid shall be laid or levied by the King or his Heirs in this Realm, without
the good will and assent of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights,
Burgesses, and other the Freemen of the Commonalty of this Realm: And by
Authority of Parliament holden in the five and twentieth year of the Reign of
King Edward the third, it is Declared and Benevolence, nor by such like Charge,
by which the Statutes before mentioned, and other the good Laws and Statutes of
this Realm, your Subjects have inherited this Freedom, That they should not be
compelled to contribute to any Tax, Tallage, Aid, or other like Charge, not set
by common censent in Parliament.

Yet nevertheless, of late diverse Commssions directed to sundry Commissioners
in several Counties with instructions have issued, by means whereof your People
have been in diverse places assembled,

And where also by the Statute called, 9. Hen. 3.29.
The great Charter of the Liberties of England, It is declared and enacted,
That no Freeman may be taken or imprisoned or be disseised of his Freeholds or
Liberties, or his free Customs, or be Outlawed or Exiled, or in any manner
destroyed, but by the lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land.

And in the eight and twentieth year of the reign of King Edward the third, 28.
Ed. 3.3.
it was declared and enacted by Authority of Parliament, That

Nevertheless, 37. Ed. 3.18.
against the tenor of the said Statutes, and other the good Laws and Statutes
of your Realm, 38. Ed. 3.9.
to that end provided, diverse of your Subjects have of late been imprisoned
without any cause showed, 42. Ed. 3.3.
and when for their deliverance they were brought before your Justices, 17.
Ric. 2.6.
by your Majesty's Writs of Habeas Corpus, there to undergo and receive as the
Court should order, and their Keepers commanded to certify

And whereas of late great companies of Soldiers and Mariners, have been
dispersed into diverse Counties of the Realm, and the Inhabitants against their
wills have been compelled to receive them into their houses, and there to
suffer them to sojourn, against

And whereas also by Authority of Parliament, 25. Ed. 3.9.
in the 25 year of the reign of King Edward the third, it is declared and
enacted, That no man shall be forejudged of life or limb against the form of
the great Charter, 9. Hen. 3.29.
and the Law of the Land: 25. Ed. 3.4.
And by the said great Charter and other the Laws and Statutes of this your
Realm, 28. Ed. 3.3.
no man ought to be adjudged to death, but by the Laws established in this your
Realm, either by the Customs of the same Realm, or by Acts of Parliament: Land,
according to the Justice of Martial Law, against such Soldiers and Mariners, or
other dissolute persons joining with them, as should commit any Murder,
Robbery, Felony, Mutiny, or other Outrage or Misdemeanor whatsoever, and by
such summary Course and Order, as is agreeable to Martial Law, and is used in
Armies in time of War, to proceed to the trial and condemnation of such
offenders, and them to cause to be executed and put to death, according to the
Law Martial.

By pretext whereof, some of your Majesty's Subjects have been by

And also sundry grievous offenders by color thereof, claiming an exemption
have escaped the punishments due to them by the Laws and Statutes of this your
Realm, by reason that diverse of your Officers, and Ministers of Justice have
unjustly refused, or forborne to proceed against such offenders according to the
same Laws and Statutes, upon

The Petition
They do therefore humbly pray your most Excellent Majesty, That no man
hereafter be compelled to make or yield any Gift, Loan, Benevolence, Tax, or
such like Charge, without common consent by Act of Parliament; and that none be
called to make answer, or take such Oath, or to give attendance, or he
confined, or otherwise

All which they most humbly pray of your most Excellent Majesty, as their
Rights and Liberties according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm: And that
your Majesty would also vouchsafe to declare, That the awards, doings, and
proceedings to the prejudice of your People, in any of the Premises, shall not
be drawn hereafter into Consequence or Example: And that your Majesty would be
also graciously pleased, for the further comfort and safety of your People, to
declare your royal Will and Pleasure, That in the things aforesaid all your
Officers and Ministers shall serve you, according to the Laws

Which Petition being read, the 2 of June 2628. The Kings Answer was thus
delivered unto it.

The King wills that Right be done according to the Laws and Customs of the
Realm; And that the Statutes be put in due execution, that his Subjects may
have no cause to complain of any wrong or oppressions,

The Answer debated.
On Tuesday June 3. the King's Answer was read in the House of Commons, and
seemed too scant, in regard of so much expense of time and labor as had been
employed in contriving the petition: Whereupon Sir John Elliot stood up and
made a long Speech, wherein he gave forth so full and lively representation of
all Grievances, both general and particular, as if they had never before been
mentioned.

HE reduced the Cause of all our evils to Five heads: Our insincerity and
doubling in Religion, Sir Jo. Elliots Speech in the laying open of grievances.
which he exemplified by the freedom and increase of Papists; by the
composition with them in the North; Ireland, and elsewhere.

2. Our want of Council, which sacrificed our honor and our men sent to the
Palatinate, stopping those greater supplies appointed for that Service, by
which it might have been made defensible; this gave direction to that late
expedition to Ree, whose wounds are yet bleeding, by means France, and their
King by a necessary consequence are divided, and that Country so prepared
against us, that we have nothing to promise our neighbors, hardly for our
selves, insomuch as by the issue and success it may rather be thought a
conception of Spain, then begotten here by us.

3. The insufficiency and unfaithfulness of our Generals Witness first the
expedition to Cales, where we arrived and found a Conquest ready ( viz.) the
Spanish ships fit for the satisfaction of a voyage^ either in point of honor,
Ree, where the whole action was carried against the judgment and opinion of
the Officers, ( viz.) those that were of the Council; was not the first, was
not the last, was not all, at land in the intrenching, in the continuance
there, in the assault, in the retreat, without their assent? Alexander or
Caesar ever did know, the enriching of an enemy by courtesies, when the
Soldiers want help, nor of the private entercourses and parlies with the Fort,
which continually were held; what they intended, may be read in the success.

3. Witness the last voyage to Rotchel, which needs no observation, and is
fresh in memory.



5. The oppression of the Subject, it needs no demonstration, the Algier,
witness that of Mansfield, witness that to Cales, witness the next, witness
that to Ree; witness the last, witness the Palatinate, witness the Turks,
witness the Dunkirks, witness all; we were never so much weakened, nor had less
hopes how to be restored.

These Mr. Speaker are our dangers, these are they do threaten us, and those
are like that Trojan Horse, brought in cunningly to surprise us, in these do
lurk the strongest of our enemies ready to issue on us, and if we do not now
the more speedily expel them, these are the sign, the invitation to others.

These will prepare their entrance, that we shall have no means left of refuge
or defense; for if we have these enemies at home, how can we strive with those
that are abroad? if we be free from these, no other can impeach

Our ancient English virtue thus rectified, I say, will secure us, and unless
there be a speedy reformation in these, I know not what hopes or expectations

These things, Sir, I shall desire to have taken into consideration, that as we
are the great Council of the Kingdom, and have the apprehension of these
dangers, we may truly represent them unto the King, wherein I conceive we are
bound by a treble Obligation of duty unto God, of duty to his Majesty, and of
duty to our Country.

And therefore I wish it may so stand with the Wisdom and Judgment of the
House, that they may be drawn into the body of a Remonstrance,

And thus, Sir, with a large affection and loyalty to his Majesty, and with a
firm duty and service to my Country, I have suddenly, and it may be,

Some against the recapitulating of Grievances.
IT seemed to others not suitable to the wisdom of the House in that conjuncture,
to begin to recapitulate those misfortunes which were now obvious to all,
accounting it more discretion not to look back, but forward: and since the King
was so near to meet him, that the happiness expected

Exceptions to Sir John Elliots Speech.
IT was intimated by Sir Henry Martin, that this Speech of Sir John Elliot was
suggested from disaffection to his Majesty; and there wanted not some who said,
it was made out of some distrust of his Majesty's Answer to the Petition; but
Sir John Elliot protested the contrary, and that himself and others had a
resolution to open these last mentioned Grievances, to John Elliots was
attested by Sir Thomas Wentworth, and Sir Robert Phillips.

WHilst Sir John Elliot was speaking, an interruption was made by Sir Humphrey
May, expressing a dislike; but he was commanded by the Commons to go on: More
exceptions.
and being afterward questioned for a Passage in that Speech, viz. That some
actions seemed to be but conceptions of Spain, he explained himself, That in
respect of the affairs of Denmark, the engagement of that unfortunate accident
of Ree, he conceived was a conception of Spain, rather then to have any motion
from our Council here.

IN this Debate Sir Edward Cook propounded, Sir Edward Cook.
That an humble Remonstrance be presented to his Majesty, touching the dangers
and means of safety of King and Kingdom: which Resolution was taken by the
House, and thereupon they turned themselves into a Grand Committee, and the
Committee for the Bill of Subsidies was ordered to expedite the said
Remonstrance.


THat his Majesty having upon the Petition, A Message from the King to the
House of Commons, to end the Sessions.
exhibited by both Houses, given an Answer full of Justice and Grace, for which
we and our posterity have just cause to bless his Majesty, it is now time to
grow to a conclusion of a Session, and therefore his Majesty thinks fit to let
you know, Wednesday the 11 of this Month, and therefore wishes that the House
will seriously attend these businesses, which may best bring the Session to a
happy conclusion, without entertaining new matters, and so husband the time
that his Majesty may with the more comfort bring us speedily together again: at
which time, if there be any further Grievances

After the reading of this Message, the House proceeded with a Declaration
against Doctor Manwaring, which was the same day presented to the Lords at a
Conference, betwixt the Committees of both Houses of Parliament: and Mr. Pimm
was appointed by the House of Commons to manage that Conference.

The Declaration of the Commons against Dr. Manwaring, Clerk and Doctor in
Divinity.
FOr the more effectual prevention of the apparent ruin and destruction of
this Kingdom, which must necessarily ensue, if the good and fundamental Laws
and Customs therein established, should be Roger Manwaring, Clerk, Dr. in
Divinity, That whereas by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, the free
Subjects of England do undoubtedly inherit this Right and Liberty, not to be
compelled to contribute any Tax, Tollage, Aid; or to make any Loans not set or
imposed by common consent, by Act of Parliament. And diverse of his Majesty's
loving Subjects relying upon the said Laws and Customs, did in all humility
refuse to lend such sums of Moneys, without Authority of Parliament, as were
lately required of them.

Nevertheless he the said Roger Manwaring in contempt, and contrar^ to the Laws
of this Realm, has lately preached in his Majesty's presence two several
Sermons, That is to say, the fourth day of July Religion and Allegiance; and
with a wicked and malicious intention to seduce and misguide the Conscience of
the Kings most excellent Majesty, touching the observation of the Laws and
Customs of this Kingdom, and of the Rights and Liberties of the Subjects, to
incense his Royal displeasure against his good Subjects so refusing, to
scandalize, subvert and impeach the good Laws and Government of this Realm, and
the Authority of the Roger Manwaring does in the said Sermons and Book persuade
the Kings most excellent Majesty,

First, that his Majesty is not bound to keep and observe the good Laws and
Customs of this Realm, concerning the Rights and Liberties of the Subjects
aforementioned: And that his Royal Will and Command in imposing Loans, Taxes
and other Aids upon his people without common consent in Parliament, does so
far bind the

Secondly, that those of his Majesty's loving Subjects which refused the Loan
aforementioned in such manner, as is before recited, did therein offend against
the Law of God, against his Majesty's Supreme Authority, and by so doing became
guilty of Impiety, Dissoialty, Rebellion and Disobedience, and liable to many
other Taxes, and Censures, which he in the several parts of his Book does most
falsely and maliciously lay upon them.

Thirdly, that authority of Parliaments is not necessary for the

All which the Commons are ready to prove, not only by the general scope of the
same Sermons and Book, but likewise by several Clauses, Assertions, and
Sentences therein contained; and that he the said Roger Manwaring by preaching
and publishing the Sermons and Book aforementioned, Roger Manwaring, and also
of replying to the answers which he the said Roger shall make unto any of the
matters contained in this present Bill of Complaint, and of offering further
proof of the premises, or of any of them, as the Cause according to the Course
of Parliament shall require, do pray that the said Roger Manwaring may be put
to answer to all and every the premises, and that such proceeding, examination,
trial, judgment, and exemplary punishment may be thereupon had and executed,
as is agreeable to Law and Justice.

This Declaration engrossed in Parliament being read, Mr. Pym addressed himself
to the Lords in this manner.
THat he should speak to this Cause with more confidence, Mr. Pyms Speech at
the delivery of the charge against Dr. Manwaring.
because he saw nothing out of himself that might discourage him: If he
considered the matter, the Offenses were of an high nature, of easy proof; if
he considered their Lordships, who were the Judges of their own interest, their
own honor, the example of their Ancestors, the care of their Posterity,

If this be so, by the same act of his Apprehension, by which he believes his
Majesty's love to Piety and Justice, he must needs believe his

Then he proceeded to that which he said was the Task enjoined him, to make
good every Clause of that which had been read unto them: which that he might
the more clearly perform, he prepounded to observe that order of parts unto
which the said Declaration was naturally dissolved.

1. Of the Preamble. 2. The Body of the Charge.
The preamble consisted altogether of recital; first of the Inducements upon
which the Commons undertook this complaint.

The second of those Laws and Liberties against which the offense was committed.

The third of the violation of those Laws which have relation to that offense.



The first, that the form of Government in any State could not be altered
without apparent danger of ruin to that State.

The second, the Law of England, whereby the Subjects was exempted from Taxes
and Loans not granted by common consent of Parliament, was not introduced by
any Statute, or by any Charter or Sanction of Princes, but was the Ancient and
Fundamental Law issuing from the first frame and constitution of the Kingdom.

The third, that this Liberty of the Subject is not only most convenient and
profitable for the People, but most honorable, most necessary for the King,
yea in that point of supply for which it was endeavored to be broken.

The form of Government is that which does actuate and dispose every part and
member of a State to the common good; and as those parts give strength and
ornament to the whole, so they receive from it again strength and protection in
their several stations and degrees.

If this mutual relation and intercourse be broken, the whole frame will
quickly be dissolved, and fall in pieces, and in stead of this concord and
interchange of support, whilst one part seeks to uphold the old form of
Government, and the other part to introduce a new, they will miserably

The second question is as manifest, there are plain footsteps of those Laws in
^he Government of the Saxons, they were of that vigor and force as to overlive
the Conquest, nay to give bounds and limits to the Conqueror, whose victory
gave him first hope; but the assurance and possession of the Crown he obtained
by composition, in which he bound himself to observe these and the other
ancient Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, which afterward he likewise
confirmed by oath at his Coronation:

To clear the third Position (he said) may seem to some men more a Paradox,
That those Liberties of the Subject should be so honorable, so

But he said he would not insist upon any of those points, nor yet upon other
very important; he said, that if those Liberties were taken away, there would
remain no means for the Subjects, by any act of Bounty or

And he desired their Lordships to remember what profitable Prerogatives the
Laws had appointed for the support of Sovereignty; as Wardships, Treasures
trove, Felons-goods, Fines, Amercements, and other Issues of Courts, Wrecks,
Escheats, and many more too long to be enumerated; which for the most part are
now by Charters and Grants of several Princes dispersed into the hands of
private Persons; and that besides the ancient Demeasnes of the Crown of
England, William the Conqueror did annex, for the better maintenance of his
Estate, great proportions of those Lands, which were confiscate from those
English which persisted to withstand him, and of these very few remain at this
day in the Kings possession: And that since that time the revenue of the Crown



In his entrance into the second part he propounded these Steps, by which he
meant to proceed.

1. To show the state of the Cause, as it stood both in the Charge and in the
Proof, that so their Lordships might the better compare them both

2. To take away the pretenses of mitigations and limitations of his Opinions,
which the Doctor had provided for his own defense.

3. To observe those circumstances of Aggravation, which might properly be
annexed to his Charge.

4. To propound some Precedents of former times, wherein though he could not
match the offense now in question (for he thought the like before had never
been committed) yet he should produce such as should sufficiently

The Offense was prescribed in a double manner, First, by the general scope and
intention, and by the matter and particulars of the Fact, whereby that
intention was expressed.

In the description of the intention he observed six Points, every one of which
was a Character of extreme malice and wickedness.

2. To incense his Royal Displeasure against his Subjects. 3. To scandalize,
impeach and subvert the good Laws and Government of the Kingdom, and Authority
of Parliaments. 4. To avert his Majesty's mind from calling of Parliaments. 5.
To alienate his royal Heart from his People. 6. To cause Jealousies, Sedition,
and Division in the Kingdom.
Of these particulars (he said) he would forbear to speak further, till he

The Materials of the Charge were contrived into three distinct Articles, the
first of these comprehended two Clauses.

1. That his Majesty is not bound to keep and observe the good Laws and Customs
of the Realm, concerning the right and liberty of the Subject to be exempted
from all Loans, Taxes, and other Aids laid upon them, without common consent in
Parliament.

2. That his Majesty's Will and Command in imposing any Charges upon his
Subjects without such consent, does so far bind them in their Consciences, that
they cannot refuse the same without peril of eternal damnation.

Two kinds of Proof were produced upon this Article.

The first was from some assertions of the Doctors, concerning the England.

The next kind of Proof was from his Censures, and determinations upon the
particular Case of the late Loan, which by necessity and parity of reason, were
likewise applicable to all Cases of the like nature. And lest by frailty of
memory he might mistake the words, or invert the sense, he desired leave to
resort to his Paper, wherein the places were carefully extracted out of the
Book it self. And then he read each particular Clause

Then he proceeded and said, That from this evidence of the Fact does issue a
clear evidence of his wicked intention to misguide and seduce the Kings
Conscience, touching the observation of the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom,
to scandalize and impeach the good Laws and Government of the Realm, and the
Authority of Parliaments, which are two of those Characters of malice which he
formerly noted, and now enforced Scandalum magnatum, Slander and Infamy cast
upon great Lords and Officers of the Kingdom, have been always most severely
censured; how

All men (and so the greatest and highest Magistrates) are subject to passions
and partialities, whereby they may be transported into overhard injurious
Courses: Which Considerations may sometimes excuse, though never justify the
railing and evil speeches of men, who have been so provoked; it being a true
rule, That whatsoever gives strength and inforcement

The second Article he said contained three Clauses.

1. That these refusers had offended against the Law of God.

2. Against the supreme Authority.

3. By so doing, were become guilty of Impiety, Disloyalty, Rebellion,
Disobedience, and liable to many other Taxes.

For proof of all these (he said) he needed no other evidence then what might
be easily drawn from those places which he had read already; for what impiety
can be greater, then to contemn the Law of God, and to prefer humane Laws
before it? what greater disloyalty, rebellion and disobedience, then to depress
supreme Authority, to tie the hands and clip the wings of Sovereign Princes?
Yet he desired their Lordships patience in hearing some few other places,
wherein the Stains and Taint, which the Doctor endeavored to lay upon the
Refusers, might appear by the odiousness of

The first Comparison is with Popish Recusants; yet he makes them the worst of
the two, and for the better resemblance, gives them a new name of Temporal
Recusants.

For this he alleges the 1. Sermon, Page 31, 32. and part of the fifth
Consideration, by which he would persuade them to yield to this Loan.

Fifthly, If they would consider what advantage this their Recusancy in
Temporals, gives to the common adversary, who for disobedience in

We must needs be argued of less Conscience, and more Ingratitude both to God
and the King, if in Temporal things we obey not: They in Spirituals deny
subjection, wherein they may perhaps frame unto themselves

The second Comparison is with Turks and Jews, in the 2. Sermon, Page 47. What
a Paradox is, etc. What a Turk will do for a Christian, and a Christian for a
Turk, and a Jew for both, etc. the same and

The third Comparison is with Corah, Dathan and Abiram, Theudas and Judas,
which is taken out of the second Sermon, Page 49. where he labors to deprive
those refusers of all merit in their sufferings for this Cause.

Corah, Dothan and Abiram, whom for their murmurings God suddenly sunk into
Hell fire, might as well allege their sufferings had some resemblance with
that of the three Children, in the Babylonian Furnace; and Theudas and Judas
the two Incendiaries of the people in the days of Caesar's Maccabees.

Thus he ended the second Article of the Charge, upon which he said were
imprinted other two of these six Characters of malice formerly vented: That is,
a wicked intention to increase his Majesty's displeasure against his good
Subjects so refusing, and to alienate his heart from the rest of his People:
Both which were Points so odious, that he needed not to add any further
inforcement or illustration.



1. That Authority of Parliament is not necessary for the raising of Aids, and
Subsidies.

2. That the slow proceedings of such Assemblies, are not fit to supply the
urgent necessity of the State.

3. That Parliaments are apt to produce sundry Impediments to the just designs
of Princes, and to give them occasion of displeasure and discontent.

For proof of all which he alleged two places, containing the two first of
those six Considerations, which are propounded by the Doctor, to induce the
refusers to yield to the Loan in the first Sermon, Page 26, 27.

First, if they would please to consider, that though such Assemblies as are
the highest and greatest Representations of a Kingdom, be most Sacred and
Honorable, and Necessary also to those ends to which they were at first
instituted: yet know we must that ordained they were not to this end, to
contribute any Right to Kings, whereby to challenge tributary

Secondly, if they would consider the importunities that often may be urgent,
and pressing necessaries of State, that cannot stay without certain and
apparent danger, for the motion and revolution of so great and

He said he needed not draw any Arguments or Conclusions from these places; the
substance of the Charge appeared sufficiently in the words themselves, and to
this third Article he fixed two other of these six Characters of malice, That
it is his wicked intention to avert his Majesty's mind from calling of
Parliaments, and to cause Jealousies, Seditions, and Divisions in the Kingdom:
which he shortly enforced thus. If Parliaments be taken away, Mischiefs and
Disorders must needs abound, without any possibility of good Laws to reform
them; Grievances will

And so he concluded this third Article of the Charge.

The Limitations whereby the Doctor had provided to justify (or at least to
excuse) himself, were propounded to be three.

1. That he did not attribute to the King any such absolute Power as might be
exercised at all times, or upon all occasions, according to his

2. That the sum required, must be proportionable to the ability of the party,
and to the use and occasion.

3. That he did not say, That the substance of the Municipal or National Laws
might be omitted or neglected, but the Circumstances only.

To these were offered three Answers, the first general, the other two
particular. The general Answer was this, that it is all one to leave the Power
absolute, and to leave the judgment arbitrary when to execute that Power; for
although these limitations should be admitted, yet it is left to the King alone
to determine, what is an urgent and pressing necessity, what is a just
proportion both in respect of the ability, and of the use and occasion; and
what shall be said to be a Circumstance, and what

The first particular Answer applied to that limitation of urgent necessity,
was taken from the case of Normandy, as it appears in the Comentaries of Guilme
Jermie upon the customary Laws of that Duchy: they Lewis the tenth, which by
his Charter in the year 1314. acknowledging the Right and Custom of the
Country, and that they had been unjustly grieved, did grant and provide that
from thence forward they should be free from all Subsidies and Exactions to be
imposed by him and his Successors, yet with this clause, Si necessity grand ne
le requiret: which small exception has devoured all these Immunities; for
though these States meet every year, yet they have little or

The second particular Answer applied to the limitation and diminution of this
Power, which may be pretended to be made by this word Circumstance, as if he
did acknowledge the King to be bound to the substance of the Law, and free
only in regard of the manner; whereas if the places be observed, it will
appear that he intends by that word, the Assembly of Parliaments, and assent of
the People, such Contribution which is the very

The Circumstances of Aggravation observed to be annexed to this Cause were
these.

The first from the place where these Sermons were preached; the Court, the
Kings own Family, where such Doctrine was before so well believed, that no man
needed to be converted. Of this there could be no end, but either Simoniacal,
by flattery and soothing to make way for his own preferment, or else extreme
malicious, to add new afflictions

The second was from the consideration of his holy Function: He is a Preacher
of Gods Word; and yet he had endeavored to make that which was the only rule
of Justice and Goodness, to be the warrant for violence and oppression. He is a
Messenger of Peace, but he had endeavored England, but he has acted the part
of a Romish Jesuit; they labor our destruction by dissolving the Oath of
Allegiance taken by the People; he does the same work, by dissolving the Oath
of Protection and Justice taken by the King.

A third point of Aggravation was drawn from the quality of these Authors, upon
whose authority he does principally rely, being for the most part Friars and
Jesuits, and from his fraud and shifting in citing those Authors to purposes
quite different from their own meanings.

Touching which it was observed, that most of his places are such as were
intended by the Authors concerning absolute Monarchies, not regulated James to
^he Lords and Commons in Parliament 1609.

In these our times we are to distinguish betwixt the state of Kings in their
first original, and between the state of settled Kings and Monarchs that do at
this time govern in Civil Kingdoms, etc.

Every just King in a settled Kingdom is bound to observe the paction

All Kings that are not Tyrants or perjured, will be glad to bound themselves
within the limits of their Laws; and they that persuade them to the contrary
are Vipers and Pests, both against them and the Commonwealth.

It was secondly observed, that in the 27. page of his first Sermon he cites
these words out of Suarez de legibus, lib. 5. cap. 17. Acceptationem; the
Jesuit adds, neque ex antiquo Jure Hispaniae; which words are left our by the
Doctor, lest the Reader might be invited to enquire what was antiqu^m jus
Hispaniae; and it might have been learned from the same Author in another place
of that Work, that about two hundred years since, this liberty was granted to
the People by one of the Kings, that no Tribute should be imposed without their
consent; And the Author adds further, that after the Law introduced Spain being
powerful and wise Princes would never have parted with such a mark of absolute
Royalty, if they had not found in this course more advantage then in the other,
and the success and prosperity of that Kingdom, through the valor and industry
of the Spanish Nation so much advanced since that time, do manifest the wisdom
of that change.

The third observation of fraud, in perverting his Authors, was this, Suarez de
legibus, li. 5. ca. 15. fol. 300. Tributa esse maxim naturalia, and prae se
far Justitiam, quia exiguntur de rebus propriis; This he produces in proof
of the just right of Kings to lay Tributes. And no man that reads it doubts but
that in Suarez opinion the Kings Interest and Propriety in the Goods of his
Subjects is the ground of that Justice; But the truth is, that Suarez in that
Chapter had distributed Tributes into diverse kinds, of which he calls one sort
tributum reale, and describes Solent ita vocari pensiones quaedam quae
penduntur regibus, and principibus exteris and agris, quae a principio ad
sustentationem illis applicata fuerunt, ipsi vero in feodum aliis ea donarunt
sub certa pensione annua, quae jure civili Canon appellari solet, quia certa
regula and lege praescripta erat; So that the issue is, this which Suarez
affirms for justification of one kind of Tribute, which is no more then a Fee
farm of rent due by reservation in the grant of Kings own lands; the Doctor
herein, worse then a Jesuit, does wrest to the justification of all kinds of
Tribute exacted by Imposition upon the goods of the Subjects, wherein the King
had no interest or propriety at all.

4. The last aggravation was drawn from his behavior since these Sermons
preached, whereby he did continue still to multiply and increase May last he
was so bold as to publish the same doctrine in his own parish Church of St.
Giles; the points of which Sermons were these.

That the King had right to order all, as to him should seem good, without any
man's consent.

That the King might require in time of necessity Aid; and if the Subjects did
not supply, the King might justly avenge it.



These Assertions in that Sermon he said would be proved by very good
testimony, and therefore desired the Lords that it might be carefully examined,
because the Commons held it to be a great contempt to the Parliament for him to
maintain that so publicly which was here questioned.



In the last place he produced some such precedents as might testify what the
opinion of our Ancestors would have been, if this case had fallen out in their
time; And herein he said he would confine himself to the reigns of the first
three Edwards, two of them Princes of great Westminster. 1. Ca. 33.

By this Statute 3. Edw. 1. provision was made against those who should tell
any false News, or devise, by which any discord or scandal may arise betwixt
the King, his People, and great Men of the Kingdom.

27. Edw. 3. Rot. part. nu. 20. It was declared by the Kings Proclamation sent
into all the Counties of England, That they that reported that he would not
observe the Great Charter were malicious people, who desired to put trouble and
debate betwixt the King and his Subjects, and to

5. Edw. 2. Inter novas ordinationes, Henry de Beamond for giving the King ill
Counsel against his Oath, was put from the Council, and restrained for coming
into the presence of the King under pain of confiscation and banishment.

19. Edw. 2. Clause Minidors. Commissions were granted to inquire W. 1.
touching the spreading of News, whereby discord and scandal might grow betwixt
the King and his People.

10. Edw. 3. Clause M. 26. Proclamations went out to arrest all them who had
presumed to report that the King would lay upon the Wools certain sums besides
the ancient and due Customs, where the King calls these reports exquisita
mendacia, etc. quae non tantum in publicam laesionem, sed in nostrum cedunt
damnum, and dedecus manifestum*

12. Edw. 3. Rot. Almaniae. The King writes to the Archbishop of Canterbury,
excusing himself for some impositions which he had said, professes his great
sorrow for it, desires the Archbishop by Indulgences and other ways to stir up
the People to pray for him, hoping that God would enable him by some
satisfactory benefit to make amends, and comfort his Subjects for those
pressures.

To these temporal Precedents of ancient times which were alleged, he added an
Ecclesiastical Precedent out of a book called Pupilla Oculi, being De
participantibus cum excommunicatis, fol. 59. All the Articles of Magna Charta
are inserted with this direction, Hos articulos ignorare non debent quibus
incumbit confessiones audire infra provinciam Cantuariensem.

He likewise remembered the Proclamation 8. Iac. for the calling in and burning
of Doctor Cowel's book, for which these reasons are given, For mistaking the
true state of the Parliament of the Kingdom, and fundamental constitution and
privileges thereof: For speaking irreverently of the Common Law, it being a
thing utterly unlawful for any Subject to speak or write against that Law under
which he lives, and which we are sworn and resolve to maintain.

From these Precedents he collected, that if former Parliaments were so careful
of false rumors and news, they would have been much more tender of such
doctrines as these, which might produce true occasions of discord betwixt the
King and his People.

If those who reported the King would lay Impositions, and break

The third general part was the conclusion or prayer of the Commons, which
consisted of three Clauses.

First, they reserved to themselves liberty of any other accusation, and for
this he said there was great reason, that as the Doctor multiplied his
offenses, so they may renew their accusations.

Secondly, they saved to themselves liberty of replying to his Answer, for they
had great cause to think that he who shifted so much in offending, would shift
much more in answering.

Thirdly, they desire he might be brought to examination and judgment;

NOt long after the Commons, by their Speaker, demanded Judgment of the Lords
against the Doctor; who not accounting his submission with tears and grief, a
satisfaction for the great offense wherewith he stood charged, gave this
Sentence.

1. That Dr. Manwaring Doctor in Divinity shall be imprisoned, during the
pleasure of the House.

2. That he be fined one thousand pounds to the King.

3. That he shall make such submission and acknowledgement of his offenses, as
shall be set down by a Committee in writing, judgment given against Dr.
Manwawaring.
both at the Bar and in the House of Commons.

4. That he shall be suspended for the time of three years from the exercise of
the Ministry, and in the mean time a sufficient preaching Minister shall be
provided out of his livings to serve the Cure: This suspension and

5. That he shall be hereafter disabled to have any Ecclesiastical Dignity, or
secular Office.

6. That he shall be for ever disabled to preach at the Court hereafter.

7. That his said Book is worthy to be burnt, and that for the better effecting
of this, his Majesty may be moved to grant a Proclamation to call in the said
Books, that they may be all burnt accordingly, in London, and both the
Universities, and for the Inhibiting the printing thereof, upon a great penalty.

Doctor Manwarings submission was in these words;
MAy it please this Honorable House, Dr. Manwaings submissions.
I do here in all sorrow of Heart and true Repentance, acknowledge the many
Errors and Indiscretions which I have committed, in preaching and publishing
those two Sermons of mine, which I called Religion and Allegiance; and my great
fault in Giles in the Fields, the fourth of May last past. I do humbly
acknowledge those three Sermons to have been full of many dangerous Passages,
Inferences, and scandalous Aspersions in most part of the same; And I do humbly
acknowledge the Justice of this Honorable House, in that Judgment and Sentence
passed upon me for my great offense; And I do from the bottom of my Heart crave
pardon of God, the King, and this Honorable House, and the Church, and this
Commonwealth

Roger Manwaring.

Another Message was brought from his Majesty by the Speaker, Tuesday 5 of June.
Another Message from the King.
by which he set a day* for the end of this Session, and he commanded the
Speaker to let them know, that he will certainly hold that day prefixed without
alteration; and because that cannot be, if the House entertain more business of
length, he requires them that they enter not into or proceed with any new
business, which may spend greater time, or which may lay any Scandal or
Aspersion upon the State-government, or Ministers thereof.

SIr Robert Phillips upon this occasion expressed himself thus: Sir Robert
Phillips.
I perceive that toward God and toward man, there is little hope after our
humble and careful endeavors, seeing our Sins are many and so great: I consider
my own infirmities, and if ever my Passions were wrought upon, then now, this
Message stirs me up especially; when I remember with what moderation we have
proceeded, I cannot but wonder to see the miserable straight we are now in:
What have we not done to have merited? Former times have given wounds enough to
the peoples Liberty, we came hither full of wounds, and we have cured what we
could, and what is the return of all, but misery and desolation? What did we
aim at, but to have served his Majesty, and to have done that that would have
made him Great and Glorious? if this be a fault, then we are all Criminous:
What

Sir John Elliot.
OUr sins are so exceeding great (said Sir John Elliot) that unless we speedily
return to God, God will remove himself further from us; ye know with what
affection and integrity we have proceeded hitherto, to have gained his
Majesty's heart, and out of a necessity of our duty were brought to that course
we were in: I doubt a misrepresentation to his Majesty has drawn this mark of
his displeasure upon us: I observe in the Message amongst other sad
particulars, it is conceived that we were about to lay etc. It is said also, as
if we cast some aspersions on his Majesty's Ministers, I am confident no
Minister, how dear soever, can --

Here the Speaker started up from the seat of the Chair, apprehending Sir John
Elliot intended to fall upon the Duke, and some of the Ministers of State;
said, There is a command laid upon me, that I must command you John Elliot sat
down.

Sir Dudly Diggs.
I Am as much grieved as ever, said Sir Dudley Diggs; Must we not proceed? let
us sit in silence, we are miserable, we know not what to do.

Hereupon there was a sad silence in the House for a while, which was broken by
Sir Nathaniel Rich, in these words:

Sir Nathan. Rich.
WE must now speak, or for ever hold our peace; for us to be silent when King
and Kingdom are in this calamity, is not fit. The question is, Whether we shall
secure our selves by silence, yea or no? I know it is more for our own
security, but it is not for the security of those for whom we serve; let us
think on them: some instruments desire a change, we fear his Majesty's safety,
and the safety of the Kingdom, I do not say we now see it, and shall we now sit
still and do nothing, and so be scattered?

Others said, That the Speech lately spoken by Sir John Elliot, had given
offense (as they feared) to his Majesty.

WHereupon the House declared, That every Member of the House is free from any
undutiful Speech, from the beginning of the Parliament to that day; The Commons
declare that no undutiful Speech has been spoken.
and Ordered, That the House be turned into a Committee, to consider what is
fit to be done for the safety of the Kingdom; and that no man go out, upon pain
of going to the Tower: But before the Speaker left the Chair, he desired leave
to go forth; and the House ordered that he may go forth, if he please. And the
House was hereupon Whitby in the Chair.

I Am as full of grief as others, Mr. Wandesford.
said Mr. Wandesford, let us recollect our English hearts, and not sit still,
but do our duties; two ways are propounded, To go to the Lords, or to the King;
I think it is fit we go to the King, for this does concern our Liberties, and
let us not fear to make a Remonstrance of our rights; we are his Counselors;
there are some men which call evil good, and good evil, and bitter sweet:
Justice is

THen Sir Edw. Cook spoke freely, Sir Edw. Cook declares the Duke the cause of
all our miseries.
We have dealt with that duty and moderation that never was the like, Rebus sic
stantibus, after such a violation of the Liberties of the Subject; let us take
this to heart. In 30. E. 3. were they then in doubt in Parliament to name men
that misled the King? they accused John de Gaunt, the Kings Son, and Lord
Latimer, and Lord Nevel, for misadvising the King, and they went to the Tower
H. 4. Parl. Rot. numb. 31, and 32.11. H. 4. numb. 13. there the Council are
complained of, and are removed from the King; they mewed up the King, and
dissuaded him from the Common Good; and why are we now retrived from that way
we were in? why may we not name those that are the Cause of all our evils? In
4. H. 3. and 27. E. 3. and 13. R. 2. the Parliament moderateth the Kings
prerogative, and nothing grows to abuse, but this Duke of Buckingham is the
cause of all our miseries, and till the King be informed thereof, we shall
never go out with honor, or sit with honor here; that man is the Grievance of
Grievances: let us set down the causes of all our dysasters, and all will
reflect upon him. As for going to the Lords, that is not via Regia; our
Liberties are now impeached, we are concerned; it is not via Regia, the Lords
are not participant with our Liberties.

Mr. Seldom advised that a Declaration be drawn under four heads. Mr. Seldens
advice for a Declaration against the Duke.
1. To express the Houses dutiful carriage toward his Majesty. 2. To tender
their Liberties that are violated. 3. To present what the purpose of the House
was to have dealt in. 4. That that great Person, viz. the Duke, fearing himself
to be questioned, did interpose and cause this distraction. All this time (said
he) we have cast a mantle on what was done last Parliament, but now being
driven again to look on that man, let

IN conclusion, the House agreed upon several heads concerning innovation in
Religion, the safety of the King and Kingdom, misgovernment, Several heads
agreed on for a Remonstrance.
misfortune of our late designs, with the causes of them; And whilst it was
moving to be put to the question, that the Duke of Buckingham shall be
instanced to be the chief and principal cause of all those evils, the Speaker
(who after he had leave to go forth, went privately to the King) brought this
Message,

A Message from the King by the Speak^r.
THat his Majesty commands for the present they adjourn the House till to morrow
morning, and that all Committees cease in the mean time. And the House was
accordingly adjourned.

AT the same time the King sent for the Lord Keeper to attend him presently;
the House of Lords was adjourned ad libitum; the Lord Keeper being returned,
and the House resumed, his Lordship signified his Majesty's desire, that the
House and all Committees be adjourned till

AFter this Message was delivered, the Lords House fearing a sudden
dissolution, fell into consideration of the weak estate of the Kingdom, and of
our Friends and Allies abroad; of the great strength of the House of Austria,
and the King of Spains ambition, aspiring to an universal Monarchy, and his
present great preparations for war. Hereupon the House was moved to name a
select Committee, to represent these things to his

Having met in our Collections with a Letter of Mr. Allureds, to old Mr.
Chamberlain of the Court of Wards; and being a concurrent proof to the Passages
this day in the House; We have thought fit here to mention it, viz.
Sir,
YEsterday was a day of desolation among us in Parliament, and this day we John
Elliot mo^ed, that as we intended to furnish his Majesty with money, we should
also supply him with Counsel, which was one part of the occasion why we were
sent by the Country, and called for by his Majesty; And since that House was
the greatest Council of the Kingdom, where, or when should his Majesty have
better Counsel then from thence; So he desired there might be a Declaration
made to the King of the danger wherein the Kingdom stood by the decay and
contempt of Religion, the insufficiency of his Generals, the unfaithfulness of
his Officers,

In the enumerating of which, the Chancellor of the Duchy said it was a
strange language, yet the House commanded Sir John Elliot to go on, then the
Chancellor desired if he went on, that himself might go out, whereupon they all
bad him begone, yet he stayed and heard him out, and the House generally
inclined to such a Declaration to be presented in an humble and a modes^
manner, John of Gaunt the Kings Son and others, and of late have meddled with,
and sentenced the Lord Chancellor Bacon, and the Lord Treasurer Cranfield. Then
Sir Robert Philips spoke and mingled his words with weeping, Mr. Prynne did the
like, and Sir Edward Cook, overcome with passion, seeing the desolation likely
to ensue, was forced to sit down when he began to speak through the abundance
of tears, yea the Speaker in his Speech could not refrain from weeping and
shedding of tears, besides a great many whose great griefs made them dumb and
silent, yet some bore up in that storm Whitby was to come into it, that they
might speak the freer and the frequenter, and commanded no man to go out of the
House upon pain of going to the Tower; Then the Speaker humbly and earnestly
besought the House to give him leave to absent himself for half an hour,
presuming they did not think he did it for any ill intention; which was
instantly granted him: then upon many Debates about their Liberties hereby
infringed, and the eminent danger wherein the Kingdom stood; Sir Edward Cook
told them, he now saw God had not accepted all those miseries was the Duke of
Buckingham, which was entertained and answered with a cheerful acclamation of
the House, as when one good Hound recovers the scent, the rest come in with a
full cry: so they pursued it, and every one came on home, and laid the blame
where they thought the fault was, and as they were Voting it to the Question
whether they should name him in their intended Remonstrance, the Sole or the
Principal cause of all their miseries at home and abroad: The Speaker having
been three hours absent, and with the King, returned with this Message; That
the House should then rise (being about eleven

Affectionately at your service Thomas Alured.
This 6. of June 1628.

The Message mentioned in this Letter of the 6. of June, is already before
expressed.

Friday 6. June. Mr. Speaker brings another Message from the King the day
following.
Another Message from the King to the Commons.
IN my service to this House I have had many undeserved favors from you, which
I shall ever with all humbleness acknowledge, but none can be greater then that
testimony of your confidence yesterday showed unto me, whereby I hope I have
done nothing, or made any representation to his Majesty, but what is for the
honor and service of this House, and I will have my tongue cleave to my mouth,
before I will speak to the disadvantage of any Member thereof, I have

Whereas his Majesty understanding that ye did conceive his last Message to
restrain you in your just Privileges, to complain of any of his Ministers,
These are to declare his intentions, that he had no meaning of barring you from
what has been your Right, but only to avoid all scandals on his Council and
Actions past, and that his Ministers might not be, nor himself under their
names taxed for their Counsel unto his Majesty, and that no such particulars
should be taken

Mr. Speaker proceeded.
I will observe somewhat out of this Message, ye may observe a great
inclination in his Majesty to meet in this House. I was bold yesterday to take
notice of that liberty ye gave me to go to his Majesty. I know there are none
here but did imagine whither I went, and but that I knew ye where desirous and
content that I should leave you, I would not have desired it, give me leave to
say, this Message bars you not of your Right in matter, nay not in manner, but
it reaches to his Councels past, and for giving him Council in those things
which he commanded. It is not his Majesty's intentions to protect any Abetter
of Spain. The end of this was that we might meet again sweetly and happily.


MY Lords, his Majesty takes notice to your great advantage of the proceedings
of this house upon the hearing of his Majesty's message yesterday; A Message
from his Majesty t^ the house of Lords.
He accounts it a fair respect that ye would neither agree of any Committee, or
send any Message to his Majesty, though it were in your own hearts, but yield
your selves to his Majesty's Message, and defer your own resolutions till you
meet again at the time appointed

But his Majesty says ye had just cause to be sensible of the danger,
considering how the estate of Christendom now stands in respect of

Sir Robert Philips assumed the Debate upon the Message delivered by the
Speaker, and said;
I rise up with a disposition somewhat in more hope of comfort then The Kings
Message g^ves the Commons more hope then formerly.
yet in regard of the uncertainty of Councels, I shall not change much: In the
first place I must be bold without flattering, a thing nor incident to me to
tell you (Mr. Speaker) you have not only at all times discharged the duty of a
good Speaker, but of a good man, for which I render you many thanks.

Another respect touching his Majesty's Answer to our Petition, First if that
Answer fall out to be short, I free his Majesty, and I believe his Resolution
was to give that that we all expected; But in that, and if any have construed
that what we have done has been out of fear, let him know we came hither free
men, and will ever resolve to endure the worst, and they are poor men that make
such interpretations of Parliaments; in this way and method we proceeded, and
if any thing fall out unhappily, it is not King Charles that advised himself,
but King Charles misadvised by others, and misled by misordered Council, it
becomes us to consider what we were doing, and now to advise what is fit to be
done. We were taking consideration of the State

The Commons sent a message to the Lords, that they would

Afterward the House was turned again into a Committee, and considered of some
more heads to be inserted into the Declaration or Remonstrance, as the design
to bring into this Nation Foreign Forces under the command of Dolbeir; And
Burlemack was called into the House, Burlemack called into the House.
who confessed he received thirty thousand pound by Privy Holland, but he
^eares a Countermand is gone to stay them.

The Privy Seal is in these Words.
CHarles by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To the Treasurer, and under Treasurer for our
Exchequer for the time being, Greeting; We do hereby will and command you out
of our Treasury remaining in the receipt of our said Exchequer, forthwith to
pay, or cause to be paid unto Philip Burlemack, of London Merchant, the sum
of thirty thousand pounds to be paid by him over by Bill of Exchange into the
Low Countries, and Germany, unto our Trusty and well-beloved Sir William
Balfoure Knight, and John Dolbier Esquire, or either of viz. for the levying
and transporting of one thousand Horse, fifteen thousand pounds; for five
thousand Muskets, five thousand Corslets, and five thousand Pikes, ten thousand
five hundred pounds; and for one thousand Curaseers complete, two hundred
Corslets, and Carbines, four thousand five hundred pounds, amounting in the
whole to the said sum of thirty thousand pounds. And this our letter shall be
your sufficient warrant, and discharge in this behalf. Given under our Privy
Seal at our Palace of Westminster the 30th. of January, in the third year of
our Reign.

June the seventh, the King came to the Lords House, and the House MAy it
please your most excellent Majesty, The Petition of both Houses to his Majesty
for a further Answer to the Petition of right.
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament assembled, taking
into consideration that the good intelligence between your Majesty and your
people does much depend upon your Majesty's answer unto their Petition of Right
formerly presented. With

Whereunto the King replied.
The answer I have already given you was made with so good deliberation, and
approved by the judgments of so many wise men, His Majesty's second Answer to
the Petition of right.
that I could not have imagined but it should have given you full satisfaction;



The Petition was read, and this answer was returned: Soit droit fait come il
est desire. C. R.



You see how ready I have showed my self to satisfy your demands, so that I
have done my part; Wherefore if this Parliament have not

Whereupon the Commons returned to their own House with unspeakable joy, and
resolved so to proceed as to express their thankfulness; and now frequent
mention was made of proceeding with the Bill of subsidies, of sending the Bills
(which were ready) to the Lords, of perfecting the Bill of Tunnage and
Poundage, and Sir John Strange^^ies also expressed his joy at the answer, and
further added, Let us perfect our Remonstrance; King James was wont to say, He
kn^w that by Parliaments which otherwise he could never have known.

All Grand Committees to cease.
Trade, Grievances, and Courts of Justice, to sit no longer, but that the House
proceed only in the consideration of Grievances of most moment, And first they
fell upon the Commission for Excise, and sent to the Lord Keeper for the same,
who returned answer that he received Warrant at the Council Table for the
sealing thereof, and when it was Sealed, he carried it back to the Council
Table. The Commission being sent, it was read in the House, viz.

CHarles, By the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To Sir Thomas Coventry Knight, Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal of England; To James Earl of Malburg, Lord High Treasurer or
England, Henry Earl of Manchester, Lord President of our Council, Edward Earl
of Worcester, Lord Keeper of our Privy Seal; George Duke of Buckingham, Lord
high Admiral of England, William E. of Pembrook, Lord Steward of Our Household;
Philip Earl of Mountgomery, Lord Chamberlain of Our Household, Theophilus Earl
of Suffolk, Edward Earl of Dorset, William Earl of Salisbury, Thomas Earl of
Exeter, John Earl of Bridgwater, James Earl of Carlisle, Henry Earl of Holland,
William Earl of Denbigh, George Totnes, Sir George Hay Knight. Lord Chancellor of
Scotland, William Earl of Morton, Thomas Earl of Kelley, Thomas Earl of
Mellers, Edward Uiscount Conway, one of our principal Secretaries of State;
Edward Uiscount Wimbleton, Oliver Uiscount Grandison, Henry Falkland Lord
Deputy of Ireland; To the Lord Bp. of Winchester, Will. Lord Bp. of Bath and
Wells, Fulk Lo. Brook, Dudley Ash, Lord Carlton, Uice Chamberlain of Our
Household; Sir Thomas Edmonds Treasurer of our Household, Sir John Savil
Controler Robert Nanton Master of the Court of Wards, Sir John Cook one of the
principal Secretaries of State, Sir Richard Weston Chancellor, and under
Treasurer of our Exchequer, Julius Caesar Master of the Rolls, and Sir Humphrey
May Knight. Chancellor of Our Duchy of Lancaster, Greeting. Whereas the present
Conjuncture of the general affairs of Christendom, and our own particular
interest, in giving assistance unto our oppressed Allies, and for providing for
the defense

And we do hereby authorize, and appoint, and strictly will, and require you,
that speedily and seriously you enter into consideration of all the best and
speediest ways and means ye can for raising of Moneys for the most Important
occasions aforesaid: UUhich without extremest hazard to Us, our Dominions, and
People, and to our Friends, and Allies, can admit of no long delay, the same to
be done by Impositions, or oth^rwise, as in your wisdoms and best Judgments ye
shall find to be most convenient in a case of this inevitable necessity,
wherein Form and Circumstance Our honor, and safety of our Dominions, and
People: And for the doing hereof, these Presents shall be to you, and every of
you a sufficient warrant and discharge in that behal^: In witness whereof we
have caused these Our Letters to be made Letters Patents; Witness Our self at
Westminster the last day of February in the third year of Our Reign.

Per ipsum Regem.

Sir Edward Cook observed some circumstances in the Commission.
FIrst, it was after the Summons to the Parliament, Sure, some thought the
Parliament should not be. Sir Edward Cooks Observations upon the said
Commission.
2. There is a Pudor in it, it was kept secret, some great Lords never knew it.
3. The end of it was Excises, for they are Impositions, and to be sure he would
have the word (otherwise) wherefore his advice was to go up to the Lords, and

Hereupon there ensued a Conference with the Lords, which was thus managed by
Sir Edward Cook.
My Lords, The subject of this Conference is a Commission, therefore Sir Edward
Cook mannageth the Conference between both Houses concerning the Commission.
which was done accordingly. That which I shall deliver is certain Observations
out of the Patent. First, The Persons to whom it is directed. 2. The Authority
that is committed. 3. The great penalty laid on them if they do it not. 4. The
Time.

1. The Persons to whom it is directed are twenty three Lords, and other of his
Majesty's Council. 2. The Authority commmitted unto them, is to consider how
Money may be Leavied by Impositions, or otherwise: self, may produce a happy
effect: the King and both Houses have given a Judgment, the greatest that ever
was against this in the Petition of Right, and when this Judgment is given, see
how Gods goodness has brought it to pass, that this Patent shall be part of
Execution of that Judgment, to dam it for the punishment.

I do utterly dislike that clause, as you tender the Kings Honor; That that
must come to a thing of this nature, and it is strange to me, I cannot dive
into it; I leave it to your Lordships, for the time, It came out

That which I am to demand of your Lordships first, is, that as we having
considered of this Commission, finding it ex diametro against the late Judgment
in the Petition of Right, have condemned it; So your Lordships would concur
with us, as hitherto ye have done. 2. That this Commission as a thing against
Law, may be cancelled.

The Lords accepted the motion, and promised to present the same to his
Majesty.

This done, the House of Commons Voted that the Commission, the not guarding
the narrow Seas, the decay of Trade, and other particulars be inserted in the
Remonstrance.

THe House having well nigh finished the several particulars of grievances of
most moment, resumeth the former motion to declare who was the cause of all
those evils, which in a Committee of the whole House was mentioned before.

F^resh Debate in the House against the Duke.
The Debate was as hot as ever, and the crimes so frequently objected The cause
of some, and A. cause of other grievances. For the first, he instanced in the
disaster of the Armies, the decay of Ports, Trade, Ships, and Mariners. For the
second, he instanced in Religion. First, his Mother was a Recusant, and a
fosterer of Recusants. Secondly, Papists have honor in his own employments,
and Papists Captains are placed by him. And as for Arminians, York House is a
place of Mountague and others, from whence is like to follow Innovation in
Government.

Another in pursuit of the Argument, that Papists were employed by the Duke,
named Dalbeer, as the man who betrayed our men at the Isle of Ree, where all
was carried by the advice of private men, and some ill affected in Religion,
and in assault before they came away, 500. men were lost, and in the Retreat
Dalbeer was to make a Bridge, which did so entangle them, as they could make no
defense: and all contrary

Sir Robert Philips was of opinion to have the Declaration run thus, We
conceive the greatness and power of the Duke of Buckingham is the chief cause
of all these evils. We are not in a way of Charge, but of a Remonstrance.

Sir John Elliot, Sir Edward Cook, and Mr. Seldom were positively to name the
Duke as the cause of our evils, for so said they he had been already declared
in the last Parliament, Sir John Elliot.
since when the causes are multiplied, and he has deserved nothing better of
the Commonwealth.

In this Debate there wanted not Mediators which did desire the House for their
own ends and happiness, to be sparing in that Humphrey May put them again in
mind of the Kings desire, that all personal aspersions might be forborne, that
his Majesty will take it as an argument of their moderation and judgment, if
they forbear in this.

Sir Henry Martin advised that the Remonstrance be so framed, Sir Henry Martin.
as to make it passable to his Majesty's judgment and affection: Let him be
persuaded that it comes from a public sense, and not from private ends. And he
vindicated the Duke in point of Religion. It Is

Sir Benjamin Rudyard gave his judgment, Sir Benjamin Rudyard.
that if the matter be urged home, it will proclaim the man louder then we can
in words. If we name excess of Power, and abuse of Power, it will reach to the
Duke, and all others in future times: and to a Gentleman of honor nothing

And because the employment of Dalbeer had given much offense, Sir Thomas
Jermin.
Sir Thomas Jermin stood up in his defense, and said he had given great
evidence of his Trust and Fidelity. When the Count Palatine retired Mansfield
to make a head, and the King sent word to the Palatine to be present in Person,
Dalbeer went along with him, with one more, and being in a Village in Germany,
a Troop of fifty Horse met them. Dalbeer went to the Captain and said, we are
in a Service, I will give you so many crowns to conduct us, which was done, and
Dalbeer went along with him.

June the 13. it was Ordered upon the Question, that the excessive Power of the
Duke of Buckingham, is the cause of the Evils and Dangers to the King and
Kingdom; And that this be added to the Remonstrance.

At this very time being June 18. 1628. Doctor Lamb, so called, having been at
a Playhouse, came, through the City of London, and being a person very
notorious, Dr. Lamb killed.
the Boys gathered thick about him, which increased by the access of ordinary
People and the Rabble; they presently reviled him with words, calling him a
Witch, a Devil, the Duke's Conjurer, etc. he took Sanctuary in the Windmill
Tavern at the lower end of the Old Jury, where he remained a little space; but
there being two Doors opening to several Streets out of the said House, the
London endeavored to find out the most active persons in this Riot, but could
not find any that either could, or if they could, were willing to witness
against any person in that business. This happened to be in Parliament time,
and at that instant of time when they were about the Remonstrance against the
Duke.

And shortly after, so high was the rage of people, that they would

Let Charles and George do what they can,
The Duke shall die like Doctor Lamb.
What fine the City underwent for this miscarriage, we shall observe in order
of time.

Two days after the Privy Council writ this ensuing Letter to the Lord London.

A Letter to the City about Dr. Lambs Death.
WHereas we are given to understand, that the fury and outrage of diverse
dissolute and disorderly person assembled together in great numbers, without
any resistance made, or course taken to suppress them (by the Magistrates to
whom it appertained) one Lamb was in a barbarous manner slain and murdered,
wherewith his Majesty having been likewise made acquainted, as he is very
sensible of the scandal that may hereby be cast upon the


Dr. Neal, and Dr. Laud suspected for Atminians.
The Commons at this time voted that Doctor Neal Bishop of Winchester, and Dr.
Laud Bishop of Bath and Wells, be named to be those near about the King who are
suspected to be Arminians, and that they are justly suspected to be unsound in
their opinions that way.

The House was turned again into a Committee concerning the Remonstrance.

And Mr. Seldom proposed that to the excessive power of the Duke should be
added the abuse of that power, Mr. Seldom.
and since that abuse is the cause of these evils, that it be presented to his
Majesty to consider whether it

MOst Dread Sovereign, The Commons Remonstrance against the Duke.
as with humble thankfulness we your dutiful Commons now assembled in
Parliament, do acknowledge the great comfort which we have in your Majesty's

To which end we most humbly entreat your Majesty first, and especially, to
cast your eyes upon the miserable condition of this your own Kingdom, of late
so strangely weakened and dejected, that unless, through your Majesty's most
gracious Wisdom, Goodness shall bless God for you, and ever preserve a
thankful memory of your great goodness and Justice therein.) And we do verily
believe, that all, or most of these things which we shall now present unto your
Majesty, are either unknown unto you, or else by some of your Majesty's
Ministers o^fered under such specious pretenses, as may hide their own ill
intentions, and ill consequences of them from your Majesty. But we assure our
selves, according to the good example of your Majesty's Predecessors, nothing
can make that it would be the greatest unfaithfulness, and breach of duty to
his Majesty, and of the trust committed to them by the Country that could be,
if in setting forth the grievances of the people, and the condition of all the
parts of this Kingdom from whence they come, they did not deal clearly with
him, without sparing any, how near and dear soever they were unto him, if they
were hurtful, or dangerous to the Commonwealth.

In confidence therefore of your Majesty's gracious acceptance in a matter of
so high importance, and in faithful discharge of our duties; We do first of all
most humbly beseech your Majesty to take notice, that howsoever we know your
Majesty, does with your soul abhor, that any such thing should be imagined or
attempted; Yet there is a general fear conceived in your people of secret
working and combination to introduce into this kingdom innovation and change
of our holy Religion, more precious unto us then our lives Oxford. We find
there has followed Buckingham, who her self openly professing that Religion is
a known favourer and supporter of them that do the same, which we well hoped
upon your Majesty's Oxford, should not have been permitted, nor that any of
your Majesty's Subjects of that religion justly to be suspected, should be
entertained in the service of your Majesty, or your royal consort the Queen.
Some likewise of that Religion have had Honors, Offices, and places of Command
and Authority lately conferred upon them. But that which strikes the greatest
terror into the hearts of your Loyal Subjects concerning this, is, that Letters
of Stay of legal proceedings against them have been procured from your Majesty
(by what indirect means we know not) And Commissions under the great Seal
granted and executed for composition to be London, and the Subburbs thereof;
Where exceeding many Families do make their abode publicly, frequent Mass at
Denmark House and other places, and by their often meetings and conferences,
have opportunities of combining their Councels, and Strength together, to the
hazard of your Majesty's safety, and the State, and most especially in these
doubtful and calamitous times. And as our fear concerning change or subversion
of Neale Bishop of Winchester, and Doctor Lawd, Bishop of Bath and Wells, who
are justly suspected to be unsound in their opinions that way. And it being now
generally held the way to preferment, and promotion in the Church, many
Scholars do bend the course of their Studies to maintain those Errors; Their
Books and opinions are suffered to be printed and published, and ^n the other
side the imprinting of such as are written against them, and in defense of the
Orthodox Church, are hindered and to strengthen and increase our own Relgion,
and to oppose both those, which is the diligent teaching and instruction of the
people in the true knowledge, and worship of Almighty God. And therefore means
have been sought out to depresse and discountenance pious, and painful, and
Orthodox Preachers, and how conformable soever, and peaceable in their
disposition and carriage they be, yet the preferment of such is opposed, and
instead of being encouraged, they are molested with vexatious courses, and
pursuits, Ireland; where, without control, the Popish Religion is openly
confessed, and practiced in every Dublyn, and most of the great Towns, and
diverse other places of the Kingdom; which of what ill consequence it may
prove, if not seasonably repressed, we leave to your Majesty's wisdom to
Judge. But most humbly beseech you (as we

And if now to all these your Majesty will be pleased to add the consideration
of the circumstances of time, wherein these courses tending to the destruction
of true Religion, within these your Kingdoms, have been taken here, even then
when the same is with open force and violence prosecuted in other Countries,
and

And besides this fear of Innovation in Religion; we do in much comforted, and
raised again out of that sadness and discontent, which they generally had
conceived throughout the whole Kingdom, for the undue courses which were the
last year taken for raising of moneys by loanes, then which (whatever your
Majesty has been informed to the contrary) there were never any moneys
demanded, nor paid with greater grief and general dislike of all your faithful
Subjects; though many,

The Billeting of Soldiers did much augment both their fears and grief,
wherein likewise they find much comfort upon your gracious Answer to our
petition of Right, and to that we presented to your Majesty concerning this
particular. Yet we most humbly beseech your Majesty, that we may inform you,
that the still

The report of the strange and dangerous purpose of bringing in German Horse
and Riders, would have turned our doubts into despair, and our fears into a
certainty of confusion, had not your Majesty's gracious message (for which we
humbly give you thanks) comforted us, by the assurance of your Royal word, that
they neither are, nor were intended by your Majesty, for any England; but that
they were designed for some other foreign employment. Yet the sight of the
Privy Seal by which it seems they were to be leavied, the great sum of
money, which upon examinations we found to be paid for that purpose, gave us
just cause of fear, That much about the same time there was a Commission under
the Great Seal granted unto the Lords, and others of the Privy Council, to
consider of other ways

These men could not be ignorant that the bringing in of Strangers for aid,
has been pernicious to most States, where they England fatal. We do bless God
that has given your Majesty a wise understanding heart to discern of those
courses, and that such power produces nothing but weakness, and calamity. And
we beseech your Majesty to pardon the vehemency of our expression, if in the
Loyal and zealous affections we bear to your Majesty and your service, we are
bold to declare to your Majesty, and the whole world, that we hold it far
beneath the heart of any free English man to think that this victorious Nation
should now stand in need of German Soldiers to defend their own King and
kingdom.

But when we consider the course formerly mentioned; and these things tending
to an apparent change of Government, the often breaches of Parliament, whereby
your Majesty has been deprived Buckingham to be general of an Army in the Land
in the time of peace, the discharging of faithful and sufficient Officers and
Ministers, some from Judicial places, and others from the Offices and
authorities which they formerly held in the Commonwealth;

And if your Majesty would be pleased to take a further view of the present
state of your Realm, We do humbly pray you to consider, Cales, and the Isle of
Ree, and the last expedition to Rochel, have not extremely wasted that stock
of Honor that was left unto this kingdom, sometimes terrible to all other
Nations, and now declining to contempt beneath the meanest.

Together with our Honors, we there lost those (and that not a few) who had
they lived, we might have some better hope of Ree, Your Majesty received
information but of a few hundreds. And this dishonor and loss has been
purchased with the consumption of above a million of Treasure.

Many of the Forts are exceeding weak, and decayed, and want both men and
Munition. And here we cannot but with grief consider and complain of a strange
improvidence (we think your Majesty will rather call it treachery) That your
store of powder which by order of your Privy Council, dated the tenth of
December, 1626. should be constantly three hundred Last, besides a continual
supply of twenty Last a month for ordinary expenses, and were now fit (as we
conceive) to be double the proportion, is at this time in the Tower (the
present Warrants being served) but nine Lasts and forty eight pounds in all,
which we tremble to think of. And that notwithstanding this extreme scarcity
of powder, great quantities have been permitted to be sold out of your
Majesty's Store, to particular persons for private Gain; Whereof we have seen a
certificate, six Last sold sithence the 14th. of January last, and your
Majesty's store being unfurnished of powder, which by a contract made with Mr.
Evelyn by advise of your Lords in Parliament, ought to be supplied monthly with
twenty last at the rate of three pound, ten shillings, ten pence a Barrel; Your
Majesty has been forced to pay above seven pound a Barrel for powder to be Mr.
Burlemack the last year, and that powder not so good as that by Contract your
Majesty should have, by one third part; All which are most fearful and
dangerous abuses. But what the poverty, weakness, and misery of your kingdom
is now grown unto by decay of Trade, and destruction, and loss of Ships and
Mariners, within these three years; we are almost afraid to declare; And could
we

One reason amongst many of this decay of Trade, and loss of Dunkirk does so
contiually rob and spoil your Subjects, that we can assure your Majesty (if
some present and effectual remedy be not forthwith provided) the whole Trade
of this Kingdom, the shipping, mariners, and all belonging Duke of
Buckingham, and the abuse of that power: And we humbly submit unto your
Majesty's excellent Wisdom, whether it be safe for your self, or your
Kingdoms, that so great power as rests in him by Sea and Land, should be in the
hands of any one Subject whatsoever.

And as it is not safe, so sure we are, it cannot be for your service, affoard,
especially in these times of common danger.

And our humble desire is further, that your most excellent Majesty will be
pleased to take into your Princely consideration, whether in respect the said
Duke has so* abused his power, it be safe for your Majesty and your Kingdom,
to continue him either in his great Offices, or in his place of nearness and
Council about your sacred Person.

And thus in all humility, aiming at nothing but the honor

The Speaker appointed to deliver the Remonstrance.
HEreupon a Message was sent to his Majesty, desiring access to his Person with
the Remonstrance, and the Speaker was appointed to deliver it, who much desired
to be excused, but the House would not give way thereunto. The House also sent
up the Bill of Subsidy unto Humphrey May, that he means to end this Session on
the 26. of June, whereupon the Commons fall upon the Bill of Tunnage and
Poundage. In the mean time this ensuing Order concerning the Duke was made in
the Starchamber upon the signification of his Majesty's pleasure; In Interiori
Camera Stellata 16. Junii, Anno quarto Caroli Reg.
Order in Star Chamber concerning the Duke.
FOrasmuch as his Majesty has been graciously pleased to signify unto his
Highness Attorney General, that his Royal pleasure is, that the Bill or
information Exhibited into this Court, against the Right Honorable George Duke
of Buck. for diverse great offenses, and misdemeanors objected against him (for
that his Majesty is fully satisfied of the innocence of that Duke in all those
things mentioned in the said information, as well by his own certain knowledge,
as by the thereupon, be forthwith taken from the File, by his Majesty's said
Attorney General, according to his Majesty's pleasure therein to him signified
under his hand, and now remaining in the custody of the Register of this Court.

Dated this present 16. day of June, 4. Caroli Exam. per Jo. Arthur.


16. Iunii 1628.

ON this very day the Duke signified unto the House, that he is informed that
one Mr. Christopher Eukener of the House of Commons, The Duke desires to clear
himself concerning some words.
has affirmed that his Grace did speak these words at his own Table. Viz.
Tush, it makes no matter what the Commons or Parliament does, for without my
leave and authority, they shall not be able to touch the hair of a Dog. And
his Grace desired leave of their Lordships, that he

Their Lordships considering thereof, ordered that the Duke shall be left to
himself to do herein what he thinks best in the House of Commons. Whereupon the
Duke gave their Lordships thanks, and protested upon

The Duke also charged one Mr. Melvin for speaking words against him. Viz.
First, That Melvin said, That the Dukes plot was, that the Parliament should
be dissolved, and that the Duke and the King with a great Scotland should
assist him so that when war was amongst our selves, the Enemy should come in,
for this Kingdom is already sold to the Enemy by the Duke. 2. That the Duke had
a stronger Council then the King, of which were certain Jesuits Scotishmen,
and that they did sit in Council every night, from one of the clock till three.
3. That when the King had a purpose to do any thing of what consequence 4. That
when the Ordnance were shipped at St. Martins, the Duke caused the Soldiers to
go on that they might be destroyed. 5. That the Duke said he had an Army of
16000. Foot, and 1200. Horse. 6. That King James his blood, and Marquess
Hamiltons, with others cries out for vengeance to heaven. 7. That he could not
expect any thing but ruin of this Kingdom. 8. That Prince Henry was poisoned
by Sir Thomas Overbury, and he himself served with the same sauce, and that the
Earl of Somerset and others could say much to this. 9. That he himself had a
Cardinal to his Uncle or near Kinsman, whereby he had great intelligence.
About the same time the Lord Keeper reported to the House of Lords what his
Majesty said, touching the Commission of Excise. Viz. The Commission for Excise
cancelled.


That their Lordships had reason to be satisfied with what was truly and
rightly told them by the Lords of the Council, that this Commission was no more
but a warrant of advice, which his Majesty knew to be agreeable to the time,
and the manifold occasions then in hand, but now having a supply from the loves
of his people, he esteems the

The day following, the Lord Keeper reported that his Majesty had cancelled the
Commission, and the Warrant for putting the Seal thereunto, and did there
openly show it, and a Message was sent to the

The Commons resume again the Debate upon the Bill of Tunnage and Poundage;
Whereupon Mr. Seldom said, Whereas the Kings Council objected, Mr. Seldom
concerning Tunnage and Poundage.
that 1. Eliz. says, It was Granted time out of mind to the King, I fear his
Majesty is told so, and some body does ascertain him so: But we may clear that,
for not only 1. Eliz. but also in the Statute of 1. Iac. the word time out of
mind is, That whereas H. 7. and other his Majesty's Progenitors have had some
Subsidy for the guarding of the Seas, And that there was never a King but had
some Subsidy, in that sense it is indeed time out of mind. Yet is it a matter
of free gift: for public Bills the King says, Le Roy se veult, for Petitions
of Right, Soit droit fait come est desire.

For the Bill of Subsidies it is thus, the King heartily thanking the Subjects
for their good wills; In all the Bills of Tunnage and Poundage is the very same
Answer, save one, which was 1. Eliz. and but for that

Upon this Debate it was Ordered that a Committee be appointed to draw a
Remonstrance to his Majesty, of the peoples Rights, and of the undue taking of
Tunnage and Poundage, and Impositions, without Act of Parliament, and to show
the Reasons why the House cannot in so short a time prepare that Bill.

The Remonstrance was as follows,
MOst Gracious Sovereign, Your Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, The
Commons Remonstrance of Tunnage and Poundage.
the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, being in nothing more
careful, then of the Honor and Prosperity of your Majesty, and the kingdom,
which they know do much depend upon that happy union, and relation betwixt
your Majesty and your people, do with much sorrow apprehend, into their
consideration and resolution, as most important for the common good; Amongst
other things they have taken into especial care the preparing of a Bill, for
the Granting of your Majesty such a Subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage, as might
uphold your Profit and Revenue in as ample a manner, as their just care and
respect of Trade) wherein not only the Prosperity, but even the Life of the
Kingdom does consist) would permit. London, but of other remote parts, they
find it not possible to be accomplished at this time; Wherefore considering it
will be much more pr^judicial to the right of the Subject, if your Majesty
should continue to receive the same without Authority of Law, after the
determination of a Session, then if there had been a Recess by Adjournment
only, In which case that intended That there ought not any Imposition to be
laid upon the Goods of Merchants, Exported or Imported, without common consent
by Act of Parliament, which is the right and inheritance of your Subjects,
founded not only upon the most Ancient and Original constitution of this
Kingdom, but often confirmed and declared in diverse Statute Laws.

And for the better manifestation thereof, may it please Your Proviso, that if
the War were ended in the mean time, then the Grant should cease; And of Course
it has been sequestered into the hands of some Subjects to be had it for life,
until the Reign of H. 7. who was so far from conceiving he had any right
thereunto. That although he granted Commissions for collecting certain duties
and Customs due by Law, yet he made no Commissions for receiving the Subsidy
of Tunnage and Poundage, until the same was granted unto him in Parliament.
Since his time all the Kings and Queens of this Realm have had the like Grants
for life by the free love and good will of the Subjects. And whenever the
people have been

But not being now able to accomplish this their desire, there is no course
left unto them, without manifest breach of their duty, both to your Majesty and
their Country, save only to That the receiving of Tunnage and Poundage, and
other Impositions not granted by Parliament, is a breach of the Fundamental
Liberties of this Kingdom, and contrary to your Majesty's Royal answer to the
said Petition of Right. And therefore they do most humbly beseech your Majesty
to forbear any further recieving of the same, and not to take it in ill part
from those of your Majesty's loving Subjects, who shall refuse to make payment
of any such Charges, without Warrant of Law demanded.

And as by this forbearance, your most excellent Majesty shall manifest unto
the world, your Royal Justice in the observation of your Laws: So, they doubt
not, but hereafter at the time appointed for their coming again, they shall
have occasion to express their great desire to advance your Majesty's Honor and
Profit.

Mr. Noy.
MR. Noy after the reading hereof, moved the House that his Majesty might be
requested, that the Merchants might ship their goods without a Cocket,
otherwise they do forfeit their goods.

June 26. The Speaker being sent for to the King at Whitehall, came not into
the House till about nine a clock. And after Prayers, the Remonstrance
concerning Tunnage and Poundage being engrossed, was a reading in the House,
and while it was a reading, the King sent for the Speaker, and the whole House,
and the King made a Speech as follows.

The K. ends this Session in person, and declares the reason.
before I give my assent to the Bills, I will tell you the cause, though I must
avow, that I owe the account of my actions to God alone. It is known to every
one, that a while ago the House of Commons gave me a Remonstrance, how
acceptable, every man may judge, and for the merit of it, I will not call that
in question, for I am sure no wise man can justify it.

Now since I am truly informed, that a second Remonstrance is

This is so prejudicial unto me, that I am forced to end this Session some few
hours before I meant, being not willing to receive any more Remonstrances, to
which I must give a harsh Answer. And since I see that even the House of
Commons begins already to make false

The profession of both Houses in the time of hammering this Petition, was no
ways to trench upon my Prerogative, saying they had neither intention or power
to hurt it. Therefore it must needs be conceived, that I have granted no new,
but only confirmed the Ancient Liberties of my Subjects. Yet to show the
clearness of my intentions, that I

To conclude, I command you all that are here to take notice of what I have
spoken at this time, to be the true intent and meaning of what I granted you in
your Petition; But especially, you my Lords the Judges, for you only under me
belongs the interpretation of Laws, for none of the Houses of Parliament,
either joint or separate, (what new Doctrine soever may be raised) have any
Power either to make, or declare a Law without my consent.

After this Speech ended, the Bill of Subsidy was delivered to the Speaker,
standing at the Bar in the Lords House, who made a short Speech, and showed,
that it was the greatest gift that ever was given in so short a time. And so
craving pardon for the errors of the House, and his own (which he knew to be
very many) he desired the King to give his Royal Assent.

The King came so suddenly and unexpectedly to the House, that the Lords were
not in their Robes, and the Commons had given no direction or Order for the
Speaker to deliver the Bill of Subsidies, Neither was it brought down to the
Commons House, as it was used, but the Bills were read, and the Bill for the
Sabbath, for Recusants children, for Alehouse-keepers, for continuance of
Statutes, for the Clergies Subsidy, for the Lay of Subsidy, all passed. But
for the Bill for explanation of the Statutes 3. Iac. about Leases of Recusants
Lands,

Many private Bills passed also, and after they were all read, their Titles and
the Kings Answer to them, which to the public Bills was Le Roy le veult, to
the private, Soit fait come il est desire.

The Lord Keeper said, it is his Majesty's pleasure that this Session now end,
and that the Parliament be prorogued till the twentieth of October next.

At this Parliament which begun at Westminster the 17. of March Anno Regni R.
Caroli 3. These Acts were passed.
FIrst, An Act for further reformation of sundry Abuses committed on the Lords
day called Sunday. 2. The Petition exhibited to his Majesty, by the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled,
concerning diverse Rights and Privileges of the Subject, with the Kings assent
thereunto in full Parliament. 3. An Act for repressing of all unlicenced
Alehouses. 4. An Act to restrain the sending over of any to be popishly bred
beyond the Seas. 5. An Act for establishing of Suttons Hospital, etc. 6. An Act
for the Establishing of the Tenants Estates of Bromfield and in the County of
Denbigh, etc. 7. An Act for the continuance and repeal of diverse Statutes, etc.
9. An Act for five entire Subsidies granted by the Clergy. 10. An Act
concerning the Title, etc. of Earl of Arundel, and for the annexing of the
Castle of Arundel, and other Lands, to the said Title of Earl of Arundel. 11.
An Act to assure the Jointure of the Lady Francis Nevil, and to enable the Lord
Abergavenny to sell Lands. 12. An Act concerning the Lands of William Earl of
Devon. 13. An Act to confirm the Estates of the Lord Morlies Tenants in Tatham
and Gressingham. 14. An Act for reestating of Lands of William Morgan Esquire and
discharging the trust concerning them. 15. A Declararation of the Commons
against Doctor Manwaring. 16. An Act to enable Dutton Lord Gerrard to make a
Jointure to any Wife, that he shall hereafter marry, and to provide for younger
children, and the securing Alice, Frances, and Eliz. Gerrard, sisters of the
said Lord Gerrard. 17. An Act for restitution in blood of Carew Rawleigh Esquire
and to confirm Letters Patents made to the Earl of Bristol by King James. 18.
An Act for the Naturalizing of Isaac Ashley, Henry Ashley, Thomas Ashley, and
Bernard Ashley, sons of Sir Jacob Ashley Knight. 19. An Act for Naturalizing of
Samuel Powel. 20. An Act for the naturalizing of Alexander Levingston, Gent.
21. An Act for the naturalizing of John Trumbal, and of William Beer, Edward
Beer, and Sidney Beer, and Samuel Wentworth. 22. An Act for the amendment of a
word miswritten in an Act made An. 21. Iac. R. to enable Vincent Low Esquire. to
sell Lands, etc. 23. An Act for naturalizing of Sir Robert Ayton Knight. 24. An
Act for confirmation of Letters Patents made by King James to John Earl of
Bristol. 25. An Act for naturalizing of John Aldersey, Mary Aldersey, Anne
Aldersey, Eliz. Aldersey, and Margaret Aldersey, etc. 26. An Act for the
naturalizing of Daniel Delingue Knight. 27. An Act for the naturalizing of Sir.
Robert Dyel Knight. and George Kirk Esquire. An Act for the naturalizing of James
Freese.
In the Interval between the two Sessions, there happened many remarkable
passages.

Manwarings Sermons entitled Religion and Allegiance were suppressed by
Proclamation, Dr. Manwarings Sermon supp^essed by Proclamation.
the King declaring that though the grounds thereof were rightly laid, to
persuade obedience from Subjects to their Sovereign, and that for conscience
sake; yet in diverse passages, inferences, and applications thereof, trenching
upon the Laws of this Land, and proceedings of Parliaments, whereof he was
ignorant, he so far erred, that he had drawn upon himself the just censure and
sentence of the High Court of Parliament, by whose judgment also

Then a Proclamation came forth declaring the Kings pleasure for proceedings
with Popish Recusants, A Proclamation and commissi^n concerning composition
with Recusants.
and directions to his Commissioners for making compositions for two parts of
three of their Estates, which by Law were due to his Majesty; nevertheless
(for the most part) they got off upon easy terms by reason of compositions at

This was seconded with another Proclamation commanding that diligent search be
made for all Priests and Jesuits (particularly the Bishop Calcedon) and others
that have taken Orders by authority from the Sea of Rome, A Proclamation
against the Bishop of Calcedon.
that they be apprehended and committed to the Goal of that County where they
shall be found, there to remain without Bail or Mainprize till they be tried
by due course of Law, and if Wisbitch, or some other safe prison, where they
shall remain under strait and close custody, and be wholly restrained from
exercising their function, and spreading their superstitious and dangerous
doctrines.

Hereupon the Privy Council wrote to the Bishop of Ely a Letter of the tenor
following; Romish Priests to be sent to Wisbitch.
WHereas his Majesty has been informed, that the Romish Priests, Jesuits and
Seminaries lurking in this Kingdom, do obstinately and maliciously continue
their wonted practices to Wisbitch, in the Isle of Ely to receive and lodge all
such Priests; Jesuits and Seminaries, and other prisoners,




The Jesuits taken in Clarken-well being then in several prisons, it was
ordered by the Council they should all be removed to Newgate, Jesuits taken at
Clerkenwell, or acted to be proceeded against.
and such of them as were not as yet convicted and condemned, should be
proceeded against until they were condemned, and then that VVisbitch according
to the Proclamation in that behalf, and the Attorney General was required to
take course to entitle the King to the goods taken in the house which was
designed for a College; and accordingly they were proceeded against, and but
only one convicted, which proceeding was questioned in the ensuing Session of
Parliament.

Order to search what Recusants are about London.
And upon Information, that there was a greater concourse of Recusants in or
near London then had been usual at other times, the Privy Council sent to the
Lord Mayor to require him to cause diligent search

Sir Richard Weston and Bishop Laud advanced.
July 15. (being St. Swithins day) Sir Richard Weston Chancellor of Exchequer
was made Lord Treasurer of England, and the same day was Bishop Laud translated
to the Bishopric of London.

Mr. Montague advanced, and his Apello Caesarem called in.
About the same time, Master Montague formerly mentioned, was designed to the
Bishopric of Chichester upon the decease of Bishop Carleton. Nevertheless his
Appello Caesarem was thought fit to be called in, the King declaring that out
of his care to maintain the Church in the unity of true Religion, and the bond
of peace, to prevent unnecessary Richard Montague now Bishop of Chichester
entitled Apello Caesarem was the first cause of those disputes and
differences, which since have much troubled the quiet of the Church, he would
take away occasion, by commanding all persons that had any of those Books in
their hands to deliver them to the Bishop of the Diocese, or if it be in
either Universities to the Chancellor and Vice Chancellor thereof, Preaching
and Writing, pro and con about unnecessary questions prohibited.
who were commanded to suppress them. And if any by preaching, reading, or
making of Books pro and contra concerning those unnecessary questions shall
revive the difference, he was

But ere this Proclamation was published, the Books were for the most part
vented and out of danger of seasure, and the suppressing of all writing and
preaching in Answer thereunto, was (it seems by some) the thing mainly
intended; for the several answers made by Doctor Featly, and Doctor Goad, in
their parallels, by Master Burton, Master Ward, Master Yates, Master Wotton,
as also by Francis Rows Esquire in a Book called King James his Religion, were all
suppressed, and diverse of the Printers questioned in the high Commission.

Moreover Bishop Montague, and Doctor Manwaring procured a Royal pardon of all
Errors heretofore committed by them, A pardon granted to Dr. Manwaring, and Dr.
Montague.
either in speaking, writing, or printing, for which they might be hereafter
questioned; And Doctor Manwaring censured by the Lords in Parliament, and
perpetually disabled from future Ecclesiastical preferments in the England, was
immediately presented to the Rectory of Stamford-Rivers in Essex, and had a
dispensation to hold it, together with the Rectory of St. Giles in the fields.

The Town of Rochel was at this time straightly beleagured by the French King,
Rochel close besieged and relief designed.
and the King of England had prepared a Fleet to relieve it, under the Command
of the Duke of Buckingham, The Duke slain.
who being advanced as far as Portsmouth, on Saturday, August 23. being
Bartholomew Eve, was suddenly slain in his own Lodgings there, by one
Leivtenant Felton, about The villain has killed me! Company coming presently
in found him weltring in his blood, and each person looking upon another
marvelled who should do so horrid an act, a jealousy was presently had of
Monsieur Sobeez who was then there laboring for speedy relief to be sent to
Rochel, but he protesting his innocence, Felton immediately stepped out, and
said, I am the man that did the deed, let no man suffer that is innocent;
whereupon he was immediately apprehended, sent to London and there imprisoned.
The King was within four miles of Portsmouth, when the news was brought him of
the death of the Duke, he bid secure the murderer, and Bishop Laud had
advertisement of his death the 24th. of August, Dr. Montague consecrated Bishop.
being then at Croiden with Bishop Neal, and other Bishops consecrating Bishop
Montague for Chichester.

Notwithstanding the death of the Duke, Rochel again attempted to be relieved,
but in vain.
the King pursued the design Rochel, and again set out a Fleet with provision
and fireships to put relief into the Town; the Fleet went from Plymouth the
beginning of September, did several times attempt the Barricado, but in vain,
and so was enforced to give over any further attempt, which the Rochellers
perceiving, gave themselves for lost, and immediately came to a capitulation,
upon very mean terms as to themselves; yet Lowes King of France was careful
by Articles (had they been performed) that those outrages should not be
committed upon the entry of the Town (which the few remaining inhabitants were
much afraid of, and afterward felt) and so mixed mercy with his conquest, yet
presently after high outrages were committed, and great was the persecution of
the Reformed Churches, which constrained them again to send to the King of
England to implore aid with these expressions, that but the treaty being
shortly after made between the two Crowns; all things were settled in peace
between the King and those of the reformed Religion.

The sad condition of Rochel at the surrender
Concerning the state of Rochel at the surrender, we have seen a Relation to
this purpose, that the misery of the besieged was almost incredible, having
lived long upon Horseflesh, Hides, and Leather, Dogs and Cats, hardly leaving
a Horse alive, still in hopes that the relief promised from England would prove
effectual to them; they held it so long France entered the Town, and many corpse
eaten with Vermin, Ravens and Birds.

The Fleet which thus put to sea for the Relief of Rochel was defective,
Defects in the relief of Rochel questioned.
which was tainted, and in tackling and other materials, insomuch as at the
return thereof, information being given to the King and Council of diverse
defaults and defects in the said ships, victuals and provision of this and the
former expedition to Rochel; and in the discipline and performance of Commands
and resolutions taken in that action to the great prejudice of the service; it
was ordered that the Earls of Denbigh, Linsey, and Morton, and the Lord
Wilmott, and Master Secretary Cook should forthwith meet together, and consider
of Linsey, and inform themselves of defaults in the particulars before
mentioned, and make report thereof to the Board. The Scots under the command of
the Earl Morton, and some Irish also, were sent to quarter in the Isle of
Weight, which Island was unacquainted with the quartering of Foreigners.

Outrages committed by soldiers.
In Essex many robberies and outrages were committed by the Soldiers then
returned from Sea. Whereupon the Privy Counselors required the Justices of
Peace in that County to choose a Provost Marshal

Advertisement of foreign designs.
And upon advertisement of some hostile preparations from foreign enemies, the
Privy Council taking care for securing the coasts in Kent, Sussex, Hampshire,
Dorcetshire, and Devonshire renewed their directions to the Lords of those
Counties for the careful watching of Beacons,

About the time the Fleet went last to the relief of Rochel, the King being
solicited by the Ambassadors of the King of Denmark, The King of Denmark
assisted with forces.
and the united Provinces to send shipping to secure the Elbe, and men for the
defense of Lackstat, resolved upon the sending of five Ships accordingly, but
first to dispatch the men for the relief of the Town, the preservation whereof
did mainly impart the security of the River, wherefore the Regiments then
remaining in several of the States Garrison Towns, which were reformed out of
four Regiments, under the Command of Sir Charles Morgan, and supposed to
consist of two thousand men, were designed for this employment; But in regard
that by the capitulations at the rendering of Stoade, these soldiers were first
to touch in England Harwitch, and to sail thence to Luck^^a^, under the
command of their former General, and by reason of the absence of the English
Fleet upon the service of Rotchel, the States and the Prince of Orange were
desired to accommodate them with Ships of convoy in crossing the Seas, But a
while after the King considering that the six months wherein that Regiment was
bound not to serve against the Emperor, were near expiring, and the Winter
approaching, which by England, and cause unnecessary charge, commanded Sir
Charles Morgan to forbear to touch at Harwitch, but to shape his course by the
nearest and straightest way from Holland to Luckstat, and to stay at the place
of imbarquing, so many days as with the time which will be taken up in their
passage, may accomplish the full six months; Moreover, these Reformed Regiments
brought from Stoade, being found upon their mustering fourteen hundred, the
King made a Vere, the season of the year not permitting to rely upon new
recruits from England; for which he engaged his royal word to the States and
the Prince of Orange, that for every man they lent him, he would send them two
as soon as his forces return from Rochel.

Touching the Horse levied in Germany, and intended (as was said) to be
transported into England, The German House disposed of.
about the last Session of Parliament the Privy Dalbeere upon certain overtures
made by the King of Sweden, and the Duke of Savoy to receive them into their
pay and service, that he might dispose of the said Cavalry to those Princes
being his Majesty's friends and Allies with condition that his Majesty be no
further charged with their pay, transportation, or entertainment in any manner
whatsoever.

After the death of the Duke, Dr. Laud in ^avour with the King.
the King seemed to take none to favor so much as Dr. Laud, Bishop of London,
to whom he sent many gracious

BY Orders from the Bishop, there were then entered in the Docket Book, several
Conge D'esliers and Royal assents for Dr. May to be Bishop of Bath and Wells,
Conge d'es^ier for certain Bishops.
for Doctor Corbet to be Bishop of Oxford, and for Samuel then Bishop of
Norwitch, to be Archbishop of York.

In the University of Oxford, Bishop Laud bore the sway. The Lord Chancellor
William Earl of Pembrook commiting his power into his hands. And this year he
framed the Statutes for the reducing and limiting the free Election of
Proctors, which before (as himself said) were Factious, and Tumultuary to the
several Colleges by course.


The meeting of the Parliament appointed to be the 20. of October. was by
Proclamation the first day of that month Prorogued to the 20. of Ianu.
following. The meeting of the Parliament adjourned to Jan. 20. Great resort to
Felton in prison.


Whilst Felton remained a Prisoner at London, great was the resort of people
to see the man who had committed so bold a murder, others came to understand
what were the Motives and Inducements thereunto, to which the man for the most
part answered, That he did acknowledge the Fact, and condemned himself for the
doing thereof; Yet withal

Felton examined before the Council.
Afterward Felton was called before the Council, where he confessed much of
what is before mentioned concerning his Inducement to the Murder, the Council
much pressed him to confess who set him on work to do such a bloody act, and
if the Puritans had no hand therein, he denied they had, and so he did to the
last, that no person whatsoever Laud Bishop of London being then at the Council
Table, told him, if he would not confess, he must go to the rack; Felton
replied, if it must be so, he could not tell whom he might nominate in the
extremity of torture, and if what he should say then must go for truth, he
could not tell whether his Lordship (meaning the Bishop of London) or which of
their Lordships he might name, Threatened to be Racked.
for torture might draw unexpected things from him; after this he was asked
November. 4. Car. propounded the question to Sr. Tho. Richardson, Lord Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, to be propounded to all the Justices. (Viz.)
Felton now a prisoner in the Tower, The Judges opinions taken therein.
having confessed that he had killed Buckingham, and said he was induced to
this, partly for private displeasure, and partly by reason of a Remonstrance in
Parliament, having also read some Books, which he said defended that it was
lawful to kill an Enemy to the Republique, the question therefore is, whether
by the Law he might not be Racked, and whether there were any Law against it,
for (said the King) if it might be done by Law, he would not use his
Prerogative in this Point, and having put this Question to the Lord chief
Justice, the King commanded him to demand

First, the Justices of Sergeants Inn in Chancery Lane did meet and agree, that
the King may not, in this case put the party to the Rack. And the fourteenth of
November all the Justices being assembled at Sergeants Inn in Fleetstreet,
agreed in one, that he ought not by the Law to be tortured by the Rack, for no
such punishment is known or allowed by our Law.

And this in case of Treason was brought into this Kingdom in the time of Henry
6. note Fortescue for this Point, in his Book de laudibus legum Angliae, see
the preamble of the Act 28. H. 8. for the Trial of Felony, where Treasons are
done upon the Sea, and Statute 14. Edw. 3. Chapter 9.

Since the last Session of Parliament, Merchants committed about Customs.
certain Merchant; who traded in Wines, had been committed to the Fleet for the
non-payment of an Imposition of 20. s. the Tun, and were now at liberty upon
their entering into bond for the payment of that Imposition.

Moreover the King in full Council declared his absolute will and pleasure to
have the entry of 2. s. 2. d. the hundred upon all Currens to Queen Elizabeth,
who first gave being to the Levant Company, and which had been paid both in his
Fathers time and his own, and that their Majesty's were equally possessed of
the whole sum of 5. s. 6. d. the hundred by a solemn and Legal Judgment in
the Exchequer, and he straightly charged his Council to examine the great abuse
in this point, and to make a full reparation to his Honor, by inflicting
punishment as well upon Officers as Merchants,

And Diverse Merchants of London having forcibly Landed, Merchants summonned to
the Council Table.
and endeavored to carry away their Goods and Merchandises from the
Custom-house Key, without payment of duties, were summoned to the
Councel-table: And the Council was informed against them, that they had caused
great and unlawful assemblies of people to be gathered together, to the breach
of the Kings Peace, and Mr. Chambers was committed Michaelmas 4. Car.

Richard Chambers being in Prison in the Marshalsie, Mr. Chambers brought up
with a Habeas Corpus, and bailed.
Del hostel de Roy, desired an Habeas Corpus, and had it, which being returable
upon the 16. day of October, the Marshall returned, that he was committed to
prison the 28. day of September. last, by command of the Lords of the Council.
The Warrant verbatim was, That he was committed for insolent behavior, and
words spoken at the Councel-Table, which was The words were, as information was
given, though not expressed in the Return, That such great Customs and
Impositions were required from the Merchants in England, as were in no other
place, and that they were more screwed up, then under the Turk.] And because it
was not mentioned what the words were, so as the Court might adjudge of them,
the Return was held insufficient, and the Warden of the Prison advised to amend
his Return: and he was by Rule of the Court appointed Habeas Corpus, and the
Prisoner was advised by the Court, That in the mean time he should submit to
the Lords, and Petition them for his enlargement, The Warden of the Prison
bringing the Prisoner in again in Court, the 23. day of October. Then Mr.
Iermin for the Prisoner moved, That forasmuch as it appeared by the Return,
that he was not committed for Treason or Felony, nor does it appear what the
words were, whereto he might give answer, he therefore prayed, he might be
dismissed or bailed. But the Kings Attorney moved, That he might have day
until the 25. of October, to consider of the Return, and be informed of the
words, and that in the interim, the Prisoner might attend the Councel-Table,
and Petition. But the Prisoner affirmed, that he oftentimes had assayed by
Petition, and could not prevail, although he October; and he prayed the Justice
of the Law, and the inheritance of a Subject; Whereupon, at his importunity,
the Court commanded him to be bailed: and he was bound in a Recognizance of
four hundred pounds, and four good Merchants his Sureties were bound in
Recognizance of one hundred pound a piece, that he should appear here in
Crastino animarum, and in the interim should be of the good behavior; And
advertized him, they might, for contemptuous words, cause an Indictment or
Information in this Court to be drawn against him, if they would.

The Lords of the Council were much dissatisfied with the Bailing of Chambers.
Lords of the Council dissatisfied with his bailing.
Whereupon the Judges were ^ent for to the Lord Keeper at Durham House; where
were present, besides the Lord Keeper, the Lord Treasurer, Lord Privy Seal, and
the Chancellor of the Duchy; And the Lord Keeper then declared unto them, that
the said enlargement of Chambers was without due regard had to the Privy

Felton brought to trial.
On Thursday the 27. of November, Felton was removed from the Tower to the
Gate House in order to his trial, and was the same day brought by the Sheriffs
of London to the King's Bench Bar, and the indictment being read, he was
demanded whether he were guilty of the murder therein mentioned: he answered he
was guilty in killing the Duke of Buc. and further said that he did deserve
death for the same, Confesses the Fact.
though he Tenders his hand to be cut off.
nevertheless the King sent to the Judges to intimate his desire, that his
hand might be cut off before execution, but the Court answered that it could
not be, for in all murders the Judgment was the same, unless when the
Statute of 25. E. 3. did alter the nature of the offense, and upon a several
indictment, as it was in Queen Elizabeth's found guilty, and afterward hanged;
and Felton was afterward hung up in chains in manner as is usual upon
notorious murders. Hung in chains.


IN Michaelmas Term the Farmers and Officers of the Custom House seized great
quantities of Currants belonging to Mr. Samuel Vassal of London Merchant, Mr.
Vassals goods seized on for denying Customs.
because he refused to pay an Imposition of five Vassal refused to pay the
same, conceiving it was an Imposition against the Law of the Land; Whereupon
the Kings Attorney General exhibited an Information in the Exchequer against
the said Vassal, Information p^eserved against him.
setting forth that King James did by his Letters Patents command the taking
the said Imposition, and that his Majesty that now is, by his Letters Patents,
dated 26. Iunii, 2. Caroli, by the advice of his Privy James, until it might
receive a settling by Parliament, and the Information did set forth, that the
said Samuel Vassal before the first day of October, 4. Car. did bring into the
Port of London, 4638. hundred weight of Currants, for which he refused to pay
Custom.

To this information the said Samuel Vassal appeared, Mr. Vassals plea to the
Information.
and pleaded the Statute of Magna Charta, and the Statute de talagio non
concedendo, Antiqua seu recta consuetudo, and that it was imposed without
assent of Parliament, to which Plea the said Attorney General demurred in Law,
and Mr. Vassal joined in demur, etc.

Afterward the Barons of the Exchequer did publicly deny to hear Master
Vassals Council to argue for him, saying, that his the Vassalls Case would fall
under the same rule with one Bates Case, and therefore the Case was already
adjudged. Master Vasalls Council alleged that they had nothing to do with
Bates his Case, but desired to argue Master Vassalls Case. The Barons replied
that they knew the opinion of the Court, and should be heard no further; and
said that the King was in possession, and they would keep him in possession;
and shortly after the Court of Exchequer imprisoned the said Master Vassal for
not paying such sums of money as the Officers of the Vassal.

About the same time diverse goods and Merchandises belonging to Richard
Chambers of London Merchant, Mr. Chambers goods seized on for not paying
customs.
were seized and conveyed into Storehouses at the Custom-house, by the
Officers of the Custom, because the said Chambers refused to pay the subsidy of
Tunnage Chambers conceiving no such subsidy or duty was due or payable, the
same having not been granted by Parliament to his Majesty, and having sued
forth a writ of Replevin, A Replevin sued ou^.
the proper remedy in Law to regain the possession of his goods; And
superseaded.
the Barrons of the Exchequer did order an Injunction under the Seal of the
said Court directed to the Sheriffs of London commanding them thereby not to
execute the said writ, or any the like Writs of Replevin, that should
afterward be sued forth by any person or persons for the delivery of any goods
in the like nature detained, and did declare publicly in Court that the said
goods by Law were not repleviable, and the Sheriffs of London did accordingly
forbear to execute the said Writ of Replevin. Master Chambers finding this
obstruction, offered to give great security unto the Court for payment of such
duties as should be made appear to Chambers would deposite all such sums of
money as the said Officers respectively demanded of him, for duties to his
Majesty which he refused to do. The Court did order the Officers of the Custom
to detain double value of the sums by them demanded for duties to his
Majesty, and to restore the residue.

Mr. Rolls a Merchant.
The same course of proceeding the Barrons of the Exchequer held in the Case of
Master John Rolls of London Merchant, whose goods were detained for not paying
of Tunnage and Poundage.

Private consultations about the ensuing Parliament.
The meeting of the Parliament now drawing nigh, the King consults with a select
Committee of his Privy Counselors, what probably de facto, until it was
granted by Parliament, and that his Majesty has done the like, and that if
they will pass the Bill to his Majesty as his Ancestors had it, his Majesty
will do any reasonable thing, to declare that he claims not Tunnage and
Poundage otherwise then by grant in Parliament, but if this do not satisfy,
then to avow a breach

And for bringing the Kings business to a speedy issue, it was advised, that
the Bill of Tunnage and Poundage be prepared before the Parliament sit, in the
same form as it passed to King James, adding words to give it from the first
day of the Kings Reign, and that the Bill be presented at the first sitting of
the Parliament, and the Privy Council of the House to declare that his Majesty
caused it to be timely presented, to cut off all questions and debates, and to

They also took into consideration diverse other matters, which they apprehended
the Parliament would insist upon, as proceeding to censure the actions of the
Duke of Buckingham, to accuse some of the Kings servants now living, upon
common Fame, to cast personal aspersions in Parliament upon the Kings
Counselors, or to charge them with giving ill counsel to the King, to handle
questions touching matters of Religion, proper for his Majesty, and a
Convocation to determine, to raise objections against his Majesty's Speech the
last day of

SO soon as the Parliament Reassemble on Tuesday the 20. of Ianu. In the first
place, The Parliament meets, they enquire whether the Petition of Right be
enrolled.
the Commons inquired whether the Petition of Right, with his Majesty's Answer
unto it were enrolled in the Parliament Rolls, and the Courts of Westminster,
as his Majesty promised them the last Session: and they found his Majesty's
Speech made the last day Norton the Kings Printer being called into the House,
and demanded by what Warrant the Additions (besides his Majesty's Answer) to
the Petition of Right were Printed, he said there was a Warrant, as he thought
from the K. himself, and being demanded whether there were some Copies Printed
without additions, he said there were about 1500. but they were suppressed by
Warrant, and Mr. Attorney General commanded that no more of them should be
Printed, and that

The next thing taken into consideration, What were the violations of the
Subjects Liberties since the last Parliament.
was the violation of the Liberties of the People, since the end of the last
Session, even contrary to the Petition of Right, some having been since the
time committed, and a Command sent to the Sheriff not to execute a Replevin,
when men's Goods and Merchandises have been taken away, and it was instanced in
the Case of Mr. Rolls a Merchant, and known to be a Member If all the
Parliament were in you, we would take your goods.

Whereupon Sir Robert Philips made this Speech.
BY this Information you see how unfortunate these times are, Sir Robert
Philips Speech concerning that matter.
and how full time it was for this Assembly to meet to serve his Majesty, and
to serve their command; they knew the party was a Parliament man, nay, they
say, if all the Parliament were in you, this we would do, and justify it. If
we suffer the Privilege of Parliament and Liberty of Subjects to be thus
violated, for fear of complaint, we give a wound to the happiness of the
Kingdom. The course of Justice is interrupted, and an Order in the Exchequer
made for the stay of the goods, and since there is a seizure, upon the approach
of Parliament, of goods amounting to five thousand pounds for a pretended duty
of two hundred pounds Custom, Its time to look about us.

In the first year of King James, by reason of the sickness that there was,
the Parliament was prorogued; and then there were some so bold as to take this
Tunnage and Poundage, and then we questioned the men tha^ demanded it. Let us
proceed with affection of duty, and make up breaches, let a Committee be
appointed for the examination of these proceedings.

The matter was referred to a Committee.
This business was referred to a Committee, and the Officers of the Custom
House (who had seized these Merchants goods) were ordered to be sent for, and
whilst they were in Debate of this business, the King sent a Whitehall, Where
his Majesty made this Speech.

The Kings Speech to both Houses in the Banqueting House.
THe care I have to remove all Obstacles that may hinder the good correspondency
between me and this Parliament, is the cause I have called you together at this
time, the particular occasion being a complaint made

The complaint I speak of is for staying men's goods that denied Tunnage and
Poundage, this may have an easy and short conclusion, if my words and actions
be rightly understood, for by passing the Bill as my Ancestors have had it, my
bypast actions will be included, and my future proceedings authorized, de been
esse, showing you the necessity, not the right by which I was to take it until
you had granted it to me, assuring my self, according to your general
professions, you wanted time, not will to give it me.

Wherefore now having opportunity, I expect that without loss of time, you
make good your professions, and so by passing of a Bill, put an end to all the
Questions arising from this Subject: especially since I have cleared the only
Scruple that can trouble you in this business; to conclude, Let us not be
jealous one of the others actions, for if I had been easily moved at every
occasion, the Order you made on Wednesday last, might have made me startle,
there being some show to suspect that you had given your selves the liberty to
be the Inquisitors after complaints (the words of your Order being somewhat too
largely pend)

This I have spoken, to show you how slow I am to believe harshly of your
proceedings, likewise to assure you, that the Houses Resolutions, not
particular men's speeches, shall make me judge well or ill, not doubting, but
according to my example you will be deaf to ill reports concerning me, till my
words and actions speak for themselves, that so this Session beginning with
confidence one toward another, it may end with a perfect good understanding
between us. Which God grant.

26. of January.
MR. Secretary Cook delivered a Message from the King to the House of Commons,
The K. sends a Message to the House of Commons speedily to take Tunnag^ and
Poundage in to consideration.
that the Bill for Tunnage and Poundage might be speedily taken into
consideration, and that time might not be slipped, and did very much press (in
his Majesty's n^me) the reading thereof as a matter of weight and importance,
and said that he spoke it for their service, and that moderation in their
proceedings, would But the Commons resolv^ to proceed in matters of Religion
did at that time forbear to speak their minds freely, and resolved to husband
their time, and did accordingly further empower the Committee to examine
violation of Liberty, and property since the last Session of Parliament, and
resolved to proceed in the next place, with matters of Religion, and
particularly against the Sect of Arminians, upon which occasion Mr. Rous spoke
to this

Mr. Speaker, we have of late entered into consideration of the Petition of
Right, Mr. Rous Speech ^oncerning Religion.
and the violation of it, and upon good reason, for it concerns our Goods,
Liberties, and Laws, but there is a right of higher nature, that preserves for
us far greater things, Eternal life, our souls, yea our God himself, a Religion
derived to us from the King of Kings, confirmed upon us by the Kings of this
Kingdom, Enacted Babylon, to make her show more lovely, and to draw so many
suitors to her, I desire that it may be considered how the Sea of Rome does eat
into our Religion, and fret into the Banks, Arminianism, an Error that makes
the Grace of God lackey it after the will of man, that makes the sheep to keep
the Shepherd, Spanish Monarchy: for an Arminian is the Spawn of a Papist, and
if there come the warmth of favor upon him, you shall see him turn into one of
those Froggs that rise out of the bottomless pit; And if you mark it well, you
shall see an Arminian reaching out his hand to a Papist, a Papist to a Jesuit,
a Jesuit gives one hand to the Pope, and another to the King of Spain, and
these men having kindled a fire in our neighbor Country, now they have brought
over some of it hither, to set on flame this Kingdom also: Yea, let us further
search and consider whether these be not the men, that break in upon the goods
and Liberties of this Commonwealth, for by this means they make way for the
taking away of our Religion; Jobs Religion, he begun at his goods, saying, lay
thy hand on all he has, and he will curse thee to thy face; either they think
thereby to set a distaste between Prince and People, or else to find some
other way of supply, to avoid or break Parliaments: that so they may break in
upon our Religion, and bring in their errors. But let us do as Job did, who
being constant against temptation, held fast his Religion, and his goods were
restored to him with advantage, so if we hold

Tuesday the 27. of January.
A Report from the Comm^tee for Religion.
A Report was made to the House from the Committee for Religion, of matters
concerning Religion, which passed the last Session Cook brings this message
from the King, that his Majesty understanding the R^monstrance concerning
Religion was called for, The Remonstrance concerning Religion sent back by the
King.
was pleased (to take away all Question) to command him to deliver it unto
them, hoping never the less that they will proceed with the Bill for Tunnage
and Poundage, and give precedence to that business,

But the House thought fit to prefer Religion, and to give it the first place
in their debates, saying, if Popery and Arminianisme join hand in hand
together, Precedence again given to Religion before Tunnage and Poundage.
it would by degrees bring in Spanish tyranny, under which these Laws and
Liberties, must Cease. Besides that it was fit time to enquire what persons
have been advanced to Ecclesiastical preferments, and to whom pardons have been
granted since the last Session; That Religion concerns the King as well as the
Subjects, and the work of the Lord must not be done negligently, whereupon
Pymme spoke as follows.

TWo diseases there be (said he) the one old, the other new; the old Popery,
Mr. Pyms speech concerning Religion.
the new Arminianism; there be three things to be inquired after concerning
Popery.

1. The cessation of the Execution of Laws against Papists. 3. The Law violated
in bringing in of superstitious ceremonies amongst us, especially at Durham, by
Mr. Cozens, as Angels, Crucifixes, Saints, Altars, Candles on Candlemas day,
burnt in the Church after the Popish manner.
For Arminianisme let it be advised.

1. That a way be open for the truth. Edward the sixths days, and by the
writing of Martin Bucer, and Peter Martyr, who were employed in making our
Articles; and by the constant professions, sealed by the blood of so many
Martyrs, as Cranmer, Ridley, and others, and by the 36. Articles in Queen
Elizabeth's time, and by the Articles agreed upon at Lambeth, as the Doctrine of
the Church of England, which King James sent to Dort, and to Ireland, and were
avowed by us and our Heresies; what pardons they have had for false doctrine;
what prohibiting of Books, and writings against their doctrine, and permitting
of such books as have been for them: Let us inquire after the Abettors; Henry
8. the Earl of Essex was condemned for countenancing books of Heresy; For the
convocation, it is but a Provincial Sinod of Canturbury, and York that is
distant and cannot do any thing to bind us or the Laws; For the
High Commission, it was derived from Parliament.
Wednesday 28. Secretary Cook delivered another message to the House concerning
the precedence of Tunnage and Poundage, declaring that his Majesty intends not
thereby to interrupt them, Message by Secretary Cook about Tunnage and Poundage.
as to Religion, so that they do not entrench on that which belongs not to them
which message was seconded by Sir Thomas Edmonds in these words.

Sir Tho. Edm^nds.
I am sorry the House has given cause to so many messages about

Master Corriton replied.
Mr. Corriton.
WHen men speak here of neglect of duty to his Majesty, let them know we know no
such thing, nor what they mean: And I see not how we do neglect the same; I see
it is in all our hearts to expedite

An Answer resolved to be given to the Kings messages
The House resolved to send an answer to the King, that these messages are
inconvenient, and breed debates and loss of time, and did further resolve that
Tunnage and Poundage, arising naturally from this

Sir John Eliot concerning Religion.
Sir John Eliot upon this occasion spoke to this purpose, I have always observed
(said he) that in the proceedings of this House, our best advantage is order,
and I was very glad when that noble Gentleman, my Countryman, gave occasion to
state our proceedings, for

There is a jealousy conceived, as if we meant to dispute in matters of faith,
it is our profession, this is not to be disputed, it is not in the Parliament
to make a new Religion, nor I hope shall it be in any to alter the body of the
truth, which we now profess, I must confess not only he, but all Princes are
subject unto, and Princes no doubt are subject to mis-informations, and many
actions may be entitled to their Names, when it is not done by themselves.
Antiochus King of Asia sent his Letters and missives to several Provinces, that
if they received any dispatches in his name, not agreeable to justice, Ignoto
se litteras esse scriptas ideoque iis non parerent, and the reason of it is
given by Gratian, because that oftentimes by the importunity of Ministers
Principes saepe constringuntur, ut non concedenda concedant, are drawn to
Popery and Arminianism, our Faith and Religion is in danger by it, for like an
Inundation it does break in at once upon us. It is said, if there be any
difference in Opinion concerning the seasonable interpretation of the 39.
Articles, the Bishops and the Clergy in the Convocation have power to dispute
it, and to order which way they please, and for ought I know, Popery and
Arminianism E. 6. that young Prince of famous memory, where he does express
the condition of the Bishops of that time under his own hand writing, That some
for We see there are some among our Bishops who are not Orthodox, nor sound in
Religion as they should be, witness the two Bishops complained of the last
meeting of the Parliament, I apprehend such a fear, that should we be in their
power, we may be in danger to have our Religion overthrown, some of these are
Masters of Ceremonies, and they labor to introduce new Ceremonies into the
Church; Yet some Ceremonies



The Vow of the House of Commons in Parliament.
WE the Commons in Parliament Assembled, The Commons enter into a Vow.
Elizabeth, which by the public Act of the Church of England, and by the
general, and current Expositions of the Writers of our Church, have been
delivered unto us. And we reject the sense of the Jesuits, and Arminians, and
all others wherein they differ from us.

Friday the thirtieth of January 1628. Both Houses join in Petitioning the King
for a Fast.
Both Houses Petition the King for a fast.
MOst Gracious Sovereign, It is the very earnest desire of us your most dutiful
Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this Parliament
Assembled, may procure honor to Almighty God in the preservation of his true
Religion, much honor to your Majesty, prosperity to your people, and comfort
to your Majesty's Friends and Allies.

The Kings Answer to the Petition.
His Majesty's Answer.
and Gentlemen, The chief Motive of your Petition, being the deplorable
Condition of the Reformed Churches abroad, is too true: And our duty is so much
as in us lies, to give them all possible help; But certainly, fighting will
do them more good then fasting: though I do not wholly disallow of the
latter; yet I must tell you, that the custom of fasting every Session, is but
lately begun, and I confess I am not fully

Yet to show you how smoothly I desire your business to go on, (eschewing as
much as I can Questions or jealousies) I do willingly grant your request
herein, but with this Note, That this shall not hereafter be brought into
president for frequent Fasts, except upon great occasions; And for form and
time, I will advise

Soon after the House of Commons presented a Declaration to the King, touching
their resolutions to give precedence to Religion.
The Commons Declaration to the King to give precedence to Religion.
putting us in mind of our present entering upon the consideration of a Grant
of Tunnage and Poundage, but the manner of possessing, the House therewith
being disagreeable to our Orders and Privileges, that we could not proceed
therein; And finding our selves in your Majesty's name pressed in that
business, and that we should give precedence thereunto, we cannot but express
think, we cannot without impiety to God, disloyalty to your Majesty (and
unthankfulness to those from whom we are put in trust) retard our proceedings
until something be done to secure us in this maine point, which we prefer above
our lives, and all earthly things whatsoever; And here we do with all humble
thankfulness acknowledge your Majesty's most pious care, and Princely
Intentions to suppress both Popery and Arminianism; the Professor of the one,
being an open enemy (...) the maintainer of the other,

Whereunto the King thus Answered.
His Majesty's Answer to the Commons Declaration.
GEntlemen, this Answer being somewhat long, may in reason require some time to
reply unto it, since as most of you cannot but judge this gives no
satisfaction. Therefore I shall give you it is confessed by your Answer; You
must either think I want power (which cannot be) or that I am very ill
councelled, if it be in so much danger as you affirm: Though I may say much of
this, I will say no more, but that for all this I shall not stop mine ears to
you upon this subject, so that in form and matter you transgress not your
limits; as for Tunnage and Poundage; I do not so much desire it out of
greediness of the thing (being persuaded you will make no stop in it, when

Hereupon Secretary Cook did acknowledge, that at the presenting of the Bill of
Tunnage to be read, he said his Majesty much desired it, but it was a mistake
that his Majesty commanded it.

Wednesday the 4. of February.

THe House fell into debate of the Kings Declaration published in print, Debate
about the Kings D^claration concerning disputes about Religion.
to prohibit dispute or preaching one way or other concerning the matters
mentioned in the Declaration, alleging in the debate that the main end thereof
was to suppress the Puritan party, and yet to give liberty to the contrary
side, and they conceived that Bishop Laud, and Bishop Montague, mentioned in
the last Remonstrance, had advised the King to that Declaration; Bishop Laud
being advanced since the London, and Mr. Montague since that time made Bishop
of Chichester; And a Warrant was grantted to the Attorney General to draw up a
pardon for him, but whereas the Warrant was but for one, the Attorney put four
into the pardon ( viz.) Bishop Montague, Doctor Cosens, Doctor Sibthorp, and
Doctor Manwaring.

Tuesday the 10. of February.

Mr. Rolls sitting in Parliament was called forth and served with a Subpaena.
the Warehouse of Mr. Rolls (Merchant and Member of the House then sitting in
Parliament) was locked up by a Pursuevant, and himself called forth from the
Committee and served with a Subpoena.

This gave occasion of smart debates in the House, Debate concerning the same.
some said they were made the subject of scorn and contempt; others conceived
this to be a bone thrown in by them that have drawn a cloud on the true
Religion to divert or interrupt them in the prosecution of that matter, and
they Subpoena was taken forth.

Sir Humphrey May, Chancellor of the Duchy, and one of the Privy Council,
assured the House that this neither proceeded from King nor Council, and
therefore desired it might be searched into the bottom.

And it was afterward cleared by Master Attorney General, by his writing a
Letter to Mr. Rolls, that the serving a Subpoena upon him was a mistake; The
mistake of the Subpaena cleared.
and prayed that a favorable interpretation might be given of that matter.

Upon report from the Committee for Tunnage and Poundage, Sir John
Wolstenholme, A report from the Committee for Tunnage and Poundage.
Mr. Dawes, and Mr. Carmarthan were ordered to appear at the Bar on Friday
next, and report was made to the House that Master Attorney (notwithstanding
his Letter did give order for the process Mr. Rolls, and that in the Bill
preferred in the Exchequer, it was expressed the Merchants did plot, practice
and combine against the peace of the Kingdom; This business being a matter of
weight, the further consideration thereof was appointed for another day, and no
member might go out of Town without License.

Thursday the 12. of February.

THe House was turned into a Committee concerning the business of Committee
mee^ ag^n upon Tunnage and Poundage.
and several Merchants did Petition that their goods were not only seized, but
informations preferred in Star Chamber against them; The Committee in their
debate inclined that the Merchants might have their goods before they enter
upon the Bill for Tunnage, and Mr. Noy expressed himself in these words.

We cannot safely give, unless we be in possession, and the proceedings in the
Exchequer nullified, as also the information in the Star Chamber, and the
annexion to the Petition of Right, Mr. Noy concerning Tunnage and Poundage.
for it will not be

Hereupon the House ordered that the Barons of the Exchequer be sent unto* to
make void their injunction and order, Barons of the Exchequer sent unto about
staying the delivery of Merchants goods.

The Barons Answer.


concerning the staying of Merchants goods, to which the Barons returned this
answer.

Whereas the Honorable House of Commons by order of the 12. of February have
appointed that notice shall be given to the Lord Treasurer, Chancellor, and
Barons of the Exchequer of a Declaration made by Sir John VVolstenholme, Abrah.
Dawes, and Rich. Carmarthan in the House of Commons, that the goods that the
Merchants brought into the Kings Storehouse, and laid up there for his
Majesty's use, were detained, as they conceive, only for the duty of Tunnage
and Poundage, and other sums comprised in the Book of rates, which notice was
given, to the end the said Court of Exchequer might further proceed therein, as
to justice did by those Orders and Injunctions stay those Suits, and did fully
declare by the said Orders, that the owners, if they conceived themselves
wronged, might take such remedy as the Law allows.

Richard Weston, John Walter, Tho. Trevor. Lo. Newburgh. John Denham. George
Vernon.
Not satisfactory.
instead of satisfaction expected by the House, was looked upon as a
justification of their Actions, whereupon a motion was made to go on, to
consider of their proceedings, and whether ever the Court of Exchequer held
this course before, for staying of Replevins, and whether this has been done
by Prerogative of the King in his Court of Exchequer.

A report was made from the Committee concerning the pardons A report
concerning pardons to Dr. Manwaring, Mr. Montague* etc.
to certain persons questioned in Parliament, and the reporter informed the
House, that they do find upon examination that Dr. Sibthorpe, and Mr: Cosens
did solicit the obtaining of their own pardons, and that they said the Bishop
of Winchester would get the Kings hand to them, and it did also appear to the
Committee, that the Bishop of Winchester did promise the procuring of Mr.
Montagues pardon, that Dr. Manwaring solicited his own pardon, and that the
Bishop of Winchester got the Kings hand to it, Mr. Oliver being of this
Committee, informed the House what countenance the Bishop of Winchester did
give to some persons that preached flat Popery, Mr. Cromwell against the Bishop
of Winchester.
and mentioned the persons by name, and how by this Bishops means, Manwaring
(who by censure the last Parliament, was disabled for ever holding any
Ecclesiastical dignity in the Church, and confessed the Justice of that
Censure) is nevertheless preferred to a rich Living: If these be the steps to
Church preferment (said he) what may we expect.

A Petition from the Booksellers and Printers in London, was also presented, A
complaint of the no^ licensing of Books against Popery
complaining of the restraint of Books written against Popery and Arminianism,
and the contrary allowed of by the only means of Dr. Laud Bishop of London, and
that diverse of the Printers and Booksellers have been sent for by Pursuivants
for ^rinting Books against Popery, and that Licensing is only restrained to the
Bishop of London and his Chaplains, and instanced in certain Books against
Popery, which were

Upon which occasion Mr. Seldom declared, Mr. Seldom concerning Printing.
that it is true, there is no Law to prevent the Printing of any Books in
England, only a Decree in Star Chamber, and he advised that a Law might be made
concerning Printing, otherwise he said a man might be Fined, Imprisoned, and
his Goods taken from him by virtue of the said Decree, which is a great
Invasion upon the Liberty of the Subject.

The House of Commons being informed that an Information was Richard Chambers
and others, concerning some matters that fell out about their refusal to pay
Tunnage and Poundage since the last Session of Parliament, because the same was
not granted by Act of Parliament, they referred the same to a Committee to
examine the truth of their proceedings, and that whither they ought not to have
privilege of Parliament, in regard they had then a Petition depending in
Parliament to protect them against the said proceedings, and Sir William Acton
Sheriff of London, being examined before the Committee concerning some matters
about the Customers, and not giving that clear Answer which he ought, and as
the House conceived he might have done, was therefore committed to the Tower of
London. And a Question mas made in the House at that time, whether the House
had at any time before committed a Sheriff of London to prison, to which Mr.
Seldom made Answer, that he could not call to mind London to prison, but he
well remembered a president of sending both the Sheriffs of London to the Tower,
and instanced the Case.

Debates about increase of Popery.
Friday February 13. the Parliament fell into consideration of the great
increase of Popery, and it was moved to examine the releasing of the Jesuits
that were arraigned at Newgate, whereof one only was condemned, though they
were ten in number, and they all Priests, and had a College here in London
about Clerken-well, these men (said some)

Secretary Cook concerning the Priests arraigned at Newgate.
Hereup^n Secretary Cook declared that a Minister of State having notice of
these ten persons, and this College intended to be kept at Clarkenwell,
acquainted his Majesty with it, and I should not discharge my duty, if I should
not declare how much his Majesty referred it to the especial care of the Lords
of the Council, who examining the same, Newgate, and gave order to Mr.
Attorney to prosecute the Law against them. He further added, that this
College was first at Edmonton, removed from thence to Camberwel, and thence to
Clerkenwell.

Hereupon it was Ordered that all the Knights and Burgesses of the House, shall
to morrow morning declare what knowledge they have of Letters, and other means
that have been used for the staying of proceedings against Recusants, and
Messengers were sent to Mr. Attorney to examine him touching that matter.

Mr. Long a Justice of Peace, who was said to understand much in the same
business; Mr. Long a Justice of peace examined.
was likewise sent for and examined, and said; that by the appointment of Mr.
Secretary Cook, he apprehended these persons, and took their Examinations, and
said further, that he heard they were delivered out of Newgate, by Order from
Mr. Attorney; That Mr. Middlemore a general Solicitor for the Papists hired
this house, and that there are diverse Books of Accounts, of Receipts and
Disbursements to the value of 300. l. per an. with diverse Recusants names, who
allowed toward Mr. Secretary Cook.

It was further reported from the Committee, that the Priest taken at
Clerkenwell, which was condemned, should be Reprieved by a Warrant from the
King, signified by a Privy Councellor: and another Warrant was produced by the
Keeper of Newgate, under the hand of the Kings Attorney General to release the
other 9. Priests; to which Mr. Secretary Cook replied, the K. being merciful in
case of blood, gave direction for Long had to produce, were not made use of.

The Committee appointed to examine the Atturny-General, reported this answer:
Sir Robert Heath his answer concerning the prosecution of the Priests.
I did receive (said the Atturny) order touching some Persons taken in
Clarkenwel, conceived to be Priests, from the Council Board, and for that refer
myself to the Order.

And I conceive I did follow the directions of that Order.

Newgate, as the Order from the Council Board directed; and I gave directions
for Indictments to be drawn against them, as for being Priests; and I sent for,
and conferred with the witnesses, and took their Informations: and I sent for
Mr. Long who was formerly acquainted with that business, as I was advised to do
by Mr. Secretary Cook, and desired him to take special care thereof at the
Sessions. And I did not conceive, that by the Order I was directed to go
thither my self; but if I had been so directed, Mr. Secretary, but so
generally, as I know not how to enquire thereof; but I did take care to entitle
the King to the goods, as the special directions to me was by the Order of the
Board; and the Indictment failed to be found against all but one: and I gave
warrant to the Treasurers remembrancer of the Exchequer, for a special
commission to that purpose; and I advised with Mr. Long, Mr. Scrivener: and a
Commission was granted to Gentlemen of very good quality, and an inquisition is
found and returned accordingly, whereby the King is entitled to the goods.

I had warrant from his Majesty to bayl them: but for the manner of that, I
must crave leave to acquaint the King therewith, before I answer any further.

I understood that an Indictment was preferred against three of them for
Treason, and I did direct Mr. Long, that if the Indictment should not be ^ound

I gave directions for Indictments to be drawn against them, but I gave no
special directions, whether it should be drawn as against Jesuits or Priests,
but left that to the care of Mr. Long; and did not then conceive there was any
difference in the substance of the Indictment for Treason between Priests and
Jesuits.

I can give no special reason why I rather bound them to appear at the
Council Table then at the Sessions, but only this, because I received my first
directions

When the Sessions was past, I did enquire of Mr. Long what was the success of
these Indictments: who informed me, that one only was found guilty of being a
Priest; and thereupon I gave order for the Commission before mentioned to
enquire of their goods.



And being again sent unto for a clearer answer, he said, For he Warrant which
I received for the discharge of the prisoners, and the Bond taken by me upon
their deliverance, which has a dependence upon that Warrant, and whereof ye
require an account, I have attended his Majesty, but ye have no leave to show
them; and the Bonds being taken but in December last, I keep them with me, as I
conceive was proper for my place; but shall be ready to deliver them when I
shall receive a commandment to that purpose.

A Fast. Mr. Dawes answer to the Commons.
Wednesday the eighteenth of February, the Fast was kept; and the nineteenth of
February, Mr. Dawes one of the Customers, being called in Rolls Goods, a Member
of this House, said, That he took Mr. Rolls Goods by virtue of a Commission
under the great Seal, and other Warrants. That he knew Mr. Rolls demanded his
Privilege, but he did understand his Privilege did only extend to his
person, not to his goods. And he further said, He took those Goods for such
duties as were due in the time of King James, and that the King had sent for
him on Sunday last, and commanded him to make no other answer.

Mr Carmarthens answer.
Mr. Carmarthen, another of the Customers, being called in, said, That he knew
Mr. Rolls to be a Parliament Man, and told him, He did not find any
Parliament Man exempted in their Commission; and as for the words charged on
him, that he should say, If all the body of the House were in him, he would not
deliver the Goods; he answered, If he said he would not, it was because he
could not.

Mr. Seldom hereupon said, If here be any near the King that does mispresent
our Actions, Mr. Seldom.
let the curse light on them, not on us; and believe it, it is high time to
vindicate our selves in this case, else it is in vain for us to sit here.

The House in a Committee about the Customers answer.
It was hereupon resolved by question, That this shall be presently taken into
consideration; and being conceived to be a business of great consequence, it
was ordered that the house be dissolved into a Committee, for the more freedom
of debate; and that no Member go out of the House without leave, during the
sitting of the Committee.

Mr. Noy.
Mr. Noy was of opinion, That the Customers had neither Commission nor command
to seize, therefore without doubt the House may proceed safely to the Question;
that the privilege is broken by the Customers, Nathaniel Rich.

Message by Secretary Cook from the King about the Customers.
Monday the 23 of February, the same business continued under debate, and some
were for a bare restitution of the Goods taken, others for impleading those who
took them as Delinquents: in the mean time, Mr. Secretary brought this message
from the King, That it concerns his Majesty in a high degree of justice and
honor, that truth be not concealed; which is, that what the Customers did, was
by his own

At White Hall the 22 of February, 1628.

Order by the King and Council concelning the Costomers.
THis day his Majesty in full council taking knowledge of the debate in the
house of Commons the day before, concerning the Officers of his Customs, and of
the respect used by the Committee to sever the private interest of the said
Officers from that of his Majesty; holding it to concern him highly in justice
and honor, to let the truth in such a point touching his servants, to be
either concealed or mistaken, did there declare, That what was formerly done by
his Farmers and Officers of the Customs, was done by his own direction and
commandment, and by direction and commandment of his Privy Council, himself for
the most part being This being particularly voted by the whole Council, was the
general assent of them all; and accordingly Mr. Secretary Cook had order to
deliver a Message the next day from his Majesty to the house of Commons.

The Kings Commission to the Lord Treasurer, and Barons of the

C. R.

WHereas the Lords of our Council taking into consideration our Revenue, The
Kings Commission to the Customers, etc.
and finding that Tonnage and Poundage is a principal Revenue of our Crown, and
has been continued for these many years; have therefore ordered all those
duties of Subsidy, Custom James, and as they shall be appointed by us under
our Seal, to be levied: know ye, that we by advice of our Lords, declare our
will, that all those duties be levied and collected as they were in the time of
our father, and in such manner as we shall appoint: and if any person refuse to
pay, then our will is, That the Lord Treasurer shall commit to prison such so
refusing, till they conform themselves; and we give full power to all our
officers from time to time to give assistance to the Farmers of the

Soon after report was made from the grand Committee, Resolve concerning Mr.
Rolls.
that they took into their consideration the violation of the Liberty of the
house by the Customers; and at last they resolved that Mr. Rolls, a Member of
the house, ought to have privilege of person and goods; but the command of the
King is so great, that they leave it to the house. After the passing of this
vote, the Kings late message by Mr. Secretary Cook was

Some took occasion to say, Debates.
That these interruptions proceeded from some Prelates, and other Abettors of
the Popish party, who fear to be discovered, and would provoke to a breach: to
which Sir Humphry May replied: We have Oil and Vinegar before us; if you go to
punish the Customers as Delinquents, there is Vinegar in the Wound: Think
rather of some course to have restitution; others said, Delinquency cannot be
named, but presently a breach must be intimated: when we do that which is just,
let

Hereupon Sir John Elliot made a Speech, Sir John Ellyots Speech against
particular persons.
and therein named Dr. Neal the Bishop of Winchester, and the great Lord
Treasurer, in whose person (said he) all evil is contracted; I find him acting
and building on those grounds laid by his Mr. the Great Duke; and his spirit is
moving to these interruptions, and they for fear break Parliaments, lest
Parliaments should break them* I find him the head of all the great party; the
Lord Weston afterward died a Papist.
Papists, all Jesuits and Priests derive from him their shelter and protection,
etc. A little interruption being here given, he proceeded further in his
Speech: and afterward the Speaker was moved to put the Question then proposed
by the House; The Speaker refuses to put the Question.
but he refused to do it, and said, That he was otherwise commanded from the
King..

Mr. Seldens Speech thereupon.
Then said Mr. Seldom, Dare not you, Mr. Speaker, put the Question when we
command you? If you will not put it, we must sit still; thus we shall

Hereupon the House in some heat adjourned until Wednesday next.

On Wednesday the 25 of February, both Houses by his Majesty's command were
adjourned till Monday morning the second of March.

Monday the second of March, the Commons meet, and urge the Speaker to put the
Question; The Speaker again refuses to put the Question.
who said, I have a command from the King to adjourn till March the tenth, and
put no Question: and endeavoring to go out of the Chair, was notwithstanding
held by some Members (the House foreseeing a dissolution) till this ensuing
Protestation was published in the House: viz.

Protestation in Parliament propounded whilst the Speaker was held in his chair.
Whosoever shall bring in Innovation of Religion, or by favor or countenance
seek to extend or introduce Popery or Arminianism, or other opinion disagreeing

2. Whosoever shall counsel or advise the taking and levying of the Subsidies
of Tunnage and Poundage, not being granted by Parliament, or shall be an Actor
or Instrument therein, shall be likewise reputed an Innovator in the
Government, and Capital Enemy to the Kingdom and Commonwealth.

3. If any Merchant or Person whatsoever shall voluntarily yield, or pay the
said Subsidies of Tunnage and Poundage, not being granted by Parliament; he
England, and an Enemy to the same.

Hereupon the King sent for the Sergeant of the House, but he was detained, The
King sends the Usher of the Lords House.
the Door being locked; then he sent the Gentleman Usher of the Lords House,
with a Message; and he was refused admittance, till the said Votes were read;
and then in much confusion the House was adjourned to the tenth of March,
according as it was intimated from his Majesty. Nevertheless his Majesty by
Proclamation dated the second March, declares the Parliament to be dissolved.

The passages of this day and the preceding day in Parliament, are hereafter
more fully related in the proceedings in the Kings Bench.

By the King. A Proclamation about the dissolving of the
WHereas We for the general good of our Kingdom, caused our high Court of
Parliament to assemble and meet by prorogation, the 20 day of January last
past; sithence which time the same has been continued. And although in this
time by the malevolent dispositions of some ill affected persons of the House
of Commons, We have had sundry Just Causes of offense and dislike of their
proceedings; yet We resolved with patience to try the uttermost, which we the
rather did, for that We found in that House a great number of sober and grave
Persons, well-affected to Religion five and twentieth day of February last, by
the uniform advice of our Privy Council, caused both Houses to be adiourned
until this present day, hoping in the mean time, that a better and more right
understanding might be begotten between Us and the Members of that House,
whereby this Parliament might have a happy end and issue.

And for the same intent, We did again this day command the tenth day of this
Month: It has so happened by the disobedient and seditious carriage of those
said ill affected persons of the House of Commons, That We, and Our Regal
Authority and Commandment, have been so highly contemned, as our Kingly Office
cannot bear, nor any former age can parallel. And therefore it is Our full and
absolute resolution to dissolve the same Parliament, whereof We thought good to
give notice unto all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and to Parliament, and
to all others whom it may concern, That they may depart about their needful
affairs, without attending any longer here. Nevertheless* We will that they and
all others shall take notice, that We do, and ever will distinguish between
those who have showed good affection to Religion and Government, and those that
have given themselves over to faction, and to work disturbance to the peace

Given at our Court at Whitehal, this second day of March, in the fourth year
of Our Reign of Great Britan, France and Ireland.
This Proclamation was not published till after the tenth of March.

The day following Warrants were directed from the Council to Denzil Holles Esquire
Sir Miles Hobert, Warrants to apprehend several Members of Parliament.
Sir John Elliot, Sir Peter Hayman, John Seldom Esquire William Coriton, Walter
Long, William Stroud, Benjamin Valentine, commanding their personal appearance
on the morrow. At which time, Mr. Holles, Sir John Elliot, Mr. Corriton, Mr.
Valentine appearing, and refusing to answer out of Parliament, what was said
and done in Parliament, were committed close prisoners to the Tower, and
Warrants were given, the Parliament being still in being, for the sealing up of
the studies of Mr. Holles, Mr. Seldom, and Sir John Elliot: Long, and Mr.
Stroud not then, nor of some time after appearing, a Proclamation issued out,
for the apprehending of them.

On the tenth of March, being six days after the commitment of the said
Members, his Majesty being set in his Royal Throne with his Crown on his head,
and in his Robes, and the Lords in their Robes also: and diverse of the Commons
below the Bar, but not their Speaker, neither were they called: his Majesty
spoke as follows.

My Lords,
I Never came here upon so unpleasant an occasion, it being the dissolution of
a Parliament; The Kings Speech at the Dissolution of the Parliament.
therefore men may have some cause to wonder, why I should not rather choose to
do this by Commission, it being a general maxim of Kings, to leave harsh
Commands to their Ministers, themselves only executing My Lords, are so far
from being any causers of it, that I take as much comfort in your dutiful
demeanor, as I am justly distasted with their proceedings; yet to avoid their
mistakings, let me tell you, that it is so far from me to adjudge all the House
alike guilty, that I kn^w that there are many My Lords, must justly expect from
me that favor and protection, that a good King owes to his loving and
faithful Nobility.

And now, my Lord Keeper, Do what I have commanded you.

Then the Lord Keeper said, My Lords and Gentlemen of the House of Commons, the
Kings Majesty does dissolve this Parliament.

Whilst the King is preparing a Declaration of the causes and motives which
induced him to dissolve this Parliament, let us see what followed hereupon.

Libels cast abroad.
The discontents of the common people upon this Dissolution were heightened
against the powerful men at Court, and the Kings most inward Paul's yard; one
against Bishop Laud, to this effect; Laud, look to thy self, be assured thy
life is sought; as thou art the fountain of wickedness, repent of thy monstrous
sins before thou be taken out of the world; and assure they self, neither God
nor the world can endure such a vile Counselor or whisperer to live. The other
was as bad against the L. Treasurer Weston.

The King purposing to proceed against the Members of the House of Commons who
were committed to Prison by him in the Star Chamber, Members examined before
the Lords of the Council.
April.

5 Caroli. Anno 1629.
WHereupon all the Judges met at Sergeants-Inne by command from his Majesty,
where Mr. Attorney proposed certain Questions concerning the offenses of some
of the Parliament Men committed to the Tower, and other prisons: at which time
one Question was proposed and resolved, Questions propounded to the Judges
concerning the imprisoned Members.
viz. That the Statute of 4 H. 8.8. entitled, An Act concerning Richard
Strode, was a particular Act of a Parliament, and extended only to Richard
Strode, and to those persons that had joined with him to prefer a Bill to the
House of Commons concerning Tynners; And although the Act be private, and
extends to them alone, yet it was no more then all other Parliament Men by
privilege of house ought to have, viz. Freedom of speech concerning those
matters debated in Parliament by a Parliamentary course.

The rest of the Questions Mr. Attorney was wished to set down in writing
against another day.

Upon Monday following, all the Judges met again, and then Mr. Attorney
proposed these Questions.

1. Whether if any Subject has received probable Information of any Treason or
treacherous attempt or intention against the King or State, that Subject ought

Sol. The resolution and answer of all the Justices, That it is an offense

2. Whether it be a good answer or excuse, being thus interrogated, and
refusing to answer, to say, That he was a Parliament Man when he received this
Information, and that he spoke thereof in the Parliament House; and therefore
the Parliament being now ended, he refused to answer to any such Questions but
in the Parliament House, and not in any other place?

Sol. To this the Judges by advise privately to Mr. Attorney, gave this That
this excuse being in Nature of a Plea, and an error in judgment, was not
punishable until he were overruled in an orderly manner to make another
answer; and whether the party were brought in Ore tenus, or by Information, for
this Plea he was not to be punished.

3. Whether a Parliament Man committing an offense against the King or Council
not in a Parliament way, might after the Parliament ended, he punished or not?

Sol. All the Judges una voce answered, He might, if he be not punished contra
morem Parliamentarium, to exceed the bounds and limits of his place and duty.
And all agreed, That regularly he cannot be compelled out of Parliament to
answer things done in Parliament in a Parliamentary course; but it is otherwise
where things are done exorbitantly, for those are not the Acts of a Court.

4. Whether if one Parliament Man alone shall resolve, or two or three shall
covertly conspire to raise false slanders and rumors against the Lords of the

Sol. The Judges resolve that the same was punishable out of Parliament, as an
offense exorbitant committed in Parliament, beyond the office, and besides the
duty of a Parliament Man.

There was another Question put by Mr. Attorney, viz.

Whether if a man in Parliament, by way of digression, and not upon any
occasion arising concerning the same in Parliament, shall say, The Lords of the
Council and the Judges had agreed to trample upon the Liberty of the Subject,
and the privileges of Parliament, he were punishable or not?

The Judges desired to be spared to make any answer thereunto, because it
concerned themselves in particular.

The next day Mr. Atturny put the Judges another Case.

It is demanded of a Parliament Man, being called Ore tenus before the Court of
Star Chamber, being charged that he did not submit himself to examination for
such things as did concern the King and the Government of the State, and were
affirmed to be done by a third person, and not by himself, if he confess his
hand to that refusal, and make his excuse, and plead because he had privilege
of Parliament;

Whether the Court will not overruled this plea as erroneous, and that he ought

Answer.
It is the justest way for the King and the party not to proceed Ore tenus,
because it being a point in Law, it is fit to hear Counsel before it be
overruled; and upon an Ore tenus by the Rules of Star Chamber, Counsel ought
not to be admitted; and that it would not be for the Honor of the King, nor the
safety of the subject to proceed in that manner.

Mr. Stroud and Mr. Long brought upon a Habeas Corpus.
Pasca 5 Car. upon a Habeas Corpus of this Court to bring the body of William
Stroud Esquire with the cause of his imprisonment to the Marshal That Mr. William
Stroud was committed under my custody by virtue of a certain Warrant, under the
hands of twelve of the Lords of the Privy Council of the King: the tenor of
which Warrant follows in these words.

YOu are to take knowledge, that it is his Majesty's pleasure and commandment,
that you take into your custody the Body of William Stroud Esquire and keep him
close prisoner till you shall receive other order, either from his Majesty or
this Board; for so doing, this shall be your Warrant. Dated this 2 of April
1629. And the direction of the Warrant was, To the Marshal of the Kings Bench,
or his Deputy.

He is also detained in prison by virtue of a Warrant under his Majesty's hand;
the tenor of which Warrant follows in these words.

C.R.

WHereas you have in your custody the Body of William Stroud Esquire by Warrant of
Our Lords of our Privy Council, by Our special Command, you

Given at Greenwich, the 7 of May 1629. in the 5 year of Our Reign.
The direction being, To the Marshal of Our Bench for the time being, and hae
sunt causae captionis and detentionis praedicti Gulielmi Stroud.

And upon another Habeas Corpus to the Marshal of the Household to Walter Long
Esquire in Court, it was returned according as the Return of Mr. Stroud was.

Mr. Ask of the Inner Temple of Counsel for Mr. Stroud, and Mr. Mason of
Lincoln's Inn of Counsel for Mr. Long, argued against the insufficiency of the
Return; which with the Arguments of the Kings Counsel we here forbear to
mention, lest it be too great a diversion to the Reader from the Historical
part; yet those and other Arguments we have nevertheless postponed at the end
of this first Volume, for the benefit

The seventh of May, an Information was ex^ibited in the Star Chamber; which
because it is a remarkable Proceeding, we give you here at large. An
Information in Star Chamber against the Members.


Iovis Septimo die Maii, Anno Quinto Ca. R.
HUmbly shows and informs unto Your most excellent Majesty, To. Heath. Hu
Davenport To. Bartley. Heneage Finch. William Hudson
Sir Robert Heath Knight, Your Majesty's Attorney General, for and on Your
Majesty's behalf, That whereas by the Ancient and Fundamental Laws of this
Kingdom, the high Court of Parliament consists of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal in the Lords House, and of the Knights, An Information in Star.
Chamber against Sir Io. Elliot, etc.
Citizens and Burgesses in the Commons House of Westminster, the seventeenth
day of March, in the third year of Your Majesty's Reign, which continued
January last; from which day, until the twenty fifth day of February following,
the said Houses continued sitting. And although the great part of the House of
Commons, being zealous of the Common Good, did endeavor to have effected those
good things for which they were called thither; yet between the said twentieth
day of January, and the said twenty fifth day of February, by the malevolent
Disposition of some ill-affected Members of the said House, sundry Diversions
and Interruptions John Elliot Knight, then, and all the time of the said
Parliament, being one of the Members of the said Commons House, wickedly and
maliciously intending, under a feigned Color and Pretense of debating the
necessary Affairs of the January, and before the said twenty fifth day of
February last, did openly and publicly in the said House of Commons, falsely
and maliciously affirm, That your Majesty's Privy Council, all your Judges, and
your Counsel learned, had conspired together to trample under their feet the
Liberties of the said Subjects of this Realm, and the privileges of that
House. And further: so it is, may it please your most excellent Majesty, that
when your Majesty, upon the twenty fifth day of February, had by Sir John
Finch, Knight, then Speaker of the said house of Commons, signified your Royal
pleasure to the said house, that the said March then following, he the said Sir
John Elliot, and Denzil Holles Esquire, Benjamin Valantine Gent. Walter Long
Esquire, William Corriton Esquire, William Strode Esquire, John Seldom Esquire,
Sir Miles Hobert, and Sir Peter Hayman, Knights, all Members at that time of
the said Commons house, conceiving with themselves that your Majesty, being
justly provoked thereto, would speedily dissolve that Parliament; They the said
Sir John Elliot, Denzil Holles, Benjamin Valentine, Sir Miles Hobert, and Sir
Peter Hayman, and every of them, by unlawful Confederacy and Combination
between them in that behalf before had, did maliciously resolve, agree and
conspire how and by what means before that Parliament should be dissolved, they
might raise such false and scandalous rumors against your Majesty's
Government, and your Counselors of Estate attending your person, that thereby
as much as in them lies, they might disturb the happy Government of this
Kingdom John Elliot, with the privitie and consent of the said Denzil Holles,
and all other the said confederates, did prepare a paper or writing, wherein he
had written, or caused to be written, diverse false and scandalous March now
last past, having signified Your Royal pleasure unto the said Sir John Finch,
then the Speaker of that House, That the said House should then be presently
adjourned until the tenth day of the said Month of March, without any further
speech or proceedings at that time; and the said Speaker then delivered Your
Majesty's pleasure and commandment Your Royal pleasure in that behalf, for a
present adjournment of the House, the greatest number of the Members of that
House, in their duty and Allegiance unto your Majesty, were willing to have
given a ready Obedience, as the Lords Spiritual and Temporal of the Lords
House, upon the very same day, upon the like signification made unto them of
your Majesty's pleasure, by your Lord Keeper of your Great Seal of England, the
Speaker of that House, had done: yet so it is, John Ellyot, for the satisfying
of his own malice, and disloyal affections to your Majesty, and by the
confederacy and agreement aforesaid, and in a high contempt and disobedience
unto your Majesty's command aforesaid, and with set purpose to oppose your
Majesty's said command, did stand up, and several times offered to speak.
Whereupon the said Speaker, in obedience to your Majesty's said command,
endeavoring to have gone out of the chair, the said Denzil Holles, and Benjamin
Valentine Denzil Holles and Benjamin Valentine laid violent hands upon the said
Speaker, forcibly, and unlawfully, and by strong hand thrust him into his chair
again; and then the said Sir John Ellyot again stood up, and used these
speeches: ( viz.) We have prepared a short Declaration of our intentions, which
I hope shall agree with the honor of the House, and the Justice of the King:
and with that he threw down a paper into the floor of the said House, desiring
it might be read: and the said Denzil Holles, Benj. Valentine, and all William
Corriton in this distemper demeaned himself so passionately and violently, that
he then and there violently, forcibly, and unlawfully, assaulted and stroke
Winterton, Gent. then being a Member of the said House: and diverse of the
Members of the said House being then desirous, and endeavoring to have gone out
of the said House, the said Sir Miles Hobert did of his own head, lock the door
of the said House, and kept the key thereof, and imprisoned the Members of the
said House, being then in the said House against their wills, so William
Strode, for the further expressing of his malignity and undutifulness toward
your Majesty, and in pursuance of the agreement and confederacy aforesaid,
openly moved, and with much earnestness urged, that the said paper or
declaration might be first read, to the end (as he then in great contempt of
your Royal Majesty said) that we, meaning the Members of the house, may not be
turned off like scattered sheep, and sent home as we were last Sessions, with a
scorn put upon us in print; meaning thereby the words which your Majesty in
your own Person spoke at the ending of the last Session, and caused the same to
be printed: and the said Stroud in a very disorderly manner further moved, That
all those who would have the said paper read, should stand up; which diverse of
them thereupon did do accordingly, and he the said Stroud amongst others did
stand up; and in this heat of contention and height of disobedience, Peter
Hayman with rough and reproachful words, reproved the said Speaker for being
constant and resolute in his obedience to your Majesty, in not putting the
reading of the said paper to the Question, as by all the said Confederates,
with many Reasons and Arguments he was urged to do: and the said Sir Peter
Hayman then further said, That the said Speaker was made an Instrument to cut
up the Liberty of the Subjects by the roots. But when by no means the said
Speaker John Seldom moved, that the Clerk of the said House might read the
same: and when the said Sir John Ellyot found that he and his Confederates
aforesaid, could not procure the said paper to be read; he, the said Sir John
Ellyot, to the end he might not lose that opportunity to vent and publish those
malicious and seditious Resolutions which he and his Confederates had
collected, and prepared as aforesaid, took back the I shall non express that by
Tongue, which this paper should have done; and then spoke these words. The
miserable condition we are in, both in matters of Religion and Policy, makes me
look with a tender eye both to the Person of the King, and to the Subjects: and
then speaking of them whom he intended to be ill Instruments in this State, at
whom he principally aimed, he said, There are amongst them some Prelates of the
Church, the great Bishop of Winchester and his fellows; it is apparent
Buckingham whether greater or subordinate, that they shall all be declared as
Capital Enemies to the King and Kingdom, that will persuade the King to take
Tunnage and Poundage without grant of Parliament; and that if any Merchants
shall willingly pay those Duties without consent of Parliament, they shall be
declared as Accessaries to the rest. Which Words of the said Sir John Elliot,
were by him uttered as aforesaid, falsely, and maliciously, and seditiously, out
of the wickedness of his That no man was ever blasted in that house, but a
curse fell upon him.

John Elliot had thus vented that malice and wickedness which lay in his heart,
and, as appears by his own words, were expressed in the said paper which was
prepared as aforesaid, the said Walter Long, out of his inveterate malice to
your Majesty and to your Affairs, and by the confederacy aforesaid, then and
there said, That man who shall give away my Liberty and Inheritance (I speak of
the Merchants) I note them for Capital Enemies to the Kingdom. And lest the
Denzil Holles collected into several heads what the said Sir John Elliot had
before delivered out of that paper, and then said, Whosoever shall counsel the
taking up of Tunnage and Poundage without an Act of Parliament, let him be
accounted a capital Enemy to the King and And further: What Merchant soever
shall pay Tunnage and Poundage without an Act of Parliament, let him be counted
a Betrayer of the Liberty of the Subjects, and a Capital Enemy of the King and
Kingdom.

Which Positions thus laid, the said Denzil Holles neither being Speaker, nor
sitting in the Chair as in a Committee by direction of the House, but in an
irregular way, and contrary to all course of orderly proceedings in Parliament,
offered to put these things so delivered

And further: so it is, may it please your most excellent Majesty, That the
disobedience of the said Confederates was then grown to that height, that when
Edward Grimston, the Sergeant at Arms then attending the Speaker of that house,
was sent for by your Majesty, personally to attend your Highness, and the same
was made known in the said house, Edward Grimston locked up in the said house,
and would not suffer him to go out of the house to attend your Majesty: and
when also on the same day James Maxwel Esquire, the Gentleman Usher of the
Black Rod, was sent from your Majesty to the said Commons house with a message
immediately from your Majesty's own person, they the said Confederates utterly
refused to open the door of the house, and to admit the said James Maxwel to go
to deliver his message. After all which, the said house was then adjourned
until the said tenth day of March then following, and on the said tenth day of
March the said Parliament was dissolved and ended. In consideration of all
which premises, And for as much as the contempt and disobedience of the said
Sir John Ellyot and other the confederates aforesaid, were so great, and so
many and unwarranted by the privilege and due Star Chamber.

Memorandum, That the 29. of May, Anno quinto Car. Reg. these words, viz. After
all which the said House was then adjourned March; and on the said tenth day of
March the said Parliament was dissolved and ended; were added and inserted by
order of the Court, immediately before In tender consideration, etc.

Proceedings in Star Chamber against Mr. Chambers.
At the same time Sir Robert Heath the Kings Atturny General preferred
Star Chamber against Richard Chambers of the City of London Merchant; wherein,
first, he did set forth the gracious Government of the King, and the great
Privileges which the Merchants have in their Trading, by paying moderate
duties for the goods and merchandises exported and imported; and setting forth,
that the raising and publishing of undutiful and false speeches, which may tend
to the dishonor of the King or the State, or to the discouragement

That nevertheless the said Richard Chambers, the 28. day of September last,
being amongst some other merchants called to the Councel-board at Hampton
Court, about some things which were complained of in reference to the Customs,
did then and there, in an insolent manner, That the Merchants are in no part of
the World so skrewed and wrung as in England; That in Turkey they have more
encouragement. By which words, he the said Richard Chambers, as the Information
sets forth, did endeavor to alienate the good affection of his Majesty's
Subjects from his Majesty, and to bring a slander upon his just Government; and
therefore the Kings Attorney prayed process against

His Answer.
To this Mr. Chambers made answer, That having a Case of silk Grogerams brought
from Bristol by a Carrier to London, of the value of 400. l. the same were by
some inferior Officers attending on the Custom House, seized without this
Defendants consent; notwithstanding he offered to give security to pay such
Customs as should be due by Law, and that he has been otherwise grieved and
damnified, by the injurious dealing of the Underofficers of the Custom House;
and mentioned the particulars wherein: and that being called before the Lords
of the Council, he confesses, that out of the great sense which he had of the
injuries done him by the said inferior Officers, he did utter these words, That
the Merchants in England were more wrung and screwed then in foreign Parts:
Which words were only spoken in the presence of the speeches only aimed at
the abuses of the inferior Officers, who in many things dealt most cruelly
with him and other Merchants.

May, 1629. the Cause came to be heard in the Star Chamber, and the Court were
of opinion that the words spoken were a comparing of his Majesty's Government
with the Government of the Turks; intending thereby to make the people believe
that his Majesty's happy Government may be termed Turkish Tyranny; and
therefore the Court fined the said Mr. Chambers in the sum of 2000 l. to his
Majesty's use, and to stand committed to the prison of the Fleet, and to make
submission for his great offense both at the Council Board, in Court of
Star Chamber, and at the Royal Exchange.

There was a great difference of opinion in the Court about the Fine: and
because it is a remarkable Case, here follows the names of each several
person who gave sentence, and the Fine they concluded upon, viz. His Sentence.
Sir Francis Cottington, Chancellor of the Exchequer, his opinion was for 500
l. Fine to the King, and to acknowledge his offense at the Council Board, the
Star-Chamber-Bar, and Exchange. Sir Tho. Richardson, Lord chief Justice of the
common pleas, 500 l. Fine to the King, and to desire the Kings favor. Nicholas
Hide, Lord chief Justice of the Kings Bench, 500 l. and to desire the Kings
favor. Sir John Cook, Secretary of State 1000 l. Sir Humphry May, Chancellor
1500 l. Sir Thomas Edmons 2000 l. Sir Edward Barret 2000 l. Doctor Neal, Bishop
of Winchester 3000 l. Doctor Laud, Bishop of London 3000 l. Lord Carlton,
principal Secretary of State 3000 l. Lord, Chancellor of Scotland 2000 l. Earl
of Holland 1500 l. Earl of Doncaster 1500 l. Earl of Salisbury 1500 l. Earl of
Dorset 3000 l. Earl of Suffolk 3000 l. Earl of Mountgomery, Lord Chamberlain
1500 l. Earl of Arundel, Lord High Marshal 3000 l. Lord Montague Lord Privy
Seal 3000 l. Lord Connoway, 2000 l. Lord Weston Lord Treasurer 3000 l. Lord
Coventry, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal 1500 l. So the fine was settled to 2000
l.


And all (except the two Chief Justices) concurred for a submission also to be
made. And accordingly the copy of the submission was sent to the Warden of the
Fleet, from Mr. Atturny General, to show the said Richard Chambers, to perform
and acknowledge it; and was as follows: A submission tendered.
I Richard Chambers of London Merchant, do humby acknowledge, that Easter Term
last, sentenced by the Honorable Court of Star Chamber, for that in September
last 1628. being convented before the Lords and others of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council Board, upon some speeches then used concerning the
Merchants of this Kingdom, and his Majesty's well and gracious usage of them;
did then and there, in insolent, contemptuous and seditious manner, falsely and
maliciously say and affirm, That they, meaning the Merchants, are in no parts
of the world so skrewed England; and that in Turkey they have more
encouragement. And whereas by the sentence of that Honorable Court, I was
adjudged among other punishments justly imposed upon me, to make my humble
acknowledgment and submission of this great offense at this Honorable Board,
before I should be delivered out of the Prison of the Fleet, whereto I was then
committed, as by the said Decree and Sentence of that Court, among other things
it does and may appear: Now I the said Richard Chambers, in obedience to the
Sentence of the said Honorable Court, do humbly confess and acknowledge the
speaking of



When Mr. Chambers read this draught of submission, he thus subscribed the
same: His refusal.
All the abovesaid Contents and Submission, I Richard Chambers do utterly abhor
and detest, as most unjust and false; and never to death will acknowledge any
part thereof.

Rich. Chambers.




Also he under-writ these Texts of Scripture to the said Submission, before he
returned it.

That make a man an offender for a word, Places of Scripture mentioned by him.
Isa. 29.21.
and lay a snare for him that reproves in the gate, and turn aside the just
for a thing of naught.

Blame not before thou have examined the truth; Ecclus. 11.7, 8
understand first, and then rebuke; answer not before thou have heard the
cause, neither interrupt men in the

Does our Law judge any man before it hear him, John 7.51. Act. 26.2.
and know what he does?

King Agrippa said unto Paul, Thou art permitted to speak for thy self.

Thou shall not wrest the judgment of the poor in his cause, Exodus 23.6. Deuteronomy.
16.19.
thou shall not respect persons, neither take a gift: for a gift does blind the
eyes of the wise, and pervert the eyes of the righteous.

Woe to them that devise iniquity, Mich. 2.1, 2.
because it is in the power of their hand, and they covet fields and take them
by violence, and houses and take them away: so

Thus says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 45.9 and 46.8.
Let it suffice you, O Princes of Israel: remove violence and spoil, and
execute judgment and justice, take away your exactions from my people, says
the Lord God.

If thou see the oppression of the Poor, Eccles. 5.8.
and violent perverting of judgment and justice in a Province, marvel not at
the matter: for he that is higher then the highest regards, and there be
higher then they.

Per me, Richard Chambers.

Afterward in the Term of Trinity, London. His Plea in the Exchequer
the 5 year of King Charles, it is found in the great Roll of this year, that
there is demanded there, of Richard Chambers of London Merchant, 2000 l. for a
certain fine imposed on him, hither sent by virtue of a writ of our said Lord
the King, under the foot of the great Seal of England, directed to the
Treasurer and Barons of this Exchequer, for making execution thereof to the use
of Utas of the Blessed Trinity, this Term, comes the said Richard Chambers in
his own proper person, and demands Oyer of the demand aforesaid, and it is read
unto him; and he demands Oyer also of the Writ aforesaid, under the foot of the
Great Seal of England hither sent, and it is read unto him in these words:
Charles by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, etc. To
his Treasurer and Barons of his Exchequer, health: The extret of certain fines
taxed and adjudged by Us and our said Council, in our said Council, in Our
Court of Star Chamber in the Term of St Michael, the Term of St. Hillary, and
the Term of Easter last past, upon Thomas Barns of the Parish of St. Clements
Danes in the County of Middlesex Carpenter, and others severally and dividedly,
as they be there severally assessed, We send unto you included in these
presents, commanding that looking into them, you do that which by Law you ought
to do against them, for the Witness our Self at Westminster the 21 of May, in
the year of Our Reign the 5 Mutas.




And the tenor of the Schedule to the said Writ annexed, as to the said Richard
Chambers, follows, in these words: IN the Term of Easter, the fifth year of
King Charles, of Richard Chambers of London Merchant 2000 l. which being read,
heard, and by him understood, he complains that he is grievously vexed and
inquieted by color of the Premises; and that not justly, for that protesting
that the said great Roll, and the matter therein contained, Richard Chambers
says, That he, of the demand aforesaid, in the great Roll aforesaid mentioned,
and every parcel thereof, ought to be discharged against the said Lord the
King, for that he said, That he, from the time of the Taxation o^ the aforesaid
Fine, and long before, was a Freeman and a Merchant of this Kingdom, that is to
say, In the Parish of the blessed Mary of the Arches in the Ward of Cheap, H.
3.9.
London. And that by a certain Act Henry late King of England the Third, held
in the ninth year of his reign, it was provided by Authority of the said
Parliament, That a Freeman shall not be amerced for a little offense, but
according to the manner of the said offense; and for a great offense, according
to the greatness of the offense, saving to him his Contenement or Freehold, and
a Merchant in the same manner, saving unto him his Merchandise, and a Villain
of any other then the King after the same manner to be amerced, saving his
Wainage; E. 1.3.
And by a certain other Act in the Parliament of the Lord Edward late King of
England the first, held in the Third year of his reign, it was and is provided,
That no City, Borough, or Town, nor any man should be amerced without
reasonable cause, and according to his Trespass; that is to say, A Freeman,
saving to him his Contenement; A Merchant, saving to him his Merchandise; and A
Villan, saving to him his Wainage: H. 3.9.
And by the same Act in the Parliament of the said Lord Henry late King of
England the Third, held in the ninth year of his reign aforesaid, it was and is
provided by Authority of the said Parliament, That no Freemen should be taken
or imprisoned, or disseized of his Freehold or Liberties, or free Customs, or
outlawed or banished, or any way destroyed. And that the Lord the King should
not go upon him, nor deal with him, but by a lawful judgment of his Peers, or
by the Law of the Land. And by a Edward late King of England the Third, E. 3.5 t
held in the fifth year of his reign, it was and is provided by the Authority
of the said Parliament, That no man henceforward should be attached by reason
of any Accusation, nor pre-judged of Life or Member, nor that his Lands,
Tenements, Goods or Chattels should be seized into the hands of the Lord the
King against the form of the great Charter, H. 7.3.
and the Law of the Land. And by a certain Act in the Parliament of the Lord
Henry late King of England of money by Jurors, by great ryots and unlawful
assemblies the policy and good Government of this Kingdom was almost subdued:
and by not punishing of the said inconveniences, and by occasion of the
Premises, little or nothing was found by Inquisition; by reason thereof, the
Laws of the Land had little effect in their execution, to the increase of
Murders, Robberies, Perjuries and Insecurities of all men living, to the loss
of their Lands and Goods, to the great displeasure England for the time being,
and the Keeper of the Privy Seal of the Lord the King, or two of them, calling
to them one Bishop, one Lord temporal of the most honorable Council of the
Lord the King, and two chief Justices of the Kings Bench and Common pleas for
the time being, or two other Justices in their absence, by Bill or Information
exhibited to the Chancellor for the King or H. 8.21.
And by a certain other Act in the Parliament of the Lord Henry late King of
England the eighth, held in the one and twentieth year of his reign, reciting
the offenses in the aforesaid Statute of the said late King Henry the seventh
beforementioned, by Authority of the said Parliament, it was and is ordained
and enacted, That henceforward the Chancellor, Treasurer of England, and the
President of the most honorable Privy Council of the King attending his most
honorable person for the time being, and the Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal of
the Lord the King, or two of them, calling to them one England, the Treasurer,
the President of the said most honorable Council of the Lord the King, or the
Keeper of the Privy Seal of the Lord the King for the time being, for any
misdemeanour in the aforesaid Statute of King Henry the seventh aforesaid
before recited, from Henry the seventh, and of all other Statutes thereupon
made not revoked and expired, in the same manner and form as they might and
ought be punished if they were convicted according to the due order of the Laws
of the Richard Chambers, nor by the Law of the Land, nor according to the
manner of the pretended offense of the said Richard Chambers, nor saving unto
him his Merchandise, nor for any offense mentioned in the said Statutes: all
and singular the which, the said Richard Chambers is ready to verify to the
Court, etc. and demands judgment; and that he be discharge of the said 2000 l.
against the said Lord the now King; and that as to the premises he may be
dismissed from this Court.

1629. 16 June
Waterhouse.



With this Plea, he annexed a Petition to the Lord Chief Baron, and

The Copy of the Order upon Mr. Atturneys motion in the Exchequer, the 17 July
1629. Per the Lord Chief Baron.
London. Order in the Exchequer.
TOuching the Plea put into this Court by Richard Chambers, to discharge himself
of a ^ine of 2000 l. set on him in the Star Chamber, Forasmuch as Sir Robert
Heath Kni^^^, his Majesty's Attorney General, informed Chambers in his said
Plea recites diverse Statutes and Magna Charta, and what offenses are punishable
in the Star Chamber, and how the proceedings ought to be; and upon the whole
matter concludes, That the said fine was imposed by the King and his Council,
and not by a Legal judgment of his Peers, nor by the Laws of the Land, nor
according to the manner of his offense, nor saving his Merchandise, nor for any
offense mentioned in the said Statutes; Which Plea Mr. Atturny conceiving to be
very frivolous and insufficient, and derogatory to the honor Star Chamber,
Humbly prays, might not be allowed of, nor filed: It is therefore this day
ordered, That the said Plea shall be read on Saturday next, and then upon
hearing the Kings Counsel, and the Counsel of the said Richard Chambers, this
Court will-declare their further order therein; and in the mean time the said
Plea is not to be filed nor delivered out.

In Michaelmas Term following, Mr. Chambers was brought by a Habeas out of the
Fleet: and the Warden did return,

Mr. Chambers brought by a Habeas Corpus
THat he was committed to the Fleet by virtue of a Decree in the Star Chamber,
by reason of certain words he used at the Council Table, (viz.) That the
Merchants of England were skrewed up here in England, more then in Turkey. And
for these and other words of defamation of the Government, he was censured to
be committed to the Fleet, and to be there imprisoned until he made his
submission at the l. And now at the Bar he prayed to be delivered, because this
Sentence is not warranted by any Law or Statute: For the Statute of 3 Henrici
7. which is the foundation of the Court of Star Chamber, does not give them any
authority to punish for words only. But all the Court informed him, That the
Court of Star Chamber was not erected by the Statute of 3 H. 7. but was a Court
many years before, and one of the most high and honorable Courts of Justice:
and to deliver one who was committed by the Decree of one of the Courts of
Justice, was not the usage of this Court; and therefore he was remanded.

As a concurrant proof of these Proceedings concerning Mr. Chambers, viz. To
the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland. Richard
Chambers Merchant, late Alderman and Sheriff of the City of London:
SHOWING,
THat in the Parliament held in the years 1627 and 1628, His Petition to the
Parliament.
it was voted and declared by the honorable house of Commons, That whosoever
shall counsel or advise the taking or levying of the Subsidy of Tonnage and
Poundage, not England, and Enemies to the same, as may appear by the said Order
upon Record.

In submission and obedience whereunto, the Petitioner first opposed and
withstood the payment of Tonnage and Poundage (until they were settled by
Parliament) 1628, and 1629, the Petitioner had 7060 pounds of his Goods
wrongfully taken and detained from him by the late Kings Officers and Farmers
of the Custom House of London for pretended duties, and a heavy Sentence and
Fine in the Star Chamber, which was imposed upon him in the year 1629. besides
which losses, the Petitioner further suffered in his person by six whole years
imprisonment in the Fleet, for not submitting to that Sentence and Fine: and in
the year 1637, nine months imprisonment in Newgate for withstanding
ship money:

Which sufferings the honorable house of Commons (upon the Petioners complaint
in the year 1640) taking into their grave considerations, were pleased to refer
the examination thereof to a Committee of 50 Members, wherein were included the
Committee for the Navy and Customs; who being well satisfied of the truth
thereof, by oath, and other good sufficient proofs upon Record, drew up their
Report, That the Petitioner ought then to have 13680 pounds in part

In pursuit of which report, the Parliament then levied and received from the
old Farmers and Officers of the Customs 50 thousand pounds for wrongs and
abuses done to the Petitioner (chiefly) and other Merchants, intending first to
give to the Petitioner satisfaction out of the same, because he was the first
man that opposed the pretended duties, and the greatest sufferer.

Whereupon, in the year 1642. the Petitioner was chosen Alderman, and in the
year 1644. Sheriff of the City of London: which places the Petitioner earnestly
endeavored to shun; but such were the earnest importunities, and persuasive
encouragements of diverse Members of the honorable House, (who then desired to
have the Petitioner in place of trust, for his former service to the
Commonwealth) that the Petitioner was constrained to accept not only of the
place of Alderman, but further underwent the office and charge of Sheriff of
London, 4000 pounds that year.

But notwithstanding the aforesaid promises and intents of the Parliament to
give the Petitioner satisfaction, such were the great compulsive exigents, and
urgent necessities of those times, caused by the public distractions, that the
said moneys were converted to the public use; therefore the Parliament desired
the Petitioner to have a little patience, promising him speedy satisfaction as
well for the forbearance as for the principal debt: but the distractions
continuing, and the Petitioner had neither interest nor any part of his
principal, the Parliament in 1648 in part of satisfaction, settled the
Petitioner in the office of Surveyor and Check in the Custom-house of London,
then worth at least 600 pounds per annum; but the Petitioner having enjoyed
that place only eight months, was causlesly outed by sinister information of
intruders, who have enjoyed that office, and divided the profit thereof between
them ever since that intrusion.

Moreover, the late King by Privy Seal, owes to the Petitioners wife (who is
the Relict of Mr. Thomas Ferrer) for Linen Cloth 5000 pounds, and for 1200
pounds, for which she was assigned satisfaction out of the Customs of Tobacco;
besides, she was further assigned out of Sir Thomas Dawes Office 100 marks per
annum: all which debts likewise lie wholly unsatisfied, to the Petitioners
great prejudice.

Besides the aforesaid losses, hindrances, expenses, sufferings, and
forbearances of the profit of the said Office, the Petitioner from time to time
has laid out himself for the common good, in acting, lending, spending, (and
serving) when others refused; exposed himself to that eminent danger at
Branford, by London and Commonwealth, insomuch, that thereby, and for want of
his satisfaction aforesaid, the Petitioner having consumed his Estate, has
been constrained to sell and morgage some part of his Lands to pay Creditors,
and to maintain his Family, having a Wife and nine Children; and is likely to
be undone for obeying the Parliaments Commands, unless by the justice and
commiseration of this honorable Assembly he be speedily relieved and righted,
for that ever since the said reported sum, the Petitioner from time to time
has made

The Petitioner therefore humbly prays, That he may not perish for acting for
the public good according to the Declaration of Parliament, but that now after
26 years suffering, whereof twelve years in fruitless and wearisome waitings,
this honorable Assembly would now be pleased to take the unparalled London,
(from whence his first losses and sufferings sprang) and the other mo^ty to be
discompted upon such Goods as the Petitioner shall make entries of by
Exportation or importation in the Custom House London, until his debt with the
interest be fully satisfied and paid; or any other speedy way, as in your grave
wisdoms shall seem meet; and in like manner for his wives Debt, which is to pay
Debts and Legacies: and that the Petitioner may forthwith

And the Petitioner with his, shall as in all duty ever pray, etc. Richard
Chambers.
Sept. 6. 1654.


The Petitioner being wearied out with twelve years attendance upon His death.
in hopes of reparation for his imprisonment, troubles, and losses, during the
eleven years former interval of Parliament, in standing for the Liberty of the
Subject, grew infirm; and being not relieved, was reduced to a low estate and
condition: he died in Summer 1658. being about the age of seventy years.

Trinity, 5. Car. Banco Regis. The first day of this Term upon a Habeas Corpus
to Sir Allen Apsley the Lieutenant of the Tower, Mr. Seldom brought upon a
Habeas Corpus.
to bring here John Seldom Esquire with the cause of Detencer: he returned the same
cause as was in Mr. Stroods Case. And Mr. Littleton of the Inner Temple, of
Counsel with Mr. Seldom, moved, that the Return was insufficient in substance;
therefore prayed, that he might be bayled: and said, that it was a matter of
great consequence both to the Crown of the King, and to the Liberty of the
Subject. But as for the difficulty of Law contained in it, he said (under
favor) the Case cannot be said Grand. And so proceeded to his Argument (which
for the Reasons

The same day Sir Miles Hubbord, Benjamin Valentine, Denzil Holles, Esquire were at
the Bar upon the Habeas Corpus, directed to several Prisons. And their Counsel
were ready at the Bar to have argued the Case for them also. But because the
same Return was made for them as for Mr. Seldom, they all Declared, they would
rely on this Argument made by Mr. Littleton.

Sir Robert Heath the Kings Attorney General argued, that this Return was good;
and that Mr. Seldom and the rest of the parties ought not to be bailed; and
that within the Return there appears good cause of their commitment, and of
their detaining also. He said, The Case is great in expectation and
consequence, and concerns the Liberty of the Subject on one part, whereof the
Argument is plausible; and on the other part it concerns the safety and
Sovereignty of the King, which (he said) is a thing of greater weight; and that
the consideration

When the Court was ready to have delivered their opinions in this great
business, the Prisoners were not brought to the Bar according to the Rule of
the Court. Therefore Proclamation was made, for the keepers of the several
Prisons to bring in their Prisoners; but none of them appeared, but the Marshal
of the Kings Bench: who informed the Court, that Mr. Strood who was in his
custody, was removed yesterday, and put in the Tower of London by the Kings own
warrant; and so it was done with the other Prisoners, for each of them was
removed out of his prison in which he was before. But notwithstanding, it was
prayed by the Counsel for the Prisoners, that the Court would deliver their
opinion as to the matter in Law: but the Court refused to do

The evening before, there came a Letter to the Judges of this Court from the
King himself, informing the Court with the Reasons, wherefore the Prisoners
were not suffered to come at the day appointed for the resolution of the
Judges. These were the words of the Letter.

To our Trusty and welbeloved, Our Chief A letter from the King to the Judges.
and the rest of Our Justices of Our Bench.
C. R.
TRusty and welbeloved,
we Greet you well: Whereas by our special commandment Sir Miles Hubard, Walter
Long, and William Stroud from the several prisons where they were formerly
committed, and have now sent them to our Tower of London; understanding there
are various constructions made thereof, according to the several apprehensions
of those who discourse of it, as if we had done it to decline the course of
Justice: We have therefore thought fit to let you know the true Reason and
occasion thereof; as also, why we commanded, those and the other Prisoners
should not come before you the last day: We (having heard how most of them a
while since did carry Seldom and Valentine should attend you tomorrow, they
being sufficient to appear before you, since you cannot as yet give any
resolute opinion in the main point in Question.

Given under our Signet at Our Manor at Greenwich, this 24 Iunii, in the 5
year of our Reign.

Within three hours after the receipt of those Letters, other Letters were
brought unto the said Judges, as follows.

To Our trusty and well-beloved, Our Chief Justices, and the rest of Our
Justices of Our Bench.
C. R.

TRusty and well-beloved, Another Letter.
we greet you well: Whereas by our Letters of this days date, we gave you to
understand our pleasure, That of those prisoners which by our Commandment are
kept in our Tower of London, Seldom and Valentine should be brought tomorrow
before you; now upon more mature Deliberation, we have resolved, That all of
them shall receive the same treatment, and that none shall come before you,
until we have cause given us to believe they will make a better demonstration
of their Modesty and Civility both toward us and

Given under our Signet at our Manor at Greenwich, this 24 day of June, in the
fifth year of our Reign.

So the Court this Term delivered no opinion, and the imprisoned Gentlemen
continued in restraint all the long Vacation.

Habeas Corpus was prayed to the Pursevant of Arms for four Constables of
Hertfordshire, to whose custody they were committed by the Lords of the
Privy Council; and the Habeas Corpus was granted on their behalf: but then they
were committed to the Custody of other Pursevants; and so upon every Habeas
Corpus they were removed from Pursevant to Pursevant, and could have no fruit
of their Habeas Corpus all this Term.

There wanted not some, who upon the Kings dissolution of this Parliament,
France, which was in time about four years before the blazing Star, by Lewis
the eleventh King of France, who by reason the third Estate representing the
Commons did incroach (as he declared) too much upon the Clergy and Nobility,
the King dissolved that Parliament of the three Estates, and never L' Assembli
des Notables.
which is called L' assembli des Notables, An assembly of certain eminent
persons of his own Nomination; whereunto he added some Counselor out of every
Court of Parliament: there being eight in all in France, and being few in
number, and of his own Nomination, would more readily comply with the Kings
proposals, and not dispute his will and pleasure, as the general assembly of
three Estates had wont to do when the King trenched upon

That which gives us occasion to mention this last particular, is a little
Tract composed to the said end and purpose, and which did this Trinity long
Vacation walk abroad, and went from hand to hand, sometime at Court, sometime
in the Country, and sometime at the Innes of Court; which we here set down
verbatim in the Appendix, that the humor of the Author thereof may be the more
clearly discerned: and when we come to its proper time and place, you shall see
what success this Pamphlet had, when it was questioned in the Star Chamber.

A Letter to the Judges.
Toward the latter end of his Vacation, all the Justices of the Kings
Michaelmas day. These Letters were from the Council Table; and the cause
expressed in them, was, That his Majesty had present and urgent occasion to use
their service. The Judges came up accordingly on Tuesday being Michaelmas day.
The next morning about four a clock, Letters were brought to the chief Justice
from Mr. Trumbal Clerk of the Council then attending, that he, and Judge
Whitlock, one of the Judges of that Court, should attend the King that Hampton
that morning; The King confers with some of them.
where the King taking them apart from the Council, fell upon the business of
the Gentlemen in the Tower, and was contented they should be bayled
notwithstanding their obstinacy in that they would not give the King a
Petition, expressing, That they were sorry he was offended with them: he showed
his purpose to proceed against them by the common Law in the Kings Bench, and
to leave his proceeding in the Star Chamber. Diverse

Motion to bail the prisoners.
The first day of Michaelmas Term it was moved by Mr. Mason to have the
Resolution of the Judges; and the Court with one voice said, That they are now
content that they shall be bayled, but that they ought to find sureties also
for the good behavior; and Jones Justice said, That so it was done in the Case
which had been often remembered to another purpose, two wit, Russels Case in 9
E. 3. To which Mr. Seldom answered, (with whom all the other prisoners agreed
in opinion) That they have their sureties ready for First, the Case here had
long depended in Court (and they have been imprisoned for these thirty weeks)
and it had been oftentimes argued on the one side and the other; and those that
argued for the King, always demanded that we should be remanded; and those
which argued on our side, desired that we might be bayled or discharged: but it
was never the desire of the one side or the other If baylable or not; therefore
he now desires that the matter of bayl and of good behavior may be severed,
and not con^ounded.

Secondly, because the finding of sureties of good behavior is seldom urged
upon Returns of Felonies or Treasons. And it is but an implication upon the
Return, that we are culpable of those matters which are objected.

3. We demand to be bayled in point of Right; and if it be not grantable of
Right, we do not demand it: but the finding of Sureties for the good behavior
is a point of discretion merely; and we cannot assent to it, without great
offense to the Parliament, where these matters which are surmised by the Return
were acted; and by the Statute of 4 Hen. 8. all punishments of such nature are
made void etc.

Curia.

The Return does not make mention of any thing done in Parliament, and we
cannot in a judicial way take notice that these things were done in Parliament.
And by Whitlock, The surety of good behavior, is as a preventing medicine
Crook, It is no inconvenience to the Prisoners: for the same bayl suffices,
and all shall be written upon one piece of parchment. And Heath Attorney
General said, That by the command of the King he had an information ready in
his hand to deliver in the Court against them. Hide Chief Justice: If now you
refuse to find sureties for the good behavior, and be for that cause remanded;
perhaps we afterward will not grant Habeas Corpus for you, inasmuch as we are
made acquainted

Ashly the Kings Sergeant offered his own bayl for Mr. Holles one of the
Prisoners (who had married his daughter and heir.) But the Court refused it;
for it is contrary to the course of the Court, unless the Prisoner himself will
become bound also.

And Mr. Long that had found sureties in the Chief Justices Chamber for the
good behavior, refused to continue his sureties any longer, inasmuch as they
were bound in a great sum of 2000 l. and the good

Accordingly the same Term an Information was exhibited by the Attorney General
against Sir John Elliot, An Information exhibited in the Kings Bench against
vir John Elliot, etc.
Denzil Holles, Sir Benjamin Valentine, reciting, That a Parliament was
summoned to be held at Westminster, 17 Martii tertio Caroli Regis, ibid.
inchoat. and that Sir John was duly elected, and returned Knight for the County
of Cornwall, and the other two Burgesses of Parliament for other places: and Sir
John Finch chosen Speaker.

That Sir John Elliot machinans and intendens, omnibus viis and modis, seminare
and excitare discord, evil will, murmurings and seditions, as well versus
Regem, Magnates, Praelatos, Proceres and Justiciarios suos, quam inter
Magnates, Proceres, and Justiciarios, and reliquos Subditos Regis, and
totaliter Regni Angliae, tam in Domino Rege, quam in Conciliariis and Ministris
suis cujuscunque generis; and introducere tumultum and confusionem, in all
Estates and parts, and ad intentionem, That all the Kings Subjects should
withdraw their affections from the King. The 23 of February Ann. 4 Carol. in
the Parliament, and hearing of the Commons, falso, malitiose and seditiose,
used these words, The Kings Privy Council, his Judges, and his Counsel learned,
have conspired together, to trample under their feet the Liberties of the
Subjects of this Realm, and the Liberties of this House. And afterward upon
the 2 of March, Ann. 4. aforesaid, the King appointed the Parliament to be
adjourned until the 10 of March next following, and so signified his pleasure
to the House of Commons: and that the three Defendants the said 2 day of March
4 Car. malitiose, agreed, and amongst themselves conspired to disturb and
distract the Commons, that they should not adjourn themselves according to the
Kings pleasure before signified; And that John Elliot, according to the
agreement and conspiracy aforesaid, had maliciously in propositum and
intentionem praedict. in the House of Commons aforesaid, spoken these false,
malicious, pernicious, and seditious words precedent, etc. And that the said
Denzil Holles, according to the agreement and conspiracy aforesaid, between him
and the other Defendants, then and there, falso, malitiose, and seditiose,
uttered haec falsa, malitiosa, and scandalosa verba precedentia, etc. And that
the said Denzil Holles and Benjamin Valentine, secundum agreamentum and
conspirationem uttered the said words upon the said 2 of March, after the
signifying the Kings pleasure to adjourn: and the said Sir John Finch the
Speaker endeavoring to get out of the chair according to the Kings command,
They vi and armis, manu forti and illicito assaulted, evil entreated, and
forcibly detayned him in the chair; and afterward, he being out of the chair,
they assaulted him in the House, and evil entreated him, and violenter manu
forti and illicito drew him to the chair, and thrust him into it: whereupon
there was in maximum contemptum, and to the disherison of the King his Crown
and Dignity: for which, etc.

The Plea of Sir John Elliot.
To this Information the Defendants put in a Plea to the jurisdiction Forasmuch
as these offenses are supposed to have been done in Parliament, they ought not
to be punished in this Court, or any other, except in Parliament. And the
Attorney General moved the Court to overruled the Plea as to the jurisdiction
of the Court; and this he said, the Court might do, although he did not demur
upon the Plea. But the Court would not overruled the Plea; but gave a day to
join in demurr that Term. And on the first day of the next Term, the Record to
be read; and within a day after, argued at the Bar.

In Hilary Term following, the Case of Walter Long Esquire, one of the
imprisoned Gentlemen, came to hearing in the Star Chamber, which was as
follows.

Mr Walter Long's Case in the Star Chamber.
An Information was exhibited into the Star Chamber, by SIR Robert Heath Knight,
his Majesty's Attorney General Plaintiff, against the said Walter Long
Defendant, for a great and presumptuous Contempt against his Majesty, for
breach of duty and trust of his Office, and for manifest and wilful breach of
his Oath taken as high Sheriff of the County of Wilts, and not residing and
dwelling in his own person in the said County, according to the said Oath; but
being chosen one of the Citizens for the City of Bath, in the County of
Somerset, to serve for the said City in the last Parliament, by color thereof
he remained at London or Westminster during the time of that Parliament by the
space of three months and above, in neglect of his Duty, and in manifest
contempt of the Laws of this kingdom: which cause That the said Defendant Long
was by his now Majesty made high Sheriff of the County of Wilts in or about
November, in the third year of his Majesty's reign, and received his Patent of
Sheriffwick for the said County about ten days after; and that he took an Oath
before one of the Masters of the Chancery, for the due execution of the said
Office of Sheriff of the said County. In which Oath, as appeared Bath, the said
Defendant Long was chosen one of the Citizens to serve for the said City of
Bath in the Parliament then summoned, to be holden and commence upon the
seventeenth day of March in the said third year of his Majesty's reign; and
being so chosen and returned by the Sheriff of the County of Somerset,
Westminster in the County of Middlesex, and did, during the most part of the
said Parliament, continue in and about the City of London and Westminster, and
did attend in the Parliament as a Citizen for the said City of Bath: during all
which time he likewise was and continued high Sheriff for the said County of
Wilts, and had no particular license from his Majesty to the contrary. Upon
consideration whereof, as also of the the particular causes and reasons of the
Defendants Demurrer and Plea formerly exhibited unto the said Information, the
benefit whereof was by order of the Court reserved unto the Defendant to be
debated and considered of at the hearing of this cause, and of diverse other
matters now urged for the Defendant, both to have justified his the said
Defendants attendance in Parliament, and his not residence in person in the
County Attorney General, and others of his Majesty's Counsel learned. And
therefore the whole Court were clear of opinion, and did so declare, That the
said Defendant, who at that time, as high Sheriff, had the custody and charge
of the County of Wilts committed unto him by his Majesty, and had taken his
Oath according to the Law to abide in his proper person within his Bayliffwick
during all the time of his Sheriffwick as aforesaid, and whose trust and
employment did require his personal attendance in the said County, had not
only committed a great offense in violating the said Oath so by him taken, but
also a great misdemeanor in breach of the trust committed unto him by his
Majesty, and in contempt of his Majesty's pleasure signified unto him by and
under his Highness great Seal, when he granted unto him the said Office of
Sheriffwick For which said several great Offenses in breach of his said Oath,
neglect of the trust and duty of his Office, and the great and high contempt of
his Majesty, their Lordships did hold the said Defendant worthy the sentence of
the Court; the rather, to the end that by this example the Sheriffs of all
other Counties may be deterred from committing the like offenses hereafter, and
may take notice that their personal residence and attendance is required within
their Bayliffwicks during the time of their Sheriffwick. The Court therefore

Arguments concerning Sir John Elliot.
The same Term Mr. Mason argued in the kings Bench for Sir John against the
Information preferred against him (amongst others) by Sir Robert Heath the
kings Attorney General; and the same day the Attorney General argued in
maintenance of the said Information: the Judges also the same day spoke briefly
to the Case, and agreed with one Voice, That the Court, as this Case is, shall
have Jurisdiction, although that these offenses were committed in Parliament,
and that the imprisoned Members ought to answer.

Jones began and said, That though this Question be now newly moved, yet it is
an ancient Question with him; for it had been in his thoughts these eighteen
years. For this Information there are three Questions in it: 1. Whether the
matters informed be true or false: and this ought to be determined by Jury or
Demurrer. 2. When the matters of the Information are found or confessed to be
true, if 3. Admit that the offenses are truly charged, if this Court has power
to punish them: and that is the sole Question of this day.


And it seems to me, that of these offenses, although committed in Parliament,
this Court shall have jurisdiction to punish them. The Plea of the Defendents
here to the jurisdiction being concluded with a Demurrer, is not peremptory
unto them, although it be adjudged

In the discussion of this point, I decline these Questions: 1. If the matter
be voted in Parliament, when it is finished, it can be punished and examined in
another Court. 2. If the matter be commenced in Parliament, and that ended, if
afterward it may be Questioned in another Court.


I question not these Matters, but I hold, That an Offense committed First,
Quia interest Reipublicae ut malesicia non maneant impunita: and there ought to
be a fresh punishment of them. Parliaments are called at the Kings pleasure,
and the King is not compellible to call his Parliament; and if before the next
Parliament, the party offending, or the witnesses die, then there will be a
^ayler of Justice. The Parliament is no constant Court; every Parliament mostly
consists of several men, and by consequence they cannot take notice of matters
done in the foregoing Parliament; and there they do not examine by oath, unless
it be in Chancery, as it is used of late time. Thirdly, The Parliament cannot
send Process to make the offenders to appear at the next Parliament; and being
at large, if they hear a noise of a Parliament, they will fugam facere, and so
prevent their punishment. Fourthly, Put the case that one of the Defendants be
made a Baron of Parliament,


It has been objected, That the Parliament is the Superior Court to this,
therefore this Court cannot examine their proceedings.

To this I say, That this Court of the Kings Bench is a higher Court then the
Justices of Oyer and Terminer, or the Justices of Assize:

2. Obj. It is a Privilege of Parliament, whereof we are not competent Judges.

To this I say, That Privilegium est privata lex, and private legem. And this
ought to be by grant prescription in Parliament, and then it ought to be
pleaded for the manner, as is 33 Hen. 8 Die. as it is not here pleaded. Also we
are Judges of all Acts of Parliament: as, 4 Hen. 7. Ordinance made by the King
and Commons is not good, and we are Judges what shall be said a Session of
Parliament, as it is in Plowden in Patridges Case. We are Judges of their lives
and lands, therefore of their Liberties. And 8 Eliz. (which was cited by Mr.
Attorney) it was the opinion of Dyer, Oatlyn, and Southcot, Justices, That
offenses committed in Parliament may be punished out of Parliament. And 3 Ed.
3.19. it is good Law. And it is usual near the end of Parliaments to set some
petty punishment upon offenders in Parliament, to prevent other Courts. And I
have seen a Roll in this Court, in 6 H. 6. where judgment was given in a writ
of annuity in Ireland, and afterward the said judgment was reversed in
Parliament in Ireland; upon which judgment, Writ of Error was brought in this
Court, and reversed.

Lord Chief Justice Hide.
Hide Chief Justice, to the same intent:

No new matter has been offered to us now by them that argue for the
Defendants, but the same Reasons and Authorities in substance, which were
objected before all the Justices of England and Barons of the Exchequer, at
Sergeants-Inn in Fleet Street, upon an Information in the Star Chamber That an
offense committed in Parliament, that being ended, may be punished out of
Parliament. And no Court more apt for that purpose then this Court in which we
are: and it cannot be punished in a future Parliament, because it cannot take
notice of matters done in a foregoing Parliament.

As to that that was said, That an Inferior Court cannot meddle Newgate. 3 E.
3.19. and 1 Mar. which have been cited, overruled this case. Therefore.

Justice Whitlock.
Whitlock accordingly:

1. I say in this Case, Nihil dictum quod non dictum prius. 2. That all the
Judges of England have resolved this very point. 3. That now we are but upon
the brink and skirts of the Cause: for it is not now in Question if these be
offenses or no; or, if true or false; but only if this Court have jurisdiction.


But it has been objected, That the offense is not capital, therefore it is
not examinable in this Court.

But though it be not capital, yet it is criminal, for it is sowing of sedition
to the destruction of the Commonwealth. The Question now is not between us that
are Judges of this Court and the Parliament, or between the King and the
Parliament; but between some private Bracton says, solum Deum habet ultorem.
But no other within the Realm has this Privilege. It is true, that that which
is done in Parliament by consent of all the house, shall not be questioned
elsewhere; but if any private Members exuunt personas judicum, is there such
Sanctimony in the place, that they may not be questioned for it elsewhere? The
Bishop of Ross, as the Case has been put, being Ambassador here, practiced
matters against the State. And it was resolved, That although Legatus sit Rex
in alieno solo, yet when he goes out of the bounds of his Office, and complots
with Traitors in this Kingdom, that he shall be punished as an offender here. A
Minister has a great Privilege when he is in the Pulpit; but yet if in the
Pulpit he utter speeches which are scandalous to the State, he is punishable:
so in this Case, when a Burgess of Parliament becomes mutinous, he shall not
have the Privilege of Parliament. In my opinion, the Realm cannot consist
without Parliaments, but the behavior of Parliament Men ought

But it has been objected:

To this I put this Case: When a Peer of the Realm is arraigned of Treason, we
are not his Judges, but the high Steward, and he shall be tried by his Peers:
But if error be committed in this proceeding, that shall be reversed by error
in this Court; for that which we do, is Coram ipso Rege.

That the Parliament-Law differs from the Law by which we judge in this Court
in sundry Cases. And for the instance which has been made, That by the Statute
none ought to be chosen Burgess of a Town in which he does not inhabit, but
that the usage of Parliament is contrary. But if Information be brought upon
the said Statute against such a Burgess, I think that the Statute is a good
warrant for us to give judgment against him.

And it has been objected: That there is no President in this matter.

But there are sundry Presidents by which it appears that the Parliament has
transmitted matters to this Court, as 2 R. 2. there being a question between a
great Peer and a Bishop, it was transmitted to this Eliz. Die. That the Earl
Marshal of England is an Officer of this Court; and it is always admitted in
Parliament, That the privileges of Parliament hold not in three Cases, to wit,
in case of Treason; secondly, in case of Felony, and in suit for the peace; and
the last is our very case. Therefore, etc.

Crook argued to the same intent (but I did not well hear him:) he said, That
these offenses ought to be punished in the Court, or no where; and all manner
off offenses which are against the Crown, are examinable in this Court.

It has been objected: That by this means none will adventure to make his
complaints in Parliament.

That is not so, for he may complain in a Parliamentary course, but not falsely
and unlawfully, as here is pretended; for that which is unlawfully, cannot be
in a Parliamentary course.

It has been objected: That the Parliament is a higher Court then this is.

And it is true: But every Member of Parliament is not a Court; and if he
commit offense, he is punishable here. Our Court is a Court of high
jurisdiction, it cannot take cognizance of real Pleas; but if a real Plea comes
by Error in this Court, it shall never be transmitted. But this Court may award
a grand Cape, and other Process usual in real Actions: But of all capital and
criminal causes we are originally competent Judges, and by consequence of this
matter. But I am not proditore, would have made this Treason. And for the other
matters, he agreed with the Judges. Judgment.
Therefore by the Court, the Defendants were ruled to plead further: and Mr.
Lenthal of Lincoln's Inn was assigned of Counsel for them.

Inasmuch as the Defendants would not put in other Plea the last day of the
Term, Judgment pronounced.
judgment was given against them upon a nihil dicit; which judgment was
pronounced by Jones to this effect:

The matter of the Information now by the confession of the Defendants is
admitted to be true, and we think their Plea to the jurisdiction insufficient
for the matter and manner of it. And we hereby will not draw the true Liberties
of Parliament Men into Question; to wit, for such matters which they do or
speak in Parliamentary manner. But in this case there was a conspiracy between
the Defendants to slander the State, and to raise sedition and discord between
the King his Peers and People; and this was not a Parliamentary Judges of
England, except one, have Resolved the Statute of 4 Hen. 8. to be a private
Act, and to extend to Strood only. But every Member of the Parliament shall
have such Privileges as are there mentioned; but they have no Privilege to
speak at their pleasure. The Parliament is an high Court, therefore it ought
not to be disorderly, but ought to give good example to other Courts. If a Judge
of our Court shall rayl upon the State or Clergy, he is punishable

2. For the punishment, although the offense be great, yet that shall be with a
light hand, and shall be in this manner. 1. That every of the Defendants shall
be imprisoned during the Kings pleasure: Sir John Elliot to be imprisoned in
the Tower of London, and the other Defendants in other Prisons. 2. That none of
them shall be delivered out of Prison until he give security 3. Sir John
Elliot, inasmuch as we think him the greatest offender, and the ringleader,
shall pay a fine to the King of 2000 l. and Mr. Holles, a fine of 1000 marks:
and Mr. Valentine, because he is of less ability then the rest, shall pay a
fine of 500 l. And to all this, all the other Justices with one voice accorded.


FINIS.
APPENDIX.
His Majesty's Declaration to all his Loving Subjects, of the Causes which
moved him to dissolve the last Parliament, March 10. 1628.
HOwsoever Princes are not bound to give account of their Actions but to God
alone; The Kings Declaration of the causes, which moved him to dissolve the
last Parliament.
yet for the satisfaction of the minds and affections of Our Loving Subjects,
We have thought good to set down thus much by way of Declaration, that We may
appear to the world in the truth and sincerity of Our Actions, and not in
those Colors, in which We know some turbulent and ill-affected spirits (to
masque and disguise their wicked intentions,

We assembled our Parliament the 17th. day of March, in the third year of Our
Reign, for the safety of Religion, for securing Our Kingdoms and Subjects at
home, and Our friends and Allies abroad. And therefore at the first sitting
down of it, We declared the miserable afflicted estate of those of the reformed
Religion, in Germany, France, and other parts of Christendom; the distressed
extremities of Our dearest Uncle, the King of Denmark, chased out of a great
part of his Dominions; Austria, and their ancient confederates) the French King
professed the rooting out of the Protestant Religion; That, of the Princes and
States on Our party, some were overrun, others diverted, and some disabled to
give assistance. For which, and other important motives, We propounded a speedy
supply of Treasure, answerable to the necessity of the Cause.

These things in the beginning were well resented by the House of



In those large Disputes, as We permitted many of Our high prerogatives to be
debated, which in the best times of Our Predecessors had never been questioned,
without punishment or sharp reproof; so We did endeavor to have shortened those
debates, for winning of time, which would have much advantaged Our great
affairs, both at home and abroad. And therefore both by speeches and messages,
We did often declare Our gracious and clear resolution, to maintain, not only
the Parliament, but all our People, in their ancient and just liberties,
without either violation or diminution; and in the end, for their full
satisfaction and security, did by an Answer, framed in the form by themselves
desired, to their Parliamentary Petition, confirm their ancient

This Parliament, howsoever besides the settling Our necessary supply, and their
own liberties, they wasted much time in such proceedings, (blasting Our
Government, as We are unwilling to remember) yet We suffered them to sit,
until themselves desired Us to appoint a time for their Recesse, not naming
either Adjournment or Prorogation.

Whereupon by advice of Our Council, We resolved to prorogue and make a
Session; and to that end prefixed a day, by which they might (as was meet in so
long a Sitting) finish some profitable and good Laws; and withal gave order
for a gracious Pardon to all Our Subjects: which, according to the use of
former Parliaments, passed the Higher House, and was sent down to the Commons.
All which being graciously intended by Us, was ill-entertained by some
disaffected persons of that House, who by their artifices, in a short time
raised so to that Petition, to the diminution of Our profit, and (which was
more) to the danger of Our Government: We resolved to prevent the finishing of
that Remonstrance, and other dangerous intentions of some ill-affected persons,
by ending the Session the next morning, some few hours sooner then was
expected; and by Our Own Mouth to declare to both Houses the cause thereof; and
for hindering the spreading of those sinister interpretations of that Petition
and Answer, June last.

The Session thus ended, and the Parliament risen, that intended Remonstrance
gave Us occasion to look into the business of Tunnage and Poundage. And
therefore, though Our necessities pleaded strongly for Us, yet We were not apt
to strain that point too far, but resolved to guide Our Self by the practice of
former Ages, and examples Edward the fourth, the Subsidy of Tunnage and
Poundage was not granted unto that King, but was first granted unto him by
Parliament in the third year of his Reign; yet the same was accounted and
answered to that King, Richard the Third, King Henry the Seventh, King Henry
the Eighth, King Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, the Subsidy
of Tunnage and Poundage was not only enjoyed by every of those Kings and
Queens, from the death of each of them deceasing, until it was granted by
Parliament unto the Successor; but in all those times (being for the most part
peacable, and passion and distemper) could be against receiving of Tunnage and
Poundage; especially since We do, and still must, pursue those ends, and
undergo that charge, for which it was first granted to the Crown; It having
been so long and constantly continued to Our Predecessors, as that in four
several Acts of Parliament for the granting thereof to King Edward the Sixth,
Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, and Our blessed Father. It is in express terms
mentioned, to have been had and enjoyed by the several Kings, named in those
Acts, time out of

And as in this We did, what in reason and honor was fit for the present, so
Our Thoughts were daily intentive upon the re-assembling of Our Parliament,
with full intention on Our part, to take away all ill-understanding between Us
and Our people; whose loves, as We desired to continue and preserve, so We used
Our best endeavors, to prepare and facilitate the way to it. And to this end,
having taken a strict and exact survey of Our Government, both in the Church
and Appello Caesarem, or, An Appeal to Caesar; and published in the year 1625.
by Richard Montague, then Bachelor of Divinity, and now Bishop of Chichester;
and because it did open the way to those schisms and divisions, which have
since ensued in the Church, We did, for remedy and redress thereof, and for
the satisfaction of the consciences of Our good people, not only by Our
public Elizabeth of famous memory; and by a Declaration before those Articles,
We did tie and restrain all opinions to the sense of those Articles, that
nothing might be left for private fancies and innovations. For, We call God to
record, before whom We stand, that it is, and always has been, Our hearts
desire, to be found worthy of that Title, which We account Defender of the
Faith. Neither shall We ever give way to the authorizing of any thing, whereby
any Innovation may steal or creep into the Church; but to preserve that unity
of Doctrine and Discipline, established in the time of Queen Elizabeth, whereby
the Church of England has stood and flourished ever since.

And as we were careful to make up all breaches and rents in Religion at home,
so did We, by Our Proclamation and Commandment, for the execution of Laws
against Priests, and Popish Recusants, fortify all ways and approaches
against that foreign Enemy; which if it have not succeeded according to Our
intention, We must lay the fault where it is, in the subordinate Officers, and
Ministers in the

And, as We have been careful for the settling of Religion, and quieting the
Church; so were We not unmindfull of the preservation of the just and ancient
Liberties of Our Subjects, which we secured to them by our gracious Answer to
the Petition in Parliament, having not since that time done any act whereby to
infringe them. But Our care is, and hereafter shall be, to keep them entire and
inviolable, as We

Next to the care of Religion, and of Our Subjects Rights, We did Our best for
the provident and well-ordering of that aid and supply, which was granted us
the last Session, whereof no part has been wastefully spent, nor put to any
other use, than those for which it was desired and granted; as upon payment of
Our Fleet and Army: wherein Our care has been such, as We chose rather to
discontent seu been, seu male facta premunt; and whatsoever once seemed amiss
is ever remembered; but good endeavors are never regarded.

Now all these things that were the chief complaints the last Session, being by
Our Princely care so seriously reformed, the Parliament reassembled January
last. We expected, according to the candor and sincerity of our own thoughts,
that men would have framed themselves for the effecting of a right
understanding between Us and Our People. But some few malevolent persons, like
Empericks and lewd Artists, did strive to make new work, and to have some
disease on foot, to keep themselves in request, and to be employed and
entertained in the cure. And yet to manifest how much offenses have been
diminished, The Committees for Grievances, Committees for Courts of Justice,
and Committees for Trade, have, since the sitting down of the Parliament,
received few Complaints, and those such, as they themselves have not thought to
be of that moment or importance, with which Our Ears should be acquainted.

No sooner therefore was the Parliament set down, but these ill affected men
began to sow and disperse their jealousies, by casting out some glances and
doubtful speeches, as if the Subject had not been so Westminster, and in what
manner the same was done. And a day also was then appointed, on which, the
House being resolved Templum Domini, Templum Domini, when the true care of the
Church never came into

Having, by these artifices, made a jealous impression in the hearts of many;
and a day being appointed to treat of the Grant of Tunnage and Poundage, at the
time prefixed, all express great willingness to any moderate and
well-disposed minds, declare, That it was Our meaning, by the gift of Our
people, to enjoy it, and that we did not challenge it of right, but took it de
been esse, showing thereby, not the right, but the necessity, by which We were
to take it, (wherein We descended, for their satisfaction, so far beneath Our
self, as We are confident, never any of Our Predecessors did the like, nor was
the like ever required or expected from Them). Yet for all this, the Bill of
John Rolls, a Member of their House, but also of Richard Chambers, John
Fowkes, and Bartholomew Gilman, against the Officers of Our Customs, for
detaining their goods, upon refusal to pay the ordinary Duty, accustomed to be
paid for the same. And upon these complaints, they send for the Officers of the
Customs, enforcing them to attend day after day, by the space of

We are not ignorant, how much that House has of late years endeavored to
extend their privileges, by setting up general Committees for Religion, for
Courts of Justice, for Trade, and the like; a course never heard of until of
late: So as, where in former timos the Knights and Burgesses were wont to
communicate to the House such business, as they brought from their Countries;
now there are so many Chairs erected, to make inquiry upon all sorts of men,
where



They sent messengers to examine upon sundry questions, Our two Newgate, of
which, they are not accountable to the House of Commons.

And whereas Suits were commenced in Our Court of Star Chamber, against Richard
Chambers, John Fowks, Bartholomew Gilman, and Richard Phillips, by Our Attorney
General, for great misdemeanors; they resolved, that they were to have
privilege of Parliament against us for their persons, for no other cause, but
because they had Petitions depending in that House; and (which is more strange)
they resolved, that a Signification should be made from that House, by a
Letter, to issue under the hand of their Speaker, unto the Lord Keeper of Our
Great Seal, that no attachments should be granted out against the said
Chambers, Fowks, Gilman, or Phillips, during their said privilege of
Parliament. Whereas it is far above the power of that House, to give direction
Westminster, to stop Attatchments against any man, though never so strongly
privileged; the breach of Privilege being not in the Court that grants, but
in the Party or Minister that puts in execution such Attachments. And
therefore, if any such Letter had come to the Lord Keeper, as it did not, he
should have highly offended Us if he had obeyed it. Nay, they went so far, as
they spared not the honor of Our Councill-board, but examined their
proceedings in the case of Our Customers, interrogating what Savage, they
passed without check or censure by the House. By which may appear, how far the
Members of that House have of late swollen beyond the rules

They sent for Our Sheriff of London to examine him in a cause, whereof they
had no jurisdiction; their true and ancient jurisdiction extending only to
their own Members, and to the conservation of their privileges, and not to the
censure of foreign persons and causes, London, using that outward pretext for a
cause of committing him, the true and inward cause being, for that he had
showed himself dutiful to Us and Our commandments, in the matter concerning
Our Customs.

In these innovations (which We will never permit again) they

Lastly, in their proceedings against Our Customers, they went about to censure
them as Delinquents, and to punish them, for staying some goods of some
factious Merchants, in Our Storehouse, for not paying those Duties which
themselves had for^erly paid, and which

To give some color to their proceedings herein, they went about to create a
new privilege, (which We will never admit) That a Parliament Man has
privilege for his goods against the King; the consequence whereof would be,
That he may not be constrained to pay any Duties to the King, during the time
of privilege of Parliament. It is true, they would have this case to have been
between the Merchants, and Our Farmers of Our Customs, and have severed them
from Our interest and commandment, thereby the rather to make them Monday the
23d of February, sent a message unto them by Secretary Cook, thanking them for
the respect they had showed, in severing the interest of Our Farmers from Our
Own interest and commandment. Nevertheless, We were bound in honor to
acknowledge a truth, that, Adjourn, Adjourn; and thereupon, without any cause
given on Our part, in a very unusual manner, adjourned, until the Wednesday
following.

On which day, by the uniform wisdom of Our Privy Council, We caused March;
hoping that in the mean time, a better and more right understanding might be
begotten between Us, and the Members of that House, whereby the Parliament
might come to a happy Issue.

But understanding by good advertisment, that their discontent did not in that
time digest, and pass away; We resolved to make a second adjournment, until
the tenth of March; which was done, as well to take time to Our Self, to think
of some means to accommodate those Here are the passages concerning the Members
deportment in the House, mentioned in this Declaration, which we ^orbear to
repeat, in regard the same are at large expressed in the Information in the
Star Chamber before mentioned.


Whilst the Duke of Buckingham lived, he was entitled to all the distempers
and ill events of former Parliaments; and therefore much endeavor was used to
demolish him, as the only wall of separation between Us and Our people. But
now he is dead, no alteration was may not see the truth, and largeness of Our
heart toward them. So that now it is manifest, the Duke was not alone the mark
these men shot at, but was only as a near minister of Ours, taken up, on the
By, and in their passage to their more secret designs; which were only to
cast Our Affairs into a desperate condition, to abate the powers of Our Crown*
and to bring Our Government into obloquy; that, in the end, all things may be
overwhelmed with Anarchy and Confusion.

We do not impute these dysasters to the whole House of Commons,

We have thus declared the manifold causes We had, to dissolve this Parliament,
whereby all the world may see, how much they have forgotten their former
engagements at the entry into the War, themselves being perswaders to it;
promising to make Us feared by Our enemies, and esteemed by Our friends. And
how they turned the Necessities grown by that War, to enforce us to yield to
Conditions incompatible with Monarchy.

And now that Our People may discern, that these provocations of England,
without admitting or conniving at any backsliding, either to Popery or Schism.
We do also declare, That we will maintain the ancient and just rights and
liberties of Our Subjects, with so much constancy and justice, that they shall
have cause to acknowledge, That under Our government and gracious protection,
they live in a more

And for Our Ministers, We will not that they be terrified by those harsh
proceedings, that have been strained against some of them. For, as we will not
command any thing unjust or dishonorable, but shall use Our authority and
prerogatives for the good of Our People; so we will expect, that Our Ministers
obey Us, and they shall assure themselves, We will protect them.

As for Our Merchants, We let them know, We shall always endeavor no good or
dutiful Subject will deny it, being so necessary for the good of the whole
Kingdom. And if any factious Merchant will affront Us, in a thing so
reasonable, and wherein we require no more, nor in no other manner, than so
many of Our Predecessors have done, and have been dutifully obeyed: Let them
not deceive themselves, but be assured, that We shall find honorable and just
means to support Our Estate, vindicate Our Sovereignty, and preserve the
Authority

And now having laid down the truth and clearness of Our proceedings, all wise
and discreet men may easily judge of those rumors, and jealous fears, that are
maliciously and wickedly bruited abroad; and may discern, by examination of
their own hearts, whether (in respect of the free passage of the Gospel,
indifferent and equal administration of Justice, freedom from oppression, and
the great peace and quietness which every man enjoys under his own Vine

A Proposition for His Majesty's Service, to bridle the Impertinency of
Parliaments. Afterward questioned in the Star Chamber.
A Proposition presented to the King how to keep in awe this nation.
THe Proposition for your Majesty's service contains two parts: the one, to
secure your State, and to bridle the impertinency of First to have a Fortress
in every considerable Town.
and faithful Men, as they ought to be, with all other circumstances fit for
to be digested in a business of this nature; ordering Spain in the year 1588.
6. That your Majesty's government is the more secure, by the people's more
subjection; and by their subjection, your Parliament must be forced

For these, and diverse other weighty reasons, It may be considered in this
place, to make your Majesty more powerful and strong, some Imprimis, That none
wear Arms or Weapons at all, either in City or Country, but such as your
Majesty may think fit to privilege, and they to be enrolled. 2. That as many
highways as conveniently may be done, Secondly, To cause highways to be
made through such Towns.
be made passable through those Cities and Towns fortified, to constrain the
passengers to travel through them. 3. That the soldiers of Fortresses be
sometimes chosen of another Nation, Thirdly, To choose the Soldiers of such
Fortresses, no Inhabitants of the place.
if subject to the same Prince; but howsoever, not to be born in the same
Province, or within forty or fifty miles of the Fortress, and not to have
friends or correspondency 4. To let none pass through such places without a
Ticket.
and keys kept by the Mayor or Governor. 5. Also Innkeepers to deliver the
names of all unknown passengers that lodge in their houses; and if they stay
suspitiously at any time, 5. To have the names of all lodgers taken by
Inkeepers.
to present them to the Governor: whereby dangerous persons seeing these
strict courses, will be more wary of their actions, England, each chief Town
commonly has a ruinated Castle, well seated for strength, whose foundation and
stones remaining, may be both quickly

To maintain yearly the Fort, The expense of these Forts.
I make account in ordinary pay, three thousand men will be sufficient, and
will require forty thousand pound per Annum, or thereabouts, being an expense
that inferior Princes undergo, for their necessary safety. All which
prevention added to the invincible Sea-force your Majesty has already, and may
have, will make you the most powerful and obeyed King of the world. Which I
could likewise confirm by many examples, but I omit them for brevity, and not
to confuse your Majesty with too much matter. Your Majesty may find by the
scope of this discourse, the means showed in general to bridle your Subjects,
that may be either To impose an oath on the Subjects.
for better prevention thereof, to make known to your Majesty the purpose of a
general Oath your Subjects may take, for sure avoiding of all rubs, that may
hinder the conclusion of these businesses. It is further meant, that no subject
upon pain of high Treason, like, either make Laws, or reverse any made, with
any other Act, so great a Monarch as your self may do, and that without further
consent of a Parliament, or need to call them at all in such cases;
considering, that the Parliament in all matters, excepting causes to be
sentenced as the highest Court, ought to be subject unto your Majesty's will,
to give the negative or affirmative conclusion, and not to be constrained by
their impertinencies to any inconvenience, appertaining to your Majesty's
Regal Authority; and this, notwithstanding any bad England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and your Heirs for ever; and so received, not only of your Subjects,
but also of the whole world. How necessary the dangerous supremacy of
Parliament's usurpation is to be prevented, The example of Jews the Eleventh
King of France, does manifest, who found the like opposition as your Majesty
does; and by his wisdom suppressed it. And, to the

2. The second part of this Discourse is, touching your Majesty's Profit,
after your State is secured: Wherein I should observe both some reasonable
content to the people, as also consider the great expenses

Imprimis, The first means or course intended to increase your Majesty's
revenues or profit withal, Means ^o increase the King's revenewes.
is of greatest consequence, and I call it a Decimation, being so termed in
Italy, where in some part it is in use, importing the tenth of all Subjects
estates to be paid as a yearly rent to their Prince, To demand a Decima of men's
estates.
and as well monyed men in Towns, as landed men in the Countries, their value
and estates esteemed justly as it is to the true value, though with reason; and
this paid yearly in money: England for your Majesty's service, may serve
instead of Subsidies, Fifteens, and such like, which in this case are fit to be
released, for the Subjects benefit and content, in recompense of the said
Decima, which will yield your Majesty more in certainly, than they do Casually
by five hundred thousand pounds per annum at the least. To buy out all Leases
upon the Crown Lands.
Item, That when your Majesty has gotten money into your hands by some courses
to be set down, it would be a profitable course to increase your Entrada, to
buy out all Estates and Leases upon your own Lands, in such sort, as they be
made no losers; whereby having your Lands free, and renting it out to the true
value, as it is most in use, and not employed as heretofore, at an old Rent,
and small ^ines., you may then rent it out for at least four or five times more
per Annum, by this course it will be augmented at the least two hundred
thousand pounds per Annum; and to buy out the Tenants estates will come to a
small matter by the course, to make them no losers, considering the gain they
have already made upon the Land: And this is the rather to be done, and the
present course changed, because it has been a custom used merely to cosen the
King. To take the Salt into his Majesty's own hands.
Item. Whereas most Princes do receive the benefit per Annum. To demand a rate
for Sealing the weights every year.
It is likewise in other parts, that all Weights and Measures of the land,
either in private Houses, Shops, or public Markets, should be viewed to be
just, and sealed once a year, paying to the Prince for it; which in England,
applied to your Majesty, with order to pay sixpence for the sealing of per
Annum. Item, Though all Countries pay a Gabella for transportation of Cloth, To
demand an Impost for Wools.
and so likewise in England; yet in Spain there is Impost upon the Wools, which
in England is so great a wealth and benefit to the Sheep-Masters, as they may
well pay you five pound per cent. of the true value at the shearing, which I
conceive may be worth one hundred and forty thousand pounds per Annum. To put a
Tax upon every Lawyers Fee.
Item. Whereas the Lawyers Fees and gains in England be excessive, to your
Subjects prejudice; per cent. of the true value that the Cause has gained him;
and for recompense thereof, to limit all Lawyers Fees and gettings, whereby the
Subject shall save more in Fees and Charges, then he gives to your Majesty in
the Gabella, which I believe may be worth, one year with another, To put a Tax
upon Inns and Victualling-houses for a License.
fifty thousand pounds. Item, Whereas the Innes and Victualling-houses in
England are more chargeable to the Travelers, Tuskany and other parts; that
is, a prohibiting all Innes and Victualling-houses, but such as shall pay it;
and to impose upon the chief Inns and Taverns, to pay ten pounds a year to your
Majesty, and the worst five pound per Annum; and all Alehouses twenty
shillings per Annum, more or less, as they are in custom. Of all sorts there
are so many in England, that this Impos^ may well yield one hundred thousand
per Annum to your Majesty. To put a Tax upon all Car^le, Flesh, and Horses sold
in the Market.
Item, In Tuscany and other parts, there is a Gabella of all Cattle, or Flesh,
and Horses sold in Markets, paying three or four per cent. of what they are
sold for, which by conjecture may be worth in England two hundred thousand
pounds per Annum; using the like Custom upon Fish, and other Victuals, (Bread
excepted) and for this cause, Flesh, and Fish, and Victuals in the Markets, to
be priced and sold by weight, whereby the Subject saves more in not being
cousened, than the Imposition impaireth them. Item, In Tuskany is used a
Taxation of seven per cent. upon all alienation of Lands to the true value. To
put a Tax upon all Lands alienated.
As also seven per cent. upon all Dowries or Marriage-monies. The like, if it
be justly used in England, were worth at least one hundred thousand pound per
Annum; with many other Taxations upon Meal, and upon all Merchandises in all
Towns, as well as Port-Towns, which here I omit, with diverse others, England.
And in satisfaction of the Subject for these Taxes, your Majesty may be pleased
to release them of Wardships, and to enjoy all their Estates at eighteen y^ers
old; and in the mean time, their profits to be preserved for their own benefit.
And also in forfeitures of Estate by condemnation, your Majesty may release the
Subject, as not to take the forfeiture of their Lands, but their Goods,
High Treason only excepted; and to allow the Counsel of Lawyers in case of
life and death; as also nor to be condemned without two Item, Some of the
former Taxations, used in Ireland and in Scotland, as may easily be brought
about by the first example thereof used in England, may very well be made to
increase your Revenue there, more then it is, by two hundred thousand pound per
Annum. To demand a rate upon all Offices in his Majesty's grant.
Item, All Offices in the Land, great and small, in your Majesty's grant, may
be granted, with condition, to pay you a part yearly, according to the value:
This in time per Annum: adding also Notaries, Atturneys, and such like, to pay
some proportion yearly toward it, for being allowed by your Majesty to
practice, and prohibiting else any to practice in such places. Item, To reduce
his Majesty's Household to Board wages.
To reduce your Majesty's household to Board-wages, as most other Princes do,
reserving some few Tables; this will save your Majesty sixty thousand pounds
per Annum, and ease greatly the Subject besides, both in Carriages and
Provision, which is a good Item, I know an assured course in your Majesty's
Navy, which may save at least forty thousand pounds per Annum, which requiring
a whole Discourse by it self, I omit; only promise you to do it, whenever
you command. Item, Whereas your Majesty's Laws do command the strict keeping
of Fasting-daies, To demand a rate for license to eat Lacticinia.
you may also prohibit on those days to eat Eggs, Cheese, and White-meats, but
only such as are contented (...) pay eighteen pence a year for the liberty to
eat them, Crusado in Spain, as your Majesty knows, being first begun there,
under the pretense to defend the Land against the Moors. And the same used in
England, as aforesaid, may very well yield, one year with another, one hundred
thousand pounds, without any disgust to any, because it is at every ones choice
to give it or no. To take an imposition upon the Catholics lands
Lastly, I have a course per Annum, by raising a certain value upon their
Lands, and some other impositions; which requiring a long Discourse by it self,
I will omit it here, setting it down in my Instructions; it will save your
Majesty at least One hundred thousand pounds per Annum, to make it pain of
death, and confiscation of goods and lands, for any of the Officers to cosen
You, which now is much to be feared they do, or else they could not be so rich;
and herein to allow a fourth part benefit to them that shall find out the
cousenage. Here is not meant Officers of State, as the Lord Treasurer, etc.
being Officers of the per Annum: Suppose it be but one Million and a Half, as
assuredly your Majesty may make by these courses set down, yet it is much more
then I promised in my Letter for your Majesty's service. Besides, some sums of
money in present, At the Prince his marriage to make Earls in Principi, and to
pay for it.
by the courses following: Imprimis, By the Prince's Marriage, to make all the
Earls in England Grandees of Spain, and Principi, with such like privileges,
and to Spain in the Kingdom of Naples. And Barons to be made Earls.
And so likewise Barons to be made Earls and Peers, to pay ninteen thousand
pounds a piece, I think might yield five hundred thousand pounds, and oblige
them more sure to his Majesty. 3. To make choice of two hundred of the richest
men of England in estate, To make 200 rich men Titulate, and they to pay for
the Titles.
that be not Noblemen, and make them Titulate, as is used in Naples, To make
Gentlemen of low quality, and rich Farmers, Esquires.
To make Gentlemen of low quality, and Francklines, and rich Farmers, Esquires,
to precede them, would yield your Majesty also a great sum of money in present.
I know England had, but also

Pasc. 5. Caroli Regis. B. R. The Reports of the following Arguments were taken
by Mr. Widdrington of Gray's-Inn.
Mr. Stroud Esquire brought to the Kings-Bench-Bar, upon a Habeas Corpus.
UPon the Habeas Corpus out of this Court, to bring here the body of one William
Stroud Esquire with the cause of his imprisonment, Kings Bench, it was returned in
this manner: That William Stroud Esquire was committed under my custody, by virtue
of a certain Warrant under the hands of twelve Lords of the Privy Council of
the Lord the King; the tenor of which Warrant follows in these words.

You are to take knowledge, that it is his Majesty's express pleasure and
commandment, that you take into your custody the body of William Stroud Esquire and
keep him close-prisoner, until you shall receive d of April, 1629. And the
Direction thereof was, To the Marshall of the King's Bench, or his Deputy. He
is likewise held in prison by virtue of a certain Warrant, under the hand of
the King himself, the tenor of which Warrant follows in these words. Carolus
Rex. Whereas you have in your custody the body of William Stroud Esquire committed
by the Greenwich the 7 th of May, 1629. in the 5 th year of Our Reign. And the
direction was, To Our Marshall for Our Bench for the time being. And these are
the William Stroud, etc.

Also Walter Long Esquire.
And upon another Habeas Corpus to the Marshall of the Household, to have the
body of Walter Long Esquire he made the same Return as above.

Ask of the Inner Temple, of Counsel with Mr. Stroud, moved, That the Return
was insufficient. The Return consists upon two Warrants, bearing several
Dates, which are the causes of the taking and detaining of the Prisoner. For
the first Warrant, which is of the H. 6. F. Monstrance de faits. 1 H. 7.4.
Hussy Markham, in the time of Edw. 4. and Forrescue in his Book, de laudibus
Legum Angliae, cap. 18. And the reason given is, because no action of false
imprisonment lies against the King if the Imprisonment be wrongful; and the
King cannot be a wrong doer. The Statute of Magna Charta is, That no freeman
be imprisoned, but by the Law of the Land. And it appears by these Books, that
it is against the Law of the Land that the King should imprison any one.

2. Admit that this be only a signification and notification given by the King
himself of the commitment of the prisoner; yet it seems, that that
signification is of no force, 1. Because the words are general and uncertain,
-- for notable contempts -- There are in the Law many contempts of Notable --
Every contempt which is made to the King is notable. -- Against Our Government
-- Contempt which is committed in a Court of Record or Chancery, is a contempt
against the Government of the King, to wit, because they disobey the King when
he commands them by his Writs, C. 8. 60. a. Beechers case. The last two words
of the For stirring up of sedition against Us -- which words likewise are
indefinite and general. I find not the word [ Sedition] in our Books, but
taken adjectively, as seditious books, seditious news, etc. in the Statute of
1 st. and 2 d. of Phil. and Mary, cap. 3. the words are, If any person shall be
convicted, etc. for speaking, etc. any false, seditious, or slanderous news,
saying of the tails of the Queen, etc. he shall lose his ears, or pay 100 l.
There the penalty imposed upon C. 4. Lord Cromwell's case 13. where Sedition is
defined to be seorsum itio, when a man takes a course of his own. And there it
is said, that the words, -- maintain sedition against the Queen's proceedings
-- shall be expounded according to the coherence of all the words, and the
intent of the parties. So that it is plain, that there is a sedition that is
only finable, and which is no cause of imprisonment without bail: And what the
sedition is that is here intended, cannot be gathered out of the words, they
are so general, against Us -- those words are redundant, for every sedition is
against the King.

Upon the generality and incertainty of all the words in the Return, he put
these cases, 18. E. 3. A man was indicted, quia furatus est equum, and does not
say Felonic, and therefore ill, 29. ass. 45. A man was indicted that he was
communis latro, and the indictment held vicious, because too general. So here,
the offenses are returned generally. But there ought to be something
individual, C. 5.57. Specot's case, quia is no good cause for the Bishop to
refuse a Clerk, for it is too general, and there are schisms diverse kinds, 38.
E. 3.2. Because the Clerk is criminosus, it is no good cause for the Bishop to
refuse him, 8 and 9 Eliz. Die. 254. The Bishop of N. refuses one, because he
was a haunter of Taverns, etc. for which, and diverse other crimes, he was
unfit, held that the last words are too general and uncertain, 40. E. 3.6. In
the tender of a marriage, and refusal of the heir, he ought to allege a
certain cause of refusal, Whereupon C. 8.68. Trollop's case, to say, That the
Plantiff is excommunicated for diverse contumacies, shall not disable him,
without showing some cause in special of the excommunication, upon which the
Court may judge whether it were just or no. So here. And he concluded with a
case that was resolved, Hill. 33 Eliz. Peak and Paul the Defendants said of the
Pantiff, Thou art a mutinous and seditious man, and maintains sedition against
the Queen; and the words adjudged not actionable.

Mason of Lincolns-Inne, of Counsel with Mr. Long, moved also, that the Return
was insufficient. Mr. Mason of Lincoln's Inn, his Argument for Mr. Long.
For the first Warrant, that he was committed by command of the King, signified
by the Privy Council, I will not argue that, because it was claimed as an
ancient right pertaining to the Subject, in the Petition of Right, whereto the
King for stirring up sedition against Us and Our Government. Sedition is not
any determined offense within our Law; our Law gives definitions or
descriptions of other offenses, to wit, of Treason, Murder, Felony, etc. but
there is no crime in our Law called Sedition. It is defined by a Civilian to be
Seditio, or Secessio, cum pars reipublicae contra partem infurgit; so that
sedition is nothing but division. Braeton and Glanvill have the word [ Seditio]
generally. Before the E. 3. chap. 2. it was not clear enough what thing was
Treason, what not; by which Statute it is declared what shall be said Treason,
and that the Judges shall not declare any thing to be Treason, that is not
contained within the said Statute, but it shall be declared only by
Parliament. And that Statute speaks not of Sedition, nor the Statute of 1 H. 4.
chap. 10. which makes some things Treason, which are not contained within the
said Statute of 25 E. 3. The E. 6. chap. 12. takes away all intervenient
Statutes, which declared new Treasons; and the said Act declares other things
to be Treason, but mentions not Sedition. Sedition is the quality of an
offense, and is oftentimes taken Adverbially or Adjectively. To raise tumults
or trespasses is sedition, Tim. 2. E. 3. rot. 23. B. R. Garbart's case, A man
was indicted, because in the high street he took I. S. there, being in hostile
manner, and usurped over him royal power, which is manifest sedition; and
there it was but an indictment Mich. 20. E. 1. rot 27. One that was surveyor of
the Wood-work for the King, was indicted for stealing of timber, and detaining
wages, ( ridding Carpenters wages) by one that was but a boy; and this is there
termed Sedition, and yet it was but a petty Felony, Mich. 42. E. 3. rot. 65.
B. R. R. Pope was appealed by the wife of I. S. because he feloniously and
seditiously murdered I. S. and [ seditiously] was there put in, because it was
done privily. By which cases it appears, that sedition is not taken as a
Substantive, so H. 4. chap. 15. there is punishment inflicted for the raising
of seditious doctrine, and yet no punishment could have been inflicted for it
until the said Statute; and yet it was seditious, as well before the said
Statute as after. And this appears also by the Statute of 1 and 2 of Phil. and
Mar. chap. 3. which has been cited. The Statute 13 Eliz. chap. 2. reci^es,
that diverse seditious and evil disposed persons, etc. obtained Bulls of
reconciliation from the Pope, which offense was made Praemunire. By the Statute
of 13. Eliz. chap. 1. for the avoiding of contentious and seditious Titles to
the Crown, it is enacted by the said Statute, That he that shall declare the
Successor of the King, shall forfeit the moity of his goods, etc. so that the
said offense, although it be seditious, is not treason by the Common Law, nor
is made treason by the Statute of 25. E. 3. nor by the Statute of 13 Eliz. By
the Statute of 23 Eliz. chap. 2. he that speaks seditious or slanderous news of
the Queen, shall lose his ears, or pay 200 l. and the second offense is made
Felony. The Statute of 35 Eliz. chap. 1. (...) seditious Sectaries, which
absent themselves from the l. by the month. Out of all which Statutes it may be
collected, that the word [Sedition] is taken variously, according to the
subject in hand. And C. 4. Lord Cromwell's case [Seditious] is referred to
doctrine. There are offenses more high in their nature than sedition, which
were not treason, unless so declared by act of Parliament. Every rebellious
act is sedition, yet if such Acts be not within the Statute of 23 Ed. 3. they
are not treason. 17 R. 2. chap. 8. Insurrection of villains and others is not
made treason, which R. 2. is repealed by the Statute of 1 H. 4. By the Statute
of 3 and 4 E. 6. chap. 5. to assemble people to alter the Laws, is made
treason, if they continue together an hour after Proclamation made. This
assembly of people was sedition at the Common Law; and the very assembly, if
they after dissolve upon Proclamation made, is not treason by the said Statute.
By the Statute of 14 Eliz. chap. 1. it is made Felony, maliciously and
rebelliously to hold from the Queen any Castles, E. 3. it is not treason. 2. It
seems clearly, that this Case is within the Petition of Right, in which Magna
Charta, and the Statutes of 25, and 28 E. 3. are recited. The grievance there
was, That diverse have been imprisoned without any cause showed, to which they
might make answer according to the Law. And upon this Return, nothing appears
to be objected to which he might answer. It appears not what that Sedition,
was. This is the very grief intended to be remedied by this Statute: To this he
cannot answer according to Law. It appears not whether this were a seditious
act, trespass, or slander, or what it was at all. The words are, -- Sedition
against the King -- This helps not, for every offense is against the King,
against his Crown and dignity; that which disturbs the Commonwealth is against
the King, seditious doctrine is sedition against the King, as is before said.
In 28 H. 6. vide Postrat. fol. 19. the Lords William de la Pool may be
committed for diverse treasons, and sundry other heinous crimes; and the
Petition held not good, because too general: Whereupon they exhibit particular
Articles against him. And therefore upon the whole matter he concluded and
prayed, that Mr. Long might be discharged from his imprisonment.

On another day, Sergeant Barckley his Argument against Stroud and Long.
Barckley and Davenport, the Kings Sergeants, Barckley began, and said, That
the case is new, and of great weight and consequence, and yet under favor, the
prerogative of the King, and the liberty of the Subject, are not mainly touched
therein; for the case is not so general as it has been made, but particular
upon this particular Return. The liberty of the Subject is a tender point, the
right whereof is great, just, and inviolable. The prerogative of the King is an
high point, to which every subject ought to submit. I intend not to make any
discourse of the one or the other; I will only remember what the King has
determined upon them both, in his speech which he made upon the Petition of
right, to wit, That the Peoples liberties strengthen the Kings prerogative, and
that the Kings prerogative is to defend the Peoples liberties. Thi^ (...)
settle the hearts of the people concerning their liberty The way which I

The objections which have been made are reducible to four heads.

1. By what the prisoner here shall be said to be committed and detained. 2.
That this Commitment is against the Petition of right. 3. That the Cause which
is here returned, is general and uncertain. 4. That the offenses mentioned in
the Return are but Finable, and therefore notwithstanding them the party is
bailable.
For the first, it has been objected, that the commitment here was by the
Lords of the Privy Council, and the signification of this cause is by the King
himself. But I say, that there is a further matter in the Return; for the Lords
of the Council do it by the command of the King, and they only pursue this
command. I will not dispute* whether H. 6.28. Poign^^ case is express in it.
And in the Petition of right it is admitted, that they may commit. And this is
not alleged there for a grievance, but the grievance there, was, because the
particular charge of commitment was not showed. Some Books have been objected
to prove, that the King, though in person, cannot commit any person, 16 H. 6.
F. Monstrance de faits 182. But the authority of that Book vanishes, if the
case be D. whereof the King is seized in Fee, and the King commands us to cut.
And the opinion of the Court was, that this is no plea, without showing a
specialty of the command of the King. And there the whole Court says, That if
the King command me to arrest a man, whereby I arrest him, he shall have
trespass or imprisonment against me, although it be done in the presence of
the King. That the following H. 7.4. was objected, Hussy says, that Markham
said to King Edw. 4. that he cannot arrest a man for suspicion of Treason or
Felony, because if he do wrong, the party cannot have his action. To this I
say, That the Book there is to be understood of a wrongful arrest, for there
is spoken of an action of false imprisonment; and a wrongful arrest cannot be
made by the King.

2. It stands not with the dignity of the King to arrest any man; C. 4. 73. The
King makes a Lease for years, rendering rent, with condition of re-entry for
non-payment; he shall take advantage of the condition without any demand; and
the reason there given, is, that a decorum and convenience might be observed.
So it is not befitting for the King in person to arrest any man, but the King
may command another to do it. Bracton lib. 2. de acquirendo rerum Dominio, fol.
55. says, That the Crown of the King is to do justice and judgment, and facere
pacem, without which, the Crown it self cannot subsist. Several constructions
are to be made upon those several words, -- and the last words -- facere pacem
-- imply, that the King has a coercive power. Britton f. 1. amongst the
Errata. The King said in person, H. 7.7. C. 11.85. it is said, That the King is
the chief Justice. And Lambert in his Justice of Peace, fol. 3. says, That in
ancient Histories, the chief Justice of England is called, Capitalis Justicia
and Prima Justicia, after the King, in England. So that the King has the same
power of Justice, as the Chief Justice had. H. 7.8. A Justice of Peace may
arrest men riotously assembled, for prevention of further mischief. And the
Book also says, That he may leave his servants there to arrest men, for
safeguard of the peace. It is a case well known, that if a house be set on
fire, every man may pull down the next house, for prevention of greater
mischief; so it seems concerning the Incendiaries ass. 56. and 22 E. 4.45. in
false imprisonment the Defendant justifies, because the Plantiff was mad and
out of his wits, and that he had done some harm, and that he had bound and beat
him to avoid further harm, which might have happened by his madness: And the
justification was held good. So it is in matter of Government, to avoid
commotions, the E. 3. no freeman may be taken or imprisoned -- yet against the
tenor of the said Statute, etc. diverse of your subjects have of late been
imprisoned, without any cause showed; and when for their deliverance, etc. they
were brought Habeas corpus, there to undergo and receive as the Court should
order, and their Keepers commanded to certify the cause of their deteyner, and
no cause was certified, but that they were detained by your Majesty's special
command, signified by the Lords of your Council; and yet were returned back to
several prisons, without being charged with any thing to which they might make
answer according to Law. These last words are observable, -- Without being
charged with any thing, to which they might Habeas Corpus, for the cause
returned therein cannot be traversed, 9 H. 6. 54. but the Court took it as
true. But the setting forth of the cause, and the answer to the same cause, is
to be upon other proceedings, to wit, upon the indictment for the offense, or
otherwise. And there is great difference between the return of a Writ to which
a man may answer, and the return of an Habeas corpus. 10 E. 4. and 3 H. 7.11.
are, that if the Sheriff return Rescous, all certainties of every circumstance
ought to be showed, because it is fitting, that a thing certain be brought into
judgment. And upon showing of the grievance, as above, the Petition is, that no
freeman, in any such manner as before is mentioned, be imprisoned or detained,
(such) and it has relation to such imprisonment, which is mentioned in the
premises. And imprisonment mentioned in the premises of the Petition is, where
no cause at all was [such] is the word relative, appears by C. 11, 62. where
many cases are put to the same purpose; which see.

The third objection was, That the Return was general and uncertain. The
Counsel on the other side had divided the words of the Return, but that is to
offer violence thereunto; for an exposition shall not be made by fractions, but
upon the whole matter. For the first notable contempts -- It has been said,
that the addition of the word [notable] is but to make a flourish: But I say,
That [notable] is not the emphasis of the Return, but it only expresses the
nature of the offense; and yet [notable] is a word observable by it self in the
Law, and implies, that the thing is known and noted. By 27 E. 1. Sheriffs shall
be punished, that let notorious offenders to bayl; and by the Statute of 4 H.
4. chap. 3. a notorious or common thief shall not make his purgation: and 26 E.
3.71. in a trespass for falls imprisonment, Huntington, and because he was seen
in the company of R. de Thorby, who was a notorious thief, he, as Bailiff of
Huntington, took him upon suspicion. I confess, that -- for contempts -- is
general, yea it is genus generalissimum, and within the Petition of Right; but
the words are, -- against Our Self -- It has been said, That this might be by
irreverent words or gestures. -- and Our Government -- It has been said, that
this might be by contempt to the Kings Writ, Retraxit, as Beechers case is. To
this I answer, That those words which are spoken to one purpose, ought not to
be wrested to another; and this is against the common meaning of the words, C.
4. Thou art a murderer, the Defendant shall not afterward explain it to be a
murderer of Hares, for the highest murder is intended. So here, the highest
Government is intended.

4. It has been objected, that -- for stirring up of sedition against Us --
may perhaps be but an offense Finable: But those words Sedition against Us and
Our Government --, which makes it particular. It has been confessed by one
that argued on the other side, that there is a general in a particular. C. 4.
Hollands case, there is the most general, and there is general in particular,
as the State Ecclesiastical. 3 ly. There is more particular, as Colleges,
Habeas Corpus. no precise certainty is required. In an Indictment, a certainty
of all circumstances is requisite; in Pleading, a certainty is required; in
Coun^s, a more precise certainty; in Bars, a certainty to a common intent is
enough. There is not such precise certainty required here as in Indictment or
Count, because the party ought to answer unto them; nor so much certainty is
required in this as in a Bar. And the Return is not uncertain; for, as it is
said in Plowden, 202. and 193. a thing is uncertain, where it may be taken
indifferently, one way or the other. But where the intendment the one way
exceeds the intendment the other way, it is not uncertain, as it is here. The
words are, -- for notable contempts against Us and Our Government, -- Here is
certainty of intendment one way. There are many Writs which are more uncertain
th^^ this Return here is, and yet good. The Writ concerning the taking of an
Apostate is general, Quod spreto habitu Ordinis; and yet there are more sorts
of Apostasies. In the Writ concerning the amoving of a Leper, the words are
general, and yet it appears by F. N. B. that there are two kinds of Lepers,
one outward, and the other inward; and for the latter [Sedition] is not a
Law-tearm nor known in the Law, of which the Judges can take no notice; but the
words to express offenses of this nature, are, Murder, Treason, Felony* etc.
and that no Indictment of Sedition generally was ever seen. To this I answer,
Perhaps it is true, that no Indictment was ever seen made, because Dyer 69.261.
C. 4. Vaux's case; yet in 5 E. 6. Dyer. 69. it is said, that Furatus implies
Felonice cepit, although the contrary has been objected. In a Return, words by
Periphrasis are sufficient. The Warrant of a Justice of Peace to apprehend I.
S. because of prepensed malice, interfecit I. D. is good enough, although there
wants the word murdravit. In 5 R. 2. F. trial 54. Belknap says, That a
miscreant shall forfeit his land. Out of Peaks case, which has been objected,
that for these words, [seditious fellow] no action lies; and so is C. 4.19. b.
because those words do not import an act to be done, but only an inclination
to do it; but if a man say such words of another, which import that he has
made sedition, they are actionable, as it was resolved in Phillips and Badby's
case, 24 Eliz. C. 4.19. a. adjudged actionable. So in the Lord Cromwells, C.
4.12, 13. the action would have lain for those words, You like of those that
maintain sedition against the Queens proceedings, if there had not been another
matter in the case. I agree, the case of 21 E. 3. Sir John Garboyls case, and
42. E. 3. for in those cases, sedition was only taken adjectively, and shows
an inclination only to do a seditious act, and in such sense sedition may be
applied to other offenses then treason. In 31 E. 1. f. guard. 157. Gardein in
Socage made feofment of land which he had in Ward, This is forfeiture, says
the Book, for the treason which he did to the Ward; so there, one thing is
called treason, which is only a breach of trust. In an appeal of Mayhem, it is
felonice, and yet 6 H. 7.1. it is not Felony: But felony is there only put to
express the heinousness of the offense, it is, as it were, a felony. The
Statutes of 2 H. 4.1 Mar. 13 Eliz. 35 Eliz. 17 R. 2.3. and 4 E. 6.14 Eliz.
which have been objected, have the word [Sedition] but not applyable to this
case. Bracton in his Book, de Corona, says, Si quis, etc. If any by rash
attempt, plotting the Kings death, should act, or cause any to act, to the
sedition of the Lord the King, or of his Army, it is treason. And Glanvil, in
as many words, says, That to do any thing in sedition of the Kingdom, or of
the Army, is high treason. And Britton, fol. 16; It is high treason to Seditio
est quasi seorsum-itio, when the people are severed from the King: or it is,
Seperans a ditione, when the people are severed from the power of the King. And
in this sense, Sedition is no stranger in our Law; and such sedition which
severs the people from the King is Treason.

But it has been objected, that by the Statute of 25 E. 3. the Parliament Br.
treason 24. the words are, Compass or imagine the death of the King; and there
it is taken, that he that maliciously devises how the King may come to death,
by words, or otherwise, and does an act to explain it, as, in assaying
harness, this is treason, 13 Eliz. Die. 298. Doctor Story's case, he being
beyond sea, practiced with a foreign Prince to invade the Realm, and held
treason, E. 3.4 Mar. Die. 144. The taking of the Castle of Scarborough was
treason in Stafford, by 30. ass. p. 19. which was presently after the making of
the Statute of 25 E. 3. A man ought to have been hanged and drawn, that brought
Letters of Excommengement from the Pope, and published them in England: And it
is to be noted, that at the same time, there was no Statute to make it treason,
but upon construction of the said Statute of 25 E. 3 though now it be made
treason by the Statute Eliz. if it be with intention to advance foreign
power. Perhaps the sedition mentioned in this Return is high treason, and yet
the King may make it an offense Finable, for he may prosecute the offender in
what course he pleases; and if it be treason, then the prisoners are not
baylable, by the Statute of Westminster. But, suppose that it is but a Finable
offense, yet by the said Statute, those which are imprisoned for open and
notorious naughtiness shall not be bayled; the same naughtiness is there
intended high and exorbitant offense?

2. It is fit to restrain the prisoners of their liberty, that the
Commonwealth be not damnif^ed. It is lawful to pull down a house, to prevent
the spreading mischief of fire; it is lawful to restrain a furious man. And by
the 14 H. 7. a Justice of peace may restrain one rout. Then the restraint of
dangerous men to the Commonwealth is justifiable and necessary, 24 E. 3.33. p.
25. Sir Thomas Figet went armed in the Palace, which was showed to the Kings
Council; wherefore he was taken and T. threatened him. Out of which case I
observe two things: First, that the Judge of this Court did cause a man to be
apprehended, upon complaint made to the Council, that is, to the Lords of the
Privy Council. 2. That although he did nothing, he is not mayn-pernable until
the King sent his pleasure, because he was armed and furiously disposed. So
here. UUherefore I pray, that the Prisoners may be sent back again.

Davenport argued to the same intent and purpose, and therefore I will report
his Argument briefly. Sergeant Davenport's Argument against Stroud and Long


E. 4.20. In false imprisonment, the Defendant did justify, and alleged
several reasons of his justification; to wit, because a man was killed, and
that this was in the County of S. and that the common voice and fame was, that
the Plaintiff was culpable. And this was Bryan did there object, That the plea
was double or treble; and the reason was, because twenty causes of suspicion
make but one entire cause; and indivisible unity in this ought not to be
divided. So C. 8.66. Crogates. In an action of trespass, the Defendant
justifies for several causes; and held good, because upon the matter, all of
them make but one cause. C. 8.117. It is said, That it is an unjust thing,
unless the whole Law be looked into, to judge and answer, by propounding any
one particular thereof; and if it be unjust

2. Although the Counsel on the other side have taken this case to be within
the Petition of Right, yet this is Petitio principii, to take that for granted
which is the question in debate. He said, That he would not offer violence to
the Petition of Right, to which the King had assented,

3. He said, That this was the actual commitment of the Lords of the Privy
Council, and the habitual or virtuall commitment of the King. But because
upon these two matters he put no case, nor gave any reason, but what had been
put or given in the Argument of the Habeas corpus, Mich. 3 Caroli. and
afterward in the House of Commons, which was reported to the Lords in the
painted Chamber, (all which Arguments I heard) I have here omitted them. And
for the great respect which the Law gives to the commands of the King, he put
these cases, 7 H. 3. Attachment of waste against the Tenant in Dower, and the
waste was assigned in the taking of fish out of a pond, and the carrying them
away. The Defendant pleaded, That her second husband, by the command of the
Lord the King, dyed, no action lies against the wife for that waste. And F. N.
B. 17. A. If the Tenant in precipe at the grand cape makes default, the King
may send a UUrit to the Justices, rehearsing that he was in his service, etc.
commanding them that that default be not prejudicial to him; and this command
of the King excuses his default, be the cause true or no.

4. For the particulars of the Return, it is -- for notable contempts against
the Government -- But as to that it has been said, raising sedition against Us
-- But as to this it has been said, That Seditio is not a word known in the
Law, and is always taken either Adverbially or Adjectively, and is not a
Substantive. [Seditio] in the Law, and the consequent of it likewise, which is,
seductio populi. But it is not ever found to be taken in a good sense; it is
always ranked and coupled with treason, rebellion, insurrection, or such like,
as it appears by all those Statutes which have been remembered on the other
side. Therefore

Trin. 5 Car. B. R.
THe first day of the Term, upon Habeas Corpus to Sir Allen Apsley the
Lieutenant of the Tower, Mr. Littleton's Argument for Mr. Seldom.
to bring here the body of John Seldom Esquire with the cause of detention. He
returned the same cause as above; and Littleton, of Counsel with him, moved,
that the Return was insufficient in substance; therefore he prayed, that he
might be bayled.

It is true, that it is of great consequence, both to the Crown of the King,
and to the liberty of the Subject. But, under favor, for the difficulty of Law
contained in it, the case cannot be said Grand. In my Argument, I will offer
nothing to the Court, but that which I have seen with these eyes, and that
which in my understanding

I will divide my argument into four several heads.

1. To point out those matters which I think unnecessary, and not conducible to
the matter in question. 2. I will consider the Warrant of the Privy Council in
this case. 3. The UUarrant of the King himself. 4. The objections which have
been made by the contrary side, the strength of them, and give answer to them.
For the first of these heads, 1. I will admit, that the King may commit a man.
2. That a man committed by the King is not replevisable by the Sheriff, but he
is baylable by this Court, notwithstanding the Statute of Westminster. 1 C. 15. And
that he shall not be baylable, is against the Petition of Right; I will not
dispute it, for it is established by the Answer of the King to the said
Petition. And the Arguments made to this purpose in the said Parliament, and in
the Painted Chamber before both the Houses, are recorded in Parliament, to
which every one may resort. But I will lay as a ground of my following
Argument, that as offenses are



3. For the Warrant of the King, as it is certified by this Return, there is
not any sufficient cause contained within it, for the detaining [for notable
contempts by him committed against Our Self and Our Government] For [contempts]
all contempts are against the King, mediately or immediately, and against his
Government. [Notable] this is all one with notorious and manifest, as appears
by the Statute of Westminster. 1 chap. 15. and 26 E. 3.71. which has been
remembered. And [Notable] is but an emphaticall expression of the nature of the
thing, and alters it not. [Against Us] All riots, routs, batteries, and
trespasses, Michael Apsley's case, and in Ruswel's case, 13 Jac. for the Return
is too general. C. 11.98. In it, the nature of the offense ought to be
expressed, that the Court may judge thereof. And [contempts] here is
indilivi^luum vagum; therefore for them, before conviction, the

The second part of the Return is, [And for stirring up of sedition against Us]
The other-side said, that [Seditio] is ever taken in the worst sense. That is
true. But hence it follows not, that the party that commits it is not
baylable. Every small offense is taken in the worst sense, as the stealing of
an Apple, and the like; but such kind of offenders shall not be committed
without bayl. To examine the nature of this offense, which is called [Sedition]
it ought to be understood, as this Return is, either as Trespass, or as high
Treason, for it cannot be intended to be petty-treason; for, petty-treason is
so called, in respect of the offense done to any particular subject; but in
respect of the King, it is but as a felony, therefore the Indictments for the
same are, Feloniously and traitorously. And here the words are, -- sedition
against Us -- so of necessity it ought to be intended of an offense, that more
immediately [Seditio] is used. 2. How it shall be expounded here by the
relation thereof to the King. 3. What sense these words [against Us] shall have
here.

1. For Sedition; it is not found in the division of offenses in our Law, but
as it is mingled and coupled with other offenses. No Indictment of Sedition
only was ever seen, nor can be shown; routs, riots, and unlawful assemblies,
are much of the same nature with it, [Seditio] in Latin, and the derivation of
it is, as has been observed, Se-itio, or, Seorsum-itio; and the seditious (as
one says) take a diversion, and draw others: It is used in the Bible, in
Poets, Histories, and Orators, for a tumult, or hurly-burly, or uprore, or
confused noise, -- Seditioque recens dubioque susurro, in Live. lib. 2. cap. 44.
And in Tacitus it is taken for mutiny in an Army, Numb. cap. 20.3. the Latin
Translation is, Versi in seditione; the English is, chode, or murmured. Numb.
26.9. the Latin is, In seditione Corah; the English is, In the company of
Corah, Numb. 27. 3. the Latin is, Nec fuit in seditione eorum; the English is,
In the company or assembly of them. Judge. 12.1. the Latin Translation is,
Facta est ergo seditio in Ephraim; the English Translation is, The In the New
Testament, Act. 19.40. Seditio in the Latin is translated uprore, or meeting.
Act. 15.2. Facta est ergo seditio, etc. and it is translated dissension and
disputation. Act. 24.5. Tertullus the Orator accuses Paul for moving sedition;
and the subsequent words are, A ringleader of the sect of the Pharisees; so
that his sedition there was but a schism: And the words there are in a manner
the very same with ours here; there it was, for moving; here, for stirring of
sedition. Seditio, as an discordiam, to wit, when the members of one body fight
one against another. The Lord of St. Albans, who was lately the Lord Chancellor
of England, and was a Lawyer, and great Statesman likewise, and well knew the
acceptance of this word [Sedition] in our Law, has made an Essay of Sedition,
and the Title of the Essay is, Of Seditions and Tumults: the whole Essay
deserves the reading. And there is a Prayer in the Letany, -- From sedition and
heresy, etc. So that there Sedition is taken as a kind

This being the natural signification of the word, then the next labor shall
be to see, if any thing in our Law cross this exposition. And it seems
clearly, that there is not. 2 H. 4. cap. 15. And it is in the Parliament-Roll,
numb. 48. against Lollards, who at that time were taken as heretics, says,
That such Preachers which excite and stir up to sedition shall be convented
before the Ordinary, etc. There, sedition is taken for dissension and division
in doctrine. And this is not made treason by the said Statute, although the
said Statute be now repealed by the Statute of 25 H. 8. c. 4. 1 and 2 Phil. and
Mar. c. 3. which is in Rastall, News 4. which is an act against seditious
words and news of the King and Queen, which is a great misdemeanor; and yet
the punishment appointed to be inflicted by the said Statute is but the Pillory
or a Fine of 100 l. And the said Statute, by the Statute of 1 Eliz. c. 16. was
extended to her also, which Statute now by her death is expired: which I pray
may be observed, 13 Eliz. cap. 1. against those, who seditiously publish who
are the true heirs of the Crown, that they shall be imprisoned for a year, etc.
And 13 Eliz. c. 2. the seditious bringing in of the Pope's Bulls is made
treason, which implies, that it was not so at the Common Law, 23 Eliz. c. 2. If
any person shall devise, write or print any Cook's Entries, f. 352.353.) there
are the words -- rebellionem and seditionem movere; and yet it is but felony,
35 Eliz. c. 1. made against seditious Sectaries. Also there are certain Books
and Authorities in Law, which express the nature of this word Sedition, C.
4.13. the Lord Cromwell's case. In an action for those words, You like of those
that maintain seditions against the Queens proceedings, the Defendant pleaded,
That he intended the maintenance of a seditious Sermon; and this was adjudged a
good plea and ^ustification. From which it follows, that the Seditious Sermon
mentioned in the Declaration, and the maintaining of sedition against the
Queen, is all of one signification; for if they might have been taken in a
different sense, the justification; had not been good. Phillips and Badby's
case, which is in C. 4. a. which was objected by Sergeant Berkley, makes
strongly for me; for there an action upon the case was brought by a person, for
those words, [Thou have made a seditious Sermon, and moved the people to
sedition this day] And although it were there adjudged that the action lay, yet
the reason of the Judgment is observable, which was, because the words
scandalize the Plaintiff in his profession; which imply, that if they had not
scandalized him in his profession, no action would have lain. And ordinary
words, if they scandalize a man in his profession, Tr. 21. E. 3. roll. 23. Sir
John Garbut's case, which was put before by Mason, the Indictment was in
prejudice of his Crown, and in manifest sedition, and yet the offense there was
but a Robbery. It is true, that upon his arraignment he stood mute, therefore
the Roll is, that he was put to penance, that is, so strong and hard pain; and
this proves, that it was not treason; for if a man arraigned of treason stand
mute, yet the usual judgment of treason shall be given on him. And it is true
also, that he cannot have his Clergy, because insidiator viarum was in the
Indictment; which if it was, outs the party of his Clergy, until the H. 4. c.
2. as is observed in C. 11. Alexander Poulter's case. And upon the same Roll of
21 E. 3. there are four other Indictments of the same nature, where [Seditiose]
is contained in them. Anno 1585, Queen Elizabeth sent a Letter (which I have
seen by the hands of the noble Antiquary, Sir Robert Cotton) to the Mayor of
London, for the suppressing of diverse seditious Libels, which were published
against her Princely Government; and yet in the conclusion of the Letter it
appears, that they were only against the Earl Leicester, and this was to be
published only by Proclamation in London.

5 H. 4. numb. 11. and 13. The Earl of Northumberland preferred a Petition to
the King in Parliament, in which he confesses, that he had not kept his
Majesty's Laws as a liege subject; and also confesses the gathering of power,
and the giving of Liveries: Wherefore he petitioned the worship of the King
(for so are the words) for his grace. The King, upon this Petition, demanded
the opinion of the Lords of Mich. 33 Eliz. Cawdry's case, Sedition and Schism
were Bracton f. 112, 113, 118. has been objected, that he makes sedition
treason: I will grant to them, Hengham also, who is to the same purpose; for in
those Books it is called, Seditio Regis and Regni. seditio Regis, or tumultus
Regis? shall it be the same thing in sense with seditio contra Regem? It seems,
that the said Authors neither remember Law nor Language. 2. Although they
reckon sedition amongst the crimes lesae Majestatis, yet that is not to be
regarded, for they are obsolete Authors, and are not esteemed as Authors in our
Law, as it is in Pl. 356. and C. 8.35. but they may be used for ornament, and
they are good marks to show to us, how the Law was then taken, but Glanvill
says, That a man accused of such a crime shall be bayled, and that the Accuser
shall give pledges. And Bracton says, That if no accuser appears, they shall
be set at liberty. And Hengham reckons amongst the crimes laesae Majestatis,
the breach of the Peace, and so does Glanvil also. Fleta, who was a follower of
Bracton, and transscribes much verbatim out of him, calls Sedition, Seductionem
of the Lord the King. And 12 Edw. 1. the Statute of Rutland, which prescribes
Laws for Wales, enacts, That the Sheriff shall enquire in his Turn, de
seductoribus Domini Regis; and it is not apparent, whether he intend those
which seduce Seditio is called Sedutio. In the time of Henry the seventh, the
Earl of Northumberland being a great and potent Peer, and the King standing in
awe of him, caused him, with twenty four others of great quality, to enter in
an obligation of twenty thousand pound (which Obligation is in the hands of Sir
Robert Cotton) unto Him, that if the said Earl knew Treason, Sedution, Loss,
etc. to be intended to the King, that he should reveal it. 3. Also, Crimen
laesae Majestatis, which is the phrase of the Civill-Law, is more general then
treason; and the old Authors, which have been cited much follow the Civill-Law,
which has this expression; and Sedition by the Civill-Law is Treason. But it
was resolved, 11 R. 2. n. 14. We are not governed by the Civill-Law. See
Fortoscue, f. 115. the which was not cited -there never Sedition, Strife, or
Murmur is heard.
And the Mirror of Justices, the principal copy whereof is in Benet-Colledge
Library in Cambridge, and there is also a copy in Lincolns-Inne Library) Nor
Britton Seditio in them. And I affirm confidently, that there cannot be shown
any Record, Book, or Statute, after the making of the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. in
which Seditio is taken as a capital offense. And yet the Mirror of Justices
reckons up several kinds of Treasons, which he divides into Treasons against
the Celestial or Terrestrial Majesty; against the Celestial Majesty, as
Schism, Heresy, Miscrea^^y, (and R. 2. Trial 54 is to be understood, which
says, That a Miscreant shall forfeit his Lands, because it is a kind of
Treason). And also he shows diverse Treasons against the King, as, the
deflouring of the Kings eldest Daughter, etc. but not a word of Sedition. But
admit, that Sedition imports a greater offense than Tumult, yet there is no
color to say, that it is Treason; for, 25 Edw. 3. is a flat Bar (that I may
use the Inner Temple phrase) to any Edw. 3. does not make it Treason. Stamford
cites Glanvill, and Bracton, and other ancient Books, to show what, was Treason
before the said Statute, and what not: And be says, That it was a great doubt
what shall be said Treason; saving that all agree, that any thing that tends to
the death of the King was Treason. 3 ly. Now examine the words, -- against Us
-- those words make not Sedition to take away the life of the King -- it would
have been treason; yea, the very thought of treason is treason, (though none
can judge thereof till it be produced in act) 19 H. 6.47. b. by Newton, 13 Jac.
B. R. John Owen's case, the writing of a Letter, whereby he intended the death
of the King, was treason; but it is not expressed, that the raising of this
sedition was with such intent, whereby this differs from all the cases which
can be put, in which there is such an intent of the death of the King. Also
this, Raising of sedition against Us, shall not be intended treason; for if it
had been so, the King would have so expressed it by the word Treason: For, as in
his gracious disposition, against Our Person -- it had been more certain, that
it concerned the King immediately; this, may be against any point of his
Government. And the proper and natural signification of the words, -- against
Us -- is as much as, Against Our Authority, Our superintendency, against Our
Peace, Crown, and Dignity, which are the usual Us, in Writs; and every
disobedience to any Writ may be said, Sedition against Us. Routs, riots,
illoyall assemblies, may well be said and called, Sedition against Us: And for
such offenses, a man shall not be restrained of his liberty upon an [it may be]
Such a Return is necessary, by which the Court may be truly informed of the
offense. For the Writ of Habeas Corpus is, to submit and receive what the Court
shall ordain. And this Murdravit. But the Return upon an Habeas corpus, q. d.
interfecit I. S. upon prepensed malice, is good; for the nature of the thing is
expressed, although the formal word be wanting; but H. 6.54. and I confess
it. But as C. 11. James Baggs case is, the Return ought to have certainty so
much in it, that, if it be false, the party grieved may have his action upon
the case. And the grievance complained of in the Petition of Right is, that
upon such Return no cause was certified, Habeas Corpus, but that upon the
matter contained within it, and Indictment shall be made, and he shall have his
trial upon it. And yet it is clear, and it has been agreed of all hands, in
the Argument of the grand Habeas corpus, Mich. 3. Car. in this Court, that if
the cause be certified upon the Return of the Habeas corpus, that the Court may
judge of the legality of that cause. 2. Consider the parts of this Return, as
they are coupled together, -- for notable contempts by him committed against
Our Self and Our Government, and for stirring of sedition against Us -- Upon
the entire Return, the King joins sedition Sedition is one of the notable
contempts mentioned in the first part of the Return, so that he makes it but a
contempt. For the generality and incertainty of the Return, I refer my self to
the cases put by Mr. Ask, and I will not waive any of them. True it is, if the
Return had been, that it was for Treason, he had not been bailable but by the
discretion of the Court, and such Return would have been good; but it is not so
of sedition. Guard. 157. Treason is applied to a petty offense, to the breach of
trust by a Guardian in Socage; but it is not treason. And so sedition is of far
less nature then treason, and is oftentimes taken of a trespass; it is not
treason of it self, nor seditiose was never used in an Indictment of treason.
It was not treason before the 25 of Edw. 3. nor can it be treason; for 25 E. 3.
is a flat Bar (as I have said before) to all other offenses to be treason,
which are not contained within the said Act, or declared H. 7. cap. 7. 2 H. 5.
cap. 9. 8 H. 6. cap. 14. 5 R. 2. cap. 6. 17 R. 2. cap. 8. and by 3 and 4 E. 6.
cap. 5. the assembly of twelve persons to attempt the alteration of any Law,
and the continuance together by the space of an hour, being commanded to
return, is made treason; which Act was continued by the Statute Mar. cap. 12.
and 1 Eliz. cap. 16. but now is expired by her death, and is not now in force,
(although the contrary be conceived by some) which I pray may be well observed.
By the Statute of 14 Eliz. cap. 1. rebellious taking of the Castles of the King
is made treason, if they be not delivered etc. which shows clearly, that such
taking of Castles in its nature was not treason. But the said Statute is now
expired; and also all Statutes, creating new treasons, are now repealed. M. 9.
E. 3. roll. 39. B. R. Peter Russells case; he was committed to prison by the
Deputy-Iustice of North Wales, because he was accused by one William Solomon of
sedition, and other things touching the King: And hereupon a Commission issued
out of the Chancery, to enquire, if the said Peter Russell behaved himself
Habeas Corpus out of this Court, his body was returned, but no cause. But the
said Inquisition was brought hither out of Chancery, and for that no cause of
his caption was returned, he prayed Delivery; but the Court would not deliver
him, till it knew the cause of his Commitment: Therefore (taking no regard of
the said Inquisition) they now send a Writ to the now Justice of Wales, to
certify the cause of his commitment. And thereupon he made this Return, That
the foresaid Peter Russell was taken, because one William Solomon charged him,
that he had committed diverse seditions against the Lord the King; and for that
cause he was detained, and for no other. And because the Return Videtur curiae;
which are the solemn words of a Judgment, given upon great deliberation. There
it was, -- for other things concerning Us -- This is all for other things
against Us -- Concerning the King, and, Against the King, are all one, as
appears by 25 E. 3. c. 4. de Clero, Stamf. 124. Westminster. 1. c. 15. Bracton, f.
119. 14 Eliz. c. 2. And the words of the Judgment in the said case, were not,
-- dimittitur -- but, -- ideo dimittendus -- which imply the right of the party
to be bayled. The said case in some things was more particular then our case,
and more strong; for, there was an Accuser to boot, which wants in our case.
There, true it is, that he was Wales, and here by the King himself; but this
makes no difference, as to this Court: for, be the commitment by the King
himself, or by any other, if it be not upon just cause, the party may be bayled
in this Court. And for the Inquisition, which is mentioned, it was no Trial in
the case; nor did the Court give any regard thereto. To detain the prisoner by
the command of the King singly, is against the Petition of Right; but it being
coupled with the cause, the cause is to be considered, and the truth of the
cause is to be H. 8. roll. 37. B. R. and 1 H. 8 roll. 8. Harrisons case
resolved, that a man committed by the command of the King, is baylable. And 33
Eliz. it was resolved by all the Justices of England, which I have viewed in
chief Justice Andersons Book, under his own hand, and it was produced in
Parliament, That all men committed by the Privy Council are baylable, if the
commitment be not for high treason. In all Russel's case of sedition, had been
an accusation of treason, then the Judges ought not to have bayled him of
right, and no man will say, but that the said accusation was a good cause to
commit him. But the discovery of the offense ought to be afterward in an
Indictment.

Fourthly, I come to the objections which have been made on the contrary.

1 st. It was objected, That this was a case of great consequence. I confess
it, but this consequence is not to the King; for if it be truly treason, then
they might have returned Treason, and then the party was not to be bayled of
right, till there should be a failer of prosecution; as was lately in Melvins
case, who was bailed for lack of prosecution, the Return being for high treason.

2 ly. It was objected, that there can be no conviction, as this case is,
therefore there ought to be coercive power to restrain the prisoner. This is
strange news to me, that there shall be any offense, for which a man cannot be
convict. And if there can be no conviction, it hence follows, that there is no
offense; and if there be no offense, there ought by consequence to be no
imprisonment.

ly. The case of 14 H. 7.8. has been objected, that a Justice of Peace may
commit Rioters, without bayl. I confess it, for this is by force of a Statute
which ordains it.

4 ly. It has been objected, That if a house be on fire, it is lawful to pull
down the neighbors house, for the prevention of further mischief; and the
cases of 22 ass. and 22 E. 4. that every man may justify the coercion of a
madman. I answer, That these cases are true, for of necessity, and no other
evasion: but here, bayl is proffered, which is body for body. Fire is swift,
and cannot be punished, and no caution can be obtained thereof. But observe the
true inference and consequence of Seldom is seditious, ergo, Mr. Herbert his
neighbor must be imprisoned.

5 ly. It has been objected out of Br. Treason, 24. 1 Mar. That the said
Statute of 25 E. 3. is taken largely, and that the detaining of a Castle or
Fortress is treason. To this I answer, That the bare detaining of a Castle is
not treason, unless it be with intention of the death Brook is Constables
case, Die. 128. And I confess, 13 Eliz. Die. 298. Doctor Story's case, that
conspiracy to invade the Kingdom, is treason; for this cannot be without great
danger of the death of the King; for, -- arma tenenti, Omnia dat qui justa
negat -- and all those Indictments were, that they intended the death of the
King, but no such intention is expressed here.

6 ly. It has been objected, That this case is out of the Petition of without
being charged with any thing, to which they might make answer by the Law --
which implies, that such cause ought to be contained in the Return, which being
put into an Indictment, the party may have his answer

7 ly. It was objected, that the Return shall not be construed and expounded by
fractions. I answer, That we need not make such an exposition; for the
joynt-construction thereof makes more for us, then the several, as is showed
before.

8 ly. That a general Return is sufficient, and it need not have terms of Art
in it, as an Indictment ought to have. For answer, I confess it; but I affirm,
as above, that a Return ought to be so particular, that the nature of the
offense ought to appear out of it: And it is not to be compared to general
Writs, as, Apostata capiendo, Idiota examinando, Leproso amovendo, and the
like: for those Writs are good enough, because they contain the very matter.
And although it has been said, that there are two kinds of Lepers, yet I never
heard but of one. And the Writ, de Haeretico comburendo, is general, and good,
because it is but a Writ of Execution upon a Judgment, given by the Spiritual
power. But because they might not meddle with the blood of any man, the
execution is by the Secular power.

9 ly. It has been objected out of 30 ass. p. 19. that the King would have one
drawn and hanged, for bringing in into England the Bulls of the Pope. But the
Book answers it self, for he was not drawn and hanged.

10 ly. The Statute of Westminster. 1. cap. 15. was objected. But as often as that
Statute is objected, I will always cry out, The Petition of Right, the
Petition of Right! as the King of France cried out nothing but France, France!
when all the several Dominions of the King of Spain were objected to him.

11 ly. A curious distinction has been taken by Sergeant Davenport, between
stirring To sedition, and stirring Up sedition; for the first implies an
inclination only to do it, the second implies an act done.

12 ly. The opinion of Fortescue in 31 H. 6.10. b. has been objected, That for
an offense done to the Court, a man may be committed before conviction. To this
I answer, 1 st. That the Book does not say, That he shall be committed without
bayl. 2 ly. The offense being done in face of the Court, the very view of the
Court is a conviction in

13 ly. There was objected the 24 of E. 3.23. Sir Thomas Fitchet's case, who,
for going armed in the Palace, was committed by this Court, without bayl or
mainprize; which seems to be the strongest and hardest case that has been
objected. But the answer to it is clear, and undeniable, for the Statute of 2
E. 3. c. 3. is, That if any one come armed before the Justices, he shall
forfeit his Armor, and shall be imprisoned during the Kings pleasure; so that
by the express purview of st. The Return here is for sedition; and there is an
information in the Star Chamber against the Prisoner, for seditious practices
against the King and his Government. ly. This Prisoner was ready at this Bar
the last Term, and here was a Grand-Iury at Bar the last Term, and here was the
Kings Counsel present, who are most watchful for the King; and yet an
Indictment was not preferred to them against this Prisoner. Which things induce
me to be of opinion, that the offense R. 2. Parliament Roll 14. in the printed
Statute, c. 3. and 5. where it appears, that diverse questions were propounded
by the King to Tresilian and Bealknap, the two chief Justices, and to the other
Justices: one of which questions was, How they are to be punished, who resisted
the King in exercising his royal power, etc? And the answer of the Judges was,
una voce, that they are to be punished as traitors; and 21 R. 2. c. 21. this
opinion was confirmed. But afterward in 1 H. 4. c. 3. and 4. and 1 H. 4. in
the Parliament-Roll, numb. 66, 67 Bealknap said, That he acquainted and
protested to the Earl of Kent aforehand, that his opinion was always to the
contrary. But the Parliament was not content with these excuses, but they were
all adjudged Traitors; and Tresilian's end is known to all, and Bealknap was
banished; for his Wife in 2 H. 4. brought a Writ, without naming her husband,
because he was banished. And the said Statute of 21 R. 2. was repealed.
Therefore upon the whole matter I conclude, that the Prisoner

On the same day, Sir Miles Hubbart, and Benjamin Valentine, and Densill Hollis
Esquires, were at Bar, upon an Habeas corpus directed to the several Prisons;
and their Counsel was ready at the Bar to have argued the case for them also:
But because the same Return was made as above, they said, That all of them
would rely upon this Argument made by Mr. Littleton.

Habeas corpus for Mr. Seldom and others, Sir Rob. Heath, the Kings Attorney
General, his Argument against Mr. Seldom.
was now argued by Heath, the Kings Attorney General, That this Return was
good, and that the parties ought not to be bayled:

And that within the Return there appears good cause of their commitment, and
of their detaining also. The case is great in expectation and consequence: and
concerns the liberty of the Subject on the one part, whereof the Argument is
plausible; and on the other part it concerns the Tempora mutantur. st. The
occasion of the Petition, and the grievance is showed in these words, Diverse of
your Subjects have been of late imprisoned, without any cause showed, etc. But
in this Return there is a cause showed, to which the parties may answer. Then
secondly, the prayer of the Petition is, That no freeman, in any such manner
as before is mentioned, be imprisoned or detained; that is, such manner of
imprisonment, the ground whereof does not appear. Then the answer of the King
to the Petition was in sundry words, 2 Jun. 1628. in these words, The King
Which answer gave not satisfaction. And afterward his answer was in a
Parliamentary-phrase, Soit droit fait come est desire. But afterward on the 26
of June, 1628. the King expressed his intention and meaning in the said Answer.
It must needs be conceived, that I have granted no new, but only confirmed the
ancient liberties of My Subjects, etc. A Petition in Parliament is not a Law,
yet it is for the honor st. if the Return, as it is now made, shall be
intended for true: 2. admit that it is true, if there be any offense contained
within it, which is good to detain the Prisoners. For the first, It is clear,
that the cause shall be intended true which is returned, though in truth it be
false; and so are 9 H. 6.44. and F. Corpus cum causa, 2. and C. 11. Baggs case.
2 ly. It seems, that there is such a crime contained in this Return which is a
good cause for detaining the Prisoners. It tertio Caroli, that general
Returns, that were committed by the command of the Lord the King, are not good;
and that those Arguments remain as Monuments on record, in the Upper House of
Parliament; but I will not admit them for Law. But I will remember what was the
opinion of former times, 22 H. 6.52. by Newton, a man committed by the command
of the King, is not replevisable. And the opinion cannot be intended of a
Replevin made by the Sheriff, because the principal H. 6.28. Poyning's case,
where the Return was, That he was committed by the Lords of the Council, and
it was admitted good. It is true, that this opinion is grounded upon Westminster. 1.
cap. 15. but I will not insist upon it. But the constant opinion has always
been, that a man committed by the command of the King, is not baylable. In 9 H.
6.44. it is said, That if one be taken upon the Kings suit, the Court will not
grant a Supersedeas. The contrary opinion is grounded upon Magna Charta, which
1 Jacobi, Sir John Brocket's case. 8 Jac. Sir Thomas Cesar's case. 12. Jac.
James Demetrius's case. 43 Eliz. William Rinch's case. And in the case M. 36
Eliz. and 4 and 5 Eliz. Richard Thimelby's case. And said, that there are
innumerable presidents to this purpose. M. 21 and 22 Eliz. upon the return of
an Habeas corpus it appears, that Michael Page was committed by the command of
the Lord the King, but was not delivered; and after was arraigned in this
Court, Stubbs was committed by the command of the Lord the King, for seditious
words and rumors, and he lost his hand also upon the same trial. M. 17 and 18.
Eliz. Upon Habeas corpus for John Loan, it was returned, That he was committed
for divulging sundry seditious writings, and he was remanded. And 7 H. 7 roll.
6. Rugs case; and roll. 13. Chase's case, where the Return was, that they were
committed by the command of the Lord the King, and they were not delivered; and
this was also the opinion M. 3. Car. And after the said time the Law is not
altered, and so I hope neither are your opinions. But to consider the
particular cause mentioned in the Return, I will not rely upon the first part
of the words, although they be of great weight, but only upon the last words,
-- for stirring up of sedition against Us -- But it has been objected, that
Sedition is not a word known in the Law: But I marvel, that the signification
of the word is not understood, when it is joined with the words -- agains Us --
this [Sedition] has sundry acceptations, according to the subject handled, as
it appears C. 4. Lord Cromwell's case, which has been cited. If it be spoken of
a man, that he is seditious; if it be of a company in London, it shall be
understood sedition in the Company; if it be spoken of a Soldier, it shall be
taken for mutinous. Mr. Littleton, who argued this case very well, said, That
Tacitus Seditio armata, and togata; and the last is more dangerous then the
former. But couple it with the subsequent words here, [against Us] the
interpretation and sense thereof is easy, and loquendum ut vulgus. Mr.
Littleton shows the acceptance of this word in diverse places of Scripture,
and I will not reject them, for they make for me: 20 Numb. 3. the Latin is, --
populi versi sunt in seditionem; and it is Englished -- murmuring -- Numb. 9.
in seditione Corah -- it is manifest, that that was a great Insurrection. 12
Judge. 1. Facta est ergo seditio in Ephraim, The Ephramites rose against Jephta;
and he at the same time was their Judge and Governor, so it was the height of
Insurrection. It is true, that in 15 Act. 2. Facta est seditio; and in some
Translations it is, Orta est repughantia non parva, for it may be taken in
several senses. 19 Acts 40. the Town Clerk there knew this days sedition, or
insurrection; and no doubt he was in great peril, for it was a great
insurrection; and I wish the greater ones were as circumspect as he was. 24
Act. 5. Tertullus accused Paul of sedition, and doubtless it was conceived a
great offense, if you consider the time and other circumstances, for they were
Heathens and Romans. And although he in very truth taught the Gospel of God,
yet he was taken for a pestilent fellow, and as a perswader to shake off
Government. Bracton lib. 3. de Corona, c. 2. rancks Sedition amongst the crimes
laesae Majestatis. But it has been objected, that if it be a capital offense,
it ought to be felony or treason. To this I say, That it cannot be felony, but
it may be treason, for any thing that appears. It is true, that by the statute
of 25 E. 3. treasons are declared, and nothing shallbe said treason, which is
not comprised within the said Statute, unless it be declared so [Seditio] and
it is always coupled with Insurrection or Rebellion, as appears by the
Statutes of 5 R. 2. c. 6. 17 R. 2. c. 8. 2 H. 5. c. 9. 8 H. 6. c. 14. 3 and 4.
E. 6. c. 5. 2 R. 2. c. 5. Phil. and Mar. c. 2. 1 Eliz. c. 7. 13 Eliz. c. 2. 23
Eliz. c. 2. 27 Eliz. c. 2. and 35 Eliz. c. 1. all which were cited before, and
they prove, that [Sedition] is a word well known in the Law, and of dangerous
consequence, and which cannot be expounded in good sense. Wherefore the nature
of the offense, I leave it to the Court. But out of these Statutes it appears,
that there is a narrow difference between it and treason, if there be any at
all.

3 ly. As to the Objections which have been made, I will give a short

1. It was objected, That every imprisonment is either for custody or
punishment, the last is always after the judgment given for the offense; and
if it be but for custody, the party upon tender of sufficient mainpernors is
baylable. I confess, that this difference is true, but not in all respects;
for I deny, that a man is always baylable, when imprisonment is imposed upon
him for custody: For, imprisonment is for two intents, the one is, that the
party which had offended H. 4.6. If the party come not at the day, the Bayl
shall be imprisoned; but yet the Bayl shall not suffer the same punishment
which ought to have been inflicted upon the party; as if it were for treason,
the Bayl shall not answer for the fault, Berkley did well call a seditious man
an Incendiary to the Government; and, as commune incendium, is to be restrained
of his liberty. And he put 22 E. 4. and 22. ass. 56. that a madman may be
restrained, to prevent the hurt he would otherwise do himself and others. A
seditious man is as a madman in the public State of the Commonwealth, and
therefore ought to be restrained. And it appears by the Writ, de Leproso
amovendo, that a Leper is to be removed, and in a manner imprisoned, for the
contagion Jac. c. 33. is restrained to keep within doors; and if he go abroad,
any man may justify the killing of him. The infection of sedition is as
dangerous, as any of these diseases, therefore it is not safe to let seditious
men to bayl, or at libertyty, and in dangerous cases, the wisest way is, to
make all safe. In all cases of this nature, much is left to the discretion of
the Court. The case of M. 9 E. 3. roll. 39. Russell has been objected, to be
in the point; I have viewed the Record of that case, and although it be
verbally, yet it is not materially to this purpose; for the commitment was by a
Justice of North Wales, upon the accusation of an accuser; and it was within a
short time after the Statute of 5 E. 3. by which it was Russell came in here
upon the Habeas corpus, 20 Sept. but was not delilivered until Hillary Term
following. And for 28 H. 6. the Duke of Suffolk's case which was objected, that
the general accusation of diverse treasons was not legal. That is true,
because it was in Parliament, and in the nature of an accusation; and being in
a Court of Justice, it had been unjust to condemn a man before his Trial;
Coryton, and Sir Peter Hayman. Therefore if any injury be done to the
prisoners, they themselves are the cause of it, for not submitting themselves
to the King. And for the instance which Mr. Littleton used of the Judges in 11
R. 2. although they suffered for their opinions given to the King, I desire,
that the time when their opinion was delivered may be considered, to wit, in
the time of R. 2. and the time when they suffered, to wit, in the time of H. 4.
And it was the saying of a noble Gentleman, the Lord Egerton, That Bealknap
suffered rather by the

It has been relied upon the resolution of all the Justices of England in 34
Eliz, which resolution is now registered in the Upper House of Parliament, at
the request of the Commons, in tertio Caroli Regis; but I leave it to you, as
that Resolution shall sway your judgments. The ye are to consult with the King,
and he will show you where the danger rests. Therefore upon the whole matter I
pray, that they be remanded.

When the Court was ready to have delivered their opinions in the grand Habeas
corpus for Mr. Seldom and others, the Prisoners were not brought to the Bar,
according to the Rule of the Court; Therefore Proclamation was made, for the
Keepers of the several prisons, to bring in their Prisoners; but none of them
appeared but the Marshall of the Kings Bench, who said, Stroud that was in his
custody, was removed yesterday, and put in the Tower of London by the Kings own
Warrant; and so it was done with the other Prisoners; each of them was removed
out of his Prison, in which he was before. But, this notwithstanding, it was
prayed by the Counsel of the Prisoners, that the Court would deliver their
opinion for the matter in Law. But the Court refused to do that, because it is
to no purpose; for, the Prisoners being absent, they could not be bayled,
delivered, or remanded.

Note, The last day of the Term, a Letter came to the Court from the King
himself; the effect whereof was, to inform the Court of the reasons, wherefore
the Prisoners were not suffered to come at the day appointed, for the
resolution of the Judges.

Mich. 5 Car. B. R.

THe case of the grand Habeas corpus for Mr. Seldom and others, was now moved
by Mason to have the resolution of the Judges; and the Court with one voice
said, That they are now content that they shall be bailed; but that they ought
to find Sureties also for the good behavior. And Jones Justice said, that so
it was done in the case which had been often remembered to another purpose, to
Russell's case in 9 E. 3. To which Mr. Seldom answered, (with whom all the
other Prisoners agreed in opinion) That they have the Sureties ready for the
bayl, but not for the good behavior; and desire that the bayl might first be
accepted, and that they be not urged to the other.

An Information exhibited in the King's Bench against Sir John Eliot and others.
Sir Robert Heath, the Kings Atturney-generall, exhibited Information in this
Court against Sir John Eliot Knight; Denzill Hollis, Benjamin Valentine,
Esquires: the effect of which was, That the King that now is, for weighty
causes, such a day and year, did summon a Parliament, and to that purpose sent
his Writ to the Sheriff of Cornwall to choose two Knights, by virtue whereof Sir
John Eliot was chosen, and returned Knight for Cornwall. And that in the same
manner, the other Defendants were elect Burgesses of other places for the same
Parliament. And showed further, that Sir John Finch was chosen for one of the
Citizens of Canterbury, and was Eliot, publicly and maliciously in the House
of Commons, to raise sedition between the King, his Nobles and People, uttered
these words, That the Council and Judges had all conspired, to trample
under-foot the Liberties of the Subjects. He further showed, that the King had
power to call, adjourn, and dissolve Parliaments: And that the King, for diverse
reasons, had a purpose to have the House of Commons adjourned, and gave
direction to Sir Jo^n Finch, then the Speaker, to move as adjournment, and if
it should not be obeyed, that he should forthwith come from the House to the
King. And that the Defendants, by confederacy aforehand, spoke a long and
continued Speech, which verbatim, in which were diverse malicious and seditious
words, of dangerous consequence. And to the intent that they might not be
prevented of uttering their premeditate speeches, their intention was, that the
Speaker should not go out of the Chair till they had spoken them; the
Defendants, Hollis and Valentine, lay violent hands upon the Speaker, to the
great afrightment and disturbance of the House. And the Speaker being got out
of the Chair, they by violence set him in the Chair again; so that there was a
great tumult in the House. And after the said speeches pronounced by Sir John
Eliot, Hollis did recapitulate them. And to this information, the Defendants
Hyde, chief Justice, said to the Counsel of the Defendants, So far light we
will give you. This is no new question, but all the Judges of England, and
Barons of the Exchequer, before now, have often been assembled on this occasion,
and have with great patience heard the Arguments on both sides; and it was
resolved by them all with one voice, That an offense committed in Parliament,
criminally Jones, It is true, that we all resolved That an offense committed in
Parliament against the Crown, is punishable after the Parliament, in another
Court; and what Court shall that be, but the Court of the Kings Bench, in which
the King by intendment sits? Whitlock, The question is now reduced to a
narrow room, for all the Judges are agreed, That an offense committed in
Parliament against the King or his Government, may be punished out of
Parliament. So Crook agreed, That so it had been resolved by all the Judges,
because otherwise there would be a failer of Justice. And by him, If such an
offense be punishable in another Court, what Court shall punish it but this
Court, which is the highest Court in the Realm for criminal offenses? And
perhaps not only criminal actions committed in Parliament are punishable
here, but words also.

Mason of Lincolns-Inne argued for Sir John Eliot, one of the Defendants. The
charges in the Information against him are three. Mr. Mason's Argument for Sir
John Eliot.


1. For speeches. 2. For contempts to the King in resisting the Adjournment. 3.
For conspiracy with the other Defendants, to detain Mr. Speaker in the Chair.
In the discussion of these matters, be argued much to the same intent which he
had argued before, upon an information brought in the Star Chamber against the
same Defendants, and others, for the same offenses; therefore his Argument is
reported here very briefly.

1 st. For his speeches, They contain matter of accusation against some great
Peers of the Realm; and as to them he said, That the King cannot take notice of
them. The Parliament is a Council, and the grand Council of the King, and
Councills are secret and close, none H. 4. numb. 10. That the King shall not
give credit to any ly. The words themselves contain several accusations of
great men; and the liberty of accusation has always been Parliamentary, 50 E.
3. Parliament-Roll, numb. 21. The Lord Latimer was impeached in Parliament for
sundry offenses, 11 R. 2. the Archbishop of York, 18 H. 6. numb. 18. the Duke
of Suffolk, 1 Mar. Die. 93. the Duke of Norfolk, 36 H. 6. numb. 60. un Uickar
and 3 E. 6. c. 18. the Lord Seymer, 18 of King James, the Lord of St. Albans,
Chancellor of England; and 21 of King James, Cranfield Lord Treasurer; and 1
Car. the Duke of Buckingham. 3 ly. This is a privilege of Parliament which is
determinable in Parliament, and not elsewhere, 11 R. 2. numb. 7. the
Parliament-Roll. Petition exhibited in Parliament, and allowed by the King,
That the liberties and privileges of Parliament shall only be discussed
there, and not in other Courts, nor by the Common nor Civill-Law, Selden's
Notes upon Fortescue, f. 42.) 11 R. 2. Roll of the Process and Judgment. An
appeal of treason was exhibited against the Archbishop of Canterbury and
others, and there the advice of the Sages of the one Law and the other being
required; but because the appeal concerned persons which are Peers of the
Realm, which are not tried elsewhere then in Parliament, and not in an
inferior Court, 28 H. 6. numb. 18. There being a question in Parliament
concerning Precedence, between the Earl of Arundell Devon, the opinion of the
Judges being demanded, they answered, That this question ought to be determined
by the Parliament, and by no other, 31 H. 6. numb. 25, 26. During the
prorogation of the Parliament, Thorp that was the Speaker, was out in Execution
at the Suit of the Duke of York; and upon the re-assembly of the Parliament,
the Commons made Suit to the King and Lords to have their Speaker delivered.
Upon this, the Lords demand the opinion of the Judges, who answer, That they
ought not to determine ly. This accusation in Parliament, is in legal course
of justice, and therefore the accuser shall never be impeached, 13 H. 7. and 11
Eliz. Die. 285. Forging of false deeds brought against a Peer of the Realm,
Action de scandalis Magnatum, does not lie. C. 4.14. Cutler and Dixy's case,
where diverse cases are likewise put to this purpose, 35 H. 6.15. If upon the
view of the body the slayer cannot be found, the Coron^r ought to enquire, Who
first found the dead body, and if the first finder accuse another of the
murder, that is afterward acquit, he shall not have an action upon the case,
for it was done in legal manner. So it is the duty of the Commons to enquire
of the grievances of the Subjects, H. 6.19. 8 H. 4.6. in conspiracy it is a
good plea, that he was one of the Indictors. And 20 H. 6.5. that he was a
grand-Iury-man, and informed his companions. And 21 E. 4.6, 7. and 35 H. 6.14.
that he was a Justice of Peace, and informed the Jury, 27 ass. p. 12. is to the
same purpose. And if a Justice of Peace, the first finder, a Iuror, or
Indictor, shall not be punished in such cases; a fortiori, a Member of the
House of Commons shall not, who, as 1 H. 7.4. is a Judge. 27 ass. p. 44. may be
objected, where two were indicted of conspiracy, because C. 9.56. there was
conspiracy, in procuring others to be indicted. And it is true, for there it
was not his duty to prefer such accusation. (2) The accusation was
extra-judicial, and out of Court; but it was not so in our case. (3) Words
spoken in Parliament, which is a superior E. 3.19. and Stamford, 153. will be
objected, where the Bishop of Winchester was arraigned in this Court, because
he departed the Parliament without license; there is but the opinion of Scroop,
and the case was entered, P. 3. E. 3.19. And it is to be observed, that the plea
of the Bishop there, was never overruled. From this I gather, that Scroop was
not constant to his opinion, which was sudden, being in the same Term in which
the plea was entered; or if he were, Pl. 20. in Fogassas's case, where the
opinion of the Court was against the King, the party was discharged by privy
Seal. 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. has been objected, where an Information in this
Court was preferred against Mr. Ployden, and other Members of the House of
Commons, for departing from the House without license. But in that case I
observe sine die, by the death of the Queen. (2.) In the said case, no plea was
made to the Jurisdiction of the Court, as here it is. (3.) Some of them
submitted themselves to the Fine, because it was easy, for it was but 53. 4 d.
But this cannot be urged as a president, because it never came injudgment, and
no opinion of the Court was delivered therein. And it is no argument, that
because at that time they would not plead to the jurisdiction, therefore R. 2.
Parliament-Roll 12. Thomas Hacksey was indicted of high treason in this Court,
for preferring a Petition in Parliament, but 1 H. 4. number. 90. he preferred a
Petition to have this Judgment voided, and so it was, although that the King
had pardoned him before. And 1 H. 4. numb. 104. all the Commons made Petition
to the same purpose, because this tends to the destruction of their
privileges. And this was likewise granted, 4 H. 8. c. 8. Strood's case, That
all condemnations imposed upon one, for preferring of any Bill, speaking, or
reasoning in Parliament, are void. And this has* always been conceived to be
a general Act, because the Le Roy voit, and a particular Act with Soit droit
fait al parties. And 33 H. 6.17.18. A general Act is always enrolled, and so
this is.

2 ly. For the second matter, the contempt to the command of the Adjournment,
18 Jac. it was questioned in Parliament, Whether the King can adjourn the
Parliament, (although it be without doubt that the King can prorogue it) And
the Judges resolve, that the King may Eliz. it was resolved accordingly. But it
is to be observed, that none was then impeached for moving that question. (2)
It is to be observed, that they resolve, that the adjournment may be by
Commission, but not resolved, that it may be by a verbal command, signified by
another; and it derogates not from the Kings prerogative, that he cannot so do,
no more then in the case of 26 H. 8.8. that he cannot grant one acre of land by
parol. The King himself may adjourn the House in person, or under the great
Test Meipso. and if there was no command, then there can be no contempt in the
disobedience of that command. (3) In this no contempt appears by the
Information, for the Information is, That the King had power to adjourn
Parliaments. Then put case the command be, that they should adjourn themselves;
this is no pursuance of the power which Voluntas non cogitur.

3 ly. For the third matter, which is the Conspiracy: Although this be supposed
to be out of the House, yet the Act is legal; for, Members of the House may
advise of matters out of the House; for the House it self is not so much for
consultations, as for proposition of them. And 20 H. 6.34. is, that Enquests
which are sworn for the E. 4. 4. and 18 H. 8.5. A wife that has title to have
Dower, agrees with an other to enter, (which has right) that she against him
may recover her Dower. This shall not be said Covin, because both the parties
have right and title. (2) It will be objected, That if these matters shall not
be punishable here, they shall be unpunished altogether, because the Parliament
is determined. To this I say, That they may be punished in the subsequent
Parliament, and so there shall be no failer of right. And many times matters in
one Parliament, have been continued to E. 3. numb. 16. the Lord Barkley's case,
50 E. 3. numb. 185.21 R. 2. c. 16.6 H. 6. numb. 45, 46.8 H. 4. numb. 12.
Offenses in the Forest ought to be punished in Air, and Eyres oftentimes were
not held, but every third year. C. 9. Epistle, and 36 E. 3. c. 10. A Parliament
may be every year. Error in this Court cannot be reversed but in Parliament.
And yet it was never objected, that therefore there shall be a failer of Right.
25 E. 3. c. 2. If a new case of treason happen, which is doubtful, it shall
not be determined till the next Parliament. Westminster. 2. c. 28. where a new case
happens, in which there is no Writ, stay shall be made till the next
Parliament. And yet in these cases, there is no failer of Right. And so the
Judges have always done in all difficult cases; they have referred the
determination of them to the next Parliament, as appears by 2 E. 3 6, 7.1 E.
3.8.33 H. 6.18.5 E. 2. Dower. 145. the case of Dower of a Rentcharge. And 1
Jac. the Judges refuse to deliver their opinions concerning the union of the
two Kingdoms. The present case is great, rare, and without president therefore

The Court. The question is not now, whether these matters be offenses, and
whether true or false. But, admitting them to be offenses, the sole question
is, Whether this Court may punish them; so that a great part of your Argument
is nothing to the present question.

At another day, Mr. Calibrop's Argument for Mr. Valentine.
being the next, Calthrop argued for Mr. Valentine, another of the Defendants.

st. In general, he said, for the nature of the crimes, that they are of four
sorts.

1. In Matter. 2. In Words. 3. By Consent. 4. By Letters.
Two of them are laid to the charge of this Defendant, to wit, The crune of the
Matter, and of Consent. And of offenses, Bracton makes some public, some
private. The offenses here are public. And of them, some are capital, some
not capital, as assault, conspiracy, and such like, which have not the
punishment of life and death. Public crimes capital, are such as are against
the Law of Nature, as treason, murder; I will agree, that if they be committed
in Parliament, they may be questioned elsewhere out of Parliament. But in our
case, the crimes are not capital, H. 7. Keilw. 92. 2 ass. 3 H. 4.10.22 E. 4.43.
Therefore this Court shall not have jurisdiction of them, for they are not
against the Law of Nations* of God, or Nature. And if these matters shall be
examinable here, by consequence all the actions of Parliament Men may be drawn
in question in this Court. But it seems by these reasons that this Court shall
not have jurisdiction as this case is:

st. Because these offenses are justifiable, being but the bringing the Jac.
and 16 H. 7.3 C. 9.31. are, that such matters cannot be tried by the Country.
And now they cannot be tried by Record, because, as 29 H. 8. Die. 32. is, an
inferior Court cannot write to a superior. Certiorari lies out of the
Chancery, to send this here by Mittimus, for there never was any president
thereof; and the Book of the House of Commons, which is with their Clerk, ought
not to be divulged. And C. Littl. is, that if a man be indicted in this Court
for Piracy committed upon the Sea, he may well plead to the jurisdiction of
this Court, because this Court cannot try it.

ly. It appears by the old Treatise, de modo tenendi Parliamentum, that the
Judges are but assistants in the Parliament; and if any in pares est nullum
imperium, multo minus in eos qui majus imperium habent. C. Littl. says, that
the Parliament st. for the place, It appears by 11 E. 4.3. and old Entries,
101. that in an Ejectione firm, it is a Durham, old Entries, 419. for it is
questionable there, and not out of the County. 2 ly. For persons, H. 15. H. 7.
roll. 93* old Entries, 47. If a Clerk of the Chancery be impleaded in this
Court, he may plead his privilege, and shall not answer. So it is of a Clerk
of the Exchequer, old Entries, 473. then much more when offenses are done in
Parliament, which is exempt from ordinary jurisdiction, they shall not be drawn
in question in this Court. And if a man be Indicted in this Court, he may plead
Sanctuary, 22 H. 7. Keilw. 91. and 22. and shall be restored, 21 E. 3.60. The
Abbot of Bury's case is to the same purpose. (5) For any thing that appears,
the House of Jermans, from whence he was sent; therefore he is in nature of an
Ambassador, and he shall not be questioned for any thing in the Execution of
his office, if he do nothing against the Law of Nature or Nations, as it is in
the case of an Ambassador. In the time of Queen Elizabeth, the Bishop of Rosse
Scotland, Camden's Brit. 449.
being Ambassador here, attempted diverse matters against the State; and by the
opinion of all the Civilians of the said time, he may be questioned for those
offenses, because they are against the Law of Nations and Nature; and, in such
matters, he shall not enjoy the privileges of an Ambassador. But if he commit
a civil offense, which is against the Municipall Law only, he cannot be
questioned for it, as Bodin. de Republica, agrees the case. Upon the Statute of
28 H. 8. c. 15. for trial of Pirates, 13. Jac. the case fell civiliter in the
Admiralty: For, Legati suo Regi soli judicum faciunt. So Ambassadors of
Parliament, soli Parliamento, to wit, in such things which of themselves are
justifiable. (7) There was never any president, that this Court had punished
offenses of this nature, Littl. Section 180. Co. Littl. f. 81. says, As Usage
is a good interpreter of the Laws, so Non-usage, where there is no example, is
a great intendment, that the Law will not bear it, 6 Eliz. Die. 229. upon the
Statute of 27 H. 8. of Inrolments, that bargain and sale of a House in London
ought not to be enrolled; the reason there given is, because it is not Eliz.
Die. 376. No error lies here of a Judgment given in the five Ports, because
such Writ was never seen; yet in the diversity of Courts it is said, That
error lies of a Judgment given in the five Ports, 39 H. 6.39. by Ashton, that
a protection to go to Rome was never seen, therefore he disallowed it. (8) If
this H. 5. c. 1. that every Burgess ought to be resident within the Borough
of which he is Burgess, yet the constant usage of Parliament is contrary
thereunto; and if such matter shall be in question before ye, ye ought to
adiudge according to the Statute, and not according to their usage. So the
House of Lords has a special Law also, as appears by 11 R. 2. the Roll of the
Process and Iudgmen, (which has been cited before to another purpose) where
an appeal was not according to the one Law or the other, yet it was good
according ass. p. 12. that if a Bill of Disceit be brought in this Court, where
it ought to be by Writ, This matter may be pleaded to the Jurisdiction of the
Court, because vi and armis, and contra pacem. It appears by all our Books,
that informations ought not to be grounded upon surmices, but upon matter of
Record, 4 H. 7.5.6 E. 6. Die. 74. Information in the Exchequer, and 11 H. 8.
Keilw. 101. are this purpose. And if the matter be vi and armis, then it ought
to be found by Enquest, 2 E. 3.1, 2. Appeal shall not be grounded upon the
Return of the Sheriff, but the King ought to be certified of it by Indictment,
1 H. 7.6. and Stamf. f. 95. a. E. 3. c. 4. that none shall be imprisoned but
upon Indictment or Presentment; and 28 E. 3. c. 3. 42 E. 3. c. 3. are to the
same purpose. So here, this Information ought to have been grounded upon
Indictment, or other matter of Record, and not Bracton, book 2. f. 1. Si
aliquid novi non usitatum in Regno acciderit, 2 E. 3.6, 7. and Dower 243.

Now I will remove some objections which may be made.

1. Object.
Where the King is Plaintiff, it is in his election to bring his Action in what
Court he pleases. This is true in some sense, to wit, That the King is not
restrained by the Statute of Magna Charta, Quod communia placita non sequantur
Curiam nostram; for he may bring his Quare impedit in B. R. And if it concerns
Durham, or other County Palatine, yet the King may have his Action here; for
the said Courts H. 7. Keilw. 6. the King shall not have a Formedon in Chancery.
And C. 6.20. Gregory's case, If the King will bring an Information in an
inferior Court, the party may plead to the Jurisdiction. So where the Common
Law makes a prohibition, the King has not election of his Court.

The Information is contra formam Statuti, which Statute, as I 2. Object.
is intended the Statute of 5 H. 4. c. 6. and 11 H. 6. c. 11. which gives power
to this Court to punish an assault, made upon the servant of a Knight of
Parliament. But our case is not within those Statutes, nor the intent of them;
for it is not intendible, that the Parliament would disadvantage themselves, in
point of their privilege. And this was a trespass done within the House by
Parliament Men amongst themselves. And Crompton's Jurisdiction of Courts, f. 8.
says,

3. Object.
Presidents have been cited of Parliament Men, imprisoned and punished for
matters done in Parliament. To this I say, That there is Via juris, and via
facti; and via facti is not always via juris, C. 4.93. Presidents are no good
directions, unless they be judicial.

Otherwise there will be a failer of Justice, 4. Object.
wrongs shall be unpunished. To this I answer, That a mischief is oft-times
rather sufferable then an inconvenience, to draw in question the privileges of
Parliament. By the ancient Common Law, as it appears by 21 E. 3.23. and 21 ass.
if an Infant bring an appeal, the Suit shall be stayed during his infancy,
because the party cannot have his trial by Battle against the H. 8. Die. 40.
appeal of murder lies not for murder done in several Counties.

This Court of B. R. is coram ipso Rege, 5. Object.
the King himself by intendment is here in person. And as it is said, C. 9.118.
it is Supremum Regni Tribunal, of ordinary Jurisdiction. But to this I say,
that the Parliament is a transcendent Court, and of transcendent jurisdiction;
It appears by 28 ass. p. 52. that the style of other Courts is coram Rege, as
well as this is, as coram Rege in Cancellaria, coram Rege in Camera; and though
it be coram Rege, yet the Judges H. 3. in this Court, some Entries were coram
Rege; others, Coram Hugone de Bigod.

The privileges of Parliament are not questioned, 6. Object.
but the conspiracies and misdemeanors of some of them. But to this I say,
That the distinction is difficult and narrow in this case, where the offenses
objected are justifiable: and if they be offenses, this reflects upon the House
which has not punished them.

E. 3.19. and 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. have been ob^ected. 7. Object.
But for the last it is observable, that no plea was pleaded to the
Jurisdiction, as it is in our case. And if a Parliament Man or other, which
has privilege, be impleaded in foreign Court, and neglect his plea to the
Jurisdiction, the Court may well proceed, 9 H. 7.14. 36 H. 6.34 ^. 13. Jac. In
this Court the Lord Norreys, that was a Peer of Parliament, was indicted in
this Court for the murder of one Bigoo, and pleaded his pardon. And there it
was doubted, how the

The privilege here is not claimed by Prescription or Charter, 8. Object.
therefore it is not good. But I say, that notwithstanding this, it is good; H.
6.13. 8 H. 8. Keilw. 189. Br. n. c. 515. Where Sanctuary of a Church is
pleaded, there is no need to make Prescription, because every Church is a
Sanctuary by the Common Law. Therefore, etc.

Heath, Sir Rob. Heaths Argument against Sir John Elliot.
the Kings Attorney, the same day argued on the other side,

First, he said, That Informations might well be for matters of this

2 y. It has been objected, That they are a Council, therefore they prove
them not Counselors of State, but Bedlams; the addition of one word would have
made it Treason, to wit, Proditorie. But it is the pleasure of the King to
proceed in this manner, as now it is. And there is great difference between
Bills and Libells, and between their proceedings, as Counsel and as Mutinous.

ly. That it would be of dangerous consequence; for by this means, none would
adventure to complain of grievances. I answer, They may make their complaints
in Parliamentary manner, but they may not

ly. These matters may be punished in following Parliaments. But this is
impossible, for following Parliaments cannot know, with what mind these
matters were done. Also the House of Commons is not a Court of Justice of
itself. The two Houses are but one Body, and they cannot proceed criminally to
punish crimes, but only upon their Members by way of imprisonment; and also
they are not H. 4. The Bishop of Carlisle, for words spoken in the Parliament,
Episcopus unctus, etc.

ly. 4 H. 8. Strode's case has been objected. But this is but a particular
act, although it be in print; for Rastall intitles it by the name of Strode; so
the title, Body, and proviso of the Act are particular.

6 ly. That this is an inferior Court to the Parliament, therefore, B. R. and
other Courts, may judge of their privileges, as of a Parliament Man put in
execution, etc. and other cases. It is true, that the Judges have oft-times
declined to give their judgment, upon the privileges of Parliament, sitting the
Court. But from this it follows not, that when the offense is committed there,
and not punished, and the said Court dissolved, that therefore the said matter
shall not be questioned in this Court.

ly. By this means the privileges of Parliament shall be in great

ly. Perhaps these matters were done by the Uotes of the House; or, if they be
offenses, it is an imputation to the House to say, that they had neglected to
punish them. But this matter does not appear. And if the truth were so, these
matters might be given in evidence.

ly. There is no president in the case, which is a great presumption Elizabeth,
it was resolved by Brown* and many other Justices, that offenses done in
Parliament may be punished out of Parliament, by imprisonment or otherwise. And
the case of 3 E. 3.19. is taken for good Law by Stamf. and Fitzh. And 22 E. 3.
and 1 Mar. accord directly with it. But it has been objected, that there was
no plea made to the Jurisdiction. But it is to be obserserved, that Ployden,
that was a learned man, was one of the Defendan^s, and he pleaded not to the
Jurisdiction, but pleaded license to depart. And the said Information depended
during all the Reign of Mary, during which time there were four Parliaments,
and they never questioned this matter.

But it has been further objected, That the said case differs from our case,
because that there the offense was done out of the House, and this was done
within the House. But in the said case, if license to depart be pleaded, it
ought to be tried in Parliament, as well as these offenses here. Therefore, etc.

And the same day the Judges spoke briefly to the case, and agreed with one
voice, That the Court, as this case is, shall have Jurisdiction,

Afterward the Parliament which met the 3d. of November. 1640. upon Report made
by Mr. Recorder Glyn, of the state of the several and respective cases of Mr.
Hollis, Mr. Seldom, and the rest of the imprisoned Members of the Parliament,
in tertio Caroli, touching their extraordinary sufferings, for their constant
affections to the Liberties of the Kingdom, expressed in that Parliament; And
upon Arguments made in the House thereupon, did, upon the 6th. of July, 1641.
pass these viz.

July the 6th. 1641.

Hollis, and the rest of the Members of that Parliament, 3. Car. during

Hollis, and the rest ^f the Lords, and others of the Privy Council; dureing
the Parliament, is a breach of the privilege of Parliament by those Lords and
others.

Hollis, Mr. Seldom, and Sir. John Eliot, being Members of this House, and
dureing the Parliament, and issuing of

Hollis and the rest, for matters done by them in Parliament, being members of
Parliament, and the same so appearing in the Information; is a breach of the
privilege in Parliament.

Robert Heath, and Sir Humphrey Davenport, Hennage Finch, Mr. Hudson, and Sir
Robert Berkly, that subscribed their names to the Information, are guilty
thereby of the breach of privilege of Parliament.

Hollis and the rest that appeared upon the Ha. Corp. in that they were not
bayled in Easter and Trinity Term. 5. Car.

Nicholas Hide, then chief Justice of the Kings Bench, is guilty of this delay.

William Jones then being one of the Justices of the Court of Kings Bench is
guilty of this delay.

James Whitlock Knight, then one of the Justices of the Court of Kings Bench is
not guilty of this delay.

Ordered, That the further debate of this shall be taken into Consideration on
to morrow Morning.

July the 8th. 1641.

George Crook Knight, then one of the Judges of the Kings Bench is not guilty
of this delay.

Hollis and the rest of the Members of Parliament, 3. Car. in Prison, by the
then Judges of the Kings Bench for not putting in sureties of the good
behavior, was without just or legal cause.

That the exhibiting of the Information against Mr. Hollis, Sir John and Mr.
Valentine in the Kings Bench, being members of Parliament, for matters done in
Parliament, was a breach of the privilege of Parliament.

That the overruling of the plea, pleaded by Mr. Hollis, Sir John and Mr.
Valentine, upon the Information to the Jurisdiction of the Court, was against
the Law, and privilege of Parliament.

That the Judgment given upon a Nihil dicit, against Mr. Hollis, John Eliot,
and Mr. Valentine, and fine thereupon imposed, and their several imprisonments
thereupon, was against the Law, and privilege of Parliament.

That the several proceedings against Mr. Hollis, and the rest, by

That Mr. Hollis, Mr. Stroud, Mr. Valentine, and Mr. Long, and the John Eliot,
Sir Miles Hubbard, and Sir Peter Heyman, respectively ought to have reparation
for their respective damages and sufferings, against the Lords and others of
the Council, by whose warrants they were apprehended and committed, and
against the Council that put their hands to the Information in the
Star Chamber, and against the Judges of the Kings Bench.

Lawrence Whitaker, being a Member of the Parliament, Car. entering into the
Chamber of Sir John Eliot, being likewise a Member of the Parliament, searching
of his Trunck and Papers, and sealing of them, is guilty of the breach of the
privilege of Parliament, this being done before the dissolution of Parliament.

Resolved upon the question, That Mr. Lawrence Whitaker, being Tower, there to
remain a prisoner during the pleasure of

Mr. Whitaker was called down, and kneeling at the Bar, Mr. Speaker pronounced
this Sentence against him accordingly.

Mr. Whitaker being at the Bar, did not deny, but that he did search and seal
up the Chamber, and Trunck, and Study, of Sir John Eliot, between the second
and tenth of March, during which time the Parliament was adjourned: But
endeavored to extenuate it, by the confusion of the times, at that time; the
length of the time since the crime

Afterward Mr. Recorder Glin made a further Report to the House of Commons,
viz.

Vassell, for denying to pay Tunnage and Poundage, (not granted by Act of
Parliament) in obedience to a Declaration and Vote of this House. The Warrant,
which issued and was subscribed by twelve Privy Counselors, to summon nine of
the Members of the House of Commons, in the Parliament of tertio Caroli, to
appear before them during the Parliament: viz. Mr. William Stroud, Mr. Benjamin
Valentine, Mr. Hollis, Sir John Eliot, Mr. Seldom, Sir Miles Hobert, Sir Peter
Heyman, Mr. Walter Long, and Mr. William Coriton; bearing date, tertio Mar^ii
quarto Caroli; and the names of the twelve Privy Counselors that signed this
Warrant were read. The Parliament being adjourned the second of March to the
tenth of March, and then dissolved.

The Warrants under the hands of sixteen Privy Counselors, for Denzill Hollis,
Sir John Eliot, Mr. John Seldom, Mr. Benjamin Valentine, and Mr. William
Coriton, close prisoners to the Tower, bearing date, Quarto Martii quarto
Caroli, during the Parliament, were read. And the names of the Privy
Counselors that subscribed them, were read. The Warrants under the hands of
twenty two Privy Counselors, directed to William Boswell Esquire to repair to the
lodgings of Denzil Hollis Esquire and to Simon Digby Esquire to repair to the lodgings
of Mr. John Seldom, and to Lawrence Whitaker Esquire to repair to John Eliot,
requiring them to seal up the Truncks, Studies, and Cabinets, or any other
thing that had any Papers in them, of the said Mr. Hollis, Mr. John Seldom, and
Sir. John Eliot, were read; and likewise the names of the Privy Counselors
that subscribed the said Warrants. A Warrant under the hands of thirteen Privy
Counselors, for the commitment of Mr. William Stroud close prisoner to the
Kings Bench, bearing date, 2d. April, 1628. was read, and the names of the
Privy Counselors that subscribed it: The like Warrant Walter Long close
prisoner to the Marshall-sea.

The humble Memorial of the losses, damages, sufferings, and imprisonments,
sustained and undergone by Alderman Richard Chambers, for denying to pay
Tunnage and Poundage, (not granted by Act of Parliament) in obedience to a
Declaration and Vote of this House, was this day read.

Ordered, that it be referred to the Committee for the Members of tertio
Caroli, where Mr. Recorder has the Chair; and the Committee of the Navy,
joined as to this business; to consider of the Memorial of the losses,
damages, sufferings, and imprisonments, sustained and undergone by Alderman
Richard Chambers, for his denying to betray the Liberty of the Subject, in
paying the illegal Tax of Tunnage and Poundage, (not granted by Act of
Parliament) in obedience to a Declaration and Order of this House. And the
Committee are to make report on Monday fortnight.

Resolved, etc. That Mr. Hollis shall have the sum of five thousand pounds, for
his damages, losses, imprisonments, and sufferings, sustained and undergone by
him, for his service done to the Commonwealth in the Parliament of tertio
Caroli.

Resolved, etc. That Mr. John Seldom shall have the sum of five thousand
pounds, for his damages, losses, imprisonments, and sufferings, sustained and
undergone by him for his service done to the Commonwealth, in the Parliament of
tertio Caroli.

Resolved, etc. That the sum of five thousand pounds be assigned for the
damages, losses, imprisonments, and sufferings, sustained and undergone by Sir
John Eliot, for his service done to the Commonwealth in the Parliament of
tertio Caroli, to be disposed of in such manner, as this House shall appoint.

Resolved, etc. That the sum of two thousand pounds, part of four thousand
pounds, paid into the late Court of Wards and Liveries, by the heirs of Sir
John Eliot, by reason of his marriage with Sir Daniel Norton's daughter, shall
be repaid to Mr. Eliot, out of the arrears of moneys, payable into the late
Court of Wards and Liveries, before the taking away of the said late Court.

Ordered, that it be referred to the Committee who brought in this John Eliot's
heir with Sir Daniel Norton's daughter; and what moneys was paid by reason of
the said Decree, and by whom; and to report their opinions thereupon to the
House.

Ordered, That it be referred to the Committee of the Tower to examine after
what manner Sir John Elyot came to his death, his usage in the Tower, and to
view the rooms and places where he was imprisoned,

Resolved, etc. That the sum of five thousand pounds shall be paid unto the of
Sir Peter Heyman, for the damages, losses, sufferings, and imprisonments,
sustained and undergone by Sir Peter Heyman, for his service done to the
Commonwealth in the Parliament in tertio Caroli.

Resolved, etc. That Mr. Walter Long shall have the sum of five thousand
pounds paid unto him, for the damages, losses, sufferings, tertio Caroli.

Resolved, etc. That the sum of five thousand pounds shall be assigned, for the
damages, losses, sufferings, and imprisonment, sustained and undergone by Mr.
Strode (late a member of this House) deceased, for service done by him to the
Commonwealth, in the Parliament of tertio Caroli.

Resolved, etc. That Mr. Benjamin Valentine shall have the sum of tertio Caroli.

Resolved, etc. That the sum of five hundred pounds shall be bestowed and
disposed of, for the erecting a Monument to Sir Miles Hobert, a Member of the
Parliament of tertio Caroli, in memory of his sufferings for his service to the
Commonwealth in that Parliament of tertio Caroli.

Samuel Vassell shall have the sum of ten thousand four hundred forty five
pounds twelve shillings two pence paid him, for his losses and damages
sustained, for denying to pay Tunnage and Poundage, (not granted by Act of
Parliament) in pursuance and obedience to a Declaration and Vote of this House.

Resolved, etc. That this House does declare, that they will in due time take
Mr. Vassell into further consideration, for his imprisonment and personal
sufferings.

Ordered, That it be recommitted to the Committee, who brought

FINIS.
AN INDEX Alphabetically digested, relating to the Principal
A.
ABbot Archbishop, his advice concerning the Palatinate War, p. 12 In disgrace
at Court, p. 61. his Letter to the King against Toleration of Popery, p. 85.
Still in disfavor, p. 435. A Commission to sequester him, ^b. his Narrative at
large containing the true cause of his being sequestered, p. 438. to 461. His
Speech concerning the Petition of Right, p. 552 Abbot Doctor p. 62 Acts passed
in Parliament, p. 152, 195, 644 Alford Master p. 568 Allured Master his Letter
to the Duke, p. 91. Another concerning the p. 621 Ambassadors private
Instructions, p. 18 Anhault Prince, made General of the Bohemians p. 14
Arminians p. 62, 111, 177, 180, 181, 479 Arundel Earl p. 368, etc. Ashley
Sergeant, questioned for words, p. 552 Aston Sir Walter, p. 14, 60, 106, 107,
113, 114 Le Assembli des notables, etc. p. 691. And p. 14. Appendix. Ask Mr.
His Argument for Master Stroud, p. 18. Appendix

BAcon, Lord Chancellor p. 28, 29, 31, 162 Barkley Sergeant, his Argument
against Mr. Stroud. Appendix, p. 21 Barkshire Earl p. 376 Barons of the
Exchequer sent unto about Merchants g^ods, p. 666, 667 Beecher Sir William p.
430 Bethlem Gabor assists the Bohemians p. 12 Bohemians vide Palatinate Book of
Bounty prohibited p. 417 Bramston Sergeant, upon the Habeas Corpus p. 463
Bristol vide Digby. Buckingham writes unto Gundamor of King James
dissatisfaction about the Palatines War, p. 16. Goes with the Prince into
Spain, p. 76. Made Duke, p. 78. A Letter sent to him from Mr. Allured, p. 91.
His Narrative to both Houses of Parliament, p. 119. The truth thereof attested
by the Prince, p. 16. The Popes Letter to him, p. 80. His head demanded by the
Spanish Ambassador, p. 126. The Duke is justified of both Houses, ibid. And by
King James, who called him his disciple, p. 127. Is accused again by the
Spanish Ambassador p. 144 1 Car,
Renders an account in Parliament of the Fleet, p. 190. And also speaks on his
own behalf, p. 191. Queries in Parliament concerning the Duke, p. 221. Sir John
Elliot concerning the Duke, p. 224. The Kings Speech on behalf of the Duke, p.
225. Lord Keeper to the same purpose, p. 227. The Duke explains the Kings and
the Lord Keepers Speech in Parliament, p. 229. And renders an account of his
Negotiation in the Low Countries, and elsewhere, p. 231. Is vindicated by the
Lord Conway, p. 235. The Commons present a Remonstrance against him, p. 247.
Private advice given him, p. 250. The Dukes answer to a Message from the
Commons, p. 251. Articles exhibited against him by Bristol, p. 266. The Kings
Message on behalf of the Duke, against Bristol, p. 270. Impeached by the
Commons, p. 307. managed at a Conference by Eight Members, p. 306, 307, 308,
etc. Private suggestions on behalf of the Duke, p. 360. The Kings Speech on his
behalf, p. 361. A Message from the Commons against him, p. 361. His Speech
against them, p. 367. Sir Dudley Carlton concerning him, p. 362, 363.
Dissatisfied at the release of Sir John Elliot, p. 365. Sir John Elliots
explanation concerning him, p. 366. Is chosen Chancellor of Cambridge, p. 375.
His Letter to that University, p. 377. The Kings Letter on his behalf, p. 378.
His Speech in Parliament before he gave in his Answer, p. 379. His Plea and
Answer to the Impeachment, p. 380, etc. The King prefers an Information against
him in Star Chamber, p. 417. Sets sail with the Fleet, p. 429. Lands his Army
at the Isle of Rhee, p. 430. And had a hot encounter with the French, p. 431.
Omits to take in the little Fort, ibid. Lays siege to the Citadel at St.
Martins, ibid. Retreats with the Army from Rhee, p. 469. Declared cause of all
grievances, p. 615. Desires to clear himself concerning some words, supposed to
be spoken by him, p. 639. And charges one Melvin for speaking words against
him, ibid. Is slain at Portsmouth, p. 647. The King receives news of his Death,
ibid.
Burlacy Sir John p. 15 Buroughs Captain p. 15, 40 Buroughs Sir John slain at
Rhee, p. 200
C.
CAlthrop Mr. p. 464. Appendix 49 Carlisle Earl p. 173 Carlton Sir Dudley, p.
76.362, 363 Carmarthen Mr. his Answer about Customs p. 668 Cautionary Towns in
the Netherlands delivered up p. 3 Chambers Mr. questioned at the Council, and
committed, p. 651. Brings Habeas Corpus, ibid. is bailed, p. 652. his Goods
seized on for not paying of Customs, p. 653. A Writ of Replevin denied him,
ibid. Proceedings in Star Chamber against him, p. 680. His Sentence, p. 681.
His submission tendered, p. 682. His refusal thereof, p. 683. His Plea in
Star Chamber, ibid. Brought upon Habeas Corpus, p. 686. His Petition to the
long Parliament, p. 687. His Death p. 689 Charles Prince, his Letter to Philip
the Fourth of Spain about the Match, p. 59. Goes disguised into Spain, p. 76.
Had a sight of the Princess Henrietta Maria as the passed through France, ibid.
His reception and entertainment in Spain, p. 77. Endeavors used to make him
change his Religion, p. 78. The Popes Letter to him, ibid. His Answer p. 82.
Swears to Articles of Marriage, p. 86. The Oath taken by him, p. 88. Swears to
private Articles, p. 88, 89. And afterward finds delays in Spain, p. 102.
Resolves to depart thence and leave a Proxy with Bristol, p. 103. Feasts the
Spanish Dons aboard p. 104. Arrives safe in England, ibid. Left private
Instructions with Bristol to contradict the Proxy, ibid. Attests the Dukes
Narrative in Parliament, p. 119 Is Proclaimed King, p. 169. New swears the old
Privy Council, ibid. Pursues their Advice, p. 170. Puts forth a Proclamation of
Government, p. 171. Attends in person his Fathers Funeral, ibid. Continues the
Duke intimately in favor, ibid. Levies Soldiers for the Palatinate, p. 172.
Signs the Articles of Marriage with France, ibid. The Marriage solemnised in
France, p. 173. Sends the Duke of Buckingham into France to attend the Queen
into England, p. 174. And Dover, ibid. The Marriage consummated at Canterbury,
ibid. Brings her to London, ibid. His first Speech in Parliament, p. 175. The
Lord Keepers Speech by his direction, p. 176. Owns Montague as his servant, p.
178. Adjourns the Parliament to Oxford, ibid. His Ships employed against
Rochel, ibid. His Speech at the Parliament in Oxford, p. 181. Seconded by the
Lord Conway and Secretary Cook, p. 182. He Answers the Commons Petition against
Recusants, p. 185. Sends a Message for supply, p. 194. The Commons insisting
still p. 195. And follows his design of War, ibid. Sends out Privy Seals for
money, p. 196. Disarms Recusants, p. 198. Sends out his Fleet and Army under
command of Viscount Wimbleton, p. 198, 199. Their unsuccessful Voyage, p. 200.
Spain, p. 201. Takes the Seal from Lord Keeper Williams, p. 202. Calls a
Parliament, ibid. Prepares for his Coronation, p. 203. Commands all of Forty
pound per annum to appear, and receive the Order of Knighthood, ibid. The
manner of his Coronation, p. 204. The King is present at the opening of the
second Parliament, p. 206. And commands the Lord Keeper Coventry to speak what
he intended himself to have said, ibid. Forbids resort to hear Mass, p. 216.
The Kings Letter to the Commons to hasten supply, p. 218. Seconds it with a
Message, p. 219. To which the Commons sent an Answer, p. 220. The Kings Reply,
ibid. And sends another Message concerning Mr. Cook and Doctor Turner, p. 222.
Three Subsidies and three Fifteens Voted to be given him, p. 225. And hot
Debate against the Duke, ibid. Whereupon the King speaks to the Parliament,
ibid. And refers to the Lord Keeper to speak further, p. 225, 226, etc. And
speaks again himself, p. 229. His Speech explained by the Duke, ibid. Receives
a Petition touching Nobility, p. 237. His Letter to Bristol, p. 241. His
Message concerning Bristol, p. 243. Receives a Remonstrance from the Commons
concerning the Duke, p. 247. Adjourns the Parliament for a week, p. 250. He is
attended by some Bishops concerning the Duke, p. 251. Leaves the House at
liberty to present the matter concerning the Duke, p. 252. His Message on
behalf of the Duke against Bristol, p. 260. His Speech on behalf of the Duke,
p. 361. Commits Sir Dudley Diggs and Sir John Elliot, p. 362. Releases them, p.
364. His Message concerning the Earl of Arundel, p. 368. His Answer to the
Lords Petition, p. 371, 372. His further Answer concerning the Earl of Arundel,
p. 373. Another Message from the King concerning the said Earl, p. 374, 375.
The Earl of Arundel set at liberty, p. 375. His Message to the Parliament, that
they hinder not the Election of the Duke, as Chancellor of Cambridge, p. 376,
377. His Letter to that University on the Dukes behalf, p. 378. His Letter to
the Speaker concerning Supply, p. 394. The Commons Petition him against
Recusants, p. 395. A Speech made to him by Sir Hennage Finch concerning the
Duke, p. 401. His Commission to dissolve the Parliament, p. 403 The Parliaments
Remonstrance to him, p. 404, 405, etc. His Proclamation against the said
Remonstrance, p. 415. And another against disputing about Arminian
Controtroversies, p. 416. Causes an Information to be preferred against the
Duke, p. 417. Prohibites the Book of Bounty, ibid. Takes the Forfeiture arising
from Recusants, ibid. Grants a Commission to compound with Recusants, p. 418.
His Proclamation to make his Revenue certain, ibid. Sends to his Nobles to lend
him money, ibid. Demands of the City of London the Loan of One hundred thousand
pounds, p. 419. Requires Port Towns to furnish Ships, ibid. Which the Ports in
Dorsetshire dispute, ibid. The City of London the like, and are checked, ibid.
Issues forth Privy Seals, p. 420. Requires inhabitants in Port Towns to repair
to their Houses, ibid. Sends Ships to the River Elbe, ibid. Declares the King
of Denmarks overthrow to be one ground of the Loan, p. 422. Puts forth a
Declaration concerning the Loan, ibid. Gives private Instructions concerning
the Loan, ibid. Grants a Commission for Martial Law, p. 423. Displaces Sir
Randal Crew about the Loan, and makes Sir Nicholas Hide Chief Justice, p. 424.
Sends Six thousand English into the Netherlands, page 425. Makes Sir Charles
Morgan General of them, ibid. Causes refusers of Loan money to be pressed for
Soldiers, p. 426. Dissatisfied with the French about the Queen, p. 427. and
dismisses them, p. 428. His Declaration concerning a War with France, p. 429.
Makes the Duke of Buckingham Admiral and General, and gives him a Commission,
ibid. Secures several Gentlemen for not paying the Loan money, p. 433. Grant a
Commission to sequester Archbishop Abbot, p. 435. Appoints a supply to be sent
to the Duke under the Earl of Holland, p. 466. A List of the Debt the King owes
for Fraights of Ships upon the two Expeditions to Cadize and Rhee, p. 470.
Calls a Parliament, p. 476. Set at liberty the imprisoned Gentlemen about the
Loan money, p. 477. A List of those Gentry imprisoned by the King about Loan
money, ibid. His Commission for an Imposition in nature of an Excise considered
of, p. 478. His Privy Seal to pay German Horse, ibid. His Speech at the opening
of the Third Parment, p. 480. Lord Keepers Speech by his direction, p. 481. The
Speakers Speech to him, p. 484. Petition to him for a Fast, p. 494. His
propositions for supply, p. 502. His Propositions touching supply again
mentioned, p. 509. His Answer to the Petition against Recusants, p. 511. His
Propositions debated, p. 525, 526. His Message concerning words said to be
spoken, p. 529. Another Message to secure Liberties p. 530, 531. Subsidies
resolved to be presented unto him, ibid. The Kings Answer concerning the same,
ibid. The Dukes Speech concerning the Commons liberal gift to the King, ibid. A
Message from him against a Recess at Easter, p. 543. A Message p. 544. The
Speakers Speech unto him at the delivery of the Petition against Billeting of
Soldiers, 546. His Answer to that Petition, p. 552. The Lord Keepers Speech by
his Command, to rely on the Kings word, p. 555. Secretary Cooks Speech
thereupon, on behalf of the King, p. 555, 556. Sir Benjamin Rudiards Speech
concerning the Kings word, p. 557. The King sends another Message by Secretary
Cook, to know whether the Parliament will or no rely on his word, p. 558,
559. Several ibid. He sends another Message, that he intends shortly to end
that Session, p. 560. Debates thereupon, p. 561. The Speakers Speech in Answer
to the Kings several Messages, ibid. The Kings Answer thereunto. p. 562. The
King sends another Message to rely on his word, p. 563. Several Debates
thereupon, ibid. The Petition of Right to be presented to the King, delivered
at a Conference, p. 564. His Letter declaring that he will preserve Magna
Charta etc. communicated at a Conference, p. 565, 566. The Lords Addition to
the Petition of Right to have a saving for Sovereign power, p. 567. Several
Debates and Conferences thereupon, ^hewing the Salvo, p. 568, 569, etc. The
Lords agree to the Petition of Right without the Addition, p. 592. The Kings
and Lord Keepers Speech at the presenting of the Petition of Right, p. 596. The
Petition of Right at large, p. 597. The Kings Answer thereunto, p. 598. Not
satisfactory, and several Speeches thereupon, p. 598, 599, etc. A Message from
the King to end the Session on such a day, p. 601. He sends another Message
that he will certainly hold his day to end the Session, p. 613. Several Debates
thereupon, and the Duke p. 613, 614, etc. The King commands the House to
adjourn, p. 616. The Lords Address to the King, to prevent a dissolution, ibid.
The King sends another Message to qualify his former Messages, p. 622. Several
Speeches thereupon, p. 623. p. 624. Burlemachs Examination, that they were to
be imported into England, ibid. The King receives a Petition from both Houses
for a better answer to the Petition of Right, p. 625. The Kings fuller Answer
thereunto, and his Speech, ib. p. 626. Debates thereupon, p. 627. Debates about
a Remonstrance to the King against the Duke, p. 628. A Remonstrance to the King
against the Duke, p. 631, 632, etc. The King causes the Proceedings in the
Star Chamber against the Duke to be taken off the File, p. 638. And causes the
Commission for Excise to be cancelled, p. 640. A Remonstrance to him concerning
Tonnage and Poundage, ibid. The King ends the Session of Parliament, p. 643. A
Particular of such Laws as he passed that Session of Parliament, p. 644.
Suppresses Dr Manwaring's Sermon by Proclamation, p. 645. Grants a Commission
to compound with Recusants, ibid. His Proclamation against the Bishop of
Calcedon, ibid. Sends Romish Priests to Wisbitch, p. 646. Advances Sir Rich.
Weston to be Lord Treasurer, Bishop Laud to the Bishopric of London, and
Montague to a Bishopric, ibid. Pardons Montague and Manwaring, p. 647.
Solicited to send Relief to the King of Denmark under Sir Charles Morgan, p.
648. Adjourns the Parliament that was to meet the 20 of October, to the 20 of
January, p. 650. Takes the advice of the Judges about racking of Felton, ibid.
Declares his resolution about taking the Imposition upon Currants, p. 651.
Consults with certain of his Council concerning the ensuing Parliament, p. 654.
His Speech at the second meeting of the Parliament, p. 656. Sends a Message
about the Bill for Tonnage and Poundage, p. 657. Sends a Message to give
precedence to Tonnage and Poundage, p. 658. Petition to him for a Fast, p. 662.
His Answer thereunto, p. 663. Notwithstanding his Message, precedence given to
Religion, ibid. His Answer to that Particular, p. 664. His Declaration against
Disputes about Religion debated, p. 665. A Report concerning his Pardon to
Manwaring and Montague, p. 667. His Message about Customs, p. 668. His
Commission about it, p. 669. His Declaration concerning the dissolving the
third Parliament at large, App. p. 1. Common Fame, p. 221, 222. Conway Lord, p.
12, 23, 178, 182, 185, 235, 238, 243, 268, 292, 450, 451, 455, etc. Cook
Secretary, p. 182, 498, 501, 502, 531, 544, 54, 558, 559, 560, 563. Cook Mr. p.
218, 222, 229 Cook Sir Edward, p. 201, 497, 505, 508, 526, 529, 538, 543, 564,
615, 627. Corriton Mr. p. 660 Coronation, p. 203, 204 Cottington Mr. p. 9, 13,
18, 76, 122 Cotton Sir Robert, p. 20, 471 Coventry Sir Thomas made Lord Keeper,
p. 202. His Speeches in Parliament, p. 206, 225, 481, 555, 567, 592, 596, 623.
Privy Council new sworn, p. 169. They write to Dalbeir about disposing the
German Horse, p. 648. Creswel Mr. 502. Crew Sir Randolf displaced about the
Loan, p. 424. Crew Sir Thomas, p. 55, 117, 149, 150. Again made Speaker, p.
176. Cromwell Oliver against the Bishop of Winchester, p. 667. Cromwell Lord, p.
199. Crosby Sir Piercy, Lands with Supply of men, p. 467.
D.
DArnel Sir Thomas about Habeas Corpus, p. 462. Davenport Sergeant Argument,
App. p. 27. Dawes Mr. his Answer about Customs, p. 668. Decimation projected, 5
Car. App. p. 14. Denmark King his Declaration, p. 421. His Battle, ibid. His
overthrow, p. 422. Digby Sir John his discourse betwixt the Duke of Lerma,
about a Match with Spain, p. 1. His advice to the King in that matter, p. 2. Is
authorized to treat and conclude the Match, p. 3. Presents the first draught of
Articles, p. 4. Sent Ambassador into Flanders, p. 23. The substance of his
Ambassie to the Emperor, and Duke of Bavaria, p. 37. Gives an account in
Parliament, p. 39. Made Earl of Bristol, p. 67, 68. A Letter to him from the
King, p. 68. Gives the King hope of a Match, p. 69. Has a Proxy delivered to
him by the Prince to consummate the Marriage, p. 103. Receives also private
instructions not to put it in execution, p. 104. Labors to satisfy the Prince
p. 105. He and Sir Walter Aston again attempt it, but in vain, p. 106. Bristol
sends his Apology to K. James for demurring upon the new instructions, p. 112.
Has a tender of large offers from the K. of Spain, p. 113. Protests against p.
149. A Letter from the Lord Conway to him, p. 238. His answer to the Lord
Conway, p. 239. His Petition for a Writ of Summons, p. 240. The Kings Letter to
him, p. 241. He Petitions the Lords again about his Writ of Summons, ibid. And
desires to be heard in the Accusation of the Duke, ibid. Sends a Copy of the
Lord Keepers Letter, p. 242. With his Answer thereto, p. 243. A Message from
the King concerning him, ibid. He is brought to the Bar, p. 252. Articles
preferred against him by the Kings p. 253. His expressions at the time of his
accusation, p. 258. His Speech at the delivery of the Articles against the
Duke, p. 259. Articles exhibited by him against the Duke, p. 266. And also
against the Lord Conway, p. 268. A Message from the King against Bristol, p.
270. Reasons why he should only be tried in the House of Peers, p. 271. Judges
opinions concerning that particular, p. 272. His Speech by way of Introduction
before he gave in his Answer to the Articles, p. 273, 274, etc. His Answer to
the Articles, p. 278, 279, etc. Dudley Sir Diggs, p. 55, 306, 307, 360, 364,
365, 454, 533, 544, 554, 614. Doncaster Viscount sent Ambassador, p. 11, 13,
22. Drummond Mr. p. 167.
E.
EArl Sir Walter upon a Habeas Corpus p. 462. Edmonds Sir Thomas p. 660.
Elector vide Palatinate. Elliot Sir John p. 224, 357, 360, 366, 433, 529, 532,
561, 563, 544, 554, 614, 660, 669. Information against him in the Upper Bench,
p. 693, 696, 697, Emperor vide the Palatinate. Essex Earl p. 200.
F.
FAirfax Captain, p. 15. A Monument erected at Frandendale in John Fairfax his
Brother, both slain in the defense thereof p. 155 Felton visited in prison, and
confesses the Fact, p. 650. His examination before the Council, ibid. Threatened
to be rackt, ibid. Tried, p. 652. Tendereth his hand to be cut off, ib. p. 653.
Finch Sir Hennage Speaker, p. 208, 401 Finch Sir John Speaker, p. 484, 561
Fleetwood Sir Miles p. 561 France about a Treaty of Marriage, p. 156, 114. A
Marriage there, p. 172, 173. Difference with France p. 428
G.
GAge Mr. sent to Rome, p. 23, 66, 121 Glanvile Sergeant, p. 313, 318, 574
Glynn Mr. Recorder, Ap. 56, 57 Gundamor flatters King James, p. 3. The Treaty
on the Spaniards behalf, ibid. Contrives Sir Walter Rawleighs death, p. 4, 16,
18, 20. Assaulted in London Streets, p. 34. A Letter to him to expedite the
Match, 69, see 113, 122 Gorge Sir Ferdinando, p. 180 Germany vide Palatinate.
H.
Habeas Corpus Debates and Arguments, p. 462, 463, etc. Also vide Parliament
quarto Car. and Appendix. Hackwel Mr. p. 507, 528, 568 Hayman Sir Peter p. 528
Heath Sir Robert, p. 216, 667, 689. Ap. 39, 53 Henry Prince, a Match proposed
between him and a Daughter of Spain, p. 1 Herbert Mr. p. 312 Herbert Sir
Gerrard, p. 15, 69 Herbert Sir Edward, p. 43 Heveningham Sir John brings his
Habeas Corpus, p. 462 Heidelburg, p. 66, 69 Hobby Sir Thomas, p. 528 Holland
Earl, p. 173, 469, 470 Hollis Mr. p. 676, 689, 693 Hubbard Sir Miles brought
upon a Habeas Corpus, p. 689 Hide Sir Nicholas made Chief Justice, p. 424
I.
James King of Scotland affects the Title of Peacemaker, p. 1. Desires to
Match Prince Charles with somergeat Princess, though of different Religion,
ibid. and 50. Inclines to a Match with Spain, p. 2. Flattered by Gundamor, p.
3. Delivers up the cautionary Towns, ibid. Gives a Commission to Digby to Treat
on a Marriages, ibid. Receives Articles about Religion out of Spain, p. 4.
Imployes Sir Walter Rawleigh upon a design into America, p. 4, 5. Too credulous
of the Spaniard, p. 8. A Letter showing upon what account the King gave way to
the beheading of Sir Walter Rawleigh, p. 9. Sends Viscount Doncaster
Ambassador, p. 11, 13. His advice craved by the Count Palatine, p. 12. He
dislikes the Palatines acceptance of the Crown, p. 13 a. 14 b. 16 a. Goes to
war with one Regiment to assist the Palatines, p. 14. Receives news of the
defeat given the Palatine at Prague* p. 17. Raises money by advice of Privy
Council, ibid. Flattered again by the Spaniard, p. 18. The Spaniards secret
Instructions in reference to the King, ibid. He calls a Parliament, p. 20.
Forbids discourse of State affairs, p. 21. His Speech to the Parliament, ibid.
Sends Digby Ambassador into Flanders, p. 23. His second Speech in Parliament
about Projectors, p. 24. Speaks on behalf of the Duke, p. 26, 27. Sends a
Message against Sir Henry Yelverton, p. 33 d. Intends to adjourn the
Parliament, p. 35. The Commons Declaration about the Palatinate before the
adjournment, p. 36. Reforms grievances by Proclamation, ibid. Again forbids
speaking of State Affairs, ibid. Gives the Great Seal to Dean Williams, ibid.
Reassembles the Parliament, p. 39. In his absence the Lord Keeper speaks, ibid.
Is tried with a Petition and Remonstrance from the Commons, p. 40. Writes to
the Speaker, p. 43. Answers the Petition, p. 46, 47. His Answer qualified by
the Lord Keeper, p. 52. The Commons Protestation, p. 53. The King tears it out
of the Iournal, ibid. Commits some Members of Parliament, p. 55. Imployes
others to Ireland, ibid. Again forbids speaking of State Affairs, ibid. Offers
terms to the Emperor on behalf of the Palatinate, ibid. Receives an Answer from
the Emperor, p. 56. Writes to Philip the Fourth to accelerate the Match, p. 57.
Also to Don Balthazar, p. 59. Writes for the raising of moneys, p. 61. Opposes
the Arminian Sect, p. 62. Shows favor to Recusants, ibid. Lord Keeper excuses
the Kings favor to Recusants, p. 63. Writes to the p. 64. Gives direction
concerning Preachers, ibid. New conditions demanded of him by the Pope, p. 66.
His Answer to those demands, p. 67. His Letter to Digby, p. 68. Sends him a
dispatch in a peremptory style concerning Heidelburgh, p. 70. Signs the Popes
demands, p. 73. Writes again to Bristol concerning the Palatinate, p. 74. Sends
the Prince into Spain, p. 76. Archbishop Abbots Letter to the King against
Tolleration of Popery, p. 85. Articles of Marriage sworn to by him, p. 86. p.
88. He swears also to private Articles, p. 88, 89. Pope Urban writes to King
James, p. 95. After the Princes arival, sends to Bristol not to deliver the
Proxy without restitution of the Palatinate, p. 105. And writes to the Palatine
to make his submission p. 108. The Palatines Answer, p. 109. Seeks a match with
France, p. 114. Calls a Parliament about the Treaty with Spain, p. 115. Makes a
Speech, ibid. Also another Speech in justification of the Duke, p. 127. He
makes a third speech unto them concerning p. 129. Desires he may not have a
Furrow of Land left without Restitution of the Palatinate, p. 130. Scruples at
the word insincerity of the King of Spain, p. 136. Declares his resolution to
dissolve the Treaties, p. 138. Accepts ibid. Offers to go to war in his own
person, p. 139. Is troubled at a Petition against Recusants, p. 140. That he
has broke the neck of three Parliaments, ibid. His Answer to that Petition, p.
143. Receives information concerning the Duke, p. 144. His Speech at the
adjournment of the Parliament, p. 150. A Particular p. 152. Desires a Match
with France, p. 156. Which he concludes, ibid. And the Articles are sworn unto,
ib. He gives a Commission and Oath to Count Mansfield, p. 158. He dies of a
Fever, p. 159. His Character, p. 159, 160, 161. etc. Clement, p. 165 Jermyn Sir
Thomas, p. 629 Jesuits, 22. a. 143, 150. Letter concerning the Parliament, p.
479, 646 Judges Opinions, p. 272, 465, 507, 696
K.
KEeper Lord, vide Coventry. KEeper Lord, vide Williams. Kensington Lord sent
into France in order to a Match, p. 114 King Charles vide Charles. King James
vide James. Knighthood, p. 203 Knightly Captain, p. 15 Knolls Sir Robert, ibid.
L.
LAmb Dr. killed by a tumult in London Streets, p. 630 Lamb Sir John, p. 440
Laud Dr. p. 61, 62, 159, 171, 202, Libels cast abroad against him, p. 672
Lenthal Mr. p. 700 Littleton Mr. p. 534. Ap. 28 Loan Money, p. 419, 422, 424,
426 A List of the Gentry imprisoned about Loan Money, p. 432, 477 London City
required to lend One hundred thousand pounds, p. 419. They dispute it, ibid. A
Letter to them about Dr Lamb, p. 630. Long Mr. brought upon a Habeas Corpus, p.
675. His Case in Star Chamber, p. 694. Ap. 18 Lukenar Mr Christopher, p. 639
M*
MAinheim taken, p. 70 Mallory Mr. p. 55 Mansel Sir Robert sent against Algier,
p. 34 Mansfield Count raises an Army of Twelve thousand men, p. 156. A List of
some of his Regiments, p. 157. Their miscarriage at Sea, p. 158 Manwaring Dr.
his two Sermons concerning the Loan, p. 427. Mr Rous Speech against him, p.
593. The Commons Declaration against him, p. 601. Mr Pim's Speech thereupon, p.
604. The Sentence against him, p. 612. His submission* p. 613. His Sermon
suppressed by Proclamation, p. 645, Pardoned, p. 647. And advanced, Mason Mr.
p. 570. App. 20, 44, 45 Martyn Sir Henry, p. 527, 585, 600, 629 Matthew Sir
Toby, p. 103 May Sir Humphry, p. 546 Melvyn Mr. p. 639 Michael Sir Francis
sentenced. p. 28 Mompeson Sir Giles imprisoned, p. 24. Sentenced, p. 27, 28.
Morgan Sir Charles, p. 425, 649 Morton Sir Albertus, p. 169 Montague, p. 177,
180, 181, 202, 213. Advanced to a Bishopric, and his Apello Caesarem called
in, p. 646. Pardoned, p. 647 Murrey Mr. p. 441, 442
N.
NEal Dr. Bishop of Winchester, p. 630 Netherlands appear ready to embrace the
ancient union with England, p. 110. Six thousand English sent thither, p. 425
Nobility, p. 237 Noy Mr. upon a Habeas Corpus, p. 463, 569, 642. Concerning
Tonnage and Poundage, p. 666. About Customs, p. 668.
O.
Olivares Conde his Letter conc^^ning the Match, p. 71, 72, 84, 103, 113, 120
P.
PAlatinate. A War breaks forth in Germany, p. 5. The Emperor adopts Ferdinando
to be King, p. 6. The Evangelicks Assemble at Prague, ibid. The first occasion
of the troubles in Bohemia, ibid. The Evangelicks o^^er violence to the
Emperors Council, p. 7. And put forth a Declaration, ibid. The Emperor
publishes a Manifesto in contradiction thereof, ibid. Both parties a^^, p. 8. A
Blazing Star appears, ibid. The Emperor Matthias dies, p. 11. A Cessation of
Arms proposed, ibid. The Evangelicks oppose the choosing of Ferdinando to be
King, ibid. Bethlem Gabor joins with the Evangelicks, p. 12. The Palatine
craves King James his advice, ibid. Accepts the Crown before he receives an
Answer, ibid. King James dislikes the action, p. 13. The King of Poland aids
the Emperor, ibid. The Palatine proscribed, p. 14. King James assists the
Palatine with one Regiment, ibid. The Evangelicks choose a Generalissimo, ibid.
King James dislikes the War, ibid. An Army of thirty thousand raised under
Spinola, ibid. Marches toward Bohemia therewith, p. 15. The Protestants
discouraged upon the approach of the Army, ibid. The Elector of Saxony executes
the Ban against the Palatine, ibid. The Battle at Prague, p. 17. an Order of
the King and Council to recover the Palatinate, ibid. The Palatine, p. 21*
Palatine propounds a Peace, ibid. Protestant Towns reconciled to the Emperor,
p. 23. The Emperor proceeds to execution of diverse Protestants, p. 34. The
Emperors reply to the Lord Digbies demands, p. 37. The Duke of Bavaries ibid.
The Emperors answer to Don Balthazar, p. 38* The Palatine spoiled of his
Hereditary Dominions, p. 55. King James offers terms on the Palatines behalf,
and the Emperors answer, p. 56. An Order of the Council to raise moneys for the
Palatinate, p. 60. besieged, p. 66. And taken, p. 69. Manhe^^ taken, p. 70. No
good intention in the Emperor, nor King of Spain, as to the Palatinate, p. 70,
71. Frankendale blocked up, p. 74. The Electorate conferred upon the Duke of
Bavaria, ibid. The Protestant Palatine, p. 74, 75. Sir Dudley Carlton
concerning the Palatine, p. 76. The Palatine labors to engage Prince Charles
against the marriage with Spain, p. 102. King James puts the Palatine in hope
by a Proposal of new terms, p. King James demands the Town of Frankendale,
deposited in the Arch-Dutchess hands, p. 155. A Monument erected for two
Brothers, [Fairfaxes] slain at Frankendale, ibid. An Army under Count
Mansfield, raised for the relief of the Palatinate, p. 156. A List of the
Regiments for the Palatinate, p. 157. The Miscarriage of the Army, Page 158.
The Parliament meets, p. 20. Adjourned, p. 35. Their Declaration on behalf of
the Palatinate, p. 36. Meet again, p. 39. Their Petition and Remonstrance to
the King, p. 40, 41, etc. King offended thereat, p. 43. They notwithstanding p.
44. A second parliament meets, p. 115. Sir Thomas Crew chosen Speaker, p. 117.
They justify the Duke in his Narrative, p. 126. And advise the King not to
proceed in the two Treaties of the Marriage, and the Palatinate, Give the King
three Subsidies and three Fifteens, p. 135. A Parliament called again, p. 175.
Kings Speech in Parliament, ibid. The Lord Keepers Speech, p. 176. Sir Thomas
chosen Speaker, ibid. Two Subsidies granted, p. 178. Parliament adjourned to
Oxford, ibid. Where they insist upon grievances, p. 180. And again question
Montague, ibid. Are moved by the King to hasten Supply, p. 181. Present a
Petition to the King against p. 185. And fall upon grievances, p. 194, 195.
They are dissolved, p. 195. A particular of what Acts ^^^sed the First Session
of this Parliament, ibid. A second Parliament meets, p. 206. Lord Keepers
Speech, p. 206, 207. Sir Hennage Finch chosen Speaker, p. 208. His Speech,
ibid. They fall upon grievances, p. 211. And again fall upon Montague, p. 213.
A Report of the cause of Evils and Remedies, p. 218. Several Messages from the
King, p. 219, 220. Doctor Turners Queries in Parliament, p. 221. His
Explanation, p. 222. His Letter, p. 223. Causes of grievances again opened in
the House, p. 223, 224. Three Subsidies and three Fifteens Voted, p. 225.
Debate concerning the Duke resumed, ibid. The Kings and Lord Keepers Speech
concerning him, p. 225, 226. A List of the Moneys disbursed for the War
delivered to the Commons, p. 236. The Commons present a Remonstrance to the
King, p. 247. And send a Message to the Duke, p. 251. Afterward prefer an
Impeachment against him, p. 307. Managed at a Conference by Eight Members, p.
306, 307, 308, etc. Their Message to secure the Duke, p. 361. Discontented at
the Commitment of Sir John Elliot, p. 362. Their Protestation concerning him,
and Sir Dudley Diggs, p. 364, 365. A great contest in the House of Peers,
concerning the imprisonment of the Earl of Arundel, p. 367, 368, etc. The
Commons dissatisfied that the Duke is chosen Chancellor of Cambridge, p. 376,
377. The Lords Petition to the King to stay the dissolving of the Parliament,
p. 402. A Commission to dissolve the Parliament, p. 403. The Commons
Remonstrance, p. 404, 405, etc. The Kings Declaration against the Commons
Remonstrance, Appendix p. 1. A Speech to the Parliament without doors, p. 485.
A Grand Committee settled, p. 494. Debates in Parliament, as to grievances, p.
496. The Parliament Debates the business of the Habeas Corpus, p. 502.
Arguments about it, p. 503, 504, etc. A Conference about the Petition of Right,
p. 533. Their petition about the Billeting of Soldiers, p. 548. Archbishop
Abbot his Speech concerning the Petition of Right, p. 552. Propositions
tendered by the Lords instead of the Petition of Right, p. 553. The Commons
dissatisfied with the Propositions, p. 554. They meet the 20 of January, p.
655. Make enquiry about the Petition of Right, and the violation thereof, ibid.
A Report from the Committee concerning Religion, p. 658. The Vow of the House
of Commons, p. 666. Several debates about Tonnage and Poundage, ib. The King
commands the Speaker not to put the Question, p. 670. Debates thereupon, ibid.
The Speaker held in the Chair, ib. The King sends the Usher of the Black-Rod,
and he is not admitted, ibid. The King grants Warrants to apprehend several
Members of Parliament, p. 671. His Speech at the dissolution of the Parliament,
p. 672. Members of Parliament are examined before the Lords of the Council,
ibid. Questions propounded by the Judges concerning the imprisoned Members.
ibid. 16 Jac. 1618.
1 Car. 1625.
Paul Sir George, p. 244 Pembroke Earl, p. 217 Pennington Captain, p. 179, 334,
335 Petition of right p. 597, 598 Perrot Sir James, p. 55 Phillips Sir Robert,
p. 55, 498, 505, 543, 559, 655 Plague increases in London, p. 175 Number of
them who died Anno 1625. Popes assent to the Match, p. 66. His Letter to the
Duke of Buckingham, p. 80. His Dispensation comes clogged, p. 84. Pope Urban to
King James, p. 93. To Prince Charles, p. 98 Preachers directions concerning
them, p. 64, 65. Proclamation against Preaching and Disputing, p. 416
Privy-Seals, p. 420 Projects for raising money, App. 12 Proxies in the House of
Peers, p. 273 Puritans, p. 22, a. 171. Described by Sir Jo. Lamb, p. 424, 425
Pym Mr. p. 55, 339, 531, 568, 604
Q.
QUeen Anne dies, p. 10
R.
RAwleigh Sir Walter his life sought by Gundomar, p. 4. And is Sacrificed to
satisfy Spain, p. 9. A Letter concerning him, ibid. Romish Recusants
Immunities granted to them, p. 14. The King solicited for favor to them, p.
36, 37. A Petition and Remonstrance against them, p. 40, 41. The Kings Answer
thereunto, p. 46. The King shows further favor to them, p. 52. Excused, p. 53.
Articles in favor of them, p. 89. Pope Urbans Letter on behalf of the Romish
Religion, p. 95, 98. They promote the Match with Spain, p. 102, 103, King James
his Letter concerning a Petition against them, p. 140. The Petition it self, p.
141. The p. 143. Recusants taken at Clerkenwell, p. 478. A Conference against
them, p. 510. Debates in Parliament against them, and Priests arraigned at
Newgate. p. 668. Petition of Right. p. 597, 598. Rhee Island, p. 431, 466.
Several p. 467, 468, 469. Richardson Sir Thomas, p. 23. Rich^^^ Sir Nathaniel,
p. 55, 361, 614 Rochel, p. 178, 411, 430, 467, 594, 595, 647, 648 Rolls
Merchant, p. 654, 665, 666 Rous Mr. p. 593. His Speech concerning p. 657.
Rudyard Sir Benjamin, p. 497, 557, 629
S.
SAckvile Sir Edward, p. 15, 16, 31 p. 22 a. Seldom Mr. p. 55, 314, 528, 536,
569, 615, 631, 640. Brought upon a Habeas Corpus p. 689, 692. Seymor Sir
Francis p. 495. Sherborne Mr. Sherland Master p. 345, 346, Sheriffs Oath
excepted against, page 201. Ship Vantguard employed against Rochel, p. 178.
Ships to be set out by Port Towns, page 419. Ships Arrears for Freight, page
Sibthorp Dr. complains against the Puritans, p. 424. His Sermon concerning
Loan, p. 426. See 440, 448. Smith Richard, Bishop of Calcedon, sent into
England, p. 158, 159, 645. p. 50 a. 567, 568, 569, 570, 571, 572, 573, etc.
Spain vide Digby. Speaker vide Crew Sir Thomas. Finch Sir Hennage. Finch Sir
John.
Spinola p. 14, 15. Stafford Captain, p. 15. Star Blazing appears, p. 8.
Opinion thereupon ibid. Star Chamber Informati^^ against Members of Parliament,
p. 675. Order there concerning the Duke, p. 638. Stroud Mr. brought upon a
Habeas
T.
TErm adjourned to Reading, p. 201. Turner Dr. A Physician his Queries, ibid.
His explanation, p. 222, 226.
V.
VAlentine Mr. his Case, Append. 49 Vassal Mr. his Goods seized on about
Custom, p. 653. Proceeded against in Star Chamber, ibid. His Plea to the
Information, ibid. Votes for Reparation, Appendix 56, 57 Vere Sir Horatio, p.
14, 15, 40. Villers Sir Edward, p. 23. Undertakers ibid.
W.
WAlter Sir William. page 223. Wandesford Mr. p. 356, 546, 615. Warwick Earl
sent to secure Langor-point p. 199. Wentworth Sir Thomas p. 496, 527, 529, 544,
560, 568. Weston Sir Richard, p. 12 f. 23, 56, 66, 129, 219. Made Lord
Treasurer, p. 646. Williams Dr. Sworn Keeper of the Great Seal, p. 36, 39, 52.
Excuses the Kings favor to Recusants, p. 61, 62, 63, 151, 164, 176. Refuses to
proceed against the Puritans, p. 424. A Passage of the Information in
Star Chamber against him, p. 425. Wilmot Captain, p. 15 Wimbleton Viscount, p.
198
Y.
YElverton Sir Henry accused by the Commons, page 31. His Speech thereupon,
ibid. At which King James is offended, p. 32. His particular Answer in Serie
Temporis, ibidem. King James again offended with him, p. 33. His Sentence and
Restoration, p. 34.
Z.
ZUinga Don Balthazar, page 38, 59.
FINIS.
A CATALOGUE of such BOOKS as are Printed for, and sold by Mr. George Thomason
at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.
SAncti Johannis Chrysostomi opera Graece octo voluminibus Etonae. Folio.
Purchase his Pilgrimage or Relations of the World, and the Religions observed in
all ages and places discovered, from the Creation unto this present; containing
a Theological and Asia, Africa, and America, with the Islands adjacent, etc. By
Samuel Purchase. Folio. Hakluytus Posthumus, or Purchase his Pilgrims,
containing a History of the World, in Sea Voyages, and Land Travels by
Englishmen and others. By Samuel Purchase, in Four Volumes, Folio. The History
of the Parliament of England, which began November the Third, 1640. With a
short and necessary view of some precedent years. By Thomas May Esquire Folio.
Rhemes. Whereunto is added the Translation out of the Original Greek, commonly
used in the Church of England, etc. By W. Fulke, D. D. and sometimes Master of
Pembroke-Hall in Cambridge. Folio. The History of the Reformation of the Church
of Scotland, containing Five Books, together with some Treatises conducing to
the History. John Knox. Folio. Two Treatises: In the one of which, the Nature
of Bodies; in the other, the Nature of Man's Soul is looked into. In way of
discovery of the Immortality of Reasonable Souls. By Sir Kenelme Digby. Folio.
Histoire de l'entre de la Reyne Mere du Roy tres Chrestien dan^ les Provinces
Vnies des pays has avec des Figures. Histoire de l'entre de la Reyne Mere du
Roy tres Chrestien dans la Grande Britaigne avec des Figures par le Sieur de la
Serre, Folio. Ad Serenissimum Jacob^m primum Britanniarum Monarcham, Ecclesiae
Scoticanae libellus supplex, Authore Jacobo Melvino. Quarto. Polycarpi and
Ignatii Epistolae una cum vetere vulgata interpretatione Latina, ex trium
Manuscriptorum codicum collatione, integritati suae restitutae; quibus praefixa
est Iacobi Vsserii Archiepiscopi Armachani dissertatio. Quarto Appendix
Ignatiana in qua continentur, 1. Ignatii Epistolae Genuinae, 2. Ignatii
Martyriam a Philone 3. Tiberiani Plinii Secundi, and Trajani imp. de Constantia
Martyrum illius temporis Epistolae, 4. Smyrnensis Ecclesiae de Polycarpi
Martyrio Epistola. 5. In Ignatii and Polycarpi Acta, atque in Epistolas etiam
Ignatio perperam adscriptas Annotationes Iacobi Vsserii Armachani. Quarto.
(...) Clementis ad Corinthios Epistola Prior. Patritius Junius ex lateris
Reliquiis vetustissimi examplaris Bibliotherae Regiae, eruit. Quarto. Purchase
his Pilgrim Microcosmus, or the History of Man, relating the wonders of his
Generation, Vanities in his Degeneration, necessity of his Regeneration;
meditated on the words of David, Psalm. 39.5. By Samuel Purchase. Octavo. Saint
Augustine his Enchyridion to Laurence, or the chief and principal Heads of all
Christian Religion, the Second Edition. Twelves. Theologia Naturalis, sive
liber Creaturarum Specialiter de homine and de Natura ejus, in quantum homo and
de his quae sunt ei necessaria ad cognoscendum Deum and seipsum, and omne
debitum ad quod homo tenetur and obligatur tam Deo quam proximo. Authore
Raymundo de Sabunde, Octavo. Frederici Spanhemii Epistola ad Nobilisstmum Virum
Davidem Buchananum, super controversiis quibusdam quae in Ecclesiis Anglic^nis
agitantur. Octavo. The Works of Edward Reynolds, D. D. containing three
Treatises, of the Vanity of the Creature, Sinfulness of Sin, the Life of
Christ. An Explication of Psalm. C X. Meditations on the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper. An Explication of the Fourteenth Chapter of Hosea. A Treatise of the
Passions and Faculties of the Soul. Collected in Folio. Diverse Sermons Preached
upon several occasions by Edward Reynolds, D. D. Quarto. A Treatise touching
the Peace of the Church, or an Apostolical Rule how to judge aright in
differences which concern Religion. Published by Authority. Quarto. A Treatise
of Use and Custom. By Mer. Causabon. D. D. Quarto. Deus, Natura, Gratia: sive
tractatus de Praedestinatione, de meritis and peccatorum Remissione, sen de
Justificatione, and denique de sanctorum invocatione, reliquiarum and imaginum
veneratione, de indulgentiis and Purgatorio, and sub finem de Excommunicatione.
Accessit Paraphrastica Expositio reliquorum Articulorum confessionis Anglicae.
Per Fr. Franciscum Sancta Clara. Octavo. Apologia Episcoporum, seu Sacri
Magistratus Propugnatio. Multa multorum vocibus ventilantur, and mendacia
adversus sacerdotes Dei, de Diaboli ore prolata, ad rumpendam Catholicae
unitatis concordiam ubique jactantur. Authore Francisco a Sancta Clara. Octavo.

