A PEACEABLE AND TEMPERATE PLEA FOR PAVLS PRESBYTERY IN SCOTLAND, OR A modest
and Brotherly Dispute of the government of the Church of SCOTLAND, Wherein, Our
Discipline is demonstrated to be the true Apostolic way of divine Truth, and
the Arguments on the contrary are friendly dissolved, the grounds of Separation
and the Indepencie of particular Congregations, in defense of Ecclesiastical
Presbyteries, Synods and Assemblies, are examined and tried.

By Samuel Rutherfurd Professor of Divinity at Saint Andrews.

PSALM. 48. 12. Walk about Zion, and go round about her, tell the Towers
thereof. VER. 13. Mark ye well her Bulwarks, consider her Palaces, that ye
may tell (it) to the generations following. LONDON, Printed for John Bartlet at
the guilt-Cup near St Austins-gate, 1642*

TO THE HONORABLE And truly Noble Lord, Earl of Lindsey, Lord JOHN PARBROTH,
etc. one of his Majesty's Honorable Privy Council.
Grace, Mercy and Peace, etc.
COnsidering (my Lord) your Lordships good mind and constant fidelity and care
in advancing this blessed Reformation, and fending both your shoulders to hold
up the Kingdom of our LORD JESUS, and also your singular respect and real
affection to this famous University, and the faculty of Divinity in this
Society, I thought it rather a matter of debtfull necessity, then of arbitrary
election and choice, that this little piece that pleads for the Government of
the Church of Scotland, should thrust it self through the thick and throng of
many worthier monuments of Learning, under the honorable Patrociny of your
Lordships name. I am not ignorant that two blocks closes the passage to many
of greater parts and ability then I am, to add (I may have leave to borrow
the word) to the Presses child-birth^ traveling with no end of making many
books, Eccles. 12. 12.
and these be the opinions of men, and the event of Printing: I may say of the
former, that Opinion is a Witch and a great Inchantresse, while men call for
Books, as nice banqueters call for dishes to the Table, for they make such
wide odds betwixt taste-pleasant and goodness of meat, as if they were sworn
to the roof of their mouth, rather then to health and life; so that it is much
more obvious to please few, and gratify none, then to satisfy all. And for
the event, it is not unlike dicing, for it is doubtsome if Fame be not a lost
prize in writing, and if the game go not cross the Authors hair. And such is
our corruption, that the air or figures of a printed name is a piece of our
self, and as our skin wherein our flesh and bones are kindly inchalmbered, and
so were most tender of one penny breadth of this hide, or of letting one drop
of blood of this kind fall to the Earth. Notwithstanding of these prejudices,
I have, howbeit most unable, dared to appear also in the Press, to say
somewhat in way of a peaceable defense of our Church Government in Scotland.
The pens of the worthy Reformers of the Christian Churches have been so
blessed in the conscience, if not in the evil eye of envy it self, that they
have cleared the Scripture way of the Government of CHRIST'S Kingdom to lie in
a midline betwixt the Popes and Prelates lawless Church Monarchy, and the
unorderly confusion of Democracie. It is not unknown, the savoury perfume and
honorable name that this poor Church has gained, partly by the whole host
of Protestant Writers and ancient Fathers, who have unanimously put down in
print, what we have done in practice, according to our National Oath, partly
by the testimony of the blessed Lights, Beza epist. 79.
and faithful Witnesses of JESUS. Brightman.
I might name Reverend Beza, Revelat. of Apoc. chapter 3. 7.
learned Brightman, that manly and stout Witness of CHRIST M. George Wishart,
History of the Church of Scotland p. 108, 109
the body of the Confessions of Faith. And it is as well manifest to the world
(Sun and Moon being Witnesses) what Prelates have attempted against
Presbyteriall Government, but one said well, Corpus Confess fide^, p. 6.
I believe JESUS to be a good man, and the Evangell blessed, because Satan,
malice and Persecutours have done so much against them both with fire and
tortures. What dust of late have they raised against it? in Church, State,
Court, Parliament, three Kingdoms, in Rome, in the heart of King and many
others, in Campo Martio, Esa. 23. 24.
in open field, yea in the Sea, that the Sea should speak contrary to that
style of the Prophet, Cant. 6. 10.
I travel in birth, I bring up children, and nothing could be the reason, but
they saw the Woman looking forth as the morning, Ps. 48. 4.
fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, terrible as an Army with banners, and
when they saw Mount Zion beautiful in situation, they marvelled, they were
troubled and hasted away. 3 Ioh. v. 9.
And what daring insolency is this? when the Prelate could not find his
Father, and thought shame of his native Father Diotrephes, Halls Remonstr^nce
to the Parliament, an. 1641.
that one D. Hall and others have put him in the line of the blood royal, and
printed him an office, jure divino, by divine right; Their Predecessors were
content of the good old, jus humanum. Yet I hope, put the Prelate in the
Calendar of well-borne officers, bastard as he is, Senec. sent.
yet many must die ere he be here. This boldness puts me in mind of the
saying, Laus nova nisi oritur, vetus amittitur, except Prelates grow in new
honor they loose their old honor. But why may we not hope that both they,
their godfather the Pope, and their god-Mother Rome shall loose both new and
old. God has fetched as broken a Ship to land, and yet they will be of Divine
Right: Is it not true that the Learned said of necessity? Necessitati quodlibet
telum utile est? Any clubbe is a sword good enough for poor necessity, or then
it is true, Necessitas egentem mendacem facit: Necessity turns the poor man
in a liar, or which I rather think; Necessitas quod poscit, nisi das, eripit.
If you give not willingly to necessity, what it suiteth, it must take it by
strong hand and club-law. CHRIST has fairly begun to his Universal conquest.
Ps. 45. 3, 4.
Gird thy sword upon thy thigh o most mighty; and blessed shall all ages to
come call all these Nobles who have shoulders to carry one stone to the raising
of the wall of this Temple, and to build the City whose name is the LORD is
there. Ezech. 48. 35.
And in this course (my Lord) live, flourish and grow, and JEHOVAH build you a
sure house, which is the prayer of

Your Lordships obliged servant at all respective obedience in CHRIST SAMUEL
RUTHERFURD.

To the Christian Reader.
I Am bold (reverend and Christian Reader) to appear in print to contribute my
weak judgment for the government of the Church of Scotland. In which suite I
have to do with foes and friends. To the former I speak not now, I mean
Prelates, Papists and haters of the truth* I doubt not but I am condemned in
their books of both errors and crimes, my hope to prevail with such is small,
if that be true, Damnati lingua vocem habet, vim non habet, The tongue of the
condemned has a noise of words, but no power to persuade, except this be also
true, Magna vis veritatis, Truth may swim, it cannot sink. But I speak to the
godly, the lover of the Truth, the sufferer for Truth against Antichristian
Prelacy, (which is but spilt Popery, or half-dyed Papistry) who possibly likes
not well of Presbyteriall government. And to such I am a debtor for love,
charity, honor, and all due respect in Christ Jesus, and a seat and lodging in
my heart and highest esteem. Phil. 1 7.
And to think of all such is both, as the Apostle says, (...), meet. And also
(if it be beside the truth) an honest and almost innocent error. Yea and to say
to every one in whom (as reverend Bucer says) there is aliquid Christi, Bucer.
any of Christ's new Creation, Hier. Sophron.
as Ierom said to a friend, tibi and quod possum debeo, and quod non possum, I
owe to thee what I am able to do, and more for thy good. And of these I humbly
beg equity, charity, and unpartiall weighing of precious truth. I am grieved
that this should be put on me which a Heathen laid on his friend, Seneca.
Amavit patriam quia suam, non quia patriam, he loved his country because his
own, not because his country. Seeing it is weakness to overlove a National
faith, because National, and not because it is faith. Truth naked and stripped
of all supervenient relations is love worthy. And there is as great cause of
sorrow that all the Lords people should not mind one thing, and sing one Song,
and join in one against the children of Babel. Job 16. 19.
Neither should I fear that, animo dolenti nihil oportet credere, sorrow
deserves no faith, Since my witness is in heaven, and my record on high, That
I both love and dispute, I contradict and I reverence at once in this Treatise,
Phil. 3. 15.
and shall hope, if any be otherwise minded, God shall even reveal this unto
them. And it is meet so to do, since our Physician Christ can well difference
betwixt weakness and wickedness, and will not have us cast one straw, before
any whose face is toward Heaven, to cause them to stumble. Love has a bosom
and arms to carry the weak Lambs, and is a bridge over the River to keep the
weak passenger dry footed. Dearly beloved, let us all in one Spirit, one love,
one affection, join to build the City that is named, Ezech. 48. 35.
The Lord is there. O that our Lord would be pleased to suspend the Heaven and
glory of some, and that our Heaven might for a season be stayed out of Heaven,
so we might live to see two Sisters the Daughters of one Father, and of one
Mother, Jerusalem who is above, Britains Israel and Judah, England and
Scotland coming together, weeping and asking the way to Sion, and their faces
thither ward, saying, Come, let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual
Covenant that shall not be forgotten. And not that only (for why should the
Glory of our Royal and princely King, the plant of Renown be confined within
this narrow Isle o^ Britain?) but that he would make us eyewitnesses of his
last Marriage-glory on earth, when he having cast the cursed millstone Babylon
in the Sea, and sown the land of graven Images with brimstone, and destroyed
Idols out of the earth, shall be espoused on our elder Sister the Church of the
Jews, and the fullness of the Gentiles. O that Christ would enlarge his Love
bed. And O what a honor to the servants of the Lord to bear up the tail of
Christ his Marriage-robe-royall, in the day of our high and royal Solomon's
espousals. And what a second time-Heaven were it before eternities Heaven to
have a bed in his chariot, which is bottomed with gold and paved and floured
with Love for the daughters of his last married Jerusalem. And who knows but
our Lord has now entered on that glorious Marriage-suit? Let us believe, wait
on, love, follow truth and peace, be zealous for the Lord, and pray for the
exalting of his Throne. And so I am.

Yours in all respective love and observance, S. R.

A Table of the Contents of the ensuing Treatise*
CHAP. 1. QUEST. 1.
WHether the keys of the Kingdom of Christ be conferred by Christ Jesus upon
the multitude of believers, as upon the first and proper subject, or upon the
Church-guides only? p. 1.
CHAP. 2. QVEST. 2.
Whether or no some do warrantably prove from Scripture, that the power of the
keys is given to all the faithful? p. 20.
CHAP. 3. QVEST. 3.
Whether or no the Church of believers in a Congregation be the first Church,
having the highest power of jurisdiction within it self, and that
independently, and a power above and over the Eldership, to constitute and
ordain them, and to censure, depose and excommunicate them in the case of
corruption of Doctrine, and scandals of life and conversation? p. 30.
CHAP. 4. QVEST. 4.
Whether or no our brethren prove strongly that the Church of believers is the
first Church, having supreme jurisdiction over the Eldership? p. 38.
CHAP. 5. QVEST. 5.
Whether or no some do warrantably affirm the power of the keys to be
originally and essentially in the Church of believers, and in the Church-guides
only, quoad exercitium, and from the Church of believers, as the Mistress whom
the guides are to serve, and from whom they have borrowed the use of the keys?
p. 52.
CHAP. 6. QVEST. 6.
Whether Christ has left the actual government of his Church to the multitude
of believers? p. 63.
CHAP. 7. QVEST. 7.
If there be no true visible Church in the New Testament but only one
Congregation meeting in one place, and no Presbyteriall or representative
Church as they call it? p. 70.
CHAP. 8. QVEST. 8.
Whether or no our Savior does warrant and allow a Church of Elders and
Overseers in these words, Mat 18. Tell the Church? p. 83, 85.
CHAP. 9. QVEST. 9.
What members are necessarily required for the right and lawful constitution
of a true Politic visible Church, to the which we may join in Gods worship?
p. 92.
CHAP. 10. QVEST. 10.
Whether or no it be lawful to separate from a true Church visible, for the
corruptions of Teachers and wickedness of Pastors and professors, where faith
is begotten by the preaching of professed truth? p. 120.
CHAP. 11. QVEST. 11.
Whether or no separation from a true Church, because of the sins of the
Professors, and manifest defense of scandalous persons can be proved from Gods
word to be lawful? p. 149.
CHAP. 12. QVEST. 12.
Whether or no some do warrantably teach that Baptism should be administrated
only to Infants borne of one, at least of the nearest Parents known to be
believers, and who are to be admitted to the Lords Supper? p. 164.
CHAP. 13. QVEST. 13.
Whether or no every particular Congregation and Church has of it self
independent power from Christ Jesus, to exercise the whole power of the keys
without any subjection to any superior Ecclesiastical indicatorie? p. 187.
CHAP. 14. QVEST. 14.
Whether or no the power Ecclesiastical of Synods can be proved from the
famous Council holden at Jerusalem? Acts 15. p. 199.
CHAP. 15. QVEST. 15.
Whether or not by other valid Arguments from Gods word the lawfulness of
Synods and Assemblies can be concluded? p. 217.
CHAP. 16. QVEST. 16.
Whether or no it can be demonstrated from Gods Word, that all particular
Congregations have of and within themselves full power of Church Discipline
without any subjection to Presbyteries, Synods, and higher Church Assemblies?
where also the question about public prophesying of such gifted men as are not
in office, is discussed against the tenent of Separatists? p. 231.
CHAP. 17. QVEST. 17.
Whether or no some do warrantably teach that no man has Pastoral power to
preach and administer the Sacraments as a Pastor without the bounds of his own
Congregation. And from whence essentially is the calling of a Minister from the
Presbytery, or from the people? p. 260.
CHAP. 18. QVEST. 18.
Certain Quares or doubts following upon the Doctrine of independent
Congregations? p. 272.
CHAP. 19. QVEST. 19.
Doubts generally seeming to oppose Presbyteriall government discussed and
loosed, as anent ruling, Elders, Deacons, Widows, the power of Kings in
matters Ecclesiastic, p. 280.
CHAP. 20. QVEST. 20.
Whether or no the government of the Church of Scotland can be demonstrate from
the clear testimonies of Gods Word? p. 362.
CHAPTER I.
QUEST. 1.
Whether the power of the Keys of the Kingdom of CHRIST, be conferred, upon
the multitude of believers, as upon the first and proper subject, or upon the
Church-guides?
THe Question is not understood of that Royal and Kingly power of excellency
and Independencie, Matthew 28. 18. Bucan. loc. 42 q. 2.
called all power, Cartwright against Whitgist, page 139.
which is only in Christ Jesus, Ames. English puritanisme, p 9. Parker de
polit. Ecclesiast. lib. 3. cap. 1*
but of the supreme Ministerial power, (as all expound it, Bucanus,
Cartwright, Amesius, Parker) that is given to the Church. By the Keys we
understand not the Monarchical power of Teaching, supreme defining Articles of
faith, Rhemens. in Mat. 16.
and judging the Scriptures, as the Jesuits of Rhemes do dream, Bellarmine.
Vulcane, not Christ made these Keys. (...) 22. ^5, 22. ^^^vel. 3. 7.
We deny not what Bellarmine says, that the keys signify a Princedome in
Scripture, Matthew. 28. 18. Chrysostom. in Mat. hom. 25.
as the key of David's house promised to Eliakim. This key Christ only keeps:
Chrysostom and Gregory both say, Gregor. lib. 4. Epist 32.
that the care of the whole Christian Church was committed to Peter, which
proves not his Princedome, Calvin. Institut. lib. 4. cap. 6. and Comment. in
Mat. 16.
but only his ministerial power, given to all the Apostles, as well as to him:
but the Metaphor is borrowed from a Steward, Bucan. loc. 42. q. 2.
or Master-household, who has the keys of the house given to him, to open and
shut doors, at his pleasure, Whitaker. to. 2. Controvers. 4. q. 2* ^ 5.
as Calvin, Bucan, Whitaker explain it well, and it is the power of preaching
and governing given to the guides of the Church, as servants to open and shut
Heavens door to believers, or impenitent persons.

If we rightly proceed, these distinctions are to be considered.

1. There is a power physical, Petrus de Alliaco de Eccles. authoritat. part.
3. c. l. aliquid est in alio sub^ective and fo^maliter. 2. sin^liter and
causaliter. 3. ut in exemplo.
and a power moral of the Keys.

2. A power popular of the Keys that belongs to all, and a power
authoritative that belongs to the Guides only.

3. The power of the Keys is in Christ, as in the formal subject and
fountain. 2. In the Church of believers, as in the final object, seeing all
this power is for the Church. 3. In the Guides, as in the exemplar cause
representing the Church, as we say the image is in the glass, Gerson. de
potestat. Eccles. consider. 11.
and learning in the book, and this Petrus de Alliaco, and Gerson has the
like.

4. The Keys may be thought to be given. Mat. 16. to Peter, as Prince and King
of the Apostles, as Papists say, or, 2. As Peter represents the Church of
believers, as some say, or, 3 As bearing the person of Church guides, as we
shall demonstrate, God willing.

5. There is a power ordinary, Immediatio grat^ita donationis, vel. simpli^ts
designationis.
and a power extraordinary.

6. The Keys may be thought to be conferred by Christ, immediately, John 20.
22, 23.
either by the immediation of Christ's free donation and gift or or by the
immediation of simple designation: Mat. 28. 18, 19.
in the former respect the keys were given by Christ once to the Apostles; and
still to the Worlds end, Marc. Antoni. de Domi. Arch. Spalat de Repub.
Ecclesiastica. l. 5. c. 12. 11. 2.
to the Church guides, immediately without the Churches power intervening: in
the later respect Christ gives the keys mediately, by the popular consent and
election of the Church of believers, Parker* de polit. Eccles. lib. 3. c. 2.
Iac. de Almain^* de potest Eccles. c. 7
who do under Christ design and choose this person rather than that person,
Thomas rather than John, for the sacred office of weelding the Keys, neither
is any man now elected immediately by Christ, Gerson. de au^er. pap. consid. 8,
9. Joan. Major in Mat. 16.
as the Apostles were.

7. Then we may well distinguish in this question these four, 1. Power
physical. 2. Power moral. 3. Power of order, Occam. l. 1. p. ^. n. 6.
and jurisdiction. 4. The use and exercise of that power.

We are to observe, that it has been a noble and grave Question betwixt the
Church of Rome, N.
and the University of Paris (as Spalanto, and Robert Parker with others have
observed) whether Christ has given the power of the keys immediately to all
the faithful, and by them to the Pastors and Doctors, as the Parisians hold
(so teaches Almain, Joan. Major, Gerson and Occam) or if Christ has given the
keys immediately to the Church guides, as we maintain from Gods Word. The
mistake has been, that some Doctors believe that the power of the keys,
seeing it is for the good of the whole Church, must have some common subject,
viz. the universal Church, in which it must for orders cause first reside,
before it be given to certain guides; But neither Scripture, nature, nor
reason requires such a shifting of the keys from hand to hand, seeing Christ
can keep them, and immediately put them in their trust, whom he likes best.
Hence for the determination of the Question.

I. Conclusion. 1 Conclusion.
The physical power of the keys is given to men as they are professors, that
is, men, and not Angels are capable of that power; for when they are made
members of the visible Church, they are differenced both from Angels and
Infidels, as Pagans and Turks, for Angels according to Christ's humble love and
deep wisdom, are not upon the list to be office bearers in his house: but
this is not formally a power of the keys, but a popular power about the keys,
whereby popular consent may be given to the key-bearers, for their election.

II. Conclusion; 2 Conclusion.
There is a power popular, but not authoritative; a power of private Christians
(not an official power of charge) given to the visible professors to make
choice of their own office-bearers: Acts 1. 21.
those against whom we now dispute, Act. 6. 4.
brethren, reverend, learned and holy, do confound and take for one and the
same, the power of electing or choosing officers, and the power of Ordination.
And they make election of Elders (which by Gods Word is due to all the
faithful) an act of jurisdiction, whereas it is a private and popular^act,
flowing from that spirit of grace in believers, and from the light of saving
faith, and a grace that they call, Aquinas ^2. q. 81.
gratia gratum faciens, grace whereby we are accepted to God, 1 These. 5. 21.
as Aquinas speaks, for it is that Heavenly instinct of Believers, 1 John. 4.
1.
whereby they try all thing, John* 10. 8. 27. 28.
and keep that which is good, and whereby they try the spirits (even of
Officebearers) whether they be of God, Heb. 5* 14.
or not, and know the voice of the Shepherd, from the voice of a stranger, and
have their senses exercised to discern good and evil. I deny not, but there
is a twofold power of election of guides, one proper to believers, which is, as
I have described it, their choosing of Officers, De jure, and should flow from
this descerning instinct of saving grave in believers: there is an other power
of election, De facto, that flows from a common grace of discerning in
visible professors, both is sufficient for Ecclesiastical choosing of guides,
yet both is but popular, not authoritative; but power of authoritative
jurisdiction, is gratia gratis data, a common grace given to many, that are
never converted nor saved; yea the office of a public guide to save others, is
given to a man that is never saved himself, and requires some indowments of
governing, that are not required in all the faithful, as is cleared by Paul, 1
Timothy 3. 1 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4, 5* 6.
Therefore Gerson will have us to difference betwixt these two, Gerson de
aufer. pa consid. 16.
a Pastor ad utilitatem, and a Pastor ad veritatem, and a called Pastor, and
a called Christian Pastor. Almain de pote. laica and eccles. ^. 3.
And Almaine proves well, that the calling to a Church-office, is not founded
upon saving faith and charity. This power of choosing is a power about the
keys, but not a power of the keys. 2. It is common to all believers, who are
not to take Pastors as the market goes, upon a blind hearesay, but official
authority is given to Demas, and Judas, and such men often. 3. It is given to
women to try the spirits, M. Best Churches plea against Pages.
yet women have not authority, neither are to usurp authority over men in
the Church. I desire in the fear of God that this may be considered by William
Best, Henry Jacob Governm^^. by free consent of the people, p. 70.
Henry Jacob, and the Author of Presbyteriall Government examined, for our
Divines, (as Daneus) give the calling of church guides to the Presbytery,
Presbyteriall government examined, an. 1641 p* 10, 11.
and the approbation to the people Vrsine differenceth betwixt the judgment of
Elders, and the consent of people; and Bucer judiciously distinguishes power
from authority; Danaeus in 1 Timothy 5. 22.
And Martyr, Calvin, Beza, Zuinglius, Viretus, Luther, so the Fathers, Vrsin.
Cateches. p. 999. 800. an. 1587.
Tertullian, Cyprian, Ambrose, Chrysostom. Bucer. in Man. 16. Haecpotesta. est
pe^es omnem ecclesi^m, authoritas modo ministerii penes prebyteros and
episcopos.
In this meaning, said Augustine, the keys were given in Peter to the whole
Church, so our Divines are to be expounded, when they say the power is in the
Church, and the exercise of the power in the guides, for that power which is in
the Church of believers, is popular, not authoritative.

III. Conclusion. Martyr in 1 Cor. 5.
The physical power of the keys is in all professors, Calvin. institut. l. 4.
c. 5.
as our first Conclusion says. 2. The supreme moral power in Christ Jesus,
Beza Epist. 83. and confess. 5. 34. Zuinglius ad Valen
formally and independently, To me is given all power in Heaven and Earth,
Matthew 28. 18. this includes the power of working miracles, Viretus dialogo.
20.
by the hands of his Apostles, all, as well as the power of the keys, Luther
de vocat. Ministr. p. 365. Tertul. in Apol. concenlum plebis requirit.
and is communicated to the Church not formally, but in the effect. 3. Power
moral, about the keys, as is said in 2. Conclusion, is given to all the
faithful. 4. The exercise of the keys to preach, and administer the seals of
Grace, Cyprian. 4. 2 Epist. 1. 2.
to open and shut Heaven by the keys, Ambros.
is given to the Rulers in some things, as they are scattered and single men,
Chrysostom. in Mat. 16.
as to preach, and administer the Sacraments, August.
without consent in special to every singular act: 3 Conclusion.
in some things, as to exercise power of Jurisdiction, the exercise, and the
power is given to a community, not to one, Vnitati, non uni, as Gerson
observes from Augustine, and Augustine from the word, Gerson de potest.
eccles. consider. 4.
Matthew the sixteenth, for the Church not one single man has power of
Discipline: if one Pastor himself alone should Excommunicate, Augustine.
the Excommunication were null, Matthew. 18.
both in the court of CHRIST and his Church, Gerson ibid.
Ephesians. 4. 11.
if a Pastor should baptize against the Churches mind, the Baptism were
valid, howbeit there were an error in the fact, for power of jurisdiction is
given to the members of the Church scattered, tanquam subjecto cuidam materiali
and potentiali, in remote power, and not formally, but as they are met in a
Synod in Christ's name. 5. The power of the keys is given to the Church of
believers two ways. 1. As to the end, or the small object of the keys: and
this we acknowledge as truth, for Christ gave officers for the Church, as his
intended end, He gave some to be Apostles, etc. for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of
Christ. But 2. The power of the Keys is not given to believers as to the
formal subject, that they may authoritatively make and ordain officers. Hence
the,

IV. Conclusion, 4. Conclusion.
is this. When the Church stands of believers, only as contradistinguished
from her guides, it is then totum homogeneum, a body consisting of alike parts,
where the denomination of the whole is given to the parts; as every part of
water is water, so every three believers of five hundred believers, is a Church
of believers. Now if a Church should be in a remote Island, not consociate with
other Churches, and yet wanting guides, our brethren say in this case, the
power of the Keys should be seen to be in believers, and they might choose
and ordain their own officers. I grant they have great Schoolmen to say with
them, Iac. Almainde potest. Eccles. c. ^. ad 2. Si Cardinales omnes ess^nt
mortui, aut nollent ^igere, ad universalitatem fidelium spectaret elig^^e
(papam) papam octam dia ^ l. 1. p. 1. c. 31. adat. 3. potestas eligendi esset
ad La^cos. ^ylvest. Sum ver. excom. 9. n. ^. Caj^tan. Opus^. to 1. Tr^ct. 1.
Vasy. in 3 p. disp. 244. c. 3. ^. 30. 31.
as Almaine and Oc^am, and the School of Paris, who say, if all the Cardinals
were dead, the faithful might and should choose the Pope. Sylvester in summa,
verbo. excommunicatio 9. nu. 2. says, The Roman clergy should have the power
of choosing the Pope in that case. But C^jetan. Tom. 1. Epist Tractat. 1.
Vasquez. in 3. part. Thomas Tom. 3. Disput. 244. cap. 3. 30. 31. do better say
in that case, the power of choosing should be in the hands of a General
Council, and that by divine right: Then by their mind supreme power or the
keys by divine right, is in the hands of Church guides. But great Schoolmen
say, that the keys by a miracle and extraordinary might remain in the body of
the faithful. But I say in this case Necessity is an unbooked and naughty
Lawyer, and God extraordinarily should supply the want of ordination, as he can
do the defect of second causes: so that if God send some pastors to a
congregation that were unwilling to choose their own Eldership, Pastors might
ordain themselves Pastors in that case to these people, and God should supply
their want of popular election, and this is alls good to prove election to be
in the hands of Church guides (which both our brethren and we deny) as the
other case is to prove the power of the keys to be in the multitude. But we
are now disputeing about the power of the keys in a Church ministerial, which
is totum heterageneum, where the whole gives not a denomination to the part,
as every part of a man is not a man, Iu^lus^ 10. ^. lib sing. de. eccles. c. 8.
a Church made up of only believers is not Christ's organicall body; where there
are eyes, ears, and hands, and feet, as is meaned, Romans 12. and 1 Cor. 12. for
all are here an eye of believers, and all of collateral and equal authority,
neither is there here an eye or an hand in a ministerial function above a
foot. But we now dispute about the keys of a ministerial Church, as Iunius
says, made up of integrall parts of (...) and (...)* of Shepherds and Sheep.

V. Conclusion. 5. Conclusion.
The office bearers of the Church have the power of the Keys and their office
immediately from Christ, by the immediation of free gift: they have their
offices from the Church, by the mediation of orderly designation; seeing it is
the Church which designeth such a man to such an office, therefore it is said,
Ephesians. 4. 11. He gave some to be Apostles for the Church, he says not, to the
Church, as if the faithful by an innate and received power from Christ, did
ordain by authority Ministers as their servants and Deputies, for all the
authority is Christ's, not the believers. I grant what is given for the Church,
in some sense, is said to be given to the Church, Chrysostom. de sacerdo^^.
as Chrysostom said, The gift of baptism is given to the whole Church, but
the power of baptising is not given to all the believers, as to the subject.

This Conclusion I prove. 1. That is not to be holden which is not written, as
our brethren hold. So Best, Travers, Parker, Best Churches plea, arg. 8. p. 73.
^ravers de disci. eccles. fol. 11. 12. Parker de polit. eccles. l. 2. c. 4, 5.
Ames. M. Jacob, so also Theodoret, Cyrill, Augustine, Ambrose, but it is
neither expressly, nor by good consequence in Scriptures, no precept, no
promise, where all the faithful lay hands on men for the Ministry, as Titus,
Paul, and the Presbytery do, Ames Fresh suit. page 29. 30.
1 Timothy 4. 14. or where all the faithful do bind and loose, Jacob.
governm. 12, 13.
and receive witnesses judicially against Elders, as Peter and Timothy have
authority to do. Theodoret. in 1 Cor. 11.


2. Argument. Cyrill in Joan. 1. August. Psalm. 119. Ambros. in 1 Cor. 7.
If the word say that the power of the keys is given to certain select
persons, and not to all believers, then is not this power given to all
believers: 1 Cor. 12. 28.
but the word says the former, Ephesians. 4. 11.
er. The Assumption is thus proved, If these Offices that essentially include
both the power and the exercise of the Keys, 1 Cor. 12.
be given to some select persons and not to all the faithful, Ioh. 20. v. 21,
22. 23.
then are not the Keys given to all the faithful: 2 Cor. 5. 20.
but the Lord gave the office of Apostles, 2 Argument.
Prophets, Calvin in loc. Apostolos inaugurat Christus in officium, cui eos
prius destinarat. Bullinger. ib. ^os orbis ecclesiae ministros decernit.
etc. to some only. And God has set some in the Church (then not all) first,
Apostles, secondarily, Prophets, thirdly, Teachers, etc. And he gave some to
be Apostles (not all) and some Prophets, etc. Are all Apostles? The major is
proved, because to be an Apostle, a Pastor, etc. is to have a power given by
Christ to use the keys by preaching, binding and loosing, 3 Argument.
by censures, as an Apostle, Pastor. etc. This cannot be answered, Mus^ul.
mittit ea potestate qua a patre missus est. Beza in loc.
seeing there must be another power to bind and loose in Pastors, and Elders,
than is in all believers, Cajetan comment. ibid.
women, believing children, and many believers unapt to govern. Toletus to. 2.
com. 26.


3 Argument. To whomsoever Christ gives the power of the Keys, Chrysostom.
Apostolos constituit hic legatos suos and vicarios.
to them he gave a ministerial spirit by way of special embassage to remit
and to retain sins, as the Ambassadors of God in Christ's stead, and them he
sent, as the father sent him, Cyrill lib. 12. in Joan ca. 55. and Cyprian de
unitate Eccles. prope initium. M^ttit hic (inquiunt) Apostolos cum ^mni pote
^ate Apostolico numeri conveniente.
as is clear in the Scripture, As the Father sent me, so send I you, etc. He
breat^ed on them and said, receive the Holy Ghost: whosoever sins ye remit
they are remitted. In which words, our Divines, Calvin, Bullinger, Musculus,
Beza, yea and Papists, Cajetan, Toletus, teach that Christ here did inaugurate
his Disciples to preach and exercise the censures of the Church: so also
Cyrill, Chrysostom, Cyprian. But this ministerial spirit, Christ gave not to
all the faithful, but only to the Apostles, for he sent not Mary Magdalene and
Cleophas in this place, as M. Smith says, and why? because it is gathered from
Luke 24. 33, 34, 36. That Magdalene and Cleophas were there, (says he) when
Christ said, As my Father sent me so send I you, Ioh. Smith in his parallel.
censures and observations. against M. Bernard, p. 52.
Therefore Mary also, and Cleopha^ received a ministerial power of the keys,
all as well as (...) Apostles. I answer, but this place is all one with Mat.
28. 18, 19. where they are commanded to preach and baptize, which is not
lawful to women. 1 Cor. 14. 1 Timothy 2. And it is all one with the Commission,
Mark 16 14. which is restruted to the eleven. Another weak ground he has,
that the eleven were not made Apostles, until Christ's Ascension, Act. 2. when
the spirit was sent, and until he led captivity captive, Ephesians. 4. 11. but
this power was given to all the Disciples before his ascension. Answer, a
higher m^asure of the Spirit was powered on the Apostles at Christ's Ascension,
and by virtue of his Ascension, he ordained Apostles, Ephesians. 4. 11. but will it
follow, none were made Apostles until he ascended? if this were good, by
virtue of his death, we obtain forgiveness of sins, by his ascending to
heaven, we also ascend. But hence it follows not, that there is no
forgiveness of sins while Christ die, and that there is no ascending to
heaven of the spirits of the Patriarchs and Fathers, while Christ ascended. 2.
That the Apostles were called, and received Apostleship from Christ in the
days of his slesh, before his death, is clear, Matthew. 10. 2, 3. and that they
went out, and preached, and cast out devils. A second exception there is of
some, who say, a concionall or preaching power of forgivness of sins is not
given to all, to whom a loosing from sins by Church censures is given, as is
clear in our Ruling Elders, who have not power to forgive sins by preaching,
yet have power to forgive, bind and loose, by Church Censures. Answer, We may
distinguish where the law distinguishes, (...)
for howbeit the power of preaching be not given formally to ruleing Elders,
yet it is effectually in the fruit given to them, in the judicial and
authoritative application in the external court of Christ's Church, Amesius de
cons. l. 4. c. 29. q. 11.
but believers, as believers only, have neither power to preach formally,
Parker de Polit. l. 3. c. 18.
nor yet effectively to apply judicially the threatenings of the word in
discipline, Cyril. in Levit. l. 9.
to the judicial correction of delinquents; now the keys in the word, Chrysostom.
Homil. in Hag. c. 1.
and the keys in the discipline, are the same keys of Christ's kingdom,
Basil. moral. c. 14.
as Amesius observes, and the keys of the word are the keys of the kingdom,
August. contr. Faust. l. 3. c. 18.
committed to all, either formally or effectively, Beda. in 1 Pet. 5.
to whom the keys of discipline are given, Best Churches plea.
but they are never given to single believers who cannot lawfully preach. Jacob
Gover. p. 90.
Therefore single believers are not the subject of the keys. Robinson
Iustific. Smith parallel ensures, p. 52, 53


4. Argument. Such power of the keys, without the which the Church of Christ
is perfect, 4. Argument.
and complete for government, is superfluous, and so not of Divine, but of
humane Ordination. But the Church is complete and perfect in its government, in
that there are in it believers, Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and Deacons, suppose
no power of the keys, be in the community of believers. The proposition is
Parkers; so reason the Fathers, Cyrill, Chrysostom, Basil. Augustine, Beda: so
William Best, M. Jacob, M Robinson. I prove the Assumption. The Eldership have
no oversight in the Lord, and there is no necessity or exercise of the keys,
as Elders, if all believers have a ministerial power to bind and loose: as M.
Smith and others, teach: and if all edify by the keys, Parker de polit.
eccles. l. 3. c. 2.
as Parker says, and judicially censure, excommunicate, English puritanisme, 9.
and ordain, or depose their rulers, as the English Puritanisme, and authors
of the presbytery examined do prove, Presbyter. Govern. examined. p. 12. reas.
1, 2, 3 Guide to Zion, pos. 58. p. 31.
from 1 Cor. 5. and Guide to Zion. For ten believers being nothing but
believers by Divine right, or als well the governing Church without the
Eldership, as having them, Mat. 16.
suppose all the Elders were believers. Where also there be twenty times three
believers, they have all in their own families the power of the keys, and so
there are twenty Churches, complete and independent within themselves, joined
in twenty neighbor families, all under one covenant with God, and flying all
known sins. Now when Christ says, If thy brother offend thee, and obstinately
refuse to hear, tell the Church. Which of the twenty three shall the Brother
wronged have recourse unto? (tell the Church) as reason would say, must be
some visible Church, Senate or judicatorie, but all these twenty threes met
within their houses are independent Churches, if they be believers as we
suppose, and all visible Churches. Shall we think that Christ has left a
grieved brother to a blind, Tell the Church? and yet who can know this Church?
for all have alike interest in Christ, which of the twenty threes be the
Church that Christ meaned in these words, Tell the Church, by this doctrine
none can dream.

5 Argument. 5. Argument.
The multitude of believers has either this power of the keys from Christ,
and from heaven; or from the earth, and from men: for I think our brethren
will not dream of any ecclesiastic positive law, not warranted in Gods word,
for a third, for this Papists teach. This is Christ's argument for John Baptists
ministry. If from Christ and Heaven, it is either from the law of nature, or
from some divine positive law: from nature it is not. For 1. the power is not
natural, but supernatural, reaching a supernatural end, the gathering of the
Saints, Ephesians 4. 11, 12. neither is this power such, as can have nature for its
Author, as Almain says, Almain de auth. eccles. c. 2. potestas ecclesiastica
non est humanitus iustituibilis.
seeing it is above natures reach. And so also says And* Duvallius. If happily
they say, it is from good consequence natural, for because of the claim and
interest that the faithful have in Christ, Christ's keys are given to them,
Duvallius in 22.
as God giving Christ, he gives all other things with Christ. Thom. ^om. 2. de
sum. pontif. tract. 4. q. 3. p. 1.
I Answer. This makes no man, but a believer, yea no gifted pastor capable of
the keys, except he have faith in Christ, which we shall hereafter refute, as
contrary to Scripture. Romans 8. 32.
Neither can it be from any positive law, or grant, or promise in the new
Testament, that all the members of the Church shall be Princes, Bellarm. de
pont. Romans l. 1. c. 6.
Rulers, Commanders, that Christ has left none to be over other in the Lord.
If this be from men, it is a humane ordinance, and cannot stand. See what
Bellarmine says to this purpose.

6. Argument. 6 Argument.
The power of the Keys is either given to the believers as believers, or as
they are such whom God gifteth for government, selected from amongst others,
if the later be said, we have our intent, and the keys must be given
immediately to some selected guides: If the keys be given to believers, as
they are such, and under this reduplication, Then 1. All believing women and
children have authority in the Lord over the congregation, which, as Duvallius
says, Duvallius 22. to. 2. tract. 4. de sum pontif. q. 3. Baines Dioce trial
q. 3. concl. 3. p. 84.
is not to be admitted, for quod convenit (...) convenit (...). Yea, 2. says
Paul Baynes, If the power of the keys and teaching had been given to all
believers, all should have been made Pastors and Doctors, though not to
continue so in exercising the power. Parker de polit. eccles. l. 3. c. 4.
And so all must have the power of seeing, as the Church eyes and Watchmen, and
all the power of hearing, Presbyter Gover. examined, p. 23.
as the Church ears, and certainly, 1 Cor. 12. 17. 24
the second act must proceed from the essence and first act, as moving must
proceed from a living soul, to laugh from a reasonable soul, so to
excommunicate judicially, to judge, correct, cast out, bind and loose, (all
which Parker and others prove to agree to believers from Matthew 18. and 1 Corinthians. 5.) must flow from a ministerial principle, and so all must be eyes,
and ears, which is against the variety of the gifts of the spirit. If the
whole body were an eye, where were the hearing, if the whole were hearing,
where were the smelling? v. 14. for the whole body is not one member, but many,
yea, a collection of many members.

Hence, 7 Argument.
7. Argument. That is not to be admitted which overturneth the order
established by Christ of commanding, Heb. 3. 17
and obeying, 1 These. 5. 12.
and which everteth the integrall members and parts of a visible politic
ministerial body of Christ, 1 Timothy 5. 17
but to give the power of the keys to all, Ezekiel. 33. 7
and every one, Ezekiel. 34. 2, 3, 4.
overturneth this order of Christ's, Ier. 23. 1, 2, 3
Ergo, 2 Cor. 5. 20.
This doctrine is not to be admitted. Mark 3, 14
The Major is undeniable. Acts 1. 8.
I prove the Minor. The ministerial Church is divided, 1 Cor. 4 1, 2
as Junius says, in Sheepeheards, 1 Cor. 4. 15
and flock, 1 Timothy 4. 16.
some are (...) and (...) Overseers and Watchmen, Mark 12. 2
others, such as are to submit and obey: Mat. 13. 3
some are Watchmen, Mat 9. 38
then they have some that they watch over: ^ Cor. 9 10.
Some Shepherds, ergo, they must have Sheep: Some Ambassadors in Christ's
stead, (...) lib. sing. de eccles. c. 9.
Ergo, They have some to whom they carry the Embassage, Heralds, Witnesses,
Stewards, Fathers, Saviors, Sowers, Reapers, builders, then they must have, a
People, House, Sons, Ground, etc. upon whom they exercise their native
operations. But if all have power of the keys, and power to edify by binding
and loosing, all should be Overseers, Watchmen, Sheepheards, Ambassadors,
Francis. Johnson. answer to the articles of divis. p. 42. 43.
and if all were Fathers, where were the Sons? What a work would this be, that
all Christians must leave their trading, husbandry, arts, sailing, and oversee
the Church, Smith parallels censures and observations. p, 66. Col. 4. 17.
and judge and determine Church matters betwixt brother and brother. So Francis
Johnson reasons: Master Smith answers two things to this. Smyth ib. p. 67.
1. The Elders (says he) shall obey the voice of the Church, in things
commanded by God, and all the Saints are to obey the Elders in things commanded
by God, and these may well stand together. I answer, If we speak of diverse
kinds of obedience, it is true, people is to obey the Pastors and Elders
using the keys, here the sheep obey the Shepherds, and this is the obedience
that Christ has established in his house, and the Elders as Archippus, are to
hear the flock admonishing, no commanding as Watchmen, Fathers, Pastors by
the power of the keys, that they would take heed to the ministry, which they
have received of the Lord, and this is but private admonition, that one man,
one woman, may give to their Pastors. Now one man is not the Church bearing
the keys, but this opinion makes Archippus and all the faithful at Colosse
to bear the keys, and command by power of the keys, so that all are Fathers,
Pastors; Pastors by one and the same power of the keys. His second answer
is. All are not rulers: An incorporation may make a Major or Sheriffs, and yet
the incorporation is not a Major and Sheriff: So the Church may make
Ministers, and yet the Church it self is not properly an Elder, or a Deacon.
Answer, It is not alike, An incorporation has a privilege, but not any
princely or magisteriall authority to create a Major, but the Saints have the
regal power of the keys from Christ, not only to make Elders, but also to
judge authoritatively with coequall power with the Elders: by your doctrine, if
the whole inhabitants of a city may make a Major, and set themselves down in
the Bench, as collateral Judges with the Major, then all the inhabitants
indeed were Majors, as all the Saints in Corinth did judicially excommunicate,
why are they not then all Elders and Pastors? Show us any authority that
Pastors have in governing, which the meanest of the congregation has not? And
this makes all Ministers, and all, to be Watchmen, Fathers, Overseers. This I
take to have been the error of Tertullian, Tertul. de pudic.
who will have Christ to have left all Christians with alike power.

8. Argument. 8 Argument.
If there be a peculiar authority in Pastors over the flock, 1 Cor. 4. 21.
that is not in the flock, Then the keys are not both in the Pastors, 2 Cor.
13. 10.
and the people: but the first is said in Scripture, Rev. 2. v. 14, 20.
ergo, The later must also be said. I prove the Minor. Becanus in opus^.
contra. M. Ant. de dominis. tom. (...) 3.
What, will ye, that I come to you with a rod, or in love, or in the Spirit of
meekness? also. Therefore I write these things being absent, lest being
present I should use sharpness, according to the power that the Lord has
given me, to edification, and not to destruction. Hence it is that the Angels
of the seven Churches in Asia are rebuked for not exerc^sing discipline against
Iezabel, and the holders of the Doctrine of Bal^m: which proves the Angels had
the keys, else all alike had been rebuked. Now that every one of Corinth has
the power of Paul's Rod, and his power given for edification, is most
ridiculous. So Becanus the Jesuit. Can every believer say to a Church, (...).
Shall I come to you with the Rod? Yet if all have the keys, as the subject,
all have the Rod also.

9. Arg. 9. Argument.
That which Christ will have to be a ministerial power in the members of his
Church, Esaias. ^1. 5.
to the exercise thereof Christ gives competent and answerable gifts to the
foresaid effect. Esaias 62. 6.
But God neither gives, Esaias 60. 10, 11, 12.
nor has promised, ^er. 1. 4. 1^.
nor requires answerable gifts for using the keys in all believers. Exodus 4.
11, 12.
Therefore Christ wills no ministerial power of the keys to be in all the
members of the Church. Esaias. 6. 6.
The proposition I prove 1. God promises gifts to the priesthood of the new
Testament. Ezekiel. 2. 1, 2.
As 1. Diligence, Ioh. 20. 21.
Esaias 61. Act. 9. 1^.
That strangers shall stand and feed their flocks. 2. Zeal, Esaias 62. That they
shall never give the Lord rest. Necessity of discipline p. 30.
3. That they shall be clothed with salvation. 2. When God sends Moses,
Isaiah, Exodus 3. 11. 1^.
Jeremiah, he gives them gifts and abilities for the calling. Deuteronomy 34. 9.
So (as the Treatist of Discipline observes) it is often said, Esaias 61. 1, 2.
The Spirit of the Lord came upon him, Esaias 56. 10.
and he judged Israel. Ieh. 23. 14, 16.
So also other places for this. 3. They are condemned who take on them a
calling, Ezekiel. 13. 7, 8.
and say, Thus says the Lord, and yet the Lord sent them not, Mat. 25. v. 25,
26 27.
neither spoke he to them, as in Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel. 4. Where the
Lord gives a calling or power, such as the keys of his Kingdom, the not
improving and putting the Lords Talent to the bank, is a sinful digging of the
Lords Talent in the earth. Hence I desire to know from Gods word, these four
things, 1. If the power of the keys be given by Christ to all the faithful,
this power is a ministerial calling. Where is there a promise for light,
prudence for government, to go out and in before the Lords people, made to
every one of the Lords people? 2. Where is the tongue promised to them all in
judgment, that none shall resist, and the consolations promised to them, in
the discharge of this power of the keys? 3. Where is the Spirit of the Lord
coming upon them all, and every one, that they may judge the people? 4. Where
are the believers condemned for usurping the keys, and because being ignorant
they cannot discharge that calling? Where is the careless governing of all and
every one of the faithful rebuked in the word of God, as a digging of the
Lords talent in the earth? I add two things to confirm this. 1. Our Divines
disputing against the great Pope, the Bishop of Rome, and against the little
Pope, the Prelate his god-son, and first born, come out of the Popes loins, as
Calvin, Beza, Iunius, Zanchius, Sadeel, Pareus, Vrsine, Whitaker, Reynold, and
Amesius, Baines, Parker, Didoclavius, etc. They prove, if such power of the
keys and plenitude of order, and jurisdiction, were in these two creatures,
the Pope and the Prelate, the wisdom of Christ in his Word, should have set
down the canons for the regulating of the power, besides the canons that
concerns all other Bishops or Pastors, for the heads or Monarchs duty in
the common wealth, is carefully set down in the word, as what a man the King
should be; but the word has no canons for the power of the keys, and the
regulating of that power, in all and every believer, man and woman. 2. If God
set down a Canon, and requires abilities in the Church guides, as Elders
labou^ing in the word and doctrine, and governing, and in Deacons, that, he
requires not in all believers, then the power of the keys is not in the
Church guides, and in all believers also; but the former is said, 1 Timothy 3. for
it is required in a Minister that his power of the keys may be said to be of
God, 1 Timothy 3
that he should rule his own house well, 1 Cor. ^. 2
else how should he (...), 1 Pet 5, 2, 3
take care to govern the Church of God? 1 Timothy 4. 16, 17
One may be a believer, 1 Timothy 5. 19, 20
and yet this is not required of him, 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3
as he is a believer, an Elder should not be a Lord over the flock, Tit. 1. 5,
6. 7
it is required of a Steward, that he be faithful as a Steward, that he
ordain Elders, and these men of good report, that he receive not an accusation
against an Elder: Now I hope, these are not required of believers, as
believers, neither were the Epistles to Timothy and Titus written so much to
these men, as believers; as to them as holy Elders, and Pastors: And yet if
the power of the keys be common to all the faithful, these Epistles are
written to all believers, primely to men, and believing children, how they
should use the keys, ordain Elders, receive Witnesses, govern the Church.
Job 5. 27
Dear Brethren, see this and consider it for your good.

10. Argument. That which makes the government of Gods house Democraticall and
popular, is not to be taught: but this Opinion is such, as I hope to prove
hereafter.

11. Argument. If the power of the keys be given to believers, Parker de
polit. l. 3. c. 2.
as believers, Then all, and only believers, have the power of the keys: Quod
convenit (...) convenit (...), That which agrees to any thing reduplicative,
and for this formal reason, it agrees to that subject only: But all and only
believers have not the power of the keys. for the Major, Parker teaches, The
keys were given to Peter, as a believer, not as an Apostle. I prove the
Assumption. The believers three or four may be excommunicated, and that
justly, in which case they remain believers, and yet being no members of the
Church, cannot have the power of the keys: also many have the power of the
keys, yea, and are pastors, that are not believers: as Christ says, Have not
I chosen you twelve, and yet one of you is a Devil? Many will say to me in
that day, John 6. 70.
Lord, we have prophefied in thy name, Mat. 7. 22. 23.
and in thy name cast out Devils, etc. and yet they are workers of iniquity,
Phil. 1. 16. 17, 1^
never known of Christ as his elect. So some enemies to Paul and wicked men,
Phil. 1. Haters of the Gospel, and yet preached it, in such sort that Paul
rejoiced that Christ was preached. Now if they be not believers that are
pastors, their pastoral acts of baptizing and administering the Sacraments are
null, seeing they have no power of the keys, many shall doubt if they have
been baptized, because they may happily doubt, yea, too justly doubt of the
belief, and so of the pastors power of the keys. Yea, six or ten professors
and visible Saints are an independent congregation, and so have the power of
the Keys to appoint an Eldership, to Excommunicate, and yet these ten may be
faithless hyppocrites: hence all their acts of the keys are null. It is
known, how Austin, Jerome and the Fathers contend that the Baptism of
Heretics is lawful.

12. If I shall once for all here clear from Antiquity, that the Eldership
has only the keys, I also prove from Antiquity, 1. A Presbyteriall and
representative Church. 2. That the congregation of believers, is not an
independent Senate, to ordain an Eldership, and deprive them. 3. That the
prime ground of an independent congregation has no ground in Antiquity.

Polycarpus Pastor of Smyrna an hearer of the Apostles, Polycarpus an. 143.
praecipit Philippensibus ut presbyteris and diaconis, sicut Deo and Christo se
subjiciant.
as is thought, An. 143. wills the Philippians to submit themselves to the
Elders and Deacons, Irenaus lib. 4. c. 43. and cap. 44. monet fideles ut cum
presbyterii ordine Sermonem suum and conversationem sine offensa praestent.
Tertullian apol. c. 39. ait, seniores excommunicationi and censuris praefuisse.
as to Christ. Irenaeus the Disciple of Polycarpus admonishes the faithful of
the same. Tertullian, An. 226. says, The Elders had the charge of
excommunication and censures.

Ignatius very ancient, Ignatius epist. ad Tinllanos, presbyterium definit
caeu^m sacrum consiliarios and confessores, (...), Episc. and ibid. (...) Dei
and consociatum caetum Apostolorum, and ib. Sed and presbyteris subjects
estote, tanquam Christi Apostolis. Origin. contra Cell vocat. (...)
ecclesiarum. Ruffin. lib. 10. c. 5. hist. eccles. Cyprian. epist. 14. ep. 33.
ep. 10. ep. 68. ut s^cerdos peebe praesente, sub omni um occulis deligatur, and
dignis atque idoneus publico judicio ac testimo. comprobetur, omni a^m (inquit
l. 3. ep. 11.) ad me perlato, placuit contrahi presbyterium: Fi^milianus
Seniores and propositi ordimandi potestatem habent. Clem. Alex. s^ro^n. lib. 7.
penes presbyteros est discipline quae homine m^liores fac^. Basil. ad Noe
Caesu. ep. 75. Interrogate (...) vesto^, and annunci^tibunt vobis, quod e^ia
usi paroe^i^ loci citu divisae esse videbantur, coron^mento (...) unita erant
and una senten i^ guberna^antur. Ath^nas epist: ^ o^thodox Hyeren Eccles habet
senatum (...) presbyterio^um, (...) epist. ^. ad Dunetria. (...) in 1. Tim.
A^equam diaboli instinctu communi presbytertorum consil^o ecclesia regebatur.
Eusebias l. 1. de vita Constant. at the fa^^ous Council of N^e, Nar. 250.
Bishops multitudes of Elders and Deacons. So the Magdeburg cent 1. de g^ber.
eccles. c. 7. Socrat. l. 1. c. 8. shows us that then Paph^utius, neither a
Bishop nor yet a pastor opposed the single life of Churchmen.
if we believe antiquity, describes our very Scottish Presbytery, and calls
it, a Senate of Pastors and Elders, that was in the Church in his time. So
Origin, who lived with Tertullian, resembles the Presbytery to the Senate of a
City, and Ruffinus agrees with them. Cyprian, the presbyters and other
officers have the power of the keys. So the Nicen Council says (as the
Mageburgen. and Socrates say) Aurelius was ordained by Cyprian and his
colleagues: he requires that the multitude he present to consent, but that the
Presbyteries ordain.

Cyprian ascribes the same opinion to Firmilianus. So Clemens Alexandrinus,
Discipline is in the hands of the Presbyters. Basil also establishes a
Presbyteriall Senate of more parishes, as is our Scottish Presbytery, and that
by the authority of the ancient Fathers. Athanasius conjoyneth the people and
Clergy in ordination and election, and gives to every one of them their own
part.

Jerome his mind is known to all. So Dionysius Alexandrin. The Synod of
Antioch, writing to the Church about Samosetanus, calls themselves Pastors,
Elders, and Deacons. So also the Council of Carthage. 4. Ambros. in 1 Timothy 5.
or the ancient author of that Commentary, acknowledges the government by the
Presbytery to be most ancient. Dionysi. Alexandrin. degmata quae grassabantur
inter frat^es (presbyteris) discutienda offe^^hat.
And Augustine against Crescon. acknowledges this, and Gregor. They both give
the power of censures Presbyteris and senioribus, Synod Antic^h tom. Council.
Episcopi, presbyteri and diaconi dilectissimis fratribus in Domino salutem.
to the Pastors and Elders. So for this also Eusebius, Zonaras, Theodoret,
Chrysostom, and farther Nazianzen. To oversee and govern is due to the
Pastors. Council. Carthag. 4. ca. 23. Epis copus nullius causam audiat absque
praesidentia clericorum suotum, aalioqui irrita erit sententia ejus. Ambros. in
1 Timothy S. Synagoga and postea ecclesia seniores habuit, sine quorum consilio
nihil agebaturin ecclesia.


The Ancient confession of the Waldenses, An. 1535. offered to the King of
Boheme, approved by Luther, Melanchton, Bucer, and Musculus approves the
government by Pastors, Deacons and Elders. Augustine. contr. Crescon l. 3. c.
56. and epist. 136.
Wickliffe, John Hus, and Hierome of Prage adhereth to this confession, as
Aeneas Sylvius witnesses. Eusebius histor. eccles. lib l. c. 5. Zonaras in
Can. 5. conoil. Laodicen.
This was a point laid upon Wicklisse, condemned in the Council of Constanoe,
The^doret. hist. Eccles. lib. 1. c. 9. Chrysoct. in 2 Cor. l^^. 26. Ordinatio
est suff^^giis senatus. The Romans say this in their ordination of the Pope by
Cardinals. Nazianzen. in Apolog. pascere, moderar; praecsie curare, etc. hujus
nos curationis ministri esse debemus and adjutores, quicunque alliis praesumus.
Confessio Waldenium an. 1535. Aeneas Sylv^us historiae Bohemicae cap. 35.
Bellarm. de pontif. l. 1 c. 8. Council. ^oletau. 8. Baronius tom. 1. anno. 34.
as Bellarmine says, That Ecclesiastical power is given immediately to the
Officers. So the Council of Toled 8. yea, and Baronius himself says, Christ
breathed his power immediately on the Apostles, John. 20. The Papists giving
the highest power of jurisdiction to an Oecumenick Council, teach this. The
Council of Constance says, A general Council has its power immediately
from Christ. A General Council (of theirs) at Lawsanne, An. 1440. A General
Council at Pisa, An. 1512 as they call it. So the General Council of Basil
confirmed, (as they say) by Pope Martine the fifth. Council. Constan. sess. 4,
and 5.
So also many famous University as the University of Cullen, University of
Cullen.
consulted, advised and required by Theodor. Of Ersord. an. 1440.
Archbishop of Cullen, Of Cracovia anno 1440.
the University of Erford, of Cracovia, of Paris: Of Paris
To add our own Divines, Calvin, Luther, Melanchton, Martyr, Musculus, etc.
were supersluous.

CHAPTER II. Quest. 2.
Whether or no some do warrantably prove from Scriptures, that the power of the
keys is given to all the faithful?
IT is needful that we discuss the Arguments of these who ascribe this power
to the faithful. Parker de polit. eccles. l. 3. c, 2. n. 1. expounding Mat.
16. 19.
And 1. Parker reasons thus, proving the keys to be given to Peter, not as
he sustained the person of an Apostle, but as he sustained the person of all
the faithful, Mat. 16. Peter sustaineth his person here, whose he represents
in other places: but in other places he represents the person of believers.
Ergo, The Keys are given to him ^ere, as he represents the person of
believers. And so the keys are given to all believers, Mat. 16. in Peter's
person, who represents all believers, giving in their names this confession,
Thou are Jesus the son of the living God.

Answer 1. The proposition is not sure, but a begging of the question, for
sometime Peter speaks as a believer in name of the rest, John 6. 68. Mat. 19.
27. sometimes as a weak and sinful man, Chrysostom.
Matthew. 26. 35. and as a Satan and adversary to Christ, August.
Mat. 16. 23. John 13. 8. sometime a command is given to him, Theophyl.
as an Apostle, John 21. 16, 17. (2) I deny the Assumption. Nomine discipulorum
cum sequentium Christum.
He answers in the name only of these to whom Christ propounded the question,
but Christ propounded the question, as Chrysostom, Augustine, Theophylact,
Calvin, Beza, and Marlorat, say, only to the believing Disciples and Apostles
then present, and not to all the believers.

Parker his second and third reason is, 2 Argument.
The promise of the Keys agrees with the confession, but the confession is of
all the faithful. 2. The nearer occasion wherefore the Keys were promised to
Peter, was his second answer, but the question was not concerning any thing
proper to Churchmen, but of that faith, Origin. tract. 6. in Mat.
That Christ is the Son of God, which is proper to all the faithful. Hierom.
in Mat. 16.
So Hilarie, Ambrose, Augustine, Theophylact, so Whitaker. Ambros. in Luc. l.
1. c. 24.


Answer. We may oppose Fathers to Fathers, Origin, Hieronymus, Cyprian. de
simplic. praelat.
Ambrose, Cyprian, teach, that the keys were given to Peter as the first in
gifts and age, August. tract. ult in loan.
and in his person Omnibus Apostolis and successoribus Petri, Almain. de
potest. Eccles. and laica. c. 16.
to all the Apostles and successors of Peter, and so Augustine, also, Cyprian,
Optatus and Hierome: Petrus de Alliaco ubi supra.
for unities sake Peter only receives the Keys, Joan. Major. did. 24. fol. 2
13.
but in him all the rest. See more of this in Almaine, and Petrus de Alliaco,
and Joan. Major. 2. I acknowledge the Fathers teach that Peter received the
Keys, Basil. l. 2. contr. Eun^m.
as Basil says, Cyrill in Joan. l. 2. c. 2.
propter (...), for the excellency of his faith. Athanasius ad Foelicem. Chrysostom.
homil. 4. in ca. 6. Esa.
that he received the keys for, and to all the faithful, as to the proper
subject of the keys. God did promise an established kingdom to Jeroboam,
Ambros. sermon. 4^
if he should walk in Gods statutes: 1 King. 11. 38.
it follows not therefore in the person of Jeroboam, 1 Cor, 12. 29.
that an established kingdom is promised to all that walk in Gods statutes.
Origin tract. 1. in Mat. an vero soli Petro, and non aliis Apostolis. Synod.
Coloniens. sub Adulpho.
God might have rewarded the faith of Peter as he did the faith of Mary
Magdalen, and not have made him an Apostle for his confession. God is free in
his rewards, Medi. 6. c. 1.
and therefore I deny that the confession of Peter, Promissio in omnes
apostolor.
and his Apostolic dignity is of alike length and breadth, for to Peter here
is promised, not only the power, but the exercise of the keys by preaching the
Gospel, as is clear, verse. 19. But I hope to all that believes that Jesus is
the son of God, as to many private Christians, women, and children, that
believe, the exercise of the keys by preaching the Gospel is not given. Are
all Apostles? are all Teachers? 3. Suppose the Keys were given to Peter,
because he believed, and therefore as a believer (which is a sickly
consequence) it follows not, Therefore the keys are given to Peter, and in
him to all believers, as to the subject, but only that the keys are given to
all believers, as the object, and for their behoof: To say nothing, that by
this tenet all must be believers to whom the keys are given, else the keys
are not given to them, which is most absurd.

Parker 3. 3 Ob.
Reasons thus. To be a Peter, that is, a constant rock, and stable believer,
agrees to all believers: Ergo, So does the keys to all believers. Answer.
This reason, if it has the strength of a rock against the truth, should prove
that one constant believer, and that a woman, should have the power of the
keys, but one believer is not the Church, as Answorth grants. 2. I deny the
consequence, for so Judas should have had no power of the Keys, because he was
never a stable believer, nor yet builded upon the Rock.

Parker yet fourthly reasons. 4 Ob.
The keys are promised to that Church which is builded upon a Rock, and
against which the gates of hell shall not prevail, but this is not the Church
of Ministers, but the Church of believers in Christ that is builded upon the
rock: Ergo, Answer. I deny, that it hence follows, that therefore the keys
are given to the Church of believers as to the first subject, so as the Church
has in her self this ministerial power: Only it follows, Therefore the
keys are promised to the Church builded upon Christ, as to the object and end,
for which Christ intends the keys: for what is promised for the good, and
behoof of the Church, is promised to be given to the Church: as God promises
to his Church in the Prophets, David, that is, Christ, David's son, as their
king; that is, a King for their salvation, Ho^ca 1. 11.
but it is not a good consequence, Ezekiel 37. 24*
Ergo, Ezekiel 34. 22.
Christ's Kingly power is first promised to the Church as to the subject, Esaias
9. 6. To us a son is given.
that she may derive that kingly power from her to Christ, as our brethren say,
The Church of believers does communicate a Ministerial power and authority
from her self to all her Officers. See for this also Vasquez. Vasquiz. in p.
3. Tho. to. 3. disp. 144. c. 5.
in 3. Tho. to. 3. Disp. 144. cap. 5. Non quaecunque, etc. Whatever is given to
Kings and Rulers, as heads of the people, are not given to the people.

Sixthly, 6 Ob.
Parker thus reasons. To whom the means of building on the Rock, to wit, the
opening of heaven, belongs, to these the keys do belong: But the means of
edifying one another, which is only by the word in mutual exhorting, Barrow.
discovery of the false Church, p. 35.
and rebuking, and comforting belongetth to all the faithful. So Barrow. So M.
Smith. If admonition (says he) appertain to every brother, Smyth patalles
censutes. p. 36.
why not excommunication? for there is power to bind and loose in two or three
witnesses toward a brother, and why not in the body of the whole Church?
Answer. 1. The Major is false, for the opening of heaven actively by preaching
of the Word publicly, in a constitute Church, is only by the pastors, as the
edifying by the seal^s is only by them, but the opening of heaven passively,
that is, opened heaven agrees only* to believers. Now the means actively,
that is a pastoral opening of heaven agrees only to officers, not to all. 2.
Every edifying by the word is not an act of the keys, for there are two acts
of the keys, one preparatorie, Gradus ad rem, vel mitium materiale, this is
one rebuking one, and is not the action of the Church, seeing one is not a
Church, this is only a preparation to the Churches use of the Keys, as is
clear, Matthew 18. 15 If he hear thee, thou have gained thy Brother, the man
is edifyed here, and the matter is not dilated to the Churchs as it is, verse
17. 18. The keys are not yet used. There, is an other edifying by public
rebuking, this is Gradus in re, and initium formale, a formal act of the
keys, for if admonition private per modum communis charitatis, and not per
modum specialis delegationis, were an act of the keys, Tit. 2. 2.
then because an Elder woman is to instruct the younger, one woman should have
both the power and actual exercise of the kyes toward an other woman: this is
absurd.

Their seventh Argument is from the Parisian School, Ob. 7.
All things are yours, D. Parisien. de polit. eccl p, 2 Robins. justif. in
Separat.
whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, etc. So they cite Revel. 2. 27. So
Robinson, and so Smith, so Parker. Smith paral. p 38
To whom Christ is given for a King, to them the power of Christ the King is
given. Also to whom the covenant and Christ is given, to them all the
promises, 2 Corinthians. 1. 10. Psalm. 133. 3. Act. 2. 39. And so the power of
binding and loosing is given. Answer 1. All are yours finaliter, that is, all
are for you, avd tend to your salvation. 2. All are yours in fructu; in the
fruit that God brings out of all, Paul or Apollo their ministry, out of
life and death, that is, faith, comfort, salvation are yours, this is true, But
all are yours, subjective, inhaesive, formaliter, All are yours formally and in
possession it is false, for then ye should be all earthly Kings, all Pastors
to preach and administer the Sacraments. 2. Christ and the promises are made to
one single believer, and that a woman, a child, but a single woman is not the
Church, having power to bind and loose in heaven. 3. The promise of binding and
loosing is made to the faithful, that is, for their good and edifying, but not
to them as the subject, for in that place it is said, The world, life, and
death are yours, how can the world be in the faithful as in the subject? They
do not possess all the world: how is death in them as the subject, except
they be dead?

8. They reason thus. Parker de polit. l. 3. c. 8.
Christ has given in gift Pastors to the Church. Ergo, He has given them the
authority of Pastors, for God mocketh not his Church, to give them gifts
whereof they are not capable. Hence Parker infers, that the power of the
keys is in the believers immediately, and in the Rulers at the second hand,
and borrowed from them.

Answer. First, I retort the Argument. Christ has given the actual exercise
of the keys, the preaching of the Word, and the administration of the
Sacraments to the Church of believers: will it hence follow, that believers,
because they are believers, are capable of the exercise of the keys. This is
against Parker himself. 2. Christ has given Pastors to the Church (in gift)
that is, to the Church as the Subject, and first disposer of these offices, it
is most false, for the Rulers of the Church or Presbytery is the first
subject, and these who authoritatively under Christ do ordain pastors, the
Church of believers does only elect and choose them by a popular consent.
Christ has given Pastors (in gift) to the Church, that is for the Churches
good and edification: hence it follows not that believers are incapable of
Pastors in the way and manner that they are given to them. God mocketh not
Israel, when he gives to them David. as their King, but it follows not the
people are the first subject of the Kingly power.

9 Parker reasons thus, ibid. Ob. 9 Parker ib.
The power spoken of, Mat. 16. and 18. should be applied to all the Church, and
to Christ's friends, not to his enemies, there is no ecclesiastic power in
heretics, and Schismatikes What is the cause, (seeing both heretics, and also
believers do exercise the power of the keys) that the keys are given to the
one, that is to believers, as to the end, and not to heretics? Surely as
Gyprian says, because the authority is given principally to believers as to
the end, and to them principally, and to others secondarily, as they are
esteemed parts of the Church of believers, and have their authority derived
from believers. Answer. The power spoken of Mat. 16. 18. is given to the
visible governing Church, whether they be believers, or hypocrites providing
they be Pastors and Elders called lawfully by the presbytery, and chosen by
the people, and the power of the keys is given to the eldership, that has the
oversight of the flock, in the Lord, 1 Thessal. 5. as to the subject, but yet
this power is given to the Church of believers to gather them in to Christ, and
for the reprobate to clear Gods justice, and to make them inexcusable, and
there is no reason to ask a cause, Why both believers and heretics exercise
the power of the Keys, seeing Christ gave this power to believers, and not to
heretics, for I say Christ has given the power of the keys to both, when he
gifteth both with ability to discharge the places, and gives them authority
in his Church; And it is a false ground, and not far from Anabaptisme, that
there is not Ecclesiastical power in heretics and Schismatikes. Judas, and
all called Pastors, and Elders (suppose they be before God, but plaistered
hypocrites and covered Wolves) have no less the power of the keys, as is
clear, Matthew 7. 22, 23. Philippians 1. 16. then Paul or Peter. And also it
is false, that Rulers have their authority from believers, they have their
offices by way of ordination from Christ and the Presbytery, and by way of
popular election and designation from professors of the Church, be partly
believers, partly unbelievers.

10. M. Smith reasons thus. 10 Ob.
Christ gave the power of binding and loosing, Smith paral. page 52. 53.
Mat. 18. not to the Presbytery, but to Disciples and Bret^ren, because, verse.
15. 17. the Disciples move a question concerning the Kingdom of Heaven, and
Christ teaches that little ones, that is, Brethren and Disciples are not to be
offended, but to be sough! when they are lost, v. 15. he teaches the duties of
admonition in the degrees thereof, for the winning of brethren: He speaks of
Brethren and Disciples, attributing to them power of binding and loosing, v.
19. promising the hearing of their prayers, if they be but two or three, v. 21.
22. teaching them remission of offenses private, unto seventy times seven times.

Answer. Luke 22.
All this depends upon this Argument. If the whole scope and intent aim at
Disciples and Brethren, Mat. 7. 15.
then power of binding and loosing is given to brethren, which connection is
most false, and loose: Christ speaks to believers of the power of the
ministerial Church, or Preaching, Baptizing, Ergo, He gives to these he
speaks unto, and to all brethren, power to bind, and loose, and preach, and
baptize: This does not follow, for so a power to preach and baptize is given to
believing women. Christ speaks to his Disciples as Disciples, of the dominion
of the Kings and Princes of the Gentiles, of false Prophets, Wolves in
Sheepskins, ergo, he gives to his Disciples a power to be Kings, and a
warrant to be false Teachers, it follows no ways. 2. By a brother, v. 15. is
not meant a true believer, but a brother in profession, else we are not to
labor to gain, by this text, unbelieving brethren, and to complain to the
Church of their obstinacy, or to forgive them private offenses done against us
to seventie times seven times, which is against the course of the Text. 3. By
this gloss, little Bairnes, which are not to be offended, are brethren, which
have power to bind and loose, and preach and baptize, which is absurd. 4. It
is clear, by the Church here is meant a Society different from the faithful
and brethren, that he speaks of: for he will have the offended brother to
rebuke before two or three brethren in private, and if the offender hear not
(tell the Church) Now three believers, to whom the matter is already told,
Smith ib.
is a Church to Master Smith; for so he says in that same place, Then Christ
bids tell the matter to the Church, before the Church hear of it. 5.
Neither does the hearing of prayers prove a ministerial Church, seeing God
hears the prayers of one believer in the Prison, or the Whales belly: but it
is the doctrine of these, with whom we now reason, that six, professing Christ,
being visible Saints (who may be unseene Devils in heart* and so neither
Brethren, Disciples, nor little ones) are an independent visible Church, having
power to bind and loose: and therefore suppose Christ spoke here, to his
Disciples and believers, of the Churches power in excommunication, it is a
weak collection, that therefore all Disciples have power to bind and loose:
And these words, verse 18. Whatsoever ye bind on earth, etc. must be meant only
of the Apostles, and of the Church, verse 18. yea, and it must exclude Peter
and his offending brother, suppose they were both believers, because parties,
by the Law of nature and Nations, cannot be Judges. But some say that these
words* (What ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven) have reference
to a private forgiving, an^ gaining of a convinced brother before witnesses,
verse. 15. And a brother in private should forgive another to seventie times
seven times, 21. 22. Therefore private brethren may bind and loose. Answer, No
private brother can bind on earth, for then one brother might excommunicate,
for these words, Whatsoever ye bind on earth, etc is a ratifying in heaven, of
the sentence of excommunication, verse 17. 2. Binding in private must be a not
forgiving of private wrongs, which is a sinful binding, and forbidden, verse
22. and Matthew, 6. 14, And rather cannot be ratified in heaven, as
Ecclesiastic binding and loosing is, verse 18. expressly made good and valid in
heaven.

11. Smith reasons thus. 11. Ob.
The Covenant is made with the Church, Smith paral. p. 55.
and so the promises of the covenant, but cursing them that curse the Church,
and blessing them that bless the Church, Genesis 12. 3. and remission of sins,
which is a part of the blessing, are given to believers, as a part of the
covenant, Romans 4. 7. 8. Therefore a power of binding and loosing from sin must
be given, to the Church as the covenant is given to her. Answer. The covenant
is given to one believing woman, ergo, by this reason also power to baptize,
for Smith says, page 51. By one and the same power does the Church preach,
pray, baptize, excommunicate, absolve. But this is absurd. 2. Cursing and
blessing, Genes. 12. and remission of sins, Romans 4. is not the private
believers cursing and remission, but Gods or the ministers publicly and
authoritatively as sent of God. And so it is a vain collection.

12. Smith reasons. Ob. 12
To whom Christ is given directly and immediately, as King, Priest, and
Prophet, Unto them all other things with Christ are given, Romans 8. 32. And so
the Saints are made Kings, Priests, and Prophets to God to forgive bind and
loose. But Christ is given to all believers, and so the power of binding and
loosing to all believers. Answer. To whom Christ is given subjectively and
formally, as their gifted Redeemer to dwell into them by faith, To them all
things are given either subjectively, as the personal blessings of the
covenant, a new heart, remission of sins, perseverance in grace, or
objectively, and finaliter, for their good, other ways, if one manner of
giving be understood in both* it should follow that all the believers were
temporal Kings and Princes, which is most false: for temporal princedomes are
given for their good, but not personally to themselves: So the power of the
keys is given for their salvation, but not to all believers personally. 1 Cor.
12. 1^. 29.
It is in vain to reason from the privileges of believers as believers, to
infer that all Ecclesiastic privileges are personally given also to
believers, for then should all be Apostles, all Teachers, all the whole body
should be an eye, and where then should be the hearing? And this man takes
away all necessity of a calling by the Church to the ministry, as do the
Arminians and Socinians. Neither can he maintain that there is a twofold
power of the keys, one remote belonging to men, as Christians: another nearer,
that is ecclesiastical, and given orderly by the Church: for he and his
followers will have all believers, because they are believers in a visible
Church actually to censure, bind, loose, absolve, excommunicate.

13. Thus reasons Smith and so Parker. The Spouse has power immediately from
the husband, the body from the head without any intermediating power. Ergo, The
believers have power of binding without the mediation of Elders. Answer. All
comparisons halt either in one leg, or other: Every like halteth, Smith p 53.
and the argument presupposes a falsehood, Ob. 14.
that the power of binding and loosing is in the Church of believers mediately
or immediately, Parker. Chrysostom. de sace^d. l. 7.
which we deny, it is only in the ministerial Church and conveyed from Christ
to the Spouse as to the object and end, Hieron. in Mat* 16.
in the fruits and effects.

14 They lastly allege Fathers, Gratian. 7. q. 1. 16.
Chrysostom says, The power of baptizing is given to the Church. Almain de
auth. eccl. c. 7. ^at. 4.
So Hierome. The whole Church has judiciarie power over the guides. Aquinas.
So Gratian, Gerson.
Hugo a Sancto Victo, Aquinas, Gerson, Council of Constance, Ambrose. in Psa.
38. Quod Petro dicitur Apostolis dicitur.
Almaine for this coteth Augustine. Answer. We are not subject to Almaine or
Gerson in this question, they be otherwise expounded. What is given for the
Church, is said to be given to the Church in the style of Fathers: Augustine.
tract. 124. ^n Joan. ecclesia claves regni coelorum accepit in Petro.
So do Ambrose, Origin, Beda, Chrysostom say. What was given to Peter was
given to all faithful Pastors. And we know that Chrysostom denies the power
of baptizing to any but to Pastors. Lombard. l. 4. d. 19. out of Ierom. says,
habet omnis ecclesia claves in Episcopis and presbyteris. So Nilus for the
Greek Church, l. 2. de. primat. and the Confef. of Sweveland art. 15. and the
confess. of B^he. c 14. give the keys to the Church of Believers, but to them
as ^o the end. 2. As to the consenters in all.


15. They also add this. He that may promise eternal life to a private
believer, and denounce wrath on an unbeliever, has power to open and shut
heaven, But a private believer who should exhort his brother, Heb. 3. 13. teach
and admonish, Col. 3 16. Comfort him, 1 These. 5. 11. may promise life to a
believer, denounce wrath to an unbeliever. Ergo, He may open and shut heaven,
for the word is the Key.

Answer. One private Christian may use the key toward another this way, but
these are not the keys ecclesiastically and formally that are given to the
Church, seeing one man is not the Church: But only the keys materially used in
a private way, as a common servant at command of the Lord of the house may use
the keys and give broad to the barnes, but it follows not hence, that the
keys are given to him authoritatively as to the Steward by special office,
because this servant of charity uses the keys, or rather that which is in
place of the keys, which is the word in a private way.

CHAPTER III.
Quest. 2.
Whether or no the Church of believers in a Congregation, be the first Church,
having the highest power of jurisdiction within it self, Origin. in Mat. 1. Si
autem super unam illam Petram arbitraris universam ecclesiam aedificari a Deo,
quid dices de Iacobo et Ioaune?
and that independently, and power above and over their Eldership, Beda homil.
in illud. (Quem me dicunt) Petro et caeteris Apostolis data est haec potestat
ligandi et solvendi.
to constitute and ordain them by an intrinsecall power received from Jesus
Christ, and by that same power to censure and depose them, Cyr^l. in Esaias l. 4
orat. 2.
when they become scandalous in life, Chrysostom. in Gal. c. 2.
or corrupt in doctrine. Cyprian. de unit. Eccles.

THe determination of this question, so near of blood and kindred to the
former two, is of much force to clear many doubts in this subject. Hence I
propound these following distinctions, as very considerable.

1. A Church independent is twofold, either a Church of believers in a
congregation, having originally the power of the keys within themselves, to
make or unmake their officers. 2. Or an Eldership of one congregation,
including the congregation that may from an intrinsecall power, without
subordination to Synods provincial or national, exercise all jurisdiction.
This question is of the former independent Church. 2. A Church is considered
two ways, 1. As totum essentiale, this is a mystical Church, consisting of
only b^lievers, or of persons, as professing faith, a Church of faithful, of
Saints. 2. The Church is considered as totum integrale, made up of officers,
and a flock, this Ames. calls an instituted Church, others a Ministerial
Church, as we consider John, as a believer, or John, as an Elder, or minister
of a Church. 3. There is a twofold Primacie answerable, to this, Primit^s
mystica seu Christiana, et primitas ecclesiastica seu ministerialis.
One whereby a number of believers is the first mystical body of Christ,
immediately united to Christ, as a mystical body to the head. See
This is a mystical or Christian primacy; or (to speak so) firstnesse or
principality. Amesii medulla l. 3. c. 31. sect. 2. et cap. 13.
2. There is an other primacy or principality ministerial, whereby such a
number of men are the first subject of the keys, having power of binding and
loosing, first and immediately from Christ, as is proved, Chapter 1. 4. 3. Christ
has a twofold influence, as head upon these two bodies, one influence of
special and saving grace upon the Church of believers; An other common
influence, communicating to the ministerial body the power of the keys and
gifts which he gave to men, Ephesians. 4. 11. 12.
to be Pastors, and Teachers, and Elders, when he ascended on high, and le^
captivity captive. Neither do they look right on this question, who will have
the power of the keys an essential property of the Church of believers, for
there is no reciprocation here, betwixt the property and the subject; seeing
the power of the keys is in many that are unbelievers, and not of Christ's
mystical body. Many warrantably preach Christ to others, and seal the
covenant to others, who are unsaved men: remember the builders of the Arc: and
many are Christ's mystical body, that have not the power of the keys: All
believers are not Eld^rs having power of order.
Hence our 1. Conclusion. Romans 8. 28.
If we speak of a Christian primacie and eminency of grace, 1 Cor. 1. 24.
the Church of believers sincerely professing the faith and believing is the
only first true visible Church. Act. 20. 28.
1. The essence and definition of a called and effectually translated company
agrees to them, Ephesians. 1. 25.
and they are the called of God. Rev. 1. 5.
2. Mat. 19.
Because the promises made to the redeemed, saved and washen Church belongs
to them; they are properly the Church builded on the rock, the loved and
redeemed spouse of Christ. 2. This Church is the true body of Christ, Ephesians. 2.
22.
which shall infallibly be glorified with the head Christ. 1 Cor. 12.
The ministerial Church is his body also, on which he has an influence
bestowing upon them common gifts: but not a body which shall infallibly be
glorified, but in so far as they are true members of the Church of believers.
And here observe, our brethren have no cause to object to us, that there is not
a place in all the old or new Testament, where the word (Church) signifies
only the presbytery or Eldership (the contrary whereof, God willing, I shall
show) but I desire that they will produce a place in either the old or new
Testament, where the word Church signifies a governing multitude, or a
ministerial company of only believers having power and use of the keys: yet
this must be showed in this dispute, if their principles stand good.

11. Conclusion. A multitude of believers sincerely professing the faith, is
the first visible mystical Church, because the definition of a visible
mystical Church agrees to them, being redeemed professors of the Gospel. So
the saints at Colosse, Corinth, Philippi, as not including their guides, is a
true uisible Church. Before I come to the third conclusion, I must show what
our brethren hold anent this present question. Eng. Puritanism. c. 2. sect. 1.
The English puritanisme holds every Congregation or Assembly of true
believers, Guide to Zion, p. 7. sect. 11.
joining together according to the order of the Gospel in the true worship of
God, to be a true visible Church. Parker de polit. eccles. l. 3. c. 12.
And that this name is unproperly given to Synods or Assemblies (of
office-bearers) so also the Guide to Zion. Best Churches plea against Pag^t,
sect. 8. p. 88.
Parker makes the Church of believers in any particular congregation, to be
the highest and most supreme Church in majoritie and power of jurisdiction
above t^eir own Eldership, or Presbytery, having power to ordain or depose
them, above all Synods of Pastors and Elders. William Best, cites and
approves the mind of the English Church (as he calls it) at Frankeford: the
Ministers and Seniors severally and jointly, shall have no authority to make
any manner of decrees or ordinances to bind the congregation, or any member
thereof, but shall ^^ecute such ordinances, as shall be made by the
congregation, and to them delivered. Hooker against Paget, They which had
complete and perfect Ministers, Discourse of troubles* Frank. p 115. 116
before any Classes had power to call those Ministers, they have authority
above the Ministers. Ho^ker against Paget^ 20. quest. Answ. 11.
But a particul^r congregation had perfect and complete Ministers, perfectly
and completely called before any Classes. Apology of brownists against
Universe. of Oxford. Art. 2^ 24.
To this agrees the confession of faith, of the unjustly called Brownists,
that every Christian congregation, yea two or three sequestered from the whole,
has ^ower from Christ of election, Parker de Polit. eccles, l, 3. c. 12. 11.
3. a^g. 2.
ordination, deposition, excommunication of the Elders or Office-bearers set
over them. And expressly M. Parker, Quid igitur supremitas alibi quam in sonte
(...)? in congregatione fidelium. ut ibi prob^t.
a man otherwise of an excellent spirit for holiness and learning says, That
the supremacy of Ecclesiastical power is in the Church of believers,
contradistinguished from their guides, Paul and Apollo.

Here we see our brethrens mind clear, P^otestation printed an. 1^16. (...).
15.
Ten or twenty believers in a congregation have from Christ, 1. The supreme
power of the keys. The separatists thi^d II petition to K. ^ames first
position.
2. They are the supremest and highest Church on earth. 3. Above Pastors and
Elders, even convened in a Synod in Christ's name. 4. Some few believers
clothed with no ecclesiastical office may ordain Pastors, and Elders,
deprive and excommunicate them. 5. Give ordinances and laws to the Eldership.
6. When Synods or assemblies of office-bearers are met in assemblies, and
cannot agree in their canons, the matter is to be referred by appeal or
reference to a company of believers clothed with no ecclesiastical function,
as to the most supreme ecclesiastical judicatorie on earth. These are points
unknown to Scripture, which our brethren hold.

Hence out third conclusion. The Church of believers in eminence and primacie
of Christian dignity is above the Church ministerial as ministerial, 1. In
dignity. 2. Stabilitie. 3. Causalitie. Indignity. 1. Because the Church of
believers is the redeemed and conquested purchase of our Lord Jesus, but all
the office-bearers, or the ministerial Churches of Pastors and Elders on
earth, are not his redeemed ones, in so far as they are no more but officers
and ministers of the house, except they be believers, and so they fall in to
the redeemed Church which is a better world, than to be naked pulpit-men. 2. In
stabilitie, because the advocation of Christ that the gates of hell shall not
prevail against the Church of believers, and the promises of the Covenant for
perseverance stands good for them: But no such promises of stabilitie are
made to naked Church guides, but if they guide well, they fare the better; only
common gifts are promised to them which cannot take them to heaven. 3. In
causalitie, the Church of believers are superior, and above the Church of
Church-guides, because Rulers and Officers are servants and means employed by
Christ for the Church of believers, Tertul. apol. c. 33 Orig in ^. hom. 7 Cypr.
l. de pasto. c. 13.
as for the end, office-bearers are for believers, as the means for the end,
but believers are not for office-bearers. Chrysostom. de sacerd. l. 3.
Medicine is for our health, and meat for our life, August. de doct. Christ.
l. 1. c. 18. Epiphan. contr. haeres. 73.
and the end is the cause, and so excellenter than the means, because of these
three respects, and of the necessity of consent of believers in all acts of
Government. Christ's kingdom being a willing people. Hieron. ^d Gal. 9* 10.
The Fathers, Tertullian, Origin, Cyrill. in Ioh. 20 21.
Cyprian, Chrysostom, Augustine, Epiphanius, Jerome, Hilarious.
Cyrill, Hilarie, and our late Divines, Junius, Chemnitius, Iun. l. sing. de
eccles. c. 9.
Martyr Calvin, Beza, Willet, Fulke, Bucer, and our brethren Baines and Ames.
do ascribe a superiority, and so an authority to believers, Chemnit. exam.
council. Trident. Martyr. in Cor. 5 Calvin. Comment. in ^ Cor. 5. 21.
as to the fountain and cause of jurisdiction above Ministers, and give the
exercise of jurisdiction only to officers, not because officers have not the
power, Be^a ib.
as well as the exercise, but because the being and operation of officers is all
for the Church. Fulk against Rhemist. 1 Cor. 5. 3.
Gerson also in this subjecteth the Pope, (and we every Pastor, suppone he
were a double Lord Prelate) to the Church, Willet syno^s papis. cont. 9 q 1. c.
9.
that is, to the Council or Assembly of the Church, and that in a fourefold
respect: 1. Ratione indeviabilitatis, Bayn. dioces. try. q. 3.
because the ports of hell shall not prevail against the Church, but the Pope
or the Pastor is a man; Ames. medulla. l. 2. c. 32. these ^7 Gerson. de potest^
ecclesiast. consid. ^.
may nod and totter. 2. Ratione regulabilitatis; because the Church in a Synod
may regulate and line the Pope or pastor when he crooketh, because he is not
essentially a right line. 3. Ratione multiplicitatis, because the Church
contains in it the Popes, or Pastors power, but the Pope or Pastor
contains not in his bosom the Churches power. 4. Ratione obligabilitatis,
Iu^. l. sing. de eccles. c. 9. 10. 2
because the Church may appoint laws to oblige both Pope and Pastor, but the
Pope or Pastor cannot oblige the Church. Now as the Church of believers is
above the Church guides in Christian dignity and excellency of grace: for
as much as the saving grace of faith is more excellent, than the common graces
of the power of the keys, yet in an other respect the Church guides are a
Church ministerial in authority and jurisdiction above the believers.
Therefore Junius says, the Pastor and the flock are in diverse relations,
above, and inferior to one another.

Hence, 1. Every one of these two Churches, are first and highest each in their
own kind, The Church of believers is the highest and most supreme Church (I
speak of a Christian supremacy and dignity) in the one kind. Also a
ministerial Church is the highest and most supreme Church in its kind, to wit,
in a ministerial authority. But that which we prove is, that we see not in
Gods word a Church of sole believers that is a governing and ministerial
Church having the keys and power and exercise of jurisdiction over the
Eldership and Church-guides whatever our brethren say on the contrary.

Our first Argument is, 1 Argument.
Because such a Church, in name or thing is not in the old and new Testament.
Therefore this independent Church to us is nothing, for the Antecedent we
require precept, promise, or practice, for such a Church.

2. We have proved that the power of the keys is no ways given to sole
believers, 2 Argument.
ergo, far less can the exercise of that power be in them over their guides,
except we establish a popular government, where all the members of the Church
have the power of the keys and do actively use them, and judge, ordain,
consttuite, despose, and excommunicate their rulers.

3. Every lawful power of jurisdiction is regulated by precepts in Gods word,
3 Argument.
But this power in believers over their guides is not so regulated, for Gods
word gives precepts to regulate the Kings power to his subjects, Deuteronomy. 17* 8
19. 20.
that he play not the Tyrant, Col. 3. 21.
the Masters power to his servants, that he deal equally with them, Ephesians. 6.
4. 9. ^
the parents power over the children that they provoke them not to wrath,, and
so in all lawful powers that are of God. But in no place has God said. Ye
that are the flock and sheep oversee and govern your sheepheards, nor has
he said, ye that are sheep, children, sons of the house, use your power over
your shepherds, fathers in God, stewards in Christ's house with moderation and
longanimitie and wisdom; nor has he said, ye sons, ^lock and people of God,
feed, govern, and rule these that are your fathers in God, and have the
oversight over you in the Lord not as lords over the Lords inheritance, but as
good examples to the flock, yet this must be in Scripture, if this power be of
God.

4 If the Eldership and Church-guides be rulers and governors taking care of
the house of God, 4 Argument.
1 Timothy 3, 4, 5. Such as rule well the people, 1 Timothy 5. 17. such as must rule
with diligence, Rom 12. 8. and feed the flock of God, not as lords over Gods
inheritance, taking the oversight not by constraint, 1 Pet 5. 2. such as are
over the people in the Lord, 1 These. 5. 12. such as rule over the people and
the believers, watching for their souls, and must give an account to God
therefore, Heb. 13. 17. 18. Then have the Elders by divine right a jurisdiction
over the Lords people in the Lord, and so the Elders in authority and
jurisdiction are above the people* And so by no reason can the people be over
their overseers in the Lord, and command, watch, take care for their souls.
They say diverse ways one may be both a Shepherd and a Sheep, the King as
King is above the Pastor, and the Pastor being a man owes subjection and
obedience to the King. Again, as the King is a member of the Church, he is to
hear and obey the pastor as the messenger of Lord of losts, according to that
(he that hears you, hears me) and so may it be here. But I answer. The case
is no way like; for our brethren make the pastors and the flock to be over
one another, and subject one to another, with one and the same kind of
subjection. I grant Archippus is over the Colossians to command them in the
Lord, but the Colossians are not in the same power of jurisdiction over
Archippus, they may only admonish him to fulfill his Ministry, but they have
no authoritative power of jurisdiction to command, to deprive, to
excommunicate: but by this learning, ten Elders with the consent of ten
believers may excommunicate ten believers, and these same ten believers may
excommunicate these ten Elders, and his ten believers, for there is an
independent Church of believers on both sides: hence sons and servants may
excommunicate those that are over them in the Lord, and watch for their souls.

5. That ever in a constitute Church, except where God calls extraordinarily,
5 Argument. as Act. 1. 15.
pastors were ordained pastors by a multitude, Act. 6. ^. 6.
that are not pastors nor Elders, but only believers and private Christians,
Act. 14. 26.
is not to be read in the word of God; 1 Timothy 4. 14.
for every where in the word, 1 Timothy 5. 22.
where pastors and elders are created, 2 Timothy 2. 2.
there are they ordained by pastors; Tit. 1. 5.
neither find we ever Apostles or pastors to be tried and found true or false,
Revel. 2. 2. 14. 15. 16. v. 20.
and not suffered to teach by the sole believers, but by the Angels of the
Churches. If believers being only believers may ordain pastors, and may again
depose and excommunicate, which are the highest acts of jurisdiction, then may
they preach and baptize not being called Ministers, then may the Sacraments be
administrate where there are no pastors, which is absurd to the Separatists
themselves.

6 If the whole eldership in a congregation err and commit scandalous sins, 6.
Argument.
to whom shall we complain? not to themselves, for they are parties to be
judged: nor to a Synod, for independent congregations acknowledge no authority
of Classes and Synods: then to the Church. What is that? To the believers: Then
Christ Mat. 18. intended to erect no ministerial Church at all, yea the
ministry by no place in Scripture have power of jurisdiction. If not by this
place Mat. 18. for Mat. 16. the keys were given, and the binding and l^osing
(says our brethren) to the Church builded upon the rock, but this was the
Church of believers, not the Church of Ministers: Hence have we cause to doubt,
whether our brethren acknowledge a ministry which has received the keys
from Christ if these two prime places fail them, whereas Fathers, Doctors,
Councels, our Divines Protestants and Lutherans, popish Writers, Schoolmen,
Canonists, casuists, acknowledge the keys to be given to the Apostles in
these places: This doctrine will find too great favor with the Anabaptists
denying the power and authority and necessity of the Churches calling to the
Ministers of the new Testament.

7 What if the women and believing children be the greater part, 7 Argument.
shall they be the Church, Mat. 18. which has the power of the keys, suppose
the whole Eldership and gravest Christians be on the contrary side. But the
Elders with them being but three or four believers gathered together in
Christ's name, have also the power of the keys, and are essentially a true
visible Church, and yet are overswayed by the manifest and most ignorant.

8 When a question cannot be determined by three believers ( viz. a complainer
and three believing brethren) who are witnesses, Argument.
Mat. 18. v. 16. 17.) which to o^r brethren is a Church having power of the
keys) then Christ commands to tell the Church which has power to bind and
loose, that is, the Elders. When the Disciples and two Apostles cannot
determine the question about circumcision, and the Church of Antioch cannot
determine it, the practice of the Apostles was to refer the decision to
Apostles and Elders, Act. 15. 2. 6. 22. Act. 16. 4. This doctrine says the
contrary, when matters cannot be determined by Elders and Minister, the matter
is to be referred to the company of private believers, as to the Principal and
sole supreme Church builded on the rock, which only properly and principally
and essentially has the keys. And this is contrary to Apostolic order.

CHAP. IV.
Quest. 4.
Whether or no our brethren prove strongly, that the Church of believers is the
first Church, having supreme jurisdiction above the Eldership.
MAster Parker of good memory, to prove that the Church of believers is above
and superior to the ministerial Church of Bishops or Eldership, Parker de
po^it. eccle. l. 3. c. 12 ^ecret. regn ju^^s 35. pa^s in toto contine^u^: minus
in majore. Gerson.
1. Reasons thus. The member and the part is inferior in authority to the
body, and the whole. But guides are members of the Church of believers:
Therefore guides are inferior to the Church of believers: So says the law,
The part is contained in the whole. Aenea^ Sylvius.
So Gerson, and the fathers of Basil, as Aeneas Silvius cited by Morton,
Morton. Apol. part. 2. l. 4. c. 12.
prove the Pope to be inferior to a General Council, and that he must be
judged by them. Answ. We deny not, but the guides as guides are inferior to
believers, inferior in Christian dignity and eminency, and this in as far as
the guides are believers; for one believer is inferior to ten believers,
because a part of a Church of believers is inferior to the whole: but hence is
not proved, that the guides every way that are in authority and jurisdiction
are inferior to believers. The eye as a part is inferior to the whole body,
but as endued with the excellent faculty of seeing is not inferior to the
whole body. 2. Rulers as Rulers are not parts, nor members of a Congregation
consisting only of believers, for in so far as they are Rulers, they are
members of a Presbyteriall Church, and so they are inferior in dignity and
authority to the whole. The Pope is a part and a base part of the ministerial
Church, but it follows not hence, that the body or community of believers
may censure him: neither may every whole, or every body exercise jurisdiction
over the members: for then every family of believers might excommunicate the
master of the family, ten believers might excommunicate five. Every body that
has authority, and is a free incorporation within it self may censure every
member, but as a company of believers cannot ordain, so neither can they
depose or excommunicate a Minister.

Secondly, Parker 16. arg. de polit.
Parker reasons thus. Every mean is inferior to the end, 2 Argument.
but Church guides are means ordained of Christ for the Church of believers,
and the gathering of the Saints as Gods intended end. Therefore Church guides
are inferior to the Church of believers, and subject thereunto. So Paul 1 Cor.
11. proves the woman to be subject to the man, because the woman is for the
man. Answ. From this is only concluded, that Rulers are inferior in dignity
to the believers, which is neither questioned nor denied by us: but it is not
hence proved, that believers have majoritie of jurisdiction above the
overseers, or that overseers borrow the power of the keys from the believers
as from the first subject. The woman is inferior in dignity to the man, and
the man more excellent, but the man (suppose he be the end) has not a
jurisdiction or Lordly power over the woman. Christ the mediator is for the
Churches salvation as for the end, it follows not that the Church has a
jurisdiction over Christ. The good Angels are ministering spirits for the good
of the heirs of salvation, Heb. 1. 14. It follows not by good Logic, that
the heirs of salvation have power of jurisdiction over the good Angels.

Thirdly, ^ Argument.
Parker reasons thus from the dignity of the Church. Parker.
If the Church be a Mistress, Spouse, and Mother, then her guides must be
subject to her, Bergens Apol. part. 2. l. 4. c. 14.
as servants and sons. So Bergensis in the council of Basil, So Whittaker,
proves the Pope to be subject to the Church as his Mother. Answe. The Church
of sole believers is not the Spouse and mother of the Church guides, but the
ministerial Church of Pastors and elders is Queen Mother, that begets the
sons of Zion to God, and so all the authoritative power that the mother has
it is from the Fathers and Pastors, Gal. 4. 19.
that beget children to God; Other ways one private Christian that is a means
of begeating a pastor to the faith of Christ has power of jurisdiction over
the Pastor, which no wise man will aver, when Divines subject the Pope to a
general Council, they make him with good reason inferior to a ministerial
Church.

Fourthly, Parker reasons thus. If Christ communicate a greater measure and a
more immediate presence of his spirit to the Church of believers, Whittaker.
than to the overseers. Then the most supreme power of jurisdiction is given to
the believers, and not to the overseers. So Whittaker, where there is m^joritie
of power, there is majoritie of assistance of the Holy Spirit ruling the
Church; many eyes see more than one. (I will be with you to the end of the
world) is promised to the Church. So our Divines reason against the Pope.
Greater is the Temple than the gold that sanctifies the Temple, the altar than
the sacrifice. The faithful cannot fall away, the guides, except they be
believers may fall away, neither is there a promise of salvation, remission of
sins made to the guides, which is made to the Church of believers. Ans. If
the ways of Christ's presence with the believer, and with the overseers were
one and the same, the argument would say some thing, but they are of diverse
kinds. Therefore I deny this (Where Christ is more immediately present, there
is the more supreme power of the keys, or there is the power of the keys more
principally) for it is a caption a non causa: for Christ's presence by faith is
not the cause of the power of the keys Saving grace is not the cause why God
gives common gifts; for then a holier pastor should be more essentially a
Pastor. Baptism administrat, by him should be more essentially baptism, then
the baptism administered by a less holy or a profane pastor, this is the
error of the Donatists to hang the worthiness of Gods ordinances upon the
worthiness of the instruments, one baptism is not more essentially baptism
than another: Whatever be the goodness or badnesse of the Minister, the power
of the keys essentially is one and the same in all. God does more assist and
more abundantly bless one man's ministry than another, but the difference
there is in the effects and manner of working, not in the essence and nature of
the keys, as we say a man of thirty years is more and greater of stature and
a bigger man than a child of four years old, but a man of thirty years is not
more essentially a reasonable creature than a child of four years old, for
the nature of man is alike essentially in both. The goodness of God and his
good pleasure is the cause why God gives the power of the keys to some
persons and not to othersome, the grace and holiness of a man is not the
cause. It is dangerous to aver that the power of the keys is more or less
in persons, according as they are more or less sanctified and graced of God,
for then Mary Magdalene has more power of the keys, and has more
ecclesiastic authority than Judas, or any unbelieving Pastor duly called of
Christ, and his Church. And therefore it is a sickly consequence to reason from
the excellency of the promises of grace and the measure of holiness to the
power of the keys, or the measure of the power of the keys. Our Divines
reason well from a greater majoritie of grace and light pastoral, or of gifts
pastoral or ecclesiastic to infer the majoritie of power of jurisdiction,
and of this speaks Whittaker and our Divines, There is a greater measure of
the Spirit of prophecy and of grace ministerial, promised to the whole
representative Church of Christ, convened in a Council Occumenick, than to one
man, the Pope, or to a Prophet, and they give, but do not grant that the Pope
is a Prophet, when they hold him to be a thief or a robber. Hence they prove
well the Pope to be inferior in power of jurisdiction to a general council
of Pastors and Elders. 2. It is utterly false that they say, where there is
more stabilitie of grace and holiness, there is more authority and
ecclesiastical power, When both the subjects are not capable of ecclesiastic
power, now the subjects are so here, the Eldership is a subject capable of the
keys, but the community of believers that are private Christians, and no
more, are not capable of this power, and they beg the question who reason with
us in this argument. It is soul reasoning to say, the snow is whiter than a
Raven, because there is more of cold qualities elementarie in the snow, nor in
the Raven because the Raven is not white at all. Ariste top. 1. l. 8*
Aristotle taught us long since at the Schools that the comparative degree
could not be ascribed to the subjects of whom the positive degree is denied.
Because a Raven is not white, it is vanity to prove that snow is whiter than a
Raven. Believers are not capable of the keys remaining only believers, except
God freely call them to the Ministerial state. Believers (I grant) have
authority of grace to be Kings and Priests to God (for grace has with it
heavenly Majesty and authority) but they have not authority official, or
power ecclesiastic, they want both power of order and jurisdiction, except
they be called Pastors and Elders, but then they are believers and somewhat
more. But if they want power of jurisdiction, their power as members of the
congregation is christian, popular, private, not authoritative, not a power of
the keys. Grace true and saving adds a fair luster to the power of the
keys, and does graciously qualify and adorn that power, but where there is no
power of the keys in simple believers it cannot adorn it: to please and
embrouder a wicked man is not Christ. What is the power of believers shall be
declared hereafter, if God permit.

4. Parker disputes thus. 4. Argument.
The Church-guides must be subject to the censures of the Church of believers,
Parker ib. arg. 9. Col. 4. 17.
whereof they are members, The Colossians must say to Archippus, Ambr. Quid
honor (...) qua u^ imperator ecclesiae filius (...)
take heed to the ministry that thou have received of the Lord. So Ambrose
thinks it the rulers, even the Emperors honor to be subject to the Church.
Nazian. calls the Emperor himself a sheep of the flock, and subject to
the tribunal, as Bellarmine grants, Decret. p. 2. c. 25 Q. 8. Can. Nazian.
orat. ad Bellarm. de pontif. Romans l. 3. c. 14.
and that (tell the Church) binds Peter, and the highest ruler. So Barrow,
Every member is bound to the edification, service, and utilitie of the whole
body commanded to reprove his brother, to bind their sins by the word of God,
even their Princes with chains, Barrow discover of the false Church p. 166.
to admonish Archippus, yea, though an Apostle or Angel preached an other
Gospel to pronounce him accursed, Answ. That the Prelate should be above the
Church, and exempted from the laws and censures of the Church, whereof he is a
Prelate, is most unjust, and this worthy Parker proves unanswerably. Emperors
being pastors are under the laws of Jesus Christ the highest lawgiver, and so
Ambrose and Nazianzen say well. But hence is not proved, because the
Collossians are as private Christians to admonish or rubuke their pastor
Archippus. Therefore the body of believers have the power of the keys to
depose and excommunicate, and consequently to ordain and lay hands on
pastors, 1 Timothy 5. 22.
which is commanded and commended only to such as to Timothy and Titus, Tit. 1.
5.
and in them to the Elders and Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4. 14.
and that (tell the Church) does bind Peter and oblige all Pastors and Rulers,
to be liable to the laws and censures of the Church, but by the word Church is
not meaned the Church of believers; but the Eldership of all incorporations
ecclesiastic, respective of congregations, presbyteries and Synods, as God
willing I shall make good.

3. Barrowes Scriptures are most corruptly wrested, for Joseph a prince did
bind in fetters the Senators of Egypt, therefore a private believer has the
keys of the Kingdom of heaven to shut and open. What reason is there here? An
Apostle or Angel preaching another Gospel is accursed, it follows not.
Therefore a private believer, suppone a woman who is no less than a man, bound
to the edification service and utilitie of the whole body, is to excommunicate
an Apostle, or an Angel who shall preach an other Gospel. The keys shall be
too common, if all private Christians may put to their hand, and use them,
because they are to teach, admonish, rebuke, comfort, and edify one another in
a private and popular way: any may see, it is one thing for one member of the
body to help one another by exhorting and rebuking (which is a work of common
charity) and for pastors publicly as the ambassadors of Christ Jesus, to use
the keys by public preaching of the Gospel (which is a work of his
pastoral charge) yea these two differ as an act of obedience to the law of
nature and common charity, and an act of obedience to a divine positive law.

5. Parker reasons thus. Coactive jurisdiction as excommunication, 5 Object,
is a mean of edification, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the
Lord, 1 Corinthians 5. 4. Now the souls of guides (Parker says the souls of
Prelates) shall be in a wors^ case, than the souls of the flock, if they be
not subject to a particular Church, as Corinth: for they want that mean of
edification which others have. Some say Synods are to take order with pasto^rs,
and not the Church of Believers; But Papists answer, The Bishop is to be judged
by the Archbishop or Patriarch, if they shall scandalously sin, then they are
to be left to the Pope, and the General Council, which cannot be had. Answer.
I deny not but every pastor is subject in some things to the Eldership of the
congregation, where he is, and if he were not liable to laws or censure, he
were a pope, but in the matter that deserves deprivation he is only to be
censured by the Presbytery and Synods, ^uriscon ejusdem est dignitatem
confer cujus est aufer^e. and contra.
for a number of believers, nay a number of Ruling Elders cannot deprive him,
because they cannot ordain a pastor: for the law says well, It is one power
of the keys to ordain and to exauthorate and deprive: But no word of God will
warrant a number of believers to censure ecclesiastically their pastor, not
because he is their pastor and they his flock (for so the Eldership of his
own congregation might not ecclesiastically censure him, which I judge to be
false) but because the Church of sole believers has not the power of the
keys, and they have not power to censure any other believer, except in a
private way, as fellow members of that same body: but in a constitute. Church,
a College of pastors and Elders only has power to deprive or excommunicate a
pastor, and there remains CHRIST'S way of edification, that he be in this
case censured by Synods. But ye will say, this is the Papists answer. I
answer, it is not, for they will have the pastor censured by the Prelate, the
Prelate by the Arch-Prelate, which we deny as Antichristian, for all are to be
by the Church. But Synods may err. Then appe^le to a greater Synod, for united
force is stronger. But they also (you will say) may errr^, I answer, and the
Congregation of sole believers is not free from error, but this doctrine of our
brethren shall resolve all government in the hands of the people, as in the
highest and most sovereign ju^icature, which is to make all Pastors, all
oversee^^, all Judges.

6. Parker reasons from the necessary defense of the Church. Object* 6.
Every particular Church is an Army, Keckerman polit. l. 2. c. 28.
a Ship, a body, 1 Cor. 12. Therefore when they are near danger, they have
power to take order with a drunken Pilot, Hottomanm de jure reg^i (...) l. 1.
c* 12.
and put him from the rud^er, and to take order with a tyrann^u^ Capt^ine, and
to purge out the filth and excrements of the body. So politicians, as
Keckerman, Hottomanus say a wicked Magistrate is to be deposed, if no other
remedy can be found, Gerson de pa^ Cons. 12.
So Gerson. Answ. It is one thing what a multitude may do in a desperate case
of necessity, when overseers will not by their authority remove a wolf and a
false teacher, extremis morbis extrema remedia; Hard diseases and desperate
have need of desperate cures. But it is an other case when in a constitute
Church, there is a government of Christ established, for there are two things
to be considered here. 1. A popular, but withal a private substraction and
separation from the Ministry of a known Wolf and seducer, and this the Law
of nature will warrant, Saravia lacet tutela inculpata (...), si malus (...) ab
ecclesia depon^ nequ^
than licet tutela inculpata uti as Parker says from Saravia. So the son may
save himself by a just defense in ^leeing from his mad father, or his
distracted friend coming to kill him. Now this defense is not an authoritative
act, nor act judicial of authority, but an act natural that is common to any
private person, yea to all without the true Church as well as within to take
that care in extreme necessity, for the safety of their souls, that they would
do for the safety of their bodies. 2. The question is whether the community
of believers may do this, that is, whether they by the power of the keys
given them by Jesus Christ may deprive and excommunicate the Pastor, because
the Law of Nature in some cases may warrant a private separation from a corrupt
ministry. 3. The case is not a like here as in a free Commonwealth, for a
free Commonwealth contains, Ordines regni, the estates that have
nomotheticke power, Iunius Brutus q. 3.
and they not only by the Law of Nature may use justa tutela, Bucherius l* 1.
16 Althus. polit. c. 15.
a necessary defense of their life's from a Tyrants fury, but also by the Law of
Nations may authoritatively repress and limite him as is proved by Iunius
Brutus, Bucherius, H^nonius polit. disp. 2. 11. ^,
Althusius, H^nonius. Therefore Henning, Amisaeus, do well distinguish between
plebem and (...) populum, Isiodor l. 9.
for indeed the multitude excluding the States, Orig. cont. Cells. c. 9.
or the base of the people can hardly have an other Law against a Tyrant,
Aristo. polit. l. 1^ c. 3.
then the Law of Nature, Plato de repub. c. 8.
but the Commonwealth including the estates of a free kingdom, has an
authoritative. Livius l. 24. natu^am multitudinis fi^it.
So Isiodor, Origin, Aristotle, Plato, Tit. Livius, Plutarch, and that of the
Council of Basil, Plutarch in Aegid. in princ. Aenea^ Silvius de Gest. council.
Plus valet regnum, quam rex, the Kingdom is more worth than the King, (as
Silvius cites,) is approved by all: but the multitude of sole believers, have
not the keys at all and therefore they can do no other thing, Basilens. l. 1.
but use a necessary defense of their souls. Gerson consid. 4 ver^t. 12.
And what Keckerman and Hottoman says is not against us. Also Gerson in name
of the Parisians, going to the Council of Pisan, says a Council may be
gathered without the Pope (without the guides) of the Church) two ways,
Charitative, when Charity reigns. 2. Authoritative, when the case of the
Churches ruin requires that a Council should be, and if the Pope (and
Pastors) refuse to convene; and the necessary defense of souls is the like
here.

7. No power is given to Pastors absolutely, Arg. 7.
but to edification, and so upon condition, (...).
and therefore if the condition cease, the power cease: But say ye, It
cease; What then? it follows not they should be deprived, by the Church,
but by the Synod: yea, but you will say, it follows, for the power is not
given for the edification of the Synod, and not for their destruction, but for
the edification of the Church, and this destroys the Church. Also Synods
cannot always be had.

Answ. If the power be abused wholly, it cease and the Pastor before God, in
foro interno, has losed his power; If it be abused in one or two acts, it is
not losed, else a King doing against judgment and justice, and a Pastor doing
against piety should leave off to be a King, and Pastor; which is hard to
affirm. 2. The power authoritative, is given by the Presbytery for the
edification of the Church principally, and for the edifying of Synods and
Elderships, Secondarily, but hence it follows not that this power should be
taken away by the Church of sole believers. Object. Synods (says he) cannot
be had ordinarily. Answ. So neither public preaching at some times; It
follows not therefore that public preaching is not a mean of edifying,
because through accident, and iniquity of time the public preaching cannot be
had.

8 Parker reasons from the stability of the Church. 8. ^^g.
Where there is more stabilitie, there is more authority, as our Divines
reason, proving the Pope to be inferior to the Council. 1. A Church cannot be
gathered in the name of Christ, but there is the power of Christ, 1 Cor. 5. 4.
Matthew. 18. But a Church may be, Saravia.
and was constitute at first, says Saravia, without El^ers and Pastors. 2. The
Church has ecclesiasticke au^hority, when the overseers are absent, as in the
reformed Churches, or when by heresy they lose their authority, the authority
of the overseers, depends on the Church, Morton.
but the authority of the Church depends not on the overseers. 3. When the
Pastor is dead, the Church keeps still her authority, Bellarmine.
when the Pope is (says Bellarmine) the keys remain in the Christ's hands,
and he gives them to the next Pope: Behold fleeing keys (says Morton.) Ans.
A ministerial Church is never gathered in Christ's name, while there be a
ministry, unless you would say, Peter is a man before he be a reasonable
creature which is a contradiction, some few believers may meet together, but
they cannot preach, baptize, censure, while Christ's power of the keys be
given them, except by an extraordinary power from I. C. 2. What if a Church of
believers be by order of nature, before there be overseers? Yet have they not
the keys while CHRIST call some of their number out to give them the Keys,
for there was no power of the Keys of the New Testament, while Christ gave it
to John Baptist, and called the twelve Disciples; else their calling to be
Apostles should not be a conferring on them the Keys, which is false: for
when, Matthew. 10. 1, 5. they are sent out with power to preach, he gave them the
Keys, and yet they were a Church of Disciples before, and first called to
faith, and then to the Keys, and to the Apostleship. 2. The Church of
believers have no authority Ecclesiastical, nor power of the Keys, if all the
Pastors on earth were removed from the Church by Death, and in that case the
Keys should indeed be only in Christs-hand, and the case being extraordinary,
Christ behoved extraordinarily, to supply the want of ordination, which
Timothy, Titus, and other Elders does ordinarily give, for the Church of
believers could not give that which they have not, and yet Bellarmines Keys
are ^leeing Keys, for he has no cause to say, when the Pope dies; The Keys
flee to Heaven, for there are living many thousand Pastors and Elders who have
the Keys suppone the Pope died, and never lived again.

10. Parker reasons thus, (...)
If Peter stand up, Acts 2. in sign of reverence (as standing is in Scripture,
Numbers. 16. 9. 1. ^hro. 19. 11. Ezec. 44. 11. John 3. 29.) before the
multitude of believers, then he acknowledged their authority above his; But
Peter did the former, Acts 2. Answ. This argument concludes not the power of
the Keys to be in the multitude: There is Authority of grace in a multitude
professing the Truth but not power of the Keys, and certainly we deny not
simply, but believers are far above all overseers. But the question now is of
superiority and honor of jurisdiction.

11. If nothing must be done in a Church without the common consent of
believers, Object. 11.
then believers have jurisdiction above their overseers; The Brethren of the
separation petition ^ to K James positi^ 5. page 47.
but the former is true. Act 15. Act. 1. I may add what these of the
Separation say. The faithful had knowledge and consent in elections, Act. 1.
15, 23, 26. Act. 6. 2, 3, 5. and 14, 23. and 15. 23 25. For hearing and
deciding Ecclesiastical controversies, Act. 11. 2, 18. and 15. 2, 22. and 21.
18. 22. for writing general letters. Act. 15. 25. for sending some to build
other Churches, Act. 11. 22. for sending the benevolence of Brethren to other
Churches, 1 Cor. 16. 3. and 2 Cor. 8. 19. for excommunication, 1 Cor. 5. Mat.
18. Ans. If this be a good Argument, All public Church business is to be done
by knowledge and consent of believers, and cannot be done by their overseers
done. Therefore the faithful have jurisdiction over the overseers.

Answ. We will borrow the Argument (and give it back again) for us; no public
business is to be done without the knowledge and consent of Eldership. Beza
Confess. Q. 43.
Ergo, The Eldership has the jurisdiction. 2. That all be done by their
consent, Neque enim ijs assen^ior qui non nisi ex totius Ecclesiae consensu and
rogati^ singulu quemqu^ excommunicari volunt.
I grant, but with these distinctions, 1. Their quiet and tacit consent, for
there is not required an express consent by word of mouth of all the multitude
(as of women) speaking in the Church, for they should give reasons of their
consent, if an express consent be required. 2 Consent of manyest, not all, else
the Churches deed should bind none absent. 3. A consent popular, not judicial,
else they are all made Judges. 4. Their privity is thought a consent; how could
six thousand that our Brethren make an independent Church in the Apostles time
all speak. 2. All judge in Excommunication. 3* All reason, dispute, propone,
answer, as Judges must do; here grave Beza, our Divines Calvine, Bucer,
Bullinger, Melancton, Beza, Bucan, Pareus, Rivetus, Sibrandus, Junius,
Treleatius, the fathers Cyprian, Jerome, Augustine, Nazianzen, Chrysostom,
Ambrose, Theodoret, Theophylact require all to be done, consentiente plebe. But
my Brethren, what if there be a discord, and believers deny consent. In a
matter of Excommunication Zepperus, Pareus Vrsin, quest Catech 85. art 3. page
47^. Si videant sequi maiora mala multos inter se dissentire, scindi Ecc^esiam,
non debent procedere*
Zanchius, Beza, Bucanus, Pareus think the Eldership should not excommunicate.
2. But what if the contagion of the not excommunicated leaven the whole lump? I
see not how believers have a negative consent. 3. If the matter be a point of
necessary truth to be determined, and the Pastors and Elders in the Lord and
from his Word command it as a necessary truth to be obeyed, but the Believers
consent not, I ask whither or not that which Watchmen command from Gods Word
and authoritatively and judicially in his name, ought not to stand as an
obliging Mandat and Canon, even when the Believers gainsay? Our Brethren say,
the Mandat tyeth and obliges materially and in it self, but not
ecclesiastically, because believers do not consent, it has not the force of a
Canon, seeing they have the keys. Ans. But this Canon (Arrianisme is Heresy)
we suppose is all one both materially and Ecclesiastically, according to that
(He that hears you, hears me) and so it tyeth being determined by Pastors
with others Synodically conveened. Shall it oblige the one way Ecclesiastically
being preached, and not the other way being Synodically determined, because the
people consents not? Certainly if power of preaching be a power of the keys,
all that are silent to that which is preached give a consent to what is
preached, for silence at the hearing of a vow, when it is lawful to speak is
a consent, Numb. 30. ver. 14. Now it is lawful to any member of the
Congregation, to speak against what is unfound in Doctrine publicly
delivered, so it be spoken timously: Hence it must follow that what tyeth and
obliges as an act of the keys in preaching, tyeth also when determined by the
Eldership, suppose all the Congregation do not judge and determine judicially:
I may say that by our Bretherens grounds, preaching is a public Ecclesiastic
act of the keys, and of the whole Church, for the Church preaches by her
Pastor, as by her mouth and servant receiving authority, and the keys to
preach from the Church. Therefore all must give their consent to what is
preached, else it is not the Word of God or to be judged and reputed to tie us
to faith and obedience, no less then public acts of the Church, and this were
strange, to say, the word preaching is not the word obliging ecclesiastically,
except all believers women and children confirm it by their consent and
suffrages judicial.

12. Parker reasons thus. 1^. Argument.
If Peter render an account to the particular Church of believers at Jerusalem,
Parker 16.
of his eating with the uncircumcised, Gratian. Decr. part. 2. c. ^. q. 7. c. 4.
and of what may be judged scandalous, Gerson de auss^rib. pa. cons. 1^.
then the judicial power of censuring Church-guides is in the hands of the
people; Best Churches plea, p 22. ^8.
But this Peter the Apostle did Act. 11. not (as Gratian says) ut doctor
mansuetudinis, but, Council. Basil^^ns.
as ^erus says, ex officio. And as Gerson says, Doctor Paris^^e polit.
Eccles. p. 13.
non ex humili condescensione, sed ex debito and obligatione, Jac. Almain. de
authorit. Eccl c 7.
not of Humility, but of duty. So reasons Best also. So Almain says, Pope
Nicolas said to Lotharins, except he would abstain from the company of his
excommunicated whore, he would complain to the Church, Occam. Dialog. l 6.
part 1 c. 60.
he said not, he would take order with him himself, as being above a Council.
Papa de nec^ssitate (...) tenetur se purgare si grave scandalum oriatur apud
Catholicos, probatur 8* ra^.
When Symmachus the Pope contended with some, he gathered a Council, and they
judged the matter: If two Popes contend for a Popedom (says Almaine) a
general Council is to determine.

Answ. The Major is not true, Peter is to purge himself before any one brother
offended of a scandal, and far more before the Church: Yea, the necessity of
his salvation, and so the law of nature forbidding to offend the weak, wills
him to purge himself, if he were a Pope (says Occam) now one offended brother
is not a church, and so the Superiority of jurisdiction in believers is not
hence concluded. 2. He purged himself before the Apostles and Brethren, ver 1
and not before the Brethren only. 3. If he had done wrong, he was obliged to
confess his scandal before one offended believer, and also before all the
Church, but that prooveth not jurisdiction in the believers.

13. Paul rebukes Peter before the Church of Antioch, Object. 13.
ergo. That Church of Antioch might judge Peter.

Ans. The same answer suffices* 2. It is not proved that in the presence of
Believers only Paul did rebuke him from this Text.

14. Christ immediately and without the mediation of the Church ( says Parker)
communicates himself to believers, Object. 14.
ergo, he communicates his power also immediately to his Church.

Ans. It follows not, because he communicates not his power of the keys to
the Church of believers, either mediately or immediately, because he gives it
not to them at all.

CHAP. V.
Q. Whether or no some do warrantably teach, that the power of the Keys is
essentially and originally in the Church of Believers, and in the Church-guides
only at the second hand, and in the by, quoad exer^itium, so as the Church of
Believers should be the mistress delegating the keys by an imbred and kindly
authority, and the Church-guides as her proper servants and delegats do borrow
the use and exercise of the keys from the foresaid Church of Believers?
THe tenent of these, with whom we now dispute is that all the power of the
keys is given by Christ to the multitude of Believers, as to the first
fountain, and that this power is derived and gested by the mulmultitude of
believers to such and such persons to be used and exercised by them, as the
servants both of Christ and the Church: For the clearing of the question and
trying if this distinction be law-biding. These distinctions are to be observed.

1. The power of the keys may be thought to come to the Ministers of the
Church three ways, as shall be cleared, 1. By mediate derivation, the Church
receiving this power from Christ, and deriving it over to the friends of the
Bridegroom. 2. By immediate donation, God immediately gives the honor of the
keys to these whom he makes his Courtyers in this kind. 3. By application,
the Church only naming the men to the office. 2. The power of the keys, and
all sacred offices in Gods House, are from the immediate wisdom of Christ; The
designation of such men to such offices is by the ministry of the Church. 3.
The power of the keys is one thing, the lawful exercise of the keys is
another thing. 4. The Ministers may be thought the servants either of the
Church, or servants of Christ for the Church. 5. Designation of men by the
Church to sacred offices may be thought either in the Churches free will, or
tied to the laws designed by Christ. 6. The Church of believers may be thought
either the virtuall or the formal subject of the keys. 7. The power of the
keys may be thought to be given to the community or multitude of Believers or
professors of faith in Christ, in the general, not designing one man rather
then another, but leaving that to the disposition of means, and disposition of
second causes, who shall be the man, as to be a Musician, to be an Astronomer
is given to mankind as some way proper to man, Porphyr. Isag. c. de Proprio.
as Porphyre says, howbeit all and every one of mankind, be not always
Musicians and Astronomers.
It is thought by our Brethren, that the Church of believers is the first seat,
the prime subject, and head fountain under Jesus Christ, to whom the keys are
given, and that howbeit all offices and officers be only of Christ's
institution, yet the Church of believers do as the Spouse and Mistress, and
bride of Christ communicate the lawful exercise of some acts of the keys, as
to preach, administer the Sacraments, oversee the conversation of the flock,
care for the poor to some certain men, as her deputies and servants with
borrowed authority from her self, as the Wellhead and prime fountain under
Christ of all the authority and use of the keys that is in the officers of the
House, Facultas Paris. de polit. Eccle^. page 1 2 an 16^2
as Pastors, Vulgar est atque indul^tatum ^ides axioma Deum and naturam, prius
atque immediatius ad totum suppositum, quam ad aliquam partem supposits,
quamvis nobilissimam intendere, eamque ob causam fecultatem vi le^di. e. g.
to^t d^tamesse homini, ut per ^^ulum ta^quam per organ^^ and ^^^^sirum hominis
exercer^u^, ^amoculus per and propter homin^^ ^xi^^it Schola Pa^i siensi^ hoc
infallibili (...) firmamento, congruenter ad mentem om^iu^ ora^quorum d^ctorum
Ecclesiae perp^tuo, constanter^ docuit, Christum fundando Ecclesiam prius,
immediatius atque essentials u^ claves se^^^tsdictionem toti dedisse Ecclesiae
quam Petro, ut per unum ministeri ^liter exercerentur and page 2. probant per
textum, 1 Cor. 3. Omnia vestra sunt. Vide 16 page 3, 4. page 7. page 19 and
express page 6. Potestas essentiali^er Ecclesiae collata est, gubernatoribus
quoad exercitium, Parisie page 3^. Aug ad Matt 1^, 7 Chrysostom. de sacerdot. l.
3. Tertul Apol c 35, 3^ Madonatus Su^^u^a q. w. art. ^ Ferus in Mat. 6
^ansenius ib and Mat. ^8 Sutlu^ius de Pontif R l. 4. c 8 W^itak. To^ 2 contr.
5. q 2.
Doctors and Elders, the Church still keeping in her own hands authority and
power of the keys in most material acts of the power of the keys, as by
these keys to ordain and elect all the officers, and in case of aberration or
failing to censure, depose, excommunicate them, and all members of the visible
Church, and that independently, and without any subordination to Presbyteries,
Classes and Synods; even as the kingly power of actual government is in the
Kings hand, and he appoints deputies and servants under himself, and in his
name and authority, to do and execute his will, according to the Laws of the
Kingdom, so does the Church of believers under Christ by an imbred authority
and power received from Christ, send out Pastors, Doctors, and Elders in her
name and authority to exercise certain ministerial acts, yet so as the Church
of believers in all the acts performed by the officers, remains the
principal and prime agent, cause and actor under Christ, and the officers only
her servants, deputies and instruments, performing all by authority borrowed
from her the bride, Queen and Spouse of Christ: This they believe to be
contained in the Scriptures, and taught by Fathers and Doctors of the Church. I
deny not but by the faculty of Paris, this question was agitated in the
Council of Basil and Constance, to bring the Pope as a son and servant under
the power of a General Council. The Sorbonists and Doctors of Paris, that are
not near the smoke of the Popes glory, for this, contend with the Jesuits,
men that are sworn bellies to the world and the Pope. The Parisians cite the
Council of Carthage, where Augustine was present: And Augustine, and
Tertullian, and Chrysostom seem to favor this. So Maldonate, Ferus,
Jansenius, Sutluvius, Whittaker, Morton, Spalato, Gerson, Almain, Petr. de
Alliac. Also Edmundus Richerius, and Sim. Vegorius set out a book of Church
policy, depressing the Pope, and extolling the Church power as full and
complete without a ministerial head, M^rton apolog. p. ^lib 4 c 1^ M. Anto^tus
de Dom. Arch^epis. Spalat^ns. de rep^ Eccl l. 5 c. c. 12. n. 1, 2, 3, 4 lib. 6
c 2 c. n 28, 29.
as their own Parisian Doctors acknowledging the command of having a Pope to
be affirmative, and not to bind always, and that the Churches power remains
full when the Pope is dead, as the Parisians say, p. 8. The book came out
without the name of an Author, and was condemned by Cardinal Peronius,
Archbishop of Senona, Gerson de ^userib. pap and de potest Ecc. 3 4, 5 Almain
de author Eccl. c 7. Petr. de Alliac. de Eccl anthorit. par: cap. 1.
and Primate of France and Germany, and is refuted by Andreas Duvallius a
Sorbonist. What our Divines say in this, I have exponed to be far otherwise
then is the mind of Parker, Simon Vigerius de Eccl^s. and polit. potest. Act.
M. Jacob, M. Best, and the Authors of presbyteriall government examined, Ann.
1641.

Hence our first conclusion is: Mart against Vigerius.
All offices and office-bearers in Gods house have their warrant immediately
from Christ Jesus, Duvallius 22. to 2. (...) 4 part. 1. contr. Vigor. Parker de
Polit. Eccl l. 3 c 8.
as we all agree against the bastard prelacy. 1. because of the perfection and
plenitude of Scripture. 2 because of our Lawgiver Christ's wisdom, H^n^ ac
Goverina, p. 6. 8.
and his seven Spirits that are before the Throne, Best* against Pag^^*
Presbyter govern. examine^, ^n 16^ 1
seeing he sees better then men. 3. because of the Scriptures. Ephesians. 4. 11.
Romans 12. 7, 8, 9. w 1 Cor. 12. 26, 27, 28, 29. 1 Timothy 3. Act. 20. ^8. And
therefore Presbyters and Deacons have their offices immediately from Christ,
and not from the Prelates

11. Conclusion. The first subject of the keys is either made quate or
narrower, as one Pastor and some ruling Elders of a Congregation: And these
have not the power of all the keys, as of ordination of Pastors, and so of
deposition; seeing in the Apostolic Church there were always a number of
Pastors at the ordination of Pastors, only they may perform some acts of
discipline that concerns that flock. The adequate and proper subject of full
power of the keys is the presbytery of Pastors and Elders, as we shall prove
hereafter.

3. Conclusion. The power of the keys indirectly comes from the Church of
believers to some select officers, I say (indirectly) not directly, because
howbeit believers by no innate and intrinsicall power of jurisdiction in them,
do ordain officers; yet they are to give a popular consent to the election of
their officers, as the word of God, all the ^athers and our Divines teach
against Papists and Prelates, who take away this power from the people of God.
Now by this popular election men are put in that state, whereby they may be and
are ordained office-bearers by the laying on of the hands of the Elders. And
this our brethrens arguments prove and no more. Hence the power of the keys
comes to the officers three ways, whereof we deny one. 1. As if the Church
of believers received the keys first from Christ, then by authority from
Christ did give over the use of them in some acts to the officers, and did
appoint them her servants. That this is not according to the Scriptures of God,
I hope by gods grace to prove. 2. The power of the keys and all power of
jurisdiction and order is first in Christ, then immediately communicated to the
Apostles and their successors in them, and here the offices and power is of
Christ Jesus only. Almain de Dom. nature and civil. and Eccl Council. 2 par. 1
M. Ant^n. de Dom. Archie Spala de rep. Eccl. l. 5. c. 3. n 11.
3. As the application of the man to the office, and the office to the man is
twofold; one by popular election, such a man pleased the multitude, Act. 1.
Act. 6. Another by authoritative ordination or imposition of hands to an office
in Gods house, which they would have by a multitude of believers, having no
ministerial function; but is not in the Apostolic Church of the New
Testament, that ever we can read. We find out ordination by the presbytery, 1 Timothy 4. 14.

4. Conclusion. The essence and definition of a Church does not ex aequo,
equally, and alike agree to the Church of believers and Ministers, or
office-bearers, or to a company of a visible Church, made up of these two
parts, believers and officers, as our brethren speak of their visible Church.
My reason is clear, Believers are essentially and properly the mystical body
of Christ, and the Church of redeemed ones, Ephesians. 5* 25. Act. 20. 28. And the
Church builded on a rock, which they say received the keys from Christ (which
I dare not say) but the Church of officers, that are only officers and no more,
that is called of God and his Church, and clothed with a calling to be Pastors
and Doctors, Elders, Deacons, are not the redeemed of God; but may often be,
and are reprobates, and not members of Christ's true body according to the
influence of saving grace, Now from this I infer, that believers and
office-bearers make not one common and true mystical body that has received
equally the keys from Christ, and that these predications are unproper and
figurative, and that literally and in rigor of the letter they are false. (Sion
brings good tidings (the Church gives suck and milk to her children) (the
Church begets a man child) because the Pastors of the Church do these
things: For there is no effective influence or causality coming from the
Church of believers in these and the like Pastoral actions, except that they
pray for these fruits of a Ministry, they choose the men for the work, but do
not ordain them: But we cannot say that the Church does formally preach and
beget children to God in and through preachers, as their servants, as a King
speaks such a business by his Legate and Ambassador; and our King does
govern and reign in Ireland by his Deputy: Here the Kings authority has
influence in the acts of his Deputy, and Legate: For where will Scripture bear
this (The believers at Colossee preach to the believers at Colossee by their
servant Archippus) (Philippians preach to Philippians by their servant
Epaphroditus) And (the Church exercises authority, and governs her self in
and through the servants sent by her self) And (the faithful Thessalonians
are over themselves in the Lord, and obey themselves in their servants, and
Ministers sent by themselves) how I say, will the holy Spirits style of
language make these in rigor true? but according to our brethrens tenants they
are most true. Childley against M. Edwards, p. 10, 11.
Katheren Childley against Edwards says, page 10, 11. When the hand launceth
the foot, it cannot be said properly the action of the hand alone, because the
hand is set on work by the body, if the body be destitute of the power, for
the motion of the body comes not from the hand, but the motion of the hand
from the body. So this Argument would say, The Pastor preaches as the mouth of
the Church, and preaching is an act of the whole Church performed by the Pastor
as their servant or mouth; And so the power of preaching must be first in the
Church, and not first in the Pastors, as motion is first in the body, and not
first in the hand.

Answ. The comparison holds not, The Pastor is Gods mouth, Jer. 15. 19. Luke
1. 70. But Pastors are not the mouth of the Church, and the motion is here from
Christ principally, from the Pastor as the mouth instrumentally, from the
Church objectively and finally, and the comparison of the body natural halteth
in this.

It may be objected, 2 Cor. 4. 5. We preach not our selves but Christ Jesus,
and our selves your servants for Christ's sake. Therefore Ministers are the
servants of the Church.

Answ. Ministers may be thought the Churches servants two ways, 1.
Subiectively, as if they had their authority from the Church, and were Pastors
of men, or from men. Vasquez 10 3. in (...) 3 dis. 40.
This is the questioned sense that we deny. Sunt servi quia laborant pro
Ecclesia, Heb. 1, 14.
2. finaliter, that is, they are servants not of the Church, but for the
Church, as Christ is called our servant, Mat. 20. 28. And the Angels our
ministering spirits; yet neither Christ nor the Angels have authority and a
Calling from us to their service. It is as if one would say, The Physician has
skill from the sick person; which is false, because God gave him skill for the
sick person, and not from the sick person.

5. Conclusion. We judge this distinction against Scripture and reason, that
the power of the keys essentially, fundamentally and originally is in the
Church of believers, and the exercise only, and some borrowed acts of the keys
should be in the officers.

1. Because we are not to distinguish where the Law does not distinguish, 1 Arg.
because this distinguishing is unknown to the Scripture, Reguta ^uris Non
distinguendi^ ubi Lex. non distingui^.
which never gives the keys to the believers. Parker de Pol. l. c. 8. n. 4.


2. The comparison which Parker fetches from the Parisians, 2. Arg.
holds not. Sight is in the eye, as the instrument, but it is principally and
originally from the whole man, for the whole man sees by the eye. The
authority of the Church is as the soul in the whole body (as Bridgesius says)
and in every member of the body: Bridges. l. 3. p ^32.
Howbeit it does not exercise the power in every member, but it sees by the
eye, and hears by the ear, so the power of the keys is in all, and every
one of the faithful, but it exercises some Acts ministerial, as preaching,
baptizing in the guides, and other are Acts in other members of the body, but
the power is in all.

But I answer, That this comparison halteth many ways.

1. The body is a physical, organicall matter capable of the soul, and a
kindly or natural house or shop for the soul to work in, and every member
may exercise some vital operation by the souls inacting of it, as hearing,
smelling, seeing, moving, growing, etc. But the Church consisting of believers
and Ministers, that are often opposed by way of contradiction, as believers and
non believers, and a believer that is no more but a believer, is not capable of
the power of the keys, it being gratia gratis data, a freely given gift of
God, except the Lord be pleased freely to give it by some Law or promise; And
so these that are only believers, are as the wooden leg, or the eye of glass
in the body wanting all authoritative power of the ministry where God has not
gifted and called them, now every member of the body is inacted by the soul.

2. If this comparison hold well, as every member of the body lives, and is
denominated a living thing (howbeit every member be not an eye, or an ear) by
the information of the soul: so every toe and finger lives by the inacting of
the soul, actu primo, and moves and grows actu secundo: so must every
believer in the body of Christ, Man and woman be actu primo, and essentially a
ministerial part and office-bearer having authority from Christ, and also actu
secundo, exercise some ministerial acts; for such as is the nature of the act,
such is the nature of the power, and such as is the power, such is the act. If
the power be ministerial, so is the act: If the act be not ministerial (as it
cannot be in these only that are believers, especially women and children) so
neither is the power.

3. The whole man sees by the eye, hears by the ear, 3. Arg.
but the believers see by their own eyes (as they must live by their own
faith) and not with the Pastors eyes, neither do they grow by that soul of
grace by which the Pastor grows.

3. The Believers must either be the virtuall, or the formal subject of the
keys, They are not the virtuall subject or cause, as flint is a cause of fire;
for our brethren say that the believers formally perform acts of the keys,
and that they rebuke, they excommunicate, they choose their officers, which is
an authoritative act of the keys, as they teach. Now a virtuall cause is not
formally the cause of the effect; as fire is the cause of fire, and does not
formally perform acts of the formal cause; food does not formally make motion
in the body, but only virtually. But they are forced to acknowledge that
believers are the formal subject of the keys: It is absurd that one should
essentially, and actu primo, have the power of the keys, and yet he may not
preach, nor baptize, that is, as if one had a reasonable soul, and yet could
neither discourse nor move, nor walk.

4. The power of the keys is either in the officers as officers, 4. Arg.
or only as believers; if as officers, then they cannot borrow the keys from
believers, seeing they have them as officers, suppose they be not believers,
and that is against the meaning of this distinction; if they have the power of
the keys only as believers, then all Ministers that are non-beleevers want
the keys.

5. Office-bearers have either a nearer and more ministerial power of the
keys then believers, 5. Arg.
or only that same ministerial power; if the former be said, the ministry is
but a naked act, that some exercise at the Churches direction sometimes, and no
habitual power whereby Paul is made a Minister, Col. 1. 25. and Epaphroditus
is denominated a faithful messenger, Phil. 2. 25. for so one shall not be a
Minister of Christ; but when he is in the act of his ministry, against
Scripture and reason. If office-bearers have only that same ministerial power
that believers have, Then Ministers cannot ordain others to be Ministers,
except they be believers, and a Minister shall not preach from an inward
principle, proper to a Minister; but from a principle common to him with other
believers, which makes no di^ference betwixt a believer and a Minister, but in
the naked acts; And this is all one, as to say a man does walk naked, and yet
he is void of life; he preaches, and has no other inward power ministerial,
then any believing woman or child has.

6. If the power of the keys be originally in the Church of Believers, 6. Arg.
and the exercise only in officers, then Pastors in rigor of speech are the
Churches servants, and so not over them in the Lord. 2. Pastors are sent by the
Church from the inherent and innate power of the Church, as if the Church had a
dominion and authority over the Pastors, hence will it follow that Pastors have
their authority from Believers, which is most absurd: For then if Believers
should receive the keys immediately from Christ to be communicated to others,
and applied to men fit and able therefore, this application is not a making of
a Minister, or a reason why Archippus is a Minister, as the reason why a fire
burns a dry tree, is not the application of the tree to the fire, but the
nature of the fire, and dryness of the timber: If one should bring out from
amongst ten glasses one, and hold it out to the Suns light and beams, this
refulgent beauty and glancing is not from the man that brings the glass
before the Sun, except occasionally, the glancing splendour is from the nature
of the glass, and the Suns light: And the man applies not the light of the
Sun to the glass, but brings out the glass to the light of the Sun: So
do Believers but apply the fit person in their wise election to Gods office,
and they apply not the office to the man, for it is presupposed they are tied
to the rules, 1 Timothy 3. requiring such a man, as is of good report, apt to
teach, etc. and the application is not in the free will of people or Pastors,
neither has God left it to Believers in general what men they place in
offices. So Spalato.

7. It cannot stand with Christ's wisdom, 7. Arg.
that he has conferred an excellent supernatural power of the keys that
reaches supernatural ends and effects, A^ton de Dom. Arc^iepise. Spalat. de
repub. Eccl. Eccl. l. 6* c. 2. n 23, 24.
and then forbidden multitudes who have this power, as men, women and children,
to touch the Arc, or to preach, or meddle with the holy things of God. So
Francis White, 8. Arg.
Andrea Duvall, Soto, Victoria, Baynes.

8. Christ would have set down rules how all Believers should use this power,
White against Flsh r, p. ^4.
as he sets down Canons how all Churchmen should use their power,
Du^allius, m. 22. tom. 2. t^act. ^. Q. 5.
in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus: Soto.
If any such power (as is pretended) were originally and fundamentally in all
Believers. Vict^r. Bay^es Dioces. (...) Q 3. con. 3.
But we read of no rules or no Canons in Gods word, obliging all Believers to
bring in act, to actuate or exercise this power thus and thus, and not
according to their own liking; Therefore there is in them originally no such
power.

CHAP. VI.
Q. 6. Whether Christ has left the actual government of his Church to the
multitude of Believers?
PLato said well of Government by the hands of the people, Plato in Polit.
That amongst lawful governments it is worst, Arist. l. 4 Polit. c. 2
amongst unjust governments the best* Vlut. in Aegid.
Aristotle says, of of its nature it is corrupt and faulty. Plutarch calls
it the Serpents tail leading the head. Xenoph. de repub.
Xenophon speaks not well of it. Athen in p^inc.
Our Divines, Beza de grand. Minist.
as Calvin, Beza, Chemnitius, Calvin in Mat. 1^,
M^lancthon, M^lancthon.
Luther. Luther.
Junius, Junius.
Pareus Pareus.
make the government of the Church to partake of all the three governments. In
respect of Christ the only supreme King it is an absolute Monarchy; but this
is the invisible government for the most part in respect of the rulers as
Pastors and Elders, it is an Aristocracie, the visible government being in the
hands of the Elders, and in respect of some things that concerns the whole
members of the visible Church, it is a Democracie, or has some popular
government in it.

We are now to enquire, if the government of the visible Church be in the
collective body of the Congregation, as indeed by consequent they teach with
whom we now dispute, or in the Eldership; in Classes and Synods provincial and
national, as it is now in Scotland. We hold that the government popular, as it
is properly taken, when the collective body judges and governs to be
expressly against the word of God, Ephesians. 4. 11. He gave some (not all) to be
Apostles, etc. 1 Cor. 12. 28. And God has set some in the Church, first
Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. Now we beseech you brethren, to know them that labor amongst
you, and are over you in the Lord, Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that have the rule
over you, and submit your selves, etc. 1 Timothy 5. 17. Let the Elders that rule
well be counted worthy of double honor. Hence it is clear as the noone-sunne,
if there be some over the people of God, some that are Elders that rule well,
some to whom the people should submit, and give obedience, then the whole
people are not rulers, all have not the rod, nor a definitive voice in that
highest censure of excommunication. All are not overseers, guides, governors,
fathers, stewards, shepherds; but some are governed, subject, sons, the flock
ruled, and fed, then does not the people govern.

2. The keys were only given to the Elders, 2. Arg.
as is proved.

3. God set down in his word rules, 3. Arg.
canons, and directions for all lawful governors, how Timothy and Titus
should behave themselves in Gods house, in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus;
but no where does God give directions how all believers should rule, command
and govern, neither has he promised that Spirit to all in that charge.

4. Guides are eyes, 4. Arg.
ears, fathers, gifted-teachers, Ephesians. 4. 11. But the whole body is not an eye,
for then where were the hearing? 1 Cor. 12. 17. All are not fathers, nor all
governors gifted therefore, 1 Cor. 12. 28, 29. actual government is not in the
hands of all the community of believers.

5. The faults of evil government is laid upon some, 5. Arg.
not upon all, 1 Timothy 3. 4, 5, 6. Mat. 24. 28. Tit. 1. 7. 1 Pet. 5. 3. Revel.
2. 14, 20. 3. Ep. John v. 10. And the praise of good government is given to
some, not to all, 1 These. 5. 12. Heb. 12. 17. 1 Timothy 5. 17. Rev. 2. 2. 2 Timothy
4. 4, 5. 1 Pet. 5. 4, 5.

6. It is against the dignity of such as are Ambassadors in Christ's room, 6.
Arg.
2 Cor. 5. 20. representing his person who are to be heard as himself, Mat.
10. 41, 42. His Angels, Revel. 2. 1. entrusted with his secrets, 2 Cor. 5. 18.
His stewards and builders, 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2, 3. Cor. 3. 10. the friends of the
Bridegroom, Joh. 3. 29. Therefore they must have some honor of government that
is not given to all, and every one of the people.

7. That government which necessarily includes a confusion, 7. Arg.
is not to be thought to come from the God of order, popular government is
such, for in some Apostolic Congregations that were independent, there were
six thousand and above, Smith. 69. M Best.
Act. 4. 9. Two answers are given here, 1. Smith says one may speak for all
the Church or two. Answ. These two are then a representative Church, and do
speak in the name of the rest, which he denies. 2. M. Best says, none should
be a congregation, but so many as may orderly meet without confusion. Answ.
Then the Apostles government was confused, else there was an Eldership that
represented the rest, and the Church of believers was no independent Church. A
manuscript for independencie of Churches.
A third answer is, Let heads of Families, and fathers only speak. Answ. Yet
you fall upon a selected and representative Church, which otherways you deny.
2. If sons and servants have a like interest in Christ, and a like power of
the keys, who dare for eschewing confusion take from them what Christ has
given them? We may not do evil or rob any that good may come of it. Ainsworth
against Bernard. The Authors deny they maintain popular government; Ainsworth
against Bernard.
Therefore (say they) the state is popular, the government on Christ's part is a
Monarchy, Authors of Presbytery gover. examined. p. 23.
and in the hands of Elders an Aristocracy. The people is freely to voice in
Elections and judgment of the Churches, Docto. Parisi. de pol^^^ia eccles. page
10, 11.
let the Elders publicly propone and order all things, let them reproove,
convince, exhort, etc. So they say, they hold no Democracy or popular
government. Ans. I acknowledge that the Doctors of Paris do make distinction
betwixt the state and government, who yet do acknowledge a visible Monarchy in
the Church, C^ncil. Constant.
and so did the Fathers of the Council of Constance: For the state of the
Church is indeed popular in respect nothing that concerns the state and body
of the Church, and so concerns the^, should be done without the privity or
consent of the people of God, no excommunication until the man and his
scandalous sins be delated to them. 1 Cor. 5. Nothing should be concluded in
a Synod, until the people hear and know, yea they have all place to speak,
object, reason and dispute in an orderly way, as may be collected from Act. 15.
12, 13. letters are sent in the Churches name, charity sent to the distressed
Saints in their name, officers chosen by their consent, but all this makes no
popular government, if we speak properly, seeing the multitude does not judge,
define judicially, nor sentence, nor command and give out Canons and
Constitutions. But these of whom we now speak do constitute a popular
government in the Church, Parker de polit. eccl l. 3. c. 4.
which I prove, 1. Parker, the foresaid Authors, Best Church plea arg. 7.
page 70. and page 88.
Best, M. Jacob, Smith, and these that are for independency of Congregations
ascribe to the whole multitude, English Puritanis* art. 2, 3, 4.
and from 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5, 12. a judicial exercise of the rod, Authors of
Presb. gover examined, page 2, 13.
and a judging of these that are within, Mat. 2. 18. The Church to be heard and
obeyed that does judicially excommunicate is not the Church of overseers (say
they) but the Church of all believers. Jacob. gover 70. Smith parallel. 65. 66,
67.
3. Binding and loosing and the keys of the Kingdom, and that is, both power
and exercise is given to the Church builded on the rock, against which the
gates of Hell shall not prevail, Mat. 16. 18, 19. so they teach also. 4. All
the power and jurisdiction that Presbyteries and Synods have, says Parker, is
from the Church of believers. 5. The Congregation of believers has power of
jurisdiction over the officers, and rulers of the Church, Arist^t. polit. l. c.
1. Bodin. l. 6. c. 74.
to make and unmake, ordain, censure, depose and excommunicate their
overseers (say they) Now all who have written Politiks, Tholosan. histor.
polit. l. 1.
as Aristotle, Bodin, Tholosanus, Junius de politcia, q. 4.
and our Divines disputing against the Popes Monarchy, Daveus polit. l. 4. c. 5.
Junius, Daneus, Keckerman, Chamier, Keckerm system. Theo. l. 3* c 6.
Musculus, Sadeel say, these are properly Judges, who cognosce and
authoritatively try, sentence, decree and punish delinquents, Cha^^ier.
pa^strat. to 2. l. 9. c. 2. n. 4, P. Martyr. loc, com, page 783.
and all this the whole faithful do by the power of the keys, as is prooved,
ergo, there is a democraticall or popular government brought into Christ's house
this way, and all necessity of overseers and officers taken close away.
Musculus.
Smith says, Sadeel.
it is Antichristian to place Rulers and Elders over the whole body of the
Church. Smith parallel. pa. 54, and* p. ^6.
Yea, Arnisaeus de rep. l. 2. sec. 5. c. 5.
he sees not why all believers may not preach and administer the Sacraments:
And if the Keys be given to them, Spalato de rep. eccl^s. l. 1. proemio.
and actual government to over-see and rule their overseers, I see not how
this will not follow from the foresaid grounds. See what Arnisaeus and Spalato
says, Arnisa^us de rep. l. 2. sect c. 6.
both acknowledge, that is popular government when the people rules
themselves. Neither is it enough to say the Elders rule, because they propone
and order all things, and reproove, convince and exhort; for no man will have
the Apostle James, whom many of our Divines think President and Moderator of
the Council of Jerusalem, Act. 15. The Ruler and one that is over the
Council in the Lord, and such an one as the Council must obey and submit
unto, for his place of Moderation: For the Duke of Venetia, because he
moderateth their Senate, Duke of Venice.
and proponeth and orders suffrages, is not thought by Bodine, Tolosanus,
Arnisaeus, Keckerman, or any Politician to be the King and Prince of the
Venetians, and Lord Judge over the Senate. The Lacedemonian government was
popular, Ephori.
howbeit the people did order their matters by their Ephori, Moderator of our
assemblies in Scotland.
that were a sort of Rulers to the people. The Moderatour of our Assembly is
not Judge, or over the Assembly in the Lord: Nay, he has not a suff^age and
decisme voice in our Assembly, because he is Moderator, but because he is a
chosen Commissioner and member of the Assembly. Field.
So Field says well, Turrecremat. Council* Pa^isitus.
If the Pope be only a President in the Council, he is not a Prince.
Turr^cremata distinguishes betwixt a President of Honor, and a President of
Authority. The Canon of the Council of Paris makes the Pope above this or
this Church or Bishop, but when he is in a general Council, he is there as a
President of Honor only, Heb. 13* 17.
not as a Prince, but as the first member by order of the Council and subject
to the Council. 1 These. 5. 12.
Now the Scripture gives to the overseers an authority, 1 Timothy 5. 17.
a presidency of authority, Act. 20* 28.
We must obey them, and submit to them, and hear them as we would hear
Christ. 2. Seeing this is ordinary to our Brethren to reason thus. All the
faithful are the Spouse and Body of Christ, Kings and Priests unto God, and
have a like title and interest in him, therefore the Keys are immediately
communicated to them without the mediation of Rulers interveening: Hence I
infer, if all have alike right to the keys for their alike title by Faith,
and right of free redemption in Christ, ergo, all are alike Rulers over all in
the Lord: then because believers as believers have a title and interest in
Christ as their redeemer, and office-bearers; because office bearers have no
title in Christ as Redeemer (for no office gives a man a claim to Christ, as
a redeemer, but only some general title to him as Lord of the house) Hence it
shall follow that the believers are Overseers and Rulers and Pastors, and that
they should order and moderate all public actions: So I see no authority or
preheminency given to the Church-guides, but that which is due, and more due to
the believers then to them. As for reprooving, convincing, exhorting, these are
common to all the faithful, as our Brethren say, and so due to them by virtue
of the keys, and more due then to office-bearers, who do but borrow the keys
at the second hand (as they teach) and receive them not immediately from
Christ. Now we all know that Anabaptists take away all Magistracy under the New
Testament, all dominion conquered by war, all relation of captain and
soldier, master and servant, upon this ground, that we are all Christ's
freemen, all Christians equally redeemed in Christ; And if the son make you
free then are you free indeed. And the New Testament makes us all Christ's
ransomed ones, and so there should be no servant. Calvin. Instit. lib. 4. c*
10. Sect. 10, 11, 12.
And we are called in Christ to liberty, be not servants of men. See what our
Divines, Pareu^ in Ca^^ches. Miscell. in Ephoris. Christian. Relig. Bucan. loc.
49. q 10 n. 2.
Calvin, Pareus, Bucan, Tilenus, Professors of Leyden answer Anabaptists,
Libertines, Socinians, Arminians thus abusing Gods Word.

And certainly if the keys and government of the Church be given to all
believers, Tilen Syntag. 1. par. disp. 45. in 5 precept.
because they are all made Kings, Profess. Leiden. in Synopt. purior.
Priests and Prophets, and we are made free and redeemed in Christ, Theolog.
disput 50. these. 16, 17, 18.
and all things are made ours, Therefore I may well infer upon the same
grounds, the keys of civil power to be Kings temporal and freemen civilly are
made ours, if all things be ours, and so no Magistrate, no Captain, no soldier
(peace and liberty are ours) no master or servant. I am far from thinking that
our worthy Brethren do allow of this conclusion, Ignatius Epist ad Phil^d (...).
but the principles are too sibb and near of blood. Basil. de Spir. s^nct* c.
16.
What Fathers say for the Church government by Elders, and not by the people
may be seen in Ignatius, Ambros. in 1 Cor. 11.
who will have us to have recourse to the Apostles, Chrys^st. homil. in Man. 18.
as to the College of Presbyters. And Basilius says, Cyprian. epist. 72.
Tertul. Apolog. c. 35.
The governors of the Church are set down 1 Cor. 12. 28. And Ambrose on that
place says, the Church policy is set down, O^igen.
1 Cor. 12. So Chrysostom, August.
Cyprian, Tertullian, so Origin, Ireneus, August. Theophylact, Hyerom.
Theodoret, Hyerom, which for time I cannot cite at length. Theophylac. in
Joan, 20, 21. Theodoret.


CHAP. VII.
Q. 7. If there be no true visible Church in the New Testament, but only a
congregation meeting in one place, and no Presbyteriall or representative
Church (as they call it) at all.
Our Brethren hold that the only true public visible Church in the New
Testament is a Congregation of Believers joined together by a voluntary
profession of Faith, and meeting in one place to worship God. They deny 1. That
the word (Church) does ever signify a Presbytery or Eldership. 2. They deny
that there is any representative Church, properly so called, or that it has
the title of a Church in the New Testament. 3. They deny that there is any
Provincial or National Church that can be called a visible politic body of
Christ. 4. They deny any Church to have power of jurisdiction over a particular
Congregation. For the decision of the present questions, these distinctions are
to be observed,

1. There be odds betwixt a Church visible, and a Church ministerial. 2. There
be odds betwixt a Cathedral or mother Church (and this we deny) and a Church
National and provincial, which cannot meet to the worship of God in all the
particular members thereof. 3. The Church is termed representative three ways
(as we shall hear) 1. properly, 2. commonly, 3. most properly. 4. Suppose the
name of Presbyteriall Church be not in the New Testament, yet if the thing it
self be in it, it is sufficient.
The word Church is not taken here, 1. For the Temple or House where God is
worshipped. 2. Neither for four or five that worship God ordinarily within the
walls of a Family, Romans 16. 5. Salute the Church at their House, Piscetor.
These. de Eccles.
1 Cor. 16. 19. Philem. v. 2. It is termed Kahal, that is in the old Testament
rendered Synagogue, Iuni^^ lib. sing. de Eccles. c. 10.
and Kahal rendered Ecclesia. And Kahal, Deuteronomy. 5. 22. or Hehillah, Guide to
Zion, p. 2. pos. 3, 4.
Deuteronomy. 33. 4. signifies a Congregation of people, Ioh. Ball Trial of
Separation. chapter 12. page 170, 171.
and Gnedah a Congregation, Exodus 16. 1. Psalm. 111. 1. is turned Ecclesia, Mat.
16. 18. Act. 7. 38. Kahal is either a multitude of Nations or People, Genesis 35.
11. so Jer. 50. 9. An Assembly of Nations, not a Church of Nations, came
against Babylon; Sometimes the Tribes and Governors are called Kahal, the
Church or Assembly, 1 Chronicles. 13. 2, 3. 1 Chronicles. 29. 6. 2 Chronicles. 1. 2, 3. See
Piscator, Junius, Guide to Zion. The word Gnedah that signifies the Assembly
of the Judges, Psalm. 82. 1. is turned in the New Testament (...); Act. 5. 27.
and Act. 6. 12. M. Ball has observed that the Arabic Interpreter uses four
words, Gamhon, Act. 19. 31, 39. 2. Gamahaton, Acts 7. 38. both signifies an
Assembly, or an Assembly of Princes. 3. Kainsaton, Romans 16. 1. Acts 11. 26. 4.
Bihaton, Matthew. 16. 18. and 18. 17. the Church that has power to determine
controversies.

1. Conclusion. A number of believers professing the truth is not presently a
visible politic Church, 1 Because then every Christian Family should be a
visible politic Church, 2 Peter offended, Mat. 18. and rebuking his offending
brother, before three witnesses, and gaining his brother to repentance, v. 16.
is a number of believers in that same act professing the truth, and convincing
an offender, and so professing Gods worship, and yet they are not the judging
governing Church, because if the offender will not hear Peter, then he is to
tell the Church. Hence visibility of Profession agrees both to a number of
believers (if for example ten out of ten particular Congregations confess
Christ before a persecuting Judge) and also to a constitute Church of Believers
and Elders. Then true Faith and the visible professing of true Faith is not
enough to constitute a Church that ordinarily has power and exercise of the
keys; neither find we any warrant in Gods Word, that the swearing of an oath,
or making a covenant, by four or five or 10. or 40. believers to worship God
together as he has commanded in his word does essentially constitute a visible
ministerial Church, 1. Because a ministerial Church is a body of Pastor and
People, of eyes, ears, hands, feet, whereof Christ is head, Romans 12. 4. 1 Cor.
12. v. 14, 15, etc. but a number of sole and only believers are not such a
body. 2. More is there required an oath and covenant, but this is and may be
where there is no ministry.

2. Conclusion. We deny that Christ has given power of jurisdiction to one
particular Church over another particular Church, or to one Church to be a
mother Church to give laws and orders, Baynes. Dioces. trial. q 1.
to little daughter-churches under it; for that jurisdiction is not to be found
in the Word of God, Parker de polit. eccles l. 3. c. 13. etc. 14.
and so is not lawful. See Paul Baynes and Parker and Cartwright. Cartwright
against Whytgi^t.


3. Conclusion. A Church may be a visible incorporation of guides and people
meeting for the worship of God, and exercise of discipline, and yet not
necessarily a Church of believers, for if there be twenty or thirty visible
Saints, who are Saints in profession, they may meet for the worship of God, and
consequently by our Brethrers grounds, independently and without any
subordination to Synods or classes exercise discipline. I prove that they are
not necessarily believers, 1. Because to make one or two formal members of a
visible Church is not required that they be indeed believers, it suffices that
they profess Faith, and be apparently Saints; and our Brethren teach they may
be Hypocrites, and often are, as Judas was amongst the Apostles, now by that
same reason all the thretty may be heart-hypocrites, and face-professors, for
who sees the heart? And our Brethren say the preaching of the word, and the
administration of the Sacraments are not essential notes and marks of the
Church, because the word is often preached to reprobates and unbeleevers, and
by that same reason the power of the keys and discipline is exercised by
hypocrites and unbeleevers. Ames. Medul. Theol. l. 1. c. 3^ n. 10
2. Amesius says it is probable (he says not it is necessary) where the Word
and Sacraments are that there are some believers: And I say it is probable; but
that at all times there should be believers, especially when it is first
founded, it is not necessary. I say when it is first founded; because we cannot
say it is possible that there should be never any believers there at all; for
the Lord sends not a ministry to these where there are none chosen at all;
it does cross the wisdom of God, who does nothing in vain, that he should
light a candle where he had no lossed money; and the Shepherd should be sent
through the fields, where there were no lossed sheep at all. Hence I infer
these consectaries. 1. that the claim and title that a people has to Christ
is not the ground why the keys are given to that people, as to the original
subject, because they may have the Word, Sacraments and keys a long time, and
yet want faith in Christ, and so all title and claim to Christ: All which time
they have the keys, discipline, and Sacraments; and I believe their acts of
discipline, censures, and Sacraments, are valide, therefore the Church redeemed
and builded on the rock Christ, is not the kindly subject of the keys. 2. The
keys are given to professors clothed with a ministerial calling, whither
they be believers or unbeleevers, howbeit God gives them for the salvation and
edification of believers. 3. There is nothing required to make a independent
Congregation, but an profession of the truth, covenantwayes, and outward
worshipping of God, suppose the members be unbeleevers.

4. Conclusion. There is a visible governing Church in the new Testament, whose
members in complete number of believers does not meet in one place ordinarily
for the worship of God, neither can they continually so meet. 1. The Church of
Jerusalem was one Church, under one government, and called one Church in the
singular number, which grew from one hundred and twenty, Acts 1. to three
thousand one hundred and twenty, Acts 4. 41. and then added to these, Acts 4.
4. five thousand men, which is eight thousand one hundred and twenty. And Acts
9. 35. all that dwelt at Lydda and Saron turned to the Lord, v. 42. many in
Joppa believed in the Lord, Acts 20. 21. many thousands of the Jews believed,
Acts 5. 14. multitudes of believers more were added to the Lord, both of men and
women, Acts 6. 1. their number were multiplied. Now it was not possible they
could all meet in one house, especially seeing that prophecye was to take its
first accomplishment at Jerusalem, Isa. 405.
where all flesh was to see the salvation of God. And that of Joel 2. I will
pour my spirit on all flesh. Baynes Diocesantry. q. 1. p. 15.
Its true Bayne says, this Church was numerous by accident, at extraordinary
confluences of strangers. Yet the multitudes of thousands which I have observed
from the story of the Acts (granting the confluence, Acts 2. of nations to be
extraordinary) did meet daily, Acts 2. 46. from house to house. Now so many
thousands could not meet daily, that is, ordinarily. 2. From house to house in
private houses, and so it is not possible all that people did make but one
Congregation independent, where 1* all had voices in discipline. 2. all did
break bread, that is, receive the Sacrament in a private house: so that their
meeting together must be taken distributively in diverse Congregations, not
collectively, for that were against edification. 2. against the nature of
congregationall worship. 2. There was a visible Church in Samaria under one
government, that could not convene in all the members, in one place. The
numerous people in Samaria converted to the faith is known to all, it being
the head City of the ten Tribes: So huge that all Israel was named Samaria,
They received the faith, Acts 8. and as ver. 10. They all gave heed to Simon
Magus, from the least to the greatest. So ver. 6. with one accord they gave
heed unto these things which Philip spoke, hearing and seeing the miracles that
he wrought, ver. 12. they believed and were baptized both men and women. And
that on Philip might have preached to one single Congregation, who doubts?
but the number of believers were so many, that ver. 14. the Apostles behooved
to send Peter and John to help to hold up the harvest. 3. That the Church of
Ephesus could not be one single Congregation that met together is clear. 1.
There was there a Presbytery of Pastors or Bishops, Acts 20. 28. and these
preaching or feeding Pastors, who were to watch and take heed to false teachers
rising up amongst themselves. 1. teaching perverse things. 2. making Disciples
to themselves: the teacher and scholar are relata, every one of them has
respect to other. 2. That they were teaching Elders that did follow the
Apostles doctrine is clear, Rev. 2. 2. Thou have tried them that say they are
Apostles, and are not, and have found them to be liars, and Christ terms them
one Church for their common government. Refut. Tylen. Par. ad Scot. sect, 11 c.
^2
The answer of Tylen says, Christ says not (...) to the Churches, and
therefore all the Congregation were one Presbyteriall Church at Ephesus. But it
is without example in the word that one single Congregation with one Pastor
only, and some ruling Elders does try Ministers gifts, and finding them false
teachers, authoritatively to cast them out, so that the harvest has been so
great, that false teachers calling themselves Apostles resorted to Ephesus, to
help the good number of Pastors who were there already, Acts 20. 28. By this it
is clear that Ephesus had many Congregations in it, and many preachers also,
who in a common society fed the flock, and exercised discipline, Rev. 2. 2.
neither can we say, there was but one Angel there, except we make that one a
Prelate contrary to the word of God, Acts 20. 28. 2. The multitude of converts
there required a Presbytery, or a multitude of consociated Pastors, Acts 19.
20. Paul continued there by the space of two years, so that all they who dwelt
in Asia heard the word of the Lord, 1 Cor. 16. 8. there was a great door, and
effectual open to him at Ephesus. 2. They were once madly devoted to their
great Idol Diana, and had a Temple for her that all Asia wondered at* therefore
Ephesus was no small Town. This Temple Herostratus says, was built by all
Asia, Herostratus.
and was two hundred and twenty years in building, and had in it (as he says)
one hundred and twenty seven pillars, every one of them made by several Kings,
and every one of them sixty foot high. Now ver. 19. Paul's miracles were known
to all the Jews and Greeks at Ephesus, and fear fell on them all, and the
name of the Lord Jesus was magnified, and many of them that believed, came and
confessed, and showed their deeds. v. 19. And many that used curious arts
brought their books, and burnt them before all men. And what wonder? it is
said, ver. 20. so mightily grew the word of God. Paul fought with beasts at
Ephesus, millions here were mad upon the Idol Diana: If the believers had not
been the manyest, they durst not profess the burning of their books, nor
durst Paul stay there two years. Hence if there was a settled Church here above
two years, a constituted Presbytery in this City, Acts 20. 17, 28. that had
power of jurisdiction to ordain teaching Elders, and reject hirelings, Rev. 2.
2. and so many thousands of Greeks and Jews, such an effectual door opened
to the Gospel, against so many thousands opposing, there was not here one
only single independent Church, that met in one house only but a Presbyteriall
Church. Now they could not all preach at one time to them, being a number of
preachers, Acts 20. 36. Paul prayed with them all, and yet they were set over
that flock by the Holy Ghost, Acts 20. 28. therefore they had each their own
Church, and one cannot officiate or exercise Pastoral acts amongst the flock of
another Pastor, as our brethren would prove from this same place, Acts 20.

4. What, shall we say the Church of Rome was only an independent single
Congregation that met in one place, or house, seeing the faith and obedience of
the Saints there, was heard through all the world, Romans 1. 8. Romans 16. 19. so
that Tertullian in his time says, half of the City was Christians. And
Cornelius says, beside himself there was forty and five Presbyters. Consider
how many prime persons and families Paul saluteth, Romans 16. Paul styles them
one Church, and one body that had jurisdiction common to all, Romans 1^. 3, 4, 5,
6,

5. So Galatia is written too as to one Church, and had one government and
discipline, Gal. 5. 9. A little leaven (of false doctrine) leaveneth the whole
lump, as 1 Cor. 5. v. 6, 7. and Gal. 5. ver. 10. He that troubles you shall
bear his judgment, whosoever he be, ver, 12. I would they were even cut off
(by the rod of discipline, as Pareus and Perkins expound it) that trouble you.
Par^us* Perkin. on Gal.
So Gal. 6. 1. the spiritual are to restore in meekness the weak falling in
sin, and yet they were many Congregations in Galatia, Gal. 1. 2* 1 Cor. 16. 1.

6. We find a Presbytery at Antioch of Prophets and teachers, Acts 13. 1. who
laid hands on Paul and Barnabas, 2, 3. and ordained them to go and preach. And
a Presbytery at Lystra, Acts 16. 1, 2, 3. where Timothy was recommended to
Paul, and received in his company, and laid hands on by him: Now that this
imposition of hands was not done by the collective body of the Church, but by
the Elders and Presbytery is clear from, Iun. Eccles. l. 3. c. 1.
1 Timothy 4. 14. as Iunius collecteth, for that the people laid on hands, there
is no ground.

7. And Acts 21. 18. There is a Presbytery at Jerusalem of James, and the
Elders exercising jurisdiction; for before them Paul gives account of his
ministry amongst the Gentiles, v: 19, 20. and they enjoin Paul for the
believing Jews sake to purify himself, v. 23, 24. which Paul obeyed, v: 26,
27. and this Presbytery takes on them the Canons of the Council of Jerusalem
made, Acts 15. at least as a part of that famous Council.

8 To ordain Elders in every city is all one, as to ordain Elders in every
Church, Act: 14. 23. so does Luke expone it, Parker de Polit. Eccles. l. 3. c.
23.
as Parker confesses, Act: 20. 17. And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and
called the Elders of the Church, he says not of the Churches, Act: 16. 4. And
when they went through the cities, they delivered them the decrees, etc. now
what is meaned by cities is exponed in the next ver: 5. So were the Churches
established: So Tit: 1. 5. That Thou should appoint Elders in every city, as
I appointed thee: Then that there be an Eldership and Presbytery of Pastors in
every city is an Apostolic Institution, and so the commandment of our Lord
Jesus: for that Paul understands there especially preaching Elders in every
city, is clear by the words following, that shows what sort of men preaching
Elders should be, ver: 9. able by sound Doctrine both to exhort and to convince
the gainsayers, etc. Hence if an Eldership in a city as Ephesus and Jerusalem
and Antioch, where all cannot meet for multitude, be an Eldership in one
Church, Discipline of Scotland. 2. book 7. c.
as our book of Discipline has it, then there was Presbyteries in great
cities, where there were many Congregations, but the former is proved already,
ergo, the Presbytery of many Congregations is the Apostles Presbytery.

9. If Gods word warrant a number of officers in Gods house, who ordains
Pastors by laying on of hands, and who tries these who say they are Apostles
and Pastors, and are liars, and who has jurisdiction to punish false teachers,
as Balaam and Iezabel, and who appoints Elders in cities and Churches; then
is there a Presbytery and society of Pastors and Elders in more consociated, and
neighbor congregations appointed for this effect.

But there is such a number of officers in Gods House, of which number are no
single believers, not clothed with any Ministerial calling. Therefore there
must be a Presbytery, diff^rent from private Professors, that overseeth many
Congregations.

I prove the proposition, First, that there is such a number, and that they are
different from ordinary professors, 1 Timothy: 4. 14. Neglect not the gist that is
in thee, which was given by the laying on of the hands of the Elders, Re: 2. 2.
Re. 2. 14, 20. Tit: 1. 5. 1 Timothy: 5 22. now that ordinary professors who are
not Elders, do lay hands on Pastors, ordain or appoint Elders, and judicially
try and choose, or refuse false Teachers, and censure or deprive them, wants
precept, promise or practice in the Word of God, except we say the Epistles to
Timothy and Titus are not written to Churchmen, but to all professors that
they should lay hands suddenly on no man, that they should appoint Elders in
every city: Now also that this united Presbytery is a Presbytery of one single
Congregation is, 1 Against that which we have prooved of the great Church of
Ephesus, Act: 20. Act: 19. Rev: 2. as also against the necessity of Pastors
labors, who are not to stay in numbers together upon one single Congregation,
where two or more cannot be had.

To the place 1 Timothy: 4. 14. some answer that, Bucer against Dunam fortres. in
I^edidocl. in alt. Dam^sc.
that laying on of the hands of the Presbytery was extraordinary, and ceased
with the Apostles: Others say, he speaks of the office, not of the persons.

Answ: The latter is a devise of Prelates refuted by our Divines, an office
neither has hands nor feet, but persons only have hands.

2. Castalio calls this with good warrant, Castal^o in l^c. Chrysostom Hug.
Cardinal.
The Senate of Elders, Chrysostom: and Hugo Cardinalis, a College of Presbyters,
Junius These. The^l. dis. 47 These 2.
Iunius says, it is all one with the Church, Mat: 18.

But thirdly, we deny not but there was an extraordinary laying on of hands by
the Apostles by which the Holy Ghost was given, Act: 8. 18. But this is the
laying on of the hands of the Apostles, as Presbyters, which is ordinary, and
is limited, and ruled by the Word, and must not be done suddenly, 1 Timothy 5. 22.
now no such rule is laid upon the miraculous laying on of hands, there is no
fear that the Apostles in working of miracles should partake of other men's
sins, and that the ordinary laying on of hands, such as this was, did not
give the Holy Ghost is clear, Act: 14. 3. The Elders lays hands on Paul and
Barnabas, who before had received the Holy Ghost, Act: 9. 17. 3. This answer is
against the nature of this Epistle, where Paul sets down a plat-forme of
Church government to be kept unviolably to the second coming of Christ, as
is clear, 1 Timothy 6. 14. and so he says himself, 1 Timothy 3. 15. These things I
write that thou may know how to behave thy self in the Church, Gerson:
Bucer. These were written for ages to come, Bucer. (...). D^wnam, p 495.
so the Refutator of Tilen, and our own Rollock, and so the Fathers, Oecumenus
say, he sets down the sum of Ecclesiasticke Discipline. Preslyteria
futurerum saeculorum. Refut ^il. Parenes. ad Sectos. ca. 18. sect. 9.
So Chrysostom, Augustine, Enthim: Cyrillus.

10. Suppose we should grant a Presbyteriall Church be not expressly in the
Word, Roll ad praeside^ and presbytoros ecclesiae. Oecumen summa^ Oeconomiae
ecclesiasticae Chrysostom.
as we think it is, Mat. 18. as we shall prove, yet the thing it self cannot
be denied: hence take away a Presbytery, whose it is to ordain and censure
Pastors, Augustine.
of necessity the government and power of the keys must be in the hands of the
people, Enthymius.
against the arguments in the former Chapter, Cyrillus.
that cannot be answered, for the multitude of believers cannot ordain a
Pastor, suppose we grant they are to choose and elect their own Pastor, yet it
is not warranted by the Word that ruling Elders with one pastor should ordain
pastors, seeing ordinations is given still to preaching Elders, Act: 14. 3.
Tit: 1. 5. 1 Timothy: 5. 22. 2 Timothy 2. 2. Rev: 2. 2. Act: 20. 29, 30. and to more
pastors then to one only.

But by the way, let us hear what is said against this.

1. The word Church signifies always a gathered together Church, Object. 1.
or such as may gather together, Act: 11. 26. a whole year they assembled with
the Church, Assertion of government of the Church of Scotland, par. 2. c^ 3. p.
141, 14^. p. 150, ^
Act: 20. 7. The Disciples came together to break bread, so Act: 1. 10. Act:
2. 44, 46. Act: 5. 12. Act: 15. 25.

An. Our brother M. Gillespi says many Interpreters expound (...), they were
together, that is, of one accord in love and amity: and also Churches not being
builded, and they meeting in private houses, as in Mary's house, Act: 12.
school of Tyrrannus, Act: 19. 9. in an upper chamber, Act: 20. 8. Paul's
lodging at Rome, Act: 28. 13. What private houses could ordinarily contain so
many thousands?

2. The Scripture speaks so to give us an example of the public meeting for
public worship, where it is not needful, that all met in one place
collectively, it is enough they meet all distributively.

3. Neither does the word Church always signify a meeting of one single
Congregation, Act. 12 5.
as Act: 12. Prayers was made by the Church, 1 Cor 15. 9.
that is by all professors. Act 8. 3.
Herod vexed the Church, Act: 8. Saul made havocke of the Church, Act. 10. 11.
I persecuted the Church. There is no necessity to expound these of people
meeting ordinarily to worship God; for Herod and Saul persecuted all, whither
Apostles or professors in houses, not respecting their meeting in one place;
also it shall follow that prayers were not made in private, but only in the
Church, that is, in the conveened Congregation for Peter, which is absurd: And
that they were a visible Church is clear, else Herod, and Saul could not
persecute them. Object. 2.
Parker answers, The whole Nation of the Jews did meet at one meeting, Act.
7. 38.
and are called by Luke the Church, Lu, 12.
and there came innumerable multitudes to hear Christ. Answ. That is for us,
the Church of the Jews contained six hundredth thousand fighting men, beside
women, children and aged persons, and the Levites that attended the Tabernacle
and Arc; it were a wonder to make out of this an independent Congregation, all
judging and governing both themselves and their governors: Therefore there may
be a visible Church under one government that cannot ordinarily meet to hear
the Word of God, and howbeit there met innumerable multitudes, Luke. 12 to
hear Christ, and that with great confusion, that is forbidden in Church
meetings, 1 Cor: 14. So that they trod on one another, that multitude could not
be a Church, 1. Ordinarily meeting. 2. To hear one pastor. 3. To judge all the
people and over-see their manners. 4. And to communicate ordinarily at one
Table in the Lords Supper: this is against the nature and true use of a
Congregation met in one place for the public worship.

Thirdly, Object. 3.
they reason; the Church visible in the New Testament are called the Churches
in the plural number, Act. 9. 31.
the Churches of Judea, 1 Cor. 16* 1, 19.
Galatia, 2 Cor. 8. 1.
Asia, Macedonia. Hence it follows there is no visible Church larger then a
Church meeting in one house. Act. 1^. 41.


Answ: We read of the Church of Jerusalem, Act: 15. where certainly there
were more particular Churches.

2 It follows not, for more Churches were visible and audible, Act: 15. at
that famous council, and are called so united, the whole Church, and yet
separated, they were sundry churches; they are so named in opposition only to
the National and typical Church of Judea, not in opposition to provincial
and National Churches and Synods.

5 Conclusion. A Church may be called representative three ways.

1 Properly, as if the Rulers stood in the persons of believers, judging for
them, as if the believers were there themselves, as a deputy represents the
King: So Israel did swear a covenant, Deuteronomy: 9. 14, 15. for their posterity not
borne: this way the Eldership do not judge for the Congregations, as if the
Congregations did judge by them as by their instruments, as Robinson says,
Robinson in his Apology for separatists.
because the multitude of believers should not judge at all, therefore Elders
do not in governing represent their persons: Bannes. Tom. 3. in 22. quest. 1.
art. 10, conclus. 3.
So Bannes said the Pope this way has no Legate, for he cannot give an
Apostolic spirit to his Ambassador, Presbyter gov examined, p 10, 11.
for then he mi^ht leave (says he) an apostolic spirit in legacy to some
successor: We acknowledge no representative church in this sense, as the
author of presbyteriall government examined unjustly imputes to us.

2 A representative Church may be thought a number sent by a community, and
elected to give laws, absolutely tying, as if believers should say, We resign
our faith and conscience to you, to held good whatever you determine without
repeal or trial; that is blind faith, that we disclaim: all our Rulers acts
in our Assemblies do bind, 1 conditionally, if they be lawful and convenient,
2 matters to be enacted are first to be referred to the congregations and
Elderships of particular congregations before they be enacted.

3 A representative Church is a number having election and designation from the
Church of believers, but ordination from the Eldership to voice, determine and
command, as those who are over them in the Lord, to make constitutions and
decrees according to Gods word, and this way we hold a representative Church,
Mat: 18. and 1 Cor: 5. which made acts according to Gods word, tying the whole
congregation, even the absents; for the presents represents the absent: If
the incestuous person had bin judicially excommunicated, the Apostle Paul and
all the absents, that neither had bin actours, nor witnesses had bin tied to
abstain from bortherly conversing with him, and this way the decrees of the
Council of Jerusalem tied the absent Churches, Act: 16. 4. and Chr^sts power
of the keys, John 20. were given to Thomas, howbeit absent, and Paul's Epistles
to Collosse, Eph^sus, Galatia laid an Ecclesiastical tie upon these Churches
that consented not to the writing of these Epistles; not only because the
matter is the Canonicke word of God, but also the tie was Ecclesiastical, in
so far as the flock is obliged to hear the Pastor, according to that (He
that hears you hears me, and he that despises you despises me.) Any
absent through sickness or other distractions, from the election of Matthias,
Acts 1. the seven Deacons, Acts 6. and the Elders chosen in every City, Acts
14. 23. were tied to stand to the election of Matthias, the seven Deacons, and
the Elders in every City; else no act of the Church were valid, where one or
two disassenteth, or where two or three are absent by sickness, and other
distractions insuperable: And so here our brethren (I believe) cannot, in
reason, deny but there is a representative Church, whose deed tyeth the
absents. And the reason is clear, that to make a Church-constitution oblige in
conscience, and ecclesiastically, there is not required as an essential
ingredient of obligation, that all, and every one who are tied and obliged, be
personally present, to voice and consent to the constitution; for constitutions
tie Ecclesiastically, as made by the Church, but not as made by all, and every
one of the Church. And the lawfulness of Commissioners to represent the case
of the Church is clear in Gods Word; as Antioch sent Commissioners to
Jerusalem, Acts 15. Jerusalem sent Barnabas their Messenger to Antioch, 11. 22.
But Titus, Timotheus, Epaphroditus, and others were sent by the Churches, and
to the Churches, as Commissioners, and Ambassadors of the Church of Christ.

CHAP. VIII.
Quest. 8. If our Savior does warrant a Church of Elders and Overseers in
these words, Mat. 18. Tell the Church.
WE have an argument of weight for a Presbyteriall Church in our Saviors
words, Mat. 18. 17. If thy brother (offending) neglect to hear them (the
Christian witnesses before whom he is convinced of his ^ault) tell the Church,
but if he neglect to hear the Church, Let him be to thee as a heathen, and a
Publicane. v. 18. Verily, I say to you, whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be
bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye lose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.

The Septuagint agrees with Matthew, Septuagi^ta turn^ it out of Syriacke.
Aria^s. Mont. Tremel. Beza. Pare^, Mus^ul^^. Lyra. Hug. Card. Caieta^. Aquinas.
Casta. dicito R^ipub.
(...). So Arias Montanus, Tremell, Beza, Pareus, Musc^lus, Lyra, Hug.
Cardinalis, Caieta^, Aquinas: It is not much matter that Castalio turns (Tell
the Assembly of the Commons) Augustine, Cyprian, Hyeronim, and all are against
him. The scope of these words, is not, August. Cypr. Hier^n.
as many believe, that our Savior sets down a way how to remove private
offenses done betwixt brother and brother only. 1. Because the words then
should not prove the lawfulness of excommunicating for public and scandalous
sins. 2. The scope is as large, as binding and loosing on earth, and
proportionally in heaven. But our Saviors aim is, to establish a Church
consistory, for removing all scandals and offenses out of the Church, private
and public, betwixt brother and brother, and betwixt Church and Church.
Neither is there ground for the foresaid scope, because he says (If thy
brother offend) in the singular number; for what if three, six, ten brethren
offend, is not this course of our Saviors to be taken, if six offend six?
Hence it follows that the Church here signifies not only the Eldership of a
particular Congregation, but it signifies respectively all Presbyteries, and
Synods, Provincial, National, and Oecomenicke; for seeing Excommunication and
Ecclesiastical binding and loosing is Christ's remedy, against all scandals
private or public in Christ's kingdom, then by a brother, by a Synechdoche is
meant all that offends; then if a sister-Church offend a sister-Church, or a
Provincial, or National Church offend a neighbor sister-Church, Christ's
remedies being Catholic and universal, as far as our diseases go, the
course must be to (Tell the Church) I purpose then first, to show this
interpretation to be agreeable to the mind of all Doctors, acknowledging one
Church of Elders here, Chrysostom. Dic Presul. Aug. dic. Episc. Hier dicendum multis.
and next to prove our interpretation. Chrysostom Tell the Overseers,
Augustine Tell the Watchmen, Hieron. We must tell many. So Cyprian, so the
Council of Ancyra. Cypr. l 3 Ep. 14. Council. Anchy. c. 18
So Ambrose, Ball says: The Aethiopicke Interpreter says, Tell the house of
Christians. Ambran 2 Timothy 5. Ball^ryall of separa. c. 12. p. ^70.
Boderian, Tell the house of Judgments. All our Divines say this, Calvin,
Aethiop. Interp. domo Ch^istiano^ii. Boderian domo Iudiciorum*
Beza, Pureus, Chemnitius, Aretius, Erasmus, Polunus, Calvin com. Mat 18.
Hemmigius, Hyperius, Musculus, Iunius, Piscator, Bucanus, Rivetus, Cartwright,
Marlorat, Dan. Tossun, Bu^er, The harmony of confess. Helvet, French, English,
Beza in Mat. 18.
Vrsine, Whittaker. So Papists, Emanuel, S^. Victor, Parteus com. 16. Chemniti.
Aretiu^.
Parisian Doctors, Fathers of Basil, and Constance, Joan Gerson, Iac. Almain,
Simon Vigorius, Aquinas, Occam. Erasm in Nov* Te. Polan. Syn^. l. 7 Hemmig in
To. (...) Hyper in 1 Timothy 2. Musc. in l^^. co. 8. Iunius in disp. Theol. disp.
47 2. Piscator loc. com de Eccl. 23. These 9. Bucan. loc. com. loc. 44, q. 13.
Rivet Catho. Ortho, tom. ^. tract. 1. quest 8. 11. 6, Tyle^ Syntag. disp. 38.
These. 10. 11, 12. Cartwright against Whitgy^t, tract 17. c. 2. divis. 9.
Mar^^ra^^^ Mat. 18. Dan. Tossa^^^ in past. Evang. 48, Bucer in Romans 12.
Con^ess. Helvet. Gallic. Anglic. Vrsi^. Catech. exp. par. 2. page 534
Whittakerd. ^ontif. Romans contr. 4 quest. 1. Emmanuel, Sa. Victor. in Mat. 18,
Doct. Paris. de Polit. Eccles. page 1, ^. 3. Council. Basil. Constant. Gerson,
Alma^^, Vigor. Aquin. Occam, Duvalli^^, l 6. par 1* c. 60.
What Bilson, Downam, Sutluvius says against this is answered by Parker, Ant.
Waleus and other worthy divines.

That the Church of Elders is here understood I prove. Christ here alludeth to
the Synedry and Consistory of the Jews, with which his hearers were well
acquainted; for he was now speaking to the Jews, who knew his language well,
and knew these terms. Brother, witnesses, Sunedry, Assembly, Congregation;
Heathen, Publicane, and knew what Church had power to cast out and repute men
for Publicanes and sinners: For as Beza observes, who would understand Christ
here to speak of a Christian Presbytery, that has power to excommunicate,
except we consider that Christ has a respect in this form of speech to the
Jews Church-policy: And Christ in like manner, Mat. 5. 22. accomodateth his
speech to the form of the Jews judicatories: For many learned note out of the
Talmud that the Jews had three judicatories noted there. 1. The Triumviri
judged small matters. 2. Their Synedry consisting of twenty three judges, more
weighty matters, and inflicted more weighty punishments; and 3. the great
Council of 71. Judges did handle questions about false prophets, the
High Priest, and of other weightiest causes; and therefore he shows the
punishment of an offending brother amongst the Jews too darkly; but these
judicatories were well known to them. And here excommunication is expressed in
Jewish terms in use at that time. Let him be to thee as a heathen, that is, a
stranger from the common wealth of Israel, not one of the true Church, but such
a one as they called Goijm. Drus. ^ot Beza (...) in Mat 18.
So Drusius and Beza on this place. Now (Tell the Church) Kahal to those that
know the Jews form of speech must be (Tell the Elders of the Congregation)
amongst them, the multitude no more judged causes, then we would think him
excommunicated who is esteemed one not (...) borne of Abraham, and so all the
whole Church of the Gentiles should be excommunicated. Fran. Johnson exposition
of this plac^ Mat. 18.
So Franc. Johnson. 2. The Church of believers convened together is still a
Church met together, 2. Arg.
for hearing the Word, receiving the Sacraments, 1 Cor. 11. 18, 19. 1 Cor. 14,
19, 20, 21. In which none are to speak but Pastors, and as the Separatists
say, Prophets, and not all private persons; but this is a Church not assembled
to prophesying and praying, but to rebuking, to judicial censuring by binding
and loosing, where all private persons, as their witnesses, the offended
brother, be they public, or be they private persons (yea suppose a woman
otherwise forbidden to speak in the Church met for worship, 1 Cor. 14.) may
speak in this Church, for a woman may offend, and be excommunicate, or be
offended, for scandals betwixt woman and woman is to be removed.

3. The Church spoken of here is such a superior and judicial seat, 3. Arg.
as ought to be obeyed in the Lord, under the pain of excommunication, and to
whose voice and sentence coactive the contumacious is said to be disobedient, 1 Samuel 2. 25.
as (...) (and (...) and (...) to disobey in the holy tongues does signify.
Deuteronomy. 17. 12.
But a multitude of believers are no such superior and judicial seat as may
be obeyed, Ier. 13. 10.
or disobeyed by inferiors, Deuteronomy. 5. 1.
under the pain of excommunication, Hear O Israel.
for it is without the warrant of Gods Word, Luke 10. 16.
that all Christians, 1 Ioh. 4* 6.
Pastors, Ioh. ^ 28.
Ioh. 8. 47.
Elders, Ioh. 10* 3* 27.
and Doctors are under the judicial and coactive sentence of believers. Acts.
3. 23.


4. What ever Church may excommunicate, Heb. 3. 7.
every member thereof convened with the Church may inflict all inferior
censures also; Heb. 13. 17. 4. Arg.
for whosoever may inflict judicially the greater punishment, may inflict the
less; but all the members of the Church of believers may not in this assembled
Church inflict lesser punishments: For example, a woman, a son, a servant,
who are all equally the true members of the true Church of believers, being
believing professors may not in an assembled Congregation rebuke publicly her
husband and Pastor, his Father and Master: For public rebuking being a degree
of teaching, and especially in the assembled Church, the Apostle will not have
the woman to teach publicly, and usurp authority over the man, nor any to
exhort and rebuke in the Church but Pastors.

5. These to whom the essence and definition of a Ministerial Church having
power to excommunicate (as this Church has that power, Mat. 18. 17.) does
necessarily and essentially belong, these, and these only are here understood
under the name of the Church. But so it is, that the essence and definition of
a Ministerial Church having power to excommunicate, agrees not necessarily
and essentially to a company of true believers assembled Church-wayes, ergo, by
the name of a Church here is no ways understood the Church of true believers
assembled Church-wayes. The proposition is undeniable, for out of the words may
be gathered a definition of a Ministerial Church, to wit, an Assembly that has
power of preaching and binding and loosing, and so of all Church Censures. I
prove the assumption, To have power to preach, convene before them, and
judicially cognosce and sentence, and excommunicate a contumacious member does
agree to these that by no necessity are believers, because to have power to
preach and excommunicate essentially require no more, but that persons be, 1.
professors of the truth. 2. that they be gifted to preach and govern. 3. that
they be duly called thereunto by the Church, as Judas and others are; but all
these three are, and may be in a company in whom is no saving faith, as the
word and experience clear: For howbeit to be a called Pastor (the like I say
of Elders, Park de polit. Eccl l 3 c. 13.
Doctors, Deacons, and visible professors) require faith in Christ, as a
gracious element and necessary ingredient to make him a saved man: Answorth
positions of the Church, These. 30. p. 121. ^ and ^hes. 35. Presb. govern. exam.
p 10, 11.
Yet it is not required to the essence of a Pastor. Yea Parker, Answorth, and
authors of Presbyter, govern* ex. acknowledge professors to be members of a
visible Church, and so to have power of the keys who are but rotten
hypocrites, and what wonder? seeing God only sees the heart, and men cannot
see far in a millstone.

6. All the arguments proving that the power of the keys is not given to all
believers, 6. Arg.
but only to the overseers of the Church, and proving that the government of
Christ's house is not popular, but in the hands of the Elders proves the same,
Sup. cap. 1. q. 1. and q. 6. cap. 6.
for this is a ruling, and authoritative and judging Church.

7. Pareus says, 7. Arg.
The Church here meaned is the Church to be complained unto, but none can
complain to a multitude.

8. The practice of the Apostolic Church, 8. Arg.
1 Cor. 1. The house of Eloe being grieved with the schism of Corinth, tells
not the whole believers, but tells it to Paul, and in him to the Pastors, who
had the rod of discipline in their hands, and the Spirit of God gives rules
about receiving complaints to the Eldership, Tit. 1. 13. and never to all
believers; therefore the rebuking and excommunicating Church spoken of here
must be the Church of Elders.

9. The Church here is those to whom the keys are given, 9. Arg.
Mat. 16. 19. I will give to thee the keys, whatsoever thou shall bind on
earth, shall be bound in heaven; but here the keys are given to Peter, and in
him, to the Apostles, and those to whom he said, Joh. 20. Whose sins ye
forgive, they are forgiven, and whose sins ye retain, they are retained; for
that is to bind and loose in heaven, as they should bind, and loose on earth;
and to whom he said (As my Father sent me, so send I you) but this Christ said
to the Church of the Apostles and Elders, for he has not sent every believer
as his Father sent him, for that is a Pastoral sending, as is clear from Mat.
^8. 18. All power is given to me in heaven and in earth. Hence he draws a
conclusion, v. 19. Go therefore and teach, etc. Which clearly includes the
keys and power of preaching, baptizing, and governing, which agrees not to
all believers in any tolerable sense: Theoph. in Ioh. 20. Chry. Cyryl.
As Theophilact, Chrysostom, Cyrill, August. Hieron. Cyprian teach, and that
this place, Ioh. 20. (As my Father sent me, so send I you) cannot be common to
all believers, the Fathers teach Theophilact* in loc.

He says to them, Enter ye in my ministerial charge. Cyrill. in loc. and
Chrysostom. ibid. Creati sunt totius orbis Doctores. Aug. Aug. in Psalm 44. Hier.
Epist. ad E^ag
in Psa. 44. Hieron. Epist. and Evagrin. Cyprian Epist. 41. in locum Pauli,
omnes successisse. Cy^r ^p. 41.


10. The only apparent Argument against this interpretation is weak, Arg. 10.
and so our interpretation must stand: For they say that the word Church is
never taken but for a company of believers, and the redeemed, Ephesians. 2. 20.
builded on the rock Christ. I deny not but the word Church is very sparingly
taken for the overseers only; yet it is taken in that sense, and there is
reason why it cannot be otherwise taken in this place; for Revelation. 2. The
Angel of the Church of Ephesus, Smyrna, etc. stands for the whole Church,
and the whole Church is written unto under the name of the Angel of such a
Church: Which may be demonstrated thus, 1. because not only the Ministers, but
the people that have ears to hear, are all and every one of them commanded to
hear. 2, The promise of eating the tree of life, v. 7. of giving the hidden
Manna, and the white stone, and the new name, and they shall be clothed in
white, and their names not blotted out of the book of life who overcommeth,
agrees not to Ministers only. 3. The command of being faithful to the death,
of holding fast what they have, that none take away their crown, of
strengthening what remains, of being zealous, and of repenting, are not given
to Ministers only. 4. The rebukes of falling from the first Love, of not
watching, of lukewarmnesse are not laid upon Ministers only; therefore to the
Angel of the Church of Ephesus, of the Church of Smyrna, must need force have
this meaning, Unto the Church of Ephesus, of Smyrna, and what is said to the
Angels, is said to the Churches, as is clear, comparing chap. 1. v. 20. and
chap. 2. v. 1. with v. 9. 11, 17. So Acts 18* v, 21, 22. Paul is said to salute
the Church, that must be the chief men and Elders of the Church; for the
Church being so numerous at Jerusalem, as is proved, he could not salute the
Church of believers, 1. his manner in writing his Epistles is to salute the
prime persons only, and the rest in general; and this being a real
salutation, or by all appearance verbal, he could not salute them all man by
man, seeing he saw them in the bye, and the Kirk of Jerusalem (for he landed
at Cesarea) was more numerous, Also Isa. ^0 9. O Sion that brings
goodtydings, is an exhortation, as Junius says, to the preaching Church whic ^
is expounded, Isa. 51 ^. and Nah. 1* 15. and R^m. 10. 15. only of the Pastors
sent of God to preach the Evangil of peace.
then that he could salute them all, man by man. And also the Church is named
from the Pastors, Isa. 40. 9. Sion that brings good tidings, and it is the
Preachers that ordinarily preach the good tidings, and the woman that has many
sons, Isa. 54. 1, 2. Gal. 4. 26* 27. Isa. 49. 21. the woman that brings
forth the manchilde, Rev. 12. the bride who is made the keeper of the vineyard,
Cant. 1. 6. Now it is the Pastors properly that travel in birth to beget
children to God, Gal. 4. 19. to the policye of which Church respect is had in
this form of speaking, the word Kahal, Gnedah Ecclesia, a Church, an Assembly
does only signify the Princes and Rulers, when the spirit is speaking of
matters of government, discipline, commanding, complaints, or controversy, as
he speaks here, Psalm. 62. 1. God stands in the Church Gnedah, or
Congregation of the mighty, Number. 35. 24. And the Congregation (Gnedah) shall
Judge betwixt the slayer and the avenger of blood, but it is expounded, Jos.
20. 4. and the slayer shall declare his cause before the Elders of that City.
So Deuteronomy. 11, 12, 16, 17. th^se that are called the men of Israel, Josh. 9. 6.
are called the Princes of the Church or Congregation, v. 15. So compare, 2 Samuel
7. 7. spoke I one word with one of the tribes of Israel, with 1 Chronicles. 17. 6.
spoke I one word to any of the Judges of Israel? So compare Exodus ^0. 18, 19.
All the people saw the thunder, v. 19. And they said to Moses, speak thou to
us, with Deutronom. 5. 23. And it came to pass, when ye heard the voice, out
of the mids of darkness that ye came near to me, even all the heads of your
Tribes and Elders and said, compare Exodus: 4. 29. with 30. 31. also compare 1
Chr. 28. And David assembled all the Princes of Israel, the Princes of the
Tribes, and the captains of the companies that ministered to the King, with
chap. 29. 1. Furthermore David the King said to all the congregation.

Ainsworth acknowledges that the word (Congregation) is thus taken for the
Elders only; Ainsworth counterpoyson against M. Berdnard, p. 113 Confess. art.
24.
so the Separatists in their confession cite this, Psalm: 122. 3. Lev: 20. 4, 5,
etc. with Mat: 18. 17. Add to these that 1. Judges and Priests in Israel might
give sentence of death, and judge of Leprosy without the peoples consent,
Deuteronomy: 1. 16. 2 Chronicles: 26. 16. Deuteronomy: 17. 8. and yet Israel as well as we, were
Kings and Priests to God, Exodus: 19. 5, 6. Psalm: 149. 1, 2. And why may not we
say (Tell the Church of Elders, as Judges) and in telling them, ye tell the
believers, in respect that Elders are not to pronounce sentence of
Excommunication, while they make declaration to the Church of believers.

11 Argument. That Church which the plaintiff must tell, that is publicly to
admonish the offender, but that is the Church of Elders, 1 These: 5. 12, 13, 14.
1 Timothy: 5. 20. Luk: 10. 16. for they only are to receive public delations, and
to rebuke publicly, as is, Titus 1. 13. 1 Timothy 5. 1. and ver: 19. 2 Timothy
4. 2.

12 It shall follow, if Christ understand here by the Church, the Church of
believers, that in the case of an Elderships scandalous life, or if otherwise
all the officers be taken away by death, that then a company of believing women
and children being the Spouse of Christ, and so having claim and title to
Christ, his covenant and all his ordinances, may censure, deprive and
excommunicate the ^lders, and ordain Elders and pastors with public fasting
and praying and laying on of hands. But this latter is unwritten in the Word of
God. For 1. Private believers, far less believing women and children cannot
judge the watchmen, and those who were over them in the Lord. 2. In the Old
Testament the heads of Families only excommunicated, Gen: 21. 10, 11, 12, 13.
and the Priests judged the Leper, Levit: 13. 3, 4, 5. Deuteronomy: 24. 8, 9. Numb: 5.
1. not the people, and in the New Testament, the Apostles and Elders only
ordained pastors and officers with praying and laying on of hands, Act: 6. 6.
Act: 13. 3. Act: 14. 23. 1 Timothy: 4. 14. 2 Timothy: 1. 6. 1 Timothy: 5. 22. Tit: 1. 5.
and never the people: also if three be believers happen to be an independent
Church, and then the plantiff rebuking the offender according to Christ's rule,
Mat: 16. 16. before the Brethren who are witnesses, he shall tell the Church,
before he tell the Church, because three are an independent Church by the
Doctrine of our Brethren, and moreover if these three being a Church, shall
excommunicate the offending brother before the Church (of which Christ
speaks, when he says, tell the Church) shall hear of the matter: Then shall
1. Christ's order be violated: 2. The offending brother shall be excommunicated
by a true ministerial Church, ^lave non errante, and that duly, because he is
contumacious to them, and yet he is not excommunicated, because Christ's order
is violated, and the matter is never come before the Church, who has power to
bind and loose on Earth: 3. And certainly they must say three or four
believers do not make a Church, and they must give some other thing to make up
essentially one true visible Church, then a company of believers visibly
professing one Covenant with God.

13. And we have here for us the testimony of learned Parker, 13. Arg.
who is otherwise against us in this plea, Parker de politeia. l 3. c. 15. n. 1.
who confesses our Thesis, Ex hu q^^ eluctari cupit nobiscum, seutire necesse
est ecclesiam fidelium a Christo intellectam esse (Mat: 18.) non qua
simpliciter censi lera^^^, sed qua ais^^pli^^^ excicet, iuxta temperamentum
a^^l^ocroticum in pr^ septerto, ecclesian quippe, primo loco, co^sideratam in
his verbis dic ecclesiae, praec^se partem Aristocratic^m, ad est presbyterium,
significare existimamus, quae vero postertore commemoratur, in his verb^, si
ecclesian non audicrit, sic (ut Downamus docet) excommunicantem prepter
contemptam ecclesiam includit, ac non decernentem tantum ac examinantem, tum
and partem ecclesiae democraticam continet, qua populi consensus ad
excommunicationem necessarius est.
that in these words (tell the Church) Christ does understand the Presbytery or
Eldership. Hence the word Church in the New Testament does not always signify
the Church of Believers, Disciples, Brethren, who pray in Christ's name and are
heard in Heaven, and are builded on the Rock, and are the body and spouse of
Christ, for a number may be and often is, an Eldership judicially
excommunicating, and a Presbytery, yea and also including some externally
professing Christ, who are not a company of redeemed ones, built by saving
faith upon the Rock Jesus Christ. Also it is insolent that the word Church
here should signify both precisely the Eldership, and also in that same verse:
the whole Congregation of believers; because the same Church to the which the
offended brother should put in his bill of complaint, is that very Church which
must be heard, and obeyed under the pain of excommunication.

2. It is hard that the offender should be excommunicated for not hearing and
obeying the Congregation of believers, who are not (...), over him in the Lord.

3. By grant of M. Parker the Church of believers has not power from this
place Mat: 18. to ordain pastors to themselves, when they want pastors, or to
excommunicate their own Eldership in case of scandalous sins, which is against
his grounds and our Brethrens principles, who ascribe this authority to the
Congregation of believers, because a number of believers is not an
Aristocraticall part and a select Presbytery and Eldership, as he says is
meaned in this word (tell the Church.)

14. The Church here cannot well mean a visible Congregation of believers and
Elders conveened to hear the Word preached, 14. Ar.
so as he who contemns two private admonitions should be accused and censured
in the face of the Congregation conveened to hear Gods Word. Because the Church
meets in Christ's name for Gods worship, if they meet in faith and humble
sense of sin, with purpose of heart to worship God in spirit and truth, but
there is some other thing required, that the excommunicating Church, meet for
the actual exercise of discipline, for beside meeting in Christ's name, there
is required that the Church meet with Paul's spirit, and the rod of discipline,
1 Cor: 5. 4. That ye meet in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and my spirit
with power of our Lord Jesus Christ. Then Paul's spirit as an Elder, who has
power of the rod, a spirit and power of excommunication is required to this
meeting. But I doubt not but the Church of believers did meet at Corinth, 1
Cor: 11. for hearing the Word and receiving the Lords Supper, and for ordinary
wor^hip and praying and praising when it was not needful that Paul should
write, That ye meet together in the name of our Lord Jesus and my spirit to
hear the Word and to receive the Lords Supper: There was no need of Paul's
spirit for that, therefore I conclude that this meeting of the excommunicating
Church requires another spirit and authoritative power to deliver to Satan
(such as was in Paul) then is required in ten believers meeting in faith,
without Paul's authoritative power, to hear Gods Word. For Paul says of his
authoritative meeting, I verily absent in body but present in spirit, have
judged, etc. but Paul knew that they might meet as a number of believers to
hear the Word, whither Paul be absent or present in spirit, and this I observe
for their mistake who teach that two or three agreeing together upon Earth and
praying for one thing, are heard of God, as it is said, Mat: 18. 19, 20. is an
independent Church having the power of the Keys, for first, Christ then has
not provided a sure way, for removing scandals. And when he says (tell the
Church) this (tell the Church) must be a definite, visible, conspicuously known
Church; now in one congregation, one province, one nation there be three
hundredth, six or ten hundredth threes or fours of professed believers, if every
three and every four be an independent Church, to which of all these many
threes and fours, shall the plantiffe address himself, for they be all
equally independent Churches, the plantiffe is left in the midst, and knows
not his ordinary judge, there be so many tribunals in one Congregation, yea in
one Family.

2. How many key-bearing Churches shall be within one independent Congregation,
who may all meet in public in one house, for the joint worshipping of God
together?

3. Christ in these words, where he is said to hear two who shall agree
together upon earth as touching one thing, has no purpose to erect visible
Churches with the full power of the keys, consisting only of three or four
believers, but he does argue here from the less to the more, Bucer. com. ib.
as Bucer says, and as Musculus. God will not only ratify excommunication,
Muscul com. ib.
but he will hear the prayers of his children universally; Calvin. com. ib. P
and this promise, Paraus com. ^b.
ver. 20. of Christ's presence amongst two or three is more large and general,
then his promise to ratify the sentence of excommunication, even that Christ
will be with his own, howbeit they be not Church-waies conveened; or rather,
as Paraeus says, it is a general promise of the presence of Christ's grace in
his Church, sive magna, sive parva, either great or small, and I grant it will
prove the power of our Church sessions in Scotland very well, where there is
often but one Pastor, and some few ruling Elders, but Christ cannot promise a
Church-presence of his Spirit and grace, or such a presence whereby he ratifieth
the censures of the Church, but where there is a Church consisting of Elders
and people, but if the words be pressed according to the letter and definite
number, then it shall follow that every two believers; yea suppose two women
agreeing on earth to pray for one thing, shall be a Ministerial Church, having
the power of the keys, which is most absurd: For a number of believers make not
a Church, having the power of the keys, for 1. They want the power of binding
and loosing by preaching. 2. They are not a golden candlestick, in the which
Christ walks, as a visible Church is, Rev. 1. Christ's meaning the^ must be, I
promise my presence to the smallest Church, suppose it were possible that a
Ministerial Church could consist of the least number, that is, even of two
only: but Christ's purpose is not to make every two believers a visible
Ministerial Church, and every believing Family a congregation having the power
of the keys. Vasque^. in 3. Tho. tom. disp. ^44 c. 5.
Vasquez the Jesuit has arguments and ancients to speak from the Text this
which we say, Enchirid.
which can hardly be answered. Christia. instit.
See that Enchiridion of the Province of Cullen under Charles the V. See also
Jansenius, Synod provin.
Maldonat and others on this Text. C^loniae.
Iansen. Maldonat. in Math. 18.


CHAP. IX.
Q. 9. What members are necessarily required for the right and lawful
constitution of a true politic visible Church, to the which we may join in
Gods worship.
IT is maintained by these of the Separation, Barrow disco of the false Church.
p. 8, 9, 10
that the rightly constituted Church must consist of the Lords planting (as
says M. Barrow) all taught of God, Guide to Zion. p. 10.
all plants of righteousness, Separat 3. pe^it to K. Iams* pas p. 44
sons of Zion, precious stones, a redeemed people, a royal generation,
Confess. ar. 1^ p 19 A^^sworth against Bernard reas. 5. er. p. 17^.
so the Guide to Zion. The true visible Church (say the Separatists) is a
company of people called and separated from the world, by the word of God, M.
Can neces of Sepa^, sec. 3. pa. 174, ^75.
and joined together in a voluntary profession of the faith. So Separatists in
their petit. Mr. Ainsworth, Discovery of N. Light. printed an. 1641.
M. Can, the discovery of N. Light. For the clearing of the Question, we
remit to the consideration of the Reader these distinctions.

1. Distinct. There be some Saints by external calling, but not chosen, some
Saints by internal and effectual calling, called and chosen of God. 2.
Distinct. There be some members of a visible Church, who, de jure, by right and
obligation should be such, there be other members of a visible Church, de
facto; and in practice, who are such and such members. 3. Distinct. There is a
moral obligation, and so all the members of a visible Church are obliged to
be Saints by effectual calling, there is a physical obligation, and so that
persons may be members of a visible Church as visible, it is not essentially
required that they be effectually called. 4. Did. If a true Church and a
visible Church, as visible may not for a time be opposed by way of
contradiction, as a believing Church, and a non-believing Church, I remit to be
considered, and shall God willing be cleared. 5. Did. It is one thing to be
wicked and scandalous indeed and really; and another thing to be scandalous
juridice, and in the Court of the Church and notarily. 6. Did. A known and
openly scandalous person and a well lustred and dyed Hypocrite are to be
differenced in the Church 7. Did. Let it be considered, if the preaching of
the word be not in diverse considerations. 1. A mean of constituting and making
a visible Church. 2. A true note of a visible Church. 3. A mean of saving the
believing Church, now visibly professing the Faith. 8. Did. Let it be
considered if the Magistrate and King may not compel men to the confessing and
professing of the faith, actu imperato, by an external forcing power, and yet
neither Magistrate nor Pastor can compel to heart-believing, actu elicito, by
an inward moving of the heart. 9. Let it be considered if a visible Church may
not be a true Church by reason of some few sound believers and sincere seekers
of God, and that same whole body an infected lump and whoorish in respect of
some visible professors, who are hypocrites and proud despisers of the Lord.
10. Let it be considered if a Church may not be termed by Gods Spirit an
whore, no Church, no Spouse, jure and merito and quod vocationem passivam, in
respect of bad deserving and their not answering on their parts to the call of
God, and yet that same Church remain de facto, formaliter and quoad vocationem
Dei activam, formally and in regard of Gods part and his active vocation and
calling the Spouse and bride of Christ. Hence our first Conclusion. The Saints
by external calling are the true matter of a visible Church.
1. The word (Ecclesia) the called of God, proves this: For those are a true
visible Church, where God has set up a Candlestick, and whom God calls to
Repentance, Remission of sins and life eternal in Christ, because there be
a settled Ministry calling.

2. Because all to whom the Word is preached are called the visible Church, as
all within the house are vessels of the house visibly, howbeeit there be in
the house, Vessels of Honor and vessels of dishonor.

3. So says Ainsworth, this we hold, That Saints by calling are the only
matter of a visible Church, yet withal we hold, 2 Timothy 2. 20, 11.
that many are called, but few chosen. So also the kingdom of Heaven or
visible Church is a draw net, Ainsworth against Bernard separ. ^ch. p. 174.
wherein are good and bad fishes, a barne-floore, wherein are chafe and good
wheat. See 1 Corinthians 1. 23. Collossians 1. 1, 2. Romans 1. 7. Philip. 1. 1.
Math. 20. 16.

2. Conclusion, 2. Conclusion.
All the members of the visible Church de jure, and by right, or by moral
obligation ought to be Saints effectually called. 1. Because the commandment
of making to themselves a new heart, Ezech. 18. 31. and to be renewed in the
spirit of their mind, Ephesians. 4. 23. Rom 12. 2. and to be holy, as he who has
called them is holy, 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. It does lay an obligation moral upon
all within the visible Church. 2. Because the preached Gospel is the grace of
God appearing to all men teaching them to deny ungodliness, etc. Tit. 2. v.
11, 12.

3. Conclusion. 3. Conclusion
But, de facto, as the visible Church is in the field of the world, all the
members of the visible Church are not effectually called, justified,
sanctified, neither is it needful by a physical obligation for the true
nature and essence of a visible Church, that all the members of it be inwardly
called and sanctified, every professor is obliged to believe, Ioh. 3. 18, 36.
else the wrath of God abides on him, and he is condemned already. But to make
a man a visible professor, and a member of the true visible Church as visible,
saving faith is not essentially required, so as he should be no member of the
Church visible, if he believe not.

That this may be right taken; observe that the visible Church falls under a
twofold consideration. 1. In concreto, as a Church. 2. In abstracto, as
visible. The visible Church considered in concreto, is a part of the
universal, Catholic and unvisible Church which partaketh of the nature and
essence of a true Church, and Christ's mystical body, in which consideration we
deny reprobates and unbelevers to be members of the visible Church. 1. Because
there is no real communion (whatever Bellarmine and Papists say on the
contrary) betwixt righteousness and unrighteousness, light and darkness,
the seed of the woman, and the seed of the Serpent, so as they can make up one
true Church. 2. Because these who are not Christ's, are not members of Christ,
and so no part of his mystical body. 3. Because they are not bought with a
price; nor his purchased flock in the blood of God, as Acts 20. the true Church
is, nor builded upon a rock, as Mat. 16. 18. 4. Christ is not their Redeemer,
head, High Priest, King and Savior, and so neither are they his redeemed, his
members, his people, subjects and saved ones. 5. Because the promises made to
the chos^n and believers, to give them a new heart, regeneration,
sanctification, remission of sins are made to them only, and in Gods gracious
intention, and not to reprobates. Whence I infer these conclusions.

1. Sepera^ists arguments must be weak, for they all conclude that which we
deny not, and no other thing, to wit, that haereticks, adulterers, forcerers,
blasphemers be no parts of Christ's visible Church, as it is a Church. Yea we
say that as the tree leg, and the eye of glass, and the teeth of silver by art
put in the body, are no members of the living body, so neither are these
members of the true Church, and so much do all our Divines, as Calvin, Beza,
Junius, Whittaker, Tilen, Piscator, Pareus, Vrsine, Tr^l^atius, Sibrandus,
Amesius prove against Papists.

2. Preaching of the Gospel is called a note of the Church, and profession of
faith a note of the Church both, the former is a no^e of the teaching Church or
minsteriall Church called, Ecclesia docens. The latter is a note of the
professing Church, who professes the faith, which we may call Ecclesia utens,
or Ecclesia practice consideram.

3. Profession of the faith is thought to be true, either Subjectively. 2.
Objectively. Or 3. Both Subjectively and Objectively. Profession subjectively
is true when the professor does indeed profess and avow the truth, and does
not only seem to avow and profess the truth, and this is no note of a true
Church, because it may be in hypocrites, who really go to Church, really hear
the word and partake of the Sacraments, but not sincerely. Profession true
objectively is when the professor does profess that faith which is indeed
sound and orthodox. And this is a mark of the true teaching or ministerial
Church, and may be in a visible company of professors who for the time are not
sincere believers. But a profession of the faith both objectively true and
subjectively is, when the object is orthodox and sound truth, and the professor
sincerely and graciously, and with an honest heart believes and professes the
truth, and this way profession of the truth is a true and essential note of a
visible Church as it is a true Church and body of Christ, and so are our
Divines to be expounded in this doctrine about the notes of the visible Church.
But withal, the visible Church is to be considered in abstracto, under the
notion of visibility, and as visible, and as performing all the external acts
of professing, governing, hearing, preaching, praising, administrating the
seals of the covenant, binding and loosing in the external and visible court
of Christ, and under this reduplication as obvious to men's eyes, and therefore
in this notion all external professors who are not manifestly and openly
scandalous are to be reputed members of the true visible Church, and therefore
this term, would be considered, a true visible Church. For the adjective
(true) may either be referred to the subject (Church) and so signifies the
true mystical body of Christ visibly, and with all sincerely professing the
sound faith. Or it may be referred to the other adjective (visible) and so it
is no other but a company of professors visible to our senses, and so truly
visible, whose members may be unsound and false professors: Then the question
is, whither visible Saints 1. forsaking all known sins. 2. Doing all the
known will of God. 3. Growing in grace, M. Smith. paral. cens. obser, page ^2
Discov. of N. Light prin* an. 1641.
(as says Smith, and the discov. of N. Light.) be the only true matter of a
right and lawfully consistent visible Church and congregation; so as we are to
join with no company of worshippers of God, but such visible Saints as these,
and to acknowledge no other society a true Church, whereto we are obliged to
adjoyne our selves as members, save only such a s^ciety: Or is this sufficient
for the nature, and right constitution of a true visible Church, that the
company that we are to join our selves unto, as visible members, have in it
these true marks of a visible Church, The pure word of God purely preached,
and the Sacraments duly administered, with discipline according to Gods word,
and withal a people externally professing the foresaid faith, suppose they
cannot give to us manifest tokens and evidences that they are effectually
called, and partakers of the divine nature, and translated from death to life,
and are elected, called and justified; This latter we hold as the truth of God;
these of the Separation hold the former. Now we must carefully distinguish here
what are to be distinguished; for there are many questions infolded here of
diverse natures: For 1. The question is if the society have the word, seals and
right discipline, and they profess the truth, suppose their lives be wicked;
whether they should not be answerable to that which they profess? I Answer. No
doubt they ought to be answerable to their light, and obey the holy calling. 2.
What if many of them lead a life contrary to that which they profess, and yet
the governors use not the rod of discipline to censure them: then whether
should the members separate from that Church? They ought to separate, (say the
Separatists,) They ought not to separate from the Church and worship, say we;
they are to stay with their Mother, but to plead with her; and modestly and
seasonably say, that Archippus and others do not fulfill their Ministry, which
they have received of the Lord. 3. What if there be purity of doctrine, but
extreme wickedness, contrary to their doctrine; whether is that company a
true Church or not? I answer, it is a true, visible and a teaching or right
ministerial Church, but for as far as can be seen, not a holy, not a
sanctified Church, and therefore must not be deserted and left. 4. What if the
guides receive in as members of the Church, those who are known to be most
scandalous and wicked, and not such Saints as Paul writes unto at Rome,
Corinth, Ephesus Colosse. Answ. The faults of the guides are not your faults
who are private members, you are to keep public communion in the public
ordinances of Christ, but not to take part with their unfruitful works, but
rather to reprove them. 5. What if the members of the Church can give no real
proofs that they are inwardly called, sanctified, and justified, and yet you
see no scandalous out-breakings in them, to testify the contrary. I answer,
for as much as grace may be under many ashes, as a piece of gold amongst
mountains of earth: If they profess the sound faith, they are a true visible
Church, and we are to acknowledge them as such, and to join our selves as
members to such a society, or being already members, we are to remain in that
society, and not to separate from it in any sort.

The Separation does complain that in our Church are (as Ainsworth says)
swarms of Atheists, Ainsworth counterpoyson against Bernard p. 3.
Idolaters, Papists, erroneous and heretical sectaries, witches, charmers,
sorcerers, Declar. of Eccles. discip. p. 171. Dialog. of
thieves, adulterers, liars, etc. The Gentiles enter unto the temple of God,
the holy things of God, the Sacraments indifferently communicated with clean
and unclean, circumcised and uncircumcised: And amongst you are thousands who
cannot tell how they shall be saved. So say others, as M. Barrow and Smith.
Hence infer they our Church is a false Church, not right constitute, no
Spouse of Christ, no royal generation, not a people who has Christ for King,
Priest, and Prophet. We on the contrary hold this as our fourth conclusion,
That howbeit openly and grossly profane wicked persons, as known atheists,
and mockers of Religion, Idolaters, papists, heretics, sorcerers, witches,
thieves, adulterers, etc. are not to be kept in the Church; but to be
excommunicated, nor yet to be received into the Church as members thereof,
until they give evidences of their repentance: Yet we say that there is
nothing required more as touching the essential properties, and nature of
being members of a Church, as visible; but that they profess before men the
faith, and desire the seals of the Covenant, and crave fellowship with the
visible Church, which I prove:

1. From the manner of receiving members in the Apostolic Church, where
nothing is required but a professed willingness to receive the Gospel,
howbeit they receive it not from their heart, Act. 2. 41. then they that gladly
received his word (Peter's word) were baptized, and the same day were added to
the Church about three thousand souls, v. 45. And they sold their possessions
and parted them to all men. Now amongst these glad receivers of the Gospel
were Ananias and Saphira, chapter 4. v. 34, 35, 36, 37. chap. 6. v. 1, 2, 3. It is
true they are all charged by Peter to repent, ere they be baptized, and added
to the Church; but the Apostles require no more to make members of the visible
Church, ^ut 1. professed willing receiving of the word and this receiving
expressed by an outward act of selling their goods, which was but hypoc^isie in
Ananias and Saphira, as the event declared; yet were Ananias and Saphira, for
that time members of the Churches as truly visible, and their acts of electing
and choosing a Pastor, and consenting to excommunicate scandalous persons in
that time valid in Christ's cout: Yea suppose Ananias had been a preacher, his
preaching and baptizing should have been valid, by grant of Separatists. Also
there is no more required by the Church of Simon Magus, Act 8. v. 13. but
believing historically at the sight of miracles, and he was baptized and
received into the Church presently. Now this believing was not seen to be
saving faith to Peter and the Apostles, we know no ways they had to know it,
seeing they know not the heart, but what is said, v. 13. he continued with
Philip, and wondered, which an hypocrite might do, and he had been not long
since an abominable sorcerer, and usurped the honor of God like a
sacrilegious robber of the Almighty of his glory, ver. 9, 10, 11. And the like
we may see of Demas, who forsook Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 10 and followed the present
world: There was nothing to make him a member of the visible Church then, but
that for a while he followed Paul in his journeyes, and professed the faith.
And the like must be said of Hymeneus and Alexander, who for a time were
members of the true Church, as it is visible, and a professing Church; and this
was known only by their profession; yet that they had but a bare profession
is clear, seeing afterward they made shipwreck of faith, 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20.
Now our brethren cannot deny but all these might, and did exercise
Ecclesiastical Acts that were valid and ratified of God* yea of binding and
loosing, and so nothing is required to make men members of a visible Church,
but such an outward profession of faith as may befall, and has been found in
the fairest broidered and pa^mented hypocrites, who have been in the Apostolic
Church. Also what more was in Judas, even after Christ had said (Have not I
chosen you twelve, and one of you is a Devil?) yet the eleven say not, Lord,
discover him to us, that we may separate from him.

2. Argument. 2. Arg.
If the visible Church planted and constituted lawfu^ly, be a draw-net, wherein
are fishes of all sorts; and a house wherein are vessels of silver and gold;
and also base vessels of brass and wood; and a barne-floore wherein are wheat
and a chafe, then a Church is rightly constitute; howbeit there be in it
believers and unbeleevers, and hypocrites, as members thereof: And there is no
more required to make members of the Church visible as visible, but that they
be within the net, hearers of the word, within the house as vessels of brass,
within the barne-wals as chafe, in likeness and appearance like wheat: But
the former is true, Barrow dis^ov. falls Church, p 20.
and granted by Barrow, Mat 13. 47. 2 Timothy 2. 20, 21. Mat. 3. 12. Barrow says,
Hypocrites are ever in the Church, but it follows not that the profane
multitude for that should be admitted members without proof of their faith.
Answ. As the likeness between the vessel of brass, and the vessel of gold,
and their being in one and the same Noblemans cu^table together, is sufficient
to make the brazen vessel a part of the plenishing of the house: so the
hypocrites external profession, and receiving the word, and remaining in the
Church, as Ananias and Saphira, and Simon Magus his believing, his adhering to
Philip, his desire of Baptism makes him a member of the visible Church, and
the Church that these are in, is a truly and right constitute visible Church.

3. Argument. 3. Arg.
If that Church be rightly constitute and a true Church, where the man without
the wedding garment comes to the Marriage of the Kings son, that is, where
multitudes were called, and do hear the Word, and so come to the banquet of
the Gospel, that are not chosen, and are destitute of the wedding garment of
faith and Christ's righteousness, and all these that are professed hearers of
the word, and yet not sound believers. Then a professed and external use of
the means (if no outward out-breakings of scandals be in them) makes men
members of the visible Church, and the Church is rightly constitute where these
are; but the former is true, Mat. 22. v. ^, 3. etc. v. 11, 12, 13. and this is
a point most ordinary in every visible Assembly, where the word is preached,
where some believe, and some are hardened, as in the parable of the sower,
where the seed falls upon good ground, and brings forth fruit, and also
upon the way side, upon the rockie and thorny ground, and in the parable of the
ten Virgins, to make them all the visible kingdom of heaven, there is no more
required, but that all have l^mps, that is, a profession that they are the
Bridegroomes men attending the wedding, and yet five of them wants oil. And
so when Christ preaches and works miracles, some believe, and some believe
not, Joh. 7. 31, 32, 33. Acts 2. 48, 49, 50. compared with Acts 5. 1, 2. 2 Cor.
15. 16.

4. Argument. ^. Arg.
Israel was a right constituted Church. The covenanted people of God, an holy
people to the Lord, chosen to be a peculiar people to himself, Deuteronomy. 14. 1, 2.
Deuteronomy. 29, 10, 11, 12. a people on whom God set his love, Deuteronomy. 7. 7. So happy
as none was like unto them, saved by the Lord the shield of their help, Deuteronomy.
33. 26, 27, 28, 29. a people with whom God would not ^reake his oath, and
Covenant made with Abraham, Judge. 2. 1. and their God, 1 King. 18. 36. 2 King.
9. 6. and he calls them his people, Hos 6 Jer. 2. 13. married unto the Lord,
Ier. 3. 14. and married for ever, Ier. 31. 36, 37. Ier. 32 40, 41. Hos 2. 19,
20. Isa. 50. 30. Psalm. 80. 30, 31, 32, 33, etc. A people who had avowed the
Lord to be their God, a people whom the Lord had avowed to be his peculiar
people, Deuteronomy. 26. 18, 19. A people with goodly tents, as the gardens by the
rivers side, as the trees of Libanus, that the Lord has planted, Number. 24. 5,
6. A people on whom the Lord looked upon, and behold their time was the time of
love, over whom the Lord spread his skirts of love, to whom God swear a
Covenant, and made them his, Ezech. 16, 6, 7, 8, 9. the Lords heritage, Ier.
12. 8. his pleasant son, and dear child. Ier. 31. 20. his wel-beloved, Isa.
5. 1. And yet because of transgressions and the backsliders and revolters that
wre amongst them, a perverse and crooked generation, Deuteronomy. 32. 5. at that same
time had waxed fat and thick, and lightly esteemed the rock of their
salvation, v. 15. A people that had no eyes to see, nor ears to hear, nor a
heart to perceive, to that day, Deuteronomy. 29. 4. spotted, but not as his children,
Deuteronomy. 32. 5. a whorish people, v. 16, 17. Sodom and Gomorrah, Deuteronomy 32. 32.
Isa. 1. 10. an harlot city full of murderers, dross, not silver, wine and
water, v. 21, 22. uncircumcised in heart, Ier. 9. 26. to God no better then
uncircumcised Aethyopians, Egyptians, Philistines, and Syrians, Amos 9 7. these
that played the harlot with many lovers, in all the highways, Ier. 3. 1* 2,
3. The Prophets prophesying falsely, the Priests bearing rule by their means,
and the people loving to have it so, Ierem. 5. 31. The Princes wolves, evening
wolves, Ezekiel 22. 27. What Apostasy was in Israel, yea in all, except Cal^b
and Joshuah? What harlotrie with the Daughters of Moab? and that vile Idol
Baal-peor? both immediately before, and immediately after the Spirit had called
them, a blessed people, goodly plants, trees of the Lords planting, Numb. 24.
as may be seen in the Chapters of that story, especially, cap. 25. Hence
unanswerably it must follow, A Church visible is a rightly and lawfully
constitute Church, to the which we may join our selves as members, and yet it
is a mixed multitude of godly and profane, circumcised and clean,
uncircumcised and unclean. And Moses and the Prophets knew Israel to be thus
mixed and rebuked them, and yet terms them a married people to the Lord,
Jer. 3. 14.

5. Argument. 5. Arg.
If the Church of the Jews was a truly constitute visible Church, a Church
that did worship a God they knew, and of whom was salvation, Joh. 4. 22. in
Christ's days, and had Moses chair among them, and teachers on that chair
whom Christ commanded to hear, and obey, Mat. 23 1, 2, 3. and was the Lords
vineyard, Mat. 21. 33. and the Lords building, ver. 42. and had the Kingdom of
God amongst them, ver. 43. and the Lords Priests whom Christ commanded to
acknowledge and obey, Mat. 8. 4. and if the Lord countenanced their feasts,
preached in the Temple, and their Synagogues, John 5. 1. John 7. 37. John 8. 2.
Luke 4. 16, 17. and that daily, and yet there was in their Church Scribes and
Pharisees, who perverted the Law of God, Mat. 5. 21. who made the Law of God of
none effect with their traditions, Mat. 15. 6. and polluted all with will
worship, Mark. 7. 6, 7, 8, etc. Master builders who rejected Christ the corner
stone of the building, and slew the heir Christ to make the vineyard their
own, Mat. 21. v. 42. v. 38 killers of the Prophets, Mat. 23. 37. blind guides
who led the blind people in the ^^tch. Christ's own who would not receive him,
Joh. 1. 12. if they slew the Lord of glory, Acts 5. 30. Acts 2. 36. Gods house
made a house of merchandise, a den of thieves, John 2. 16. the Priesthood was
bought and sold, Caiaphas was High Priest that year: By Gods Law the
High Priest should have continued so all his life. All this being true, then a
Church is a right constitute Church, where the clean and unclean are mixed.

6. The like I might prove of the Church of Coriath, 6. Arg.
Galatia, Co^fes art. 17.
and Ephesus, Thyatira, Sardis, Laodicea. And the Separatists grant that
hypocrites are often in the true visible Church, then the presence of wicked
men in a visible Church marr^th not the constitution of a Church, only
Separatists would have a more accurate trial taken before persons were
received in the Church, lest the uncircumcised enter into the temple of the
Lord. But all the marks that we are to take before we receive members in the
Church, or they also, is but an external profession: And the Apostles took no
marks in receiving Ananias and Saphira, Simon Magus, Demas, Alexander, and
Hymyneus, but only an hypocritical profession, Calv. Ins^^it l. ^. c. 1. ^ect
8.
as Calvin has well observed, (...)
and after him Cameron. We have no certainty of faith to know that this, or
this man is a believer, that another man believes and is saved is not the
object of my faith. 2. Hence it follows, that of a Congregation of forty
professors, four and twenty may be, (...).
and often are but hypocrites; yet these four and twenty, suppose twelve of
them be the Pastor, Elders and Deacons, are truly parts of the Church as
visible: Howbeit not parts of the Church as the Church, and as the true and
mystciall body of Jesus Christ, and by this same reason all the forty may be
hypocrites for a time, because they are but men, who sees not the heart, who
did congregate this Church, and what is true of four and twenty may befall
forty. I say (for a time) they may be all hypocrites, or at the first
constitution of the Church, but that all shall remain so, I think is against
the wisdom and gracious intention of God, who does not set up a candle and
candlestick, but to seek his own lost money: And where he sends
shepherds, he has there some lost sheep, because the preaching of the word is
an essential note of a visible Church. Hence that Congregation of forty not
yet converted is a true visible Church, I mean, a true teaching and
Ministerial Church in which are acts Pastoral of preaching, baptizing,
binding, and loosing that are valid and right Ecclesiastically: For Baptism
there administrated was not to be repeated, and such a Church by the Ministry
therein, is and may be converted to the saving faith of Christ: yea and
Separatists would call such an independent Congregation. Hence 3. this must
follow, that as to make one a Pastor, and to make twelve men Deacons and
Elders, and so such as has joint power of the keys, even by the grant of
Separatists, with the rest of the Congregation, there is not faith in Christ
required as an essential element, as I have proved from Mat. 7. 22. so to make
these twelve members of a visible Congregation, Faith is not essentially
required (suppose it be morally required) so by that same reason to make other
twelve members in that visible society in Christ, faith were not required, as
to make Demas, Ananias, Saphira, Magus, Alexander, Hy^^^cus and some more of
that kind a visible Church: There is no more required but that profession of
faith which moved the Apostolic Church to make them members of a true Church
visible: For what makes formally a member of a Church visible, to wit,
profession of the faith, that same makes forty also members of a visible
Church, and quae est ratio constitutiva partium, est etiam const^tutiva totius.
That which formally constituteth a part, does formally constitute the whole,
where the whole is made of parts of the same nature, as what is essential to
make a quart of water, that is essential to make a whole sea of water, and
every part of the visible Church is visible, and a visible professor, as
visibility denominateth the whole, so does it every part of the whole. And from
this I infer this fourth, That a visible Church as visible, does not
essentially and necessarily consist of believers; but only of professors of
belief, so that a Church and a visible Church may be opposed by way of
contradiction, as a number of believers, and a number of non-believers. For a
Church essentially is a number of believers and Christ's mystical body, else it
is not a Church, that is, a number of persons effectually called; for this
cause I grant an Eldership of a congregation; a Synod Provincial or National
are unproperly called a Church; and howbeit we list not to strive about names,
we may grant our General assembly not to be properly called a National Church,
but by a figure, for the believers of the Nation are properly the National
Church, I mean a mystical believing Church.

5. Conclusion. The preaching of the Word and seals thereof ordinarily settled in
a visible society is the essential note and mark of a true Church: Ainsworth
counterpoyson, p. 10, 11 Robinson.
It is weak and vain that Ainsworth, Robinson, Can and Master Smith say, The
preaching of the Word is no essential mark of the true Church, and why?
Because forsooth, our Masters learned from Barrow to say; It is preached to the
Reprobate to whom it is the ^avour of death unto death, and it was preached to
the scoffing Athenians by Paul Act. 17. and yet the Athenians were not a true
Church. But we distinguish three things here.

There is 1. The single and occasional preaching of the Word.

2. The settled preaching of the Word, the settling of the Candle-sticke and
Kingdom to dwell amongst a people.

3. The preached Word, with the seals, especially the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper. The single and occasional preaching, or by concomitancy as to a people
unconverted and unbelievers, and so it is not an essential note of the true
Church, but a mean to gather a Church to God, and this they prove, and no
more, and so do the Belgicke, Arminians and Socinians prove against our
reformed Churches, that it is no mark of the Church; Simon Episcop. dis. 8.
The s. 0.
so Episcopius, the Remonstrants, Remonst in Apol. ^ol 411.
the Catechize of Raccovia and Socinus, but this is as if one would say: the
colors and arms of such a King in war are carried through the enemies
fields, Catech. Racco^. ca. 1. fol. ^98
as well as through the Kingsland; Socin. de Eccl^s. p. 98.
therefore they are not the proper colors of such a King.

2. The settled preaching of the Word established and remaining in a Church, as
the standing candlestick, the fixed kingdom of God is the essential mark of
the true Church, and preached in Gods blessed decree of Election only for, and
to the chosen believers, and as it were in the bie to the profane reprobates
amongst them, and this they cannot be able to improove. And it was M. Smiths
vanity to say, the Reformed Churches have the Word, Calv instruct. adversus
liler^.
as the thief has the honest man's purse. Anabaptists reason just that way.
See Calvin.

3. The preaching of the Word, and the seals of the settled covenant is a means
of confirming those that are already converted: Neither is it much against us
that the Word is preached to the reprobate; for the preaching of the Word is
considered either in it self, E^ise. disp. 26. these. 4, 5. and ib 2, 3.
and actu primo, and so it is a mark of the visible Church. R^monst. Confess.
2^ sect. ^. and Apol sol. 2^7. ^^^onent non es^e p^^cise necessa^tam ad
constituendum (...)
Or. 2. As it is effectual by the Spirit of Jesus, and actu secundo, and so it
is an essential mark of the true Church and lively body of Christ, according
to that cited by Whittaker, Calvin, Willet, Paraeus, Beza, Vrsine, Bucanus, and
our Divines, John 1^. So^^n t^act d^ Eccles. ad loc. Romans 10. Socin de exter.
reg. christ eccles so. 253 C^tech. Racco^ de (...) christ. c. 10 pa, 305. 306.
My Sheep hear my voice. Hence observe a vile Doctrine of Separatists, holden
also by Socinians and Arrainians, as Episcopius, the Belgicke Remonstrants,
Socinus, the Raccovian Catechize, and ^heophil. Nicolaides, That all gifted
persons may preach publicly, (...) Nicola^des Tract. de (...) cap. 1. p. 144.
and ib (...) Separat. co^fess art. 34, 35. p. 25.
and that there is no nec^ssity of c^lling of Pastors by the Presbytery, so do
they teach, That there can be no lawful Pastors now after the Apostasy of of
Antichrist, till t^ere be a constitute Church of believers to choose them, or a
flock to them to watch over. And therefore conversion is ordinarily wrought
(say they) by private Christians, that have the gift to p^ophecy publicly, and
yet are not Pastors; for private Christians do gather the Church (say they)
Pastors do not ordinarily convert, they do only confirm the church of Saints
already converted. Against which we say. Pastors as pastors conve^t ^^en to
(...)
The new Testament of Christ tells us of no officers to preach in Christ's
name, for the perfecting of the Saints, the work of the Ministry, edifying of
the body of Christ, 1 Arg,
but Pastors and Doctors, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.

2. None but such as have power of binding and loosing by the preaching of the
Word, 2. A^g.
Joh. 20.

3. Those to whom Christ gives power of public teaching, 3 Arg.
to those he gives power of Baptizing, Mat. 28. 18, 19. and sends them as
his Father sent him.

4. How shall they preach except they be sent? 4. Arg.
Romans 10. 14. Sending in the Apostolic Church was by praying and the laying on
of the hands of the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4. 14.

5. There is nothing more ordinary then that Pastors as Pastors, 5. Arg.
and by virtue of their pastoral office convert souls. 1. Arg.
1. Faith is begotten by hearing a sent ^reacher, Romans 10. 14, 15. Ministers by
whom we believe, 1 Cor. 3. 9. by them we receive the Spirit by the hearing of
Faith, Gal: 3. 2. 2. 2.
People are begotten over a^aine by them, as by spiritual fathers and mothers,
1 Cor. 4. 15. Gal: 4. 19. 3. 3.
Pastors are the (...), wooers and under-suters to gain the Brides consent, to
marry the lovely Bridegroom Christ Jesus, Joh. 2. ^9 2 Cor: 11. 2, 3. 4. 4.
Their Word is the savor of life unto life unto some, and the savor of death
unto death unto others, 2 Cor. 2. 16. They are to preach with all gentleness,
waiting if God peradventure will give repentance to the gainsayers, 2 Timothy: 2.
24, 25, 26. 5. 5.
They are Ambassadors in Christ's steed, beseeching men to be recon^iled unto
God, a Cor: 5. 20. 6. 6.
The weapons of their warfare are mighty through God to fling down strong
holds (of unbelief) to cast down imaginatims, and every high thing, that
exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and to bring unto captivity
every thought to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor: 10. 4, 5. and so they are to
pull men out of the hands of Satan. 7. 7.
They are to seek the Lords Sheep, Ezekiel. 34 4. Hence the object and matter
that a Pastor is to work on as a Pastor, is unbelievers, unborne men,
gainsayers, proud, disobedient, keeping strong holds against Christ: So the
nature of the Pastors office is to open the eyes of the blind, to turn them
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may
receive forgiveness of sins, Act: 26. 18. and this evidently evinceth, that
the visible and rightly constitute Church, where God has erected a Ministry
is a number of blinded sinners in Satan's power, and in the power of darkness
for the most part, while God by a Ministry delivers them, suppose they
profess the Faith. It is also a Doctrine unknown to the Word of God, that the
Church of Christ is gathered and edified formally as a Church without Christ's
Ministers that are sent to gain the consent of the Bride to marry the
Bridegroom Christ. It is also unknown to Scripture that Prophets are no
Pastors, and have no power of the pastoral calling or s^ales of the Covenant,
Should those be the ordinary officers of Christ that gather sinners in to
Christ, and convert to the Faith of Jesus men dead in sins and trespasses, who
yet are neither Pastors nor Doctors sent by Christ and his Church.

6. Conclusion. Seeing then the Church has no other mark and rule to look
unto, in the receiving in of members into a visible Church, but external
profession, which is no infallible mark of a true convert, the Church is
rightly constitute, where all borne within the visible Church and professing
the Faith are received, suppose many wicked persons be there. Now seeing time,
favor of men, prosperity accompanying the Gospel, bring many into the Church,
so the Magistrate may compel men to adjoyn themselves to the true Church.

O says, M. Barrow. M. Ainsworth. M. Cann^. Object.
Master Barrow, Ainsworth, Mr. Can. The blast of the Kings horn can make no
man a member of Christ's body, that must be done willingly, and by the Spirit of
Christ, not by compulsion: The Magistrate (say they) can work faith in none,
he ought indeed to abolish Idolatry, set up the true Worship of God, suppress
errors, cause the truth to be taught, yet he cannot constrain men to join to
the Church.

I answer, This is a senseless reason; for how does the Magistrate abolish
Idolatry, set up the true worship of God? It is, I hope, by external force and
power: For the Magistrate as the Magistrate does nothing but by an external
coactive power. The Magistrate uses the sword, not reasons, preaching and
counsel. Yea, this way he cannot abolish idolatry, nor erect the pure worship
of God, for it is a work of Gods Spirit and a willing work, that a subject
forsake Idols, and worship God purely at the command of a King, as it is the
work of God, that he believe in Christ, and join himself to the Church of
true believers.

2. That a man by external profession adjoyn himself to the true visible
Church, is not a work of saving faith, as our Masters dream, for Simon Magus
and Ananias and Saphira a turned members of the visible Church upon as small
motives, as the command of a King, upon the motive of gain and honor, and
were never a whit nearer Christ for all this.

3. The Magistrate cannot compel men to believe, Juniu^ contr. ^. cont. Bell
l. 3 ca. 6.
nor can the Minister by preaching, or the power of the keys do it, Vo^tius
despera. ca^ Papa. l. ^. sect. 2. c. 12.
except Gods Spirit do it, but as Junius ^aith, he may compel men to profess
belief, but not to believe, he may compel to the external means, not to the
end. 2. The Magistrate (as Voetius says) may compel by remooving impediments,
as idols and false teachers and authoritatively. 2. compel to the means. Now
it shall be easy to answer their Objections, who wou^d prove that Saints are
the only matter of a rightly and lawfully constitute visible church. Barr^w
discov. p. 9 ^0.


First, Object. 1.
Master Barrow reasons against us thus, The material Temple from the very
foundation was of choice costly stones, the beams of choice Cedars and
Algummim-trees, which typified the church of the new Testament, Isa. 54. 11.
Behold I will lay thy stones with carbuncle and thy foundations with Saphirs,
etc. Is^. 6. 17. for brass I will bring gold, Isa. 35. 8. No Lion, nor
ravenous beast shall be in the mountain of the Lord, but the redeemed of the
Lord, Jer. 31. 34. They shall all know me from the least of them, to the
greatest, in this mountain there shall be no cockatrise, aspe, lion, leopard
until they have left their poison, Isaiah 11. 6. Answer first.

These places none (except Anabaptists) can apply according to the letter, to
the Church independent of every Parish, may not the Separatists, who ^each that
there is rotten timber in their visible Temple, and chalk stones, Lions,
Barrow disco. p ^0 (...) pa^a l. p. 28. 29.
Wolves, Cockatrices, for says Barrow, Ainsworth, and all their side, there
are always in the Church glorious Hypocrites; now such as Judas, Demas,
Hymeneus, and such hypocrites are not precious stones, gold, taught of God,
there is not a visible Church of a congregation out of Heaven, where there is
not a hypocrite and an unbeliever.

2. The place Isa. 54. and Jer: 31. is understood of the Catholic Church, with
whom the covenant of grace is made, Isa. 54. 10. Jer: 31. 31. and this covenant
is not everlasting, nor an eternal covenant to any one Parish Church, yea, nor
to a National Church, nor to Corinth, Ephesus, Pergamus, all which particular
Churches are fallen under horrible Idolatry, Muscul. com in Calvin. (...) 54.
Hi^^o^. (...).
and in those Mountains are Lions and Leopards, and therefore as Musculus,
Calvin, Hierom, and the course of the Text clears he is speaking of the
begun holiness of the whole Church, of the redeemed under Christ, which is
finally and fully accomplished in Heaven, for what use should there be of
excommunication, and of the Pastors and Porters care to hold out, and cast out,
by the Church censures, Lions, Leopards, Cockatrices, if all, and every one in
the Church be taught of God?

3. It is beside the Text to make the Temple of Jerusalem a type of a Parish
congregation, it was a type of Christ, John 2. 21. of every believer, 1 Cor. 6.
19. and of the whole Catholic Church.

4. Where it is said, There shall be no ravenous beast in the Mountain of the
Lord, the Mountain of the Lord is not taken literally for Mount Sion, as if
in every little Mountain of a visible congregation, made up of so many Saints,
there were not a Judas amongst them; But by the Mountain of the Lord is meaned
the Catholic Church, alluding to the visible Mount Sion, a type of the Church
of Christ through all the earth.

2. They dispute thus: Object. 2.
God in all ages has appointed, and made a separation of his people from the
world, before the Law, under the Law, and now in the time of the Gospel, Genesis
4. 6. Exodus 6. 3. Levit. 20. 24. Ezech. 6. 11. Psalm. 84. 10.

Answ. God has made a separation of the Church from the wicked, but not such a
separation, as there remains no mixture of hypocrites and unbeleevers in the
Church. The Church was separated from Caines seed, yet was there Idolatry,
defection and wickedness: in the Church, till God charged Abraham to leave his
country, and his fathers house. God separated his Israel from Egypt, but so
that there was much Idolatry and wickedness in Israel thus separated.

God may, and does separate his own from Egypt, (...) in Marriage and mixture
with the Canaanites. (...) that are born in the visible Church and profess
(...) us, should not be received in the Church (...) be all taught of God, all
precious stones, all plants of righteousness: it follows no way, but the
contrary, therefore because they are unbeleevers under the power and chains of
Satan, and ignorance, they are to be received in a communion with the Church,
to be hearers of the word, that they may be all taught of God, and all made
righteous plants.

3. They reason thus. Object. 3.
The wicked have not Christ for their head. So the guide to Zion. Guide to
Zion. pos. 32. page 16. Separatist 3. petitio. 3. posit arg. 2, Barrow. d^sco.
^al. Church page 22
A true visible Church (say the Separatists) is the Temple of the Lord, the
body of Christ, a kingdom of Priests, a Church of Saints, the household and
Kingdom of God. Yea says Barrow, a people, chosen, redeemed Saints by
calling, partakers of the most precious faith, and glorious hope, the humble,
obedient, loving Sheep of Christ, a sheepe-fold watched by discipline, a
garden well enclosed, here enters no Cananite, every vessel is holy.

Answ. 1. The body of Christ, a Kingdom of Priests and Saints, and these that
are partakers of the holy faith, are the chosen of God, ordained for glory in
his decree of election, and effectually called and justified; but the
adversaries say, that the visible Church is a company of Saints by calling,
where (says Ainsworth) there be many called, but few chosen, hence this
argument will prove that none, no hypocrites can be in the visible Church, as a
Church is indeed Christ's body. Now the Church visible as a Church is indeed
Christ's body, a reyall Priesthood, a chosen generation, but as visible, it is
sufficient that the Church be a royal Priesthood only in profession, and so
possibly for a while, no royal Priesthood, no chosen generation, as I have
observed before. But (say they) hypocrites are not indeed and really members of
the true visible Church, but only in reputation, as an eye of glass, is not
indeed a true part of the body.

I answer, then our adversaries give us no right description of the true
natural and lively members of the true visible Church, he that would give such
a definition of a man as agrees both to a living man, and to a pictured or
painted man, were but a painted Logician. For they acknowledge the true parts
of a visible Church to be a chosen people, a royal generation, partakers of
the holy faith, either they are really and in Gods esteem a chosen people, etc.
And so we are at a point, there be none members of a visible Church, none ought
to hear the word as members of the Church, none ought to preach, baptize, bind
and loose with the rest of the Congregation, but these that are really chosen
and effectually called, which cannot be said. Ainsworth then and M. Can, and
Smith do but mock us, when they say, The true matter of a true visible Church
are Saints in profession, and in the judgment of charity, for that is not
enough, they must be according to the Texts of Scripture alleged by Barrow,
not only in the judgment of charity, but in Gods estimation, and in the
judgment of verity, a chosen people, a royal generation. If the true matter
of the true visible Church be a chosen generation and a royal Priesthood only
in profession, the places cited will not help them; for Peter, 1 Pet. 2.
writes not to an independent Congregation, who are in profession only a chosen
people; But he writes to the Catholic Church, even to all the dispersed and
sanctified, and regenerated in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bythinia,
who were not only a chosen generation in profession, but also really and in
Gods decree of election. Neither Peter nor Isaiah are of purpose to teach that
in the independent Congregation of the New Testament there are none, but all
righteous men, no stones (to speak with Isaiah) but Saphires and Carbuncles,
no thorns and briers, but only the fur and the myrtle trees; no iron and
brass, but all gold and silver; no Cananite, no Lion, no unclean vessel,
this they shall not find in the independent Congregations of Separatists, nor
can it be in the visible Church on earth, except they seek the Anabaptists
Church, a man in the Moon.

4. They reason thus, 4. Object.
The wicked are expressly forbidden in the word of God, Guide place cited p^^
32. page 16.
for meddling with his Covenant and ordinances, Psalm. 50. So the guide to Zion.

Answ. The wicked are forbidden to speak of Gods Law and his Covenant, in some
case, so long as they hate to be reformed, but they are not simply forbidden;
but hence it follows not, that they should not be ordinary hearers of the
word, but rather they are to be hearers, and so members of the visible Church,
seeing faith comes by hearing. 2. From this argument is nothing concluded
against us, for such adulterers, thieves and slanderers, as are forbidden to
take Gods Law in their mouth, Psalm. 50. are to be cast out of the Church, and
the question is, if they be not cast out, if the Church for that be no true
Church, that we should remain in, they say it leaves off to be a true visible
Church: we deny.

5. There is (says Ainsworth) proclaimed by God himself, 5. Object.
enmity and war, betwixt the seed of the woman, and the seed of the
Serpent; Geneses 3. 1 Cor. 6.
and there is no communion nor fellowship betwixt Christ and Beliall, light and
darkness. Therefore the profane and the godly cannot be mixed together in one
visible society, as two contraries are not capeable of one and the same form.

Answ. This will prove that which is not denied, that the godly and ungodly
cannot agree well together, suppose the ungodly be latent hypocrites; for they
have two contrary natures, as fire and water, and have two contrary fathers,
God and Satan, but that is not denied. But hence it follows not but that
hypocrites and unbeleevers may be all their life in external society with the
wicked, and make up one true visible Church.

6. If the godly have a due right to the promises and seals of Gods covenant,
6. Object.
and his presence and blessings appertain to them. Separatists ^. petition to
K. James, 3. position, page 45.
Mat. 28. 18, 19. 2 Cor. 6. 17. Levit. 26. 11, 12. Isa. 56. 20. Then no
profane persons can be received or retained in the visible Church with the
godly; for this is, 1. To profane the holy things of God, which no believer
should suffer. 2. This is contrary to the nature of the covenant that offers
remission of sins only to the chosen and faithful. 3. The godly shall become
one body with the wicked, by having communion with them. 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. and
so shall be defiled, Haggai 2. 12. 1 Corin. 5. 6.

Answ. 1. This argument is injurious to Gods providence, who has left no
infallible means to keep his own Name and ordinances from profanation, and
his own Church from being leavened and defiled with the unclean. For Simon
Magus, Annanias and Saphira, Demas, to whom the precious promises of the
covenant were preached, and the seals conferred, could not be discerned to be
hypocrites by any word of God, while the event of their out-breaking
wickedness declared them to be such, and so this should prove that God is not
tender enough of the honor of his own Name and ordinances, who should permit
hypocrites to lurk in the visible Church, and hear the promises, and receive
the seals of the covenant, and defile and pollute them, and Christ's body the
Church, for the godly by that Text are made one body, 1 Cor. 10. (if it be
rightly expounded) with the latent hypocrites that come to the communion with
them. 2. The promises and seals were not defiled to Christ and his Disciples,
because Judas did hear the word, and receive the seals of the word with them:
The Word and Sacraments were not polluted to Paul, because Demas did
communicate with him. 3. If some one private Christian know another to be an
adulterer, he is to rebuke him privately, and not to tell the Church, but in
case of obstinacy, and suppose the Church would not cast out the adulterer,
yet is he not to private persons an adulterer, while he be juridice, by two or
three witnesses convicted before the Church, and all this while it is lawful
to communicate with him; for a a testimony should not be received against any,
but under two witnesses. We are not made one body by eating that same supper
with an unbeleever, except it be one visible body communicating in one visible
bread. Christ and the Apostles were not made one body mystical with Judas, by
eating the Passover together, but only one visible external society which is
not inconvenient.

7. They reason thus: 7. Object.
The leaper by the Law was not to remain in the camp, but behooved for so
many days to be removed, and not readmitted to come amongst the people of
God, while he was cleansed; the uncircumcised must not be admitted to eat the
Passover, the unclean and uncircumcised, the (...) the Heathen, the Moabites
and Ammorites were not suffered to enter into the Temple: And all these
signified that no profane person should be mixed with the congregation of
believers.

I answer. The uncircumcised and the Heathen did sore-signifie the
excommunicated, who are to be reputed as Heathen and Publicanes, Mat. 18. 17.
and these are to be cast out of the Church being once sentenced and judged by
the Church according to Christ's order and Paul's; if the sin be public,
Math. 18. and 1 Timothy: 5. 20. yet are they not to be debarred wholly from the
society of the congregation, but they must not be counted as enemies, but
admonished as Brethren, 2 These: 3. 15. the uncircumcised were not counted as
brethren, yea excommunication is a mean to save the spirit in the day of the
Lord, 1 Cor: 5. 5. and so he is under the Churches cure, as a sick son, and
must hear the Word, and is to be as a Heathen, and yet not a Heathen indeed,
but warned as a brother, and in some Church Communion with us.

8. They reason thus, 8. Object.
If the profane be admitted as members of the true visible Church, the true
Church should not be distinguished from false Churches, contrary to the word of
God, Psalm. 84. 10. Cant: 1. 6, 7. Hos. 2, ^9, 20. 2 Cor: 6. 15. Rev. 1. 11, 12,
20. compared with 17. 1, 5. but God has differenced his true Church from all
Synagogues of Satan, and humane societies, as a separated and sanctified people?

Answ. Gods courts, Psalm. 84. 10. are differenced from the tents of
wickedness, The flocks of the companions, Cant: 1. 7. expounded to be the
false Church, are differenced from the true Church, in that in the true Church
are the Kidds fed beside the Shepherds tents, that is, the Word of God is
purely preached in the true Church, and the members thereof profess this Word,
which is not done in the tents of wickedness, and yet a Judas is often one of
the Shepherds, and a Demas a follower of Paul and the Gospel, a member of
this true Church visible.

2. Hos. 2. Israel is called not Gods wife, and God not her husband, not
because Israel left off to be a true Church, de facto, and formally, as if upon
Gods part he had given her a bill of divorcement, the contrary whereof is said,
v. 6, 7. he will give her grace to return to her first husband, and 19. he
will marry her, and Jer: 13. 14. he was married to backesliding* Israel, that
had played the harlot with many lovers, Jer. 3. 14. v. 1. but Isreal is called
no wife, de jure, by her evil deservings, as a husband says to his wife that
has played the harlot, you are not my wife, to wit, by law and right of
deserving, for you have broken your Marriage-oath. Yet upon his part who has
not rent and cancelled the contract of marriage, nor put her out at doors with
a written bill of divorcement, she is de facto and formally, still a wife, and
so was God still in covenant with Israel, and sent his Prophets to them, and
they had circumcision amongst them, and God had there seven thousand that had
not bowed their knee to Baal, and had not cast off his people whom he
fore-knew, Romans 11. 1, 2, 3, 4.

3. God is present and Christ also in the midst of the seven candle-sticks, and
walks in his Church, and goes not away, because these that dig down his
Altars and slay his Prophets, and so extinguish the candles, are in the visible
Church, as is clear, he walked in Ephesus beside his candle-stick, howbeit,
they had fallen from their first-love, and in Pergamus, howbeit the doctrine of
Bal^am was there, and in Thyatira, howbeit, Jezabel the false Prophetess was
there seducing his people.

CHAP. X.
Quest. 10. Whither or no it be lawful to separate from a true Church visible,
for the corruption of teachers, and the wickedness of Pastors and
professors, where Faith is begotten by the preaching of professed truth?
THat we may the more orderly proceed, these distinctions are to be considered,
as making way to clear the question.

1. There is a separation in the visible Church, and a Separation out of, and
from the visible Church. 2. There is a Separation total and whole, from any
visible communion with the Church; or partial and in part, from a point of
Doctrine or practice of the Church in a particular only. 3. There is a
Separation negative, when we deny the practice of an error with silence, or
refuse public communion with the Church, but do not erect a new Church within
the Church. There is a separation positive, when we do not only refuse
practice of errors, and protest and plead against them, but also erect a new
visible Church. 4. As there is a threefold communion, 1. in Baptism, 2. in
hearing of the Word, 3. in communicating with the Church at the Lords Supper,
so there is a threefold separation answerable thereunto. 5. The influence of a
worship corrupt may either be thought to come from the persons with whom we
worship, or 2. from the matter of the worship, if corrupt, and that either, 1.
by practice, or 2. by not practicing something that an affirmative commandment
of God impaseth on us. 6. A communion in worship either implies a consent and
approbation of the worship, or no consent at all. 7. A communion of worship
when the worship in the matter is lawful, yet for the profession may be most
unlawful, as to hear a Jesuit preach sound Doctrine. 8. There is a
separation from a friendly familiarity, and from a communion in worship.
1. Conclusion. We are to separate in the true visible Church, from all
communion, wherein need-force we cannot choose but sin, suppose we separate
not from the Church, Ephesians. 5. 11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works
of darkness, but rather reproove them, Col. 2. ^1. Touch not, taste not,
handle not, 2 Epist. John. Bid him not God speed, that brings another
doctrine.

2. Conclusion, from the first conclusion it will follow, that a separation in
part, I mean, in some acts of public worship, when we cannot choose but fall
in sin, from a true Church is lawful, as we must separate from an idolatrous
communion, where the bread is adored: for then the Lords Table is made an Idols
Table, and yet we are not totally and wholly to separate from the Church and
hearing of the word, and prayers and praises of that Church, as we shall hear.

3. Conclusion. Anent separation from Rome, and spiritual Babel: We have two
parties to satisfy, if they would in reason be informed. 1. Papists. 2.
Separatists, opposers of government Presbyteriall, who think we have all as
good reason to separate from our selves and Presbyteriall Churches, as from
Babel. But I shall speak a little of the first in some few Theses considerable
for our purpose.

1. Consideration. Bell. de not. eccles. l. 4. c. 10.
It is most false that Bellarmine says, Churches all withered as branches
separated from trees, when they separated from Rome: Joseph grew as a fruitful
Branch, and blessings was on the top of his head, when he was separated from
his Brethren, Deuteronomy. 33. 16. For 1. The contrary is seen in the reformed
Churches who never flourished, as since our separation from Rome. 2. The
Churches in Asia and Africa, and especially the Greek Church flourished ever
since, and they separated from Rome, and had famous learned men in them after
the separation, as Theophylact, Damascen, Occumenius, Zonaras, Cedrenus, Elias
Cretensis, Basil: Nilus, and many others, and especially the Ethiopian and
Armenian Churches had both their Bishops and Assemblies, howbeit general they
could not have, seeing they were apart, not the whole Church.

2. Consideration. The faithful before Luther, the Albigenses, Waldenses and
others, yea the Roman Doctors themselves holding the fundamental points with
some hay and stubble builded upon the foundation made a negative Separation
from Babylon* and did neither hold, nor profess their gross Idolatries, and
other fundamental errors, howbeit they did not hold them positively, by
erecting a new Church, because the separation was then in the blade, and not
ripe for the Harvest.

3. Consideration. We hold that Rome made the Separation from the Reformed
Churches, and not we from them, as the rotten wall makes the schism in the
house, when the house stands still and the rotten wall falls.

1. Because we left not Christianity in Rome, but the leprosy of Popery
growing upon Christianity, seeing we kept the Apostolic faith, and did
positively separate from the pookes, blybes, and ulcers of Christian Rome.

2. We did not separate from the Western Churches, either collective or
representatively gathered in a general Council.

3. We departed not from a National, Provincial or Parishonall Church, or
Pastors that we had before, nor from the material Temples and Churches, except
that some not very considerable hyrelings and idoll-pastours would not go
before us.

4. And because the succession of fundamental truths from generations to
generations, is as necessary as the perpetual existence of the true Catholic
Church, while the covenant with night and day and the ordinances of Heaven
shall continue, Jer: 31. 37. therefore there were a succession of professors
and members of the Catholic Church that did ever hold these fundamentals,
which we to this day hold against Rome; suppose Histories cannot clear the
particular persons by name.

5. We have not separated from Romes baptism and ordination of Pastors
according to the substance of the act, nor from the letter of the twelve
Articles of the Creed and contents of the old and new Testament, as they stand
with relation to the mind and intent of the Holy Ghost, howbeit we have left
the false interpretations of the Lords of poor peoples Faith and Consciences.

4. Consideration. We separate not from acts of love to have the relics of
Babel saved, howbeit we have separated from communion in faith and worship.

5. Consideration. The essential ingredients and reasons of a lawful divorce
are here. 1. we could not lie in one bed with that sometime sister Church of
Rome, but our skin behoved to rub upon her botch-boyle, and therefore we did
separate from nothing but corruption. 2. There was there persecutions, and in
that we are patients and ejected rather then departers on foot and horse. 3. A
professed dominion over our consciences. 4. Necessity of receiving the mark of
the beast, and so the plagues of the beast, to worship Images, and the work of
men's hands, a necessity of professing fundamental errors, that subvert the
foundation of faith, did all necessitate our separation.

6. Consideration. The Church of believers might lawfully use justa tutela
aet^rnae salutis, a necessary defense for salvation, and forsake her corrupt
guides and choose others, and so we had the consent of the Church to the
separation, and a voice from Heaven, Come out of her my people.

7. Consideration. A collateral and sister-Church, such as Rome ever was, is
not said to separate from another; the lesser separateth always from the
greater, the member from the body. Where there is a schism, sister-Protestant
Churches then cannot be said to separate one from another, nor can the crime of
schism here be more objected to us then to Rome, but rather to Rome separating
from Orthodoxe and right believing Rome.

8. Consideration. We separate not from men but errors. 2. We separate from
Papisme kindly, properly and totally: from Christian Articles in no sort. 3.
From points of truth sewed and engraven with Popery only by accident, breaking
the thread and needle that sowed them together.

But as concerning the other point. We see not how we are to separate from the
reformed Churches, Ainsworth counterpoyson, p 8.
as Ainsworth says, and how M. Jacob says, Our reformed Divines cannot
satisfy the objection that Calvin and Luther, and Zuinglius, who had their
ordination and calling to be Pastors from the Church of Rome, and so from
Antichrist, and so our Ministers having ordination and calling from Ministers,
who had their calling from Antichrist cannot be lawful Ministers, nor our
Church a true Church, seeing it wants a true Ministry, except we say with
them, they had their calling essentially from the suffrages and consent of the
Church of believers, who have power to ordain Ministers, and power to depose
and excommunicate them if need be. But I answer, this power is in the back of
the Bible, and amongst unwritten traditions, not in the holy Oracles of the old
or new Testament. Hence I will speak a word of the calling of our reformers.
2. of the Church of Rome, A^ton Walleu^ne^. (...) 8.
if they could give a calling to our reformers, Eccles. pa. ^* 10.
seeing we hold them to be an Antichristian Church. Some answer and Walleus
approves them, that Luther, Zuinglius, Farellus were Pastors ordinary of
Churches, Tylen. sytnag. theol. dis. 23. these. 41, 42, 43.
and so had power to convince the gainsayers. Bucan. loc. com. 42. quest. 47.
But the question yet remains from whence had these before them their
calling? Our Divines, Profess Leydens. dis 42. these. 41, 42, 43.
Tylen, Bucan, professors Leyd. Walleus distinguish here three things, 1.
Something in the calling of our reformers was from God: so authoritatively,
they were called of God, the Ministry being of God. 2. The Christian Church
lying under Popery, called, designed, and ordained the men to be Pastors; so
their calling according to the substance of the act was from God, and the
Roman Church as a Christian Church. 3. There was corruption in the way and
manner of their vocation, as the Antichristian ceremonies, and an oath to
maintain the doctrine of the Church of Rome, not only as a Christian Church,
but also as Romish, if any of them did swear to defend the corruptions of the
Church, this latter was taken away by Gods illumination of their minds: A
called Minister swears to defend the truth, and this truth of this Church;
but aye under the notion of truth; and if he see it to be error he still
holds the substance of his oath, in as far as it is obligatory and tyeth him
in conscience.

It is objected, Obi.
An Antichristian Church cannot ordain Christian Ministers, Rome was then an
Antichristian Church, Ergo,

Answ. Ans.
That which is wholly, as touching its whole essence Antichristian, cannot
ordain Christian Ministers: True, A dead man cannot beget a living barn: The
Roman Church was not wholly Antichristian, but kept some of Christ's truth.
That which is Antichristian in part only, may ordain Ministers, who have the
true essence of a Ministerial calling; for Israel no wife, but a whore, Hos.
2. 2. a whore and no wife merito and iure, in ill deserving; yet a mother and a
wife, de facto, and keeping something of a covenanted bride, is called Gods
people, Hos. 4. 6. and Ezech. 16. 21. Thou have slain my children, then her
barnes were Gods barnes in Covenant, and not bastards: God was still Samaria's
God, Hos. 13. 16. a remnant according to election remained, Romans 11. 5. The
Orthodox Fathers acknowledged the Africanes as a true Church, who defended
heresy, that barnes baptized by heretics were to be baptized again. 2. A
calling is extraordinary, either in habit or in exercise; in habit, as to be an
Apostle, and have the gift of miracles: Thus our reformers calling was not
extraordinary, they were not immediately called by God from heaven; for they
would not have concealed such a calling, if they had had any such: Or a calling
is extraordinary in the exercise, and that two ways; Either in the Principle
moving them to teach, or 2. in the manner of teaching and efficacy; a calling
extraordinary in the principle moving, is twofold: Either a mere Prophetical
impulsion of Revelation, stirring them up to such an act, as the Spirit of the
Lord came upon Saul, and he prophesied, this our reformers had not, because we
never find that they allege it. 2. A more then ordinary motion with
illumination by Gods Spirit, speaking in the Scriptures, in which motions they
were not subordinate in the exercise of their Ministry to the Church of
Pastors; but immediately in that subordinated to God, and in this I prove that
our reformers were extraordinary Doctors.

1. Because Ezech. 34. in a universal aposta^ye of the Prophets and
shepherds, the Lord extraordinarily works, v. 11. For thus says the Lord
God, behold I, even I will both search my sheep, and seek them out. Now this
is by Pastors, when the ordinary Pastors are all failed. So Rev. 11. in that
universal Apostacye under Antichrist, when the Gentiles tread upon the utter
Court of the Temple, and the holy City, God stirs up two witnesses to
prophecye in sack^loth; that is, some few Pastors (for two is the smallest
number) and they prophecye, and are slain, and yet they rise again. We need
not apply this to men in particular, as to John Hush, and Jerome of Prague; but
certainly, some few spoke against Babylon, and they were borne down, and
oppressed, and killed, and men of that same spirit rose and spoke that same
truth, as if the very two men who were slain, had risen within three days
again.

2. Because when the Church is overgone with heresy and Apostacye, our
reformers in the exercise of their Minestery, were not to keep a certain
flock as in a constitute Church, and suppose they had no calling but eminent
gifts, they were to spread the Gospel to Nations, as Luther did, and suppose
the people should resist them, as in many places they did; yet God called them,
and they were not to expect election from people: So Cyprus and Cyrenus
preached, Act. 11. and 18. and we read of no vocation that they had from
either people or Apostle. Origin, Homil 11. i^ Number. 18.
So Origin preached to a people in a certain Town, where there was not one
Christian, and afterward he was chosen their Pastor.

As for the Church of Rome, suppose our Reformers have their calling thence,
yet have we a true Ministry and there was a Church in Rome before the Lateran
Council, which could constitute a true Ministry, as I clear in these
distinctions, for the Church of Rome it has these parts.

1. Distinction. 1. The court of Rome and Clergy, 2. The seduced people.

2. Distinction. There is a teaching court professing and teaching Popery, and
obtruding it upon the consciences of others. 2. There is a people professing
and believing this with heat of zeal. 3. A people misled, ignorant, not
doubting but following. 4. There is a people of God, Come out of her my people,
ergo. there is a covenanted people of God there, 2 Thessalonians. Antichrist shall sit
in the Temple of God, ergo. GOD has a Temple in Rome.

A third Distinction is necessary; a true Church is one thing veritate
Metaphysica, with the verity of essence, as a sick-man, or a man wanting a leg
is a true man, and has a reasonable soul in him, and a true Church veritate
Ethica, a Church morally true, that is, a sound, whole, a pure Church
professing the sound faith, that is another thing. Rome is a sick-Church and a
maimed and lamed Church, wanting legs and arms, and so is not morally a true
Church, for vile corruption of Doctrine is there, as we say a thief is not a
true man, but a false and a taking man, yet he has a man's nature and a
reasonable soul in him; the question is if Rome have the soul, life and being
of a Church.

A fourth Distinction is: That the question is either of a teaching Church and
a Ministerial, professing Christ, the Word and Baptism, or of a believing
Church and Spouse of Christ.

The fifth Distinction is. If Rome relatively be a wife in comparison of other
Churches, or if Rome absolutely in her self be a Church.

The sixth Distinction is. If Rome be jure and merito, a Spouse, or an Harlot,
or de facto, a wife, not having received a Bill of Divorcement, as the Church
of the Jews.

The seventh Distinction is. If Rome according to some parts be a Spouse, and
keeps any list of marriage kindness to her husband, or if she be according to
other parts a cast off whore.

The eighth and last is, if Rome be materially a Church, having in it the
Doctrine of faith, or if formally it be no Church, having no professed faith
that has the nature of faith.

Hence shortly I say, The Court of Rome as Popish, is the falling sickness of
the Church, not the Church. But the same Court teaching something of Christ,
baptism, good-works, etc, has something of the life and being of a Church,
howbeit she be not a whole Church, her skin being leprous, pocky and polluted.

1. Because in a Church that is no Church, there cannot be a true feale of Gods
covenant, but in the Court of Rome there is true baptism; for we baptize not
again children once baptized there; some of the Separation called it
Idoll-baptisme, and no baptism, which is Anabaptisme, for then all converted
Papists must be baptized again, no less then converted Turks and Jews; But
1. The covenant is there, Come out of her my people: then their baptism
confirms this covenant. 2. Circumcision even in apostate Israel is true
circumcision, her barnes the Lords barnes, Ezech. 16. 21. he is Isreal's God,
the holy one of Israel in the midst thereof. In Hezokiahs reformation the
people ate the Passover, and yet all had corrupted their ways, and had been
a long time worshipping Idols, and they are not, 2 Chro. 30. circumcised
again, and yet Exodus 12. none but the circumcised might eat the `Passeover.

2. Because the word of God and so the contract of Marriage is professed
amongst them, and so there is an external active calling there, and the word
of the covenant sounding amongst them, and a passive calling also, because many
secretly believe and obey. 3. Many fundamental truths are taught that may
beget faith, and so there are true and valid pastoral acts in that Church. 2.
I say there is an hid and invisible Church and Temple in Rome, and these God
warns to come out of Babel, and these we by writings cry unto, that they
would forsake their harlot mother, and worship the Lord in truth, and they
obey, howbeit they dare not profess the truth. But the teaching Church
teaching Popery and fundamental truths, and obtruding them upon the
consciences of others, is not the believing Church, and so not the spouse and
body of Christ. 3. Rome now compared with Paul's Rome which he did write unto,
is no Church, no spouse, as a whorish wife compared with her self in her first
month to her Husband, while she was chaste, is now, when she imbraceth the
bosom of a stranger, no wife, and yet Rome compared with Indians who worship
Satan, with Persians who worship the Sun, with the Egyptians who worshipped
gods growing in their gard^ns, as Oneons and Garlic, for so Juvenal, O sanctas
gentes quibus haec nascuntur in hortis Numina. I say, Franci^ John ans. to ob
of Separat, page 62, 63.
being compared with these, they are the Lords Temple, 2 These. 24. Rev. 18. 4.
and his Wife, as (one says well) apostate Israel compared with Syrians,
Philistines is counted Gods people, having the true God for their God, 2 King.
5. 8, 15, 17. But being compared with Judah which ruled with God, and was
faithful with the Saints, is called no wife, but an harlot, Hose 2. 2, 5. and
4. 15. and 5. 3, 4. 4. Rome iure and merito, in her bad deserving to her Lord,
is no wife, no Church, no spouse, no people in covenant with God, and yet de
facto and formally in possession, in profession, and for matrimonial tables
which she keeps is a Church, and differs from the Jews, as a Church and no
Church. 1. Because albeit the Jews have the old Testament, which implicity and
by interpretation is the covenant, yet they want two things which Rome has
which destroys the essence of a true Church. 1. The Jews give not so much as
a virtuall consent to the Marriage and the very external active calling and
invitation to come to Christ, and all ministerial publishing of the news of
salvation is removed from them, Acts 13. 46. but there is a virtuall consent to
the Marriage with Christ in Rome, and salvation there in the word, and some
ministerial and pastoral publication thereof as in the seed. 2. Jews
directly oppugn the Cardinal foundation of salvation, 1 Cor. 3. 11. Acts 4.
12. 1 These. 2. 15, 16. Christ Jesus, Papists profess him, and have his seals
amongst them, especially baptism. 5. Rome in concreto, according to her best
part, to wit, secret believers groaning and sighing in Egypts bondage is a true
Church; but Rome in abstracto, the faction of Papists, as Papists, are no
spouse of Christ, but the whore of Babel, and mother of fornications. 6.
Howsoever Rome be materially a true Church, having the material object of
faith, the doctrine of the old and new Testament common with us, yet formally
they are not one Church with us, but there is a real and essential separation
betwixt us and them, as betwixt a true Church and an Antichristian Church, a
spouse of Christ and no spouse; for faith relatively taken, faith of many
united in one society does essentially constitute a Church, and the formal
object of their faith is the word of the Church, and of men, or Gods word as
expounded by men, and our faiths object formal is the word of God, as the word
of God, and so do formally differ. 7. Howbeit I say Rome is a Church teaching
and professing, and has something of the life and being of a true Church, yet
I hold not that Rome is Christ's body, nor his wife. Neither mean I with our
late novators, Prelates and their faction sometimes in this Land, and now in
England, that Rome is a true Church, as they taught, that is, Calv. iustit.
lib. 4 cap. 2. sect. 11.
so a true Church as, 1. We erred in separating from that leaper whore. 2. That
her errors are not fundamental, Junius, lib sing^, de eccl. cap. 17.
and that we and this mother can be reconciled and bed together. Whittaker,
contr^, 2 quest 3. cap. 2.
But what I say, is holden by our Divines Calvin, Junius, Whittaker, that
famous Divine Rivetus; Rivet, in Catho. orthodox. 101. q. 7. tract. 2. 11.
that most learned Professor Gilbertus Voetius, Gil^. vo^ti^ desper. causae
papatus lib. 3. cap. 7. sect. 2.
and our Divines. Voetius makes nine ranks of these that were not dyed and
engrained Papists in the popish Church. 1. Some deceived. 2. Some compelled. 3.
Some ignorant. 4. Some careless, who took^ not heed to that faith. 5. Some
doubting. 6. Some loathing it. 7. Some sighing. 8. Some opposing and
contradicting it. 9. Some separating from it. Now seeing our Church has
nothing to do with Rome, and our ministry lawful, Separatists may hence be
satisfied. Spalat^^. de. Rep. eccl. in osten e^r. Sua. c. 1. page 887. 888,
Neither yet do I think with Spalato de repub. Eccles. in ostensione error.
Suarezij cap. 1. page 887, 888. That the Roimane Church is erroneous only in
excess, seeing ^n substantial points there is such defect also as averteth
aith.

4. Conclusion, There be three sorts that have communion rightly with our
Church, 1. Infants baptized, for baptism is a seal of their fellowship with
Christ, and therefore of communion with the Church, because Separatists will
have none members of the Church, while they can give proofs thereof by signs
of regeneration, infants must be without the Church, as Infidels and Turks, for
none are the Church to them, but the royal generation, partakers of the holy
faith, taught of God, called and separated from the world, the rest are
without: hence baptism shall either seal no entering of infants in the Church,
contrary to Gods word, or the baptizing of infants is not lawful, as
Anabaptists teach. 2. The hearers of the word have a communion with the Church
as is clear, seeing these that eat of one bread are one body, these that
profess in the hearing of the word, that same faith, are also that same body
in profession; yet excommunicate persons are admitted as hearers of the word.
Hence only the extreme and great excommunication, 1 Cor. 16. 22. cutteth of
men from being simply no members of the Church, that excommunication that
makes the party as a heathen and Publican, supposes him still to be a brother
and hearer of the word, 2 These. 3. 14, 15. And all these are members of the
Church and yet not necessarily converted. 3. The regenerate and believers that
communicate of one bread and one cup at the Lords Table, are most nearly and
properly members of one visible body, and none of these are to separate from
Christ's body.

5. Conclusion, It is not lawful to separate from any worship of the Church
for the sins of the fellow-worshippers, whether they be officers or private
Christians.

1. Because Scribes and Pharisees, 1 Arg.
and the Church in Christ's days was a most perverse Church, the rulers
perverted the Law, Mat. 5. 21. denied that hatred and rash anger was a sin,
ver. 22. or heart adultery a sin. Made the commandment of God of no effect by
their traditions, Mat. 15. 6. polluted the worship with superstition and
will worship, ver. 7. 8. Mark. 7. 6, 7, 8. said it was nothing to swear by the
Temple, devoured widows houses, made their proselites children of damnation,
Mat. 13. 14, 15, 16. were blind guides, filled the measure of their fathers
wrath, slew the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2. 8, 9. killed and crucisied the
Prophets, were blind guides, and the blind people followed them, and slew the
Lord of glory also. The Priesthood was kept by Moyen, Caiphas was
High Priest that year. But Christ by practice and precept forbad to separate
from this Church. Ergo, etc, The assumption is clear. Mat. 23. They sit in
Moses his chair, hear them, Mat. 10. 6, 7. Go to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel and preach. And Christ and his Disciples observed their feasts,
preached in the Temple and Synagogues, Joh. 1. 7, 37. Joh 8. 2. Luke 4. 16.
Luke 1. 9. Christ reasoned with them about religion, Ioh. 10. 24, 25, 26.

Ainsworth replyeth to this, Ainsworth conuterposs. page 8.
Christ and his Disciples separated from the corruptions of the Jewish Church:
and from false Churches, as from the Samaritanes. Answ. We acknowledge
separation from corruption, but not from the worship of corrupters, when they
keep the foundation, the Samaratine-Church had not the foundation, but
worshipped they knew not what, neither was there salvation in their Church,
John 4. 2. but there was the true God worshipped among the Jews and salvation
amongst them.

2. Ainsworth replyeth, The Jewish Church consisted still, as Moses had
ordained, Levit. 20. 24. of a people separated from the heathen, and were the
children of the Prophets and covenant, Joh. 4. 9. Acts 3. 25. but your Church
consists of an unseparated people? Answ. The Priesthood was changed, Toletus
in Ioh. 10. Calvin in loo.
Ioh. 11. 51. Caiphas was High Priest that year, against the Law (as Tollet
observes) for the High Priest, Josephus antiq. Iud. lib. 18. cap. 3.
Exodus 28. 29. by the Law was High Priest till his dying day. But all was
corrupted (says Calvin,) and all bought and sold (says Josephus:) this was as
Anti-Mosaicall as our reformers Ministry is Antichristian, if they had their
calling only from Rome. 2. The Jewish Church consisted of men separated from
heathen, who said stand back, I am holier then thou, Isaiah 65. but they were
corrupters of the L^w, murderers of the Prophets and the heir Christ, Math.
21. hypocrites, will-worshippers, blind guides, blind people, etc.

Our second Argument, 2. Arg.
If Gods Prophets and people were never commanded to separate from the public
worship, but commanded to come up to Jerusalem and worship, pray, sacrifice
with Gods people, Deuteronomy. 12, 11, 12, 13. Deuteronomy. 15. 19, 20. Deuteronomy. 16. 7, 8. v.
16, 17. And yet that people was a crooked and perverse generation, Deuteronomy. 32. 5.
not his children, provokers of God to jealousy with strange gods, sacrificers
to Devils, ver. 16, 17. their works for bitterness like the clusters and
grapes of Sodom, ver. 32. a people that had neither eyes nor ears, nor heart
to understand God, Deuteronomy. 29, 3, 4. stiff necked, foolish, proud, murmurers,
idolaters, etc. Then the sinfulness of the worshippers defiles not the
worship, and we are not to separate from the worship for the wickedness of the
worshippers. But the former is Scripture, Ergo separate we cannot upon this
pretense. The proposition is sure, for God cannot both command his people to
come and worship publicly with his people, and then also forbid them, because
for the wickedness of the worshippers, they were to abstain. Also 2. It will
follow that the people should not have gone to Shiloh when God commanded them
to sacrifice with Elies sons, 1 ^am. 2.
because they committed silthinesse with the women at the door of the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, because Elies soones wickedness made men to
abhor the Lords sacrifice.

Also 3. Because to prophecy to a people, 3. Arg.
and for the people to hear the word of prophecy are both acts of worshipping
God, it will follow, if we must abstain from the worship for the known sins
of fellow-worshippers, then Isaiah sinned in prophesying to a people laden with
iniquity, corrupt children, the seed of evil doers, hypocrites, rebels,
Sodom and Gomorrah, murderers, oppressors, etc. Isa. 1. for Isaiah and that
wicked people worshipping together, the worship was defiled to Isaiah, by these
wicked hearers, and he should have abstained from prophesying and separated
from that polluted and unlawful worship. Hence Jeremiah sinned in prophesying
to Israel and Judah, Hosea sinned, Amos sinned in prophesying to wicked people,
Jonah sinned in prophesying to Niniveh; Paul sinned in preaching Christ to the
obstinate Jews, to the scoffing Athenians. And seeing they were commanded to
prophecy obedience to Gods commandments, shall it be sin and disobedience, for
certainly the preacher and the hearers of the preaching join in one and the
same worship.

Also 4. Baruch should not have gone to the house of the Lord at the
commandment of Jeremiah, 4. Arg.
and so at Gods commandment, Ier. 36, 6, 7. to read the book of the
Prophecy of Jeremiah, in the ears of the Princes and people at the entry of
the newgate of the Lords house, ver. 10. because the Princes, Priests,
Prophets and people followed Baalim, slew their children to Molech, forsook
the Lord their God, said to a stock thou art my father, came to Gods house and
cried, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, and yet did steal,
murder, commit adultery, swear falsely, burn incense to Baal, and walk after
other gods, Jer. 9. 2, 3, 13, 14. Chap. 5. 31. Chap. 7. 8, 9, 10. Chap. 2. 13,
14. ver. 27. Chap. 14. 15, 16. Chap. 23. 1, 2, 3, 9, 10, 11, 12. Chap. 7. 30,
31, 32. Chap. 15. 1. No people could be more desperately wicked; yet Jeremiah
worshipped God with them, commanded Baruch to worship God, and commanded the
King, his servants, and the people publicly to worship and hear and believe
the word, Chap. 22. 2, 3. v. 5. Chap. 19. 3, 4. Chap. 26. 2. And besides he
should have commanded the faithful to separate from such an Idolatrous Church,
and not commanded them to hear in the Lords house, and believe and obey. So
Ezechiel commands a most wicked and idolatrous people to join in the public
worship, Ezekiel. 6 2, 3. Chap. 20. 3, 4, 5. Chap. 21. 3, 4. so all the rest of
the Prophets.

1. This idolatrous people in the judgment of charity could not be judged
visible Saints, seeing they were visible Idolaters, liars, murderers,
adulterers, and an Assembly of treacherous persons.

2. It cannot be said, that to prophecy to them in public is not to keep a
religious communion with them. For to hear on Messiah preached, these same
promises, threatenings, covenant, and that ordinarily, is an evident sign of a
Church Fellowship, and joint worshipping of God together.

There only reason that they give to this is. Robinson against Bernard. p. 100.
The commonwealth of Israel was a policy established by God, by covenant
without exception, and so long as the Covenant stood unbroken on Gods part,
though broken on their part, it was not lawful to separate from that Church.
So Robinson.

Others say, Ainsworth counterpoyson p. 8,
Christ behooved to be borne of the true Church, therefore they never left off
to be the true Church till Christ came.

Answ. First, we have Robinson contrary to Ainsworth, the Israelites then
sacrifi^ed to Devils, not to God, Deuteronomy. 32. 17. ^ Chron. 11. 15. and will you
say the Prophets separated no^ from them, says Ainsworth. We say in the act of
sacrificing to Devils, the Prophets that were holy separated from them, but not
from their Church and lawful worship. Robinson says, They were to hold
communion with that Church of Israel without exception.

2. We have a fair confession, Separatist confess. (...). 31.
that contrary to the 31. Article, The faithful may become and stand members,
and have a spiritual communion with a people, as an orderly gathered and
constituted Church of Christ that are Idolaters, thieves, murderers,
worshippers of Baal, so being they worship the true God publicly as he
commands, and be in external covenant with him.

3. Suppose the Church of Israel should have had a typical privilege in this
beyond all the Churches of the new Testament, which Ainsworth will not grant,
neither can we see it, yet all the Separatists goodly arguments hence fall to
the ground, if the faithful might lawfully keep Church fellowship with the
Church of Israel so corrupted. Then in the old Testament Christ and Belial,
light and darkness might be in one Church worship. Then in the old Testament,
the seed of the woman, and the Serpents seed could agree together, then it was
lawful to remain in Babel, lawful to become members of an Harlot Church, and
be defiled with their unlawful worship, and to consent thereunto. Then it was
not required in the old Testament, that the Church of God, and his people in
Covenant should be a Royal Priesthood, an holy people. In the old Testament,
the Church might be a whore, Worship Baal, Sacrifice to Divel^, and yet remain
the Spouse and wife of Jehovah. All their passages cited in the old Testament
for separation from a Church fall. The Church of Israel had not Christ for
their King, Priest and Prophet, and therefore was not separated from all false
Churches, as they prove from Hos. 2. 2. Cant. 1. 7, 8. Psalm. 84. 10. in the old
Testament, The wicked might have taken the covenant of God in their mouth,
contrary to Psalm. 50. 16, 17. which place the author of the Guide to Zion,
Guide to Zion, pos. 32. p. 16.
alleges, to prove that idolaters and wicked persons are not members of the
true visible Church. Separat 3. petit to K. Iams.; pos.
Then it is false that Separatists said, The Lord in all ages appointed, and
made a separation of his people from the world, before the Law, under the Law,
and now in the time of the Gospel. For M. Robinson teaches us in the old
Testament none were to separate from the Church of Israel though never so
abominable in wickedness.

Lastly, The Church of Israel had no such privilege as that persons who were
idolaters, thieves, worshippers of Baal, and forsakers of the true God, and
going a whoring after strange gods should remain members of Christ's true body,
and a redeemed Church; for then they should have had a privilege, to go to
Heaven, holding the broad way to Hell, for Christ's true body shall be glorified.

Also 5. Elijah should have grievously sinned against God in gathering together
all Israel on Mount Carmell, 5. Arg.
amongst the which there were seven thousand that bowed not their knee to Baal,
^o^. 11.
and was the Lords elected and sanctified people, and also with them the
idolatrous people that halted betwixt God and Baal, 1 Kin. 18. for so he
brought light and darkness, Christ and Belial to one and the same public
worship, for there was praying and preaching and a miraculous sacrifice, and
ver. 39. All the people fell on their faces and worshipped, and Elijah knew
them to be an idolatrous people, and that the faithful in that worship behoved
to have bin defiled and consenters to the unlawful worship of these halters
betwixt God and Baal.

Master Can, M. Can neces* of Sepa^. pa. 107.
poor soul doubtsome what to say, says, These that preach to people have not
spiritual communion with all which are present and hear the same, for the
Devil is often a hearer. But this is a poor shift, for neither Savior, Word
of God, covenant, promise, or seal belongs to Satan: He is a hearer to carry
away the seed that falls by the way side, Mat. 13. And so because the word is
not Satan's in offer, and he comes uncalled, he has no Church communion with
the Church, but the Word preached to men, and especially in an ordinary way is
a professed communion with all professors, for so the word of God says, Eze.
33. 3. They come unto thee as the people comes, and they sit before thee as
my people, and they hear thy words. And Esa. 58. 2. They ask of me the
ordinances of Justice, they take delight in approaching to God. And Esa. 2. 2.
The peoples communion with one another in going to the Lords Mountain to be
taught his Word, is set down as a mark of the called Church of the Gentiles.

2. To hear or profess hearing of the word is a worshipping of God: therefore
joynt-hearers are joynt-worshippers, and have communion together.

3. To eat at one Table of the Lord is a profession that the eaters are one
body, 1 Cor. 10. 17. with that same Lord, and promises are offered in the word
that are sealed in the Sacrament.

4. All our Divines prove the Church of the Jews, and the Church under the
New Testament to be one Church, because that same word of the covenant, and
that same faith in substance that was preached and sealed to us, was preached
to them, 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4. Heb: 11. Heb: 13. 8. Heb: 3. 7, 8, 12, 13. none
deny this but Arminians, Socinians, Papists, and some other perverters of the
Scriptures.

5. If a joint hearing of the Word be denied to be a Church Communion in
external worship, upon this ground, because all that hear do not believe,
but many scoff at the Word, many hate it, many reject it in their hearts, as
Separatists reason; this is most weak and prooveth that all have not an
internal communion by faith and love, but it is nothing against a
Church Communion, in the matter of Separation. Also hence it might be
concluded, none have a Church Communion that eats at one Table, and eats
one bread and drinks one cup, except only believers, and so all Hypocrites in
the visible Church, hearing together, praying and praising and receiving the
seals of the covenant together in one politic and visible body with
believers, should be Separatists from believers, having no Church communion
with believers, the contrary whereof reason and s^nse teaches, and Scripture,
Psalm. 42. 4. Psalm. 55. 13, 14. 1 Cor: 10. 17. Math: 13. 47. Mat: 12. 13.
confirms. Master Can seeing this says, We affirm not that there can be no
religious communion, but with members of a visible Church, our profession and
practice is daily otherways, yet so that they be such persons, howbeit not in
Church State, yet to be judged in the Faith by their gracious and holy
walking, and are persons in the judgment of Men gracious and holy in their
walking, but members of a visible Church are visible Saints, and so if there be
no religious communion to be kept, but with persons judged gracious, then is
there no religious communion to be kept, but with members of the visible
Church, who are gracious and holy, which is a plain contradiction.

Moreover 6. 6. Arg.
The zeal of Josiah commended so highly by God, should have bin sinful and
wicked zeal, in commanding all the people to keepte the most solemn Passover
that ever had been since the days of the Judges, 2 King. 23. 21, 22. and yet
Judah was universally corrupted with high places, idolatry and false
Priesthood, images, groves, etc. It is true Josiah reformed all these, it is
as true he sought no more of the people for their external right worship, but
profession, and could get no more, yet he commanded not separation from the
Church of Judah, for these corruptions, howbeit much heart wickedness was
amongst them, as is clear, v. 26. Notwithstanding God turned not from the
fierceness of his great anger against Judah.

Moreover 7. 7. Arg.
Asa his zeal should have bin as sinful in commanding all Judah and Benjamin,
and the strangers with them out of Ephraim and Manasseh, to conveene in an
Assembly (which was far from separation) to a solemn service of swearing a
Covenant, to se^k the Lord, under the pain of death, to both men and women,
and presently after such abominable Idols as ^ad bin in Judah and Benjamin, 2 Chronicles. 15. 8. were they all turned visible Saints, a holy people, a chosen
generation, all taught of God, all partakers of the faith and promises, so
suddenly at one Proclamation?

Also 8. 8. Arg.
Joshua 24. conveened all the Tribes and exhorted them to serve the Lord, he
charged them all to conveene, and they did enter in a covenant with the Lord,
and he set up a stone under an oak that was by the Sanctuary, ver: 26. Now
this conveening of them all, even these who v. 14. and 23. had strange gods
amongst them beside the Lord, as Ioshuah knew well, and gave warning thereof,
must have bin a sinful fact in Joshua, in commanding a mixture of Gods people,
and these that had strange gods, to assemble in the Sanctuary, and enter in
covenant with God, and hear the servant of God exhort them so heavenly in that
Sermon Chap. 23. and Chap. 24. of Ioshuah, this was light and darkness, Christ
and Belial to come to one Sanctuary to defile the worship of God, pollute the
people with leaven, take the name of God in vain, if Separatists teach true
Doctrine.

And 9. 9. Arg.
Moses sinned grievously, Deuteronomy. 29. in assembling all the men of Israel, their
little ones, wives, strangers, hewers of wood, drawers of water to enter in an
oath and covenant to serve God, which was a solemn public worship; for there
was amongst that company, who ought to have bin separated, v. 4. those to whom
the Lord had not given a heart to perceive, nor eyes to see, nor ears to hear
to this day. So Moses in that profaned the name of God, polluted the word of
the covenant. Many other instances might be given for this purpose.

3. Argument. ^. Principal Arg.
If Paul do not only not command separation in the Church of Corinth, but also
command and approove their meeting together in Church Communion, 1 Cor. 5. 4. 1
Cor. 11. 18, 20, 21, 22. 1 Cor. 14. 23. 1 Cor. 16. 2. where there was schisms
and contentious, 1 Cor. 1. 12, 13. envying and strife, 1 Cor. 3. 3. incest, and
incest tolerated, such as is not named amongst the Gentiles, 1 Cor. 5. 1. going
to law with their brethren for gain before Infidels, 1 Cor. 6. Harlotry, v. 15,
16. Eating at the Idols-Table, 1 Cor. 8. Keeping fellowship with Devils, 1 Cor.
10. 20, 2, 22. coming to the Lords Table drunken, 1 Cor. 11. 21. eating and
drinking damnation, v. 29, 30. A denying of a fundamental point of faith, the
resurrection of the dead, and that with scoffing at it, 1 Cor. 15. 35.
Murdering of weak souls, whom Christ had dyed for, 1 Cor. 8. 12, 13. Paul's
name despitefully traduced, 2 Cor. 10. 8, 9. etc. Then it is unlawful to
separate from the pure worship of God, because a Church is not constitute of
visible Saints, and a people all taught of God.

To this Master Barrow answers. Barrow of a false Church, p 24.
1. These were faults of frailty and ignorance.

Answ. Such sins of the flesh against the law of nature, as envy, strife,
extortion, drunkenness at the Lords Table are not sins of frailty, malicious
hating and reproaching the known and approoved servant of God, 1 Corinthians: 10.
11, 12. 1 Corinthians: 4. 18, 19, 20. are not frailties, but must contaminate the
worship, no less then sins to the which obstinacy is added, howbeit possibly
not in alike measure and degree. 2. We then are to think them members of a
visible Church, and not to separate from them, howbeit in the judgment of
charity we cannot say, they are a royal Priesthood, the holy seed, the sheep
of Christ, the Spouse and body of Christ, and all taught of God, as you say,
for so the constitution of the visible Church is marred, and a company that is
not such, is not the matter of a visible Church, as you teach.

Barrow secondly says, We should not separate, till their sins be reprooved
and censured, and they declared incorrigible, and such as will not hear
admonition, such were not the Corinthians.

Answ. Then we are to esteem denyers of the resurrection, schismatickes,
extortioners, drunkards, incestuous persons, fornicatours known so to us, to
be a Royal Priesthood, the Sheep, body and Spouse of Christ, regenerate,
plants of righteousness, precious stones of Zion, all taught of God, aye and
while the Church and Professors rebuke them and censure them.

2. If these were not dispisers of Paul's admonitions, why should Paul say, 1
Cor. 4. 21. shall I come to you with the rod? how were some of them puffed up
as though Paul would not come, ver. 18. and why does Paul never once command
that they separate from the Church, if the Church will not use the rod
against them? if the servant of God must wait on gainsayers and obstinate
persons, if at any time God shall give them repentance, 2 Timothy 2. 14, 15, 16.
Should not one wait on a whole Church, or many in a Church and keep communion
with them, Separatists, con^ess. art 36. page 26.
till God give them repentance? It Is true, Separatists say there should be no
separation from a Church till all means be used of rebuking, but why did not
then Elijah, Moses, Joshuah, Isaiah, Jeremiah command separation? and why did
they command Church Fellowship after all means are used, and Israel declared
stiff-necked, Deuteronomy. 9. 6. Sodom, Gomorrah, Isa. 1. 10. impudent and
hard-hearted, Ezech. 3. 7. stiff hearted, chap. 2. 4. refusing to hearken,
pulling away the shoulder, stopping their ear, making their heart as an
Adamant? Zach. 7. 11, 12. after all which Church communion with them in the
word, covenant and oath of God, Sacraments, Passover, circumcision, prayer,
hearing of the word is commanded.

4. Argument. 4. Principal Arg.
If the Apostle term the Gallatians the Church of Christ, brethren; Gal. 1.
2. receivers of the Spirit by the hearing of faith, chap. 3. 2. the children of
God by faith in Christ, ver. 26. spiritual, chap. 6. 1. and so esteems them
a right constitute Church not to be separated from, howbeit they were in part
removed from Christ to another Gospel, Gal. 1. 8. bewitched, foolish, joining
circumcision and the works of the Law with faith, and so fallen from Christ,
Christ profiting them nothing, fallen from grace, running in vain, under the
Law again, and not under Christ, Gal. 5. 4, 5, 6, 18. beginning in the Spirit,
ending in the flesh, Gal. 3* 3. if so (I say) then is it not lawful to
separate from a Church, for the sins of the worshippers. But the former is
true, Ergo, so is the latter. The proposition is clear, because Paul's styles
which he gives them make them the body and spouse of Christ, and so it is not
lawful to separate from them. Also Paul writes to them as to the Church of
Christ, which is an acknowledged Church Communion.

5. Argument. ^* Principal Arg.
If the Church of Ephesus be a true Church, holding the candlestick of Christ
and Christ's presence walking in it, that su^fered for Christ's name, and fainted
not, Rev. 2. and yet had fallen from her first-love. If Pergamus held the
doctrine of Balaam, and the Nicolaitans, and murdered the Saints, had Satan's
throne amongst them, ver. 13. 14. If Thyatira suffered the woman Jezabel to
seduce the servants of Christ. If Sardis had a name to live, and was dead, and
her works were not perfect before God; If Laodicea turned cold, indifferent
and lukewarm in the matters of God, and was ready to be spewed out at Christ's
mouth. Then may a church remain a true Church with a lawful, visible
Ministry, having power of the word, seals and Church discipline, as all these
had, and cannot be separated from, except we would leave the candlestick, and
Christ walking in the midst of the golden candlesticks.

6. Argument. 6. Principal Arg.
If we are to bear long in patience, and brotherly kindness, with the most
refractarie, and stiff-necked gainsayers, and to preach to them, and so keep
external communion with them, as Paul says the servant of God must do, 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. much more owe we this to a whole Church which does
contumaciously suffer, or defend a sin, and a sinner. But the former is true,
Ergo* so is the latter. The proposition is proved, If we owe patience and
longanimity to one, then far more to a hundred, five hundred, ten hundred, so
John Epist 3. ver. 10, 11. did bear with the Church wherein wickedness was
tolerated. This argument is confirmed, That which the Prophets of God at Gods
command did, preaching, and waiting on upon an obstinate Church all the day
long, that same onwaiting patience owe we to the Church, whereof we are
members: But the Prophets, at Gods command, kept Church Fellowship of
prophesying to a people disobedient, and obstinate aye till God cast them off,
as Isaiah does chap. 65. 2, 3. all the day long: The Prophets went and preached
to Jerusalem after they had stoned, and killed the former Prophets, Mat. 23.
37. and after they had killed the heir Christ Jesus, they preached to them
also, Acts 2. 22. Acts 3. 13, 14. Acts 4. 1, 2, 3. 5. 4, etc. so Jer. 3* 12.
Jeremiah after he had been put in the stocks, and the word of the Lord became
a reproach, yet still prophesied, Ier, 20. 9. Ier. 26. 12. Now a preacher in a
constitute Church is a member and part of that Church where he preaches, and
is to believe and be saved by that same word which he commands others to
hear, as a mean of their salvation, 1 Timothy 4. 16.

7. Argument. 7. Principal Arg.
If the wickedness of a Church have such influence as to pollute the public
worship, and to defile these that communicate in the worship, so as they must
separate therefrom, and if the unconverted preacher be not to be heard, as a
lawful Pastor. Then also we can communicate in no Church, where there are
lurking hypocrites; But both these are against the word of God, Ergo separation
from the Church in that kind must be against the word of God also. The
proposition is clear: If the sins of these that hear, and communicate with
me, defile the worship to me, they defile it whether I know their sins or no.
If a pest man eating with me, defile my meat; the meat is infected to me,
whether I know it or no, and if I be obliged to know it, and know it not, my
ignorance is sinful, and does not excuse me. Now certainly no believer is
obliged to know the latent hypocrite, it was no sin in the eleven Apostles,
that they knew not Judas to be the traitor while God discovered him. The
assumption I prove, an unconverted man may be a called Pastor, whom we may
lawfully hear, as Judas was a chosen Apostle, so Mat. 7. 22, 23. Phil. 1. 16,
17, 18. Also it were lawful to be a member of no visible Church, if the sins
of unknown hypocrites should defile the worship, because in the net and
barne-floore there are always bad fish and ch^ffe. Barrow discov. page 30.
Judge then if M. Barrow teach judiciously. If the open sins (says he) of
Ministers or people defile not word and Sacraments administrated by them, why
has God said the sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to the Lord? Prove.
15. and that the wicked may as well kill a man, as a bullock, and what the
defiled ^riest touches is defiled, their prayers and sacraments are not the
Ordinances of God. Answ. Except by Anabaptists, I never read the Scripture so
perverted; the praying, preaching, sacraments of a defiled Priest, and an
unconverted man, to himself, but not to others, are abominable, and sin
before God; whether they be censured by the Church or no, whether they be known
to be defiled and polluted sinners in the state of nature, or not known;
because their persons are not reconciled in Christ to God, as all our Divines
prove, as Augustine and Prosper proves against Pelagians, August. cont. Julian
lib. 4. cap. 13. and cont. Pesag and C^lest. lib. ^. cap. ^6 Prosper. cont.
Collat. cap. 18.
and our Divines against Arminians; see for this what Arminius, Corvinus, and
the Jesuit Bellarmine, Suarez and ^asques says on the contrary. The notoriety
of Ministers and professors sins, Armin. an^^berk. page 244. ad a^t. 31. page
25^.
or their secrecy is all one, the sin defiles the man, and the man's worship,
preaching and prayers to himself, Collat. Hag. page 250, 251.
but their sins do not an^ll, and make of no effect the ordinances of God,
Corv. cont Molin. cap. 38.
that are public, the prayer of the unconverted Minister is the prayer of the
Church, Bellarm. de great. and lib arbit. lib. 5. cap. ^.
and heard for Christ's sake, howbeit the man himself be a taker of Gods name
in vain, Suarez. de great. lib. 1. cap. 21.
else infants baptized by an unconverted Pastor, were infidels, and yet
unbaptised, Vasquez. in 12. tom. 2. disp.
if his sacraments administered by him in the state of sin be no ordinances of
Christ, but abominations that defile others as well as himself. Thus the
preaching of Scribes and Pharisees, the abominable slaves of hell, as
concerning their conversation, were not to be heard, even while they sat on
Moses chair, the contrary whereof Christ commands, Mat. 23. 2, 3, 4.

8. Argument If the Church-worship must be forsaken, 8. Principal Arg.
for the wickedness of the fellow-worshippers, then the public ordinances of
word and sacraments, should have their worth and dignity from the persons
worshipping: as preaching should be more the word of God, the holier the
preacher be; and less the word of God, the less holy that he be, and not the
word of God at all, if the preacher be an unwashen and an unhallowed Priest
(whereof there are too many, alas, in our age) But this were absurd, the word
has all the essential dignity and holiness from God, and preaching and
baptizing are true pastoral acts and means of salvation, so the men be called
by God and the Church having their power from Christ Jesus, whose ordinances
they are, what ever be the men's moral carriage. I grant it is more unsavory,
and works the less, if the man be an ungracious slave of sin, but that is
by accident and from our corruption who cannot look to Gods word, and receive
it as his word, but we must look who he is, a good, or a bad man who carries
the letters; and what vessel it be that bears Gods-treasure, if of gold, or
of earth. August. contr. Donatists.
This argument Augustine presses against the Donatists.

9. Argument. 9 Principal Arg.
If Church-worship, where wicked people worship with us, be defiled to us
believers, then Peter's preaching was defiled to the converts, Acts 2. because
Ananias and Saphira, Simon Magus did worship with them: Moses, Elijah, Joshua
could not but be defiled by the prefence of stiff-necked people, whose hearts
were going after Baalim, and they sinned in taking part and consenting to a
polluted covenant, Passover, feast of the Lord, Sermon or the like. It is not
enough to say, if they knew the worshippers to b^ such, they were not to
communicate with them. I answer, then the worship public where wicked persons
do communicate, does not of it self contaminate and pollute the worship to
others who are true believers, but only upon condition that believers know the
wickedness, for 1. We desire a warrant of this from the Word of God, or the
nature of the worship. 2. And if so be baptism administered by a private
person, whom we take to be a faithful Pastor, should be lawful, I never
thought our knowledge had power to change worship from a pure and clean case,
to make it impure and unclean, by this means light and darkness, Christ and
Beliall, the woman's seed and the Serpents seed may remain together, we may
stay with the infectious botch of unclean worship, while we know it, and the
Church rebuke and censure it, but it is too long, to lie in the fire, and be
burnt to ashes, till we take notice of the secrets that are known to God, that
is, whether the whole thousand professors that worship with us, be believers or
unbeleevers. 3. This answer helps not against our argument, for Moses,
Isaiah, Jeremiah and the Apostles, knew most part that these with whom they did
publicly communicate in public worship were stiff-necked, rebellious,
idolatrous, superstitious, and yet they did not separate from the public
worship, for their wickedness.

10. Argument. 10. Principal. Arg.
That which is so heinous a sin, as to profane Gods name, and ordinances, to
marry Christ and Belial, to mix God and Idols that are Devils, should have
been forbidden in the old and new Testament; but separation from the true
worship of God for the sins of the worshippers is never forbidden, and
communion is ever commanded in the old, or new Testament, therefore separation
cannot be lawful, and communion cannot be such a sin.

6. Conclusion. 6. Conclusion
A worship may be false in the matter two ways, either when we are to practice
it, or give our assent to it, as to receive the Sacraments after an unlawful
manner, to assent to corrupt doctrine, that is never lawful, and here we may
separate from the worship, when we separate not from the Church. Or then the
worship is false in the matter, but our presence does not make it unlawful to
us; as professors may hear a preacher who preaches the body of divinity
soundly, howbeit he mix errors with it, because what every one hears they
are to try ere they believe, as the Spirit of God teaches, 1 These. 5. 21. Try
all things, hold fast what is good, 1 John 4. 1. Try the spirits: in so doing
we separate from the Sermon, while we hear the good and refuse the evil:
because we separate from the error of the worship, therefore to hear unsound
doctrine is not to partake of false worship, because we are to hear the
Pharisees, but to beware of their leaven, and finding it to be sour and
unsound doctrine, we are to reject it.

7. Conclusion. 7. Conclusion*
A communion in worship true in the matter, where the person called, for
example, the Preacher is a minister of Antichrist, is unlawful, because we are
not to acknowledge any of Babel, or Baals Priests professing their calling to
be of the Pope, the man of sin.

8. Conclusion. 8. Conclusion
When we separate from a Church overturning the foundation of religion, as from
Rome, we are to keep a desire of gaining them, howbeit not a brotherly
fellowship with them. Augustine says with us, we are in mercy to rebuke what
we cannot amend, and to bear it patiently, and else where: So Ciprian, August.
Epist. 162. and 50. shows, the Africans were esteemed a Church of Christ,
howbeit they strictly held baptism, by heretics, to be no baptism.

CHAP. XI.
Quest. 11. Whither or no separation from a true Church because of the sins
of professors and manifest defense of scandalous persons can be proved from
Gods word, to be lawful.
Diverse places of Scripture are abused by Separatists, to maintain the
lawfullnesse of their separation, 2 Cor. 6. 17. Come out from amongst them and
separate your selves says the Lord, 1. Object. Of Separatists.
and touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you, Ainsworth counterposs.
page 8.
Ergo (says Ainsworth) It is commanded us of God to come out of a corrupt
Church, and separate from it, if we would be in covenant with God.

Answ. 1. This is no local separation commanded the Corinthians, Erasm.
Sarcer. in loc. 2 Cor. 6.
as Erasmus Sarcerius observes, but a separation in affection, and if it were
a local separation, it is from the Idol-table of the Gentiles, at which some
did eat at Corinth to the great offense of the weak, 1 Cor. 8. 10. 1 Cor. 10.
17, 18, 19, 20. but from this is badly concluded separation out of the Church
of Corinth, or any other true Church, where the word and sacraments are in
purity, suppose some errors be practiced by some: Paul borrowed this place from
Isa. 52. 11. as Calvin thinks, Calvin in l^c.
where the Lord charge the people to come out from Babylon, seeing Cyrus had
proclaimed liberty to them to come home, and applies it to the case of
Corinth, that they should fly all fellowship with Idols, and Idols temples and
tables, 1 Cor. 8. 10. because light and darkness, Christ and Beliall cannot
agree, as he cites from Ezech. 37. Ezech 43. 7. Levit. 26. in the former
verse, Marloratus in 2 Cor. 6.
as Marlorat teaches. Now this separation in Corinth was in a Church from the
Idolatry in it, which separation we allow, but not a separation out of a
Church, else the words would bear that Paul will have them to forsake the
Church of Corinth, for idolatrous tables in it, and set up a new Church of
their own, which the Separatists dare not say, and is contrary to other places,
1 Cor. 5. 4. 1 Cor. 11. 1 Cor. 14. Where he commands and allows their
meeting and public Church communion, therefore this place proves not their
point.

2. This separation is such a separation as is betwixt light and darkness,
Christ and Beliall, but the separation is not from external communion, which
Separatists urge, but from all spiritual and internal communion. For
Separatists teach that always there are in the Church visible hypocrites and
true believers, for the which cause M. Barrow says, Barrow.
it is compared to a draw-net wherein there are both good and bad; now
Hypocrites and believers together in one visible Church are light and darkness
together, and external Church communion with the hypocrite (which is lawful)
cannot be a touching of an unclean thing, and so Church Fellowship with the
wicked cannot be Christ and Belial together.

3. That Separation here commanded is from the worship of God corrupted in the
matter, where need force the Corinthians behoved to be joined to Idols, v: 16*
For what agreement (says he) has the Temple of God with Idols? Now he
means, that the faithful who were Temples of the holy Spirit should not sit
and eat at the Idols Table, which is called, 1 Cor: 10. 20, 21. The Devils
Table and cup. But what Logic is this? Separate from Idols, ergo, separate
from a Church, where the true worship of God is, and is professed and taught;
this is to be yoaked with Christ's body, Spouse, truth, but to fly the errors
that are in the body, which we also teach.

2. They object, 2. Object.
Rev: 18. 4. Go out of her my people that ye be not partakers of her sins,
and that y^ receive not of her plagues. Ergo, we must separate from the Church
where there is any thing of Romes worship.

Answ. It follows not; for it is as if one would say, the wrath of God is to
come upon the whore of Rome, who has overturned the foundation of true faith.
Ergo, if Corinth will not excommunicate the incestuous man after ye have warned
them of their duty, come out of that Babel also, least ye be partakers of her
sins. For they teach were a visible Church never so sound, pure, holy, fair
in doctrine and life, yet if they refuse to cast out a scandalous person, and
will spare and defend him, they are to be separated from, and those that stay
in that Church and* keep communion with her, are partakers of her sins.
Howbeit some saving truths remain in the Church of Rome, and in that we keep
yet a material and real union with Rome in as far as they profess one God;
three persons, two natures in Christ, etc. but we have separated from Rome. 1.
Because their Doctrine of professed and commanded Idolatry, and their other
Heresies everteth the foundation of Faith. 2. Because they lay another
foundation above the foundation Christ, the Pope, and a multitude of Idol-gods,
but it follows in no sort. Ergo, we are to separate from every true Church of
Christ, that is incorrigible in one fault or other.

Where is there a Christian Church that we could live in in the Earth, yea
except the Anabaptists-Church, a Church of white paper as fair as Heaven, and
the Sun, that there is not a spot on more then on the triumphing Church, this
on Earth is a city in the Moon.

3. They object, Object. 3. Ainsworth ib.
Come not ye to Gilgall, neither go ye up to Bethaven, therefore people were
to separate from Idolatrous Israel.

Answ. I have prooved that the true Prophets commanded Church Fellowship with
Israel after their Idolatry: and judge if this be good, Go not to Bethaven,
that is the house of vanity, called Bethel the house of God, where Jeroboams
calves were worshipped, ergo, separate from all the worship of God in Israel:
we say, Ex negatione speciei, male concluditur negatio generis, separate from
Ieroboams calves: therefore separate from all true worship of God in Israel, it
is a bad consequence.

4. They object, Object. 4.
In the old Testament the Law consisted of outward ordinances, and if they were
outwardly performed, there was no cause to separate from them. But under the
new Testament, all things are become now and spiritual, where Christ has
given power to all the faithful to censure scandalous sins, Barrow di^cov of
false Church p* 39, 40
all should separate from a corrupt Church: So Barrow. But Master Smith helps
him, Smith paral. cens. p. 29, 30.
All things were shadows in the old Testament: David, Jehoshaphat, etc.
suffered known sins in the land, yet were they the true matter of the
typical Church, being typically and ceremonially clean: for to the
constitution of the typical Church, there was not required true holiness, but
ceremonial cleanness: Holiness was required of them for their acceptance
before God, but not for the constitution of their Church: so there were there
typical Saints, typical Hypocrites, that might have no communion together
till they were purified, and yet being indeed wicked persons they might have
Church Communion together. But our constitution, ministry, communion,
separation are contrary to theirs, Robinson against Bernard. p, 248.
true holiness is required under the new Testament. Robinson adds, No man
could absolutely separate from the Church of the Jews, for it was the only one
visible Church upon the face of the Earth, tied to one Temple, Altar,
Sacrifice, Priesthood and place, they had not excommunication, as we have now,
the offender was by bodily death cut off from the commonwealth, as from the
Church?

Answ. It is most false that external performances of duties were sufficient
to make men members of the visible Church of the old Testament. If this
difference of ceremonial and spiritual h^linesse betwixt the church of old,
and the Church of the new Testament stand, then the Church of the new
Testament, where there are any hypocrites s^^al be no true vis^b^e Church,
because hypocritos in the new Testament has but ceremonial and external
holiness, not real or spiritual, as the hypocrites of the old Testament.
1. Because man-slayers* adulterers, etc. were to be cut off and excommunicated
from the congregation of the Lord, and their prayers were not accepted of God,
even by Moses his law, Number: 35. 33, 34. Es: 1. 10, 11, 14, 15. Es. 66. 3, 4, 5.
2 It is false that all the worship under the new Testament is so spiritual
that outward performances of external profession in the new Testament does not
also make professors Ecclesiastically holy and separated from other people not
of the visible Church, for Ananias, Saphira, Simon Magus for a time were
externally holy, and differenced from Pagans without the Church by their
baptism and external profession. Then Barrow must quit all places in the old
Testament, for separation from a wicked Ministry, as that Prove. 15. The
Sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to God, was as true in the old as in the
new Testament. Ergo, the Sacrifices offered by the wicked Priest were no
ordinances of God, and did pollute others, who did communicate with him.

2. The Sacraments of the Jewish Church in substance were one and the same with
our Sacraments, Heb. 13. 8. 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3. Joh. 8. 56. Joh. 6. 50, 51.
Col. 2. 11, 12. 1 Cor: 5. 7. all say this except* Papists, Anabaptists,
Arminians and Socinians, and for notoriously wicked persons to use the
Sacraments with profane and wicked hearts, was most unlawful and made them in
that no members of the true Church, but as Sodom and Gomorrah, ^s. 1. 10. as
Aethiopians, Egyptians and Philistines, Amos 9. 7. and such were forbidden to
take Gods covenant in their mouth, seeing they hated to be reformed, Psalm. 50.
16, 17. Their prayers were abomination when their hands were bloody, Es: 1. 15.
their Sacrifices like the murdering of a man, and the Sacrificing of a dog,
which was abomination to God, Isa, 66. 3. and so are all the means they use,
but I believe, if Christ was the Spouse, Priest, head of the body to the Church
of the Jews, as to us, to the constitution of this body visibly worshipping him
in a Church State, there was required that the people should be not only
typically holy, but really, and that God should be sanctified not only
typically, but really, by real declaration of all that drew nigh to him, and
the Song of Solomon says, that the communion was moral, spiritual, beside
that it was typical in some points. 3 Petition to K. James. 3. pos.
And this is direct contrary to their confession, where they make Separation
from a corrupt Church moral, and to that separation of the godly from the
wicked was taught of God, before the Law, under the Law, and under the Gospel,
and they teach, That all true Churches from the beginning, to the end of the
world are one in nature, and essential constitution: And would the Lord have
these to receive the seals of his covenant, as true members typical of a
typical Church: This they say is 1 To take the name of God in vain. 2. That
the Lord does seal unrighteousness. 3. That he prophaneth his Sons blood and
death: then a people laden with iniqu^ty, a Sodom, a generation of Idolaters
might all by Gods typical command, claim to the promises of the covenant, and
they only.

3. The common believers amongst the Jews had the power of the keys, as well
as we, if Separatists teach right, for they had power to rebuke one another,
Levit: 19. 17. and this to them is a part of the power of the keys, Smith
paral* 60, 61
as Smith says, they had power of ordination to lay hands on their officers,
and the right of election, as they would prove from, Levit: 8. 2, 3. a place
notwithstanding abused, Separatist 3. petition, 3 posit. 3* reas. p. 47.
for the congregation there is the Princes of the congregation, as it is a
hundred times taken in the old Testament, else how could six hundredth thousand
persons, beside aged men, women and children lay hands on the officers? They
did also excommunicate no less then our Church of believers, as they say, 3.
Petit. 8* posit.
therefore their Church in the essence of a visible Church was every way as
ours, except in some accidental ceremonies.

Lastly, suppose the Jews were the only visible Church that none could
separate from, yet Christ and Belial, light and darkness should never dwell
together.

5. They object, Robinson. ^insworth. Smith. M. Can.
A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, and so a scandalous sinner not
censured, makes the whole Church an infected lump, therefore we are to separate
from that Church, if they go on, except we would be leavened: So Robinson,
Ainsworth, Smith, Can, object.

Answ 1. There is a double infection, one physical as leaven, that by touching
leaveneth, and pest-cloaths that by touching defile the air or men's bodies:
the comparison holds not in this, I am sure. There is a moral infection by
evil example, and so the incestuous Corinthian, not excommunicated, did
infect, if any should use his company as a brother and member of the Church; of
this latter sort, the place 1 Cor: 5. is to be understood. The incestuous man
would infect, if the guides and the Apostles spirit should ^^t cast him out:
Hence it is true that Church guydes, in not excommunicating, did what was in
them morally, to infect and leaven the Church: but 1. It follows not that the
Church was actu secundo, and actually infected, howbeit, no thanks to the
guides. 2. It follows not that they should separate from a Church that might
infect, because that is not Gods mean of eschewing infection to lowpe out of
one true Church to another for one fault.

2. The eschewing and separating from the error of the Church, and the man's
company, is enough to them to eschew the infection. They urge, But it is
atempting of God to stay in an infected lump, suppose you be not actually
infected your self, for no thanks to you, as it is a tempting of God, to
keep company with a wicked man, suppose by Gods grace, ye learn not his
wicked fashions, a man is guilty of selfe-murther, who rydeth a swelling and
dangerous river, and sins in so doing, suppose God graciously pardon his
rashness, and carry him through the river safe.

I Answ. 1. To stay in every place where sinners are, and to haunt the wicked
man's company as his companion, is a sinful tempting of God, suppose ye be not
actually ensnared: but to stay in the company or Church, carefully flying every
spot and soul air, that may blow sin upon you, is no tempting of God.

But secondly, they thus urge, to stay a member of a leavened Church, and keep
Church Communion with that infected Church, is to tempt God, therefore God
calls you to separate from that Church.

I answer 1. To stay a member of that Church wholly leavened, and where the
matter of the worship is leaven, and fundamental points corrupted and obtruded
upon the conscience, is to tempt God, for then I keep communion with a
leavened Church, as leavened, such as is Babell: but the assumption now is
false, and the case not so here, but to keep my self and remain a member of a
Church leavened in part with one sin, and to take no part with the sin, and
yield no consent thereunto is no tempting of God; Paul joined as a member with
the Church of Corinth, and acknowledged them as a Church, and commanded to
keep Church fellowship with them, 1 Cor: 5. 4. even when this leavened lump
was souring amongst them.

But thirdly they urge, the incestuous man's sin not censured, infected the
Church, the infected Church infecteth the worship.

Answ. I deny that the sin of the worshippers infecteth the worship to others
that are not guilty, it infecteth the worship to themselves, but not to others,
a worship corrupt by accident only through the fault of the worshipper, may and
does make the Lords Supper damnation to the eater, and therefore the eater is
forbidden so to eat; a worship in the matter and intrinsecall principle unjust
and sinful is defiled both to the man himself and to all that takes part
with him, as the teacher of false Doctrine and all that hears and believes
are defiled, but if the sin of an unworthy communicant even known to be so be
damnation to himself, and defile the worship to others, then Paul would have
said, he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own
damnation, and the damnation of the whole Church, and Paul should have
forbidden all others to eat and drink withal, who communicates unworthily,
if he allowed separation, but he says, he eats and drinks damnation,
(...), to himself, not to all others.

But fourthly, they urge thus, We must not only strive to rebuke, and censure
one another, but we must not stay a member of that Church, in the which we are
not permitted to do the duty that Christ has commanded us, for the station
and place is unwarrantable, where we are necessitated to sin, that is, to
omit a duty of the Keys, that God has given to all the faithful. Ergo, we
must separate from that Church, where all the faithful may not use the Keys.

Answ. 1. Also if the power of the Keys be in the hands of the people, as some
teach, so as they are under a commandment of God to rebuke authoritatively,
and judicially to censure and excommunicate, their universal omission of that
duty seems to be sinful; and (howbeit I be loath to teach Separation) I see
not how the authors who give the power of the keys to all private Christians,
are not to separate from all Churches where Presbyteriall government is, no
less then the strictest Separatists do^.

2. Affirmative precepts tie not in all differences of time: To rebuke your
brother is always lawful, so it be done, observing due circumstances; but
that every be^eever rebuke Church-wayes, and judicially by the power of the
keys does not tie at all, because Christ never gave that power to all. 2. Some
duties tie absolutely, as to pray, these we cannot forbear: Suppose a Church
should make a Law, like Darius to borrow a dumb Devil, for thirty days, and
to pray none, that Church should not be heard, and not acknowledged in that.
Other duties tie conditionally, as not to pray in public with a man
notoriously serving Satan, and deserving to be excommunicate; yet if the Church
excommunicate not, we are not to separate from the prayer of the Church,
because that person is suffered there: so these duties that tie upon a
condition that depends upon others and not upon my self, tie not always. I
am obliged to believe what point the Pastor teaches, but not absolutely, but
upon condition it agrees to Gods Word.

They fifthly urge. But I am necessitated in a false Church to communicate with
those whom I know to be no members of the true Church, but limbs of Satan,
because in Gods court they are excommunicated, and no members of the Church;
but through the corruption of these that have the power of the keys, these are
permitted to be members of the Church, who in Gods court are no members at all;
and if I remain in the Church, I must communicate with them, yea if I remain
in the Church, I must communicate at that table where the holy things of God
are profaned by dogs and swine, therefore in that case I must separate.

Answ. In your holiest independent Church where discipline is m^st in vigor,
you meet with this doubt, and must separate also, if this reason be good: For
suppose you know one to be guilty of adultery and murder, and had seen it with
your eyes, the party guilty to you is not guilty to the Church: For 1. you are
but one, none is guilty Ecclesiastically, and to be debar^ed penally and
judicially from the holy things of God, except by confession to the Church, or
by two or three witnesses. 2. You know what is holden by all our Divines,
Thmomas Aquin. Ca^etan de authoritat pap. cap 19.
yea even the Canon Law and Papists teach that the Church cannot judge of hid
things, and acts of the mind. S^to. 22. q. 1. a^t. 3. Durand.
So says Thom. Aquin. Cajetan, Soto, Durandus, Almain, Gerson, Navar. Driedo,
Joan. Mayor. Paludan. Almain de potest. eccl cap. 10.
Antonin. their ground is good: The Church cannot judge of that they cannot
see; Gerson de vit^ spir. lect. 4. lit. G. H.
And the Churches power of the keys is all for the external policy of the
Church, Navar. in sumin. cap. 27. ^. 57.
and therefore such a sin cannot be the object of Church-censure, Driedo de
li^ert. Christ. li. 3. ca. 5.
or cause of Separation, Maiorm.
Excommunication is ever used against external scandals, Pa^u ^a in 4. q. 3.
Antonin. 3.
Mat. 18. 15. 1 Cor. 5. 1. 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20. 2 These. 3* 14. show one place
where the Church excommunicateth for non-regeneration.

6. They object, 6. Object.
It is not lawful to call God Father jointly with these who are not brethren,
Smith. paral. page 107.
but sons of Satan, Ergo, we are to separate from such. So Smith reasons.

Answ. Except they be all and every one the sons of God, 7. Object.
that are in our visible Church, and not one hypocrite or child of Satan
amongst them, by this argument we must separate from them, and so Separatists
are to separate from their own Congregation, wherein they acknowledge there be
hypocrites. This is Anabaptisticall holiness, Isa. 65.

7. They object, It is not lawful to make Christ a Mediator to all the
profane in the land, and to make all the profane members of his body, Ergo,
we are to separate from a confused Church?

Answ. So was Corinth, Galatin, Ephesus, confused Churches, wherein there were
hypocrites. We make Christ Mediator and Head to the visible Church, according
to the best part, as Christ speaks, Joh. 17. Thine they were, when Judas was
never Gods. And Paul calls Corinth Saints, Colosse Saints, and faithful
brethren, 1 Cor 1. 1, 2.
and Peter, the elected according to the foreknowledge of God, Col. 1. 1, 2.
begotten again to a lively hope, where yet there was some at Corinth. 1 Pet.
1. 2, 3, 4.
2. Cor. 2. 16. To whom the Gospel was the savor of death unto death, some to
whom it was hidden, whom Satan had blinded, 2 Cor. 4. 3. And some in Colosse
carried away with Angel-worship, Col. 2. 18, 19.
not holding the head Christ, some of those to whom Peter writes were such, 1
Pet. 2. 8.
who stumbled at the stone laid on Zion, and there was amongst them, false
teachers privily bringing in damnable Heresies, 2. and many followed their
pernicious ways, 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 13.
spots, feasting amongst the Saints, having eyes full of Adultery, that cannot
cease from sin, etc.

8, They object, 8. Object.
These that are mixed with unbeleevers consent to all the sins of the
unbeleevers, and to all their profanation of the holy things of God, seeing
God has given them the power of the keys to hold out and excommunicate all
wicked persons; therefore believers are to separate from all prophaners of the
Covenant, except they would forfeit their Covenant.

Answ. A simple worshipping with hypocrites whom we know not is not a consent
to their profanation of the holy things of God; Christ's eating the Passover
with Judas; the Disciples eating the Passover, when Christ said, One of you
has a Devil, one of you shall betray me, did not import consent, nor
partaking with Judas his profaning of the Sacraments. 2. Neither has God
given to all believers the power of the keys that way, as is alleged. 3.
Suppose the Eldership in whose hands only are the keys, should permit a
known adulterer, who never professed his repentance therefore to the Lords
Table; yet this were not in the Eldership the sin against the Holy Ghost, and
to forfeit the Covenant, though it were a great sin.

9. They object, God commands the godly to plead with their mother, because
(says he) she is not my wife, nor I her husband, Ergo, if the Church turn a
harlot, the children are to protest and plead against her, as reputing her no
mother, and so they are to forsake her.

Answ. If this place prove lawfulness of separation from the Jewish Church, as
from a harlot cast off of God, it shall cross a maine principle of
Separatists, that the Jewish Church was the only visible Church from which it
was not lawful to separate, seeing the Messiah behooved to be borne there, and
the Temple, sacrifices were only there. Also this pleading was for harlotry
and Idolatry: But M. Smith and others say, that wickedness and Idolatry did
not mar the constitution of the Jewish Church, so being they had ceremonial
and typical holiness according to the letter of the outward legal service;
and so from this separation from the true Church is vainly collected. 2. Plead
with your mother for her harlotries. Hence it follows first, 1. They were to
esteem her as a mother, and of duty as sons to plead with her. 2. If they
were to plead with her, and rebuke her, they were to keep communion with her;
because non-rebuking for a time is a sign of separation and suspending
communion for a time, Ezech. 3. 26. Thou shall be dumb, and shall not be to
them a reprover, for they are a rebellious house, Ergo, reproving is a sign of
communion. But they say, they were to plead with their mother by power of the
keys; and if their mother would not return to the Lord her first husband, then
they were to go on to a full separation from her.

I answer: Then two or three faithful ones in the Church of the Jews, no
less then in the Christian Church were a true visible Church, having the power
of the keys. This is contrary to their own doctrine, who make a typical and
ceremonial cleanness sufficient to constitute the Jewish Church; but require
a real, true, and spiritual holiness, to the constitution of the Church of
the New Testament: For if the children may plead with the mother for want of
spiritual chastity and marriage-love to her Lord, and for that contend against
her, to separate from her, as from a harlot and non-Church, then is real
holiness required for the constitution of a visible Church amongst the Jews,
as amongst us, which Separatists deny.

10. They object, Abraham 10. Object.
behooved to separate from his fathers house, for the idolatry thereof, before
Abraham's family was made the true Church of God, therefore there is no
remaining in a Church where the worship is corrupted?

Answ. Separation from a Society professing Idolatry and corrupting altogether
the doctrine of the Covenant, such as was Abraham's fathers house, we grant is
lawful, their father was an Hittite, and their mother was an Ammorite, Ezech.
16. 3, 4, 5, etc. Isa. 51. 1, 2. but what is this to separate from a Church
where are the true signs of Gods presence, the Word and Sacraments in
substance professed. 2. God in a particular call went before Abraham to make a
Church of him, of whom the Messiah was to come, and to whom he was to give his
Covenant, whereas his Covenant was not in Abraham's fathers house: This call is
not made, nor this Revelation to these who separate from the Church and true
Covenant.

11. They object, 11. Object.
The Ministry of the Gospel should be as the holy flock, Ezech 36, 38. So
Ainsworth.
as the flock of Jerusalem in their solemn feasts, that the oblation might be
sanctified; but when the people is a confused profane multitude, they are not
the oblation of the Lord, and so not the Church that we can remain in to, and
offer such lamed sacrifice to God in our prayers?

Answ. The same will follow in their Churches, where Minister and professors
being whited walls, and painted hypocrites, though not known to others: A
scabbed sacrifice is offered to God, and that hypocrites are in the Church
always, we and they agree and teach jointly. 2. What though the people be
profane and known to be a bad sacrifice, seeing they profess the truth,
shall they be excluded from the prayers of the Church, and none offered to God
in the prayers of the Church, but only believers? shall not these be offered
in prayer to God, who are yet unconverted? what means that petition then (Thy
Kingdom come) is it not a prayer of the Churches for the non-converted.

12. They object, 12. Object.
With that Church we cannot join with, as members thereof, where Images and
Pictures of Devils are laid upon Gods Altar for spiritual sacrifices, which is
as abominable to God, as unclean beasts were under the Law: And Christ cannot
be a Priest to offer these in public Church Service to God; but profane men
in the Church are such pictures of Devils, Ergo, the true Church should not
offer them to God, nor should we stay in that Church where such are offered, as
Christ will not offer unto God.

Answ. 1. That same inconvenience shall ever retort upon the objectors, because
hypocrites that are still in the visible Church shall be Images and Pictures of
Devils offered to God, and Christ can be no Priest to offer such to God.

2. That a visible Church may be a holy oblation laid upon the Altar of God, to
be offered to God, by our High Priest Christ: It is not required for the
Essence of a true and acceptable sacrifice of worship, that all and every one
of the Congregation be holy and spiritually clean: For then the Church of the
Lords Disciples and followers in the days of his flesh should not be a clean
offering to God, for amongst them was Judas. The Church of believers, Acts 2.
should not be an holy oblation, but an offering to God of Images and Pictures
of Devils: For in their visible Church was Ananias, Saphira, and Simon Magus:
Christ our High Priest bears the twelve Tribes of Israel in his breast, and
offers Israel to God as the typical Priest did; yet all and every Idolater,
Sorcerer, Murderer in Israel, are not written on Christ's breast, but only
thos^ that are sealed of every Tribe, Rev. 7. It is sufficient to make the
oblation holy, that there are some few believers that are stamped with the
Image of God, and offered in a holy and clean oblation to God, by out
High Priest Christ: For amongst Separatists were sound revolt^rs that left
their Congregation, and wrote against the Separation; yet these were once
offered to God while they were visible Saints, and esteemed to be taught of God
and sound believers.

13. They object, Object. 13.
That it is not lawful to have communion with a Church, where there is any
superstition or Idolatry, or false worship: For David would not take up the
names of Idols in his lips; nor is it lawful to touch the garment spotted of
the flesh, in respect, one Achan taking the accursed spoil, brought judgment
on all the rest, and therefore they must separate who would be free of the
curse.

Answ. It is not lawful to communicate with the holiest Church on earth in an
act of false worship we grant; but every false worship does neither make a true
Church, a false Church, or no Church; neither gives it a ground and warrant of
Separation; for there was much false worship in Corinth, where many were
partakers of the Idols Table, 1 Cor. 8. 10. and many denied the Resurrection,
and so Thyatira, Pergamus, Rev. 2. where were Balaams doctrine, and Jezabel the
false Prophetess, and yet none of these are to be separated from, as false
Churches, and the Separatists would observe this, that when Churches in the New
Testament are most sharply rebuked, if communion with these Churches going on
in their sins be Idolatry and false worship, and offering of Devils Images to
God, how is it, that the Lord and his Apostles rebukes the faults, but never
warns the true and sound believers to separate and make a new Church, seeing
this is the only remedy to them, and there is not another way to escape the
judgment of the whol^ Church? 2. David would not take up the names of Idols in
his lips, nor should any touch the garment spotted of the ^lesh, nor consent
unto, or countenance Idols, but to communicate with a Church where there is a
profane people and a false worship, in some points, is not to touch unclean
garments, for the clean and the sound worship of God is clean, and as for the
example of Achan, it is most impertinent, Israel knew not Achans sacrilege,
till the Lord found out the man, and if this stand good, a lurking hypocrite,
and an unseene Achan in a visible Congregation, brings a curse on the
Congregation, and from such a Congregation we are to separate, What madness is
this, we are to separate from a society, before we know any Achan to be amongst
them. But Separatists say, God would not have punished Israel by making them
^ly before the men of Ai, Josh. 7. If Israel did take no part with Achan, but
because of Achans sacrilege they were punished, ver. 11. Israel has sinned
and transgressed my covenant, which I commanded them: for they have taken the
accursed thing.

I answer, This gives us occasion to speak a little of the communion with
other men's sins: We partake these ways of the Churches sins. 1. When we work
with them, and are helping causes, this communion is unlawful. 2. When we
counsel or persuade to false worship. 3. When we omit what we are obliged to
do, or commit that we should not do, from whence others are occasioned to
sin; for by moral interpretation, he promoveth the sin of others, who does not
give all due and obliged diligence to hinder the committing of sin. 4. Those
who consent to sin, who approve and praise the fact, and the committers of the
fact. 5. Those that do not rebuke sin. 6. Those who are not displeased for
it, and does not mourn for it, Ezech. 9. and are not humbled for it, and does
not pity the sinner, and pray that God in his mercy or justice may be
glorified. Now of all these we are to consider how Israel did properly
communicate with Achans sin. Some say there is a seventh way different from
all, when we in heart desire to do, what others do wickedly, in the external
fact, As Israel also coveted in their heart what Achan took with his hands, or
when we do the same sin by Analogy, that others are doing, as the Mariners
are punished for Jonahs sin, when as they were doing a sin by Anology like
the sin of Jonah: For Jonah fled from Gods presence, as if God could not have
followed him through the Seas, and had been like the Idoll-gods; and the
Mariners did the same, they worshipped an Idol-god, and knew not the God that
made the Heaven and the Earth. Now wherein none of these seven ways we partake
of the sins of a Church, how can their worship be defiled to us, or have any
influence to infect us? but the truth is Israel were guilty of Achans sin,
because they did not carefully observe, and wa^ne one another to take heed that
they meddled not with the accursed thing, but Joshuah never dreamed of
Separation from Israel for Achans sin, and the Text says not that; for they
could not separate from the Church for Achans sacrilege, which was not known
to them, while God discovered the same, else by this Text we are to separate
from all Churches, where there does live hidden and covered Achans, and unseen
hypocrites, and thus we behoved to remove and separate up to the Church
tryumphing in Heaven, or then with Anabaptists find a spotless Church on Earth.

14. They object, 14. Object.
To be present at a Mass is to countenance an Idol-worship, so to be present
in a Church-worship where there is any errors in the worship is to countenance
the error, for what worship we countenance, to that we say Amen, and so we
must consent to the wrong constitution of a Church where are profane people?

Answ. 1. ^o countenance a worship professedly Idolatrous, where the name of
the worship does import the worshipping of a false god, is unlawful, for
others do interpret our presence a joint worshipping with them. But our
presence at every lawful worship that is acknowledged lawful, does not give
so much as interpretatively signification of our consent to every particular in
the worship, because hearing, discerning, choosing or refusing, believing or
not believing, according as you find the points agreeable to Gods word, or
dissonant therefrom, does interveene betwixt your presence at the worship, and
your consent to the worship; now the act of consenting, approving and receiving
the point of worship is formally to partake of the worship, else we could not
obey the precept, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. Try all things: some things in the Preacher
are to be borne with; the Preachers of the Separation have not an Apostolic
and infallible spirit, if any of them preach unsound Doctrine, the presence of
the hearers does not involve them in the guilt of the Preachers erroneous
worship. The Pharisees corrupting of the Law was known and rebuked by Christ,
but yet Christ forbad Separation, Hear them (says Christ, Mat. 23.) they sit
in Moses his chair.

CHAP. XII.
Quest. 12. Whither or no do some warrantably teach, that baptism should be
administrated only to Infant^ borne of one at least, of the nearest Parents,
known to be a believer, and within the covenant? And who are to be admitted to
the Lords Supper?
NOt only these of the Separation, but also others whom we do most unwillingly
oppose in this, hold, that Baptism is to be denied to Infants, whose nearest
Parents, one at least, are not known to be within the covenant: That our mind
may be known in this, we propose these distinctions to the learned and godly
Reader to be considered.

1. There is an inherent holiness, and there is a federall holiness, whereby some
are holy by covenant, that is, have right to the means of salvation, which
right Turks and Pagans have not. 2. People or persons are two ways within the
covenant. 1. Truly, and by faith in Christ, and according to the election of
grace. 2. In profession, because the word of the covenant is preached to them,
as members of the visible Church. 3. There is a holiness of the covenant, and a
holiness of covenanters, and there is a holiness of the Nation, flock and
people, and a holiness of the single person. 4. There is a holiness of election
in Gods mind, and a holiness real, and of the persons elected. 5. There is a
federall or covenant-holines, de jure, by right, such as goes before Baptism
in the Infants borne in the visible Church, and a holiness de facto, a formal
covenant-holines after they are baptized.
Hence our first Conclusion, All the Infants borne within the visible Church,
what ever be the wickedness of their nearest Parents are to be received within
the Church by Baptism.

1. Argument. 1. Arg.
If the children of wicked parents were circumcised, all without exception,
notwithstanding the wickedness of their parents, then the children of these
who are borne in the visible Church of Christians, are to receive that same
seal in nature and substance of that same covenant of grace, which is
baptism. But all the children of most wicked parents, were circumcised without
exception. Ergo, so are the children of Christians borne in the visible Church.
The proposition cannot be denied by our brethren. 1. They say circumcision was
given only to members of the visible Church, to whom the doctrine of the
covenant, Genesis 17. 7, 8. was preached, and these were professors only within
the visible Church of the Jews, Best Churches plea. arg. 3. and 4. page 61, 62.
as M. Best says, and if children were to be circumcised because God said (I
will be your God and the God of your seed) then because this promise is made to
Christians, and to their seed in the new Testament, Acts 2. 38. they should be
baptized. ver. 38. be baptized every one of you, etc. ver. 39. for the promise
is made to you, and to your children. Whence it is clear, as these who were
externally in covenant, were only to be circumcised, so these, who are
externally in covenant in the christian Church, are to be baptized. I prove the
assumption, that all the male children were to be baptized without exception.
1. From Gods commandment, Genesis 17. 10. Every man-child amongst you shall be
circumcised, ver. 11. Every man-child in your generation, he that is borne in
the house, and bought with money of any stranger, that is not thy seed, the
uncircumcised must be cut off from his people, he has broken my covenant. Here
is no exception, but all must be circumcised. 2. Also many must be circumsed,
as these to whom the Lord gave the Land for a possession, and was Abraham's
seed, according to the flesh, but the land was given to the most wicked of
Abraham's seed, so cap. 8. 3. That all the children of the wicked are
circumcised is clear, Josh. 5. Because Joshuah at Gods commandment
circumcised the children of Israel, ver. 2. 3, 7. whose wicked parents the Lord
had consumed, because they obeyed not the voice of the Lord, unto whom the Lord
swear that he would not show them the Land which the Lord swear to their
fathers. And Heb. 3. 10. of that generation the Lord said, They do always
err in their heart, and they have not known my ways, there was in them an
evil heart, an hard heart, an unbeleeving heart, ver. 13. 15, 18. and yet God
commanded Joshuah to circumcise their children, therefore there was no more
required of the circumcised, but that they were Abraham's seed according to the
flesh, and by that same reason there is no more required of infants that they
may be baptized, but that they be borne in the christian Church, for the
Christian baptism, and the Jewish circumcision in substance are all one. Romans
6. 4. Col. 2. 11. Jer. 9. 26. Jer. 4. 4. 1 Pet. 3. 21, 22. This is so true,
that circumcision is put for the Nation of the Jews, Acts 11. 2. Romans 2. 26,
27. Gal. 2. 7. Gal. 6. 15. which speech could not stand, if most part of the
children of the Jews, for the parents wickedness were to be uncircumcised:
neither do we read in Gods word, that ever the children of wicked Jews were
uncircumcised, and if their circumcision had been a profaning of the
covenant, and dishonouring and polluting of the holy things of God, the
Prophets who rebuked all the sins of that Nation, would not have passed in
silence that which should have been a National sin in them: and as God
determines the quality of these that eat the Passover, that they be
circumcised people, and so Jews, so does he determine the quality of these
that are to be externally circumcised, Genesis 17. every male child. Some answer
that these infants, Josh. 5. circumcised, were the infants of parents dead in
the wilderness, and so they were not now under the care and tutorie of their
parents, but under the care of others, and so they might be circumcised.

Answ. But the death of the parents did not change their Church State, for they
were still the children of wicked parents, whose carcases fell in the
wilderness, and that in Gods wrath, Hebrews 3.

2. Argument. 2. Arg.
If John Baptist Mat. 3. 5. baptized Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the
regions round about, and that without any further examination of the aged, so
they would confess their sins, and yet he called them a generation of
vipers, and so the seed of murderers and evil doers, such as are vipers, and
Christ said Mat. 18. that of their children, and such like was the Kingdom of
God; then the children of Pharisees and Publicans and wicked persons are to be
baptized, so their parents profess the doctrine of the covenant, but the
former is true, Ergo.

3. Argument. 3. Arg.
If Peter, Acts 2. 38, 39. command every one of the Jews to be baptized by
this argument, because the promise (says he) is made to you, and to your
children, and to as many as the Lord shall call, then all are to be baptized,
to whom the promise of the covenant, and external calling by this covenant is
made, but the promise of the covenant is made to the seed of the wicked within
the visible Church, Ergo the seal of that promise is to be conferred upon
them, I prove the assumption. When God said to Abraham, I will be thy God, and
the God of thy seed, by the seed of Abraham he cannot mean the nearest of
Abraham's seed only, to wit, the nearest sons, for so by that, he should have
been Abraham's God, and Isaacks God only, and not Iaacobs God, and the God of
the seed of Jacob, which is against the tenor of the covenant, now if God be
the God of Abraham's seed far off, and near down, to many generations, the
wickedness of the nearest parents cannot break the covenant, as is clear,
Ezech. 20. 18, 19. v. 22. v. 36, 37. v. 42, 43. Psalm. 106. v. 40, 45, 46, Romans
3. 3. Lev. 26. 44, 45. spoken of the sons of wicked parents, and if these
children stand in the covenant, for Gods names sake, and God say expressly,
Ezech. 20 18, 19. to the sons of wicked parents who grieved his holy spirit
in the wilderness: walk in my statutes and walk not in the statutes of your
fathers, I am the Lord your God, then they were in covenant notwithstanding of
the wickedness of their fathers, and therefore by our bretherens argument, the
seals of the covenant should be bestowed upon them.

4. Argument. 4. Arg.
If the Lord show mercy to the thousand generations of them who love him, and
keep his commandments, then the wickedness of the nearest parents, do not
remove the mercy of the covenant from the children, because the mercy extends
to the thousand generations: But the former is said, Exodus 20. in the second
commandment, and therefore for the sins of their nearest parents, they are
not excluded from the mercy of the covenant, and therefore neither from the
seals of that mercy. If our brethren say, we have no assurance of faith, that
their thousand generation upward has been lovers of God and keepers of his
commandments, and so the children in faith cannot be baptized.

I answer first, by this argument you cannot deny baptism to them in faith.

2. You have not certainty of faith, Camero prelec. de visib. eccles.
which must be grounded upon infallible verity, that their nearest parents are
believers, you have for that only the judgment of charity, as Camero says
well: and this faith you have infallibly, that the sins of no one, or two, or
four persons do interrupt the course of Gods immutable covenant in the race
of covenanters borne in the visible Church, Romans 3. 3, 4. Josh. 5. 2, 3, 4.
Levit 26. 41, 42, 43, 44. Ezech. 20. 14, 17, 22.

5. Argument. 5. Arg.
The infallible promise of the covenant, I will be thy God, and the God of thy
seed: which is made to us Gentiles, as well as to the Jews, Gal. 3. 10, 11,
12, 13. must make a difference betwixt the seed of Christians, and the seed of
Turks and Pagans, and these that are without the true Church of Christians. But
if so, that the sins and wickedness of the nearest parents cut off their
children, from the mercy of the covenant, and hinder God to be their God; then
these infants are in no better case through the covenant made to their
grandfathers and generations upward, then the sons of Turks and Pagans; for
they are strangers to the covenant, and have no right to the seals of the
covenant, no more then the children of Turks. I prove the proposition (I will
be thy God and the God of thy seed) extends the covenant to the seed of the
faithful to many generations downward, until it please the Lord to translate
his Sons Kingdom, and remove the candlestick from a people; Neither can the
meaning be, (I will be thy God and the God of thy seed, except the nearest
parents of thy seed be unbeleevers,) for that is contrary to the Scriptures
aboved cited. Neither can they say, that the children of unbeleeving parents
borne within the christian Church, have right to the covenant and the seals
thereof, when they come to age, and do believe and repent, for so the children
of Turks, if they believe and repent have that same right, as is clear, Isaiah
56. 6, 7. Acts 10. 34, 35.

6. Argument. 6. Arg.
If God in the covenant of grace and Evangell, will not have the son to bear
the iniquity of the father, except the son follow the evil ways of his
parents, and so make the fathers iniquity his own: then cannot the children of
wicked parents be excluded from the covenant, and the seals of the covenant,
for the sins and wickedness of their nearest parents; But the former is
said, Ezech. 18. 4. The son shall not bear the iniquity of his father: Now
infants as yet being free of actual sins, have not served themselves heirs
to the iniquities of their fathers. Neither can it be said, as some say, the
children of Turks are not to be baptized, because their parents are without the
covenant, and yet these children being free of actual transgressions bear the
iniquity of their fathers.

I answer, God keeps a legal way with Turks and all that are without the
Church, and covenant of grace, and we suppose the child borne of wicked parents
to be in the case of election, and so really within the covenant, and it is
ordinary enough that chosen and redeemed infants be born of unbelieving
parents, in that case who can say that God lays their fathers iniquities on
them in spiritual and eternal punishments, such as is to be reputed without
the covenant, and dying in that estate, to be damned for ever.

7. Arg. 7. Arg.
If the root be holy, so also are the branches, Romans 11. 16. Now this holiness
cannot be meant of personal and inherent holiness; for it is not true in that
sense, if the fathers and forefathers be truly sanctified and believers, then
are the branches and children sanctified and believers, the contrary whereof we
see in wicked Absalom borne of holy David, and many others: Therefore this
holiness must be the holiness of the Nation, not of persons; it must be an
holiness, because of their elected and chosen parents the Patriarchs and
Prophets, and the holy seed of the Jews: and so the holiness federall, or the
holiness of the covenant. If then the Jews in Paul's time were holy by
covenant, howbeit for the present the sons were branches broken often for
unbelief: much more seeing God has chosen the race and Nation of the
Gentiles, and is become a God to us and to our seed, the seed must be holy with
holiness of the chosen Nation, and holiness external of the covenant,
notwithstanding the father and mother were as wicked, as the Jews who slew the
Lord of glory.

8. Argument. 8. Arg.
If the special and only reason, why Baptism should be denied to the children
of nearest Parents who are unbelievers, be weak and contrary to the
Scriptures, then is this opinion contrary to Scripture also; but the former is
true, Ergo, so is the latter: for not only the special, but the only argument
is, because these children are without the covenant, seeing their nearest
Parents are without the covenant, but this is most false many ways.

1. God commands (as I showed before) that the children of most wicked
Parents, Josh. 5. should be circumcised. Ergo, God esteemed them within the
covenant, notwithstanding of their fathers wickedness.

2. The Lord terms the children of those who slew their sons to Molech,
and so ostered them to Devils, to be his sons, Ezech. 16. 20. Moreover thou
have taken my sons and my daughters, which thou have borne to me, and these
have thou sacrificed to them to be devoured: is this of thy whooredomes a small
matter, v. 21. That thou have slain my children, etc. So Ezekiel. 23. 37. If they
be the Lords sons, and borne to the Lord, howbeit their Parents were bloody
murderers, and sacrificers to ^Divels; then God esteemed these sons within
the covenant, and who are we to exclude them out of Gods covenant?

3. The sons of most wicked Parents dying in their i^ fancy may be saved, and
of them God has his own chosen, as we see in many aged ones borne of wicked
Parents. Ergo, the wickedness of the Parents is a weak ground to say they are
without the covenant, especially seeing we affirm, God has his decrees of
Election and Reprobation of infants, Romans 9. 11. no less then of aged, the
contrary whereof we know Arminians teach.

9. Arg. 9. Arg.
If external profession be sufficient without longer examination to baptize
the aged, as we see in Simon Magus, Act. 8. 13. and in Ananias* and Saphira,
Act. 2. 38, 39, 44* 45. compared with Act. 5. 1, 2. by the Apostles practice:
Then the profession of faith in the forefathers is enough for us to judge
their forefathers within the covenant, and consenters to the covenant; for
when many thousands at once are said to enter in covenant with God, as is
clear, Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12, 13. Josh. 24. 24, 25. 2 Chronicles. 15. 9, 10, 11, 12.
they could not give any larger proofs or evidences of their faith of the
covenant, then a solemn assembling together, and a verbal oath or a saying
(Amen, or So be it) as Deuteronomy. 27. 14* 17. after which they were reputed in the
covenant, and so their seed also in the covenant. August 75.
Augustine his mind is that such infants are not to be excluded from baptism,
Bucan loc. com. 47. q 33.
so Bucan, Calvin, Wallens, the Professors of Leyden. Calv Instit.


Let us hear shortly what our brethren say on the contrary. Wall^^ loc. com.
de baptism p. 960, 96^. Professor. Leyd. in synop. purior. theol, disput. 44*
these. 49.
M. Best and others object, Those only are to receive the seal of the
covenant, whose Parents, at least one of them, in external profession, are
within the covenant; but infants borne of wicked and profane parents, are not
borne of parents in external profession within the covenant, 1. Object.
Ergo, the infants of wicked parents are not to receive the seal of the
covenant. The proposition he proves from Genes. 17. 10. This is my covenant,
Best Churches plea p. 52, 53.
and every man-child amongst you shall be circumcised, and Romans 4. 11. He
received the sign of circumcision, Separatists 3. petition* positto* p. 72.
a seal of the righteousness of Faith. The assumption he and others prove,
Guide to ^en. pos. 5^. p. 31.
because murderers, drunkards, swearers, and whose children we baptize,
declare themselves not to be Christians, nor faithful, nor Saints by their
wicked life, and so not within the covenant. This argument also the Separatists
use.

Answ. The Major is false, and not proved from Genesis 17. or Romans 4 for neither
of these places speak of nearest Parents, father and mother one at least; the
Text bears no such thing, but the contrary. These are to receive the seal of
the covenant whose forefathers are in external profession within the
covenant; for God commands not Abraham only to circumcise his sons, but all
parents descended of Abraham to circumcise their seed, the seed of Abraham
carnally descended to all generations: and so the nearest parents only are not
to be looked unto.

2. This argument does either proceed according to this meaning, that these
infants only are to receive the seal of the covenant whose parents are within
the covenant by an inward ingrafting and union by true faith, besides the
external professing thereof; or then there is no other thing required, but only
external profession, that the Church without sin may confer the seals; if
the former be said, it will follow that God speaks, Genesis 17. only to Abraham
and his sons by faith, according to the promise, and only to believers; but God
speaks to all Abraham's sons according to the flesh. 2. Because God should
speak an untruth, that he were a God by real union of faith to all that are
commanded to be circumcised; for he commanded thousands to be circumcised to
whom he was not a God by real union of faith: therefore these words must
import, that nothing is more required, that the Church without sin may confer
the seal of the covenant, but the children to be descended of parents
professing the truth and faith, although the parents indeed, as concerning any
real union of faith, be plain strangers to the covenant, and members of the
Church only as an arm of wood is a member of the body, which being true, as it
must be said, the assumption is weak and sick. ^or the question is, what it is
to be externally within the covenant, it is not to slay all known sins, to
be a chosen people, a people taught of God (for then God would not have
commanded Joshua Chap. 5. to circumcise all Israel, because their fathers
externally were within the covenant) as this argument would say; for their
fathers were a generation of unbelievers who knew not God, who tempted him and
grieved his holy Spirit in the wilderness, and professed themselves by their
murmuring never to be truly within the covenant. Then to profess the doctrine
of the covenant is but to be borne Jews, and avow the Lord in external
profession, and Deuteronomy. 29. swear a covenant with him, when the heart is blinded
and hardened, v. 4. And so by this it is clear Joshua had commandment of God
to give the seal of the covenant to their children, who were as openly wicked
against the Lord, as murderers, drunkards, swearers, etc. 3. This argument
will prove circumcision could lawfully be given to none, but the children of
parents within the covenant, that is, professedly known to be faithful, holy,
and se^arated from the profane world in the judgment of c^arity: this has no
warrant of the word. For 1. The children of the most wicked were circumcised,
Josh. 5. 2. We desire to know whom God forbad to be circumcised that were
carnally descended of Abraham? Or show us ex^mple or precept thereof in the
Word? 3. What God required in the parents, whose Infants the Church might
lawfully and without sin circumcise, so they were borne Jews: O says Mr.
Best, they behooved to be members of the Church whose infants might lawfully be
circumcised. I answer, that is, ignotum per ignotius, Show me one person being
a borne Jew, whose child the Lord forbad to circumcise? 2. What is it to be a
member of the Jewish Church? Is it to be a visible Saint and taught of God? I
true, that was required indeed to make men acceptable before God; but to make
one a visible member of the Jewish Church visible, nothing was required, but to
be a borne Jew, and profess Gods truth, and keep them from external
ceremonial pollutions, I mean to be a member of the visible Church, to keep
external and Church Communion with the rest of Gods people.

Secondly, 2. Object.
they object, Not only must they be in profession within the covenant; but
also members of some visible Church and particular congregation, that is, that
they be within the Church; M. Best Churches ^lea. p. 60, 61* arg. 1
for we have nothing to do to judge them that are without. 1 Cor. 5. 12. And
this M. Best Proves by the order required in Gods Church, putting a difference
betwixt Church Communion and Christian-communion, A man may be a just,
peaceable, quiet man, and so meet to be a Citizen in a City, but he has not
right to the privileges of the brughe, until he come to them by due order; so
must a man not only be a Christian ere his child be baptized; but also a
member of a visible Church.

Answ. 1. This Objection proceeds from a great mistake, as if
Church Communion with a particular independent congregation were more, and a
better and nearer ground of baptizing, then Christian-communion, which we judge
to be false; because the Catholic Church is by order of nature, and first and
more principally the body, spouse, redeemed flock of Christ, then any
particular independent congregation, that is but a part or member of the
Catholic Church; and therefore the covenant, promises of grace, the power of
the keys, the seals of the covenant belong first and principally to the
Catholic Church, and to these that are in Christian communion with her, before
they belong to this or that visible part of the Catholic Church, and so all
ecclesiastic power of the keys must be first and more principally in the
Catholic Church, then in a particular congregation, as a reasonable soul by
order of nature is in man, before it be in Peter, Thomas or John.

2. I believe these are within, that are professors of the true faith, suppose
they be not members of the Church of Corinth, or of any settled Church, it is
enough if they be within the covenant, and these are without only, who are
Infidels and Pagans, not professing the true and sound faith, as the Apostle
means, 1 Cor. 5. 12. Baptism is a privilege of the Church, not a privilege
of such a particular independent Church, and the distinction betwixt
Christian-communion and Church Communion in this point is needless and
fruitless; for none are to be refused of baptism, whose parents profess the
faith and Christian-communion: Howbeit, they by Gods providence may be cast
into a country where they are not, and cannot be (without due examination)
members of a settled Church, as one may hear the word and join in public
prayer with any true Church he comes unto, and so having Christian-communion
with a true Church, he has by that same also Church communion. For baptism is
not like Burgess^ freedom in a city, a man may be a free Citizen in one Town
or City, and not be a free citizen to have right to the privileges of all
other Cities, but he who is Christ's freeman in one Church, has Christian
freedom and right to communion thereby in all Churches, and may have
Church Communion in all true Churches; but he that is a free Burgess in one
City, is not free in all.

Thirdly, they object, If Baptism be given to all promiscuously, the Church
shall not be the house of God, to receive only Gods family, but a common Inn
to receive all clean and unclean. So Best citing Cartwright. Best 16. p. 64.
Separatists 3 petit. 10. pos. at. 2 reas. 3.
Baptism is to be administered (say the Separatists) only to the seed of the
faithful, because such only are accounted to the Lord for a generation, which
he begets and receives in his Church to declare his righteousness in
Christ, Psalm. 22. 30, 31. Romans 4. 11. and Romans 11. 16. Math. 10. 13, 16.

Answ. Cartwright in that place is only against the baptizing of infants of
excommunicate parents who are cast out of the Church; Cartwright against
Whytgift, p. 172.
but as the Church is a house, so there are in the house of baptized ones, both
clean and unclean: Neither are they all barnes of the house, who are within
the house: the profession of cleanness and holiness, and of the faith of
Christ, makes it a house different from the society of Pagans and In^idels.

2. Whereas M. Best urges that none should be baptized, but members of the
visible Church: he makes all baptized members of the Church, how then must
they be all visible Saints, clean persons and holy? For baptism makes not the
thousand part that are baptized to be visible Saints.

3. This Generation begotten of the Lord and received into the Church to
declare his righteousness, Psalm. 22. is not such only as are to be baptized;
for that generation, v. 30. is a seed that serves the Lord, and v. 31.
declares his righteousness: All infants whether of faithful or unfaithful
parents do alike service to God, and alike declare his righteousness, that is
to say, infants of what ever kind can do no service to God. If their meaning
be the infants of faithful parents circumcised shall serve God, and declare
his Righteousness, when they come to age: First this Text says not they are
the seed of the faithful only that shall serve God: For the seed of the
faithful, such as Ammon, Absalom, and David's seed often refuse to serve God,
and declare his righteousness, and the seed and children of wicked Parents, as
Hezekiah the son of wicked Ahaz, and Josiah the son of wicked Amon, do
often serve God, and declare his righteousness: So they cite Scriptures, that
by no force of reason do speak for them, as Romans 4. 11. and Romans 11. 16. say
nothing; but if the root be holy with the holiness federall, and of the
external profession: So are the branches; but the place speaks nothing of
true inherent holiness; for then all holy Parents should have holy and visible
Saints coming out of their loins, which is against Scripture and experience.

Fourthly, Object. 4.
they object, By this our Divines lose their best Argument against Anabaptists;
Best 16. p. 56.
namely, that children of Christians by that same warrant are to be baptized,
that Infants under the Law were circumcised; but none was circumcised but a
member of the visible Church under the Law. Now this ye gainsay, who would
have all clean and unclean baptized, and so you leave your pattern.

Answ. We leave our pattern in no sort: For all were circumcised that were
borne of circumcised Parents within the Church of the Jews: so all are to be
baptized that are borne of Christians, and baptized Parents professing the
faith. But (say they) Drunkards, Murderers, Sco^^ers, Swearers, and ignorant
Atheists both Fathers and Mothers, whose children you baptize, do not profess
the ^aith; for in works they deny and belie their profession.

Answ. Then you will have the children of none to be baptized, but those whose
parents are sound and sincere professors in the judgment of charity; but so
Joshuah failed who circumcised the children of all professing themselves to be
Abraham's sons carnally; howbeit Joshuah knew, and was an eyewitness that
their Fathers did deny and belie their profession. And John baptized the ^eed
of all, Mat. 3. that professed the faith of the Messiah, although he knew them
to be a generation of vipers.

2. They often require that one of the Parents be a believer, or else the
child cannot be clean, nor lawfully baptized, and they repose on that place,
1 Cor. 7. 14. For the unbeleeving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the
unbeleeving wife is sanctified by the husband; Else (that is, if both were
unbeleevers) were your children unclean (that is not within the covenant) but
now are they holy. And they allege Beza and Pareus for this.

Answ. But they mistake the word (unbeleeving) for by (unbeleeving) in that
place (as the Professors of Leyden do well observe) is meant Infidel Gentiles
that are without the Church, Pro^es. Leyd. Synop. purior. Theol.
and profess not Christ, as is clear from the Text: For where the husband
that believed was married on a Pagan-wife; Walle^^ 16 disp. 44. these. 49.
or a Jew he thought being converted to the Christian faith, he behooved to
sunder with his Pagan-wife; and the wife converted to the Christian faith
married to a heathen and Pagan-husband thought she behoved to divorce, and that
the marriage could not be sanctified. The Apostle answers this case of
conscience: Suppose the Father be a Pagan, if the Mother be a believer, that
is, a professor of Christianity (for a Believer is here opposed to a Pagan)
yet the children are holy by the Mothers or Fathers profession of Christianity.
Hence the Argument is strong for us, Profession of Christianity opposed to
Paganism makes the children clean and holy before God by the holiness of
the Covenant; therefore Infants borne of parents professing Christian Religion
are to be baptized: For that this troubled many converted, that they were
married to heathen, and bondmen to them, and in such and such callings as they
thought inconsistible with Christian Religion is clear from verse 14, 15, 16,
20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Be^a in ^ Cor. 7 (...).
And Beza on that place says, it was never heard in the ancient Church that
every Infidel child was to be baptized. And Pareus says, Pareus coment. 1
Cor. 7.
the children of Christian parents are holy before Baptism by a Covenant and
external holiness, iure, by Gods right being borne of Christian parents; And
after Baptism they are holy, de facto, formally and actually. Melanctho^ loc.
com. page ^83*
So say Melancthon and Keckerman. But I fear that these who will have none
baptized but the child^en of believing parents, Keckerman Syl'em ^heol l. 3. p.
4^3.
aim at this, That the faith of the father is imputed to the children, which
indeed reverend Beza does maintain: Beza in Colleg. Monpelg. p. 98.
Or then a worse, that Infants are not to be baptized at all, seeing they
oppose the places that we cite for the lawfulness of baptizing Infants.
Presbyter govern. exam. anno 1641
The authors of Presbyteriall government call the baptizing of children a
untimous anticipation. Our brethrens mind is, that the Infants of both Parents
known to be unbeleevers, are not to be baptized until they come to age, and
can give proof that they are within the covenant of grace, what Anabaptists
think here is known. Boniface 4. Best. Church plea, a^g 5. p. 63.
Some say that Boniface the 4. in the year 606. began the Baptism of infants.
M. Best says too nakedly. I believe at Augustine, Cyprian, Origin, Cyrill,
Nazianzen, Ambrose, and many other Fathers affirm, that the Church has
received the Baptism of Infants from the Apostles. What? does he not believe
that it is most evidently in Scripture? and has he no better warrant then the
^athers?

Fourthly, 4. Object.
M. Best objecteth, If there be no precept nor example for baptizing of Infants
begotten of both Parents unbeleeving; then there is no promise of blessing made
unto it; but the first is true, Ergo, the second.

Answ. 1. We ask with what faith, and by what precept or example was ever
circumcision in the whole old Testament denied to any male-childe of the most
wicked Jews; and by what precept and example is Baptism denied to any Infant
in the New Testament for his Parents wickedness? the Fathers professing the
Christian Faith: Yea, seeing Baptism is denied to Infants upon a suspicion,
that their Parents are destitute of faith, and not within the Covenant; Now
this suspicion is not faith, nor grounded upon any word of God, or certainty
of faith; for whether an other man believe, or believe not, it is not faith,
nor known by faiths certainty to me, but by the judgment of charity.

Fifthly, Object. 5.
they object, If all promiscuously be baptized, Gods name is taken in vain,
and the holy Sacrament greatly abused, Mal. 1. 12. Heb. 10 29.

Answ. This is to accuse God, as if he had not found sufficient ways out to
save his own name from blasphemy. Nor can our brethren by their Doctrine save
his name from dishonor, nor the Sacrament from profanation; because
multitudes of Infants borne of believing Parents are reprobates, and yet God
has commanded to baptize them, who being reprobates must be without the
covenant, and so the covenant is profaned, and many Infants of wicked Parents
are chosen, and within the covenant; yet are we forbidden by our brethren to
give them the seals of the covenant until they come to age, which also should
be given to them, and needs force by their doctrine that Christ has commanded
a certain way of dishonouring his name (which is blasphemy) ^or we have not
such a clear way to know Infants clean and unclean, as the Priest had to
know the polluted bread, and the polluted sacrifices, Mal. 1. 7, 12. as he
cites: For what Infants are within the covenant indeed, and chosen of God; and
what not: We neither know, nor is it requisite that we know further then that
we are to know, that they are borne within the visible Church.

Sixthly, Object. 6.
they say, The Church of God is defiled, Hag. 2. 14, 15. Ezech. 44. 7. Best
Church plea, p. 63.
If all Infants promiscuously be baptized; for then the people and every work
of their hand, and their offering is unclean. So M. Best.

Answ. We deny that children borne within the visible Church are an unclean
offering to the Lord, and that the baptizing of them polluteth the Nation, and
all the worship of the Nation, as they would gather from Haggai: For being
borne of the holy Nation, they are holy with a federall and national
holiness, Romans 11. 16. If the root be holy so are the branches: For our
brethren baptize children of Parents who are hypocrites and unbeleevers, and so
the uncircumcised in heart come into the Sanctuary: Yea Peter in baptizing
Simon Magus, and Ananias and Saphira brought in the uncircumcised in heart and
the strangers to Gods covenant, as Best alleges from Ezech. 44. borrowing
such abused testimonies of Gods word from Separatists, as they borrowed them
from Anabaptists: For we preach and invite in the Gospel all the uncircumcised
in heart, and all the wicked to come and hear and partake of the holy things
of the Gospel, and receive the promises thereof with faith: And when many come
to this heavenly banquet without their wedding garment, Mat. ^2. 12, 13. 2 Cor.
2. 16. Mat. 21. 43, 44. It follows not, because they profane the holy things
of God, that Ministers who baptize the Infants of hypocrites, and profane
persons, are accessarie to the profaning of the holy things of God, and that
we bring in the polluted in heart to the Sanctuary of God. It is one thing whom
Ministers should receive as members of the Sanctuary and Church; and another
thing, who should come in, and what sort of persons they are obliged to be who
come to be members. To say that Ministers should receive none into the Church
but those that are circumcised in heart, and clean and holy, and clothed with
the wedding garment of faith is more then our brethren can prove: Nay, we are
to invite to the wedding good and bad, chosen and unchosen, Mat. 22. 9. As many
as you find bid to the wedding. But that all that come to be received members
of the unvisible Church are obliged to be circumcised in heart, and holy, and
clothed with the wedding garment, else they profane the Sanctuary and holy
things of God) is most true: But we desire that our brethren would prove this;
The Porters that held out the uncircumcised and the strangers out of the
Sanctuary, were types of the Ministers and Church of the New Testament, who
should receive none to be Church Members, and invite none to the wedding of the
Gospel, but such as have their wedding garment, and are circumcised in heart,
and are clean, and holy, else they profane and defile the Church of God, as
M. Best says. We believe this latter to be an untruth, and yet the strength of
this Argument does hang upon this: They are obliged to be such who enter into
the Church, else they defile the Sanctuary, Ergo, the Church and Ministers of
the New Testament are obliged to invite none to any Church Communion, or
receive them into a Church fellowship, but only the circumcised in heart: We
utterly deny this consequence. It is one thing, what sort of persons they ought
to be, that should be members of the Church (doubtless they should be
believers) And another thing, whom the Church should receive in (these should
be professors.)

Seventhly, 7. Object.
M. Best reasons thus, The Minister is made a covenant-breaker, Mal. 2. 8.
who baptized the child of profane Parents, and why? because he offers the
blind for a sacrifice to God.

Answ. What if the Parents be esteemed believers, and are but hypocrites
indeed, as is too ordinary: There is then a blind sacrifice offered to God,
and that by Gods commandment. 2. It follows no way that the Minister is
accessory to this sacrifice: Suppose it were blind, as none can judge that but
God; but the Minister does what his Master commands him, to preach unto all,
and baptize all that are borne within the visible Church; the sacrifice may be
blind by their doctrine and ours also; but that it is a sacrifice blind to
the Minister, and he a Priest to offer that blind sacrifice, is not hence
concluded.

Eighthly, 8. Object.
Best says, Divine wrath is kindled for the profanation of holy things.

Answ. That this is the Ministers or Churches profanation of holy things is
not proved: It is not wrath procured by the Ministers, or those who receive
them into the Church, but wrath procured by the unworthy incommers.

Ninthly, 9. Object.
Separatists reason thus: If all be baptized promiscuously, Separatist^ ^ pe^^^
p^s. 10.
unbeleevers and profane, together with their children shall be counted in
that state to be Abraham's seed, and heirs of the promis^, and so to be
Christ's, contrary to Gal. 3. 7, 29. with Genesis 15. 6. and 17. 7.

Answ. 1. A promiscuous baptizing of all we deny: It may import a baptizing of
the Infants of Turks, or of Papists, who avow they will bring up the child
baptized in the Roman faith: In which case, it would seem Baptism should be
denied, Walleus in loc. com.
as the learned Walleus thinks. 2. There is a double counting on in Gods
seed. 1. One according to Election, and so only the elect are counted in the
seed, as is clear, Romans 9. Paul expounds, Genesis 15. This counting in the seed
is not well counted to be common to all circumcised: Separatists do ordinarily
miscount and abuse Scriptures, not caring what they cite, so that the Margen
swell with citations. 2. There is an Ecclesiastical and conditional counting,
whereby all baptized are in the judgment of charity counted Abraham's heirs;
but with the condition, that they have Abraham's faith, and be internally in
Abraham's covenant, and so are counted in the seed, and all baptized. Hence the
Separatists other two Arguments do not conclude: For they infer, if all must
be baptized, that unbeleevers have alike interest with believers in the seals
and privileges of the Church, and must be counted in that same body and state
with believers: For to the external privileges and visible body of the Church
all professors (for they are not to be reputed unbeleevers) have alike
interest; but to the inward favors and graces sealed in the Sacraments, and in
the true and mystical body of Christ they have not all alike interest who are
baptized. 2. Separatists do ignorantly and uncharitably in this dispute take
the children of the nearest Parents that are profane and wicked, and
unbeleeving and unclean Infants for all one: For because their Fathers many
generations upward were within the covenant; therefore are such children in
external prof^ssion within the covenant, as the Lord did show favor to his
people for Abraham and David's sake many years after they were dead, when their
nearest Parents were wicked and profane, Psalm. 106. 45, 46. Psalm. 105. 41, 42.
Ezech. 20. 2^. and chap. 36. 21, 22.

2. Conclusion. 2. Conclus.
These only are to be admitted to the Supper of the Lord, whom in charity we
judge, can and do try and examine themselves, and rightly discern the Lords
body, and who in faith can annuntiate the Lords death, unto his second coming
again: And therefore children and infants, ignorants, and scandalously
flagitious persons, and mad persons are to be debarred. But that none should be
Church Members of Christ's visible body, but such as we can, and dare admit to
the Lords Supper, is most false: For we put a manifest difference betwixt those
that are admitted into Christ's visible body, as ordinary hearers of the word,
such as are ignorants, and many unconverted professors; and the excommunicate
who are admitted to be ordinary hearers of the word, but are not to be admitted
to the Supper of the Lord; for so we should profane the holy things of God,
and be accessory to the profaning of the Lords body and precious blood. Here a
doubt arises, seeing Christ crucified is the substance and object of faith in
the word preached, as well as in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; and in no
sort are Ministers to be accessory to the profaning of the holy things of God,
or of casting pearls before swine, Mat. 7. 6. Mat. 15. 26. Heb. 10. 29. Hag.
2. 14, 15. Number. 5. 2, 3. and Levit. 19. 22. How do we admit the ignorant and
unbeleevers, yea the excommunicate, Mat. 22. 9. 2 Thessalonians 3. 15. to the holy
things of the Gospel preached, which we know they shall, and do profane? For
to them the word is the savor of death unto death, 2 Cor. 2. 16. and Christ is
a rock of offense, and a stumbling stone, a ginne and a snare, Isa. 8. 14. 1
Pet. 2. 8. and yet we are accessory to their profaning of the Lords Table if
we admit such to the Table.

Answ. There are great odds betwixt a possible and necessary mean of salvation
profaned, and a mean of salvation not necessary nor possible to reach its end
for the which it is ordained: If these of the Separation would distinguish this
as Gods word does, they should not so stumble about the constitution of a
visible Church: For the word preached is the necessary and possible mean of
conversion to the most flagitious and wicked hearers; And howbeit they profane
the word, promises, and despise Christ and his covenant in the word preached;
yet Ministers in receiving such into Church Communion are not accessory to the
profaning of Gods holy things; because they are under a necessity of offering
Christ preached, as the only ordinary, necessary, and possible mean of
salvation; Therefore we admit them to the hearing and believing of the word,
per se, and kindly; but to the stumbling at the word by accident, by their
abuse coming from themselves. But the Lords Supper being a Seal of our
nourishment and spiritual growth in Christ, it presupposes faith, and the
begun life of God, and the new birth, and so to those who are openly flagitious
and known unbeleevers, it is neither a necessary mean of salvation, nor yet a
possible mean: Not necessary; for meat and drink and these elements cannot
nourish those who have no life of God in them at all: As bread and wine are not
means at all to a dead man, Infestment in the husbands lands, and a dowry is no
mean necessary at all to an unmarried virgin remaining unmarried. Also until
the communicant believe in Christ, it is not a possible Seal; for it can seal
nothing to one that is not capable of nouri^hment, seeing the unbeleever by no
possibility can be sealed up in a growing communion with Christ. And this
Supper is not a formal mean of conversion, but a formal mean of the further
growth and nourishment of these who are already converted; and therefore when
Ministers are accessory to admit to the Lords Table these whom they know are
unbeleevers, they have there a kindly influence in the profaning of the holy
things of God, in giving a mean of salvation to these to whom it is neither
necessary nor possible: But in admittance of members of the Church to be
ordinary hearers of the word, their influence is not kindly, and their
cooperation only accidental. The sin is in the abusers of the word only,
which is a mean both necessary and possible, and the fault is not in the
Ministers. For this cause are we to be more strict in admitting to the Lords
Supper, then in receiving of Church Members to Baptism, and the hearing of the
Word. But as we are to take care that the holy things of God be not profaned
in this Sacrament: so also that none be debarred by the under-stewards and
servants whom the Master of the house has admitted. And 1. none are to be
excluded from the Table, but such as are under the Church Censures, except the
impediments be natural, not moral, such as age and distraction. 2. That none
are reputed incapable, but such as are juridice, and in the Church-court, under
two or three witnesses convicted; for why should the Church punishments be
inflicted blindly, such as is debarring from the Lords Table? therefore the
Minister has no power of the Keys himself alone, without the Eldership to
debar any; for then he himself uses the Keys by censuring, Pope-like,
without the Church. 3. Grossly ignorant are to be censured by the Church, and
debarred: But it may perhaps be here said, I make no evidence of conversion
required to go before, as seen to the Church, before they dare admit to the
Lords Table, but such as may be in hypocrites.

Answ. And so did the Apostolic Church, I doubt not but the Apostles did, Acts
2. 46, 47. admit Ananias and Saphira to the Lords Table: And so did Paul
esteem of Demas, and would once have admitted Hymeneus, Alexander and others;
and this is clear, 1 John 2. 19. If they had been of us, they would no doubt
have cont^nued with us: Then they remained for a space communicators with the
true Church in the word of the covenant and seals. We are against Separatists,
who will have the number of aged persons that are members of the Church, and
the number of those who are to be admitted to the Sacrament, equal. We think
multitudes are members of the visible Church, and must be hearers, as known
unbeleevers, who are not to be admitted to the Sacrament.

CHAP. XIII.
Quest. 13. Whether or no every particular Congregation and Church has of it
self independent power from Christ, to exercise the whole power of the Keys,
without any subjection to any superior Ecclesiastical jurisdiction?
IT is known that these of the Separation, and others, whom we love and
reverence, contend for the independency of every visible Congregation, denying
that they are subject to Synods, Presbyteries, and National Assemblies of the
Churches consociated; holding that they can, and may give counsel, and
brotherly advise in matters doubtful: But that Presbyteries or Synods have no
Ecclesiastical power to command in the Lord any Congregation whatsoever.

I observed before that there be two degrees of a Church independent, 1. In
every visible Congregation there is a number of believers, to whom our brethren
say, Christ has committed the power of the keys, who have power to choose and
ordain their own officers, Pastors, Doctors, Elders and Deacons, and also
judicially to censure, rebuke, sentence, depose and excommunicate these same
office-bearers. We have disputed already against this independent Church. 2.
There is another Church indepe^dent, which is that same congregation of
believers new clothed with a settled and constituted ^ldership, one Pastor, and
Elders, and Doctors: Of this Congregation is our present question. This
Congregation again has either one Pastor only, with a number of Elders; or it
has a number of Pastors and Elders who do meet for discipline, which is a
Presbyteriall Church, such as we esteem the Church of Corinth, the Church of
Ephesus. The question is of a visible Church in both senses: And for the
former, they have within themselves some power of discipline, so far as
concerns themselves, as the Arguments of our brethren do prove, but with
subordination to the Eldership of their own and other sister and consociate
Congregations, who shall meet in a Presbytery. The Church in the latter meaning
cannot conveniently meet in all and every one of the members thereof, but does
meet in their Rulers, as the Eldership of Ephesus did meet, Acts 20. 17. And
Paul and James, and the Eldership of Jerusalem did meet, Acts 21. 18, 19, 20,
21. And of this Presbytery that ordained Timothy a Pastor, we read 1 Timothy 4.
14. So the Eldership of Ephesus, Rev. 2. 2. whereof there were a number of
Pastors, as we may read Acts 20. 28, 29, 36. who tried those who called
themselves Apostles, and did lie, and were found liars, Rev. 2. 2. This
Presbytery consisting of more Pastors, is the first ruling and governing Church,
having power of the keys in all points of discipline within themselves; They
have intensively power of the keys in all points, and equal power (intensive)
with greater Synods and Assemblies; because ordination of Pastors by them, 1 Timothy 4. 14. is as valide in the point of Church Discipline, as the Decrees made
in the great Council convented at Jerusalem, Acts 15. 21, 22, etc. But
Provincial Synods, and National Assemblies have greater power then the
Presbyteries extensive; because they have power as a great body to exercise
discipline that concerns the whole Congregations of all the Nation, which
power is not in inferior Elderships. Now that there is not to be ^ound in the
word a Congregation with an Eldership, and one Pastor that has the power of
all discipline independently, within it self, I prove:

1. I reason from the Apostolic Churches practice, 1. Arg.
which must be a pattern to us: And first, let no man say the Argument is
weak, because the Apostolic Church being liable to persecution, and Parishes
not then settled, their order cannot be a rule to us: For 1. we have not a
perfect pattern if the Apostolic Church be laid aside, as no rule to us. 2.
It is said, Acts 9. 31. Then had the Churches rest throughout all Judea,
Galilie, and Samaria, and were edefied, and walking in the fear of the Lord,
and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost, were multiplied. Hence if there be not a
pattern of such an independent Congregation by precept or practice, where one
particular Congregation with one Pastor, and their Eldership did exercise, or
may exercise all power of the keys in all points: Then such an independent
Congregation is not to be holden; but the former is true: For 1. an instance
cannot be given in the point of ordination of Ministers, by a Congregation with
one Pastor. We desire an instance. 2. All ordination by practice and precept in
the New Testament is by more Pastors then one; yea by a College of Pastors,
which is clear, Acts 1. 13. the eleven Apostles were at the ordination of
Matthias, and the Apostle Peter presideth in the action. And Acts 6. 2. the
twelve Apostles did ordain the seven Deacons, ver. 6. and prayed and laid
their hands on them, ver. 6. It is vain that Turre^remata and other Papists
say, De P^^tif. l. 2. c. 1. p 64.
that Peter himself alone might have chosen the seven Deacons. Whittaker de
conc. quaest. 5. p. 150.
See for this Whitgyft opposing Turrecremata, and Whittaker. Also see Acts 13.
1, 2, 3. Prophets and teachers with the Apostles sent Paul and Barnabas to
preach to the Gentiles, and they fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on
them. So Paul and Barnabas, if there were not more Pastors with them, Acts 14.
23. appointed Elders in every Church with fasting and prayer, Acts 20. 17. ver.
28. There was a College of preaching Elders at Ephesus, and at Philippi, Phil.
1. 2. Bishops and Deacons at Thessalonica, 1 These. 9. 12. a multitude, that is,
more then one Pastor that were over them in the Lord, and labored amongst
them, and admonished them, ver. 13 1 Timothy 4. 14. a College or Senate of
Presbyters or Pastors, who ordained Timothy by the laying on of hands. 2. If
ordination of Pastors in the word be never given to people, or believers, or to
ruling Elders; but still to Pastors, as is clear, 1 Timothy 5. 22. Tit. 1. ver.
5. Acts 6. 6. Acts 13. 3. 2 Timothy 1. 6. 1 Timothy 4. 14. And if ordination in the
word of God be never in the power of one single Pastor (except we bring in a
Prelate into the Church) then one Pastor, with one single Congregation cannot
exercise this point of discipline, and so not all points of discipline. 3. If
the preaching Elders be charged by the Spirit of God to watch against grievous
wolves speaking perverse things, Acts 20. 29, 30, 3^. and rebuked because they
suffer them to teach false doctrine; and commended, because they try false
teachers, and cast them out, Rev. 2. ver. 14. ver. 20. ver. 2. if they be
commanded to ordain faithful men, 2 Timothy 2. 2. and taught whom they should
ordain, Tit. 1. 5, 6, 7. 1 Timothy 3. ver. 2, 3, 4, 5. 1 Timothy 5. 22. and whom
they should reject, as unmeet for the work of the Lord: Then one Pastor and a
single Congregation have not the power of this point of discipline, and so they
are not independent within themselves; but the former is said by GODS Word.
Ergo, so is the latter.

2. Argument. 2. Arg.
That government is not of God, nor from the wisdom of Christ the lawgiver,
that devises means of discipline for edifying the people by the keys, and
omitteth means for edifying by the keys the Elders of every particular
congregation; but the doctrine of independent Congregations is such. Ergo, this
doctrine is not of God. The proposition is clear, Christ's perfect government
has ways and means in his Testament, to edify all ranks and degrees of
people, for the perfecting of the body of his Saints, Ephesians. 3. 11. 1 Cor. 5. 4,
5. Mat. 18. 15, 16. John 20. 21, 22, 23. I prove the Assumption: If a pastor
and six or twelve Elders turn scandalous in their lives, and unsound and
corrupt in the Faith: there is no way of gaining them by the power of the
keys; for there be but three ways imaginable.

1. That they should censure and use the rod against themselves, which is
against nature, reason and unwritten in the Word of God.

2. They cannot be censured by Presbyteries and Synods; for the doctrine of
independent Congregations does abhor this.

And thirdly, they cannot be censured by the multitude of believers; for 1. The
Lord has not given the rod and power of edification, such as Paul speaks of,
1 Cor. 4. 20, 21. to the flock over the overseers. 2. This is popular
government and worse, the flock made overseers to the Shepherds, the sons
authorized to correct the fathers. 3. We desire a pattern of this government
from the word of God.

Our third argument is from many absurdities. 3. Arg.
That doctrine is not sound, from whence flow many absurdities contrary to Gods
Word; but from the doctrine of independent Congregations without subordination
to Synods, flow many absurdities contrary to Gods Word, Ergo, that doctrine is
not sound. The Major is out of controversy, and is clear; for the Scriptures
reason from absurdities, 1 Cor. 15. 14, 15. John 8. 55. I prove the assumption;
as,

1. The Prophets shall not be authoritatively judged by Prophets and Pastors,
but by the multitude, contrary to that, 1 Cor* 14. 29. Let the Prophets speak
two or three, and let the other judge.

2. Authoritative and judicial excommunication was in the Pastors and Elders
power, 1 Co. 5. 4. 1 Timothy 1. 20. 2 Cor. 10. 8. 1 Cor. 4. 21. this doctrine
^u^teth authoritative and judicial excommunication into the hands of all the
people.

3. All the assemblies of Pastors in the Apostolic Church, for the discipline
which concerned many Churches, upon necessary causes shall be temporary and
extraordinary, and so not obliging us now, as Acts 1. Act. 6. Act. 11. 1. Act.
8. 14. Act. 13. 1, 2, 3. Act. 15. Act. 21. 18, 19. 1 Timothy 4. 14. and yet these
same necessary causes of such assemblies, as Divisions betwixt Grecians and
Hebrews, heresies, schisms remain in the Church to the worlds end.

4. Those who authoritatively govern and edi^ie the Church, are men separated
from the world, not entangled with the affairs of this life, 2 Timothy 2. 2, 3, 4,
5. therefore if all the multitude govern and over-see both themselves and
their guides: they are not to remain in their callings, as tradesmen,
servants, merchant^, lawyers, etc. but to give themselves wholly to the
over-seeing of the Church, contrary to that which the Word of God says,
ordaining every man to abide in his calling, 1 Cor. 7. 20, 21, 22. Col. 3. 22.
1 Thessalonians. 4. 11.

5. Believers are overseers to excommunicate, deprive, censure, and
authoritatively rebuke their pastors, and so 1. pastors of pastors, overseers
and watchmen, over their Overseers and Watchmen. 2. The relation of pastor
and flock, of feeders and a people fed is taken away. 3. That which the
Scripture ascribes to pastor^ only, 1 Timothy 5. 19, 20. Tit. 1. 13. v. 9. is
given to private professors. 6. The brotherly consociation of the authority
and power of jurisdiction in many sister-Churches united together, is taken
away, there is no Christian-communion of Church officers, as Church officers 7.
All particular Churches are left, in case of errors, to the immediate
judgment of Christ, and obnoxious to no Church censures, suppose they consist
of six or ten professors only. 8. The grounds of the doctrine are these same
arguments, which Anabaptists and Socinians use against the places of Kings,
Judges, Magistrates, to wit, that believers are free, redeemed, bought with a
price, all things are theirs; and therefore all power, which consequence is no
stronger the one way, then the other. 9. It lays a blot upon Christ's wisdom,
who has appointed congregations to be edified by no power of the keys in case
of aberration and incorrigible obstinacy. 10. It makes the Word of God
imperfect, which sets down no Canons, how the believers of an independent
Church should govern, and Paul teaches how Timothy and Titus, and all
Churchmen should govern. 11. It excludes not women from usurping authority
over men, by judging, excommunicating, ordaining pastors, seeing they are the
body and Spouse of Christ as believing men are. 12. It makes the Sacraments no
Sacraments, the baptized non-baptized, and in the place of Turks; if possibly
the pastor and the ten professors of the independent Church be unbelievers,
which is too ordinary. 13. By this an assembly of Pastors and Elders from
diverse congregations, have no more the power of the keys, then one single man,
who may counsel and advise his brother. 14. Extreme confusion and inevitable
schisms hence arise, whilst such a sister-Church says, I am Paul's, and her
sister-Church says, I am Apollo's, and there is no remedy against this fire.
15. The pattern of a Church governing and ministerial, consisting of only
believers, is neither in all the Scriptures, antiquity, nor in the writings of
Divines. But of these I shall speak more fully hereafter, God willing.

4. Argument. 4. Arg.
That Doctrine is not to be holden, which tends to the removing of a public
Ministry* but the doctrine of independent Churches is such. Ergo, the doctrine
of independent Churches, is not to be holden. The proposition is out of doubt,
seeing Christ has ordained a public Ministry for the gathering of his Church,
Ephesians: 3. 11. 1 Cor: 11. 1 Cor: 14 1 Timothy: 3. 1, 2, 3. Heb: 13. 17. 1 Thessalonians: 5.
12, 13. 1 Cor: 5. 4. Math: 16. 19. Math: 28. 18. Joh: 20. 21, 22, 23. English
Puritanis. me, c 2 art. 1. p. 4. Light for the ^gnorant, printed, an. 1641. p.
20.
I prove the assumption. By the doctrine of independency, two or three, or ten
or twelve private Christians in a private Family, Guide to Zion, pos. 11. p. 7.
joining themselves covenant-waies to worship God is a true visible Church:
Separatist. 3. p^tit. to King James (...) p 44.
So the English Puritanisme: So a Treatise called, Light for the ignorant: So
the Guide to Zion: So the Separatists holding Independent Congregations, define
a visible Church, Every company, Congregation or Assembly of true believers,
joining together according to the order of the Gospel, in the true worship, is
a true visible Church. This being the true definition of an independent
congregation from the writings of the Patrons thereof; I prove that it takes
away the necessity of public ministry. 1. because every twelve in a private
Family is this way joined together, and is an independent Church. 2 this
congregation being independent, it has within it self the power of the keys,
and is not subject (says the English Puritanisme) to any other Superior
ecclesiastical jurisdiction, ^nglish Puritanis. c 2. art. 3 p. 4.
then to that which is within it self. But,

1 Katherin against M. Edwards says, p. 7, 8. Private Christians have the
Spirit. Ergo, they may pray.

Answ: God forbid we deny, but they both may and ought to pray continually: but
hence it follows not affirmative, a genere ad speciem, therefore they may
authoritatively, not being called of God, as was Aaron, and invade the pastors
chair, and pray and fast and lay on hands by ministerial authority, as the
pastors do, Act: 6. 6. Act: 13. 3.

2. The Church (says the Feminin Author, p. 8.) is not blind, so that none
have power of seeing, but only the officers.

Answ. All believers see and discern true and false teachers, 1 John 4. 1.
Heb: 5. 14. 2 Cor: 3. 18. Psalm: 119. 18. Ephesians: 1. 17. but it follows not,
affirmative, a genere a^ speciem, the^fore they do all see as the eye of the
body, with an authoritative and pastoral light and eye; for then all the body
should be an eye, where were then the hearing? 2 Cor. 12. 17. 3 Within it self
there is no jurisdiction ministerial; for in the definition of a Church
ministerial, there is deep silence of Ministers or office-bearers; and good
reason by their grounds, who hold it: For it is a society of believers joined
together covenant ways in the true worship of God; which society has power to
ordain and elect their own pastors and Elders, here is the power of the keys
to bind and loose on earth, as Christ binds and loses in Heaven, Math: 18.
18. chap: 16. 19 and a ministerial act of these keys, to wit, the ordaining
of Pastors, Doctors, Elders and Deacons; before there be any Pastor, Doctor or
Elder or Deacon. A ministry then must only be necessary, ad been esse, non ad
esse simpliciter, to the better or wel-being of the independent Church, and not
to the simple being of the Church* for the thing must have a perfect
constituted being and essence, before it can have any operation, and working
proceeding from that being: as one must be a living creature endued with a
sensitive soul, before it can hear, or see, or touch; now this independent
Church, must have the perfect essence and being of a ministerial Church,
seeing it does by the power of the keys within it self constitute and ordain
her own Ministers and Pastors; and if they were joined in the worship of God
before they had Ministers, they did in a visible way (being a visible Church in
the complete being of a visible Church) worship God, before they had
Ministers; for before they ordain their Ministers, they must keep the
Apostolic order, fast and pray, and lay on their hands, for so did the
Apostles, Act: 1. 24. Acts 6. v. 6. Acts 13. 3. Act: 14. 23. 1 Timothy: 4. 14. 2 Timothy: 1. 5. So here are, public fasting, public praying, public ordination of
a visible and independent Church, and as yet they have no Ministers; So in case
the Eldership of a congregation shall all turn scandalous and heretical: this
same independent congregation may excommunicate them. Ergo before
excommunication, they must publicly and by the power of the keys, convince
them of Heresy, rebuke them, pray for them, and finally by the spirit of Paul
a Pastor, 1 Cor: 5. 4. judicially cast them out. Now let all be Judges, if this
be far from pastoral preaching, and if here be not ministerial acts, and
the highest judicial and authoritative censure exercised by no Ministers at
all; and what hinders by this reason, but the independent Church (that does
publicly and authoritatively pray, fast, rebuke, convince gainsayers, make and
unmake, by the power of the keys, pastors and Ministers) may also without
Ministers preach, and administer the Sacraments? against which the Separatists
themselves do speak and give reasons from Scripture, that none may administer
the Sacraments, until the pastors and teachers be chosen and ordained in their
office. Separatists confess. art. 34. p. 25.
But hence we clearly see an independent Church constituted in its complete
essence, and exercising ministerial acts, and using the keys without any
ministry and edifying their Ministers, so that a ministry is accidental, and a
stranger to the independent Church both in its nature and working, and seeing
they edify others without a ministry: why may not private Families, where the
independent Church dwells, edify themselves without a public ministry? I
read in Arminian and Socinian writings, that seeing the Scriptures are now
patent to all. 1 A sent Ministry is rather useful and profitable then
necessary. 2 The preaching of the Word by Ministers is not necessary: So
Episcopi^s: The Arminians in their Apology, Episcop disput. 26. 23.
and the Catechize of Raccovia: I will not impute these conclusions to our
dear brethren, Remonstr. apol fol. 246.
but I entreat the father of Lights to make them see the premises. Remonstran
in confess. c. 21 sec. ^, 4.
3 Three or four believers this way in covenant joined together to worship
God, Cat^ches. Raccovie^s de eccles. C^^isti a* 11. ^^l. 305. 306. and 16. fol.
^01 30^.
have intensively and essentially all the power of the keys, as the Council
convented at Jerusalem, Acts 15. 4. the power of Ordination, public praying,
public and authoritative convincing of the gainsayers, and judicial rebuking,
which Paul ascribes to the Pastors and preaching Elders, 1 Timothy: 5. 20, 21. 1 Timothy: 3. 2. Tit: 1. 9. 2 Timothy: 4. 2. as essential parts proper to their calling,
do not agree at all to pastors, but by accident, in so far as they are
believers, or parts of an independent congregation by this doctrine; for if the
keys and the use of the keys, in all these ministerial acts, be given to a
society of believers so joined in covenant to serve God, as to the first,
native and independent subject: all these must agree to Ministers at the second
hand, and by communication. For if God has given heat to the fire, as to the
first and native Subject; all other things must be hot by borrowing heat from
the fire; and so Pastors rebuke, exhort, ordain Pastors, censure and
excommunicate Pastors only by accident, and at the by, in so far as they are
believers, and parts of the independent congregation: And all these are
exercised most kindly in an independent congregation by some of their number,
Robinso^* Childley.
suppose there be no Pastors at all in the congregation. Robinson (in
justification of Separatists, p. 121, 122) and Katherin Childly (against M.
Edwards, pa. 3.) say, as a private Citizen may become a Magistrate: So a
private member may become a Minister in case of necessity, to ordain Pastors
in a congregation, where there is none, and therefore (say they) the Church may
subsist for a time without Pastor or Elder. Answ. In an extraordinary case a
private man, yea a Prophet as Samuel has performed, by the extraordinary
impultion of the spirit, that which King Saul should do, to wit, he may kill
Agag; but an independent congregation of private men ordaining pastors (say our
Brethren) is Christ's settled ordinance to the worlds end. 2 The question is,
whither the Church can subsist a politic ministerial body without Pastors and
Elders. 3 By this the independent way is extraordinary, where a private man may
invade the pastors chair; then Synods must be ordinary: else they must give us
another way then their independent way or presbyteriall Churches, that is
ordinary. I desire also to know, how our brethren who are for the maintenance
of independent Churches, can eschew the public prophesying of some qualified
in the Church, even of persons never called to be Pastors, which the
Separatists do maintain to the grief of the godly and learned; for in an
independent congregation, where Pastors and Elders are not yet chosen, and when
they are in process to excommunicate them, who shall publicly pray, exhort,
rebuke, convince the Eldership to be ordained or excommunicated? I doubt, but a
grosser point then the prophesying of men who are in no pastoral calling must
be holden, to the discharging of all these public actions of the Church; yea,
I see not but with a like warrant, private men may administer the Sacraments;
because Christ from his Mediatory power gave one and the same ministerial
power to pastors, to teach and baptize Mat: 28. 18, 19.

5. Argum. 5. Arg.
If Gods word allow a presbyteriall Church, and a presbytery of Pastors and
Elders: then are we not to hold any such independent congregation; for our
brethren acknowledge they cannot consist together. Cap. 7. q 7. conc. 4.
But the former is clear, 1 Timothy: 4. 14. Mat: 18. 17. 18. and is proved by us
already. Other arguments I shall (God willing) add in the following questions.

CHAP. XIV.
Quest. 14. Whither or no the power ecclesiastical of Synods can be prooved
from the famous council of Jerusalem holden, Act: 15.
NOw follows our sixth Argument against independent congregations. Six
Argument^ against independe^t congregations.
Where I purpose (God willing) to prove that the practice of the Apostolic
Church gives us warrant for Synods, and a meeting of Pastors, and Elders from
many particular congregations giving and making ecclesiastical Canons and
Decrees that tie and lay a band ecclesiastical upon many particular
congregations, to observe and obey these Decrees. And, 1. the popular and
democraticall government of Anabaptists, where the people governs themselves,
and the Church, we reject. 2 The Popish Hierarchy, and the Popish or Episcopal
Synods, where my lord Prelate the Antichrists eldest son, sits domineering
and ruling all, we reject. 3 We grant that one sister-Church, or one
presbytery, or one provincial or National Assembly has no jurisdiction over
another sister-Church, presbytery or fellow Assembly. 4 As there is a communion
of Saints by brotherly counsel, direction, advise and encouragement: So this
same communion is far more to be observed by sister-Churches, to write and to
send Commissioners and salutations one to another; and hitherto our brethren
and we go one way. 5 An absolute, independent and unlimited power of Synods
over congregations, we also condemn: Their decrees tie two ways I grant, 1.
Materially; for the intrinsicall lawfullnesse of the decree: Thus our brethren
will not deny, but this tie is common to the brotherly counsel and advise of
friends and brethren counselling one another from Gods word. For all are tied
to follow what God commands in his word, whither a superior, an inferior or
an equal speak: But we hold that the decrees of greater Synods do lay an
ecclesiastical tie upon under, or lesser Synods in those bounds where
presbyteries and particular congregations are. But it is weakness in
Separatists, and womanly and weakly said by the author of Justification of
independent Churches, Chidl^y.
printed, an. 1641. under the name of Katherin Childly, page 17. that the
Synod. Act: 15. it not properly a Synod; because their decrees were not
alterable, but such as were warranted by God, and a perpetual rule for all the
Churches of the Gentiles, for that author ignorantly presumes that Synods may
make Canons of nothing but of circumstances of mere order: Whereas Synods with
good warrant, following this Synod, have made Acts against Arrians, Nestorius,
and other heretics ecclesiastically condemning fundamental errors. And
here I enter to prove the lawfullness^ of Synods, and to dispute against the
independency of a visible presbyteriall Church, For that which in Scotland we
call, following Gods word, 1 Timothy: 4. 14. the presbytery.

But before we proceed, one question would be cleared, What ground is there to
tie a congregation by an ecclesiastical tie of obedience to a presbytery, and
a presbytery to a provincial Assembly, and a provincial Assembly to a
National Assembly: for seeing these are not in Gods Word, they would seem
devices of men, and of noe divine institution; one may say, whether have they
warrant in a positive Law of God, or in the law of nature?

I answer, they have warrant of both: for it is Gods positive law, that the
Elders and Overseers be over the Church in the Lord, Heb: 13. 17. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
12, 13. Math: 18. 17, 18. I call this Gods positive Law, because if it had bin
the will of the Lawgiver, he might have appointed an High Priest, or some
arch-Pastor or prime officer in his name to command the whole Church, like to
the Judge and the High Priest in the old Testament: So Aristocraticall
government is not natural, our presbyteries are founded upon the free will of
Christ, who appointed this government rather then another. Now the question,
how subordination of congregations to presbyteries, and of presbyteries to
greater Synods is of natures law is harder, but a thing is natural two ways,
1. simply and in it self, 2. and by consequent; an example of the former is,
by the law of nature, the hand moves, the feet walks, at the direction of
the will, which is a commanding faculty that rules all the motions of moving
from place to place: This way it is not directly natural that Archippu^ be
governed by the Eldership and Presbytery at Colosse; because he may be removed
to another Presbytery, he possibly might have bee^e a member of the presbytery
at Corinth, and never been subject to the presbytery at Colosse. Example of
the latter, it is simply supernatural for Peter to be borne over again, ^ath:
16. 17. John 1. 12, 13. but upon supposition that God has given him a new
nature, it is natural or (as we say) connaturall and kindly to this new nature
in Peter to love Christ, and to love Christ's sheep and his lambs, because
every like loves a like; So the subordination is not natural: for it is not
natural for John and Thomas to be subject to such an Eldership of this
congregation; for Gods providence might have disposed that John and Thomas
should have dwelt in another congregation as members thereof, and so subject to
another Eldership. But secondarily and by consequent upon supposition that they
are members and inhabitants of this ecclesiastical incorporation it is kindly
and connaturall now that they be subjected ecclesiastically to the Eldership of
Christ's appointing in this congregation: and so the ground of the bond is (the
part must be in subjection to those who command the whole) John and Thomas are
parts of this congregation, such an Eldership commands the whole, therefore
John and Thomas are in subjection to such an Eldership. So all the believers of
this congregation and all the believers of the sister-congregations are parts
of this presbytery; whereas Gods providence might have disposed, that all the
believers here might have been parts and members of another presbytery: And so
by proportion sundry presbyteries are parts of a provincial Church, and sundry
believers of many provinces are parts and members of a National Church. Now
the division of a Nation into Provinces, and of Provinces into so many
territories called presbyteries, and the division of presbyteries into so many
congregations, cannot be called a devise of man's, because it is not in the Word
of God; for by that same reason, that John and Thomas and so many threes and
foures of believers should be members of an independent congregation, seeing it
is not in the Word, it shall be also a devise of man. For all our singular acts
are mixed, there is something moral in them, and that must be squared and
ruled by the word; and something is in them not moral, but positive, and this
is not to be squared by the word; but sometimes by natures light (which I grant
is a part implicit of Gods word) sometimes it is enough that the positive part
be negatively conform to the word, that is, not contrary to it: Howbeit I hold
that the morality required in every action, must be positively conform to the
word, for example the Law says, Every male-childe must be circumcised the
eighth day, Genesis 17. 7. Now the action of Christ's circumcision, and Christ's
presenting in the Temple, and offering of two turtle Doves, and two young
pigeons is said to be according to the Law of Moses, Luke 2. 23. (...), as it
is written; yet the b^be Jesus by name, his mother Mary who brought him into
the Temple, the Priest by name that offered the Doves for him, are not written
in the Scripture of Moses his law; but the morality of that action was
positively conform to Moses his law: so that every part be subject to the law
of the whole is Gods word; but that parts and whole be thus divided it was not
required to be defined in the word. But what our brethren deny is, that as
Peter and John are Ecclesiastical parts of a single Congregation under the
jurisdiction of that single Congregation is clear in the word of God; but that
three or four Congregations are parts ^cclesiasticall of a Presbytery, and
Ecclesiastically subjected to the government of the Presbytery; as John and
Thomas are parts subjected to the government of a Congregation is utterly
denied. But we may reply, John and Thomas are to obey their Pastor preaching,
in the Lord, and by that same reason they are to obey their Pastors gathered
together, with the Elders in a Synod: So by that same reason, as John and
Thomas are to obey their Eldership convented in their own Congregation to
govern them, by that same reason, John and Thomas of four Congregations are
to hear and obey their own Elderships convented by that same authority of
Christ in another Congregation, when a College of other Elderships are joined
with them.

But I come to the Scriptures of God. If when the Churches of Syria, Sylicia,
Antioch and Jerusalem were troubled with a question, whether they should keep
the Law of Moses, and be circumcised, and could not determine it amongst
themselves in their particular Churches, they had their recourse to an assembly
of Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem, who gave out a Decree and Canon anent that
question, which the Churches were obliged to keep, then when particular
Congregations are troubled with the like questions in doctrine and government,
they are by their example to have recou^se to an Assembly of Pastors and
Elders, that are over many Churches, and to receive Decrees also, which they
are obliged to keep: But the former is the practice of the Apostolic Church,
Ergo, to have recourse to a Synod of Pastors and Elders, to receive Decrees
from them, that tie many particular Churches, is lawful to us.

I prove the assumption, A question troubled these Churches, some false
teachers said (Cyrinthus as Epiphanius thinks) You must be circumcised after
the manner of Moses, Epiph.
Acts 15. ver. 1. and there was no small dissension and disputation about this,
ver. 2. and this question troubled the Church of Jerusalem, as ver. 4. and 5.
do declare: And it troubled the Churches of Antioch, Syria, and Cylicia, ver.
23. 2. That the question could not well be determined in their particular
Churches, is clear from ver. 34, from three circumstances, 1. The maintainers
of the question troubled them. 2. They almost subverted their souls with
words. 3. They allege a necessity of keeping Moses Law, and that it was the
commandment and doctrine of the Apostles and Elders. 3. That in this question
that troubled them so much, they have their recourse to a Synod, is clear,
ver. 6. And the Apostles and Elders came to consider of this matter; and ver.
2. They determined that Paul and Barnabas, and certain others of them should
go up to Jerusalem, unto the Apostles and Elders about this question; And that
the Apostles who were led by an infallible spirit, and could not err, might
have determined the question, is clear by their speeches in the counsel, if
the Apostles had not had a mind to set down a Samplar and a Copy of an Assembly
in such cases. 4. That there are here the members of a Synod is clear,
Apostles, Elders, Brethren, ver. 23. and Commissioners from Antioch, ver. 2.
certain others, and the Elders of the Church at Jerusalem, James, Paul, and
the Elders of Jerusalem, chap. 21. v. 17, 18 compared with ver. 25. So here are
Elders from sundry Congregations. 5. That these Decrees did tie and
Ecclesiastically oblige the Churches; howbeit all the members were not present
to consent is clear, chap. 16. ver. 4. And as they went through the Cities,
they delivered them the Decrees for to keep, Acts 21. ver. 25. We have written
and concluded that they observe no such things, but that they keep themselves,
etc. So chap. 15. 28. It seemed good to lay on you no greater burden then these
necessary things, etc. Now let us hear the exceptions which our brethren
propound on the contra^y, to prove that this was no general Assembly.

They object 1. This cannot be proved to be an o^cumenicke Council, Object. 1.
that is, an Assembly of the whole Churches of the world.

Answ. Howbeit Augustine, Chrysostom, Cyrillus, Theophylact, Theodoret,
Cyprian, Ambrose, and most of the learned Fathers agree, that it was an
o^cumenicke Assembly, yet we will not contend, many Churches of Jews and
Gentiles were here by their Comm^ssioners, which is sufficient for our point.
2. The Apostles who were universal Pastors of the whole world, were here.

2. They object, There is no word of a Synod or Assembly in the Text. 2. Object.


Answ. Gilbert V^^^^us do classib. the^* 7.
The thing it self is here, if not the name, says that learned Voetius. 2.
Neither is the name of an independent Church in Scripture, nor the word Trinity
or Sacrament, what then? the the things are in Scripture. 3. verse 6. (...),
they assembled, and ver. 25. they were together, is plainly a Synod.

They object 3. Object. 3.
Though there were a general assembly here, yet it proves nothing for the
power of the keys to be in such an assembly, Manuscript for independent
Churc^^^.
but only it says something for a power of deciding of controversies in
matter of ^aith, which implies no act of jurisdiction.

Answ. 1. The deciding of controversies in matters of doctrine tying the
Churches, and laying a burden on them, as it is, ver. 28. and tying them to
keep the Decrees, chap. 21. 25. chap. 16. 4. is an a^t of jurisdiction, and an
opening and shutting heaven by the power of the keys, when it is done
Synodically, as this is here. 2. This presupposes that the power of the keys
is only in censuring matters of fact, and not in a ministerial j^dging and
condemning of false doctrine; which is against Scripture: For Ephesus is
commended for using the keys in condemning the doctrine of those who called
themselves Apostles and were not; and Pergamus rebuked for suffering the
doctrine of Balaam; and Thyatira is rebuked for suffering Jezabel to teach the
lawfulness of fornication, and of eating things sacrificed unto Idols, Rev. 2.
v. 2. v. 14. v. 20.

They object fourthly, 4. Object.
The true cause why Paul and Barnabas were sent to Jerusalem, Manuscript for
independent Church^^.
was not to get authoritative resolution of the question in hand; but to know,
whether these teachers had warrant from the Apostles to teach the necessity of
circumcision, as they pretended they had, as may be gathered from ver. 24. To
whom we gave no such command.

Answ. The contrary is seen in the Text: For if the Apostles had commanded any
such thing, it was a dispute of fact in this Synod, and they might soon have
answered that; but the thing questioned was questis iuris, a question if
circumcision must be, v. 5., and that they must be circumcised, ver. 24. Also
Paul and Barnabas were sent to Jerusalem, ver. 2. about this question. Now the
question was not whether the Apostles had taught the lawfulness of
circumcision or not? But the question is, ver. 1. Certain men taught, except
ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses you cannot be saved. 2. It were a
vain thing to say that v. 6. the Apostles and Elders met about this matter, to
see what the Apostles had taught, and what not. 3. The Apostles bring reasons
from the Scriptures, and from the calling of the Gentiles, which were vain
reasons if nothing were in question; but whether the Apostles had taught this
point, or not taught it. 4. That Paul and Barnabas were sent to be resolved of
more, then whether the Apostles had taught this or not, is clear by their
answer in the Decree. It seemed good, etc. to lay no greater burden on you, and
that you abstain from meats offered to Idols, etc.

They object fifthly, ^. Object.
There was no combination of many Pastors of diverse Churches, but only a few
messengers seen from Antioch to the Congregation at Jerusalem: Hence many say,
it was an assembly of a particular Church, and it binds only as a particular
and special meeting. So M. Best.

Answ 1. We stand not upon an exact meeting of all Churches, M. Best plea for
the Church. sect. 4. page 33.
when as the nature and essence of a Synodicall and Assembly-meeting is saved:
Here were Apostles and Elders, whose charge was the wide world, And the Elders
of Jerusalem, and Commissioners sent from Antioch, and they send Canons and
Decrees to other Churches. 2. A decree of one particular independent
Congregation cannot bind another, as our brethren teach: But the Decrees made
here did tie the Churches of Syria, B^idgesias. Hugo Gr^tiet.
Cylicia, Antioch, and Jerusalem. v. 22, 23. chap. 16. v. 4. Yea and all the
Churches of the Gentiles, Acts 21. 25. remember that enemies to our Synods, as
Bridgesius and Hugo Grotius object this also: De Polit. Eccles. l 3 c. 23.
This is the answer of Bridgesius and Hugo Grotius who deny the necessity of
reformed Synods; Parker who is for our brethren in many points refuteth this,
and proves it was a Synod.

They object sixthly, 6. Object.
They were not neighboring Churches that sent; M. (...)* 16 P 34. M. Best.
for Jerusalem did lie two hundred ^iles from Antioch: How could they that lay
so far distant, ordinarily meet, as your Classes did?

Answ. To the essence of a Synod, and the necessity thereof is not required
such meetings of Churches so far distant; but when the Churches necessity
requires it, the lawfulness thereof may hence well be concluded, and that
when they lie so ne^r-hand they may more conveniently meet. 2. Neither is this
much (to give M. Best his Geography at his own measure) when the Churches were
now in their infancy, and the question of such importance, that the Churches
travel many miles for their resolut^on in this.

They object seventhly, 7. Object.
How prove you that these that were sent from Antioch, had authority in the
Church of Jerusalem.

Answ. Because Paul and Barnabas sent from Antioch had voices in these Decrees.

They object eighthly, Object. 8.
It cannot be proved from hen^e that Antioch was a Church depending on
Jerusalem.

Answ. Neither do we intend to prove such a matter: But hence it follows,
that both Antioch, and Jerusalem, and Syria, and Cilicia depend upon the
Decrees of these Pastors of diverse Congregations assembled in this Synod.

They object ninthly, Object. 9.
That Papists and Prelates allege this place to prove their Dioc^san Synods.

Answ. So does Satan allege a Scripture, Psalm 91. which must not be
rejected, because it was once in his foul mouth: Prelates allege this place
to make Jerusalem a Cathedral and Mother Church, having Supremacy, and
Jurisdiction over Antio^h, and other Churches, that there may be erected there
a silken chair for my Lord Prelate, and that Laws may be given by him to
bind all men's consciences under him, in things which they call indifferent, we
allege this place for an Apostolic assembly, to make Jerusalem a collateral
and Sister-church with Antioch, and the Churches of Syria and Cilicia,
depending on a general Council: We deny all Primacie to Jerusalem, it was
only judged the most convenient seat for the Council: We allow no Chair for
Prelate or Pastors, but that they determine in the Council according to Gods
Word, laying bands on no man's conscience farther then the Word of God, and the
dictates of sound reason, and Christian prudency do require.

They tenthly object, 10. Object.
That the matter carried from Antioch to Jerusalem was agreed upon by the whole
Church, M. Best.
and not carried thither by one man, as is done in your Classes. So M. Best.

Answ. It were good that things that concern many Churches were referred by
common consent to higher assemblies; but if one man be wronged, and see truth
suffer by partiality, the Law of nature will warrant him to appeal to an
assembly, where there is more light and greater authority, as the weaker may
^ly to the stronger: And the Churches whose souls were subverted with words,
Acts 15. v. 24. did ^ly to the authority of a greater assembly, when ther^ is
no small dissension about the question in hand, Acts 15. 2.

They object eleventhly, Object. 11.
The thing concluded in this assembly was divine Scripture, imposed upon all
the Churches of the Gentiles, v. 22. 28. and the conclusion obliged, because it
was Apostolic, and Canonicke Scripture, not because it was Synodicall, and the
Decree of a Church-assembly, and so the tie was Divine, not Ecclesiasticke. It
seemed good to the Holy Ghost.

Answ. 1. So the excommunication of the incestuous man, 1 Cor. 5. (if he was
excommunicated) and his rereceiving again in the bosom of the Church, 1 Cor.
2. and the laying on of the hands of the Elders on Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. 14. and
the appointing Elders at Lystra, Iconium, Antioch, and fasting and praying at
the said ordination, Acts 14. v. 21, 22, 23. was Scripture, and set down in
the Canonicke History by the Holy Ghost; but no man can deny that the
conclusion or Decree of excommunication given out by the Church of Corinth, and
the ordination of Timothy to be a Pastor, and the appointing of the Elders at
Lystra, did oblige the Churches of Corinth, Ephesus, and Lystra, with an
Ecclesiastical tie, as Ecclesiastical Synods do oblige.

2. That this conclusion does oblige as a Decree of a Synod, and not as
Apostolic and Canonicke Scripture, I prove 1. Because the Apostles and
Prophets being immediately inspired by the Holy Ghost, in the penning of
Scripture do never consult and give decisive voices, to Elders, Brethren, and
the whole community of believers in the penning holy Scripture: For then, as it
is said, Ephesians. 2. 20. That our faith is built upon the Apostles and Prophets,
that is, upon their doctrine: so shall our faith in this point, concerning the
taking in of the Church of the Gentil^s, in one body with the Jews, as is
proved from Scripture, v. 14, 15, 16, 17. be built upon the doctrine of Elders,
Brethren, and whole Church of Jerusalem; for all had joint voices in this
Council, as our brethren say, which is a great absurdity. The commandments of
the Apostles, are the commandments of the Lord, 1 Cor. 14. 37. But the
commandments of the whole Church of Jerusalem, 2 Pet. 3. 2.
such as they say this Decree was, are not the commandments of the Lord: For
we condemn Papists, such as Suare^, Suarez de trip.
Vasquez, Bellarmine, Cai^tan, Sotus, and with them Formalists, (...) tract. 1
disp. 5. se^^. 4.
such as Hooker and Sutluvius who make a difference betwixt divine
comma^dements, Vasquez in 3 tom. 3 d ^p 2. 6 c 3.
and Apostolic commandments, and humane ordinances, for our Divines, Bellarm
de verbo m^n^script.
as Junius, Beza, Pareus, Tylen, Sibrandus, Ca^^tan, Opus. 1. tract 37.
Whittaker, Willet, Reynolds, Jewel, make all Apostolic mandates to be
divine, Sotu^ de (...) l 7. c. 6. a^. 1.
and humane commandments, or ^cclesiasticall mandates, to oblige only
secondarily, Hooke^. polit. l. ^. p. 15^.
and as they agree with divine and Apostolic commandments: Su^luvi^^ de Pre^^
c. 11. p. 67.
But here our brethren make mandates of ordinary believers, that were neither
Apostles nor Prophets to be divine and Canonicke Scripture. 3. That which is
proper to the Church, to Christ his second coming again, does not oblige as
Canonicke Scripture: ^or Canonicke Scripture shall not be still written till
Christ come again, because the Canon is already closed with a curse upon all
adders, Rev. 22. but what is decreed according to Gods word, by Church-guides,
with the consent, tacit, or express of all the community of believers, as this
was v. 22. (as we and our brethren do jointly confess) is proper to the
Church to Christ's second coming, Ergo, this Decree obliges not as Scripture.
4. The Apostles if they had not purpose that this Decree should oblige as an
Ecclesiastical mandate; but as Canonicke Scripture, they would not 1. have
advised with all the believers, as with collateral and joint penmen with them
of holy Scripture. 2. They would not have disputed and reasoned together, every
one helping another, as they do here, v. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, etc. 3. They would
not depresse and submit the immediately inspiring Apostelike spirit to men's
consent; so as men must give consent, and say Amen to what God the author of
Scripture shall dite as Scripture. This was a villifying and lessening of the
authority of Scripture; therefore necessarily hence it follows this was an
Ecclesiastical degrace of an Assembly.

They object twelfthly, Object. 12.
That Paul and Barnabas went up to Jerusalem, not to submit their judgment to
the Apostles, for then they had not been infallible, neither for the necessity
of an assembly, or because Congregations depend does on assemblies; but they
did it 1. to conciliate authority to the Decrees. 2. To stop the mouths of
false Apostles, who alleged that the Lords Apostles stood for circumcision,
otherwise Paul himself might have determined the point.

Answ. 1. Paul as an ordinary Pastor, howbeit not as an Apostle, was to submit
to a Synod in this case, as an Apostle he might have excommunicated the
incestuous Corinthian, without the Church; but it shall not follow that Paul
did write to the Corinthians to excommunicate him for no necessity of a
Church-court and Synod, but only to conciliate authority to excommunication,
and to stop the mouths of enemies.

2. I ask what authority do they mean, 1. authority of brotherly advise? But
these Decrees bind as the Decrees of the Church, v. 28. chap. 16. 4. chap. 21.
v. 25. 2, If they mean authority Ecclesiastical, the cause is ours. 3. If
they mean authority of divine Scripture, then this Decree must have more
authority th^n other Scriptures, which were not penned by common consent of all
believers. 4. This is a bad consequence, Paul could have determined the point
his alone, Ergo, there was no need of a Council, for the Scriptures and many
holy Pastors determine that Christ is equal with God the Father: It follows
not that therefore there is no need of one Council to condemn ^rrius.

They object 13. Object. 13.
There were no Commissioners at this assembly from the Churches of Syria and
Cilicia, therefore it was not an assembly obliging Ecclesiastically all the
Churches of the Gentiles.

Answ. 1. Suppose Syria and Cilicia had no Commissioners here (which yet we
cannot grant, but give only) yet Jerusalem and Antioch had their Commissioners,
which makes the meeting formally and ess^ntially a Synod, of many particular
Churches met synodically in one; for there were many single Pari^hionall
congregations both at Jerusalem and at Antioch. 2. We doubt not but the
Apostles who wrote to them the Decrees of the assembly, advertised them also of
that Apostolic remedy for determining the question, seeing they writ to them,
ver. 24. We have heard that some have troubled you with words, sub^erting your
souls, saying, ye must be circumcised, Ergo, the Apostles tendered their
s^lvation; therefore we are to think that Syria and Cilicia had their
Commissioners here: What if they neglected to send (a facto ad ius non valet
consequentia) they should have sent Commissioners. This assemblies Decrees did
lay a tie and bond upon the Churches of Syria and Cilicia, then it did either
tie them as a counsel and advise, or or as a part of Scripture, or thirdly as
a Decree of an Ecclesiastical Synod: If the first be said, this Canon does not
lay a command upon them, the contrary whereof we find, v. ^8. it lays a
burden on them, chap. 16. 4. chap. 21. 28. and Decrees that they must keep.
The second is unanswerably confuted in answering the tenth objection: If the
third be said we obtain what we seek, and so they should have sent
Commissioners, otherwise the Decrees of Synods shall oblige Ecclesiastically
Churches who are not obliged to be present in their Commissioners, which
neither we, nor they can affirm.

14. They object, Object. 14.
That this is not one of our Synods, for the multitude of believers had voices
here. And the whole multitude spoke, for it is said, v. 12. Then all the
multitude keept silence, Best. Parke^.
and gave audience. And Whittaker says, they had decisive voices, but in your
Synods none have voices, but only the Eldership.

Answ. 1. That the faithful speak, Scotland disci^line 2. book chap. 7.
propose, and reason, (...). a^^. 6^.
our book of discipline says. So says Zuinglius, Beza Epi^t. 83.
Beza, yea the Fathers, as Cyprian and others: Who will not have Acts made
against the peoples consent; Cypr l. 4. ^^p 21, 24.
it is like the multitude speak, Whit. c^nt. 3. q. 3. c. 3. (...) est
no^^^ll^s ex ple^e (...)
but orderly, seeing the Holy Ghost was here, v 28. Whittaker says only, it is
like that some of the multitude spoke: And what marvel then many should
speak, seeing it was untruth that any of Moses Law, which was also Gods Law,
should be abrogated. 2. The Church may send in some cases learned and holy men
to Synods, who are neither Pastors, Elders, nor Doctors: So was here (...)
brethren, that is, choice and able men; otherwise believing women, and the
whole Church of believers com^ under the name of brethren in Scripture. Romans ^
3. Ro^: 12. 3. Romans 10. 1. 1 Cor. ^. 11. 1 Cor 3. 1. 1 Cor. 12. 1. (...). 3. 1.
1 Thessalonians. ^. 1. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1. Iam. 3* 1.
Parker says well, The material ground of commissioners at assemblies is
their gifts and holiness, the formal ground is the Church calling and sending
them. 3. That the whole multitude had definitive voices, is first against what
we have said, expounding these words, Mat. 18. (Tell the Church) 2. It is a
mere popular government refuted before. Parker de poli^ l. 3. c. 18. (...) ex
donis interni* pendet* (...) ex delegatione Ecclesi^e. (...) in act. 1^. 6.
Palam est ad Apostolicos vir^s rer^m ad fidem (...) C^lv. Com ^b v. 6. (...)
lucas tot^m Ecclesiam (...).
3. I reason from the end of the Synod. These only had definitive votes, who
met together synodically for to consider of this question, but these were only
Apostles and Elders, v. 6. including brethren, who only had place to judge, as
Bullinger and Calvin says, and not the multitude. 4. The Canons are
denomin^ted (...), Decrees ordained by the Apostles and Elders, Acts 16. 4.
Acts 21. 25. 5. By what warrant could the brethren at Jerusalem give Laws to
brethren of other independent congregations of Syria and Cilicia, and these
also who were absent? So this shall be no Syn^d. 6. I grant the Epistle is sent
in the name of all: For 1. to send greeting in an Epistle is not an act of
jurisdiction, but a sort of Christian kindness^* 2. It was done by common
consent of all. 3. It added some more authority. 4. It is possible the sending
of the Decrees required charges and expenses.

15. The Female replyer to M. Edwards, the reason (says she) why the Church of
Antioch sent the matter to be d^cided at Jerusalem, was because the parties
were members of the Church of Jerusalem, Acts 15. 1. certain men which came
from Judaea taught the brethren, etc. v. 24. They went out from us, and this
proves independency of Churches, for the Church of Antioch judged it an
unequal thing to judge members of the Church of Jerusalem.

Answ. 1. Let it be that contenders for ceremonies were of the sect of the
Pharisees; yet the souls of these of Antioch were subverted, v. 24. If Antioch
had been independent, they could have determined the truth, to prevent
subversion of souls, who ever were the authors of that wicked doctrine; but
their sending their commissioners to the Synod at Jerusalem proves that in a
thing common to them all they depend upon a Synod that does oblige them all. 2.
How could one independent Church at Jerusalem give Laws to an independent
Church at Antioch? 3. Antioch might have condemned the heresy. Suppose they
could not judge the heretics, if they were an independent congregation,
seeing the heresy troubled them.

16. They object, O^cumenicke and universal Synods of the whole Christian
Church are unpossible; M Bell Church plea sect. 7. at 7. Parker de Pol^. l. 3.
c 13.
and the Church is, and may be without Synods; therefore Synods are no
ordinances of Christ. So Best. See Parker.

Answ. Whittaker says indeed universal Synods are not simply necessary;
Whittaker cont 1. q 1. p ^2, 23.
and Parker says no more, they are not absolutely necessary, (...) Conslan. c*
^9
necessitate medij, but they are necessary, necessitate praecepti, and
conditionally, if some politic union were amongst all National Churches; but
hence it follows not that they are not Christ's ordinances, because they are
not this way necessary, necessitate medij; for then Baptism and the Lords
Supper, public preaching of the word, perfect discipline were not Christ's
ordinances, because in time of persecution, or universal apost^sie, many, yea
even whole Churches may be saved without these. 2. Synods are necessary for the
well being, not simply for the being of the Church: But hence it is a weak
consequence; therefore they are not ordinances of Christ. 3. It is known that
the Popes power hinders general Councels; Nanclerus Vo^. 1. gen 8.
for the Councels of Constance and Basil, where the Popes wings were clipped,
Conc^ Constan. loc cit.
made that good, burnt children dread fire. Cardinals oath, ann. 1^03.
Adrian, it may be with some honesty, promised the council of Trent, anno
1522. But Clemens the seventh did openly oppose Charles the fifth his
Chancellors proclaiming thereof at Bononia; they feared the place that the
Emperors power should shame them, and learned well from Ioh. 23. as Nanclerus
says, to make the place of the council all in all: And such was Trent; for
they licked and revised again and again all the circumstances of that
council, that it was a birth in the Popes womb good twenty and five years,
and then was the Popes barn borne against his will; yet general councels
should be, Popes hinder them to be, and what wonder? Thieves love not well
iustice-courts; yet by their own Law they should be. The council of Constance
ordained that a general council should be every ten years once: Yea after
the councels of Lansen and Florence, the sea being void, ann. 1503. the
Cardinals convened, and swear to Almighty God, and blasphemously to Peter and
Paul, that whosoever of them shall be created Pope, he shall convene a general
council within two years after his inauguration; which oath Julius 2. did
swear, Julius 2 his oath. (...) of the Council of Trent, c 1. p. 4
but had neither honesty, nor memory to perform. The faculty of Paris, and
Church of France, who are still (as says the Reviewer of the council of
Trent) at daggers drawing with the Pope and court of Rome, Br. (...) de causa
Dei. ^3 c. 53.
do cry and write for a general council: (...), ex^u^ge. quaeso, exime
gladium.
But (they say) ^he articles of Paris cannot climb oveer the Alps. It is some
hundred years since Thomas Bradwardine of Canterbury, the hammer of the
Pelagians cried to waken Simon Peter, that he might speak out of his
Councell-chaire for grace against the Pelagians. But J^suites bellies and
pens stout for their Father the Pope, think it wisdom that the Pope be
deaf at the cries of Dominicanes, who call for his holiness tongue to
determine in bickerings betwixt their order and Jesuits in the matter of
Grace, Predestination, Free Will, Gods providence. The Pope fearing a general
Council, thinks best that they rather blood other in the Schools, then that
his greatness hazard to face the Court of a general Council; and therefore
matters are now tried at home. Lod. Molina the Father of the new Science, the
middle light with that wild heed fansied to be in God, was cited before Clemens
the 8^^, and holden in process five years, even before Paul the fifth, and
the Cardinals, and when all was done, was whipped with a Toads stool, and
nothing was determined, Pra^. de Arriba in Th^^l. spec in pref Council Nicae. c.
6.
as says Francis. de Ariba. Other Councels ordained that there should be in
all places, Provincial and National Assemblies. Council Trull. c. 8.
So ordained the Council of Nice, Conc A^r^. c. 138.
Trulla, Africa, Sardis. Hence I add a third distinction: Council. Sard c. 15.
From this is concluded only that Councels are not necessary, but impossible,
impossibilitate morali, non Physica: Councels are only morally impossible, not
simply impossible, and that through men's corruption. It follows not therefore
they are not Gods ordinances: For seeing Churches independent are morally, and
I fear, more then morally impossible, and have been hindered by Prelates, our
brethren would not from hence conclude that they are not Gods ordinances. A
Congregation of visible Saints where there is not an hypocrite, is unpossible
morally, and cannot be because of our corruption; yet such a Congregation
should be, and so is an ordinance of Christ. Let me also add the fourth
distinction: Christ may well ordain that as a necessary mean of edification,
which cannot be had ordinarily in the full perfection and degrees required, so
it may be had in the degrees and parts, that may edify, howbeit not so well,
and not so conveniently: so Synods are ordinarily possible, I mean lesser
Synods, if not fuller and compleater, if an universal Synod cannot be had, a
National may be in Scotland, and in England also if it please the Prelates,
and if God will, whether Prelates will or will not; and if these cannot be,
Provincial Synods are, and may be, and if these cannot be, yet Synods,
Elderships, and particular Churches may be; and I think independent
Congregations in their perfection consisting of sincere believers only, and a
perfect Church Discipline, are Gods necessary means of edification, yet in
their perfection they cannot be had. But to close this point, no Divine that
ever did write, or speak of this Chapter, except some of late; but they
acknowledge, Acts 15. to be a formal copy and draught of a general Assembly.
I might cite all our Protestant Divines, the Lutherans, Papists, Schoolmen,
Casuists, all the Fathers; and Councels, all the Doctors ancient and modern;
but this was to fetch water to the Sea.

CHAP. XV.
Que. 15. Whether or no by other valid Arguments from Gods word, the
lawfulness of Synods can be concluded?
HItherto has been six Arguments against Churches independent, and
consequently proving the lawfulness of Synods. Now follows our seventh
Argument.

7. If there be a commandment to tell the Church when an obstinate brother
offends a brother, then must this course also be taken when an obstinate
Church shall offend a Sister-church. But the former is true, Mat 18. Ergo,
Parker de Polit. l. 3. c. 24
so is the latter. This is not mine, but the Argument of Parker, Quid enim
annon cla^si Synodi quaedam species est?
D. Ammes, Professors of Leyden, and of all our Divines, Willet, Whittaker,
Junius, Beza, Am^s Be^lar.
etc. Our brethren say Christ speaks, Mat. 18. of a particular Congregation,
Enciv. to 2. l. ^. c. ^, Pro^ess Leyd. in Synop. di^p. ^9. (...)
and not of many Congregations meeting synodically in their members of
principal note, as Pastors and Elders. 1. Because an offended brother cannot
have a Synod of Elders, and a National Assembly always to complain unto, and
so Christ shall not set down an expedite way to remove scandals betwixt
brother and brother. 2 Christ (say they) is setting down a way, how an
obstinate offender shall be cast out of the Church, where he was an ordinary
hearer of the word, and a compartner with other professors of the holy things
of God, in a particular visible Church. Now these of diverse Congregations
partake not in a Church Communion of these same holy things of God, Word,
Sacraments, and Discipline.

Answ. 1. Christ here sets down a way how all offenses of brethren may be
taken away; for Christ's salve must be as broad and large as the soar, and
excommunication must reach as far as offenses; but offenses are betwixt
Church and Church, betwixt the Grecians and the Hebrews, Acts 6. 1. no less
then betwixt a single brother and a brother.

2. I borrow the Argument and pay it home again. Christ sets down a way
how all scandals in his visible Church may be removed: So teach our brethren,
as an offended brother cannot always have recourse to a National Assembly,
and so Christ's remedy shall be insufficient. If by a Church, Mat. 18. we
understand a Synod, say they; but when the Grecian Church offends the Hebrew
Church, the Hebrew Church cannot complain to the Grecian Church, for the Law
forbids the party to be the Judge; therefore if they understand, Mat. 18.
only a Congregation, excluding all Synods, Christ's remedy of removing scandals
betwixt Sister, and Sister-church, shall be unsufficient; therefore the Grecian
and Hebrews must have recourse, as Act. 6. to a College of Apostles and
Pastors, and that is a Synod.

3. I borrow the other Argument also, and shall pay it again.

These who are consociated and neighboured together in the Acts and Dentees of
visible Church Communion, by rebuking one another, Leviticus 19. 17.
Admonishing, Collosians 3. 16. Exhorting, Hebrews 3. 13. comforting one
another, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 11. and pleading one against another, Hosea 2. 2. and
occasionally communicating one with another in that same Word and Sacrament,
and in eschewing the fellowship of one and the same excommunicate person.

These make up one visible politic Church, that is under a common
Church Government, according to Christ's discipline, which regulateth these acts
of Church Communion of one with another.

But so it is, that Grecians and Hebrews, and sundry particular
sister-Churches, are consociated and neighboured together in the foresaid acts
and dentees of visible Church Communion, etc.

Ergo, diverse sister-Churches so make up one visible politic Church under one
common Church government, according to Christ's discipline, etc.

The proposition is our brethrens, whereby they prove, and that strongly, that
single professors consociated in these acts and dentees of visible Church
communion, make up one visible Church under one common government, Basil.
epist. 10.
and so say the Fathers Basil, Chrysostom.
Chrysostom, Augustine and Athanasius, August.
howbeit in habitation we be separated, Athanas.
yet are we one body, Licet longissime separat^.
and Cyprian will have nothing done in the cause of many Churches, Cypr. l. 1.
epist. 8. nis^ omnes in ^num conveniamu^.
except we all meet in one place.

The assumption for the communion of sundry Churches Parker grants, and the
Scripture is clear, Laodicea and Colosse have a sister-communion in that same
word of God, Col: 4. 16. so Corinth, Macedonia and Galatia in these same acts
of charity to the Saints at Jerusalem, 1 Cor: 16. 1, 2, 3, 4. see also 2 Cor:
8. 1. Rom: 16. 27. Also if any person be excommunicate in one congregation,
also in all the neighbor congregations. 1. Because his sins are bound in
Heaven. 2 He is delivered to Satan, 1 Cor. 5. 4. to all. 3. Christ says he
should be as an Heathen to all, and so is excluded from Church communion to
all. Hence these visible acts of Church communion require a common law and
discipline of Christ to regulate them, seeing they may offend in the excess
and defect one to another, but one common discipline they cannot have, except
they may by authority conveene in one Synod in their principal members. Also
Field, Bilson, Field on the Church. l. 5. c. 30.
Whittaker allege this place for Synods, all say if Pastors have authority
every one within themselves and far more when they are met in a Synod, Bilson
gover. p. 52.
for vis unita fortior, Whittak. de cont. q. 5 c. 3.
united force is stronger.

Our eighth Argument is, 8. Arg.
from the constant practice of the Apostles, if all weighty affairs that
concern equally many particular congregations were managed, not by one single
congregation, but by the joint voices and suffrages of Apostles, Pastors and
selected Brethren of many congregations in the Apostolic Church: Then were
Synods the practice of the Apostles, and not independent congregations, but the
former is true. Ergo, so is the latter. The proposition our brethren grant. I
prove the assumption by an induction. 1. The select Pastors of the Christian
world, and select brethren, Act: 1. did elect and ordain Matthias to be one of
the twelve, because that concerned many particular Churches, the public
treasury of Apostolic Churches was committed to the Apostles, because that
concerned them all, Act. 4. 33, 34. When the Churches of the Grecians, and the
Churches of the Hebrews murmured the one against the other, one common Synod
of the twelve Apostles authoritatively conveened, and ordained with praying and
laying on of hands the seven Deacons, A^to. Walleus loc. (...). p. 893.
Act. 6. 2, 3, 4, 5. and Walleus says, the argument for ordaining Deacons,
that the Pastors might attend the word and prayer, proves also that there were
then ruling Elders. Also Act. 20. 28. there is a Synod of Pastors at Ephesus,
whom Paul warned to take heed to the flock, and Act: 11. 2. Peter gives a
reckning and count of his going in to the Gentiles, before a Synod of Apostles
and Brethren, for it was unpossible that the multitude of believers now grown
so numerous could all meet in one house, and Act. 21. 18. an Assembly of
Apostles and Elders orda^neth Paul to purify himself, a Synod of Elders, 1 Timothy: 4. 14. ordained Timothy.

9. Argument is from the care of Christ Jesus the head of the Church, 9. Arg.
in the end of excommunication. Hence if Christ Jesus take care that one
particular congregation be not leavened, and sowred with the wicked
conversation of one, then far more will he take care that many Churches be
not leavened, and has ordained excommunication for many, as for one; but our
brethren grant he has taken care that one lump leaven not one single
congregation, 1 Cor. 5. 4. etc. I prove the proposition, For Christ's remedy for
remooving of scandals is hence argued to be unperfect, if excommunication do
not remove all offenses, and prevent the leavening of many lumpes; for he that
cares for the part must far more care for a whole Church, and ordain
excommunication of a Church, for the edifying thereof, 1 Cor. 4. 20, 21. 2 Cor.
10. 8. That their spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord, 1 Cor. 5. 4. 5.
and since he took this care for a National Church, Numb. 5. 2, 3, 4, 5. Who
can doubt, but he has care of edifying and saving in the day of the Lord,
Churches of Nations and Provinces under the New Testament, yea and a greater
care, then for saving one single man, seeing the influence of his love is
bounded first upon the body, bride and spouse by order of nature, before it be
bounded upon one finger or toe or any particular member of the body, I mean
one single person. They answer. God has provided other means for whole
Churches then to excommunicate them, for it wants precept, promise and
practice to excommunicate a whole Church, they are to be rebuked, and we must
plead with obstinate Churches, Hos. 2. 2. and if they remain obstinate, we
are to withdraw our fellowship an^ communion from them, and not to acknowledge
them as sister-Churches that is we are to separate from them, but there is no
warrant to excommunicate them.

Answ. 1. I say this is a begging of the question, for we desire a warrant of
Gods Word why sister-Churches may use some power of the keys against
sister-Churches, such as is to rebuke them, plead with them, Hos. 2. 2. and yet
we may not use all power of the keys, even excommunication; now to rebuke and
plead against a Church, to Parker and our brethren is a power of jurisdiction,
and a sort of closing and shutting of Heaven.

2. The Jews did justly excommunicate the Church of the Samaritans, and Christ
allows thereof, John 4. 22. ye worship ye know not what, salvation is of the
Jews, in which words, Christ pronounces the Jews to be the true Church, and
the Samaritans, not to be the true Church.

3. I desire to know what excommunication is, if it be not to deny all
Church Communion with those who were once in our Church, now if this be done by
one Sister-church to another sister-church, it is no excommunication at all,
seeing Christ has not given the power of the keys to one Sister-church over
another, for one particular Church is not set over another in the Lord, but
when the Eldership of many consociated Sister-churches denies Church communion
to one of these consociated Churches having turned obstinate in scandalous
sins, I see not what this is else but excommunication and authoritative
unchurching and ejection of such a Church. Also our brethren plead for the
peoples power in excommunicating, because all and ^very one of the believers
are to eschew the company of the person excommunicated, therefore all and every
one should have hand in excommunicating him, as all Israel and not the Judges
only were actors in putting away the leaven, so reasons Parker M. Best,
Parker. de polit. l. 3. c 4
so also the Separatistes, yea if it be right taken, so also says Beza, P.
Martyr, Calvin, Marlorat: M Best Church plea p. 50.
So Chrysostom, Augustine; for all are to consent to the excommunication of
one who is a member of that visible Church with themselves, Separatist 3.
petit. 8. pos ar. 3 p 6^.
but so it is that all consociated Churches are to eschew the company of an
excommunicated by a single congregation supposed by our brethren to be
independent: Beza an. in 1 Cor. ^. 4.
Because 1. if they admit him to the Lords Supper with them, Martyr. com.
they profane the holy things of God. Calvin in 1 Cor. 5.
2. They annull excommunication supposed by our brethren duly, Marlor.
and clave non errante, Pareus.
inflicted, Chrysostom.
and so they loose on earth kim whom God has bound in Heaven, Augustine.
they hold him for a member of Christ, and a brother whom Christ has delivered
to Satan, and will have to be reputed as a Heathen and a Publican. Ergo, by
this reason all should have hand in excommunicating such a person, but many
Sister-churches consociated together in neighbourly and sisterly
Church Fellowship; as we heard before Col. 4. 16. 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2, 3. 2 Cor. 8.
1. Romans 16. 27.
cannot excommunicate in their own persons being possibly twenty several
congregations. Therefore they must excommunicate in their Elderships
synodically conveened, which is our purpose we intend. It is but a womanly
evasion of the Femall author who differenceth betwixt rejection of an
offending Church and excommunication. K^therin Childley against M. Ed, wards,
p. 18.
We may reject (says she) an offending Church, but not excommunicate: Saul
rejected God, did he therefore excommunicate God? ^or this is but a suting of
the question, it is not simple rejection of an obstinate Church that we plead
for, but an authoritative unchurching and not acknowledging of an obstinate
Church to be any more a Church with whom we can communicate in the holy things
of God, and this is more then simple rejection, or refusing to obey, as Saul is
said to reject God. I grant we seldom find the practice of excommunicating
Churches in the New Testament, because so long as a number of believers are in
a Church, God leaves them not all to be involved in one scandalous gross
sin, therefore the presbytery is to censure particular persons and not the
whole Church, therefore when we separated from Rome, which was an authoritative
declaration that Rome is now no longer a Spouse of Christ, but a strumpet, we
did not separate from the faithful lurking amongst them.

10. Argument. 10. Ar.
That government is not from Christ that is deficient in the means of
propagation of the Gospel to Nations and congregations that want the Gospel.

But the government by independent congregations is such. The proposition is
clear, 1. Because Christ's keys are perfect and opens all locks. 2. Our
Divines hence prove Christ a perfect Mediator, King, Priest and Prophet;
because he perfectly cures our threefold misery.

I prove the assumption, by the doctrine of independency. Pastors and Doctors
may not preach the Gospel without the bounds of their own congregation,
neither can they exercise any pastoral acts else where, says the English
Puritanisme and M. Best, English Puritanis. c 2. at 6 p. 5.
and so Pastors and Doctors have now, since Apostles are out of the world, ^
Best. Churches plea, arg. 8. p. 73, 74
and the Churches are planted, no authority pastoral to preach the Gospel to
those who sit in the region, and shadow of death, and if they preach the
Gospel to those who are not of their congregation. 1. They do it as private
men, not as Pastors. 2. They have no pastourall authority or calling from
Jesus Christ, and his Church so to do. But certainly Papists, as Bellarmine,
Bellar. de pontis l. 1 c. 9.
Suarez, Becanus, Vasquez, Gregor. de Valentia seem to say better, Suarez de
tripl. vi^t. disp. 18. sec. 1. n. 5.
who will have the authoritative power of sending Pastors to Nations, who want
the Gospel, Becan. Vasquez. Greg. Valen.
to be in the Pope, whom they conceive to be an universal Pastor to care for
the whole Churches, so Christ has left no pastoral authority on Earth in
Pastors and Doctors to make those the Churches of Christ, and to translate them
to the kingdom of grace, who are yet carried away with dumb Idols, and howbeit
the Apostles and their universal commission ordinary to preach the Gospel to
all, their immediate calling, their extraordinary gifts be now out of the
world, yet it is unbeseeming the care of Christ, that pastoral authority
should be so confined at home, and imprisoned within the lists of every
particular Church, consisting possibly of six or ten believers only, that the
care for many Churches, 2 Cor. 11. 28. The pastoral care to gain Jew and
Gentile, those that are within and without, to be made all things to all men to
save some, should be now in no pastors on earth, but dead with the Apostles, as
if these places, 1 Cor. 10. 32. 1 Cor. 9. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Romans 1. 14, 15.
Romans 9. 2, 3. did not press to all Ministers of Christ, the extending of their
pastoral vigilance to the feeding and governing of all the Churches in their
bounds that makes up one visible politic body, communicating one with another
in the acts of Church Communion. Hence it must follow, 1. When the Grecian
Church shall be wronged by the Hebrew Church, that the pastors may not
synodically meet, and by joint authority remove the offenses betwixt Church and
Church, as the Apostles did, Act. 6. 2. It follows that all the meetings and
convention of the Apostles and Pastors, to take care authoritatively for the
Churches, as Act. 1. Act. 4 35. Act. 6. 2, 3, 4. Act. 11. 1. Act. 8. 14. Act.
14. 1, 2, 3, Act. 15. 6. Act. 21. 18, 19, 20, etc. Act. 20. 18. Act. 14 23. 1 Timothy 4. 14. were all meetings of Apostles, extraordinary, temporary, and Synods
of Apostles as Apostles, and not meetings of pastors as pastors to join their
authority in one for the governing of many Churches. 3. It follows that
Pastors and Elders and Doctors may now no more lawfully meet and join their
authority in one for the feeding of the flock, then they may take on them to
work miracles, speak with tongues, and as Apostles go up and down the earth
and preach to all the world the Gospel. O that our Lord would be pleased to
reveal his mind to our dear Brethren in this point of truth. For what be
extraordinary and temporary in the conjoined authority and pastoral care of
the Apostles for all the Churches of the world, I see not, neither is it in
reason imaginable, which does not in conscience oblige Pastors, Doctors and
Elders in the Church of Scotland, to conjoyne their authority in one Synodicall
power for all the Churches of Scotland, O says our Brethren, there should be
too many masters, commanders and Lords over the free and independent visible
Churches of Christ.

I answer, seeing all these Pastors and Elders in a national Synod, are no
other way over all the Churches of Scotland, then the particular Eldership in a
particular congregation is over the believers, there be no more too many Lords
and Masters over the whole Churches collectively united in a general Synod,
then there be too many Lords over the particular congregations. For 1. in both
meetings the believers choose their own guides and commanders that are over
them. 2. Nothing is done in either a National or in a congregationall Synod
without the tacit consent of believers. 3. In both, it is free for believers
to refuse and not receive, what is decreed contrary to Gods Word, See Zipperus,
Zipper. de polit. l. 3. c 4.
and so there is no dominion here, but what you find, Heb. 13. 17. 1 ^hess. 5.
14, 15. Math. 18. 17, 18. Nay, our brethren will have pastors so far
strangers to all congregations, save only to their own, that M. Davenport and
Mr. Best says to the Pastors and Churches other Churches are without, and
Pastors have nothing to do to judge them, and they allege for this, 1 Cor.
5. 12. but by these that are (without) Paul means not these who were not of
the congregation of Corinth, but he means Infidels and Heathen as in other
Scriptures, Col. 5. 4.
for Paul judged and excommunicated Hymenaeus and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1. 20. who
were without the Church of Corinth, and if this exposition, stand Pastors can
extend no Church censure toward these who are of other congregations, neither
can they rebuke nor admonish them as Christians, for these are Acts of
Church Censures, as our brethren teach.

Our eleventh Argument is from the light of sanctified reason; for sanctisied
reason teaches that the stronger authority of the greater politic body of
Christ should help the parts of the body that are weaker, as 1 Cor. 12. The
whole body suffers when one member suffers, and so the whole body helps
the weaker, and less honorable member, 1 Cor. 12. v. 23, 26. So universal
nature contendeth for the safety of particular nature, and helps it;
therefore the greater body and National Church is to communicate its authority
for the good of a particular Congregation, which is a part thereof: But the
doctrine of independency makes every Congregation an independent and complete
body within it self, needing no authority to govern it, higher then its own
authority, as if it were an independent whole Church, and no part of a greater
visible Church: But suppose the greatest part of Corinth deny the resurrection,
as often the worst are manyest, then I ask, Cant. 2. 15.
whom to does the Lord speak? Take us the little foxes that spoil the vines:
He speaks either to greater Synods, which we say, that the greater body may
help a part, and save a little daughter of Sion: Or to the soundest part of the
Congregation; but they are weakest and fewest, and shall the greater body look
and see a member perish, and not help? Let them help (say our brethren) with
advise and counsel, but not with command and authority.

I answer, Take us the little foxes, is an act of authoritative and
disciplinary taking enjoined to the Church.

2. Our Argument is drawn from the greater authority in the politic body to
the lesser; brotherly advise is not authority. Hence authority as authority by
this means shall not help the weaker parts of the body, contrary to that which
we have at length commanded, 1 Cor. 12. Neither do some reply well* that he
speaks, 1 Cor. 12. of Christ's invisible body, because it is said, v. 13. For by
one spirit we are all baptized into one body, A manuscript for independent
Churches, c, 1. p. 12
whether we be Jews or Gentiles. Jews and Gentiles (says he) make not a
visible Church, but an invisible Catholic Church.

I answer 1. What can hinder under the New Testament, Paul a Jew to make a
visible Church with the Ephesians who are Gentiles?

2. That he speaks of a visible politic body is clear while he alleges,
The eye exercises Pastoral acts of seeing for the foot, and that the ear
hears for the whole body, and when one member suffers all suffer, which is
principally true of a politic visible body: For we are not baptized in one
body visible, with those preachers who are long ago dead, who never preached
for the good of us who now believe in Christ, because we never heard them
preach, and so they are not eyes seeing for us.

Our twelfth Argument is from the practices of the Jewish Church in a moral
duty. Arg. 12.


If Christ has left the Churches of a whole Nation in no worse case then the
National Church of the Jews were in, for their public giving of thanks, for
the turning away of Gods wrath, when the Land is defiled with blood and other
National transgressions, for the bringing back the Ark of God, for the
renewing a National Covenant and Oath with God in case of universal Apostasy
from God and true Religion. Then has Christ ordained to Churches in the New
Testament National Assemblies, which authoritatively only can reach these
ends and effects.

But Christ has left the Churches of a whole Nation in no worse case then the
National Church of the Jews was in, for reaching the foresaid ends and
effects, Ergo, etc.

I have to prove 1. That the Jews had their solemn Assemblies for these ends.
2. That these Assemblies were moral, and so concern us. 3. That these ends
cannot be attained without National Assemblies, which being done, I trust the
Argument shall stand strong.

For the first I may prove both in the Jewish, and after their example in the
Christian Church, Deuteronomy. 29. 20. All Israel were convened to enter in Covenant
with the Lord. So Joshuah for the same end assembled all the Tribes of Israel,
Josh. 24 1. their Heads, Judges and Officers. And Samuel, 1 Samuel 12. gathered
all Israel to renew their repentance for their sin in asking a King. So did
Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 29. 4. in an universal Apostasy. And Josiah, 2 Chronicles, 34.
29. And Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15. 9. gathered all Judah and Benjamin, and they swear a
Covenant to the Lord. And Ahab, 1 King. 22. gathered four hundred Prophets to
ask counsel about going to war against Ramoth Gilead. And Herod, Mat. 2. 3.
when Christ was borne. Julius ^. Bull, anno 1551. Theol. l. 1. c 7. Russin l.
10. c ^. Socra^ Irip. hi^^. l. 1. c. ult.
So Solomon did when the Temple was consecrated, and David assembled them to
bring the Arc to it is place. The examples of these Kings did godly Emperors
follow and convened general Councels, Eusebius. de vit. Con. l. ^. c. 6.
what ever Julius 3. usurp in his Bull, ann. 1551. December. 15. Constantine
convened the Council of Nice, Theod. l. 5. c. 6.
as says Theodoret, Sec. l. 7. c 39.
Ruffin, Socrates and Eusebius. Theodosius called the 2. general Council at
Constantinople, Euag l. 1. c. 9.
as Theodoret says: Niceph. l. 14* c. 34.
And Theodosius gathered the third general Council at Ephesus, Sozo^en. l. 3.
c. 9.
as Socrates and Euagrius says. Niceph. l. 17. c. ^7.
Valentine and Martian called the Council of Chalcedo^, Martin Poli^us in
Constant, 4.
and the Council of Sardis in Illyrium, as Sozomen says: And Justinian called
the fifth general Council at Constantinople, as Nicephorus says. Constantine
the 4. gathered the sixth general Council at Constantinople, as says
Martinus Polonus. I might add many others, but these may suffice. I prove the
second particular, that convening of general Councels in the Jewish Church was
moral: For 1. an oath and vow to keep Gods Commandments is a part of the
third Commandment, according to that Psalm 119. v. 106. I have sworn, and I
will perform, that I will keep thy righteous judgments, and the maintenance
of the true Religion in a Land is obligatory for ever: For Iud. v. 3. we are
willed earnestly to contend for the faith once delivered to the Saints; and it
is obedience to the third Commandment, to avow God and his Son Christ before
men, Mat. 10. 32. And so does Moses commend it in Israel, Deuteronomy. 26. 17. Thou
have avouched. the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and
to keep his statutes, and his Commandments, etc. Now what ever does lay a bond
morally binding on man, does also morally bind a whole Nation. 2. It is most
certain that blood defiled the land of Israel morally, as it was a Land, and
not as the holy Land only, Number. 35. 33. Hos. 4 1, 2, 3. 1. Because it is a
sin against the Law of Nature, for man is made according to Gods Image, Genesis
9. 6. (2.) Because blood defiles the Land under the New Testament, as in the
Jewish Church; for if this were not, the Magistrate had no warrant from Number.
33. to use the sword against the murderer, which is that very same that is
taught by Socinians, Arminians, E^iscop. disp. 13. these. 18. 19
and Anabaptists. So teaches Episcopius, Joan Geisteran, Joan Ge^^eran. (...)
mag. (...) Sla^us aper. dec^^ 53.
and Henry Slatius, so also Socinus, the Chatechise of Raccovia deny that the
Magistrate now under the Messiah his kingdom should shed the blood of any
murderer or malefactor: (...) in d^sens. ver. sentent de mag polit. pa^. 2. f
^32, 235
Yea if it be known (says Ostorodius) that a man cannot be a Magistrate
without shedding of blood, Cat. chapter R^^ov de Proc. Christi. c. ^. p. 146
and war, It is not lawful for him to be a Magistrate, quia praecepta Christi
non permittunt ulli homini adimere vitam. (...) Institut. Relig c ^8
So also says Smalcius, therefore needforce these precepts anent shedding of
blood are not judicial. ^ma^c disp 7 de (...) oper. contr. Frantz.
but moral, seeing the Magistrate carries the sword, as the Minister of God
to execute judgment upon the evil doer, Romans 13. 4 which being undenyably
true, a National Church must have means allowed of Christ to purge the land
of blood, Sodomy, and other National sins, for the which Canaan spewed out
seven great Nations. Also, Because of swearing the land shall mourn, Ier. 23.
10. And if the Arc be taken away, as it was out of his place, 1 Chronicles. 13. The
Land is in a hard case, we see no means but an Assembly of the National
Church, that by authority of the Assembly all may be moved to renew their
Covenant with God, to repent, and to bring ^acke again the Gospel; as David
conveened all Israel, 1 Chronicles. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4. to bring back the Arc from
^ireath-jearim: For the Gospels departure and universal Apostasy (when we are
as Israel, without the true God, and a teaching Priest, as 2 Chronicles. 15. and
withal in great trouble) is a case that concerns not a particular
Congregation only, but the whole Land; and therefore the whole Church of the
Nation must be assembled in their heads and leaders to turn away Gods wrath,
and bring back the glory that is departed from the La^d by renewing our
Covenant with God. Lastly, the whole host and armies of writers, ancient and
modern, may be alleged for the lawfulness of Synods, as witnesses the
Tomes of the Councels general and Provincial.

CHAP. XVI.
Whether or no it can be demonstrated from Gods Word, that all particular
Congregations have of, and within themselves full power of Church Discipline
without any subjection to Presbyteries, Synods, or higher Assemblies?
VEry reverend and holy men hold the affirmative part of this question, M. B^st
Church plea ^ect. 7. at. 1. and 4. page 68. Parker de Polit. l 3. c. 4.
and deny all subj^ction of Congregations to Presbyteries and Assemblies. Their
first Argument is,

If Churches planted by the Apostles, such as Corinth, have power within
themselves to exercise Church Discipline, as to rebuke, excommunicate, loose
and relaxe from excommunication: Then ought not particular Congregations now to
stand under any other Ecclesiastical authority out of themselves. But the
former is true, 1 Cor. 5. 2, 3. So M. Best, Parker, the Separatists, Robinson,
Authors of Presb. govern. examined, Separat. 3 pet. pos 8 a^, 3.
prove that all believers in Corinth had voice in excommunication. R. bi^s
against Bernard, p. 70.
1. They amongst whom the fornicator was, Pres^, govern. examined, ann. 16^^.
p. 12, 13.
they who were puffed up, and sorrowed not that he was not cut off, they were
to be gathered together in one, and to judge and excommunicate, v. 12. but the
fornicator was not amongst the Elders only, but amongst all the believers,
neither were the Elders only pussed up, nor did they only not sorrow that the
incestuous man was not cut off, but the bel^evers also were puffed up, and did
not sorrow that he was not cut ^ff, Ergo, all the believers had voices in
judging and excommunicating. 2. Of old not the Levites only were to purge out
the leaven, but all Israel also, Ergo; here not the Elders only are to purge
out this leaven. 3. Paul writes not to the Elders only, not to be mixed with
the fornicators, but to all the faithful. 4. The faithful, and not the Elders
only were to forgive, 2 Cor. 2.

Answ. I will first answer these reasons, and withal show how the people had
hand in excommunication, and might prove that there was a Presbytery of many
Pastors at Corinth, and not a single Congregation of one Pastor, and some few
Elders and believers, who did excommunicate. I retort these Arguments: These
with whom the fornicator did converse, and so leavened them, these who were
pus^ed up, and sorrowed not at the man's fall, and at his not being cut off by
excommunication, these were judicially to excommunicate with the Elders: But
the fornicator conversed amongst believing women and children, and did leaven
them, believing women and children were puffed up and sorrowed not, Ergo,
Believing women and children did judicially excommunicate, but the conclusion
is foul, and against the Argumentators, Ergo, so must some of the premises be
foul and false, but the assumption is most true; therefore their major
proposition must be false; therefore they must first acknowledge a
representative Church with us, and that men only did judicially excommunicate,
and not all the faithful, except they make women ordinary Judges usurping the
authority over men. Then the number of these who were puffed up, and sorrowed
not at his fall, etc. must be more then the number of the persons who should
judicially excommunicate.

2. The authors of Presbyteriall govern. Page 23.
exam. say, Elders are principally to judge, and to be leaders and first actors
in excommunicating, and people are to follow in the second room and assent.
Ant. Walleus loc. com. p. 1012.
So say our Divines, Walleus, Bucan. loc. com. 44. q 13.
Bucanus, Rollocus, Beza. Therefore Paul cannot rebuke private believers,
Rolloc. com. in 2 These. 3.
because they did not excommunicate judicially in the first room; for then
Paul should have rebuked the Elders and leaders for not excommunicating in the
order answerable to their place and power, Beza an. may, in 1 Cor. 5. 4.
and because they did not judicially and authoritatively lead, and go before
as first actors and prime moderators in the judicial act of delivering of the
man to Satan, and so Paul cannot in reason rebuke all the faithful amongst
whom the scandalous man did converse, and who were pus^ed up, and sorrowed not
at the man's fall, because they did not excommunicate judicially, at most, they
can be rebuked only for not excommunicating in the second room, and in that
orderly and subordinate way suitable to their place and power.

3. I see no foot-step of any tolerable ground in the Text, why it should be
alleged that all the faithful men coming to age (to speak nothing of
believing women and children) are rebuked for not excommunicating judicially
the fornicator; but rather the contrary, that the faithful out of office were
not to excommunicate judicially: For applying these words as a reproof to
believing men, v. 2. And ye are pu^fed up, and have not rather sorrowed, that
(...), to the end that he that has done this deed, (...), may be taken from
amongst you. He uses the passive verb, not the active, whereby it appears
that the believers were patients rather, then agents in the not judicial and
authoritative taking away of the man from amongst them, and that their fault
was that they mo^ned not to God for the man's fall, and the remiss negligence
of the Elders, by whose authority he might have been authoritatively delivered
to Satan. Pateus com. ib. O^lvin.
Pareus says, that he blames the believers security; (...). Jactatis vos
incu^pali^es esse. Iu^u^ Eccl. l. 2. c. 1, and 9. n. 14.
Calvin, their not being humbled at the fall, and Cajetan, they boasted that
the fornicator was the sinner, not they.

4. That great Divine Junius does excellently observe that Paul joins
himself as an extraordinary Elder with the ordinary Eldership of Corinth, v.
4. When you are gathered together with my spirit: For, as I observed before,
Paul requires not only that they be gathered together in the name of Christ,
which is required in all meetings for Gods worship in Prayers, Word and
Sacraments; but also here he requires that they meet (says he) with my
spirit, that is, with my Presbyteriall power of the keys, and, 1 Cor. 4. 21.
with the authority which the Lord has given us for edification, 2 Cor. 10. 8.
as I am an Elder. So said the Prophet to Gehazi, 2 King. 5. 26. went not my
spirit with thee, that is, my Prophetical power, Col. 2. 5. For though I be
absent in the ^lesh, yet I am present in spirit. Now the believers out of
office did not convene in this meeting, endued with Paul's Ministerial and
Pastoral spirit; for single believers receive not Ministerial spirit from
God, neither is such a spirit promised to them: Give an instance in Scripture
of this promise, and we shall lose this cause; but this spirit for doctrine and
discipline so given to Pastors, 1 Cor. 4. 21. 2 Cor. 10. 8. Col. 4. 17. 2 Cor.
4. 1. 2 Cor. 5. 18. 1 Cor. 12 28, 29. v. 17. therefore the coming together with
Paul's spirit, that is, with his ministerial power of the keys, as an Elder,
must be restrained to the Eldership of Corinth, and cannot be applied to single
believers, men, women and children, who yet were puffed up and sorrowed not, v
2. therefore this is not a gathering together of an independent Congregation of
believers, men and women meeting with Paul's spirit, and his presbyteriall power
of the keys in an authoritative and judicial way to excommunicate, but it
must be a gathering together of these who had such a spirit and power pastoral
and ministerial, as Paul had. I deny not but the faithful conveened, or were
to conveene in this meeting with the Eldership, for praying and hearing the
word preached, which must be conjoined with excommunication, but the meeting is
denominated pastoral and presbyteriall with spiritual power from the special
intended end in that act, which was authoritatively to deliver the fornicatour
to Satan, V^^^ in exp^ Ca^e. de excom.
and Vrsine thinks not without reason that the man was excommunicated, and
there being a space interveening betwixt Paul's writing of the first, and his
second Epistle to the Corinthians, that Paul, 2 Cor. 2. writes for relaxing
him from the sentence of excommunication. Also Paul when he says, (...), I
have already judged as present, means not a popular or private judging, as we
say, the Physician judges of the disease by the pulse, Marsil. pata. p dict 1
c. 2.
and the Geometer judges of figures, as Marsilius speaks, but understands
a joint authoritive judging with the Eldership, otherwise he needed not to
add (but present in spirit, as if I were present, have already judged) for
whither he had been absent or present, he might have given his private mind
of the due demerit of so scandalous a sin.

5. The maine thing that our brethren rest much on, is that one command of
delivering to Satan, v. 4. and purging out the old leaven, v. 7. and the word
of judging that Paul takes to himself, v. 4. is given, v. 12. to all
believers, and to all that he writes unto; but Paul would not say they command
the believers to do that which they had no authority and power from Christ to
do, if all believers had not power judicially to excommunicate. But I answer,
beside that this is to bring in a popular government in Gods house; they
consider not that they presuppose as granted, what we justly deny, that all and
every verse of this chapter is spoken jointly and equally to all both Elders
and people, which cannot in reason be said, as in other parts of the epistle,
where sometimes he speaks of all, as 1 Cor. 1. 1, 4, 5. both pastors and
people, sometimes of the people, 1 Cor. 1. 12. 1 Cor. 4. 1. sometimes of
teachers only, 1 Cor. 3. 12. 1 Cor. 4. 2. 2. One and the same word (...), to
purge out the leaven, v. 7. applied to both Elders and believers have diverse
meanings, according as it is applied to diverse subjects, so that the Elders did
excommunicate, and purge out one way, that is authoritatively and with Paul's
spirit, and ministerial power; I mean that same power in kind and speech
that was in Paul was in the Elders, for Paul was no Prelate above other
pastors, and the people did purge out the leaven another way, by a popular
consenting that he should be excommunicate, and this is well grounded on
Scripture, see Acts 4. 27, 28. Herod, Pilate, Gentiles and Jews crucified
Christ; now it is certain they did not cruci^ie him one and the same way,
Pilate judicially, the people of the Jews in a popular way of asking and
consenting crucified him, so 1 Samuel 12. 18. All the people greatly feared the
Lord, and Samuel; that same verb (...) jara, to fear, expresses both the
peoples fearing of God, which is a religious fear commanded in the first
Commandment, and due to God only, and the peoples fearing of Samuel, which
civil reverence given to Samuel as to a Prophet, is a far inferior fear,
and commanded in the ^ift Commandment, so Prove. 24. 21. My son fear the
Lord and the King, 1 Chro. 29. 20. And the people worshipped Jehovah and the
King, the verb is (...) Shachah, which signifies to bow and incline the body
religiously, but the meaning cannot be, that the people gave one and the same
religious worship to God and the King, for that should be idolatry: So howbeit
Elders and believers were rebuked for not excommunicating, and both commanded
to excommunicate and purge out the leaven, it will never follow that both has
one and the same judicial power to excommunicate, but every one should purge
out the leaven, according to their place and power; and Israel is commanded to
put out the leper; yet the Priest only put him out judicially, and Israel is
commanded to put to death the false Prophet, and so to put away evil out of
the midst of them, Deuteronomy. 13. 5. and yet the Judge did put away evil judicially
and authoritatively, and the people as executioners stoning him to death, v. 9,
10. and what I say of excommunicating, that same is said of the authoritative
pardoning of the fornicatour, 2 Cor. 2. for (...), Vrs^^t. q. 85. p. 490, art.
3.
as Vrsine observes, is by authority to confirm their love to him, as Gal. 3.
15. the testament is confirmed, (...), and so does Kemnitius, Calvin and
Bullinger Kemnitius exam, conc. Trid. de indulg. par. ^. p. ^9. Calvin con^,
ib. Bulling.
take the word.

It is also more then evident that the Church of Corinth was not a congregation
of believers only, or a congregation with one pastor only, and so not an
independent congregation, for there was at Corinth a college of pastors and so
a presbytery of Elders, Doctors, teachers and Prophets; for 1. Paul was but a
founder of this Church, there were many others that built upon the foundation
Christ Jesus, and some built gold and silver, that is good and sound Doctrine,
some hay and stubble, 1 Cor. 3, 11, 12, 13.
1 Cor. 4. 6. And these things, Brethren, I have in a figure trans-ferred to my
self, and to Apollo for your sakes, that ye might learn in us, not to think
of men above that which is (written:) whence I collect, howbeit Paul, and
Apollo and Cephas, were not constantly resident teachers at Corinth, yet there
were other pastors there, of whom Paul and Apollo were named as figures, that
with the less envy he might rebuke them, and amongst these many teachers, some
said this is the best preacher, others said nay, but another preacher likes my
ear better; and so there has been so many choice pastors there, as the
Proverb was true amongst them, Wealth makes wit to waver, which Paul sharply
rebukes as a schism, 1 Cor. 1. 12, 13. 1 Cor: 3. 4, 5. So Paul says, Though
ye have ten thousand and instructors, yet have ye not many ^athers, 1 Co^: 4.
15. Then they had amongst them many teachers: And it is 2. clear from 1 Cor.
12. 14, 15, 16, 17, 28, 29, 30. that there were amongst them Apostles,
Prophets, Doctors, Governments, or ruling Elders, and that this fault was
amongst them, that the higher contemned the lower, which is, as if the eye
should say, I have no need of the hand, and that they were not content of that
place in Christ's body, while as they would all be pastors, and all eyes, and
so, where then were the hearing, v. 17. and to these especially Paul directed
his re^uke, 1 Cor. 5. because of their neglect of discipline against scandalous
persons, not excluding the multitude of believers, who also in their kind
deserved to be rebuked. 3. We may see 1 Cor. 14. There was amongst them a good
number of Prophets, who both propheeyed two or three, after other, by co^ ^e,
and who also by the power of the keys did pu^lickly judge of true and false
doctrine, v. 29. which is indeed our presbytery. See v. 1, 2, 3. v. 12, 13. v.
24, 25, 26. so that it is a wonder to me that any learned men should think that
the Church of Corinth was one single and independent congregation, and that
they met all in one house, where ^. the Lord had much people, 2. where we are
not to think in such a plentiful harvest of Christ, that so many pastors and
teachers, and so many Apostles and Prophets, as there were there, as you may
gather from 1 Cor. 14. 24, 31, 32. and so many speaking with diverse tongues, so
many who wrought miracles, so many who had the gift of discerning, ver. 26, 27.
that all these were employed to edify one single congregation, who were all
ordinary worshippers of God within the walls of one house, 4. We see how the
false Apostles and teachers labored to make Paul a despised Apostle amongst
them, as is clear in the 2 epist. chapter 10. chapter 11. chapter 12. and so their meeting
together, 1 Cor. 5. 1 Cor. 11. 1 Cor. 14. must be expounded of their meeting
distributively, not collectively, M. Rolins^ against M. Yates, p. 28. Beza a^.
in 1 Cor. 12.
as though all met in one house; and suppose that the pains of so numerous a
company of Prophets should do nothing, but feed one single congregation which
meet all in one house, Calvin. Pareus com. in ^ 1 Cor. 12.
yet there was here a College of many Pastors, Prophets, Doctors and Elders,
who have power of excommunication, so faith Robinson, that there were many
Doctors and Teachers in this Church, and proves it well from 1 Co. 12. for
which, see what our own Divines say, as Calvin, Beza, Pareus, Bulling. Martyr.
Pelican. Bulling. Martyr. Pelican. Pomera. com. in 1 Cor. 14.
Pomeran. Chryso. Theoph. Oec^men. Ambros.
So also Chrysostom. Theoph. Oecumen. Ambros. Lyra. Caietan. So I think this
place thus discussed is much against independent Churches, Lyram 1. Cor. 14.
Caiet^.
and for the presbyteries power.

They object 2. Object. 2.
Act. 14. 2. Then appointed they Elders by the peoples consent in every Church.
Ergo, Every Congregation has power to choose their own Pastors and Elders.

Answ. 1. Paul and Barnabas the Apostles of Christ chose Elders in every
Church, with the peoples consent. Ergo, a congregation wanting pastors who
ordains Elders, can and may of themselves ordain Pastors and Elders. What a
weak consequence is this? Pastors in an Apostolic Church ordained pastors.
Ergo, the multitude have power to ordain Pastors. I rather infer the
contrary. Ergo, there are no congregations of believers independent, who have
power to ordain Pastors without a College of Pastors, Caietan. in Act. 14.
23.
and observe (says Caietan) on that place, Vasquez in 3. par. Thom. tom. 3
disp. 24 ^ c. 5.
That the fasting and prayers of the Apostles were at the Ordination of
Presbyteries.

2. Suppose (...) were applied to the people, Iun. de cloric. c. 7. n 61.
I see not what can in reason be said against Vasquez, T^len. disp 25 de voc.
min these. 15, 16.
who says, it will follow only they were created by the consent of the people,
Calvin. com^b. Beza. in may ib. Bulling. ib.
and a man more to be respected then Vasquez, Fran. Iunius says, that lifting
up of the hands may well be meant of Paul and Barnabas their hands. See also
Tilen, Calvin, Beza and Bullinger. Ordinary Election (says he) is from this
commended, and this form of rite of lifting up of the hands was borrowed from
the Grecians, who gave suffrages with lifted up hands. However the peoples free
election is hence authorized, which form was used in Cyprians time, Cyprian l.
1. epist. 4. Bellar.
Quando ipsa (plebs) maxim habeat potestatem, Theod, l. 1. c. 9.
vel eligendi dignos sacerdotes, vel indignos recusandi, quod and ipsum videmus
de divina authoritate descendere, ut sacerdos plebe present sub omnium oculis
deligatur, and dignus, atque idoneus publico iudicio ac testimonio comprobetur.
It is naught that Bellarmine says, they had not jus eligendi, power of
choosing, but jus ferendi testimonium devita ac moribus, power to give
testimony of the life and conversation of the pastors chosen, but good man he
sees not that this is a power of Election, by Cyprians testimony, and no power
of choosing, which is a contradiction, and so says Theodoret, avouching this
to be the mind of the Council of Nice in an Epistle to the Bishops of
Alexandria, Council Nice. epist. ad episc. Alexand. Council. Constantin^. Greg
^x. i^ Missana de electione. Kran^zius l 8. Metrop. c. 3.
and the first general Council at Constantinople. Only from the time of
Frederick the ij. who died, ann. 1300. were the people excluded from the power
of choosing Pastors and Elders, Vasquez. in 3. Tho. tom. 3. disp. 244 c. 5. n.
55.
and this was the deed of Gregory the ix. as Krantzius reports. Vasquez
defends Illyricus in this, whom Bellarmine refuteth, Radevicus de gest.
F^^de, 1* c. 50.
It is true some say the election of Alexander the iij. which was four hundred
years before, was made by the Cardinals only, without the peoples consent: But
1. What may the Antichrist not d^? his deed is not law. 2. Who can believe such
a dreamer as Radevicus, Platinai^ decret. elect. Greg^r. 7 Chrysostom. de
sacerdot. l. 3. sol. 14.
who alleges this. Platine (I grant) says, that Gregory the 7. was chosen
500. years before, by the Cardinals only: But to these I add Gregory was a
lawless man, Leo epist. 89. ad episcop. per V^ennensem provinc. Gregor. Mag
epist. l 2 c. 69.
and from lawless facts without the authority of Scriptures and Synods no
lawful election, without the consent of the people, can be concluded. But what
can be said against Chrysostom. Leo and Gregor. Magn. and many clear testimonies
for us, Gra^ian, did. 32, 34 (...), 63.
which are to be seen in Gratian. all affirming that the ancient Church
required the consent of the people to the ordination of Elders, but all these
expressly speak of popular cognition of the good parts, gifts and holiness of
the chosen Elders, and do still ascribe authoritative Ordination of Elders to
the presbytery of Elders, as all Ancients with one pen affirm.

They object from Col. 2. 4. Object. 3.
That the Church of Colosse had order, and so discipline within themselves,
Ergo, Colosse was an independent Church. And that same they allege of the
Church of Thessalonica, which had the power of Excommunication within
themselves, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 6.

Answ. Seeing Epaphras, Col. 1. 7. and Archippus, Col. 4. 17. and others were
their pastors at Colosse, it is no marvel that they had discipline within
themselves, but what then? therefore they had discipline independently, the
Congregation not standing under subjection to the Presbiterie, it follows no
ways.

2. They had discipline within themselves, not being compassed with
sister-Churches in a Christian consociation, it will not follow therefore
Churches conf^ciated with other Churches. 2. Churches in case of aberration. 3.
Churches in points of discipline that concerns many Churches. 4. In the case
of difficulties that cannot be expedited and determined by the particular
Churches, it will not (I say) follow, that they have power of discipline
independently, and without subordination to superior judicatures.

3. The conclusion to be proved is, that one pastor with some ruling Elders and
believers is the most supreme ministerial Church, Syrus ^inistror^^
periphrasis. Beza. ib. Erasm. Calvin. Bulling. Marlorat. Su^^vius. Brightman.
Scultetu^.
subordinate to none other Church assemblies now in Thessalonica, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
12, 13. there were many pastors who warned and admonished them. The Syrian
says (who stand before your face to teach you) Beza says they were teachers:
so Erasmus, Calvin, Bullinger, so he styles the pastors: so Marlorat, Sutlu.
Brightman, Scultetus.

4. They object, Object. 4.
The seven Churches of Asia are comm^nded, or rebuk^d by Christ for exercising
or omitting discipline, every candle stick stood by it self, and held forth
her own light, if they had had dependency one upon another, one message would
have served them all; but only Thyat^ra is charged for sufferin^ J^zabell to
teach, if they were one Church, the whole would have been gulty of the sins
of the part, the whole being negligent to disciplinate the part, but every
Church is rebuked for it is own fault, Ergo, every one was independent within it
self. So M. Best, Author of Presb. gover. exam. and the femall doctrix
Childley. M. Best. Pr^sb gov exam* Kath. Childley, p. 19


Answ. The first of these seven, to wit, Ephesus was not a particular
congregation, but had a presbytery of Elders in it, Act. 20. 17, 36. Paul
prayed with them all; this is not said in the word, but of a reasonable good
number of persons; Brightman. Apoc. c. 2.
Brightman under the name of an Angel, Bulling. ib. Didoclav. 11. alta Damasc.
p. 132, 133, 135.
he writes to a college of Angels or Pastors. Bullinger he writes to many
Pastors. Didoclav. proves by good arguments against Downam his Angell-Prelate
that he writes to a college of Angels in every Church. August. hom. 2. in
Apoc prapositis eccl^siaram.
Augustine he speaks to the Rulers; so says Gregor. Magnus, Gregor. mor. in
Job l. 34. c. 4.
Primasius, Beda, Haymo, Fulk, Perkins, Fox: neither has one single pastor the
power of the keys, Primasius. Beda. Haymo. Fulk against Rh^mest. Rev. 1. 20.
Perkins. Fox.
but at the second hand, the beleivers have it as the prime ministerial
fountain of all Church discipline, and so they by our brethrens learning,
should have bin principally rebuked.

2. Also Asia was of the Roman Empire, and contained Phrygia, Mysia, Caria,
Lydi^, Troas and Thessalonica, and every one of these must be proved to be
single congregations, and suppose they were, they have many pastors in them, as
Ephesus had, they had power of discipline in all points that concerned
themselves, but in things common to all, they had it not, but in dependence,
and what? howbeit Synods could not so conveniently be had under the persecuting
Domitian, no absurdity will follow, discipline may be exercised without
provincial Synods.

3. It is a weak ground, Every candlestick stood by is self, and and held
forth it is own light: For the light of the Candlestick is a preaching Pastor
shining in light of holy Doctrine: We dispute not about independency of
preaching Ministers in the act of preaching; but about independency of Churches
in the acts of Church Discipline; And so this is a weak ground (I say) for
independent Churches; yea neither is the Pastor in the act of Pastoral shining
in sound Doctrine independent; for our brethren teach that private persons by
the power of the keys ordain him, call him to office, censure and depose, and
excommunicate him, if nee^ require, and this is no small dependency.

4. It is no less loose and weak to allege they are independent Churches,
because every Church is reproved for it is own faults; reproof is a sort of
censure: What, because the fornicator, 1 Cor 5. is repr^ved for a sin that is
scarce named amongst the Gentiles, yea and judged worthy to be excommunicated?
shall it hence follow that the fornicator is no member dependent, and in
Ecclesiastical subjection to the Church of Corinth? So some of the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 15. 12. are reproved for denying the resurrection; for this
was the fault of some, and not of all: But will it follow, these some were no
independent parts of the Church of Corinth, but an independent Church by
themselves? The faults of remiss discipline may be laid upon a whole National
Church in some cases, when it comes to the notice of the National Church,
that such a particular Church fails in this and this point of discipline; but
we teach not that these seven Churches made up one National Church; yet this
hinders not, but parts of an independent and subordinate Church may be
rebuked for their faults, and yet remain dependent parts.

5. They object, 5. Object.
If Christ bid an offending brother tell the particular Church whereof he is a
member, then that particular Church may excommunicate, Mat. 18. 19. and so has
power within it self of the highest censures, M. Best.
and is independent, but the former is true, Mat. 18. Ergo, Vrsine (say they)
Zuinglius, Andrews, Kemnitius, Aretius, Pelargius, Hunnius, Vatablus, Munster,
Beza, Erasmus, Whittaker, etc. expound this of a particular Congregation.

Answ. 1. We shall also expound this of a particular Church, but not of such an
one as has but one Pastor, neither do these Divines mean any other Church
then a College of Pastors and Elders.

2. Your own Parker, Parker de Poli^. 3. c 24.
the learned Voetius, and Edmundus Richerius, Gu^l. Voe^. de Pol. ^ccl. these 7.
and the Doctors of Paris cite this place to prove the lawfulness of Synods,
yea even hence they prove Peter, Edmu^d, Richer. de Pol. and Eccles. potest, p.
14.
and so the Pope is answerable to a general Council.

3. When an Eldership of a particular Congregation is the obstinate brethren,
Do. Paris. de Pol. Eccl. p 13.
to be censured, I desire our reverend brethren to show in that case a
ministerial, Gerson de Potest. Eccl. consid. 4.
governing, and censuring Church, consisting only of private persons out of
office, to whom the offending person shall complain? I appeal to the whole
old and new Testament, to all antiquity, to all Divines writings the word
(Church) in this notion. See also G^rson.

6. They object, Every particular Church is the body of Christ, Object. 6.
his Spouse, Wife, and Kingdom, and every one has received faith of equal
price, 1 Cor. 12 20. 27. with 4. 17. and 5. 12. and 11. 23. 26. and ^4. 33. Mat
18 r. 7, ^0.
2 Pet. 1. 1. and consequently of equal power, and right to the tree of Life,
and Word of God, and the holy things, the keys of the Kingdom, 1 Timothy 1. 3.
15.
the promise and use of Christ's power and presenc^, Romans 12. 4, 8. Separatists
3. petit.
Therefore there is not one Church above another. ^ pos. p. 43.
So the Separatists. Best.

Answ. 1. If this argument from an equal interest and right to Christ, the
promise, life eternal stand good, not only one Church shall not be over
another; but also Pastors and Elders cannot be over the flock in the Lord, nor
have the charge of them, nor watch for their souls: The contrary whereof you
shall read, 1 Cor. 12. 17, 28, 29. 1 These. 5. 12, 13, 14. Heb. 13. 17. Ephesians.
4. 11. and the reason is good, but truly better with Anabaptists, then with men
fearing God; because Pastors and people, King and Subject, Doctor and Scholar,
being believers, Act. 10. 34.
have all received like precious faith, and right to the tree of Life, etc. for
God is no accepter of persons.

2. By this Argument three believers in an independent Congregation consisting
of three hundred shall be no dependent part in Ecclesiastical subjection to
three hundred, and every three of independent Churches shall be a Church
independent, and twenty independent Churches shall be in one independent
Church, because all the three hundred believers have received alike precious
faith, etc*

3. The consequence of the Argument is most weak, for precious faith and
claim and interest in Christ is not the ground why Christ gives the keys to
some, and not to others, but the ground is the good pleasure of Gods will.
Christ gave not the keys, nor any Church Authority to Judas, Demas, and the
like, because of their precious faith; but because he calls to labor in his
vineyard, whom he pleases, and whom he pleases he calls not.

7. They object, 7. Object.
Provincial and National Churches are humane forms brought in after the
similitude of ^ivill governments amongst the Romans, Ames. Medul. Theol. l. 1.
c 32. ^ these. 22.
and there is no Church properly so called, but a Parish Church. See D. Ammes.

Answ. 1. (...), The lifting up of the hands in voicing at the election of
Elders, Act. 14. 23. so taken from a civil form of peoples giving their
suffrages amongst the Lacedaemonians, as our brethren say: Yet it is not for
that unlawful, or an humane form, a Parishionall meeting of the people to
hear the word, is taken from a civil form of both Romans and Grecians
convening to hear declamations and Panygerickes, yet a Parishionall Church is
not for that a humane and unlawful Church.

2. We say not that a Synod is a properly so called mystical Church, yet its a
proper ministerial and teaching Church, such as is, Acts 15.

8. They object, Object. 8.
The Popish superiority of one Church over another should be lawful, if a
Church be in bondage under a Church, better be under a great Lord Pope, and a
little Lord Prelate, as under many National Lords in a National
Church-Assembly.

Answ. 1. We make no other subjection here then our brethren make; for they
make ten to be subject to ^^ve hundred in an independent Congregation: As the
part is in subjection to the Laws of the whole, so make we many Churches in
Cities, Towns and Provinces subject in the Lord to all their own Pastors and
Elders convened in a National Assembly: Papists make their Synods to lay bonds
upon the consciences of men.

2. Their Synods cannot err.

3. The Lord Prelate over rules them.

4. They make things indifferent necessary.

5. People may not examine Decrees of their Synods according to Gods Word.

6. People may not reason or speak in their Synods. We acknowledge no such
Synods. 2. Papists, as Bellarmine, Bellarm.
Costerus, Pierius, do not think Synods very necessary, (...) Fuchr. P^e^^r
in Exodus 10.
they call the Popes determination an easier way for ending controversies then
Councels; and therefore Pierius says here, frustra sit per plura, etc.

9. They object, 9. Object.
If a representative Church consisting only of Pastors, Doctors and Elders, be
a Church of Christ's institution, it should have a Pastor over it, as all
Churches have; and if it be a general Council* the Pastor thereof can be no
other then the Pope, and there beh^ved to be also an universal Consistory of
Cardinals.

Answ I deny both these consequences, a feeding, governing and ministerial
Church does not necessarily require a Pastor over it. Timothy is a Pastor to
himself, and by preaching both saves himself and others, 1 Timothy 4. 16.

2. Cardinals are degrees above Pastors and Prelates, our Synods are made up,
as Acts 15, of Pastors, Elders and Brethren, whereof we acknowledge no Pastor
of Pastors but Christ Jesus, no Doctor of Doctors, no Elder of Elders, and so I
see not what this consequence means.

10. They object, 10. Object.
That which concerns all should be handled by all. Quod omnes tangit ab
omnibus tractari debet; but matters of disci^line concern the conscience and
practice of all, Ergo, all and every believer should handle matters of
discipline, and not some few of a whole Nation who represents the rest.

Answ. That which concerns all, one and the same way and the manner, should
be handled by all. That which concerns all, diverse and sundry manner of ways
should be handled by all diverse manner of ways: If ten men be owners of a
ship, nine of them cannot sell the ship without the consent of the tenth owner:
If all both Elders or Ministers, and the whole company of believers had one and
the same power of the keys, we see not but all, Ministers and people should
have a like hand in voicing and coucluding; nor do I well see, that if the
keys be given to all believers, upon our brethrens former ground, because they
are the body and Spouse of Christ, how women and believing children can be
excluded from joynt-governing and use of the keys (except in the act of
public teaching, 1 Cor. 14. 34. 35. 1 Timothy 2. 12.) with Pastors, Doctors and
Elders, seeing they are the body and Spouse of Christ, no less then men: God
accepts no persons, nor sexes, male or female, in these spiritual
privileges, Gal. 3. ^8. 2 Cor. 6. 18. 1 Pet. 3. 4, 5, 6. But seeing discipline
concerns all diverse ways, according as God has seated and placed persons in
his Church; some in higher, and some in lower places of Christ's body; therefore
Ministers are to handle points of doctrine and discipline in Synods
authoritatively. People also by electing Commissioners to Synods, by
consenting, reasoning, proposing and advising, and according to their place,
^ot authoritatively.

11. They object, Object. 11.
It is a Popish abusing of the people of God to exclude them from all
government of Gods house, and all means of edifying one another, and lead on
the people in an implicit faith and ^ind obedience.

Answ. This objection touches the question anent the power of private
Christians in edifying one another, where I must stay a little to clear
doubts, for diverse run in extremities here. Hence our

1. Conclusion. Separat 3 pet. 4. posit p. 5
We utterly condemn the doctrine of Separatists, who teach that private
Christians gifted with knowledge, (...) against (...).
suppose they be out of office, are to preach the Gospel, A^nsworth communion
of Saints.
and to prophecy publicly for the edefying of the Church.

1. Because by consent of all sound Divines, all antiquity and confession of
party, and Paul's testimony, Ephesians. 4. 11. there are none given of Christ, when he
ascended on high, for the public edefying of the Church, and gathering of the
Saints to Christ's second coming, save only Pastors, and Doctors and Elders.
But the private gifted men are to edefie by public prophesying, and they be
none of Christ's officers, and they are unlawful teachers.

2. To preach publicly as ordinary messengers. (I say) ordinary, because of
our expectants of the ministry, who preach by the call of the Church, for a
time, as the Sons of the Prophets, while they be ordained Pastors. To preach
(I say) publicly, is a formal act of Pastors who are sent, Romans 10. but these
Prophets are not sent, Ergo, they ought not to preach. They answer but as
Anabaptists and Socinians do, who say to be gifted of God is to be sent; but I
answer, Paul Rom 10. 14, 15. thinks not so, because he understands such a
sending, as is required in ordinary Pastors, who begets faith in their
hearers, v. 14. and whose feet are beautiful upon the monntaines, by bringing
glad tidings of peace, v. 15. Now these were such as both were gifted, and had
authority to preach. 2. Christ, Mat. 10. clearly differenceth gifting of
Pastors, v. 1. from authoritative sending, v. 5. v. 16. And also John 20, 21,
22, 23. 3. Because God challenges such as run, and the Lord sends them not,
Jer. 23. 21. 4. Because no man takes that honor on him, except he be called
of God, as was Aaron, Heb. 5. Suppose he be gifted as our Savior was. 6.
Public Preachers have power authoritative to bind and loose, and accordingly
God binds and loses in heaven; but private believers have not this power
but only Pastors, Mat. 18. 18. Mat. 16. 19. John 20. 23. 7. Such Preachers they
dream to be in the old Testament; but the ^ld Testament speaks of none but
men in office, as Priests, Levites, Prophets, etc.

M. Robinson says, R^binson against Tat^r, p 28.
1 Cor. 14. There were gifted ordinary Prophets not in office, who preached
publicly.

Answ. These Prophets were Prophets by office, and so b^side that they were
gifted, they were sent with official authority to preach. 1. They are such as
Paul speaks of, 1 Cor. 12. 28. God has set some in the Church, first
Apostles, secondarily Prophets, Ergo, they were officers set in the body, as
Apostles were at that time, Ephesians. 4. 11. 2. They are called Prophets, 1 Cor. 14.
v. 29, 32. But in all the old or new Testament, Prophets signify over these
that are in office, as the places in the margen clear, Gen 10. 7. Exodus 7 ^.
Deuteronomy. 8 55. Judge 6. ^. 1 Sa^. 3. ^0. 1 Samuel 22. 5. 1 Sa^. 7. 2. 1 King. 1 8. 1
King 1^. 29. 1 King 13 11. 2 King 3. 1. K^^g. 6 12. 2 King 20, 1. 2 Chronicles. 12.
5. Psalm 7^ 9. Lam. 2. 20, Hab. 1 1. Mat 1. 2, M^^ 2 17. (...) 7. 6. Acts (...)
10. (...) 8, (...) 15. Rev. 11* 10.
and a place cannot be brought where the word Prophet signifies a man who
publicly preaches, and yet is no Prophet by office, but possibly a Fashioner,
a ^lough-man, a Shoemaker* 3. The formal ^ff^cts of publi^e edefying,
comfe^ti^g, convincing, converting souls are ascribed to these. ^ophets, v. 1,
3, 4, 5, 12, 24 25, 31. which are ascribed to pr^^ching Pastors, Rom 10. 14,
15. 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2, 3. 4. In this chapter, and in chap. 13. Paul does set down
Canons anent the right use of the offices that he spoke of, 1 Cor. 12. 28, 29.
5. Paul must think them Prophets by office, while as he compares himself who
was an Apostle and Prophet with these Prophets, v. 37. If any man think
himself to be a Prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things
that I write to you are the Commandments of the Lord.

Also these Prophets were extraordinary and temporary, as were the gifts of
tongues and miracles; and therefore none out of office now are to prophecy
publicly. M. Robinson says, they cannot be extraordinary, because
extraordinary Prophets are infallible, and cannot err, else the Scriptures
should have been written by Prophets, who could err, but these Prophets, 1
Cor. 14. could err and were not infallible, because their doctrine was to be
judged, v. 29.

Answ. Part^^ com. Bulling. ib. Calvin.
This is a silly reason, Pareus, Bulling, Calvin, Beza says all spirits are to
be tried by the word, and all Prophets, even Samuel and Nathan may err, and
look beside the book, and may speak of their own spirit, how then were the
penmen of Scripture infallible, says Robinson?

I answer, there are none simply infallible but God, every man is a liar: The
penmen of the Scripture were infallible, because when they were actually
inspired by the Holy Ghost, they could not err: And the spirits of all
Prophets are to be tried by the word, even of Paul preaching at Berea: But it
follows not that Paul then could err. To this they answer, that false
Prophets, as Balaam, could not err when they were actually inspired, no more
then Canonicke writers.

Answ. In the case of infallibility all are alike, none are infallible by any
infused habit of a Prophetical spirit; but false Prophets were inspired with
an habitual spirit of lying, which spirit is not in Canonicke writers.
Robinson and others of his side think them not extraordinarily inspired. 1.
Because these Prophets might have been interrupted and put to silence, that
another to whom choiser things were revealed, might prophecy, v. 3. 2 Because
Paul exhorts to pray for the gift of interpretation, and to covet (says
others) to prophecy. Now we cannot seek in faith from God an extraordinary
and miraculous gift. 3. Others add, this prophesying was subject to the
free will of the Prophets, for they might prophecy, or keep silence, as they
pleased; but the acts of extraordinary prophesying are not subjected to the
free will of the Prophets; therefore this was but ordinary prophesying, to the
which all gifted professors even out of o^fice are obliged for the edefying of
the Church of Christ to the worlds end.

Answ. All these three come to one, to wit, acts of extraordinary prophesying
are under the determination of free will. Pareus prolego in Hos.
A little of this.

1. Conclusion, Pareus observes well that there be two kinds of Prophets. 1.
Some who foretold things to come, of these the Text in hand speaks not. 2.
Some extraordinarily inspired with an extraordinary grace of interpreting
Scripture: The former were Prophets in the old Testament, the latter especially
Prophets of the new Testament; knowledge of both were given without study or
pains. So there was a Prophetical spirit in Paul, Gal. 1. 12. I received it
not of man, neither was I taught it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ.

2. Conclusion. The act of foretelling things to come, especially things merely
contingent, which are determined only in the free Decree of God, is not so
under our free will, as the acts of preaching and interpreting Scripture out of
a Prophetical infused habit: For prophesying things to come seemed to have
come on the Prophets of old, as a fire-^lash appears to a man's eye in the
dark air, he cannot choose but see it, Ezech. 2. 14. So the spirit lifted me
up, and took me away, and I went in bitterness, Hiero^. Epist. 125. trium
questionum ad Damas q ^.
in the heat of my spirit, but the hand of the Lord was str^ng upon me, Jer.
20. 9. And I said, I will not make mention of him, Oecumen in ^ These, Gregor.
Mor. l. 2. c ult.
nor speak any more in his name, but his word was in my heart, as a burning
fire shut up in my bones, Thom. 22. q. 172. a^t. 2.
and I was weary with forbearing, and I could not stay, 2. King. 3. 15. The
hand of the Lord came upon Elisha, and he prophesied. See Ierom. Oecumen.
Greg^r. and Thomas.

The Prophetical spirit in the New Testament seems to be more swayed with
free will, and moral threatenings, 1 Cor. 9. 16. Woe unto me if I preach not
the Gospel; yet the habit from whence he preached was a Prophetical
principle, Galath. 1. 12. 1 Cor. 14. 32.

3. Conclu. Hence prophesying is not a habit, and it is a habit. It is not an
habit. 1. Because no Prophet can simply prophecy when he will, except the man
Christ, especially of things to come by contingent causes (the presence of
which things (says Suarez) is only connaturall to God, Suarez d^ tripl. virt.
disp 8. sec. 8. n 7.
and to no morrall man) coming on men by a transient irradiation, while as the
candle of Gods prophetical light glanceth upon the fancy, and from thence to
the mind, that the man may see and read the species and images, and when this
light shines not Nathan and Samuel read beside the Bible and are widely out.
Proph^cy also is an habit. For 1. something remain in Isaiah and Jeremiah
while they sleep, and prophecy not, from whence they are named Prophets, and
really are Prophets; for when God has once revealed himself to one as to his
own Prophet, even from by past revelation. 1 There remains a disposition to
prophecy, 1 Samuel 3. 20. All Israel knew, even from Dan to Beersheba, that
Samuel was established to be a Prophet of the Lord. 2. Because there remains
a prophetical light, whereby the man gave ass^nt to the last prophetical
revelation, and so the species and prophetical images must remain in the
fantasy, and with these a prophetical memory of by past predictions, and so
some experimental certainty, that what he fore-telleth shall come to pass:
See Thomas and Caietan, Thomas 22. q. 172. ar. 2*
now the object prophetical is known three ways, Ca^^tan. co^. in 22. q.
171. ar^. 2.
1. When the naked natural images or species of the material object are only
cast in by God and no more, and this is most in dreams, as Nebuchadnezar saw a
tree in his dream, but knew not that it was a King, Pharaoh saw seven blasted
reeds and seven lean kine, but knew not that they were seven years of Famine.
And sometimes in a vision being in an ecstasy, as John, Rev. 1. saw 1. seven
candl^sticks, but knew not that they were the seven Churches of Asia, while
Christ revealed the meaning to him. 2. The images and species are known
formally, as signs signifying thus and thus, as Joseph by a prophetical light
saw the seven lean kine to be seven years of famine. 3. Now there is a third
light, to judge of the act of seeing, which I take to be twofold. 1. When the
Seer and Prophet is persuaded that what he sees is a prophetical vision, and
not a delusion of Satan, this is (as says Pareus) the very light of prophecy,
Pareus prolog. in com^n Hos ^r. 1.
or some extraordinary light (as says Anto, Walleus) There is another light
whereby the Seer believes these things shall come to pass, Anton Walleus i^
loc. com. de Theol p. 18.
which he sees, either by a common light of historical faith, as Pharaoh
might believe that seven years of plenty should come, and Balaam that Christ
the star of Jacob should certainly arise and shine upon the Church, or the
Seer sees and believes by light of saving faith, as Isaiah and Daniel
believed that the Messiah should be slai^e, and this latter light whatever good
Schoolmen say on the contrary, is the light of faith; for the three former
lights might well be in Balaam. 1. He might see in his fantasy, the species of
the star of Jacob. 2. And know that they meaned no other thing, then the
Messiah. 3. And be certainly persuaded that he saw so, and that he was not
deluded, yea and historically believe that that blessed Star should arise,
and yet he had no light of saving faith to believe that the Messiah should
come. So h^^e we cannot but distinguish betwixt a prophetical light, in the
second and third sight, which is gratia gratis data, a free gift, and the light
of saving faith, which is gratia gratum fa^iens, a saving grace of GOD in the
sound believer, only in this last sight.

4. Conclus. Hence Separatists may see that extraordinary acts of prophecy may
well be subjected to the determination of the Church, and yet be extraordinary
inspirations, and that diverse ways.

1. Because the^ were Prophets of the New Testament, and so grace being more
abundant now nor under the old Testament, it can bow and facilitate freewill
to acts of prophesying, and Paul from more grace labored more abundantly then
they all.

2. Prophesying at that time in Corinth might well be obtained by prayer upon
the extraordinary impulsion of the spirit, as Daniel obtained by prayer the
interpretation of a dream, neither can it be proved from 1 Cor. 14. that Paul
wills them all without exception, to covet to speak with tongues and to
prophecy, but only these that were extraordinarily moved to pray, except these
(v. 31. yea may all prophecy) be contrary to these words (1 Cor. 12. 29. are
all Prophets?) which we cannot say.

3. Because it was of old in the power of Prophets to use some means to
dispose themselves to prophecy, for when the passion of anger overclouded the
fancy and the species therein, then Elisha calls for a minstrell to play, and
dispose the mind better, as Ca^etan says: Howbeit for all that the Text
says, the hand of the Lord only actuated these species, and caused him to
prophecy. ^ Kin 3. 15. (...) com in 2 (...) 3 ad (...) conseque^ter (...) ad
De^m.


Neither are Robinsons arguments of great weight, I answer only these that have
most apparency, 1 If the Lords giving of the spirit extraordinary to Eld^d and
Medad made them Prophets both in office and exercise, by due proportion, gifts
under the New Testament are sufficient to make men ordinary Prophets. Ro^i^s
against Yales, p. 37, 38.


Answ. The antecedent is false, because to Eldad and Medad were given both the
spirit of prophecy, and from that gifted spirit, came a prophetical impulsion
actually to prophecy without any farther call of the Church; for God spoke then
by impulsion, as he does now by his Word, else one may say the physical and
natural power that Samuel had to kill Agag, was a calling sufficient to
authorize him to kill ^gag, and an hability to discharge the office of the
High Priest in a man of the tribe of Judah were a good calling for one so
gifted to thrust himself in Aarons chair, which God tied only to Levies Tribe.

2. This is that which Epi^copius, Epis^^p dis. 26. these 2, ^.
Se^inians and Arminians teach from Anabaptists, (...) trac de (...) 10. p. 88.
and (...) c 10. p (...) 87, 88.
so The^phil. Nicolai^, And Radaecius, Catech. of Raccovia, Ostorod. Socinus
the (...), 1. That the sending and calling of Ministers by the Church n^w when
the Gospel is sufficiently promulgated, (...) Nedo G^r. c. 1 p. 3.
is not necessary. 2. That any gifted man has a warrant, Cat^ch. (...) de
(...) c. 11. p. (...), 306 (...) Insti c 42.
because he is gifted to be a Pastor without any call or authority official
from the Church. And what? will Robinson say, Socin tract. de eccl. ad 10 c
Romans 10. 4. 15 and de exter. reg. (...). fo 252.
because these Prophe^s are gifted to baptize and to administer the Supper of
the Lord, as well as they are to preach the Gospel, then by this goodly reason
of his, Rem^^str. confess. c. ^2 sec. 1.
they may be pastors without any calling of the Church, and certainly any man
gifted to be a King, Apol ^o. 295.
and a Magistrate, by the calling that the Word of God allows shall by this
reason have a call to leap up to the throne and the bench; but our Divines as
Calvin, Parcus, Zanchius, Iunius, Beza, make two dif^e^rent things in a lawful
calling. 1. (...), gifts for the calling, which is not enough. 2. (...),
authority from the Church, which is also required.

2. He objecteth, 2 Chronicles. 17. 7. Jehoshaphat sent his Princes to teach the
cities of Judah with the Levites, and all Princes and Ma^istrates are bound to
expound, open up, and apply the law by which they govern, else they rule by
tyranny. Hence the public Sermon of Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 19. to the Judges
and Levites, and his prayer, and Hezekiahs Sermons, 2 Chr 29. and Nehemiah
taught the people, Neh. 8.

Answ. 1. Iunius and Ar. Mont^^. Iehoshaphat (...) Shalach, Lesarou, read, he
sent with the Princes, the Levites to teach, so that the Princes were not sent
to teach.

2. It is said he sent the Princes to teach not in their own persons, but he
sent them to take care that the Levites should teach in time of that Apostasy.

3. The Kings and Judges were to teach according to the judicial Law the
equity of their sentence to the ill doer, as a Judge to convince a thief and a
murderer may lay before him the eighth and the sixth commandment in so far
as the breach of these disturbeth the peace of the commonwealth, not as they
are Church scandals, and whither the male-factor be convinced or not, the Judge
punishes with the sword, so that the Judges handling of the judicial law, and
his handling of the moral law now is merely civil and coactive, neither is he
to labor the conversion and repentance of the Elder, and so ecclesiastical
edification; but the handling of the law by the Separatist Prophets is merely
pastoral and for the conversion of souls, and they are the only preachers who
gather the Church of Saints; Pastors and Doctors are not to convert souls to
Christ, but to confirm these who are already converted and made Saints by
their Prophets, neither is the Prophets handling of the law civil, coactive or
regal, all which they teach themselves: So are we to think of these
exhortations of Iehoshaphat and Hezekiah, they taught indeed (...), secundum
quid in a civil and coactive and regal way, by a kingly and imperial
commanding, not by a servant way, or a ministerial or pastoral way. Ergo,
Kings are Prophets, and Seers and Priests, whose lips should preserve
knowledge, and ergo, Kings are Ministers, by whom we believe, and sent to open
the eyes of the blind as Prophets, 1 Cor. 14. It is a most vain consequence.
So also from Jehoshaphat, a general of an army his public praying having the
spirit of adoption, asking help from the Lord of Hoasts before the armies
join in battle, can no ways be concluded that Iehoshaphat was a public
Prophet, for then at all times, as in that extraordinary war, he should
publicly pray for the people in all Church-meetings, as did the Priest.

What he brings for public preaching in the Synagogue by Christ, Paul and
others, which (says he) were not Pastors, is not to any purpose. Christ and
Paul had a calling, ordinary or extraordinary it skilleth not, it was more then
naked gifts; some private Christains, Act. 8. 4. preached the Gospel, but
when? in time of heavy persecution when they were scattered, v. 1. v. 4. Then
all gifted Christians, tradesmen or what else, not separated by Christ and his
Churches calling may now preach the Gospel, yea be the ordinary and only
converters of souls and gatherers of the Saints; it follows no ways.

2. Many grave Divines think these were the seventy Disciples, and not private
professors. Other doubts of this kind are of no weight, therefore I go on to
that which Christians may do, and yet have they no power of the keys.

2. Conclusion. 2. Conclusion
They are to edify, exhort, rebuke and comfort one another, Heb. 3. 13:
and this they may do, not one to one only, Lev. 19. 17.
as some say, but one to many, 1. So the Scripture says, 1 Thessalonians 5. 11, 12.
Proverb. 10. 21. Col. 3. 16.
The lips of the righteous feed many, Heb. 10. 23.
Ephesians. 4. 29. They are to speak words ministering grace to the hearers: Mal 4.
16.
So says Calvine, Zach. 8. 21.
Bullinger, Calv. com. Hos. 2. (...)
Beza, Bulling in ^cl. 46.
Davenant, Whittaker, Pareus, Zanchius, Beza. ib.
Musculus, Gualther. 2. The word (...), exhort one another, Dav^nanit. in Col.
3. 16.
will not bear that one with one only should confer, Whittak. Tom. 2. de
auth. scrip. l. 3. c. 14. ad, 14.
but one with many (howbeit a multitude should evert the nature of private
conference) Iam. 5. 6. Parcus in Hos. 2. 2. Zanch.
pray one for another, (...), it were narrow charity to pray one for one only,
Muscul in Es. c. 2. 2.
Iam. 5. 9. Gualib. hom. 17.
Grudge not one against another, (...); this forbids not only grudging of
one against one, but of one against many, Roman. 13. 9. Love another, (...),
Gal. 5. 13. In love serve one another, and the same is to be observed in the
Hebrew, Mal. 3. 16. They that feared the Lord spoke often one to another, (...)
every man to his neighbor, 2 King. 7. 9. The four Lepers said one to another,
this was not one to one, but one of three, 2 Kin. 7. 6. and the Syrians said
one to another, (...). This could not have been one man of the Syrians speaking
to one only, for then how could the whole army ^ly, Gen 42. 21. And the
Brethren of Joseph said every one to his brother, Vajomeru ^ish el-achiu, Genesis
37. 19. But some allow conference of one with many, but they deny that it ought
to be indicted, fore-set or intended, but only occasional: but these with ill
logic distinguish, where the law distingui^heth not, for one and the same
conference is both occasioned by the Lords chast^s^men^s upon Job. chapter 1 chapter 2.
and als^ fore-set and intended by Jobs friends, who made an appointment to come
together to mourn with him, and to comfort him, for the word, v. 11. (...)
jagnad is to indict, fore-set time and place, 2 Samuel 20. 5. So Amasah went to
assemble the men of Judah, but he tarried longer then the time which he had
appointed him, (...) Exodus 25. 23. There will I appoint with thee or meet with
thee, Job 9. 19. Who shall set me a time to plead, Am. 3. 3. Numb. 10. 4. 2.
If conference of many be lawful, as it is Job 2. 11 Mal. 4. 16. Esa. 2. 2.
Jer. 50. v. 4, 5. Zach. 8. 21. Ps. 42. 4. Ps. 55. 14 Luke 24. 14, 15. Deuteronomy. 6.
7, 8. 9. then the fore-setting of time and place is no essential ingredient in
the action to make it of a lawful action, to become unlawful, except it were
fore-set upon religious reason of some sacred or mystical signification, as
our holy days were: mere circumstances, do not change actions that way. 3.
All Divines, the Fathers as Augustine, Aug. de civ. D^i. l. 1. c. 9.
Chrysostom, Ambrose, Hyeron. Thomas, Ch^ys. hom in ^x. 23.
Bannes, Suarez, Vasquez, Valentia, make private exhorting and rebuking our
fallen brother a duty of the law of nature, Ambros. in Lu^. 17.
such as to take our neighbors Ox out of a ditch, Hyer. in Mat. 18.
to visit a prisoner, Thom ^. q. 33.
to give alms to the poor: Barnes in 22. q. 33. art. 2.
now if to intend time and place to lift up a brother whom God has cast down,
to reduce him whom we understand God has permitted to wander, Suarez Vasquez
ib Valentia Jesuita.
be unlawful, then to foreset time and place to visit a captive in prison, to
give alms to the poor by that same reason were unlawful, which no man, in
reason, can say. 4. To intend and to appoint time and place for obedience to
any Commandment of God does rather make the action the more good and landable,
as the more deliberation in an ill action the worse, and the more deliberation
in a good action the better, Psalm. 119. 30. v. 62, 106, 147.

Neither is that Objection more against us then against the word of God, while
some say, If private Christians may teach, exhort and rebuke one another, then
may they preach and expound the word of God.

I answer 1. For one private person to preach to one and that occasionally is
no less unlawful, then for one of intention and fore-setting time and place
to preach to many.

2. The word makes mutual exhorting lawful, and condemns the mutual
preaching of private Christians.

3. Private exhorting and teaching differ. 1. The Pastor rebukes swearing as a
public watchman, with care for many, Ex officio specialis delegationis, and
authoritatively by the power of the keys, the private person rebukes swearing
out of charity, with care only of these with whom he converseth withal, by
noe power of the Keys. A Watchman gives warning of the approach of the
enemy, and the common Soldier may do the same, the Schoolmaster teaches one
lesson, the schoole-fellow teaches that same, the one by office, the other of
common Charity. 2. The Pastor interprets the word, the private person does
but use, apply and accommodate the sense and interpretation of the word to his
own act of believing, and the acts of admonishing, rebuking, comforting his
brother.

Twelfthly they object against Synods. The Pope is the Antichrist, because he
wills men to appeal from their own Churches to him, as Whittaker and
Chamier. prove; but the doctrine of the Synods teach men to appeal from
particular Churches to Synods, and by no word of God have Pastors power over
other Congregations, nor their own.

Answ. Antioch appealed from corrupt teachers, Acts 15. 2, 3. and that is
Apostolic; but to appeal from a Church to a man of sin, as if he were the
whole Church is Antichristian.

2. If six believers in a Congregation of forty believers should censure a
brother, our brethren would say that brother should appeal from these six
(who yet make an independent Congregation) to the Church of forty, yet should
not this be Antichristian.

3. To appeal from a Church as an unlawful judicatory is unlawful, but to
appeal from a lesser Church, as from a not competent Judge, to that same
Church in a larger meeting is most lawful.

4. That Pastors of diverse Churches have power over many Congregations, being
convened in a Synod is clear, Acts 1. Acts 6. Acts 15.

13. They object, Object. 13.
That this wants antiquity.

Answ. Conc^l. Sa^d c 17.
This is said for the fashion, Con^^l. Laodic. c. 12
what means then the tomes of Councels, Con^, Africa, c. 127
the Council of Sardis, Laodicea, Conc. Toledo. 4. c. 25
Africa, August. con. dona^^^^ l. 2. c 3.
Toledo 4. Canon Law, Cyprian, Augustine, Tertullus, Cypr. l. 2. ep. 3.
Irene, Chrysostom, etc.

CHAP. XVII.
Whether or no some do warrantably teach that a Pactor has no pastoral power
to preach and administrate the Sacraments, without the bounds of his own
Congregation? and from whence essentially is the calling of a Pastor?
Our brethren who teach that the ordination of Pastors is only from that power
of the keys that they imagine to be in the body of believers must needs,
holding such an humane ministerial Church, fall in diverse errors; as 1. that
he cannot officiate pastorally without that number of believers, from whence
essentially he has his pastoral calling. 2. When the Churches necessity shall
call him to remove to another independent flock: He is no Pastor while he be
ordained and chosen of new by that flock. So the English Puritanisme, English
Puritanis. c. 2. a^ 6. p. 5.
and M. Best. M. Best against Paget, p. 133, 134.


We hold that a Pastor may officiate, as a Pastor without his own congregation.

1. Arg. That which the brotherhood and communion of Sister-Churches requires
to be done, that Pastors may lawfully do; but this the brotherhood of
Sister-Churches requires to be done, Ergo, etc. the assumption is proved, 1.
Because death, or necessary absence of Pastors, necessity of keeping the
flock. 2. Necessity of convincing the gainsayers if the present Pastor be
weak in learning, yet able to cut the word aright (says M. Paget) requires
this. Pagets answer to Dave^port, p. ^35. M. Best Church plea, p. 30, 31.
M. Best answers, Officers of Churches may be helpful to other Churches, as
Christians, but not as Ministers.

Answ. This Argument presupposes that Pastors not as Pastors, but as
Christians either may administer the Sacraments lawfully, and so any Christian
may administer the Sacraments, which is both Popish and absurd, or that it is
not lawful for Pastors to administer the Sacrament out of their own
congregation, or to any other of another congregation then their own, and so
yet communion of Sister-Churches, in these acts, is clean taken away. 2. Our
Argument is from Church Communion not in Christian acts as Christian, but in
ministerial acts as ministerial.

2. Arg. If Ministers (as M. Paget argues) may labor to convert unbeleeving
strangers, and to add them to their flock, that they may enlarge Christ's
kingdom, then they may exercise Pastoral acts over, and above others then
these of their own charge; but the former is true, Ergo, so is the latter. The
assumption is clear, because Prove. 93. Wisdom sends out her maids to call
in these that are without; and 1 Cor. 14. 24. the Prophets as Prophets were
pastorally to convince; and so to convert In^idels, who were not of their
charge. M. Best answers, These acts are not acts of a Minister as a Minister,
a man and a wife, a father and a child, a Pastor and a flock are relatives,
as I am a Father, I exercise not proper acts as a Father, but toward my own
children, what good I do to others cannot be said to be the acts of a Father,
but rather of a friend, a neighbor, a Christian, etc.

Answ. He presumes that a Pastor may preach and exercise pastoral acts, as a
Christian, but so all Christians may pastorally preach though not called of
God, contrary to the Scripture: Heb 5 4, ^. Rom ^ 14, 15. 1 Timothy ^. 21. Acts.
23. Acts 6 5. Acts 13. 2. Acts 1^. 23. 2 Timothy 2. 2. 1 Timothy 3 1, 1. Tit 1 5.
Enerist ep 2. Cal^tu^ ep 2 ad Epise. Gal c 3. (...) 3 c. de (...) Episc Vasquez
in 3. Tho. To^^. de sacr disp. 240. c. 1. n. 2.
so women and private persons may invade the Pastors chare.

2. It is vain to press similitudes while they blood, for Christ properly is
the bridegroom and husband of his Church, Ephesians. 5 6, 27. John 3. 29 Rev. 19. 9.
Rev. 21. 9. Is^. 54 5. Pastors are but the (...) under suitors for the
bridegroom, John 3. 29. This is Popish doctrine to make such a relation
betwixt a mortal man and an independent Church. Pope Enaristus and Calix^us
says, while the Bishop lives, the Church can no more be given to another,
without his consent, nor the wife can be given to another then to her own
husband, without his consent. And so said Innocentius the third therefore at
the consecration, after imposition of hands (says Vasquez) and anointing of
the Bishop, and delivering to him a staff, a consecrated and blessed ring is
put on his ring-finger in token he is married to the Church; but what have we
to do with such trash as this? For in a word, the comparison of a marriage in
this point is either Popish or unseasonable, or both; because the mutual
consent betwixt A. B. and his wife, being essentially marriage, as the Canon
Law, Divines, and sound Casuists acknowledge, it makes A B. a husband, and
also the husband of such a wife during their lifetime; but election of the
people that A. B. be their Pastor, and A. B. his acceptance of the Church as
his charge, makes him not both a Pastor, and also the Pastor of that Church;
because the ordination of the Presbytery makes A. B. formally and essentially
a Pastor, I mean a called Pastor under Christ; but the election of the people
and his consent does not make him a Minister, but does only appropriate him
after he is made a Minister to be the Minister of such a Church, and so the
comparison halteth in the maine point for which it is alleged; therefore A.
B. is made indefinitely a Pastor for the Church, and is obliged to labor the
conversion of all, within and without the bounds of his Church, in as far as he
is a Pastor: But forasmuch as the Church thinks good to appropriate his
Ministry to this particular congregation, for the more commodious congregating
and gathering of the sheep of Christ, he is not so their Pastor, as he cannot
exercise Pastoral acts toward others also, neither does the place, Acts 20.
28. and 1 Pet. 5. 2. insinuate any such marriage-relation betwixt Pastor and
Parish, as that he is a Pastor to none but his own Parish, for as he is to
seed specially, these over which the Holy Ghost has made him overseer, and
amongst whom he is principally by the Churches special appropriation and
application of his ministry to them: So also has the Holy Ghost made him an
over-seer to feed indefinitely, and as Gods providence shall offer occasion, as
many as God has purchased by his blood, Acts 20. 28. and as many as are the
Lords heritage, 1 Pet. 5. 3. whether they be of his own congregation or no, as
the words clearly import, and he is a Pastor to them as they are the Lords
heritage conquered with his blood, and not because he is appointed Pastor over
them, and no more.

3. Arg. Believers of diverse congregations are members of a visible politic
body, and are to keep Church Communion together in exhorting, rebuking and
comforting one another, and so may eat bread at the Lords Table, and be made
one body, 1 Cor. 10. 27. but by this doctrine they may not eat at one Table of
the Lord; For if the Pastor may not administer the Sacrament lawfully to
persons of diverse congregations, neither may they receive the Lords Supper from
him; for if it be unlawful for the Pastor to administer the Sacrament to these
of other congregations, seeing he is to them as a Non-Pastor, and as a
Christian only, they cannot lawfully receive the Supper of the Lord from a
Non-Pastor: Yea, and Pastors baptizing Infants of other congregations do
sin, and these Infants thus baptized are In^idels and non-baptized, because
they are baptized by one who is a Non-Minister to the baptized.

4. Arg. 4. Arg.
That opinion must be reasonlesse and without ground, the special reason and
ground whereof is false. But the special ground and reason of this opinion is
false, Ergo, etc. I prove the assumption: The special ground thereof is, that
ordination and election of Pastors are all one, and that Pastors have
essentially their calling from the election of the people; but there be wide
differences betwixt ordination of a Pastor which essentially makes him a
Pastor, and the peoples choosing him to be their Pastor; The^^^ in. 1.
as 1. that all Divines according to Gods Word make them different things, Tim.
4. 14.
as do Theophylact, Cypr. ep. 33.
Cyprian, Athan ep. ad O^th. Ambros. com. in 1 Timothy 5.
Athanasius, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Hyperius, Aretius, Professors of Leyden,
Morneus, Plessaeus, ^hrys. ^om. 13. in 1 Timothy
Zanchius, Willet, Gers. Bucer, Zipperus. 2. The word of God restrains
ordination of officers to Pastors, Hyper. in 1 Timothy 4.
1 Timothy 4. 14. 1 Timothy 5. 22. 2 Timothy 2. 2. Tit. 1. 5. Ar^^ in 1 Timothy 4.
Acts 6. 6. Profess Leyd. disp. 42. ^n. 32. Ecc* M. Plesseus de p. 30.
Acts 13. 1, 2, 3. and ascribes election of officers to the people, Acts 6. v.
5. 3. Ordination is an act of authority and supreme jurisdiction conjoined with
fasting, Zanch in 4 praecep Wille^ Synop. pap p. 2. cont. 5. q. 3 Gers Buce^
degub. Eccl. sect 86. p. ^35. Zipp^r. de Pol. Eccl. 2. c. 1^. n. 8, 9, 10.
praying, and laying on of the hands of the Elders; but publ^^^e praying and
dedicating the Pastor to Christ's service with imposition of hands is given to
Pastors, Acts 6. 6. 1 Timothy 4. 14. Acts 13. 1, 2, 3. but never to the multitude
of believers: Give an instance in all the Scripture of the ordination of
Pastors and officers of the New Testament that way. No man ever alleged any;
one place in Numbers they bring, where the children of Israel are said to lay
on hands on the Levites; but judge how six hundred thousand sighting men could
all lay their hands on the Levites? and these were not all Israel, but
certainly these must be the heads and Princes of Tribes, who put hands on the
Levites, as the word is often taken, as I observed before. Now ordination is an
act of jurisdiction, such as is to send an Ambassador; but that an Ambassador
consent to go (such as is election) is no act of jurisdiction: For a father to
give his daughter in marriage to one is an authoritative act of a father; but
for the daughter to consent to the choice, is no act of authority, but an act
of her private choice. 2. Ordination is that which formally makes the man and
Pastor: The peoples election does only appropriate the man's ministry to such
and such a people: It is one thing to make a gold ring, this is an act of art,
and another thing to propine and gift the ring to such a person. M. Jacob
says, the people has power to reject a Minister who is unworthy; True, they
have power to reject him from being their Minister, but their power of election
or rejection has no influence in either ordaining him to be a Pastor, or
rejecting him from being no Pastor.

Neither is it much that M. Best says, 1. Object.
that in this an Apostle differs from the Pastor, that the Apostle is a
Pastor through the whole Christian world, but the Pastor is tied to a certain
congregation out of which he is not a Pastor.

Answ. We allow of no Pastors ordained Pastors without a certain flock; but
this hinders not, but ordination of a Pastor is one thing, and tying of a
Pastor to be a Past^r of such a flock is another thing, and that these two
come from diverse causes and grounds. An Apostle was a Pastor to all the world,
yet might he exercise pastoral acts of preaching and praying toward these
people who would not receive his ministry, and against whom he was to shake
off the dust of his feet, Mat. 10.
as a witness, and a Pastor is only the Pastor of that flock over the which
the Holy Ghost by the Churches authority has set him as their Pastor; but yet
so, as when he preaches in another congregation, he cease not to be a
Pastor, howbeit he be not the Pastor of that flock.

They object, Object. 2.
The essence of a Pastor is from something, but it can be from nothing but from
the consent of the people. So M. Jacob. Hen. Iac. of Chu^. govern. c 7: p. 168.


Answ. The pastoral calling is essentially from something, but it is not from
the consent of the people; because a man may exercise pastoral acts of
preaching toward these who are most unwilling to receive his ministry, Ergo,
the pastoral calling must be essentially from the ordination of Elders, 1 Timothy
4. 14.

3. They object, Object. 3.
Whatsoever is essential at some times and places for the making of a
Minister, is essential for ever; but the peoples consent at some times and
places is for the making of a Minister essential, and no other thing at that
time can be essential: For example, when Christians came first out of
Antichristian tyranny, when there are no lawful Pastors, and in the first
conversion of the Indies, Separatist Protest. anno 1616. a^. 10. 3. pe^. pos 5.
p. 47. M Jacob Church gov^^n. (...). 7. p. 47.
where there are no Pastors. So Separatists and M. Jacob.

Answ. I borrow this Argument, what is essential at some time and places for
the making of a Pastor is evermore essential; but ordination of Pastors by
Pastors, and sending them to preach to the Indies, who are unwilling to receive
their ministry is only essential to make a man sent thither a Pastor; for
peoples consent in that case cannot be essential, where they will not give
their consent at all, and non ens cannot be essential to the making of a
Pastor.

2. What is essential for making a Minister who is extraordinarily called of
God, is not ever more essential to the making of a Minister ordinarily called
of God, in an Island where the Gospel is, if all the Pastors should dye, the
people might choose Pastors to themselves, but they could not then make Pastors,
God only without the ministry of other Pastors in that case should make
Pastors; but it follows not hence that Pastors ordinarily have not their
calling to be Pastors from the ordination of Pastors.

4. They object, Object. 4.
When the Church electeth her Pastor, she says, we give thee A. B. power to
administer the word, seals and censures, and the Minister does possess and
assume. Ergo, the people election is the essence of a Ministers calling. Smith
ce^s. paral* p 112, 113.
So John Smith.

Answ. It is presupposed by order of nature, that A. B. is first called and
ordained a Pastor by Christ, and (...) laying on the hands of the Elders, 1 Timothy 4. 14. before the people can elect him for their Pastor: For if A. B. be
no Pastor, people cannot choose him to be their Pastor, neither does the peoples
election give any such power to A. B. That power is given by the Presbyteries
act of ordination, by order of nature, before the peoples formal act of
election: As the husband who in a Lapidaries shop chooses a gold ring for his
wife, and puts it on her finger, presupposes it was a gold ring before his
choosing thereof, neither does his choosing thereof make it a gold-ring, but
only make it his wifes gold-ring by application to her: Just so, peoples
election appropriateth such a man who is already a Pastor to such a charge, but
does not make the Pastor a Pastor, but chooses him only to be their Pastor.

5. Smith labors to prove that the ministry comes not by succession from
Ministers: Object. 5.
For then (says he) the ministry should be before there were any Church;
Smith paral. ^2.
but the Church is before the ministry, and calls the Ministers to office.

Answ. The Church ministerial, the governing Church, whereof we now speak,
cannot be before there be a ministry; for then there should be Ministers
before there be Ministers, which is against common sense: The Church mystical
is before the Church ministerial, I grant; but a Church mystical, or a Church
of believers may choose Pastors before they can ordinarily be their Pastors, but
they cannot make Pastors: Yea, and God at same times supplyeth the want of
popular election, while he calls one to preach to a people, never consenting
he shall be their Pastor, and so neither can the objector maintain a
succession of believers always calling Ministers, nor do we hold a constant
ordination of Pastors in a continual line of succession from the Apostles made
by Pastors, the succession may be interrupted, but then God himself supplyeth
the want of ordinary ordination appointed by himself, 1 Timothy 4. 14. Tit. 1. 5.
1 Timothy 5. 21, 22. Acts. 6. 6.

6. They object, 6. Object.
If a Ministerial power come (says M. Smith), Smith. ib.
by succession from Presbyteries, then are Presbyters Lords of the Churches
faith, in respect that the Church cannot enjoy the holy things of God, howbeit
she be of her self the body and Spouse of Christ, without the Presbyters
consent.

Answ. Any may here see right down Anabaptisme, because the Church cannot
enjoy pastoral preaching, and the Sacraments without Pastors appointed of
Christ for that effect, Mat. 28. 18, 19. John 20. 21, 22, 23. Mar. 16. 15.
therefore Pastors are Lords of the peoples faith, so they may have Baptism and
the Supper of the Lord, because they are Christ's Spouse and body, without
Pastors.

2. By this goodly Argument, private believers preaching and baptizing are
Lords of the faith of other private believers, who are their hearers, because
notwithstanding that private believers be the body and Spouse of Christ of
themselves; yet can they not, by M. Smiths reasoning, enjoy the holy things of
God, without the ministry of private Christians preaching and administrating
to them the Sacraments.

7. Smith objecteth, ^. Object.
If ministerial power come by succession from Ministers, then Ministers may
excommunicate the whole Church of Christ.

Answ. This is most weak, Illud tantum possumus quod de iure possumus. And by
this reason the believers may excommunicate the whole ministry also, which is
no less absurd.

8. Smith adds, 8. Object.
If the Eld^rs and Deacons dye, the succession fails, and a mnisteriall power
of Christ ^eing once lost can never be recovered again, and so there shall be
no Ministers in the world.

Answ. Suppose in this or that Church all the Ministers should dye, yet it
follows not that a Ministry can utterly fail in the Church: It is contrary
to Ephesians. 4. 11. and to the perpetuity of Christ's kingly government and Thr^ne,
Psalm. ^9. 36. 37*
which shall endure as the days of heaven: Psalm. 72. v. 4, 5, 6.
And what if God extraordinarily supply the want of ordination in this or that
particular Church? A ministerial power is conferred in that case immediately
upon some, in a Church removed from any Church-consociation from other
Churches, and so Christ's ministerial power dies not.

9. Smith re^soneth thus, 9. Object.
to prove that believers may ordain their own officers, That which is given
by Christ to the Church is in the power and possession of the Church, but
officers and offices are given to the Church.

Answ. What is given to the Church sinaliter and obiective, that is for the
behoof and good of the Church, for their edification and salvation as Gods
proposed end, such as preaching and baptizing, that is in the Churches power
and possession, is most false, and so I deny the mayor proposition; for
preaching and baptizing is given by Christ for the good and salvation of women
and private Christians; yet women and private Christians may not preach,
baptize and ordain Ministers. Whatsoever is given to the Church, subiective,
as to the proper subject, Mistress and Spouse, to dispose and carve upon at
her pleasure, is in the Churches power and possession: It is true, but now the
assumption is false, because officers and offices are not so given to the
Church of believers as to the subject. Christ ascending on high, gave Pastors
and teachers for the Church of believers, for their gathering and perfecting,
but not to the Church of believers.

10. If two or three (says M. Smith) faithful ones have power to make a
Church, 10. Object.
then have they power to make the Ministers of the Church, but two or three
have power to make a Church. Ergo, two or three faithful ones have power to
make the Ministers of a Church. He proves the major. They who can do the
greater can do the less, to make a Church is greater; for the Church is the
Body, Spouse and Wife, the Ministers are but an ornament of the body, and so
the less: The assumption he proves, two or three faithful ones have Christ,
the holy things of David, the promises. Ergo, two or three have power to make a
Church.

Answ. These who can make a Church mystical have power to make a Church
ministerial, or Ministers of a Church: that I deny: As for the probation, this
proposition (These who can do the greater can do the less) must be right
taken: It is true, in these same kind of works, and in the same kind of power.
Christ can forgive sins, Ergo, he can do less, he can say to a sick man,
take up thy bed and walk: So if by prayer Jacob obtain a blessing from God,
which is greater, then by prayer he will obtain deliverance out of the hands
of Esau, which is less; but in powers of diverse kinds it holds not true: A
believer by prayer may obtain grace and perseverance, which is greater, but it
follows not, Ergo, he can open the eyes of the blind, and work miracles,
which is less; and therefore howbeit three can make a mystical Church, which
is greater, by a power of saving grace (which is gratia gratum faciens) It
follows not, that therefore they have a ministerial and pastoral power of
the keys (which is gratia gratis data) to preach and make Ministers: For then,
because Mary Magdalen has power to believe that Christ buried shall rise
again from the death, which is greater; therefore she has power to preach and
baptize, which is a lesser power: He who has power to make a ship, has not
for that power to make a cup.

11. Smith reasons thus: These who have the true matter and form, have the
property which arises from the matter and form, that is Christ's ministerial
power to assume all the means of their edification to salvation; but two or
three faithful ones are the true matter of the Church of the New Testament,
and therefore have the true form or covenant of the New Testament, and so have
a ministerial power arising from these two.

Answ. These who have the true matter and form of a mystical Church of
believers, these have the union and property of a mystical Church resulting
from matter and form, is most true; but they have not for that the true
property of a ministerial Church; faith, and the covenant written in the heart
is not the form of a ministerial Church, but of a mystical Church of
believers. Six borne Scottish men dwelling in Paris, make a body of Scottish
men; but they are not for that a politic body of Scottish men living
according to the Laws of Scotland: Four believers are a mystical Church
borne over again by the Spirit of Christ; but if they be no more but single
believers, they are not for that a ministerial Church, which is necessarily a
politic body governed by Christ's Laws, consisting of shepherd and flock:
But this man will have three believers, because they are believers, to be
Ministers, and so takes away all vocation and ordination of Church Officers by
the Churches authority, which is flat Anabaptisme.

CHAP. XVIII.
Certain Quaeres anent independencie of Congregations.
Quaere 1. IF the independencie of Congregations stand, whether or no is a
Democracie, and the actual government of the Church in the peoples hands?

I answer affirmatively, seeing calling, ordination, censuring, depriving, and
judicial excommunication of Church-guides are in their hand, I see not what
they want, and wherein Morellius erred.

2. Quaere. Seeing hence it follows that single believers are to pray
publicly, and exhort publicly, and authoritatively convince gainsayers at the
ordination and deprivation of Pastors, if they may not also publicly preach
and administer the Sacrament?

I answer: If you give to single believers one pastoral Act, you may with the
like weight of reason give to them all.

3. Whether or no is a ministry necessary in a visible Church?

I answer: seeing all these eminent acts of the Pastoral charge by an ordinary
power may be performed by single believers, I cannot see any necessity of a
Ministry.

4. Whether or no then is every mystical Church of believers, because it is
such, a ministerial Church, having the keys both in use and power?

I answer: The former doctrine standing it is.

5. If every one borne of God be not by that birth borne also a Key-bearer to
open and shut Heaven?

I answer, he is.

6. If hence a Senate of Elders who laid on hands at ordination of Ministers, 1 Timothy 4. 14. 1 Timothy 5. 22. Acts 6. 6. be not then quite out of the Church?

I answer, in Churches independent it is quite gone.

7. If then all believers as well as the Apostles, and Paul, Timothy and Titus
are not to lay hands on Pastors?

Answer, no doubt they are, but precept or practice therefore in the Apostolic
Church I see none.

8. If the doctrine of refusing Baptism to Infants, whose nearest parents are
not, one of them, at least, believers, does not infer, that such a Church,
where they are baptized is a false Church in the matter, and so in its
constitution false? Hence I leave it to be answered by authors of
independencie, if they should not separate from such a Church?

9. Seeing we judge Papists cruel in excluding from glory unbaptized Infants,
when election and reprobation has place in Infants not borne, Romans 9. v. 11.
If we can judge Infants borne of nearest parents unbeleevers, as the children
of Pagans and Turks without the Covenant; and if the sins of one unbeleeving
Father, where many foregoing generations have been lovers of God, and keepers
of his Commandments, does exclude the Infants from the Covenant made with
these believing forefathers?

Answ. We are to judge them in no Covenant with God by the former doctrine.
Hence we require that places of Scripture where God is said to show mercy on a
wicked race of people: Yea, whose nearest parents were most wicked rejectors of
Gods Covenant, and that for the Covenant made with Abraham, as Joshuah, 5. 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Ezech. 20. v. 8, 9, 10. v. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Psalm. 106. 6, 7,
8, 9. and v. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, etc. v. 44, 45, 46. may be considered.

10. If children laden with iniquity, and the seed of evilldoers, Isa. 1. 4.
does beget in the visible Church a generation which is no more holy with
external and federall holiness, th^n Indians and ^artarians who never heard
of Christ: And seeing such a generation has by the former grounds no right to
the means of salvation, we ask with what faith we can keep any
Church Communion with such, yea how the Gospel can be preached to them.

11. Whether or no we are to keep some Church Communion with an excommunicate
person, who is to be rebuked as a brother, 2 These. 3. 15. and so is to be a
hearer of the word, and for whose good we use the medicine of excommunication,
that his spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord, 1 Cor. 5. 4. We ask if
(the doctrine of Independencie standing) we are not also totally to separate
from an excommunicate person in the very external Church Communion of hearing
the word, seeing ten excommunicated persons joined in Covenant for hearing of
the word, are no Church, no Body, no Spouse of Christ. We see not how we are
not by the former grounds totally to separate from them.

12. If we may rebuke a particular Church, and if she remain obstinate, and
will not hear, why may we not proceed acording to Christ's order, Mat. 18 and
tell the Church?

Answ. By the former grounds we are to stand at single rebuking, and proceed no
farther.

13. Suppose the independent Congregation consist of ten Elders and an hundred
believers: If the ten Elders abide sound in the faith, and the hundred
believers err in fundamental points of faith: In that case we ask, 1. If
Christ have appointed no pastoral or ministerial act of discipline to
reclaim these hundred who err from the faith.

I answer, none at all which may, authoritatively reclaim them, for they are
the supreme independent Church. 2. Because it cannot be denied but Pastors and
Doctors of the s^id Eldership may preach against their errors, and shoot
Heaven upon the pertinacious defendors of these p^rnicio^s errors, and that by
the power of the keys, Mat. 16. 19. Jo^. 20. 23. yet have they no power of
discipline to shut Heaven upon them, who thus err from the faith, nor to bind
their sins on earth, because the Eldership is not the Church, neither has
power of j^^isdiction over the hundred erring believers. How can a power of
binding and loosing by way of preaching, and that both in Gods Court and the
Churches be in these who have no power of discipline to bind and loose.

14. Seeing the Sister-Churches of Colosse and Laodic^a, Col. 4. 16. and of
Corinth, Macedonia, Achaia, Galathia, 2 Cor. 8. 1, 2, 3, 18, 19, 23, 24. chap.
9. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. are consociated together in a visible body, in external acts
of Gods worship, as to hear one and the same word of God, Col. 4. 16. and to
doc Church-businesse and works of mercy toward the poor by their delegates and
commissioners: We ask if consociated Churches tied together in a visible
Church Communion of acts of divine worship be not with as good reason a visible
politic body of Christ, as many believers consociated in a Church Communion,
if acts of divine worship does make a particular Congre-gation. 2. If the
former Church has not the power of the keys upon the grounds of a visible
Church Communion among themselves, as a Congregation has the power of the
keys upon these same grounds? 3. If these consociated Churches be not a
visible Body, Spouse, and covenanted people with God in Christ, as well as a
little Congregation of six or ten believers? 4. If such a greater body may not
meet in their overseers, and exercise discipline, and govern the particular
Congregations, as a Congregation does meet in their principal members, and
govern themselves, and all the members of the particular Congregation 5. We
ask a reason, why in a Congregation of three hundred believers partaking one
Word and Sacrament, a hundred of the three separated from the other two hundred
cannot meet and exercise the power of the keys by themselves alone, because
one worship, and one government does equally concern them all, and by that
same reason it should not be affirmed of ten Congregations, all partaking one
Word and Sacraments upon occasions which neighbourly consociation does furnish,
that one cannot meet to exercise discipline in matters which in reason equally
concerns all the ten Congregations without subordination to the joint
authority of all the ten? For if a hundred of three hundred cannot exercise
discipline there alone, without the other two, reason would enforce one or two
congregations of ten consociated congregations cannot meet, without
subordination to the whole ten, whereof one or two congregations are part; if
ten be owners of one ship, six cannot meet and dispose or sell the ship, or
repair her cordadge, or any decayed part, without the power of the other
four, whom it concerns; so if ten congregations be visible owners and
copartners of one Gospel one worship, one external profession, and one
communion with a brother, or separation from a scandalous person, we ask a
reason how one congregation can meet and dispose of that common worship,
government, and haunting familiarly with, or separating from a member of the
Church, without subordination to all the ten congregations, whom it does
concern?

15. If the Eldership of one congregation make one visible representative
Church ruling and governing the absents, we ask why the Eldership of six
congregations may not judicially meet and rule six congregations also?

16. If the power of the keys be given to believers, as believers, because
Christ is their King, Priest and Prophet, and all things are theirs, Paul,
Apollo, Cephas, the world?

1. It is asked, if none have the power of the keys, but believers, and if all
acts pastoral of preaching, binding and loosing, excommunicating performed by
unbeleeving Ministers and Professors be not hence made null, as performed a
non hab^ntibus potestatem, as if Turks and Pagans had performed these? We
think they must be null.

2. We think children baptized by unbeleeving Ministers not baptized.

3. An unbeleeving pastor not essentially a pastor.

4. If, because Christ is given to the elect, and all things are theirs, and so
all ministerial power of the keys, it is questioned, if amongst these all
things given to the believers, we may not include the Magistrates sword, the
Kings power, the masters power over the servant, the Captains power over the
soldier, so that by that same reason there be no Kings, no Judges, no Masters,
no Captains, save only believers, we see not how this follows not, as well as
that the power of the keys, and all things are given to believers, because
Christ is given to them.

5. We ask if the power of the keys in binding and retaining sins be not
given to unbeleevers, or rather for them as Gods intended end, to declare the
glory of his Justice in the vessels of wrath, as Romans 9. 17. Esa. 8. 14. 2 Cor.
2. 16. 2 Cor. 10. 6, 7, 8.

17. Quere. If the distinction of a true Church. 2. A false Church, and 3. no
Church can stand? And if the distinction of true baptism, 2. false baptism,
but valid and such as is not to be repeated, 3. and no baptism can stand?

I answer, the doctrine of independency standing, we see not how a Church
wanting the right matter and consisting of members who are not professed
believers having saving faith, can be any thing but a non-Church, and such as
is a non-Spouse, a non-body of Christ, and a non-covenanted people, and so
wanting all power of the keys.

Qu^re. If the baptism of that congregation can be valid baptism, not to be
repeated, I leave to the consideration of the learned. Yea, if the Minister be
an unbeleever by the former grounds, it can be no baptism. But some ^ay it is
the baptism of the Church, and so valid, suppose the Minister be an
unbeliever, and so want power.

I answer, the whole congregation may be unbelievers, as is the Minister, and
so yet the baptism coming from the Church, comes from these who want power,
and cannot be valid.

2. Suppose the congregation be a company of believers, yet I see not how by
their authority they can make the baptizing of a Pastor wanting all power to be
valid, for then if the Church should baptize by a Turk or a Woman, that
baptism should be valid, which no man can say.

18. What sort of an Assembly was the meeting, Act. 15. if it was a lawful
Synod of sundry particular Churches, or an extraordinary meeting, the practice
whereof does not oblige us? If it was a mere Apostolic meeting obliging as
Apostolic, and if it oblige us as Apostolic, how comes it that the
multitude spoke, and gave their mind in that which obliges us as Canonick
Scripture? For that the multitude spoke our brethren collect from v. 12. and
how is it that Elders and brethren determine in penning Canonick Scripture?
Except the first be said, there be many doubts here, of which the way of
independency cannot clear us?

Q. 19. How comes it that the Lords Apostles, who were to go through all the
Nations of the world to preach the Gospel, do so often assemble together to
consult about the common affairs of the Church and discipline, as Act. 1. Act.
2. Act. 4. Act. 6. 4. Act. 8. 14. Act. 11. 1. Act. 13. 1, 2, 3. Act. 15. Act.
21. 18. Act. 20. Paul and the Elders of Ephesus, v. 17, 18. 1 Timothy 4. 14. it is
questioned seeing these assemblies of many pastors from sundry Churches
(because the Scriptures says they were occasioned by the present necessity of
ordering things belonging to all the particular Churches) if they were only
temporary, extraordinary and Apostolic meetings, which oblige not us to the
like practice, howbeit there be the like cause of meetings in the Church now,
as errors and corrupt doctrine in many particular Churches, as were Act. 15.
the murmurings betwixt Churches, as Act. 6. a suspicious practice of a pastor,
which seems to be against Gods law, as Peter's going in to the uncircumcised,
Act. 11.

20. Whither or not Paul did not some things as an Apostle, as writing of
Canonick Scripture, working of miracles. 2. And some things as a Christian, as
Phil. 3. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. 3. And some things as an ordinary Elder and Pastor
of the Church delivering some persons to Satan, 1 Cor. 5. 4. and whither or no
is Paul's rod and authority, and his power of excommunicating, whereof he
speaks, 1 Cor. 4. 21. 1 Cor. 5. 4. 2 Cor. 10. 8. common to all believers? Our
brethren must say, it is common to all believers.

21. If the power of the keys be given to all believers, a question is, 1. If
Pastors have no other power of the keys, but that same that believers have,
seeing the ground of Christ's gift is one and the same, to wit, alike interest
in Christ, and if alike power of preaching, baptizing, excommunicating be in
Paul, and all believers? 2. Whither or no the calling of Christ and his Church
does not superadde and conf^rre to him who is made a pastor some farther power
of the keys, then h^ had before he was clothed with any such cal^ing, seeing,
to rebuke, exhort and comfort one another, are d^ties of the law of nat^^e, and
would oblige all, suppose Christ had given the (...) of the keys to none at
all, we see not, but our brethren must deny that the calling of the Church
gives any other power of the keys then the believer had before he was called.
3. If there be not a greater power of preaching, baptizing and binding and
loosing in the believers then in pastors, seeing believers give the power to
pastors, and may take it away again.

22. If six believers be excommunicated, and that justly, clave non errante,
yet remaining believers, it is questioned, if they keep not still the power of
the keys? they must keep that power, and yet are no members of Christ's visible
body.

23. I desire a place may be produced in all the old or new Testament, where a
ministerial or governing Church is taken for a company of only believers? This
our brethren teach.

24. If all authoritative Assemblies, for renewing a covenant with God,
restoring of the worship of God, be 1. A part of the paedagogy of the law of
Moses, and removed by Christ? 2. If these Assemblies in the Churches of Christ
now be a species of Judaisme? This we deny.

25. If believers exercising the most eminent acts of ordaining pastors,
public censuring, depriving and excommunicating pastors, public convincing
gainsayers, be not formally hence made by our brethren, overseers, watchmen
for the souls of Pastors and guides, and so Pastors of Pastors? We answer
affirmatively, they are by the former grounds.

26. Let the godly and learned consider, if the Patrons of independent Churches
are not to give obedience to Decrees and Canons of Synods, for the necessity of
the matter, as a brotherly counsel from Gods Word obliges in conscience the
brother to whom the counsel and advise is given; howbeit the tie be not
authoritative by the power of the keys, and if in that they are not to
conform.

CHAP. XIX.
Doubts against Presbyteriall government discussed, as about ruling Elders,
Deacons, Widows, the Kings power in things ecclesiastical.
Quest. 1. HOw does Calvin and Cartwright deny that the Apostle speaks of
ruling Elders, Tit. 1. and yet Junius and Beza, Calv, in Tit. 1. ^artwright. l.
3. p. 35.
that both a preaching and ruling Elder are there comprehended, Ju^us. (...)
^^vey c. 12.
So the author of the survey of discipline.

Answ. A great question anent the latitude of an hair; how does many
Formalists make the Prelate an humane creature, and some jure humano, and yet
Land of Canterbury and D. Hall makes him, jure divino.

2. An office may be described two ways. 1. Directly and expressly, as the
Pastor, 1 Timothy 3. 2. Indirectly, as many things agreeing to the Deacon, as that
he hold the mystery of says in a good conscience, ^e be sober, grave,
faithful in all things, etc. all which are required in the Doctor and Pastor
also.

Quest. 2. How are the ruling Elders, 1 Timothy 3. omitted where the officers are
named? Paul passes from the Bishop to the Deacon, omitting the ruling Elder:
So is he omitted, Ephesian. 3. 11 Philip. 1. 1. it is like they are not of
Christ's making, who are not in Christ's roll.

Answ. Either the Prelate or the Presbyter is omitted, 1 Timothy 3. Phil. 1. not
the preaching Presbyter, as is clear by the description agreeing only to him.
Ergo, the Prelate is out of Christ's roll.

2. Doctors are omitted, Phil. 1. 1. 1 Timothy 3. and yet are set down, Ephesians. 4.
11. yet are ruling Elders in other places, as Romans 12. 1 Cor. 12.

3. Paul, 1 Timothy 3. is not describing offices, but gives Canons, which
generally agrees to all Church Officers, howbeit he gives instance in two,
yet in such two as includes all the rest, as he that labors in teaching and
governing, and he that takes care of the Church goods. When Moses describes
the Judge, he shows what a man the King, the Justice of peace, the Sheriff,
the Major of a City, the Lord of the privy Council should be, howbeit these be
not named in the Text. Hence, because they are not named, it follows not that
they are omitted, and not spoken of in the Text.

Quest. 3. But Elders are not, 1 Cor. 12. 29. nor yet, Romans 12. but only
governors (says Whytgift and Dr. Field) and it is an ill argument, a genere
ad speciem affirmative, he names governors, it follows not therefore he
names your governing Elders.

Answ. 1. Where Paul sets down in order officers by their special names,
ordinary and extraordinary, as first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly
Teachers, etc. he cannot reckon out generals only, for so Apostles, Prophets,
Teachers, should be also but generals, for the words in Scripture also signify
generals.

2. The enumeration should halt, which yet is orderly set down, if it were
composed of a number of particulars and the generals of some easten in amongst
them.

Neither can some here well understand the civil Magistrate. 1. Because he
speaks of the Church as the body of Christ consisting of diverse members
ecclesiastical, And God has set some i^ the Church, and also he speaks of
the Church, Romans 12. 5. seeing we being many are one body in Christ, and in
that place the ruler is clearly differenced from the teaching Doctor, v. 7.
from the exhorting Pastor, and him who shows mercy in the Church, but the
civil Magistrate is not a Church officer whom God has set in the Church, as
he has set Apostles, Prophets, etc. for God has set him in (...), in the
Commonwealth, and his influence in governing Gods house is merely civil,
coactive and regal, not pastoral, ecclesiastic and ministerial.

Neither yet can the place be meant of the governing Prelate. 1. Because the
Prelate is thought to be the Apostles successor and is first in the roll, but
the governors here are some steps posterior to Apostles, Prophets, etc. 2.
Because the Prelate gives himself out to be a certain preaching creature,
such as it may be, 1 Timothy 3. 2. Tit. 1. 9. but the governors here in this
lincke are contra-distinguished from Prophets and Teachers, and so the Prelate
should either be a sole lord governor and no teacher, or then he shall be
twice, yea thrice named in one verse, 1. under the name of an Apostle, next
under the name of a Prophet, and lastly, should come in as a governor, so the
Prelate, as in Church and State, so also in the Bible, he should carry too much
book. Now seeing here are governors in the Church, contra-distinguished from
Prophets and Teachers, from a just enumeration they must be ruling Elders, and
it is to be observed that the Apostle says not, Are all Archbishops? are all
Primates? And surely the Jesuits have no l^sse room without th^ong to pin
in, in this wall, under the name of helps and governments, their regular
Canons and secular Priests, Til^^ Par ad Scot. Dilo^l. alt. Da^^as. p. 918.
as Formalists can allege for Prelates and their long tail. What Tilenus
says against this place is fully answered by Didoclavius, for because the
Apostle confounds or rather reckons together in one enumeration ordinary
and extraordinary functions in the Church, will it follow he does not here
speak of ruling Elders? If that reason be good, neither is the Prelate here,
nor is the Pastor or the Doctor here, and if there be who excel in the gift of
governing, who yet ar^ not called to preach, who can deny the necessity of this
office?

Many answers are given to elude the force of that place, Ruling Elders proved
from 1 Timothy 5. 17.
1 Timothy 5. 17. The Elders who rule well, etc. shall ever enforce that loytering
Pastors, who labor not in the Word and Doctrine are commended by the Spirit of
God, as worthy of double honor. For we reason thus.

If these sort of Elders who rule well, and especially these who labor in the
Word and Doctrine are worthy of double honor, then are there two sorts of
Elders, some who rule well, and some who labor in the Word and Doctrine.

But the former is said, 1 Timothy 5. 17.

Ergo, The latter must be true.

The proposition in terminis almost is our thesis, if two sorts of Elders be
worthy of double honor, then are there two sort of Elders, for a qualitate and
ab adjuncto subjecti ponitur subjectum ipsum: Also if Paul make the well ruling
Elder worthy of double honor, and more especially the teaching Elder, then he
acknowledges some well-ruling Elder worthy of double honor, howbeit, he
labor not in the Word. A reason is; because the positive and comparative are
ever differenced, and makes a number, when both are specified with
particularities as here, they are by (well-ruling) and (laboring in the word
and doctrine.) The Author of the Survay durst not look this place in the face.
Bilson, Field and Tylen deny our major proposition.

If one should say (say they) a preacher is worthy of double honor, especially
a painful Preacher, he should not say there be two kinds of Preachers, some
Preachers thus and thus, and some painful Preachers, and a King is worthy of
honor, especially a just King, he should not make two sorts; some are Kings,
and some are just Kings, as Deacons and Pastors are two sort of Offices.

Answ. He who says a Pastor is worthy of honor especially a painful Pastor,
should clearly insinuate that two sort of honors were due to Pastors two ways
considered; For in the former part he should speak of the office, which indeed
is worthy of honor; In the latter part he should speak of the officer in
concreto, laudably discharging his office; but Paul speaks not so; for he
speaks not of the office, and the officer, of the abstract and concret, of
the office, and the use and exercise of the office, as is here alleged; but
he speaks of officers in the exercise and use of their office in both: He
says not Elders are worthy of honor, for that might well bear this sense;
that the office of an Elder is worthy of double honor, which sense should be
most true; for the office of an Elder is worthy of double honor, which sense
should be most true; for the office of an Elder is worthy of honor. Suppose
the man be wicked; but the Apostle speaks not of the office, but the
officers, and the praiseworthy exercise of the office: The Elders who rule
well are worthy of double honor, and so the example is not alike.

2. If Paul had put down a general only in the former part, and said, an
Elder is worthy of honor, this answer might have had some color (howbeit but
a color) But now Paul puts down a special: Elders who rule well are
worthy of double honor; and with these another special sort of Elders,
especially these who labor in the word and doctrine; and so clearly he sets
down two particular species and sorts of Elders: Now to make good the sense of
the objectors of this, they must say, a worthy Preacher who rules well is
worthy of double honor, but especially a worthy Preacher is worthy of double
honor; Therefore of necessity some Elders who rule well must be meaned in the
former part, who are not meaned in the second, and these can in good reason be
no other but ruling Elders and teaching Elders; for these same sort of Elders
cannot be understood in both places.

3. And this sense, suppose it should stand, should have but a color of
reason, because you shall never find the Spirit of God commend and praise the
simple exercise of an office; but the right and conscientious exercise thereof.
Gods Spirit will not say, he who rules, and he who preaches is worthy of
double honor; but he who rules well and preaches well is worthy of double
honor.

4. By this wild interpretation men may be (...), well-governing Pastors, who
labor not in the word and doctrine, and so the dumb Prelates, who hold it all
one to be damned to a Pulpit, and to a manmill, shall be Pastors worthy of
double honor. Now Paul will not say this of a right Bishop, 1 Timothy 3. 2. Tit.
1. 9. because good governing in a Pastor includes laboring in the word and
doctrine, as the whole includes the part: For preaching is a special act of
overseeing and well-governing of souls, Jer. 1. 10. 2 Timothy: 4. 2. Because the
word is the instrument of pastoral governing, how can Pastors rule well by
using aright the word of God, except they labor in the word, which is the
shepherds staff: of right governing and painful preaching, Heb. 13. 17. Acts
20. 28, 29, ^0, 31. And so the Apostle shall say one thing twice; to wit, these
Pastors who rule well in laboring in the word are worthy of double honor,
especially these Pastors who labor well in the word and doctrine.

5. To labor in the word, (...) 1 Cor. 3. 8. 1 Cor. 15. 38. 1 These. 1. 3. Mat.
11* 28. is a word in the positive, and not in the superlative degree: And let
it be a word of the superlative degree, if the well-governing Elder here
signify the Prelate (as the current exposition of Formalists is) and the Elder
laboring in the word and doctrine signify the painful preaching Presbyter,
then the Presbyter who is a poor Pulpit-man is more worthy of double honor and
double maintenance, and the Lordly benefice, then my Lord Prelate. This gloss
will offend the proud Prelate.

Doctor Hall fetches from Scul^etus another poor interpretation: Hals humble
Remonst. to the Parliament, an. 1641. p. 198, 199.
The Elders who rule well, that is, administer the Sacraments, make public
prayers, and privately admonish faithful people are worthy of double honor,
especially these who excel in the gift of teaching, which is more excellent
then baptizing, 1 Cor. 1. 17.

Answ. 1. We have a new office brought in in odium tertij, out of hatred to
ruling Elders, and this is a creature who can baptize, administer the Lords
Supper, and pray far off a print book, and admonish in corners, but cannot
preach; but first I ask this fellows name.

2. Where is such an officer in Gods word?

3. By what warrant has one power to administer the Sacraments, and that
(...), well as a well-governing Elder, who cannot preach the word and pray,
this is but the reading Priest, who says service for hire; and yet he
baptizeth ex officio, by his office: Christ conjoyneth the public preaching
and baptizing, Mat. 28. 18, 19. as two parts of an office, and here they are
separated and given to different officers.

4. How is a man called on that rules well, because he baptizeth well, and
reads fair in the book? and is not called on who rules well, because he
preaches well? For it cannot be conceived how baptizing belongs rather to
well governing then good preaching. 3. Good governing is the Prelates element;
for so he says himself; but to preach base, it is for his Chaplain; and by
this, to read service, to baptize, to exhort privately shall make the Prelate a
good governing Elder, but worthy of less honor then the preaching Presbyter:
But the right Bishop, 1 Timothy 3. must both be apt to teach, and one who can
govern well, and this makes the Prelate in office only a Reader. Field ^.
book of the Church, c, ^6.


But neither can Doctor Fields other gloss stand. The guides of the Church are
worthy of double honor, both in respect of governing and teaching, but
especially for their pains in teaching, so he notes two parts or duties of
Presbyteriall offices, not two sorts of Presbyteries.

Answ. 1. By this it is the Prelates glory to preach, but he cries up courting
and Lordly command, and in his practice cries down preaching.

2. This interpretation wrongeth the Text: For the diverse Pronounes must note
diverse persons, as is clear in the words (...) and (...), and it is all one as
if Paul should say, That Archippus who rules well is worthy of double honor,
especially that Archippus who labors in the word and doctrine, where as it
is one Archippus who rules well, and labors in the word and doctrine. None
use to speak so supersluously, or ignorantly, This speech where the article
(...) is doubled, an^ the adverbe (...) intervening signify ever diverse
persons.
who understands the Greek Language, except by way of excellency persons be
noted which is not here: Also it should be untrue that any should be worthy of
double honor for well governing, except only he who labors in the word and
doctrine which is against reason, and the words of the Text.

Neither can these words (Tell the Church) stand in a particular Congregation,
if ruling Elders be removed, especially where there is a Pastor in the
Congregation: For then the Church should either signify the multitude of
believers, which I have abundantly refuted, or the Pastor with the Deacons; but
Deacons have no jurisdiction in Gods Church by the word of God: Or thirdly the
word Pastor it alone should signify the Church which is Popish; therefore of
necessity there must be some Rulers with the Pastors which make the
ministerial Church, of which our Savior speaks.

Neither can the famous Council at Jerusalem, consisting of Apostles, Elders
and Brethren, exclude ruling Elders. Field 5. book of the Church, c. 26.
D. Field cites Cyprian, Tertullian, Hierom, Ambrose for ruling Elders, Cyp^.
l. 4. ep. 4. l. 3. ep. ^1.
but does no way satisfy the Reader; for he makes them all preaching Elders,
and makes all the Presbyters to be preaching Presbyters, T^r^. in Apol. c. 39.
Hier. in 3 ^sa. and in sit. 1.
that he may fill the field with Prelates. Ambr. in ^ Tim 5.


But 1. the Ancients by way of question, and as it were doubting at least
polimickely determine that the Council and voices of Elders should be had in
governing the Church; but seeing they all, and most expressly Hierom
acknowledge, that Episcopus and Presbyter are all one, they must either
understand other Elders then preaching Elders, otherwise it was a question
amongst them, if Bishops had voices in the government of the Church, which was
never heard in all Antiquity.

2. Cyprian complains that seniores had been debarred in discipline, but
acknowledges that Presbyters were so proud that they were Masters of all, and
ruled all absque consensu seniorum; therefore he acknowledged preaching
Presbyters, and governing seniores to be diff^rent.

3. We are not to doubt but Hierom knew the mind of Antiquity better then D.
Field, and that Hierom was not singular in this known to all: Quid facit
Episcopus, quod non facit Presbyter excepta ordinatione? Hence Pastors have had
in the ancient Church all power of jurisdiction with these who were, as Hierom
says, Bishops or Prelates, consuetudine, non dominica dispositione, by the
Churches custom, Prelates above Pastors, and this is the judgment of all our
Divines, who have ever judged the contrary Popery, and a step to the Popes
Chair. I might cite Calvin, Beza, Junius, Bucan, Pareus, Vrsine, Luther,
Melancthon, Polan. Piscat^r, Sibrandus, Aretius, Danaeus, Fenerus, Kickerman,
Rivet, Walleus, Professors of Leyden, Gil, Voctius, and many others. Now if
Antiquity took Episcopus and Presbyter for all one, except in the sole act of
ordination, and in all other points of jurisdiction they were equal, what
meaned that word that the Ancients all approved, none gains^ying that ever I
saw who are not parties or corrupted by Prelates: Episcopi nihil faciunt sine
consilio Cleric^rum; and nihil sine consilio Presbyterorum. The meaning must be
ridiculous, except ruling Elders be understood. Pastors do nothing without the advice of Pastors, and Bishops do nothing without the counsel of Bishops; for
Bishops and preaching Presbyters are all one, except in the act of ordination.
We never read (...) soun^ antiquity that Bishops domineered over Bishops,; Yea
it is known the Bishop of Constantinople, Ambr. in 1 Timothy ^.
and the (...) had the dignity above the Bishop of Rome, and the Church of
Rome. Ambrose or as venerable a man. The Jewish Church or Synagogue, and after
the Church had Seniors or Elders, without whose counsel nothing was done in
the Church, which by what negligence it grew out know not, unless it were by
the sloth or pride of the teachers, whilst they alone would seem to be
something. Here are Elders di^^erenced from teachers: It is ignorantly replied
by Field, that none were teachers but Prelates, and all others teached by
permission from the Prelate, because Valerius Bishop of Hippo gave Augustine a
Presbyter leave to preach.

Answ. That none were teachers but Prelates is most false. What then, suppose
we grant that? were none called teachers but Prelates? he dare not say that.
Tertullian, Irenaeus, Hierom, Augustine, Cyprian, Ambrose, Chrysostom,
Oecumenius, Theophylact, Cyrillus, Prosper. Hilarious a thousand times calls
all Pastors, Doctors, teachers: And what, howbeit Christ be the only
Arch-doctor and teacher, and all others teachers by his grace and gracious
permission, are not Apostles, Bishops, Pastors called teachers, a hundred times
in Gods word? and this man will not give the Ancients leave to call poor
Presbyters teachers, and yet Paul gives them this name, as they are
contradistinguished from Apostles, Ephesians 4. 11. 1 Cor. 12. 29.

Q. 4. But the Ancients knew no Lay Elders.

Answ. Nor do we de iure know them, they are Churchmen, and should be for all
their lifetime entertained upon the Churches charges, what our Church, de
facto, does tolerate by reason of our Churches poverty, is another question.

Q. 5. How is it that your ruling-Elders do not give imposition of hands,
Surv^y, c. 16. p. 17;
and bless Pastors, ^^ld Chur. l. ^. c. 26
when they are ordained, and so the lesser should bless the grerter? So the
author of Survay. So D. Field.

Answ. If they judicially cons^nt to imposition of hands, it is sufficient.

2. There is no inconvenience that a ruling Elder, as a part of the Presbytery
bless one, who is not yet a Pastor, but to be ordained a Pastor: For the
ordainer as he is such is greater then the ordained.

Q. 6. Beza gives the keys to both Pastors and Elders. Beza in M^t. 16. 19*
Cartwright, l. 3. p 83.
Cartwright denies the koyes to any except only to Pastors. N^ellius. these.
But Daniel Ni^llius, Theol. p 243.
the keys (says he) were given to Peter, Survay, c. 17^ (...)
ratione officij, by his office, and not to the Apostles only, but also to all
who were to be sent to preach and govern^.

Answ. The keys by the preaching of the Gospel, Potestas concionalis clavium,
were given to Peter as representing all Pastors and Doctors, tanquam subiecto
adaequato: The keys by way of disciplinary binding and loosing were given to
Peter, ta^quam, subiecto virtuali, representing not only Pastors, but also
Doctors and ruling Elders, who were to be called and sent of God.

Q. 7. How can any voice in matters of Religion, but only Pastors, for ruling
Elders are not Pastors. So Field.

Answ. B^llar. de con^. l ^. c 15.
It is Jesaite-like to reason thus with Bellarmine, who says, it is a
pastoral act to define in Councels; and therefore none should teach in
Council (says Panormitan in the Council of Basil) but Prelates who are the
pillars and keys of Heaven. Council.
So said Eccius. Basil.
But the Council of Basil thought not so, Ecc^us de council.
nor the Greek Church, W^lus l. 2 de p^i^^.
for whom Nilus speaks alleging others whom it concerns, should voice
also.

2. Matters of discipline concerns all, Ergo, Elders representing the people
should voice.

3. Suppose that the suffrage and voice of a Pastor, and of an Elder be voices
different only in diverse relatio^s to diverse officers, to wit, the Pastor and
the Eider; yet in the matter of bearing weight in the conscience from force of
truth, and not from the authority of men, they are equal; and therefore ruling
Elders having knowledge and light, and withal authority of office may well
have voices: But it follows not hence that these who have knowledge are
formal Canon-makers, because the Decrees and constitutions of Synods lay two
obligations upon the people: One for the matter, and so in respect that in the
moral part thereof they m^^t be agreeable to the word, they bind the
consciences to an obedience of conscience. 2. They impose an Ecclesiastical
tie from the authority of the Co^^cell and Canon-makers, and so they require
subjection or obedience of reverence for the authority official that is in the
Canon-makers: The second command lays on the first bond or tie, and the first
command lays on the other bond and tie.

Q. 8. Philip and Steven, who were Dea^ons, baptized and preached, Acts 21. 8.
Acts 7 1, 2, 3, etc. but your Dea^ons may not preach nor baptize, that so they
may be prepared for the ministry, according to that 1 Timothy 3. 13. For they who
have used the office of a Deacon will, purch^^e to themselves a good degree,
Deacons cannot baptize and preach.
and great boldness in the faith.

Answ. What Philip and Stephen did, in facto, in an extraordinary fact, nihil
ponit in iure, it belongs nothing to Law, but the (...), of it self, is a
serving of Tables, and a taking of the burden of caring for the poor of the
Pastors, that the Pastors may give themselves to the word and prayer, Acts 6.
2, 4. Now if Deacons ex officio, turn Preachers, and give themselves to the
word and prayer, then by the Apostles reason, Acts 6. 4. they cannot serve
Tables, but they must have other Deacons to take the burden of the poor off
them, that they may give themselves to the word.

2. Christ ordains, 2. Arg.
Mat. ^8. 18. Apostles and Pastors their successors to preach the word, and not
Deacons.

3. There shall be more officers in Gods house given for the edifying of the
Saints, 3. Arg.
then Pastors and Doctors, even preaching Deacons; yea all the offices in Gods
house shall be Preachers; the Prelate to Formalists is a piece of a Preacher;
the Pastor and Doctor by their office must preach (the ruling Elder is nothing
to them) and the Deacon is a teacher, and so all are teachers, ex officio, why
then does Paul, 1 Cor. 12. difference betwixt Governors, helps and teachers,
seeing all are teachers?

4. Romans 12. He who shows mercy, 4. Arg.
and he who distributeth are differenced by their specificke acts from the
Pastor who exhorts and preaches.

5. Paul requires, 5. Arg.
1 Timothy 3. that the Pastor be apt to teach; but he requires no such thing of
the Deacon, whose qualification he describes at length.

6. The well using of the Deacons office is no more by, 6. Arg.
1 Timothy 3. 13. a degree to the ministry or pastoral calling, then, much
boldness in the faith is a degree thereunto, for he, who ex officio, does
preach and baptize, is not a degree to a Pastor, as he who discourses is not
in degree to be a man, or in preparation a man only; but he is formally a man,
now to preach and baptize, are specificke acts of a Pastor, Mat. 28. 18. and so
the Deacon must be formally a Pastor, as he is formally a a man who can and
does perform acts which proceed only from the specificke form of a man.

7. It is a mystery that a Deacon may preach and baptize, 7. Arg.
but he may not administer the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: For 1. Philip an
Evangelist as well as a Deacon might have done both. 2. Is the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper holier then the Sacrament of Baptism, that the Deacon may
administer the one Sacrament, and not the other? But this is a Masse-mystery,
there is no Transubstantiation in Baptism, and therefore a woman, a laicke (as
they speak) may baptize; but he must be a consecrated and orderly Priest who
has power to make and create the natural body of Christ. So Greg. Valent.
de Valentia, Suarez.
Suarez, Vasquez, Bucanus teaches us. Vasquez.
3. The word of God knows not any who have power to baptize, Bucanus.
and have no power to administer the Lords Supper.

8. The Popish Libeller in the Survay says, 8. Arg.
when now contributions and collections cease, Survay, c. 18. p. 20^
the Deacon may preach and baptize. Then Deacons ordained, Romans 12. 8. Acts 6.
4, 5. 1 Timothy 3. are now out of the world, and they have given to us for a well
made Deacon, an ill made and a spilt Minister; but the cause remaining the
office should remain, the Churches poverty remains: For the Prelate has a
singular faculty of creating beggars in his Officiall-Courts.

Q. 9. How is it that you have taken away widows, which was an office
established by the Apostles? Romans 12. 8. For some say they should be gone,
because they were temporary, and the heat of the Eastern Countries which
caused sickness, required them, but they are not needful now. So says
Cartwright. Others make them perpetual, as Fenner, C^^twright l. (...) p. ^^0.
some make them to be women, as Cartwright, some men, (...) defen. p. 135.
as Travors, some neither men nor women only, as Beza and Junius. T^av. did.
^ccl. p. 118, ^19.


Answ. ^un E^cl l 2 c. 4.
The perpetual use of that office we think continues, that is, that there be
some to show mercy on the poor, which are captives, exiled, strangers,
diseased, distracted, and that there be Hospitals for that effect, and
Chirurgians, Physicians, aged men and women, but that widows were officers in
the Church, as Elders and Deacons are, we think no; but that that service may
be performed by men or women, as the Church shall think good. Cartwright
thinks no other then what I say. Fenner thinks well that the sick should
always be cared for, neither by men only, nor by women only, as Beza and
Junius think, but by both as need requires.

Quest 10. Presbyteriall government cannot consist with a Monarchy, you join
with Papists in oppugning the Princes authority in causes Ecclesiastical.
Cartwright, Viretus, Calvin teach that the authority of Kings comes
immediately from God the Creator, not from God in the Mediator Christ. So the
Survay.

Answ. Sarvay of discipl. c. 32, 33.
It is the slanderous malice of Court-Sycophants, to say, a friend to Christ
cannot be a friend to Caesar; but we set down our mind here anent thus.

1. Concl. 1. Conclus.
Presbyteriall government, and the regal power of Monarchs do well consist:
Paul a favourer of this government, 1 Timothy 4. 14. commands that prayers be
put up to God for Kings and all who are in authority, and so do we teach.

2. Conclusion. 2. Conclus.
Our adversaries here corrupt the mind of Cartwright, Cartwright, p. 1. p. 93.
Viretus, Calvin, and others, who say that the authority of Kings come
immediately from God as Creator, Vir^tus dial. 3.
and not from God in Christ as Mediator: Calv admonitions to the Pa^l. 2. of
Eng. p. 61.
For the kingly power is considered two ways, 1. In general, as kingly, and
in the person of heathen Princes, who know nothing of God as a Redeemer in the
Mediator. And so the kingly power in general as given for the good of all
humane societies in general, is from God the Creator for the good of all
societies whither heathen or Christian. So Nebuchadnezzar, Darius, Nero, and
Julian were essentially Kings, and yet had not their kingly power immediately
from the Mediator Christ, except in this general sense that the kingly power
is a lawful ordinance of God warranted by the word of God, and Testament of
our Testator Jesus Christ, because these are essentially Kings and lawful
Magistrates who either never heard of Christ, nor any thing of God; but only
that he is Creator of the world, or then who persecute and hate the name of
Jesus Christ. It may be that the fruits of persecuting Princes, their
government redound to the ^ood and salvation of the Saints, and that by
accident, as all things work out for the good to those who love God. Now
^ormalists denying such to be lawful Kings, as either know not Christ, or
believe not in him, join hands with Papists, and make way for Anabaptisticall
Ana^chy, that a persecuting, or an unbeleeving King is no King, not to be
obeyed, but to be turned out of his Throne: And to this meaning, Calvin,
Viretus, and Cartwright teach that the kingly power flows immediately from
God the Creator, not from God in the Mediator Christ. But 2. the kingly power
is considered in a special manner, as it is in a Christian, whether professing
only the Gospel, or truly believing in Christ, and so in relation to Christ's
Church and to the soul of a believing Prince, the kingly power flows from
God in and through the Mediator Jesus Christ, as all common favors which in
general^ flow from God the Creator, are sanctified, and blessed to the
believers in the Mediator Christ, as meat, drink, sleep, riches, kingly
honor. And in this meaning, Saul's kingly honor in respect of Saul himself is
but a common favor flowing from the Creator; howbeit to Gods Church, for whose
good he did fight the battles of the Lord, it was a special favor flowing
from God in Christ, as our Divines say that creation (which in it self is a
common favor to all) is a mean in the execution of the Decree of El^ction to
the children of God.

3. Conclusion. 3. Conclus.
Hence our Divines say, that kingly authority is the same ordinance of God
essentially considered in the heathen Princes, Cartwright, l. 3. p 163.
as in Christian Kings, as Cartwright and others say. Ob^ruded (...), c. ^. v.
2.
Neither does it follow as our unlawful Canons teach, That the Christian Kings
now have that same power in Causes Ecclesiastical, which the godly Kings
amongst the Jews, as David and Solomon had: ^or David and Solomon were
Prophets as well as Kings, and had power to pen Canon^cke Scripture, and to
prophecy, which power in Ecclesiasticke causes no King now can have. Neither
does it follow which Whytgift says, Whytgift against (...).
that we give no more authority to the Christian Magistrate in the Church of
Christ then to the great Turk. Our Divines say, and that with good warrant,
that the kingly power as kingly, is one and the same in kind in heathen Nero,
and in Christian Constantine, As a heathen man is as essentially a father to
his own children, and a husband to his own wife, and a King to his own
subjects; as a Christian man is a father, husband, and king to his own
children, wife, and subjects. Neither does Christianity superadde, and give of
new any kingly power to a King, because he is now become by Gods grace of a
Heathen King, a Christian King, Christianity adds indeed a new obligation to
employ his kingly power, which he had full and entire before, now in its
exercise and use to more regal and kingly acts, as to take care that the
Gospel be soundly preached, the Sacraments and discipline of the Church kept
pure, and heretics punished according to that, he to whom much is given, from
him much shall be required: But the same King, while he was a heathen King, had
the same kingly power and authority to perform these regal acts; but being
yet a heathen, he wanted (...) supernaturalis, a supernatural or real and
physical power to perform these acts; now this power which he wanted before
he heard of the Gospel and believed in Christ, was not a kingly authority, for
then he should not have been a complete Heathen King before, which is against
Gods word, commanding obedience to heathen Kings, Romans 13. 1, 2. 1 Timothy 2. 1,
2. 1 Pet. 2. 17. but this power that he wanted is a Christian power to exercise
regal and kingly acts: Neither is this an inconvenience, that power to
exercise the acts of a calling in a Christian manner, be Christian and
supernatural, and yet the authority kingly, and not formally Christian, but
such as is, and may be in a heathen King; therefore kingly power and Christian
power are here carefully to be distinguished, and a Christian Kings power as a
Christian, is more then the Turks power in Church Matters. Hence our
Adversaries here dethrone and degrade the King; for they give the King a
head-ship and dominion over the Church as he is a Christian man, and take that
headship from him as a King; because if the Turk by sword should conquer
Britain, and become our King, by their grounds he should be Head of the
Church, no less then our Christian Prince who now re^gneth over us, and
certain it is a poor Headship that they give to the King, even such a
Head-ship as a Heathen King and the Turk, has over subdued Christian
kingdoms; and thus by their way Nero and Julian were heads of Christ's Church.

2. If unbeleeving Kings cease to be Kings, then when they commit any fault
that makes them in Gods Court no members of the Church, they are to be
dethroned, which is most seditious doctrine, and so Formalists herein join
with Papists.

4. Conclusion. 4. Conclus.
There be these distinctions here consider^ble:

1. The Kings power ordinary and extraordinary. 2. His power as a King. 2. and
as a singularly graced Christian. 3. His power hortatorie as a Christian, and
coactive as a King. 4. His power accumulative, not privative in Church Matters.
5. His power in actibus imperatis, in acts commanding to another, and his power
in actibus elicitis, which he is to perform himself.
If a King were a Prophet as a David, he might do many things in an
extraordinary way in Church Matters, which he cannot now ordinarily do.

2. As a singularly graced Christian, he may write Sermons and Commentaries on
holy Scripture for edifying the Church; but this should be done by him by no
kingly faculty.

3. As a Christian he may exhort others to do their duty, but as King he may
command that which Paul commanded Timothy and Titus, to commit the Gospel to
faithful men who are able to teach others, to preach in season, and out of
season, to lay hands suddenly on no man, and reform Religion, purge the Church
of idolatry, and superstition, as Joshuah and H^zekiah did, all which
Churchmen and Synods might do also; 2 Chronicles. 29.
but Synods do this in an Ecclesiasticke way, 2 King. 2^.
upon the pain of Ecclesiasticke censures. The King does it by a regal,
kingly, and coactive power of the sword.

4. the Kings power is accumulative, in giving to the Church, and ayding and
helping; God has given to the King the ten Commandments, and the Gosp^ll, as
a pupil is given to a Tutor: The King holds his sword above the Law of God, to
ward off the strokes of wicked men who do hurt the Law; but the Kings power
is not privative, to take any privilege from the Law and the Church: so his
power is as a tutor to keep, not as a father who may both give and take away
from his son the inheritance; his power is defensive, not offensive.

5. He has power in actibus imperatis, to command that all preach sound
Doctrine, decree just Canons, exercise discipline aright, but in actibus
elicitis, in acts performed by an intrinsecall power in the agent, he has no
power: for the King as King cannot preach himself, nor baptize, etc. as the
will may command the eye to see, the feet to walk, but the will does not see
nor walk: Here two errors are to be rebuked.

1. Whitgift says, Wh^tgift, tract 3 to the ad^^ c. 6. 5. divil against
Cartwright, p. 18^
the King is not the head of the Church as it is a society of elect and
believers, for so the government is spiritual, but he is the head of the
Church, as it is a visible society in external government, comprehending good
and evil. For 1. The government visible and external is merely
ecclesiastical, by Christ's spiritual laws and censures, of rebuking,
binding, loosing and excommunicating; but the King is not an ecclesiastical
person, and so not the head who has any intrinsecall influence as King in
these acts.

2. He is the head of the persons who make the Church, and so is a politic
head, but he is not the head of the Church visible, as it is such. The head
visible and member^ are of one nature, the King as King is a politic and
civil head, the visible Church is not a politic and civil, Cam^ro. (...)
but an ecclesiastic body, so Camero erreth who will have all Churchmen
synodically constituting and decreeing Canons, and in all acts of external
government subordinate to the King as King, as the instruments and servants are
subordinate to the principal cause and first commander. 1. Because then the
King should be the principal ecclesiastic matter, and prime Canon maker, the
King the first excommunicater when the Church excommunicateth; but the members
of a Church-Synod are immediately subordinate to Christ whose servants and
instruments they are, and not the servants of the King. Nathan as a man was
David's servant, but as a Prophet he was Gods servant, and not David's servant.

Hence a third error of court sycophantes must be rejected, Magistrate has ^
no negative voice in Synod^.
that the King has a negative voice in discipline, and in Church Assemblies,
which is most false.

1. Because Christ has promised to lead his Church in all truth, to be with
her to the end, to be in the midst of his own assem^led in his name, and this
promise Christ makes and keeps under Heathen Kings, who have no voice at all
in Church Assemblies, 1 Cor. 4* 5. Math. 18. 23. Act. 15. 28.

2. If the acts of Church Assemblies have no ecclesiastical power, without the
consent of a Christian ^rince, by that same reason the acts of public
preaching, baptizing and administering the Lords Supper should lay no
ecclesiastical bond upon men's consciences, except the King should consent unto
these acts; but the latter is against the Word of God, Jer. 1. 10. Jer. 1. 18,
19. 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. and most absurd. Ergo, so is the former. I prove the
connection, because that same power of Christ which is given to the Church
conveened for acts of discipline is given for preaching, and the conferring of
the seals of the covenant; for the Church has the keys to bind and loose
from Christ equally independent upon any mortal man in discipline, as in
doctrine, so in discipline the Kings power cannot be to impede all acts of
discipline or to make them null, except he consent to them.

3. Because these words are absolutely made good, 3. Arg.
without the interveening of any other authority. Whatsoever ye bind on earth,
shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever ye loose on earth, shall be loosed in
Heaven, else Christ would have said, whatsoever the King or civil Magistrate
shall bind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven, otherwise nothing is ratified
on earth or Heaven either, which the Church binds or loses, because the
King says not Amen to it.

4. If a contumacious brother shall refuse to hear the Church, 4. Arg.
he is not for that to be excommunicated and to be reputed an Heathen and a
Publican, because the civil Magistrate does not repute him such an one.

5. Of that free grace, 5. Arg.
whereby God hears the prayers of two or three agreeing to pray for one thing
on earth, the Lord binds and loses in heaven that which his Church binds
and loses on Earth, Mat. 18. 19. but the Lord hears the prayers of two or
three agreeing to pray for one thing on Earth, though the civil Magistrate do
not give his consent that these prayers be heard and granted of God; because
the Magistrate is no intercessour without whose consent God hears not
prayers. The proposition is clear from Matthew 18. ver. 18, 19.

6. If the Magistrate have such a joint power of binding and loosing, 6. Arg.
and of forgiving and reteining sins with the Church, then also with the
Apostles and their successors; but Christ gave this power to his Apostles
without any such condition, Matthew. 28. 18, 19. John ^0. 22, 23. and they
practiced this power without consent of the Magistrate, and preached and
excommunicated against his will, 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20. 1 Cor. 5. 4. yea, as the
Father sent Christ, so should the Father have sent the civil Magistrate, for
so are they sent who have power to forgive and retain sins, John 20. 21, 22,
23.

7. That power which upon just reasons we deny to the Pope, 7. Arg.
that we cannot give to the King, but upon just reasons we deny to the Pope a
negative voice in Councels, to anull lawful Councels conveened in the name of
Christ, except he who is the virtuall Church say Amen thereunto, neither is the
King the virtuall Church.

8. If a woe be due to a Pastor, 8. Arg.
if he preach not, suppose the Magistrate should forbid him to preach, 1 Cor.
9. 6.
then also is a woe due to the Church, Act. ^. 19*
which uses not the keys, though the Magistrate forbid, then has the
Magistrate no such voice, and if the Church of Pergamos be rebuked for not
using the power of the keys against these who held the Doctrine of Balaam and
the Nicolaitanes even when the Magistrate was a killer of the witnesses of
Jesus, then the Magistrat^ has no such negative voice, for it should not be
possible to censure the followers of such Doctrine, seeing, he was against
both Doctrine and Discipline, but the Lord reproves P^rgamos in this case,
Revelation 2. ver. 13, 14, 15.

9. There is no Word of God to prove that the Lord has given the power of the
keys to the King as the King, 9. Arg.
and therefore we are not to believe that he has any such power. Also if the
foresaid power of the keys be given to the Church without any such power of
the King, the Church by all the former arguments may conveene to exercise that
power, in preaching, binding, loosing, excommunicating, suppose the civil
Magistrate should discharge and inhibit these meetings, for if the power of the
keys be given immediately by Christ to the Church, then the power of meeting
for the exercise of that power must also be given, though the Magistrate say
not Amen, as is clear, Mat. 18. 18, 19, 20, 21. 1 Cor. 5. 4* 5. 1 Cor. 11. 19,
20. where the Church had her own Synods without the consent of a civil
Magistrate, but we are to repute it a special favor of God, when the King as
a nursing-^ather will countenance Synods with his royal presence, God bless
our King.

5. Conclusion. 5. Conclus.
The Kings royal power in adding his sanction to the ecclesiastical
constitutions, and in punishing such as are decreed to be heretics by the
Church is regal, and not ministerial and servile. See for this the Con c.
Chalced. A^t. 16. the Imperial laws, Cod. l. 1 tit. 8. leg. 2. Heretic.
Vocab, and decret. p. 2. cause. 23. q. 8. c. 30. crossing Bellar. de pont l. 1.
c. 7. So do their own men go against Bellarmine in this, as Sanderus de
clavib. David. l* 2. c. 13. Carerius de potest. sum. pont. l. 2. c. 23 Leo
epist. 38. to Martian and Pulcheria, and Leo epist. 7. to Theodosius. Becanus
erreth here with Bellarmine, making the King as a servant obliged to add his
sanction civil to ecclesiastical Canons. Becan. in opusc. exam. conc. Anglic
c. 7.

1. Because the use of the sword at Gods commandment is a kingly act commanded
by God, and is service done to God, not to the Church.

2. Neither is the King so to execute the Churches will, as he should judge
only of the fact, and of the assumption, yea he is to judge of the law, and of
the major proposition. I or we see not in the Word of God, where a Judge is a
Judge to punish a fault, and is not to know judicially that it is a fault: a
Judge as a Judge should know such a thing to be heresy, and not tak^ it upon
the word of an Assembly of Churchmen, Deu. 17. 18* 19. he is expressly to read
and know the law, and to know and remember the Decree, Prove. 31. 5. And the
cause which he knows not he is to search out, Job 29. 16. all which is meant
of a knowledge not of private discretion, which is required in all private
Christians, but (as I take these places) of a knowledge judicial and
authoritative which agrees to a Judge as a Judge.

3. If a Synod err, and decree that man to be an heretic who is sound in the
faith, the King is not obliged to err with the Synod, and to punish the
innocent, he is to decree righteous judgment, and so the King is to judge of
heresy, but after a regal and civil way, and with a coactive power, as the
Synod or Church-Assembly is to judge of heresy after an ecclesiastic way, and
with a spiritual power. 2. The King punishes heresy as it troubles the
Common-w^alth, and the Synod as it is scandalous and infectious in the Church.

Yea and the Christian King rules over men as men, and also as Christian-m^n;
he rules over them as men, with a dominion over their bodies, lives and goods
by his civil laws, he has also dominion as King over men, as Christians and
members of Christ's kingdom and Church, not over their consc^ences (for that is
proper only to the father of spirits) but he has a coactive power over all
men, even Pastors, as to cause them do their Christian duties, he has power to
compel Churchmen in Assemblies to determine truth, and to use the keys
right, and to preach and use the Sacraments according as Christ has commanded
in his Word, and to punish them when they do otherwise. What then if the King
discern that to be truth, and absolve the man, whom the Church-Assembly does
condemn as an heretic, who shall judge betwixt them?

I answer, the infallible rule of judging for both is the Word of God, which
speaks home unpartially to both, if they will hear, but certainly the Kings
civil, kingly coactive power to compel men to do their duty remains the
highest and most supreme power on Earth, in genere potestatis politicae, in the
kind of politic power, and pastors and all men may, by this power, be
compelled to do right, as for the abuse of the power, it is no part of the
power, and in this kind the King has a negative politic and kingly suffrage
and voice in all Church Assemblies, no ecclesiastical constitution has the
force of a law without the politic suffrage of the civil Judge. And again
the ecclesiastic power that Christ has given to his Church remains: also
the most supreme power under Christ in genere potestatis ecclesiasticae, and
the King is subject to this power. The King is not excepted in this, He that
despises you despises me, and in this, whatsoever ye shall bind on earth
shall be bound in Heaven, and in this, whose sins ye remit, they are
remitted, and whose sins ye retain they are retained, and this
ecclesiastical power being the highest on Earth, Pastors may command Kings in
the Lord, Jer. 1. 10, 18, 17. to do their duty by an ecclesiastic power.
Arminians and Formalists both ask which of the two powers are highest, and
nearest unto the head Christ, whither the kingly power, or the ecclesiastic
power, for two parallel highest powers on earth cannot be.

I answer, by asking which of the two shoulders, in a man's body are highest,
and nearest to the man's head? Certainly one of them in a well proportioned body
is not higher then another, and both are alike near the head, as none of two
pole-starrs are nearer to their Zenith and Nadir, none of two wheels in a right
Chariot are higher then another. Davenant. de iud. controver. c. 13. p. 7^
Barclaius de priest. c. 14. p. 110
The Church power (says the Prelate Davenant) is highest in teaching and
directing; the kingly power in commanding and compelling. Barclai compares
them to two shoulders under one head. Balth Meisnerus in sobr. Philo. par. 3.
Sect. 2. c. 2.
Meisner says, one of them is not above another. Anto Spal^^^ de rep. ^c. l.
6. c. 3. ^. 17.
There is no absurdity (says Spalato) that in two bodies formally different
there should be two heads, yea it is necessary. Glossa. in C. Had^i. an. did.
36: (...) art. Cusan. de conc. l. 3. c. 3.
The Roman Gloss says, Patricius is the Popes father in things temporal, and
the Pope is his father in things spiritual, as Cusan says, Papists (says
Spalat.) Berengarius l de mist sign. t^m. ^. Bibloth patr.
have deleted that out of the Gloss. Gelasius.
So Berengarius, Nicolaus I.
Gelasius Papa, Nicolaius the I agree to these words, Sciendum quod nec
Catholicae fidei, nec Christianae contrarium est legi, M Anto. de Domin.
si ad honorem regni, and sacerdotij, Arth^epist. Spala. de rep. eccl. l. 6. c.
3. n. 4, 5, 6, 7.
Rex pontifici, and pontifix obediat regi.

Spalato seems against Bellarmine, to make up the losses made by Papists in
Kings honor, while he holds, that the King his person, and as he is a
Christian man is subject to Church Power, but as King he is subject to none,
but to Christ, from whom immediately he has his kingly dignity, even as (says
he) when an Emperors servant, being a Physician, the Emperor as Emperor is
not subject to the Physician, but only the Emperor as he is a wounded man is
subject to the art of his own servant who cures him, and that of the
Emperor* free will, not by coaction, so the Image-maker or he who makes
pourtracts, in his art is not subject to the King, neither is the King as King,
Master of the art of painting, or pourtract-making, the art only is subject to
the precepts and principles of art, but the person of the painter is subject to
the kingly power; Bellarm. contra Barcl. c. 2.
for the King, as Bellarmin says, may forbid the Image-maker to draw obscene
and filthy Images, or to waste too much gold or silver upon his Images, or to
sell his images at too dear a price. Hence, says he, the kingly dignity is
not subject to the ecclesiastical power, or to any other power on earth, but
only to Jesus Christ.

I answer, the Prelate does well difference in the art of paintry these two. 1.
That which is artificial and is only ruled by art, that the King cannot
command, another thing which is moral, as that he sell not his Images too
dear, and hurt not the common wealth by spending vainly too much gold and
silver on his Images, and in this the King may make laws to limit the Painters
moral carriage, but then he and his fellows honor not the King, who call him
judge over all persons, and of all causes, or in all causes: and that without
any distinction; for when two Shoomakers contend about a point of tanning
leather, the King is not Judge in that cause, because it is a point of art
which belongs to the art, not the King. Also the right translation of the
Bible out of the Hebrew and the Greek in the vulgar language is a cause merely
ecclesiastical, belonging to the Church Assembly, it were hard to make the
King being ignorant of these mother languages, the Judge of that version, as he
is made by them Judge in all causes ecclesiastical, howbeit, de jure, he is a
politic Judge, even in this judging by a coactive and kingly power, howbeit,
de facto, and through ignorance he cannot exercise the kingly power that God
has given him in this act.

2. By this comparison, the Prelate puts upon the King ^ut a course piece of
country honor. O (faith he) as King, I make him above all, and subject to no
power in Heaven or Earth, but immediately to God; forsooth so make you the
Painter, the Shoemaker, the Fashioner subject to no power in Heaven and Earth,
no not to the King, but only immediately to God, only their persons are subject
to the King, and so is the person of the King as a Christian man, not as a
King, subject to Pastors, who may exhort him and rebuke him when he judges
unjustly.

But 3. says the Prelate, The wounded Emperor is subject to his servant the
Physician who cures him, not as Emperor, but as a wounded man, and that of
his own free will and not by coaction. What means this (not by coaction) but
that a King, neither as King, neither as a Christian man is subject to
Church Discipline, to the admonition of Pastors, by any ecclesiastical
coaction, or any law of God, but of the Kings own free will? Consider how
Court-parasites do dishonor the Lord, for if Nathan by Gods commandment was
obliged to rebuke David for his adultery and murder, and the man of God
obliged to cry against Jeroboams Altar, and the Seer obliged to reprove King
Asa, and Jeremiah commanded to speak against the Kings and Princes of the
land, and if the Kings of Israel and Judah were plagued of God, because they
would not hear and submit to the Prophets speaking to them in the name of the
Lord, then the King as a Christian man is subject to the Ecclesiastical power,
not of his own free will, as this flatterer says, but by such Ecclesiastical
coaction as God lays upon all men, whose spirits are subject to Christ's
kingly power.

4. This comparison halteth fowlely. In the art of paintry, ye may abstract
that which is moral from that which is artificial; but in a King as a King,
there is nothing artificial, or which is to be abstracted from justice and
piety; for all the acts of kingly authority as kingly, are moral acts of
justice, and of piety in preserving both the Tables of the Law (if a King
command a stratagem of war, that which is merely artificial is not from the
King as King, but from a principle of military art in him, as an expert
soldier) if then the King as King be a moral agent and a preserver of both
Tables, then as King he is subject to the Ecclesiastical power.

5. Spalato fails far in making the end of kingly government a natural
end, Spal. ib. n. 9.
not life eternal, as the end of sailing is the desired harbor, and not the
kingdom of Heaven, which is l^fe eternal; nay, but if we speak either of the
end of the work, or the end of the worker, the end of kingly power is a moral
end; for the end of the work called finis operis, is by Paul said to be, that
we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, and
this is de iure, also finis operantis, the end which the Ring is to intend, and
so the dignity, office, acts and end of the King as the King is subordinated to
Christ's kingly power in Church Discipline, and yet he is the most supreme
politic power on earth, and in eo genere, solo Deo minor, and above the
Pastors in that kind.

But do we join with Papists in this? Clemens 5. and temp^rales sua a nobis,
and sub nobis tenet (Rex) Clemens l. ^. c 11.


1. Papists say Kings hold their Crowns of the Pope the Church universal
virtually: We think Nero had not his kingdom from Peter, Azorius inst. mor.
p. ^ l. 4. c. 10 Papa subditos a Sacraments Religione erga Regem solvit.
nor Domitian and Traian their kingdom from Clemens and Anacletus, nor Hadrian
from Enaristus and Alexander.

2. Innocentius 3d. forbad obedience to Emperors: Bonifacius 8^. So Sander
devi^.
for hatred of King Philip of France forbad to pay tribute to the Emperors?
Monat. l. 2. c. 4.
the Devil might blush to lay that upon us. Council. go^ 8. c. 14. Bellar.
contra Barclatum. c. 19.


3. Was there ever amongst us the like of their 8* general Council? See more
of this in Bosius d^ sig.
A Prelate shall not light off his horse, Eccles l. 17. c 3. and B^sius de
^uinis gentium, l 1. c. 18. Fazellus de reb Sion, l. 8. c ^. Sander. de visib.
nor bow to a King, nor shall a King seek that of a Bishop, under the pain of
two years excommunication?

4. Did any of us think or write what Bellarmine has spoken against the Lords
anointed? Monat. l. 2 c. 4 Papirius Masson de Epist. Vrb. l. 5. in vita
B^nifacij 8. B^rrom. Anal tom 12. anno. 1106. n. 14. all Trumpets of Treason
that the Pope may de^hron^ Kings.
If Princes cannot be moved by Church Censures; and if the necessity of the
Church require, the (Pope) shall free their subjects from obeying them,
ipsisque principatus abrogabit, and shall pull their Princedome from them. I
say no more of this.

CHAP. XX.
Q. 20. Whether or no the government of the Church of Scotland can be proved by
Gods Word to be lawful?
1. ARTICLE.
Of the Doctrine and worship of the Church of Scotland.
WE acknowledge the Scriptures of God contained in the Old and New Testament to
contain the whole doctrine of faith and good manners, our Covenant rejects
all traditions contrary, without and beside the word of God, and so it
rejects all religious observances, all humane Ceremonies, all religious
symbolicall signs, all new means of worshipping God, all Images, positive
Rites which have any influence in Gods worship as will worship, and impious
additions to Gods word, Jer. 7. 7. 2 Samuel 7. 7. Deuteronomy. 12. 32. Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Lev.
10. 2. Heb. 1. 13. Heb. 7. 14. 1 Chronicles. 15. 13. 1 King. 12. 32. Mat. 15. 14.
Rev. 22. 18. whereas they want warrant from Gods word. All actions of divine
worship, all religious means of worship, all actions of moral conversation
must be warranted by ((...)) according as it is written, for the which cause
our Church condemns kneeling in the act of receiving the Lords Supper, all
Holy Days dedicated to God or Saints, except the Lord's Day, confirmation,
bed-communion, surplice, corner-cap, etc. because they are acts of worship and
religious means of worship, not according to the word, as is clearly shown to
the Reader by the following Categoricke Tables, where all right worship, moral
acts of discipline and conversation that are lawful will bide the trial of
this (according as it is written) even to the last specificke and individual
humane act, and where the last individual act is proved, all the rest in that
same Categorie is proved: As when I prove Peter to be a man, I prove him to be
a sensitive creature, a living creature, a bodily substance, etc. which no man
sees in the Categorie of humane Ceremonies and unlawful offices. Hence our
first Categorie.

as it is written, Mat. 26. 26.
1. The worship of God. 2. Sacramental worship. 3. Partaking of the supper of
the Lord 4. Partaking of the Lords Supper in this time and place by Peter,
James, Anna.
So in the officers of the New Testament.

as it is written, Col. 4. 17. Phil. 2. 25
1. A lawful Minister of the New Testament, 2. A lawful Pastor, 3. Archippus
Epaphroditus,
So

as it is written, 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5.
1. an act of discipline, 2. An act of Church-censure, 3. An act of the
Eldership of Corinth excommunicating the incestuous man.
The like may be said of an act of charity to the poor, 1 Cor. 16. 1.

But come to the Categorie of Formalists, and you shall see a great defect, and
this (as it is written) shallbe wanting four times, as the diagram following
does show plainly.

not written.
1. Order and decency, as it is written, 1 Cor. 14. 2 Orderly Ceremonies of
humane institution 3. Sacred symbolicall signs of Religions institution
devised by men 4. Surplice, crossing, 5. A Surplice upon William, Thomas, the
crossing of this Infant John, made by this Pastor Thomas, this day and place
So the reason is clear why we will have nothing undetermined by Scripture in
either acts of the first, or of the second Table, except mere circumstances of
persons, time, and place* which add no new morality to the actions, is because
we hold the word of God to be perfect in doctrine of faith, and manners, and
all points of discipline, which the Patrons of Ceremonies, and humane Prelates
are forced with Papists to deny.

2. ARTICLE.
Officers of the Church.
THe ordinary officers of our Church are Pastors, to whom belongs the word of
exhortation, 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3. 2 Timothy 1. 7, 8 Doctors, who in schools expound
the word of God, and convince gainsayers, Romans 12. 7, 8. Ephesians. 4. 11. 1 Cor. 12.
28. Governors, or governing Elders who rule well, Romans 12. 8. 1 Cor. 12. 28. 1 Timothy 5. 17. Acts 15. 23. and Deacons who care for the poor, Acts 6. 2, 3, 4. 1 Timothy 3. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. As for the Prelate who is pretended to be the Pastor
of Pastors, and an Ecclesiastical creature, having majority of power, both of
order and jurisdiction above the Pastor and Doctor, the Church of Scotland did
ever repute such an one the fifth element, and the sixth finger in the hand, as
having no warrant in the word, and therefore unlawful, Exodus 25. 9. Heb. 8. 5.
1 Chronicles. 8. 19. 11, 12, 13. 1 King. 6. 38. as also expressly condemned, Luke 22.
24, 25, 26. 1 Pet. 5. 3, 4. Mat. 18. 18. 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5, 6. Acts 1. 23. Acts
15. 24.

In the first constitution and infancy of our Church there were some visitors,
and superintendents for planting of Churches, because breasts and hair of our
Churches were not grown, after the example of the Apostles, who sent such to
plant, and visit Churches, and appoint Elders in Congregations, Acts 8. 14, 15,
16. Acts 13. 14. 15, 16. Acts 14. 23. Tit. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Acts 21. 17, 18.
but after the Church was planted there was no need of such.

Titular Doctors who were Pastors only, and taught not in the Schools, but
were only previous dispositions to Episcopacy, as blew color prepares a
cloth for purple, our Church never allowed, upon the grounds allowing lawful
Doctors, as the Scripture does, Romans 12. 7, 8. 1 Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11.

3. ARTICLE.
Calling of Officers, and especially Pastors.
IVnius makes according to Gods word three parts of the Pastors calling.

1. Election, some call it Nomination.

2. Presentation, or offering of the man.

3. Confirmation. When a place vacketh in the ministry, with us a Pastor
makes a Sermon of the necessity of a Pastor, showing what a person the Pastor
should be, after the example of Peter, Acts 1. 22. The looking out of a man is
sometimes given to the multitude of believers, with us, according to that, Acts
6. 3. The Apostles say, Wherefore, brethren, look ye out seven men. But
ordinarily this begins at the Presbytery, or College of Pastors, from
whence things take their beginning, Acts 1. 15. And in those days (when the
Church wanted an Apostle) Peter stood up, and said, Acts. 6. 2. then the twelve
called the multitude. When they wanted Deacons, Acts 21. 18. the matter is
brought first to the Eldership, Acts 11. 30. the Disciples charity is sent to
the Eldership. Paul sent Timothy, Titus, Sylvanus, whom after the multitude did
approve, Acts 14. 22. 2 Cor. 8. 16. and so do we.

2. The person is tried, 1. by Timothy and Titus, and so by the Presbytery. 1.
his ability, that he be able to teach others, 2 Timothy 2. 3. that he be apt to
teach, 1 Timothy 3. 2. Tit. 1. 9. else the Timothies of the Church lay hands
suddenly on him, contrary to 1 Timothy 5. 22. So the Presbytery tries according
to these Canons with us, his skill in the Tongues, Latin, Hebrew, and Greek;
his ability of preaching popular Sermons, and interpreting Scripture, in
controversies, in Chronology, and the history of the Church, and he must be
proved and tried by the people, by preaching sundry Sermons to them, 1 Timothy 3.
10. And let these first be proved, and let them use the office, what ever
officers they shall be, Pastors, Doctors, Elders or Deacons. Also his grace and
godliness is tried by both people and Presbytery, 1 Timothy 3. 2, 3. his ability
to govern, v. 4, 5. Acts 6. 3. Titus 1. 7, 8, 9. his fidelity, 2 Timothy 2. 2.
and he must bring a Testimonial or Christian Letters of recommendation, from
those amongst whom he lived as 1 Timothy 3. 7.

3. When all this is done he is not yet a Pastor. Then a day is appointed,
wherein an Edict is read and affixed on the Church-doore, and another day set
for his ordination, at which day the Edict is called, all who have any thing to
object against his life and doctrine are thrice publicly at the Church-dore
invited to come and object: And this we think is (...) And 1 Timothy 3. 10.
(...), Acts 6. 3. to find out, and to try the man. The day of ordination is a
day of fasting and praying for Gods blessing to the ministry, as Acts 13. 23.
And they ordained them Elders in every Church, and prayed with fasting, Acts
13. 3. and when they had fasted and prayed, they laid their hands on them. The
Presbytery and people meeting, some Pastor, as Acts 1. 15. preaches for the
purpose in hand, as Peter does there, v. 17. 18, 19. After Sermon the Pastor
calls him up before the Congregation, and demands if he be willing to
accept the charge, and he must testify his consent as Isaiah, Isa. 6. 8. Jer.
6. v. 7, 8. Acts 9. 20. Then the Pastor asks the peoples consent, which they
testify by their (...), the lifting up of their hands, as Acts 14. 23. and the
man must please the whole multitude, as Acts 6. v. 5. Acts 1. 26. This being
done, the Pastor comes down out of the Pulpit, and he with the Presbytery
lays their hands on his head, and prays that God would bless him, as the
Apostles did, Acts 6. 6. The Apostles prayed and laid their hands on them, Acts
13. 3. They prayed and laid their hands on them, 1 Timothy 4. 14. 1 Timothy 5. 22.
all being done, the Eldership of the Congregation give him the right hand of
fellowship, as Gal. 2. 9. The action is closed with thanksgiving, as all grave
actions should be, 1 These. 5. 18.

And this order in substance is kept in ordaining Doctors, Elders, and Deacons.
Here are no popish toys, which Papists use in ordination, no man is obtruded
upon the flock against their consent, and no man appointed a Pastor but of a
certain flock, as Acts 20. 28. 1 Pet. 5. 2.

of the Church, which receives the child in her fellowship, as Rom* 6. 3, 4,
5. 1 Pet. 4. 20, 21. The presenter of the child is the father, or some friend
if he be dead or absent, because the child is received in the Covenant because
the fathers are within the Covenant, and so sealed with the same seal of the
Covenant, Acts 2. 37, 38 Romans 11. 14. Genesis 17. 7, 8. 9, 10. and the action is
closed with thanksgiving, as all grave, but especially actions of Gods worship
should be ended, 1 Chronicles. 16. 7, 8, 9. and as the other Sacrament is closed,
Mat. 26. 30.

6. ARTICLE.
The Lords Supper.
THese only are admitted to the Lords Supper, who in the judgment of charity
have tried and examined themselvess 1 Cor. 11. 28. The profane and scandalus
are debarred from this Table, as Mat. 7 6. Psalm. 50. v. 16, 17. This Sacrament
requiring a self-examination going before, 1 Cor. 11. 28. Therefore a Sermon of
preparation is preached the day before, even as Christ prepared and dieted his
guests with heavenly Sermons preceding the action, as is clear, Luke 22. 14,
15. Mark 14. 18, 19, 20. Mat. 26. 21, 22, 23. John 13. v. 13, 14, 15, 16. A
Table is covered, not an Altar erected, as is Luke 22. 21. John 13. 28. A
Sermon for the pupose in hand is preached before, as Christ does, Joh. 13. 18,
19 20. Mat. 26. 22, 23. as a Sermon goes before Baptism, Acts 8. 35, 39. Acts
19. 4, 5, 6. The banqueters sit down at Table, even as Jesus sat down with
the twelve Disciples, as is Mat. 26. v. 20. and v. 28. Mark 14. v. 18. and 22.
the Lord honoring them with Table-honour with himself, as is clear, Luke 22.
21. John 13. 24, 28. The Pastor takes the bread, and before he break it, he
gives thanks, and prays for the blessing of the Elements, to the end and use
appointed by Christ, even as Christ did, Mat. 26. 26 and thereafter takes the
bread, rehearses the words of the institution, and breaks the bread, and
gives to the banqueters, and they divide it amongst them, at Christ's
commandment, as also he takes the cup, and says, drink ye all of this, this
is the New Testament; etc. as Christ did, Mat. 26. 26, 27. Mark 14. 22, 23.
Luke 22. 19, 20. v. 17. In the mean time while the people are eating and
drinking, the Pastor is speaking of Christ's love in dying for man, of the Lords
death, of faith required in annuntiating the Lords death till he come again,
even as Christ all the while entertained his guests with heavenly Sermons, as
is clear, Mat. 26. 28, 29. Mark 14. 25. Luke 22. 21, 2^. John 13. and having
done, they sing a Psalm, as Christ and his Disciples did, Mat. 6. 28. Mar. 14
26 all the while Elders in reverend and decent manner attend the service of the
Table as the banquet requires; for that some serve at that Supper is gathered
from Mat. 26. 19. Mark 14. 15. where mention is made of a large upper room
furnished and prepared, which is a clear warrant for a large Table, a clean
and fair Table-cloth, Basins, Cups, and vessels decent and comely for that
service, and from Christ his guirding himself with a towell, and washing their
feet, and standing as a servant, John 13. 4, 5, 6. Luke 22. 27. The nature of
the Sacrament requires thanksgiving, and therefore afternoon a Sermon of
thanksgiving is preached, which is also warranted from Mat. 26. 30.

7. ARTICLE.
Public Fasting.
THe Fast is indicted eight days before, and the causes laid open for
preparing of the people for humiliation, as Joel 2. 1, 2, 3. Isa. 22. 12, 13.
We have no anniversarie, and set Fasts or Feasts either, because God himself
by his judgment imminent, or already inflicted, or by permitting his people to
follow their own ways, calls to fasting and mourning, Isa. 22. 13, Joel 2.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. and so by his mercies and wonderful deliverances
calls to extraordinary joy of thanksgiving, Psalm. 118. 24. The doctrine of
the Law is preached, as Joel 2. and Isa 58. and the Fast observed with
abstinence from meat and drink, and carnal and ordinary pleasures. Joel 2.
16. We think to deny the lawfulness of public fasting on the Lords day, as
if the Christian Sabbath were a day only of spiritual feasting and rejoicing,
because that day Christ ended the work of redemption and second Creation, is a
wronging of the Christian Sabbath, which is ordained for the whole public
worship of God, joying, sorrowing for sin, learning Gods will in all and
every point, as the Jewish Sabbath was not ordained only for Meditation on the
work of Creation, but for worships of all kind: The worship of this day, Acts
20. 7. is as large as preaching, and being in the Spirit, on the Lords day, and
seeing the visions of God, Rev. 1. 10, 11, 12. and the whole ordinary worship
public. It is then too narrow to restrict all our Sabbath-worship to one
single act of festival rejoicing.

8. ARTICLE.
Marriage.
MArriage is no Sacrament, but because it is not a contract merely humane, and
God is said to join the parties together, Mat 19. 6. and God first married
Adam and Eve. We think it fit that the Pastor, who is the Ambassador of
Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 20. should join them together, and instruct them in the
doctrine of Marriage, as it is, Genesis 2. 18, 19. Mat. 19. 3, 4. Heb. 13. 4. 1
Cor. 7. expressed by God.

For eschewing of scandals, harlotry, forbidden Marriages, for obtaining
consent of Parents and vice-parents, and hearing of parties contracted to the
parties to be married, proclamation of purposed marriage is needful, that we
give no offense, 1 Cor. 10. 32, 33. 1 Cor. 7. 29.

9. ARTICLE.
Burial.
AS coming in the world, so neither interring and burial is performed in the
Word of God with preaching, reading service over the dead, singing Scriptures
(as Papists) which tend to superstition, therefore we use only with a company of
Christians in decent manner to convey the corpse to the Earth with moderate
mourning, conference of our mortality, as Sarah, Genesis 23. 2, 19. Abraham, Genesis
49. 31. and Joshua, Josh. 24. 30. and Samuel, 1 Samuel 25. 1, 2, 3. Josiah were
buried.

The place of burial with us is not under the Altar, or the place of
assembling, the Church, for the word or Sacraments, as Papists do, but in some
public place either near the Church or some enclosed field, because the Jews
buried sometimes in a cave, Genes. 25. 9. sometimes in a valley, Deuteronomy. 34. 6.
sometimes in a garden, 2 Kin. 21. 18. Joh. 19. 41.

ART. 10.
Schools and Doctors.
THere are with us Doctors of Divinity who teach in Schools and Universities,
men tried to be holy and learned, and then put in office, as 1 Timothy 3. 10.
under whose instruction are students aiming at the holy mynistery called
exspectantes, as in the Jewish Church in their Colleges, were young Prophets,
or sons of the Prophets, as 1 Samuel 10. 5. 2 Kin. 2. 7. 2 Kin. 4. 1. 1 Kin.
20. 35. These Doctors and also the teachers of humane literature, who train up
children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, Pro. 22. 6. Ephesians. 6. 4. if
they aim at the Ministry, prophecy in our presbyteriall meetings, 1 Cor. 14.
29.

ART. 11.
Elders and Deacons.
ELders help the Pastors in governing, but labor not in the Word and
Doctrine, 1 Timothy 5. 17. and yet visit the sick, over-see the ways and manners
of the people, and so rule with diligen^e, Rom 12. 8. 1 Cor. 12. 28. and judge
with Pastors and Doctors, Matthew. 18. 18, 19, 20. Deacons are officer; who judge
not authoritatively, neither preach the Word nor administer the Sacraments, but
attend Tables, or takes care of the Churches rents, and shows mercy with
chearfullnesse, Act. 6. 3, 4. Romans 12. 8. being tried to be grave, sober,
faithful, are put in office, 1 Timothy 3 10.

Upon the first day of the week, every one lays by in store, as God
prospers him, giving it in to abroad at the Church-doore, for the relief of
the poor, as 1 Cor. 16. 2. It is provided that Ministers have competent
stipends, as 1 Cor 9. 13. and that Hospitals be upholden, Mat. 25. 35, 36.
Eccl. 11. 1, 2. and that the fabric of the Church be upholden by the Patron
and freeholders, as Mal. 1. 10. Hag. 1. 4. Hag. 2. 16.

ART. 12.
Church Assemblies and the power of censures.
THere are Assemblies in our Church, as were in the Apostolic Church, Act. 1.
15, 16. Act 6. 2, 3, 4. Act. 11. 1, 2, 3. Act. 15. 6, 7, 8. etc. They handle
only matters merely ecclesiastical, what is scandalous, and what may edify,
Mat. 18. 18, 19, 20. 1 Cor. 5. 5, 6. but no things civil which belong to the
civil Magistrate, Luke 22. 25, 26, 27. Luke 12, 13, 14, 15. Romans 13. 4, 5, 6.
compared with Romans 12. 6, 7, 8.

Assemblies in our Church are of four sorts. 1. Sessions of every particular
Congregation who has power of discipline in things belonging to themselves,
such as is to rebuke publicly these who sin publicly, as 1 Timothy 5. 20. to
admit or not admit to the Sacrament, to order decently the public worship, 1
Cor. 11. 20, 21. 1 Cor. 14. 33, 40. Tit. 1. 5. Hence there was an Eldership
ordained in every Church, Act. 4. 23. Also seeing every particular Congregation
is a visible ministerial Church, having power of the Keys in preaching the
Word, though they be but a small number, as two or three assembled in Christ's
name, Mat. 18. yet have they a promise of Christ, of his presence for binding
and loosing, Mat. 18. 18, 19, 20. in things which belong to themselves.

The second Assembly is a Classis of many Pastors and Elders from sundry
congregations who have power of excommunication, in respect that the person
excommunicated does keep company with many consociated Churches, and so as a
leaven may infect many, 1 Cor. 5. 4. Mat. 26, 59. Joh. 11. 47. Act. 20. 17, 18.
and for this cause one Pastor of a single Congregation not being able to
ordain a Pastor (because it wants example in the Word of God) therefore a
College of Presbyters, or a Presbytery of Pastors and Elders, who have power
larger then a Session, even to excommunicate and ordain Pastors is necessary
in the Church, which ordains Timothy to be a Pastor, and so may deprive and
excommunicate him, 1 Timothy 4. 14. Act. 20. 17, 18, 28, 29. These are to assemble
together, and to prophecy two or three by course, and others sitting by are to
judge, that every man's gifts may be tried by the Presbytery and the Church
edified, 1 Cor. 14. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. and howbeit these Prophets were
extraordinarily gifted, yet their preaching by courses and the authoritative
trying and judging of the gifts of the Prophets and Pastors cannot be
extraordinary, for if that were extraordinary and temporary, there should be
now in the Church no College of Pastors who are to try the Pastors, that they
lay not hands on them suddenly, 1 Timothy 5. 22. and are to take care to commit the
Gospel to faithful men who are able to teach others, 2 Timothy 2. ^. Tit. 1. 5,
^. therefore is this Presbytery in our Church, 1 Timothy 4. 14.

The third Assembly is the meeting of many Pastors of a Province, or a greater
number of Congregations, who handle matters of discipline which concern the
whole Province, and many more Congregations, which differs not from the
Presbytery, but that it is a greater Presbytery containing more Pastors and
Elders: so we think, because there were many Pastors and Elders at Jerusalem
then at Corinth, therefore the meeting of Pastors and Elders of Jerusalem and
the Churches about, Act. 21. 18, 19. was a Provincial Assembly, so the meeting
of the Elders of Ephesus, being more then an ordinary Presbytery, because of
the multitude of that Church, Act. 19. was of the nature of a Provincial
Assembly, or a greater Presbytery, Act. 20. 17, 18.

The fourth Assembly is a general Assembly of many Provincef, and is a clear
warrant of our National Assembly, as Act. 1. 15. where the eleven Apostles
were, Act. 6. 2. where the twelve Apostles were, and Act. 15. where Jerusalem,
Antioch, Syria, and Sylicia are met in their principal guides, Apostles,
Brethren, Elders: with us the King or his Commissioner is present, as in the
National Assembly of the Jews, was King David, 1 Chronicles. 13. 1, 2. Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15. 9. Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 29. 4 Josiah 2 Chronicles. 34 29 for the King
bears the Sword, and is there as a politic President, and nursing Father,
Esa. 49. 23. Romans 13. 4. The members of the Council are Pastors, Doctors,
Elders, as Act. 15. 23. sent by the Churches for that effect, Act. 15. 2, 3.
All the Churches have place to speak, propound and reason in an orderly way,
as there the multitude spoke, v. 12, 13. but none have decisive voices save
only Commissioners, as Apostles and Elders, Act. 15. v. 2, 6. Chapter 16. 4. Chapter
21. 25. The acts of the Assembly oblige all the absents, not present in all
their members, as v. 23 24, 28. Act. 16. 4. chapter 21. 25. not because of the
authority of the Church, but because of the matter which is necessary and
agreeable to Gods word, as Act. 15. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. In this Assembly a
Moderator is chosen, who orders, propounds, and gathers the voices, as
Acts 15. either James or Peter. Silence is kept that one only speak at once,
as v. 7. first Peter, after him Barnabas and Paul, v. 12. after them James, v.
13. and these who speak are to speak to the Assembly or Moderator, not to
parties, as v. 13. Men and brethren. Also a Clerk is chosen who writes the
acts of the Assembly, as v. 23. they wrote letters after this manner. The
Commissioners carry home from the Scribe of the Assembly, the decrees of the
Pastors and Elders to be observed by them, as Act. 16. 4. Christian prudency
and natures light teaches the time and place for the next Assembly to be
appointed most conveniently, for the ^ase of all the Churches.

Where matters are difficile to inferior Assemblies, and parties wronged, and
there is no small dissension, then references and appeals are made to the
greater Assemblies, and they determine that Paul and Barnabas, or A. B. and S.
^. go to Jerusalem, or the place of the next Assembly to the Pastors and
Elders about this question, as 1, 2.

All our inferior Assemblies have brotherly correspondence by mutual advise
and counsel one with another, but none have authoritative power over another,
as 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2, 3, 4. 2 Cor. 8. 1, 2, 3. Col. 4. 17. By reason of our
Assemblies, no man though most eminent in gifts, piety, or authority, may play
the Diotrephes, 3 John v. 10. or has power to cast out the brethren out of the
Church.

2. By Assemblies order of gifts, and subordination of the part to the whole is
maintained, as Antioch is inferior to both Antioch, Jerusalem, Syria, and
Cilicia convened in a Synod, Acts 15. v. 23. compared with 28. Acts 6. both the
Church of the Hebrews, and the Church of the Grecians are subject to a Synod
of Apostles and Disciples, v. 2. and Peter a pillar of the Church, and Paul
inferior to none of the greatest Apostles, are subject to Synods, Acts 11. 1,
2, 3. Acts 21. 19, 20, 21, etc.

3. By Assemblies, schisms, dissentions, Acts 15. 2 and errors or heresies
subverting the souls of these of particular Churches, Antioch, Syria, and
Cilicia, ver. 23, 24. are removed out of the Church, and unity preserved. In
keeping of the Decrees of Assemblies particular Churches do well, v. 28. and
so are the Churches established in the faith, and increase in number daily,
Acts 16. 4, 5. and Religion is restored to it is purity, and the Land enters
into Covenant to seek the Lord God of their Father, and rejoice at the oath,
and seek the Lord with their whole desire, and he is found of them, 2 Chronicles.
15. 12, 13, 14, 15. and this have we found, So long as we were as Judah, who
ruled with God, and was faithful with the Saints, Hos. 11. v. 12. and went not
to Gilgal, nor up to Beth-aven, Hos 4. 15.

In Church Censures, we proceed thus: In private faults if a brother offend a
brother, he is admonished alone by the offended; If that gain him not, he is
admonished before two or three; If that prevail not, the matter is brought
before the Church, which has power of the keys; If he obey not the Church, he
is excommunicated, Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. in more heinous and public
faults the scandalous person is not so dealt with; but where the fault is
gross and heinous, the offender more quickly is delivered to Satan, as 1 Cor.
5. 4. 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20. Where obstin^cy and wilful impenitencie is added to
lesser scandals, the offender is excommunicated, as 1 These. 3. 14. yet with
great meekness and longanimity; for he is three Lords days publicly
admonished, and three Lords days publicly prayed for, as this gentleness is
required in the Lords servants, 2 Timothy 24, 25 before they cut off any, 1 Cor 4.
21. The censures public of the Churches are rebukes in public as Paul
requires, 1 Timothy 5. 20. and that the rebuke may be public, and the rebuked
may make public confession before the offended Congregation: He stands in a
public place, which we call the stool or pillar of repentance, which has
both a warrant by natures light, which requires that he who speaks to a
multitude should stand in a place where all may commodious^y hear to whom he
speaks, as Judge. 9. 7. Deuteronomy 27. 12, 13. And also in Scripture, by Salomons
example, who on a scaffold spoke to the people, 1 Chronicles. 14. 30. and the
practice of Ezra, who read to the people the book of the Law in a pulpit of
wood, which they had made for the purpose, Nehem. 8. 4. which also is a warrant
for a pulpit.

2. To this public rebuking, there is a second censure adjoined, which is a
debarring of the offender from the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11. 28. which is our
lesser excommunication.

3. Our third censure is the greater excommunication, which is done by the
whole Congregation, as all other censures, but diverse ways by the Presbytery
or Eldership judicially and authoritatively, by Paul his pastoral spirit, 1
Cor. 5. 4. the Minister in the Churches name pronouncing the sentence, 1 Timothy
1. 20. and and by the people, 1. consenting and approving, 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5, 6.
2. Mourning and being humbled at the sin, 1 Cor. 5. 2. 3. Abstaining from all
brotherly fellowship and familiarity with him, 1 Cor. 10. 11, 12. except where
the law of nature require duties of us, as the son to the excommunicated
father owes love and honor, and conversing with him, Exodus 20. 12. For a
commandment natural and simply moral obliges more, and in the room before
the positive and lesser commandment, as Hos. 6. 6. Mat. 12. 3, 4, 5, 6. yet is
the excommunicated excluded only from the public prayers and seals of the
Covenant, not from private prayers and hearing of the word, 1 These. 3. 15. For
the Church intends in that censure the saving of his spirit in the day of the
Lord, 1 Cor. 5. 5. and the hearing of the word is that necessary mean of
salvation, Romans 1. 16. 1 Cor. 1. 18, 21. Romans 10. 17. 1 Pet. 1. 23. The
contrary order not unlike to this is kept in confirming authoritatively the
Churches love to the excommunicated person being penitent, and in pardoning and
forgiving him when he heartily sorroweth for his sin, 2 Cor. 2. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
From this censure no member of our Church is exempted; yea a scandalous Pastor
is by the Presbytery deprived and excommunicated, as he was ordained by them, 1 Timothy 4. 14. 2 Timothy 2. 14. and he who has committed c^ying and heinous sins is
scarce ever to be readmitted in the ministry, as being hardly found such an
one as is described, 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1* 5, 6, 7. except it be seen to all that
he has obtained mercy in a conspicuous and large measure, as 1 Timothy 1. 13, 14,
15, 16.

13. ARTICLE.
Private Worship.
NOne may preach the word with us but Pastors and the sons of the Prophets, and
such of their sort who aim at the holy ministry, and that authority
Ecclesiastical must warrant them is clear by our Law and practice, Assembly
at Glask
as it was in the Jewish Church, 1 Samuel 10. 5. 2 King. 2. 7. 2 King. 4* 1. 1
King. 20. 35. Assembly at Edinburg.
The worship of God is commanded by our Assemblies to be in private families,
as chatechizing by the Master of the Family, or some other better gifted in
every Family, Deuteronomy. 6. 6. 7, 8. Genesis 18. 19. Ephesians. 6. 1, 2, 3. 2 Timothy 3. 15.
praying, Zach. 12. 10. None by any act of our Church, whether Pastor or any
other, in office, or out of office, is obliged to a stinted or read prayer, as
the word of God allows, Romans 8. 26, 27. yea here it is free to all, having
the spirit of adoption to express their particular necessities, which cannot
well be booked, to God according to the present case of the Church, and person
praying, as the Saints have done, Psalm. 88* 9. Psalm. 5. 7. Psalm. 28. 2. Psalm.
1* 21. 1. Psalm. 123. 1. Ioh. 17. 1. Luke 18. 13. and Psalm. 3. Psalm. 5. Psalm.
25. Psalm. 30. Psalm. 34. Psalm. 54. Psalm. 57. Psalm. 63. etc. yet did our Church
never condemn, but constantly practice the praying of that divine and
Canonical prayer of our Savior, called the Lords prayer, as being commanded,
Mat 6. 9 Luke 11. 2. in matter and manner, though affirmative precepts oblige
not ad semper. Also singing of Psalms is commanded by our Church in Families,
as Exodus 29. 39. Psalm. 55. 17. Ephesians. 5. 18, 19, 20. and house-discipline, as Job
1* 3. Deuteronomy. 21. 18. Psalm. 101. 7. and private fasting in Families, Nehem 1. 4.
Esth. 4. 16. Zach. 12. 11.

Our Assembly also commands godly conference at all occasional meetings, Act
at Edinburg Assembly, an. 641
or as Gods providence shall dispose, as the word of God commands, Heb. 3.
13. 1 These. 5. 11, 12. Levit. 19* 17. Zach. 8* 21. Mal. 3. 16. Col. 3. 16.
providing none invade the Pastors office to preach the word who are not called
thereunto by God and his Church, Heb. 5. 4, 5. Romans 10. 14. 15. 1 Cor. 12. 28,
29. and by that same warrant the grieved in conscience is to confess his sins,
which troubles and presses down his soul, to either an experienced
Christian or Pastor, as Jam 5. 16. but this confession is free to the grieved
party, I mean free from being canonically commanded in our Assemblies, and far
from Sacramental confession, or Auricular confession to a Priest.

FINIS.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE And truly noble Lord JOHN Earl of Lindsey, Lord
Parbroth, etc. one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council in the
Kingdom of SCOTLAND.
Errata.
Page 9. lin. 13. restr^^^ted. r restricted p. 10. l. 30. or r. are p. 38. l. 4.
manifest, r ^^^iest. p. 52 l. last guested ^. gifted p. 5^. l last (...) r.
adequate p. 60. margen. 3. Arg. r. 3. Arg in the 6. l after. p. 94. l. 1. there
be believers. r. three bel^evers. p. 100. l. ^0 cont r court p. 13^. l. ^a ^
averteth r ^verteth p 154 l. 6. and to that. r. and that the. p. ^65. l 31.
(...). r. circumcised and also r. a^. p. 200. l. 1 for. r. or. p 2* 6. l. ^.
with. r which. p. 2^2 l 12. vo^ces r. votes. p. 33 l 33. (...) r. (...) p. 2^
8. l 20. and they are (...) they are p 249 l. 25 over. r. ever p 276. l 33. we
think r. we think not p. 28^. l. 18. yet are r. so are. p 265. l. 15. and* r.
one. p. 315. l. 25. nature. r water. p. 324. l. 38, ^ele and.


