A Rational Discourse touching the Universal Medicin.
BEing now confined to on Sheet and a half, I cannot therefore to the convincment
and amazment of al gainsayers, as indeed well I could, (were there but mor Paper
allowed me) inlarg on this Subject; but only in a few words hint at these eight
Points. 1. The Division of Medicines. 2. The Nullity of a Specifical Purgativ.
3. The Necessity of an Universal Medicin. 4. That Specific Purgativs used as
Catholics are not so dangerous as Restorativs, administered also upon the sam
account. 5. The proper and genuin us of Specificks. 6. The Consistenc of
Medicines. 7. The us of this min Universal Purgativ: Together with the Dos and
Pric thereof, where it is to be had, and from whom. 8. An Account of the Author
himself.

SECT. 1. The Division of Medicines.
IN Genere: They are either Specifical or Universal. Nature it self has formed
al of them Specifical, Though some do award, that some Individual Medicaments (as
namly, Gold, Mercury, Autimony, Amber, Magnetis, Crocus, Uvae Juniperi, Sai and
Sulphur) ar Catholic: But upon a second Adviso: They will find, that not Nature,
but Art only does structurat that which is Universal. Only therefore in this cas
the Universalist, but not the Specificalist does add any thing to Nature, as
it is Adjument: However, there be so many Specific Medicaments, as there ar
Individuals thereof, whether of Vegetabls, Animals or Minerals. As for the
Universal, the Philosophers Adept divid them into three, viz. Cur it self, C^r
the Great, and Hermes his Medicin, called also the Elixir, Pantarva, (...) the
Ens P^imum (not of the Vulgar Chemist) but of the Adopted S^agyrist. This
indeed is the choycest of all, neither can it admit of a Parallel, whether in
Nature, or by Art. The other two, I call them Panthiatisms, and Panchymagogams.
The Panthiatisms, ar only fiv.

1. Adquadrant to the three Radical Principles of Nature, viz. Sal, Sulphur,
Mercury. 2. Analogant, to the three Anatomical spirits, viz. Animal, Vital and
Natural, Which is indeed an Aurun^-P^tabile, not that of the Pretender, or
Quacking Chemist; But on exactly formed as corresponding to these three
Anatomical spirits, and then is it indeed The Great Cordial. 3. Correspondent,
to the four primary Qualities. 4. Homologant, to the seven cardinal parts of
the Body; viz. The Brain, the Heart, the Liver, the Lungs, the Spleen, the Gal,
and Keins. 5. Consonant to the 12. Prop^rties and Operations of Medicin as
answering to 12. particular extremities in Nature. Of Defect Six, viz. Numbness,
Stupidity, Parsimony, Reflux, Influx and Increscency. And of Excess Six, viz.
Sensility, fullness, superfluity, afflux, efflux, and excrescency.
This Medicin is only external whether in the form of a Plaster or of a
Balsam. All the rest ar Internal; this the Internal-Restorativ, and this the
External-Restorativ. Of the Panchymagogums there ar three: On is Anotick, i. e.
Vomitiv. Cathotick, i. e. purgativ by stooling, and Diuretic, i. e. by Urin.
Thus is this of min, which of them all I have as yet only mad, though all the
rest ar known to me as well as A B C.

Another is Diaphoretick also: i. e. Purgativ, by Sweating. Though I no ways
fancy that of the Quacks, Mountebancks and Common Chemists, as also would
refrain, so much as were conveniently possibl, from Transpirativ-Medicins: Yet
must I tell you, that an Adepted Philosoph, who knows how to form, and how to
administer it so, as not to Byas, but to track Nature in it is operation can make
a very choic Panchymagogum: alowing it a Diaphoretick-property, with the other
three also. But the third and last, as it does no ways become the Skilles to
meddl with it, it being composed with a Philosophical Mixtur of the greatest
and strongest poisons, In lik-manner it must never be administered, but in
desperate cases as namly, Cancers, Palsies, Apoplexies, the King's Evil being
inveterat, Herpes, Schirrus, Leprosy, the Gout, and falling sickness.

By this, an other Quality (but a dangerous on, in an unskilful hand, though
nothing lik it, for the forsaid Maladies, besid the Elixir or Pantarva it self,
being arightly administered, dexterously formed, and prepared, this indeed is a
Cur the Great) I say, by this an other Quality is added to the Panchymagogical
Medicin, viz. The Operation by Antiperistacy. Thus in few words: al our
Universal Medicines do either operat by Sympathy, (but chiefly the Philosophical
Magnet, i. e. the Panacea) as all the fiv sorts of the Panthiatisms abov
written, among which chiefly, the Aurum Potabile: for it is, being truly
formed, the very next to the Quintessential-Medicin it self. Or else they do
work by Antipathy, as namly all the three sorts of Panchymagogums.

ANIMADVERSIONS.
1. We call it not an Universal Medicin, because it will undoubtedly, unavoidably,
and infallibly cur al Diseases; Not Hermes his Medicin it self, but only the
Divin Power can do this: I mean a Power far abov all that is in Nature, or Art.

2. Only my meaning is, that secluding divin Determination, the Pleasur of God,
or his Judgments, death it self and the fatality thereof, i. e. its power
overcoming the virtue of the Medicin, whether by a divin hand only (as when the
Elixir is administered) or by a Preter-natural activity of its own, as it is
very apt to do, notwithstanding the administration of any of all the rest,
whether Panthiatisms, or Panchymagogums. I say with these exceptions, there is
not any Diseas whatsoever, which the Catholic Medicin is not good against,
according to all that goodness, which Nature and Art either do or can afford.
Yea, even in these Limitations, it is only per accidens, and not per se that al
Diseases are not cured by it. For as a sharp ax, v. g. in ons hand is of it self
a very fit instrument to hew wood, so indeed it well can, if nothing intervein
by accident to hinder the hewing therewith: As when this Man's Neighbor will
needs hinder him from hewing therewith, though on his part or on the part of
that instrument in his hand, there be nothing wanting to hew by, Yet in the
Interim, by this Interveining Cause of his Neighbor, he is put by from hewing.
Lo, all the whil, this is but per accidens and not per se. Just so it is, with
the Universal Medicin of it self, it is fit, and on its part, nothing wanting
to Cur al Diseases; Only by accident, something or other (by which it is
mastered) does intervien, by which its virtue is interrupted, which if it had
not interviened, to stop its Energy; without doubt it had cured, what it did
not, as being of it self apt to do so, if not interrupted by an overpowring
Obstructer.

3. Neither do I mean, That this my Panchymagogum, now in us is Sufficient, to
perfect the Cur of al Diseases Tum in Effectibus, Tum in Affectious. The very
Pantarva it self could not do this, as herafter will somewhat appear. Only this
min Universal Purgativ does serve to discuss al Diseases in their effects, as
being of it self-fitted, to remov the cause of al diseases whatsoever, And yet
by accident, upon no terms must it be administered to some Persons: as those: who
ar excessivly weak and puny, whether by old age, or otherways: And in some
diseases as namly Pthysis, and Tabes. Nothing for such besid the Panacaea, lik
to the Great Cordial or Aurum Potabile. But they must stay, til they can get
it: for I am sur, they cannot have it, but from the Adepti. Besid, though indeed
it is a Cur the Great; i. e. fit to Cur the greatest of all Diseases, viz.
Epilepsies, Eistulas, Cancers, Gouts, Dropsies, Leprosies, and the rest of those
desperar Diseases abov-written: yet must I tell you, That without the forsaid
Antiperistatical Addition which as yet it has not, neither do I indeed intend
it (if ever at al) but in such desperate cases, it is not and cannot be so
Energetical, or Effectual against them, though even in all these Maladies; it is
a most Sovereign Remedy. Whosoever trys it will find it so.

SECT. 2. The Nullity of a Specifical Pungativ.
A Specific Medicin is that which is appropriated to this or that particular
Diseas, to this or that particular Humor, or to this and that particular
Complexion and Constitution: Now, to spend our tim in such a way of
Administration, whether by Purgativs or otherwis, is quit besid the Butt for
reasons which I cannot now enlarg, but only nam, because tedious and endless, a
looking into men's Urin, enquiring into Symptoms, considering the Complexions,
feeling of Pulses, attending on Critical days, together with the hearing of the
repetitions and needles discourses of the Patient or his substitut is enough
verily to make a man gray er he be old: Let me tell you, that an Adeptus can
dispatch mor Patients in a day then this drolling way can afford to do in a
year: And with what differenc in point of succes, let Work bear but witness of
it. 2. Dangerous. 3. Hurtful. 4. Intemperat.

SECT. 3. The Necessity of the Universal Medicin.
Necessary it is; first: Because as it is temperat in its operation (though not
in the Method, Matter or Preparation, whether of Crollius or of Quercetan, so
some Diseases, (as Cachexia and Pthyriasis) where there is a Confluenc of al
humors perhaps equaly predominant, do of necessity requir it. I would fain
know, how a Specifical Medicin can Cur that Patient, in whom at on tim Nature is
oppressed with Diseases of al humors, as indeed I have found it by sad
experienc in my self. At on tim I was afflicted with the Scurvy and Black
Jaundic; there was Melancholy: with the Yellow-Jaundic, and there was Choler,
with an inveterat Cough together with the Cholick; there were Pituit and Phlegm:
much about the sam tim was I also infested with the Pills, there was Blood: Sur
this could never be cured by Specificks: for that which at on tim should have
corrected on distemper, would needs have exasperated his Cross Companion.

Secondly, Because all the virtuous Qualities, which indeed should be in
Medicines, do al at one conspir in it, viz. Safty, Certainty, Expedition, and
Efficacy.

The first it has from its Preparation and Method; the third and fourth from
its Matter; but the Second from all the three, i. e. from Matter, Method and
Preparation: I mean, it has al these properties in it so far, as Nature and Art
either does or can allow to any on particular Species thereof in its proper
Series. Thus verily is my present Panchymagogum formed; for by Art I have so
composed it, as that in its proper Series its Matter, Method, and Preparation
ar unalterabl, to which, whether by Nature or Art, nothing can be added, nor any
thing diminished therfrom, Sav that in a higher and lower Series of this
Medicinal Preaicament we may find the virtue of Medicines either higher or lower;
but though Specificks neither have, nor can have al these Qualities in them; yet I
will tell you, that in expedition and efficacy, hie and nuns, they do exceed some
of our Catholics: as namly, your Mountebank-Spirits, and some of your pretended
Quacking-Catholiks; which in effect ar but Specificks: for instanc, some of them
work by the Antimonial-Cup, the antic Sulphur of Antimony, and Mercurius Vitae
as Universal: whereas a wis man knows, that Antimony per se helps nothing but
the Spleen, even as Mercury curs nothing per se, but the Maladies of the Liver:
However, though Specificks per Acciden, yea and somtim per Antiperistasin,
(which maks your Ignorants, though they know not the reason of it, but that now
I tell them it, ventur to giv them for all Diseases, as some of them do; but
others of them, (not daring to ventur so far, concluding the impossibility of
an Universal Meaicin) do administer them for many, yea for the most of
Diseases:) I say, though for these Reasons they do counterfeit an Universality
of operation, with a great deal of efficacy and expedition, wonderful for the
tim, to al Spectators, but chiefly pleasing to the Patient himself, yet be sur
of this, That Latet A^guis in Herba, I tell you, such Medicines, because not of a
temperat operation, do only make the Radical Moystur to flush for a tim, and
flow out; but er al be don, they either quit drink it up, or else do exceedingly
Impeach it: And so in process of tim the Patient is quit killed, or mad wors
than better thereby, so that in such Medicines that Proverb is verified, Soon
rip, soon rotten: yet must I tell you, That as no Carrion can kill a Crow, (some
bodies ar so antidoted against, or rather so unsensibl of Medicines that be
destructiv to them) so there is a divin hand, by which peopl (though al do not
observe it) ar preserved from the violenc of many things, that they receiv into
their bodies, enough to kill them, and yet they do not so much as hurt those that
tak them.

SECT. 4. The differenc between a Specific Purgativ, and that which is
Restorativ.
There is not so much danger to administer that which is Purgativ, though
Specific to al Diseases, as that which is Restorativ and but Specifical: for,
as that very currently does evacuat per accidens, al other humors besid to
which it is not appropriated; so this, but hap-hazard by an Antiperistasy, does
cur this or that Diseas, to which it is not a proper cur.

SECT. 5. The proper and genuin us of Specificks.
This is twofold, 1. As they serve for the Matter of the Universal Medicin,
linked together by a Methodical Union, according to the Rules of Approprtation,
just Approportion and Contemperation. 2. By themselves, and a part to prevent
that torment and other inconvenients, to which the poor Patient is exposed by
Chyrurgions Instruments, or of the Operators, and other hard means: There is
indeed great us of these fiv sorts of them. 1. Stipticks for Rupturs. 2.
Attractivs for rotten- Teeth, loos- Teeth, achd- Teeth, doubl- Teeth, Corns,
and Warts. 3. Diuretic, to dissolv and break the Ston whether in the Bladder,
or Kidneys. 4. Cathareticks for Wens, and Cut-arteries. 5. Narcoticks, in cas
some member or other must needs be cut off: they will likwis be great us of
Attractivs, for Thorns, Spiks, Pricks, Splinters and the lik: I tell you
plainly, even as no man by this my Panchymagogum can perfect al diseases, in
their effects and affects too, without the joint concurrenc, not only of all
the other Panchymagogums, and Panthiatisms, but also of al these Specificks; In
lik manner, though the very Elixir or Panacaea it self were not wanting, yet
room would be left, (of necessity too) for those Specifieks abov written.

SECT. 6. The consistene of Medicines.
Below the Consistenc of Hermes his Medicin, Which though this be rar, yet that
is but common, nothing lik to that which is in the form of a spirit: I would
have mad this my present Medicin so; only that as there is a necessity for it is
Purgativ Quality, (thus mor frequently needful, (though of it self not so
choic) than the Great Cordial.) In lik manner I behoved to refrain from this
Extraction, because then I should have altered (at least in some of its
Materials) its Purgativ faculty: However, as now I have formed it, it is so well,
as that now thou may, if thou will, not only administer it inwardly, whether
in the form of Pills, or of a Liquor by Infusion; but also apply it outwardly,
as a P^aister or Balsan: Note, the higher the Preparation is, (as indeed
Spirits ar of the highest in the vulgar part of Alchimy) the mor dangerous is
that Medicin so prepared, if it be Specifical.

SECT. 7. The Us, etc. of this present Panchymagogum.
The Us.] It is twofold. 1. Operativ, i. e. It servs to evacuat al humors, and
so to discuss al Diseases in their Causes and Effects. 2. Directiv, Shall I need
to tell thee? That in taking it thou must keep warm al day, not stiring out of
doors, walking to and again, now and then in thy room, taking it betim in the
morning, by the 7 or 8 hour at least, keeping thy self from sleep, til it has
don working; (yet may thou tak it a bed, and rest a litl immediately upon it,
but be sur to be up er it fall a working;) neither eat nor drink til it has don
working: but if it be three or four hours er it work, then drink Broth mad of
tender fresh meat, to provok it: When thou would have it to cause vomiting, so
much or so litl as thou likest, drink thy broth only fresh, or tak non at al,
unless as said is, too long a working: But when thou mindest Stooling, whether
in part or most, or altogether, then season thy Broth with Salt, drinking it
off: In Purging bewar of al sweet things; tak it either alon, or in a stewd
Pruin, the pap of an Appl, or any other way thou can best do it: But chiefly
observe these Twelv Directions.

1. Except need be, tak it not but either in Spring or Fall. 2. If thy distemper
be but small, or thou do but tak it for Conservation of thy health, or
prevention of Diseases, never tak it abov one in those two seasons aforsaid. 3.
To prevent Relapses, or the Return of Distempers, tak it duly evry Spring and
Fall. 4. If thou be not either perfectly cured, or at least fair on in the way
after thric taking of it, ceas from it, for there is but litl hops of thee. 5.
Go on still with it so long as thou findst it does thee good. 6. When thou must
tak it thric on end, let still a day intervein. 7. In Chronical Diseases, as the
Gout, Leprosy, Hypochondrick Melancholy, etc. though it betters thee all the
whil, yet tak it not abov six tims in a quarter of a year, though thou might
be mor bold with it in spring and fall than at other seasons: The frequency of
taking it then for the for-said Diseases, I shall much leav to thin own
discretion. 8. In the Cholick tak with it also three drops of the Oil of
Cummin-seed, poured into Sack Posset mad of half a pint of Sack, drink it off
warm an hour either after or before thou take the Panchymagogum it self. 9.
For the Pills and Varices, see thou let blood also by Leeches applied to the
Hemorrhoick veins. 10. But in the Apoplexy let blood in the left foot. 11. In
the Pleurisy of Blood, let blood still in that foot which is just contrary to
that sid where the malady lies. 12. In the Apoplexy it cannot well be given but
in a Liquor, and so, by Infusion: This must be don also both by great cunning
and great forc: Then will it be needful withal, to shav off the hair, and to rub
the head, (at least to do this) very strongly with hard linen cloths well
warmed.
The Dos.] On Pill at most, consisting of about 7 Grains. He must be no
ordinary man that will tak abov this: there lies much of the Cur in a just
Proportion of the Dos. Do thou therefore after Trial tak special Notic whether
thou tookest too much or too litl, til thou shall find out how much of it
indeed will fit thee; without addition or diminution: Remember, That the weak,
infirm, and tender, must tak but the Infusion of it in a Gil of Sack, being set
to infus 24 hours, thereafter well warmd in a Pottinger on liv-coals, and then
gently strained through a clean cloth, drink it immediately off: for a child it
will serve for 3 or 4 tims: and for the weaker sort of men and women the half of
it will serve at a tim: But yet I say, do thou by thin own Experienc after onc or
twic taking of it, find out how much of it, to a point, will serve thy Turn. In
infusing see thou mix it and stir it well about in the Sack, knowing, that
though it be clammy, yet the Liquor will still wash it off from that with which
thou stirrest it about: In the Infusion thou may safely giv it in all manner
of Fevers, not excepting the Hectic it self, provided it be not already turned
into the Consumption: Whit Win to infus in, for Fevers; the Spirit of Win good,
to make Infusions by.

The Pric.] On Shilling per Pill, considering how that in a litl Quantity thou
have what is sufficient for thee at onc, though as strong as most men.

The Places where, and the Persons by whom, it is to be had,] ar John Fensield,
in Toolies-Street, near London Bridge, in Flowr de Luce Yard, the second Door.
And John Eames Hosier, living under Crips-Gat Church, (so called.)

SECT. 8. An Account of the Author himself.
My nam I shall conceal; for as I lov not that my Medicin by some should be
despised because of me; so I lik not that I should be adored by any, because of
it. A Mechanic I am not: But to those that ask who I am, and how I came by all
this Knowledge, Let these few things suffic for an Answer. 1. I was bred a
Scholar at the University it self. 2. I have parts and abilities of Nature as
other men. 3. The Manifestation of the Spirit is given to me as well as to
others, to profit withal: I cannot say that ever I had this by Books; for they
have been rather a Hindranc then Furthranc to me in point of Knowledge, though I
have read and perused many. 4. I have been a Student and Practitioner in this Art
about 12 years: in which tim I have cured these remarkabl Diseases, viz. The
Cholerica Passio, the Anasarca, the Dysenteria, the Rickets, the Virgin, or
Green Sickness, the Tertian Agu, the Gonorrhaea, the Convulsion, the Catarrh,
Phlegmens, Imposthumations, Deafness, the Ston and Herpes: I have had Experienc
enough, were it no mor, but on min own body, which from a child has been
infested with all these Diseases tim after tim, viz. The Small Pox, the Measels,
Burning Fevers, the Agu, the Gonorrhaea, the Kings Evil, Heart-burning,
St^angury, Sc^lding of urin^, Toothache, Watering-eys, the Non Retention of
Urin, the Scurvy, the Cramp, the Itch, Scaldness of head, the Windy Ruptur, the
Diarrhaea, Belly-ach, Yellow jaundic, Black jaundic, Inveterat Coughs, the
Unnatural heat in my head, the Pills, Swouning, Spitting of Matter,
Hypochondrick Melancholy, Constipation, Dandriff, Obstruction of the Bowels,
Quincy, Morbus Ficalis, Hectic Fever, Tumors, and Palpitation of the Heart, in all 35 several-sorts of Diseases, 9 of which at onc infested me, and 7 (non of
the smalest of them neither) anoyed me at another tim altogether; yea, twic in
less than 3 years was I sick unto death, and each tim was I afflicted with
Diseases 6 months together, insomuch that the last tim I could not stir to let
my Bed be mad for abov 17 weeks together: And but latly by a mischanc was my
fac poisoned, (some of it got into my eyes, some down my throat) with about 2
Ounces of the strongst poison that is, excepting the Black Toad of the
Philosophers: I pray by what have I hitherto cured al these Diseases on my self?
Is not her room enough for Experienc? Yet tell I you plainly, By no Medicin that
Art frams. Though, sinc my study of Physic I have not been wanting to my self
therein, not suffering any other to medl with me. I have that which no man knows
but he that has it, by which I cur both my self and others too, now and then,
far abov that of Hermes himself* but enough of this: Only now I declar, both
conscientiously (in the sight of God) as a good man, and knowingly, as a Wis
man, That this Medicin of min, in its proper Series, is so good as that it
cannot be bettred by Nature or Art: If therefore thou art not bettered but worsted
after taking it, I can well tell thee, and perswad thee also, with good reason so
to judge, without a Ridl, why it is so: No doubt either because not following the
forgoing Directions, or because smiten of God: for in reason I can assure, there
is no reason why being taken debito Modo, and debito Tempore, it should wrong
any, seeing by Art it is so structured as that if it do no good of it self, it
can do no man harm, unless it be in this, That it has not so much virtue to
communicate to thee, as has that, which is far better; I mean the Panacaea or
Elixir, i. e. the Quintessenc. (not the pretended ones of the vulgar Chemist)
an Arabiax Word, bearing such a signification: Though not the Peripatists, yet
sur Hermet^sts, Turbists, and Ca^alists know well what is meant by it. Howbeit,
tak my Medicin as it is, (unles thou judge thy self unworthy of it) and blam
not it, whether because of thin own misgovernanc, or because of thin own
iniquities, which peradventur will restrain the blessing of it from thee; for
wherein I commend it, The Great Jehovah knows, I ly not; And to him therein do
I appeal.

POSTSCRIPT.
BEsid what formerly I did intend, I must needs add a few words mor, though I
had already hinted them in the forgoing Discourse: a Word is enough to the Wis,
as the Proverb is: yet he that has to do with peopl of al sorts, must needs
fit his words (if possibl) to al their Capacities, to prevent either their
Malicious or Ignorant Mistaks, that room be not left for Reproach: Be therefore
advised with me, for thy better satisfaction, to consider these three things:

First, As it is very easy to form a Medicin, which works intemperatly,
whether too litl or too much: So ever sinc I did apply my self to the study of
Ph^sick, I did choos rather to err by Defect, (knowing that thereby there is less
hurt, than by the other extreme) than by Excess: I confess neither of them is
good; yet sur I am, a violent Medicin does wrong thee mor than what is lenitiv
and gend: and it is the great endeavor of the Patient's safty, that provoks me
by all means possibl to avoid al Excess and violent Medicines, well knowing, That
al such do no less wast his Radical Moystur, (without which the body is but
dead) than as does the fir of the Lamp consum its Oil. Secondly, It is the
common ignoranc of Patients, That the best Medicin is that, which works most:
In their conceit, (which is their deceit) it cannot be good; unless it make them
very sick, giv them many Stools, and many Vomits, never minding all the whil,
That though such Medicines do powerfully scour the Humors, yet do they then as
powerfully great on Nature it self. Now al those Physicians (though some do it by
Ignoranc also) who mind their own profit mor, then the Patients good, observing
this to be the common mistak of al peopl, do therefore apply themselves herin, to
gratify the delusion of their Patient. To work therefore go they, with the
strongest Medicin, that may be, both for Matter and Preparation, on purpos to
make a speedy Cur of their Patient; (knowing that this will pleas him best) which
indeed is but a speedy riddanc of the diseased, and not of the Diseas, seeing
(as said is) al such Medicines do, the self sam way, Consum the Radical Moystur,
even as the fir does wast the Talow of a Candl, or the Oil of a Lamp: Her
indeed is efficacy but not safty; Now I am for both, Neither will I indeed (to
get my self a nam) humor the Patient to his hurt, by administering a Medicin to
him, which is both Efficacious, and Expedicious (This to do is the Easiest of a
1000. I can do it as well as other men) if it be not both saf and sur also.
Thirdly, It is well known to me, That this my present Medicin, As it is most
saf, (sur I am, if it do thee no good, it will do thee no harm, unles it be by,
taking too litl or too great a Quantity of it at a tim) so it is as strong,
powerful, effectual, and expeditious, as either Nature or Art, either will or can
allow it to be, with safty and surty also: or indeed any Medicin can be, or
ought to be, under Hermes his Medicin it self. Nothing administered for frequent
or common us, either is or can be, (besid the Elixir) mor efficacious, and saf
too, than it is, God knows. Only the Patient may Reproach and mistak it for
these reasons; Of which I must now Remind him. 1. Blaming it for Virtu not for
Vic, i. e. Because it does not work so strongly, (That I say not so dogedly) as
other Medicines do. Allow me to tell thee, as I hat to giv thee any Physic,
(which I am sur evry on in their Administrations, walks not by this Rul) but
What I Will tak my self; yea, and giv the Bab on the Breast, as well, though not in
the sam quantities; as him that is com to ag, To the weak, (though not in a
manner quit consumed) as well as to the strong; [Thus in all points it is the
liker the Great Elixir:] So I declar to thee without a figur, (unles I had a
mind to do him a mischief, and sought not his health) I would not giv that
Physic to a Dog, which I knew would either make him very sick, or scour him
very much, whether upwards or downwards: Well, I reckon that exces of Sickness,
which purges any further, then what provoks the Scouring with delight and eas:
And that I call Exces in Scouring, which from 6 as the Best, does exceed 8 or 12
times at the most. 2. Blaming me for Impossibility, i.e. Because I do not
determine to a Point, and that at the very first dash an exact Dos for every
person; a thing impossibl to be don without reiterated experienc, for this cause
I have much left it to thin own Trial, To find out the exact Dos without
Addition or Diminution, for thin own body, after Twic or Thric taking it. The
performanc of the Cur does much lie in the exactness of the Dos, as has been
said already. Which being onc effected, Be thou also assured, that, God
blessing it to thee, it will perform all that her is spoken, touching it. Whereas
the Dos being either too littl it will work too littl, or may be non at al, or
too much, it will work too much, and it may be, whether by Antiperistasy, or by
a secret restraint of Providenc, but litl or non at al. However, This I
determine to the best of my knowledge that on Bill of 7 Grains is a sufficient
Dos for any ordinary person whosoever. 3 Blaming me for what God does, or will
not do, i. e. Because it may be, he Restrains the virtu of it from thee, causing
it do thee-harm, making it not work, or but litl, or too much; Yea, and though
when it has acted its Part to a point, perhaps, as said is, He maks it either
do thee no good at al. Or it may be prejudic, not blessing, but cursing it to
thee, partly for thin own Iniquities, and partly for a Trial to me, Schooling
me thereby not to trust in the Creatur, but in himself alon. 4. Blaming me
perhaps for Casualties, whether ordinary or extraordinary; some mischanc or
other may happen thee, to the Retardment, Obstruction and Prejudic of the
Medicin: But mor likly thin own Negligenc, in not observing my Directions
punctualy, or besid thy intemperat living, whether by Penury, (it may be
necessity) or Exorbitancy. 5. Blaming the Medicin, because it will not humor
thee, but Nature, i.e. Because somtims it will needs Track Nature, inclining the
sam way only to work, as the present disposition of the Patient leads it to,
viz. If to Vomiting, to Vomit only, but if to Stooling, to Stool only, etc.
This indeed is a virtu, but not a vic in it: Even as is that, viz. A Working
Efficaciously, but fasly also. Without which, Neither shall I be a Physician if
I cannot attain it, nor shall thou be my Patient if thou will not have it so,
delighting only in that, which Scout thee to purpos, though not good. But
putting al Reproach to a defianc, (for this Medicin shall be magnified mauger al
Malic and Ignoranc) with the forsaid limitations: I declar again, as in the
sight of God, it may well do thee good, but not harm, performing all that is her
promised, concerning it. 6. Know, that the longer it is a working, the better
it is provided, it works at length the sam day thou takst it. Blam it not for
this, which is indeed a Virtu and not a Vic, though the Ignoranc of peopl is
apt to count it so. 7. Al Dogmatick, though not Empyrick Physicians, do make it
their work to administer no Medicin, but what is saf; for this Cause, they Trad
mor in the Pharmacopean, than in the Common Chemical Preparations, in Vegetabls
mor then in Minerals, These indeed, unless in a skilful hand, far mor dangerous
then those. Which non verily can arightly us, but those only who ar skilled to
form Panthiatisms, Panchymagogums aright, and the Panacean Medicin. Eighthly and
Lastly; to satisfy peopl of al humors and dispositions, I have so orderd the
matter, as that they may have of this Medicin, both gentl, (for the young
tender, weak and indifferent) as also strong, for the strongest and lustiest;
in so much that in reason, on of such Pills, [though I know, that either by a
secret restreint of providenc, or by an Antiperistasy, Sympathy, and Antipathy,
[yea and for the sam causes, the very least and worst of Medicines, may be and
ar effectual, when the best and greatest can not and do not avail] the
strongest Physic, and greatest Dos, that is, may be obstructed in its
operation: Or some have taken [if we may credit the persons report, which I had
from his own mouth] two drams of Mercurius Dulcis at onc two hundred tims in
and about the spac of two years observing no other Diet all the whil, then what
he used to do at any other tim;) I say in reason [at least what is common and
usual] on of such Pills is a sufficient Dos, for the strongest man that is,
though the strength of four ordinary Persons. But then Such must expect to pay
a pric equivalent to a fourfold Dos for ordinary peopl. These things I thought
good to Anticipat, both by Word and Work, lest they should have been objected to
me as my Crims. Now, not regarding the Reproach or Scorn of any, (for indeed,
as it is below me, so am I abl to justifi all that which is her written, before
God, Men, and Angels,; yea, and al things whatsoever.) I sit down in rest, with
this as my Guard; Cede, Repugnanti, Cedendo, Victor abibis. Knowing well, That
as they are but Bedlami, who expect mor from Nature or Art, or from any working
or walking according to them, than what they can afford: for Nihil dat, quod
non habet. Et ultra posse, non est esse or Nemo ultra posse. In lik manner had
we such discerning as to observe, That as the greatest of means, by God, ar
disappointed, and that the very least thereof, by him, somtims ar exalted,
Blasting the best, and blessing the worst of secondary Causes (Working without
them, with them, against them, and abov them, at his pleasur) we should then
neither Deify the Greatest, nor Contemn the Least of created means; Though still
in an absolut dependency on the Uncreated Being of the Two, choos the best and
the greatest, as the likliest and safest things for us to make us of. However,
Though now thou may have that which is so efficacious, as any safty will allow;
yet is it without the forsaid Antiperistatical Mixtur of the strongest Poisons,
which the Adept never did, nor do make us of, but in cas of those Diseases, which
they call the four Stagers, viz. The Gout, the Dropsy, the Falling Sickness and
Leprosy, with other desperate Diseases abov-written, which gaind them both
Credit and Success in their Attempts, calling it therefore Cur the Great. Whereas
their pretended Imitators, ignorant of Matter, Method and Preparation, of this
Medicin, essay to do the lik, without Respect either to Persons or Diseases, to
the quit killing of some, and, at the best, to the great hazard of the livs of
others: which, though escaped a present Lurch, yet is that thereby left behind,
(to judge in reason, setting asid how God may otherways dispos of it) which will
needs shotten their days. Al these things I thought good to add, besid this,
viz. That it is the Common and gross mistak of peopl, hand over head to tak any
thing that coms next to hand, which will but Scour them, whether upwards or
downwards, never heeding the fitness, whether of the Matter, Method, or
Preparation. Many things they may have to evacuat Humors, whether by Sweating,
Vomiting, by Vrin, or Stooling. But few, namly as they us them, do do any of
these well: Whereas my present Panthymagogum is of the very best Matter, [ Method,
no doubt) and Preparation, that can be, for any such Medicin in its proper
Series] Of Cur-al, though not of Cur the Great, (Thus it only wants the forsaid
Antiperistatical Addition; as said is) it is the very Non-ultra. Know also,
That the Degrees of my Medicin ar Three, answering al Tempers and dispositions.
1. For the Weak. 2. For the ordinary-Strong. 3. for the strongest of al, or mor
then what is Ordinary. The Outmost Dos, as I now judge however Providenc or
Experienc may alter it, whether by Sympathy, Antipathy, or Antiperistasy, for
the Ordinary a Pill of 7 Grains, and for persons that be very Robust, on of a
Scrupl, But all the 3. sorts, as they find occasion for it, may us it, whether
with or without Infusion. Yet do I advis the weaker sort, to make much us of
Infusion: yea and neither weak nor strong in Fevers or in any Diseas, that has
brought them very low, to us it without Infusion, proportioning the Dos
according to their then present stat, i. e. The strongest then not venturing,
abov 5. or 7 Grains at the most. But in this, Experienc will be thy best
Directrix, making Trial of it by degrees, as need is. Be it also known to thee,
That even as never any, but Prophetic and Apostolic Spirits knew the perfect
Universal Method, In lik manner without it, The Higher the Matter and
Preparation be, the wors is the Medicin.

SVB-POSTSCRIPT.
EVen as by observing the various Sentiments of peopl, I did therefore
unexpectedly, and undesiredly, superad the precedent Postscript; In lik manner,
I do now much mor adjoyn to all that forgoeth a few memorabl Notabilia, touching
the Medicin it self, occasioned by an Experimental Observation of its Virtuous
Quality and Operation. Both this, together with the Postscript, were added de
Novo, sinc the Discourse it self was given into the Press: Since therefore a
perfect Medicin, as indeed this is, in its proper Series does requir a perfect
Narration concerning it: And I my self in the Interim not willing to leav any
ston unturnd, because I would needs obviat al Objections, and administer al
reasonabl satisfaction to al persons, to prevent al Misunderstandings,
Miscarriages and Abuses, that in the us of this Medicin may occur: I have put my
self to all this pains, though with the necessity of using the Trop, (...) too
too much. But this will be easily excused, that which forgoeth being duly
considered. Now to the purpos. 1. As because of its Method, it can hardly, if at
al, work too violently, Though administered in an Excessiv- giftedness: So
because of its Matter, and Preparation, it does no harm but good to the Patient,
even when it does not work at al sensibly, There being either but too litl a
Quantity of it taken, or else because that is wanting in the Dos, by which its
Energy is heightened: for even then it does work Magneticaly, with a sensibl
advantag to the patients health, though all the whil unsensibl of its Operation.
I can assure him, (to speak both in Reason, and from Experienc) It will neither
harm him by too violent working: for this it cannot do, though taken at onc, I
know not how much of it. Yet let non ventur too far this way, as being neither
profitabl nor Expedient. With the sam assuranc also, do I avouch, That it will
not Venom, as other Medicines do, thy body, even though to thy feeling it did
not work at al, seeing it does operat Magneticaly also; In this assimulating
the Magnet of the Philosophers. 2. If at the very first it does strongly
evacuat, whether by Vomiting or by Stooling, as indeed it does in new Radicated
Maladies: for instanc, a Cough or Cold newly caught, Then know, that though
then it does evacuat much, yet not often: for Nihil violentum, durabile.
Whereas, in Rooted Diseases, v. g. The Gout, of 9 Months continuanc, it does
then so grapl with the Radicated humors, as that it does not spend its Virtue al
at onc, and by wholsal, but peircing into the very Roots of the Malady, it does
work Gradatim, not much at onc, but of long continuanc, er it stay its working.
As has been formerly hinted, it does track Nature, but not byas it: So now I
say, It does Track the very Diseas it self, fitting its Modus Operandi, to the
very Modus Morbi. 3. Thou must not always expect from it, That the greater is
its Dos or Giftedness, the mor therefore it will work on thee: for thou will
somtims find it lik to Sugar, and other things that I might instanc, But that
this is so well known, which, as it will not be dissolved by the stronger, but by
the weaker Liquor poured upon it: So not a great, but a small Quantity of the
sam does dissolv it best: Do not therefore mind its Quantity, but Quality, not
its Bulk, but its Virtue: for as the Proverb is, Magnitudo non est Virtus.
Experienc, as formerly hinted, therefore in this cas, will be thy best Directrix,
how to Coaptat its Giftedness and Fabric. Howb cit, Knowing very well that the
Eternal Jehovah does sway al things at his pleasur, somtims causng Fools do
what the wis cannot, the Unskillful do what the Skilful cannot, the Weak what
the Strong can not, the Artles what Artists cannot, the unlearned what the
Learned cannot, and the Wicked do, what the Godly cannot, making small means,
bad means, things meanly prepared badly prepared, not prepared at al, meanly,
badly, not at al arightly Composed, Ordered and Administered, Scarcly,
Indifferently yea not at al, but quit destructiv to Nature: Making, I say, such
things Effectual and Profitabl, Whereas their virtuous Opposits ar rendered
Ineffectual and usles by him, hic and nunc, (yea frequently too, though the
sons of Men observe it not) at his pleasur: Upon this serious Consideration, God
is my witness I ly not, I cannot, I must not, I dar not, and I will not, Boast my
self in any thing, but Jehovah only, not taking upon me to outveigh the
wickedst or meanest Practitioner that either is or can be. Only, all that
undoubtedly and with Confidenc I can promis thee, concerning this my Medicin,
in its own Nam, be these two things: On is, That in its proper Series, without
Addition or Diminution, it is a perfect Medicin in that sens of perfection, as
is abov-written in the Discourse it self. So that with this Limitation it wants
for nothing, as it is in its own Series, which either Nature or Art can better
it by. Another is, That in its proper Series it is, of al Medicines now in us,
the liklyest and most probabl Expedient for Cur and Health: Not afraid to say,
that what ever Medicin, her or there, now and then does exceed it in this or in
that, It is not because of excelling it by Art, whether in Matter, Method, or
Preparation: for this cannot be, as it is in its proper Series. Only it is by a
hidden Property, as some phras it; Which I say, is either by Providenc or by
Sympathy, Antipathy, or by Antiperistasy. However, Let God do the Best, but us
chus the Likliest, as the Proverb goes. To add a Diaphoretick Quality to it,
which I could soon do, I do not much fancy that; but far less that which is by
Sneezing and Salivation. And should I superadd thereto the forsaid
Antiperistatical Property, with a Tric this might be don also, and thereby
Translat it in to a higher Series: for then properly itwould be that which is
called Cur the Great, being only a loted for the greatest of al Diseases. Yet,
in this Structur, it must be administered to no distemper whatever, but only
these, viz. The Gout, the Cancer, the Fistula, Noli me tangere, Herpes,
Schirrous, Dropsy, Epilepsy, Struma, the Leprosy, Palsy, Morbus Gallicus,
Lethargy, Varices, Phrensy, Mania, Hypochondry, Apoplexy, Carbuncl and Plagu
Sor. As for Hermes Medicin, though he not the first Author of it, albeit of the
highest Series, Yet I do not herby giv account, whether I know it, yea or not.
Only this on thing do I profess, That no man without the knowledge of it, either
is or can be Medicus Adeptus. Yea, Neither must I, as yet, either Reveal, or do
all that I know: for, Tempore, Fatet Occulta Verisas. All this my carful and
serious advic to thee, is not for min but t^ in own profit, God knows, for I
intend not to make a Trad of Physic; But so soon as I can with convenience,
freely to giv* as I have freely received: I say, my Advic is, never ceas from
using it duly, both Spring and Fall, to prevent Relapses, the Return of
Diseases, and to maintain thin Health, as also to prevent Distempers. Neither
think it enough, that thou art either in Part or in Whole betterd by it: But go
on with it still, not only til the Cur be perfected, but also for Accelerating
the Cur, and taking away, as by the Roots, the Reliqus of the Diseas, Spar not
to tak of it, even when the Diseas seems to thee to be perfectly Cured. Yea,
though at on tim it answers not thin expectation, yet spar not to ventur on it
again at another tim; But still with that Cautiousness, as is abundantly
provided for, in the Directions abov-written, avoiding fleep in tim of taking
it, so much as is possibl.

Finaly, This most precious Medicin is thirdly to be had by Robert Gould, in
Jacob-Street, at the Sign, HAND IN HAND.

I having thus spoken, now mock on. Job. 21 3. For thou have hid their heart
from understanding: therefore shall thou not exalt them. Job. 17.4. If I have
spoken to you Earthly things, and ye Believ not; How shall ye Believ when I tell
you of Heavenly things, John 3.12. The Works of the Lord ar great, sought out
of al them, that have pleasur therein, Psalm. 111.2.
Fruere, and Vtere.
END. LONDON, 1664.

