The Morning Seeker: Showing the Benefit of being Good betimes.

With DIRECTIONS to make SURE WORK

About EARLY RELIGION.

Laid open in Several SERMONS

By John Ryther Minister of the Gospel.

Seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is near, Isa.
55.6. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee. Ps. 63.1. LONDON, Printed
by E. T. and R. H. for Dorman Newman at the Kings-Arms in the Poultry, 1673.

TO THE Honorable and truly Religious THE Lady Dorothy Norcliffe OF Langton in
Yorkshire; The Lady Elizabeth Bright, The Lady Katharine Wentworth, and the
rest of her Virtuous Daughters.
MADAM,
I Have long waited for an opportunity to acknowledge the many and great
Obligations I have been under by your Ladyship, and your Family, since
Providence put such a Price into my hand as the mercy of your Acquaintance; and
this is one reason among many others why I Dedicate these poor papers to you
and yours. 2 John 1.5.
When I considered how John wrote to the Elect Lady, and her Children walking
in the Truth, One observes that St. John who was the beloved Disciple avas of a
Noble stock, in which regard he was so known of the High Priest that he did not
fear the Jews, so as the other Disciples did. Where Nobility is enamelled with
grace, it renders it far mere illustrious and splendid.
I was much encouraged thereunto. Besides upon these accounts I could not but
lay hold of the present opportunities. 1. The Care that I know you have many
years conscientiously spent in the Education of those tender Branches, the Lord
has honored you with. O what glory might have been raised up to God, if in
the Families of Honor and Quality there had been such diligence in training up
their Posterities, in the fear of that God, whom it is a great Honor to serve!
2. The great success that crowned your Ladyships endeavors herein, (that the
Lord let you see your dear Children set upon seeking the Lord betimes,) that so
many morning seekers in such a Family (as I must confess I have not elsewhere
known) while the dew of Gods blessing upon your Education lay upon these
Branches; how did they while young grow up in Holy Affections and Desires after
the Ways and Truths of God! 3. And all this much in a time when the Power of
Godliness in many great Families was much discouraged (if not decry'd) though
Gospel duties, reading the Word, praying in Families, a strict observation of
Sabbaths did grow in to reproach and contempt in many Houses: yet all that time
the Lord helped you to Resolve with an Honorable, and holy person of Old, I
and my house will serve the Lord. Josh. 24.15.
4. The great encouragement that you have given, not only to me the meanest of
those Servants of God acquainted with your Family, but that you have given to
many more in a dark and gloomy day. O how many Families have you and yours
refreshed in a day of straits I and is it any dishonor to testify this before
this uncharitable world? 5. The Lord honoring you with solidity of judgment,
these giddy reeling times; that in days and times when erroneous notions and
principles, as well as corrupt practices have overspread many Families, you
have been preserved in the truth, and have taken great care that your Children
should, while they were young, be trained up in the truth, as it is in Jesus.
If I had no more reasons for my present tender of these poor endeavors to you
and yours, are not these enough? But I am afraid you will say here is more than
enough said: though not so much as might. I did not know upon serious thoughts
how such a design as this might tend to encourage or promote good beginnings
and breathings after God in your Family. And though, through the rich mercy and
grace of God, you be not a tender young plant in the Courts of God, but grown
up in the Grace and Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; yet here may be some
thing presented to your children that may prove through a blessing from above
of use to them, as to their further progress in the good ways of God. I
remembered one thing, when I thought of this Dedication, how often When I had
the happiness of being conversant with them.
some of them did employ me to buy or acquaint them with what Books they should
buy proper and useful for them; and who are fitter to Dedicate an useful Book
to, than such? (if God will so please to make this poor Treatise.) There are
Lambs (your Ladyships know) in the flock of Christ, that need carrying, as well
as those that are with young, that need leading; there are Babes in Christ's
School who have need of milk, as well as stronger Christians that need stronger
meat. If this may be milk, sincere milk that any of Gods new born Babes may
grow thereby, yea, any of your Children may grow up in grace thereby, this will
be the rejoicing of the Author. Now Madam, that God would cause your House to
grow, who has made a sure Covenant with you and yours, and that the dew of
Heaven, as well as fatness of the Earth may be the portion of you and yours, is
the prayer of

Your Ladyships in all Humble and due Observance, John Ryther.
December. 9. 1672.
To all Young Ones whose hearts are set to seek the Lord before it be too late,
who are and desire still to be Morning Seekers.
WHen I considered the dangers that such a day, as we live in, exposes your
precious Souls to, I was willing for your Souls sakes to contribute my Mite to
that Work which so many Reverend and Worthy Servants of Christ had gone before
me in: Yet we living in a sleepy Age, and knowing we have sleepy hearts, we
must be often calling on; and the more Calls, and the more Cryers, the more are
Souls stirred and startled. I have sadly observed several things since I with
others of the Lords Servants have been under this present day and dispensation.

1. That our great hopes and expectations, that we have had of the Lords
effectual working upon the hearts of Young Ones, have often met with great
disappointments; and many of the poor Ministers of Christ have been like the
Troops of Tema, Job 6.19, 20.
and the Company of Sheba, waiting for some good issue of the travel of their
Souls, but they were confounded, because they had hoped they were ashamed; and
is not this cruelty, to crush our hopes and cross our expectations, who travel
for you, and all in hope Christ might be formed in you? Will it be your gain if
we lose our prayers, our tears, our studies, our pains? Will this be profitable
to you, if all our designs for your good be made by your selves miscarrying
designs?

2. That it is a great reproach to the ways of God, and name of God, when
such, as have been for a time forward for God, do go back again. How has the
Name of God been blasphemed many times by the miscarriages of such? And how may
it be said of many Young Ones, as was said of that Fig Tree Jesus Christ
cursed, Mat. 21.20.
How soon is this Fig Tree withered away! Where is your Zeal, your Affections,
your Love, your fervency for God, for his Ordinances, for Duties, for Worship,
that once seemed to move upon your Spirits? O consider of it young men, that
the ways of God have been evil spoken of by your means. And I may say to you
as the Prophet to them, This has been by your means. Mal. 1.9.


3. The going back of such I have observed is a great stumbling block to
others, a great discouragement to others to own the ways of God. O say such
poor Souls, shall not I prove as others have done? make a fair flourish for a
year or two, bear green leaves, and promising buds and blossoms, but yet for
all that brings forth no fruit to perfection? And therefore such poor Souls
rather sit still, seeing so many that have been in a fair way of profession,
backslide and apostatize before them.

4. Many poor Sinners have been hardened in their Atheism, Profaneness and
contempt of the ways of God by seeing you fall off after that you have made
some progress in the ways of God. Do not they conclude at the sight of such
miscarriages, that their conditions are good, Deuteronomy. 29.19.
though they walk in the imaginations of their own heart? Do not they cry
Peace, Peace to their own Souls, though they walk in Soul-undoing and
destroying courses? Take two young men, One of them falls under some conviction
of sin, under the Ministry of the Word, upon this Conviction he launches out
into a visible Profession, owns the ways of God, Hears, Prays, Reads, repeats
Sermons, etc. The other of them continues sinning on still, senseless of his
Soul, kicks against the pricks still, but he cries, his Companion will return
to him again, this is but for a fit, a little melancholy, or to please some
party or other. Well, in a little time it proves thus, the Professing young man
becomes profane again, returns with the dog to his vomit, 2 Pet. 2.22.
and with the Sow after once washing to her wallowing in the mire, returns to
his Onions and Garlic again: O how this does now harden the other poor Sinner
in his dangerous and damnable state, and makes him venture his Soul to live and
lie, and dye in it!

5. I have observed such Young Men that once have tasted some thing of the Word
of God, and have laid under Convictions of Sin, when they have fallen off and
lost them, they have grown harder after than before; they have like the wicked
men we read of, grown worse and worse: 1 Timothy 3.13.
Such have outstripped others in sin. As Iron often heated proves harder, so it
is with such poor Souls; and is not this a sad sight to see him a Drunkard, a
Swearer, a Reviler, a Scoffer at the ways of God, who once was a praying Young
Man? One that worshipped with those he now scoffs at and reviles? If one had told
thee while thou were a praying, a professing Young Man, that thy Praying, thy
Hearing, thy repeating Sermons, would have ended thus, would not thou have said
as Hazael did to the Prophet, 2 Kings 8.13.
Is thy Servant a Dog? O but have not a few years produced too many such
instances?

6. I have observed, that as soon as many Young Ones have set forth under
Convictions of a need of Christ to seek after him, they many times have fallen
into erroneous notions. When Satan cannot keep poor Souls in profane practices,
he then will labor to poison them with pernicious Principles. And as the Devil
has his Nurseries to debauch Young Ones in their Practices, so he has his
Nurseries to poison them with pernicious Principles. No sooner does a Young Man
become sober and serious, but there are persons that are ready to drop their
poison upon them; and so many poor Souls are set wrong at the very first
setting out.

7. I have observed Young Ones to be like foolish Children, Hos. 13.13.
as the Prophet says, to stay long in the place of breaking forth; Especially
Young Ones under Godly Education, nursed up in Godly Families: How long is it
often before the work be a through-work upon their Spirits? Alas, how do their
Convictions come and go, for months, if not for years some times, not hearing
of them; and then another while Conscience being a Boanarges to them, thundering
forth the terrors of the Lord to them. One while they are murdered, another
while they walk and make a dreadful noise in the Conscience. Here poor Soul,
thou may see thy danger in delaying thy great work of seeking in thy prime and
flower of thy youth.

8. I have observed a great deal of pride grow up with the Profession of Young
Ones. O how often has this been the mortal bane and poison of many of their
Souls! How many have upon this Rock split their Convictions, their Profession,
their Expectations with their Souls for ever? Have not many poor Young Seekers
been over-set by carrying too much sail? Upon their supposition of acquired
gifts and parts how have they prided themselves? until as the Poets say of
young Narcissus, that he fell in love with his own shadow until he pined away.
Have not many Young Seekers fallen into a Consumption by self-love, and setting
too high a price upon themselves? Nay, has not this sin caused the Lord to
suffer some of them to fall into some visible gross evil, that might keep them
little and low in their own eyes all their days? Many have got a halt at the
first setting out, that they might be kept from self-exaltation.

9. I have observed an untractable Spirit grow up with Young Ones, to their
Superiors and Guides, which is a dangerous evil. Does this become young
Travelers, nay indeed any Travelers to cast off their Guides? or to think
they can get to their journeys end, without observing the Counsels, Conduct,
and the directions of such as are set over them in the Lord? Are Ministers set
over you to be your Guides, are Parents, are Masters set over you to be your
Guides, 1 Pet. 5.5.
and will you prove untractable to these? This is a great provocation to the
Lord, which occasioned that Exhortation of Peter's, You younger submit your
selves to the elder. As it particularly relates to Ministers, so it may refer
to others. At what door came in Erroneous Principles, Heb. 13.17.
at first, and Licentious Practices? Was it not at this, when persons refused
to obey and submit to them that were set over them in the Lord?

10. I have observed that Satan's grand Designs and Engines are laid so as (if
it be possible) to prevent Jesus Christ having a Young Offspring. The Devil
would not have Christ have any Nurseries, any Young Nurseries, where any tender
Plants should be set and watered, that they might become Trees of
Righteousness. Therefore he has his Nurseries to debauch and corrupt them;
like Herod, he is all for killing Christ in the cradle. O this puts him upon
that rage and wrath in pursuing poor Souls, as soon as their Convictions begin
to stir in them. As Pharaoh pursued Israel, when he saw them attempting an
escape; so does Satan follow poor Young Ones as soon as ever they look out of
their miserable Captivity under which they are in their natural estates and
conditions.

11. I have observed that the Lords effectual working upon the hearts of Young
Ones, is, and has been a token of some approaching appearance of God on the
behalf of a People or a Nation. It argues God has still some work there, some
thing to do there, that he would not leave that place and people. He does not
beget Children for the murderer, he does not use to beget Children and send
away the breasts from them. And on the contrary when Conversion-work ceases, O
then some heavy blow comes! Some National stroke is at the door! When the
Harvest is inn'd, then the laborers are called home, and this portends a
storm. Ambassadors calling home looks like a War.

12. I have observed the sad and doleful heartbreaking lamentations of many
Godly Parents over the Souls of their dear and dead Children, many Families
mourning over their dead. There was a great cry throughout the Land of Egypt
when the Firstborn was dead. Exodus 11.6.
O what a cry has gone through the Land for the Souls of poor dead Children!
One Family crying, Lord, this dear Child is dead, his Soul is dead while he
lives; 1 Timothy 5.5.
(as is said of some, while they live in pleasures are dead) and that which
cuts poor Parents to the heart, is this, they fear they shall ere long hear
such a cry for their Childrens Souls, as was in the night time in the great
Plague some times, Cast out your dead, cast out your dead. O then says one
Family, LORD, how many have we to cast out? So many Children, and so few of
them made alive to God, so few that have Christ formed in their precious Souls?
O you Young Ones that are the Seed of Godly Parents, if you miscarry to all
Eternity, your Parents Tears and Frayers, I must tell you, will be as so much
oil to make Hell flames burn so much the more vehemently upon you. If you that
are Children of the Kingdom by Education, be shut out, this will aggravate
your condemnation dreadfully.

13. I have observed that the wandering of such Young Ones, in the bywayes of
Sin, as have sprung from, and have been nursed up in Godly Families, have
rolled much reproach upon Gods Covenant. If the reproach was only upon their
Persons, it would not be so laid to heart; though for a Son to be an occasion
of reproach to his Father and Family is sad: but that which goes deeper is, the
Covenant of God is reproached. The world say, they see no difference betwixt
the posterity of the Godly and the Ungodly, and this is an overwhelming
consideration to them. And O Young Ones, is neither the Name of God, nor the
Name of your tender Parents, nor your Families, nor your immortal Souls
precious in your eyes? How may that Endictment be drawn up against you? Mic.
7.6.
The Son dishonors the Father, and the Daughter rises up against her Mother.

Lastly, I have sadly observed, a spirit of stubbornness and rebellion has
taken possession of many Young Ones toward their dear and tender Parents; 2 Timothy 3.2.
which indeed is a sin of the highest rank, Romans 1.30.
therefore reckoned among ihe sins of the later times: and so on the contrary
obedience to Parents is reckoned among the most Religious Duties. Lev. 19.^.
You shall fear every man his Mother, and his Father, and keep my Sabbaths, I
am the Lord your God. Yea, in the punishment of this sin we may read the
heinousness of it, the Rebellious Son was to be stoned to death under the Law;
Deuteronomy. 21.18, 19, 20, 21.
and sure the sin is not less now in Gospel Times than it was then.

Now Young Men, these were some of those Observations I have made, that
tendered my heart toward the everlasting good of your immortal Souls, and
prevailed with me to put these papers into your hands, hoping the Lord may in
some measure succeed them with his blessing, which is and shall be the hearty
Prayer of

Your unfeigned Souls Friend and Servant in the Ministry of the Gospel, J. R.
December. 9. 1672.
Advertisement to the Reader.
There is published by the same Author a Book Entitled A Plat for Mariners, or
the Sea-mans Preacher, in several Sermons upon Jonah's Voyage. In 8vo.

Prove. 8.17. I love them that love me, and they that seek me early shall find
me.
THat young Inquirers after the Lord Jesus Christ may be encouraged in their
following on to know him, notwithstanding the temptations they meet with
without them, and within them, this Text of Scripture is very considerable.

The Words are the Promise of Christ, to young Seekers, by way of
encouragement, to continue, and hold on in seeking him.

1. We have the Persons to whom the Promise is made, They that seek me early,
they that seek me in the morning (so the word) because that which is done in
the morning, is always done most vigorously, the Spirits being more raised, and
lively. Therefore we read of the morning, as an especial praying time, as a
time of worship, I direct my prayer unto thee in the morning, Prove. 15.14. The
word is uused. Psalm. 130.6.
and will look up -- and at another time (says he) my soul waits for thee, more
than they which wait for the morning, Psalm. 130.6. (viz.) than the Watchmen
that give notice of the morning, Tempus matutinum Hebraeis dicitur Boker a
Bokkar: Est quaerere magis conatu, and studio (Pro. 15.14.) It signisies to
seek by suing and praying, by asking direction and counsel of them that are
able to give it.
that they may offer up their Sacrifice (says Mr. Ainsworth.) These are the
Persons under the Promise, that seek him in the morning of their time, in their
youth.

2. We have the Person that makes this Promise, They that seek me (viz.) Jesus
Christ. It is apparent all over the Chapter, that is meant of Christ, who is
here called Wisdom, who indeed is the Wisdom of the Father. I need not take up
time in proving this, the very Text carries its own Evidence in it. O Poor
Soul! Christ himself is your Encourager, what ever Discouragements you meet
withal, and this he does by his own Promise.

3. Here is the Promise it self, they shall find me. They are poor mourning
Seekers, early Seekers, and young Seekers, but they shall be sure, and certain
finders. They shall not seek, as God threatened them, in the Prophet, they shall
seek me, with their Herds, and their Flocks, Hosea 5.6.
and shall not find me. They shall not seek, and be disappointed, they shall
not seek and go without, but they shall find me; who ever miss of Christ, of
all the Persons in the World, they shall not miss of him. O what Encouragement
is here to young Seekers of Christ! [This word in the Text we have rendered
thus; (Job 8.5.) If thou would seek God betimes, if thou would morning God:
Shahar (diluculare Deum diligenter, sedulo and magno studio quaerere.)

The Observations are these.

1. That young Inquirers after Christ are much upon his heart.

2. That Morning Seekers shall be sure, and certain Finders.

3. That usually in Souls morning lookers after Christ, they meet with much
discouragement. This is strongly implied, because Christ gives them this
Promise, by way of Encouragement. We will begin with this last.

Let us enquire a little what these Discouragements are; what are great
Hindrances of poor morning Seekers.

1. From within, there are discouragements. 2. From without.

1. Discouragements from within. 1. Strong Corruptions; for as soon as ever the
Soul begins to look out, and enquire after Jesus Christ, then does Corruption
begin to work more strongly, than it did before. (...) corruption is more
strong in young ones than in others, and upon this occasion (says the Soul)
Will (...) poor soul get over this moun^^^^ (...) Jesus Christ? Alas! there is
(...) Lust betwixt me and Ch^^^^, (...) shall I not one day perish by the hand
of Saul? Will not these Sons of Zerviah be too strong for me? O now says the
poor Soul my Enemies are strong and lively, (as David said) and thrust sore at
me. O poor Soul! what though thy Corruptions be strong, yet thy Redeemer is
strong: he is stronger than the strong man armed, and that promise answers this
discouragement.

He shall bring forth Judgment unto Victory: Isaiah 42.3.
though thou be but a poor smoak-ing flax, and bruised reed, yet thou shall
have the day over all thy Corruptions; and will not such a day of Victory call
for a day of thanksgiving? I have read of a Victory called Victoria
Hallelujetica, upon this: The Saxons here in England being to engage the
Britains, the Leader of the Britains being a Germanus who came over from France
to subdue the P^lagian Heresy.
Godly Bishop, having his Army in some Dales and Valleys, ordered them to cry
Hallelujah, which they did, and through the Echo of the voice in the Valleys,
the Enemy thought there was many more of them, than there was, and through fear
fled. O poor discouraged soul! thou shall have such a Victory over thy
Corruptions, as thou will for ever sing Hallelujah in Heaven for.

2. Discouragement from within is weakness of Grace. O! says the poor soul, can
such a weak Creature as I ever be able to seek Christ, through so many
difficulties? every sin is too hard for me, every duty too hard for me, I may
as well give over praying, and hearing, and contending against my sin, for I
find my self so weak, I am ever and anon foiled. O poor soul! do not thou
know the Promise is made to truth of Grace, and not only to the strength of
grace: bruised Reeds are within the Promise, as well as strong Cedars; the
Lambs are under the Promise of his Bosom; the weak of the flock this good
Shepherd has promised to strengthen; the days of small things he will not
despise; weak ones are neither cast out, nor cast off, because of weakness, if
they be Children.

3. Discouragement is sense of their own vileness and unworthiness. O poor
young ones! at first setting out after Christ they are under their Humiliations
for Sin, a great piece of which Humiliation lies in the sense of their own
Unworthiness; thus it was with the poor Prodigal, at his first coming home to
his Father's House; Lord, Luke 15.19.
I am not worthy to be called thy Son; and as the Samaritan, I am not worthy
thou should come under my Roof: O says such a poor soul, Lord will thou be
found of such a wrech as I; such a vile wrech as I?

O poor soul! do thou not know that all sinners that come unto him, though
vile, though wretched, though miserable, are to be welcomed by him? And this as
he is commissionated by the Father; John 6.37, 38.
He will in no wise cast out them that come unto him; and the strength and
stress of all lies here, this is the will of my Father. Now Christ will be sure
to act obedientially, and faithfully to his Commission received of his Father.
Luke 14.21.
Poor Souls! were not the poor Gentiles, who were Christ's Guests, vile,
Hedgeway sinners? Highway sinners? the blind, and maimed? yet how does Christ
welcome such Guests to his Table? Are you viler than these? Alas poor souls!
you that are under the sense of your own vileness, you come right to Christ
unworthy of a Pardon, of a good look, of a good word; as they came with Ropes
about their necks to the King of Israel; he usually accepts and pardons such.

4. Discouragement from within is sense of former lost, and buried Convictions.
While we are under Ordinances, or we are under Afflictions, O how ordinary is
this! and we are affected with these Convictions. But one Temptation or other,
either within, or without, meets thee, and the Conviction presently is buried;
the Soul hears no more of it, it may be for a year, or two; but if the Lord
have a gracious design upon thee, he causes thy Convictions to rise again, and
walk again; and O then the soul is troubled, and discouraged: Alas! this
Conviction is come again, but will it not die, as the last did? It will not
stay long.

O poor Soul! yet this has usually been the way of God to cause the second
Convictions, or the Return of convictions to do their work thoroughly: O how
many souls have found it so! Though truly it is a wonder of mercies, when first
Convictions are smothered and extinguished, that God ever blows them up, and
kindles them again. 1 Samuel 3.7.
God often does with young Seekers, as he did with young Samuel, calls him
again, and again, though we lie down, and sleep again, and again; it is said,
he knew not the word of the Lord, for he was young.

5. Discouragement is, fears of Nonperseverance, that young ones meet with from
within. O say these poor souls, what will become of us poor low Shrubs, when we
see such tall and strong Cedars fall? Shall we ever be able to hold on in our
way? Shall we run and not be weary, walk, and not faint? We shall never be able
to continue to the far end, to run the Race with patience that is set before us.

O poor Soul! thy Perseverance in the ways of God is Jesus Christ's Promise,
Purchase, and Charge. 1. He has promised it, Isaiah 40.31.
they that wait on the Lord shall renew their strength, even so as they shall
run and not be weary; nay if they cannot, he has promised to carry them;
Isaiah 40.11.
he carries the Lambs in his Bosom, and can any pull them out of his Bosom? If
none can pull them out of his hand, much less can any pull them out of his
heart. 2. Perseverance is Christ's Purchase; did he die for you, and will he
lose you? Will he pay the Price, and let another carry away the Purchase? Did
not he die for Glory, as well as Grace? and Happiness as well as Holiness? No,
no, not a soul that his blood is gone for, can be a miscarrying soul. 3. Your
Perseverance is Christ's charge, he has undertaken for it to his Father: John
6.37.
none that thou have given me shall be lost, but I will raise it up at the last
day.

2. They have Discouragement from without as well as from within, and both
meeting together is a great damp to the young Seeker. The discouragements from
without are from these Causes.

1. From Satan; As soon as he sees they look Christ-ward, and Heavenward, he
begins then to torment them; though while they were his Bondslaves, they were
all the time quiet. As when the Children of Israel were to go out of the
Egyptian Captivity, then Pharaoh with all his Host pursues them; so when a soul
is going out of his spiritual house of Bondage, Satan with all his might and
main labors to reduce them. It is the observation of one upon the Church, the
Woman in the Revelations, that all the while she was breeding, the Dragon did
not meddle with her; but when she comes to be delivered, then he casts a flood
after the woman to destroy both her and her man-child. So all the while a poor
soul is under some Breathings and desires only after Christ, Satan does not
much tempt, or disturb it: but when it comes to bring forth Christ, and answer
his Convictions, with a change of Conversation, O then he casts a whole flood
of Temptations and discouragements after it. And, alas! this proceeds from his
envy to the good of your souls. He is the envious one, and his envy puts him
upon laying discouragements before you: O who can stand before Envy? O poor
soul! the Lord will look after thee, while thou art looking after him. Poor
soul! be of good cheer, thy Temptations argue his Rage, and his Rage being
great argues his time of rule in thy soul is like to be short.

2. Discouragement without proceeds from the Persecution that attends the
Profession of the Gospel. While the Sun did shine upon the Gospel, it had many
friends: but when it is brought under the Clouds of Persecution, many go away
from Christ; as he said unto them, Will you also go away? There was I remember
a Law, that the first year of marriage, none should go to War: O but may young
ones say, what a discouragement it is to us, as soon as ever we desire to be
married to Christ in a profession of the Gospel, we must be Sufferers, and must
go to War with Persecutions. Well, poor Souls! be not discouraged; you shall
not go to war on your own cost; The Lord the great Captain of your Salvation
will renew your strength, and you shall run and not be weary, walk and not
faint; though Persecutions meet you in the way, Jesus Christ has his strict
Charge, and he will look after them in a suffering day.

3. Discouragement from without is the Opposition they meet with from carnal
Relations, such as are Encmies to the Cross of Christ. Many times such do
mightily oppose these ways they are ignorant of, which is a great
discouragement.

And Satan many times helps on the rage of such, and stirs up their wrath; but
yet for all this, poor soul, be not discouraged, when thy way pleases the Lord
he can make thine Enemies at Peace with thee, much more thy Relations. God many
times has turned the heart of Relations about, as he did Esau's heart to his
Brother Jacob, when pursuing of him; but if not, there is a Friend nearer than
a Brother (viz.) the Lord Jesus Christ, he will be a friend in the day of
Adversity. Nay often it is observed, that as cold water makes fire burn so much
the hotter; so Grace gains by opposition, by the cold water of discouragement
burns so much the brighter. Thy opposition will drive thee more to look up to
him, where thy strength lies, and so may be a great preservation to thee.

4. Discouragement from without is from the miscarriages of such as do profess
the Lord Jesus Christ. Many that call upon the name of Christ, do not depart
from iniquity, but walk loosely, deal unrighteously betwixt man and man,
dishonor their Profession by an unsuitable Conversation. Others, they have
more grossly backsliden from God; and whereas formerly they have been praying
men in their Families, hearing men, frequenting the means of Grace, somewhat
strict in their lives; now they have thrown off all these, and become like
other men, as vain as other men, nay as profane as other men, and this is a
great discouragement.

O poor Soul! notwithstanding this Discouragement, yet go on; for the ways of
the Lord are the same, and if thou follow on to know the Lord, thou will find
sweetness in his Ordinances and Truth notwithstanding this.

Application.
Is it so that young Seekers, early Seekers meet with Discouragement? Word of
Use is Caution. O let young ones take heed in their first looking out after
Christ,

1. Of consulting with flesh and blood; this will occasion you to yield to
Discouragements. It is said of Paul, Gal. 1.16.
he consulted not with flesh and blood. The worst counsel in the World will
flesh and blood give in the case of a man's soul. Alas poor young man! will
flesh and blood say, what art thou going to do? Art thou able to deny thy self
of the delights and pleasures of Youth? Art thou able to cut off a right hand,
to put out a right eye, to cut the throat of a beloved Isaac, to let out the
hearts blood of a constitutional Lust? Can thy tender years endure such hard
things, as Religion is like to be attended with? Can thou bear the scoffs and
jeers of the World, the oppositions and displeasure of thy dearest Relations?
And thus will flesh and blood follow thee: But alas! what is this to a poor
soul that sees its precious soul lie at stake, and is in danger? Cannot, will
not this soul reply to all these reasonings of flesh and blood, Get you behind
me Satan? What are the greatest severities in the World to a man that sees and
feels he is a lost soul for ever, if he have not a Christ?

2. Take heed in your first seekings out, and meeting with discouragements,
that you pore not unbelievingly upon your discouragements. It is true, there
ought to be sitting down, and counting the cost, for the want of which many
poor souls after Profession have backsliden; but the poor young ones may pore
too much upon their discouragements, may look too much to the dark side of the
Cloud, and say as the Prophet's man did; Alas Master, what shall we do? 2 Kings
6.15.
And the Propher prayed and his eyes were opened, and then he saw the Mountains
full of Horsemen and Chariots, and now he cries out, More are they that are with
us, than they that are against us. O thus it is with many young ones! they cry,
Alas what shall we do? And are utterly discouraged until God come and open
their eyes.

3. Take heed you young Seekers under your discouragements of believing
diabolical suggestions, that shall be cast into your hearts against the ways of
God: O! Satan will be ever suggesting one thing or other into your hearts; that
Christ is a hard Master, that his Commandments are grievous, that the burdens
of the command of the Cross are intolerable, and that in the way to Christ are
Mountains and Hills inaccessible, too high for such short breathed Creatures to
ascend or travel over: And O how many poor souls by such suggestions have been
exceedingly discouraged in their pursuits after Christ! O but this is dangerous
to take counsel of an Enemy: would any of you do so in other Cases?

4. Caution to young Seekers under discouragements, Take heed of giving over
seeking, because you find not at first what you seek: This poor souls are very
prone to. Why should I wait on the Lord any longer? (said that King.) O so say
many poor souls, why should we seek Christ any longer? Pray any longer? Hear
any longer? Solomon advises in this case, dig for Wisdom as for hidden
treasure, and seek her as silver. They that dig in such Mines as Gold and
Silver, do not give over, because they find not it first: O no! it lies deep,
and they must search with great pains and patience. The poor woman sought her
lost Groat till she found it: O continue seeking to the far end, till you find:
O it is very dangerous to give over, you see the Promise is, you shall find.

5. Caution to young Seekers: O take heed when you are under discouragements,
you do not murmr against God in your Hearts, and say as those poor Israelites
did, would to God we had never come out of Egypt; what was the matter? They
mere now with great difficulties and discouragements, and their hearts fell a
murmuring, which in the New Testament is called a going back in their Hearts: O
this does much dishonor God; as if he could not in his own everlasting arms,
carry poor souls over all their difficulties.

6. Caution, Let young Seekers take heed of drawing up hasty conclusions
against themselves, because of present discouragements; which they are very
prone to do.

O how many poor souls rashly conclude, for their part, they are cut off, and
their hope is lost; as David: Psalm. 10.7, 11.
but he said in his haste, all men are liars: so say many poor souls, I doubt
Preachers will be found liars, and flatterers unto me: Alas, did not poor
Jeremy, Jer. 15, 18.
under this discouragement, break out into that sad conclusion against God,
Will thou be a liar unto me, and altogether as waters that fail? So say poor
young ones; alas, how should such weak worms, as we are, get through such
difficulties, and discouragements? and as it is said of the Children of Israel,
in their Travel to the Good Land, so may it be said of young Travelers, Their
Souls were discouraged because of the way. Numb. 21.4.


2. Use, Is it so that morning Seekers of Jesus Christ meet with great
discouragements? then it is an Use of Direction, what shall poor young
Inquirers do under all their discouragements? Young Travelers you know stand
in need of direction, and so do young Inquirers after Christ.

1. Direction, Under your discouragements be often looking up to Christ, Rev.
1.11.
as the Alpha and Omega of the whole Work (viz.) as the Author of it, and
finisher of it. Did you ever understand the Glorious Name and Title of Christ,
I am the Alpha and the Omega; what is the meaning of this? it notes out the
Deity and Eternity of Christ, he is the first and the last (so the most
Interpreters) but there seems to be something more in it, it notes also the
Stability and Omnipotency of Christ to execute threatenings, and perform
promises, Isa. 41.4.44.6.
as you may see in the places quoted in the Margin, That Christ who has begun
a good work, is the Omega of it, he will finish it. Now do you look up to
Christ to this very end, under this very notion and title; Lord Jesus the work
is thine; the hands of Zerubbabel (as was said in that day) has laid the
foundation, and the hands of Zerubbabel must finish the building; Lord, the
foundation stone, Grace, was of thy laying, and so must the Top-stone of Glory
also: Do you thus say to Christ, when you look up to him? We have the direction
expressly given us by the Apostle, Heb. 12.2.
Look up to Jesus as the author and finisher of our Faith. Beza reads, the
Captain of our faith and looking. The word signifies, such a looking, as calls
off the eye from all other objects that represent the difficulty of the race;
and should not young Soldiers look to their Captain? In the greatest
discouragements that we can be under, we must look to him; therefore God says,
he has given him for a Leader and Commander to the people. Isa. 55.4.
He is called the Captain of our Salvation, alluding to Joshua the great
Captain of the Old Testament, under whose Conduct the children of Israel marched
to the Good Land. Well then poor Soul, do you look to him for finishing the
whole work: This made Paul so confident of the poor Philippians, 1 Phil. 6.
being confident of this very thing, that he who has begun a good work in you,
will perform it until the day of Christ.

2. Direction to young Seekers, under all their discouragements, is this, Be
sure a good foundation be laid: if there be not a good foundation, your
discouragements will sink you, or else spoil all your convictions. You know
they which built upon the sand, when discouragements beat in upon them, then
the house fell; but it was not so with the house upon the Rock; Luke 6.48.
why, what was the matter? the house that fell, dug not deep enough to lay
the foundation; and we read of the Seed that withered, because it had not depth
of earth: Mat. 13.6.
O but now a good foundation laid will bear you up under all your
discouragments. And what is the reason of the Apostasy of young ones, who once
have been warm in the ways of God; alas, the foundation at first was not well
laid.

If it be asked what I mean by young ones laying a good foundation, I answer,
there is a twofold foundation in this sense, First, there is a foundation as
to state, as to the state of an immortal soul, and thus Christ is the
foundation; there is no other foundation for the hopes of eternal salvation to
be bottomed and built upon; another foundation can no man lay (says the
Apostle) and therefore the Rock the wise builders built upon was Christ: O then
be sure to let young ones get an interest in Christ, be built upon him, be
bottomed upon him, and then they will weather all their discouragements
comfortably.

2. There is a foundation as to Principles, and Doctrinals, after which young
ones should look in their first seeking after Christ; therefore we read of
being built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief Corner Stone; this foundation was the Principles, and
the Doctrine of the Apostle; therefore we read of the twelve names of the
Apostles of the Lamb, being written upon the twelve foundations of the New
Jerusalem; and alas, how often do souls miscarry for want of Gospel Principles?
I never knew an unprincipled Professor, but at one turn or other he would
desert the Lord Jesus. You young ones may have stirring desires, some stirring
affection and convictions, but alas many times you neglect Principles. When you
meet with a discouragement, you will fall back, if you be not laid in with
Principles. Do not fish begin to stink first in the head? If the Leprosy was
in the head, the High Priest was to pronounce him utterly unclean. When Satan
cannot keep youth in profaneness, then he will labor to poison them with
Erroneous Principles.

3. Direction, to young inquirers after the Lord Jesus Christ, is this,
Acquaint your selves with the promises of the Gospel, and the way of Faith.
Mostly young ones overlook believing, they follow humbling work so fast; it is
a piece of admirable skill to put them both together, humbling work, and
believing work. O but hard work is this to be humbled under the sense of sin,
and believe for the pardon of it, at the same time. Usually young Converts
sorrow is too legal; they are the sweetest tears for sin that flow from faith's
eyes; they shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and mourn. Young Seekers
are all for mourning, and little study the way of believing; but go to the
Promise, and acquaint thy self with the fullness, and freeness, and sutableness,
and unchangeableness of the Promises; these would be great helps to you in
seeking after Christ. Let young ones acquaint themselves with two or three
things in Promises.

1. That Gospel Promises run to weak Grace. They are prone to question whether
the Promise belong to them or no; why so? O they are such weak Creatures, have
so little strength against sin, so little power against corruption: O but can
thou say, Lord, here is truth of Grace, and Lord, I walk before thee with a
true and perfect heart? O poor Soul, I tell thee the Promises run to
uprightness in heart and truth in the inward parts.

2. Let Young Ones acquaint themselves with this, that Gospel Promises look
over all unworthiness in their objects. If thou be the object of Gods love,
Promises overlook all thy unworthiness, how is his love free else? therefore we
see the Promises running down to the vilest of sinners. O how does this
temptation of unworthiness stand in the way of many a Soul to Christ? and has
kept many a Soul and Christ a long time at distance? but we may see this
answered in the Promise.

3. Let them know that the accomplishment of Promises does not depend upon any
thing in the Creature, but in God himself; this has been a great temptation,
to look for some qualifications in themselves, and so they have been spinning
some webb out of their own bowels; but alas, this can never be a garment to
them! God accomplishes his Promises for his own Names sake.

4. Let Young Seekers, 2 Cor. 1.20.
under their discouragements, know, that all the Promises are Yea and Amen in
Christ Jesus (viz.) they all receive in him a full ratification and
accomplishment; so that he is undertaker to see them all have their performance.

5. Let Young Ones, under their discouragements, know, that Gospel Promises
will carry the Soul through all difficulties they can meet with in their way;
there is that in a Promise, that will hold up the head, when ready to sink in
the very swellings of Jordan; this made Jacob plead so hard with God, in his
difficulty, that old Promise, Lord, did not thou say, thou would do me good:
therefore when Joshua had such hard service to go upon, in the conquest of the
Land of Canaan, he gave him that Promise, I will never leave thee, and Abraham
when to leave his Country, I am God all-sufficient.

4. Direction to Young Seekers under their discouragements; study well the
Righteousness of Christ. This is very hard with young ones, to get out of self:
O how many years are poor Souls before they get off the bottom of their own
Righteousness? they are prone to seek some things in themselves, as Israel of
old, who sought to obtain Righteousness in a way of works, but could not; every
temptation, every objection is too hard for a poor Soul, until it get
acquaintance with the Righteousness of Christ; but now when a Soul can call the
Lord Jesus, by that Name, The Lord my Righteousness, Jer. 23.6.
in this Name every temptation, every objection, every doubt is answered in the
Righteousness of Christ. His Righteousness is opposed to our guilt: If it be
thy nakedness that is thy objection, it is answered in Christ's Righteousness,
for it is the best robe; if it be thy deformity, here it is answered, Christ's
Righteousness is a Believers comeliness; thou art comely with the comeliness
that I have put upon thee; this is the beautiful garment that a Believer puts
on to go into the presence of God withal, and now all deformity is covered.
The poor Infant in its blood, thus was covered, and rendered comely. Is it thy
filthiness, that becomes an objection? here it is answered, the blood of Christ
is cleansing blood; who loved us, and washed us in his blood.

5. Direction to young Seekers under discouragements; Let Jesus Christ hear
often from you; when should Jesus Christ hear from you, but when
discouragements are upon you? these are to send you to Christ, these are to
bring you upon your knees. We read of the Spouse crying to Christ; 2 Cant. 14.
where was she? in the secret place of the stairs, the Text tells us, in a
discouraged, persecuted condition; yet says Christ, Thy voice is sweet, and thy
countenance comely. O poor Soul! under all thy discouragements, Christ loves to
hear from thee. O but will he hear such a poor, stubborn, brutish creature, as
I have been? Yea, I have heard Ephraim bemoaning himself; poor Ephraim was
discouraged, and yet goes to God, and cries, Lord I have a brutish heart, Lord
I have a stubborn heart, as a Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke; Jer. 31.18.
yet Lord turn thou me: here was his Prayer, and O how this took, and melted
the heart of God, that his bowels broke forth, Is Ephraim my dear Son?

6. Direction to young Seekers, under their discouragements; pore not upon thy
discouragements too much. O how ordinary is this! This is to look upon the
black and dark side of the cloud; what, is there not a bright side? Many poor
Souls by doing thus, have entered into great temptations; you lead your selves
into temptations by this means; but this has been cautioned against in the
former use, therefore I shall not enlarge upon it here.

2. Observation from this Text, we observed, was this, That Young Seekers, or
Morning Seekers are much upon the heart of Christ. It is evident in the Text,
it being a Promise, by way of encouragement to such poor Souls; O they are so
much on his heart, he would not have them discouraged: O he knows they are soon
discouraged; therefore they are upon his heart to encourage them.

1. He does encourage them by accepting of their weak beginnings; when a
Scholar is a young beginner, he is soon discouraged, but when he sees his
Master takes notice, and accepts in good part what he does, this does much
encourage him; and so a young Apprentice: Thus it is with a poor Soul at its
first enquiring after Christ; when it sees the Lord accepts and takes in good
part its weak motions after Christ, its weak affections, and desires, O it is
encouraged; will the Lord accept of any thing such a poor Creature does? have I
any offering that can find favor in his sight? what, such a poor Soul, that am
but of yesterday, that am but newly begun to peep out of my profaneness? who
have but newly turned my back on the sinful vanities of youth? This was typed
out in Gods acceptance of the first fruits, though never so small; we read the
sheaf of their first fruits of their harvest was to be given to the Priest,
Lev. 23.11, 13.
and he was to wave it before the Lord, that it might be accepted. If it be but
a poor sheaf, it is accepted though thou carried out precious Seed weeping; and
it may be have not gotten thy sheaves to return with, yet peradventure thou
have gotten one sheaf; Lev. 2.14.
Well, carry that to Christ, thy High Priest, to wave before the Lord, it may
be accepted for you: Yea, if it be but a handful of green ears you bring to the
Lord, a few green desires, and affections, they shall be accepted with the
Lord. We read of a glorious work begun in the day of Zachary, Zach. 4.10.
in the building of the Temple, and great discouragements the Instruments of
that Glorious Work met withal; there was a mountain in the way, but all is
encouraged by this, The hands of Zerubbabel (says God) has laid the
foundation, and the hands of Zerubbabel shall finish the building. For who has
despised the day of small things? says the Lord; there were some poor
beginnings, and God would not discourage them. So I say in this case, who has
despised the day of small things? what though convictions be but small,
affections small, grace small? yet God accepts of this day of small things, and
thus encourages them.

2. Jesus Christ does encourage young Seekers, by persuading their hearts that
they shall find favor and grace in the sight of God sooner or later. Did he
ever say to the House of Jacob, seek ye my face in vain? O no says the poor
Soul, I am under a Promise, they that seek shall find, therefore the poor Soul
is of good courage. O though a person does meet with discouragements, yet says
the Soul, I shall find, though I digg long first, cry long first, seek long
first, yet the good hope to speed at last becomes a great encouragement: and
the contrary is as great a discouragement. Why should I wait on the Lord any
longer, pray any longer, hear any longer, seek any longer? this weakens and
enfeebles the Soul exceedingly. What kept up Jacob in wrestling all night, but
a secret hope, and sweet persuasion that he should for all the opposition he
met withal, come off conqueror, and at last get the blessing? How is it with
your souls, young ones, as to this thing? are you persuaded your praying,
seeking, will not be in vain? O this is a great encouragement.

3. The Lord Jesus Christ does encourage young Seekers after him, by making the
yoke of Christ easier to them every day than other. Every yoke or burden is
hardest at first. O! poor Souls are ready to say of the yoke of Christ, at
first, as they did of the yoke of Circumsion; wherefore put you upon us a yoke,
that neither we nor our Fathers are able to bear? O but this yoke of Christ is
made more easy to the soul every day than other. Now an Apprentice, or a
Scholar, when he finds his work casier and easier to him, O then how is he
encouraged to go on it? O now (says the soul) I find that Scripture true,
Christ's yoke is an easy yoke, Mat. 11.28.
and his burden is a light burden; and that word I now find to be true, and
none of his Commandments are grievous. Now it may here be demanded, How does
Christ make his yoke to young Seekers easier every day than other?

1. By an increase of love in them to Christ. As love grows up in the Soul,
difficulties are not dreadful; the dread of them is taken off; when the spark
is blown into a vehement flame, what difficulty can stand before it? Who can
stand before envy? But here it may be said, who can stand before love? Many
waters cannot quench it. Is not love the greatest conqueror in the world? How
evident is this in men's love to their lusts! O what desperate adventures do
poor Sinners make to get to their lusts! As David's worthies did break through
an Host for the water of the well of Bethlehem, so do thousands of Sinners, for
love to their sins, break through a whole Host of Convictions, Reproofs,
Admonitions, Counsels, and all for love to their sins. And so love to Jesus
Christ, as it increases, the commands of Christ are pleasant; the ways of
wisdom are ways of pleasantness; we take pleasure to serve such as we love.

2. Christ makes his yoke easier every day than other, and so encourages young
Seekers, by making Duty a delight. So long as Duty is a burden, there will be
grievousness in it, but when it once is matter of delight and privilege, O
then it grows easy. Delight makes every thing easy, though difficult in it
self. Alas, a poor Soul at first, looks upon the yoke of Christ as a task, as
Scholars have their tasks at first; but after delight in them, Prayer now
becomes a delight, and the Soul can say as the Spouse did, I sit down under his
shadow with great delight. Communion with God is a great delight; reading and
hearing is a great delight; and now these duties go sweetly and easily on.

3. He makes his yoke an easy yoke, by giving them to see a difference betwixt
this yoke, and the yoke of Satan. And now says the poor Soul, the yoke of
Satan would have pressed me down to Hell, I should have drawn my self damned in
the Devils yoke, and O now how heavy do I feel it! My sins are gone over my
head as a burden, yea, as too heavy a burden for me to bear. O now when a poor
sinner compares yokes and burdens, O how easy does Christ's yoke become!

4. The Lord Jesus Christ does encourage young Seekers, by giving them hearts
to wait upon him, and sweetly and secretly renewing their strength in waiting
on him. While there is a waiting Spirit, there is encouragement; this was the
great encouragement of Jacob's Soul, a wrestling frame was kept up in him.
Wherever a Soul continues a waiter and wrestler, there is hope it will come
off conqueror; therefore we read of that blessed Promise, Isa. 40.30, 31.
The youths shall faint, and the young men shall utterly fall, but they that
wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength; strength comes in upon your
waiting. You young waiters, he will not let you wait upon him for nothing, if
your hands wax weak he will strengthen them, there shall be a secret invisible
strength sent in, that shall still keep you waiting. O but may Souls say, we
shall be weary after a while for all this. O no poor Souls you shall run and
not be weary, walk and not faint: a poor young runner shall hold on, and hold
out. That word in the Psalms is of the like comfort, Psalm. 27. ult.
to waiters, Wait on the Lord and be of good courage, and he shall strengthen
thy heart. I say, wait on the Lord. O but says the poor Soul, I am
discouraged, I know not what to do, I shall sink under them; wait on the Lord,
and what then? the Lord will strengthen thee in waiting against all thy
temptations, both within and without; the Lord is good to them that wait for
him; and thou shall find it so.

5. The Lord does encourage the souls of young Seekers by giving them tastes of
his love; for many times, at first conversion he gives more of it than he does
afterward; this is to encourage Souls, and draw them on more to love him and
seek him, and follow after him. When the Prodigal came newly home, at his first
return, O how he treated him! Bring forth the best robe, and put it on him, and
a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet. If the Lord should not give young
Seekers some sweet tastes of his love, they would be discouraged in seeking
after him: But now they that taste how good and gracious the Lord is, they come
unto him.

6. The Lord Jesus does encourage the Souls of young Seekers by passing by, and
pardoning their infirmities in their approaches to him, and graciously
accepting, and owning what is his. There is something of Gods, and something of
their own in every duty, and a great deal of their own to a little of Christ's,
a great deal of dross to a little silver, a great deal of water to a little
wine; and O says the poor young Seeker, I am discouraged, will the Lord accept
of such an offering as this? If thou should offer this to thy Governor would
he accept of it? O poor Soul see what he says, I have eaten my honey with my
honey comb; not only the honey but the comb; because of the dross he does not
refuse all; he knows how to separate the comb from the dross, the infirmities
of a duty from any thing of the spirit in a duty; he will pick out what is his
own, and pardon what is thine.

7. The Lord Jesus does encourage the Souls of young Seekers, by helping them
to believe the precious Promises made to them. There are not more precious
Promises made to any sort of sinners, or sort of people, than to young Seekers
after Christ. Is not this a precious Promise in the Text? Of all persons you
shall not be disappointed, you shall seek and find; ^^^. 40.11.
He shall carry the Lambs in his bosom, and gather them with his arm, and
shall gently lead them that are with young. O what a Soul-reviving-Promise is
this! are not Lambs weak creatures? but in his bosom shall they get both
warmth and strength. The old Proverb shall not hold in this case, The weakest
go by the walls; if they cannot go, he can carry them, and not carry them on
his back, but in his bosom, which is the easiest carriage, and the safest
carriage. O what a sweet shepherd is this, that nourishes his Lambs in his
bosom! And is not that also a rich and glorious Promise, A bruised Reed shall
he not break, nor shall he quench the smoking flax, until he bring judgment
unto victory. O poor Soul, can there be greater encouragements than in this
Promise? What is a weaker thing than a bruised Reed? what is a poorer thing
than smoking flax? soon extinguished, soon trodden out; but the Lord will make
weak ones strong, weak Grace shall be victorious Grace, (thou art a poor weak
worm, it may be) the Lord chooses things that are not, to confound things that
are.

8. The Lord encourages such as are young Seekers of him, by watering the
buddings of his own Grace in their Souls. Grace is so tender a plant, that it
will live in no soil where it is not well watered; it cannot be in any soil
but it must be watered. He takes notice of the buddings of the Pomegranate, or
the opening of it. When a poor soul begins first in its openings to desire
after Jesus Christ, in its faith, in its love to Christ, O then these are
watered with precious quickening influences from above, which makes them spring
up and grow apace; he breaths upon his young plants, Blow O south mind that the
spices may flow out; these breathings are influences from the Spirit.

1. Reason, why the Lord Jesus Christ does encourage young Seekers, because in
their first setting out to seek Christ, they meet with most temptations. O now
when Satan is like to lose his prey, how does this greedy Lion roar? when he
sees he is like to be disappointed, how does he follow the Soul with wrath and
rage? Now the greater the rage of Satan is against poor Souls, the more bowels
has Christ yearning toward them; as it is his great office to succor those
that are tempted. When Christ was born in Jerusalem, there was a great uproar.
O poor Soul! thou wondrest what is the matter, there is an uproar, a tumult in
thy own Spirit, a combat within, and thou begin'st to be restless in Spirit,
and look up to God in this condition. O what if Christ be forming in thy
soul?

There are two things make Satan bestir himself against morning Seekers;

1. It is his envy: he is the envious one, he envies the good and happiness of
every poor Soul, therefore he pursues thee.

2. His pride that his dominion should be lessened, that he should lose a
subject, this makes him rage.

2. Reason, why the Lord Jesus Christ does encourage poor morning Seekers,
because he will allure them after himself. This is the method of Jesus Christ,
to allure by encouragements young Converts. This the Lord did with the people
of Israel, Hos. 2.15.
Therefore I will allure her into the Wilderness, persuade her: and sometimes
it is called drawing, with loving kindness have I drawn thee. A poor Soul, by
being encouraged is allured after Christ spoken as some Expositors say after
the manner of Lovers, that give one another presents, not only pledges, but as
baits to allure and inflame further affections.) Every encouragement the
morning Seeker has from Christ, the more does his love burn after Christ.

3. Reason, why the Lord Jesus does encourage morning Seekers after Christ,
because this is the will of the Father, and whatsoever is his Fathers will, is
his will: they run into one another, I and my Father is one. Joh. 36.37.
Thus he argues in that famous place, I will in no wise cast out them that come
unto me; why, this is the will of my Father; God will have young Seekers
encouraged; who ever be cared for in the family, the Children must.

4. Reason, because they are soonest discouraged. O if poor Souls at the first
work get not some little taste of love, some comfort and refreshment, alas
their souls faint within them. That is the reason he will carry the Lambs in
his bosom, they are soon wearied, cannot go, are prone to be tired, and sit
still; O but this tender hearted Shepherd shall carry them, that is the reason
of that Promise, he shall not quench the smoking flax, (viz.) he shall not
carry it roughly, but tenderly toward Souls, under weak beginnings of Grace.
The smoking flax is soon put out, and the bruised Reed is soon broken; so is a
poor weak young beginner in Grace soon discouraged; but the Lord shall not do
it (viz.) he will do the contrary for it, he will strengthen, he will encourage
it.

5. Jesus Christ does encourage young morning Seekers after himself, because it
is his own work in their Souls, and he that begins a good work will carry it
on. Jesus Christ must needs encourage the breathings of his own Spirit in the
Soul; he is tender of his own begettings: every Creature that begets, seeks to
maintain that life, so does Jesus Christ. The work of Regeneration is called
the New Creature, it is of his Creation; we are his workmanship created to good
works in Christ Jesus. God will encourage his own workmanship.

Application.
Is it so that poor morning Seekers are encouraged by Jesus Christ?

1. It informs us then of the love of Christ, that it runs to the weakest of
Believers, as well as the strongest of Believers, to those that are in the
lowest form in Christ's School, as well as those that are in the highest, to the
weakest of the flock, as well as the strongest, to the youngest children, as
well as the eldest. There are three sorts of Christians, as John ranks then,
Fathers, young Men, Joh. 12.13.
and little Children.

2. It informs us of the evil and sin of the desponding frame of heart which is
often found with young Seekers (viz.) if they seek a little and find not at
first, then they are discontented, and discouraged, and then why should I wait
any longer, seek any longer, pray any longer, mourn any longer, hear any
longer? O this is an evil frame of heart, you see Christ is very loath you
should be discouraged.

1. This desponding and being discouraged, argues much shortness and impatience
of spirit in you, that you are not willing to let the Lord alone with the
management of his own work. He that believes makes not have: Psalm. 40.1, 2.
A poor Soul may be too impatient after comfort, and discoveries of love; but
David came to this frame of heart, to wait patiently upon the Lord, then the
Lord heard his cry, and delivered him out of the horrible pit.

2. Does not this speak much pride to be in the heart? What is it but pride,
that you are not willing to wait? Alas poor Souls, should not you say as the
Church did, I will put my mouth in the dust, if there may be hope. What is
non-subjection to the will of God but pride?

3. It informs what is Ministers duties, and Believers duties. This was the
charge of Christ to Peter, and in him to the Gospel Ministry succeeding him,
feed my Lambs. Joh. 21.15.
There are some that concern themselves too little with the Lambs of Christ,
they are so taken up with the Hee-goats of the flocks, that they forget there
are Lambs in the flock, that there are Hinds in the flock, poor timorous
creatures startled with any thing, for so are the Hinds. Can we write after a
better Copy than our Lord and Master has set us? He carries the Lambs in his
bosom, and should not substitute Shepherds do so? He took little children in
his arms, and should not we do so? And this is also the duty of others, Fathers
and Mothers, when you see any thing of Jesus breaking out, any desires, any
good inclinations, any convictions of sin; O you should encourage these
beginnings, this is Christ-like, and the contrary is Devil-like, Herod-like,
which undoubtedly was stirred up by Satan to kill Christ in the cradle (viz.)
while young, to seek for the life of the young Child; Pharoah-like to throw the
Male Children into the River; Pharisee-like neither to enter your selves, nor
let others enter. Masters, how should they encourage their Servants, when they
see any thing of Christ appear in them. The day is coming, you and your
servants will stand before the Lord to give an account how you have carried it
toward them, whether you have encouraged them or no; and I am afraid the
evidence of some Servants will be received against their Masters. Are not such
Masters monsters, rather than Masters, as shall waylay the salvation of a
servants Soul? Would not the rich man have prevented the coming of his brethren
to hell? What can there be any love to Souls in hell? (Expositors tell us, that
their going thither would have added to his torments, because by his example
they had sinned.) O will not this add to your torments, and misery in another
world, that you have been the occasion of so many poor Souls miscarrying under
your roof?

4. It informs us of the infinite condescension of Jesus Christ, that he will
look after poor young enquirers, after poor morning Seekers. Is not this
condescension even to admiration, to carry Lambs in his arms, to nourish poor
Lambs in his own bosom? that he should trouble himself with such poor sinful
worms? May not such souls say, how is it Lord that thou should manifest thy
self to us, and not to the world, and not to the rest of my brothers, and not
to the rest of my sisters, and not to the rest of my relations?

2. Use. Is it so that the Lord Jesus Christ is the encourager of poor morning
Seekers after himself? Then it is a word of Comfort to young Seekers. Be of
good cheer, as they said to the blind man, for the Lord calls; for the Lord
encourages you. O all you morning Seekers, be of good courage, and wait on the
Lord, and he will strengthen your hearts; I say wait upon the Lord.

1. Be of good comfort, you are the travail of Christ's Soul, and therefore he
will look after you. His suffering was his travail. O the pangs and throws of
a travailing woman! We say such have hard labor. O you poor young Converts,
inquirers after Christ, he has had hard labor for you. O the pangs of his
Fathers displeasure, that he has endured, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Here was one bitter pang, and his Soul was sorrowful unto death:
There was another pang, and throws came upon him so fast, that he died
travailing for the Salvation and Redemption of poor Sinners. Therefore we read
that sweet word, He shall see his Seed; Isa. 53.10, 11.
he shall have Seed come out of his sufferings, which are called the travail of
his Soul. And is not this a great comfort? He will surely encourage his own
travail: O poor Souls he has travailed for you; therefore he will encourage
you.

2. Second word of Comfort to young Seekers is this, you are his joy, his
delight, He shall see the travail of his Soul, and be satisfied, (viz.) it
shall be matter of great contentation and delight to see his sufferings issue,
in the bringing forth a Seed and Remnant, that shall be saved. As one delights
in his children, so does Christ in his young Seekers, Behold, Heb. 12.13.
I and the Children thou have given me (which is spoken of Christ, and quoted
out of the Prophets.) He rejoices, you see, in his Seed. O what joy was there
when the young prodigal returned home to his Father's. The whole parable
preaches this Doctrine. A man delights in his youngest children. As a man
delights in his nursery, so does Jesus Christ in his garden; he has his young
nursery.

3. Word of Comfort to young Seekers, He has accommodated Promises to suit
with the conditions of such. O what a care had Christ of such, that he would
give Promises on purpose to such? As to their weakness in Grace, he would
strengthen such poor bruised reeds; as to the dispensations of God, which they
fear they are not able to keep pace with, He shall carry the Lambs in his
bosom; they cannot go they are so weak, he shall carry them. As for the
temptations within or without, Out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings, he
shall ordain strength, to still the enemy, and the avenger. There is not any
condition, but you may find a Promise accommodated for that condition.

4. Word of Comfort to morning Seekers, You are Christ's charge; Behold I and
the Children thou have given me. Heb. 1.13. Spoken of Christ.
Now upon the Fathers donation, and the Sons acceptance they begin to be his
charge; therefore he is the great Trustee for poor Souls. He stands engaged to
give his Father an account of them all at the last day; and will not Christ be
faithful to his trust? nay to the trust God the Father has committed to him?
Therefore he loses not a soul. They pass under the hand of him that tells them
again; all that God the Father has told out to his Son, the Son tells back
again to God the Father.

5. Word of Comfort to morning Seekers is this, This argues the great love God
bears to your Souls, to call you betimes, to call you while you are young. O
how many go down to Hell, while the milk is in their breasts and marrow in
their bones! though young in years, yet old in sin, etc. O at what a rate do
some young ones sin? How expert are they grown in that cursed trade? And that
thou should be called to seek after Christ in thy young days, O what a
comfort is this! Here is one taken and another left.

O but says a poor Soul, Alas! I can get no comfort, as yet I am a poor
troubled Soul, much cast down and dejected.

They that sow in tears shall reap in joy; it is thy seed-time now, therefore
thou must not expect a crop presently, the Seed must lie in the ground. Let
your Seed-prayers, and Seed-tears lie in Gods hand a while; Light is sown for
the Righteous, and joy for the upright in heart.

O but says a poor Soul, I am followed with temptations, since that I begun to
seek after Christ, and I know not what to do.

Poor Soul, his rage is great, because his time is short; now thou art coming
out of captivity to him, he is pursuing thee to reduce thee to the old house of
bondage; thy temptations do argue, the Lord Jesus Christ is about casting out
of Satan; therefore he is angry.

O but I am a poor needy creature; Psalm. 40. ult.
well, but does not the Lord think of thee?

O but I am a weak Creature.

He will perfect strength in weakness, out of the mouth of Babes, Heb. 5.3.
etc.

O but I am an ignorant Creature.

Well, he can have compassion on the ignorant, and them that are out of the way.

The last Use is of Exhortation to Young Ones, to seek the Lord betimes, and
make supplication to him. If thou seek early after God, the Word is, Thou shall
find him. Remember your Creator in the days of your youth, Job 8.5. The word
Seeking we find used in several places: Significat quaerere diligenter and cum
cura. Daresh est summo judicio quaerere. So Eccl. 1.13.
etc. Leave all for Christ, sell all for the pearl of price. Seek him while he
is to be found.

The third Observation we are now come unto from the words, is this:

That morning Seekers shall be sure and certain finders.

They that seek me early shall find me; to be sure such find me; whoever miss
of me, they shall not.

1. By morning Seekers is meant, Job 8.5. Shahar aurare seu diluculare
signifies diligently to seek, or rise timely in the morning. Prove. 11.27.
one that seeks the Lord betimes. So Job phrases it, If thou seek the Lord, and
make supplication unto him. To remember our Creator in the days of our youth.
Our youth is our morning time to seek Christ in; our age is our afternoon: now
it is not so good seeking in the middle of the day, nor in the afternoon, as it
is in the morning.

2. By morning Seekers are meant, such as do earnestly seek the Lord Jesus: Are
there any poor Souls that do more earnestly seek the Lord Jesus than such as
give up themselves betimes to Christ? Hos. 6.15.
In their affliction they will seek me early; (viz.) they will seek me
earnestly, they will seek me in the morning; because what is done in the
morning is done with most vigor and fervency. O! morning Seekers, how
vigorously in Soul do they seek the Lord Jesus? they do not seek like Solomon's
sluggard, as though they cared not whether they found or no; but they seek with
all their heart, which we read a Promise made to; Jer. 29.13.
And you shall seek me, and find me, when you shall search for me with all your
hearts.

3. By a morning Seeker of Christ, is meant a soul that the Lord is visiting
with the day of his power. The morning is the beginning of the day, so the
morning is the beginning of the work of Grace. Hos. 6.3.
The morning of a day of Grace we read of; the Goings of God prepared as the
morning. The morning light is gradual, so is the dawnings of the day of Grace
upon the Soul; Pro. 4.18.
as that word is, The path of the Just is as the shining light, that shines
more and more unto the perfect day. There is the dawning of the day, and the
perfect day. When the day star from on High first arises in the soul; this is
the morning Seeker, it had not light to seek by, until the day star arose in
the heart; and now morning light is come in to let the soul see the misery of
its dark and undone estate without Christ. O now it is a seeker in this light
after the Lord Jesus, etc.

4. By a morning Seeker is meant, a Soul waiting for more appearances, more
arisings of the day star in and upon the Soul: Psalm. 130.6.
As David says, My Soul waits for the Lord, more than they that wait for the
morning; more than the watchmen that wait for the morning. And thus, as soon as
poor Babes in Grace are begotten to Christ, they are children of the light. All
young Converts are children of the light; they are looking out for more light,
more light of Grace, and more light of Comfort. Thus does a poor morning Seeker
wait for light to shine into his dark heart.

5. By a morning Seeker is meant, a poor Soul that stands upon the watchtower
of Observation, taking notice of the first breakings in of light: as the
watchmen waited for the first peep and dawning of the day, that they might
offer the sacrifice appointed for the morning. So a poor morning Seeker is one
that observes the first convictions that dawn upon it, the first light of the
spirit that shines into it; and it stands by the crevise and will not away; but
here is such an Ordinance, that God first convinced me by, first illuminated
me. And thus the Soul keeps an observation of the gradual breakings in of light.

6. By morning Seekers is meant, a poor Soul in its first breathings, out of
the desires and wants of the Soul to Christ; Psalm. 5.3.
My voice shall thou hear in the morning. In the morning will I direct my
prayer unto thee, and will look up. Here is the morning, a time for prayer. I
will order my prayer in the morning. In the morning of a begun work of Grace, O
what directing is there of prayer to God? A praying Soul is a morning Seeker.
Alas! the Soul prayed not before, but now a day of Grace has visited it, it
may be said of him, behold he prays.

7. By morning Seekers is understood, a Soul that looks out for some
encouragement by way of answer to prayer. In the morning will I direct my
prayer and look up (the word signifies, diligently to look out for something
that is coming toward us.) O! a morning Seeker enquires for some answer to
prayer, some encouragement to animate it in its pursuits after Christ.

8. Lastly, By a morning Seeker is meant, one that seeks with hope and joy,
that seeks cheerfully in expectation to find. The Spirits are most cheerful in
the morning. O how it glads the poor weary Sentinel to think of the approaching
day! Thus it is with a poor Soul seeking Christ; O thinks this Soul, sorrow may
continue for a night, but joy comes in the morning.

Reasons why early and morning Seekers shall be sure and certain finders.

1. Reason, why early or morning Seekers shall be sure and certain finders,
because such are importunate Seekers, and it is importunate praying, that is
prevailing prayer with God; therefore we read that Parable teaching Souls how
to seek; for his importunity he arose and gave him; Luke 11.
the word is (Impudence;) there is a holy Impudence that will not be said nay.
O! this God loves in all Seekers, but especially in morning Seekers, they are
usually importunate.

1. Young Seekers have strong corruptions to combat with. The corruptions of
youth are strong; and when strong corruptions meet with strong convictions, how
should a principle of Grace live in the Soul but by importunate seeking Christ?
The stronger the corruption, the more importunate the wrestling of the Soul
under it; strong corruptions where there is a begun work of Grace, cause the
soul to put forth strong cries and supplications.

2. Usually morning Seekers are importunate Seekers, because they have strong
temptations. We read of John writing to young men, 1 Epist. of Joh. 2.14.
I write unto you young men, because you are strong, and have overcome the
wicked one. Then young Seekers are combatants not only with their own
corruptions, but the wicked ones temptations. Paul, when a messenger of Satan
was sent him to buffet him, what did he do? He besought the Lord thrice, (viz.)
frequently or importunately. Temptations will put upon importunate Seeking the
Lord Jesus, where there is a principle of Grace in the Soul. O are not young
men's temptations stronger than others? The temptations of young men to vain
company, O how hard to overcome is this! has not this one temptation been the
Rock that many a young man has split his Soul on for ever? Solomon setting out
the sinful state of youth, being led by the strange woman, says, I discerned a
young man void of understanding; but where was he? Prove. 7.7.
The Text tells you, amongst the Simple Ones.

3. Morning Seekers are importunate Seekers, they are in their first love. Love
will be importunate; I remember the kindness of thy youth, Jer. 2.2.
and the love of thine Espousals. Their affections are strong.

4. Morning Seekers are importunate seekers, their convictions are strong. Now
where there are strong convictions, there will be importunate Seeking; morning
convictions are strong convictions. O now the power of the Lord takes hold of
the heart; and conviction is born in upon the Soul, that it stoops under it.
Thus Ephraim as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke; Jer. 31.19, 20.
I was ashamed, yea confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth. O
what strong convictions are here! and what now does poor Ephraim do? He mourns
and prays, Turn thou me, and I shall be turned.

5. Morning Seekers are importunate Seekers, their oppositions are greater and
stronger than others; oppositions within and without. Now where there is a
principle of Grace, when under opposition, it will seek so much the more
importunately after Christ. The Disciples discouraged the poor woman of Canaan,
saying, Send her away; a great discouragement, but she cried the more:
Opposition meeting with Grace does but prove like cold water upon good coals,
make them burn the brighter. Usually at thy first looking out after Christ,
opposition will meet thee; but then let such opposition send you to Christ.

2. Reason, why morning Seekers shall be certain finders, because they are
diligent Seekers, and the Promise runs unto diligent seeking; He that comes
unto God, Heb. 11.6.
must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of such as diligently seek
him. It is not the slothful Seeker that shall be the certain finder; no, no,
the desire of the sluggard kills him.

1. Morning Seekers are diligent Seekers, now they see the worth of what they
seek, none can seek diligently but such. O now they seek the Lord Jesus in the
sense of the worth of him. When we know the worth of that we seek, we will seek
diligently. Ask these Seekers what Christ is worth, and they will tell you ten
thousand worlds; he is the pearl of price, chiefest of ten thousands.

2. Morning Seekers are diligent seekers, because now they are convinced of the
worth of their Souls, for the good of which they seek. Persons will never seek
diligently, until they come to see the preciousness of their immortal souls.
Can a man be too diligent in the business of his Soul? Did ever you hear of any
repented them of their diligence in working out of their salvation with fear
and trembling when they came to die? Have you ever known any who have cried
out, what a fool was I, to pray so much, to live so holily, to take up so much
of my time about my immortal soul? Ask a poor Soul, why it is so diligent at
first seeking Christ, and it will tell you, I never saw the worth of my Soul
before, I am now seeking out for my Soul, and if I do not find, I am a lost,
undone Soul to all Eternity.

3. Morning Seekers are diligent Seekers, because they now know the evil days
are coming upon them, Eccl. 12.1.
in which they will be unfit to seek him; days of sickness, days of
affliction, it may be, temptations and trials; they seek while it is to day,
because when night comes, there will be no seeking.

4. They know there is a day in which he will not be found, Isa. 99.6.
Seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is nigh. O
says the morning Seeker, the time is coming when it will be too late, the gate
of Mercy will be shut, the bridge of Mercy drawn, and the Soul is afraid of
delaying, and dallying upon that account.

5. Morning Seekers are diligent Seekers, because they are convinced now of the
great need of Christ. O now they see, and say they are undone and lost for
ever, if they miss of the Lord Jesus. What makes persons diligent in seeking
but when they see a need of what they seek? Do not they need a Christ, that see
they are undone to all Eternity if they have not a Christ?

3. Reason, why morning Seekers will be certain finders; the Promise runs to
them: what plainer than this word in my Text, They shall find me, They that
seek shall find. He never said to the Seed of Jacob, seek ye my face in vain.
And he is faithful that has promised. Let this encourage you, that you are
under a Promise.

Application.
Is it so that morning Seekers shall be sure and certain finders? Then it is a
word of Inquiry;

Why, or what should be the reason so many poor morning Seekers are complaining
they find not him whom their Souls love? as the Spouse did, I sought him, but I
found him not. And so many poor Souls are complaining, I sought Christ so long,
but I know not that I have found him to this day.

1. Reason, why Jesus Christ is not at present found of morning Seekers, he
will exercise their Graces by it; he had a design upon the Spouse to exercise
her Grace, by withdrawing from her.

1. Says Christ, I will try whether this poor Soul love me or no; Love is a
waiting Grace; whether this poor Soul can wait, and enquire; Saw you him whom
my Soul loves?

2. Christ by this tryes their faith; faith will continue seeking, though at
present it does not find. Isa. 8.17.
I wait upon the Lord who hides his face from the house of Jacob.

2. The Lord Jesus is not found at present of morning Seekers, to draw out
their Souls in longings after him. The more a poor seeker of Christ seems to be
denied, the more is his Soul enflamed with ardent desires. Thus did Christ with
the Spouse when he had withdrawn himself; the watchmen smote her, took away her
veil from her: Yet her Spirit was raised the more after Christ to enquire after
him. Thus often it is with morning Seekers after Christ.

3. The Lord Jesus is not at present found of morning Seekers, because he will
let the Soul see it is only his free Grace that must be adored and admired in
finding Christ. Morning Seekers would be sacrificing else to their nets, and
dosing incense to their own drags, and stroaking self upon the head, and
saying, this is my praying, this is my mourning, this is my being early up in
the morning. O now he will have the Soul know, that it is of the riches of his
Grace, that he is found of those that seek him.

4. Jesus Christ is not found at present of morning Seekers, because he will
try whether their hearts be upright with himself. Many poor Souls begin to seek
Christ, but it is but for a time, temporary seekers, and afterward they are
offended with one thing or other, then they draw back; that is a note of a
rotten heart. I dare say thou were never right at heart Christ-ward that
turnest off, and look back, upon some offense taken against Christ. I doubt
there be many hypocritical Seekers; it is no wonder if such be not finders.

5. Jesus Christ is not at present found of morning Seekers, because they are
many times too legal in their seeking him; I mean, they seek him too much in a
way of works, as Israel of old did. Now he would acquaint poor Souls with the
way of faith, to seek him in a way of believing; this is the only way of
seeking Christ.

2. Word of Inquiry.

If that morning Seekers shall be certain finders of Christ, then how comes it
to pass, that so many of them after a while give over, turn their backs on the
way of God, and apostatize from that they once professed? O how many young ones
who have begun in the Spirit, and yet have ended in the flesh, as we might
judge!

1. Many young Seekers have turned off from seeking Christ, because they were
never truly numbled for sin. In their first seeking him, some transient
convictions it may be they had, but never truly humbled for sin, O young ones
look to this, or else all your affections and desires will come to nothing; you
will see no worth in Christ, no need of Christ, if you be not truly humbled for
sin. Mat. 13.5, 6.
We read of that ground that had no root, and what became of it? it withered.
That house that dug not deep to lay the foundation, what became of it? Luke
6. ult.
it fell, and great was the fall of it.

2. Many young Seekers go off from seeking Christ, because they never see any
real worth and excellency in Christ. They have had it may be some flashes of
affection, but they never see Christ to be distinctly precious to their poor
Souls. Have you ever seen him to be the pearl of price, the chiefest of ten
thousand? Can such souls, who have fallen really in love with Christ fall off
again? Did thou ever see Christ a spiritual Christ? It may be thou have looked
upon him as a carnal Christ, and have known him, as the Apostle says, after
the flesh; made only a notional Christ of him, or an historical Christ of him;
O then it is no wonder if thou fall off from seeking of him.

3. Many morning Seekers turn off from seeking Christ, because profession grows
too hot for them, because of the heat of the day. O it is fine traveling in
the morning, but after a while, the Sun gets up, and then it is with them, as
with that ground which by and by was offended when persecution arose.
Travelers take in, in the heat of the day; so I doubt do many poor young ones,
that have set fairly out after Christ.

4. Many poor young Seekers fall off from Christ, because they never truly and
really closed with him. Alas! it is not your seeking Christ, but your closing
in with Christ, will preserve you from falling off. Have you chosen the Lord
Jesus, and received him? Closing with him, is called, Job. 1.12.
receiving of him, to as many as received him. A poor Soul may be a seeker of
Christ, that is not a receiver of Christ.

5. Many morning Seekers of Christ fall off again, because they come after
Christ with some reserve. If you will be thus seekers of Christ, you shall fall
off at one time or other, (viz.) I mean, if you will reserve any lust. Thus the
young man came on to some terms with Christ, but the market soon fell, when he
was told, he must sell all; and Judas followed Christ with a reserve; usually
reserves are sinners ruin: Turn from all iniquity (said the Prophet) lest it
be your ruin.

6. Many morning Seekers fall off again, because they seek him for themselves,
and not for himself; and many do thus, that are not aware of it: this is but to
bring forth fruit to your selves (as Ephraim is charged with.) Hos. 10.1.
Do you see any loveliness in Christ, any comeliness in him? Is he a plant of
Renown to you? Many seek him for loaves, though in a more refined sense than
there spoken of, for his comforts, for his discoveries of love, for his smiles,
Mr. Rutherford.
I am more taken (says one) with my Lords manifested love, than with himself.
This is to love him for what comes from him; for his tokens.

7. Many morning Seekers fall off again, because they let other lovers in
process of time steal away their hearts. Many in the days of their youth have
sought after Christ, but after a while the heart has been strangely and
insensibly gone, affections lost, Christ not in all his thoughts, why, what is
the matter? The world it may be has won in upon the soul, or gaming, or some
other sin; and now the Soul falls off, as new suitors come on. O poor young
ones, you will have many suitors, many will court you, and then you will be in
danger.

3. The next word of Inquiry;

If that morning Seekers shall be sure finders, how comes it to pass, the Lord
Jesus has so few Seekers? One would think Jesus Christ would be thronged
after; as in the days when he was in the flesh, they thronged about the door
where he was. Alas! poor Souls, you may throng about Ordinances, and Meetings,
and yet never come near Christ. We read of a whole crowd about Christ, and yet
but one poor Woman touched him to draw virtue from him. You may crowd about
Christ in an Ordinance, and yet draw not one drop of virtue from him.

1. Hindrance to young ones seeking Christ, they are not convinced of the
misery of their distant state from Christ; if young ones or old ones were
convinced of this, if all were convinced thoroughly of their misery of lying out
from Christ, O what crying, what mourning, what running, nay, what roaring
after Christ would there be? One poor young man would run up and down, crying,
none but Christ, none but Christ. Another would run to every Ordinance,
enquiring (with the Spouse) saw you him whom my Soul loves? And another would
run to a poor Minister with this cry, Sir, I am an undone soul, if there were
no more souls in the world, if a Christ be not my portion. Another would cry,
what shall I do to be saved? Methinks I see how the stung Israelites run up and
down when the fiery Serpents had stung them, crying, O where, where is the
brazen Serpent, that I may get a look at him and be healed? So would poor Souls
convinced of their misery do.

1. Poor Soul, that lies in thy distance from Christ, did thou ever see thy
misery?

First, Thy misery of guilt, as thou art an unpardoned Soul. Is not guilt a
miserable thing to lie upon a poor Creatures conscience? Ask the Devils and
they will tell thee, if guilt be not an intolerable burden: Ask the damned
spirits, and they will preach to thee, the misery of unpardoned guilt. Nay, if
thou could talk with a despairing Soul, O what terrible things would it tell
thee, of the misery of unpardoned guilt! O poor young man, have thou found out
the way to a pardon and leave out Christ? Angels could never find out such a
way. Or do thou think to carry guilt into Glory with thee? Must any be saved,
but such as God has pardoned? If thou did see the misery of guilt, thou
would be a Seeker, and a morning Seeker after Christ? All pardons are
purchased and drawn up and preached in his name: They are purchased; we have
redemption, and remission of sin; but how come they in? through his blood; And
they preached Repentance and Remission of Sins in his Name, beginning at
Jerusalem.

2. Poor Soul, have thou seen the misery of thy distant state, as thou art
under the power of sin, as every soul is that is out of Christ? And O what a
sad sight is a young person in under the power of strong corruption? Is it
nothing to thee that thou art a slave to sin, serving diverse lusts and
pleasures? But when was this they did so? the Apostle tells us, before the
loving kindness of God their Savior did appear. Tit. 3.4, 5.
Would thou have power against sin? It may be thy Soul goes to thy prayers
for it, to thy duties for it, to thy resolutions and purposes for it; the best
way is to close with Christ, for there can be no power against sin that can
subdue it, until closure with Christ. While thou art under the power of sin, it
does what it will with thee; it Kings it, and Lords it, that thou obey'st it in
the lust thereof.

Secondly, Have thou seen the misery of thy distant state, as thou art under
enmity to God, and God under enmity to thee?

1. The enmity of thy side; O what a piece of misery is it, to be under the
power of enmity? this is a piece of the misery of the damned, they have an
inveterate enmity against God, that if such a thing were possible, they would
dethrone God; like some, we read in their distress, Isa. 8.21.
Curse their God, and their King, and look upward. Is not this misery indeed,
to be an enemy to the God of all thy mercies, to be an enemy to him thou daily
live upon, nay, cannot live one moment without? And such a monster art thou.
I have read of one that killed her Child, while it smiled; so would thou do.
Art not thou spurning Gods tender bowels every day? but now by seeking Christ,
or closing with Christ this enmity is done away.

2. Enmities on Gods side; God an enemy to thee, and can there be greater
misery than this? what, he thy enemy, that thou art every day provoking, and
can upon every provocation, in a moment turn thee into Hell? Every one fears
having great ones for their enemies, but what say thou to the great God, who
is thine enemy? If ever poor sinners were convinced of this, O what seeking
Christ would there be for reconciliation?

3. Have thou seen the misery of thy distant state, as thou art a vassal to
Satan, for so is every one out of Christ; and is this nothing to thee? Were
thou in Algier, what Letters would thou send to thy friends! setting forth
thy doleful slavery to affect their hearts, to send over thy redemption-money?
But alas! what is a Turk to the Devil? the one reaches the Body, the other the
Soul. Poor Soul out of Christ, the Devil is thy patron, and wilt not thou groan
to be delivered? Why are not Souls morning Seekers after Christ? Alas! they see
not the misery of being under the power of Satan. Now want of powerful
convictions in these three things while you lie in a distant state from Christ,
is the first cause why he has so few Seekers.

2. Hinderance to young Seekers after Christ, is, their beloved lusts, and
darling corruptions: they are willing to part with some, but not all their
lusts; there is an Isaac, that causes laughter, they cannot think of cutting
the throat of it; there is a Benjamin, they cannot tell how to let that go;
there is a Dalilah they are loath to lose; there is an Herodias they cannot
endure to part with; Mat. 13.45, 46.
a right hand they will needs keep, and hide. O no, poor young man, thou must
sell all, if thou will seek and find this pearl of price. We read of the young
man, and he was very fair and like to fall in with Christ; Mark 10.22.
Jesus Christ begins to strike at his right hand, and he pulls it in, and
Christ and he parts upon this occasion. Herod was fair, but when John gets a
blow at his Herodias, Herod gets a blow at John's head, and strikes it off. O
poor sinner, if thou resolve for Christ, thou must resolve against thy darling
sin.

3. Hinderance to young Seekers after Christ, is, their entanglement by wicked
company. They come to Ordinances, and are convinced, that sin will be bitter to
them in the latter end; and they see no way but that living and dying in such
courses they are lost for ever. Well, one would think some good would spring
and grow out of such convictions; but alas! the next time they come in their
evil company, they have absolutely lost all; one would not think these were the
young men that were so affected at Sermons: Now it may be, you may see in their
hands instead of their Bibles, their Cups; and in their mouths hear instead of
their prayers, their oaths. Well, young men, know for all this God will bring
you into judgment.

1. Will thou poor Soul rather part with a precious Christ, than with thy base
company? O unworthy Soul of Christ's bowels! to prefer thy sinful Companions
before thy Blessed Jesus; as those poor Souls preferred Barabbas before Jesus.
What will thou love a drunkard, a swearer, an unclean wanton before Jesus
Christ?

2. Will thou rather part with an immortal precious Soul, than part with thy
wicked company? O how many have been damned by this one sin! how many thousands
of Souls have been cast away for ever upon this rock! while other sins have
slain their thousands, this has slain ten thousands. O how many
company-keepers are now in Hell!

3. Then can thou look upon them when thou come to dye, and thy conscience
filled with guilt and horror? can thou then look upon them with delight?
Can thou sport thy self with thinking or discoursing how many times you have
been drunk together, how many times you have violated the Lords day together,
how many nights you have spent all gaming together? If your Companions should
come in, when you are upon a death bed, and say, Come be of good cheer,
remember such a bout, and such a bout, how merry we were. O will not this be as
a dagger to stab through your heart, will not this wound like a sword in the
bones? Remember the young man's doleful ditty in the Proverbs; and thou mourn at
last when thy flesh and thy body is consumed, and say, Prove. 5.11, 12, 13.
How have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof?

4. Will not your wicked examples one to another here, be aggravations of one
another torments in another world?

5. Poor Souls, if you will go to Hell for company, you shall have company
enough there. What company is there there? There is the Devils company, and
wicked Spirits company. As blessed Doctor Preston said in a good sense, so here
may be said in a sad sense, I shall change my place, but not my company: So
thou may say, thou must change Earth for Hell, but not thy company, there is
wicked company enough there.

4. Fourth hinderance to young Seekers after Christ is a spirit of
slothfulness; they indulge themselves too much in their own ease, as the Spouse
did, but this provoked Christ, and he did withdraw upon it. Poor Sinner, what
man that has been industrious, that by pains and care has gotten an estate,
afterward repents himself, but rather looks back upon his diligence with
delight? So, did you ever hear of any when they were to dye, that ever cried
out, O that I had not spent so many days in the service of God! O that I had
never taken such pains in seeking after Christ! But you have heard of many on
the contrary, that have cried, O that I were to live over my days and time
again! would I ever be so careless of an immortal Soul? would I ever indulge my
carnal sloth at that rate I have done? would I miss so many precious seasons of
Grace for my Soul as I have done?

1. Poor Soul, do not many strive and never win into the harbor? had not thou
need cast off thy sloth then?

2. Work out thy salvation with fear and trembling; who then would give way to
flesh?

3. It is a business of eternal consequence, who would be slothful in a
business of such great concernment?

4. All our diligence is little enough; therefore God calls for violence in the
case, to take heaven by violence, this is honorable.

5. The fruit of diligence will be peace upon a death bed. 2 Pet. 3.14.
Be diligent is Peter's exhortation; but what motive does he use? That you may
be found of him in peace.

5. Fifth hinderance to young Seekers after Christ is hope of a longer lease of
their lives, they hope there is no such have: Some years hence, when they have
gotten an estate in the world, then they will look after these things; but why
should they be so early with Christ? will not two seven years hence serve? and
thus they delay their seeking after Christ.

1. It is worth considering; what if thou do live longer and be hardened in
sin? While Plants are tender they may be dealt with, but when they are grown,
they are too sturdy. Alas poor Sinner! thou may be hereafter a sturdy sinner,
an hardened sinner, an Atheist, a Scoffer, a Persecutor, what if God shall give
thee up after thou have refused to hearken unto him, and say of thee, Psalm.
81.11, 12.
as of Israel of old, But Israel would have none of me, so I gave them up to
their own hearts lusts.

2. Is it not worth considering, whether the motions of the Spirit be not
irrecoverably forfeited by such Souls as delay seeking after Christ upon hope
of a longer day. There have been Souls that have irrecoverably forfeited the
Spirits gales; and then what a sad condition would thy poor Soul be in? God
has said, his Spirit shall not always strive with man.

3. What if while thou art hoping for a longer day, God should send thee a
summons, by the black Sergeant Death, to tell thee, this night shall thy Soul
be taken away? It was so with him, while he was saying, Soul, take thine ease,
thou have goods laid up for many years.

4. What if thy day of Grace should be over, and Christ woo no more, tender
himself no more, but his abused love turn into incensed wrath?

5. Consider, how thy puts off, and delays have grieved Christ. Have not thou
wearied out the Lord Jesus, while he has stretched his arm all the day long?

6. Consider, how your delays will sting you upon a death bed, or in another
world. O how often was I called, and yet delayed! The remembrance of every
delay, will go to your hearts like a dagger, and bleed in your conscience for
ever.

6. Sixth Hinderance to morning Seekers after Jesus Christ, is, persuasions of
Christ's unwillingness to receive them, or be found of them, because of their
unworthiness. This very case discourages many a poor Soul from seeking after
Christ; they have taken in hard thoughts of God and Christ. And O how does
Satan now haunt the Soul, taking all opportunities to blow up their unbelieving
jealousies against Christ.

1. Poor Soul, would Jesus Christ woo thee, if he were not willing to be found
of thee? Would he knock, if he were not willing to come in upon thy opening?
Would he hold out his Golden Scepter for thee to kiss, if he were not willing
to be reconciled to thee?

2. Poor Soul, would he wait if he were not willing? What speaks his great
patience and long suffering toward thee, but his willingness to be found of
thee? Why does he not only knock, but stand and knock; Behold, I stand at the
door and knock: Rev. 3.20.
He is not yet gone from your doors, which notes his willingness to be in.

3. Poor Soul, would he complain of poor Sinners unwillingness to receive him,
if he were not willing? If it stick not on the sinners side, there then is no
ground for complaining on Christ's side. O the sad complaints and groans that
have proceeded from Christ upon this account! You will not come unto me, that
ye might have life. He was grieved because of their unbelief, and hardness of
their hearts.

4. Poor Soul, would the Lord Jesus Christ send his voice behind thee, so often
prompting thee on to seek after Christ, if he were not willing? O how does the
voice still keep behind thee, in Ordinances, in Afflictions whispering to thee
thy duty? We read of the Spirit, saying, Come, as well as the Bride saying
Come; it is the Spirit of God is the great maker up of the match, betwixt the
Soul and Christ; and this argues Christ is willing, because he sends his
messenger so often to thee upon the errand.

5. Poor Soul, would the Lord Jesus Christ have been so willing to come a
Salvation-errand into the world, if he were not willing to be found of Sinners?
What was Christ's errand from Heaven unto Earth? He came to seek Souls, to seek
and to save that which was lost; He came not to call the Righteous, but Sinners
to repentance. Would he seek you, if not willing to save you? O let not Christ
lose his pains, by your harboring unbelieving jealousies of his love!

7. Seventh hinderance to morning Seekers after Jesus Christ, is, they hope
they may repent upon a death bed, or sick bed, after they have spent their
youthful time in sin and vanity; this is very incident to all, but especially
to young persons.

1. Poor Soul, what if the grim Sergeant Death serve a Writ on thee unawares?
If thou be struck on a sudden where then will be thy repentance? Do thou
know the manner of thy death, any more than the time of death? What if thou
poor young man, who have slighted so many warnings, should have none given
thee when the great stroke comes? What if the Lord come upon thee in an hour
thou lookedst not for him.

2. What if thou be given up to a seared conscience, on a sick bed, or death
bed? A seared conscience at any time is sad, but most sad on a sick bed; have
not many died seared and hardened in sin, yea in their very youth? But as they
lived so they died, without sense or feeling of their sad and sinful state.

3. Poor Souls, what if your repentance then will not go with God? I think
sinners, you may well have such jealousies, that your repentance is
hypocritical, while it is thus forced and extorted from you, by reason of your
fears and horrors that now walk in your consciences. There is a great deal of
counterfeit repentance that God will not take when you come to die; late
repentance is seldom true: and is it not a pity (as one observes) to play the
Courtiers with your own Souls? They do all things late, they go to bed late,
and rise late, and dine late, and sup late, and worst of all, repent late.

4. What if thy poor Conscience should now cry, it is too late, thou should
have done it sooner? Many have thus cried out, O no there is no mercy for them,
they have stood it out too long, and now they cannot expect any thing at Gods
hand, but a righteous sentence of separation for ever from his comfortable face.

5. Poor Soul, how will it sting thee to consider thou might often have done it
in a fitter time, when thou put it off. Is not a time of health the fittest
time for repentance? O now how will the consideration of thy many calls, and
many refusals lie heavy upon thee!

8. Eighth hinderance to poor morning Seekers against Christ, is the prejudice
that Satan labors to fill their Souls with against Christ; this is very
incident to young persons, to take up prejudices against the Lord Jesus Christ.

1. Satan labors to prejudice them by the paucity and fewness of those that
seek after Christ; they are but a few, and why should you go from the way the
multitude walks in? O poor Sinner, would you be pleased to consider it is
Christ's own Doctrine, There be few that shall be saved; why should then this be
a stumbling block unto you? Have you a mind to go to Hell for company? Many are
the travelers that go hells beaten road, broad is the way that leads to
destruction, and many there be that find it.

2. Satan prejudices many times young ones by the meanness and contemptibleness
of those that are Seekers of the Lord Jesus Christ. This people that know not
the Law are accursed; few of the Rulers believed on him; not many wise Nobles,
etc. The Poor receive the Gospel. O poor Souls, know they are most honorable
that are so in the account of God, and not of man. Isa. 43.4.
Since thou were precious in my sight, thou were honorable: The Righteous is
more excellent than his neighbor. They that honor God, God will honor.

3. Satan labors to fill Souls with prejudice against Christ, by presenting
them with the difficulties they shall meet withal. It is true, you may meet
with discouragement in the way, but you shall have the breaker up go before
you, and he will make the way easy, and crooked ways straight, and rough
ways shall become plain.

4. Satan labors to fill Souls with prejudice against Christ from the manifold
infirmities that attend his followers; and indeed this is a great objection,
that all Seekers after Christ do not walk so closely as they ought. Well poor
Soul, know, the ways of God are the same, and Jesus Christ is the same, though
it is sad there should be so much ground for this stumbling block lying in your
way.

5. Satan labors to fill them with prejudice against Christ, from the Cross
that attends them; and the Cross of Christ has been a Rock of offense to many
poor Souls. Well but poor Soul, there is a Crown annexed to the Cross, they
that suffer with him shall reign with him. Unto you I appoint a Kingdom; who
were they? Such as continued with him in great temptations.

The next Use. If morning Seekers be sure and infallible finders, then it is a
word of Caution.

First, Take heed of giving over, of being too short breathed in seeking of
Christ; He that believes makes not have. To set on this Caution which is of
great concernment to every poor Soul that has set out to seek Christ, although
it was hinted the last Observation, I will enlarge it now.

1. If you give over, your hearts were never truly in good earnest in the work.
It may be you had some flashes of affection, or some gripes and pangs of
conviction, that for the present startled you, but yet your hearts were not
truly in good earnest in the work. Ah poor Soul, that truly sees its need of
Christ, the real worth and excellency that is in him, its real misery without
him, this Soul will never give over until it has found him, whom its Soul
loves. Is that love in good earnest, that because it meets discouragements,
gives over the pursuit of the object? The Spouse was in good earnest, therefore
gives not over, but still keeps up her enquiries after Christ, Saw you him whom
my Soul loves.

2. If you give over you lose the prize; if the racers give over they lose; 1
Cor. 9.24.
therefore we have that Caution, So run as you may obtain. Is not this sad to
be runners and losers, seekers and missers at last? Poor Souls, if you give
over you will go without; He that continues to the end, the same shall be
saved. We are to run with patience the Race set before us; to run it, and not
give over.

3. If you give over, and so sit down short of Christ, it will aggravate your
guilt and condemnation. What, you that once were so forward in the ways of God;
what, you that once gave such good hopes you were truly in love with Jesus
Christ; what, you that were once praying young men and women, and nigh the
Kingdom, as that Scribe we read of in the Gospel, Luke 13.26.
and to give over? O how will this aggravate your miscarriage! and you your
selves shut out, this aggravates all.

4. If you give over seeking, you will fall either into persecution or
profaneness; usually this is the end of such. When young men, while they have
been Apprentices, and under convictions, they have sought Christ, but
afterward fall off again, they ordinarily prove, either Persecutors of the
ways of God, or else Profane; this is in judgment upon them. God suffers them
to fall into these things, punishing sin with sin; and very sad has been the
end of such. Would you ever think this hopeful praying young man would prove a
drunkard, a swearer, a prodigal? If you give over seeking Christ, this I doubt
will be your end.

5. If you give over seeking Christ, this will be a great discouragement to
others; you weaken the hands of others; they will be afraid when they see you
so sadly drawn back, that they should do so too; you hinder others seeking
after Christ.

6. If you give over seeking Christ, you cloth your Ministers with shame; and
is this the love you have formerly professed to them? O how once you were
endeared to those spiritual Fathers! How could you have pulled out your very
eyes for them, when they were first instrumental to do your souls good; and is
this your kindness unto them, to put them unto shame? Disappointments bring
shame; Make me not ashamed of my hope, says David. O many Ministers had hopes
of you, and prayed for you, and have hoped you would be their Crown and
Rejoicing (as Paul said) and what now prove their shame? O how near this will
go to the hearts of Godly Ministers! Have not they said of you, as Paul said of
them, We live, if you stand fast in the Lord.

Secondly, If morning Seekers be sure and infallible finders, then take heed of
a discouraged frame of heart in seeking Christ; this is Satan's work, to
discourage poor Souls, to lay stumbling blocks in their way, and tell them
there is no hope, no; Christ will never be found of such as they are, hope is
perished from the Lord. O take heed I say of this frame of heart; you know what
they said to the poor blind man, Be of good cheer, the Lord calls thee: So do
I say unto you poor morning Seekers, be not discouraged, the Lord will be found
of you.

1. A discouraged frame of heart will open a door to hard thoughts of God.
Usually discouraged Souls are jealous and suspicious Souls of God; and alas!
this will weaken you exceedingly in your seeking after Christ. O what a hard
thought was that, My God has forgotten, my God has forsaken.

2. A discouraged frame of heart grieves the Spirit of God; what, seek Christ
with a discouraged frame of heart? can this be pleasing to the Spirit of God,
who is the Comforter?

3. A discouraged frame of heart opens a door to consult with Satan, he loves
to be fishing in troubled waters, and ordinarily he sits by discouraged Souls,
helping them to conclude against Christ and their own Souls; it is a very
dangerous thing to be drawn in to consult with Satan.

4. A discouraged frame of heart will weaken your endeavors in your pursuits
after Christ; the joy of the Lord is a believers strength, but discouragements
weaken exceedingly.

5. A discouraged frame of heart in seeking Christ, reflects upon Christ, as
though he were unwilling to be found of poor sinners: This is dishonorable to
Christ, dishonorable to his design of coming into the world; was it not to
save Sinners? dishonorable to his Promises; has not he promised, He will not
break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax?

Thirdly, If morning Seekers shall be sure and certain sinders, then take heed
of delaying to seek the Lord Jesus; do not put off Christ; take heed of this,
because that you are young, and hope you have time before you. O this many
times is a Rock that splits thousands of Souls; they say they will seek Christ
at a more convenient time.

1. Take heed of losing your morning, for the present time is only yours. Alas
poor Soul! if thou layest not hold of the fore-lock of thy present time, thou
may be undone for ever. O how the Lord calls on us to improve our present
time; Work while it is to day, and if you will hearken to his voice, while it
is to day; walk in the light, while you have the light; now is the acceptable
time.

2. Take heed of losing your morning. You young ones, you know not how short
your morning may be; and when mornings are short, persons had need be up and
doing. How many young ones have been cut off in their morning, in the prime of
their time, in the flower of their youth, gone to the Grave in a moment, while
the milk was in their breasts, and marrow in their bones?

3. Take heed you lose not your morning; it will be harder work to seek Christ
afterward, when you have delayed time after time: after you have lost the
forenoon of your lives, it will be hard redeeming the afternoon. O how rare a
thing is it to see a person wrought on in their afternoon? not but some have
been met with; but this is not so ordinary.

1. The more guilt there is upon the Soul, the harder it will be to seek out
after Christ; the longer thou delayest, the more guilt thou contractest upon
thy Soul. O what complaints have such Souls uttered. O that I had come to
Christ sooner! but will he now receive me to mercy, who have stood out so long?
Had I fallen in with Christ upon his first offers, and tenders, it had been
more easy to have thought he would have accepted me. And thou will find this a
strong objection upon thee; the heavier load of guilt upon thy Soul, the
heavier thou will find it to draw to Jesus Christ.

2. It will be harder for you to seek after Christ, after you have delayed,
because the sense of your unkindness to Christ will fill your Souls when you
are awakened. What, stand out against Christ, after so many knocks, after so
many calls, after so many offers, and invitations? Thus it was with the Spouse
when she arose to open to her Beloved, there was a little myrrh left upon the
handles of the lock, and then her bowels were moved, (viz.) She was filled with
shame and sorrow that she should use Christ so unkindly.

3. The more a Spirit of sloth takes possession on the Soul, the harder it is
to shake off.

4. Take heed of losing your morning, for a dark night is fast approaching upon
you, in which you cannot seek Christ, in which you cannot work; it is bad
seeking any thing in the dark. I may say unto you as the Prophet to them, Give
Glory to God before he cause darkness, Jer. 13.16.
and before your feet stumble upon the dark mountaion. This is the Doctrine
that our Lord Jesus Christ preached himself; Work while it is to day, for night
comes when no man can work.

1. Poor Souls, what if a night of judicial darkness, and blindness come upon
you? What if God give you over to a dark heart? He suffered some we read of to
walk in the ways of their own heart.

2. What if a night of temptation come upon you? It is ill seeking Christ under
temptation.

3. What if a night of death come upon thee, then thy seeking Christ is at end;
there is no work in the grave where thou go. What though young men, you be
now in your morning, God can cause your Sun to set at noonday, and bring a
night upon you before you are aware; therefore lose not your morning.

5. Take heed you lose not your morning; your morning discoveries and
manifestations will be your evening supports and consolations; the evening of
our lives is our declining time, our old age. And O what a mercy is this, to be
laid in with comfort when that comes! What a sad thing is that, to see one
gray headed, and forsaken of God? As David prayed, many have cause to pray,
forsake me not when I am gray headed. If you seek him in your youth, he will
sit by you when you are old. O that is a sad Text, and the sinner an hundred
years old shall be accursed. O but there are many gracious Souls that have
sought him while they were young, that comfort themselves with his loving
kindness of old, that remember the sweet lovestories, and passages betwixt
Christ and their poor Soul, and at last go off the stage of this life
triumphing. To see an old Christian go comfortably to heaven, leaning over the
staff of the Promise, and telling of nothing but his youth experiences of
Christ, O what a sight is this! And on the other side, to see an old man, who
has nothing to remember, but what a drunken wretch he has been, what a wicked
company-keeper he has been, what an unclean filthy wretch he has been, what
an oppressor of other men he has been; and such stories he can tell you all
day: O what a dreadful thing is this!

6. Take heed you lose not your morning; when God does awaken you, and get you
out of your bed of sin and sloth, it will grieve, and cut you to the very
heart, that you got up no sooner, that you have lost so much time already. O
how many Souls have been deeply wounded with the sense of their lost time? O
what complaints have such Souls groaned out, That I should be so long in the
service of sin and Satan, O that I should spend so many years in gratifying the
lusts of the flesh, in making provision for the flesh, and all that while put a
slight upon the Lord Jesus Christ, as not being worth seeking.

4. Caution, If morning Seekers shall be sure and certain finders of Christ,
then let them take heed of hasty and rash concluding against Christ and their
own Souls; this is an infirmity that young Seekers are mightily prone to in
their first convictions. O sure Jesus Christ will not be found of such poor
sinful, vile Creatures as we are: we have been such Ephraims, such Bullocks
unaccustomed to the yoke, such Sons of Belial, so stubborn even from our youth
up, we cannot think he would be found of us, though we should seek him.

1. First, O poor Soul, do you think Christ does not matter his word? If under
your temptations you should think he does not matter your Soul, yet think he
matters his word. Cannot you say, remember the Word, Lord, upon which thou
causest me to hope. Do you think Christ is indifferent, whether his Promises be
accomplished or no? No, no, not one Jota of his Promise shall fail. You may be
discouraged, but the Promise is in reference to bruised reeds and smoking
flax. Ite. 42.4.
It is said, He shall not be discouraged, nor fail; you may, but he shall not.

2. Secondly, why, Souls, should you think he will not accept of you, are not
your names in his Commission? He was sent to seek and save such as are lost;
and are not you lost Souls? Lost in your selves, lost prodigals. This my Son
was lost: and do you think he will not then accept of you?

3. Thirdly, why think you so hardly of Christ, does not Christ call such? He
came not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance. Be of good cheer
poor Soul, the Lord calls on thee, as was said to the poor blind man. But
something of this nature will fall in upon another use; therefore I will
forbear now.

5. Branch of the Caution; then let morning Seekers take heed they do not sit
down short of Christ. Why, if he will be found of us, should we sit down short
of him? As it is said in that case, so may I say in this; a Promise being left
us of entering into his Rest, let us not seem to rest short of it. There are
many things morning Seekers are prone to rest in on this side Christ. You may
take up in your common convictions, in your constitutional affections, in your
acquired gifts and parts, in your restraining grace, in a form of profession,
and so miss of Christ for ever.

1. First, take heed of resting short of Christ, many thousands have done so.
We read of the Scribe that answered Christ discreetly, and Jesus said unto him,
Thou art nigh unto the Kingdom of God: But alas, he was short of Christ for
all this. And also the young man in the Gospel rested short of Christ; and also
the foolish Virgins, and the Children of the Kingdom we read of came short of
Christ.

2. Secondly, take heed morning Seekers you do not rest short of Christ; this
will aggravate your misery exceedingly in missing of him. What, you that were
within a little of Christ miss him! What, you that were in so fair a way for
Christ, you who set out so hopefully in the morning of your day! O for poor
Souls in Hell, to sing such doleful ditties, I was once convinced of my sin,
and I was once convinced of my misery without Christ, and I was once convinced
of the excellency of Christ; But O my corruptions were too strong for my
convictions! and so my poor Soul sat short of the Lord Jesus Christ. To
miscarry within a little of harbor, within sight of land; O what a cutting
aggravation is this to poor Seamen, when almost at their Port? So many Souls
have done, they have been almost persuaded to become Christians, yet they have
rested short of Christ.

3. Thirdly, take heed, morning Seekers, that you rest not short of Christ.
Satan, if it be possible, will keep you short of Christ: this is Satan's design,
if he can but persuade the Soul to take up in something on this side Christ, in
some notion, some opinion. Hence it is, as soon as young people come under any
convictions of sin, and when any good Seed is sown in the Soul, then comes
Satan with his Tares. Then they get, it may be, some notion or opinion whereby
Satan does divert them, and hinder them from closing with Christ: And when they
are gotten hither, here they rest. Thousands have been eternally undone this
way.

3. Use. Is it so, that morning Seekers shall be sure and certain finders of
the Lord Jesus Christ? then it is an Use of

Exhortation
To set upon the duty, and work in good earnest, to loyter no more of your
morning away, to trifle no more of your precious time away: but that you may
have the comfort of the Promise, O that you may be found in obedience to the
precept; if you would find, you must seek. O poor Souls, do not you hear him
Call? Call upon him while he is near, seek him while he is to be found. What,
is not the Lord Jesus worth seeking? he is then worth nothing.

1. Motive to seek the Lord in your morning; now is your seeking time; seeking
will not always be in season. You must do things in their proper season; there
is a time for every purpose, now is the acceptable time, now is the day of
Salvation. Now acquaint thy self with God, and be at peace, was good counsel by
Jobs friend. Now is thy only time to seek acquaintance with Christ. Poor
Sinner, there is a time in which God will not be found; For this shall the
Godly pray unto him in a time when he will be found.

1. There is a day coming, in which the Spirit of God will leave striving with
you, and then seeking will be out of season. Can you seek, if the Spirit strive
not? What is that which puts poor Sinners upon seeking of Christ, but the
strivings and convictions of the Spirit?

2. There is a day coming wherein the things that concern your peace will be
hid from your eyes. Thus God told Jerusalem, But now the things that concern
your Peace are hid from your eyes. You will be judicially hardened.

3. There is a day coming, in which Gods bowels will be shut up in displeasure
against you. You are hardened against God, and God against you. O that is a
terrible Text, I will not answer when you call. What will God then do? Prove.
1.25, 26.
I will laugh at your Calamity, and mock when your fear comes.

4. There is a day coming when ordinances shall be ineffectal to you. God
says, Make the beart of this people fat. O dreadful word, to have Ordinances
given to harden, and not to soften!

5. There is a day coming, that death and hell shall look ghastly upon you; and
will this be a seeking time? Will not Christ tell you, O poor Sinner, this is
but a force? Now when you see no way but damuation before you, now you seek
after me: this is only to serve your own ends of Christ. O poor Souls, be
persuaded to seek Christ before these days come upon you.

2. Motive in the morning of your days to be seeking the Lord Jesus Christ,
such Souls shall live; in him you may have life, life is only to be had in him,
therefore he is called a Believers Life. He is the Way, the Truth and the Life;
and he is called the Living Stone. You will not come to me that you might have
life. The poor Sinner is dead, while he lies at distance from Christ; thou
may have gifts and parts, as dead bodies may be stuck with flowers, and
strawed with herbs, but this is but dubbing the dead; all this while there is
no life in the man, it is only he that has the Son has life.

1. First, They that seek Christ have living influences from Christ; he is the
head, that sends living influences into all his members. O what a supply of
influences is to be had from Jesus Christ! You must seek all you have from him;
it pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell, 2 Pet. 2.4, 5.
and this as believers head. And we read of believers being called Lively
Stones, active for Jesus Christ; not only Christians, but lively Christians.
How comes this to pass? being built up in him, united to him, as the
superstructure is to the foundation, the living Stone sends up living
influences into all that are built upon him; therefore he is the Vine, that by
his communicating influences does keep Souls, not only living, but thriving.

2. Secondly, He communicates living comfort to such as seek him. That is a
precious Prophecy concerning Christ, Psalm. 22.
The meek shall eat and be satisfied, they shall praise the Lord that seek him,
your heart shall live for ever. They shall eat by Faith the Lord Jesus Christ
and be satisfied, (viz.) be comforted in their Soul. Who? The poor, meek,
humble Seekers of Christ, in the sense of their own vileness, who have been
cast down in the sense of their own unworthiness; for by the meek are meant
such. What then? They shall live for ever; Genesis 4.5.27.
not be rejoiced and comforted for a while; for this is meant, by the heart
living, it shall be revived and comforted. O but may the poor Soul say, this
comfort will not last. O yes, Psalm. 69.33.
Their heart shall live for ever. The like Promises we have in other places.

3. Thirdly, They that seek Christ have living Graces from him; we receive of
his fullness, Grace for Grace; all we have must be in a way of seeking; not only
Grace at the first effusion, when he says to the Soul live, but the lively
exercises of Grace are from him. The Spicknard gives a pleasant smell, (viz.)
the Graces of the Spirit, Faith, and Hope, and Love, and Zeal, they are all
exercised; they put forth lively acts. What is the matter? the King is at the
Table.

3. Motive to seek the Lord Jesus in the morning of your day; your Rest must be
found in Christ. O whither will not a poor burdened sin-ladened Soul go for
Rest! O what will not a poor distressed Sinner do in hope to obtain Rest!
Rivers of Oil, and thousands of Rams, if it were possible to expiate their sin:
Nay, they will not stick at their firstborn. What is the reason the blind
Papists appoint so many Penances, so many Pilgrims, so many Fasts and
Scourgings, but they hope these are expiatory? But, alas, all this will but be
seeking that they will never find. If you will have the desirable mercy of Soul
Rest, you must go to him for it, Mat. 11.29
Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden and you shall find rest for your
Souls. The verse before says, I will give it, this, you shall find it. But
might the poor Soul say, Lord, if we seek it here, shall not we miss of it? No,
you shall be sure to find it. Isa. 11.10.
To him shall the Gentiles seek; and what then? And his rest shall be glorious.
Some Interpreters it is true take it for his Church, which is Christ's Rest, it
shall be glorious. Others carry it, his rest, the rest which he shall give, it
shall be glory. It shall be the glory of a Soul to seek and find rest from him.
What is it you young ones would have? is it this true spiritual rest and peace?
never think to have this short of Christ.

4. Motive to seek the Lord Jesus Christ in the morning of your day; you know
not what your evening may prove, or your midday may prove. What if you should
have an afternoon filled up with afflictions? do you know what God will fill up
your day withal?

1. What if God should fill up your day with temptations? Will it not then
repent you that you sought him not in the morning? If you should be exercised
with that one dismal thought, that the day of Grace is over, O how it will
grieve you that you looked out so late after Christ! O what a wretch am I to be
so much behind with Christ, and my own Soul! And O how many objections will
such a thought cast in thy way!

2. What if God fill up thy day with sharp trials, with weakness of body,
losses in thine outward estate? Will this be so fit a time to seek Christ in,
when thou will have enough to do to bear up under these trials? O then how will
thy poor Soul wish, thou had been laid in better for such rainy days? How will
thy poor Soul then grieve that thou made a friend of Christ no sooner against
such a day as this?

3. What if God toward the evening of thy day take away from thee the
advantages thou once had for thy poor Soul? It may be when thou were young thou
livedst in some Godly Family, which is no small advantage, as little as young
persons matter it. It may be thou livedst amidst some godly acquaintance, it
may be thou livedst under some powerful Soul-searching Ministry, these helps
may be removed from thee, or thou from them, and O then how thou will be
grieved, that thou sought Christ no sooner, that now thou have no more
acquaintance with him.

4. What if God should give thee but a little warning or time to look about
thee for thy Soul, if thou should die in four or five days time; and then
review thy lost time, and look over thy life again? O how will it grieve thee
that thou struck no sooner in with Christ! that now thou have all thy work to
do for Eternity, that might have got it down long ago. Now thy work to do, and
no time to do it in. Formerly thou had time, and wantedst a heart, and now
thou have a heart to it, and want time.

5. Seek Christ in the morning of your day, and you shall dye triumphing at
night. You shall go gloriously off the stage of this present life. Should not
we be often remembering our latter end? Is it not said of Jerusalem, Lam. 1.14.
she came wonderfully down, because she considered not her latter end? Is not
this to be a wise Virgin? to get your lamps and your vessels stored with Oil,
that when the Bridegroom comes, and the midnight-cry calls, you may go out
cheerfully to meet him. Is not this wisdom in Gods Book, O that my people were
wise, Deuteronomy. 32.29.
that they did consider their latter end. And who is it that has an abundant
entrance into the Kingdom of God, but the diligent Believer and Seeker? Add all
diligence that you may be found of him in peace. 1 Pet 1.5.3.14.
O how many have died with this sad and doleful note in their mouths, O it is
now too late. Had I sought Christ sooner, there had been hope; but I cannot
believe he will accept of such a refuser of a day of Grace, and tenders of
Grace, as I have been.

Lastly, O seek Christ in the morning of your day; others may be drawn to seek
him with you, and say as they did to the Daughter of Jerusalem when she had
sought him diligently, Tell us where thy Beloved is gone, that we may seek him
with thee. Your being up in the morning to seek Christ may draw others on, and
O what mercy would this be? Yob 23.3.


But by this time methinks I hear some poor Soul say, O that I knew where to
find him, I would come even to his seat: but alas, young travelers must have
some directions, and so must young Seekers; how shall we then, say poor Souls,
seek Christ?

1. Luke 2.45.
Be sure you seek him sorrowing, as the Parents of Christ after the flesh
sought him, Thy Father and I sought thee sorrowing. Sorrowing under the sense
of sin. So must you seek him. True mourners are the finding Seekers, O that is
a sweet word, Jet. 31.9.
They shall come with weepings, and with supplications will I lead them. Jer.
50.4.
They shall go weeping, seeking the Lord their God. Thus Souls must go to
Christ in a through sense of their condition. Who were they that sought to the
Brazen Serpent, but they that were stung with the fiery Serpent?

2. Seek Christ with a high appretiation of Christ. Mat. 13.4^.
Who will seek him, that does not esteem him to be the pearl of price? But when
the Merchant man had found the pearl of price, he sold all to buy it. Why did
the Spouse so seek Christ through all difficulties? He was to her the white and
ruddy one, the chiefest of ten thousands. Prove. 3.13.
We read of the happiness of the man that finds wisdom; why so? this wisdom is
Christ, and the merchandise thereof is better than that of Gold, etc.

3. Seek Christ sincerely. We read of some that turned feignedly to the Lord. O
take heed of seeking of him feignedly. If your hearts be not right, God will
discover them. Simon Magus would be a Seeker, yet he was discovered, we was in
the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity.

4. Seek him perseveringly, if you would seek him so as to find him. She sought
her lost groat, until she found it. But this has been largely insisted on
before.

5. Seek the Lord Jesus Christ through all opposition, as the Spouse did when
they took her veil from her, and the watchmen smote her; yet she gave not over.

The End of the first Sermon.
Isaiah 55.6. Seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is
near.
THe words are the Call of Christ to poor Gentile Sinners. It is clear, the
Prophet in the preceding verse is prophesying of Christ; and when he had spoke
of Christ, 1. Under the notion of a leader, 2. Under the notion of a witness,
3. Under the notion of a Savior, (so is meant by calling a Nation that knew
him not, and their running to him, and God glorifying him, viz. as the Messiah,
and Savior of poor Gentiles, as well as Jews) then the Prophet gives these
poor Gentiles a Call, which is the words of my Text.

1. In the Text we have a Call, or Exhortation to a duty.

2. We have a Motive or Argument backing that Call.

1. The Call is, Seek the Lord.

2. Motive is employed in that, while he may be found. There is an especial
season for the performance of this duty; if let slip, your Souls will repent it
to all Eternity.

Let us inquire a little, what is meant by this Call, Seek the Loed.

1. Here is this employed in it. This people and the Lord were strangers. This
is the description of a Gentile; He is a stranger to the Lord, Ephesians. 2.12.
and to the Covenant of Promise. Souls who lie far from acquaintance with God;
therefore expressed by another word, Luke 15.13.
to be in the far Country: So the Prodigal was, which was the Gentile, for the
elder Brother was the Jew. Now then by seek the Lord is meant, get into
acquaintance with him. Seek acquaintance with him, as a Savior, as a Leader.
He had been spoke of under these notions, and set out to them.

2. Seek the Lord (viz.) the willingness of the Lord to be found of poor
Gentile Sinners. He would never else have given them such a Call. He first
calls, he is first in the motion, who loved us first: the business does not
stick at Gods door, but at ours.

3. Seek the Lord, (viz.) accept of the offers of grace while he holds them
forth to you in the Gospel. This is the great Duty called to in the Text. The
Text then runs thus: There is both in time, and out of time, for your poor
Souls; there is an especial season of Grace you have; and upon this depends the
Eternal happiness and felicity of your poor Souls. Let that slip, and your
Souls are undone for ever. Lay hold of this especial time, and you are happy
for ever. This is the meaning of the Text, I will not always strive with you,
will not always call on you, will not always wait with offers of pardoning
grace; therefore before I call in my Scepter, O do you seek me.

Observations are these.
1. The Lord Jesus is willing to be found of poor Gentile Sinners. 2. There are
especial times of finding the Lord Jesus while he is to be found. 3. It is the
duty of every poor Soul to observe his especial times, to seek Christ in. 4.
There is a day and time in which Christ will not be found.
1. The Lord Jesus is willing to be found of poor Gentile Sinners. I must keep
close to my Text; and it speaks of such as have been before hinted.

1. Let us make inquiry what a Gentile Sinner is? In the general take this
Answer.

A Gentile Sinner is the worst of Sinners; the vilest of Sinners: thus the
Apostle describes them, Gal. 2.15.
We who are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles: They were reckoned
the greatest sinners. Mark 16.15.
Preach the Gospel to every Creature (viz.) Gentiles, as though they were not
worthy the name of men and women. That we may set off the Free Grace of God in
Christ to poor Sinners, let us see a Scripture-map of Gentilism, or Gentile
Sinners, that Christ is thus willing to be found of.

1. They are said to be Idolaters. Howbeit, then when ye knew not God, Gal.
4.8, 9.
ye did service unto them, who were no Gods. While they were in Heathenisme,
that is Gentilism; God is willing to be found of such. What though you have
been Idolaters? yet such may have mercy from God. Jer. 14.22.
In that black Catalogue of Sinners, Idolaters are reckoned among the
Corinthians, such were some of you. Idols are called the vanities of the
Gentiles.

2. Gentiles were poor slaves. Tit. 3.3.
For we our selves were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving
diverse lusts and pleasures, etc. They were servants to their lusts: their lusts
did Lord it over them. Know you not you are Servants to him whom you obey? Yet
of these poor Souls Christ is willing to be found. O do not say then, I am a
poor Gentile, too great a Sinner ever to find favor from the hands of God.
Luke 15.15.
The prodigal Gentile was a slave joined to a Citizen to keep Swine, and yet
God took him to be a Son; out of the field into the house.

3. Gentiles are poor hood-winkt blind Souls. Call in the blind and the halt;
(viz.) the poor Gentiles now become the Lord Jesus Christ's guests, and the
Jews are rejected. The God of this world has blinded their eyes: they go
muffled in ignorance of God and Christ from day to day: yet God is willing to
be found of them. They are such muffled Creatures, Acts 17.
that they are said to feel after God.

4. A Gentile is a poor perishing Soul. The poor man that was wounded, and lay
perishing of his wounds, is the poor Gentile, Luke 10.30.
that Jesus Christ is the good Samaritan to, and binds up his wounds, and pours
oil into them. We may say we are all poor Assyrians ready to perish, and yet
Christ is willing to be found of such. Joh. 3.10.
Whosoever believes on him, Jew or Gentile, might not perish, but have
everlasting life. Does thy poor Soul say as the poor prodigal did, and I perish
for hunger? O Jesus Christ is willing to be found of such.

5. A Gentile is a poor Soul that lies far from God. They are the inhabitants
of the far Country. Ephesians. 2.13, 14.
You who were a far off, are brought nigh by the blood of Jesus. He is there
speaking of Gentiles. They are said by the Prophet to be far from
Rightcousness. Isa. 46. ult.
Well poor Souls, Christ is willing to be found of such. Alas, Sir, says a
poor Soul, I am a great way from Christ: O so were Gentiles; there was a wall
of partition betwixt Christ and them; yet Christ's blood took it away, melted
down the stones in this partition wall.

6. A Gentile is a poor Soul without hope. Without Christ, Ephesians. 2.12. Without
hope of being saved without Christ.
without hope, can thou be worse? Yet Christ is willing to be found of such.
Alas, says a poor Soul, I have no hope. Thou art a Gentile, a poor hopeless
Soul. Because they are without Promise, they are without hope. The Heathens
feigned when all was gone, yet Hope was in the bottom of Pandora's box,
implying that Hope is a good refuge in calamity.

7. A Gentile is one that is a blasphemer of the name of God. Rom 2.24.
Christiani sancte vixissent, si Christus sancta docuisset.
For the name of God is blasphemed through you. They did take all occasions to
speak evil of God, for the infirmities of his followers. If Christ had taught
them better, they would have lived better, was the brand of Gentiles, cast upon
Christ in Tertullians time. Paul tells us he was a Blasphemer, and yet obtained
mercy. It is the spirit of a Gentile to speak evil of his Name, because of the
miscarriages of his followers.

8. A Gentile is one that seeks only after earthly things. An earthly spirit is
the spirit of the Gentiles. After these things, Mat. 6.32.
says Christ, do the Gentiles seek. It may be many poor Souls have made the
comfort of the Creature their Summum Bonum; never sought after any thing for
their Souls in all their lives: Yet Christ calls such to seek him; yea is
willing to be found of such. What though thou have been a poor earth-worm all
thy days? yet if now thou seek the Lord, there is hope for thee; if thy heart
be in good earnest for Heaven.

Take these Scriptural descriptions of Gentiles, to set off the Free grace of
God to the worst of Sinners.

1. Reason, why Jesus Christ is willing to be found of poor Gentile Sinners.

1. Because this was the end of the Fathers donations; Christ is the great gift
of his Father. Now surely the Lord would never have parted with such a gift as
his own Son, but he had some great end in such a gift. Well, what was the
Fathers design? He gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him
might not perish but have eternal life: That Gentile sinners might not perish
to all eternity. Ephesians. 2.18.
Therefore we read of such Souls being made nigh by the blood of Jesus; and
through him we have both Access, (viz.) both Jews and Gentiles, to the Father,
etc. Many poor Souls are under Objections concerning the willingness of God to
show them mercy. Do you think that the Lord would have parted with his own Son
for you, if he had not been willing to show you mercy? The Prophet tells us,
Isa. 42.6.
He is given for a Covenant to the people, for a light to the Gentiles.

2. Reason, why Jesus Christ is willing to be found of poor Gentile sinners,
this is evident from the invitations that he gives them to come in to him. O
what an invitation is this very Call of my Text to such? O how do the
affections of Christ sparkle in his invitations? 1. Consider his invitations
are free: There is no merit on our side, there is no such thing, as worthiness
in the Creature. Christ moves freely from Arguments springing up in his own
bowels; My Creature will be lost else, this poor Soul will be undone for ever
else: And as Hester said in that case, so says Christ, How can my heart endure
to see this evil come upon my people and kindred? So, O says Jesus Christ, how
can my heart endure to let this poor Soul go to Hell, and eternally perish? And
thus his heart works freely in his invitations toward poor Sinners. 2. His
invitations are affectionate invitations: invitations mixed with entreaties. I
beseech you be reconciled unto God. Christ does not only invite, but becomes a
suppliant to the sinner. He comes to the Sinner, which is obstinate and
inexorable, and upon his knees begs the Soul for his sake, for its own sake, to
accept of terms of mercy and reconciliation. 3. They are importunate
invitations. He does not invite with an indifferency of Spirit, whether we
accept of his terms or no, but he invites in good earnest, and sets on
invitations with pressing arguments, sometimes taking an argument from the
Souls danger, if it close not with his invitations, sometimes an argument from
the Souls duty, and sometimes an argument from the Souls benefit and profit;
these are importunate invitations. 4. His invitations are daily and incessant
invitations. Poor Sinners are daily invited, Christ is an every days Solicitor
and Suitor; he waits to be gracious: If you deny him to day, he comes again to
morrow; he does not cast off for every present denial. 5. His invitations are
universal; therefore thou may say as he did, I am invited also. O poor
Sinner, God has not excluded thee if thy unbelief exclude thee not. 6. His
invitations are upon the most solemn preparations that ever was: All things are
ready. Has he invited and prepared his guests, and does not this argue his
willingness to entertain?

3. Reason, why the Lord Jesus Christ is willing to be found of Gentile
Sinners, because upon this account the Father enters into a Covenant with the
Son to reward him. There was a Covenant struck betwixt Christ and his Father,
that upon his undertaking the great work of Man's Redemption, he would exalt him
and glorify him. I will glorify thee. The Rewards of Christ for
Redemption-work seem to consist in these things.

1. The conversion of Souls. Isa. 49.6.
Is it a small thing thou raise the Tribes of Israel? I will also give thee for
a light to the Gentiles: as if Christ should stand with his Father and say, But
Lord what will become of the poor Gentile part of the world? Must they all dye
in their sins and be damned? O the heart of Christ was inflamed with love after
the salvation of poor Sinners. Well, now the Lord gives him a Patent for
Gentiles as well as Jews; a Patent of Free Grace: Tit. 1.2.
this is covenanted for, betwixt God the Father and the Son: this is the
promise of Eternal Life before the world begun. He shall see the travil of his
Soul, and shall be satisfied.

2. His exaltation is promised. So he shall sprinkle nations, (viz.) convert
them: Sprinkle them with his blood: an allusion to the blood of the Paschal
Lamb, when the destroyer was to pass over. Isa. 52.15.
And Kings shall shut their mouths at him: Shall all be silent at the setting
up of his Dominion; they shall be convinced of his Kingly Office and Dignity:
Not a word to say against the Lord Jesus as King. Isa. 53 ult. He shall conquer
them, and deliver the Elect out of their hands.
Therefore says another Text, He shall divide a portion with the great: Some
read it, I will give him a portion among the great: He shall have his day of
visible greatness among them. Others read it, He shall divide the Mighty as a
prey: This will be Christ's work when he comes forth in Majesty, to prey upon
all that stand in his way to his Kingdom, whether persons or things. Now this
clearly demonstrates the point in hand; because God Covenants for this with him
upon his undertaking Redemption and Salvation-work.

Application.
Is it so, that the Lord Jesus is willing to be found of Gentile Sinners? Then,

1. It informs us of the unspeakable love of Jesus Christ to poor Sinners. O
how is it commended to us! In this, that while we were Sinners he died for us;
greater love than this has no man.

1. Is there not love in this, to be willing to be found of such as have been
professed Enemies, proclaimed Traitors? The Lord has proclaimed us upon our
first apostasy to be Traitors and Rebels to him; but yet he has sent out a
proclamation of Peace; and look to that blessed proclamation, and lay hold of
it by a hand of faith; or, Isa. 27.5.
Let him take hold of my strength, that he may make peace with me, and he shall
make peace with me. You see here is the proclamation to lay hold on. And so
poor Souls, upon their falling in with Christ are at peace. Is not here love,
shining love to poor dark Gentiles? Let us see the Proclamation renewed. Isa.
55.1, 2
I am found of them that asked not for me, I am found of them that sought me
not. I said, behold me, behold me, unto a Nation that was not called by my
Name. I have spread out my hands all the day to a rebellious people, (viz.) to
a company of poor obstinate Jews, and lo therefore I turn to the Gentiles.
Behold, here I am, here I am; so some read it, as Christ holding out terms of
Mercy, Life and Salvation to poor Sinners. If a man find his Enemy, says Saul,
will he let him go well away? O the love of Christ to Gentiles which were
enemies!

2. Is there not love in this, to call these first to look after him? Is not
this preventing love? Did I look after him, said poor Hagar, who here sees me?
Alas, if the Lord had never found me out, I had never found him. He is called a
Shepherd that seeks out his Sheep. O here do we run into corners from this good
Shepherd, until he follow us! O what love is this!

3. Is there not love in this, to tell us there is a time coming when it will
be too late to seek him? See how free and ingenuous, as I may say, Divine Love
is; it tells us the worst, that we might be awakened to look about us. If you
neglect but a while, follow your sins for a while, set out your day of Grace
for a while, then it will be over, and the bowels of the Lord will be shut up
in displeasure against you; and then you will say, as he upon his deathbed, I
have told you, now all is too late, all is now too late. Is there not great
love in warning Souls of danger before it comes?

4. Is there not love in this, that the Rejection of the Jews, the Cutting off
them should be the grafting in of the Gentiles? O that such wild Olives should
be partakers of the sweetness of the fat Olive! that ever such brambles should
be inoculated into Christ! Romans 11.33.
This raised up the spirit of Paul into a frame of admiration. The casting away
of the Jews, was the reconciling of the world.

5. There is love in this, that Christ was so willing to come as his Fathers
Gift, as a Commander and Leader to his People, as the words before speak. See
how Christ's heart echoes to the heart of the Father in the work of the
Salvation of poor Sinners! In the volume of thy Book it is written, I come to
do thy will, O God.

2. Use. O then let us a little admire the condescension of Christ in this
thing, that he is so willing to be found of poor Gentiles. It is no wonder, if
upon the head of this Divine Mystery be written a verily, Verily he took upon
him not the nature of Angels, Heb. 2.16.
but the Seed of Abraham. That he should overlook them Glorious Creatures; that
Mercy should come to poor Gentiles over the head of Angels; how few take notice
of this? 1 Pet. 1.12.
Angels desire to look into these deeps; and yet we do not look into them with
an eye of holy inspection and heavenly admiration.

3. Another word is this, If Christ be willing to be found of poor Gentile
Sinners, it is then a Call to such to seek him. Seek him while he may be found.
May not I say to poor Sinners, as God argues the case with those Jews by the
Prophet Ezekiel, Why will ye dye O ye house of Israel? So, why do poor Gentile
Sinners neglect seeking the Lord Jesus? Is not this to go carelessly the ready
way to your Eternal destruction? Is not this the rode to your Everlasting
ruin? And will not the Lord say to you one day, as the Prophet to them, Your
destruction is of your selves?

1. Motive to seek the Lord. He first is suitor to you, and seeks you; And is
not this a mighty motive? This is that great loadstone that should draw the
hearts of poor Sinners much in love with Christ: He loves them first: Who loved
us first. Christ is first in the motion. He came to seek and to save that which
is lost. Take that Parable of the Prodigal, his Father sent after him into the
far Country, sought him out, This my Son was lost, and is found. Nay, Christ is
the Shepherd of the Gentiles, and he seeks out his sheep in a dark and gloomy
day. Alas, what is the Gospel but Christ sending after poor Sinners to woo
them, to accept of terms of Grace and Mercy?

2. Motive to seek the Lord Jesus. His seeking you cost him dear. He laid down
his life for his sheep. He sought you, and where did he find you? He found you
slaves, and he must pay your ransom for you. I have found a ransom for him.
His death is our ransom. We were prisoners and captives, and could not be
redeemed at a lower rate than Christ's blood.

3. Motive. He comes from the Father to seek you. The verses going before are a
Prophecy of Christ proceeding from the Father. I have given him for a witness.
And frequently when he is spoken of to poor Gentile Sinners, then he is said to
come by way of donation. I have given him a light to the Gentiles. He comes and
brings commendations of his Fathers love to poor Sinners. He is called the
faithful and true witness of God.

4. Motive. He came from Heaven to seek you. O what Glory he left to come and
mind your Eternal concerns upon earth! I cannot, nay, what Man or Angel can
tell you what he forsook to seek you? He stripped himself of all his Glory, of
all his Royal Robes, to wash your feet, to wash you all over. He left his
Throne. I remember it is storied of a King, that found a sheep in a ditch, and
sat down on hands and knees, and pulled it out with his own hands. The Sheep
is thy own Soul, this King is the Lord Jesus, the Ditch is thy Natural
Condition in which thou had perished to all Eternity, if he had not come from
Heaven to have pulled thee out.

5. Motive. He seeks as impatient of denial. He is an importunate Seeker, he
will not be said nay; seeks like a beggar that will not be gone from your
doors. Christ will not be gone from the door of thy heart, he stands and
knocks; he does not knock as he passes by, but stands waiting for thy coming
out to accept of him, and close with him; Therefore he beseeches, wooes, waits
to be Gracious. He comes in Ordinance after Ordinance, Providence after
Providence, Motion after Motion, and Day after Day: What say thou poor Soul,
will thou now close with me? And as he did, Will thou be made whole, to the
Leper? And O how loath to go away! when will it once be?

6. Motive. He is a Seeker that is grieved when he is denied. He was grieved
because of their unbelief, and the hardness of their hearts. You cannot grieve
Christ worse than deny him, when he comes to make out love to your Souls, and
you slight him.

7. Motive. He seeks poor Sinners in their proper months. Jer. 2.24.
In their months one shall find them: Christ knows the months to find Sinners
in. All these Motives are taken from Christ, as the great seeker of Souls.

3. Use is of Reproof, 1. to such as neglect to seek the Lord, that seek him
not at all. Yet they are Seekers, but not Seekers of the Lord. Gentiles are
Seekers, after these things the Gentiles seek. They seek good trading, good
livelihoods, etc. But alas, this is all they seek after. Nay, Lev. 10.31.20.6.
we read of some that seek after Wizards, they are so far from seeking after
God. But the Lord says, he will set his face against such. Do you think, poor
Seamen, and you their wives, that this is the way to have good voyages, to go
to ask the Devil his Counsel? Some seek their lusts, Prove. 23.30.
like Solomon's drunkard they say, they will seek it yet again. But all this
while they seek not the Lord. O how few seek to the Lord? What are these poor
Souls seeking, but the living among the dead?

1. See the danger of such as seek not the Lord. Such poor Souls see no worth
in the Lord; and are not such to be reproved? If Christ be not worth seeking,
he is worth nothing. When we see the worth of any thing, we will seek after it.
The object we seek, must be some good. O how neglecters to seek Christ do
undervalue Christ!

2. They never see a want of him. We seek not, that we want not. O but now when
the poor Soul does see its need of him, then it does with the Spouse seek him.
Poor Gentiles, they sit still. It is the Character of a Gentile to sit in
darkness, Unto you who sat in darkness a great light shined, (viz.) to
Gentiles. They have no mind to rise off from their seat.

3. It will aggravate the condemnation of such, that Christ sought them, and
they would not be found of him. How often would I have gathered thee, etc.

But there are a company of poor souls that object, what have we to do with
Christ, such poor Sinners as we are?

O poor Souls, the great Promise is to such; To it shall the Gentiles seek:
Isa. 11.10.
All poor Sinners must betake themselves to this Glorious Ensign. The root of
Jesse shall stand for an Ensign of the people, to it shall the Gentiles seek.

But we are dark Creatures? Luke 1.79.
He came to give light to them that sat in darkness, and in the shadow of
death, and guide our feet in the ways of peace.

Another Use is of Inquiry, If Christ be so willing to be found of Gentile
Sinners, what then may be the reasons why poor Sinners do not seek the Lord
Jesus? O how few Seekers has the Lord Jesus! Sinners, it is true, are Seekers,
but it is of the living among the dead.

1. Poor Sinners ignorance of the worth of Christ: who will or can desire after
an unknown good? As he said to the woman, If thou knew the gift of God, Mat.
13.44, 45, 46.
thou would ask living water, and he would give it thee: So do I say, If Souls
knew the worth of Christ, they would cry, None but Christ, none but Christ.
Nothing without Christ, nothing below Christ, would satisfy their Souls. The
Merchant man could not be satisfied with goodly Pearls, after he had come to
know there was a Pearl of Price; then all the goodly Pearls were out-shined by
the Pearl of great Price, and now he is resolved upon any terms to have Christ.
He sells all. O what difference betwixt this person and the young man in the
Gospel, who when Christ bid him sell all, went away sorrowful? O this broke the
bargain betwixt him and Christ: He knew not the worth of Christ. It may be
Christ is not much valued by you now, but ask your hearts the question, O my
Soul, what will Christ be worth upon a deathbed? What will Christ be worth
when thy Soul is filled with horror of thy own guilt? When thou art a Magor
Misabib to thy self? Nay, it may be to all that are round about thee? When thy
heart is made to meditate terror? Could thou ask the damned in Hell what
Christ would be worth to them, what they would give, if it could be procured,
for one offer of Christ in good earnest? It may be they might better inform thy
judgment. If you did converse with awakened dying guilty consciences, or with
poor damned Souls, they might tell you something of the worth of Christ, or
with Souls deeply groaning under guilt at first Conversion, or with poor
tempted Souls: These four sorts of persons can tell you what apprehensions they
have of the worth of Christ. When men know the worth of a commodity, it will go
hard but they will obtain it. O what will a Malefactor judge a Pardon worth! So
does a poor self-condemned Sinner judge of Christ.

2. Poor Sinners seek not after the Lord, because they are locked up under
infidelity and unbelief. We read of being concluded and shut up under unbelief,
as close prisoners under lock and key (in arcta custodia) they are in Satan's
close custody.

1. Poor Sinners believe not Christ's willingness to embrace and entertain their
poor Souls upon closure with him. Until poor Sinners be convinced of this,
they can never make out after Christ. Therefore it is we read of Christ's
invitations, and asseverations, entreaties, promises; all to demonstrate his
willingness to be found of sinners, when they seek him. Alas, poor sinners take
up false conceptions of Christ; they think his heart is hardened against them,
and his bowels shut up in displeasure, and they take him for their adversary,
and all this is their unbelief; and so are hindered from looking out after
Christ.

2. Poor Sinners believe not the Fathers willingness to show them mercy. Many
Souls stick here, though Christ has told them, he has declared his Fathers
Name, and would declare it to poor sinners. O what pains does Christ take to
convince of his Fathers good will! Joh. 6.37, 38.
This is the will of him that sent me.

5. Poor Sinners believe not an indispensible necessity to close with Christ.
They do not see their Souls lost for ever without a Christ. And this brings me
to the next particular.

3. Poor Sinners seek not after the Lord Jesus, because they are not thoroughly
convinced of their misery without Christ. Peter did not cry out, Master save me
or I perish, until he begun to sink: So poor Souls cry not after Christ, seek
not after Christ, until they see themselves in a perishing sinking condition.
Persons may fall under some convictions of their misery, but alas, they are
^lighty convictions, and so wear off the next temptation that comes upon their
Soul: But when the conviction gets to the heart, then it is hopeful. When they
were pricked to the heart, then they cried out, Men and Brethren, what shall we
do? There are many convictions that get no farther than the head. But now when
a sense of misery is clapped to a man's heart, it will make him look out after
Christ. Let me show poor Sinners something of their misery without Christ.

1. You are without hope; and is not this the height of misery? Hope does yield
the Soul some relief in the saddest condition; but to be without hope, is to be
in Hell above ground. What is it that makes Hell, Hell? they have no hope of
ever coming forth, from the pit there is no redemption. If a man be in Algier,
hope keeps up his heart, that he shall be redeemed one day: But there is not
one prisoner of hope in all hell among all the damned.

2. Without Christ you are condemned men already. There is no condemnation to
them that are in Christ Jesus. Then it follows, they that are out of Christ
Jesus, are under the sentence of condemnation. What a miserable condition does
a poor condemned creature think himself to be in, and cannot rest night nor day
but thinking of his execution? This is the case of a poor Soul out of Christ;
though the Soul be not convinced of it.

3. The misery of a Soul out of Christ is in this, it is eternal misery. The
eternity of the misery is the sting of Hell, and the very emphasis of
damnation. To be miserable a thousand years, and then to come out of it, the
very thoughts of a better estate would be some kind of ease to the oppressed
mind: but their misery is like to be endless; and this compleats the misery. It
is called everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, etc. 2 These.
1.8.
This brings me orderly to the next head.

4. Poor Sinners seek not out to the Lord Jesus, because they are not convinced
thoroughly of a future state of the Soul. They are not under the powerful sense
of the Souls immortality. Who will seek out to Christ, if they be not convinced
that the Soul is an immortal being? Christ's errand from Heaven to Earth is in
vain, his whole series of suffering is in vain, his whole undertaking of the
work of man's redemption in vain, if there be no future state of the Soul: But
because we live in a time and day that Atheism does abound, let me offer by way
of conviction some few Arguments to prove the future state of the Soul. Alas,
men look not out after Christ, because they are not taken up with Eternity.

1. Argument is taken from Christ's death, 1 These. 1.10.
which was to deliver from wrath to come. Then there is such a thing as wrath
to come, which could not be if there were no future state of the Soul.

2. Argument of a future state is from the horror that wicked men feel
sometimes in their consciences, when they are awakened. O what Magor Misabibs
are they to themselves sometimes! Crying out, Woe is them that ever they were
born, to sin such wrath upon their own heads. These are the sparks of Hell that
are gotten into the Conscience in this life, this is the gnawing of that worm
that never dies.

3. Argument is taken from the wishes of the wicked that they might dye the
death of the Righteous, as Balaam desired.

4. Argument is taken from the sufferings of Saints. What will it profit a man
to gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? which is brought in to the
Disciples to caution them against Apostasy. O, say poor believers, we may lose
our Souls, and therefore we may not apostatize from God, and therefore they
will suffer the loss of all. The poor people of God make a sad bargain of it,
if they suffer, and yet there should be no reward.

5. Argument is taken from the great desires that sometimes Believers have to
be dissolved, as Paul did; which, if there were no enjoyment of God after,
would greatly be to believers loss, because they enjoy something of God here.

6. Argument is taken from the great joy that many Saints have had in their
passage into another world. How have they gone off the stage of this present
life with triumph, and died boasting and glorying in God?

7. Argument is taken from Saints Communion with God. If there be such a thing
here, then much more hereafter; what we enjoy here is but a drop to the Ocean.

8. Argument is taken from men's natural unwillingness to dye. Certainly there
some thing follows death, that the Soul cannot endure to think on. It is true,
the dissolving of the marriage-knot betwixt such two dear lovers, as Soul and
Body, is tedious to think of, yet there is some preapprehensions of eternity,
that trouble the Soul, that it cannot think of death with any quiet or comfort.

9. Argument is taken from the end of Christ's appointments. God has appointed
the means of Grace in reference to the salvation of poor Souls. That thou may
save thy own Soul, and them that hear thee.

10. Argument from the endeavors of Satan, seeking whom he may devour (or
drink up, as the word is.) Satan would spare his pains, if there were no future
state of the Soul. Now it is no wonder if poor sinners seek not the Lord Jesus,
when they lay not their souls under the convictions of the state of the Soul
after death.

5. Poor Sinners seek not after the Lord Jesus Christ, because they are
diverted by their worldly enjoyments and employments. We read of some that made
excuses, and all their excuses were from their worldly business, they could not
come. I have observed that young persons who have been under some notable
convictions, and resolutions to close with Christ, and seek after Christ, if
ever they have abated and cooled in their first love, it has been when they
have entered upon the world, changed their conditions, set up for themselves;
the world has stolen their hearts from God. O how sad is this! The world broke
the bargain betwixt Christ and the young man in the Gospel.

O but says a poor Soul, I know not how to seek Christ: I am a poor Gentile
Sinner that have sat in darkness, and am in my dark state of Gentilism to this
day, and how shall I seek the Lord Jesus that is, you say, thus willing to be
found of me?

1. Seek the Lord betimes. If you would be speeding Seekers of Christ, Job 8.5.
you must not be loyterers; there is but in time and out of time. Make no delay
therefore, poor sinner, in seeking the Lord Jesus Christ; take the present time
by the fore-lock. While it is to day, hearken to his voice: Now acquaint your
selves with God. We must take hold of the present time. They that seek me early
shall find me; (shall morning me, the Hebrew is.) We must in our seeking give
the morning to God. It is observable, in the morning Jacob got the blessing; in
the morning the Lord looked through the cloud, and discomfited the Egyptian
Host: Nay, Christ himself is called the Hind of the morning, the morning star;
and all to teach us to seek him in the morning. The first fruits were to be
dedicated to the Lord; the firstling of every Creature was to be offered up in
Sacrifice to the Lord: but the firstling of an Ass being so dull a Creature,
God would not accept it in sacrifice.

1. We should seek the Lord early, because the present time is the only time to
seek the Lord in. Now is the acceptable time. now is the day of salvation, etc.
Upon this monosylable Now depends Eternity (says one.) There is a present
time, and a present Truth for us to lay hold on. It was a good saying of him
when invited to dinner to morrow, says he, I have not promised myself a [to
morrow] this many years. Who knows, says Solomon, what to morrow may bring
forth? What is in the womb of to morrow? What if thy death, nay, thy damnation
should be in the womb of another day? We read of death and what was at the
heels of death? and Hell immediately followed him.

2. Seek the Lord early; you cannot promise your selves any more seasons of
Grace. If God should prolong your lives, your day of Grace may have its sunset
on a sudden; and alas, what good will your lives do you, when you are wrapped up
in gross darkness? May not you say already, Woe unto us our day goes away!
Alas, there is a night coming when no man can work.

3. Seek the Lord early; If you have your lives lengthened, your means of Grace
continued, yet you cannot promise your selves any more gales of the Spirit of
God to breath upon you. And alas, what will Gospel Ordinances signify to you,
without the spirits influences breathing in them? What is the most precious
Ministry you can sit under, if not influenced from the Lord, by the efficacy of
his own Spirit?

4. Seek the Lord early; you have loytered long, you have slept much of your
day of Grace away already. He that sleeps in harvest is a Son that causes
shame; but he that gathers in summer is a wise Son. O what a harvest of the
Gospel have we slept in! O what a spirit of deep sleep and slumber has fallen
upon us! O that we may all take that counsel, Up and be doing, and the Lord
will be with you. Up and be seeking Christ early.

5. The longer you neglect to seek the Lord Jesus, the more difficult it will
be for you. Your very sloth will take away your hearts: the more a man sits
still, the less mind he has to stir. Sitting is a pleasing posture; it is the
description of Gentile Sinners, they sit in darkness; they are pleased with
their dark state: And it is hard when we have indulged our sloth, to stir up
our selves to lay hold of God.

2. Seek the Lord earnestly as well as early. It is said of Christ, he prayed
earnestly, when in his agony; and we read of striving to enter in at the strait
gate. Strive to an agony; put your Souls into an agony: So we must seek Christ,
having our Souls in an agony. Poor Souls, it may be, fall under some general
convictions of their sins, and they are now put upon seeking the Lord; but
alas, it is with a kind of indifferency of spirit, as though they cared not
whether they found him or not. We should seek the Lord with Jacobs resolution;
I will not let thee go except thou bless me. 2 Cant. 1.2, 3, 4.
The Spouse by night sought Christ: in a night of persecution (some refer it to
that night of persecution by Antiochus Epiphanes) yet she gives not over
seeking; but did she find him? No, she found him not. Now she might have fallen
under some temptation to give over, why should I wait upon the Lord any longer?
O no, but she falls now upon an earnest search and enquiry after him, and now
she finds him.

3. Seek the Lord under the sense of a promise (viz.) believingly. They that
seek shall find. If we have not our practice bottomed in our seeking of Christ
upon some promise, we shall have no comfort in it. But now when the Soul says,
I will go a seeking Christ, but I will carry a promise with me; O this is very
comfortable! Unto him shall the Gentiles seek; and, in him shall the Gentiles
trust. This is the Great Magna Charta of the Gentiles; thou must not seek to
thy own Righteousness. We read of seeking that way. Isa. 42.2.
You must not trust in your selves, but in his Name shall the Gentiles trust.
If you know not where to trust, come hither, Mat. 12.18.
and here place your trust. Many Souls seek Christ, but their eye of faith is
not up to the promise in their seeking of him.

4. We are to seek the Lord in a through sense of our lost condition without
him. Many Souls seek Christ, but they do it not in a sense of their undone
condition. It is the lost Soul that is the right seeker of Christ. Christ seeks
such Souls, and such Souls seek Christ; then they are like to meet. That which
is promised of the Jews Return holds good here; Jer. 50.5.
Going and weeping, seeking the Lord their God, etc. It will make you seek him
weeping, if you were but convinced, you were lost to all Eternity, undone for
ever, irrecoverably miserable, if you find not Christ. The first-step to seek
Christ, is to be convinced of ones lost condition. O now the Soul falls
inquiring after Christ; If you see him whom my Soul loves, tell him, I am sick
of love.

5. Seek Christ perseveringly. Thus the Spouse did seek Christ until she found
him; as the woman sought her lost groat until she found it. The watchmen smote
the Spouse, and took away her veil from her, yet she gives not over seeking her
beloved. The watchmen, either the Ministerial watchmen, or the Magisterial,
upon the City walls, they took away her veil (viz.) a token of subjection to
Christ; yet she perseveres still seeking Christ. Jacob wrestled until the break
of day: He was a persevering wrestler, and then came the blessing.

6. We must seek Christ as appointed by the Father to entertain poor Gentile
Sinners. Therefore we see the Commission of Christ is to carry it tenderly
toward poor Gentiles, smoking flaxes, and bruised reeds. The Father has put
this work upon him, to treat with poor Gentiles about their everlasting
Salvation: and therefore we must seek Christ distinctly, under a distinct
notion, as the Father has commissioned him. Poor Sinners get some confused
notions and apprehensions of Christ, and upon these notions they seek Christ:
but all this while they are ignorant of Christ's being sent as the Fathers
Commissioner to treat with poor Sinners about the things that concern their
peace. Several words the Spirit of God has bestowed upon this thing, noting to
us that it is a matter of such great concernment.

1. He has set him forth to be a propitiation, Romans 3.25.
or foreordained him to this end and purpose.

2. God has chosen him, My Servant whom I have chosen.

3. God has called him. Isa. 42.6.


4. God has anointed him to this purpose.

5. God has sent him; now we should consider all these, and seek him as one
thus sent by his Father to treat with poor Sinners.

7. We must seek whole Christ in all his Offices. As you have received the Lord
Jesus Christ, so walk you in him. This is whole Christ; as Prophet, Priest, and
Lord. And thus should poor Gentile Sinners seek the Lord Jesus.

The second Observation is this:

That there are especial times for Sinners to find the Lord Jesus Christ in.
Seek the Lord while he may be found.

We read David pointing out such a time, For this shall every one that is Godly
pray unto thee in a time, Psalm. 32.6.
when thou will be found: or, in a finding time (so we should read it;) Others
read it in a time of hitting, when Gods judgments go abroad, and the Lord hits
the consciences. But David had been confessing his sins, and the Lord forgives
him, and the sense of this forgiveness raises his heart so, that he breaks out
thus, the Godly shall pray unto thee in such a time, in an especial time. Luke
19.41, 42.
O Jerusalem had thou known in this thy day! It was an especial time in which
they might have found the Lord, he so sweetly offering himself to them in the
Gospel. Solomon tells us, Eccl. 8.5, 6.
A wise man's heart discerns time and judgment; because to every purpose there
is a time and judgment; therefore the misery of man is great upon him. So in
this case, there is a time, an especial time to put your Spiritual purposes
into execution, to seek the Lord Jesus in: Therefore that was good Counsel, Job
22.20, 21.
Now acquaint thy self with God, and be at peace, and thereby good shall come
upon thee. Now seek the Lord. There are some especial Nows that we should all
improve and lay hold on. 2 Cor. 6.2.
Now is the acceptable time, now is the day of salvation, etc. I passed by
thee, and saw thee in thy blood, and then it was a time of love, etc.

The great question will be, what are these especial times, in which Christ is
willing to be found?

1. When he offers himself in the tenders of the Gospel. O Jerusalem, had
thou known in this thy day. It was a peculiar time in which the Lord Jesus was
preached to them. Now Christ is willing to be found of you. What is the Gospel
but Christ seeking out his Sheep, his voice calling in his Sheep; Christ
following poor sinners with invitations and entreaties, that they would return
unto him and live? We read of the Shepherd seeking out his sheep. Would Christ
offer himself, but that it is an especial time of love? O poor Souls, take heed
as you reject these offers. 1. These offers of Christ are a fruit of his blood;
if he had not died, he never had been tendered to you; and for you to refuse
these offers, is for you to reject his purchase, nay, for you to tread his
blood under-foot, and account the blood of the Covenant an unclean thing. And O
how must this needs provoke the Lord, as is said in the parable of the Supper,
when they all had refused, the Lord was angry, and resolved that none of them
should taste of his Supper. 2. These offers are offers of life and salvation; O
then take heed of rejecting them. You will not come to me that you may have
life. Now is an especial time, you may have life. If a poor condemned
Malefactor should but have his life offered him, O how would he be transported
with joy! And this is the case of every poor sinner out of Christ; he is under
a sentence of condemnation, and Christ comes and offers them their lives. O
then as we value the lives of our precious Souls, let us not reject the offers
of Christ. 3. The offers of Christ are unasked, unsought for by us, therefore
it is now an especial finding time. Thou poor sinner do not come forth and
ask a Christ, and cry for Christ, and lament after Christ. O no, but Christ
came out to offer himself to thy poor Soul, when thou lay dying and perishing
in thy blood, then he said unto thee unasked, Live. 4. The offers of Christ are
not only of his Grace but of himself: He offers not only what he has, but what
he is, to thy Soul. But my people would have none of me. He that has the Son,
has life. There must be an union with the Son, a closing with the person of
Christ, as well as with the promise of Christ. Now this is more than to offer
Grace, yea, than to offer Heaven to poor sinners. Therefore it is we read of
the marriage of the Kings Son: and shall we despise such a match as this? God
forbid. 5. Surely this is a finding time in an especial manner, he offers with
entreaties, and invitations to accept. He does not make an offer and away, as
careless whether poor sinners accept or no: but he follows his offers with
arguments, if by any means he might prevail with poor Souls, before it be too
late. 6. He offers all he has. O will neither his person nor his benefits take
with the Souls of poor sinners? All he has may be yours; If he have pardoning
mercy, it is yours; if he have sanctifying mercy, it is yours; if he have
comforting mercy, it is yours. He interests you in all his fullness upon your
closure with him: He bestows upon you a large jointure upon your marriage with
him. All is yours. Then certainly this is an especial finding time.

2. The second especial finding time is, when the Spirit breaths upon sinners
in their attendances upon God. We read of a certain season in which the Angel
came down and moved the waters. There are some certain seasons that the Spirit
of God does breath more freely upon poor sinners than at other times; and these
times we are to make an especial improvement of. The Spirit of God, it is said,
came upon Sampson by times. Certain briezes, if you will give me leave to call
them so, that come from Heaven at certain times. The wind blows where it
lists. O but poor Souls, be sure you lose not these winds; when they stand
fair for Heaven, do not let them slip; lose not a gale for Eternity, for they
are especial finding times. 1. These gales once gone, and they are
irrecoverable. There is no buying a wind for Heaven, if you would give all the
world for it: one fair gale lost, and thy poor Soul may lie wind-bound unto thy
very dying day. 2. These gales once gone, and your hearts harden. Sinners
hearts harden, as the gales of the spirit of God are abused, and so suspended.
And O what a sad case will it be for a poor Sinner to lie upon a deathbed
crying out, this heart of mine, as very a stone as it is, as hard, as it is
now, once was breathed upon by the Spirit to close with Christ, but I sinned
all those precious breathings from my Soul, and so by degrees hardened for Hell
apace. 3. These winds will not always blow upon you, the wind will not always
stands here. Say so when under the Spirits breathings. The wind will not
always hold thus fair for Heaven; it will not always blow in this quarter. My
Spirit shall not always strive with man. You must not think of having a
trade-wind for Heaven. 4. These gales must you give an account for. Why did not
you move with such a fair wind, when you had it? This question one day will be
asked your precious Souls. O what answer will you give in that day? Did not my
Spirit strive with you? but you resisted it, and vexed it, and quenched it.
Every motion you ever had and slighted, will come in as an evidence against you
another day. 5. These gales once gone will fill your Souls with horror that
you have lost them; that you were in so fair a way for closing with Christ, and
yet miss of him; so nigh the Kingdom, and never come at it. O how it grieves a
man to miscarry, that had once a fair wind! O had I but taken the opportunity
of a wind, how happy had I been! Who can think of it, but with dread, to look
back upon all the motions that you have lost, all the breathings you have lost,
and to say under the sense of all these being lost, Now your Souls are lost too?

3. Especial finding time is in a time of universal calamities and judgments
upon nations. When the deluge is abroad upon the face of the earth, then he is
willing to ask Souls to let them have room in himself. Psalm. 32.6.
For this shall every one pray unto thee in a time when thou will be found (and
observe what follows) Surcly in the floods of great waters they shall not come
nigh thee. Some Expositors take it of a finding God in a time of general
trouble and calamity. Therefore we have that sweet counsel, Seek ye the Lord,
Zeph. 2.3.
seek meekness if that you may be hid in the day of the Lords anger. When the
Lords Judgments are abroad, he calls upon poor Sinners to sue to him, after an
especial manner. O poor sinners, How can your hearts endure, or your hands be
made strong in the day that I shall deal with you? (says the Lord.) You will
be like the manslayer that had no City of Refuge to fly to, when the avenger
of blood was upon him: And was not this a very sad case? Well may it be said to
such, What will you do in the day of your Visitation? and where will you leave
your Glory? Isa. 10.2, 3.
and whither will you flee for help? God would never have given that especial
counsel, when he was to march in his anger through Israel, therefore prepare to
meet thy God O Israel, if he did not aim, it should be an especial time of
finding him. O what a Christ seeking, nay finding time was the plague, when
death and danger faced you every day, nay every hour? when the Grave and Hell
opened their mouths wide to swallow you?

4. Another especial time of finding, is, a time of personal affliction: when
sinners months are upon them, in their months one shall find her, Jer. 2.24.
spoken of the wild Ass. So it is with a poor Sinner. He cannot be tamed,
cannot be brought to hand, brought to the hand of Christ: but when affliction
is upon the sinner, O then it is an Ephraim; Thou chastisedst me and I was
chastised, Jer. 37.18, 19.
as a Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke; but yet the Lord tamed the Bullock.
Manasseh as wild as he was, was thus tamed, and brought to seek the Lord, when
he was in the briars and fetters. Now is a time for the sinner to return from
iniquity: Job 36.9.
(so Job has it) In their affliction they will seek me early.

5. Another especial time of finding Christ, is, when the Soul is under the
sense of its bewildred, lost estate and condition; O then the Soul looks out
after Christ; sees it is undone without Christ, a perishing lost Soul for ever.
This put the Prodigal upon returning to his Father, and I perish by hunger. The
Lord allures the Soul into the wilderness, it knows not what to make of its
condition, it is in a wilderness of doubts and objections, but yet Christ now
is found of it, and speaks comfortably unto it. Now the Soul does as the four
Lepers in the gate of Samaria; they were under the sentence of death in their
own apprehensions, and therefore they conclude they could but dye: So they
resolve to go into the Assyrian Camp; rather than dye in the Gate they would
dye in the Field. Thus says a poor Soul, I can but dye, therefore I will go
out to Christ, and if I dye I will dye at his foot, if I perish I perish. Now
this is a time wherein the Lord is found of poor Souls.

6. Another especial time, is a time of violent and fierce assaults and
temptations from Satan. Paul looked upon this time to be an especial praying
time. Paul besought the Lord thrice: 2 Cor. 12.7, 8.
and it was an answering time, my Grace is sufficient for thee. Satan, he is
the great Seeker after Souls, seeking whom he may devour. O now the Soul runs
from Satan to Jesus Christ, to take sanctuary in Christ. Some poor Souls have
cause to bless God for their temptation-experiences, upon this very account
that Satan's assaults have hastened them to Christ. Thus God outshoots Satan in
his own bow.

7. When the Soul meets with disappointments from the Creature, this is another
especial finding time. The poor Church speaks as a disappointed people; Hos.
6.1.
Come let us return unto the Lord. We have been big-bellied with expectations
and hopes from the Creature, but all proves but a tympany: come therefore say
they, let us return unto the Lord; He will not disappoint us. The Lord was
resolved to make up a hedge of disappointments against the poor Church, and now
she resolves what to do. Hos. 2.7.
I will return to my first Husband, it was better with me then than it is now.
Disappointments have been the occasion of the conversion of many. The Prodigal
would fain have filled his belly with the husks the Swine did eat; here was his
desire: no man gave him to eat; here was his disappointment. And what then does
he resolve on? O then he resolves to arise and go to his Father.

Application.
Is it so, that there are some especial times of finding Christ? then it is a
word of counsel. O then let no such times slip you! Lay hold of the forelock of
your especial times. There is time and opportunity, and we distinguish betwixt
them: opportunity is time filled up with seasons of Grace. O be sure then poor
Souls you redeem opportunities. It is the same counsel that the Apostle gives
them, Ephesians. 5.15, 16.
Redeem the time; and the reason is very cogent, for the days are evil. A man
has a fair wind; he has waited long for it; and now it is come about, he will
not neglect it. O when the wind presents, be sure then you take it! O poor
Soul, have thou not laid long without a wind for Heaven? Well, now it is come
about. O then improve it. O poor Soul, put not off these precious gales; say
not, come again to morrow.

1. These especial seasons and times you must be accountable for. And can you
answer it before the Great God, Sinners, that you did trifle with those seasons
that did concern your immortal Souls? God puts every Sermon upon account, every
Sabbath upon account, every Motion, nay, every Conviction upon account; they
are all bookt down in Gods book of Remembrance; and though you have forgotten
them, yet he has not. O what horror will fill your Souls, and what confusion
of face will be upon you, when you shall be called to an account for all your
especial times of finding Christ? 2. These especial times of finding Christ,
are not all persons privileges. He has not dealt with all people as with you.
How many parts of the world that never were enriched with the tenders of
Gospel Grace as you have been, but lie in the rubbish of ignorance and
ungodliness? Nay, how many that have lived under the sound of the Gospel, and
yet the Gospel is hid to them, 2 Cor. 4.3.
and such souls are lost? And shall your Souls be privileged above others in
the being under these especial seasons, and you not improve them? 3. These
especial times if you let slip, you will be hardened and rivetted in your sins.
After men have sinned away the day of Grace, O then they grow worse and worse.
Then their poor Souls do swim down the stream of all manner of profaneness.
Have you not often observed it, that after sinners have worn off their
Convictions they have been more careless, more profane, more resolute in their
course of sin? 4. These especial times if you let them slip, it may be, you
shall never have such times again. My Spirit shall no more strive with man. His
bowels will be shut up in displeasure against you. You may outlive the
breathings of the Lord upon your Souls. And O if God should awaken you, and
cause you to reflect upon what has past betwixt God and your Souls, O then it
may be you will cry out, O that it were with me as in months past! O for one of
the Motions of the Spirit of God I have slighted! O for one of the Convictions
I have murdered! 5. These especial times will exceedingly aggravate your sin,
in standing out against Christ. A woe was written upon the head of Capernaum
and Bethsaida. O when Christ shall say, what have you to say for your selves?
was not I tendered unto you? was not I offered with all the benefits of my
death? but you would none of me. O now how will such poor Souls run to the
rocks, yea be fit to creep into the holes of the ragged rocks for the Majesty
of the Lord?

2. Word is a word of direction. What shall we do by way of improvement of
these especial times, or how shall we improve them?

1. Would you improve these especial finding times? Then 1. Lament sensibly
over your lost time. Lapsed time goes to the heart of a poor convinced sinner:
nothing does cut so deep, as the consideration of trifling away golden seasons
of Grace. It was the charge the Lord brought in against Jezabel, I gave her
space to repent, but she repented not. O for a poor soul to reflect upon the
time that is past, then it will cry as Job did in that case, O that it were
with me as in months that are past! O that I might enjoy one of the days of
the Son of Man, that I have so slighted! The Apostle tells us of some who for
the time might have been Teachers of others, but alas they had lost their time.
If you lose but a tide-time, you can fret at that, and be impatient: O how many
tide-times have you lost for Eternity? Every appointment of Christ, in which
the Spirit of Christ breaths, is a tide-time. O how many market-dayes for
Heaven have your Souls lost? And can you remember them, and not lament over
them?

2. Would you improve these especial finding times? Consider then, you cannot
mis-improve, neglect these, but you put a slight upon Christ. O how dangerous
is this to put a slight upon the Lord Jesus, when he is willing to be found of
you! What a slight was that they put upon Christ, when they made all their
excuses, they could not come! when Christ tenders himself and is refused.
Therefore he complained, but my people would have none of me. For the Lord
Jesus Christ to leave the bosom of his Father, the Glory of Heaven, and be
clothed in, and married to our nature, and be made a curse for us, and after
all this to be slighted by a company of poor sinners; O what monstrous
ingratitude is this! Would we slight a Relation, a Friend, an Acquaintance
thus? Is not this to be highly uncivil to Jesus Christ? O how do poor sinners
put their incivilities upon Christ!

3. Would you not mis-improve these especial finding times? then consider how
this grieves Christ. When he came nigh the City, he wept over it; what was the
matter? this was the consideration that did draw tears from Christ's eyes, that
they had enjoyed an especial time, and day of Grace in which Christ was willing
to have been found of them. O that thou had known in this thy day, etc. We
read also of those that refused the tenders of Christ, the master of the house
was angry at them. O take heed of angring Christ, poor sinners, in this
respect. Kiss the Sun lest he be angry. What if he be, Ps. 2. ult.
and you perish from the way? When his wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed
are they that trust in him. O who can stand before the wrath of the Lamb? Yea,
what can cover us from the wrath of the Lamb? O what ingratitude is this, to
grieve him for loving you, to requite him evil for good! Is this your kindness
to your friend? Will you thus requite the Lord, O you foolish Souls? Do you
thus answer his love in coming from heaven upon your errand? It is said, the
Lord Jesus Christ was grieved because of their unbelief, and the hardness of
their hearts. You would not willingly grieve a Relation, a Father, a Mother;
and will you grieve Christ?

4. Direction. Would you not misimprove these especial finding times? then live
in the consideration of what depends upon them. Upon these times depend your
eternal conditions: upon on these monosyllables depends eternity; upon these
Nows, these present gales, and seasons of Grace. We say of some business, that
we are very solicitous about, there is much depends upon it. It is a matter of
grand importance. This is the case; thy laying hold of these special times, is
a business of great moment, as much as your immortal Souls are worth. O that
every time you prayed, you might say, this is for eternity: and every time you
heard a Sermon, O poor Soul, this is for eternity. As that great Painter said,
propter aeternitatem pingo: So should every poor sinner say of his duties.
Write Eternity upon the head of them. I have read of one that lived many years
in a Cave under the earth among multitudes of Gnats, to the wonder of many; he
was insensible of their disturbances: and the reason given is this, he was come
thither to contemplate eternity. So do I say, the consideration and
contemplation of eternity would make you forget the world and the comforts of
it, when you make your approaches to God.

5. Would you not mis-improve these especial finding times? O then live much in
the consideration of the worth of your Souls. You cannot slight the seasons of
Grace, but you slight your own Souls. O that that word were daily before you,
What shall it profit a man to gain the whole world and lose his own soul? It is
one of the first considerations usually that sets a poor sinner upon looking
out after Christ, What will become of my Soul, if I dye in this condition? Am I
not eternally undone? and then what am I better for all the trash I have
gathered together? What gains it the Hypocrite, when the Lord shall take away
his Soul? 1. Consider your Souls are Heaven-born Souls, from above, breathed in
by God; and will you slight them? 2. A spiritual being. 3. An immortal being.
4. A being that cannot be satisfied with any sublunary objects. 5. A Soul
capable of Communion with God here. 6. Capable of the fruition of God hereafter.

3. Use, is a word of examination, or inquiry. Are there some especial times
and seasons in which Christ is willing to be found? Then have ever your poor
Souls found Christ in these times? Is not this an inquiry worth following? By
being found of Christ, I mean as the word explains it, closed with Christ. When
Christ and a poor Soul meets, a poor Soul takes Christ, and accepts of him upon
the terms of the Gospel, and Christ takes a poor Soul: for as there is a taking
and receiving of Christ, so there is a receiving on Christ's side.

1. If your Souls have found Christ, then you have seen your Souls in a lost,
and bewildred condition, this my Son was lost, and is found. He was bewildred
in his far Country, but now his return was his finding time. Christ usually
meets with the Soul in the wilderness, I will allure her into the wilderness,
and speak comfortably to her. Hof. 2.14.
O how is a poor Soul at its first finding Christ bewildred and lost, cannot
tell what to make of his condition, sees nothing but misery before it, sees
nothing but Hell gaping upon him, cries out, it is undone, and without hope!

2. If you have found Christ, then you will sell all, part with all for him.
Mat. 13.44.
You read of the Merchant man that when he had found the Pearl of price, he
sold all to purchase it. Some take it, he sold all his sins he so dearly loved
before, parted with them: Some take it, he parted with all his own
Righteousness, which we are naturally as loath to part with as our Sins. O thus
did Paul, when he accounted all things dung and dross in comparison of the
excellency of Christ Jesus my Lord. They that have found the Lord Jesus, they
do not stand with him. We read, this was that which caused the young man in the
Gospel to leave Christ, he could not part with all, he had great possessions.
Now you are like to be tried, whether you have found Christ or no. If you have
found the Lord Jesus Christ, you have not only been convinced of sin, and so
seen your lost condition; but you have been convinced of Righteousness. There
are many poor Souls that stick at their convictions of sin, and get no further,
and prove like foolish children, that stay long in the place of breaking forth:
but all this while throws and pangs are put upon the Soul to prepare for the
birth, yet the Soul has not closed with Christ. The poor sinner is but now
like a man convinced of his disease, and sees his misery, but is at an utter
loss for a remedy. O but now the convictions of the Righteousness of Christ to
pardon, and freely justify the sinner, this is the remedy. A sight of sin,
without a sight of Christ is no converting work. You may be convinced of your
sins, and dye in them, and go to Hell in them. When the poor Prodigal was
found, O then the best Robe (viz.) Christ's Righteousness was to be fetched forth
and put upon him. Now poor Soul, did thou ever take thy flight to Christ's
Righteousness, to be found in him? When the poor Infant we read of, was found
out in its blood, what did God? says the Text, he cast his skirt over it,
(viz.) the skirt of the robe of his righteousness.

4. If you have found Christ you will now know how you part with him. I found
my Beloved (says the Spouse.) O but it was after long seeking! And now does
she hold him with as slack a hand of faith as she did? O no, I will hold him,
and will not let him go. O now the Soul resolves nothing shall separate him
from the love of God in Christ Jesus.

5. If you have found Christ, you will commend him unto others, and set him off
to others, that they may seek him also. Thus did the Spouse, This is my
Beloved; and she commends him in every part, from Top to Toe. And what is the
fruit of this setting forth the excellency of Christ? We will seek him with
thee. Lovers will be commending one another. O how do thou speak of Christ?
does thy Soul tell others what a Beloved thy Beloved is? what a blessed Christ,
thy Christ is? and say, this is my Beloved, and this is my Friend?

We are now come to the third Observation:

It is the especial duty of poor sinners to observe those times in which Christ
will be found: seek him while he may be found, etc.

There is but in time, (we say) and out of time. Mariners will observe their
winds, and be sure not to neglect them, be it night or day if they be present.
Merchants will observe their Marts, and not neglect them, that they may buy the
Commodities at the best hand. Nay, we read of other Creatures observing their
times; to stir up poor, careless, stupid man. The Ant observes her time, and in
Summer lays up for Winter; and the Prophet says, The Swallow and the Stork
know their appointed times, Jer. 8.7.
and observe the time of their coming. O how does God complain of man, that his
misery is great upon him, because he knows, not his time? Eccl. 8.6.
By observing of them, we are to understand laying hold of them, taking these
times by the fore-lock, and improving them to the utmost advantage for the
spiritual good of your immortal Souls. We read therefore that excellent Counsel
of the Apostles Redeeming the time: An allusion to Merchants, that observe
their Mart-times, who will be sure not to neglect them. Every poor believer,
and every poor sinner ought to be observers of the times in this sense. They
should observe when the Lord strives and breaths with their poor Souls in his
Ordinances. They should observe how the Lord allures and draws their hearts
after himself. Therefore it is we have such especial times pointed at by the
finger of God, that poor sinners might not miss of them. God points at them in
the word that they may be observed. Now acquaint thy self with God. There is
but a Now for it, a present time for it: this lost, Job 21.22.
and thy Soul is lost for ever. You must not think to put it off and say to
morrow: No, the Lord says Now; and should not you say, Lord, why not Now? O do
not say, come again at a more convenient time. Christ's time is the most
convenient time, and this is Christ's time. Now is the accepted time, etc. 2
Cor. 6.2.
See how the finger of Free Grace points out the time. O poor Soul, now thou
may be accepted of God, and laid in his bosom: Now his heart is open, now
his arms are widened, expecting thy running in thither; and if thou miss of
this accepted time, thou will for ever be rejected of God. Now or never is the
language of Christ in an Ordinance. Heb. 3.7, 8.
Hearken to his voice while it is to day. See still how God points at the
present time. While it is to day. It may be you may be dead to morrow; why may
not I say, damned to morrow? Who knows what to morrow may bring forth? Luke
12.36.
We read of opening to Christ immediately. O poor sinners, you should not delay
the business, but strike in with Christ while he is beseeching of you.

1. Reason. Poor Sinners should be observers of Christ's times. This the Lord
calls to; and if we do not this, we turn a deaf ear to this blessed charmer. O
what a pity it is, that a poor Soul should be deaf to Christ? As though Christ
only preached hell and damnation, and his Fathers displeasure. And alas, poor
sinners, it is the quite contrary; he preaches Heaven to you, Salvation to you.
This day, says he, poor Sinner, salvation is come unto thy house. If you will
not come to him, he will come to you with his Salvation. This makes me remember
that sweet call of Christ's in the Prophet, Isa. 46. ult?
Hearken unto me ye stout-hearted that are far from Righteousness. O poor
Gentile Sinners, that are afar off from me, nay, that do oppose me: yet says
he, I bring near my Righteousness. One would have thought it would have been,
You stout-hearted I bring near my wrath, I bring near my judgments: O no but
Gods thoughts are not as our thoughts. He calls such to accept of his
Righteousness, and his Salvation, and shall we be deaf to such calls? What a
call is that, Hearken to his voice while it is to day? Christ calls to poor
Sinners, that they would lay hold of their especial times.

2. This is complained on by God. The Calls of God, and the complaints of God
do both speak it. And O this has been complained on of old. O what a complaint
was that of Christ against Jerusalem, O that thou had known in this thy day,
etc! And this complaint came from Christ weeping. He came nigh the City; and
wept over it. Surely it is some notable Sermon Christ preaches, now he weeps: O
this was it, that Jerusalem did not know her day. Mat. 23.37.
And at another time, How often would I have gathered thee as a Hen gathers her
Chickens under her wings, but she would not be gathered. I would have gathered
them into me, gathered them out of their sins, gathered them out of the world;
my arms were stretched out to that very end, but they observed not their
gathering times. Alas, what are the seasons of Grace but Christ's gathering
times? He sees, poor Souls are like a Lamb in a large place, and they will
wander and wander until they drop into the Pit, whence there is no Redemption,
if Christ's compassions do not gather them.

3. We are to observe our especial times in which Christ will be found, else we
receive the Grace of God in vain. 2 Cor. 6.1, 2.
Paul writing upon this subject, We beseech you (says he) as workers with him
that you receive not the Grace of God in vain; and then follows, I have heard
thee in an accepted time, etc. He had been in the preceding Chapter speaking of
the Ministry of Reconciliation, now says, We beseech you that you receive not
this Grace, ( viz. of the Ministry of Reconciliation) in vain; which you will
do, if you observe not that now is the accepted time, that now is the day of
salvation. The end of Christ is frustrated if you observe not these times in
which he is willing to be found, for he offers himself in order to acceptance.
O how sad would this be for so many Sermons of Christ, of his Love, of the
Riches of Grace, to be in vain! For Christ to say, I have labored in vain, I
have spent my strength for naught, and in vain. Isa. 49.4.
It is spoken in the person of Christ. Is it not a pity free Grace should spend
its breath in vain? O what will sinners have to say or answer the Lord, when
the Lord Jesus shall say to them, O how many Sermons of my own Love, of my
Fathers Love, did I preach to you, but who has believed my report? All these
were in vain. I could not be credited by you, though I came from the bosom of
the Father to preach all these things unto you.

4. Sinners are to observe those especial times in which Christ is to be found,
because upon these especial times depends Eternity. The eternal condition of a
poor Soul depends upon one of these Nows. That very motion of the Spirit of
God, which it may be thou slightest, or that very Sermon it may be thou
refusest to hear, or upon the very conviction thou smotherest with thy worldly
enjoyments or employments, it may be upon these very times did depend your
eternal conditions. That Sermon thou was not at, might have been the means of
thy Conversion. As I close with these Calls of Christ, fall in with these
motions of the Spirit of Christ, so it will be with my Soul to all Eternity. O
did but sinners think of this one thing, this one Truth, how serious would it
make them in their observation of such times? Now this is for eternity, this
motion, this striving of the Spirit of God with my poor Soul. If any of you
were going to Sea on a voyage, and all that you were worth depended upon that
voyage, and if you miscarried you were undone, wives and children undone, O how
careful would you be to observe your time, your winds, your markets? This is
the case; thou art engaged in a voyage that all thou art worth is concerned in,
nay infinitely more than thou art worth, even thy precious Soul; and if thou
miscarry in this voyage thou art undone, even undone to all Eternity. O then
what a mad man art thou that observest not what may tend to the security of thy
great venture (viz.) thy precious Soul? Observe then thy gales for this voyage;
it is either a making or a marring voyage.

5. Sinners are to observe Christ's times, when he is willing to be found,
because these times lost will aggravate the condemnation of poor Souls. Christ
has not tendered himself so to all as he has done to you. O how many Souls
have lived and died without the tenders of Christ? How many that never heard of
a Christ? as they said, We have not so much as heard of an Holy Ghost. How many
that sit in darkness, and the shadow of death? How many parts of the world that
are the dark places of the earth, full of the habitations of Cruelty? You do
not hear such Sermons in India as you do in England; you do not hear Christ so
preached and tendered at Guiny, at Jamaica. Suppose those poor Indians and
Natives that you converse with there, should know what you have heard of Christ
here, and what you have professed of Christ here, they would certainly, seeing
no more of Christianity, no more of likeness to Christ among you, certainly
they would say, this Christ is an Impostor, and this Christianity a cheat, a
delusion to gull the world withal. Therefore upon this account it is that a woe
was denounced against Chorazin and Bethsaida; If I had never spoken unto you,
says Christ, you had not had sin. O Sirs, if Christ had never been preached to
you, never been tendered to you, never beseeched you, never wooed you, you had
been under less guilt: but now your sin remains; and how can you escape, who
have neglected so great salvation? You may think to escape, you may think you
have some back door to creep out at; but alas, how can you escape (as Christ
said to the Pharisees) the damnation of Hell?

6. These times of Christ's being willing to be found will not last always. O
what stronger reason to observe them! My Spirit shall not always strive with
man. You think, poor Sinners, that I will always wait on you, always woo
you, always beseech you: O no poor Sinners, times are coming on that my Bowels
will be shut up in displeasure against you, my Bridge of Mercy shall be drawn,
and my Gate of Mercy shall be shut, and then what will you do? O poor Sinners,
what standing will there be without in that day? what crying, Lord, Lord open
unto us? Do you think to have a trade-wind to heaven? do you think the wind
will always blow fair in your voyage for Eternity? The time is coming that the
Lord Jesus (as it is said of those Angels) will keep the winds in his hands,
Rev. 7.1.
and not suffer them to blow on a poor Soul. That was good Counsel of our dear
Lord, work while it is day, the night comes wherein no man can work. Your day
will not always continue, the night comes. May it not be said by many poor
Sinners, Woe unto us, our day goes away? And alas poor Sinners, the night is
no time for working in.

7. Reason. There are no Christ finding times beyond this life. No
Christ-finding times in the Grave, whither we are all going. That is excellent
counsel, Pecl. 9.10
what thou find to do, do it with all thy might. Now is the doing time, this
present time is only the doing time: and the reason is very cogent, for there
is no work in the Grave whither we go: then it is past time to work for Heaven,
to work for an interest in Christ. O that word is a sad word, it is past time.
As the Tree falls so it lies to all Eternity; there is no turning of it on the
other side. O then poor Souls had need look to it, and make sure when they
fall, they fall right, that they fall Heavenward. When you die, then all the
tenders of Christ cease.

8. Reason. Because it is not long that Christ will call, that Christ will
offer himself to be found of you. The Mart-dayes for your poor Souls will not
long continue; the shadows of the evening are stretched upon us, the Sun of the
Gospel declines apace. Time is short; Gospel-time is short, lifetime is short,
liberty is short; God is cutting us short. O now how should we observe the
finding times of Christ! It is said, 2 Kings 10.^^.
the Lord began to cut Israel short: but now the Lord has been cutting England
short a great while; cutting us short of Trading, of Liberties, of Privileges;
and all that we may observe the times of Christ, in which he is willing to be
found. The Angel within a little time will swear, Time shall be no more.

Application.
Is it so, that Sinners should observe these times of Christ? 1. It does inform
us of the great stupidity and senselesness that is upon the Souls of poor
Sinners naturally. They go on in the neglects of Christ until the Lord Jesus
meet them, and stop them. They do not consider. Nay, it was the complaint of
the Lord against his own people, that they were worse than brutes, Isa. 1.3, 4.
The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib; and yet my people do
not know, they do not consider. O the bruitishness of our hearts! The Turtle
and the Crane observe the time of their coming, etc. The Psalmist cautions us,
be not as the Horse and as the Mule, that want understanding. O may not every
poor Sinner, when God comes to convince at first the Soul, say, Surely I am
more brutish than any man?

2. It informs us that it is not the having times of Christ's offering himself,
but it is the observing of these times, that we are especially to look after.
It is indeed a great Mercy to have them, but it is a greater to observe them.
We may say in this case as in that, who is wise, will observe these things, and
the prudent shall know them. There are many poor Souls who are now in Hell,
that have lived under the Calls of Christ, under the offers of Christ. What say
you to Chorazin and Bethsaida? You may hear Christ forty years together
preached; nay, you may profess Christ; nay, you may follow Christ for loaves
many years, and after all this be Cast-awayes; nay, a man may preach Christ,
and at last be a Cast away.

3. It informs us, that the Spirit of God does not always breath alike, and
strive alike. The Spirit of the Lord came upon Sampson by times: and the Angel
came down at a certain season. The wind of the Spirit blows by gusts many times
upon poor Souls, it blows where it lists, and it blows when it lists: It
may be, not in that Ordinance thou expectedst most, but in that Ordinance thou
expectedst least. Or ever I was aware my Soul made me (says a poor Creature)
like the chariot of Aminadab. There is a set time to favor Zion: So there is a
set time for the Spirit of God, both to convince and comfort the poor Soul.

4. It informs us, that in every poor Sinners miscarriage to all Eternity,
there is room to justify God. We must not think to lay it at Gods door, as too
many would do; but we must lay it at our own doors. Hos. 13.9.
O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self. Perditio tua ex te will be the Motto
written upon Sinners backs in Hell. Will not God say to them, Jer. 4.18.
These things have your own ways and doings procured unto you? O then will not
every poor guilty Soul, cry out, O! O my self was the cause of all these! O how
often did Christ woo me, invite me, call on me, beseech me to be reconciled to
him? but wretch that I was, hard hearted wretch that I was, I had no room for
him, my heart was shut against him, I shut him out of my heart, and now for
ever I must justify him for shutting me out of his Heaven.

5. It informs us what a great evil it is to put off Christ when he is willing
to be found. O how many say of Christ, and to Christ, as he did to Paul, Come
at a more convenient time and I will hear thee. They are too busy with the
world, they have no leisure, no time, and they desire to be excused. O what if
the Lord say to such, as he did to them, They shall not taste of his Supper? O
Sinners, do you think Christ will be thus dallied with, to say to morrow, to
morrow, and Christ's voice is to day, to day? Do you think Christ can be mocked
or deceived? It is true, the Gospel is called the word of his Patience; but do
you think it is impossible to weary his Patience? Do not we read the Prophet
complaining of the Jews, You have wearied man, and will you weary God also?
Isa. 7.13.
O Sinner, do thou know what thou do to delay thy striking in with Christ?
What if God take thee at thy word when thou say, Depart from me, for as yet
I desire not the knowledge of thy ways? What if God should resolve, as Moses
said to Pharaoh, I will never see thy face more? Where were thou then? and what
a sad condition would thy poor Soul be in then?

2. Use. Is it so that poor Souls should observe Christ's times in which he is
willing to be found? then it is a word of Reproof to such as put off Christ,
that observe not these times. May not the case be expostulated with such poor
Souls, as God did with the people of Israel by the Prophet Ezekiel, why will
you dye O house of Israel? O poor Sinners, why do you neglect such great
salvation? why do you dally and delay in a business of infinite moment and
eternal consequence? Is the salvation of an immortal Soul a jesting matter? are
Heaven and Christ indifferences? O why then poor Souls should ye not arise from
your sloth, and shake your selves, and resolve to have a Christ how dearly
soever you come by him? May not Christ say to poor Sinners that loyter in their
motion Heavenward, as was said to them, why stand you idle all the day long?

1. Are not such poor Souls to be reproved? This is the highest ingratitude and
unthankfulness in the world; that Christ should make offers, and be willing to
be found, and you put a slight upon him, and you not observe them. Is this your
kindness to your friend? Will you thus requite the Lord O foolish people and
unwise?

2. Are not such Souls to be reproved? This speaks great infidelity and
unbelief. Is not this the reason why Christ and poor sinners make not a
closure, they do not believe he is willing to receive them, to embrace them, to
pardon them. This cross-iron bolt and bar of unbelief lies betwixt Christ and a
poor Soul, and was it not this that grieved Christ? He was grieved because of
their unbelief, and hardness of their heart. Their Souls were doubly bolted
against the Lord Jesus. O poor sinners, after all Christ has promised, all he
has suffered, all he has done, that you should slight Christ, when he is
willing to be found of you, is not this sad?

3. Are not such to be reproved? You will observe times for your worldly
secular advantages; you will observe a Summer season to go into the Country
for the air, if your bodies need it; you will observe times to take physic in;
you will observe your winds to sail in; you will observe your marts and fairs;
you will observe your Change-time, and all this for your outward advantage: and
alas, you neglect your especial times and seasons for your Souls. All these
things are but your outward concernments, but there are things that concern the
peace of your immortal Souls, and how do you look after them?

3. Use. Is it so that the Lords finding times ought to be observed by poor
Sinners? Then it is a word of exhortation to poor Sinners, that they would take
especial notice of such times; that it may not be said of you, as is said in
that case Job speaks, The Lord passed by on my left hand, and on my right hand,
and I perceived him not. For God to be near a poor Soul in an Ordinance, in a
motion of the Spirit, and the Soul see him not, for the eyes of the Soul to be
held that it knows him not, O how sad is this! O delay not to lay hold of
Christ at such times.

1. Your delays will provoke and displease Christ. Christ loves that Souls
should close with him without delays. We read of some that delayed the matter,
and fell to framing excuses, and the Lord was angry with them, and said, They
should not taste of his Supper. The Spouses delay to open to Christ so
displeased him, that he did withdraw from her, and she paid dearly for her
delay. Now did he stand waiting, until his locks were filled with the drops of
the night?

2. Your delays are dishonorable to Christ. They dishonor him, as though he
were not to be trusted, when he calls for Souls to close with him, to open to
him immediately, as though there were no great danger, as though it were but a
dallying, jesting matter, and you could do it when you would, even at your
leisure.

3. Your delays will prove dangerous to your own Souls. We say there is danger
in delay; and O how true is that in Soul cases! What if God shut up his bowels
in displeasure? What if he will be gracious no more in visiting you, in
breathing upon you, in knocking at your doors? What if the Lord do withdraw
from you, and say he will wait no more upon you, strive no more with you, but
pass that Sentence upon you, Let them alone, let them wander like a Lamb in a
large place. O poor Sinners, you are in danger of all this, and much more by
your delays to observe Christ's times of being willing to be found.

4. Your delays will make your falling in with Christ's finding times, a great
deal more difficult. Yea every day it will be more difficult than other. Sin
and corruption will grow stronger, Satan's temptations will be more violent. The
longer a Soul is held in a snare, the faster it is.

1. It will be more difficult, you will have fewer motions of the Spirit to
call you out, and thrust you out to close with Christ. Delay to answer the
Spirits breathings, does put him upon withdrawing. When poor Sinners have so
often quenched the Spirit, the Spirit lets them alone, and strikes sparks of
holy motions and resolutions there no more.

2. It will be more difficult, your selves will have less heart to it. The
longer a poor Soul lies snoring in the bed of sin, the less mind he has to get
up. And indeed such souls seldom get up, until the cry of fire, fire (I mean
hell fire) get into their Consciences. The longer a man sits upon a seat, the
stiffer he is, and the unfitter he is to stir and rise; so it will be in this
case.

3. It will be the more difficult, because guilt is every day more contracted.
The more guilt, the less mind to close with those times in which Christ is
willing to be found. It is with a Soul in this case, as it was with our first
Parents; they were afraid, when they saw they were naked, and they hid
themselves. Guilt is for running away from God.

4. It will be more difficult, Satan will be stronger with his opposition. His
temptations and objections will get faster hold of you. If you had sought
Christ sooner, if you had early in the morning looked after him, happily he might
have been found of you: but now says Satan, it is too late; your day of Grace
is past; now his bowels are shut up in displeasure against you. Such objections
will make dreadful work with poor guilty Souls. O it must needs be sad when
Satan's objections get into our Consciences.

5. It will be the more difficult, because the sense of former delays will
fill the heart for the present with jealousies, and misgivings of God and
Christ. Alas, I have stayed too long, I doubt it is now past time; will he be
found of me, at this time of the day? will he receive me that come so late?
will he not tell me there is no room for one that has dallied and delayed so
long? O such jealousies will exceedingly hinder the Souls falling in with
Christ.

5. Your delays, to observe Christ's times in which he is willing to be found,
may in time bring a hardness of heart upon you; and O how sad would this be?
Take heed your hearts be not hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. You
think you can close with Christ another time as well as this, in another
Ordinance as well as this, in another duty as well as this; and alas, in a
little time you come to be hardened by your delays.

We are come now to the fourth and last Observation in the Text.

There is a day and time in which Christ will not be found, as well as a day
and time in which Christ will be found. Though Christ offer himself to poor
Sinners now, yet he will not always do so; his Golden Scepter of Free Grace
will not always be held out: As there is a time to hold it out, so there is a
time to take it in. Though he call long, wait long, knock long, yet he will not
always stand at your doors. Luke 12.36
Therefore we read of opening to him immediately. He will mark the door and be
gone. We read of a very sad judgment upon Israel: They should come and seek
the Lord with their Herds, Or he has made himself free from them. Dutch.
but shall not find him, for he has withdrawn himself from them. O what a sad
case was that of the Spouse to seek her beloved, and could not find him! but
yet at last she recovered a sight of him: but it is far sadder to seek him and
never find him, but for a poor Soul to be sealed upon lost Soul to all
eternity. We read of Esau seeking the birthright, yea with tears, Heb. 12.17.
Genesis 27.36.
but yet could not find it. Christ lamented over Jerusalem under this
consideration, but now they are hid from thine eyes; now it is past time.

But the great inquiry will be this; What are these times in which Christ will
not be found? For as we have upon this Text showed the times in which Christ
will be found, so we must show the contrary, the times in which Christ will not
be found.

1. When Souls are shut up, and sealed up under obduracy and judicial hardness
of heart. Give me leave to distinguish betwixt a natural obduracy of heart, and
a judicial obduracy of heart; betwixt being under hardness of heart, and being
shut up under it. This shutting up, and giving up is an Act on Gods part; so he
gave up to their own lusts; Psalm. 81.12. Romans 1.23
I gave them over to the arbitration of their own hearts: Some read it, The
Lord past an Act of Tradition upon them. And now their time and day of Grace is
over; now the Soul is delivered up to the Jailer, and is shut up close
prisoner, sentence is past upon him, and cannot be recalled. But poor souls
know this, you first reject God, and refuse the sweet offers and tenders of the
Lord Jesus Christ; you put God upon this by your sinning against him: So the
people of Israel did, for God waits long, and wooes long, and exercises great
patience before he thus give up poor sinners.

2. Time in which Christ will not be found, is, when poor Souls seek him, but
they seek him feignedly; as it is said of the children of Israel, Jer. 3.10.
they turned to him feignedly. Poor Souls should seek the Lord with their whole
heart; and to such seeking there is a promise; Jer. 29.1^
And you shall seek me and find me, when you search for me with all your
hearts: therefore it is, the Lord has called for the heart in our seeking of
him; My Son give me thy heart; not thy tongue, nor thy head, nor thy hand; but
thy heart. The kidneys were offered in sacrifice to the Lord, to teach us he
regards the inwards, the integrity of our hearts in our sacrifices. Christ
loves to be sought to in good earnest with all your hearts. The divided heart
was found faulty.

3. When poor Souls seek him slothfully. We are to seek him diligently. We
read, to teach us this lesson, that the Ass, the firstling of an Ass was not
offered to God in sacrifice, and Snails, those slow-paced creatures were
unclean creatures. We should not be slothful in seeking Christ. Will he be
found of the sluggard? When the Spouse sought Christ in Bed, he would not be
found of her. The Spouse at another time indulged her self in her sloth, and
then Christ would not be found.

4. Another time in which Christ will not be found, is, when you have grieved
and quenched the motions of his spirit: now he will withdraw from you and will
not be found; then he says, his spirit shall not always strive with man.

When do poor Sinners grieve the Spirit that Christ will not be found? 1. When
they refuse him, though he has stood long knocking at their doors and waited
upon them. Thus we see he did by the Spouse, he waited long, until his locks
were silled with the dew of the night, and yet she opened not to Christ; and
you see how ill Christ took this, and did withdraw upon it. O poor Soul, how
long have thou made Jesus Christ stand and wait? But know he will not always
thus wait.

2. When we believe not his willingness to receive us, then we grieve him and
cause him to withdraw. He was grieved because of their unbelief, and the
hardness of their hearts, says the Text. It was said of Israel by the Lord,
Number. 14.17.
how long will this people provoke me? and how long will it be ere they believe
me, for all my signs and wonders? Unbelief puts God to his How-longs: Therefore
the Prophet complains, personating Christ, who has believed our report, etc.
Must it not needs grieve him when you do not believe him? 1. He promises to you
mercy and pardon, poor sinners, upon your coming over to close with him; and
would it not grieve any, to have the most serious and solemn promises slighted?
To be looked upon as a person unfaithful, this takes Gods good name from him;
his name is faithfulness: Is not he faithful who has promised? 2. He is sent
from his Father to declare, this is the heart of the Father also; and this must
needs grieve him that you should not credit his Father; that he should come
from Heaven to Earth with such an errand, and cannot be trusted. If you ask,
but how comes he to be so well acquainted with his Fathers heart? 1 John 18.
He tells us, he lay in his Fathers bosom, therefore he can tell best how it
beats toward poor sinners. 3. He has sealed with an oath; As I live says the
Lord, I delight not in the death of a sinner. O surely the Lord would gladly
have poor sinners to believe his love. As one says, O happy man, for whose
sake the Lord swears; O unhappy man that will not trust a swearing God! The
oath of God is for confirmation of Gods good will to poor Souls. O how must it
then grieve him that he cannot have his oath believed? 4. O how it grieves him
now he has sealed this love with his blood! Herein Divine Love is commended to
poor sinners, that while Enemies Christ died for them. 5. It must needs grieve
him, not to believe him after so long waiting upon them. Now when we have thus
grieved him, he will withdraw, and not be found of poor finners.

5. Time in which Christ will not be found of poor Souls, is, when in a time of
mercy and prosperity we have slighted him, and yet in a time of judgment and
calamity seek him, but only seek him by being affrighted at his judgments.
Israel forgot God in their Prosperity, and how did God take it? and he said, I
will hide my face from them, Psalm. 32.20.
I will see what their end will be. God now in a time of judgment will not be
found of them, because in a time of prosperity they had slighted him. Therefore
we read the Prophet Jeremy threatening Israel, that the Lord will give them his
back and not his face in the day of their calamity. Jer. 8.17.
Now O what a dreadful thing is this in a time of calamity and common judgment,
to have no God to look upon a people! To go to him at such times is not to make
him our choice, but only to make him our refuge: and if we make him not our
choice in a time of prosperity, can we expect he should be our refuge in a time
of calamity? What a sad word was that, Go to the Gods whom you have served, and
see if they can deliver you.

Application.
Are there times in which Christ will not be found? 1. It informs of the folly
of poor souls that trifle in seeking Christ. O why should we dally in a matter
of such moment, a matter of eternal consequence? Be not deceived poor sinners,
Christ will not always wait upon you, not always be willing to be found of
you. The time is coming that his bowels will be shut up in displeasure, that he
will be gracious no more, that his mercies will be clean gone for evermore. O
then why do you trifle now? will the gates of mercy always stand open? will
Christ's arms always be held wide open? 1. Here is great folly in trifling in
seeking Christ, it is a matter of eternal consequence. There is no trifling in
great cases. We say we must be serious, it is a matter of great concernment. O!
Soul-concernments are great concernments. If I miscarry (says a man) in this
design, I am undone. O then he will be mighty watchful and careful: So says a
poor Soul, if I miscarry in this great business, if I miss of Christ, I am
undone, yea to all eternity undone. 2. O the great folly of trifling in seeking
Christ! This is all the time you have to seek him in. When a man has a work
allotted to him, and he must do it in such a time, else it can never be done, O
what folly it is to trifle that time away allotted for that work! and this is
the case; this present lifetime is your allotted time to seek Christ, to get
acquaintance with Christ; and after the hourglass of this present time be out,
you will never have more time for this work. There is no work in the grave
whither you go. I often tell you the grave is too dark a shop to do any
Soul-work in. 3. O the folly of trifling in seeking of Christ! ere long it will
be past time. Is not this great folly, to trifle when time goes so fast away?
If you were like to have a long day, you might say something, sinners, for your
trifling: but to have a short day, and a great deal of work, and to triflle any
of it away, this must needs be great folly. We read of time being short.

2. It informs us of this, that though God wait long, yet he will not wait
always; my spirit shall not always strive with man. You may weary God as the
Prophet says, You have wearied man, and will you weary God also? He will be
gone from your doors, after long standing and long knocking.

3. It informs of the wisdom of such poor Souls as seek him in a day and time
when he will be found; wisdom observes to take its fittest times and seasons.
There is much in timing actions. O now this Soul and heavenly wisdom is all for
observing its seasons. Here the foolish Virgins missed it sadly; they did not
observe their seasons for getting oil into their lamps. 1. Is not this wisdom
to seek the Lord while he may be found? this will lay you in against the most
tremendous and terrible dispensations that can come upon earth. Wisdom appears
much in foresight, and in laying something in for a rainy day. O poor souls,
you know not what rainy days hang over your heads; what terrible clouds cover
the face of the heavens, and what shakings of earth and heaven may come.
Therefore it is wisdom to seek Christ before such days come, that the Lord may
not be a terror to us in an evil day. Therefore it is that Jesus Christ is
prophesied of to be a covert from rain and from storm, and a refuge. He is the
only City of refuge to fly to, when pursuers are abroad. 2. Is it not wisdom to
seek Christ while he may be found? this will fit you for death. Is it not great
wisdom to consider our latter end? This is that which God wished his own people
might do. Was not it wisdom in the five wise Virgins, that they prepared for
the Bridegrooms approaching? O how much wisdom appears in this! It is the
property of a fool to say, non putaram, I had not thought. O how many then have
died fools, saying, I never thought an interest in Christ was so difficult a
thing to obtain; I never thought of any times in which Christ would not be
found. 3. Is it not great wisdom to seek Christ while he may be found? your
eternal happiness depends upon it. Is it not wisdom to provide for eternity?
every man thinks it wisdom to provide for his own family; what then is it to
provide for his own Soul? 4. Is it not wisdom to do that now, which else your
Souls will repent to all eternity? Wisdom consists in preventing
after-repentings. O how many Souls are repenting the loss of their time in
hell! and saying, O if they were to live on earth again, and had their
opportunities to seek Christ again, they would never be such loyterers and
sluggards in the matters of their Souls. 5. Is it not wisdom to do that which
you came into the world to do? Was not this to seek the Lord while he may be
found, to look about for your salvation? Did you come into the world to eat and
drink and rise up to play? What, needed you immortal souls for such sensual
employments? 6. Is it not wisdom to do that God gives you time on purpose it
might be done? Why does God exercise so much patience? Why does he hover over
Souls, and continues thus to be gracious, but that he would still have them
seek the Lord Jesus. 7. Is it not wisdom to do that now, which we have only
means now to do it in? No means of seeking Christ after this life; no means
then of acquaintance with God. Now our days are filled up with means and
Gospel advantages to this end.

2. Use. Is it so, that there are times in which Christ Jesus will not be
found? then it is a word of Exhortation, to improve your present time in
seeking Christ; Redeem the time. The Apostle gives us the exhortation, to walk
as wise and not as fools, redeeming the time because the days are evil. 1.
Time is precious. It is a precious commodity in hell, says one, where a damned
Soul would give all the world for one inch of time. It is precious time, for it
is filled up with precious advantages for precious souls. It is precious, it is
your working-day for eternity. O then while he is to be found seek him. 2. You
must be judged according to the precious opportunities you have now for your
Souls. The word, says Christ, that I speak, shall judge you at the last day.
3. Seek him in your present day, it will lie heavy upon you that you lost so
much time in which you might have sought Christ. O how does it cut to the heart
to consider, what a day a poor sinner once had, only he wanted a heart to look
after Christ. O what wringing of hands will there be in hell one day under this
very consideration! 4. Seek him in your present day, if others had enjoyed such
Golden Scepter-seasons, they would have kissed the Scepter, and have submitted
to the terms of the Lord Jesus, they would have believed, they would have
repented, yea, in sackcloth and ashes, as is said of Tire and Sidon. 5. Seek
him in your present day, the damned Souls that have lost him for ever, if God
should privilege them to have another day of Grace to seek Christ in, O how
would they seek him! how would they mourn for him! Would they hear as you do?
pray as you do? sweal a way their time upon which eternity does depend as you
do? Would they mis-improve precious seasons for their souls as you do? If you
did but know what the loss of an immortal Soul meant, is it possible you could
sleep away, play away Sermons of Christ, Heaven and Salvation? 6. Seek him in
your present day, your Enemies seek you because you seek him. To be sought
after by Enemies and found by them, as you must reckon of one time or other;
and yet not to find Christ, O how sad is this! Methinks our enemies should stir
us up to lay hold of all seasons to seek Christ. Could you young ones, or old
ones, go to prison and have not yet found him whom your Souls love? Can you
suffer, and not have found Christ?

3. Use. Is it so, that there are times in which Christ will not be found? It
is then a word of terror to all such as live in their neglects to seek the
Lord Jesus Christ. What, poor Souls, if his bowels shall cease yearning toward
your Souls? What if they should be shut up in displeasure? If the Lord Jesus
Christ should strive with you no more, O what a dangerous condition were your
Souls in then!

1. Your danger that live in neglects of Christ is much in this, your offers
and tenders of Christ will never be forgotten by you in another world. O they
will stick by your Consciences in hell! Nothing will aggravate poor sinners
condemnation so, as this, they slighted the offers of life and salvation by
Christ. How can you escape, if you neglect such great salvation? It shall be
more tolerable for Tire and Sidon, than for Chorazin and Bethsaida. Why so? the
one had Christ preached and offered to them, and so had not the other.

2. There is no possibility for your escape that neglect to seek Christ;
whoever escape you cannot. How can you escape, etc. O poor Souls, can you
contend with the wrath of an Omnipotent God? Can your hearts endure, or your
hands be made strong in that day he shall deal with you? If you cannot escape
it, nor contend with it, O how miserable are you! This is a great piece of hell
that you are in already.

3. You that neglect Christ now, must never come under a possibility of a
tender of Grace after death. If there could but be hope in hell of a
possibility of a tender of Grace, this poor hope would relieve the Souls that
are in that pit of misery. A very peradventure, or it may be would be some
comfort to them, if they might ever come under the tenders of Christ again. No,
their condition is now unalterably stated for ever.

4. You that neglect Christ now, know, this is a degree of despite to the
Spirit of Grace. And is not this a dangerous thing? Heb. 10.29.
That Text in the Hebrews will tell you so. Is not this to use Christ
despightfully? and O how can Christ bear these sleights time after time?

5. You that neglect Christ now, are every moment under condemnation. There is
now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Then others are under
condemnation. O now what if death should smite thee in this condition? Would
not thy poor Soul, sinner, be struck dead and damned at a blow? O then see thy
danger and tremble to continue in it. Continue no longer in thy neglects of
Christ, but seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is
near.

FINIS.

