OF GARDENS.

Four Books

First written in Latin Verse BY RENATUS RAPINUS.

And now made English By I. E.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and N. T. for Thomas Collinsand John Ford at the
Middle Temple Gate, and Benjamin Tooks at the Shipin St. Paul's Churchyard,
1672.

To the Right Honorable HENRY Earl of ARLINGTON, Viscount THETFORD, etc.
His Majesty's Principal Secreiary of State, of his most honorable Privy
Council; and Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, etc.

MY LORD,
It Is become the mode of this writing age, to trouble Persons of the highest
Rank, not only with the Real Productions of Wit; but (if so I may be allowed to
speak) with the trifles and follys of it; hardly dos an ill Play come forth
without a Dedication to some great Lady, or man of Honor; and all think
themselves sufficiently secure, if they can obtain but the least pretense of
Authority to cover their imperfections: My Lord, I am sensible of mine: but
they concern only my self, and can never lessen the dignity of a Subject, which
the best of Poets, and perhaps the greatest Wits too, have celebrated with just
applause.

I know not how, my Lord, I may have succeeded with this adventure, in an age
so nice and refined, but the Die is cast, and I had rather expose my self to
the fortune of it, then loose an occasion of acknowledging your Lordships
favors, which as they have obliged the Father, so ought they to command the
gratitude of the Son: nor must I forget to acquaint your Lordship, that the
Author of this Poem addressed it to one of the most Eminent Persons in France;
and it were unhappy if it should not meet with the same good Fortune in
England; I am sure the origiginal deserves it, which though it may have lost
much of its Luster by my Translation, will yet recover its credit with
advantage, by having found in your Lordship so Illustrious a Patron. Great Men
have in all Ages bin favorable to the Muses, and done them honor; and your
Lordship, who is the true Model of Virtue and Greatness, cannot but have the
same inclinations. for the delights which adorn, those Titles; especially, when
they are innocent, and useful, and excellent, as this Poem is pronounced to be
by the Suffrages of the most discerning; I had else my Lord, suppressed my
ambition of being in Pring, and setting up for a Poet, which is neither my
talent nor design: But my Lord, to importune you no further, this piece
presumes not to intrude into your Cabinet, but to wait upon you in your Gardens
at Euston, where, if when your Lordships more weighty affairs give leave, you
vouchsafe to divert your self with the first Blossoms of my Youth, they may by
the instuence of your Lordships favor, one day produce fruits of more
maturity, and worthy the oblation of

My Lord, Your Lordships Most dutiful, and most obedient Servant I. EVELYN.

The Preface.
IT, will doubtless appear an intolerable presumption in the to prosecute that
part of the perfectest Work of all Antiquity, which was omitted by the most
accomplished Poet that ever wrote. Few are ignorant of what he says in the
fourth of his Georgicks.

For sitan and Pingues hortos quae cura colendi,
Ornaret, canerem, biferique rosaria Poesti:
Quoque modo potis gauderent intyba rivis,
Et virides apio ripae.
You would think in this place that Virgil was pleased with his own fancy, he
is so fluent; nor without cause, where he is invited by the charm of so liberal
a Subject. But whether he was hastened by his designed Poem of Bees; ot that he
reserved his time for the setting forth of his Hero, not much after he leaves
off what he had beg^n; yet not without a commendation of the Argument, as
worthy to be handled by all posterity.

Verum haec ipse equidem spatiis disclusus iniquis
Praetereo, atque aliis post commemoranda relinquo.
Now to go on where so great a man left off, to treat of a matter, which if we
may believe Pliny, was able to deter so expert a Writer, makes me fear I can
scarce free my self from the guilt of an extreme confidence, besides in the
imitation of so divine a Pattern, I raise a greater expectation then I can
satisfy: And the example which I propose to my self is not so much an
advantage to me. as it leads me to an infallible despair. What a rashness is it
to attempt that which partly for the difficulty of what Virgil has omitted,
partly for the excellency of what he has performed, none ever yet dared to
undertake? The Culture of Gardens also being arrived to that height, that
nothing can render it more perfect; and their dignity is such, that when I have
done all I can, I shall have done less then they deserve.

Nor was I a little discouraged by the defects of the Latin Tongue, since it
is an insufferable arrogance to write of a thing in Latin, of which the
Latins were wholly ignorant: For the method of Gardening which is now in
vogue, either of disposing Flowers in Beds, or the planting, and ordering of
Wall Fruits, was not used among them. But yet if I transgress either through
the penury of the Language, or my own ignorance. I am so vain as to hope, that
our Age which admires Gardens above all others, will forgive me, if I fall
short in an Essay which none have made trial of before me. On the other side, I
was encouraged by the kind reception which Gardening finds every where, even
with those of the highest and noblest rank; insomuch, that I question whether
it was ever in greater esteem. And it was requisite since we are grown more
curious in this affair then formerly, that somewhat of the delightful part of
it should be communicated, which as well by the discipline of the times, as the
industry of the improvers, is come to its utmost perfection. For certainly that
symmetry of parts, which is now visible in every Garden, is that exact beauty
to which nothing can be added.

I need not say much here of the nature of that Verse, in which Precepts were
wont to be delivered; the Georgicks of Virgil are the best patterns of it;
whose natural Ingenuity is such, as will hardly admit of that more elegant
dress which I have put on; considering also the humility of that style, in
which a naked and unmixed simplicity is most sought after. I will not go about
to excuse my self, since I have happened on a Subject in which Virgil could not
easily contain himself; though it was no difficult matter for him to do it,
especially in that duller part of Husbandry; in which nevertheless, as Pliny
observes, he only culled the flowers of things, leaving out nothing that was
capable of any splendor or ornament: hence proceeded those frequent
digressions from his purpose, that he might avoid the inconvenience of being
tedious, which Ma^robius speaks of in the 5th. book of his Saturnalia. In the
Georgicks (says he) after the precepts which are naturally harsh, he concludes
each book with the interposition of some quicker argument: As the first with
the signs of the Weather; the second with the praises of a country Life; the
third with a mortality among Cattle; and the fourth with a pertinent story of
Orpheus and Aristaeus. Nor have I bin wanting in that particular: having made
it my business to teach with as little rudeness as I can: and to advance the
dullness of the instruction by the freedom of my fancy, that I might allay the
harshness of those places, which the humility of the subject has so debased,
that otherwise they would be displeasing to the Reader.

Yet if I appear too curious: I can defend my self by the authority of all
those Greeks, who have written of Flowers, or their Culture. What can be more
elegant then the description which Nicander makes in the seond of his Georgicks
of those Gardens in the territories of Pisa, which were watered by the river
Alpheus? In which he so often makes use of those ornaments, which Poetry
derives from its fabulous times. It is almost incredible how copious and
eloquent the rest are in that argument, of whom Athenaeus makes mention in his
15th. book. Those who in verse treated of flowery Garlands, as Cratinus,
Hegesias, Anacreon, Sappho, Pancrates, Chaeremon, Eubulus, and innumerable
others. But I should not have so freely made use of Fables, in a matter that is
expected to be grave and instructive: I should have inquired into the nature of
Flowers and Plants, have described their properties, and estimated their
virtues. I confess I should; and I think I have done so: Yet not forgetting
that I act the part of a Poet, and not of a Philosopher, to gain credit by the
raw simplicity of a scrupulous discourse. But though this be a middle, and more
contracted way of writing, yet it sometimes takes courage, and exalts it self,
that the slenderness of the matter may not make it appear too mean and
dejected. To prevent which, the Soul must be excited, that so the mind (as
Anacreon has it) being raised to a poetique height, may breath forth divine
raptures.

(...)

But the mention of the Heathen Deitys, by a Christian Author, perhaps will
seem absurd to those, who are ignorant of the Genius of Poetry, which by the
services of the gods, and a feigned terror of their decrees, ought sometimes
to elevate the mind, that it may create admiration; and for this the liberty
that is usually allowed the Muses is warrant enough, if we had not that of
Religion too, which neither thinks it self, or morality injured, by that
license which a Poet takes to set off the truth, by the beauty and gracefulness
of fiction.

I have not been so nice in Wood, and Water, as in Flowers, whose charms forced
me to be a little more exuberant: unless it be in some places, where it was
convenient to make the excellency of Poetry shine forth in the delightfuliness
of Fables; that so the work might not wholly labor under the barrenness of the
precepts, which it treats of.

In the Orchard, I fear I have not satisfied their expectations, who looked for
a long Catalogue of Fruits and Apples, which are so numerous that it were
endless to go about it; in describing the different kinds of Fruit, I have only
touched the heads of things, after the example of Virgil, who in the second of
his Georgicks, speaks but of a few of those wines which Italy afforded with so
much variety and abundance; nor dos he take notice of any more then three sorts
of Olives, and as many of Pears: for nothing is more abhorrent from the nature
of that verse, then the hateful enumeration of particulars, which cannot but be
very tedious, when it descends so low as to divide every thing into atoms,
like that impertinent workman whom Horace speaks of in his Poems.

AEmilium circa ludum faber imus, and ungues
Exprimet, and molles imitabitur aere capillos,
Infoelix operis summa.
A correct writer can never fall into this error, he will rather make choice
with judgment, then be voluminous. But since I cannot avoid being faulty in
many things: I were unwise if I should endeavor to excuse all. Therefore not
to tire the Reader (whose favor I implore) with a long Preface, I will make no
more apologies for my self, but only add a word or two of the end, that is
proposed in an instructive Poem: which as it is the same with that of all
Poetry, is very easy. Not but that it is more generous, then to insist wholly
upon vanities and trifles: although its chief talent lies in being delightful:
that which makes Philosophy it self appear wiser then other things, is the
harshness, by which it renders the truth more difficult to be attained. The end
of that Poetry is as of all the rest to teach: which as Horace intimates to
Lollius.

Quid sit pulchrum, quid turpe, quid utile, quid non:
Before ac melius Chrysippo, and Crantore dicit.
Though Seneca in other things is no inconsiderate writer, yet here he is so
confident a Critique, that I have no patience with him, when he censures Virgil
in his Georgicks, for making it his business not so much to speak truth, as
what was graceful and ornamental; and to have rather aimed at the delight of
the Reader, then the improvement of the Husbandman: Thus he destroys the main
design of the Gentiler sort of Poetry, which was never more happily carried on
then by Virgil. Therefore as to this point, I value the opinion of Seneca but
little; from whom I may appeal to the judgment of antiquity, which is ever to
be reverenced by all wise men. It is manifest enough, how improbable it is,
that a man so well seen in the works of nature, and one who acts with so much
strictness in other things, should play the fool where he intends to instruct.
For what is more below a generous man, then to trifle where he should teach; or
to dwell upon nicetys, where he promises that which is serious: and no one who
is not very stupid can impute this to Virgil?

In Varro I find innumerable of the ancients to have written of agriculture.
But of all those none but Menecrates the Ephesian, and Hesiod wrote in verse,
and Hesiod was the first, who as Pliny testifies: Thousands of years ago, in
the infancy of learning, gave the first rules of Husbandry; though indeed
Hesiod treated of the manners of men, more then the nature of things; which was
what he proposed to himself: so that he acts the part of a Moralist, rather
then of a true Poet: Yet he deserves infinite praise; but not so much as
Virgil, whose performances in that kind, are above admiration. This is the
reason that makes me look upon him, as one who contrary to the mode of the rest
of the Poets-promises nothing of himself, but without modesty and plainness,
which in my opinion, is the most approved method of a good understanding; whose
clearness is the perfect accomplishment of that wisdom, which Horace ad Pisones
requires as the standard of sound and correct writing.

Scribendi recte, sapere est and principium, and Fons.

RAPINUS OF GARDENS.
Book 1. Flowers.
OF Flowers, a Gardens chiefest grace I sing,
How you may Groves to best perfection bring;
Of Aquaeducts, of Fruit, the cure and use:
This to the world is published by my Muse.
Ye Gods that make the earth to fructify,
Let no rude tempest now disturb the Sky.
Through paths by the Poetic Train untrod,
Apollo calls, though first to Maro showed;
When in the end of his discourse he writes,
What most the Italian fertile Soil delights;
To till the field his thrifty Swain he taught;
Gardens to plant, left for some later thought.
This Poets footsteps I can only trace;
Nor dare I think to equalize his pace,
Whose heavenly flight by nothing I pursue,
But my weak eyes, and keep him in my view.
Thou that art mine, and learnings greatest light,
Under whose influence justice shines more bright
Lamon, if with thy Laws severe defense,
And State Affairs a while thou can dispense;
Afford my Gardens room within thy mind,
Though to the Laws and Government resigned:
While with impartial sentence you decide
Causes, by interest, nor affection tied;
While your example is to all a law,
And your own virtue vice it self does awe;
Yet to alleviate this sublimer care,
Grant to the Muses in your thoughts a share.
Though I perhaps to lower ends aspire,
Some kinder God may set my soul on fire;
Then shall I sing, and publish loud your fame,
And in due numbers celebrate your name:
The Woods shall you, the Fountains you resound,
Your praise shall echo from the fruitful ground.
My Flowers to your Temples shall be joined,
Which for immortal Garlands are designed.
Soil fit for Gardens first of all prepare,
To The East exposed, refreshed with wholesome air,
Where no near hill his lofty head presumes
To Advance, or noisome Fens exhale in fumes.
Where no dull vapors from the Pools infect;
Flowers most of all the open air affect.
But before this you ought to know the state,
And nature of the earth you cultivate,
It Is best, where fat and clammy ground you see;
Flowers with rich soil most properly agree.
This rank with weeds of a luxuriant blade,
Culture admits, and is for flowers made.
Learn that to avoid, where deep in barren clay
The specked Euts their yellow bellies lay.
Where burning sand the upper-hand obtains,
Or where with chalk unfruitful gravel reigns.
And lest the external redness of the Soil
Deceive your labors, and despise your toil;
Deeply beneath the furrows thrust your spade:
Outward appearance many has betrayed.
Earth under the green Sward may be enclosed
To a rough sand, or burning clay disposed.
Some I Have observed, who, if the ground they find
To bring forth stones or Pebbles be inclined,
Sift it, lest they the tender blade molest,
And by their weight the flowers be oppressed.
Now if both earth and air answer your ends,
(For earth upon air's influence depends)
Enlarge your prospect, nor confine your sight
To narrow bounds; Flowers in no shades delight.
Break with the Rake, if stiffer clods abound,
And with ir'n rollers level well the ground.
Nor yet make haste your borders to describe;
But let the earth the Autumn showers imbibe;
That after it has felt the Winter cold,
You may next Spring turn up, and rake the mold.
This done, your Box in various forms dispose,
Such as were heretofore unknown to those,
Whose gardens nothing owed to modern art;
Decked by what kinder Nature did impart,
Among ignobler Plants you then might view,
Where blushing Roses intermingled grew:
No spacious Walks, no Alleys were designed,
Edged by green Box, all yet was unrefin'd.
Flora at first was unadorned, and rude;
Happ'ning at Liber's Orgies to intrude.
The Feast approch'd, the neighboring Deities
Were present; thither old Silenus hies,
Mounted on's Ass; with whom the Satyrs join
In drunken Bacchanals, and sparkling Wine.
Here Cibele through Phrygia so revered.
And with the rest our Flora too appeared:
Her hair upon her shoulders loosely played;
Or pride, or beauty this neglect had made.
How e're it was, the other Goddesses
Laughed, and despised the rudenss of her dress.
This pity moved in Berecinthia's heart,
Who grieved to see her Daughter want that art,
Which others used; and therefore to repair
Those imperfections, she adorned her hair
With various flowers; her temples these enclose,
And Box which Nature on each field bestows.
Her Mine Is now alt'red, every charming grace
Strives to be most conspicuous in her face.
As this to Flora greater beauty gives;
So hence the Gardener all his art derives.
The Romans, and the Grecians knew not how
To form their Paths, and set their Flowers as now.
Goodness of air and soil perhaps might be
Occasions of our curiosity
In Gardens; and the Genius too of France,
With time, this blessed improvement might advance.
So that if you a Villa do desire
With Gardens, for a skilful man enquire;
Who with his Pensil can on Parchment draw
The form of your intended Work. No flaw,
No errour' scapes you: Thus deformity
Timely appears to your considerate eye.
In thousand Figures some their Box infold,
As was the Cretan Labyrinth of old.
These artificial Mazes some reject,
Who more the Phrygian Flourishes affect:
And these as many various textures taught,
As uncomb'd wool by Tyrian Virgins wrought.
Others with Squares, less different, strive to please
Themselves, in which the fragrant flowers with ease,
And pleasure too, may stoop to the command
Of the spectators eye, and gath'rers hand.
I will not diverse knots to you suggest,
To choose of them which please your fancy best;
That is preferable beyond compare,
Which with the scantling of your ground does square.
When all things thus provided are, again
Level your ground, that, being smooth and plain,
Garden, and borders both may even be,
Admitting no irregularity.
As soon as snowy Winter disappears,
In planting Box employ your Laborers:
You must not trifle then, let no delay
Retard, when Sun and temperate air give way:
Where smaller limits cannot this afford,
With brick they must contented be, or board:
For Box would there the flowers over-shade,
And too much of the narrow spot invade.
This rule for larger Gardens was not meant,
Where Box is thought the greatest ornament.
And howsoever you cultivate a place;
If it wants Box, you take away its grace.
In flowers so great a difference we find,
Do we regard their natures, or their kind;
That a good Florist cannot do amiss,
To learn their natures, and their properties:
Chiefly the seasons when to set and Sow,
And in what soil what Plants do use to grow.
The seeds, and sorts of flowers no number own;
Neither is that of Bulbous roots more known.
The tenderness of some makes them desire
Propitious Spring, that then they may aspire
Into the air; while others which are bold,
Contemn North-winds, and flourish through the cold.
These love the warmer sun; those, cooler shade.
Nor is the vigor equally convai'd
To all from the earth; for flowers will abound
Sometimes in dry, often in unfruitful ground.
Earth that is barren, and does stones produce,
Though often it is improper, is of use
Sometimes in raising flowers: Therefore again
I must give warning to the Husbandman,
That he observe the seasons, and with care
Read the contents of the Celestial Sphere:
That he take notice in the monthly state,
And order, how the Stars discrminate.
What alterations, in the calmer air?
The East, and troubled Southern winds prepare:
That from the Rise and Setting of the Sun,
And by the aspect of the horned Moon,
Showers to come, and tempests he presage,
And how to Heaven we may our faith engage.
Wherein the greater and the lesser Bear
Does your Plantations infest, or spare:
How far the Hyads with excessive showers,
And the Atlantic Pleiads hurt your flowers.
Who the observation of the stars neglect,
Too late are sensible of their effect.
They with our labors correspondence hold,
And all the secrets of our Art infold.
To be more sure, you ought before to know
The Winds, and different Quarters whence they blow.
Else other Gardens you in vain admire;
Though Western Breezes with the Spring conspire,
Yet no appearance of the Winds obey;
For most of all they now their faith betray.
If Aries with his golden fleece appear,
And Zephyrus foretells the Spring is near;
Yet some unlucky Planet menaces
The Fields, and Gardens, and disturbs the Skies.
The South Wind now against the Corn, and Flowers,
Rages with frequent and destructive showers.
Of the remaining cold we should beware,
And see if ought of Winter hang in the air;
Its cruel footsteps often stay behind:
Therefore remember still to bear in mind
The Seasons that most proper are to sow;
For thus your seed will prosper best, and grow.
As soon as e're the knots have filled their space,
Lest noxious weeds should overspread the place,
Between the Borders, and the Beds, you may
Lay Gravel, and so take the weeds away;
For if you suffer them to get to head,
Mallows and Thistles over your walks will spread.
But let not this check your design at all;
The earth in time will be reciprocal.
No sooner has the Sun overcome the cold,
When with astonishment you will behold
Your Gardens riches, whither far then snow,
On a broad leaf the Primrose first will blow.
It keeps not always constant to a dye,
But loves its colors to diversifie.
The Grecian Cyclamine from far they bring,
The red and white both flourish in the Spring;
Woody Zacynthus, stony Coritus,
And Corcyraean Mountains these produce:
In The Summer months they flourish, and though late,
In Autumn too their flowers propagate.
These Season soft Fumaria too obeys,
And in Bavarian Rocks it self displays
In various colors; but is known to die;
Soon as we hear the Artill'ry of the Sky;
Blasted by Sulfurous vapors, as if dead,
It droops, and yields to the earth its vanquished head.
Now Iris springs, which from the heavenly Bow,
Is named, and does as many colors show.
Its Species, and its Tinctures different are,
According to the seasons of the year.
By the coming of the Swallows we divine,
'Twill not be long before that Celandine,
Which from that bird alone its name derives,
Favored by gentler Western-winds revives.
Golden Narcissus also now aspires;
Who looking on himself, himself admires,
He fondly tempting the destructive Power
Of Beauty, from a Boy became a Flower.
Nor longer can the Violets suppress
Their odours, clouded in a rustic dress;
Girt round with Leaves, without varieties
Of colors, from the humble turf they rise.
If we may credit what the Poets write,
She was Diana's Nymph, her sole delight.
With her Ianthis followed in each chase,
Next to the Goddess, after none in place.
As she was feeding the Pherean Cows,
By Phoebus seen, in love with her he grows:
Nor could he long conceal within his breast
Loves wound, the frighted Maiden straight addressed
Her self to the Goddess. Ah! dear sister, fly,
Said she, if you will preserve Virginity
Untouched: you must all open grounds sorbear,
And lofty hills, for he will pursue you there.
To Thickets, and for saken Vales she hyes,
And all alone by shady Fountains lies.
Nor did her modesty her form depress,
But she was valued more, for her recess.
The God perceiving nothing else avail,
Attempts by theft, and cunning to prevail.
Diana then foreseeing 'twas in vain
To think with life her honor to maintain;
Ah! let that beauty perish then, she said,
And soon a duskish color did invade
The changing Nymph, who rather chose to be
Still virtuous, though with deformity.
The fields and lower valleys these afford,
And among brambles of their own accord,
They spring; nor should their site at all abate
Of their esteem, whose value is so great.
If sharper cold give leave, about this time
The Hyacinth shoots up from Phoebus crime.
At Quoits he playing, by Eurota's side,
Chanced the boy's tender temples to divide.
The God and youth at once appalled stood?
He through his guilt, and he through want of blood;
From which, in pity of his angry fate,
A flower arose, which often does change its state,
And color; and to one peculiar kind,
No more then to one season is confined.
Now Meadow-Saffron diverse colors yields;
And on a slender stalk adorns the fields.
The earth grown by reason of internal heat,
Patient of Culture, let your Gardener set
In beds prepared, what Seeds he does intend
For Summer, and with care their growth attend
As Linum, Caltha, Lychnis, Cyanies,
Malva, Delphinium, and Anthemis,
With fragrant Melilot for seed received,
In ground before prepared, may be relieved,
If the earth defective be by being dressed;
Or by refreshing streams if drowth molest:
It were an endless labor to set down
The flowers, which in the Spring are to be sown
The moister Spring makes all in time appear;
And shows the hopes of the succeeding year.
Then, above all the flowers in the bed,
The Crown Imperial elevates his head:
Around him all the numerous vulgar spring;
As if they humbly would salute their King.
Beneath the top a golden Crown is placed;
This by a verdant tuft of leaves is graced:
Four flowers, with leaves inverted to the earth,
Do from one stalk alone derive their birth.
Nor would there any other this excel,
If to its Beauty, were but added smell.
Let not your Tulips, through the vernal showers,
Make too much haste, to spread abroad their flowers.
For the heavy aspects of the Moon would prove,
With frost pernicious to them which love
To flourish most; when Winters cold gives way,
And glad some Sun shine does serene the day.
Then on the beds in thicker ranks they stand,
And in the air their spotted leaves expand.
Their beauty chiefly from their color flows;
For whither on the leaves they do enclose
A snowy whiteness intermixed with red;
Or like the Crimson Blood a Purple shed;
Or the deep Murrey into Wan decayed;
Like a pale Widow under a black shade;
Or in stripped strakes with py'd Achates vies,
The Tulip from the rest still bears the prize.
Though now a flower, yet Dalmatis before,
Hard by Timavus Sping a blew Nymph bore;
This was her mother: changing Proteus
Her Father was; whose fickle Genius
She follows, when Vertumnus had searched over
The world, at last near to Timavus shore,
In the Illyrian bounds, the Maid he sees;
And while with flattering words he strives to please
His Mistress, she from his addresses flies,
Though in her colors he diversifies
Himself, yet still she frustrate his desires;
And would not nourish his unlawful fires.
At last, in hopes this would all doubts remove,
He tells her he is a God, a God in love.
Yet she persists; which causes him to try
By force to make the tender Maid comply:
Now she implores the Gods, and by their power
TO avoid the ravisher, becomes a flower.
The ornaments and fillets which adorned
Her head and golden hair, to leaves were turned.
Where her breast was, a slender stalk does grow'
Girt with a tuft of spreading leaves below;
In an orbic'lar figure, like a Cup,
Upon this stalk a slower rises up,
Consisting of six leaves, which proudly show
The different colors Nature can bestow.
This Nymph, though now a Flower, cannot yet
Her fancy for strange colored clothes forget.
In the worst mold this flower better thrives;
And barren earth miraculously gives
More beauty to it, then a fertile ground,
And when least strong, it is most comely found.
If to your Tulips you will add more grace,
It Is best to set them in a fainter place.
For if you put them in a richer bed,
The goodness of the soil will make them red.
Wen out of every bed the flowers disclose
Themselves, if that the humid South Wind blows,
Or from the drier North if Boreas move,
Bring Garlands to the Altars; for they love
With these to be adorned. Thus Glycera
Appeased great Jove, and did the storms allay.
A flowery Wreath was then the ornament,
With which the modest temples were content.
Profuseness had not on the vulgar gained;
And Vows to lesser bounds were then restrained.
I by my own experience do find,
That a wet April with a Southern wind,
Destroys the horror of the Spring again,
And makes our early expectations vain.
Throughout the Sabine Valleys heretosore
Bathed all in Wine, the Shepherds used to adore
Celestial Pales: Hay was the Ossering,
Which for their Seed and Cattle they did bring;
The Chaff consumed the Infernals to appease:
Them with their Februan Rites they strove to please.
That Month over which the Ram is president,
Brings forth the Bellides, the ornament
Of Virgins now, though heretofore they were
Nymphs of the Meads themselves; among them are
Those of the Woods, whose stalks discriminate
Their Species, from them which propagate
Themselves in Gardens, made of finer threads,
On lesser stalks these show their painted heads.
The white Etrurian Iris now appears;
But those are yellow, Lusitania bears:
One, for its figure, is by some desired;
The other, for its color, more admired.
With leaves condens't on the Iberian hills
Exalted high, now springs the Daffodills;
And Water-mint in moister vales we find,
For Garlands fit, when it is with Myrtle joined.
With its three colors too the flower of Jove
We see, which had it Smell, would equal prove
To the Violets: Adonis also flowers,
Whose loss Idalian Venus so deplores.
And thou Ranunculus, whose fame resounds
Among the Nymphs that dwell in Lybian bounds.
Thou through the fields in parti-colour'd dress
Aspir'st, thy paleness does thy thoughts confess.
The lovesick youth once with the same desire
Inflamed himself, and set the Nymphs on fire.
These flowers with easy culture are content;
The Mattock, Rake, or other Instrument,
They trouble not; for if with fast'ned root
Into the air they once but dare to shoot,
The bed once made, by wat'ring them you gain
So much of pleasure for so little pain.
Nor yellow Calthae with their paler light
Would I forget, showed first to Acis sight
On the Sicilian shore; which from the Sun,
Toward which they look, draw their complexion.
With curled threads, and top divided now
Along the margin of your borders grow
Stock-Gilly-flow'rs, whose blushing leaf may fear,
And justly too, the sharpness of the air.
Therefore because they cannot well preserve
Themselves against ill weather, they deserve
A place in earthen pots; the best defense
Against the North, and Winters violence.
Then if November with its horrid showers
Should rage, it cannot prejudice your flowers.
For thus disposed, when danger menaces,
To warmer sheds they are removed with ease.
Our fields may now of that Sambucus boast,
Which first was borrowed from the Geldrian Coast;
Its candid flowers when they themselves dilate,
Do most the swelling Roses imitate.
To make the year prove kind, Postumius
IN the Mayan Calends first did introduce
The Rites of Flora; for the Husbandman
In Rural matters newly then began
T'employ himself, his hair with Privet bound;
About the place the Floral Rites resound.
Swains to their Temples pleited Garlands join;
Then new-blown flowers they offered at the Shrine
Of The Goddess; for such Off' rings as these
Did best the Mother of the flowers appease.
But when the Ram, who boldly heretofore
Upon his back essayed to carry over
His Hell, disappears, from other seed
Another race of flowers will succeed.
If with kind aspects gentle Mercury
Favor his mother Maia from the Sky;
If the Olenian Goat no storms portend,
And no black showers from the clouds descend;
Now, more then ever, will the wanton ground
With all the Species of Herbs abound.
The prickly Hedges now their Odours give;
And Tam'risks with their precious leaves revive.
Soft Cicer too will flourish, and green Broom,
With Colocasia which from Egypt come;
Acanthus girt with knots, and thorns, we see,
And bright Parthenium, with Rosemary,
Triorchis, Sage, and Parsley, once the Meed,
Which to the Istmian Victor was decreed;
Dames Violets appear, with Meadow-Rue;
Among the Alps Phalangium we pursue.
Through Allobrogian Vales Isopyrum,
Time, Rhamnus, Housleek, and Antirrhinum,
With woody Nard, Arcadian Moly that
Which Homers Poems so much celebrate.
By the same culture these we raise from Seed:
With them invest your fields, let every bed
Be then replenisht; for a naked space
The honor of your Garden would disgrace.
The Seasons known, next learn how deep in mold
You ought the seeds of flowers to infold.
Among high branches lofty Piony
Proudly aspires, stained with a Crimson-dye.
A color, as it guilty odours show,
Its crimes, and not its blushes did bestow.
A happy Nymph, if her more peaceful hours
Had not been troubled by divine amors;
Mortal addresses she resus'd, as vain,
Guarding Alcinous sheep upon the Plain.
And nothing yet perhaps had made her yield,
Till an immortal Lover won the field.
Convolvulus disdaining to be bound
With diverse flowers dilated, now is found
In the moist Vales; then mighty Nature wrought,
While Lillies once employed her busy thought,
A little work, if with the rest compared;
When she to greater things her felf prepared.
Blew-bottle, Lark-spur, of their own accord
Now in the fields their different leaves afford.
Painted Blattaria, poisonous Aconite
Wolss-grass, wild Basil, Fennel which delight
In various forms and colors all, and now
Along the borders all their beauties show.
These, and a thousand others will contend
To Enrich your Garden; Odours too ascend
Spreading themselves through the serener air,
Where gentle breezes strive to bless the year.
This makes the fertile Meadows all rejoice,
And Philomela with her charming voice;
And this invites the wanton flocks to play,
As they amidst their fruitful Pastures stray.
Who could be so unkind as to persuade,
I should for th'Town forsake my Countreyshade?
Such joys I Will ever love, and should be glad
At those delightful Rivers to be staid,
Near thee, O Tours, between the Cher and Loir,
Where we the Rural Miracles admire
Of France. Thou native Soil of Gardens hail!
To the Surrentine Hills, the Sabine Vale,
Or the Oebalian fields thou giv'st not place.
Thee soft Ferentum, nor the Bantine Chase
Excel, nor what Phalantus did possess,
Or the sweet shades which happy Tibur bless.
Besides the Coast with Streams and Fountains graced,
And on each side vast tracts of Meadows placed;
The neighboring Hills all set with Vines, the Town,
Which its rich merchandises so renown;
The peoples inclinations, whose soft clime
Has rendered them polite, they spend their time
In silken works; here shady Woods are seen,
And Meadows covered with eternal green:
Gardens, as if immortal, never decay,
And fading flowers to fresher still give way.
Such is Saint Germans, which the Powers of France
Inhabit, or the Vale of Mommorance,
Such fields are washed by the Sein; Medun's like this;
And such Saint Cloud, with famous Ruel is.
The Pensile Gardens of Semiramis,
The Orchard kept by the Hesperides,
Whose Apples watched by Dragons are be liev'd;
Or vain Elyzium of the Greeks received;
Cannot approach the Streams, and Groves, which France
Adorn, or the proud Structures which advance
Her Fame, where powerful Art with Nature strives,
And Rivers into large Canales derives.
From Taurus front in June the Hyades
Appear, and lowering clouds disturb the Skies;
With prayers therefore you must Heaven appease,
And by devotion make the tempests cease:
Then will the earth be spangled over anew,
And high-topt Lychnis brings it self in view.
Asphodel too, by learned Hesiod prized,
Whose roots out temperate Ancestors sufficed.
Next these the greater Cyanys, which bring
Their name of old from a Bizantine King.
The Shield-leav'd Cresse, and Cityssus both feigned,
In humane figures to be once contained:
The first, a famous Dardan Hunter was;
The last, a Shepherd of the Argive race.
Like the Cone-bearing Cypress now we see
Linaria, which obtained in Italy
A better name, by them called Belvedere;
Nor Aquilegia longer can defer
To flower, its leaves a Violet-purple stains,
With Anthemis, as long as Taurus reigns,
It grows: The flower of Helen too ascends,
Which in it self both colors comprehends.
That Helen ancient Ilium did destroy;
Her eyes, and not the Greeks, set fire on Troy.
She Asia filled, and Europe with alarms,
And her high quarrel put the world in arms.
Then German Fox-glove, with discolored rays,
And lovely Calamint it self displays:
Thryallis, Anthora, AEthiopis,
With Scylla, whose thrice flow'ring signifies,
Like Lentisk, the three Seasons fit to plow.
Lytrum, obscure Cerynthe, All-heal too
Will show it self, known by its Tyrian dye,
With multitudes of the ignobler fry.
Now I perceive from whence these Odours flow;
While on the Roses kinder Zephyrs blow.
Out of the prickly stalk the Purple-flow'r
Springs, and commands the vulgar to adore.
The Garden-Queen does now her self display,
Soiling the luster of the rising day.
And Cynthia too withdraws her wearied sight,
Grown pale, and vanquished by excess of light.
She, who not yet had spread her tender leaves,
Impatient now of her confinement, cleaves
Through all impediments; her form divine
Speaking her justly of a Royal Line.
Her blushing modesty would make you guess,
That she was chaste, if not her Virgin-dress.
Therefore since Blood and Virtue so agree,
It shows her Chasteness, and her Majesty.
The Amazonians falsely do combine
Among themselves to place this Heroine.
Falsely, I say; for she is to Greece allowed,
Where Sea-girt Corinth to her Scepter bowed.
Fame of her Beauty spreads through every place,
And Kings themselves pay homage to her Face.
Warlike Halesus first of all arrives,
Then high born Brias, who himself derives,
From sevenfold Nile; next Ax-arm'd Arcas hies,
Covered with Laurels, proud of Victories;
Which after various perils undergone,
His conquering arms on Theban Plains had won.
All these he prostrates at her Royal Feet,
In hope such Offerings might acceptance meet.
Proud of her Beauty, she replies, her charms
Yield not to such mean Arts, but manly Arms.
No longer hearkens to their idle vows,
But in the midst of armed Troops she goes
To Phoebus, and his sisters fane, desires
Diana's aid against immodest fires.
The surious Lovers now with force attaque
The Queen, the Temple-doors they open break.
From whence repelled, their Mistress makes them feel
The dire effects of her enraged steel.
Perhaps her courage, more then feminine,
Mingled with modest blushes made her shine
More splendidly; or else some fresh supplies
Of lightning were conspicuous in her eyes.
Something there was that had amazed the rude
And duller Genius of the multitude:
For with loud shouts they daringly prefer
Rhodanthes name before Diana's: her
They now adore, and in the Goddess stead,
Cry out Rhodanthe shall be deified
When learned Apollo from the Azure Sky
Beheld Rhodanthes great impiety,
With vengefull flames, that did obliquely glide,
He makes her curse her sacrilegious pride.
Close to the Altar now her feet are joined;
Which spreading roots do yet more firmly bind.
Her arms are boughs; and though she senseless grows,
Yet great and comely in her change she shows.
She had not less perfection, then before;
And fair Rhodanthe is as fair a flower:
Happy, if she had never merited
Those honors which to her destruction led.
Apollo's vengeance stops not coldly here;
The irreligious vulgar now appear
Transformed to thorns; which in that shape contend
With dreadful points Rhodanthe to defend.
Into a Butter-fly Halesus goes;
Arcas to a Drone; while valiant Brias grows
A Caterpiller; who with one consent
Their former Mistress in new shapes frequent.
And though this flower be justly placed above
All others, yet it does not lasting prove.
Thus the best things do soonest bend to Fate;
And nothing can be durable that is great.
I cannot all the Species rehearse
Of Roses, in the narrow bounds of Verse.
Some curled, some waved about the top are found,
And others with a thousand leaves are crowned;
Through which the flaming colors do appear.
Others are single, not to insist on here
Either the Damask, or Numidian Rose,
Or Cistus, which in Lusitania grows.
Roses unarmed, if you the earth prepare,
May be produced; but they in danger are;
Because unguarded; for what excellence
Can be secure on earth without defense?
Though Saliunca to the Roses yields,
Yet it will add some beauty to our fields.
These flowers are quickly subject to decay,
And when Orion shines, they fade away.
In Pots the candid Hyacinths remain
Entire, which from their tub'rous roots obtain
Another name; our Merchants those of late
From the far distant Indies did translate:
Their station first in Italy they had;
And then to Rome, and Latium were convai'd.
From whence all Europe has been furnished, where
In every Garden now they domineer.
Not only boasting of the native Snow,
Which decks their front, but of their Odours too.
If ever any flowers you admire,
These above all will greatest care require.
In earthen Vasa's when they are secure,
The shocks of wind and rain they best endure.
And lest the parching rays of Sirius prove
Destructive, you must soon your flower remove
Into your house; nor think it labor lost,
That cannot be unworthy of your cost;
Which, to adorn, and to augment our store,
By Sea we borrow from the farthest shore.
Nor Cymbalum will long be wanting found
With Purple Flowers inverted to the ground.
The only natural difference we see
Of them, and Lillies since their smells agree.
Chrysanthes next with radiant threads appears,
Its leaf a deep Sidonlan tincture bears.
And though Amaracus at first may seem
Unworthy of a place in your esteem,
Contemn it not; for it will recompense
The want of form, in pleasing the other sense.
Venus with fragrant smell did heretofore
Indue this Plant hard by deep Simois shore.
Yarrow will now a thousand leaves expose,
And Summer Iris various colors shows.
With, Malva, Linum, yellow Melilot,
And red Ononis too; whose binding root
Does often the tardy Husbandman molest,
And stops the progress of his laboring beast:
The Nymphs may now frequent the verdant Meads,
And make them pleited Chaplets for their heads:
Their hands, and Ozier baskets may be filled
With flowers, which spread themselves over every field.
But let all Nymphs that tragic use avoid,
By which the Egyptian Queen her self destroyed.
When vanquished Antony from Actium ran,
Leaving Augustus the Empire of the Main;
She fearing to adorn his victory,
Rather chose death, then living in famy.
But lest her resolutions should be known,
Beneath the flowers the poisonous Asps were thrown.
Thus she expired in death with pleasure blessed,
Applying fatal Serpents to her breast.
Flowers in many things convenient are;
Our Tables, and our Cupboards we prepare
With them; and better to disfuse their scent,
We place them in our Rooms for ornament.
By others into Garlands they are wrought;
And so for off rings to the Altars brought.
Sometimes to Princes Bankets they ascend,
And to their Tables fragrant Odours lend;
As often they serve to grace a temperate Mess,
Where the content is more, the plenty less.
Nor want there those, who with sublime skill,
In hollow Limbecks flowers can distill.
Now with a slow, now with a quicker fire
They work, which makes the vapor strait aspire
To the cool brass, whence heated once anew,
It gently trickles into Pearly dew.
The Spirit thus of flowers is conveyed
To Water, and by trial stronger made.
Unguents from them are drawn, such as of old
To rub the hair Capuan Seplasia sold;
Capua, whose soft delights, and pleasing charms
Proved worse then Cannae to the Punick arms.
Where Hannibal that enemy to peace,
Indulged himself to luxury and ease,
Painting it self, from flowers we derive,
Whose colors did the first examples give.
By Glycera Pausiades thus taught,
Painted the different flowers which she brought
From them, and by the care of those that weave,
Such great improvements figured Silks receive.
And from that Nectar which the flowers contain,
Industrious Bees their Honey too obtain,
I should too tedious be, if I should sing
The mighty aids which herbs and flowers bring
To the Diseases men are subject to:
For these the Gods with virtue did indue.
Near Paris, where the rapid Sein does glide,
In a sub urban Villa did reside
A single man; his Garden was his Wife;
And his delight a solitary life.
Few Acres were the limits of his land;
No costly Tapestry his walls profaned:
And yet he was as satisfied as those,
On whom too partial fortune often bestows
Her greatest favors, since'tis not excess,
But moderation causes happiness,
From Regions far remote he flowers brought,
And wholesome herbs on distant Mountains sought.
Into his Garden these he did translate,
And to his friends their qualities relate.
He could not long enjoy his solitude,
Fame soon attracts the neighboring multitude;
Who importune him that he would impart
His skill, and not conceal his powerful art.
Those who of shortness in their breath complained,
And in whose bowels scorching Fevers reigned;
Some for ill humors, joints never standing still,
And beating at the heart, implored his skill.
Those, whom Physicians long had given over,
He by reviving Medicines did restore.
But he that could renew lost health again,
Deserves the praises of a better Pen.
Peruvian Granadil in Summer blows,
Which near the Amazonian River grows.
Nature her self this flowers leaves divides
Into three parts, and waves them on the sides.
From a tall stalk sharp prickles it does send,
Like those that do the Holy Thorn defend:
With triple-pointed leaves resembling those
Accursed Nails, which fixed Christ to the Cross.
Next painted Meleagris, Echium show
Themselves with Rumex, Adianium too,
And Hesperis; to which the influence
Of Phoebus various colors dispense.
Lovely Carnations then their flowers dilate;
The worth of them is, as their beauty, great.
Their Smell is excellent; a Cod below
Restrains the swelling leaves, which curled grow
Divided too; this flower exacts our care:
For if the extremes of heat or cold the air
Molest too much, they are blasted in their birth,
Unable to aspire above the earth.
Morning and evening therefore you must choose
To water them, or else their charms they lose.
Hemerocallis next we see, whose name
Deservedly from its short duration came.
Its flowers always do obliquely bend,
And into purple leaves themselves extend.
With numbers of them all your Garden store,
While they are fresh you will admire them more.
If poisonous Orobanche should by chance,
Among the rest, its noxious head advance;
Let not your Cattle eat it, lest they find
Too late the dire effects it leaves behind.
Cows set on fire by its pernicious taste,
Without delay, straight to engender haste.
Whole flocks besides, as if they were untamed,
Stray through the Woods with lustful rage inflamed.
High Matricaria on long branches shows
Her candid flowers: about them Thlaspis grows.
Thlaspis was once a Cretan youth; he loved
This Nymph; and their amors had happy proved
If fate had crowned their innocent delights,
With less unlucky Hymeneal Rites.
Chamaedris near cold Springs new vigor takes;
Nature its leaves like saws indented makes.
Two sorts of the wild Orchis now appear;
And on their leaves two different colors bear.
Within a while your Garden waxes white,
And snowy flowers will surprise your sight.
For if the Summer does not late arrive,
On verdant stalks the Lillies will revive.
France more then any Nation has preferred
This flower, some say, from Phrygla 'twas transferred
By Francus, sprung from Hector; full of the fame
Of his great Aucestours; that his own name
Might be extolled, remoter Climes he sought,
And settling here to us our Lillies brought.
But our Forefathers, by Tradition, prove
They fell, like the Ancile, from above.
Saint Clodovaeus, who did first advance
The Doctrine, and the Faith of Christ in France,
With his pure hands received the heavenly gift
And to the care of his Successors left;
That it should be preserved from age to age
His Kingdoms Ensign, and praedestin'd Badge.
These Arms shall flourish, when propitious fate
In lasting peace shall on great Lewis wait.
When he the affrighted world shall have composed,
And all the wounds of war and tumult closed;
When fraud and murder he has put to flight,
And with firm Leagues he shall mankind unite.
Now for past loves unhappy Clytie grieves,
And paleness from the parching Sun receives.
Sh' aspires over other flowers, in hopes, by chance
Her former lover might vouchsafe a glance.
Crosus, and Smilax too in June appear,
Which heretofore did humane bodies wear.
Their tufted heads when Poppies have exposed,
And the earth for new productions is disposed;
To make her riches in more splendor shine,
In the same flower different colors join.
To Eleusinian Ceres Poppies owe
Their rise; with purple leaves some higher grow:
But the white kind a dye, like silver, yields,
Showing the modest treasures of the fields.
The Seeds to Med'c'nal uses are applied,
And often in Diseases have been tried.
Sometimes short-winded Coughs they moderate,
And welcome sleep in sickly men create.
In Greece Eryngus is deserv'dly sought;
Born in a Woman's Breast, while green, it is thought
An antidote against all lustful fires;
And to allay a Husband's wild desires.
Phaon did thus his Sappho's love obtain,
If the records of time may credit gain.
But while the Dog Star rages in the Sky,
And cruel Clouds their wonted showers deny;
When burning Phoebus lengthens out the days,
Scattering the dew by his refulgent rays;
Lest all your Plants should at the root decay,
And wanting moisture quickly fade away;
From neighboring Fountains flow your Garden over,
Such vital drops will life again restore.
For now Aurora no refreshment gives,
No humid dew the dying grass relieves.
Among the flowers, which late in the year arrive,
Immortal Amaranthus will survive.
For at that time an unknown multitude
Of vulgar flowers will themselves extrude.
Conyza, Horminum, Hedysarum,
Angelica, small Henbane, Apium,
Marchmallows, woad, Armeria, Clematis,
With trembling Coriander, Barberis,
Both the Abrotonums, Myrrh, Centory,
Slender Melissa, Sium, Cicory,
Buphthalmum, Stoechas, Hyosedamus,
And spotted Calendule their flowers produce.
Mint, and Nigella too; with these we see
The Summer thus and Autumn still agree
To fructify, and thus the year goes round,
While every season is with flowers crowned.
The golden Attick Star in Meadows reigns,
So termed by Greece; but by the Latin Swains,
Amellus: In wet Vales, near Fountain sides,
It grows, or where some crook'd Maeander glides.
In making nooses it is useful found,
When the ripe Vintage hangs upon the ground.
Purple Narcissus of Iapan now flowers,
Its leaves so shine, as if with golden showers
It had been wet; which makes it far out-vy
The luster of Phoenician Tapestry.
Therefore t'augment the grace of France, it is fit
This flower into our Gardens we admit.
It Is true, it hardly answers our desires
At first, but longer culture still requires.
Yet let not this occasion our despair,
When once it blows, 'twill recompense our care.
The Box about the borders, every year,
About the Spring, or Autumn always shear.
It Is best to let the Boughs be mollifi'd
By rain, which makes them easier to divide.
But you must know, that flowers are not all
Deduced at first from one original:
For some alone from tub'rous roots proceed,
From Bulbous some, and others rise from seed.
The Beds we in October should disclose,
And on large floors the Bulbous roots expose
To the air, that the Suns rays may then attract
That moisture which in Summer they contract,
By lying under ground; thus purged and clean,
After some time they may be set again.
And better to resist the Winters cold,
They must be deeply buried in their mold.
But with less care we set the tub'rous root,
That of its own accord will downward shoot.
While others if not deeply placed are lost,
As well by drowth, as by the piercing frost.
Perhaps your stupid lab'rers may not know
The Seasons that convenient are to Sow.
Therefore you must observe, if Scorpio meet
Erigone, and move his lazy feet.
When the hoarse Crane cuts the air with tardy wing,
And makes the Clouds with horrid clangor ring.
Then Is the best time of all to plant your flowers,
If humid Autumn but with moderate showers
Some days before refresh the parched face
Of the earth, which in its bosom will embrace
The Bulbous roots, and kindly warmth infuse,
Supplying every branch with quickening juice.
But lest the rain should stagnate, and be found
By its unequal wetting of the ground.
Hurtful to the roots, by swelling banks you may
All the superfluous water drain away.
Our lab'rers thus the Royal Gardener taught;
From him, this way of planting flowers they brought.
In all that could improve, or grace the field,
In all the arts of Culture he excelled.
By the Moons face you should the Seasons know,
Over tempests she, the air, and earth below
An influence has; if she her Orb displays,
Piercing the opacous Clouds with silver rays.
When with soft breezes she inspires the air,
And makes the winds their wonted rage forbear.
Till it be Full Moon, from her first increase,
The Season's good; but if she once decrease,
Stir not the earth, nor let the Husbandman
Sow any seed; when Heaven forbids, it is vain.
You must obey, when the heavenly Signs invite;
Have the Parrhasian Stars still in your sight.
Which less then any do their luster hide;
And best of all the erring Plowman guide.
Some in preparing of their seed excel,
Making their flowers to a larger compass swell
Thus narrow bolls with curled leaves they fill,
Helping defective nature by their skill.
Others are able by their pow rful art,
New odours, and new colors to impart;
To change their figures, to retard their birth,
Or make them sooner cleave their Mother Earth.
These pleasures are with small expense and ease
Obtained, if such delights your fancy please.
Spite of hot Sirius Tanacetum lives,
And, while he burns the fields, in Africa thrives,
Its lovely colors, and thick foliage
Will allo flourish through the Winters rage.
This flower great Austrian Charles did here to fore
Besieging Tunis, from the Punick shore
Transmit to Spain. When frost first binds the ground,
And sharp December spreads its ice aground
In The Scythian Clime, in the Sarmatian fields,
Distracting Hellebore black flowers yields.
And yellow Aconites on the Alps appear,
Others at other seasons of the year.
Now Persian Cyclamine, and Laurel blows,
Which on the bank of winding Mosa grows.
Broad-leav'd Merascus, and green Sonchus live,
With Crocus, which from Iura we derive.
The late Narcissus in these Months we find,
And Winter Hyacinths; but from the wind,
And killing frost, to save your flowers, draw
Over your beds a covering of warm straw.
Thus they avoid the Winters violence,
Till the kind Spring renews its insluence.
What angry Deity did first expose
To the rough tempests, and more rigid snows,
The soft Antmony, whose comely grace
A gentler season, and a better place
Deserves^ For when with native purple bright
It shows its leaves to the propitious light,
With different colors stripped, and curled flames
Encompast, it out love and wonder claims.
There is not any other that out-vies
This flowers curled leaves, or numerous dies;
Nor the Sidonian art could e're compose
So sweet a blush, as this by nature shows.
Flora enraged, because she was so fair,
Banished this Nymph into the open air;
She was the boast and ornament of Greece,
But beauty seldom meets with happiness.
So't proved to her; for whilst the careless Maicl
To take the air, about the fresh fields strayed:
Straight jealous thoughts the angry Goddess move;
Angry her Husband Zephyrus should love
Ought but her self; the effects of her disdain
On Anemona light; her form in vain
Adorns her now, to that she owed her fate:
Less beauty might have made her fortunate.
Thus she who once among the Nymphs excelled,
Transformed is now the best of flowers held.
While Venus for her loved Adonis grieved,
After he had his mortal wound received;
Her only comfort in this flower remained;
For from his streaming blood, when she had drained
All that was humane, and had sprinkled over
The corpse with sacred juice; from the thick gore
Immediately a purple flower arose,
Which did a little recompense her loss.
This flowers form and colors so invite,
That some whole cases full of turf delight
To sow with seed; which when they first arise,
With colors pleasingly confused surprise.
Victorious Gast^ so this flower did grace,
That in his Luxemburgh he gave it place;
Called for the Pots; nor could at meals refrain,
With it himself and Court to entertain.
These in the Winter you should cultivate,
That so upon the beds they may dilate
Their percious flowers, which only can restore
Your Gardens life; for when the frost before
Destroyed without repulse, these triumph still,
And conquer that which all the rest does kill.
When others with dejected leaves do mourn,
And wet Aquarius does discharge his urne;
This with illustrious purple decks the fields,
But if her Zephyrus kind breezes yields,
She Will flourish more; by which we well may find,
That to each other they are yet inclined.
While with succeeding flowers the year is crowned,
Whose painted leaves enamel all the ground;
Admire not them, but with more grateful eyes
To Heaven look, and their great Maker prize.
In a calm night the earth and heaven agree,
There radiant Stars, here brighter Flowers we see.
RAPINUS OF GARDENS.
Book II. Woods.
LOng rows of Trees and Woods my pen invite,
With shady Walks a Gardens chief delight:
For nothing without them it pleasant made;
They beauty to the ruder Country add.
Ye Woods and spreading Groves afford my Muse
That bough, with which the sacred Poets use
TO adorn their brows; that by their pattern led,
I with due Laurels may impale my head.
Methinks the Oaks their willing tops incline,
Their trembling leaves applauding my design;
With joyful murmurs, and unforc't assent,
The Woods of Gaul accord me their consent.
Cithaeron I, and Menalus despise,
Often graced by the Arcadian Deities;
I, nor Molorchus, or Dodona's Grove,
Or thee crowned with black Oaks, Calydne love;
Cyllene thick with Cypress too I fly;
To France alone my Genius I apply.
Where noble Woods in every part abound,
And pleasant Groves commend the fertile ground.
If on thy native soil thou do prepare
TO erect a Villa, you must place it there,
Where a free prospect does it self extend
Into a Garden; whence the Sun may lend
His influence from the East; his radiant heat
Should on your house through various windows beat:
But on that side which chiefly open lies
To the North Wind, whence storms and showers arise,
There plant a wood; for, without that defense,
Nothing resists the Northern violence.
While with destructive blasts over cliffs and hills
Rough Boreas moves, and all with murmurs fills;
The Oak with shaken boughs on mountains rends,
The Valleys rore, and great Olympus bends.
Trees therefore to the winds you must expose,
Whose branches best their pow'rsul rage oppose
Thus woods defend that part of Normandy,
Which spreads it self upon the British Sea.
Where trees do all along the Ocean side
Great Villages and Meadows too divide.
But now the means of raising woods I sing;
Though from the parent Oak young shoots may spring,
Or may transplanted flourish, yet I know
No better means then if from seed they grow.
It Is true this way a longer time will need,
And Oaks but slowly are produced by seed:
Yet they with far the happier shades are blessed;
For those that rise from Acorns, as they best
With deep-fixt roots beneath the earth descend,
So their large boughs into the air ascend.
Perhaps because, when we young Sets translate,
They lose their virtue, and degenerate.
While Acorns better thrive, since from their birth
They have been more acquainted with the earth
Thus we to Woods by Acorns Being give:
But yet before the ground your seed receive,
To dig it first employ your Laborer;
Then level it; and, if young shoots appear
Above the ground, sprung from the cloven bud;
If the earth be planted in the Spring, it is good
Those weeds by frequent culture to remove,
Whoseroots would to the blossoms hurtful prove
Nor think it labor lost to use the Plow:
By Dung and Tillage all things fertile grow.
There are more ways then one to plant a Grove,
For some do best a rude confusion love:
Some into even squares dispose their trees,
Where every side does equal bounds possess.
Thus boxen legions with false arms appear
At Chess, and represent a face of war.
Which sport to Schaccia the Italians owe;
The painted frames alternate colors show.
So should the field in space and form agree;
And should in equal bounds divided be.
Whether you plant young Sets, or Acorns sow,
Still order keep; for so they best will grow.
Order to every tree like vigor gives,
And room for the aspiring branches leaves.
When with the leaf your hopes begin to bud,
Banish all wanton Cattle from the wood.
The browzing Goat the tender blossom kills;
Let the swift Horse then neigh upon the hills,
And the free Herds still in large Pastures tread;
But not upon the new-sprung branches feed.
For whose defense Enclosures should be made
Of twigs, or water into rills convai'd.
When ripening time has made your trees dilate,
And the strong roots do deeply penetrate,
All the superfluous branches must be felled,
Lest the oppressed trunk should chance to yield
Under the weight, and so its spirits lose
In fuch excre^cencies; but as for those
Which from the stock you cut, they better thrive,
As if their ruin caused them to revive.
And the slow Plant, which scaree advanced its head,
Into the air its leavy boughts will spread:
When from the fastened root it springs amain,
And can the fury of the North fustain;
On the smooth bark the shepherds should indire
Their rural strifes, and there their verses write.
But let no impious axe profane the woods,
Or violate the sacred shades; the Gods
Themselves inhabit there. Some have be held
Where drops of blood from wounded Oaks distilled:
Have seen the trembling boughs with horror shake!
So great a conscience did the Ancients make
To cut down Oaks, that it was held a crime
In that obscure and superstitious time.
For Driopeius Heaven did provoke,
By daring to destroy the AEmonian Oak;
And with it it is included Dryad' too:
A venging Ceres here her faith did show
To the wronged Nymph; while Erisichthon bore
Torments, as great as was his crime before.
Therefore it well might belesteem'd no less
Then Sacrilege, when every dark recels
The awful silence, and each gloomy shade,
Was sacred by the zealous vulgar made.
When e're they cut down Groves, or spoiled the Trees,
With gifts the Ancients Pales did appease.
Due honors once Dodona's Forest had,
When Oracles were through the Oaks convaid.
When woods instructed Prophets to foretell,
And the decrees of fate in trees did dwell.
If the aspiring Plant large branches bear,
And Beeches with extended arms appear;
There near his flocks upon the cooler ground
The Swain may lie, and with his Pipe resound
His loves; but let no vice these shades disgrace:
We ought to bear a reverence to the place.
The boughs, the unbroken silence of a wood,
The leaves themselves demonstrate that some God
Inhabits there, whose flames might be so just,
To burn those groves that had been fired by lust
But through the woods while thus the Rusticks sport,
Whole flights of Birds will thither too resort;
Whose different notes and murmurs full the air:
Thither sad Philomela will repair;
Once to her sister she complained, but now
She warbles forth her grief on every bough:
Fills all with Tereus crimes, her own hard sat;
And makes the melting rocks compassionate.
Disturb not birds which in your trees abide,
By them the will of Heaven is signified:
How often from hollow Oaks the boading Crow,
The winds and future tempests does foreshow.
Of these the wary Plowman should make use;
Hence observations of his own deduce:
And so the changes of the weather tell.
But from your Groves all hurtful birds expel.
When e're you plant, through Oaks your Beech diffuse;
The hard Male-oke, and lofty Cerrus choose.
While Esculus of the mast-bearing kind,
Chief in Ilicean Groves we always find.
For it affords a far extending shade;
Of one of these some times a wood is made.
They stand unmoved, though winter does assail,
Nor more can winds, or rain, or storms prevail.
To their own race they ever are inclined,
And love with their associates to be joined.
When Fleets are rigged, and we to fight prepare,
They yield us Plank, and furnish arms for war.
Fuel to fire, to Plowmen Plows they give,
To other uses we may them derive.
But nothing must the sacred Tree profane:
Some boughs for Garlands from it may be taken.
For those whose arms their Contrymen preserve,
Such are the honors which the Oaks deserve.
We know not certainly whence first of all
This Plant did borrow its original.
Whether on Ladon, or on Maenalus
It grew, if fat Chaonia did produce
It first, but better from our Mother Earth,
Then modern rumors we may learn their birth.
When Jupiter the worlds foundation laid,
Great Earth-born Giants Heaven did invade.
And Jove himself, (when these he did subdue,)
His lightning on the factious brethren threw.
Tellus her sons misfortunes does deplore;
And while she cherishes the yet-warm gore
Of Rhoecus, from his monstrous body grows
A vaster trunk, and from his breast arose
A hardened Oak; his shoulders are the same,
And Oak his high exalted head became.
His hundred arms which lately through the air
Were spread, now to as many boughs repair.
A sevenfold bark his now stiff trunk does bind;
And where the Giant stood, a Tree we find.
The earth to Jove strait consecrates this Tree,
Appeasing so his injured Deity;
Then 'twas that man did the first Acorns eat.
Although the honor of this Plant be great,
Both for its shade. and that it sacred is;
Yet when its branches shoot into the Skies,
Let them take heed, while with his brandished flame,
The Thund'rer rages, shaking Natures frame.
Lest they be blasted by his powerful hand,
While Tamarisks secure, and Mirtles stand.
The other parts of woods I now must sing;
With Beech, and Oak, let Elm, and Linden spring.
Nor may your Grove the Alder-tree disdain,
Or Maple of a double-colour'd grain.
The fruitful Pine, which on the mountain stands,
And there at large its noble front expands;
Thick-shooting Hazle, with the Quick beam set,
The Pitch-tree, Withy, Lotus ever wet;
With well-made trunk here let the Cornel grow,
And here Oriciau Terebinthus too;
And warlike Ash: but Birch and Ewe repress;
Let Pines and Firrs the highest hills possess:
Brambles and Brakes fill up each vacant space
With hurtful thorns; in your fields Walnuts place.
And hoary Iunipers, with Chestnuts good,
With hoops to barrel up Lyoeus blood.
The diffrence which in planting each is found,
Now learn; since the Elm with happy verdure's crowned:
Since its thick branches do themselves extend,
And a fair bark does the tall trunk commend;
With rows of Elm your garden or your field
May be adorned, and the Suns heat repelled.
They best the borders of your walks compose;
Their comely green still ornamental shows.
On a large flat continued ranks may rise,
Whose length will tire our feet, and bound our eyes.
The Gardens thus of Fountain-bleau are graced
By spreading Elms, which on each side are placed.
Where endless walks the pleased spectator views,
And every turn the verdant Scene renews.
The sage Gorycian thus his native field
Near swift Oobalian Galesus tilled.
A thousand ways of planting Elms he found;
With them he would sometimes enclose his ground:
Often in directer lines to plant he chose;
From one vast tree a numerous offspring rose.
Each younger Plant with its old Parent vies,
And from its trunk like branches still arise.
They hurt each other if too near they grow;
Therefore to all a proper space allow.
The Thracian Bard a pleasing Elm-tree chose,
Nor thought it was below him to repose
Beneath its shade, when he from hell returned,
And for twice-lost Enrydice so mourned.
Hard by cool Hebrus Rhodop' does aspire;
The Artist, here, no sooner touched his lyre,
But from the shade the spreading boughs drew near,
And the thick trees a sudden wood appear.
Holm, Withy, Cypress, Plane trees thither pressed:
The prouder Elm advanced before the rest;
And showing him his wife, the Vine, advised,
That Nuptial Rites were not to be despised.
But he the counsel scorned, and by his hate
Of Wedlock, and the Sex, incurred his fate.
High shooting Linden next exacts your care;
With grateful shades to those who take the air.
When these you plant, you still should bear in mind
Philemon and chaste Baucis: These were joined
In a poor Cottage, by their pious love,
Whose sacred ties did no less lasting prove,
Then life it self. They Jove once entertained,
And by their kindness so much on him gained;
That, being worn by times devouring rage,
He changed to trees their weak and useless age.
Though now transformed, they Male and Female are;
Nor did their change ought of their Sex impair.
Their Timber chiefly is for Turners good;
They soon shoot up, and rise into a wood.
Respect is likewise to the Maple due,
Whose leaves, both in their figure, and their hue,
Are like the Linden; but it rudely grows,
And horrid wrinkles all its trunk enclose.
The Pine, which spreads it self in every part,
And from each side large branches does impart,
Adds not the least perfection to your Groves;
Nothing the glory of its leaf removes.
A noble verdure ever it retains,
And over the humbler plants it proudly reigns.
To the Gods Mother dear; for Cybele
Turned her beloved Atys to this Tree.
On one of these vainglorious Marsyas died,
And paid his skin to Phoebus for his pride.
A way of boring holes in Box he found,
And with his artful fingers changed the sound.
Glad of himself, and thirsty after praise,
On his shrill Box he to the shepherds plays.
With thee, Apollo, next he will contend;
From thee all charms of music do descend.
But the bold Piper soon received his doom;
(who strive with Heaven never overcome.)
A strong made nut their apples fortifies,
Against the storms which threaten from the Skies.
The trees are hardy, as the fruits they bear,
And where rough winds the rugged mountains tear,
There flourish best: the lower vales they dread,
And languish if they have not room to spread.
Hazle dispersed in any place will live:
In stony grounds wild Ash, and Cornel thrive;
In more abrupt recesses these we find,
Spontaneously exposed to rain and wind.
Alder, and Withy, cheerful streams frequent,
And are the Rivers only ornament.
If ancient Fables are to be believed,
These were associates heretofore, and lived
On fishy Rivers, in a little Boat,
And with their Nets their painful living got.
The Festival approch'd; with one consent
All on the Rites of Pales are intent:
While these unmindful of the Holy Day,
Their Nets to dry upon the shore display.
But vengeance soon the offenders overtook,
Persisting still to labor in the Brook.
The angry Goddess fixed them to the shore,
And for their fault doomed them to work no more.
Thus to eternal idleness condemned;
They felt the weight of Heaven, when contemned.
The moisture of those streams by which they stand,
Indues them both with power to expand
Their leaves abroad; leaves, which from guilt look pale;
In which the never-ceasing Frogs bewail.
Let lofty hills, and each declining ground,
(For there they flourish) with tall Firrs abound.
Layers of these cut from some ancient Grove,
And buried deep in mold, in time will move
Young shoots above the earth, which soon disdain
The Southern blasts, and launch into the Main.
But in more even fields the Ash delights,
Where agood soil the generous Plant invites.
For from an Ash, which Pelion once did bear,
Divine Achilles took that happy Spear,
Which Hector killed; and in their Champions Fate
Involved the ruin of the Trojan State.
The Gods were kind to let brave Hector dye
By arms, as noble, as his enemy.
Ash, like the stubborn Hero in his end,
Always resolves rather to break then bend.
Some tears are due to the Heliades;
Those many which they shed deserve no less.
Grieved for their brothers death in Woods they range,
And worn with sorrow into Poplars change.
By which their grief was rend'red more divine,
While all their tears in precious Amber shine.
These, with your other Plants, still propagate:
It Is true indeed they are appropriate
To Italy alone, and near the Po,
Who gave them their first being, best they grow.
Into your Forests shady Poplars bring,
Which from their seed with equal vigor spring.
Rich Groves of Ebony let India show;
Iudaea Balsoms which in Gilead flow:
Persia from trees her silken Fleeces comb;
Arabia furnish the Sabaean Gum;
Whose odours sweetness to our Temples lend,
And at the Altar with our prayers ascend:
Yet I the Groves of France do more admire,
Which now on Meads, and now on hills aspire.
I not the Wood-nymph, not the Pontick Pine
Esteem, which boasts the splendour of its Line;
Or those which old Lycaeum did adorn;
Or Box on the Cytorian mountain born:
The Idaen Vale, or Erimanthian Grove,
In me no reverence, no horror move;
Since I no trees can find so large, so tall,
As those which fill the shady VVoods of Gause.
When from the cloven bud young boughs proceed,
And the Mast-bearing trees their leaves do spread;
The pestilential air often vitiates
The seasons of the year, and this creates
Whole swarms of Vermin, which the leaves assail,
And on the woods in numerous armies fall.
Creatures in different shapes together joined,
The horrid Eruc's, Palmer-worm designed
With its pestif'rous odours to annoy
Your Plants, and their young offspring to destroy.
Remember then to take these plagues away,
Lest they break out in the first showers of May.
From planting new, and lopping aged trees,
The prudent Ancients bid us never cease:
Thus no decay is in our Forests known;
But in their honor we preserve our own.
Thus in your fields a sudden race will rise,
Which with your Nurseries will yield supplies;
That may again some drooping Grove renew:
For trees like men have their successions too.
Their solid bodies worms and age impair,
And the vast Oak give place to his next heir.
While such designs employ your vacant hours,
As ordering your woods, and shady bowers;
Despise not humbler Plants, for they no less,
Then trees, your Gardens beauty do increase.
With what content we look on Myrtle Groves!
On verdant Laurels! There Is no man but loves
To find his Limon, with Acanthus, thrive.
To see the lovely Phyllirea live;
With Oleander. Ah! to what delights
Shorn Cypress, and sweet Gelsemine invites.
If any Plain be near your Garden found,
With Cypress, or with Horn-beam hedge it round.
Which in a thousand Mazes will conspire,
And to recesses unperceived retire.
Its branches, like a wall, the paths divide;
Affording a fresh Scene on every side.
It Is true, that it was honored heretofore;
But order quickly made valued more,
By its shorn leaves, and those delights which rose
From the distinguished forms in which it grows,
To some cool Arbor, by the ways deceit,
Allured, we haste, or some oblique retreat:
Where underneath its umbrage we may meet
With sure defense against the raging heat.
Though Cypresses contiguous well appear,
They better show if planted not so near.
And since to any shape, with ease, they yield,
What bound's more proper to divide a field?
Repine not Cyparissus, then in vain;
For by your change you glory did obtain.
Silvanus and this Boy with equal fire
Did heretofore a lovely Heart admire;
While in the cooler Pastures once it fed,
An arrow shot at random struck it dead.
But when the youth the dying beast had found,
And knew himself the author of the wound,
With never ceasing sorrow he laments,
And on his breast his grief and anger vents.
Silvanus moved with the poor creatures fate,
Converts his former love to present hate.
And no more pity in his angry words,
Then to himself the afflicted youth affords.
Weary of life, and quite oppressed with woe,
Upon the ground his tears in channels flow:
Which having watered the productive earth,
The Cypress first from thence derived its birth,
With Silvan's aid; nor was it only meant
TO express our sorrow, but for ornament.
Chiefly when growing low your fields they bound,
Or when your Gardens Avenues are crowned
With their long rows; sometimes it; serves to hide
Some Trench delining on the other side.
The unequal branches always keep that green,
Of which its leaves are never divested seen.
Though shook with storms, yet it unmoved remains,
And by its trial greater glory gains.
Let Phyllirea on your walls be placed,
Either with wire, or slender twigs made fast.
Its brighter leaf with proudest Arras vies,
And lends a pleasing object to our eyes.
Then let it freely on your walls ascend,
And there its native Tapestry extend.
Nor knows he well to make his Garden shine
With all delights, who fragrant Iassemine
Neglects to cherish, wherein heretofore
Industrious Bees laid up their precious store.
Unless with poles you fix it to the wall,
Its own deceitful trunk will quickly fall.
These shrubs, like wanton Ivy, still mount high;
But wanting strength on other props rely.
The pliant branches which they always bear,
Make them with ease to any thing adhear.
The pleasing odors which their flowers expire,
Make the young Nymphs and Matrons them desire,
Those to adorn themselves withal; but these
To grace the Altars of the Deities.
With foreign Iassemine be also stored,
Such as Iberian Valleys do afford:
Those which we borrow from the Portuguese;
With them which from the Ind^es over the Seas
We fetch by ship; in each of which we find
A difference of color, and of kind.
Though gentle Zephyrus propitious proves,
And welcome Spring the rigid cold removes;
Haste not too soon this tender Plant to expose.
Your Gardens glory, the rash Primrose, shows
Delay is better; since they often are lost,
By venturing too much into the frost.
The cruel blasts which come from the North wind,
To overhasty flowers are still unkind.
Let others ills create this good in you,
Without deliberation nothing do.
For this will scarce the open air endure,
Till by sufficient warmth it is secure.
No Tree your Gardens, or your Fountains more
Adorns, then what the Atlantic Apples bore.
A deathless beauty crowns its shining leaves,
And to dark Groves its flower luster gives.
Besides the splendor of its golden fruit,
Of which the boughs are never destitute;
This generous Shrub in Cases then dispose,
Made of strong Oak, these little woods compose;
Whose gilded fruits, and flowers which never fade,
A grace to the Country and your Garden add,
Proud of the treasures Nature has bestowed.
When snowy flowers the slender branches load,
And straying Nymphs to gather them prepare,
Molest them not; but let your Wife be there;
Your Children, all your Family employ,
That so your house its orders may enjoy:
That with sweet Garlands all may shade their brows;
For in their flow'is these Plants their vigor lose
Suffer the Nymphs to crop luxuriant trees,
And with their fragrant wreaths themselves to please.
Such soft delights they love; then let them still
With their fresh-gather'd fruit their bosoms fill.
These Apples Atalanta once betrayed:
They, and not Love, o'recame the cruel Maid.
These were the golden Balls which slack'd her pace,
And made her lose the honor of the race.
But these sweet smells, and pleasant shades will cease,
Nor longer be your Gardens happiness;
Unless the hostile winter be represt,
And those strong blasts sent from the stormy East.
Wherefore to hinder these from doing harm,
You must your trees with walls defensive arm.
To such warm seats they ever are inclined,
Where they avoid the fury of the wind.
These Plants, besides that they this cold would shun,
Look for the Assyrian, and the Median Sun.
In parched Africa they flourish more,
Then if they grow by Strimons Icy shore.
Lest then the frost, or barbarous North should blast
Your flowers, while all the Sky is over-cast
With duskish clouds, sheds set apart prepare,
To guard them from the winters piercing air;
Till the kind Sun these tempests does disperse,
And with his influence chears the Universe.
Then calmer breezes shall over storms prevail,
And your fresh Groves shall sweet Perfumes exhale.
These trees are various, and the fruits they bear,
Are different too. The Limons always are
Of oval figure, underneath whose rind
A juice ungrateful to our taste we find.
But though at first our Palates it displease,
Yet better with our stomach it agrees.
Others less sharp do in Hetruria spring;
Some, that are mild, from Portugal we bring.
Another sort from old Aurantia came,
To which that City does impart its name.
Hard by Dircaean Aracynthus lies
This ancient Town; the Orange hence do'srise.
To which in rind and juice the Limons yield,
By each new soil new tastes are often instilled.
Mind not the fables by the Grecians told
Of the Hesperian Sisters, who of old
On vast Mount Atlas, near the Libyan Sea,
With greatest care did cultivate this Tree
Of fierce Alcides, who by force brake in,
And in the spoils of the Nemean skin;
And from the Dragon, who securely slept,
Stole, with success, the apples which he kept.
Returned to the Aventine, he sets that hill,
With Orange Trees, which Italy now fill.
But things of greater moment are behind;
For Purple Oleander may be joined
With Oranges, and Myrtles; each of these
Peculiar graces of their own possess.
The Myrtle chiefly, which, if fame says true,
From the God's bounty its beginning drew.
When Venus placed it in the pleasant shade
Of the Idaean Vales, about it played
Whole troops of wanton Cupids, while the night
Was clear, and Cynthia did display her light.
This Citherea above all prefers,
And by transcendent favor made it hers.
With Myrtle, hence, the wedded pair delights
To crown their brows at Hymenaeal Rites.
Hence Juno, who at Marriages presides,
For Nuptial Torches always these provide.
Eriphyle, sad Procris, Phaedra too,
And all those fools, who in Elysium woo,
Honor this Plant, and under Myrtle Groves,
If after death they last, recount their loves.
Proud Victors with its boughs themselves adorn,
While round their temples wreaths with it are worn.
Tudertus, when the vanquished Sabines fled,
Placed one of these on his triumphant head.
The trunk is humble, and the top as low,
On which soft leaves and curled branches grow.
Its grateful smell, and beauty so exact,
The admiring Nymphs from every part attract.
If too much heat, or sudden cold surprise,
Which are alike the Myrtles enemies,
You must avoid them both, and quickly place
The tender Plant within a wooden Case.
Sheds may protect them, if the cold be great;
Or watring from the Summers scorching heat,
No impious tool our tenderness allows,
To fell these groves, nor cattle here must browse
Often Oleanders in great Vasd's live,
With Myrtles mixed, and Oranges, and give
Some graces to your Garden, which arise
From the confusion of their different dies.
In watery Vales, where pleasant Fountains flow,
Their fragrant berries lovely Bay-trees show.
With leaves for ever green, nor can we guess
By their endowments their extraction less.
The charming Nymph lived by clear Peneus side,
And might to Love himself have been allied,
But that she chose in virtues path to tread,
And thought a God unworthy of her bed.
Phoebus, whose darts of late successful proved
In Pythons death, expected to be loved.
And had she not withstood blind Cupids power,
The siery steeds and hea'vn had been her dower.
But she by her refusal more obtained,
And losing him, immortal honor gained.
Cherished by thee Apollo. Temples wear
The Bays, and every clamorous Theater.
The Capitol it self; and the proud gate
Of great Tarpeian Love they celebrate.
Into the Delphick Rites, the Stars they dive,
And all the hidden laws of Fate perceive.
They in the field (where death, and danger's found;
Where clashing Arms, (and louder Trumpets sound)
Incite true courage: hence the Bays, each Muse,
The inspiring God, and all good Poets choose.
Persian Ligustrum grows among the rest,
Whose azure flowers imitate the Crest
Of an Exotic Fowl; they first appear
When the warm Sun, and kinder Spring draws near.
Then the green leaves upon the boughs depend,
And sweet Perfumes into the air ascend.
Pomegranates next their glory vindicate;
Their boughs in gardens pleasing charms create.
Nothing their flaming Purple can exceed,
From the green leaf the golden flowers proceed:
Whose splendour, and the various curls they yield,
Add more then usual beauty to the field.
As soon as e're the flowers fade away,
Yet to preserve their luster from decay,
To them the fruit succeeds, which in a round
Conforms it self, whose top is ever crowned
In seats apart, stained with the Tyrian dye,
A thousand seeds within in order lie.
Thus, when industrious Bees do undertake
To raise a waxen Empire, first they make
Rooms for their honey in divided rows;
And last of all, on twigs the Combs dispose.
So every seed a narrow cell contains,
Made of hard skin, which all the frame sustains.
Neither to sharp or sweet the seeds incline
Too much, but in one mixture both conjoyn.
From whence this Crown, this Tincture is derived,
We now relate; the Nymph in Africa lived:
Descended from the old Numidians Race,
Beauty enough adorned her swarthy face;
As much as that tanned Nation can admit,
Too much, unless her stars had equaled it.
Moved by ambition she desired to know
What e're the Priests or Oracles could show
Of things to come, a Kingdom they dispense
In words including an ambiguous sense.
She thought a crown no less had signified,
But in the Priests she did in vain confide.
When Bacchus the Author of the fruitful Vine
From India came, her for his Concubine
He takes; and to repair her honor lost,
Presents her with a Crown; by fate thus crossed,
The too ambitious Virgin ceased to be;
Transmitting her own beauty to this Tree.
Sharp Paliurus, Rhamnus, (which by some
Is White-thorn termed) your Garden will become.
There leavy Caprifoil, Alcaea too,
The Idaean Bush, and Halimus may grow.
Woody Acanthus; Ruscus there may spring,
With other Shrubs, these skilful Gardeners bring
Into a thousand forms; but it is not fit
To tell their Species almost infinite.
From brighter woods the prospect may descend
Into your Garden, there it self extend
In spacious walks, divided equally,
Where the same angles in all parts agree,
In oblique windings others plant their Groves,
For every man a different figure loves.
Thus the same paths, respecting still their bound
In various tracts diffuse themselves around.
Whether your walks are strait, or crooked made,
Let gravel, or green turf be on them laid.
The Nymphs and Matrons then in woods may meet,
There walk, and to refresh their wearied feet,
Into their Chariots mount, though to the young
Labor and exercise does more belong.
If close-shorn Phylliraea you deduce
Into a hedge, for knots the Carpine use;
Or into Arbors with a hollow back,
The pliant twigs of soft Acanthus make.
With stronger wires the flowing branches bind.
For if the boughs by nothing are confined,
The Tonsile Hedge no longer will excel;
But uncontrolled beyond its limits swell.
And since the lawless Grass will often invade
The neighboring walks, repress the aspiring blade
Suffer no grass, or rugged dirt to impair
Your smoother paths; but to the Gardeners care
These things we leave; they are his business,
With setting flowers, and planting fruitful trees.
And with the master let the servants join,
With him their willing hearts and hands combine:
Some should with rowlers tame the yielding ground,
Making it plain, where ruder clods abound.
Some may fit moisture to your Meadows give,
And to the Plants and Garden may derive
Refreshing streams; let others sweep away
The fallen leaves; mend hedges that decay;
Cut off superfluous boughs; or with a Spade
Find where the Moles their winding nests have made;
Then close them up: Another flowers may sow
In beds prepared; on all some task hestow:
That if the Master happens to come down,
To fly the smoke and clamor of the Town;
He in his Villa none may idle find,
But secret joys may please his wearied mind.
And blessed is he, who tired with his affairs,
Far from all noise, all vain applause, prepares
To go, and underneath some silent shade,
Which neither cares nor anxious thoughts invade,
Does, for a while, himself alone possess;
Changing the Town for Rural happiness.
He, when the Suns hot steeds to the Ocean have,
Ere sable night the world has over-cast,
May from the hills the fields below descry,
At once diverting both his mind and eye.
Or if he please, into the woods may stray,
Listen to the Birds, which sing at break of day:
Or, when the Cattle come from pasture, hear
The bellowing Ox, the hollow Valleys tear
With his hoarse voice: Sometimes his flowers invite:
The Fountains too are worthy of his sight.
To every part he may his care extend,
And these delights all others so transcend,
That we the City now no more respect,
Or the vain honors of the Court affect.
But to cool Streams, to aged Groves retire,
And the unmixed pleasures of the fields desire.
Making our beds upon the grassie bank,
For which no art, but nature we must thank.
No Marble Pillars, no proud Pavements there,
No Galleries, or fretted Roofs appear,
The modest rooms to India nothing owe;
Nor Gold, nor Ivory, nor Arras know:
Thus lived our Ancestors, when Saturn reigned,
While the first Oracles in Oaks remained,
A harmless course of life they did pursue;
And naught beyond their hills their Rivers knew.
Rome had not yet the Universe ingrost,
Her Seven Hills few Triumphs then could boast.
Small herds then grazed in the Laurenitne Mead;
Nor many more the Arician Valleys feed.
Of Rural Ornaments, of Woods much more
I could relate, then what I have before:
But what is unfinished my next care requires,
And my tired Bark the neighboring Port desires.
RAPINUS OF GARDENS.
Book III. WATER.
OF pleasant Floods, and Streams, my Muse now sings,
Of Crystal Lakes, Grotts, and transparent Springs.
By these a Garden is more charming made,
They chiefly beautify the Rural Shade.
To me ye River-gods, your influence give,
If Deities in Springs, in Rivers live.
Into the secret caverns of the earth,
Where these perennial waters have their birth,
I now descend; as well to know the source,
As to explore which way they take their course.
To learn where all this liquid Treasure lies,
And whence the Channels still have fresh supplies.
Wherefore let those who would instructed be
In Aquaeducts, their Precepts take from me.
Into the unskilful Gardener I Will infufe
What may be ornamental, what of use.
You then who would your Villa's grace augment
And on its honor always are intent:
You who employ your time to cultivate
Your Gardens, and to make their glory great:
Among your groves and flowers let water flow;
Water, the soul of groves and slow'rs too.
He that intends to do as I direct,
Must in the Vales the scattered floods collect.
He into th'bowels of the earth must dive,
To find out Springs, which may the fields revive,
All parched and dry; for else, within a while.
No grass will live upon the thirsty Soil.
Nor is it hard to do what you desire,
If on the neighboring Hills some Rock aspire;
For in such places waters always flow,
From whence you may refresh the Meads belows
Thus the swift Loir, the Rhine, and the Garonne,
Parisian Sein, the Sealdis, and the Rhone;
The mighty Danube too, and almost all
The streams in nature from the mountains fall.
Whether some space be in the hollow Caves,
Made for a receptacle of the Waves;
Or that the vital air no sooner feels
The included cold, but it as soon distills
Into small Brooks; thus the warm Caverns sweat
Such humid drops, as when the season's wet,
And winter has obscured the air again,
From marble pillars are observed to drain.
With dewy moisture lofty Cliffs abound,
All places weep perhaps into the ground,
And through the hills, helped by the Rain and Snows,
The water runs, still sinking at it goes.
Till forced for want of room, it then disdains
More narrow bounds, insulting over the Plains.
Those before others should our credit gain,
Who would deduce all Fountains from the Main:
Whose boundless waves the Universe embrace,
And penetrate into each vacant space,
Each cranny of the earth; as in our veins
That active blood which humane life sustains,
Is always moved, so the Ocean circulates,
And into every part it self dilates.
Hence, though all rivers to the Ocean have,
And in its depth are swallowed up at last:
Yet these additions make it not run over,
Or violate the limits of the shore.
Nor is the ground so close together knit,
But that its Pores and Caverns will admit
The subtle waves, which sinking by degrees,
Descend into its deep Concavities.
When uncontrolled, they gently take their course;
But if disturbed, they make their way by force.
Where frequent clefts the gaping earth divide,
The waters there in greater plenty slide.
Thus too fresh streams do from the sea proceed,
Which of their native Salt are wholly freed.
They through the sand, and crook'd Maeanders stray,
And through uneven places force their way,
Strained by their soyls, through which they are convai'd,
They lose that brackishness which once theyhad
No taste, no other color water knows,
But what alone its mother Earth bestows.
For she alone distinguishes its end;
By causing it to heal, or to offend.
Borbon and Pugia such Springs produce,
Which borrow from the ground a wholesome juice.
By drinking them, diseases reign no more,
To dying men they welcome health restore:
The Gods in nothing more their power declare,
In nothing more we may discern their care.
What need of drugs? what use of Medicine?
Pains cannot, dare not conquer aids divine.
Art sure must starve; Physicians must grow poor,
If nature the decays of nature cure.
Let your first labor be to find a Spring,
Which from the neighboring hillock you may bring.
Such places seldom fail of these supplies,
Therefore with digging you must exercise
The earth, be diligent on every side:
Then if success be to your hopes denied;
If heavy sand composed the glebe, in vain
You wish for what you never can obtain.
When in their field some have for Fountains sought,
Which thence they to their Gardens would have brought,
I saw their thirsty wishes unrepaid;
While the deaf Gods neglected those who prayed.
Where the Medonian hills do lose their hight,
There lately dwell'd the greatest Favorite
Fortune e're had, the greatest France e're saw,
A hundred Plows his numerous Oxen draw.
The Treasures of the Kingdom he commands,
The nerves of peace and war were in his hands,
To be disposed of, as the King thought fit,
And as the rules of Government permit.
He on the advantage of the Hill had placed
A noble House, which underneath was graced
By a large Plain, over which it might be seen
From Paris, and the Country too between.
No Gardens there, no Woods were wanting found,
The spacious Prospect stretched it self around.
But by the grassie banks no water straid,
Nor with hoarse murmurs wanton rivers played.
The owner of the Seat, a thousand ways,
To find out Springs beneath the earth essays.
He left no means, no charges unapply'd:
All the efforts of art and labor tried.
Still his desire of Fountains did incerease,
And no repulses made his wishes cease,
With empty hopes he feed his longing mind,
And sought for that which he could never find.
For though he left no place unsearch'd, unmoved,
Yet his attempts still unsuccessful proved.
So hard it is, unless the Soil consent,
To find a Spring; which done, your thanks present
To the kind Gods, the Rural Power adore;
Do this, as I have done for you before.
Water, it is true, through Pipes may be convaid
From hollow Pits; so Fountains often are made,
By Art, when Nature aids not our designs,
The pensile Machine to a Tunnel joins;
Which by the motion of a Siphon straight,
The element attracts, though by its weight
It be deprest; and thus, O Sein, thy waves
Beneath Pontneuf, the tall Samarian Laves;
And pours them out above: But let all those,
Who want these helps, to him address their vows,
Whose arm, whose voice alone can water draw,
And make obdurate rocks to rivers thaw.
Now that success may equalize your pains,
Because the Earth the Searcher entertains
With seeming hopes, these cautions take from me,
Which may prevent too rash credulity.
Where small declining hillocks you perceive,
Or a^ soil where Flags and Rushes live,
Where the fat ground a slimy moisture yields,
If weeds and prickly sedge o'respread the fields;
There hidden Springs with confidence expect:
For sedgy places still to Springs direct.
The same Conyza which with Sea-weed grows,
And Moss condensed upon the surface shows,
Batrachium, and Sium too express
Unerring marks of neighboring streams. No less
By reedy Calamint we may divine.
But you may make the scattered floods combine
And though in diffrent hills they were begun,
They must united to your Garden run.
If in the hanging brow of some near hill,
A copious vein be found; then if you will,
You may of lead, or earthen tiles make use,
And so the Springs into the Vales deduce.
For where the little vein you would compel,
By adventitious waters still to swell;
There hollow Vaults of Slate do best convay
The Springs themselves, and Rains which fall that way.
The adjacent Brooks which ran before to waste,
Will by degrees to these Enclosures haste.
Collected there they soon the Channels fill,
Which will at length to larger currents swell.
Next that the waves may unmolested slide,
And not through rough and darksom winding, glide;
That you may separate the gross sediment,
At distances with drains your course indent.
For where through even ways the stream runs strong,
That heavy slime, which it had forced along,
Proceeds, till the next trench its course controlls,
Then intercepted sinks into the holes.
Though under ground the vaulted channel goes,
Yet grates upon the top of Wells dispose;
Through which the water may its passage find,
Leaving the dirt and slimy mud behind.
No sordid mire can make it now less pure,
Since by these means'tis rendered more secure.
What if illustrious Medicea calls
Arcolian Springs to the Parisian walls?
Though her endeavors Aquaeducts have made,
And murmuring streams on hollow bridges laid?
Yet such expenses are too great sor me,
Nor with my narrow fortune can agree.
With endless walls the stately Pile appears,
Which a proud row of haughty arches bears.
Within the Vault suspended waters flow,
Over cloven hills, and vales which lie below.
For with stone-walls the distances are joined,
To their extent the current is confined.
Hence come those Springs, which all the City bless.
The Royal bounty caused this happiness.
For public work on public souls depend;
To them no private fortune can pretend.
Such benefits from them alone are due,
Who with their treasures have profuseness too.
Though your estate be great, let me advise,
That to no public works you sacrifice,
That which your Fathers left: for he is to blame,
Who with his ruin buys an empty name.
In all such enterprises ruin lurks;
Who have not sunk themselves in Waterworks?
Be modest therefore, fly from all extremes;
And in canales of tile convay your streams.
Or troughs of Alder prostrate on the ground,
For to this purpose they are useful found.
But blessed is he, who can without the aid
Of lead, or tile, or troughs of Alder made,
All through his Garden neighboring Brooks dispose;
Such as near Paris noble Bearny shows:
Where copious Bivara the happy place
With swelling waves does pleasingly embrace.
And such is Liancourt; so we admire
At Borguiel in Anjou the rapid Loire.
Which through the wide Salmurian Vales and Meads,
It self with loud resounding murmurs spreads;
Abounding so with water Polycrene,
(If nature would have suffered it) had been,
Whose warbling noise the Poets now invites,
And the inspiring Muses more delights.
Nor be offended lovely Fountain, though
Through Sancaronian Forests thou do go;
Though the unkind earth affords no smoother way,
And makes thee through uneven chamberstray:
Yet art thou welcome to Lamon: If so
With thy moist springs and streams which ever flow,
Thou would refresh his gardens, and agree
To wash sweet Bavillaeum, thou would be
More fortunate, thy Deity would seem
The greatest then in Themis's esteem.
For where we find a liberal vein at hand,
And can with ease the neighboring waves command,
It Is better far then Pipes of brittle lead,
Which often crack, as often the liquor shed.
Besides confinement is an injury;
A force on water which was ever free.
But if the place you live in be so dry,
That neither Springs nor Rivers they are nigh;
Then at some distance from your garden make
Within the gaping earth a spacious Lake:
That like a Magazine may comprehend
The assembled floods, which from the hills descend,
And all the bottom pave with chalky lome,
Since that can best the falling waves overcome.
How to distribute Springs I now impart;
The means of spreading them, and with what art
Their motion must be gulded; how restrained;
Your Gardener all these things must understand.
The docile streams will any shape put on;
A thousand different courses they will run.
All these instructions I to none refuse,
Who listen to the dictates of my Muse.
If you would have your water useful be,
Where neighboring Vales beneath your Garden lie,
In Pipes of lead let it be closely penned;
Without restraint it never will ascend.
Others do rather brazen Conduits use,
That the stiff metal might more strength infuse;
To make the imprisoned Element retire,
And then with greater force again aspire.
But still take heed that the included air
Within the Pipes move no intestine war:
That its fierce motion force them not to leak,
And to get loose, the empty prison break.
Therefore through spiracles the air restore,
To those wide mansions it possessed before.
Thus in Falernian Cellars, when the Wine,
Which is the product of that generous Vine,
Is poured into the Cask, and hoop't about,
They leave a vent to let the air go out:
Were this undone, the wine would quickly fly
Through the weak ribs, and all restraint defy.
When in your gardens entrance you provide,
The waters, there united, to divide:
First, in the middle a large Fountain make;
Which from a narrow pipe its rise may take,
And to the air those waves, by which it is fed,
Remit again: About it raise a bed
Of moss, or grass, or if you think this base,
With well-wrought Marble circle in the place.
Statues of various shapes may be disposed
About the Tube; sometimes it is enclosed
By dubious Scylla; or with Sea-calves graced;
Or by a brazen Triton it is embraced.
A Triton thus at Luxembourg presides,
And from the Dolphin, which he proudly ricles.
Spouts out the streams: This place, though beautisied
With Marble round, though from Arcueill supplied;
Yet to Saint Cloud must yield in this out-shin'd,
That there the Hostel d'Orleans we find.
The little Town, the Groves before scarce known,
Enabled thus, will now give place to none.
So great an owner any seat improves;
One whom the King, one whom the people loves.
This Garden, as a Pattern, may be shown
To those who would add beauty to their own.
All other Fountains this so far transcends,
That none in France besides with it contends.
None so much plenty yields; none flows so high,
A Gulf, in the middle of the Pond do'slye,
In which a swollen tunnel opens wide;
Through hissing chinks the waters freely slide;
And in their passage like a whirlwind move,
With rapid force into the air above;
As if a watery dart were upward thrown.
But when these haughty waves do once fall down,
Resounding loud, they on each other beat,
And with a dewy shower the Basin wet.
How Fountains first had being now I tell;
If any truth in ancient stories dwell.
Hard by the Phasian Bank, with prosperous Gales,
Armed with his Club, while great Alcides sails;
A band of Argian youth was with him sent,
And among them his dearest Hylas went.
Near old Ascanius in Bithynia stood
A lofty Grove of Beech: as by this Wood
The swift Bank sayls, the weary Minyae land,
And stretch their limbs on the inviting Sand.
The nimble Favorite now goes in quest
Of hidden Springs, and wanders from the rest;
With travel tired he comes to one at last,
Straight from his shoulders on the grass he cast
The weighty Pitcher which they hither bore;
And for refreshment sits upon the shore.
Ascanius had invited to a feast
The neighboring Nymphs, fair Isis thither pressed,
With graceful Ephyra, the Inachian Dame,
And Lycaonian Melanina came.
The Rural, and the River-Nymphs were here,
And none were absent, whose abodes were near.
The Charms of Hylus Isis first surprise;
His features she admires; his sparkling eyes,
On the green turf the weary youth reposed:
Now all her artifices she disclosed;
She uses all the Artillery of Love,
All that could pity or affection move;
And though she saw but little cause, so vain
All Lovers are, she hoped he loved again.
While he by stooping to draw water strives,
Either the slippery bank his foot deceives;
Or by the vessels weight too much oppressed,
He tumbles in; to succor the distressed
Kind Isis soon approch'd; the offered aid
Not with acceptance, but with scorn he paid.
The assisting waves he scatters in the wind,
And wrestles with that stream which would be kind.
Now all the other Nymphs their prayers unite,
And to the room with Pumice arched invite
The sullen boy; there promise he shall be,
As he deserved, a liquid Deity.
Resusing still, his arms now wearied lose
Their strength, and he a sacred Fountain grows.
To which the Nymph indulging her revenge,
(For Love repulsed to cruelty will change)
Designs still proud, a lofty Genius gave,
That it by nature might a difference have
From other water; always might aspire,
Always, in vain, to be more high desire.
A copious fall its ruin hastens on;
And by its own ambition it is undone.
Mean while Alcides all along the Coast,
Vainly enquires for him whom he had lost:
The Ascanian Shores, the hills his name resound,
The Rocks and Woods of Hylas echo round.
Hylas, whose change alone was the first cause,
That water rises against natures laws.
Thus he, who the embrace of Isis flies,
Was punished by that Nymph he did despise.
Hence spouting streams in verdant Groves we see,
And noble Gardens to a luxury,
By Art diversified: for powerful Art
To the ambitious water can impart
Such diff rent shapes, as great Ruel can boast,
Where glorious Richlieu with excessive cost,
And pains, the waves into subjection brings;
And still survives in Monumental Springs.
All this he did, while he, not Lewis reigned,
And Atlas-like the tottering State sustained.
Here variously disposed the Fountains run,
First headlong fall, then rise where they begun.
Receive all forms, and move on every side;
With horrid noise, Chimaera gaping wide,
Out of her open mouth the water throws.
For from her mouth a rapid torrent flows,
From her wide throat, as waves in circles spout,
A Serpent turning sprinkles all the rout.
A brazen Hunter watchfully attends;
And threatening death the crooked tunnel bends.
Instead of shot, thence pearly drops proceed;
Drops not so fatal as if made of Lead.
This soon the laughter of the vulgar moves,
Whose acclamation the deceit approves.
But why should I repeat how many ways
In the deep Caves Art with the water plays?
The place grows moist with artificial Rain,
And hissing Springs, which here burst out amain.
Rebounding high, streams every where sweat through,
And with great drops the hanging stones bedew.
They who the Grotts, and Fountains over-see,
May as they please the streams diversifie.
Though the kind Naiades comply with those,
Who when they Grotts of Pebble do compose,
And Springs bring in, still beautify the Cells,
With Eastern stones, or Erythraean shells.
Others of hollow Pumice may be made,
And well-plac'd shells may on the top be laid.
But all these arts, which modern ages own,
Were to our happy ancestors unknown.
These sights must be exposed to the peoples view,
Whose greedy eyes such novelties pursue.
To serious things you must your self apply,
And water love in greater quantity:
Learn how to manage it when it falls down,
Either that like a River it may crown
The deeper brims of some capacious Lake;
Or the resemblance of a Pond may make.
The tube, if wide enough, may more contain,
And at a distance render it again.
Plenty in Fountains always graceful shows,
And greatest beauty from abundance flows.
Nor is the spout of water to be poised
One way, or in one form to be comprised,
It must be varied, if you pleasure seek.
Some from divided streams make showers break.
The Solar Rays and Light some represent;
Or from a twanging Bow swift arrows sent;
Others in waves from Precipices cast,
More pleasure take; then raped about as fast,
In little they Charybdie imitats,
Which so indangers the Sicilan Straight.
As in the bubling brass, over rustling fires,
Hot liquor boils, the water so aspires.
Where it abounds, the current, there divide
Into small brooks, which over the fields may glide.
And into ponds these brooks must fall at last;
Lest the best Element should run to wast.
Now learn how art restrains the wandering flood,
And at due distance makes it spread abroad.
Though to its natural course the stream's inclined,
And being free is hard to be confined;
Yet you may soon compel it to that course
Which you prescribe, and make it run by force
Through dubious errors; for it will delight
To take false channels, having lost the right.
By frequent windings water thus is staid,
Till over all the field it is convaid.
So Amymona's fabled to have erred,
As soon as Neptunes passion she had heard.
The unhappy Virgin, fearing her disgrace,
Follows, and flies her self with equal pace,
Perhaps she had not yet the power to see.
That she was changed by the amorous Deity
Changed to a stream; which in her footsteps strays,
And through Dircaean fields its pace delays.
Rivers diffused a thousand ways may pass,
With hastening waves through the divided grass.
Like sudden torrents, which the rain gives head,
Through precipices some may swiftly spread;
And in the pebbles a soft noise excite.
Some on the surface with a timorous flight,
May steal; if any thing its speed retard,
Then its shrill murmurs through the fields are heard.
Enraged it, leaps up high, and with weak strokes
The pebbles, which it overflows, provokes.
Threatening the bank it beats against the shore,
And roots of trees which froth all sprinkles over.
That slender brook, from whence hoarse noises came,
Which as it had no substance, had no name;
When other riv'lets from the Vales come in,
The Ignoble current then will soon begin
To gather strength; for bridges may be fit,
And by degrees great Vessels will admit.
Sometimes by grassie banks the River goes;
Sometimes with joy it skips upon green moss;
Sometimes it murmurs in exalted Groves,
And with its threats the narrow path reproves.
Whken it is dispersed, then let the Meads be drowned,
Let slimy mud enrich the barren ground.
If it runs deep, with dams its force restrain;
And from the Meadows noxious water drain.
Where from their fountains rivers do break loose,
And the moist Spring the Valleys overflows;
When on the Meads black showers do descend,
With mounds of earth the Groves from floods defend.
As different figures best with streams agree,
So on the sides let there some difference be.
Still with variety the borders grace,
There either grass, or fragrant flowers place;
Or with a wharf of stone the bank secure;
But troubled Fens let their own feeds obscure:
Or Weeds, where croaking Frogs and Moorhens lie;
Nothing but grass your banks must beautify.
Where silver Springs afford transparent waves,
And glist'ring sand the even bottom paves.
On which green Elms their leaves in Autumn sheed.
Thus Rivers both our care and culture need.
While in their channels they run headlong down,
We must take heed, that, as they have, no stone
Fallen from the hanging brink, may keep them back,
And through the Vales their course uneasy make.
Ye Springs and Fountains in the Woods resound,
And with your noise the silent Groves confound.
Frequent their windings, all their avenues,
And into the dry roots new life infuse.
While pleasant streams invite your thoughts and eyes,
And with resistless charms your sense surprise;
Of humane life you then may meditate,
Obnoxious to the violence of fate,
Life unperceived, like Rivers, steals away.
And though we court it, yet it will not stay.
Then may you think of its incertainty.
Constant in nothing but inconstancy.
See what rude waves disturb the things below,
And through what stormy voyages we go.
So Hypanis, you will say, and Peneus so,
Simois, and Volsoian Amasenus flow;
Naupactian Achelous, Inachus,
With slow Melanthus, swift Parthenius,
Thus ran along, and so Dyraspes went,
Whose current Borysthenian streams augment.
Besides the Fountains, which to art we owe,
That falls of water also can bestow
Such, as on rugged Iura we descry,
On Rocks; and on the Alps which touch the Sky.
Where from steep precipices it descends,
And where America it self extends
To the rude North; exposed to Eurus blast:
On Canadas bold shore the Ocean past.
There among Groves of Fit-trees ever green,
Streams falling headlong from the Cliffs are seen:
The cataracts resound along the shore;
Struck with the noise, the Woods and Valleys rore.
These wonders which by nature here are shown,
Ruellian Naiads have by Art outdone.
Into the air a Rock with lofty head
Aspires, the hasty waters thence proceed.
Dashed against rugged places they descend,
And broken thus themselves in foam they spend.
They sound, as when some torrent uncontrolled,
With mighty force is from a Mountain rolled.
The earth with horrid noise affrighted groans,
Flints which lie underneath, and moistened stones,
Are beat with waves; the untrodden paths resound,
And groves and woods do loudly echo round.
But if on even ground your Garden stand,
If no unequal hill, or cliff command,
Whence you the falling waters may revoke,
From the declining ridge of some kind rock.
Then in long ranges your Cascades digest:
The Nymph of Liancourt so hers has dressed.
For by the Gardens side, the Rivers pass
From no steep cliff, but down a bank of grass.
Nor should it less deserve of our esteem,
When from an even bed diffused the stream
Runs down a polished rock, and as it flows,
Like Linen in the air expanded shows.
The Textile flood a slender Current holds,
And in a wavy veil the place infolds.
But these Cascades and sports you need not there,
Where spacious Pools with wider brims appear.
And scarce within their banks and chambers held,
Run into brooks, and visit all the field.
And to this end, if my advice you take,
In the low places of your Garden make,
Besides the other Springs, large trenches too;
To which from every part the streams may flow.
For little Brooks and Springs are not so good,
Nor please so much as a more noble flood.
But if square Pools, and deeper Ponds you love,
Dig a broad channel; all the earth remove;
To make it level to that watery bed,
Or the deep Marsh by which it must be fed.
Then with a wharf of stone secure the place,
With cement bound; let this the shore embrace.
For the foundation you with stone must lay;
Though that it self has often been forced away.
Always by force the Element restrain,
And let the shores the raging floods contain.
The empty Lakes from Springs will be supplied,
Brought from the field along the Gardens side.
An hundred Brooks from flowing never cease,
And with their plenty make the Pools increase.
Some I have seen, who all their ponds have filled,
With those supplies which the deep torrents yield.
And in a Laver, by its bank enclosed,
The waves collected in the vales disposed:
Collected through the fields from fallen rains.
And Bavillaeum such a Pond maintains.
The Nymph o'th place has this of late prepared
The owners fortune has the house repaired.
From him the seat its greatest glory draws,
And he obtained his honor by the laws.
The slender stream through ancient ruins went,
Unless the Winter showers did augment
Its force, it washed a Villa quite decai'd,
And with its sullied waves through rubbish straid.
The Sancaronian Cattle on the brink,
And Bavillaean Cows were wont to drink.
Once with a leap I could have past it over,
But its great master quickly did restore
The beauty it had lost; and as he rose,
So still with him the current bigger grows.
That which with rushes covered ran of late,
Though small, was destined to a better Fate.
In a great Laver now the water swells,
And stored with Fish a spacious channel fills.
The graver Senators here often meet;
Here the Civilians, and the Lawyers sit.
Here wearied with the Town, and their affairs,
They please themselves, and put off all their cares.
A Spout whose fall makes all the garden sound,
Discharges in the middle of the Pond.
Nor will the plenteous waters please you less,
When in the ground a circle they possess.
Which Figure with a Garden best agrees:
If on the grassie bank a Grove of Trees,
With shining Scenes, and branches hanging down,
The seats of stone, and verdant shores does crown.
But whether they stand still, or swiftly glide,
With their broad leaves let Woods the Rivers hide.
Bestowing on each place their cooling shade;
For Springs by that alone are pleasant made.
Still banish frogs, who their old strifes recite,
And in their murmurs and complaints delight.
Drive them away; for the malicious rout
Pollutes the Springs, and stirs the mud about.
Let silver Swans upon your Rivers swim:
Let painted Barges beautify the stream;
And yielding waves with numerous oars divide.
But let no Matrons in the shores confide;
For we, too well, have known their perfidy.
After her husbands fate Alcyone,
And Anna sister to Elisa too,
The Water-gods displeased, nor did they go
Unpunished long; swift vengeance did descend,
On them, and all who dare the Gods offend.
Therefore with care these Deities adore,
Lest while your servants work along the shore,
Some swelling tide should snatch them from your sight:
But on our foes let these misfortunes light.
Now to proceed to what I have begun,
That through your fields continued streams may run.
Let the collected floods from every side
O the Garden, of themselves extended wide,
Upon the banks in equal channels beat.
No water makes a Garden more complete,
Then if arising from a copious Source,
Over all the Meads it freely takes its course.
If seen all round with sounding waves it flows,
And as it runs a noble River grows.
To add more rules to those already known,
Were vain; for if in Verse I should set down
All that this art contains, I then should swerve
From those strict laws which Poets should observe.
If you will know more, then see those vales of late
In their successful owner fortunate.
See there the Springs in order placed; some bound
In pipes of lead, and buried under ground.
There you will find the Grotts with Springs adorned;
And how by art the fountains may be turned.
Nor suffer Liancourt to escape your sight,
Whose humid streams, and grassie banks invite.
See how the Nymph the Schomberg-water guides
A thousand ways, and over the place presides.
And thou, Bellaquean Naias must be seen
Ennobled by a Prince. Thou, like a Queen,
Rul'st over all the waves of France; none dare
Affect such honors, or with thee compare:
The Rivers, Fountains, and the Lakes of Gaul,
Broad Sein, which washes the Parisian wall:
Loire, and Elaver, swallowed by the Loire,
Our own, and foreign waters thee admire.
To thee great Rome her Tiber must submit,
And Greece her self must all her streams forget.
As other Nations must subscribe to France,
So over the rest thy happy waves advance.
Victorious Lewis having settled peace,
And by his conduct made all quarrels cease,
This Garden by additions fairer made,
And from a Rock contrived a new Cascade.
But what should I these haughty Springs repeat?
Or the immense Canale, with waves repleat?
How, like a River, with majestic pride,
Betwixt steep banks the tardy waters glide.
These shores have witnessed deep intrigues of State,
Have seen when Nations have received their fate,
When suppliant Princes have our aid implored,
And on their knees our rising Sun adored.
When from all parts Ambassadors have come,
To sue for peace, or to expect their doom.
But here it is impossible to show
The riches which adorn thee Fountainbleau,
Or all the honors which thy Gardens boast:
Thy Palaces erected by the cost,
And happy luxury of former Kings,
My humble Muse of Gardens only sings.
How should I think to make thy wonders known!
When the shrill Trumpets every where are blown
By Fames loud breath, how should my feeble. voice,
Be understood amidst so great a noise?
See how much joy appears in all the Court!
And what a sacred Pledge fit to support
An Empires weight! Lucina brings to light.
You might perceive the world in joy unite;
As if the Dauphins Birthday were designed
To settle peace, and blessings on mankind.
While the glad Nymph redoubles her applause,
And celebrates great Lewis, who gives Laws
To quiet France, and with unshaken reins.
His glory with a lasting Peace maintains:
I sing the other Treasures of the Field,
And all those gifts which fruitful Orchards yield.
RAPINUS OF GARDENS.
Book IV. ORCHARDS.
NOr thee, Pomona, will my Muse forget;
Thou flourishest amidst the Summers heat;
All things are full of thee: Autumnus shows
Thy honor too, adorned by verdant boughs:
To thee Lamon, this part of my design
Relates; let prosperous Breezes then combine.
And suffer thou my voyage to succed,
That through the main my Bark may cut with speed.
Though you maintain severe Astraeas right,
Encourage virtue, and from vice affright:
Yet have we seen you play the Gardener too,
And giving precepts how your trees should grow.
Their culture, and their species too by thee
At large described, the Husbandman may see.
And for this benefit so let thy ground
Be ever kind, be ever grateful found!
Let thy luxuriant Orchards so be filld
That the weak boughs beneath their load may yield!
That Bavillaeau barns with store may break,
And Plenty never may thy house forsake!
Though to all plants each soil is not disposed,
And on some places nature has imposed
Peculiar laws, which she unchanged preserves,
Such servile laws, France scarce at all observes.
She Is fertile to excess: all fruits she bears,
And willingly repays the Plowmans cares.
What if Burgundian Hills with vines abound?
Or if with Orchards Normandy be crowned?
Though Beausse her corn? Bigorre her metals shows?
Though Bearn be woody? Troys with wine o'reflows?
If Bordeaux cattle breeds? and Auvergne yields
The best and noblest horses. Yet the sields
All over France improvement will admit:
And are for trees, or else for tillage fit,
Chiefly near thee, moist Tours, where may be seen
A lasting spring, and meadows ever-green.
Those fields which the Durance, and flower Soane
Refresh, and the sweet vales which the Garonne
With slimy waters gently passes by,
With those blessed meads which near great Paris ly,
Choose a rich soil when you intend to plant
Not that which heavy sand has rendered faint.
Avoid low vales, which lie between close hills,
Which some thick Pool with noisome vapors fills.
Where pithy Mists, and hurtful steams ascend,
Least an ill taste they to your fruit may lend.
Still fly that place, where Auster always blows,
And sor your trees that situation choose,
Where in the open air on a descent,
To bless their growth more gentle winds consent.
And though the field toth' Sun exposed be,
Or the hot winds, yet this may well agree
With flowers, but then you must some distance make
Between the flowers, and trees, and to keep back
People and Cattle, which would else offend,
With Iron-grates the avenues defend.
How to choose Land I here omit to tell,
In diffrent grounds what different habits dwell:
As also how to plant, or when to sow,
These arts the Husbandmen already know.
But if the ground cannot the Trees maintain,
In open furrows till it over again.
Dig all the barren field with care and toil,
And for exhausted earth bring better Soil.
That which comes nearest sand is best of all,
If it be moist and colored well withal.
Too many weeds from too much moisture rise:
Destructive weeds, a Gardens enemies.
Now that the plant may with the mold comply;
What fruits it most approves you first must try.
Whether the Vine thrives best upon the place,
Or other trees, for there can be no grace
In any ground that is forced against its will
To bring forth fruit: therefore remember still
Never with nature any force to use,
For it is injurious if she should refuse.
When once the field is levelled, and prepared,
Let it in equal distances be thar'd.
Appoint the seats in which your trees shall stand,
Then choose a quince from a selected band:
And having cut the woody part away,
Into warm mold you then the Plant may lay.
Nor think it is unworthy of your hand
To make the furrows hollow, or t'expand
The Earth about the roots, for still we find,
That he who does the laws of planting mind,
He who from parent-stocks, young branches cuts,
And then in trenches the soft layers puts,
Seldom repents these necessary pains,
But rather profit by his care obtains.
While Fortune waited on the Persian state;
Cyrus, who from Astyages the great
Himself derived, himself his Gardens tilled.
How often astonished Tmolus has beheld
The industrious Prince in planting Trees and Flowers.
And watring them employ his vacant hours!
How often Orontes stopped his hasty flood,
And gazing on the Royal Gardner stood.
The Sabine vallys heretofore have known
When noblest Romans have forsook the town;
When they their Pomp and Glory laid aside,
And to the Rake and Plow themselves applied,
And this employment warlike Fabius chose,
When he returned from vanquishing his foes.
He, who in open Senate made decrees,
Manures his ground, and now gives laws to Trees.
No longer over his legions he commands,
But sows the earth with his victorious hands,
The Glebe by this triumphant swain snbdued,
Repaid his pains with timely gratitude.
Became more fruitful, then it was before,
And better plants, and larger apples bore.
Thus Massinissa, when he won the day,
And made false Syphax with his troops obey;
In tilling of his ground he spent his time,
And tried t'improve the barbarous Libian clime,
Great Lewis too, who carefully attends
His Kingdom Government, sometimes descends
From his high throne, and in the Country daigns
To please him self, and slack his Empires rains.
For to St, Germans if he chance to go,
To the Versalian hills, or Fountainbleau,
He thinks not that it makes his glory less,
T'improve his ground: his Servants round him press;
Hundreds with Fruits, Hundreds with Flowers strive
To fill the place: the water some derive
Into the Gardens, while with watchful eye
He oversees the work, and equally
To every laborer his duty shows;
And the same care on all the field bestows.
Nor dos the King these arts in vain approve:
The grateful Earth rewards his Royal love.
But why should I such great examples name?
Our age wants nothing that should more inflame
Its zeal, for since the greatest men now please
Themselves in cultivating of their trees;
Since it is their praise to do do it, why should you
Refuse this sweet employment to pursue.
If fruit of your own raising can invite,
If in your Villa you can take delight,
Or can the Country love, to that apply
Your self, and to your Plants no pains deny.
The Stars if kind, or goodness of the soil,
Help not so much, as never-ceasing toil.
Then let the Earth more frequent tillage know:
The stubborn Glebe is vanquished by the Plow.
When rain or stormy winds pernicious are,
When the Suns influence or intemp'rate Air
Injurious proves the Tillers industry
And culture all defects will soon supply.
That this is true, a Marsian clown has shown,
Who in a little Garden of his own,
Which he himself manured, had store of fruit,
While all the Country else was destitute.
The standing Corn you on his ground might view:
And Apples broke the boughs on which they grew.
His neighbors quickly envied his success,
He by Thessalian arts his grounds did dress,
They said, and hastened on his early Corn
By herbs upon the Marsian mountains born,
Or magical insusions: then repleat
With rage and envy to the judgment seat
They halethe blameless swain, where his defense
He makes, with plain and Rural eloquence.
His sickle he produces, and his spade,
And rake, which by long use were brighter made.
See here, said he, the crimes which I have done:
If tools by time and usage bright are one.
These are my magic arts; these are my charms:
Then, stretching forth his labor stiffned arms
His Sabine Dame, and Daughters brawny hand
Inured to work, and with the Sunbeams tanned.
Thus by his industry his cause he gains:
So much a field improves by constant pains.
Hence comes good Corn, and hence the Trees are crowned
With leavy boughs, hence it is that they abound
In their choice fruits, in each of which we find
A color proper to it self assigned.
Then let the forked Shears, the Rake, and Prong,
Crows, Barrows, Mattocks, Rowlers which belong
To the garden, be for ever clean and bright.
Let rust on Arms and Trumpets only light.
Let useless Helmets in the dust be thrown:
But let Peace bless the Country and the Town.
Neglect that ground which culture does refuse,
Least there the tiller all his hopes should lose.
Transfer your pains to some more grateful soil.
The way of raising Plants now learn a while.
From all your Garden first a place divide,
There let the hopeful race be multiplied?
Seed for your Trees about your fields prepare,
And let the Stocks confused spring every where.
There let them all together upward shoot;
By these supply's your losses you recruit.
The fairest Plant from stones or kernels grows,
Then your mixed Seedlings in no rank dispose.
Along the walls and beds: if from their birth
They are accustomed to their mother earth;
They flourish better, be it they derive
More proper nourishment from her, or thrive
With more success, where their Forefathers were,
But you must still a generous stock prefer.
Whose vigor, and whose spirits are no less,
Then what its ancesters did once possess.
That Is best which has most joints, but those resuse
Which at wide distances few buds produce.
When with due judgment you would choose a place,
Proper, wherein to raise a future race;
Let it be in the Sun; without his aid
The ground will languish, and the fruit will fade,
He rules the winds, and tempests in the sky;
And while he views the world with his bright eye,
He cherishes all things, and vital juice
Into the witherd herbage can infuse,
He governs the twelve signs, and by him steer
The courses of the Earth, the Heaven, and year.
Heaven if observed, great benefits imparts,
Nor less the rays which glorious Phorbus darts,
Either when setting he does disappear,
Or rising guilds the Northern Hemisphear.
His radiant beams will never shine in vain,
To him and his sister then who reign
Together, and Olympus Empire sway;
Let the glad youth deserved honors pay.
They both are kind to trees; and both expect
To be observed: by them your course direct:
For they well known you have no cause to fear,
Though diffrent colors in sky appear.
Yet in the Spring desire not too much heat,
Least the remaining cold your hopes defeat:
And the Suns kindness then should prove his crime,
If forward fruit appear before its time,
Though cheerful blossoms promise you success,
Trust not the fading Flower, but still suppress
Your expectations, and for summer stay,
Whose genial warmth secures them from decay.
The gardner often vain Blossoms has believed;
And with false hopes as often has bin deceived.
In The end of Spring when welcome heat returns
When every Garden lovely fruit adorns,
Sometimes a Tree by sudden tempests crossed
The whole years Hopes in one short Night has lost.
The cruel winds now most their rage employ,
Rough Boreas more then any will destroy.
The Trees and Orchards, therefore, now, ye swains
While the fresh Spring your lively plants maintains.
Now, on your Festivals, by frequent prair
Avert pernicious winds, and have a care
In Summer nights of Moons, which nip with cold,
The cloud engendered Southern gusts withold;
And the Sithonian Northern blasts; for these,
Unless the cautious husbandman foresees
That they approach him always hurtful are,
When ever lowering clouds disturb the air
Your self with care from future ills defend,
The Seasons mark, and what the Heavens portend.
When among other seasons of the year
The time of Graffing comes; do not defer
In proper stocks young Cions to enclose;
Then buds between the cloven bark dispose.
And if your fruit be bad, as often it will,
Make choice of better, and remove the ill.
By these improvements greatest praise you get,
And thus your Gardens honor you complete.
Into your stocks the foreign pears admit,
And far fetched Apples place within the slit.
Hence springs a nobler race, and greater store
Of hopeful offspring then you had before.
The plants you want the neighborhood will give:
If not, from distant countrey's them derive.
Greece first sought plant in barbarous climes, and then
She civilized the trees as well as men.
These still at home she fortunately placed,
And by translation did correct their taste.
While ancient Fables reputation gained,
The then white Mulberry with red was stained.
Thisbe and Pyramus who yet survive
In Naso's verse. in Babylon did live:
A spotless love united both their souls;
But Parents hate their happiness controlls.
Deluded by their passion they grow bold;
Not walls, nor strict injunctions them withold.
That bliss, which in their life they could not have,
They found at last by meeting in the grave.
Hard by the place there stood an aged tree
Which, as if touched with their sad destiny.
Imbibes their blood, and caused its frait, which late
Was pale, to blush at the poor lovers fate.
So Rhodopeian Phillis heretofore,
Left by her faithless servant, on the shore,
When she was pined away with grief and shame,
An Almond in her fathers ground became.
Pallas gives Olives; Bacchus does bestow
The Figgs and Vines to Ceres Corn we owe.
But, what the Romans did, why should I tell
Whose arms on trees as well as nations fell?
While they in chains the victors Chariots drew,
Their plants as much enslaved by Tiber grew,
Into his garden thus from Cerasus
Lucullus first did Cherrys introduce;
Damascus Plums afforded; Media,
With Lydia, Egypt, India, Caria,
And Persia Apples gave; and these were brought
From the Geloni, who with Axes fought.
Each Nation which had her arms overcome,
Did thus pay tribute to triumphant Rome.
Phaliscians then, who Juno most adored,
Their empty fields with rows of Apples stored.
And the Crustumian Pears, the Sabines placed
In The Amiternan Vale, the Auruncans graced
Taburnus then with Vines and Olives too;
At these new plants amazed Anio
Admires: Oenotria likewise then possessed
Of wholesome air, and with a fat soil blessed.
Fruit bearing trees, which were before unknown
From other Gardens brought into her own.
When Plants of a corrected taste are found,
And Stocks are chosen which are young and sound;
TheGraffer then the adoptive bough must bring
Into those Stocks: of this the means I sing.
Which though they are distinct, you learn with ease
How to Graff fruitful slips in barren trees.
Some cut down trunks, which bore a lofty top,
And hollow them above, thus wood-men lop
The tallest Oaks, and cut out four square stakes;
But first of all a wedge its passage makes.
This done, the Cions may descend down right
Into the cleft; and with the Stock unite.
Though others in the rind betwixt each bud
Make an incision, and the graff include,
Which by degrees is afterward inclind
T'incorporate it self with the moist rind.
Some like a slender Pipe the bark divide,
Or like a Scutcheon slit it down the side.
Or the hard trunk, which a sharp augur cleaves,
Into its solid part the Graff receives.
Mean while, with care, the branches which are joined,
You with a sev'nfold cord must strongly bind.
And all the chinks with pitch or wax defend;
For if the cruel air should once descend
Into the cleft, it would impede the juice:
And to the plant its nourishment refuse.
But, if these dangers it has once endured,
When the adopted branch is well secured;
By their conjunction trees their nature loose;
That which was wild before, more civil grows:
Unmindful of their mother they forsake
The taste, which they from her at first did take.
From yellow Quinces, and Cornelians rise
Fruits, which are differenced by various dies.
The Pear thus mends: the Slow affords good Plums:
And the bad Cherry better now becomes.
From different boughs distinguished Species shoot;
But now I tell how you must mix your fruit,
What branches with each other you may join:
What sorts will best in amity combine.
All kinds of Pears the Quinces entertain;
And them received with their own tincture stain.
The hoary Pears their taste to Apples give,
They with the shrubby Willow too will live.
The Fig would love the Mulberry, if that
Its blacker hue would somewhat moderate.
Cherrys with Laurels blushes will compound:
Apples with Apples do their taste confound.
And, from the salvage Plum, we Pears may raise:
(If we may credit what Palladius says)
But Gardners now, by long experience wise,
What former ages taught them may despise.
They of Auvergne in Willows fruits enclose;
It Is true, at first their color grateful shows.
But, by this Marriage they degenerate are,
And taste but ill, although they look so fair.
For various Plants what air, and soil is good,
And that, which hurts them, must be understood.
Warm air, and moisture is by Apples loved:
But, if to stony hills they are removed,
You must not blame them, if they then decay.
Through a crude soil the Figg will make its way:
If it be not exposed to the rude North,
A humid Sand will make the Peach bring forth.
The Pear, when it has room enough to spread,
Where it has warmth sufficient over head,
If it be seconded by the wet ground,
With swelling fruits, and blossoms will be crowned.
The backward Mulb'ry chooses to be dry,
For constant moisture is its enemy.
And a wet soil the Apple vitiates,
The Cherry deeply rooted propogates
If self with freedom as in Italy
The thriving Olives every where we see.
A milder ground the Lemmon most desires:
One more severe the yellow Quince requires.
It is not fit that Apricots should stand
In a hot mold, and Cherrys love not sand,
No more then Strawberrys; which last, if fet
In earth that is well subdued, if to the heat
Of the warm Sun exposed, they soon abound
With juice, their Berrys then grow plump and round.
Those hills, which favor Bacchus, Lemmons sterve:
And Melons which a gentler clime deserve.
When a warm situation Plums obtain,
They quickly recompense the Gardners pain.
If in your Orchards any tree seems faint,
With wonted culture cure the sickly plant;
Er'e the whole Trunk is touched with the disease.
Briars and Weeds which fatal are to Trees
Where ere the ground is bad the fields infest,
Whence every bough with faintness is oppressed.
Culture mends bitter plants; they then, who break
The surface oftnest up; who most their rake,
And forked tools about the roots employ;
They, the best fruits, and noblest trees enjoy.
But if the soilor sow'r, or brackish be,
Neither the careful Plow-mans industry,
Nor cold, nor frost, or storms of wind or rain,
Improve those fields, they never can obtain
Their ancient reputation; all things there
Grow worse and worse, forgetting what they were.
When for an Orchard you a seat will choose,
First learn what sorts of planting are in use:
Thus with the humors of each place complys,
In open Plains on which the warm Sun lies.
There let your Trees aspire in grounds enclosed,
Let a Dwarf-race of fruit trees be disposed,
Whose boughs are round and short: nor bodies tall.
Some Plash, and tack their Layers on the wall:
Whilst others make their twisted Branches grow,
Like a shorn hedge, in a continued row.
These Rural ornaments by all are sought;
And if they vary, are more graceful thought.
Follow these precepts rather much, then those,
Which our own ancient Husbandmen impose.
The former age must all its claims resign,
Now all these arts in perfect luster shine.
Trust not your tender Plants too much abroad;
To Figgs the summer Sun must be allowed.
Apples, and Nuts, with Cherrys, Plums and Pears,
And the soft Almond, which all weather bears;
Let them with freedom in the air ascend.
And if just tastes you to your Fruit would lend,
If you would mend their genius, let them take
Their liberty, for if the Sun does bake
Them well, if to his light they are displaid,
They vanquish those which sculk within the shade.
Either this benefit from Phoebus flows,
Who on all things his influence bestows;
Or else great Trunks to make their offspring thrive,
More juice and vigor from the earth derive.
Perhaps the middle region of the sky,
(For duller vapors dare not mount so high)
Sometimes imparts a favorable Breeze,
And fanns with purer air the tops of Trees.
Then let your Gardens in the Sun be placed;
From him your Apples must receive their taste,
And hardened thus the Summer they endure,
Those which were crude he renders more mature.
The tender brood you must defend with care;
And if you can the little race repair;
With sharper tools you must restrain excess;
Or with your hand superfluous leaves suppress.
And let no bough its parent overshade,
Nor on a branch let greater weight be laid
Then it can bear: those blossoms which decay,
Or are not hopeful you must take away.
Till a more generous offspring dos succeed:
This is the only way to mend the breed.
The Mother of her children thus bereaved
Must with assiduous culture be relieved.
Though it be welcome to the sordid swain,
Too fruitful trees their plenty boast in vain:
Their store destroys them; rather let them feel
The wholesome sharpness of the crooked steel.
For, while the Gardener th'useless Flowers invades,
He greater glory to the Parent adds.
No tree can long its fruitfulness enjoy;
Such virtues their possessors soon destroy.
Unless they cease from bearing, they must wast;
For no extreme of good can ever last.
They who retard their siuit deserve more praise,
Then they who nature by incitements raise.
Some Gardners I remember near the town,
With dung their slower Apples hastened on.
The usual Method could not them content,
They by their have the Seasons did prevent.
Let no such customs in your Gardens be,
For these productions are an injury.
They in a Lethargy the Plants engage,
And make them subject to untimely age.
Let not your fruits their seasons then forsake,
Nor with ungentle hand sow'r Apples take:
Least with Abortian you the mothers kill,
And your nice stomach with raw humors fill.
If you are curious how your fruits are died,
To neighboring walls their branches must be tied.
When Titans rays on them at mid day beat,
And grow more powerful by reflected heat;
Those, which are most exposed, will best derive
The pleasing colors which the Sun can give.
How this advantage is to be obtained;
And how t'augment the heat shall be explained,
First a long wall you must due South erect,
From thence the most intensive warmth expect.
This dawbe with Mortar over; which being plain
Will best reverbe rate the rays again.
Those vermin too are killed by scorching lime'
Which would destroy the trees themselves in time.
Next hooks of Iron fix along the wall,
On them let Poles or Rods of Willow fall:
On which the branches may depend in rows,
The Husbandman with twiggs may tie them close,
Though others fasten them with knotts of wire,
In time the pliant boughs themselves desire
To bear that yoke, to which they are restrained,
If from their tender youth they are inchain'd.
That so by long obedience being taught,
They to their duty may with ease be brought.
Age dos rebellion into shoots instill:
And makes them stubborn to the benders will.
Then, that they may comply with greater ease,
Instruct them in submission by degrees.
While blooming years permit, and while they have
An inclination proper to inslave;
Along your walls young trees betimes expand,
Which by degrees may stoop to your command.
The branches, if in decent order placed.
By servitude are not at all disgraced.
No more, then when a woman dos with care
Within strict fillets bind her flowing hair:
Disposing it according to the mode,
When she intends to show her dress abroad.
Restraint becomes her hair; and thus a Tree
When it is captive will more lovely be.
If lawless twiggs rebel not from the rest;
And the green mantle dos the wall invest.
These textures noblest tapestry transcend,
And with their beauty all the place commend.
Chiefly when different fruits their seasons know,
And to your sight their various colors show.
How must it then the Gardners heart affect,
To see those beautys he never durst expect;
While on the fruit-charg'd wall, the Figgs grow black,
And Peaches red, the boughs with Apples crack.
For when the Summers part colored race
Appears, then every tree its wealth displaies,
Which was before beneath the leaves concealed;
Then it is delightful to survey each field,
To visit all your Villa, and to see
What fruits and treasures in your Gardens be.
Nor unaffecting to admire those dies,
Which on the branchy solds your sight surprise.
To pluck the early fruit, or if you will,
Home to convey the Panniers which you fill.
Whether you search what fruits are of good kind,
Or would the Genius of your Orchards find;
Or with what culture Plants will flourish best,
And when aspiring twiggs must be represt.
If you would find what stocks will Graffs admit,
And how far Graffs their former names forget.
Your Rural pleasures will excel the pride
And riches of the great; fame you will deride.
And city noise, nor the unconstant wind
Of Kings, or Peoples favor stirs your mind.
Thrice happy they who these delights pursue!
For whether they their Plants in order view,
Or overladen boughs with props relieve,
Or if to foreign fruits new names they give,
If they rast of every Plum explore,
To eat at second course, what would they more?
What greater happiness can be desired,
Then what by these diversions is acquired?
You who the beauty of your trees design,
To each along the walls its seat assign.
Cherrys with Cherrys, Figgs with Figgs may meet,
The Syrian and Crustumian Pears are fit
To mingle with the British, but we find
That Apples and red Plums must not be joined.
All that are of a sort together plant,
They must succeed if they no culture want.
And when affairs of greater moment cease
To set their stations be your business.
For if they have not ample room to spread
They then both strength and nourishment will need.
But what the kinds and various natures are
Of fruitful trees, I must not now declare:
Nor tell their different appearances,
Or how the Gardners art has with success
Improved our Orchards, what should I count ore
Those fruits, which Persia sent us heretofore?
Why or their taste should I relate, or hue,
Which more illustrious by its purple grew?
Some of a thicker substance stick fast on,
While others which are thinner quit the stone.
These last with Juice and dewy Moisture swell,
And all the other sorts by much excel.
Others there are which, like the Plum, are thin,
And have no down upon their naked skin.
Their Species, Forms, nor Names I here must sing;
As those which the Avmenians once did bring
From their high hills, by native Blushes praised;
Or those which from great stones Alcinous raised.
Tibur^ian Peaches I must here forget,
Then which Picenian ones were thought more sweer.
Nor here at all of Quinces must I boast,
Which, when they have no smell, are valued most,
Chorrys, which at first course are grateful still;
Or Figgs, which heavenly Nectar do distill.
I here pass ore, these from their taste obtain
More honor, then the mellow Apples gain.
But Nature never showed more wantonness
Then, when so many shapes she did impress,
From Wardens to the Pears which lesser grow,
And did to each its proper Juice allow.
Some imitate the brisk Falernian Wine,
Others, like Must, to sweetness more incline.
In swelling some extravagant appear;
And crooked Necks with oblong bellys bear.
To Plums and Grapes just commendations yield,
If on the Wall they are by propt upheld.
Muscat, and Purple Vines, which both observe
Their wonted seasons, may our praise deserve.
The humble Strawberrys I would repeat,
Which are by nature with sweet Juice repleat.
And, if I had but leisure, I would sing
The fragrant odours which from Melons spring.
When Husbandmen give precepts to expand
Their trees, to imitate the spreading hand,
Or backbone of a Fish they sometimes choose,
When er'e one Trunk the branches dos produce.
Successful trialls both these ways have had:
And therefore use of either may be made.
You cannot be too often put in mind
Of that advantage which your Plants will find
By being pruned: the boughs will thus obey,
And by your tool are fashioned any way.
Though tough with age, they stoop to your command,
Nor can the crooked pruning Knife withstand.
And when the Trees thus cut revive again,
When from their wounds they borrow courage, then
Often exercise your power, and so restore
Beauty to that, which was deformed before.
Youth unadvised dos in desire exceed:
And would without all moderation breed.
The Pruners care must succor each defect,
He with his hook their vices must correct.
Superfluous shoots his servants may repress;
Destructive pity makes them more increase.
But in what part they must be cut, and how,
From the experienced you will better know,
Always untouched the chiefest branches save,
From whom you hope a future race to have.
Now if the Season proves reciprocal;
You may behold your fruit upon the wall.
Yours Gardens riches then will make you glad;
Nor think that any thing can color add,
Or bigness to them, but that influence,
Which on their ranks kind Phoebus does dispense.
Nature your wishes then will satisfy,
If with these Methods only you comply.
And though we ripeness to our fruits impart
By heat on walls reflected, yet this art
By the reports of dark antiquity,
In the records of time is set more high.
And if we may at all our faith engage
To what we hear of the preceding age.
Alcinous first, who the Phoeacians swaid,
Thus to have cultivated Trees is said.
His stores with usual plenty overflowed,
And when the year its usual hope had showed,
From the malicious North arose a blast,
Which in one night laid all the Garden wast,
If any Plant by fortune was retriv'd,
And, in the fields, the common fate survived;
That ruin, which by Boreas was begun,
Was finished by the spiteful Air and Sun.
All through the sky unwonted tempests rore,
And horrid noises the clear Welkin tore.
The greatest slaughter on the Orchard salls;
Struck with portents the King the Augurs calls,
The meaning of the prodigies inquires,
And their advice upon his loss desires.
From Calais and Zethes some pretend,
(Both sprung from Boreas) that these plagues descend.
The Kings alliance both of them had sought,
Nor were unworthy by the Mother thought:
The Daughter too their passion had approved,
But neither were by Prince or People loved.
Their Father vexed to see his Sons deceived,
By them perhaps had his revenge contrived.
Because they both were angry with the King.
Some from Atlantian Calypse bring
These mischiefs. Circe only, some accused.
Calypso mindful how she was abused
By the Phoeacians, when Laertes she
From drowning saved, and boasted him to be
Her right, she then to be revenged, decreed
That Circes neighborhood, and hate might breed
These ills some think, that she the Moons aspect
Had changed, and did the purer air infect.
But good Eurymedon, who was the Priest
Of Phoebus, and a Prophet better ghest.
Think not, says he, that our misfortunes flow
From outward causes, to our selves we owe
Our dire mishaps; nor did he longer speak.
The King commands he should his silence break,
And bids him undiscovered crimes recite.
Then he; The weight of our affairs permits
Not many words, when worse events are feared,
Appease the gods, while prayers may be heard.
The objects of their vengeance now we are,
When plenty filled his stores, to his own cate,
And art, Alcinous did ascribe his fruit.
Madman that should the gifts of Heaven dispute!
That, he the Sun and Winds should so neglect,
Nor his devotions to great Jove direct.
Himself the criminal he then did find,
Accusing his proved thoughts and haughty mind.
Strait he repairs to the Phoeacian wood,
Where the Hesperian Nymph had her abode;
Where she the Oracles of Heaven spoke,
Soon a soft voice the sacred silence broke.
To mighty Jupiter twelve Bullocks pay:
As many more on Titans Altars lay.
Both Deity's have bin provoked; from them
Our fruits, and all other our blessings stream.
They went, and to great Jove twelve Bullocks paid:
And twice six more on Titans altars laid.
These rites Eurymedon ordained, should be
Yearly performed by their posterity.
Taught by the Nymph Alcinous now immures
His Orchards in, and so his Plants secures
From hurtful blasts, and where they wanted heat,
Upon the Walls he makes the Sunbeams beat.
This way of setting Trees arose from hence;
Which, though the Hesperians had forgot long since,
The Norman swains revived again; and showed
Their Servants, that their ground must be allowed
More warmth, for the reflected Sun alone,
Could make their fruits attain perfection.
From hence, this art to Paris old advance,
And stretched it self through all the parts of France.
You, who my precepts hear, this ornament,
Bestow upon your Gardens nor repent
The building of long walls, and them infold
With the green tapistry; no pains withold.
And while you do the fruitful youth survay,
Or among leavy textures loose your way;
When you behold your thriving nurserys,
Cut all superfluous branches from your Trees.
The masters hand improves the Orchard most:
For he, if any Plant its hold has lost,
Or hang; he trims and ties it up again;
Thus the neat hedge its beauty dos regain.
Vermin and Erwigs from the leaves he shakes,
And of those fruits before a trial makes,
Which he designs at second course to eat:
The times of gathering he best can set.
To the deserving praises he extends;
And those which are deceitful discommends.
When once the ground is tilled, the Gardner then
Beginst' instruct the ruder Husbandmen.
The taste and merit of each Tree he shows,
And by what Graffs the Parent better grows.
For thus is he employed; while every where
He visits all his wealth with equal care.
No time is lost: the year with fruits is blessed:
Or else the boughs with blossoms are oppressed.
Nor slow nor idle lab'rers must you hire,
These works excess of diligence require.
The stubborn Earth and Plants exact the same,
Which are by pains and culture only tame.
A backward soil with rotten dung improve,
And often in the Sun the clods remove.
If after this the year should prove unkind,
You must impute it to the spiteful wind.
Whose powerful blasts all situations sway,
For still the ground dos Heavens command obey.
Be kind ye winds, so shall your altars share
A part of that, which you with pity spare.
A thousand enemy's, a thousand ills
Ore Plants prevail: sometimes the bad air kills
The hopes oth' Spring, and therefore you must try
With greatest care these threatening Plagues to fly.
If that disease which springs from faulty air,
With its infection should your fruits impair;
The gods with vows and prayers supplicate,
No other remedy is left but that.
To fell those Trees can be no loss at all,
Whose age and sickness would your Axe forestall.
A youthful successor, with better grace,
And plenty, will supply the vacant place.
Plants by their looks betray their strength and years,
If through the gaping rind the wood appears,
If dying leaves upon the boughs are seen,
While all the rest are flourishing and green:
If they look pale, then with your knife invade
Those branches which afforded too much shade.
Sometimes beneath the bark a Canker breeds,
Or burning Moss which like a scab over spreads
The trunk with cruel Venom, these repress
Before they reach the quick, and ere they seize
The inward parts, before that all the race
With a pernicious leaness they disgrace.
If the exhausted spirits sail to do
Their offices, if they dengen'rate grow,
Dig up the Earth and with the dung of swine
Or the hoarse Stock-dove make it then combine
The hungry Mold must thus be satisfied.
And those do well who in deep trenches hide
Dry Leaves among their Dung, with Fern, or Broom,
Bean shales, or dirty Ashes are by some
Thrown on their fields, all these the ground will aid,
But let it never be too fertile made.
For as a Tree due nourishmen; may want,
So too rich Soil destroys the tender Plant.
And if you know not how a barren field
Must be encouraged, and with pains be tilled,
Or if you would allay rich Mold, that art,
The rules of culture fully will impart.
When from swift clouds or rain descends, or hail,
A thousand Plagues your Orchards will assail.
As Gnats, Worms, Catorpillers which infold
The boughs, with buzzing Drones, and Snails enrolled,
Within their Shells made always circular,
Of Merops too, and other Birds beware,
Which from the mischiefs that their Beaks effect,
Are Tigers called; when these begin t'infect
Your Nurseries, they are a Pestilence
With which no careful Gardner must dispense.
With flying smoke these Enemies oppose,
And kill the Vermin on the Leaves and Boughs.
Flys here, and painted Lizards I omit,
With cunning Moles, which still avoid the light,
And Mice, who from their holes their thefts repeat,
All these with different Traps you must defeat,
As custom and experience teaches best.
Nor ought I here more precepts to suggest;
I write not now to dull unskilful swains,
Such as of old tilled the Laurentine plains.
All Husbandmen are now so artful grown,
That almost nothing can be further shown
Of culture, nothing can be found out more,
Then what has bin invented long before.
My hasty Muse permits me not to write
Of famous Gardens here or to recite
Those noble Villa's, which deserve my verse,
No^ here my Countries honors I rehearse.
Ye Gardens therefore, and your owners too,
Forgive me, if you have not what is your due.
When France her former riches shall regain,
If our affairs should prosper once again;
Then by the bounty of a lasting Peace,
Our labors may be crowned with more success.
The World of late in Wars has bin engaged,
And stem Enyo through all Europe tag'd;
Famine, and Pestilence, and Fevers reigned,
The blushing fields with civil Gore were stained.
The gods were all averse, who can remount
Those crimes, which do the reach of thought surmount.
The violated Laws, the broken faith,
And Nations guilty of their Sov'rains death?
And heavier ills then these had yet remained,
If Lewis from the gift of Heaven obtained;
Had not with powerful arms, and greater mind,
Repaired our fortune, ere it quite declined,
Then having stretched his bounds from shore to shore,
That he might arts and manners too restore,
And through the World the golden age renew;
The rains of Justice great Lamon to you
He gave, and you ore his Tribunals placed:
When led by you Astroea shall, at last,
Return to us again, as we have cause
To hope from the beginnings of your Laws;
Then shall the Earth in her first glory be;
And those new arts and methods which by thee
TO improve their Plants the Husbandmen receive,
Shall ever in thy native Soil survive.
Thus much of Gardens, I at Clermont sung,
In thee sweet Paris; treading all along
Those sacred steps; which Virgil led before,
When blessed in her affairs, in her King more,
Ore willing Nations France began to sway:
And made the universe her Power obey.
FINIS.
THE TABLE
Before the Reader make use of the Table, he is desired to reform in the Book
the following Pages, thus:

For 29 92 48 84 66 76 67 77 68 89 78 79 79 78

A.
Abricot, Page 203. Acanthus Branc Vrsine. Bears-foot 30, also, Thorn 100.
118. Achilles's spear, 96. Aconite, Herba Christi, vide Anthora, 38. 66.
Adiantum, Black-Oake. Fern, 52. AEthiopis, Ethiopian Mullein 38. Alca^a,
Marsh-mallow, 118. Alcinous the Fable, 222. Alder, 87. 94. Almond, Fable of
Phillis, 196. Amaracus, Majoran, 46. Amaranthus, Velvet-flower, 59 Amellus,
Shire-wort, 60. Amymona, the Fable, 156. Anemonie, and Fable, 67. Angelica, 59.
Anthemis, Camomil, 19. Anthora, Wolfebane, 38. Antirrhinum, Calves-snout, 31.
Apium, Parsley, 59. Apples, 197. 203. April, 24. Aqueducts, 126. 138, 139. v.
Fountain, etc. Aquilegia. Colombine, 37. Arcueil described, 138. Armeria,
Pinks, 59. Ash, 93. 95, 96. Asphodel, Daffodil, 36. After-Atticus, Starwort,
60. Atalanta, and Fable, 107. vide Oranges.
B.
Bafil, 32. Batrachium, Crowfoot, Cranesbill, 136. Bays, 113. 115. V. Daphne.
Beech, 83. Bellaquea, Fontain bleau, 172. 174. Bellides, Daisyes, 25. Berny,
141. Birds, 83. Blattaria, Moth Mullein, 32. Blewbottle, 32. Box Knots, 8, 9,
10. 61. Bupthalmum, Ox Eye, 60.
C.
Calamint, 136. Calendula, Marigold, 60. Caltha, March-Marigold, 27. Canales,
165. 168. 171. 173. V. Fountains, Waterworks, Ponds. Canker, 231. V
Infirmities. Caprifoile, Honysuckle, 118. Carnations, V. Gilliflowers, 53.
Carpine, Hornbeam, 119. Cascades, 162. 165. V. Waterworks. Celandine,
Swallow-wort, 16. Centaury, 59. Cerynthe, Hony-wort, 38. Cerrus, Holme-Oke, 83
Chamaedrys, Germander, 55. Cherrys, 196. 201. 203. 216. Chestnuts, 88.
Chrysanthes, Corn-Marigold, 46. Cicher, Ciche, 30. Cicory, 59. Cityssus,
Shrub-Trefoile, 37. Clematis, Periwinkle, 59. St. Cloud described and
celebrated, 35. 146. Clytie, Sunflower, 57. Colocasia, Egiptian-Bean, 30.
Colors, 210. Composts, 181. V. Dung. Conduits, 144. V. Fountains. Convolvulus,
Bindweed, 32. Conyza, Fleabane, 59. 136. Coriander, 59. Cornel, 87. 93.
Country life, and Villa praised 121. 168. 215. Cresse, 37. Crocus, Saffron,
57. 67. Crown-Imperial, 20. Cyanus, Blew-bottle, 19. Cyclamen, Sowbread, 14.
Cymbalum, Mountain Lilly, 45 Cypress 100, 101. 103. Cyrus, 183.
D.
Dalmatis, the Fable, V. Tulip. Daphne, the fable, 114. V. Bays. Dauphine his
birth, 175. December, 66. Delphinium, Larkspur, 32. Distilling, 48. Dodona, 81.
Dung, 209. 232. V. Compost. Dwarf Trees, 205.
E.
Echium, Scorpion grass, 52. Education, 212. Elm, 87, 88, 89. Eringo,
Sea-Holly, 58. Esculus, a species of Oak, 84. Ewe, 87.
F.
Fabius, 183. Felling, 230. Fennel, 32. Figs, 201, 262, 206. Fur, 87. 95.
Flos Iovis, Pansy, 26. Flora the Fable, and her Rites, 6. 29. Flowers 1. their
difference and variety, 10, 11. Culture 27. 62. 65. Seasons, 11. 63, 64.
Cautions in gathering, 47. Use 48. 50. Painting, 49. Flower de luce, Arms of
France, 55. V. Iris. Fountains, Origin, 129. Qualities, 135. 137. 143. 157.
Artificial, and Cisterns, 143. 145, 146. Aqueducts, Grotts, Cascades,
Waterworks, etc. Fountainbleau, described and celebrated, 88. Fox-glove, 38.
France, its Orchards and Productions, 178. Frogs, 169. Fruit, 192. Praecoce,
Tardy, 209. V. Wall-fruit. Fruitfulness, 208.
G.
Gardeus, Soil, 3. Situation and Culture, 4, 5. of old not so Elegant, 6, 7.
Garlands, 24, 26. 48. St. Germains, described and celebrated, 35 Gelsemine,
100. 104, 105. Granadil, Passionflower, 52. Graffing and Graffs, 194. 198.
Greece, 195. Grotts, V. Fountains, Waterworks. Groves, where to Plant, 75. 119.
infamous to destroy, 81, 82. V. Woods.
H.
Halimus, Sea-Purslane, 118. Hazle, 87. 93. Hedges, 100. Hedysarum,
Hatchetfetches, 59 Hell bore, 66. Hellen, Elicampane, 37. Hemerocallis, Day
Lilly, 53. Henbane, 59. Hesperis, Dames-Violet, 53. Horminum, Clary, 59.
Hornbeam, 100, 101. House-Leek, 31. Human Life, 161. Hyacinth, Iacintb, 67.
Hylas, V. Isis. Hyosciamus, 60. V. Henbane,
I.
Ianthis, the Fable, 16. Ilex, Scarlet-Oke, 84. Idustry, 187. Infirmities of
Plants, Vermin, 211. 231. 233. Influences, 11, 12. 64. 206, 207. Iris, 15. 26.
V. Flower de lys, Isis and Hylas the Fable, 149. Isopirum, Water-Trefoile, 31.
June, 57. Juniper, 88.
L.
Laurel, 66. 100. Lewis XIV. celebrated, 173. 184. 235. Ligustrum, Privet, 115.
Lillies, 55. Linden, Lime Tree, 87. 90. Limon, 100. 109. 203. Linaria,
Toadflax, 37. Linum, Gardenflax, 19. 46. Liancourt, 141. 164. 172. Loire, 141.
Lopping, 99. 121. Lotus, Nettle Tree, 87. Luxembourg, 146. Lychnis, Wild Rose
Campion, 19 Lytrum, Willow Herb, 38.
M.
Malva, Wild Mallow, 46. Maple, 87. 91. March Mallows, 59. Marsy as, the Fable,
92. Massinissa, 184. Matricaria, Featherfew, 54. Meadow Saffron, 19. Medune
celebrated, 35. Meleagris, checkered Daffedil, 52. Melilot, Plaster Claver,
46. Melissa, Balm, 59. Melons, 203. Merascus, Mezereon, 67. Mint, 60. Mixture,
201. Moly, Sorcerers Garliek, 31. Momorancy Vale celebrated, 35 Moon, 193.
Mulberry, Fable of Pyramus and Thisbe, 195. 201. 203. Myrtle, 26. 100. 111.
Saered to Venus, 112.
N.
Nard, 31. Nailing, 219. Narcissus, 16. 26. 67. Narcissus of Iapan, 60, 61.
Nigella, Gith, 60, November, 28. Nursery, 228, 229.
O.
Oak, 76. Culture, Use 84. Fable of Rhoecus, 85. V. Woods, Woods of France,
97, 98. Oleander, Rose-bay, 100. 111. 113. Olives, 197. Ononis, Rest-harrow,
46. Oranges, 106. ad 110. Orthards, Soil, 176. 179. 202. Situation, 180. 205.
Culture, 181, 186. 187. Orchis, Dog-stones, 55. Orobanche, Broom-Rape, 54.
Orpheus, 90.
P.
Painting Flowers, V. Flowrs. Paliurus, Christ's Thorn, 118. Parsley, 30
Parthenium, Mayweed, 30. Peaches, 202. 217. Piony and fable, 31. Pears, 197.
200, 201, 202. 216. 218. Phalangium, Spiderwort, 30. Philemon and Baucis, 91.
Phillyraea, Mock-privet, 100. 103. 119. Pine, 87. 92. Pitch-Tree, 87. Planting,
99. 182. Plums, 204. 216. 196. 200. Pomegranate, 115. ad 118. Ponds, 165. V.
Canales. Poplar, 96. Poppyes, 57. Primrose, 14. Pruning, 208. 220. 221.
Q.
Quiekbearn, 87. Quince, 201. 203.
R.
Ranunculus, Crowfoot, 26. Rhamnus, Hartshorn, 31. 118. Rhodanthe Fable, vide
Rose. Rivers celebrated, 161. Rivalets, 156. 159. Rocks artificial, 145. V.
Grotts, Waterworks. Romans, 183. Rose and Fable of Rhodanthe, 38, 39. etc.
Rosemary, 30. Rue, 30. Ruel described and celebrased, 151. 163. Rumex, Dock,
52. Ruscus, Butchers Broom, ^18. (...) Water, 125. How to find, 127. 132. 136.
Expense, 133. 139. Waterworks, Grots, Fountains, 153. 155. Watermint, 26.
Watering, 59. 64. Weeds, 14. 181. 204. Winds, 12. 192. 229. Willow. 201 Withy.
87. 94. Woad, 59. Woods, their planting, 75. 77, 78 79. 120.
Y.
Yarrow, 46.

