THE Rape of EUROPA BY JUPITER. A MASQUE; As it is Sung at the QUEENS THEATER,
IN Dorset-Garden.

By their MAJESTY'S Servants.

Mutatus formam tauri, mistusque Juvencis
Mugit, et in teneris formosus obambulat herbis.
Ovid: Metam. LONDON: Printed by M. Bennet, and are to be sold by most
Booksellers. 1694. Price Sixpence.

The Names of the Persons that Sing.
JUpiter. Mr. Bowman. Mercury. Mr. Magnus. Europa. Mrs. Bracegirdle. Hearse. Two
Nymphs. Mrs. Hodgson. Aglaura. Two Nymphs. Mrs. Cibber. Coridon. Mr. Doggett.
Dancers.
Mr. Doggett. Mr. Phillboy. Mr. Prince. Mr. Bray. Mrs. Knight. Mrs. Lucas. Mrs.
Temple.
ARGUMENT.
EUropa Sister of Cadmus, and Daughter of Agenor King of Phoenicia, was
Solicited by her Father to marry a Nobleman of Tire. But She being a Nymph of
Diana's train, was averse to the Importunities of her Lover, and commands of
her severe Father; In vain was her Aversion, for he strictly commanded her to
prepare her self for the performance of his will. But Death being a more
acceptable choice, she gets leave for a short time, (by the intercession of her
Brother and a promise of compliance upon her return, to her Father's orders)
with a few Companions to retire to the Country: Jupiter being cloyed with the
Fruition of his late Mistress Io, Resolves upon a New Amor, and Descending
with his Son Mercury, sees the discontent Europa, and loves her. But finding
her Inclination contrary to his Desires, transforms himself into the Figure of
a Bull, and so by Artifice, Endeavors to Enjoy his Love. The Nymph being
pleased with the beauty of the Metamorphoz'd Deity, Adorns the Beast with
Ribbons and Flowers, and by degrees is Encouraged to get upon him, when the God
taking the Hint, conveys her through the Hellespont, and ravishes her, and to
Recompense her Lost Virginity makes her a Star.

SCENE, a Campaigne Country.
Mercury descends in a Chariot drawn by Ravens. Mer. DRawn by Commanding Love,
Imperial Jove,
Designs to Visit some New tempting fair
There is no end of his Amors.
No sooner one has quit the Field,
But others to his Godhead yield,
And so imploys my hours:
See where the first of Gods descending.
All Nature his known will attending.
Jupiter descends on an Eagle.
Jup. HAste, haste my Son, my Love admits of no delay
In yonder Tyrian Grove
You Will find my Love,
Begone, and with your awful wand prepare.
All things for my reception there.
They ascend.
The Scene Changes to a Spacious Plain, a Mellancholly Symphony of Music. Then
Enter Europa, Hearse and Aglaura. Mercury appears above. Eu. Pressed with my
greifs who can my sorrows end?
There Is none.

Mer. There is,

Eur. Ah no.

Mer. There is a Friend.

Eur. Who is that Friend that will so Courteous prove?

Mer. Your Greifs are pitty'd by the mighty Jove.

Eur. When will that Potent God ordain my fate?

Mer. With patience till the happy Minute wait.

Mer. ascends. Hearse. APpear all appear your kind Mistress to show
What wondrous things you can do.
Let sorrow and care,
Pale Cheeks and despair
For ever Europa be strange to the Fair.

Enter Shepherds, Shepherdesses and Coridon, who after some Music join in a
Dance. Cor. HOW passingly fine these Gay whimsies here dance.
Come come my dear Malkin let us too advance,
In spite of their frisks and their Capers so high,
I Will show what Buff Jerkin can do by and by.
They Dance.
Hearse and Aglaura sing this following Song in parts. STreams of Pleasure here
abounding
Make blessed the Shepherds of this Grove,
Eternal Joys the Nymphs surrounding
Produce the effects of Lasting love.
Here no buisy heads aspiring
Study the ruin of the great,
But each swain his Lass admiring,
Laughs at the turmoyls of the great.
Chor. But each swain his Lass, etc.

Euro. Still I Am Greiving Still Lamenting
Still Complaining of my Fate,
Still the Cruel Gods Consenting
Add New troubles to my State.

Agla. Give than Royal maid your sorrows over
Implore no longer Heaven in vain,
Since there is above no bliss in store
Search here below your Joys to gain.

Chor. Give than Royal Maid, etc.

Coridon and his Mistress Sing this following Dialogue. Made by Mr. Doggett,
and Sung by him and Mrs. Hodgson. M. AT London che've been, at London che've
been
And c'have seen the King and the Queen'a
C'have seen Lords and Earls,
And many fine Girls,
That turned up their tails at fifteen'a.
Che've seen the Lord Mayor,
And Bartholdom Fair,
And their I met with the Draggon,
That St. George that bold Knight,
Fought and Killed outright
Whilst a man could toss off a flaggon.
From thence as I went
To see the Monument,
I met with a Girl in Cheapside'a,
That for half a Crown
Plucked up her silk Gown,
And showd me how far she could stride'a.

Woe. What else I did see,
Is nothing to me,
For if she had such tricks as these be,
I Am sure she is a whore
Therefore say no more,
Nor think that I e're will be pleased with ye.

M. Nay prithee now hold,
And don't cry nor scold
If you know what it is to be quiet,
I went but to try
If that I could spy
How I could like Londoners diet.

Woe. And for ought I see
The're not like to we,

M. Faith and Troth it is a folly to lie
I think they are not

Woe. No John not a jot

M. Joan -- I prithee come in and let us try.

Woe. Na good now la-be
Give an Inch I see
You Will take -- Pish-hie-what's the matter?
Why sure John you wont

M. I Am a Dog and I don't,
Now I Am set on it, let what will come after.

Enter Mercury. Mer. SLeep Close the Eyes of all that is here
For mighty Jove will straight appear
And Mortals must not dare to veiw
What Jove on Earth resolves to do.

Cor. What whipster are you? that dares here resort,
Adzooks to hinder our sport:
Begone and quit the place
Or Crab-stick here shall wipe you over the Face
'Flesh and Bones do you laugh, I shall mawle.
yawns. Mercury Charms him to sleep.
Mer. Hail Royal maid? beloved of Heaven,
Pattern of Chastity Divine
A votary to Great Diana's Shrine,
To you a present Jove has given,
Close by the Sea it stands
Waiting to be received by your Fair hands.

Eur. Blessed be Jove.
To him I Will daily incense pay,
And at his Altars Maiden offerings lay
Both for his Gift and Love.
Exiunt.
A Symphony of Music, and they all wake. Cor. Adzooks I have had a most
Notable Nap.
But where is our Mistress, adsniggs she is gone,
O dismal mishap.
We Are all quite undone.

The Scene draws and discovers Europa on a Bulls back in the Sea. Cor. Look
She Is on a Bull's back in the midst oth' Sea.
Ods flesh what will now become of poor me.
They all run off.
Eu. Is there no succor, help, are Gods too grown
Ravishers, help help, oh Heavens is there is none.
A Symphony of Music.
The Scene Changes to a Bower, and discovers Jupiter and Europa, her Hair loose
about her, as just Ravished. Eur. UNdone Europa by a God undone;
Is then Astrea fled from Heaven,
Oh whether is the Goddess driven?
To the Infernal Cave she is gone.
Confusion, Horror, Death, all come,
For in my Ravished Breast for you is Room:
Who Is there?
Ha! it is my Ravisher!
Oh let me fly the hated God.
I feel I go
To Shades below,
My Last abode.
Swouns.
The Attendants place Europa in a Chariot. Ju. RAise her my Son, no more my
Fair,
Lament, for thou shall be a Star,
Sound Music from the Spears her mind to ease,
And tune her Soul for the Immortal bliss.

Music sound and as Jupiter and Europa ascend this Chorus is Sung, and after
the Chorus they join in a Grand Dance. Cho. See where the God and Nymphs
ascending,
And Choirs of Spirits them attending,
They Mount, they Mount the seats of rest
Where Souls are with Immortal Pleasures Blessed.

FINIS.

