A Short View OF TRAGEDY; It Is Original, Excellency, and Corruption. WITH SOME
Reflections on Shakespeare, and other Practitioners for the STAGE. By Mr. Rymer,
Servant to their Majesty's.

-- Hodieque manent vestigia ruris. Hor. LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by
Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford Arms in Warwick Lane, and at the Black Lion in
Fleetstreet, between the two Temple-Gates. 1693.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Charles,
Earl of Dorset and Middlesex, Baron Buckhurst, and Ld. Chamberlain of their
Majesty's Household, Knight. of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, Lord Lieutenant
of Sussex, and one of their Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord, COntemplation and Action have their different Seasons. It was after
the defeat of Antony, and the business of the World pretty well over, when
Virgil and Horace came to be so distinguished at Court.

Alexander, who had given so good proof of his Judgment by the Honors paid to
the Memory of Homer, and of P^dar, found in his time no better Poet than (...).
(...) to the great Alexander, was for Laureate and Historiographer.

When once again the business of the World is over, Now my Lord, that the Muses
Commonweal is become your Province, what may we not expect? This I say, not
with intent to apply that of Quintilian on Augustus Cae^ar, Parum Diis visum
est esse eum Maxim^m Poetarum: that were a Common Topic: But because, when
some years ago, I tried the Public with Observations concerning the Stage; It
was principally your Countenance that buoyed me up, and supported a Righteous
Cause against the Prejudice and Corruption then reigning.

I would not raise up again the Spirit of the late Prince of Conti; His Traite
contre la Comedy, has by others been termed la defense de la virtue. My zeal
goes no higher than the Doctrine of Horace, and Aristotle; and the Primitive
Fathers of Dramatick Poet^y: If that Purity may be Allowed under a Christian
Dispensation.

The World, surely, other Matters apart, owes much to Cardinal Richelieu, for
his Encouragement to the Belles Lettres. From thence we may reckon, that we
begin to understand the Epick Poem by the means of Bossu; and Tragedy by
Monsieur D^cier. The World is not agreed which is the Nobler Poem: Pla^o and
Bossu prefer the former; Aristotle and Dacier declare for Tragedy. Three,
indeed, o^ the Epick (the two by Homer and Virgil's Aeneids) are reckoned in
the degree of Perfection: But amongst the Tragedies, only the Oedipus of
Sophocles. That, by Corneille, and by others, of a Modern Cut, quantum Muta^us!
but I already trespass too long upon your time, who am,

My Lord, Your ever Bounden Faithful Humble Servant.

THE Contents.
Chap. I. THe Chorus ke^ps the Poet ^o Rules. A show to ^e Spectators. Two
S^nses to be pleased* The Eye, by ^he Show, and by the Action. Pl^ys Acted
without words. Words often better out of the way. Instances in Shakespeare. Ben
Johnson and Seneca Noted. To the Ear, Pronunciation is all in all. The Story of
Demosthenes. Mistakes in Judging. T^ sorts of Judges. At Athens ^ Third sort.
Judges upon Oath. In France Judges divided about the Cid. Cardinal Richelieu
against the Majority. At the Thomas Morus, weeping unawares. Horace Angry with
Shows. The French Opera inconsistent with Nature and Good sense. Burlesk Verse.
At Paris Christ's Passion in Burlesk. A Tragedy of Aeschylus. The defeat of
Xerxes. The Subject, and Economy. How imitated for our English Stage. King
John of France, Francis 1. Prisoners. The Spanish Armado in. 88. An imitation,
recommended to Mr. Dreyden.

Chap. 2. Tragedy before Thespis. A Religious Worship: Music and Dance follow
the Chorus: Governments c^re of the Stage, as of Religion. No Private Person to
build a Chapel. Tongue Men not to present Plays. Didascalia, and
Tragedy-doctors. Difficulty. Public Revenue for Plays. Theatre-money sacred.
End of Poetry. What effect by Aeschylus. Of his Persians. Schools for Boys.
Stage for Men. Character of Aristophanes. Opinion of the Persian Ambassador.
The State takes aim from him. Spares not his Master the People. Democratical
Corruption. His Address unimit able. Comedy after him dwindles. Somewhat like
him amongst the Moderns. Rehearsal. Alchymist. Vertuoso. Rabilais.

End of Poetry with the Romans. Tragedies by their Great Men. All Translation.
Numa Pompilius. Old Romans aversion to Poetry. 12 Tables. Stage Plays to remove
the Plague. Never improved by them. The use hardly known. Far short of the
Greeks. Horace and Virgil. Their Conduct. Terence's Complaint. Want^d Show. And
Action. Athens the Soil for Dramatick Poetry. A foreign Plant with the Romans.
They for the Eye, pleased more with the outside. Their Theaters co^siderable,
not the Tragedies. Horace's Reason.

Chap. 3. The first Christians cry against Idols, Stage Plays, Pagan Worship.
Apostolical Constitutions. Greek and Latin Fathers. Tertullian's Conceit.
Counsels against Heathen Learning. Greek Wisdom. St. Hi^rom, St. Austin, their
Sin of Heathen Books. A Canon that no Bishop read an Heathen Book. ^ulians
Project. The Christians Co^ntermine. A Christian Homer, Pindar, and Euripides.
Stage Plays particularly levelled at. The same heat at this day in the Spanish
Jesuits. Pedro de Guzman against Stage Plays and Bullfeasts. The Name of Poet a
Bugbear at the Reformation. The Heresy charged on SingSongs, and Stage Plays.
Marot's Psalms. How in vog^e at the French-Court. Reasons against Stage Plays.
Lactantius. The same 2000 years ago by Plato. Tragedy, Homer, Aeschylu^.
Objections by Aristophanes.

Chap. 4. Aristotl^'s (...) Answer evasive. Plato a better Divine. Not better
than our Modern. God may use ill instruments. The false Dream. The two Barr^ls.
Fables before Hom^r. H^ of God sensibly. Plato, Cant. Meta^hore the utmost we
are capable of. Fables. Allegory. Celsus to Origin against the Bible. All^gory,
a cure for all. Homer's Fables from the Bible. The false Dream, from the Story
of Achab improved by Homer. Averroes of Arabian Poets. Apollo Loxias.
Particular sentences. Texts of Scripture. Juno, Job's Wife. SS. in V^lgar
Tongu^. Euripides, ill Women. No blam^ to the art. Pomp of the Theater. What
ill names by ^esuits.

Chap. 5. Of Poetry in Italy. Aristotle's Works. Tramontains. Cardinal Bibiena.
Tragedy there with Chorus. Strolers. Christ's Passion.

Of Poetry in France. Clem. Marot. Strolers there. Proceedings at Law against
them. Report of their Case. Their Old Testament. Acts of the Apostles, and
Christ's Passion. Banished from France. Comedy there. Tragedy by Hardy,
Corneille, Richilieu. Acad^my Royal. The Theater. Caution that no Equivoque,
nor ought against good Manners. More nice than the Pulpit. Their Gall^ntry,
Verse, Language, unfit for Tragedy. Dramatick representations banished from
Spain. Nurse of Heresy. Father Guzman. Escobar.

Of Poetry in England. British, Saxon, Norman, Latin and Provencial Poetry
there. Richard Ceur de Lion, a Provencial Poet. O^r Monks and History false on
that account. The Gay Science. That and the Albigenses Contemporary, and from
the same Countr^y. King Kichard's Fellow-Poets. Jef^ry Rudel, and Countess of
Tripoly.

Chap. 6. Savery de Mauleon a Provencial Poet. Testimony of him. King R. I. His
Verses when Prisoner in Austria. The Emperor Frederick Barbarossa. His Poetry.
Ramond Beringhier. Four Daughters, four Queens. Rob. Grosthead. His Provencial
Poetry. Other Languages stubborn. Chaucer refined our English. Which in
perfection by Waller. His Poem on the Navy Royal, beyond all modern Poetry in
any Language. Before him our Poets better expressed their thoughts in Latin.
Whence Hoveden might mistake, and his Malice. A Translation from Grosthead. The
Harp a Music then in fashion. Five Tragedies from Joan Queen of Naples.
Foreigners all called French. Plays by the ParishClerks of London. What under
H. VIII. flourish under Queen Elizabeth. The Gorboduck. French much behind-hand
with us. Tragedy, with us, but a shadow.

Chap. 7. Othello. More of a piece. In Tragedy four parts. Fable, the Poets
part. Cinthio's Novels. Othello altered for the worse. Marriage, absurd,
forbidden by Horace. Fable of Othello* Use and Application. Othello's
Love-powder. High-German Doctor. Venetians odd taste of things. Their Women
fools. Employ Strangers. Hate the Moors. Characters. Nothing of the Moor in
Othello, of a Venetian in Desdemona. Of a Soldier in Jago. The Soldiers
Character, by Horace* What by Shakespeare. Agamemnon. Venetians no sense of
Jelaousie. Thoughts, in Othello, in a Horse, or Mastiff, more sensibly expressed.
Ill Manners. Outrageous to a Nobleman, to Humanity. Address, in telling bad
news. In Princes Courts. In Aristophanes. In Rabelais. Venetian Senate. T^eir
Wisdom.

Chap. 8. Re^lections on the Julius Caesar. Men famous in History. To be robbed
of their go^d name, Sacrilege. Shakespeare, abuse of History. Contradiction, in
the character of Brutus. Villon and Dante, that Hugh Capet from a Butcher.
Preparation in Poetry. Strong reasons in Cassius* Roman Senators impertinent as
the Venetian. Portia as Desdemona. The same parts and good breeding. How talk
of Business. ^ispers. Brutus's Tinder-box, Sleepy Boy, Fiddle. Bru^us and
Cassius, Flat-foot Mimicks. The Indignity. Laberius. Play of the Incarnation.
The Madonna's -- Shouting and Ba^tel. Strolers in Cornwall. Rehearsal, law for
acting it once a week.

The Catiline by Ben. Johnson. Why an Orator to be vir bonus. Ben cou*d
distinguish Men and Manners. Sylla's Ghost. The spee^h not to be made in a
blind Corner. Corneille. Common sense teaches Unity of Action. The Chorus, of
necessity, keep the Poet to time, and place. No rule observed. A Life in
Plutarch. Acts of the Apostles. Ben is fidus interpres. Is the Horse in Mill in
slat opposition to Horace. Tristing tale, or corruption of History, unfit for
Tragedy. In contempt of Poetry. Aristophanes, not the occasion of the Death of
Socrates. Was for a reformation in the service book. With what address he
effected it.

Sarpedon's Fast, of divine institution. The le^ sally from, or Parenthesis in
the ancient Comedy of more moment than all our Tragedies. English Comedy the
best.

Extrait des Registres du Parliament du Vendredy 9. Decembre l'an 1541. Monsieur
de S. Andre President.


ERRATA.
Page 8. l. 10. Beau. p. 10. l. 5. ingenieuses. p. 21. l. 20. haberg^ons.
CHAP. I.
The CONTENTS.
The Chorus keeps the Poet to Rules. A show to the Spectators. Two Senses to be
pleased. The Eye, by the Show, and by the Action. Plays Acted without Word^.
Words often better out of the way. Instances in Shakespeare. Ben. Johnson and
Seneca Noted. To the Ear, P^onunciation is all in all. The Story of
Demosthenes. Mistakes in Judging. Two sorts of Judges. At Athens a Third sort.
Judges upon Oath. In France Judges divided about the Cid. Cardinal Richelieu
against the Majority. A^ the Thomas Morus, weeping unawares. Horace Angry with
Shows. The French Opera inconsistent with Nature and Good sense. Burlesk Verse.
At Paris Christ's Passion in Burlesk. A Tragedy of Aeschylus. The defeat of
Xerxes. The Subject, and Economy. How imitated for our English Stage. King
John of France, Francis 1. Prisoners. The Spanish Armado in 88. An imitation,
recommended to Mr. Dreyden.

WHAT Reformation may not we exp^ct now, that in France they see the necessity
of a Chor^s to their Tragedies? Boyer, and Racine, both of the Royal Academy,
have led the Dance; they have tried the success in the last Plays that were
Presented by them.

The Chorus was the root and original, and is certainly always the most
necessary part of Tragedy.

The Spectators thereby are secured, that their Poet shall not juggle, or put
upon them in the matter of Place, and ^ime, other than is just and reasonable
for the representation.

And the Poet has this benefit; the Chorus is a goodly Show, so that he need
not ramble from his Subject out of his Wits for some foreign Toy or
Hobbyhorse, to humor the Multitude.

Poetica.
Aristotle tells us of T^o Senses that must be pleased, our Sight, and our
Ears: And it is in vain for a Poet (with Bays in the Rehearsal) to complain of
Injustice, and the wrong Judgment in his Audience, unless these Two sens^s be
gratified.

The worst on it is, that most People are wholly led by these ^wo senses, and
follow them upon content, without ever troubling their Noddle farther.

How many Plays owe all their success to a rare Show? Even in the days of
Horace, enter on the Stage a Person in a Costly strange Habit, Lord! What
Clapping, what Noise and Thunder, as Heaven and Earth were coming together! yet
not one word spoken.

Dixit (...) aliquid? nil, s^ne, quid placit Ergo?
(...) (...) violas imitat^ (...).
Was there ought said? tr^th, no, What then did touch ye?
Some Prince of (...), or ^ Mamamouch^.
It matters not whether there be any Plot, any Characters, any Sense, or a wise
Word from one end to the other, provided in our Play we have the S^nate of
Rome, the Venetian Senate i^ their Pontificalibus, or a Blackamoor Ru^ian, or
Tom Dove, or other Four* legged Hero of the Bear-Garden.

The Eye is a quick sense, will be in with our Fancy, and prepossess the Head
strangely. Another means whereby the Eye misleads our Judgment is the Action:
We go to see a Play Acted; in Tragedy is represented a Memorable Action; so the
Spectators are always pleased to see Action, and are not often so ill-natured
to pry into, and examine whether it be Proper, Just, Natural, in season, or out
of season. Bays in the Rehearsal well knew this secret: The Two Kings are at
their Coranto; nay, the Moon and the Earth dance the Hey; any thing in Nature,
or against Nature, rather than allow the Serious Council, or other dull
business to interrupt, or obstruct Action.

This thing of Action finds the blindside of humane-kind an hundred ways. We
laugh and weep with those that laugh or weep; we gape, stretch, and are very
dotterels by example.

Action is speaking to the Eyes; and all Europe over Plays have been
represented with great applause, in a Tongue unknown, and sometimes without any
Language at all*

Muny, peradventure, of the Tragical Scenes in Shakespeare, cried up for the
Action, might do yet better without words: Words are a sort of heavy baggage,
that were better out of the way, at the push of Action; especially in his
bombast Circumstance, where the Words and Action are seldom akin, generally are
inconsistent, at cross purposes, embarrass or destroy each other; yet to those
who take not the words distinctly, there may be something in the buz and sound,
that like a drone to a Bagpipe may serve to set off the Action: For an instance
of the former, Would not a rap at the door better express Jago's meaning? than

-- Call aloud. Jago. Do with like tim^rous accent, and dire yel,
As when by night and negligence the ^ire
Is sp^ed in populous Cit^s.
For, What Ship? Who is Arrived? The Answer is,

It Is one Jago, A^ncient to the General,
He has had most Favorable and Happy speed;
Tempests themselves, high Seas, and houling Winds,
The guttered Rocks, and congregated Sands,
Traitors enst^p'd, to* clog the guiltless Keel,
As having s^nse of Beauty, do omit
Their common Natures, letting go safely by
The divine Desdemona.

Is this the Language of the Exchange, or the Ensuring-Office? Once in a man's
life, he might be content at Bedlam to hear such a rapture. In a Play one
should speak like a man of business, his speech must be (...), which the French
render Agiss^nte; the Italians, Negotiosa, and Operativa; but by this
Gentleman's talk one may well guess he has nothing to do. And he has many
Companions, that are

-- Hey day!
I know not what to do, nor what to say. Rehearsal.

It was then a strange imagination in Ben. Johnson, to go stuff out a Play with
Tully's Orations. And in Seneca, to think his dry Mora^s, and a tedious train
of Sentences might do feats, or have any wonderful operation in the Drama.

Some go to s^e, others to hear a Play. The Poet should please both; but be
sure that the Spectators be satisfied, whatever Entertainment he give his
Audience.

But if neither the Show, nor the Action cheats us, there remains still a
notable vehicle to carry o^f nonsense, which is ^he Pronunciation.

(...) the l^ud Trump^t, which our Courage aids;
(...) learn, That sound, as well as sense persw^des. Waller.

Demosthenes Plutarch, Demosthen.
had a good stock of ^se, was a great Master of Words; could turn a period, and
draw up his tropes in a line of Battle; and fain would he h^ seen some effect
of his Orations; no ^dy was moved, no body minded him. (...) goes to the
Playhouse, bargains with (...) Actor, and learned of him to speak R^undly and
Gracefully: From that time, (...) but Demosthenes? Never such a lead^g man!
whenever he spoke, no division, not a vote to the contrary, the whole House
were with him* (...) Co^radicente. This change observed, a Friend went to him
^or the secret; Tell me, says he, your Nostrum, tell ^e your Receip; What is
the main Ingredie^t that makes an Orator? Demosthenes answer^d, Pronunci^tion:
What then the next thing? (...): Pray then, What the Third? Still the answer
was Pronunciation.

Now this was at A^hens, where want of Wit was never an objection against them.
So that it is not in Song only, that a goo^ voice diverts us from the Wit and
Sense. From the S^age, the Bar or the Pulpit, a good vo^ce will prepossess our
ears, and having seized that Pass, is in a fair way to surprise our Judgment.

Considering then what power the Show, the Action, and the Pronunci^tion have
over us, it is no wonder ^at wise men often mistake, and give an hasty
Judgment, which upon a ^eview is justly set aside.

H^race divides ^he sudges into Majores Numero, and the few or better sort; and
these ^or the most part were of different Judgments: The like distinct^on may
hold in all other Nations; only at Athens there was a third sort, who were
Judges upon Plutarch, Cim^.
Oath, Judges in Commission, by the Government sworn to do right, and determine
the Merits of a Play, without favor or affection.

But amongst the Moderns, never was a Cause canvass'd with so much heat,
between the Play-Judges, as that in France, about Corneille's Tragedy of the
Cid. The Majority were so fond of it, that with them it became a Proverb,
Pelisson. Hist. Acad.
Cela est plus bean que la Cid. On the other side, Cardinal Richelien damned
it, and said, All the pudder about it, was only between the ignorant people,
and the men of judgment.

Yet this Cardinal with so nice a taste, had not many years before been several
times to see acted the Tragedy of Sir Thomas Moor, and as often wept at the
Representation. Never were known so many people Parnasse Reform.
crowded to death, as at that Play. Yet was it the Manufacture of Jehan de
Serre, one about the form of our Flekno, or Thom^s Jordan. The same de Serre,
that dedicated a Book of Meditations to K. Charles ^. and went home with
Pockets full of Medals and Reward.

By this Instance we see a man the most sharp, and of the greatest penetration
was imposed upon by these cheating Senses, the Eyes and the Ears, which
greedily took in the impression from the Show, the Action, and from the
^mphasis and Pronunciation; tho there was no great matter of F^, no Manners, no
fine Thoughts, no Language; that is, nothing of a Tragedy, nothing of a Poet
all the while.

Horace was very angry with these empty Shows and Vanity, which the Gentlemen
of his time ran like mad after. -- Insanos oculos, et gaudia vana. What would he
have said to the French Opera of late so much in vogue? There it is for you to
bewitch your eyes, and to charm your ears. There is a Cup of Enchantment, there
is Music and Machine; Circe and Calipso in conspiracy against Nature and good
Sense. It Is a Debauch the most insinuating, and the most pernicious; none would
think an Opera and Civil Reason, should be the growth of one and the same
Climate. But shall we wonder at any thing for a Sacrifice to the Grand Monarch?
such Worship, such Idol. All flattery to him is insipid, unless it be
prodigious: Nothing reasonable, or within compass can come near the Matter. All
must be monstrous, enormous, and outrageous to Nature, to be like him, or give
any Echo on his Appetite.

Were Rabelais alive again, he would look on his Garagantua as but a Pygmy.
Waller.
-- The H^roes Race excels the Poets Thought. The Academy Royal may pack up
their Modes and Methods, and (...) ingeniens^s; the R^c nes and the Corneilles
must all now (...) to the Tune of Baptista. Here is the O^; here is Machine and
Baptista, sarew^ll Apollo and the Muses.

Away with your Opera from the Theater* b^r had they become the Heathen
Temples; for the Corybantian Priests, and ( Semiv^ros Gallos) the old Capons of
Gaul, than a People hat pretend from (...), or descen^ from the undoubted Loins
of Germain and Norman Conquerors.

In the French, not many years before was observed the like vicious appetite,
and immoderate Passion for verse Burlesque.

They were current in Italy an hundred years, ere they passed to this side the
Alps; But when once they had their turn in France, so right to their humor,
they overran all; Pelisson Histor. Acad.
nothing wise or sober might stand in their way. All were possessed with the
Spirit of Burlesk, from Doll in the Dairy, to the Matrons at Court, and Maids
of Honor. Nay, so far went the Frenzy, that no Bookseller would meddle on any
terms without Burlesk; insomuch that Ann. 1649. was at Paris printed a serious
Treatise with this Tit^e, -- La Passim de N^tre Seign^ur, En verse (...). If we
cannot rise to the Persection of intreigue in Sophocles, let us sit down with
the honesty and simplicity of the first beginners in Tragedy: As for example;

One of the most simple now extant, is the P^rsians by A^schylus.

Some ten years after that Darius had been beaten by the Greeks, (...) (his
Father Darius being dead) brought against them such Forces by Sea and Land, the
like never known in History: Xerxes went also in person, with all the Maison de
Roy, Satrapie and Gendarmery; all were routed. Some forty years afterward the
Poet takes hence his subject for a Tragedy.

The Place is by Darius's Tomb, in the Metropolis of Persia.
The Time is the Night, an hour or two before day break.
First, on the Stage are seen 15 Persons in Robes, proper for the Satrapa, or
Chief Princes in Persia: Suppose they met so early at the Tomb, then sacred,
and ordinarily resorted to by people troubled in mind, on the accounts of
Dreams, or any thing not boding good. They talk of the state of Affairs: Of
Greece; and of the Expedition. After some time take upon them to be the Chorus.

The next on the Stage comes Atossa the Queen Mother of Persia; she could not
lie in Bed for a Dream that troubled her; so in a fit of Devotion comes to her
Husband's Tomb, there luckily m^ets with so many Wisemen and Couns^llors to
eas: her Mind by interpreting her Dream; This with the Chorus makes the Second
Act.

A^r this, their Disorder, Lamentation and (...), is such, that Darius is
disturbed in his (...)* s^ his Gh^st appears, and belike stays with t^m till
Day break: Then the Chorus concludes the Act.

In the Fourth Act come the Messengers with sad Tidings, which, with the
reflections and troubles thereupon, and the Chorus, fill out this Act.

In the Last, Xerxes himself arrives, which gives occasion of condoling,
houling* and distraction enough, to the end of the Tragedy.

One may imagine how a Grecian Audience that loved their Country, and gloried
in the Virtue of their Ancestors would be affected with this Representation.

Never appeared on the Stage a Ghost of greater consequence. The Grand Monarch
Darius, who had been so shamefully beaten by those pet^y Provinces of the
United Grecians, could not now lie quiet in his Grave for them; but must be
raised from the dead again, to be witness of his Son's Disgrace, and of their
Triumph.

Were a Tragedy after this Model to be drawn for our Stage, Greece and Persia
are too far from us: The Scene must be laid nearer home: As at the Louvre; and
instead of Xerxes we might take John, King of Francc, and the Battle of
Poictiers. So if the Germans or Spaniards were to compose a Play, on the Bat^el
of Pavia, and King Francis there taken Prisoner, the Scene should not be laid
at Vienna, or at Madrid, but at the Louvre. For there the Tragedy would
principally operate, and there all the Lines most naturally center.

But perhaps the memorable Adventure of the Spaniards in 88. against England,
may better resemble that of Xerxes: Suppose then a Tragedy called The
Invin^ible Arm^do.

The Place, then for the A^tion, may be at Madrid, by some Tomb, or s^lemn
place of resort; or if we prefer a ^rn in it from good to bad Fortune, then
some Drawing Room in the Palace near the King's Bedchamber.

The Time to begin, Twelve at Night.

The Sc^ne opening presents 15 Grandees of Spain, with their most sol^mn Beards
and Acco^trements, met there (suppose) after some Ball, or other public
occasi^n. They talk of the state of Affairs, the greatness of their Power, the
vastness of their Dominions, and prospect to be infallibly, ere long, Lords of
all. With this prosperity and goodly thoughts transported, they at last form
themselves into the Chorus, and walk such measures, ^ith Music, as may become
the gravity of such a Chorus.

Then enter two or three of the Cabinet Council, who now have leave to tell the
Secret; That the Preparations and the Invincible Armade was to conquer England.
These, with part of the Chorus, may communicate all the Particulars, the
Provisions, and the Strength by Sea and Land; the certainty of success, the
Advantages by that accession; and the many Tun of Tar* Barrels for the
H^reticks. These Topics may afford matter enough, with the Chorus, for the
Second Act.

In the Third Act, these Gentl^men of the Cabinet cannot agree about sharing
the Preferments of England, and a mighty broil th^re is amongst them. One will
not be content unless h^ is King of Man; another will b^ Duke of Lancaster.
One, that had seen a Coronation in England, will by all means be Duke of
Aquitayn, or else Duke of Normandy. And on this occasion two Competitors have a
juster occasion to wo^k up, and show the Muscles of their Passion, then
Shakespeare's Cassius and Brutus. After, the Chorus.

The Fourth Act may, inst^ad of Atossa, present some old Dames of the Court,
used to dream Dreams, and to s^e Sprights, in their Night-Rails, and Forhead
Clothes, to alarm our Gentlemen with new apprehensions, which make distraction
and disorders sufficient to furnish out this Act.

In the last Act the King enters, and wisely discourses against Dreams and
Hobgoblins, to quiet their minds: And ^he more to satisfy them, and take off
their fright, he lets them to know that St. Loyala had appeared to him, and
assured him that all is well. This said, comes a Messenger of the ill News; his
Account is lame, suspected, he sent to Prison. A second Messenger, that came
away long after, but had a spe^dier Passage, his account is distinct, and all
their loss cred^ted. So in fine, one of the Chorus concludes with that of
Euripides: Thus you see the Gods bring things to pass often, otherwise than was
by man proposed.

In this ^raught we see the Fable, and the Characters or Manners of Spaniards,
and room ^or (...) Thoughts, and noble Expressions, as much as the Poet can
afford.

The First Act gives a Review, or Ostentation of their Strength in
Battel-array. In the Second, they are in motion for the A^tack, and we see
where the Action falls. In the Third they quarrel about dividing the Spoil. In
the Fourth, They meet with a Repulse; are beaten off by a Vanguard of Dreams,
Goblins, and Terrors of the Night. In the Fifth, They rally under their King in
Person, and make good their Ground, till overpowered by fresh Troops of
Conviction; and mighty Truth prevails.


For the First Act, a Painter would draw Spain hovering, and ready to strike at
the Universe. In the Second, just taking England in her Pounces.


But it must not be forgotten in the Second Act, that there be some
Spanish-Fryar or ^esuit, a^ St. Xaviere (for he may drop in by miracle, any
where) to ring in their ears the Northern Heresy; like ^ago in Shakespeare, Put
Money in thy Purse, I say, Put Money in thy Purse. So often may he repeat the
Northern Heresy. Away with your Secular Advantages; I say, the Northern
Heresy; there is Roast-meat for the Church; Voto a Christo, the Northern
Heresy.

If Mr. Dryden might try his Pen on this Subject, doubtless, to an Audience
that heartily love their Country, and glory in the Virtue of their Ancestors,
his imitation of Aschylus would have better success, and would Pit, Box and
Gallery, far beyond any thing now in possession of the Stage, however wrought
up by the unimitable Shakespeare.

CHAP. II.
The CONTENTS.
Tragedy before Thespis. A Religious Worship: Musi^k and Dance follow the
(...): Governments care of the Stage, as of Religion. No Priva^e Person to
build a Chapel. Young men not to present Plays. Didascalia, and
Tragedy-doctors. Difficulty. Public R^venue for Plays. Thea^remoney sacred.
End of Poetry. What effect by Aeschylus. Of his Persians. Schools for Boys.
Stage for Men. Character of Aristophanes. Opinion of the Persian Ambassador.
The State takes aim from him. Spares not his Master the People. Democratical
Corruption. His Address unimitable. Comedy after him dwindles. Somewhat like
him amongst the Moderns. Rehearsal. Alchymist. Vertuoso. Rabilais.

End of Poetry with the Romans. Tragedies by their Great Men. All Translation.
Numa Pompilius. Old Romans aversion to Poetry. 12 Tables. StagePlays to remove
the Plague. Never improved by them. The use ha^dly known. Far short of the
Greeks. Horace and Virgil. Their Conduct. Terence's Complaint. Wanted ^how. And
Action. Athens the Soil for Dramatick Poetry. A foreign Plant with the Romans.
They sor the Eye, pleased more with the outside. Their Theaters considerable,
not the Tragedies. Horace's Reason.

AUthors generally look no higher than Thespis for the Original of Tragedy; yet
Plato reckons it much ancienter.

Minos, Minos dial.
says he, for all his wisdom, was overseen in making war upon Athens; where
lived so many Tragic Poets, that represented him, and fixed on him and his
Family a Name and Character never to be wiped off.

The Judges of Hell, Pasiphae, and her Minotaur, are upon record to all
Posterity.

All agree, that in the beginning it was purely a Religious Worship, and solemn
Service for their Holy Days. Afterward it came from the Temples to the
Theater, admitted of a Secular Allay, and grew to be some Image of the World,
and Humane Life. When it was brought to the utmost perfection by Sophocles, the
Chorus continued a necessary part of the Tragedy; but that Music and the
Dancing which came along with the Chorus, were mere Religion, were no part of
the Tragedy, nor had any thing of Philosophy or Instruction in them.

The Government had the same care of these Representations, as of their
Religion, and as much caution about them. The Laws would not permit a private
person to make a Chapel, raise an Altar, or cons^crate an Image; otherwise all
places would in time be so crammed from the Devotion of Women and weak heads,
that a man should not set a foot, nor find elbow-room, for Gods, and Shrines,
consecrated stuff.

The like providence had they for the Theater. No Schol. Aristo.
Po^t under the age o^ 30 or 40 years was allowed to present any Play to be
acted. Seldens Marmora, and other Chronol^gers inform us that Aeschylus had the
victory, when he was 40 years old: And Eur^pides not till he was 43. The
dramatick Poet was styled (...), and Trag^dodidasculus, as one should say,
Comedy-doctor, and Trag^dy-doctor: We find too the Word didascalia, with the
Titles of T^rence's Comedies, which afterward the Latins came to imitate, as
Cicero in Brut. Livius qui primus fabulam Docuit, And Hor. -- vel q^i Docuere
Togat^s. So to write a Play, in the opinion of Aristophanes, Comod^-didascalia,
is of all things the most difficult.

More Plutarch.
of their public money was spent about the Chorus, and other charges and
decorations of their Theater, than in all their Wars with the Kings of Persia.

An^ when brough^ to their last extremity, that no other Bank remained ^or
them, wherewith to carry on a War, without which War they could not longer
expect to be a People, the delicate turn used by Demosthenes, in starting the
mo^ion, ^or applying this Theatre-money to the War, is observed as a Demitr.
Libanius. O^n. 1.
Masterpiece of address by the Orators. Did I say (quoth Demonsthenes) the
Theatre-money may be applied to the War? no, by Jove, no^ I.

Monasteri^s and Church Lands were never wi^h us so sacred.

In the days of (...), it was on all hands agreed, that the best (...) was he
who had done the most to make men ver^uous and serviceable to the Public. In a
Dialogue of the dead, Aristoph. Frogs.
where they dispute the precedence, says (...), Consider (...) s^t ^s m^ I lest
^u.

(...) (...), ^ur C^bits high, not such as now-a-da^s,
That slip the collar when they should serve th^r (...).
Indifferent, loose (...)
pr^dential, (...)
tricki^g Fellows;
Naught did they breathe, but broad Swords, (...)-Axes,
The H^lmets lofty pride, (...)
^ack-Boots, Ha^ons,
With true (...).
(...).
So when his Princes at Th^bes, and when his Persians were acted, not a
Spectator, but bit his Thumbs with impatience for the Field, to give the Enemy
Bat^el. So his Patroclus, his Tencer, and his Thimaleon`s were represented only
to spur on his Countrymen to Virtue, and provoke them to a generous Emulation.

And here Aristophanes declares another Rule (which Plato takes from him) That
if any thing looks with an ill face, the Poet must hide it; not suffer it, by
any means, to be shown or represented in a Play: Because as the Schools are for
teaching Children, the Stage should be ^or men of riper years and Judgment. So
that a Poet must be sure that his Doctrine be good and wholesome.

This Author appears in his Function, a man of wonderful zeal for Virtue, and
the good of his Country; and he laid about him with an undaunted resolution,
as it were some Christian Martyr, for his Faith and Religion. He plainly ran a
Muck at all manner of Vice wherever he saw it, be it in the greatest
Philosophers, the greatest Poets, the Generals, or the Ministers of State.

The Persian Ambassador, who was Lieger there (as formerly the French with us)
seeing the Town all at his beck; and the Government taking aim, turning out,
disgracing, impeaching, banishing, out-lawing and attainting the great men,
according as he hinted, or held up the finger, the Ambassador, not
understanding the Athenian temper, was astonished at the man.

And, for all the Democracy, no less bold was he with his Sovereign,
Legislative people: Representing Aristoph. equites.
them, taking Bribes, selling their Votes, bought o^f; Nay, the whole House led
away for (...)
a D^sh of Sprats, or pennyworth of Coriand^r. -- (...). He tells 'em (as the
practice amongst them) that the Government had no occasion for men of wit or
honesty. The most ignorant, the most impudent, and the greatest Rogue stood
fairest always for a Place, and the best qualified to be their chief Minister.
He tells them, nothing shall fright him; Truth and Honesty are on his side; he
has the heart of Hercules, will speak what is just and generous, tho Cerberus,
and all the kennel of Hell Hounds were loo'd upon him.

But then his Address was admirable: He would make the Truth visible and
palpable, and every way sensible to them. The Art and the Application; his
strange Fetches, his lucky Starts; his odd Inventions, the wild Turns, Returns,
and Counter-turns were never matched, nor are ever to be reached again.

Who followed him in Comedy were content to trifle with the Punks, the Pandars,
the Ruffian, the old Chu^, the Davus or Knave of the Family, and his young
Master.

Amongst the Moderns, our Re^earsal is some resemblance of his Frogs: The
Vertuoso's Character, and Ben Johnson's Alchymist give some shadow of his
Clouds; but nowhere, peradventure wanders so much of his Spirit, as in the
French Rab^lais.

We may trust Horace for the sense of the Latins, at the time when they were
best able to judge. Then they reckoned, as the Greeks had done, that the End of
Poetry was as well to be profitable, as to be pleasant. * Simul and jucunda,
and idonea dicere Vitae. But what their practice, or how they improved the
drama, we s^e not. They tell of an Oedipus, written by Julius Caesar; an
Al^maeon, by Catullus; a Thyestes by Gracchus; an Adrastus, and an Ajax by
Augustus Caesar; an Astyonax, by Rutilius; a M^dea by Mecaenas; a Medea by
Ovid: with Seneca's Medea too. The Names of these several Tragedies import,
that these great men were con^ent to translate from the Greek, no farther then
had their ambition carried them, Horace says, indeed, Non minimum (...) d^cus
v^stigia Grae^. (...), and Celebrare (...) sacta. We find the name of O^ b^
Mecaenas; and D^omedes Instan^ in the B^tus, the (...), and the (...), for
Fabl^s of the Roman Garb; but ^e know no farther of them, what su^ the had, nor
how nobly they performed wh^ they had so boldly undertaken, in writing alone,
without a Greek Copy before 'em. It seems but a faint Commendation (the Non
mi^mum) that Horace gives them.

The Rom^ns were a rougher sort of People; and wonderful (...) were they of the
Grecian Arts, or of any Comm^rce with a Politer Nation. Till Numa (...), very
little had they of either Religion or Poetry amongst them. Nor made he use of
it farther, than for the H^s, and Anthems at the Altars and (...): (...) Poetry
had they none. And indeed at that time it was hardly safe for Poetry to stir
from Sanctuary; for in the world, the rigid Fathers had given the Poets an ugly
name, calling them Grassatores; which in Modern Italia^ may be rendered Banditi.

It was with much (...), and (...) an Usurpation by the (...), that they
stoop^d to a (...) with Greece for the commodity of their Laws; which were not
till then im^orted; and from thence we hear of the Twelve Tables.

For the Livy. l. 7.
Stag^-Plays: It was a Plague that first introduced them. They try, by that
strange Worship, to appease their Gods; and avert the Judgment so heavy on
them. But their first Secular Plays were taught by Livius Andronicus, some 200
years after the Twelve Tables at Rome. He set up for some skill in this
Dramatick way, (...) from the Greek.

Nor did Plautus that followed him attempt any farther, than to Translate: yet
carried he the Drama beyond what any Roman since could pretend to. He
Translates indeed, but with that spirit and mastery, one might take him for an
Original; did we not always find the Scene at Athens; and all the pother is
some little jilting story, or knavish pranck: Proposing only some trifling
silly Mirth or Pastime.

He had not the courage to trace Aristophanes, He had not an Heart of Hercules,
to combat Vice. Perhaps in his time, they had not yet learned to make their
Doctrine profitable; for he commends one for a rarity.

(...) paucas poeta reperiunt Comaedias Ubi boni Meliores fiant. After all the
goodly commendations and pretty things, by Quintilian (n) acknowledged due to
Pl^tus, and Terence, frankly he concludes, in Com^dia maxim Claudicamus -- vix
levem Consequimur umbr^m; That the Roman is insinitely short of the Greek
Comedy, hardly comes up to the shadow of it. Horace would fain wi^h some
color, ( o) make good the Comparison betwixt the Romans and the Greeks; on
that Topic, to slatter Augustus. But Virgil, with no disadvantage to his
Compliment, gave up the Cause. Excudent al^i -- Turegere imperio populos,
Roman, memento. H^ tibi erunt Arts -- Let them have all the praises due to
their polite Learning: To govern and to give Laws, be these thy Arts, O Caesar!
this is thy glory without a Rival.

On other occasions Horace declares his mind freely enough.

Terence complains heavily that he could not keep his Audience together: One
while they ran after the Gladiators, another time the Blockheads would be
gaping at a RopeDancer. -- Rumor venit datum iri gladiatores -- -- neque
spectari, neque cognosci potuerit, () l. 6.
() Epist.
Ita p^pulus, studio stupidus in funambulo, Annimu^ occuparat -- Here might be
a just Fable, true Characters, good ^ence, and neat Expression. Here might be
Nature and Morality in a delicate turn of Words: But where is the Show? where
is the Action, that are the Fac totum to the Spectators?

Upon the whole; This dramatick Poetry was like a foreign Plant among^ them,
the Climate not very kindly, an^ cultivated but indifferently; so might put
forth Leaves and Blossoms, without yielding any Fruit of much importance.

Athens was the genuine Soil for it, there it took, there it flourished, and
ran up to overtop every thing secular and sacred: There had this Poetry the
Honor, the Pomps, and the Dignity; their Regalia, and their Pontificalia.

But the Romans, mostly looked no deeper than the Show. They took up with the
outside and Portico; their Genius dwelt in their eye; there they fed it, there
indulged and pampered it immoderately: So that their (...) and their
Amphitheatres will always be remembered, tho their Tragedy and Comed^ be only
shadow; or Magni Nominis umbra.

They reckoned these matters of wit and sp^culation, not so consistent with the
severity of an active warlike people: something of their old Saturn lay heavy
in their heads to the very last. -- Hodieque manent vestigia ruris, says
Horace. And he gives the Reason;

Serus enim Graecis admovit acumin a Chartis:
Et post Punica bell^ qui^tus qu^rere caepit,
Quid Sophocles, quid ^hespis, and Aeschylus utile ferrent.
CHAP. III.
The CONTENTS.
The first Christians cry against Idols, Stage Plays, Page an Worship.
Apostolical Cons^itution* Gr^k and Latin Fathers. T^tullian's Conceit*
Councils against H^athen Learning. Greek-Wisdom. St. Hierom, St. Austin, their
Sin of H^athen Books. A Canon that no Bis^op read an H^athen Book. ^ulians
Project. The Christians countermine. A Christian Homer, Pindar, and E^ripides.
Stage Plays particularly levelled at. The same heat at this day in the Spa^ish
Jesuits. Pedro de Guzman against Stage Plays, and Bull-feasts. The Name of a
Po^t a Bugbear at the R^formation. The Heresy charged on Sing-Songs, and
^tage*Plays. Marot's Psalms. How in vo^ue at the Fren^h Court. Reasons against
Stage Plays. L^ctantius. The same 2000 years ago by Plato. Tragedy, Homer,
Aeschylus. Objections by Aristophanes.

WHEN our first Christians had scuffled out their way from amongst the ^ews,
and turned their back on Palestine, they were put to a new sort of Game with
the Gentil^s.

The Law and the Old-TestamentProphets stood 'em no longer in stead; they must
now conjure up the Sibyls, and call the Philosophers to their assistance. And
as Idolatry had been the most roaring sin amongst the Isralites; their main Cry
still is against Idols; and nothing stood so full in their face as did the
Theaters; where Tragedies and Commedies on the Good Times and F^stivals were
presented as the greatest and most solemn part of the Pagan Worstip: For these
had their Altars, and the particular Gods to which they were consecrated.

T^rtull. de Idol.
Idolatriae ab initio dicata, habent prophanationis suae maculam. No wonder
then if the Theater, with all its Ministers and dependants, had a very ill name
in the first A^es of Christianity. Hence it was, that if any body had to do
with the c. 3. l. 8.
Theater, the Apostolical Constitutions would not allow him Baptism. ^aint
C^ril afterward declar^s, that when In our (...) we say, I renounce thee,
S^tan, and all thy w^rks and Pomps: Those Pomps of the Devil are Stag^-Pla^s,
and the like vanities. To the same Tune Tertullian, L. de Spec.
That in our Baptis^ (...) the Devil and his Pomps, we cannot go to a
Stage Play without turning Apostates.

Hence indeed the Greek and Latin Fathers had an ample Field for their
Eloquence and Declamation, before the Arrians, the Gnostics, and other
intestine Heresies sprang up to divert them. So we find St. Cypr^an, St. Basil,
Clement of Alexandria, very warm upon this occasion: And in many a good Homily
St. Chrysostom puts it home to 'em, and cries shame, that people should listen
to a Comedian with the same ears that they hear an Evangelical Preacher.

St. Austin Epist* 202* Nectar.
will have those that go to Plays, as bad as any that write, or act them; Nullo
modo potuisse Scriptiones and actiones recipi Comaediarum, nisi mores
recipientium Consonarent. But Tertullian runs it off beyond all of 'em, with a
notable Conceit against the Tragedians: l. de Spect.
The Devil, says he, sets them upon their high Pantosles to give Christ the
lie, who s^id, no bod^ can add one Cubit to his Stature. T^agaedos Cothurnis
extulit Diabolus, quia nemo potest (...) Cub^tum unum ad Staturam suam, and sic
(...) facere vult Christum.

These Flashes from single Authors, and drops of heat, had no such wonder^ul
effect, but that the (...) still walked on in his high shoes; ye^ might they
well expect a more terrible storm from the Reverend Fathers, when met in a body
together, in Council Ecumenical. Then indeed began the Ecclesiastical Thunder
to fly about, and presently the Theaters, Tragedy, Comedy, Bear-baiting,
Gladiators, and Heretics, are given all to the Devil, without distinction.

Nor was it sufficient for the zeal of those times to put down Plays. All
Heathen Learning fell under the like censure and condemnation. One might as
well have told them of the Antipodes, as persuaded the reading of Tully's
Offices: They were afraid of the Greek Philosophy, like Children of a Bugbear,
least it fetch 'em away. Cl^m. Strom.


What a plunge was In Ruf.
St. Hierom put to, by Rufinus, laying to his charge the reading of Heathen
Authors? How St. Austin heartily begs God In Ruf.
pardon, for having read Virgil with delight* in his greener years? Conc. 4.
Can. 16.
It was not only against the Figment a poetarum, that their Canons levelled: A
Council of Carthage would not allow that a Bishop should read any Heathen Book.
Conc. 4. Can. 16.


This blind Zeal gave a pleasant prospect to the Apostate Julian: And he might
well foresee what this new Religion was like to come to, without a new set of
Miracles to support it. He therefore was, in this, for complying with them, and
seconded their Designs; making a Law, that no Christion should be taught (...)
the (...) Schools, or make use o^ that Learning. This made the Christians
suspect a Snake in the Gra^s, and put them on the other hand (...) His^*
Eccl^s. l. 5. c. 17.
upon a (...)*Plot* to frustrate his proj^ct So they set to wo^k Apollinarius,
a person, very luckily t^en; of manifold Le^rning and Wit; who, in the room of
Ho^er, composed for them the ^istory of the Old Testament in Heroic Verse,
down to the Times o^ Saul.

And Comedies also in imitation of (...), together with Trage^ies, like those
of Euripides; and Lyricks, exactly to the strain of Pindar. An old Author, in
his lise of Gregory Nazianzen, assures us how that that holy Prelate undertook
and performed the very same thing, so deseated the purpose of that wicked
T^rant. These Noble Labors have all dropped short of us? What Philosophers, wh^t
Conjurers should we have been? how our Ears would ha'tingl^d at this day, with
the three Homers, and a Triple Round of all the Grecian Po^try? But the
Fathers and Councils for several Ages declaring against every thing of ^eathen
denomination; the Stage*Pla^, of course, were cried out upon, as Pagan
Practice, ^eathen Tradition, ^ags and Relics of Paganism, and Pagan Idol^try,
in vented by the Devil, and appropriated to the Worship of fals^ Gods.

And, upon this Topic, to this day, we find the Spanish Jesuits wondrous
Eloquent. Says Pedro de Guzman Dis. 5. 1.
; The Christian Emperors, Kings, and Pop^s have cut off, and burnt with the
fire of their holy Zeal, many Heads of that old Hydra of Pagan Leudness: But
yet there be two Heads that still remain, which cause a world of mischief:
These two Heads also must be lopt off and burnt down to rights; to wit, y
Comedia^ y los Juegos de Toros, Comedies, and the Bull-Feasts.

At the beginning of the Reformation, the name of Poet was a mighty Scar-Crow
to the Mumpsimus Doctors every where. The German Divines, and Professors at
Kullen, were nettled and uneasy by this Poet, and the the other Poet Epi^t. Obsc.
; Poet Reuclin, Poet Erasmus. Every body was reckoned a Poet that was more a
Conjurer than themselves. And, belike, the Jesuits are still of Opinion, That
the Stage Plays have not done 'em service. Campanella tells us, that the German
and Gallican Heresy began with Sing-Song, and is carried on by l. Poetic. c. 6.
Comedy, and Tragedies. Ex Cantilenis incepit Haeresis Germanica and Gallicana,
Comoediis and Tragoediis nutritur; Meaning, perhaps, Mar^s Translation of the
Psalms. The Sorbone declared against them, ^et were they so much in v^gue at
the French Court, that no person of Note, but had their favorite Psalm to
their occasions. King H. 2. cho^e the 42 Psalm, Ainsi qu' on oy^ le Cerf. Like
as the Heart does -- which he ^ung when a-hunting. Madam de Valentinois, who was
in Love, took the 130. D^ fond de ma pensee -- From the bottom of my heart,
which she sung en volte. The Queens choice was the 6th, Ne v^eillez pas o Sire,
Lord, in thy wrath -- to an Air on the Chant des buffons. Anthony King of
Navarr had the 43th, Revange moy, prens ta querelle. Judge, and revenge my
Cause (...) (...), Hi^. Hare^.
, which he tuned to the Brawl of Poictiers, and the rest in like manne^.
Clement Marot ^et their Pipes a-going in Court and Country. And the poor
Heretics keep it up to this day; though (God-wo^) they now (many of them) sing
their Song in a strange Land.

To be called Apostate; to be denied our Baptism, Eucharist, and Christian
Burial; to be Excommunicated, and given up to the Devil by so many Fathers,
Canons, and Councils; however terrible to the Ears, is not so convincing to the
Understanding, as one fair Argument from Reason. What occurs of this kind is
peradventure mostwhat comprehended in these words of Lactantius.

Comicae Fabuloe de stupris Virginum loquuntur, aut amoribus Meretricum: Et quo
Lib* 6* Inst. Div.
magis sunt eloquentes qui flagitia illa finxerunt, eo magis sententiarum
elegantia persuadent. Et sacilius inhoerent Audientium memorioe versus numerosi
and ornati. Tragicoe ^istorioe subjiciunt oculis Parricidia, and Incesta, and
Cothurnata scelera demonstrant.

In Comedies, says he, are represented the debauch, and lewd Pranks amongst
Women of evil Conversation: And the more excellent that the Poet is, the deeper
is the impression on the hearers. The Neatness and Elegance of Thought, with
the Beauty and Sweetness of the Verse, run always in their mind, and will not
out of their head. Tragedy lays before 'em Parricides, Incests, and Wick^dness
in its Pontificalibus.

This indeed is of weight, and deserves consideration. It is a s^anding
Objection; and was a Pagan Objection above two thousand (...) ago.

Plato is very particular in his charge; says he, Fraud and Rapine, l. Common.
Di^l. ^.
and all manner of violence they commend or countenance by good Presidents, and
Examples of this, and the other God, or Son of God. Mercury is made the Patron
for stealing. And how scurvily does Jupiter deal with his Old Father? What
piques, f^wds and domestic squabbles amongst themselves? nor is their War with
the Giants a more tolerable ^iction. L* of L^ws, Dial. 12.
Whatever is devised of this kind is a false fable, and a lie, and yet, were it
true, not fit to be divulged to the people. Commonw. ut supra.
God is never to be represented whether in Song^, in Psalms, or Tragedy,
otherwise than Just, Good, and Gracious. And on no account, to be said the
author of Evil. When any evil is done the Cause is to be sought for elsewhere.
Nor is it to be imagined that God had any hand in it. Therefore is it not to be
endured that any Poet should as Homer Il, ^.
, give out, that,

Two Barrels in his Cellar Jove has still
Of gifts to be bestowed on Mortal Wights,
One full of good, the other full of ill,
And usually to mingle them delight^.
Nor must be susfer'd that infraction and violation of the Oaths and Truce by
Il*. 3.
Pandaru^ when done at the instigation of Jupiter and Minerva.

Nor that broyl and controversy amongst the Gods, put to the Arbitration and
Decision of Jupiter and Themis.

Nor can Aeschylus be allowed to vent any thing like that saying,

Whom Jove would d^stroy ^e takes away their Senses.

Nor, if in any sort of Poetry relation is made of the affliction that befell to
Niob^, or to the Pelopidoe, or to the Trojans; or the like: It must not be
suggested that this was the work of God: but if it be; then a reason is to be
subjoyned, as that God did, indeed, what was good and just, and did chastise
'em, for their good. But he must not say that punishment is an Affliction, and
that God afflicted them. For that would neither be Pious, be Profitable, nor be
Consistent.

Nor must he represent God disguising himself and putting on several shapes to
carry on some Cheat or Imposture, nor to be capable of any Change, Passion, or
Perturbation. Nor say that ^he Gods ^der from Town to Town in the likeness of
Strangers (...).
. And such Lies as are abroad, of Pro^eus and Thetis. And in some Tragedies,
Juno turned into a Priest, gathering the benevolence of the Congregation for
the Sons of Inachus, newly restored to life.

Nor is the lying Dream, sent by Jupiter to Agamemnon Il. 2.
by any means to be excused.

Nor Aeschylus where he brings in Thetis complaining that at her Wedding Apollo
in her Epithalamium sung:

That long the Son of Thetis was to live;
By no disease molested. That the Gods
Took of my Fortunes care and special liking;
And gave me joy, and praises in abundance.
Could my hopes fail, thus founded o^ Apollo,
His Mouth Divine, Fatidical, and True?
Yet He, the same, that slatt'red me so fair,
And at my Table sat a willing guest,
He, that thu^ did and said, even He has slain (my Child.
And in Homer, when she cries out Il. (...).
,

A^ wretched Goddess that I was to bear
The best of all the Heroes --
And when Jupiter mourns so heavily Il. (...).
:

A^ me! my Son Sarpedon will be slain --
And for the honor of his Son so dear,
For Rain he drops of blood from Heaven sends.
And when he laughs at Vulcan limping along with a Cup of Nectar.

And then the Gods laughed all at once outright
To see the lame, and sooty Vulcan skink Il. ^.
.
Aeschylus had, in Athens, made a great noise with his Tragedy called the
Furies: ^r which Aristo^hanes, to expose the Tragic Po^ts wrote a Comedy,
which he named the Frogs: There he charges Euripides for having brought upon
the Stage, Phoedra's, Sthenobaea's, and the like wicked Strumpets. Nay.

What is he not guilty of?
H^s ^e not shown you panders,
And Women bringing for^h in Temples?
And such as mix with their own Brothers?
And those that say: Not to live is to live?
Thus has ^e filled the Town
With Scribes, Busfoons, and Monkeys,
That banter, and make Asses of the People.
He again twits him with his,

(...)
(...)*
Who can tell but that to live is to dye,
To drink is to think, and to sleep, a woolsack.
This second line is added to ridicule the former, and for this sentence he
taxes Furipides as teaching Skepticism; And everywhere is playing upon that,

My Tongue did Swear, my Mind was never Sworn. As if thereby Euripides opened a
door to Equivocation and Perjury.

Thus we see how well Aristophanes, and Plato agree with Lactantius; and charge
upon Tragedy the same enormities, Incests, and Cothurnata scelera, and also the
odd unlucky sayings that stick in our memory, and will not out of a body's head.

When King Archelaus asked Plato what book he might read to learn the state of
Affairs and Government in Athens, Plato bid him only to read Aristophanes; it is
likely that we may better trust him for the State of Poetry in his time. And we
may be confident he would mince nothing, out of any favor or affection, being
a professed Enemy to Euripides.

Upon a presumption then that nothing more can be raised to bear against this
sort of Poetry; we may proceed ^o offer something in answer to those objections.

CHAP. IV.
Aristotle's general Answer evasive. Plato a better Divine. Not better than our
Modern. God may use ill instruments. The false Dream. The two Barrels. Fables
before Homer. He of God sensibly. Plato, Cant. Metaphore the utmost we are
capa^le of. Fables. Allegory. Celsus to Origin against the Bible. Allegory, a
cure for all. Homers Fables from the Bible. The false Dream, from the Story of
Achab improved by Homer. Averroes of Arabian Poets. Apollo Loxias. Particular
sent^nces. Text^ of Scripture. Juno, Job's Wife. SS in Vulgar Tongue.
Euripides, ill Women. No blame to the art. Pomp of the Theater. What ill names
by Jesui^s.

FOR every Cavil, against any thing devised by the Poets, in relation to the
Gods, P^ica.
Aristotle proposes one general answer, That a Critic need not be so fierce
and positive to quarrel on that account, where all are in the dark, that
neith^r Critic nor Poet know ought of the matter. We may grant that this
answer is evasive; And may allow that Aristotl^ might not be so great a Divine
as Plato: yet, doubtless our Modern Divines are a match for Plato: And have the
better end of the Staff in this controversy. Who all hold with Hom^r and the
old Poets tha^ God may to good ends and purposes, make use of evil means, and
instruments.

And thus was Pandarus employed by Jove and Pallas to break the Peace. And the
lying Dream sent to cheat Agamomno^.

-- A Dream he called, false Dream, said he,
Go, bye to Agamemnons Tent, and say,
Distinctly, as you bidden are by me.
Bid ^im bring up his Army now to Troy,
For now the time is come, he shall it take.
Objections of this kind make no dis^iculty now-adays, with the most Orthodox:
nor do the two Barrels in Jov^' s Cellar, make any ill sound: we know with what
Heifer they have plowed; and see the Original of all the Greek Mythology; their
Gods, and H^roes.

Not to repres^nt their Gods with face, and fingers, with actions, and
passions, and other Modifications, after the fashions of men, were to say
nothing. St. Paul that soared as high as any body, and had the gift of Tongues,
declares the things above ineffable. Homer knew this; therefore would not
banter the World with hard words, and unintelligible gibberish, as Plato and
others have since done; but did accommodate his Speech to our Human Senses, by
Metaphors, Similitudes, Tropes, and Parables; after the manner of Moses, and
the Ol^ Prophets before him. He entertains and fills us to the utmost of our
Organs and Capacity. Something he sinds for all our S^nses. He brings them to
our Eyes, our Ear^, our Touch: Nectar he provides for our Tas^e, and there
always exhale^ an Ambrosial Odor in the Divine Presence. What Plato, or an
Angel would say further, pass^s all understanding, would not enter our Organs;
could have no reli^h or proportion to af^ect us, more than the Music of the
Spheres. Metaphor must be the Language, when we travel in a Country beyond our
Senses.

The wisest part of the World were always taken with Fables, as the most
delightful means to convey Instruction, and leave the strongest Impression on
our Mind. They in the Huet on R^mance.
East will not be persuaded that the Fables, with us, under the name of Aesop,
were other than of their Country growth: And L^ckman they avouch to ^e the
Author of them.

The Old Prophets could devise nothing higher for the future Messia^, than that
every thing he should say would be a Parable.

As for the Fables which in (...), or on the Stage give offense: The Ancients
had a thing called an Allegory, which went a great way ^owards s^opping the
mouth of many a pert Observator*

We see the word in the Apostle St. Paul, Galat. c. 4.
and the application of it, which St. Origin was glad to find, when Celsus
called him to account for the Old Testament; so many odd Tales, Eve with the
Serpent, Cain and Abel: the building of Ba^l, Sodom, with Lot and hi^
Daughters, Orige^ against Celsus, l. 4.
Pa^icidia, and ^ncesta, and Cothu^nata (...), f^r be^ond any thing fabled in
(...) o^ Thyestes: (...) Shall we Christians only, says he, be denied the
benefit of this Allegory? Man not we be allowed our Mystery, and Tropological
meaning?

So we see what Lact^ntius objected against Homer, and the Heathen Tragedies,
is by the Heathens objected against our Bible, and Religion.

But we need not be so angry on either hand. Find but out the Allegory, and we
are all to^rights again.

Besides, it is now no secret, that Homer had most of his Fables from some
Hebrew Tradition or Original. Strom. Pr. Evang.
Clement of Alexandria, and Eusebius made the discovery long ago.

So the lying Dream Il. l. 2. Common. Dia. 2.
sent by Jupiter to Agamemnon, which Plato was so much offended at, is a
Poetical Improvement from the Sto^y of Achab. What pretty turn and dress he
sets it off in, to bend and fashion it into one piece with his Song; and to
accommodate it the better to our Ears in a more Philosophical Climate?

Averroes, after his Comment on the P^etica, allows that Aristotle's Rules do
not much concern the Arabian Poets; What then, says he, shall we conclude that
he wrote not Rules for the Arabians? God forbid! Aristotle wrote Nature; he
wrote for all Human kind.

But the Arabian Fancies always are on the gallop: They are not to march in
rank and file, nor be subject to our Europae^ ^iscipline Homer understood their
Spirit, and could make the beft on it: He knew how to manage the fiery Arab, and
bring the wildest Asiat^ck to his hand.

Aesc^ylus is not to be blamed, when he ^lls of Apollo singing at a Wedding,
that much happiness should ensue thereupon; and the Child should live long.
Apollo before then had the Epithete of Loxias, from his double meaning; to show
the Nature of Oracles. Be not out of patience, Thetis, thy Child shall live,
his memory, his better part. Homer has ensur'd it for Achilles, to the end of
the World.

If then the Fables her^tofore employed for the Drama, are not so hastily to be
censured; no body, I conceive, will stick with us for the particular sayings,
as before mentioned to be objected by Aristophanes, Plato, and Lactantius.

For their good sayings, we have St. Paul citing a whole Verse out of a Comedy
of Menander. St Clemens of Alexandria brings more proofs for Christianity from
Menander and other Comedies, than from all the Bible, or any other Topic.

On the other hand, where ill men are represented, we must not take it amiss
that they say ill things Dolus an Virtus, quis in host requirit? When we
remember the saying, we remem^er it the saying of a Rogue; of Sinon, as
notorious amongst his Companions, as was Judas amongst the Apostles.

Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta mov^bo. This by every body is allowed to
be a very wick^d saying. But why may not Juno sometimes take as much liberty of
her Tongue, as Job's Wife, or any other OldTestam^nt Matron? There is no
question but we sind more abuse of the sayings in holy Scripture, and the
consequence more Tragical, than from any perverted Text in Po^try. Curse ye
Meroz, serves any bodies purpose, that would be cutting Throats. C^mpanella and
Pedro de Guzman would urge as much against the S. S. in our Mother Tongue, on
^his account, as against this Nurs^ of Heresy, this Hydra's Head of Dramatick
representations.

If there be any e^e and inspection on the Pulpits, that they be kept to
decency and Rule; May not the King and Queens (...) deserve the l^ke care, and
have its Committee of Lay-Bishops to see that no Doctri^e be there broached,
but what tends to ^he Edisication, at well as to the Delight of the Spectators.

If Euripides brought on the St^ge Harlo^ (f) Aeschylu^ ^hew'd none; nor any
Woman tha^ might ^e so much as susp^cted to be in love. What was an errou^ in
one, is not ^o be charged on the r^st; nor a Reslection on the ^rt. Indeed,
^hen the A^t is abused, one m^ with ^ully ^ry out, O proe^laram Morum
Emendatric^m Poe^icam! But the same ^rony is as applicable to the Pulpit, as to
the Stage.

Grant there, in a Tragedy, the (...) of the Invention, the novelty of the
Fictions, the strength of Verse, the ^siness of Expression, the solid R^son,
the warmth of Passion, ^ill heightened and rising from Act to Act; together
with the richness of Figures, the pomp of the (...), the habi^s, gesture and
voice of the Actors, at the same instant charming both the Eyes and the Ears;
so the Senses being won, the Judgment is surprised, and the whole Man at once
led captive: A body mu^t be of Brass or Stone to resist so many Charms, and be
Master of himself amidst so much allurement and temptation

Grant all this, I say, where is the hurt? what is the danger? If the En^ (...)
all is to show Virtue in T^iumph. The (...) thoughts make ^he strongest
impr^ssion; and the juster passions sind the kindest receptio^ amongst us. The
Medicine is not less wholesome, for the Honey, o^ the gilded Pill. Nor can a
Moral (...) be less profitable, when dressed and set off with all the advantage
and decoration of the Theater.

This is, indeed, of all diversions the most bewitching; and the Theater is a
Magazine, not to be trusted, but under the special eye and direction of a
Vir^uous Government, otherwise, according to the course of the World, it might,
p^ssibly, degenerate; to deserve the Aspersions, and ill names, whereby the
Jesuits would render it odious, calling it the S^hool of Vice, the Sanctuary of
Venus, the Templ^ of Impiety, the Furnace of Babylon, the Consistory of
Impurity, the Shop of Leud^ss, the Pest of Commonwealths, the Seminary of
Debauchery, Satan's Festival, and the Devil's Dancing-School.

CHAP. V.
Of Poetry in Italy. Aristotle's Works. Tramontains. Cardinal Bibiena. Tragedy
there with Chorus. Strolers. Christ's Passion.

Of Poetry in France. Clem. Marot. Strolers there. Proceedings at Law against
them. Report of their Case. Their Old Testament* Acts of the Apostles, and
Christ's Passion. Banished from France. Comedy there. Tragedy by Hardy,
Corneille, Richilieu. Academy Royal. The Theater. Caution that no Equivoque,
nor ought against good Manners. More nice than the Pulpit. Their Gallantry,
Verse, Language, unfit for Tragedy. Dramatick representations banished from
Spain. Nurse of Heresy. Father Guzman. Escobar.

Of Poetry in England. British, Saxon, Norman, Latin and Provencial Poetry
here. Richard Ceur de Lion, a Provencial ^oet. Our Monks and History false on
that account. The Gay Science. That and the Albigenses contemporany, and from
the same Country. King Richard's Fellow-Poets. Jeffry Rudel, and Countess of
Tripoly.

IN the beginning of the last Century, when People began to open their Eyes,
and look farther into the Matters of Religion and good Litterature, Italy had
much the start and advantage from the rest of Europe, thither were Aristotle's
Works first brought a-shoar; and there were they translated, conn'd, and
commented by the chiefest Wits amongst them. And above all, hi^ Poeti^a engaged
their u^most car^ and application.

So many Comments had they made, and so many Critica^ O^servations, before, on
this side the Alps, any thing, in that way, was understood, tha^ they ^gan to
lay it down for a truth, (...) ^he Tramontans had no gusto. Oltramontani, says
one of them, Non sono zelanti d^le buon^ reg^le de Greci, and de Latini. The^
m^ke no Conscience of breaking the good Laws of the Greeks and Latins.

Others undertook to put in practice, and write by his Principles and
Direction. Bibiena (afterward a Cardinal) first tried his Talent on a Comedy;
and was followed by Aciosto, (...), Ma^hiavel, and many others, who took
^lautus and Terence for their Patterns.

Trissino, Ruscalli, Cinthio, Tasso, with many more, wro^e Tr^gedies in blank
Verse, with the Chorus. and every thing to the best of their power, after the
Atheni^n Models.

But Italy had no Fund for the vast charge of Dramatick representations; they
h^d no standing Revenue for the Theater; and however magnificent some Prince
might be on an extraordinary Wedding or great occasion; there was nothing
constant, nor could it, in such circumstances, be expected, that the Drama
there should turn to account, or rise to any tolerable reputation. Therefore
the ordinary business of the Stage was left amongst a company of Strolers, who
wandered up and down, acting Farce, or turning into Farce, whatever they acted.
Poe^ica.
Castelvetro tells us, that even at Rome, in his time, Christ's Passion was so
acted by them, as to set all the Audience a-laughing.

Francis the first, by whose Encouragement Letters had begun to slourish in
France, and Poetry more particularly, by the means of Clement Marot (who then
translated the Psalms, and sent abroad his Balades, which Campanella reckons to
have ushered in the Heresy) King Francis, I say, was much delighted, for want
of better, with these Strolers. At the latter end of his Reign we find a Cause
of the Strolers notably pleaded and debated amongst their Lawyers and the
King's Counsel.

The Charge against them extracted from the Pa^liament Rolls, Anno 1541.

That They, 2 or 3 years ago, had undertaken to represent Chr^st's Passion, and
the Acts o^ the Apos^les; and therein had (...) me^n illiterate fellows, who
were not cunning in those matters, as a Carpenter, a Bum-Bailiff, a Weaver, and
others, who had committed diverse faults* both in the Fi^tion, and in their
Action. An^ to lengthen out the time, had interlarded many Apocryphal Mat^ers,
not contained in the Acts of the Apostles, that their Play might last three or
four days longer; thereby to get the more Money from the People. Adding,
moreover at the beginning, or at the end, Drolls, and wanton Farces, and by
that means had made it hold out for six or seven months together: By means
whereof the Divine Service was neglected, no body went to Church, Charity grew
cold; besides all the Adulteries, Fornications, Mockeries, and Derisions
unexpressible.

More ^specially, in the first place, on Holydays, from eight or nine a Clock
a-mornings, the People left their Parish-Mass, Sermon, and Vespers, to take
their place at the Play^house; and s^aid there till five in the Afternoon. So
that Preaching was left oss, the Preachers finding no body to hear them.

And the people, as they came back from the Play house, would publicly and
loudly mock at the Plays and Actors, repeating some words they had heard knocked
out of joint, at the Play; or some part ill acted, saying in derision, The Holy
Ghost was lo^h to come down, and the like.

And generally the Parsons of the Parishes, to have their pastime at the Plays,
have left off the Afternoon Prayers on Holy Days: Or have said them alone by
themselves at Noon, an hour not usual, nor Canonical. And even the King's
Chaplains, in the Chapel of the Household, whilst the Plays lasted, have on
Holy Days said the Evening-Prayers at Noon: And besides, ran them off
post-haste, to be gone to the Playhouse: A thing undecent, unusual, of evil
example, and contrary to the holy Councils of the Church, namely, the Council
of Carthage, where it is said, Qui die solemni praetermisso Ecclesiae conventu
ad spectacula vadit, excommunicetur.

2. ^reaching is more decent for the Instruction of the People (provided it is
done by Theologians, men of Learning and Knowledge) than are the Plays, made by
those that are ignorant and illiterate; who neither know what they speak nor
what they act; representing the Acts of the Apostles, the Old Testament, and
the like Histories which they pretend to Act.

3. It is plain by Natural Reason, that without first k^owing the Truth, one
cannot make a ^iction; for Fiction is to be something as near the Truth as may
be; whereas neither the Masters, nor the Actors know the A B C. They (...)
neither the Bible, nor any profane Learning, being Mechanics* as Cobblers,
Bot^hers, Porters, that c^n neither read nor write, nor ^ave been trained to
the Stage, or that sort of exercise: Neither is their Tongue w^l hung, nor have
they proper Language, nor can the accent the words, or give them a d^cent
(...): Nor do they know at all wha^ they are about, or what it is they s^y; so
that sometimes they chop one word into three, s^p in the middle of a sentence,
m^king it a question, which is a sentence o^ Admiration; accenting and
pronouncing with t^eir ges^ure every thing Kim Kam, quite contrary; causing a
laughter, and hooting in the Play-^ouse, that instead of turning to
E^ification, there is nothing but scandal and d^rision.

4. The ^arccs and wanton Interludes which they mi^ with the Mys^eries
Ecclesiastical, ^ake it a thing forbidden by all the Councils, a^ the Doctors
all agree.

5. It is visible that what they do is for Lucre only; as they would do with a
Tavern, or Trade: And they raise the price, which the first year was twenty and
twenty five ^rowns, the next thirty and thirty six Crowns, and is this present
year forty and fifty Crowns of the Sun, for every Box.

6. Great mischief, by Assignations, under color of going to the Plays,
Adulteri^s, etc.

7. The Plays occasion Junketing and expenses extraordinary, amongst the common
people; so that which a Handy-cra^ty-man has earned in a week, shall be all
spent in one day, at the Plays, and the Junketing and Drunkenness, whereby his
Wife and poor Children susfer all the week.

8. Charity so much impaired, that within the six weeks that the Plays have
continued, the Alms are lessened 3000 Livres.

Nothwiths^anding all which, one Roy^r, a Fish-seller, a Carpenter, a C^ler,
and ot^rs their Companions have anew for this next year undertaken to have
acted the Old Testament, and set a price for hereafter to get money from the
people.

Of all which, the King's Attorney General being informed, h^th put a stop to
their fart^ er proceedings. They show a Letter of Privilege they had obtained
from the King.

By the Letters it appears, they had suggested to the King, that what they did
was out of pure Zeal and Devotion, and for the Edisication of the people, which
is false; and besides, their quality and circumstances speak the contrary* and
what they do is barely a Trade for gain. Moreover, in the Old (...) ^e many
things not so proper to be declar^ ^o the People, weak and simple, that may be
drawn in to turn Jews for want of understanding.

For these considerations a stop is put to their Acting of the Old Testament
till the good pleas^re, will and intention of the King, when informed of those
matters, shall be known.

The said Attorney General also presented another Complaint against the former
Company, that they might put into the Poors Box, out of their Profits, for
their representing the Acts of the Apostles, eight hundred Livres till farther
order; the like against the Company that acted Chri^t's Passion.

The Council for the Strolers says, He comes not to answer the Charge against
them that show the Acts of the Apostles; but for the new Company only of the
Mystery, for the Old Testament. And true it is, that the King two years since
having sometimes seen them (...) the Mystery of the Passion; and by the account
then made him, how well they played the Acts of the Apostles; and that it was
worth his while also to see the Representation of the Old Testament, Royer
abovenamed, being then present, did promise the King to get the Old Testament
Acted. And thereupon the King gave leave to the said Ro^er, to have the
Representation of the Old Testament; and granted him Letters Patents
accordingly.

This Record, abridg'd here, in the translation, giving so particular an
History of the Sage in those days, is added at length in the Original, at the
end of the Book.

King Francis lived about five or six years after. And then were the Co^ans
both French and Italians, all packt off, and banished the Kingdom.

In 1597. Peter l'Ariveu publish^d Comedies, written, as he tells us, in
imitation of the Ancient Greeks, Latins, and Modern Italians. And the end he
proposed was according to ^orace,

Quelque profit, and contentement ensemble. After him Alexander Hardy attempted
Tragedy, whose works were (...) ann. 1625 Not long (...) succeeded the famous
Corneille, who beg^n to write for the Stage, af^r Hardy's Model.

And now, if the French Theater did not rise to equal the glory of the Romans,
and Ancient Greeks, it was not for want of En^ from the Government. Cardinal
Richelieu, who had the power in his hand, did heartily and generously perform
his part. He founded the Academy Royal, and more especially provided for the
Theater. Yet with this Caution, Lew. 13. Decl. 1641.
never to represent Aucunes actions Malhonnestes, ny d'^er d'aucu^es paroles
lascives, ny a double entente, qui puissent blesser l'honnestete public. And
we ^ind the Poets stand corrected, and do penance if they chance to offend
against this declaration. The liberty de l'equivoque, nor any idee vilaine will
the escape censure, even by the Audience. So the Theodore by Corneille, wo^'d
not take. No other reason could be devised by the Author, but the mere conceit
of her Prostitution, which was odious to the imag^. And He rightly observes
from thence, that our Theaters are much more delicate on those occasions, than
were the A^nt Fathers, or the Pulpits. Says he; However it is some satisfaction
to me that I see the better and more sound part of my Judges impute this ill
success to that imagination of a (...), which one could not endure; though 'twas
well known, it would not take effect: And that to allay the horror of it, I man
use of ^ll the helps that art and experience could furnish me withal. Amidst
this disgrace, I re^ce to see the purity of our Stage, to find that an (...),
the fairest Ornament ^f the sec^nd book of St. Ambros' s Virgins, appears too
licentiou^ to pass on our Stage. What might have been said, if, like that great
Doctor of the church, I (...) shown the Virgin in that infam us place, if I had
described the various agitations of her mind, whilst she was in the place, if I
had drawn the troubles she felt that instant she saw (^r lover) Didymus come in
to her; it is on this occasion that this great Saint makes Triumph that
Eloquence which Converted St. Aus^in, it is for this sp^tacle, t^ He
particularly invites the Virgins to open their eyes.

I kept her from the sight, And so much as I could, from the imagination of my
Audience. Yet after all my industry, the modesty of o^r Theat^e is such, to
dislike that little, which the necessity of my subject, forced me to make known.

In points of decency the French are certainly very de^e, and commendable, The
noble encou^ they m^ withal, and their singular applic^on have carried them
very far in the i^ovement of the Drama. Nor were the Audience to be taxed for
the hasty applause, ^y have o^n given to Plays of no great merit. It has been
so in all Nations.

As, in Pictures, A man who had never seen such a thing before, would find his
amusement, and be in admiration at every Sign-post, or Saracens head that he
Travels by. The first Plays of Corneille were better, that is, more regular,
than any before him, the Audience had never seen the like. Judgment runs, most*
what by comparison: by Purple we Judge of Purple.

They now see the difference betwixt his first Essays, and the Plays composed
in his riper years.

After all it is observed how much, that Wild-goose-chase of Romance runs still
in their head, some S^enes of Love must every where be shuffled in, though never
so unseasonable.

The Grecians were for Love and Music as mad as any Monsieur of *em all; yet
their Music kept within bounds; attempted no Metamorphosis to turn the Drama
to an Opera. Nor did their Love come whining on the Stage to E^eminate the
Majesty of their Trag^dy. It was not any love for Briseis that made Achilles so
wroth; it was the affront, ^n taking his booty from him, in the fa^e of the
Confederate Army. This, his S^omach could not digest.

-- ne^ ^ravem Peleidoe stomachum cedere Nescij. Hor. O^e, with the Genius of
Miguel Cervante, might, doubtless, find matter for as good a Satyr, from the
(...) Gallantry, as He had done from the Spanish Chivalry.

Another obj^ction, is their w^iting Plays in Ryme.

The Hexameter wo^'d not pass in Greek or Latin Tragedy, for the language is to
be Agiss^nte, active. They reckoned the Jambick to be the verse for business.

-- Natum rebus agendi^. Hor. The French seem the remotest in the World from
this sort of Turn. Our Ear should not be hankering after the Ryme, when the
business should wholly take us up, and fill our Head. The words must be all
free, independent, and disengaged, no entanglement of Ryme to be in our way. We
must clear the Decks, and down with the Ornaments and Trappings in the day of
Action, and ^ngagement.

But they are not only ^etter'd with Ryme, but their verse is the long
Alexandrin, of twelve syllables: with a stop, or pause always in the middle.

As if a Latin Tragedy were written all in Pentameters. To the Tune of,

Hei mihi quod domino, non licet ire tuo; Or, with us, to the Air of Hopkins
and Sternold.

O sing unto the Lord, a new and joyful song. A Man should not trust his own
Ear to Judge a foreign lang^age by, but their own best au^ors are sensible of
this halt in their ver^e, and complain of that Cesure and perp^al Monotomy, as
they call it.

In n^their languag^ it self wants strength and sinews, is too seeble for the
Weight and Maj^y of Tragedy. We see their Conson^s spread on Paper, but they
stick in the Hedg^; ^hey pa^s not their Teeth in their (...).

From Spain little observable can be expected in relation to Dramatick Poetry;
Since Ca^panella had assured them that it is the N^rse of Here^ie.

So Father (...)* informs us that his Catholic Majesty, Phil. II. Disc. 6. 1.
8.
toward the end of his life, (when ^is Wisdom was en su pun^, on the prick of
perfection, old age (...) la salsa de la ^abiduria, seeing neit^er medio, o
remedio ^o (...) them) did qu^ ^nish them the Country.

^en another Jesuit le^ us to know how rel^giously the truly Catholic, Phil.
IV. this very year 1646. has packt them awa as the common Plague from out the
King doms of Spain, by his Royal Edict.

Quam pie Phil, IV. vere Catholi^us Comoedia^ ab Hispanioe regni^, ho^ Anno
1646. ut Communem pestem regio ablegarit Fdicto, Escobar. Mor. Theol. So we see
this Nurse of Heresy, this Head of the Pagan Hydra, is like to have no footing
within the Catholic Majesty's Dominions. The (...) and the M^ses must not set
their Horses together.

Since the decay of the Roman Empire this Island, peradventure has been more
fortunate in matters of Poetry, than any of our Neighbors. Notwithstanding the
present flourish and os^entation of the French Theater: Our Wit might have made
us the better Poets: though our honesty make us worse Politicians. We ^ind of the
British Poetry to this day. One of our oldest Medals bears an Harp on the
Reverse, with the Name Kunobeline around it.

The Germans have often printed with Plautus a Comedy called Querolus; which no
body now questions, but that it was written by Gildas, who lived Anno. 493.

After him Thaliessi^, and Merlin, and others, had they not written in Welsh,
might yet deserve an esteem amongst u^*

Our Saxon Kings have their Grants, and Charters in Ryme, yet upon Record.

The first William came, singing Roland, to fight that decisive Battle, which
wan him England. Rolandi cantu inchoato, ut bellatoram animos accenderet,
proelium Commiserunt. As Mat. Paris, Mat. Westminster, Will. Malm^bury,
Knighton, and the rest inform us.

And indeed, to write in Latin the World had not the like to our Poets of that
Century Joseph of Exeter, wrote so much above the Age, that he was well-nigh
lost from us; his Poem of the Trojan War, going a long time current in Print
for a Classick, under the name of Cornelius Nepos. He brings us to King R. I.
with whom, and with Baldwyn Archbishop of Canterbury, He went to the Holy War.

This King, Richard Ceur de lion, and his Brother Jeffrey had formerly lived
much in the Courts of several Princes, in and about Provence, so came to take
delight in their Language, their Poetry (then called the Gay Science) and their
Poets; which began not long before his time, to be in great vogue in the World.

The Italian B^mbo. Speron Sp^rone, etc.
Authors acknowledge that the best part of their Language, and of their Poetry
is drawn from that o^ Proven^, as, indeed, is also that o^ the Sp^nish, and
other Modern Languages. It is certain that Petrarch (the Poet that the Itali^ns
brag most on to this d^y) would show very empty, If the Provenci^l ^oets had
from him, all their own again. And, in truth, all our Modern Poetry comes from
them.

Never was known that ^pplication, both in the Princes and People, as at that
^ime every where to the Provencial (...), which gave one of Phil^ de Me^sks.
their (...) the fancy that Charlemain made a Donation of Provence, to be the
Poets Patrim^y.

I should not be so large on this occasion but to antidote against an
impression, our Monks of that time might otherwise make upon us. As, amongst
the rest, Roger Hoveden tells, that this King Richard, to raise himself a name,
went about begging and buying verses and flattering Rymes; And by rewards
enticed over from France Singers and Jes^ers, to sing of him in the Streets*
And it was every where given out, that there was not the like of him, in the
World again. Hic ad augmentum and famam sui Nomi^is, emendicata carmina, and
rithmos adulatorios comparabat, and de reg^ Francorum Cantores and Joculatores
allexerat ut de illo canerent in Plateis, and diceba^ur ubique quod non erat
talis in orb.

That these Songsters and Jesters were brought from France is most false.
France had no (...) thereabouts in those days. Those Countries were Fie^s of
the Empire. ^rederick I. had Enfeoffed Ramond B^renger of the County of
Provence, ^orcalquiers, and places adjacent, as not long after Frederick II.
ins^all'd William au courb ne^, Prince of Orange, King of Arles* and Viennes:
which family had formerly (...) Provence. As truly, he might have said, they
were brought from Spain: ^or Ildesonso King of Arragon, Count of Provence,
Barcelona, etc. had given and settl^d on his Son this County of Provence. It
may be noted that about the same time that the Provencial Poetry did flourish,
did also spring up that ^eresy of the Albigenses that so much alarmed the
Popish World, and cost so many Crusades to suppress them. Ramond Count of
Toulouse was the Protector of the Albigenses, and was also a principal Patron
of these Poets. Gu^hem of Agoult, Albert of Sisteron, Rambald of Orange (names
now revived by the Duke of Savoy) and the like, were Provencial Poets; All the
Princes that were in league together to support the Albigenses against ^rance
and the Pope, did encourage and patronize these Poet^, amongst the r^st a King
of Arragon lo^ his life in the quarrel, at a Battle where Simon Monsort did
command as chief of the Crus^de.

From hence we may gather why the Monks were so angry at ^hese Singers and
Jesters. And did not like that the King should be so familiar with them.

One of them with King Richard was Anselm Faydet, of whom Petrarch.

-- Anselmo
and mill alt^i ne vidi: a cui la lingua
Lancia and spada fu sempre, and scudo and elmo
I saw, with many others, Anselm there,
Whose tongue was shield and helm^t, sword and spear.
This Anselm was wont to write (...), and Tragedies; which in his own Country
he could sell for 2 or 3000 livres Turnois; and some for more: And had several
acted at his own charge. After King Richa^ds death, he married a Nun, a Dam^ of
(...) lity, out of a Nunnery at Aix. And ^ter went to live with the Marquess o^
(...) ferrat, who took part with the Count (...) Toulouse: And to him Anselm
ventured (...) show a Comedy; which till then he had k^pt secret from every
body: and there (...) it acted.

In one ^f his Poems he describes the Pal^e of Love, his Court, his State, his
^er, which Petrarch chang^d, and fa^on'd to his mind; and calls it, in his ^ok
il triumfo di amore.

Another of these Jesters was Fouchet of Marseilles, who upon the death of King
Ri^hard, went home, turned Monk, and ros^ to be Archbishop of Toulouse. Dante
ha^ him in his Paradise, and Petrarch of him thus

Folchetto: ch'a Marsilia il nome ha dato,
and a Genovatolto: and al' estremo
Cangio, per miglior patria, habito and stato.
Another of these (with Jeffrey King Richard's Brother) was Jeffrey Rudel, of
whom Petrarch,

Gia^fre Rudel, ch' uso la vela e'l remo
A cerc^r la sua morte --
Whilst this Poet was with our Prince Jeffrey, he was told, by Pilgrims that
came from the Holy Land, so many fine things of the Countess of Tripoly, that
he could stay no longer.

He puts on a Pilgrims Weeds, takes^ Voyage to Tripoly, fell sick by the way,
and ere he came ashore was almost dead. The Countess informed of this
Errantry, went to the Ship, took him by the hand. He opened his Eyes, said,
Having seen her, he was satisfied; so departed this life.

She made for him a most splendid Funeral, provided him a Tomb of Porphyry, and
his Epitaph in Arabic Verse: And had his S^nnets all curiously copied over,
and illumined, with Letters of Gold; was taken with Melancholy, and turned Nun:
One of the Songs made in his Voyage, was this:

Yrat, and dolent m'eu partray
s'yeu non vey est' amor de luench.
e non say qu' ouras la veyray,
car son trop nostras terras luench.
Dieu que fes tout quant ve^, e vay:
e form' a quest' amor de luench,
my don poder al cor, car hay
esper vezer l'amour de luench.
Segnour, tenes my per very,
l'amour qu' ay verse ella de luench.
car per un ben que m'en eschai
ha mill mals tant soy de luench.
Ja d'autre amor non janziray
s'yeu nen jau dest' amor de luench.
q'una plus bella non en sa
en luec que sia, ny pres, ny luench.
Sad and heavy should I part,
but for this Love so far away;
not knowing what my ways may thwart,
my Native Land so far away.
Thou that of all things Maker art,
and form'st this Love so far away;
give body's strength, then shall not I start,
from seeing her so far away.
How true a Love to pure desert,
my Love to her so far away!
eased once, a thousand times I smart*
whilst, ah! she is so far away.
None other Love, none other Dart
I feel, but hers so far away,
but fairer never touched a^ heart,
than hers that is so far away.
CHAP. VII.
Savery de Mauleon a Provencial Poet. Testimony of him. King R. I. His Verses
when Prisoner in Austria. The Emperor Frederick Barbarossa. His Poetry. Ramond
Beringhier. Four Daughters, four Queens. Rob. Grosthead. His Provencial Poetry.
Other Languages stubborn. Chaucer refined our English. Which in perfection by
Waller. His Poem on the Navy Royal, beyond all Modern Poetry in any Language.
Besore him our Poets better expressed their thoughts in Latin. Whence Hoveden
might mistake, and his Malice. A Translation from Grosthead. The Harp a Music
then in fashion. Five Tragedies from Joan Queen of Naples. Foreigners all
called French. Plays by the Parish-Clerks of London. What under H. VIII.
flourish under Queen Elizab^th. The Gorboduck. French much behind-hand with us.
Tragedy, with us, but a shadow.

SAvery de Mauleon, mentioned in our English Histories, is reckoned another of
these Provencial Poets; of him an old Gui^hem Briton. MSS. with Signior Reli.
Bard, amongst them, gave this Testimony:

Dousfament fait motz and sos
ab amor que' m' a vencut.
Sweetly could he say and sing
of Love, that me has vanquished.
And the same Author says of King Richard,

Coblas a teira fair adroitement
pou vos oillez enten dompna gentilz.
Stanza's he triml^ could invent,
upon the Eyes of Lady gent.
One Stanza, of a Song made by him, when a Prisoner in Austria, may serve for a
taste.

Or ^achan ben mos homs, e mos Barons,
Anglez, Normans, Peytavins, e Gascons;
qu'yeu non ay ja si paure Compagnon,
que per aver lou laissess en preson.
Know ye, my Men, my Barons all,
In England, and in Normandy,
In Poicters, and in Gascony,
I no Companion held so small,
To let him thus in durance lie.
Our King Richard had not the Expedient of the French King St. Lewis, who,
taken Prisoner by the Sarazens, pawned the Eucharist, body for body, to the
Insidels for his Ransom.

Signior Redi, now with the great Duke of Tuscany, tells us the Mss. with King
Richard's Poetry Redi Dithyrambick.
, and many other of the P^ovencial Poets are in his keeping.

This of the Emperor Frederick I. is current every where.

Plas my Cavallier Francez,
e la donna Catallana,
e l'ourar Gynoez,
e la Cour de Kastellana,
lou Kantar Provensales,
e la dansa Trivyzana,
e la corpse Arrogonez
e la perla Julliana,
les man's e Kara d'Angles,
e lou donzel de Thus^ana.
I like in France the Chivalry,
The Catalonian Lass for me,
The Genoes for working well,
But for a Court commend Castile.
For Song, no Country to Provance,
And Treves must carry't for a dance.
The finest shapes in Arragon,
In Juliers they speak in Tune.
The English ^or an hand and face,
^or Boys, troth, Tuscany's the place.
They who have written the lives of the Provencial Poets, with King Richard,
and the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, give us also the life of Ramond Count of
Provence, memorable for his four Daughters, married to so many Kings. Margaret,
to Lewis King of France. Elionor to our H. III. Sance, to Richard King of the
Romans, Beatrice to Charles King of Naples and Sicily. On this occasion, thus
Dante.

Quattro figlie hebbe, and Ciascuna reina
Ramondo Beringhieri. --
Four lovely Daughters, each of them a Queen,
Had Ramond Beringher. --
Neither were the Churchmen all of the same Kidney with the Monks: as may be
gathered from the famous Bishop of Lincoln Rob. Grosthead; the most eminent in
his time for Piety and Learning, and the Man of greatest Authority, who when
living made the old Gentleman in St. Peter's Chair tremble, and the bare Ghost
of him, afterward so thumpt off the Pope, that he died of the contusion. He
composed several treatises in this Provencial Ryme and Language. One of them,
in Bodleys Library, bears this title: Tractatus in lingua Romana secundum Dom.
Rob. Grosseteste Lincoln Ep. de Principio Creationis Mundi. The beginning is
this:

Ki pense ben, ben peut dire:
Sanz penser ne poet sofsire
De null bon our Comencer
Deu nos doint de li penser
De ki, par ki, en ki sont
Toz les bens ki font el mond.
He that thinks well, well can say:
Without thinking, naught he may:
Not a good work once begin.
God would have us think of him:
From whom, by whom, in whom are all
The good things which the World we call.
This Provencial was the first, of the modern languages, that yielded and
chim'd in with the music and sweetness of ryme; which making its way by Savoy
to Monserat; The Italians thence began to file their volgare; And to set their
verses all after the Chimes of Provence. Our Intermarriages, and our Dominions
thereabouts, brought us much sooner acquainted with their Tongue and Poetry?
And they, wit^ us, that would write verse, as King Richard, Savery de Mauleon,
and Rob. Grostead, finding the English stubborn and unweildy, fell readily to
that of Prove^ce, as more glib, and lighter on the Tongue. But they who
attempted verse in English, down till Chaucers time, made an heavy pudder, and
are always miserably put to it for a word to clink: which commonly fall so
awkard, and unexpectedly as dropping from the Clouds by some Machi^e or Miracle.

Chaucer found an Herculean labor on his Hands; And did perform to Admiration.
He seizes all Provencal, French or Latin that came in his way, gives them a new
garb and livery, and mingles them amongst our English: turns out English,
gowty, or superannuated, to place in their room the foreigners, fit for
service, trained and accustomed to Poetical Discipline.

But though the Italian reformation was begun and finished well nigh at the same
time by Bocc^ce, Dan^e, and Petrarch. Our language retained something of the
churl; something of the Stiff and Gothish did stick upon it, till long after
Chaucer.

Chaucer threw in Latin, French, Provenci^l, and other Languages, like new Stum
to raise a Fermentation; In Queen Elizabeth's time it grew fine, but came not
to an Head and Spirit, did not shine and sparkle till Mr. Waller set it a
running. And one may observe by his Poem on the Navy, An. 1632. that No^ the
language only, but His Poetry then distinguished him from all his
contemporaries, both in England and in other Nations; And from all before him
upwards to Horace and Virgil. For there, besides the Language Clean and
Majestic, the Thoughts new, and noble; the Verse sweet, smooth, full and
strong; the turn of the Poem is happy to Admiration. The first line, with all
that follow in order, leads to the conclusion, all bring to the same point and
center,

To his own ch^sen more indulgent, He
Dares trust such power with so much piety.
Her^ is both Homer and Virgil; the fortis Achilles, and the pius Aeneas, in
the person he Complim^nts, and the greatness is owing to his Virtue. The
Thought and Application is most Natural, Just, and tru^ in Poetry, though in
fact, and really, He might have no more fortitude or piety, than another body.
For the repairing then of Paul's gave a reasonable color for his Piety; And
that Navy Royal might well give him the pre eminence in power, above Achilles.
whoever before that time, tried the same thoughts in Latin and in English
verse; the former always had the advantage; the expression being more lively,
free, elegant, and easy: Whereas in the English some thing or other was still
amiss; force or affectation, poverty or super^luity mangling or disguising,
pinching or encombring it.

Amongst the names for these Provencial Poets in their own Country, they were
called Troubadours, Jeongleors, and Chanterres, the last word is not foreign
to our Cathedrals, the second Roger Hoveden rendered Joculatores, as we may
turn the first to Trompeters, but the Troubadours, or Troverres were so named
from their Invention, as we say tresor troue, and the Italians call them
Trovatore; And Jongleors was given them from some Musical instrument then in
use, as the Greek or Latin, that were called Lyrick Poets. So our Rob. of
Grosthead might then be a Jongleor, from his delight in the Harp, as we find in
a preface to one of his Books in Bodleys Library, part of which is this.

For lewed men y undyrtoke,
In Englysh Tongue to make this Book;
For many beyn of seeche manner
That Talys and Rymys wyle blethly here,
In Gamys and Festys and at the ale
Love men to lestene trotonale.
To all Crystyn men under Sun
And to good men of Brunne,
And specially all by name
The felawshepe of Symprynghame
Robert of Brunne gretyth zow.
The Ze^s of Grace fyl than to be
A thousand and three hundred and three
In that time turned ey this
In English Tongue out of Frankys.
I shall zow tell^ as y have herd
Of the bysihop S^ynt Roberd
His name is Erosteste
Of Lyncolne so seyth the geste
He lovede much to here the Harp --
The Harp, it seems, was in ^eputation at that time; And in Provence might b^
no hindrance to their matt^rs of Piety; nor be ill Music for the Albigenses,
and ^he ^eresie of Lions. They had their Godly Romances, their Turneament of
Antichrist, and Fantamarie del Paganesmo, and the like. Some wrote the Wars and
Prowess of several Kings and Princes, the King of Arles against the Saracens,
la guerra delli Baulsens^, the War of the Princes of Baulx (the Prince of
Orange's Family, etc.) but Comedy and Tragedy was what most of them offered at
in their way.

The ^amous Joan, Queen of Naples, gave subject, to one of the last of those
Poets, sor five Tragedies: called by him, 1. The Andreassa. 2. The Taranta. 3.
The Maiorichi^a. 4. The Alemanna, from Andreas, from a Prince of Taranto, a
Prince of Maiorca, a German Prince (of the House of Brunswich) her four
Husbands, murdered by her. 5. Giovannella, from her own just and ignominious
catastrophe.

By all this History we see the assertion o^ Campanella was not without
^oundation* And for the same cause our Monks might well be jealous of King
Richard, and dislike in our other Kings, about that time, their great
Correspondence and Alliances in Provence.

So the great cry in Henry the III. time (who with his Brother Richard, had
Married two of the Daughters of that Count of Provence, was against the French:
(by that name noting all Forreigner^.*)

Rob. Gloc. Mss. Cotton.
To remue the Frensse men to libbe beyond se,
By hor londs her and there, and ne come noght age.
And to granti God laws and the old Charter also,
That so often was igranted er, and so often undo.
And yet from this Marriage, sprang those our Kings which afterward conquered
France.

These re^lections have drawn me too ^ar beyond my purpose, which was only to
treat of dramatick representations. Survey of London.
Of which kind Stow tells us that in the time of R. II. An. 1391. the Parish
Clerks of London Acted a Play at the Skinners Well by Smithfield, which lasted
three days; and was of Matters from Adam and Eve. And in H. IV. his time, Ann.
1409. another was represented at the same place, which held eight days.

From this, and what was noted before in France and Italy, we may gather that
the Old Testament, Christ's Passion, and the Acts of the Apostles, were the
ordinary entertainment on the Stage, all Europe over, for an hundred year or
two, of our greatest ignorance and da^kness. But that in England we had been
used to another sort of Plays in the beginning of H. VIII. Reign may be seen
from that of the Skel^n.
Laureat on Cardinal woolsey:

Like Mahound in a Play;
No man dare him with say.
And in the same reign we find printed the Interludes of John Heywood. But
early under Queen Elizabeth, our dramatick Poetry grew to something of a just
symmetry and proportion in 1566. Geo. Gascoigne of Gray's Inn translated the
Supposes, from Ariosto, which was there acted: as also his Jocasta Englished
from Euripides, the Epilogue witten by Chr. Yelverton.

And after that were reckoned for Comedy, Edward Earl of Oxford; for Tragedy
amongst others, Thomas Lord of Buchurst, whose Gorboduck is a fable, doubtless,
better turned for Tragedy, than any on this side the Alps in his time; and
might have ^een a better direction to Shakespeare and Ben. Johnson than any
guide they have had the luck to follow.

Here is a King, the Queen, and their two Sons. The King divides his Realm, and
gives it betwixt his two Sons. They quarrel. The Elder Brother Kills the
Young.* Which provokes the Mother to Kill the Elder. Thereupon the King Kills
the Mother* And then to make a clear Stage the people rise and dispatch old
Gorboduck.

It is objected by our Neighbors against the English, that we delight in
bloody spectacles. Our Poets who have not imitated Gorboduck in the regularity
and roundness of the design, have not failed on the Theater to give us the
atrocite and blood* enough in all Conscience. From this time Dramatick Poetry
began to thrive with us, and flourish wonderfully. The French confess they had
nothing in this kind considerable till 1635. that the Academy Royal was
founded. Long before which time we had from Shakespeare, Fletcher, and Ben.
Johnson whole Volumes; at this day in possession of the Stage, and acted with
greater applause than ever. Yet after all, ^ fear what Quintilian pronounced
concerning the Roman Comedy, may as justly be said of English Tragedy: In
Tragoedia maxim claudicamus, vix levem consequimur umbram. In Tragedy we come
short extremely; hardly have we a slender shadow of it.

CHAP. V.
Othello. More of a piece. ^n Tragedy ^our parts. Fable, the Po^ts part.
Cinthio's Novels. Othello al^ered for the worse. Marriage, absurd, ^orbidden by
Horace. Fable of Othello. Use and Application. Othello's Love powder.
High-German Doctor. Venetians odd taste of things. Their Women fools. Employ
Strangers. Hate the Moors. Characters. Nothing of the Moor in Othello, of a
Venetian in Desdemona. Of a Soldier in Jago. The Soldiers Character, by
Horace. What by Shakespeare. Agamemnon. Venetians no s^nse of Jealousy.
Thoughts, in Othello, in a Horse, or Masti^f, more sensibly expressed. Ill
Manners. Outrageous to a Nobleman, to Humanity. Address, in telling bad n^ws.
In Princes Courts. In Aristophanes. In Rabelais. Venetian Sena^e. Their Wisdom.

FRom all the Tragedies acted on our English Stage, O^hello is said ^o bear the
Bell away. The Subject is more of a piece, and there is indeed something like,
there is, as it were, some phantom of a Fable. The Fable is always accounted
the Soul of Tragedy. And it is the Fable which is properly the Poets part.
Because the other three parts of Tragedy, to wit the Characters are taken from
the Moral Philosopher; the thoughts or sense, from them that teach Rhetoric:
And the last part, which is the expr^ssion, we learn from the Grammarians.

This Fable is drawn from a Novel, composed in Italian by Giraldi Cinthio, who
also was a Writer of Tragedies. And to that use employed such of his Tules, as
he judged proper for the Stage. But with this o^ the Moor, he m^ddl'd no
farther.

Shakespeare al^ers it from the Original in several particulars, but always,
unfortunately, for the worse* He bestows a name on his Moor; and styles him the
Moor of Venice: a Note of pre-eminence, which neither History nor Heraldry can
allow him. Cinthio, who knew him best, and whose creature he was, calls him
simply a Moor. We say the Piper of Strasburgh; the Jew of Florence; And, if you
please, the Pindar of Wakefield: all upon Record, and memorable in their
Places. But we see no such Cause for the Moors preferment to that dignity. And
it is an affront to all Chroniclers, and Antiquaries, to top upon 'um a Moor,
with that mark of renown, who yet had never fallen within the Sphere of their
Cognizance.

Then is the* Moors Wife, from a simple Ci^izen, in Cinth^o, dressed up with
her Top knots, and raised to be Desdemona, a Senators Daugh^er* All this is
very strange; And therefore pleases such as r^lect not on the improbability.
This ma^ch might well be without the Par^nts Consent. Old Hora^e long ago
forbad the Banes.

Sed non ut placidis Coeant immitia, non ut
Serpents avibus gem^nentur, tigribus agni.
The Fable.
O^hello, a Blackmoor Captain, by talking of his Pro^ess and Feats of War,
makes Desdemona a Sena^ors Daughter to be in love with him; and to be married
to him, without her Parents knowledge; And ^aving pr^ferred Cassio, to ^e his
Lieutenant, (a place which his Enfign Jago sued for) Jago in revenge, works the
Moor into a Jealous^ that Cassio Cuckolds him: which he effects by stealing and
conve^ing a certain Handkerchi^f, which had, at the Wedding, been by the Moor
presented to his B^ide. Hereupon, Othello and Jago plot the Deaths of Desdemona
and Cassio, Othello Murders her, and soon after is convinced of her Innocence.
And as he is about to be carried to Prison, in order to be punished for the
Murder, He kills himself.

What ever rubs or difficulty may stick on the Bark, the Moral, sure, of this
Fable is ^ery instructive.

1. First, This may be a caution to all Maidens of Quality how, without their
Parents con^ent, they run away with blackamo^rs.

Di non si accompag^are con huomo, cui la natura and il cielo, and il modo
della vita, d^sgiunge da noi. Cin^hio.

Secondly, This may be a warning to all good Wives, that they look well to
their Linen.

Thirdly, This may be a lesson to Husbands, that before their Jealousy be
Tragical, the proofs may be Mathema^ical.

Cinthio affirms that She was not overcome by a Womanish Appetite, but by the
Virtue of the Moor. It must be a good-natured Reader that takes Cinthio's word
in this case, though in a Novel. Shakespeare, who is accountable both to the Eyes,
and to the Ears, And to convince the very heart of an Audience, shows that
Desdemona was won, by hearing Othello talk,

Othello. -- I spoke of most disastrou^ chances,
of Moving accidents, by flood and field;
of hair-breadth scapes in the imminent deadly breach;
of being taken by the insolent foe;
and sold to slavery: of my redemption thence;
and portents in my Travels History:
wherein of Antars vast, and Deserts idle,
rough Quarries, Rocks, and Hills, whose heads (touch Heaven,
It was my hint to speak, such was my process:
and of the Cannibals that each others eat:
the Anthropophagi, and men whose heads
do grow beneath their shoulders --

This was the Charm, this was the phil^re, the love* owder that took ^he
Daughter of this Noble Venetian. This was sufficient to make the Black*amoor
White, and reconcile all, though there had been a Clovenfoot into the bargain.

A meaner woman might be as soon taken by Aqua Tetrachymagogo^.

Nodes, Cataracts, Tumors, Chilblains, Carnosity, Shankers, or any Cant in the
Bill of an High-Germ^n Doctor is as good fustian Circumstance, and as likely to
charm a Senators Daughter. But, it seems, the noble Venetians have an other
sense of things. The Doge himself tells us;

Doge. I think this Tale would win my Daughter too.


Horace tells us,

Intererit Multum -- Colchus an Assyri^s, Thebis nutritus, an Argi^. Shakespeare
in this Play calls 'em the supersubtle venetians. Yet examine throughout the
Tragedy there is nothing in the noble Desdemona, that is not below any Country
Chambermaid with us.

And the account he gives of their Noblemen and Senate, can only be calculated
for the latitude of Gotham.

The Character of that Sta^e is to employ strangers in their Wars; But shall a
Poet thence fancy that they will set a Negro to be their General; or t^ust a
Moor to defend them against the Turk? With us a Black-amoor might rise to be a
Trumpeter; but Shakespeare would not have him less than a Lieutenant-Gener^ With
us a Moor might marry some (...) (...), or Sm^ll-coal Wench: (...), would
provide him the Daught^r and ^eir of some great Lord, or Privy-Co^cellor: And
all the ^own should (...) it a very suitable match: Yet the (...) are not bred
up with that hatred and av^n to the Moors, as are the Venetians, who su^er by a
perpetual Hostility from them,

Littora littoribu^ contraria -- Nothing is more odious in Nature than an
improbable lie; And, certainly, never was any Play fraught, like this of
Othello, with improbabilities.

The ^haracters or Manners, which are the second part in a Tragedy, are not
less unnatural and improper, than the Fable was improbable and absurd.

Othello is made a Venetian General. We see nothing done by him, nor related
concerning him, that comports with the condition of a General, or, indeed, of a
Man, unless the killing himself, to avoid a death the Law was about to inflict
upon him. When his Jealousy had wrought him up to a resolution of's taking
revenge for the supposed injury, He sets Jago to the fighting part, to kill
Cassio; And chooses himself to murder the silly Woman his Wife, that was like to
make no resistance.

His Love and his Jealousy are no part of a Soldiers Character, unless for
Comedy.

But what is most intolerable is Jago. He is no Black-amoor Soldier, so we may
be sure he should be like other Soldiers of o^r acquaintance; yet never in
Tragedy, nor in Comedy, nor in Nature was a Soldier with his Character; take
it in the Authors own words*

Em. -- some Eternal Villain,
Some bufie, and insinuating Rogue,
Some cogging, couzening Slave, to get some Office.

Horace Describes a Soldier o^rwise: Impiger, iracundus, ine^orabilis, ace^.

Shakespeare knew his Character of Jago was inconsistent. In this very Play he
pronounces,

If thou do deliver more or less than Truth, Thou art no Soldier. -- This he
knew, but to entertain the Audience with something new and surprising, against
common sense, and Nature, he would pass upon us a close, dissembling, false,
insinuating rascal, instead of an openhearted, frank, plain-dealing Soldier, a
character constantly worn by them for some thousands of years in the World.

Su^on in Tib.
Tiberius Caesar had a Poet Arraigned for his Life: because Agamemnon was
brought on the S^age by him, with a character unbecoming a Soldier.

Our Ensigns and Subalterns, when disgusted by the Captain, throw up their
Commissions, bluster, and are barefaced. Jago, I hope, is not brought on the
Stage, in a Red Coat. I know not what ^ivery the Venetians wear: but am sure
they hold not these conditions to be alla soldatesca.

Non sia egli perfare la vendetta con infidie, ma con la spada in mano.
Cinthio.

Nor is our Poet more discreet in his Desdemona, He had chosen a Soldier for
his Knave: And a Venetian Lady is to be the Fool.

This Senators Daughter runs away to (a Carriers Inn) the Sagittary, with a
Black^amoor: is no sooner wedded to him, but the very night she Beds him, is
importuning and teizing him ^or a young smock-fac'd Lieutenant, Cassi^. And
tho* she perceives the Moor Jealous of Cassio, yet will she not forbear, but
still rings Cassio, Cassio in both his Ears.

Roderigo is the Cully of Jago, brought in to be murdered by Jago, that Jago's
hands might be the more in Blood, and be yet the more abominable Villain: who
witho^t that was too wicked on all Conscience; And had more to answer for, than
any Tragedy, or Furies could inflict upon him. So there can be nothing in the
characters, either for the profit, or to delight an Audience.

The third thing to be considered is the Th^ughts. But from such Characters, we
need not expect many that are either true, or ^ine, or noble.

And without these, that is, ^hout sense or meaning, the ^ourth part of
Tragedy, which is the expression can hardly deserve to be treated o^
distinctly. The verse rumbling in our Ears are of good use to help off the
action.

In the Neighing of an Horse, or in the growling of a Mastiff, there is a
meaning, there is as lively expression, and, may I say, more humanity, than
many times in the Tragical flights of Shakespeare.

Step then amongst the Scenes to observe the Conduct in this Tragedy.

The first we see are Jago and Roderigo, by Night in the Streets of Venice.
After growling a long time together, they resolve to tell Brabantio that his
Daughter is run away with the Black a-moor. Jago and Roderigo were not of
quality to be familiar with Brabantio, nor had any provocation from him, to
deserve a rude thing at their hands. Brabantio was a Noble Venetian one of the
Sovereign Lords, and principal persons in the Government, Peer to the most
Serene Doge, one attended with more state, ceremony and punctillio, than any
English Duke, or Nobleman in the government will pretend to. This misfortune in
his Daughter is so prodigious, so tender a point, as might puzzle the finest
Wit of the most supersubtle Venetian to touch upon it, or break the discovery
to her Father. See then how delicately Shakespeare minces the matter:

Rod. What ho, Brabantio, Signior Brabantio, ho.


Jago. Awake, what ho, Brabantio,
Thieves, thieves, thieves:
Look to your House, your Daug^ter, and your Bags
Thieves, thieves.
Brabantio at a Window.


Bra. What is the reason o^ this terrible summons?
What is the matter there?

Rod. Signior, is all your Family within?


Jago. Are your Doors locked?


B^a. Why, wherefore ask ^ou this?
your Gown,

Jago. Sir, you are robbed, for shame put on
Your Heart is burst, you have lost half your Soul,
Even now, very now, an old black Ram
Is tupping your white Ewe: arise, arise,
Awake the snorting Citizens with the Bell,
Or else the Devil will make a Grandsire of you, arise I sad.

Nor have they yet done, amongst other ribaldry, they tell him.

Jago. Sir, you are one of those that will not serve God, if the Devil bid you;
because we come to do you service, you think us Russians, you will have your
Daughter covered with a Barba^y Stallion. You Will have your Nephews neigh to
you; you will have Coursers sor Cousins, and (...) f^r Germans.


Bra. What (...) (...) art thou?


Jago. I am ^ne, Sir, that come to tell you, your D^ughter and the Moor, are
now making the Beas^ with two backs.


In former days there wont to be kept at the Courts of Princes some body in a
Fools Coat, that in pure simplicity might let slip some^hing, which made way
for the ill news, and blunted the shock, which otherwise might have come too
violent upon the par^y.

Aristophanes puts Nicias and Demosthenes in the disguise of Servants, that
they might, without indecency, be Drunk; And Drunk he must make them that they
might without reserve lay open the Arcana of State; And the Knavery of their
Ministers.

After King ^rancis had been taken Prisoner at Pavia. Rabelais tells of a
Drunken bout between Gargantua and Friar John; wh^re the valiant Friar,
bragging over his Cups, amongst his other slights, says he, Had I lived in the
days of Jesus Christ, I would have guarded Mount Olivet that the Jews should
never have taken him. The Devil fe^ch me, if I would not have ham string'd those
Mr. (...), that after their good Supper, ran away so ^urvily and left their
M^ster to shift ^or himself. I hate a Man should run away, when he should play
at sharps. Pox on it, that I should not be King of France for an hundred years
or two. I would curtail all our French Dogs that ran away at Pavia.

This is address, this is truly Satyr, where the preparation is such, that the
thing principally designed, falls in, as it only were of course.

But Shakespeare shows us another sort of address, his manners and good breeding
must not be like the rest of the Civil World. Brabantio was not in M^squerade,
was not incognito; Jago well knew his rank and dignity.

Jago. The Magnifico is much ^loved,
And has in his effect, a voice potential
As double as the Duke --

But besides the Manners to a Magnifico, humanity cannot bear that an old
Gentleman in his misfortune should be insulted over with such a rabble o^
Skoundrel language, when no cause or provocation. Yet thus it is on our Stage,
this is our School of good manners, and the Speculum Vitae.

But our Mag^ifico is here in the dark, nor are yet his Robes on: attend him to
the Senate house, and there see the difference, see the effects of Purple.

So, by and by, we find the Duke of Venice with his Senators in Council, at
Midnight, upon advice that the Turks, or Ottamites, or both together, were
ready in transport Ships, put to Sea, in order to make a Descent upon Cyprus.
This is the posture, when we see Brabantio, and Othello join them* By their
Conduct and manner of talk, a body must strain hard to fancy the Scene at
Venice; And not rather in some of our Cinq-ports, where the Baily and his
Fishermen are knocking their heads together on account of some Whale; or some
terrible broil upon the Coast. But to show them true Venetians, the Maritime
affairs stick not long on their hand; the public may sink or swim. They will
sit up all night to hear a Doctors Commons, Matrimonial, Cause. And have the
Merits of the Cause at large laid open to 'em, that they may decide it before
they Stir. What can be pleaded to keep awake their attent^on so wonderfully?

Never, sure, was sorm of pleading so tedious and so heavy, as this whole
Scene, and midnight entertainment. Take his own words: says the Respondent.

Oath. Most potent, grave, and reverend Signiors,
My very noble, and approved good Masters:
That I have taken away this old man's Daughter;
It is most true: true, I have Married her,
The very front and head of my offending,
Has this extent, no more: rude I am in my speech.
And little blessed with the set phrase of peace,
For since these Arms of mine had seven years pith,
Till now some nine Moons wasted, they have used
Their dearest action in the Tented Field:
And little of this great World can I speak,
More than pertains to Broils and Battle,
And therefore little shall I grace my Cause,
In speaking of my self; yet by your gracious patience
I would a round unravish d Tale deliver,
Of my whole course of love, what drags, what charms
What Conjuration, and what mighty Magic,
(for such proceedings am I charged withal)
I won his Daughter.

All this is but Preamble, to tell the Court that He wants words. This was the
Eloquence which kept them up all Night, and drew their attention, in the midst
of their alarms.

One might rather think the novelty, and strangeness of the cas^ pr^vail'd upon
them: no, the Senators do not reckon it s^range at all. Instead of s^arting at
the Prodigy, every one is samiliar with Desdemon^, as he were her own natural
Father, rejoice in her good fortune, and wish their own several Daugh^ers as
hopefully married. Should the Poet have provided such a Husband for an only
Daught^r of any noble P^r in England, the Black-amoor must have ch^ng'd his
Skin, to look our House of ^ords in the Face.

Aeschylus is noted in Aristophanes sor letting Niobe be two or three Acts on
the Stage, before she speaks. Our Noble Ven^tian, sure, is in the other more
unnatural ^xtreme. His words slow in abundance; no Butter-Quean can be more
lavi^h. Nay: he is for talking of S^ate* As^airs too, above any body:

Bra. Please it your Grace, on to the State Affairs --


Yet is this ^W0rd^ sensible of his afsliction; before the and of the Play his
Heart breaks, he di^s.

Gra. Poor Desdemona, I am glad t^y ^ther's dead,
Thy match was m^rtal to him, and pure grief
Shore his old thread in twain --

A third part in a T^agedy is the Thoughts: from Venetians, Noblemen, and
Senators, we may expect fine Thoughts. Here is a trial of skill: sor a parting
blow, ^he Duke, and Brabantio Cap sentences. Where the^ shall we seek sor the
Thoughts, if we let slip this occasion? says the Duke:

Duk: Let me speak like your self and lay a Sentence,
Which like a greese or step, may help these lover^
In^o your favor.
When remedies are past the grief is ended,
By seeing the worst which late on hopes d^pended,
To mourn a mischief that is past and go^,
Is the next way to draw more mischief on;
What cannot be preserved when ^ortune (...),
Patience her injury a Mocker m^kes.
The robbed that smiles, steals something from a Thief,
He robs himself, that sp^nds an hopeless grief*

Bra. So let the Turk of Cypru^ us beguile
We lose it not so long as we can smile*
He ^ears the sentence well, that nothing bears
But the free comfort which from thence he hears,
But he bears both the sentence and the sorrow,
That to pay grief must of poor patience borrow:
These Sentences to Sugar, or to Gall,
Being strong on both sides are equivocal.
But words are words* I never yet did hear,
That the bruised Heart was pierced through the Ear.
Beseech you now to the a^airs of State.

How far would the Queen of Sheba have traveled to hear the Wisdom of our
Noble Venetians? or is not our Rehe^rsal*
Brentford a Venetian Colony, for methinks their talk is the very same?

What says Prince Volscius?

Volscius. What shall I do, what conduct shall I find
To lead me through this twy light of my mind?

What says Amaryllis?

Ama. I hope its slow beginning will portend
A forward exit to all future end.

What says Prince Pretty-man?

Pre. Was ever Son yet brought to this distress,
To be, for being a Son, made Fatherless?
Ah, you just Gods, rob me not of a Father,
The being of a Son take from me rather.

Pa^urge, sadly perplexed, and trying all the means in the World, to be well
advised, in that knotty point whether he should Marry, or no; Amongst the rest,
consults Raminigrobis, an old Poet; as one belonging to Apollo; And from whom
he might expect something like an Oracle. And he was not disappointed. From
Raminigr^bis he had this Answer:

Prenez la, ne la prenez pas.
Si vous la prenez, c'est bien fait.
Si ne la prenez, en effet
Ce sera ouvre par compass.
Gallopez, mais allez le pas.
Recullez, entres y de fait.
Prenez la, ne.
Take, or not take her, off or on:
Hand^ dandy is your Lot.
When he^ name you write, you blot.
It Is undone, when all is done.
Ended, ere it is begun.
Never Gallop whilst you Trot.
Set not forward, when you run,
Nor be single, though alone,
Take, or not take her, off, or on.
What provocation, or cause of malice our Poet might have to Libel the most
Serene Republic, I cannot tell: but certainly, th^re can be no wit in this
representation.

For the Second Act, our Poet having (...) his a^fairs at Venice, shows the
(...) n^xt (I know not how many leagues osf) in the Isl^nd of Cyprus. ^he
Audi^nce must ^e there too: And yet our Bays had it never in his h^ad, to make
any provision o^ Transport Ships for them.

In the days that the Old Testament was Act^d in Clerkenwell, by the Parish
Clerks o^ London, the Israelites might pass through the Red sea: but alas, at
this time, we have no Moses to bid the Waters make way, and to Usher us along.
Well, the absurditi^s of this kind break no Bones. They may make Fools of us;
but do not hurt o^r (...).

Come a^shoar then, and observe the Countenance of the People, after the
dreadful Storm, and their apprehensions from an Invasion by the (...), their
succou^ and friends (...) and tossed, no body knew w^ither. The first that came
to Land was Cassio* his sirst Salutation to the Govern^ur, Mo^tanio, is:

Cas. Th^nks to the valiant of this Isle:
That so approve the Moor, and let the Heavens
Give him defense against their Elements,
For I have lost him on the dangerous Sea.

To him the Governor speaks, indeed, like a Man in his wits.

Mont. Is he well Ship^?


The Lieutenant answers thus.

Cas. His Bark is s^outly Tymber'd, and his Pilot
Of very expert, and approved allowance,
Therefore my hopes (not surfeited ^o death)
Stand in bold care.

The Governors first question was very proper; his next question, in this
posture of af^airs, is:

Mont. But, good Lieutenant, is our general Wiv'd?


A question so remote, so impertinent and absurd, so odd and surprising never
entered Bayes's Pericranium. Only the answer may Tally with it.

Cas. Most fortunately, he has atcheiv'd a Maid,
That Parragons description, and wild fame:
One that excels the quirks of blasoning Pens:
And in the essential vesture of Creation,
Does bear an excellency --

They who like this Authors writing will not be offended to find so much
repeated from him. I pretend not here to tax either the Sense, or the Language;
those Circumstances had their proper place in the Venetian Senate. What I now
cite is to show how probable, how natural, how reasonable the Conduct is, all
along.

I thought it enough that Cassio should be acquainted with a Virgin of that
rank and consideration in Venice, as Desdemona. I wondered that in the
Senate House every one should know her so familiarly: ye^, here also at Cyprus,
every body is in a rapture at the name of Desdemona: except only Montanio who
must be ignorant; that Cassio, who has an excellent cut in shaping an Answer,
may give him the satisfaction:

Mont. What is she?


Cas. She that I spoke of: our Captain^ Captain,
Left in the Cond^ct of the bold Jago,
Whose footing here anticipates our thoughts
A Sennets speed: great Jove Othello guard,
And swell his Sail with thine own powerful breath,
That be may bless this Bay with his Tall Ship,
And swiftly come to Desdemona's Arms,
Give renewed fire to our extincted Spirits,
And bring all Cyprus comfort:
Enter Desdemona, etc* -- O behold,
The riches of the Ship is come on shore.
Ye men of Cyprus, let her have your Knees:
Hail to the Lady: and the Grace of Heaven
Before, behind thee, and on every hand.
E^wheel the round --

In the name of phrenzy, what means this Soldier? or would he talk thus, if he
m^ant any thing at all? Who can say Shakespeare is to blame in his Character of
a Soldier? Has he not here done him reason? When could our Tramo^tains talk at
this rate? but our ^arsey and Garnsey Captains must not speak so sine things,
nor compare with the Mediterranean, or Garrisons in Rhodes and Cyprus.

The next thing our Officer does, is to salute ^ago's Wise, with this Conge to
the Husband,

Cas. Good Ancient, ^ou are welcome, welcome Mistress,
Let it not Gall your Patience, good Jago,
That I extend my Manners, it is my Breeding,
That gives me this bold show of Curtesy.

Jago. Sir, would she give you so much of her lips,
As of her tongue she has bestowed on me,
You Would have enough.

Des. Alas! she has no speech.


Now follows a long rabble of Jack*pudden farce betwixt ^ago and Desdemona,
that runs on with all the little plays, jingle, and trash below the patience of
any Countr^y Kitchin*maid with her Sweetheart. The Venetian Donna is hard put
to it for pastime! And this is all, when they are newly got on shore, from a
dismal Tempest, and when every moment she might expect to hear her Lord (as she
calls him) that she runs so mad after, is arrived or lost* And moreover.

-- In a Town of War, -- The peoples Hearts brim^ul of fear. Never in the World
had any Pagan Poet his Brains turned at this Monstrous rate. But the ground of
all this Bedlam-Bus^oonry we saw, Page 54.
in the case of the French Strolers, the Company for Acting Christ's Passion, or
the Old Testament, were Carpenters, Cobblers, and illiterate fellows; who found
that the Drolls, and Fooleries interlarded by them, brought in the rabble, and
lengthened their time, so they got Money by the bargain.

Our Shakespeare, doubtl^ss, was a great Master in this craft. These Carpenters
and Cobblers were the guides he followed. And it is then no wonder that we find
so much farce and Apocryphal Matter in his Tragedies. Thereby un-hallowing the
Theater, profaning the name of Tragedy; And instead of representing Men and
Manners, turning all Morality, good sense, and humanity into mockery and
derision.

But pass we to something of a more serious air and Complexion. Othello and his
Bride are the first Night, no sooner warm in Bed together, but a Drunken
Quarrel happening in the Garrison, two Soldiers Fight; And the General rises to
part the Fray: He swears.

O^hel. Now by Heaven,
*My blood begins my safer guides to rule,
*And passion, having my best judgment cooled,
Assays to lead the way: if once I stir,
Or do but lift this arm, the best of you
Shall sink in my rebuke: give me to know
How this ^oul rout began; who set it on,
And he that is approved in this offense,
Though he had twined with me both at a birth,
Should lose me: what, in a Town of War,
Yet wild, the peoples Hearts brimful of fear,
To manage private, and domestic quarrels,
In Night, and on the Court, and guard of safety,
It Is Monstrous, Jago, who began?

In the days of yore, Soldiers did not swear in this fashion. What should a
Soldier say ^arther, when he swears, unless he blaspheme? action should speak
the rest. What follows must be ex ore gladii; He is to rap out an Oath, not
Wire-draw and Spin it out: by the style one might judge that Shakespears
Soldiers were never bred in a Camp, but rather had belonged to some
A^idavit*Office. Consider also throughout this whole Scene, how the Moori^h
General proceeds in examining into this Rout; No Justice Clod-pate could go on
with more Phlegm and deli^eration. The very first night that he lies with the
Divine Desdemona to be thus interrupted, might provoke a Man's Christian
Patience to swear in another style. But a Negro General is a Man of strange
Mettle. Only his Venetian Bride is a match for him. She understands that the
Soldiers in the Garrison are by the ears together: And presently she at
midnight, is in amongst them.

Desd. What Is the matter there?


Othel. All Is well now Sweeting --
Come away to Bed --

In the beginning of this second Act, before they had lain together, Desdemon^
was said to be, o^r Captains Captain; Now they are no sooner in Bed together,
but Jago is adyising Cassio in these words.

Jago. -- Our Generals Wi^e is now the General, I may say so in this respect,
for that he has devoted, and given up himself to the contemplation, mark, and
devotement of her parts and graces. Confess your self freely to her, importune
her; she will help to put you in your place again: she is so free, so kind, so
apt, so blessed a disposition, that, she holds it a vice in her goodness, not
to do more than she is requested. This broken joint between you and her
Husband, entreat her to splinter --


And he says afterward.

Jago. -- It Is m^st easy
The inclining Desdemona to subdue,
In any honest* suit. She Is framed as fruitful,
As the free Elements: And then for her
To win the Moo^* were it to renounce his Baptism,
All seals and ^mbols of redeemed sin,
^is soul is so enfe^ter'd to her love,
That (...) may make, unmake, do what she list:
Even as her appetite shall play the God
With his weak function --

This kind of discourse implies an experience and long conversation, the
HoneyMoon over, and a Marriage of some standing. Would any man, in his wits,
talk thus of a Bridegroom and Bride the first night of their coming together?

Yet this is necessary for our Poet; it would not otherwise ^erve his turn.
This is the source, the foundation of his Plot; hence is the spring and
occasion for all the Jealousy and bluster that ensues.

Nor are we in better circumstances for Roderigo. The last thing said by him in
the former Act was,

Rod. -- I Will go s^ll all my Land.


A ^ir Estate is sold to put money in his P^rse, for this adventure. And ^o
here, the next day.

Rod. I do follow here in the Chase, not like a Hound that (...), but one that
fills up the cry: My Money is almost spent. I have been tonight exceedingly
well cudgelled, I think the issue will be, I shall have so much experience for
my pains, and so no Money a^ all, and with a little more wit return to Ve^


The Venetian squire had a good riddance for his Acres. The Poet allows him
just time to be once drunk, a very conscionable reckoning!

In this Second Act, the face of a^airs could in truth be no other, than

-- In a Town of War, Yet wild, the peoples Hearts brim-ful of sear. But
nothing either in this Act, or in the rest that follow, show any color or
complexion, any resemblance or proportion to that face and posture it ought to
bear. Should a Painter draw any one Scene of this Play, and write over it, This
is a Town of War; would any body believe that the Man were in his senses? would
not a Goose, or Dromedary for it, be a name as just and suitable? And what in
Painting would be absurd, can never pass upon the World for Poetry.

Cassio having escaped the Storm comes on shore at Cyprus, that night gets
Drunk, Fights, is turned out from his Command, grows sob^r again, takes advice
how to be restored, is all Repentanc^ and Mortification: ^et before he sleeps,
is in the Morning at his Generals door with a noise of Fiddles, and a Droll to
introduce him to a little Mouth-speech with the Bride.

Cassio. Give me advantag^ of some brief discourse
With Desdemona alone.

Em. ^ray you come in,
I will bestow you, where you shall have time
To speak your bosom freely.

So, they are put together: And when he had gone on a good while speaking his
bosom, Desdemona answers him.

Des. Do not doubt that, before Emilia here,
I give thee warrant of thy place; assure thee,
If I do vow a friendship, I Will perform it,
To the last article --

Then after a ribble rabble of fulsome impertinence. She is at her Husband slap
dash:

Desd. -- Good love, call ^im back.


Othel. Not now, sweet Desdemona, some other time.


Desd. But shall't shortly?


Othel. The sooner, sweet, for you.


Desd. Shall't be tonight at Supper?


Othel. No, not tonight.


Desd. Tomorrow Dinner the^?


Othel. I shall not dine at home,
I meet the Captains at the Citadel.

Desd. Why then to morrow night, or Tuesday (more,
Or night, or Wednesday more?

After forty lin^s more, at this rate, they part, and then co^es the wonderful
Scene, where J^go by shr^s, half words, and ambiguous reflections, works
Othell^ up to be Jealous. One might think, after what we have seen, that there
needs no great cunning, no great poetry and address to make the Moor Jealous.
Such impatience, such a rout for a handsome young fellow, the very morning
after her Marriage must make him either to be jealous, or to take her for a
Changeling, below his Jealousy. After this Scene, it might strain the (...)
skill to reconcile the couple, and allay the Jealousy. Jago now can only actum
agere, and vex the audience with a naus^ous repe^ition.

Whence comes it then, that this is the top scene, the Scene that raises
Othello above all other Tragedies on our (...)? It is purely from the Action*
from the Mops and the Mows the Grimace, the Grins and Gesticulation. Such
scenes as this have made all the World run after Harlequi^ and Scaramuccio.

The several degrees of Action were amongst the Ancients distinguished by the
Cothurnus, the Soccus, and by the Planipes.

Had this scene been represented at old Rome, Othello and Jago must have
quitted their Buskins; They must have played barefoot: the spectators would not
have been content without seeing their Podometry; And the Jealousy work at the
very Toes of 'em* Words, be they Spanish, or Polish, or any inarticulate sound,
have the same effect, they can only serve to distinguish, and, as it were, beat
time to the Action. But here we see a known Language does woefully encumber, and
clog the operation: as either forced, or heavy, or tri^ling, or incoherent, or
improper, or most what improbable. When no words interpose to spoil the
conceit, every one interprets as he likes best. So in that memorable di^pute
betwixt Panurge and our English Philosopher in Rabelais, performed without a
word speaking; The Theologians, Physicians, and Surgeons, made one inference*
the Lawyers, Civil^ans, and Canonists, drew another conclusion more to their
mind.

Othello the night of his arrival at ^yprus, is to consummate with Desdemona,
they go to Bed. Both are raised and run into the Town amidst the Soldiers that
were a fighting: then go to Bed again, that morning he sees Cassio with her;
She importunes him to restore Cassio. Othello shows nothing of the Soldiers
Mettle: but like a tedious, drawling, tame Goose, is gaping after any paultrey
^nsinuation, laboring to be jealous; And catching at every blown surmize.

Jago. My Lord, I see you are moved.


Oath. No, not much moved.
Do not think but Desdemona is honest*

Jag. Long live she so, and long live you to think so.


Oath. And yet how Nature erring from it self,


Jag. I, There Is the point: as to be ^old with you,
Not to affect many proposed Matches
Of her own clime, complexion, and degree,
Wherein we see, in all things, Nature tends,
Fie, we may smell in such a will most rank,
Foul disproportion, thoughts unnatural --

The Poet here is certainly in the right, and by consequence the foundation of
the Play must be concluded to be Monstrous; And the constitution, all over, to
be most rank,

Foul disproportion, thoughts unnatural. Which instead of moving pity, or any
passion Tragical and Reasonable, can produce nothing but horror and aversion,
and what is odious and grievous to an Audience. After this fair Mornings work,
the Bride enters, drops a Cursey.

Desd. How now, my dear Othello,
Your Dinner, and the generous Islanders
By you invited, do attend ^our presence.

Oath. I am to blame.


Desd. Why is your speech so faint? Are you not well?


Oath. I have a pain upon my Forehead, dear.


Michael Cassio came not from Venice in the Ship with Desdemona, nor till this
Morning could be suspected of an opportunity with her. And it is now but Dinner
time; yet the Moor complains of his Forehead. He might have set a Guard on
Cassio, or have locked up Desdemona, or have observed their carriage a day or
two longer. He is on other occasions phlegmatic enough: this is very hasty.
But after Dinner we ^ave a wonderful flight:

Othel. What sense had I of her stolen hours ^f lust?
I saw't not, thought it not, it harmed not me:
I slept the next night well* was free and merry,
I found not Cassio's kisses on her lips --

A little after this, says he,

Oath. Give me a living reason that she is disloyal.


Jago. -- I lay with Cassio lately,
And being troubled with a raging Tooth, I could not sleep;
There are a kind of men so loose of Soul,
That in their sleeps will mutter their affairs,
One of this kind is Cassio:
In sleep I heard him say: sweet Desdemona,
Let us be wary, let us hide our loves:
And then, Sir, wo^'d he gripe, and wring my hand,
Cry o^t, sweet Creature; and then kiss me hard,
As if he plu^ up kisses by the roots,
That grew upon my Lips, then laid his Leg
Over my Thigh, and ^gh'd, and kissed, and then
Cried, c^sed fa^, that gave thee to the Moor.

By the Rapture of Oth^llo, one might think that he raves, is not of ^ound
Memory, forgets that h^ has not yet been two nights in the Matrimonial Bed with
his Desde^ona. But we find Jago, who should have a better memory, forging his
lies after the v^ry same Mod^l. The very night of their Marriag^ at V^nice, the
Moor, and also Cassio, were sent away to Cyprus. In the Second Act, Othello and
his Bride go the first time to Bed; The Third Act opens the next morning* The
parties have been in view to this moment. We saw the opportunity which was
given for Cassio to speak hi^ bosom to her, once, indeed, might go a great way
with a Venetia^. But once, will not do the Poets business; The Audience must
suppose a great many ^outs, to make the plot operate. They must deny their
senses, to reconcile it to common sense: or make it any way consistent, and
hang together.

No^, for the most part, are the single thoughts more consistent, than is the
economy: The Indians do as they ought in painting the Devil White: but says
Othello:

Oath. -- Her name that ^as as fresh
As Dian's Visage, is now begrim'd and black,
As mine* own face --

There is not a Monky but understands Nature better; not a Pug in Barbary that
has not a truer taste of things.

Othel. -- O now for ever
Farewell the tranquil mind, farewell content;
Farewell the plumed troop, and the big Wars,
That make Ambition Virtue: O farewell,
Farewell the neighing Steed, and the shrill Trump,
The spirit stirring Drum, the ear-piercing Fief,
The royal Banner, and all quality,
Pride, Pomp, and Circumstance of glorious War,
And O ye Mortal Engines, whose wide throats
Th'i^mortal Joves great clamours counterseit,
Farewell, Othello's occupation's gone.

These lines are recited here, not for any thing Poetical in them, besides the
sound, that pleases. Yet this sort of imagery and ampli^ication is extremely
taking, where it is just and natural. As in Gorboduck, when a young Princess on
whose fancy the personal gallantry of the Kings Son then slain, had made a
strong impression, thus, out of the abundance of her imagination, pours forth
her grief*

Marcella: -- Ah noble Prince! how often have I beheld
Thee mounted on thy fierce, and trampling Steed,
Shining in Armor bright before the Tilt,
Wearing thy Mistress sleeve tied on thy helm.
Then charge thy staff, to please thy Ladies Eye,
That bowed the head piece of thy friendly Foe?
How often in arms, on Horse to bend the Mace,
How often in arms, on foot, to break the Spear;
Which never now these Eyes may see again?

Notwithstanding that this Scene had proceeded with fury and bluster sufficient
to make the whole Isle ring of his Jealousy, yet is Desdemona diverting her
self with a paultry buffoon and only solicitous in quest of Cassio:

Desd. Seek him, bid ^im come hither, tell him --
Where should I lose that Handcherchief, Emilia?
Believe me I had rather lose my Purse,
Full of Crusado's: And but my noble Moor
Is true of mind, and made of no such baseness,
As Jealous Creat^res are; it were enough
To put him to ill thinking.

Em. Is he not Jealous?


Des^. Who he? I think the Sun, where he was born,
Drew all such humors from him.

By this manner of speech one would gather the couple had been yoked together
a compet^nt while, what might ^e say more, had they cohabited, and had been Man
and Wi^e ^even years?

She spies the Moor.

Desd. I will not leave him now,
Till Cassio is recalled.
I have sent to bid Cassio come speak with yo^*

Othel. -- Lend me thy Handkerchief.


Desd. -- This is a trick to put me from my suit.
I pray let Cassio be received again.

Em. -- Is not this man Jealous?
-- It Is not a year or two shows us a man --

As if for the first year or two, Othell^ had not been jealous? This third Act
begin^ in the morning, at noon she drops the Ha^dkerchief, after dinner she
misses it, and then follows all this outrage and ho^rible clutter about it. If
we believe a small D^mosel in the last Sc^ne of this Act, this day is
effectually seven days.

Bianca. -- What keep a week away! seven days, seven nights,
Eightscore eight hours, and lovers absent hours,
More tedious than the Dial eightscore times.
Oh weary reckoning!

Our Poet is at this plunge, that whether this Act contains the compass of one
day, of seven days, or of seven years, or of all together, the repugnance and
absurdity would be the same. For Othello, all the while, has nothing to say or
to do, but what loudly* proclaim him jealous: her friend and con^ident Emilia
again and again rounds her in the Ear that the Man is Jealous: yet this
Venetian dame is neither to see, nor to hear; nor to have any sense or
understanding, nor to strike any other note but Cassio, Cassio.

The Scotchman hearing trut S^ot, trut Scot, when he saw it came from a Bird,
checked his Choler, and put up his Swerd again, with a Braad O God, G. if
th`aa'dst ben a Maan, as thou art ane Green Geuse, I sud ha stuck tha' to thin
heart. Desdemona and that Parrot might pass for Birds of a Feather; and if
Sauney had not been more generous than Othello, but continued to insult the
poor Creature after this beastly example, he would have given our Poet as good
stuff to work upon: And his Tragedy of the Green Geuse, might have deserved a
better audience, than this o^ Desdemona, or The Moor of Venice.

ACT IV.
Enter Jago and Othello* Jago. Will you think so?


Othel. Think so, Jago.


Jago. What, to kiss in private?


Othel. An unauthorised kiss.


Jago. Or to be naked with her friend a-bed,
An hour or more, not meaning any harm?

Othel. Naked a-bed, Jago, and not mean harm? --


At this gross rate of trifling, our General and his Ancient March on most
heroically; till the Jealous Booby has his Brains turned; and falls in a
Trance. Would any imagine this to be the Language of Venetia^s, of Soldiers,
and mighty Captains? no B^tholomew Droll could subsist upon such tr^sh. But ^o,
a (...) never ^ed in Tragedy.

Jago. Stand you while a part --
-- Inca^e your self;
And mark the Jeers, the Gibes, and notable scorns,
That dwell in every region of his ^ace,
For I will make him tell the ^ale a new,
Where, how, how often, how long ago, and when,
^e has, and is again t^ ^pe your Wife:
I say, but mark his gesture --

With this d^vice Othello withdraws. Says Jago aside.

Jago. Now will I question Cassio of Bianca*
A Huswife --
That doats on Cassio --
He when he hears of her cannot refrain
From the excess of Laughter --
As he shall ^mile, O^hello ^all go mad,
And his unbooki^h jealousy must co^ster
Poor Cassio's smiles, gesture, and light be viour
Quite in the wrong --

So to work they go: And Ot^ello is as wise a commentator, and makes his
applications pat, as heart could wish -- but I would not expect to find this
Scene acted nearer than in Southwark Fair. But the Handkerchief is brought in
at last, to stop all holes, and close the evidence. So now being (...) with the
proof, they come to a resolution, that the o^enders shall be murdered.

Othel. -- But yet the pity of it, Jago, a^ the pity.


Jago. If you be so fond over her iniquity give her Patent to osfend. For if it
touches not ^ou, it comes near no Body.

Do it not with poison, strangle her in her Bed; Even ^he Bed she has
contaminated.


Oath. Good, good, the Justice of it pleases, very good.


Jago. And for Cassio, let me be his undertaker --


Jago had some pretense to be discontent with Othello and Cassio: And what
passed ^itherto, was the operation of revenge. Desdemona had never done him
h^rm, always kind to him, and to his Wife; was his Country-woman, a Dame of
quality: for him to abet her Murd^r, shows nothing of a Soldier, nothing of a
Man, nothing of Nature in it. The Ordinary of New gate never had the like
M^ster to pa^s under his examination. Can it be any diversion to see a Rogue
beyond what the Devil ever finished? Or would it be any instruction to an
Audience? Jago could desire no better than to set Cassio and Oth^lio, his two
Enemies, by the Ears together; so he might have been revenged on them both at
once: And choosing for his own ^hare, the Murder of Desdemona, he had the
opportunity to play booty, and save the poor harmless wretch. But the Poet must
do every thing by contraries: to surprise the Audience still with something
^orrible and prodigious, beyond any human imagination. At this rate he must out
do the Devil, to be a Poet in the rank with Shakespeare.

Soon after this, arrives from Venice, Ludovico, a noble Cousin of Desdemona,
presently she is at him also, on the behalf of Cassio.

Desd. Cousin there is sallen between him and my Lord
An unkind breach, but ^ou shall make all well.

Lud. Is there division 'twixt my Lord and Cassio.


Desd. A most unhappy one, ^ would do much
To atone them, for the love I bear to Cassio.

By this time, we are to ^elieve the couple have been a week or t^o Married:
And Othello's Jealousy that had rag^d so loudly, and had been so uneasy to
himself, must have reached her knowledge. The Audience have all heard him more
p^ain with her, than was needful to a V^netian capacity: And yet she must still
be impertinent in her suit for Cassio, well, this Magnifico comes from the
Doge, and Senators, to displace Othello.

Lud. -- Deputing Cassio in his Government.


Desd. Trust me, I am glad on it.


Oath. Indeed.


Desd. My lord.


Oath. I am glad to see you mad.


Desd. How, sweet Othello.


Oath. Devil.


Desd. I have not deserved this.


O^h. O ^evil, Devil --
Out of my ^ight.

Desd. I will not stay to offend you.


Lud. Truly, an obedient Lady.
I do beseech your Lordship call ^er back.

Oath Mistress.


De^d. My Lord.


Oath. What would ^ou with her Sir?


^ud. Who, I, my Lord?


Oath. I, y^u did wish that I would m^ke her turn.
Sir, she can turn, and turn, and yet go on,
And turn again, and she can weep, Sir, weep.
And she is o^edient, as you say, obedient:
Very obedient --

Lud. What strike your Wife?


Of what (...) and blood does o^r Poet make these noble Venetian^? the men
without Gall; the Women without ei^er Brains or Sense? A Senators Daughter runs
away with this Black-amoor; the Government employs this Moor to de^end them
against the ^urks, so (...) not the Mo^rs Marriage at present, but the danger
over, ^er Father gets the Moor (...), sends his Kinsman, Seignior Lu^ovico, to
Cyp^us with the Commission for a new Gene^al; who, at his arrival, ^inds the
Moor cal^ing the Lady his ^inswoman, (...) and Strumpet, and kicking her: what
says the Magnifico?

^ud. My Lord this would not be believ*d i^ Venice,
T^o* I should swear I saw't, it is very much;
(...) her amends: she weeps.

The M^or has no bod^ to take his part, no body of his Color: Ludovico has the
new Governor ^assio, and all his Countrym^n Venetians about him. What Poet
would give a villainous Black amoor this A^cendant? What Tramontain could fancy
the Venetians so low, so despicable, or so patien^? this outrage to an injured
(...), the Divine Desdemona, might in a cold^r Climate have provoked some body
to be her Champion: but the Italians may well conclude we have a strange Genius
for Poetry. In the next Scene Othello is examining the supposed Bawd; then
follows another s^orm of horror and outrage against the poor Chicken, his
Wife. Some Drayman or drunken T^ker might possibly treat his drab at this sort
of rate, and mean no harm by it: but for his excellency, a My lord General, to
Serenade a Senator's Daughter with such a volly of scoundrel silthy Language,
is sure the most absurd Maggot that ^ver bred from any Poets addle Brain.

And she is in the right, who tells us,

Emil. -- A Beggar in his Drink,
Could not have laid such terms upon his Callet.

This is not to describe passion. Seneca had another notion in the Case:

Parvae loquuntur curae, ingentes stupent. And so had the Painter, who drew
Agamemnon with his Face covered. Yet to make all worse, her Murder, and the
manner of it, had before been resolved upon and concerted. But nothing is to
provoke a Venetian; she takes all in good part; had the Scene lain in Russia,
what could we have expected more? With us a Tinkers Trull would be Nettled,
would repartee with more spirit, and not appear so void of spleen.

Desd. O good Jago,
What shall I do to win my Lord again?

No Woman bred out of a Pig-stye, could talk so meanly. After this, she is
called to Supper with Othello, Ludovico, etc. after that comes a filthy sort of
Pastoral Scene, where the Weddi^g Sheets, and Song of Willow, and her M^thers
Maid, poor Barba^a, are not the least moving things in this (...). But that we
may not be kept too long in the dumps, nor the melan^holy Scenes lie too heavy,
(...) on our (...), this Act gives us for a ^arewell, the salsa, O picante,
some quibbles, and smart touches, as Ovid had (...):

Est and in obscaenos (...) Tragoedi^ ri^us. The last Act begins with Jago and
Roderig^; Who a li^le before had b^n upon the husf:

Rod. I say it is not very well: I will make my self known to Desdemona; if she
will r^turn me my Jewels, I will ^ive over my suit, and rep^nt my unlawful
solicitation, if not, ass^re your self, I ll seek satis^action of you.


Roderigo, a Noble Venetian had sought D^sdemona ^n Marriage, is troub^ed to
^ind the Moor had got her srom him, advises with Jago, who ^headles him to sell
his Es^ate, (...) go ov^ ^he Sea to Cyprus, in (...) to C^ckold Othello, ther^
having cheated Roderigo of all his Mon^y and Jewels, on pretense of presenting
them to Desdemona, our Gallant grows angry, and would have satisfaction from
Jago; who sets all right, by ^lling him Ca^sio is to be Governor, O^hello is
going with Desdemona into (...); to prevent this, you are to murder Cassio, and
then all may be well.

Jago. ^e goes into Mauritania, and takes with him the fair Desdemona, unless
his abode be lingered here ^y some accident, wherein none c^n be so d^terminate,
as the removing ^f Cassio.


Had Roderigo been one of the Ba^diti, he might not much stick at the Murder.
But why Roderigo should take this for pa^ment, and (...) his person where the
prospect o^ advantage is so very uncertain and remote, no body c^n imagine. It
had need be a super-subtle Venetian that this Plot will pass upon* Then after a
little spurt of villainy and Murder, we are brought to the most lament^ble, that
ever appeared on any Stage* A noble Venetian Lady is to be murdered by our
Poet; in sober sadness, purely for being a Fool. No Paga^ Poet but would have
found some Machine for her deliverance. Pegasus would have strained hard to
have brought old Perseus on his back, time enough, to rescue this Andromeda
from so foul a Monster. Has our Christian Poetry no generosity, nor bowels? Ha,
Sir Lancelot! ha St. George! will no Ghost leave the shades for us in
extremity, to save a distressed Damosel?

But for our comfort, however felonious is the Heart, hear with what soft
language, he does approach her, with a Candle in his Hand:

Ot^. Put out the light and then put out the light;
If I quench thee, thou flaming Minister,
I can again thy former light restore --

Who would call him Barbarian, Monster, Savage? Is this a Black-amoor?

Soles occidere and redire possunt -- The very Soul and Quintessence of Sir
George Etheridge.

One might think the General should not glory much in this action, but make an
hasty work on it, and have turned his Eyes away from so unsouldierly an
Execution: yet is he all pause and deliberation; handles her as calmly: and is
as careful of her Souls health, as it had been her Father Confessor. Have you
prayed to Night, Desdemona? But the suspense is necessary, that he might have a
convenient while so to roll his Eyes, and so to g^aw his nether lip to the
spectators. Besides the greater cruelty -- sub tam lentis maxillis.

But hark, a most tragical thing laid to her charge.

Oath. That Handkerchief, that I so loved, and gave thee,
Thou gav'st to Cassio.

Desd. No by my Life and Soul;
Send for the man and ask him.

Oath. -- By Heaven, I saw my Hankerchief in his hand --
-- I saw the Ha^dkerchief.

So much ado, so much stress, so much passion and repetition about an
Handkerchief! Why was not this called the Tragedy of the Handkerchief? What can
be more absurd than (as Quintilian expresses it) in parvis litibus has
Tragoedias movere? We have heard of Fortunatus his Purse, and of the Invisible
Cloak, long ago wom thread bare, and stowed up in the Wardrobe of obsolete
Romances: one might think, that were a fit er place for this Handkerchief, than
that it, at this time of day, be worn on the Stage, to raise every where all
this clutter and turmoil. Had it been Desdemona's Garter, the Sagacious Moor
might have smelt a Rat: but the Handkerchief is so remote a trifle, no Booby,
on this side Mauritania, could make any consequence from it.

We may learn here, that a Woman never loses her Tongue, even though after she is
stifled.

Desd* O f^lsly, falsely murdered.


Em. Sweet Desdemona, O sweet Mistress, speak.


Desd. A guiltless death I dye*


Em. O who has done the deed?


Desd. No body, I my self, farewell.
Commend me to my kind Lord, O farewell*

This Desdemona is a black swan; or an old Black-amoor is a bewitching
Bedfellow. If this be Nature, it is a laschete below what the English Language
can express.

For Lardella, to make love, li^e an Humble Be, was, in the Rehearsal, thought
a fancy odd enough.

But hark what follows:

Oath. -- O heavy hour!
Methinks it should be now a huge Eclipse
Of Sun and Moon, and that the affrighted globe
Should yawn at Alteration.

This is wonderful. Here is Poetry to elevate and amuse. Here is sound
All-sufficient. It would be uncivil to ask Flamstead, if the Sun and Moon can
both together be so hugely eclipsed, in any heavy hour whatsoever. Nor must the
Spectators consult Gresham College, whether a body is naturally frighted till
he Yawn again. The Fortune of Greece is not concerned with these Matters. These
are Physical circumstances a Poet may be ignorant in, without any harm to the
public. These slips have no influence on our Manners and good Life; which are
the Poets Province.

Rather may we ask here what unnatural crime ^esdemona, or her P^rents had
committed, to bring this Judgment down upon her; to Wed a Black-amoor, and
inno^ent to be thus cruelly murdered by ^im. What instruction can we make out
of this Catastrophe? Or whtiher must (...) reslection lead us? Is not this to
envenome and sour our spirits, to make us repine and grumble at Providence; and
the government of the World? If this be our end, what boots it to be Virtuous?

Desdemona dropped the Handkerchief, and missed it that very day after her
Marriage* it might have been rumpl'd up with her Wedding sheets: And this Night
that she lay in her wedding sheets, ^he Fairey Napkin (whilst Othello was
stifling her) might have started up to disarm his fury, and stop his ungracious
mouth. Then might she (in a Trance for fear) have lain as dead. Then might he,
believing her dead, touched with remorse, have honestly cut his own Throat, by
the good leave, and with the applause of all the Spectators. Who might
thereupon have gone home with a quiet mind, admiring the beauty of Providence;
fairly and truly represented on the Theater.

Oath. -- Why, how should she be murdered?


Em. Alas, who knows?


Oath. You heard her say her sels it was not ^.


Em. She did so, I must needs report a truth.


Oath. She Is like a liar gone to burn in Hell.
'Twas I that did it.

Em. O, the more Angel she!
And you the blacker Devil.

Oath. She turned to folly, and she was a^ Whore.


Em. Thou do belie her, an^ thou art a Devil.


Oath. She was false as Water.


Em. Thou art rash as Fire,
To say that she was false: O she wa^ heavenly true.

In this kind of Dialogue they continue for forty lines farther, before she
bethinks her self, to cry Murder.

Em. -- Help, help, O help,
The Moor has killed my Mistress, murder, Murder.

But from this Scene to the end of the Play we meet with nothing but blood and
butchery, described much-what to the styl^ of the last Speeches and ^onfessions
of the persons executed at Tyburn: with this dif^erence, that there we have the
fact, and the due course of Justice, whereas our Poet against all Justice and
Reason, against all Law, Humanity and Nature, in a barbarous arbitrary way,
executes and makes havoc of his subjects, Hab-nab, as they come to hand.
Desdemona dropped her Handkerchief; therefore she must be stisl'd. Othello, by
law to be broken on the Wheel, by the Poets cunning escapes with cutting his
own Throat. (...), for I know not what, comes off with a broken shin. Jago
murders his Benefactor Roderigo, as this were poetical gratitude. Jago is not
yet killed, because there yet never was such a villain alive. The Devil, if
once he brings a man to be dipped in a deadly sin, lets him alone, to take his
course: and now when the Foul ^iend has done with him, our wise Authors take
the sinner into their poetical serv^ce; there to accomplish him, and do the
Devi^s drudgery.

Philosophy ^ells us it is a principle in the Nature of Man to be grateful.

History may tell us that John an Oaks, John a Styles, or Jago were ungrateful;
Poetry is to follow Nature; P^ilosophy must be his guide: history and fact in
particular cases of John an Oaks, or John of St^les, are no warrant or
direction for a Poet. Therefore Arist^tle is always tellin^ ^s that Poety is
(...), is more general and ^stracted, is led more by the Philosophy, the reason
and nature of things, than History: which only records things higlety, piglety,
right or wrong as they happen. Hi^ory might without any preamble or difficulty,
say that Jago was ungrateful. Philosophy th^n calls him unnatural; But the Poet
is not, without h^ge labor and preparation to expose ^he Monster; and after
show the Divine Vengeance executed upon him. The Poet is not to add (...)
Murder to his ingratitude: ^e has not ^ntidote enough for the Poison: his ^ll
and Furies are not punishment (...) for one single c^ime, of that bulk and
aggravation.

Em. O ^hou dull Moor, that Handkerchief thou spea^est on,
I found ^y (...), and did give my Husband:
For often with a (...) earnestne^,
(More ^han indeed (...)'d to such a trifle)
He begged of me to steal (...).

Here we see the meanest woman in the Play takes this Handkerchief for a (...)
below he^ Husband to trouble his head about it. Yet w^ and, it entered into our
Poets' he^d, to make a Tr^gedy of this ^rifle.

Then for the unraveling of the Plot; as they call it, never was old deputy
Recorde^* in a Country Town, with his spectacles in summoning up the evidence,
at such a puzzle: so blunder'd, and be doultefied: as is our Poet, to have a
good riddance: And get the Catastrophe off his hands.

What can remain ^ith the Audience to carry ^ome with them from this sort of
Poetry, for their use and edification* how can it work, unless (instead of
settling the mind, and purging our passions) to delude our senses, disorder our
thoughts* addle our brain, pervert our affections, hair our imaginations,
corrupt our appetite, and fill our head with vanity, confusion, Tintamarre, and
Jingle-jangle, beyond what all the Parish Clarks of London, with their old
Testament farces, and interludes, in Richard the seconds time could ever
pretend to? Our only hopes, for the good of their Souls, can be, that these
people go to the Playhouse, as they do to Church, to sit still, look on one
another, make no reflection, nor mind the Play, more than they would a Sermon.

There is in this Play, some burl^sk, some humor, and ramble of Comical Wit,
some show, and some Mimickry to divert the spectators: but the tragical part
is, plainly none other, than a Bloody Farce, without salt or savor.

CHAP. VIII.
Reflections on the Julius Caesar. Men famous in Hi^tory. To be robbed of their
go^ name, Sacr^ledge. Shakespeare, abuse of History. Co^tradiction, in the
character of Brutus. Vill^n and Dante^, that Hugh Capet from a Butcher.
Preparation in Poetry. Strong reasons in Cassius. Roman Senators impertinent as
the Venetian. Po^ia as Desdemo^a. The same parts and good breeding. How talk of
Business. Whis^ers. Brutus's Tinder-box, Sleepy Boy, Fiddle. Brutus and Cas^us,
Flat-foot Mimicks. The Indignity. Laberius. Play of the Incarnation. The
Madonna's -- Shouting and Battle. Strollers in Cornwall. Rehearsal, law for
acting it once a week.

The Catiline by Ben. Johnson. Why an Orator to be vir bonus. Be^ could
distinguish Men and Manners. Sylla's Ghost* The speech not to be made in a
blind Corner. Corneille. Common sense teaches Unity of Action. The Chorus, of
necessity, keep the Poet to time, and place. No rule observed. A Life in
Plutarch. Acts of the Apostles. Ben is fidus interpres. Is the Horse in Mill in
flat opposition to Horace. Trisling tale, or corruption of History, unfit for
Tragedy. In contempt of Poetry. Aristophanes, not the occasion of the Death of
Socrates. Was sor a reformation in the service book. With what address he
effected it.

Sarpedon's Fast, of divine institution. The least sally from, or Parenthesis
in the ancient Comedy of more moment than all our Tragedies. English Comedy the
best.

IN the former Play, our Poet might be the bolder, the persons being all his
own Creatures, and mere fiction. But here he sins not against Nature and
Philosophy only, but against the most known History, and the memory of the
Noblest Romans, that ought to be sacred to all Posterity. He might be familiar
with Othello and Jago, as his own natural acquaintance: but Coesar and Brutus
were above his conversation* To put them in Fools Coats, and make them
Jack-puddens in the Shakespeare dress, is a Sacrilege, beyond any thing in
Spelman. The Truth is, this authors head was full of villainous, unnatural
images, and history has only furnished him with great names, thereby to
recommend them to the World; by writing over them, This is Brutus; this is
Cicero; this is Caesar. But generally his History flies in his Face; And comes
in flat contradiction to the Poets imagination. As for example: of Brutus says
Antony, his Enemy.

Ant. -- His life was gentle, and the Elements
So mixed in him, that Nature might stand up,
And say to all the World, this was a Man.

And when every body judged it necessary to kill Antony, our Author in his
Laconical way, makes Brutus speak thus:

Bru. Our Course will seem too bloody, Caius Cassius,
To cut the Head off, and then ^ack the Limbs,
Like wrath in death, and envy afte^wards;
For Antony i^ but a Limb of Caesar:
Let Us be Sacrificers, but not Butchers, Caius,
We all stand up against the Spirit of Caesar,
And in the Spir^ of (...) there is no blood;
O that we then could come by Caesar's Spirit,
And not dismember Caesar; but, alas!
Caesar must bleed for it. And gentle friends,
Let Us kill him boldly, but not wrathfully*
Let Us carve him, as a dish fit for the Gods,
Not hew him, as a Carcass fit for Hounds.
And let our Hearts, as subtle Masters do,
Stir up their Servants to an act of rage,
And after seem to chide 'em. This shall make
Our purpose necessary, and not enviou^:
Which so appearing to the common eyes,
We shall be called Purgers, not murderers.
And for Mark Antony think not of him:
For he can do no more than Caesar's arm,
When Caesar's head is off.

In these two speeches we have the true character of Brutus, according to
History. But when Shakespeare's own blundering Maggot of self contradiction
works, then must Brutus cry ^ut.

Bru. -- Stoop, Romans, stoop,
And let us bath our hands in Caesar's blood
Up to the Elbows --

Had this been spoken by some King of France, we might remember Villon:

Se fusse des hoirs Hue Capel,
Qui fut extrait de boucherie,
On m'eut parmy ce drapel,
Fait boire de l'escorcherie.
And what Dante has recorded.

Chiamato fui di la Ugo ciapetta,
Di me son Nati i Philippi, e' Loigi,
Per cui novellamente e' Francia retta,
Figlivol fui d'un Beccaio di Parigi --
For, indeed, that ^anguage which Shakespeare puts in the Mouth of Brutus would
not suit, (...) be convenient, unless from some son of the Shambles, or some
natural offspring of the Butchery. But never any Poet so boldly and so
barefaced, flou^d ^long from contradiction to contradi^. A little preparation
and forecast might do well now and then. For his Desdemona's Marriage, He might
have helped out the probability by feigning how that some way, or other, a
Black-amoor Woman had been her Nurse, and suckl'd her: Or that once, upon a
time, some Virtuoso had transfused into her Veins the Blood of a black Sheep:
after which she might never be at quiet till she is, as the Poet will have it,
Tupt with an old black ram.

But to match this pithy discourse of Brutus; see the weighty argumentative
oration, whereby Cassius draws him into the Conspiracy.

Cas. -- Brutus, and Caesar: what should be in that Caesar?
Why should that name be sounded more than yours?
Write them together: yours is as fair a name:
Sound them, it does become the mouth as well.
Weigh them, it is as heavy: conjure with them,
Brutus will ftart a Spirit as soon as Caesar.
Now, in the names of all the Gods at once,
Upon what meat does this our Caesar feed,
That he is grown so great? Age, thou art shamed;
Rome thou have lost the breed of noble bloods.
When went there by an Age since the great flood*
But it was famed with more, than with one man?
When could they say (till now) that talked of Rome.
That her wide Walls encompassed but one man?
Now it is Rome indeed, and ^oom enough
When there is in it but one only Man --

One may Note that all our Authors Senators, and his Orators had their learning
and education at the same school, be they Venetians, Black-amoors, Ottamit^s,
or noble Romans. Brutus and Cassius here, may ^ap sentences, with Brabantio,
and the Doge of Venice, or any Magnifico of them all. We saw how the Venetian
Senate spent their time, when, amidst their alarms, called to Counsel at
midnight. Here the Roman Senators, the midnight before Coesar's death (met in
the Garden of Brutus, to settle the matt^r of their Conspiracy) are gazing up
to the Stars, and have no more in their heads than to wrangle about which is
the East and West.

Decius. ^ere lies the East, does not the day break here?


Caska. N^.


Cinna. O, pardon, Sir, it does, and yo^ gray lines,
That fret the Clouds, are Messengers of Day.

Caska. You shall confess* that you are both deceived:
Here as I point my Sword, the Sun arises,
Which is a great way growing on the South,
Weighing the youthful season of the year,
Some two months hence, up higher toward the North,
He first presents his fire, and the high East
Stands as the Capitol directly here.

This is directly, as Bays tells us, to show the World a Pattern here, how men
should talk of Business. But it would be a wrong to the Poet, not to info^m the
reader, that on the Stage, the Spectators see Brutus and Gassius all this while
at Whisper together. That is the importance, that deserves all the attention.
But the grand question would be: does the Audience hear 'em Whisper?

Ush. Why, truly I cannot tell: there is much to be said upon the word Whisper --


Another Poet would have allowed the noble Brutus a Watch-Candle in his Chamber
this important night, rather than have puzzel'd his Man Lucius to grope in the
dark for a Flint and Tinder-box, to get the Taper lighted. It would have been
no great charge to the Poet, however. Afterward, another night, the Fiddle is
in danger to be broken by this sleepy Boy.

Bru. If thou do nod thou break'st thy Instrument.


But pass we to the famous Scene, where Brutus and Cassius are by the Poet
represented acting the parts of Mimicks: from the Nobility and Buskins* they
are made the Planipedes; are brought to dance barefoot, for a Spectacle to the
people, Two Philosophers, two generals, ( imperatores was their title) the
ultimi Romanorum, are to play the Bullies and Buffoon, to show their
Legerdemain, their activity of face, and divarication of Muscles. They are to
play a prize, a trial of skill in huffing and swaggering, like two drunken
Hectors, for a two-penny reckoning.

When the Roman Mettle was somewhat more allaid, and their Stomach not so very
fierce, in Augustus's time; Laberius, who was excell^nt at that sport, was
forced once by the Emperor to show his Talent upon the Stage: in his Prologue,
he complains that

Necessity has no law.
It was the will of Caesar brought me hither,
What was imagined for me to deny
This Caesar; when the ^ods deny him nothing?
But says he,

-- Ego ^is tricenis annis actis sine nota,
Eques Romanus lare egressus meo,
Domum revertor Mimus. Nimirum hac die
Una plus vixi mihi quam vivendum suit --
Twice thirty years have I lived without blemish;
From home I came a Roman Gentleman,
But back shall go a Mimick. This one day
Is one day longer than I should have lived.
This may show with what indignity our Poet treats the noblest Romans. But
there is no other cloth in his Wardrobe. Every one must be content to wear a
Fools Coat, who comes to be dressed by him. Nor is he more civil to the Ladies.
Portia, in good manners, might have challenged more respect: she that shines, a
glory of the first magnitude in the Gallery of Heroic Dames, is with our Poet,
scarce one remove from a Natural: She is the own Cousin German, of one piece,
the very same impertinent silly flesh and blood with Desdemona. Shakespears
genius lay for Comedy and Humor. In Tragedy he appears quite out of his
Element; his Brains are turned, he raves and rambles, without any coherence,
any spark of reason, or any rule to control him, or set bounds to his phrenzy.
His imagination was still running after his Masters, the Cobblers, and Parish
Clerks, and Old Testament Stroulers. So he might make bold with Portia, as they
had done with the Virgin Mary. Who, in a Church Acting their Play called The
Incarnation, had usually the Ave Mary mumbl'd over to a stradling wench (for
the blessed Virgin) strawhatted, blew-apron'd, big-bellied, with her Immaculate
Conception up to her chin.

The Italian Painters are noted for drawing the Madonna's by their own Wives or
Mistresses; one might wonder what sort of Betty Mackerel, Shakespeare found in
his days, to fit for his Portia, and Desdemona; and Ladies of a rank, and
dignity, for their place in Tragedy. But to him a Tragedy in Burlesk, a merry
Tragedy was no Monster, no absurdity, nor at all preposterous: all colors are
the same to a Blind man. The Thunder and Lightning, the Shouting and Battle,
and alarms every where in this play, may well keep the Audience awake;
otherwise no Sermon would be so strong an Opiate. But since the memorable
action by the Putney Pikes, the Hammersmith Brigate, and the Chelsey Cuira^ers:
one might think, in a modest Nation, no Battle would ever presume to show upon
the Stage again, unless it were at Perin in Cornwall, where the story goes that,
some time before the year 88. the Spaniards once were landing to burn the Town,
just at the nick when a Company of Stroulers with their Drums and their
shouting were setting Sampson upon the Philistines, which so sca^'d Mr.
Spaniard, that they Scampered back to their Galions, as apprehending our whole
Tilbury Camp had lain in Ambush, and were coming souse upon them.

At Athens (^hey tell us) the Tragedies of Aesculus, Sophocles, and Euripides
were enrolled with their Laws, and made part of their Statute-Book.

We want a law for Acting the Rehearsal once a week, to keep us in our sen^es,
and secure us against the Noise and Non^ence, the Farce and Fustian which, in
the name of Tragedy, have so long invaded, and usurp our Theater.

Tully desines an Orator to be, Vir bonu^ dicendique peritus. Why must he be a
good Man, as if a bad Man might not be a good Speaker? But what avails it to
Speak well, unless a man is well heard? To gain attention Aristotle told us, it
was necessary that an Orator be a good Man; therefore he that writes Tragedy
should be careful that the persons of his Drama, be of consideration and
importance, that the Audience may readily lend an Ear, and give attention to
what they say, and act. Who would thrust into a crowd to hear what Mr. Jago,
Roderigo, or Cassio, is like to say? From a Venetian Senate, or a Roman Senate
one might expect great matters: But their Poet was out of sorts; he had it not
for them; the Senators must be no wiser than other folk.

Ben, Johnson, knew to distinguish men and manners, at an other rate. In
Catiline we find our selves in Europe, we are no longer in the Land of Savages,
amongst Blackamoors, Barbarians, and Monsters.

The Scene is Rome and first on the Stage appears Sylla's Ghost.

Do thou not feel me, Rome? Not yet? One would, i^ reason, imagine the Ghost
is in some public open place, upon some Em^nence, where Rome is all within his
view: But it is a surprising thing to find that this rattling Rodomontado speech
is in a dark, close, private sleeping hole of (...)'s,

Yet the Chorus, is of all wonders the strangest. The Chorus is always present
on the Stage, privy to, and interessed in all that passes, and thereupon make
their Reslections to Conclude the several Acts.

Sylla's Ghost, though never so big, might ^lide in at the Keyhole; but how
comes the Chorus into Catilins Cabinet?

Aurelia is soon after with him too, but the Poet had perhaps provided her some
Truckle* bed in a dark Closet by him.

In short, it is strange that Been, who understood the turn of Comedy so well;
and had found the success, should thus grope in the dark, and jumble things
together without head or tail, without any rule or proportion, without any
reason or design. Might not the Acts of the Apostles, or a Life in Plutarch, be
as well Acted, and as properly called a Tragedy, as any History of a Conspiracy?

Corneille tells us, in the Examen of his Melite that when first he began to
write, he thought there had been no Rules: So had no guide but a little Common
sense, with the Example of Mr. Hardy, and some others, (...) more regular than
he. This Common sense (says he) which was all my ^ule, brought me to find out
the unity of Acti* on to imbroyl four* Lovers by one and the same intreague.
Ben. Johnson, besides his Common sense to tell him that the Unity of Action was
necessary; had stumbl'd (I know not how) on a Chorus; which is not to ^e drawn
through a Keyhole, to be lugg'd about, or juggl'd with an hocus pocus hither
and thither; nor stowed in a garret, nor put into quarters with the Breentford
Army, so must of necessity keep the Poet to unity of place; And also to some
Conscionable time, for the representation: Because the Chorus is not to be
trusted out of sight, is not to eat or drink till they have given up their
Verdict, and the Plaudite is over.

One would not talk of rules, or what is regular with Shakespeare, or any
followers, in the Gang of the Strouling Fraternity; but it is lamentable that Been. Johnson, his Sto^e and his Timber, however otherwise of value, must lie a
miserable heap of ruins, for want of Architecture, or some Son of Vitruvius, to
join them together. He had red Horace, had Translated that to the Pisones:

Nec verbum verbo curabis reddere, fidus interpres. -- Ben. -- Being a Poet,
thou may feign, create,
Not care, as thou would faithfully translate,
To render word for word --

And this other precept.

Nec circa vilem, patulumque morabe is Orbem.

Ben. -- The vile, broad-trodden ring forsake.


What is there material in this Catiline, either in the Manners. in the
Thoughts, or in the Expression, (three parts of Tragedy) which is not word for
word translation? In the Fable, or Plot (which is the first, and principal
part) what see we, but the vile broad trodden ring? Vile, Horac^ calls it, as a
thing below, and too mean for any man of wit to busy his head withal. Patulum,
he calls it, because it is obvious, and easy for any body to do as much as
that comes to. It Is but to plodd along, st^p by step in the same tract: It Is
drudgery only for the blind Horse in a Mill. No Creature sound of Wind and
^imb, but would choose a nobler Field, and a more generous Career.

Homer, we sind, slips sometime into a Tract of Scripture, but his Peg^sus is
not stabl'd there, presently up he springs, mounts aloft, is on the wing, no
^arthly bounds, or barriers to consine him.

For Ben, to sin t^us against the clearest light and conviction, argues a
strange stupidity: It was bad enough in him, against his Judgment and
Conscience, to interlard so much fiddle faddle, Comedy, and Apocryphal matters
in the History: Because, forsooth,

-- his nam plebecula gaudet. Where the Poet has chosen a subject of importance
sufficient and proper for Tragedy, there is no room for this petty int^rlude
and diversion. Had some Princes come express from Salankemen (remote as it is)
to give an account of the battle, whilst the story was hot and new, and made a
relation accurate, and distinctly, with all the pomp, and advantage of the
Theater, would the Audience have susfer'd a Tumbler or Baboon, a Bear, or Rope
dancer to have withdrawn their attention; or to have interrupted the Nar^ative;
though it had held as long as a Dramatick Representation. Nor at that time would
they thank a body for his quibbles, or wit out of season: This man's Feather, or
that Captains Embroidered Coat might not be touched upon but in a very short
Parenthesis.

It is merely by the ill-chosen Subject, or the ill-adjusting it, that the
Audience runs a gadding after what is sorreign, and from the business. And when
some senceless trisling tale, as that of Othello; or some mang^'d, abused,
undigested, interlarded History on our Stage impiously assumes the sacred name
of Tragedy, it is no wonder if the Theater grow corrupt and scandalous, and
Poetry srom its A^cient Reputation and Dignity, is sunk to the utmost Contempt
and De^ision.

Many have been osfended with Aristophanes as accessory to the death of
Socrates; ^ut who so shall consider the State of affairs at that juncture, when
the ^louds was acted, might sooner believe the Poets design was rather
previous, (as we call it) to try the strength of a Party, by the Coun^enance of
the People: And the success of this Play, they discovered how far the interest
of Alcibiades prevailed. Alcibiades was the dangerous man to the Government,
too big ^or the Republic, and sor Arisiophane^ himself.

Socrates came not to be judicially arraigned in twenty years after the Comedy.
They sirst had made sure of his protector, and got him out of the way. Upon
which. the Commonwealth party took heart, and would make the Philosopher
answer for the rare accomplishments which Alcibiades had drawn from him, and so
ill Employed.

Socrates should not have mocked at the Old Religion, till sure of some means
to introduce a better. Socrates had not the gi^t of Miracles.

Alcibiades with his Companions could learn from S^crates to blaspheme the
established Worship: But were too sensual for a urer Faith, and Divine
speculations.

^hereupon followed so many mad pranks amongst them: As that for example, when
the Gods of the Town (set at every man's Door) were, as they had been so many
Sign-posts, all in one night broken down. How would the People look, after this
outrage? What could they expect, but Hell to swa^ow 'em up all quick, the next
morning?

Aristophanes, in a sober way, was not against a Resormation. He attempted an
(...), and wrought it E^ectually. As (...): The A^henians, wanting a tr^e
C^lculation of the course of the Moon, were often in great con^usion about
their Holy Days. They kept Fast often when they should have Feas^ed, and other
times had their Festival on a work day; and many times the Feast and Fast came
a-pick apack. To recti^e this, in that very Play ( the Clouds) against
Socrates, there the Ch^rus returns, and addresses to the Spectato s, in this
manner.

As we were departing, the Moon (our La^y) met us,

And ^id us tell ye,

First, that she gives her love to you, and your Confederates.

In the next place that she is angry with you, as ill dealt withal by you,

For her good turns to all of you, not in words, but Effectually.

In particular, every month She saves you two pence halfpenny, in Lanthorn and
CandleLight:

And then going abroad a nights you cry, Hold, boy, there needs no Link, it is
Moonshine.

In other respects She likes you well,

S^ving that you are out in your Accounts most shamefully.

Jumbling all things hand over ^ead counfounedly;

In so much that the Gods threaten her immoderately:

When t^eir appetite is balked, and they go home with hungry Nostrils, because
you want a good Almanac.

For when you should be Sacrificing,

Then are you at the Sess^ons, trying Felons and Pick-pockets.

On the other hand, when it is Ember-week in Heaven,

And all are Fasting, with an a-lack; and well aday:

For the death of Memnon or Sarpedon* Then (...) your Hecatombs*

By this, every body were convinced that the form by law established wanted
amendment; the Priests from all parts were gathered together? they were ashamed
of their Calendar, Reform, Reform was the only cry amongst 'em; Not one Nolumus
-- In ^ll the Convocation.

And thereupon Meton, the Mathematician was sent for, and se^ to work; And from
^hence our Chrono-graphers had a new Ep^cha.

From this place we may observe another reason for Homer, against the vid p^ge
(...).
objection ^y Plato, to wit, that Homer had an eye ^o the Greek Liturgy, And
that passage in Ho^ as to show Sarpedons Fast to be of Divine I^stitution.

This small Sally, or start out from the play is of greater Moment, is of more
weight and importance, ^han all the Tragedies on our Stage con'd pr^tend to.
And yet for mod^rn Comedy, doubtless our English are the best in the World.

Extrait des Registres du Parliament du Vendredy 9. Decembre l'an 1541. Monsi^ur
de S. Andre President.
Enter le Procureur General du Roy prenant le fait en main pour les pauvres de
Paris demandeur and requerant l'enterinement d'une Request par luy presentee a
la Cour d'une part.

Et Maistre Francois Hamelin Notaire au Chastelet de Paris, Francois Pouldrain,
Leonard Choblets, Jean Louvet, Maistres Entrepreneurs du Jeu, and Mystere des
Acts des Apostres, n'agueres execute en cette Vill^ de Paris, defendeurs a
l'enterinement de ladit^ Request, d'autre.

Le Maistre pour le Procureur du Roy, dit qu'anciennement les Romans
instituerent plusieurs jeux publics, de la plus part desquels parle Tite Live,
and les (...) tous Flavius qui a ecrit de Roma triumphant^. M^is quelques jeux
que ce fussen^, il n'y en avoit aucuns qui fussent ordinaires; ain^ ne se
faisoient sinon les occasions occurren^es, and pour quelques causes notables
and in^ignes* comme pour quelque victoire ou triomphe, ou pour quelque pomp
funebre ou autre notable cause. Vray est que Festus Pompeius recite une maniere
de jeux qui se faisoient sans occasions, and dicebantur ludi saeculares; mais
ils ne se faisoient, nisi centesimo quoque anno. Et encore apres que les
Romans furent attediez de tells jeux publics and qu'ils connurent qu'ls
tournoient en lascivete, and in perniciem de la Republique, ils les laiss^ent:
and y eut loy express que les frais and impenses qui se faisoient de jeux
publics, s^roient employez es reparations de la ville de Rome: Et encore est
aujourd'huy cette loy ecrite, l. unica c. de Expensis ludorum lib. 1^.

Et pour le fait, dit que puis trois ou quatre ans en ca les Maistres dela
Passion ont entrepris de fair j^uer and representerle Mystere de la Passion
qui a es^e fait, and parce qu'il s'est trouve qu'ils y ont fait gros gain, sont
venus aucuns particuliers gen non lettrez, ny entendus en tells affairs, and
gens de condition infame, comme un Menusier, un Sergent a Verge, and un
Tapissier and autres qui ont fait jouer les Acts des Apostres, en iceux commis
plus^eurs fautes, tant aux feintes qu'au jeu, and pour allonger le temps on
fait composer, dicter and adjouster plusieurs chooses apocryphes, quoy que soit
non contenues es Acts des Apostres, and fait durer trois ou quatre journees, a
sin d'exiger plus d'argent du peuple, en entremettant a la sin ou au
commencement du jeu, ^arces lascives and de mocqueries, en ont (...) durer
'leur jeu l'espace de six ou s^pt mo^s, d'ou sont advenus, and adviennent (...)
de service divin, refroidi^ement de charitez and aumosnes, adulteres and
fornications insinies, scandales, derisions and mocqueries.

Et pour les declarer en premier lieu par le menu, dit que pendant lesdits
jeux, and tant qu'il ont dure, le commun peuple des huit a neu^ heures du matin
es jours de Festes delaissoit sa Mess Pa^oissiale, Sermon and Vespres pour
aller esdits jeux garder sa place, and y estre jusqu'a cinq heures du soir: ont
cesse les Predications, car n'eussent eu les Predicateurs qui les eust ecoutez.
Et retournant desdits jeux, se mocquoient hautement and publiquement par les
rues desdits jeux and des joueurs, contresaisant quelque langage impropre
qu'ils avoient ouy desdits jeux ou autre chose mal faite, criant par derision
que le S. Esprit n'avoit point voulu descendre, and par d'autres mocqueries. Et
le plus souvent les Prestres des Paroisses pour avoir leur passe-temps d'aller
esdits jeux, ont delais^e dire Vespres les jours de Festes, ou les ont dites
tout seuls des l'heure de Midy, heure non accoustumee: and mesme les Chantres
ou Chappellains de la Saint Chappelle de ce Palais tant que lesdits jeux ont
dure, ont dit Vespres les jours de Festes a l'heure de midy, and encore les
disoient en post and a la legere pour aller esdits jeux, chose indecente, non
accoustumee and de mauvais exemple, and contre les saints Conciles de l'Eglise,
mesme contre le Concile de Chartage, in c. qui di^ de consecrat. did. 1: ou
est dit: Qui die solemni proetermisso Ecclesioe conventu ad Spectacula vadit,
excommunicetur.

Secundo, les Predications sont plus decentes pour l'instruction du peuple,
attendu qu'elles se font par Theologiens gens doctes and de scavoir, que ne
sont les Acts ou representations qu'on appelle jeux que font gens ignorans and
indoctes qui n'en^endent ce qu*ils font ne ce qu'ils dient, re* presentant les
Acts des Apostres, le vieux Testament and autres semblables Histoires qu'ils
s'efsorcent de representer.

Tertio, il est certain and indubitable par jugement natural que fiction d'une
chose n'est possible sans prealable intelligence de la verite. Car siction
n'est autre chose qu'une approach que l'ons s'esforce fair au plus prez que
l'on peut de la verite. Et tant les Entrepreneurs que les joueurs sont gens
ignares and non lettrez qui ne scavent ny A. ny B. qui n'ont intelligence non
seulement de la Saint Ecriture, immo ny d'Ecritures prophanes. Sont les
joueurs artisans mechaniques, comme Cordonn^ers, Savetiers, Crocheteurs de
Greve, de tous estats and arts mechaniques, qui ne scavent lire ny ecrire, and
qui on-ques ne furent instruits ny exercez en Theaters and lieux publics a
fair tells acts, and davantage n'ont langue diserte ny langage propre, ny les
accens de prononciation decente, ny aucune intelligence de ce qu'ils dient:
tellement que le plus souvent advient que d'un mot ils en font trois: font
point ou pause au milieu d'une proposition, se^s ou oraison imparfaite; font
d'un interrogant un admirant, ou autre geste, prolation au accent contraires a
ce qu'ils dient, don't souvent advient derision and clameur public dedans le
Theater mesme, tellement qu'au lieu de tourner a edification, leur jeu turn a
scandale and derision.

Quarto, ils meslent le plus souvent des farces, and autres jeux impudiques,
lascifs ou derisoires qu'ils jou^nt a la fin ou au commencement, pour attirer
le commun peuple a y retourner, qui ne demand que tells voluptez and folies,
qui sont chooses defendu^s par tous les Saints Conciles de l'Eglise, de mesler
Farces and Comedies derisoires avec les Mysteres Ecclesiastiques, ainsi qu'il
est traitte par tous les Docteurs in c. cum decorem. de vita and honestate
Clericorum, and per hoc in summa eodem titulo. Item ludi Theatrales. Et par le
Concile de Basle au decret de Spectaculis in Ecclesia non faciendis.

Quinto, l'on reconnoist oculairement que tout ce qu'ils en font, est seulement
pour le quest and pour le gain, comme ils feroient d'une Tavern ou
negotiation, and qu'ils veulent devenir Histrions, Joculateurs ou Batteleurs;
car comme dit Panorm* in tit. cum decorem, un personnage est repute Histrion,
Batteleur and Joculateur quand par deux fois il return causa questus a fair
jeux ou spectacles publics... and ainsi en propres terms le declare Panorm: in
dicto tit. cum decorem. C'y l'on void que ja par deux fois il y sont venus pour
le quest and profit seulement, and d'an en an, ils hauss^nt le prix; car la
premiere annee ils faisoient payer vingt and cinq escus pour ^cune loge, and la
second ils en ont fait payer trente and trente six escus; and maintenant ils
les mettent a quarente and cinquante escus sol. A^nsi l'on connoist
oculairement qu'il n'y a que le quest and p^ofit particulier qu^ les mean, and
ne sont qu'inventions pour tirer subtilement argent du peuple.

Sexto, il advient mill inconveniens and maux; car sous couleur de ces je^, se
^ont plusieurs parties and assignations* insi^s fornications, adulteres,
maquerellages. Et pour cette cause est eadem rubrica seu titulus in lib. 11. c.
de Spectaculis, and Scenicis, and Lenonibus.

Septimo, si sont esdits jeux commessations and depenses (...) par l^ commun
peuple; tellem^nt que c^ qu'^n pauvre artisan aura gagne^ (...) l^ semaine, il
l'ira dependre en un jour (...) (...), ^ant pour payer a l'entree, qu'e^
^messation and yvrognesse; and faudra qu^ sa femme and enfans en endurent toute
la semain.

Octavo, l'on a connu par experience que lesdits jeux ont grandement diminue
les charitez and ausmosnes, tellement qu'en six mois qu'ont durelesdits jeux,
les ausmonesont diminue de la sum de trois mill livres, and en appert par
certification signee des Commissaires sur le fait des pauvres.

Ce neanmoins un nomme le Royer, and vendeur de poisson, un Tapissier, un
Menusi^ and quelues autres leurs compagnons ont de nouveau entrepris de fair
jouer l'^nneeprochane le vieil Testament, and veulent fair desormais un
ordinaire desdits jeux pour exiger argent du peuple.

Don't averty le Procureur General du Roy, a present sa Request pour leur
fair inhibitions and defenses de non passer outre a leur entreprise. Ils luy
ont apporte une l^ttre de Privilege qu'ils disent avoir obtenu du Roy, qu'ils
ont presentee avec une Request au Lieutenant Criminel qui ne leur a voulu
repondre. Au moyen de quoy ils se son^ retirez au Lieutenant Civil, qui leur a
repondu leu^ Request, and pour ce que par lesdites lettres ils ont done a
^ntendre au Roy qu'ils l^ ^ont par zele de devotion, and pour l'edification du
peuple, qui est (...) non veritable, and y repugne l^ur qualite and encore plus
leurs facult^z: mais le font seulement par un^ negotiation ou merchandise and
pour le quest, gain and prosit qu'ils en esperent, and autrement ne le
feroient. Davantage y a plusieus chooses au Vieil Testament qu'il n'est
expedient (...) au peuple, comme gens ignorance and imbecill^, qui pourroit
pren^re occasion de Judai^sme a fault d'intelligence.

Pour ces causes and autres con^iderations qui seroient de long recit, conclud
a l'enterinement de sa Request; and en ce faisan^ que defenses leur soient
faites de non p^sser outre a leur entreprise desdits Jeux du vieil Testament,
jusqu'au bon plai^r, (...) and intention du Roy, les chos^s sus^lites par luy
entendues.

A aussi ledit Procureur Gen^ral pr^nte autre Request, a ce que p^ur l^s c^ses
s^sdites, les anciens Entrepren^urs soi^nt ^enus mettre, and delivrer de leur
g^in and deniers procedans desdits j^ux des Act^s des Apostres, la somm^ de
huit cens livr^ parisis en la boete aux pauv^s par provisio^, and sauf apres
avoir veu par la Cour l'estat de l^urs frais and de leur gain, en or^onner ^lus
grande sum, si fair se doit. Ainsi ^n ^ut en pareil cas ordonne contre les
Maist^es de la Passion. Et requiert qu'a ce saire ils soi^nt contraints chacun
de'eux seul, and pour le tout, par vente and exploitation de leurs biens, and
mesme par emprisonnement de leurs persons, and conclud.

Ryant dit qu'il n'a charge de defendre a la Request du Pro^ureur General du
Roy pour le regard des Maistres Entrepreneurs du mystere des Acts des
Apostres; mais seulement a charge pour les nouveaux Maistres Entrepren^urs du
mystere de l'ancien Testament, r^montre a la Cour les causes qui les ont meus a
entreprendre fair executer l^ mystere de l'ancien Testament. Est que le Roy
ayant veu jouer quelque fois le mystere de la Passion y a deux ans, and pour le
rapport qui luy a este^ fait de l'execution du mystere des Acts des Apostres,
and averty qu'il feroit bon voir la representation de l'ancien Testament, un
nomme le Royers' estoit retire verse luy, and luy auroit done a entendre, que
sous son bon plaisir il entreprendroit volontiers a fair representer cet
ancien Testament par mystere: a quoy volontiers le Roy avoit incline^,
tellement qu'il avoit permis audit le Royer fair representer ledit ancien
Testament par mystere; and a cette cause l^y avoit fait expedier ses lettres
patentes addressantes au Prevost de Paris Juge ordinaire. Le Royer ayant
lesdites lettres, en demand en Chastelet la verification appellez les gens du
Roy. De leur consentement ledit Prevost de Paris ou son Lieutenant en
enterinant les* dites lettres, permit audit le Royer qu'il commence a fair
fair quelques preparatifs pour l'execution. Et connoissant que luy seul ne
pouvoit subvenir aux frais necessaires pour la grandeur del'acte and
magnificence qu'il y falloit garder, associe avec luy quatre ou cinq honnestes
Marchans de cette ville. Et pour autant que tous estoient ignorans des frais
que l'on pourroit fair, prennent avec eux un des Maistres entrepreneurs des
Acts des Apostres pour les instruire de ce qui leur conviendroit fair. Et eux
se pensant asseurez au moyen de la permission du Roy, and de la verification
faite du consentement des Gens du Roy, marchandent aux Marchands de Draps de
soye and autres pour les fournir des etofes qu'il leur falloit; and ont avance
grande sum de deniers, aux uns deux mill livres, aux autres sept cens,
tellement qu'il y a obligation sur eux de plus de sept mill livres. Ont fait
dresser le livre de l'ancien Testament, iceluy communique au Theologien Picard
pour oster ce qu'il verroit ne'stre a dire: Ont choisi gens experts ^ cut^ndus
^our execu^er l^ mystere. Et sont quasi (...) l^s (...) (...), and ja par tou^
publi^z que l'on doi^ jouer. Neantmoins le Procureur General du Roy par une
Request presentee a la Cour les avoit inhibe de passer ou^re. Dit qu (...) n^
veulent estre desobeissans a la Cour; mais att^ndu les Let^es (...) du Roy, la
veri^ication du consen^ment des Gens du Roy, la Cour sous correction, doit
lever les deienses. Joint qu'il n'^st qu^stion de ludis pertinent ibus tantum
ad (...) urbis, vel l^itiam populi, qui e^core ne (...) prohibez; mais de l
edification du (...) en nostre soy. Il est vray que l^s Entrepreneurs ne sont
gens pour (...)* (...); mais que par l'Histoire (...)* s^a (...) l'Ancien
Testament; and l^ (...) les rud^s, and non scavans mieux (...) ^ le voir a
l'oeil, que par la seule parole qui (...) p^urroitestre faite. E^de dire qu'^ a
d^s (...), and des assemblees mauvais^s, and qu^ l^s aumosn^s des pauvres en
pourron^ (...) (...); c^la n'est considerable; ^ar ne s'est point trouve qu*il
y ait eu de scandal^s, ny mauvaises (...) aux mysteres (...) la (...), and
(...) d^s Apostres. Et quant a^x aumosnes else se ^esroidissent tous les (...)
pour autr^ cause que chacun ne scait pas ^ (...) (...) suppli^ la Cour, veu la
permission du Roy, la verification d'icelle; and conside^e les preparati^s que
les E^trepreneurs ont (...), and que ^es non est amplius integra, il plai^e a
la Cour lever lesdites defenses, autr^ment perdroient les pauvres gens
beaucoup. Et neanmoins o^sre du gain qu'ils pourront fair que la Cour en
ordonne tell sum qu'elle verra pour les pauvres.

Le Mai^re dit qui*l n'y a point permission du Prevost de Paris; ains au
contraire ledit Prevost a ordonne qu'aucuns seroien^ app^llez, pour ouyr apre^
ordonner ce que de raison.

A dit Ryant que s'y est: a leu la Request presentee audit Prevos^, ^epondue,
and signee De Mesme.

A dit le Maistre qu'il y avoit objection: Car premierement s'^stoient
addressez au Lieutenant Criminel qui les avoit re^usez. Et pour ce requiert les
defenses tenir jusques a ce que le Procu^eur General aura adverty le Roy; and
que sur ce il aura ent^ndu son intention, and vouloir.

Interpelle Ryant s'il vouloit rien dire pour l^s Maistres des Acts des
Apostres, a di^ qu'il y ^n a un, ou deux presens, qui luy font dire quils sont
prests de render compte.

La Cour dit qu'en ayant egard a la request faite par ledit Procureur General
du Roy, el^e a ordonne, and ordonne que les Anciens Maistres bailleront la
sum de 800. live. parisis par provision, pour employer a l'aliment and
nourriture des pauvres de cette Ville de Paris: and semblablement mettront
pardevers ladite Cour leur estat* and compte; pour iceluy veu leur estre
pourveu ainsi qu'il appartiendra par raison: and a ce saire ils seront
contraints par prise de corpse, un seul pour le tour. Et quant a la second
request dudit Procureur General, tendant a ce que defenses fussent faites aux
nouve^ux Maistres Entrepreneurs du mystere de l'Ancien Testament, ladite Cour a
fait and fait inhibitions and defenses ausdits nouveaux Maistres de proceder a
l'execution de leur entreprise, jusqu' a ce qu'elle ait s^eu ^ur ce le bon
plaisir and vouloir du Roy, pour iceluy ouy, leur fair tell permission, qu'il
plaira audit Seigneur ordonner.

Apres lequel prononce a requis Ryant delay estre done ausdits Maistres
Anciens pour bailler ladite sum de huit cens livers c^r ils n'avoient
proesentem pecuniam.

A dit Bru^art Procureur General qu'il leu raccordequinzaine. Ladite Cour a
ordonn^ que lesdits Anciens M^istres payeront la moitie de lad^ sum dedans
quinzaine, and l'autre moitie la quinzaine ensuivant.

FINIS*
A Catalogue of Books, Printed for Richard Baldwin.
STate T^acts; being a ^her Coll^ction of ^everal Choice Treatises relating to
the Government, from the year 1660 to 1689. Now published in a Body, to show
the Necessity and clear the Legality of the late Revo^tion, ^d our present
happy Settlement, under the auspi^ious Reign of Their Maje^ies King William ^d
Queen Mary.

A Brief Disq^isition of the Law of Nature, according to the Principles and
Method laid down in the Reverend Dr. Combe^lands (now Lord Bishop of
P^rborough) Latin Treati^e on that Subject. As also his con^utation of Mr.
Hob^s's (...) put into another method, with the Right Reverend Auth^
approbation.

Bibliotheca Politica: Or, a Discourse by way of Dialogue, whether the Commons
of England ^epresented by Knig^s, ^zens and Burgisses in Parliament, weere one
of the Three Estates in Parliament before the 49th of H^ III. or 18th of Edw.
I. Collected out of the most approved Authors, both Ancient and Modern.
Dialogue the Sixth.

Mercurius R^formatus: Or the New Observator. Containing Reflections upon the
most Remarkable Events falling out from time to time in Europe, and more
par^larly in England. The Fifth Volume, Printed for Rich. Baldwin; where are
also to be had the First, Second, Third, and Fourth Volum^s, with the Appendix
to them.

The Speech of the Right honorable Thomas Earl of Stamford, Lord Gra^ of
Grooby, etc. at the General Quarter Sessions held for the County of (...), at
Michielmas, 1691. His Lordship being made Custos Rotulorum for the said County,
by the late Lord Commissioners of the Great Seal.

Truth ^rought to Light; or the History of the first 14 years of King James I.
In Four Parts. I. The happy state of England at hi^ Majesty's Entrance; the
corruption of it afterward. With the Rise of Particular Favorites, and the
Divisions be^ this and other S^ates a^road. II. The Divorce betwixt the Lady
Franci^ Howard, and Robert Earl of (...), before the King's Delegates,
authorized under the King's Broad-Seal: As also the Arraignment of Sir Jer.
Ellis, Lieutenant of the Tow^r, etc. about the murder of Sir Tho. (...), with
all Proceedings thereupon, and the King's gracious Pardon and Favor to the
Countess. III. A Declaration of his Majesty's Revenue since he came to the
Crown of England; with the Anuual Is^ues, Gifts, Pensions* and extraordinary
Di^bursements. IV. The Commissions and Warrants for the burning of two
Here^icks, newly revived, with two Pardons, one for Th^ilus Higgons, the other
for Sir Eustace Heart.

A Poem, occasioned by the late Discont^nts and Disturbances in the S^ate. With
Reflections upon the Rise and Progress of Priestcraft. Written by N. Tate.

The Folly of Priest-Crast, a Comedy.

The Memoirs of Monsieur (...); containing the most secret Transactions and
Affairs, from the Death of Hen^ IV. till the beginning of the Ministry of the
Cardinal de Rich^u. To which is added, a (...)* Relation of the Archbishop of
Embrun's Voyage i^o England, and of his Negotiation for the Advancement of* the
Roman Ca^olick Religion here; together wi^h the Duke of Buckinghain's Letters
to the said ArchBishop, about the pr^gress of that Affair; which happened the
last Years o^* King James I. ^is Reign. Faithfully translated out of the (...)
Original.

The Cabine^ Opened; o^, the Secret History of the Amors of Madam d^ Maintenon
with the French King* Translated from the French Copy.

Eu^ope's Chains broke; or a sure and sp^edy Project to Rescue Her from the
present Usurpati^ o^ (...) Tyrant of France.

A True Relation of the Cruelties and Birbarities of the* F^nch, upon the
English Prisoners of War. Being a Journa^ of their Travels from Dinan in
Brittany, to Thoulon in Provence; and back again. With a Description of the
Situation, and Fortifications of all the Eminent Towns upon the Road, and
their Distance. Of their Prisons and Hospitals, and the number of Men that died
under their Cruelty: With the Names of many of them, and the places of their
De^ths and Burials: With an Account of the great Charity and suf^erings of the
^oor Pro^s of France; And other material Things that (...) upon the Way.

FINIS*

