TWO SERMONS, PREACHED BY BRVNE RYVES, D. D. AND D. of C.

St LUKE 12. 15. Take heed and beware of Covetousness.

Printed in the Year, 1652.

1 TIMOTHY 6. 10. For the Love of money is the Root of all Evil.


SAint Peter, speaking of S. Paul's Epistles, says, that there are in them,
some Things hard to be understood, 2 Pet. 3. 16. Though my Text be not to be
found, in the Catalogue and Number of those things, which are (...), hard to be
understood, yet experience tells us, that it is to be found in the Catalogue,
and number of those things, which are (...), hard to be believed, for while S.
Paul before us, and we, after him, preach, that the Love of Money is the Root
of all Evil, yet the small eredit, that this Apostolical, undoubted truth,
finds with the children of this world, gives us too just cause, to take up that
complaint, which our Apostle borrows, from the Prophet Isaiah, and apply it to
this particular, Lord who has believed our report? Romans 10. 16. While
therefore I endeavor, to evidence this Truth, to the Conscience of every man,
I shall observe this method.

1. I shall open the Nature of this Sin, and (...) what this (...), This Love
of Money is.

2. I shall make it appear, to be, as the Apostle here Characterizeth it,
(...): The Root of all Evil.

3. In the Last place, for Application. I shall offer unto you, First, some
motives to dehort, and Secondly, some helps to preserve you, from so dangerous,
so destructive a Sin.

First, I must show you what this Love of Money, is: Part. 1.
Two words there are, in the new Testament that usually serve to express the
Nature of this Sin, the first is (...), usually Translated Covetousness, used
by S. Luke, Take heed and beware of Covetousness, Luke 12. 15. The Second is
(...), here used by S. Paul, and translated, the Love of Money: From this
double appellation, Aquinas observes, that Covetousness is a 2. 2ae. q. 118.
Compound, complicate sin, opposed to a double virtue: (...) is the Rapacious
part of Covetousness, opposed to Justice: (...), is the Tenacious part of
Covetousness, opposed to Liberality: (...) is Covetousness in getting, (...),
is Covetousness in Keeping: (...) has a Large paw, to get, and gather more
then enough, and (...), is the Mortmaine of Covetousness to detain, and hold
back, whatsoever the other has gotten.

But (...) here used, and Translated, The Love of Money, is not to be bounded
within so narrow a compass, as to signify, but that part only of
Covetousness, which is opposed to Liberality, for as Aquinas speaking of the
word Avaritia says, Nomen Avaritiae ampliandum Ibid. Art 2.
est, The word Covetousness is to be extended to a general signification of
every inordinate desire, of having any thing: And as S. Austin, in his book De
Doctrina Christiana, inlargeth the word Money, to signify, not only Mensuram
Valoris Rerum, the measure of the value of things but the very things
themselves, Omnia quoru^ sunt domini, pecunia vocantur, whatsoever we are
owners of, may be called our money; for so God says of a hired Servant,
Pecunia tua est, he is thy money, Ex. 21. 21. So the word (...), here, Nomen
ampliandum est, is not to be shrunk up to the narrow circle, of whose Image and
Superscription is this, to signify Coin only, but to be enlarged so far, as to
comprehend under its Latitude, the vast, and boundless extent, both of the
desires, endeavors, and sinful acts, of the sin of Covetousness: And
therefore S. Ambrose, S. Austine, and the whole stream of the Latin Fathers,
translate (...) here, by Avaritia, the common word, whereby they render both
(...) and (...): And though Aquinas, and after him the Schools, have passed 2.
2ae. q. 113. Art. 4.
an easy censure on this Love of Money, and (unless upon supposition of
Imperfection of the Act, or Aversion from Charity) have blanched it into a
Venial sin, yet S. Paul, who best knew the nature of this sin, points out the
malignity of it, in a truer Character, (...), The Love of Money is the Root of
all Evil.

In a word, this (...), is no less, then, Injusta Acquisitio and Illegitima
detentio, unjust getting of wealth and unlawful keeping of it; It is Amor
nimius, and Amor nimii, A desire, inflamed, more then enough, of having more
then enovgh: In a word, it is no other, then the Adequate subject of S.
Augustins Definition of Covetousness, who says, that it is, Plus velle quam
fatest, an Inordinate desire of having, and keeping more wealth, then, what is
enough. Lib. 3. De Lib. Arb. cap. 17.

In which Definition, two things need Explanation, First, what that is, that
makes the desire of wealth to be Inordinate? Secondly, how we shall know what
is Enough? what bounds, and limits we shall set unto it? since it is evident,
that it does not consist In Puncto Indivisibili, in any one particular measure,
or proportion whatsoever.

For the First, diverse things there are, that render the desire of wealth to be
Inordinate.

First, a wrong Method, when we seek wealth preposterously, when that which
should be first, is the last thing in our endeavors: when (contrary to our
Saviors Precept Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his Matthew. 6. 33.
Righteousness, etc.) we suffer, this Love of Money, to take up, if not the
whole, yet the Principal, and first place in our endeavors, and affections.

Secondly, when, the Love of Money, does rule, not only in our affections, but
in our judgments too, so, that we esteem it far above its true value, and more
then its worth can merit: when, we magnify wealth so far, as to account all
men happy, that have it, and our selves, and all others miserable that want it.
Hence proceed discontent at our present estate, murmuring, and repining, at
Gods Providence, for denying us such a measure of the Riches of this world,
expostulating, as for an Injury, why did not God make me Rich? and not only
so, but hence springs envey at another man's prosperity, and plenty, an evil eye
at our neighbors wealth, and a settled resolution to be rich, Per fas and
nefas, to the loss, not only of quietness, and content, but of Justice, and
Innocence also; according to that of Solomon, He that makes haste to be Rich,
shall not be Innocent, Prove. 28. 20. and that of S. Paul here, They that will
be rich, (that is, that are resolved to be so) fall into Temptation and a
snare, at the verse before my Text.

Thirdly, when that reliance, that trust, and confidence, which is due to God,
is placed in Riches, when we do Cor apponere, set our hearts upon them, Psalm.
62. 10. and make them our refuge, when, instead of making God our portion, and
our inheritance, we do, as Job speaks, Make gold our hope, and say unto the
fine gold thou art my confidence, Job 31. 24. upon this very ground S. Paul
calls Covetousness, Idolatry, Col. 3. 5. and the covetous man, an Idolater,
Ephesians. 5. 5.

Fourthly, when we are over hot in the prosecution of wealth, and so eager, as
neither to stay Gods leisure, no, nor so much as to take his directions along
with us in getting it: when we endeavor to get wealth, with distracted
carfulness, and anxiety, making (as Solomon speaks) our days sorrow, our
travel grief, and our hearts to take no rest in the night, Eccles. 2. 23.

Lastly, when we set no bounds, no limits to our appetite, when we enlarge our
desires, as hell, to lade our selves with thick clay, and suffer those desires,
to increase, with our wealth, the soul, by a restless avarice, still fighting
against its own satisfaction, by desiring more: In this, coming short of the
moderation, even of profane Esau, who refused his Brother Jacobs presents, with
an Abunde mihi satis est, mi Frater, I have enough my Brother, Genesis 33. 9.
which points, at the second thing in this Definition, needing Explanation, viz.
How we shall know, what this enough is, since it is evident, that it does not
consist In Puncto indivisibili, in any one particular, prescribed, or limited
proportion, or measure, whatsoever.

Two ways there are to find out this Proportion, First, by those lawful means,
which God affords for the Moderate getting of wealth: and Secondly by our
Necessities.

The First way to know what this Enough is, is, by those lawful means, which
God gives for the getting of wealth: God, in his divine providence, has not
afforded to all men, an equal proportion of these means, and therefore it is
evident, that in the dispensations of his Providence, he did not intend, an
equal proportion of wealth to all: for God is no Leveller, but a God of Order:
So that as in Ezekiels Vision, the motion of the wheels, was answerable to the
motion of the creatures, when these went, those went, when these stood still,
the other did not move, and the Reason of this Conformity, was, because the
Spirit of the Living Creatures was in the wheels, Ezekiel. 1. 20. So in this case,
the measure of our wealth must be proportioned, to the means, which God affords
us for the getting of wealth, when these move, and are enlarged, our desires
may move with them, when these stand still, and rest, so must our desires. And
the Reason, why they must move, and rest together, is, because the proportion
of Gods allotment, is in the means, as the spirit of the creatures was in the
wheels: so that if God cut short the means, to get wealth, we must contract our
desires, and cause them to move in an equipage answerable, and commensurate to
them, Small means to get wealth, and small desires of having wealth, suit best
together.

Secondly, as this proportion of our wealth may be known, by the means, which
God affords us for the getting of wealth; So it is known, by our Necessities,
Now there is a Fourfold Necessity.

First, there is Necessitas Naturae, the Necessity of Nature, which is the
Proportion so rigidly prescribed indeed by the Stoics, but not so strictly
practiced by them: Natura paucis contenta, says Seneca, Nature is content with
a little: If you ask her for a bill of fare, she writes bread, and water, if
you would have Nature, to furnish a Wardrobe, she provides, Lodging and
Clothing to cover our Nakedness, Eccles. 39. 16. It Is true, what is her due,
she will not be denied, for, Contumax est, Epist. 119.
suum poscit, says the same Stoic, she is a rigid exactor, and claims her
due, but yet she is not chargeable, for, Qui se ad id quod Natura exigit,
composuit, non tantum Ibid.
extra sensum paupertatis est, sed extra metum: as the same Philosopher speaks,
He that bounds himself within the Exigencies of Nature, is out of the danger,
not only of the sense, and feeling of poverty, but of the fear also: But
Religion does not confine us to so narrow a compass, so straight a Sphere, as
the necessity of Nature: yet if occasion serve, our Apostle in this Chapter,
gives a precept looking this way, Habentes victum and vestitum, etc. having
food, and raiment, let us therewith be content, verse 8. for these, in S.
Jeroms account, are no less, then, Divitiae Christianorum, The Riches of
Christians, Nay long before Christianity, taught the world this moderation,
Jacob articled with God for no more, but Protection, food, and raiment: If God
will be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread
to eat, and raiment to put on, etc. then shall the Lord be my God, Genesis 28.
20, 21.

Secondly, there is Necessitas Personae, a Necessity of a man's particular
Person, to maintain our bodies, in Strength, and cheerfulness; for the better
inabling us, in the discharge of our general, and particular callings: And this
does vary, according to the diversities of men's Education, Temperature, and
Constitution, and the like; One man, with Jacob, being able to endure the heat
of the day, and the frost of the night; to rise up early, and late take rest,
and to eat the bread of carfulness, and yet with Daniel and his companions,
prosper better with their course fare, then the rest which had their Portions
from the Kings table. One, is able to quench his thirst with water, and with
Gideons soldiers, to lap it out of the next brook, when another, is fain, to
make use of S. Paul's prescription to Timothy, Drink no longer water, but use a
little wine, for thy stomachs sake, and thine often infirmities, Chap. 5. of
this Epist. verse 23.

Thirdly, there is Necessitas Expedientiae, a Necessity (as I may so call it)
of Expediencie: when, besides things necessary, there is some regard to be had
to Expediency, when besides, what is absolutely necessary to our Subsistence,
there is something indulged to our Refreshment: and therefore it was but way
wardly done of the Cynick, to cast away his dish, as superfluous because he saw
a boy, drink water out of the hollow of his hand.

Lastly, there is Necessitas Conditionis, a Necessity of our Calling and
Condition of life; which admits a very great Latitude, according to the various
Relations, and Stations, which men hold, both in Church and State, so that,
that, which is but necessary, for a master of a Family, may be superfluous to
him, that is not burdened with those Relations, and Dependencies: That which is
but enough for a Magistrate, whose port, and condition, needs greater supplies,
may be too much for a private man, who needs not those poor, but yet necessary
advantages, to commend him to the awe, and distance of the vulgar. Lastly, that
which is but necessary for a Minister, in respect of those duties which God
requires of him, as, Hospitality, Chap. 3. of this Epistle, verse 2. Attendance
upon the Altar, attendance upon preaching, and neglecting all other means of
Subsistence, attendance upon study, and reading, Cha. 4. of this Epistle, verse
6. Caeteris paribus, may be too much for a man, not abstracted, and sequestered,
from the world, not consecrated, and set apart, for those sacred Employments.

And as this is true of our present Necessities, so we may judge of this
Enough, by our future necessities, according to that of S. Paul, The children
ought not to lay up for the Parents, but the Parents for the children, 2 Cor.
12. 14. And, if any man provide not for his own, especially for those of his
own household, he has denied the faith, and is worse then an Infidel, Chap. 5.
of this Epistle, verse 8. both which places, look beyond the present time, and
do enjoin, not only a moderate care for the present, but (...), though not
(...), a lawful providence, though not a distrustful, anxious carfulness for
the time to come.

Having thus briefly showed you, what this love of money is in it self, and in
its own Nature, I come now to show, what it is in its effects, and so it is,
(...), The Root of all Evil.

And here to a people trained up in Christianity, it Part. 2.
may seem superfluous, to go about to prove, that this Love of Money is a Sin,
or at least a Sin, so exceeding sinful as to be a teeming, mother sin, The Root
of all Evil; but upon a strict survey, we shall find it, not only, not
superfluous, but very necessary, for while other sins are (...)
self-condemning, self-convicting sins, Infamous in their very surface, and
outward appearance, as carrying their own Stigma, and brand in their foreheads,
The love of Money, is a sin no less, nay, perhaps more sinful then the rest,
and yet, is usually passed over, with less observation, hardly with any note
of Infamy cast upon it, as if the object of it were not the Mammon of
unrighteousness, and it self, The Root of all Evil.

Yet not, that we are so to understand S. Paul, as if every particular sin,
committed by the children of disobedience, did owe its being, and guilt, to
this (...); No, the word All, here, is not collective, but distributive, and to
be taken, not, Pro Singulis Generum, but Pro Generibus Singulorum: And that,
because, First, it gives life, and being to some sins of all kinds; or,
Secondly, because, as it breeds many sins, so it foments, and nourishes more;
Thirdly, because it disposes the Person in whom it reigns, to the perpetration
of any sin, that may conduce to the satisfaction of its canine appetite, for
cui nihil satis, Nihil turpe, He that thinks nothing Enough, will never boggle
at any thing, or scruple it, as wicked, and sinful; or Lastly, the Apostle may
in a just detestation of this sin, call it the root of all evil, because it is
the Root not only of that evil, which the Schools call Malum Culpae, the evil
of guilt, but of the other evil also, which they call Malum Poenae, the evil of
Punishment: I shall insist on both, and show it to be, First, The Root, of the
evil of guilt.

And here, it is not my intent with Aquinas, and the Schoolmen, to present you
with a long Catalogue, or large Pedigree of the numerous offspring of this
unhappy mother, or point at every branch of this impure Root; I shall not stand
to show you, what sway it bears, what influence it has, on most of the Actions
of men; How it steals into the Juntoes of States, votes in the grand Counsels
of War, and Peace, and mingles in the consultations, and deliberations of
Kingdoms, Nations, and Commonwealths, and overrules their Results, to
particular advantages: I shall not now arraign it for perverting of Judgment,
and Justice, abusing power, and authority, to oppression, and wrong: making
both Law, and Conscience, to stoop, and comply, with its Empire and commands: I
shall not now tell you, how it pants after the dust of the Earth, on the head
of the poor, Amos 2. 7. what spoil it makes in the Country, how it depopulates
in one Lordship, and racks the Tenants in an other, In both perhaps, robbing
the Labourer of his hire, and grinding the faces of the poor: I shall not lead
you through the streets of your own City, and taking down the dark cloth, show
you, where it stands at the tradesmans elbow, and brok's between the buyer, and
the seller; how it teaches one to ingrosse Commodities, and another to
adulterate them: In a word, I shall not now stand to tell you, how this one
sin, has filled both Country, and City, with Men as with Caterpillars, as God
threatened Babylon, Jer. 51. 14. Nor shall I aggravate its sinfulness, by
showing that it made, Achan undergo the curse of God the Father, Tempted Judas,
to betray God the Son, betrayed Ananias, and Sapphira, to lie unto the Holy
Ghost, nor Lastly, shall I demonstrate unto you, how inconsistent, and directly
opposite it is, to the three Theological virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity, No!
some sower fruits there are, that spring from this root, more applicable to
these unhappy times, and have set our teeth on edge, and of these, I shall name
but some.

First, Aversion from, and, Indisposition to piety and devotion, Alienation of
the affections from God, and his service, all spring from this Root: The
Prophet Ezekiel accuses the Israelites to God, for disobedience to, and
neglect of, the word, preached by him, but withal, gives the Reason, points
out the Thief, that had stolen away their hearts from God, They will not do thy
words, for their heart goes after their Covetousness, Ezekiel. 33. 31. This made
David to pray so earnestly against this Sin, Incline my heart, O Lord, unto thy
Testimonies, and not unto covetousness, Psalm. 119. 36. where the Antithesis,
or Opposition which the Prophet makes, between, inclining his heart to Gods
Testimonies, and, not unto Covetousness, is very remarkable, Incline my heart
unto thy Testimonies, and not unto Covetousness, where, Not unto Covetousness,
shows, that these two, are Incompatible, and cannot possibly consist together,
A Heart, set, on Covetousness, and at the same time set, on Gods commandments:
Nemo potest amplecti, Dei gratiam, simul, and Seculi, says S. Ambrose: And
yet, behold a greater then S. Ambrose is here, and bears Testimony to this
Truth, Ye cannot serve God, and Mammon, says our Savior, Mat. 6. 24. This
sin, of all others, does, as it were, Transubstantiate the soul, from Spirit,
to Earth: If the Covetous, chance to read the Bible, he magnifies the promises
of the Old Testament far above those of the New, These, being but Spiritual, of
certain Notional things, which silly Churchmen, call Grace, and Glory, Things
which he understands not: The other, are of things Temporal, obvious to sight,
as long life, and plenty, A Land flowing with milk, and honey, Garners, full,
and plenteous with all manner of store; Sheep, bringing forth Thousands, and
ten thousands in our streets: If he think on the Temporal Jerusalem, he is much
pleased with it, considered as it was in Solomon's reign, who made silver to be
in Jerusalem, as stones for abundance, 1 Kings 10. 27. If he chance to
meditate, on the heavenly Jerusalem, he is ravished with the description of it,
and, in despite of reason, resolves, not to admit of an Allegory, when he
reads, Her gates are of pearl, and her streets of pure gold, Revel. 21. 21. He
does not so much magnify S. Paul, for his Rapture, into the third heaven, as,
he does contemn S. Peter, for professing his poverty, Silver and gold have I
none, Acts 3. 6. If he wake, all the Inferior Globe rowls in his brains: There
sail the ships, aye, and there grase the sheep, and cattle upon a Thousand
hills: There, are Hedges, and Ditches, Psalm. 50. 10.
Closes, Towns, and Tenements, Markets, and Faires, Purchases, and Mortgages,
Leases, Bills, and Bonds: If he sleep, he does not so much as dream of Heaven,
his habit of Covetousness, makes his very slumbers sinful: A perfect Son of
the old Adam, who was from the 1 Cor. 15. 47.
Earth earthly: certainly God is not in all his thoughts: And therefore, as God
is not in his Love, so, he is in Gods hatred: The Covetous whom God abhors,
Psalm. 10. 3.

Secondly, Rebellion, and Treason, spring from this root; It Is evident in
Judas, Judas was Covetous, and a Traitor,, and therefore a Traitor, because
Covetous, He did not only carry, but love the bag: He sold his Master, not
out of hatred to his Masters Person, but out of love to the thirty pieces of
silver: The wages of unrighteousness has seduced more besides Balaam: And
therefore when Sextius and Licinius, Two seditious Tribunes of the People, had
usurped, all power, over the people, and Senate of Rome, by the space of Live.
l. 6.
nine years; and reigned in the City, Tanquam, Romulus, ac Tacius, Appius
Claudius, in his Oration, against those Rebels, observes, that, as
Covetousness was the first Incentive, to these Seditions, to begin their
Rebellion, so, Covetousness was that, which did foment, and spin it out to that
length: for all this was: Quia pecunias alienas, quia agros, dono dant tanta
dulcedo est ex alienis fortunis praedandi, as he there speaks: by an usurped
power, they invaded, and gave away other men's moneys, and other men's
possessions, so sweet a thing it is, to grow rich by Rapine, and Oppression,
and to make other men's fortunes, the prey of Treason and Rebellion: But it is a
tender Argument, and I shall prosecute it no further.

Thirdly, from this Root springs Sacrilege, that abomination, of desolation,
in the Church of God: Will a man rob God? says the Prophet, Mal. 3. 8. Why?
can God be robbed? There are I confess, a Generation of men, that do not only
Sceptically move the doubt, but Dogmatically, though Atheistically, resolve for
the Negative, As if God, when he gave us his Son, had, with him, so freely
given us all things, as if he could not, or at least, would not, accept of a
Return, of our thankful Homage, and acknowledgement of his dominion, over all
the works of his hands, by an Oblation, of a holy Portion, Ezekiel. 45. 1. These
are the Righteous (as they pretend) that should possess the Earth; aye, so
possess it, that God himself, shall have no portion, no share in the Divident:
But certainly, God has lost, neither his Dominion over the whole, nor his
Property in any portion, that piety, or devotion, shall consecrate unto him:
The Prophet therefore, makes no doubt of the possibility, but that a man may
rob God, except it be of a Moral possibility, Will a man rob God? That is, can
any man be so desperately wicked, so much the child of the Devil, and not the
Devil himself, as to rob God? his own God? some bold Sacrilegi there have been,
that have adventured, to rob the Gods of other Nations, yet, In Omni Religione
nil tale sine vindicta, as Lactantius truly observes, never without due
punishment following upon such Sacrilege, as if God, the punishment of
Sacrilege, committed on the Anathemata, Gifts, consecrated to false Gods,
should, as by a kind of Pedagogie, teach his own, to keep clean hands, from
whatever was dedicated to the True: He that doubts of this, let him but read,
that Oration, of the Locri, Live. l. 29.
in Livy, concerning the spoil done, First by Pyrrus, and afterward, by the
Roman Garrison, on the Temple, and treasury, of their Goddess Proserpina: But
yet, can any man arive at that height of Impiety, as to rob his own God? or if
one such prodigious monster may possibly be found, amongst men, yet shall we
find such a People? will a Nation rob God? their own God? yes, the Love of
Money, can do this too, It Is the root of all Evil, This great Evil, Sacrilege,
Robbing of God, Robbing our own God: But what will follow? why, that which
follows in the Prophet, Mal. 3. 9. Maledictione Maledicti estis, Ye are cursed
with a Curse, for ye have robbed me, even this whole Nation; and if ye would
know, what this curse is, do but read the 83 Psalm; I do not know, whether
there be more Rhetoric, or terror in it, at the 3d verse, you shall find a
crafty council, or combination of all the Enemies of the Church, to destroy the
members of the Church, and to invade their possessions, for the result of the
council, is, Let us take to our selves, the houses of God into possession,
verse 12. But the word, is no sooner out of their mouths, but the Curse of God
follows upon the neck of it, Pone eos ut Rotam: O my God make them like a
wheel, and as the stubble before the wind, like as the fire that burns up the
wood, and as the slame that consumes the Mountains, so persecute them with thy
Tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm, let them be confounded, and
troubled for ever, yea, let them be put to shame, and perish, etc. verse 13,
14, 15, etc. And now, if any man has a longing, to devour that which is holy,
to swallow up the Patrimony of Christ, and the dowry, of his Spouse the Church,
He sees here, at what rate he may do it: It Is a dreadful Curse: and yet, I am
afraid, that there are too many, that have an itch to share in the Sacrilege,
and as for the Curse, to put that to the adventure.

Lastly, it is the Root of Apostasy, and falling off from God, and that in a
double Respect, First in respect of the truth it self, and Secondly, in Respect
of the open profession of the Truth.

For the First, the Apostle here is positive, The Love of Money is the Root of
all Evil, which while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith: and
not only so, They have erred not only in their own persons, but for gain,
they have turned Hucksters of the word of God, (...), as S. Paul speaks of the
false teachers of his time: Corrupting the word of God, 2 Cor. 2. 17. As
Hucksters, that mingle bad, with good, that so the good, may countenance, and
vent the bad: and through Covetousness, (...), They shall make merchandise of
you, 2 Pet. 2. 3. Expose their followers to sale, as wares at a public Mart:
Nay, by this means, they do, (...), Col. 2. 8. Praedam abigere, drive away the
prey, as when after a victory, companies of men, herds of cattle, and flocks
of sheep, amassed into a body, are driven away, as spoils, before the
conquerours: Nay, S. Ignatius in his third Epistle, goes higher, and says,
that they are (...), men, that for gain, set Christ himself to sale: And God
knows, too many such merchants, we have, now a days, who teach such things as
they ought not, for filthy lucres sake, Tit. 1. 11. who, through the divisions,
and Schisms which they make, rend the seamlesse coat of Christ, disturb the
common peace of the Church, and serve not the Lord Christ, but their own
bellies, Romans 16. 18.

Secondly, as it is the Root of Apostacy in respect of the Integrity of the
Truth, so it is the Root of Apostasy also, in respect of the open profession of
that Truth: It Is more then probable, that this, was Demas his Apostasy: Demas
(says S. Paul) has forsaken me, having embraced this present world, 2 Timothy 4.
10. It seems, he thought it safer, to close with the world, or as we usually
call it, make his peace, then run the hazard of losing his estate, by adhering
to a persecuted Truth: Our Savior tells us that there is (...), the
deceitfulness of Riches, Mark 4. 19. And certainly, never age did afford,
more, and greater examples of their deceitfulness, then this age of ours: I
know not whether hope of gain on one side, or fear of losing on the other, has
deceived most: Good God, how hardly shall a rich man enter into the kingdom of
God? I am ashamed to speak it, but I have this to accuse my nation of, this
Love of Money, has so possessed their hearts, that they measure, not only
honesty, and Loyalty, but Religion it self by gain: Nay, it is much to be
feared, that if some might enjoy their own in peace, they would not only submit
to Schisms, and Heresies, but embrace the Alcoran, and submit to Turcisme, if
they were proposed, as a condition.

And now this Love of Money, being so fertile a mother, of the Evil of guilt,
you cannot imagine, it should be barren, of the Evil of Punishment: God
therefore, to the covetous man's Malum Culpae, adds, his Malum Poenae, For God
does usually punish such a sinner; First, in his Estate, Secondly, in his
Children, and Posterity, and Lastly in his own Person.

First, God does punish him in his Estate, and that, First, by giving him
wealth, but denying him a heart to use it.

Secondly, by bereaving him of his Idol, which he adored, and depriving him, of
that wealth, on which he so much doted.

First, to such a sinner, God may give wealth, but not give him a heart to use
it: He gives the Covetous their desire, but deals with them, as heretofore with
the Israelites: he sends leanness with all into their souls, Psalm. 106. 15.
'Twas Seneca's Observation, Divitias habent, quomodo habere dicimur febrem, cum
illa nos habeat: A Covetous man, has Riches, as we are said to have a Fever,
when, we have not the Fever, but the Fever has us: so the Covetous man, can
not so much be said, to have wealth, as wealth to have him, he does not
possess, but is possessed: How many be there in the world, that live poor, for
no other end, but to die rich? and almost starve themselves to day, out of an
irreligious fear, that they may want to morrow? There is an evil (says
Solomon) which I have seen under the Sun, and it is common amongst men: A man
to whom God has given Riches, wealth, and honor, so that he wants nothing
for his soul, of all that he possesses, yet God gives him not power to eat
thereof, but a stranger eats it: This is a vanity, and an evil disease,
Eccles. 6. 1, 2. A Vanity? and an Evil Disease? Nay, it is a Curse, and a Curse
like that, which fell, on the incredulous Lord, that would not believe the
Prophet Elisha's prediction, of the plenty in Samaria, for behold, He sees the
plenty with his eyes, but he does not eat thereof, 2 Kings 7. 2.

Certainly, such men, will never go to Hell, for Dives his sin, for clothing
themselves with Purple, and fine Linen, and faring sumptuously, every day, Luke
16. 19. No! their sin is oppression, and injustice, practiced not more on other
men, then, their own Persons; Interdicting, and denying themselves necessaries,
defrauding, and robbing their mouths, of what their hands have gotten: So,
that while other sinners, though they do not enjoy the happiness, and bliss
of the other world, yet they are abundantly filled, with the contents, and
pleasures of this life: They eat, they drink, they enjoy the good of their
labors, and it is their portion, as Solomon speaks, Eccles. 5. 18. One
danceth, another drinks away his life; one consumes his days in excess and
Riot, another in chambering and wantonness: These, though they go down to
Hell, the place of weeping, and gnashing of teeth, yet they go merrily thither;
But the Covetous man, is of all sinners, most miserable; He does not enjoy
himself, nor find comfort neither in this life, nor in that, which is to come:
Dives, and Lazarus, the rich Churl, is both, in one: Dives in his life time
received his good things, but after death was tormented; Lazarus in his life
time received his evil things, but after death was comforted; but the covetous
has none of this variety, he partakes with both, only in the worser part: In
the midst of all his plenty, he is like Lazarus in his life, poor, and
wretched: and, for his plenty, thus abused, he is like Dives in his death,
scorched in flames, and tormented: So, that look, with what solicitude, and
carfulness, other men get Heaven, with no less, does this man get Hell; Not
only the kingdom of God, but the kingdom of Satan, suffers violence, and the
violent take it by force: And as other men work out their Salvation, so this
man works out his Damnation, with fear and trembling.

But, because, the Covetous may think it, not a Curse, but a Blessing, to have
wealth, though he have no heart to use it. Therefore Secondly, God does
oftentimes deprive him of his wealth, so that now he has no wealth to use,
that before, had no heart, to use that wealth, which he had: This sin, leavens
a man's whole substance, with Gods Curse, which makes his baggs, like his
desires, bottomless, or as it is in the Prophet Haggai, it is put into a bag
with holes, Hag. 1. 6. So that his Riches, as Solomon speaks, make them wings,
and fly away to heaven, Prove. 23. 5. before the owner descends to hell: He
shall not save (says Job) of that which he desires, there shall none of his
wealth be left, therefore no man shall look for his goods, Job 20. 20, 21. That
is, he shall die so poor, that no man shall care to be his heir, or executor:
Nay, because he trusted in his Riches, and Sacrificed to his Net, applauded his
own wit and industry, that got it; therefore, God shall deprive him of both,
For he shall leave his riches in the midst of his days, and at his later end
he shall be a fool, Jer. 17. 11. So that his end shall be, beggar, and fool,
both in one: See a Pattern of Gods Justice in this kind, in his dealing with
the Caldeans: Woe to him that increases; that which is not his, how long? and
to him that ladeth himself with thick clay: shall they not rise up suddenly,
that shall bite thee? and awake that shall vex thee? and thou shall be for
booties unto them, because thou have spoiled many nations, all the remnant of
the nations shall spoil thee, Hab. 2. 6, 7, etc. First, or last, God will spoil
the spoilers, either by his secret curse, blasting, or blowing upon their
estate, Hag. 1. 9. or by the hand, of a greater oppressor; so that he, that
has been Praedo minoris, shall (as S. Austin speaks) become, Praeda majoris.
He that has preyed upon the less, shall himself become a prey to the greater:
It Is just with God to do so: Thou shall be for booties to them.

The Second SERMON.
AS God, does punish the Covetous, in his Estate, so, Secondly, he does punish
him in his Children; and in them, frustrates the end, and intentions, of all
the fathers hoarding up: what makes the Covetous, thus to enlarge his desires
as Hell, to snatch on the right hand, and on the left, to lade himself with
thick clay? why! it is to raise a house, to advance a family; but how often does
Prodigality, become heir to Covetousness? The Love of Money, though it may
bring, good materials, to build a House, yet, it seldom, or never, lays a sure
Foundation: No! Job tells us right, Aedificat ut Tinea domum suam, He builds his
house, as a Moth, and as a Booth, that the keeper makes, Job 27. 18. Builds
his house as a Moth? and, as a Booth, that the keeper makes? how is that? How
does the Moth, build his house? or the Keeper his Booth? The Moth, devours the
house he builds, and then devours it, even when he builds it: The Keeper,
builds but sightly, because he does not intend it for perpetuity: Booths, you
know, in the Law of Moses, were Emblems of a Transitory, unsettled condition:
here to day, and gone to morrow; and yet, aedificat, sicut Tinea, etc. The
Oppressor, and the Covetous, (for it is he, of whom Job there speaks) builds
his house as a Moth, and as a Booth that the Keeper makes.

You have a Proverb, and it is an Irreligious one, It Is happy for the Child,
whose Father goes to the Devil: you know the meaning of it: But, as God said of
that Proverb, The Fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the Childrens teeth are
set an edge: As I live says the Lord God, ye shall not have occasion any more
to use this Proverb in Israel, Ezekiel. 18. 3. So, let me say, of this Proverb, as
I live says the Lord, as ye never had, so ye never shall have occasion, to use
this Proverb in Israel, for, God, shall take away the father with hooks, and
his posterity with fish-hooks, and they shall go out at the breaches, Amos 4.
2, 3. Let them build houses, and families, as strong, as they can, and (as the
Psalmist speaks) Leave the rest of their substance Psalm. 17. 24.
for their babes; yet the Curse of God, like the whirlwind from the
wilderness, Job 1. 19. shall smite the house, aye, so smite it, that their
Posterity shall go out at the breaches: Nay, their children, (as Zophar speaks)
shall flatter the poor, Job 20. 10. They shall be reduced to that extreme
beggary, and want, that they shall flatter a mean man, for an alms, and fawn
upon a poor man, for a crust of bread.

If therefore thou do think to raise a house, or advance a family, lay not
the foundation, in this sin, This Love of Money; This were to build, but upon
the sand, and instead of consulting honor to thy posterity, thou will as the
Prophet speaks, but consult shame to thy house, and sin against thine own soul,
Hab. 2. 10. But if thou will lay a sure foundation, whereon to raise a Family,
if thou will leave thy posterity, a secure, and durable estate, follow these
directions, Purchase for them, by thine Alms, and Charitable works, the Prayers
of the poor, and needy: Give Alms of all that ye possess, and behold all
things are clean unto you, Luke 11. 41. Revive, that antiquated, lost piece of
Christianity, which our forefathers called Charity, but this present fanatical,
Atheistical age, has disgraced, with the name of Popery, and Popish Merits:
follow Daniels counsel to Nebuchadnezzar, Break off thy sins by righteousness,
and thine iniquities, by showing mercy to the poor, Dan. 4. 27. It may not only
be a lengthning to thine own tranquillity, but it may prove a reserve; a
Treasure laid up in heaven for thy Posterity, these works may prove importunate
Advocates with God for thee, and thine, after thee: Settle upon them, the
durable Patrimony of a Religious, sober, and honest Education: Bequeath them,
the legacy of thine own good Example, in all virtuous, and godly conversation:
And then, though the portion of Earthly riches, which thou leavest them, be but
little, yet, it is a great deal better, to leave them a little, well gotten,
with Gods blessing, then a great deal, ill gotten, with Gods curse, mingled
amongst it.

Lastly, as God punish the Covetous in his estate, and in his children, so he
does punish him especially in his own Person; and that, as Caietan observes,
First, in his body, Secondly, in his soul.

First, this sin, leads the sinner headlong to destruction, and perdition,
before at the 9th verse: And the sinner pierces himself through with many
sorrows; at the later end of this verse: Nec cibus securus, Ad Donat. Ep. 2.
somnusve contingit, (says S. Cyprian) suspirat in convivio, vigilat in pluma:
He neither eats, nor sleeps in security, he sighs at a feast, nor do the
temples of his head take any rest, though on his down-bed: for the abundance of
the rich, will not suffer him to sleep, Eccles. 5. 22. And the wise son of
Sirach tells us, That watching for riches does consume the flesh, and the care
thereof, drives away sleep, Eccles. 31. 1.

Lastly, if none of these Punishments light upon this sin; yet in this, the
sinner, sins against his own soul, Hab. 2. 10. And that First, by sealing it up
under impenitency, here; and Secondly, by sealing it up, under eternal torments
hereafter.

First, this sin, seals up the soul of the sinner, under impenitency here; for
this sin, like that of lust, seldom finds the grace of Repentance; I will not
say, that God, will not give him the grace of Repentance, but if he do, I may
boldly say, There Is a Camel Mar. 19. 24.
gone through the eye of an Needle: for in this, it is a state more dangerous,
less recoverable, then lust: for while age, oftentimes, proves a remedy to
this, and other sins, which grow old, and decrepid with the body of the sinner,
This Love of Money, of all others, is Peccatum Senectutis, the Sin of old age,
and is then strongest, when the sinner, is weakest, and in a preposterous
manner of sinning, makes provision for the Viaticum of his life, in the very
conclusion of it, as if he had set out, but yesterday: and therefore Ghetius de
Coma, in his cases of Conscience, thinks it Lib. 1. verbo, Avaritia.
is not impertinent, to move the question, whether the Natural pronenesse, that
is in old men, to the sin of Covetousness, does excuse them from the guilt?
but he resolves it in the Negative: And the Reason, why this sin, cleaves so
fast to old age, when other sins languish, and fall off; is, Because, the soul,
not being set upon God, and his goodness, which alone, can satisfy that
better part of man, and other lusts which did use to entertain, and court the
soul, languishing with age, it finds the lust of Coveting money, the fittest
sin, wherein to exercise it self: So Simonides, in Plutarch, being upbraided,
for being Covetous, made it his Apology; That whereas, the delight of other
pleasures, was gone, he did foment, and nourish, his old age with that (...),
that Profitable pleasure: Hence it is, that many, having escaped the danger of
the highway ground, having understood, the word of God preached, and professed
the same; And the danger of the stony gound, in undergoing some troubles, and
persecutions, for the Truth, yet nourishing in themselves, too great a love, of
worldly riches, they have shipwracked at this Rock, stifled all their graces,
choked all their hopeful beginnings, with the cares of the world, and the
deceitfulness of Riches, as our Savior speaks, Mat. 13. 22.

Secondly, as he sins against his own soul, by sealing it up under Impenitency,
here, so he sins against his own soul, by sealing it up, under eternal
torments, hereafter: What is the hope of the Hypocrite, though he have gained,
(says Job) when God takes away his soul? Job 27. 8. Certainly whatsoever he
gains, he loses heaven, the thought whereof (without doubt) is the greatest
torment in Hell. The Covetous has no inheritance in the kingdom of Christ, and
of God, (says S. Paul) Ephesians. 5. 5. and again, The Covetous shall not inherit
the kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9. If therefore, there be any which hear me this
day, who are not resolved upon the question, which is best, to save your souls,
or your estates, consider that of our Savior, and let it sink down into your
hearts, What is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his
own soul? Mat. 16. 16. A Text, most seasonable for these times of Temptation,
to be admitted, into your bed-chambers, and closets, and counting houses, into
your most retired, inmost thoughts, when ye deliberate what to do, or resolve
on, in these times of danger, and distraction; For as this is Hora Tentationis,
so this is Tentatio Horae; as this is the time of Temptation, so this is the
Temptation of the Time.

Thus you see, as well as I could, I have made good, this Apostolical position,
That, The love of Money is the Root of all Evil, both of the evil of guilt,
and, the evil of punishment: I shall now, in the last place, by way of
Application, only offer you, some Motives, or Considerations to dehort, and
some helps to preserve you, from so dangerous a sin.

And here First, that the Impetuousnesse of this Part. 3.
Passion may not violently transport thee, stay a little, and consider thy
Saviors Poverty: Magna abusio, and nimis magna, quod dives fieri velit
vermiculus, pro quo, Deus majestatis, pauper esse voluit, says S. Bernard: It
is a foul abuse, and an abuse not to be endured, That, that worm should covet
to be made rich, for whose sake, the Lord of glory, was content, to be made
poor: He that laid the foundations of the earth, and spread out the heavens
like a curtain over it, had not a place, where to lay his head: He that
treasured Mat. 8. 20.
up the mines of Gold, and Silver, in the deep vaults, and bowels of the earth,
was fain to Angle for Mat. 17.
silver to pay his Tribute: does thy course garment trouble thee? Remember his
swaddling clothes: Is thy bead uneasy? yet it is not harder then his manger: Is
thy house poor, and mean? forget not, that he had not a house where to lay his
head: If therefore God gives thee Poverty, he deals no worse with thee, then
with his own Son: But for the Testimony of a good Conscience, have thou lost
All? thou art bound to rejoice, and to glorify God, in that behalf, that he
has vouchsafed thee the honor, and counted thee worthy, to suffer for his
Truth: whatsoever flesh, and blood may mutter, it is a Regalio, a favor, not
vouchsafed to every one: but yet, withal remember, that loss of goods, is but
the least, and the lowest of the sufferings of the Saints: if God call us to
Martyrdom, to resistance unto blood, and to the laying down of our lives, for
the Testimony of his Truth, the Justice of our cause will be Infularum Loco, as
Seneca speaks, the Garland, and Ribonds, to the Sacrifice; These, are but the
(...), the after sufferings of Christ, which we his members are to fill up in
our flesh, Col. 1. 24.

Secondly, Consider that in desiring Riches, thou do desire things, that are
extremely dangerous; and contain in them, a possibility, whereby the owner may
be made extremely miserable: for, besides, that they are a condition, wherein,
fortune has a greater scope, and latitude, wherein to inflict crosses, so that
often times, they prove a snare, and expose their owner to envy, and
oppression, (for we live in those times, in which Poverty, is a protection,
more secure then Innocence, a sanctuary, if not more sacred, yet more
Inviolable) So on the other side, it is manifest, that riches, and plenty, have
temptations, far greater, then poverty: It was the Observation of a Religious
Votary, That the Devils of Consolation, as he calls them, are more dangerous,
then those of Tribulation: certainly, of the Two extremes, the wise man, in
that prayer, Prove. 30. plainly intimates, that the Temptations of riches, are
more dangerous, then those, of poverty: Give me (says he) neither poverty, nor
riches, feed me with food convenient for me, lest I be full, and deny thee, and
say, who is the Lord? or lest, I be poor, and steal, and take the name of my
God in vain. Verse 8, 9. Poverty, may drive a man to steal, to deal unjustly,
and then to forswear it, and take the name of God in vain: but if a man be
rich, and full, he is in danger, to deny God, and in pride of heart to say,
with Pharaoh, who is the Lord? Certainly, it is very difficult, to be rich, and
not to neglect God, and to trust in riches? upon this very ground, our Savior
says, That, it is easier for a Camel, to go through the eye of a needle, then
for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 19. 24.

Thirdly, Consider, in what manner, thou came into the world, and how thou
shall go out, we were born, Sine Integumento, and we depart, Sine viatico, Ep.
44.
as S. Ambrose speaks: Nature, does furnish us, with provision, neither, at our
coming into the world, nor at our going out: of all that which thou do
possess, what shall thou carry with thee, but a Winding Sheet, and a Coffin?
perhaps neither: What a madness is it then, to wound thy soul, to get, what
shortly thou must leave behind thee, and carry with thee, nothing else, but the
guilt, of ill gotten wealth? Perhaps thou will answer, Though, I leave my
wealth, yet I shall leave it to my Child, that shall be after me: Though, this
cannot be every Covetous man's Apology, For there is one alone (as Solomon
speaks) and there is not a Second; yea, he has neither child, nor brother, yet
is there no end of his labor, neither is his eye satisfied with riches,
neither says he, for whom do I labor, and bereave my soul of good? Eccles. 4.
8. But suppose, thou have children, and can say, though, I leave my wealth,
yet I shall leave it to my Child that shall be after me: yet let me tell thee,
thou know not, whether that Child, will be a wise man, or a fool: This,
Solomon calls vanity, and for this, very reason, he did even hate his labor, as
himself speaks: I hated all my labor, which I had taken under the Sun,
because (says he) I should leave it to a man that shall be after me, and who
knows, whether he shall be a wise man or a fool, yet he shall have rule over
all my labors, wherein I have labored, and wherein, I have showed my self
wise under the Sun, this also is vanity, Eccles. 2. 19. Thy wealth, may prove
to thy posterity, but an instrument, to serve some lust, to commit, some sin:
an Instrument of Gods dishonor, and their own damnation: Nay, as thy wealth,
was useless to thy self, so may thy Children, be useless to themselves,
useless to the public, to their Country, useless to the Church of Christ:
They may be fools, or prodigals, or extremely wicked, the very Curse, and
Punishment of their fathers Avarice.

Fourthly, Consider, that when by sordid, and dishonest courses, thou have got
a great estate, yet this great estate does not fill thy Appetite: ^idem sunt
termini Regni tui Alexander and mundi, as he spoke in the Suasory: The same
bounds, measured Alexanders Empire, and the world, and yet, inventus est, qui
concupisceret aliquid post omnia: he would have more then all; in coveting a
Second world before he was full master of the First: Habes A^rum, habes
argentum, concupiscis aurum, and concupiscis Argentum, habes, and concupiscis,
Plenus es and sitis, morbus est, non Opulentia, says S. Austin: Thou have Ser.
3. de verb. Apost.
gold, and thou have silver, and yet thou do covet gold and covet silver;
Thou have, and yet do covet; Thou art full, but not satisfied; this is not a
fullness but a disease: for Riches, were no more made, to fill the soul, then
Learning, or Knowledge were to fill a bag: He that (as one speaks) shall shoot
an Arrow, cut of a Plough, or hunt a Hare with an Elephant, cannot be said to
be unfortunate, for missing the prey, but foolish, in choosing such improper
Instruments, to obtain it: so, he that shall seek for content in Riches, or the
things of this life, is not so unhappy, in losing his desires, as vain, and
foolish, in the choice of such means, to obtain them. And therefore, it was not
without mystery, observed, amongst the Ancients, That they, who made Gods of
gold, and silver, of hope, and fear, peace, and war, Garlic, and Onions;
beasts, and serpents: nay, though they deisied, diseases, and quod dicere nolo:
what, without breach of modesty I cannot name, yet, Funesta Pecunia, templo,
nondum habitas, They never deified money, nor erected any Temple to it: thereby
meaning, that, though wealth was admired by common, or abused understandings,
yet, from riches, (further then they served, and supplied the exigencies, and
necessities of nature) nothing conducing, to man's real content, and
happiness, could be expected.

While therefore, these considerations, convince your judgments: let these
means, and helps assist your wills, in the great work of mortifying, this
powerful lust, The Love of Money, which is the Root of all Evil.

First, Labor, to anchor thy soul, with content, to say with the Apostle, I
have learned, in whatsoever estute I am, therewith to be content, Phil. 4. 11.
for content, is a nearer cut, to wealth, then Covetousness: For, what matters
it, whether thou be rich Tuo, and pationti^ (...), beneficio, an fortun^? as
Seneca speaks, by the benefit of thine own, moderation, Ep. 119.
and contentation, or the bounty of fortune? for as he reasons on, Nihil
interest utrum non desideres, an habeas? where is the difference, between
having, and not desiring? There is content in both: for, as our life, does not
consist, in the abundance of the things which a man possesses, so neither does
his content: there is a way, which S. Paul found out, of having nothing, and
yet possessing all things, 2 Cor. 6. 10. Content, reconciles this seeming
contradiction of having nothing, and yet possessing all things: for, as he,
that is master of a great estate, is still poor, if he think it to be too
little: So he that is possessed of a mean estate, is rich, if he think it to be
enough: He that seeks for Content, without himself, loses both himself, and
it: Quareigitur a Fortuna, potius impetrem, ut det, quam a me, ne petam? says
the same Seneca, why should Irather desire of God, to give me wealth, then to
desire of my self, not to desire it? I conclude this, with the Epigrammatist,
Fis fieri dives, Pontice? nil cupias: He is abundantly rich, that desires
nothing.

Secondly, Learn to compare, things Temporal, with things Spiritual, and see,
how the scales will turn: Vilescunt temporalia, cum considerantur aeterna,
says S. Gregory: the Glo-worm, may seem, a glorious light, till the Sun, that
eye of the world, be disclosed, and Temporal riches may seem, a great blessing,
until they be weighed, with the Eternal, in the balance of the Sanctuary;
Raise thy meditations therefore, to the heavenly Jerusalem; walk about her
walls, mark all her bull warks, tell all her towers, and in comparison of that
City that is above, thou will say, of all Earthly possessions, as Hyram did, of
the Cities which Solomon gave him, they pleased him not, and he called them the
land of Cabul unto this day; that is the dirty land, 1 Kings 9. 13. What were
the pleasures and riches of Egypt, the pomp, and glory of Pharaohs Court in the
eyes of Moses after he had once seen his God? what was the world, and the
vanities thereof, in S. Peter's thoughts, after he had a glimpse of the glory of
heaven, and a ray of the happiness thereof, in the Transfiguration of Christ?
As some great Peer therefore, that has been used to stately shows, and courtly
magnificence, does not vouchsafe so much, as to cast an eye, or a glance,
toward the mean, and worthless Gewgaws of a Pedlars pack, which yet silly
children, and fools behold with wonder, and greediness, their eyes dwelling
long upon them; So, the soul, that by divine contemplation, has its
conversation in heaven, scorns to suffer its self to be transported, with the
trash, and toys, of this vain, and transitory world: I have read of a
Spiritual person, who saw heaven but in a dream. dream, but 'twas such a dream,
as made deep impressions in him: the glory, and happiness of it, being
presented, with vigorous, and pertinacious phantasms, not easily disbanding:
So, that when he awaked, he knew not his own Cell: he remembered not him, that
slept, in the same Dorter, with him; nor could he tell, how night, and day,
were distinguished nor could he discern, oil, from mine, but, passionately
cried out for his vision again, Read mihi campos meos floridos, Colnmnam
auream, Comitem Hieronymum, assistentes Angelos: Give me (...) fields again, my
most delicious fields: Give me my Pillar of a glorious Light; my Companion S.
Jerome, and my assistant Angels: And this lasted, until he was told of his duty,
when the fear of a sin disincharmed him, and caused him to take care, lest he
lost the substance, out of a transported greediness, to possess the shadow:
the same operation (at least in some proportion) which that vision, had on him,
may meditation have on thee: Labor therefore, to get a piercing eye, in
meditation, to see the Invisible God, send out thy soul, in a devout ecstasy,
contemplate, the glory, and beauty of heaven, weigh the happiness of the
Saints, and Angels, and of the Spirits of just men made perfect: Think upon
those ravishing, unspeakable Consolations, that like a torrent of joy, shall
swallowup those, that are redeemed from the earth; And these meditations, must
needs kindle, and inflame thy affections, inseparably to be united to God, and
work in thee an holy impatience of delay, and a staying here, a loathing of the
things, of this world, and a wearisomenesse, of the prolongation of thy
pilgrimage here in this world, being wholly bent, upon that, which is to come;
saying with the Psalmist, My soul is ^^^inst for God, even for the living God,
when shall (...), to appear before the pres^^ce of God, Psalm 4^. 2.

Thirdly, (...) all this inordinate (...) proceeds from distrust, and
diffidence of Gods protection, and providence, providing for our selves,
because we do not believe, that God, will provide for us; have faith in God,
knowing, that he has said, I will never leave thee, nor for sake thee, Heb.
13. 5. Certainly our great cares, come from our, little faith. great faith
would lessen our cares; for Faith, does not only purify, but satisfy, the
heart: So, that whereas before, Covetousness, did make Gold, thy God, now quite
contrary, this affiance, shall make God, thy Gold: for as Job speaks, if thou
return to the Almighty, thou shall then lay up gold, as dust, and the gold of
Ophir as the stones of the brook; Eritque Omnipotens, Lectissimum aurum tuum,
as Junius reads that place: And the Almighty shall be thy choice gold, and
silver, and strength unto thee, Job 22. 23, 24, and c. So, undervaluing the
world, the wealth, and glory, and pomp of it, thou will prefer God, in all thy
desires, saying with the Psalmist, The Lord himself is the portion of mine
inheritance, and of my cup; Thou shall maintain my lot; The lot is fallen unto
me, in a fair ground, yea, I have a goodly heritage, Psalm. 16. 6, 7.

Lastly, To all these considerations, and means, to prevent, or cast out this
Love of Money which is the Root of all Evil: join, fervent prayer to God, that
he would make these means, and thy endeavors, effectual unto thee: Pray with
the Prophet David, in the place but now, alleged, Incline my heart O Lord
unto thy Testimonies, and not unto Covetousness: and he, that knowing the
plague of his own heart, shall thus pray against it, Then hear thou in heaven,
O Lord, thy dwelling place, and do, according to all that thy servant calls
unto thee for, even for Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with thee, O Father, and
the Holy Ghost, be ascribed, all honor, and praise, dominion, and power, now
and for ever.

AMEN.
FINIS.

