Imprimatur, Hic Liber cui Titulus, The Present State, etc. Ex AEd. Lamb. 8.
Feb. 1678/9.
Car. Trumball Rev. in Christo Pat. ac Dom. Dom. Gul. Archiep. Cant. a Sac. Dom.

THE PRESENT STATE OF THE GREEK AND ARMENIAN Churches, Anno Christi, 1678.

Written at the Command of his Majesty, By PAUL RICAUT, Esquire, Late Consul at
Smyrna, and Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey at the Mitre in Fleet Street, near
Temple Bar. 1679.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO THE KING'S Most Excellent MAJESTY.
DREAD SOVEREIGN,
THESE following Treatises, which contain the Articles of Faith, and Customs of
the Greek and Armenian Churches, are a Task, which some Years past, Your Royal
Self was pleased to impose upon me; which though it be a Work more proper and
fit to be undertaken by some Learned Divine, rather than by a Person of my
Profession; yet, being moved thereunto by Command of Your Majesty, I esteemed
the Incumbence thereof to be a Duty, as obligatory as any other Act of
Obedience which I owe unto your Majesty, from which nothing but Death, or
Sickness, or some other violent disappointment could absolve me.

But that I have been thus tardy in the Execution of Your Royal Command, was
occasioned by my Attendance on Your Majesty's Affairs in Turkey, which being
protracted beyond my expectation, I deferred the payment of this Debt until I
could make tender of it with my own hands, and personally, on my Knees at the
same time, beg a remission for the defect. Being now therefore, by God's
Providence, returned to my own Country; behold me (Great Sir) at the Footstool
of Your Throne to pay this my Vow, which I always esteemed both Sacred and
Religious, and therefore tender it with a fear and trembling agreeable to that
vast distance and disproportion which is between Your Sublime Majesty, and the
humblest of your Servants: For Your Majesty, who transcends in Wisdom, is able
to penetrate into the deepest Points of these Discourses, and make more
judicious Reflections thereon, than the ablest Clerks and Critics of the
Schools; to which, when I add that admirable Spirit which. God oftentimes
bestows on Kings, illuminating them like Prophets, and bestowing on them
supereminent Graces, I cannot but with profound reverence and awe, expose this
little Work to the judicious and perspicatious Eye of Your Majesty, and with
the same care and caution offer nothing but what is sincere, and approved by
the Confession of the Oriental Faith, and allowed by the ablest Divines of the
Greek Church to be consentaneous to their Doctrine, having therein offered
nothing out of partiallity, to the Cause of the Reformed Churches, or prejudice
to the Papal Interest.

If this Treatise may find acceptance with Your Majesty, I shall account my
self extremely happy, and be encouraged to dedicate all my vacant hours, and
recesses from more necessary and public Services, to Studies grateful to Your
Majesty, and useful to my Country: For, being the Son of that Father, who, by
his Services and Sufferings, has set a fair Example to his Posterity, of
Loyalty and Obedience to Your Majesty, and of Conformity to the Church of
England, I have, in the largest Characters, Copied out that Lesson, and thereby
delight my self in nothing so much, as when I am performing my Duty and
Services toward God and Your Majesty; who am, with all Allacrity and Devotion,

Your Majesty's Most obedient, most loyal, most humble Subject, and meanest of
your Servants, PAUL RICAUT.

THE PREFACE
THESE following Treatises, of the Greek and Armenian Churches, contain a
perfect Compendium (as I may report) of those Principles which they call the
Articles of an Orthodox Faith, deduced (as they profess) from the purer times
of Christianity, and conserved incorrupt from the Tainture and Contagion of
Heresy in all succeeding Ages. I have not pretended in these ensuing
Discourses to discover which are Ancient and which are Modern Positions, but
clearly to lay down the matter of Fact, how they are held, and how maintained;
Not have I undertaken to confute those Tenants which I find to oppugn the
Articles of the Reformed Religion, being of a temper naturally averse to all
Disputations, and rather inclinable to reconcile Differences, than to widen
them; that so, by a favorable interpretation of all, that is not plain
Heresy, or open Blasphemy, I might, as it were, throw a Covering over the
smaller Blots or Blemishes of Humane Errors, whereby all the Christian World
(if possible) might agree in Charity, to bear each others Infirmities, and
entertain no other Emulations and Contests, than those which tend to out-vy one
the other in excesses of Piety, and a virtuous Religion.

For besides the uneasiness I find in my self on all occasions of Wranglings
and Debates, as well as an unsufficiency for Polemick Learning, I have
observed, That very few have yielded the Fort of their Understanding to the
force or violence of Disputations or Arguments, though Marshaled in all the
Warlike Exercitations of the Schools: For the Defendants, as Pride, Interest,
Zeal, and the Troops of other Passions, which are the common Soldiers of
Reason, are so well fortified and obstinate within, that they fear no storm or
assault from without; nor can they be constrained to surrender by a long Siege
and Famine; for their nourishments, consisting only of Notions and Air, are
never to be reduced, until that Pabulum be intercepted, and our Appetites
breath their last; and then, when Death comes, and we enter into the Regions of
Light, and our Intellects become free and manumised from the slavery and
usurpations of our Passions, we shall then, and not till then, discover the
sophistry of our Reasons; whereby those Clouds and Mists will vanish, which
vain jangling about Words, Interest, Pride, and the rest have exhaled, and
therewith obscured, and almost extinguished the true Lamp of the Soul: Witness
those Volumes and Folios of Disputation between the Reformed and Roman
Churches; what Kingdoms or Provinces have they convertted? or what
Universities, by plain demonstration of Argument, have they confuted, and
caused to recant their Error? Nay what single person almost has yielded to
the conviction of a Syllogism, without having first been prepossessed by an
affection to a side, or Party, on score of some Relation, or something of
Example, which they fancy, admire, and would imitate. It is very easy, (as an
ingenuous Countryman of ours says) without growing to the extreme impudence of
palpable lying, by leaving out the bad on one side, and good on the other, by
enforcing and flourishing all Circumstances and Accidents which are in our
favor, and by elevating and disgracing the contrary, by sprinkling the terms
of Honor wholly on the one side, and of Hatred and Ignominy on the other, to
make the Tale turn which way it shall please the Teller. And herein too many
Protestants, as well as the Papists seem to blame, who, being both
over-passionate toward their Party and Interest, have for the most part in the
Relation of their Stories done injury to Truth, abused the present Age, and
injured posterity. For I persuade my self, that had it not been for the extreme
Ambition of the Roman Jesuitical Clergy on the one side, and the too hot and
blind Zeal of some Pharisaical Professors on the other, Truth might have been
established with moderation, and all Churches reconciled without railing
Accusations, or personal Reproaches. It is easy to pacify when both Parties
are willing to condescend unto Expedients of Concord and Peace, which is then
only effected when the Spirits of men are become quiet and sedate, by the
virtues of Meekness and Charity, which are the only rare dispositions unto
knowledge and a godly life: but when men will soar in their fancies as high as
Heaven, and there penetrate into the Decrees of Predestination, dispute the
manner of the Holy Ghost's procession, and dive into the Mysteries of the Holy
Trinity, and Secrets of the Eucharist, matters so hidden and abstruse, that
Angels look into them with wonder and admiration, and Humane Reason becomes
giddy and blind, by too rash an approach to those astonishing lights, and loses
it is way in that immense cavity and vastness of distance which is between
Heaven and Earth: And when men do only esteem and indulge their Party, and damn
all other Societies, what can be more destructive to humane Polity? How can we
expect or hope for the conversion of Turks or Heathens, when they shall be
affrighted at the Church Gate, by some Opposites to one another of their own
divided persuasions, with the threats of Hell and Damnation, and meet almost as
many Anathemas as when they remained Infidels? How can we expect a
Reconciliation and Concord, whilst the Papists are so inveterate against the
Protestants, and all other Christian Churches; that those who are most
indiscreetly zealous amongst them, believe the Foundation of their Faith ought
justly to be subverted, not only by menacing Bulls, and Excommunications, but
by Fire and Sword, by Massacres of the People, deposing of Kings by the Papal
Authority, and by the murder of their true and natural King, and of such a King
as has been indulgent to all his Subjects, and to them in particular? that if
Religion had not struck them with an awe and dreadful affrightment of shedding
the Blood of God's Anointed, yet at least common gratitude, and the Bowels of
Humanity, should have deterred them from a Design so full of horror and
amazement. But if the Head be of these Principles, what else can we expect from
the Members of it? If these be the Foundations of their Religion, can the
super-structure be other than false and wicked? for I am confident that that
Religion is Unchristian, whose Conclusions are Blood and Destruction. Whilst
the Papists confined their Disputes within those Questions which were
controverted Problems, such as the Infallibility of the Church,
Transubstantiation, Prayers to Saints, and the like, on which Volumes have been
wrote, the Victory seemed doubtful; for, both sides, as in drawn Battles,
boasted of advantage. But when they began to discover the rottenness of their
Principles in Morality, which is naturally impressed on the Consciences of men,
and is properly the Light and Lamp of the Soul; such Morality I mean as allows
mental Reservations, Officiosum mendacium, or officious Lies, and a thousand
other Corruptions; whereby Equivocations, Falsehoods and Lies, are not only
excused and made lawful, but the greatest impurities hallowed and made good;
then, I say, their Adversaries took just advantage to render their Principles
not only destructive to a Church, but inconsistent with the first Elements and
Foundations of Government. In short therefore, there is no way to Concord and
Peace, but by Charity; to Theological knowledge, but by Faith and Humility,
which are Divine Gifts, which we must desire and pray for: When God shall have
conferred these upon us, we may lay aside all Disputations, and enter into the
plain Path; nothing is then more easy to be believed, than the Symbols of the
Apostolical and other Creeds received by the Church Universally; nothing more
easily practiced, than the Commands of the Decalogue, Fear and love God above
all, and Love your Neighbor as your self, and those especially of the Household
of Faith; this is that which cuts short all Arguments, for herein is comprised
the Law and the Prophets.

Considering the Premises, I shall not enter the Lists of Disputation against
any point maintained by the Greek Church, but however shall boldly reprove it,
in the generality of the people, of coldness and want of Devotion, seeming only
to maintain a mere outside and shell of Religion, laying more stress and
efficacy on the observation of their Fasts performed with rigor and severity,
and their Feasts celebrated with mirth and jollity, than on the force of
Prayer, and energy of a spiritual life. And yet I am so far from condemning
their Lents and Fasts, which are so ancient, (as may well be believed to have
been Apostolical) that I have entertained frequent imaginations in my mind,
that in so great looseness of life, and decay of Discipline, it was an especial
Grace and Favor of God, that the severity of Lents should still be maintained
and observed in those parts, whereby the People are restrained from Luxury,
curbed from Profaneness and Wantonness, and affected with some impressions of
Religion: for whilst they fear to eat any thing, though in secret, which is a
breach of Lent, they seem sensible of the danger of what they apprehend evil,
and capable of more lively and more substantial impressions. But the truth is,
they are ill instructed, or rather not taught at all, Sermons and Catechizing
are rare amongst them, Masses and Divine Service hudled and run over in a
cursory and negligent manner, and all Offices performed so perfunctorily, and
with so little Devotion, that if any people content themselves with the Opus
Operatum, it may be said to be these, or, that have a form of Godliness, but in
many of them too little of the power thereof.

Yet I cannot but almost retract what I have said, when I consider, how they
are startled and affrighted at the Sentence of Excommunication; how strict and
frequent some are in their Confessions, how obedient and submissive to the
censure and injunction of the Priest; which certainly do evidence some inward
tenderness of Conscience, and dispositions toward being edifyed, and built up
in a more perfect frame and structure of Religion. But here I lose my self and
am amazed, when I contemplate the light of the Gospel which shines in our
Islands, what daily Lectures we hear from the Pulpits; the knowledge we have
from the Scriptures, expanded and laid open to us in our own Tongue, the Divine
Mysteries expounded by learned Commentaries, and most Mechanics amongst us
more learned and knowing than the Doctors and Clergy of Greece: And yet, good
God! That all this should serve to render us more blind, or more perverse; for
who is it that values the Excommunication of a Bishop, or other Ecclesiastical
Censures? who accounts of Vigils and Fasts according to the Institutions of the
Universal, and of their own Church? or weighs the private Instructions of a
Priest, who is the Monitor of his Soul? Nay, even those who profess Obedience
to the Church of England, and attribute an efficacy to the power of the Keys,
and would not for the world be under an Excommunication, and hold themselves
obliged to celebrate the Feasts with devotion and rejoicing, and account the
nonobservance thereof, the Characteristical point of a Phanatick: yet, when the
Anniversary Fasts take their turn, which impose the same injunction on them of
keeping holy, as do the Feasts, they find excuses to evade the obligation, and
dispute against all Penance, Mortification, and Severities of life, as grounded
on the Doctrine of Merits, and Works of Supererogation: And in this manner
elude that admirable duty enjoined by Christ himself, where he says, That when
the Bridegroom is taken from them then they should fast, and would abolish that
signal mark of Christianity, which by its rigor and frequency distinguishes it
from all other Religions in the World. Some, I know, will be apt to attribute
this abridgment of the Clergies power to their supereminent knowledge, and more
clear light of Scripture, that they are better instructed than to be guided by
their Priests, or to stand in awe of the condemnation of a supercilious
Prelate: but such Learning as this, derived from the Principles of Pride and
Licentiousness, is far worse than ignorance: and that Person who is humble and
submissive, apt and willing to be instructed, is a better Christian, and in a
more secure path and way to Godliness and Heaven, than he, that having heard
and read much, stands dangerously towering on the presumptuous Pinnacle of his
own Reason.

And indeed this adherence to the Doctrine of their Church, is the proper Basis
and Pillar of their Faith: For those ancient janglings, and controversies,
which possessed the Greek Spirits in former days, and through the acrimony of
their malice and hatred, opened a breach in diverse pales of the Eastern Church,
whereby the whole surface of things, was overwhelmed with the vast inundation
of the Mohammedan Enemy; are Tragedies so sadly recorded, that the present Age
seems, by the memory of those Examples, so far to dread the danger of divisions
and innovations; that they refuse to amend even that, which by their own
confession is an Error, either in doctrine or practice: but it is no wonder,
that those from whom God has removed the ancient glory of his Candlestick
brightly shining amongst them, should delight to dwell in the twilight of
Batts, and groap in an Egyptian darkness: but it is strange, that those to whom
his mercies and patience indulge the clearer Rays of the Gospel, should
forsake the Sunshine of divine Illumination, to follow fantastic and wandering
lights, mistaking them for that great Pillar of Fire, which conducted the
Israelites.

Another great help to support, and maintain the Eastern Church, is their
Confession to a Priest; for by nothing more does the Power and Authority of the
Greek Church and Clergy seem to be maintained and asserted; who account it the
sole Axel on which the Globe of Ecclesiastical Polity turns; and that without
it they can neither have Influence on Men's Consciences, nor, under the power of
Infidels and Aliens, govern the least Circumstance of their lives and manners.
I know not how far the Roman Clergy may have abused this Excellent evidence of
repentance, this Ordinance of the Gospel, this admirable means to inflame our
devotion, and to guide and instruct us in the rules of holy Living: It is more
than probable, that their use of it in an ordinary and familiar manner, rather
in form than substance, without regard to feigned, or real Penitentiaries, and
as an encouragment to annimate men to sin, when they can so easily be pardoned,
has afforded just occasion to those, who desired a Reformation, to exclaim
against it, and to take it wholly from the Church, as an Institution so
entirely corrupted, as never more to be reformed or recovered, but by a total
abolishment. The Church of England (as I am persuaded) apprehended it under
this notion, when its Wisdom, and perhaps I may say the Spirit of God, thought
fit to dispense for a time with this Discipline of Penance, but with intention
to restore it again when the time should become more seasonable, and we our
selves more worthy to receive so profitable an Institution; as our Rubric
seems to intimate in the Office appointed for the first day of Lent. And this
Doctrine is maintained in the Sermons and Writings of our Divines, and given as
Counsel in that Exhortation preceding the Communion Service, that we should
confess our sins, not only to God and our Brethren whom we have offended, but
in Cases of scandal and a troubled Conscience, or other need of Ghostly Counsel
and Advice, to consult God's Ministers, the Priests; in which Case also our
Church has provided a Form of Absolution.

Considering which Premises, it will not be difficult to conjecture under what
Notion the Eastern apprehends the Western Reformed Churches; for they, taking
notice that the English neither keep Fasts, nor practice Confession, nor
ordinarily make the Sign of the Cross; and that the Dutch Nation at Smyrna
rehearse no Prayers, at the Burial of the dead, are not only scandalized
thereat, but also Jews and Turks take offense at the silence of Prayers when
the dead are buried; wondering what sort of Heresy, or Sect, is sprung up in
the World, so different from the Religion of all the Prophets; at which
undecent practice, the Roman Clergy taking advantage to disparage the
Protestants, represent them to the Greeks under the notion of Calvinists, whom
they characterise to be such as contemn all Order in the Church, the authority
of Priesthood, abolish Fasts, abhor the Cross, contemn the Saints, besides a
thousand other Heresies and Schisms, in which they report we are at odds
amongst our selves: And in reallity, were it not that the English Nation, by
the orderly use of their Liturgy, and Discipline of their Church, observing the
Lords day and the Grand Festivals, did vindicate themselves of these
Aspersions; it were impossible to persuade the Oriental Countries, that those
which we call Reformed, were Christians, or at least to retain any thing of
Ancient and Apostolical Institution: Upon which score, the Greeks detest that
Confession of Faith, supposed to be wrote by Cyrillus, their Patriarch of
Constantinople, in the year 1629, and Printed and Confuted in the year 1631, by
Mattheus Caryonhilus, Archbishop of Iconium; for that Confession, agreeing
wholly with the Doctrine of Calvin in every particular, is believed in a great
measure to have been fathered on him by the Jesuits; who, to justify their
inhumane Persecutions of that worthy Prelate, by making Turks and Infidels the
Instruments of their rage, formed and vented any thing which might procure the
Curses and Anathemas of the Old and New Rome. I am persuaded that this
Cyrillus, having spent some time in England, and there observed that purity of
our Doctrine, and the excellency of our Discipline, which flourished in the
beginning of the Reign of King Charles the Martyr, and viewed our Churches
trimmed and adorned in a modest Medium, between the wanton and superstitious
dress of Rome, and the slovenry and insipid Government of Geneva, entertained a
high Opinion of our happy Reformation; intending thence perhaps to draw a
Pattern, whereby to amend and correct the defaults of the Greek Church,
retrenching the length of their Services, and the multitude of their
Ceremonies, and also by that Exemplar to reduce their Festivals to a moderate
number, to create a right apprehension of the state of Souls after separation,
and wholly to take away certain conceits both superstitious and savouring of
Gentilism, and confirm his Church in a reverend Opinion of the Holy Sacrament
of the Eucharist, without lanching so far into the explication of that Mystery,
as of late they have done both in the Anatolian Confession, which was generally
owned and confirmed in the year 1672, by the Subscription of the four Oriental
Patriarchs, and of the Metropolites then present, at the Instance of Mounsieur
de Nointel, Ambassador for his most Christian Majesty, a very intelligent and
ingenious Gentleman. And had not this good Patriarch been thus maliciously
prosecuted, and his life taken from him by unhappy Wiles, he might, with God's
assistance, have accomplished a work of Reformation, and piloted the Church
into that state of Apostolical Purity, which King James, Erasmus, Cassander,
Melancthon, Bucar the Archbishop of Spalatro, and others did design.

But God, it seems, has not as yet ordained the time for so happy a Conversion
and Reformation, which is a Blessing rather to be wished for at present than to
be expected; till when, it is the duty of all good Men, and the Elect of God,
to offer a continual Sacrifice of Prayer on the Altar of their hearts, that he
would be pleased to grant us Unity of Faith in our Religion, and Peace and
Concord in all Christian Governments, that being one Sheepfold, under one
Shepherd, the Lord Jesus, we may imitate the Example of him who is the Prince
of Peace.

Amen.
THE CONTENTS OF The several Chapters of the Present State of the Greek Church.
CHAP. I.
THE Present State of the Greek Church in general under the Turkish Tyranny.
page 1
CHAP. II.
Of the seven Churches of Asia, unto which S. John wrote, viz. Smyrna, Ephesus,
Thyatira, Laodicea, Philadelphia, Sardis, and Pergamus; wherein also is treated
of Hierapolis. 30
CHAP. III.
Of the Office and Constitution of the four Patriarchs, the Extent of their
respective Jurisdictions, their Revenue, and whence it arises, with what
precedence or place the Patriarch of Constantinople acknowledges to the Pope of
Rome. 81
CHAP. IV.
The Opinion of the Greek Church concerning that Article in the Nicene Creed. I
believe one Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church, and what Authority and Power
is given by them thereunto. 120
CHAP. V.
Of the Fasts of the Greek Church. 129
CHAP. VI.
Of the Feasts observed in the Greek Church. 139
CHAP. VII.
Of Baptism, and the sealing of Infants, called, (...). 161
CHAP. VIII.
Of the second Mystery called Chrism. 171
CHAP. IX.
Of the third Mystery called, The Holy Eucharist, as also of the Blessed Bread,
called, (...), in Latin, Panis Benedictus. 177
CHAP. X.
Of the fourth Mystery called Priesthood, wherein is treated of their
Monasteries, Orders of Friars and Nuns, and the Austerity of their lives. 201
CHAP. XI.
In which is treated of Mount Athos, called by the Greeks, (...), or, The Holy
Mountain, and of the Monasteries thereon, and of the other more famous
Monasteries of the Oriental Churches. 215
CHAP. XII.
Of Confession, Contrition, and the (...), or, The Oil of Prayer. 263
CHAP. XIII.
Of the power of Excommunication, and upon what slight occasions they make use
of it. 271
CHAP. XIV.
Of the treatment the Greeks use toward their Dead, and the Opinion they have
of Purgatory, and the middle State of Souls. 203
CHAP. XV.
Of the fifth Mystery called Marriage, and the Customs they use therein. 305
CHAP. XVI.
Of the Liturgies used in the Greek Church, and of their length, and when used.
317
CHAP. XVII.
Of Pictures and Images in the Greek Church. 321
CHAP. XVIII.
Of Prayers to Saints, and Adoration of Angels. 331
CHAP. XIX.
Of the Greek Islands in the AEgean Sea, called now the Arche-pelago, and the
division there of Religion between the Greek and Latin Churches. 337
CHAP. XX.
Of other Matters and Tenants held in the Greek Church, not comprised in the
premises, and particular Customs observed amongst them. 370
THE CONTENTS OF
The several Chapters of the Present State of the Armenian Church.

CHAP. I.
OF the Armenian Church in general. 385
CHAP. II.
Of their Patriarchs and Government in the Church. 390
CHAP. III.
Of Etchmeasin. 396
CHAP. IV.
The Confession of Faith in the Armenian Church. 409
CHAP. V.
Of Fasts in the Armenian Church. 415
CHAP. VI.
Of Feasts in the Armenian Church. 419
CHAP. VII.
Of their Monasteries and Rules observed therein. 423
CHAP. VIII.
Of the two Sacraments Baptism, and the Lord's Supper. 431
CHAP. IX.
Of Penance and Excommunication. 438
CHAP. X.
Of their Marriages. 440
CHAP. XI.
Their Opinion of Souls in the state of separation, and their Ceremonies used
toward the dead. 442
CHAP. XII.
A Confession of the Armenian Doctrine, subscribed unto by the Patriarch and
Bishops together at Constantinople. 447
THE PRESENT STATE OF THE GREEK CHURCH.
CHAP. I.
The Present State of the Greek Church in general, under the Turkish Tyranny.

THE ancient division of Greece into many Commonwealths, and their inveterate
hatred against Philip of Macedon, for no other Reason than because he was a
King, and (as they styled him) a Tyrant, and the unquiet disposition of that
People, never contented in their Estate, nor satisfied in their Rulers, (the
Humor and Fate of most Popular Governments) have to us, and to all future
Ages, represented the Grecians, as great lovers of alteration and freedom: Time
afterward, and vicissitude of things, transforming them from Associates to be
Subjects of the Roman^ Empire, they enjoyed notwithstanding, for some Ages, the
benefit of their own Laws, Protection and Liberty, under the successful
progress of the conquering Eagles; and when the Imperial Seat was transported
to Bizantium, the Emperors themselves became Grecians, and the People enjoyed
still the lenity and gentleness of the Roman Yoke.

In this easiness of living things continued until the year of Christ 1300.
when an unexpected Storm arose from the East, which, as a little Cloud,
appearing first at a distance like a spot, or the measure of a Palm, does
afterward diffuse it self in a general blackness over the Face of the whole
Heavens; or as I have seen at a large Prospect, something like the Swarm of a
single Hive, which, approaching nearer, has proved to be an Army of Locusts in
those infinite numbers as have darkened the Sun at Noon, and overspread the
Valleys, but even now green, proud, and luxuriant in the Plenty and Fruit they
bore. Just so the Turk from an inconsiderable beginning, contemned, and scorned
by his petty Neighbors, much more by the Puissance and Power of the Grecian
Emperors, came on a sudden like a Whirlwind from the East, and, like
Locusts, overspread the Face of Asia, and now feeds and triumphs in the most
pleasant and opulent parts of Europe.

But because Providence in this World does not ordinarily dispose of things
without rational Causes and previous Dispositions, (not to dispute here that
which some affirm concerning a certain period prefixed by the secret Counsel of
God's decree, to the Continuance and Being of all Governments) no more rational
Causes can be assigned to have concurred toward the destruction of the Grecian
Dominion and Liberty, than their own luxurious Security, Avarice, and Faction.
Their delight in ease, begot in them negligence, and security in their Affairs,
blindly permitting the Turks to pass over the Bosphorus, and build a Castle on
the European side, under the notion of a Sheep-pen, or Enclosure for their
Cattle; and on the other side of the Hellespont, took little notice when their
Armies were transported, and had taken a Fort Which the Greeks called by the
name of, A Stye of Hogs: they laughed at the Turks for contending for a Stye;
and so continued in this careless way of living and drollery, until the Enemy,
from the Kennel of unclean Beasts, had penetrated into the Palaces of their
Emperor, and violated all the Sanctuaries of Divine and Humane Rites.
Covetousness, in like manner, which is the root of all Evils, robbed the
Treasury of their Princes; and the Officers, with Detestable Corruption, preyed
on what was levied for the maintenance of War, and having enriched their own
Coffers, starved the Public; by which means, all Warlike Preparations ceasing,
the Soldiery became mutinous and unruly, and the People faint and discouraged.
The Factions also, in the Civil Government, were not less dangerous, caused by
Emulations, Jealousies, and Treachery (Evils incident, even at this day, unto
the Nature of this People;) for their Hatred, and Dissensions were heightened
with such inveterate Malice, each toward other, as could more easily submit to
an Enemy, than condescend to a Citizen; Externo potius applicet, quam Civi
cedat. With this quarrelsome temper of the Greeks, Q. Flaminius was anciently
so well acquainted, that fearing their Dissensions amongst themselves (after he
had withdrawn his Army from Greece) might expose them to the Sword of Philip of
Macedon, Concordiae in Civitatibus Principes and Ordines inter se, and in
commune omnes Civitates consulerent, adversus consentientes, nec Regem quenquam
satis validum nec Tyrannumfore. T. Live. li. 34.
and Nabis the Tyrant, exhorted all the States of Greece to Unity and
Agreement, which, like the Bundle of Arrows, could hardly be broken by the
greatest Force. The foregoing disorders, and this factious temper, were
Preludes to the destruction of the Grecian Empire, which first being made
Christian and equally glorious to any Church of Christ, both for Multitude, and
for the Zeal of Professors, was through the Grace of God more excellently
prepared with Passive Virtues to sustain the Yoke of the Grand Oppressor, which
was imposed on them for not better observing the Law of Christ's Kingdom.

In this condition, we are now to consider of this lost and undone Empire,
whose Crown and Diadem being fallen to the Ground, and not farther to be
accounted amongst the great Potentates, who sway and govern the Earth; we are
to treat of it, as of a number of People professing the Gospel of Christ; and
in Spiritual Matters submitting with all obedience to the Government and Rule
prescribed them by such Pastors and Ministers, as have, by succession of Ages,
been instituted and set over them by Christ and his Apostles. And being here to
speak of a Church-Christian, we are not to treat of it as of a single Province,
as of Hellas, or as confined to Attica alone, Ab Isthmi Angustiis Hellas
incipit. nor as afterward by enlargement of the Macedonian Dominion over the
lesser Commonwealths, the Achivi, Danai, Myrmidones, Pelasgi, and Argivi, were
nominated with the common appellation of Grecians. But we are here to consider
them both as Hellenes, properly of the Greek Nation, as denoted in Scripture, 1
Cor. 1. v. 22. (...), The Greeks seek Wisdom, and as such a number of
Christians, who in any part of the World submit to the Government of one of the
four Patriarchs.

The Greek Church is ancient, and had the Blessing and Honor to be taught by
the Apostles themselves; for St. Paul himself was their great Doctor, by whom
the Gospel was first preached at Philippi in Macedonia; next at Thessalonica,
the chief City in Mygdonia; then at Athens in Attica, and Corinth in
Peloponesus. Apollos also came from Ephesus, being instructed by Aquila and
Priscilla, and preached the Gospel in Achaia, Acts 18. 24. And so gloriously
was the Doctrine of Christianity received and propagated by the vast numbers of
Christians, who crowded into the Church, that for the better Government
thereof, it was thought fit and necessary to dispose them under several
Jurisdictions; so St. Paul constituted Dionysius at Athens, Aristarchus at
Thessalonica, Epaphroditus at Philippi, Silas at Corinth, Timothy at Ephesus,
and Titus in the Isle of Crete, now called Candia: and so generally were the
Greeks in those days converted to the Christian Faith, that a Grecian and a
Christian were almost convertible Terms, comprehending, as it were, the whole
Body of the Gentiles, (...), to the Jew first, and then to the Gentile, or
Greek, Romans 2. v. 9, 10. But how ancient this Church was, with what Zeal it
begun, with what Glory and Magnificence it shined, under the protection and
succor of its nursing Fathers the Grecian Emperors, is not our Theme in this
following Treatise: But our Subject here is more Tragical, the subversion of
the Sanctuaries of Religion, the Royal Priesthood expelled their Churches, and
those converted into Moschs; the Mysteries of the Altar concealed in secret and
dark places; for such I have seen in Cities and Villages where I have
traveled, rather like Vaults or Sepulchers than Churches, having their Roofs
almost levelled with the Superficies of the Earth, lest the most ordinary
exsurgency of structure should be accused for triumph of Religion, and to stand
in competition with the lofty Spires of the Mohammedan Moschs. But so it became
Christ to suffer; and, in imitation of that Grand Exemplar, his Church, as
Members of his Mystical Body, conforms to his admirable Humility and Patience,
whereby the promise of our Savior is verified, That the Gates of Hell shall
not prevail against his Church, and that Tyranny and Oppression shall never
subdue the Constancy, or abate the loud Profession of the Christian Religion.
And as the increase and prevalency of the Christian Faith against the violence
of Kings and Emperors, and all the Terrors of Death, is a demonstration of
its verity; so the stable perseverance in these our days of the Greek Church
therein, notwithstanding the Oppression and Contempt put upon it by the Turk,
and the Allurements and Pleasures of this World, is a Confirmation no less
convincing than the Miracles and Power which attended its first beginnings: For
indeed it is admirable to see and consider with what Constancy, Resolution, and
Simplicity, ignorant and poor men keep their Faith; and that the proffer of
Worldly Preferments, and the privilege which they enjoy by becoming Turks, the
Mode and Fashion of that Country which they inhabit, should not decoy or
debauch such silly Souls, who can offer little more of Argument in defense of
their persuasion, than the Doctrine of their Forefathers, and the common
profession of those, who, in many places, especially in the Morea, and all
Romagnia, use the same Customs, and speak the same Language of Greek with them.
Nor can I attribute this Constancy to the mere force of Education, for Turks
intermingle with them In the Morea and parts of Greece.
, inhabit in the same Street, and sometimes under the same Roof; their Children
play, and are bred up together, and have almost the same Manners and Customs
with them, and have little different besides their Religion, and something of
Briskness and Spirit in the Children of Turks, which seems naturally to usurp
an Authority over their Greek Play-Fellows: So that if Education were the sole
motive and principle, Turcism might sooner take root than Christianity, having
the opportunity equal, and in the easiness of things naturally to be believed,
and other specious and fair offers, the advantage, before the mysterious
Doctrine of our Faith, and the exact severity of our lives, which is neither
revealed nor performed by the mere motion of flesh and blood: But certainly
much is to be attributed herein to the Grace of God, and the Promises of the
Gospel; and if any Art or Polity can be said to have place over the affection
of the People; none seems more efficacious than the strict observation of the
Fasts and Feasts of their Church, by which the people are taught as in a
visible Catechism, the History of Christianity; more (I dare say) than by their
ill-composed Sermons, or repetition of the Scripture in the Vulgar Tongue; for
being severely imposed, and observed with much solemnity, they affect the
Vulgar with an awe of something divine and extraordinary in them. The fear also
and apprehension of some Authority in the Church, as the power of the Keys, The
Esteem which the Greeks have of the power of the Keys.
Excommunications, and other Ecclesiastical Censures, work a reverence in the
people toward their Clergy, which is indeed the main Pillar and Basis which
supports a Church. For as Tacitus speaks of the Jewish Nation, when under the
Roman Power; That, Hon^^ Sacerdotii firmamentum Potentiae eorum; the Honor
which they gave to their Priesthood was the foundation of their Regimen; for
that which commands the conscience, reduces the body, will, and affections to
obedience: so more particularly in Ecclesiastical Polity, it is the Fence and
Hedge of the Sheepfold. This being broken down, the Sheep stray, and Satan
enters with his seed of Heresy and Schism; for what can hinder men from
running into Prodigies of Fancy and wild Opinions, where every man is his own
Pastor and his own Bishop? This apprehension of Power which attends the Keys,
is available in a double capacity; for, besides the energy it has in Spiritual
Matters, it supplies amongst the Greeks the defect of a Temporal Authority: in
regard that they (though Subjects of the Turk) do yet oftentimes in
Controversies about matters of Right follow the advice of the Apostle, by
referring the determination of their Cause to the arbitrament of spiritual men,
and chief of their Saints, who are their Bishop or Patriarch, and other Chiefs
of their Clergy, rather than to stand to the Judicature of Infidels. But this
the Church presumes not to bind on men's Consciences, left it should seem to
usurp that Right which others hold by the Sword, and contradict that saying of
our Savior, My Kingdom is not of this world: Howsoever, such as are religious
and devout amongst them, esteem it a Crime highly scandalous, and savouring of
a bad intention, to have recourse rather to a Mohammedan Divan than a Christian
Sentence; as if those who can judge of the inward Conscience were not yet
sufficient to Umpire in a Temporal Cause.

Secondly, This Reverence to the Church produces a firm belief and strict
adherence to the Articles of it, and to all the Ceremonies and matters the most
minute and indifferent, not suffering the least change or alteration in them:
which in this conjuncture and state of things seems very convenient, if not
necessary, in the Greek Church. The Greeks presume not to vary in their
Doctrine or Practice.
For though they are sensible (as many of their Priests have confessed to me)
of the inconvenient length of their Liturgies (concerning which we shall speak
in another Chapter) and of many superstitious Customs and Ceremonies derived to
them from the times of Gentilism, which are now ingrafted into, and as it were
grown up with their Religion, and many other Rites of which the wiser men are
ashamed, and wish they were amended; yet they fear to correct and alter them:
Nay (as they have assured me) the very alteration of the Old to the New Style
would be highly hazardous; lest the People observing their Guides to vary in
the least point from their ancient, and (as they imagine) their Canonical
Profession, should begin to suspect the truth of all, and from a doubt dispute
themselves into an indifference, and thence into an entire desertion of the
Faith. Though the Christian Religion professed in the Ottoman Dominions lies
under a Cloud, and a sad discouragement, yet, thanks be to God, there is a free
and public exercise thereof allowed in most parts, and something of respect
given to the Clergy, even by the Mahometans themselves, who esteem honor due
to all persons of what Profession soever, who are set apart and consecrated to
Gods service: For it is evident that the Turks The Turks have some opinion of
the sanctity of the Christian Religion.
entertain something of a good opinion of the sanctity of the Christian
Religion, and a belief that God hears their Prayers, because that in the time
of common Pestilence, or Calamity, both the Greek and Armenian Patriarchs are
enjoined by the Turks to assemble their People and pray against it. This
permission of the Christian Religion indulged by the Turks, is both agreeable
to Mahomet's Doctrine, and the Privileges granted by the Sultans, who in their
Conquests of the Grecian Empire judged that a toleration of Religion would much
facilitate the entire subjection of that People.

The greatest burden that is laid upon them by the Turk is their Haratch or
Poll-money, for which every man who is arrived to 20 years of age pays Four
Lion Dollars per Annum; and Youths between 15 to 20 pay half so much; but Women
are exempt from this burden. Also Greeks who have Lands and Houses are taxed
pro rato for extraordinary Expenses, for entertaining a Pasha or some great
Person, whose charges they are obliged to defray in his passage through their
Country: and this Tax is as well common to Turks as Greeks. But this is a
matter inconsiderable in respect of that Custom of Decimation, which was a
taking away of the Tithe, or every Tenth of Male-children from the Greeks,
according to the number of them in the respective Parishes, out of which
proceeded the best and stoutest of the Turkish Janisaries: but this Custom is
now wholly out of use, not having been practiced for many years; either because
the Turks are willing to lay an easy Yoke on the Greeks, or because so many of
them turn Mahometans, and of other parts and Nations such numbers flock daily
to the Profession of Turcism, that there is no need of this unnatural addition
to increase the Power and Kingdoms of the Turk.

But with what freedom soever Christianity is licensed amongst the Turks in
Europe, it lies under a Cloud, and a greater abhorrency in Asia (unless in the
Maritime Towns and Places, where Traffic and Commerce have taught them
Civility.) For Mahometanisme having had its first Original in Asia, is most
precisely observed in those Eastern parts, where Christian Priests are forced
to live with caution, and officiate in obscurity and privacy, fearing the
superstitious temper of the Asian Zealots, who are of a Pharisaical humor,
high esteemers of their own sanctity; in comparison of which, they account the
European Turks loose and negligent Professors, defiled by the use of Wine, and
unhallowed by their conversation with the Christians, to whom they commonly
bear so horrible a detestation, that some of them judge it unlawful to be in
their company, or receive presents from them, or to give them the salutation of
peace, and esteem their Clothes, if touched by Christians, to be polluted
Garments, profaning their prayers. It is generally observed, that Pharisaical
The pride of Pharisaical Professors.
Professors in all Religions are the worst people in the world, and the
greatest disturbers of Humane Conversation, and the peace and quiet of a
Commonwealth. I knew once at Smyrna a Reverend Preacher amongst the Turks, or
as you may call him a Doctor or Schoolmaster, who had many Pupils under him,
whom he instructed in the Mohammedan Law, who was so great a lover of his own
Sect, that he hated the rest of Mankind; his Sermons were always stuffed with
Invectives against Christians, charging Smyrna with unpardonable sins, for
indulging privileges unto them, and for admitting them into their Country on
consideration of that lucre and benefit which their Trade brings: in which
discourse he oftentimes suffered himself to be so extravagantly transported
with intemperance of language, that at length the Officers of the City were
forced to put him in mind of the common scandal he gave to the interest and
subsistence of the Inhabitants; that those discourses reflected on the Grand
Signor and his Government, and were Declamations against the clemency of their
Emperor toward his Subjects, and opposed those Capitulations and Articles
which the wisdom of their Government had concluded with Christian Princes,
which were matters of that concernment, as were neither safe for him to handle,
nor for them to hear: with which Admonition though this Pharisee grew more
moderate in his language, yet his pride and insolence was not in the least
abated; for when he mounted his Mule, accompanied with his Followers on foot,
of the same rank and head, and accidentally met with Franks riding abroad on
Horses (such they call all the Western Christians) they would force them to
alight, and with great reverence attend until the sanctity of so holy a man
were past: For their Books (as they report) say, and teach them not to suffer
Christians to sit on their Horses, whilst men of their profession pass by them.
But our people little concerning themselves with what is written in their
Books, and less supporting an insolence and affront from them, there often
happened rencounters and scuffles between both parties, which had proceeded to
higher quarrels, had not the Magistrates seasonably suppressed the insolence of
that people; which was afterward confirmed by Commands from the Grand Signor.

But not only has the Greek Church the Turk for an Enemy and an Oppressor, but
also the Latins; The advantage of the Latin Church above the Greek.
who not being able by their Missionaries to gain them to their party, and
persuade them to renounce the Jurisdiction of their Patriarchs, and own the
Authority and Supremacy of the Roman Bishop, do never omit those occasions
which may bring them under the lash of the Turk, and engage them in a constant
and continual expense; hoping that the people being oppressed and tired, and in
no condition of having relief under the protection of their own Governors, may
at length be induced to embrace a Foreign Head, who has riches and power to
defend them. Moreover, besides these wiles, the Roman Priests frequent all
places, where the Greeks inhabit, endeavoring to draw them unto their side
both by Preaching and Writings, of which one being written in the Vulgar Greek
by Francis Richard a Jesuit, and printed at Paris, called (...) (...), was
dispersed in all parts, where that Language was current; of which the Patriarch
and Presbyters of that Church taking special notice, and being very jealous and
sensible of the ill effects it might produce in the minds of the Ignorant,
caused about 18 Years past that Book to be burnt, prohibiting the use and
reading thereof unto all people of their Church, under penalty of the most
severe Excommunication. But so far indeed have the Latins the advantage over
the Greeks, as Riches has over Poverty, or Learning over Ignorance. And
whereas now the ancient Structures and Colleges of Athens are become ruinous,
and only a fit habitation for its own Owl, and all Greece poor and illiterate,
such Spirits and Wits amongst them, who aspire unto Sciences and Knowledge, are
forced to seek it in Italy: where sucking from the same Fountain, and eating
Bread made with the same Leaven of the Latins, it is natural that they should
conform to the same Principles and Doctrine. So that it will not be strange, if
in Exposition of those points wherein the Church of God for some Ages has been
silent, and but now controverted in these latter days, the Greek Priests should
with little variety follow the sense of the Latin, which they take up at
adventure, not being of themselves capable either to prove, or try the meaning
of the Scriptures, or examine the ancient Tenants of their own Church. And thus
much shall suffice to have spoken of the Greek Church in general.

CHAP. II.
Of the seven Churches of Asia, to which St. John wrote; Viz. Smyrna, Ephesus,
Laodicea, Philadelphia, Sardis, Pergamus, and Thyatira; wherein also is treated
of Hierapolis.

BEING to treat of the Present State of the Greek Church; the condition in
which the seven Churches of Asia now stand, of which Christ himself and the
Holy Spirit was pleased to take so much notice, Rev. I. must not only come
pertinent to our discourse, but in some measure also delight the curiosity of
the Reader, being transferred from my self, who have with my own Eyes beheld
the strange Catastrophe of those anciently famous Cities, which now, for the
most part, are forgotten in their Names, as well as buried in their Ruins.

It seems that these ancient Cities were not only famous for their Devotions,
which moved our Lord Christ, by the hand of the beloved Disciple, to write them
a Letter, but likewise by a special denomination were called the Churches of
Asia the less, though others might be as renowned, and as devout as they; in
which the Gospel had been preached, and accepted, and might be styled with the
same appellation, as parts of this great Continent, which is one of the
quarters of the World. But this term of Asia is here restrained to the lesser
or Lydian Asia, in which the seven Churches are situate, different, as Heylin
observes, from the Proconsular, which well agrees with what is said Acts 16. v.
6. and v. 7. When they had gone through Phrygia, and the Region of Galatia, and
were forbidden of the Holy Ghost to preach the Word in Asia, after they were
come to Mysia, they assayed to go into Bythinia, but the Spirit suffered them
not. Nor is the Name of Asia improperly restrained to Lydia it self, AEolis,
and Jonia, and some parts of the greater Mysia; because a famous City seated at
the foot of the Mountain Tmolus gave this denomination to the Countries
circumjacent, before it was enlarged so far, as to become a general Name for
the greater Continent.

This Mountain though in some parts hides his head in the Clouds, and commonly
wears a covering of Snow, and is asperous, craggy, and barren; Tmolus.
yet in other place, that I have passed, where his head is not so loftily
raised, he is more fruitful and pleasant, replenished with Villages and
Inhabitants, adorned with straight Pines and Oaks, the Soil as rich and fat as
the lower Valleys, watered with abundance of cool and pleasant Streams, planted
with Vineyards and Fruit Trees to refresh weary and heated Travelers, which
near some Villages being set with care and art, intermixed with Streams and
Falls of Water, render them more pleasant than the Orchards of the Plains, or
Gardens of the Cities.

The City of Smyrna Smyrna.
(as I am apt to believe) had anciently its Chief situation upon, and on the
side of the South-Hills, which we call the Wind-mill-Hills over Santa
Veneranda; but being shaken with Earthquakes, was afterward for the
convenience of Trade, re-edified for the most part in a bottom, or level, being
removed from a more wholesome air of a rising Hill (which still retains in its
ruinous Footsteps the marks and remembrances of its ancient Glory) to a place
of Bogs and Fens, which in the Autumn evaporated those Fumes and Atoms, which
engendered malignant Fevers, and proved most fatal to English bodies; though
now for some years past, that the lower parts being inhabited, the Ditches
drained, and the Bogs turned into Gardens, and the air purified by the fire and
smoke of many Inhabitants, this place cannot, in my opinion, be esteemed less
healthful than any other Maritime City in the Levant. This City is still the
most happy and flourishing of all the other Sister-Churches, having still the
Honor to be a Metropolis, and to rule over those which were formerly co-equals
with it. The convenience of its Port and Harbor (being one of the finest Bays
in the world) caused the Christian Merchants to choose it, for the Chief Scale
of the Turkish Empire; whose Trade increasing, and thereby the Customs of the
Grand Signor, began in these late years to be taken notice of by the principal
Ministers of State, and to acquire a Renown above all the Cities in the lesser
Asia: for this Cause, the famous Vizier Achmet, Son of Kuperlee, cast his Eyes
upon it; and understanding in what manner this City was neglected, how its
ancient Buildings and Royal Structures were destroyed, its Aquaeducts decayed,
and no public Edifice remaining agreeable to the state and glory of such a
Mart and Emporium, famous through the World, was moved to take a resolution to
restore in some measure the pristine magnificence of this City: which
undertaking to do at his own charge and expense, he erected a stately
Besasteene, (which is a place where Shops are kept, like our Exchange) a
sumptuous Chane with a Bagno, and Stables belonging to it, all built of
Freestone, and covered with Lead, except the Stables; which Stones were
brought from the ancient Ruins of the old Smyrna; and also formed and raised a
handsome Structure for the Custom-house upon Piles of Wood within the Sea: for
convenience of all which, he erected a stately Aquaeduct, and joined so many
Streams of Water into one Current, that not only the New-Buildings were
supplied therewith, Besides 10 old Fountains which were dry, but again repaired.
but also 73 new Fountains were added to this City; so that whereas formerly
some Houses were forced to fetch their Water from far, now every Family is well
accommodated, and every Street as well supplied therewith, as most Cities are
which are seated in the great Continent of Asia. All which was finished and
completed in the year of our Lord, 1677.

This is the present State and Condition of Smyrna in these Modern times: How
it was anciently, we shall best understand from History, and from the Remains
of Antiquity, of which few are discernable; as namely, the Theater, The Theater.
which was about the year 1675. wholly ruined by the Turks, and the Stones
carried down to raise the new Edifices: At the destruction whereof it is
observable, that in the midst of one of the main Walls, there was found
enclosed about a Bushel of Medals, all of the Stamp of Galienus the Emperor,
of which I my self procured some; judging that this Theater, which was almost
as ancient as the City it self, might be repaired afterward by Galienus, and
this Copper-Coyn there enclosed in memory of this Emperor, that future Ages
might acknowledge him to have been the Builder of that stately Fabric,
whenever time or Enemies should bring it to destruction. Over the Gate of the
Upper Castle on the Hill the Roman Eagles continue still engraved; and not far
from thence is the Tomb of S. Polycarpus, one of the first blessed Martyrs of
the Gospel of Christ Jesus, who was put to death in the Theater. At the Gate of
this Castle we speak of, there is a great Head of Stone immured in the Wall,
something resembling the Head of an Amazon, which the Turks call Coidafa; and
thereof have this Story. That in ancient times the Archi-pelago, or Ionian Sea,
was once firm Land; but when Alexander the Great intending to make his
Conquests as far as the East Indies, was refused passage through the Countries
of this Coidafa, to whom the Archi-pelago, then firm Land, was subject, he in
revenge cut that Neck of Land, which we call the Hellespont, and thereby let in
the Propontis and Euxine Sea into her Country, which made such a Deluge and
Inundation, as ever after overwhelmed that vast Tract of Land, which now makes
a Sea, leaving only some few Isles, which were the tops of Mountains, and make
up those many Islands which we find in the Archi-pelago. And thus much we are
assured from a piece of Turkish History: but it matters little what the Turks
report or write in these cases; for it is more probable, that that Woman which
the Turks call Coidafa, was that great Amazon-Smyrna, which Strabo says gave
the Name to this City; whose Face may be that which we find enstamped on Medals
with the Inscription of(...)

The People that first built this City came from Ephesus, and dispossessed the
Leleges of their Habitation (as Strabo reports:) Afterward the Lydians
demolished the Buildings, so that for the space of 400 years it was inhabited
rather like a Village than a City, until Antigonus, and after him Lysimachus
restored it to its ancient splendor. The original of Smyrna.
The City was chiefly built on the side of the Hill; and it is now evident,
since the great Ruins round the Town were dug up to supply the
New-Buildings with Stone, that all those Ruins on the East Side of the River
Meles, were no other than Temples, and Burying-places of the dead; and
particularly that which we called the Temple of Janus; which being demolished,
proved no other than a Vault full of Sepulchers, and might become the Bodies of
the Monarchs and Princes of this Country: I once believed it to be the
Homerium, or the square Porch, which (Strabo says) was dedicated to Homer; but
my Eyes have evinced the contrary; and it may rather be that large Porch which
we find situated on the Hill near to the Castle.

Having taken this view of Smyrna, let us proceed to the next Church, which in
my Travels was Ephesus, Ephesus.
distant about 45 English Miles S. South-East from Smyrna, and about five Miles
from the Sea, accounted in ancient times for a Maritime City, by reason of the
River Cayster, The River Cayster.
which near to the Sea was capable to receive the Vessels of those days; but
further up and nearer to the City, it turns and winds so wantonly through the
Plains, and with such curious doublings, as gave occasion to Travelers, upon
the Authority especially of Heylin, to mistake it for the Meander; which Error
the Name which the Turks give it of the lesser Mendres may confirm. But before
we enter into this City, (if we may now so call it,) let us first hear what
Strabo reports thereof in ancient times. It was encompassed (says he) with that
Wall which now stands at the charge of Lysimachus, who therefore named it
Arsinoa, after the Name of his Wife; but that Name prevailed not long, before
it returned to its ancient denomination of Ephesus. The Government was
exercised by a Senate, and in matters of great importance all the People were
assembled. The Temple of Diana The Temple of Diana.
was first built by Chersiphron; but this being burnt by one Herostratus, a
more stately Edifice was erected by the large and devout Contributions of the
Female Sex: but these not being sufficient to perfect the Work, Alexander
proffered to complete the remainder at his own Expense, on condition that his
Name might be entitled to the whole Fabric. But this offer was refused by the
Complement of a witty Ephesian, That it was not seemly for one God to
contribute to the Temple of another.

All the Priests of this Temple were Eunuchs, called Megalobizi; these were in
great Honor, and assisted by Virgins. This City has both a Port and Shipping
belonging to it; but the Port is very shallow by reason of the great quantity
of mud which the Cayster throws up; but the City daily increases, and is the
principal Emporium of Asia on this side of the Taurus. Pliny who was also well
acquainted with the Geography of these places, instructs us farther, and tells
in his Not. Hist. lib. 5. That Ephesus attollitur Monte Pione, and alluitur
Caistro in Cylbianis jugis orto. And true it is, that its situation is on the
side of a Hill, having a Prospect to the West toward a lovely Plain, watered
and embellished with the pleasant Circles of the Cayster. Some Marshes there
are not far distant, and yet so far, as that the Vapor of them seems not to
reach or corrupt the air of the City. The Soil produces abundantly Woods of
Tamerisk, which overrunning the Plains, render them delightful to the Eyes of
the beholders. But nothing appears more remarkable and stately to a Stranger,
in his near approach to this place, than the Castle on the Hill, and the lofty
Fabric of Saint John's Church, S. John's Church.
now converted to a Turkish Mosch, the biggest Pillar in which is five Turkish
Pikes and a half in compass, which is upwards of four English yards; these
lifting up their heads amongst other Ruins, and humble Cottages of the present
Inhabitants, seem to promise that magnificent Structure, which renowned and
made famous this City in ancient-History. But at the entrance, a person
stumbles at Pillars of Porphiry, and finds an uneasy passage over subverted
Temples and Palaces; the memory of what they have been is not preserved by
Tradition, and few or no Inscriptions remaining to direct us. Some marks there
are of a Building more ample and stately than the rest, which seems to have
been seated in the Suburbs of the City without the Wall; and therefore gives us
cause to conjecture it to have been the Temple of Diana, The Temple of Diana in
its ruins.
the Metropolitan Shrine of all others dedicated to that Goddess, anciently
adjoining to the Ortygian Grove and Cenchrian Stream, where she and Apollo were
reported in Fables to be born from Latona. Tac. An. lib. 3.
Ephesii memorabant, non, ut vulgus crederet Dianam atque; Apollinem Delo
genitos: Esse apud se Cenchrium Aninem lucum Ortygium, ubi Latonam partu
gravidam, and Oleae, quae tum etiam maneat, adnifam, edidisse ea Numina. This
therefore might probably have been the Temple of that Goddess, which all Asia
and the World worshipped, and caused that riot and pudder amongst the
Silver-smiths of this place. Acts 19. 27.
Under the Ruins of this Temple we descended about 30 Stairs with Lights in
our hands, where we entered into diverse narrow passages, with many turnings and
windings, that it was necessary to make use of a Clew of Thread to guide us,
which some therefore call a Labyrinth; but to me it seemed no other than the
Foundation of the Temple, which for Fabrics of that weight and magnificence,
is convenient (as I conceive) according to the Rules of the best Architecture.
The air below was moist, and of a suffocating heat, which nourished Bats of a
prodigious bigness, which oft-times struck at our Torches, as Enemies unto
light, and Companions of those Spirits which inhabit the Stygian darkness. Not
far from hence was a stately Lavatory of Porphiry, called Saint John's Font,
the Diameter of which was about seven Turkish Pikes, wherein (it is reported)
he baptized great multitudes of Believers. Not far from hence was shown us the
Cave of the seven Sleepers, The seven Sleepers.
the Story of which, whether true or false, is yet current through the World,
and believed so far by the Christians that anciently inhabited Ephesus, that
they have erected a Chapel in memory of them, part of which remains unto this
day, and the Painting as yet not wholly defaced.

The Theater The Theater.
is almost wholly destroyed, few Seats being there remaining, and of other
Ruins no certain knowledge can be had; the Inscriptions which I found I shall
here insert, though they be for the most part so disfigured, and broken off
from the Portals of Gates, and Triumphal Arches, as can little satisfy any man's
Curiosity; as namely this, which I took from a Wall which seemed to have been
some public Structure. M. P. VED. INICE. PP. VEDIAE. PT. Paulli.
M.
Filiae Uxoris and Etul,
N.


On an Arch is written, Accenso Rensi and Asiae.

In a Wall of the Castle is a Head cut in Stone, having a Face like the Moon,
on the right side a Snake, on the left a Bow: we may fancy it to mean
Proserpina, Luna, Diana. Near the Gate of the Castle there is a Stone with this
Inscription, (...) On a Marble Chest, (...) Near the Temple of Diana is this
Inscription,

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Of this Publius Vedius Abascantus, mention is made in other places: as, PVED.
-- CANTVS IVNIOR, that is A bascantus. Ibidem, -- M:P. VEDI. NICEPH --...
VEDIAF P.F. PAVLLINAE...

In another place there is a Stone reversed within a Wall, part of which is
covered with Earth with this broken Inscription.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Over a Gate, which appears to have been in the middle of the City, are diverse
Figures engraven, still plain and not much defaced, which seem to represent the
Story of Hector's Body drawn about the City of Troy by Achilles, and without
Reason fancied by some to be a description of the first Christian Persecutions:
for I having no such strength of Imagination to represent it to me in that
Form, and observing likewise that the Stones do not exactly square each with
the other, I am induced to believe, that they were fetched from some other
place, and fixed there for Ornament in more modern times.

The Aquaeduct The Aquaeduct.
on the East Side, agreeable to the ancient Magnificence, and Honor of so
Renowned a City, appears not very Antique, at least to have been repaired in
latter times, in regard, that some stones which are found there, are reversed
in the Walls, with Inscriptions denoting Marcus Aurelius, and therefore seem to
have been placed by the Turks, as casually they came to hand, at the time that
they first took possession of that City, when for some years it flourished even
in their days, before the Ottoman Family became Master of Constantinople, or
those parts of the lesser Asia. But now the Relics of the Gentiles, the
Christians, and the Turks are subverted, and lie unknown, and heaped
promiscuously together: for the whole Town is nothing but a Habitation of
Heardsmen and Farmers, living in low and humble Cottages of dirt, covered on
the top with Earth, Sheltered from the extremity of weather by mighty Masses of
ruinous Walls; the pride, and ostentation of former days, and the Emblem in
these, of the frailty of the World, and the transient Vanity of humane Glory.
For I cannot, but with many reflections on the Wisdom, and Providence of
Almighty God, who casts down one, and raises another, and on the strange
alterations, and Metamorphosis of worldly things, take a prospect of this City
of Ephesus, being as well changed in the Variety of Names as of Conditions. For
as Pliny says, during the Trojan War it was called Alopes, then Ortygia, then
Morgas, then Ephesus, and now by the Turks Ayasaluck, seeming to derive this
Name from (...) in Greek, luck being a termination in Turkish of the abstract,
as ness is in English, as holy, holiness, and the like. This place where once
Christianity so flourished, as to be a Mother Church, and the Sea of a
Metropolitan Bishop, cannot now show one Family of Christians; so has the
secret Providence of God disposed Affairs, too deep and mysterious for us to
search into.

About 10 Miles distant from Ephesus, to the South-west, lies the Town
anciently called Phygela, Phygela.
by the Turks Koush Adasee, or the Islandland of Birds, by the Italians Scala
Nova, but falsely esteemed Miletum, where Saint Paul landed, when he sent to the
Elders at Ephesus, Acts 20. 17.

From hence we passed on to Tyria Tyria not Thyatira
so called by the Turks, which by proximity of the name, is by the Christians
supposed to be Thyatira, but certainly not without great Error. For Tyria is a
City about 25 Miles distant from Ephesus, pleasantly situated on the rising of
a Hill, well watered and planted with Trees, that at a distance it seems to be
seated in a Grove, lying open on the North to a fruitful and pleasant Plain:
Observing here no Ruins or marks of Antiquity, nor amongst the Greeks
themselves, born in this City, any Tradition of the pristine state thereof,
(which often gives light to probable Conjectures) I confidently concluded, that
this place was not the ancient Thyatira, but rather a modern City erected by
the Turks: and the more satisfied I am in this persuasion, when I consider what
Livy writes concerning the situation of Thyatira, Lib. 37.
before he describes the Fight between the Romans and Antiochus; for he says
that Antiochus had pitched his Camp about Thyatira, and from thence passing the
Phrygian River, which is the Hermus, he retreated, and again encamped about
Magnesia ad Sipulum; from whence it is evident, that Thyatira must have been
somewhere between Pergamus and Magnesia, and not another way, where it is now
vulgarly imagined; which I shall make more clearly apparent in its due place,
when Providence in the Circle of my Travels, shall bring me to the City which
the Turks call Akhisar.

Laodicea is another of those Cities, Laodicea.
which is also forgotten in its Name, and overwhelmed in its Ruins: and yet we
certainly discovered it about four days journey South-East from Tyria: In our
way to which we happily crossed the true Meander, The Meander.
called by the Turks Boiuch Mendres, or the great Meander, as they call the
Cayster the little Mendres. The first sight we had of it, was from the top of a
Mountain, being part of the Tmolus, from whence in the Plain beneath, we
discovered innumerable turnings and windings of the River, with such variety as
might entertain the Eyes of a Stranger for some hours with pleasure. Ipse
recurvatis ludit Maeander in undis. And so continues to encircle all the Plains
it runs through, with wanton Mazes, and with such a rapid current, that it
stirred up the Earth and Gravel from the bottom, so that we found not the
Streams of Water so clear and Crystalline as we hoped to have enjoyed, when we
sat down to make our Collation on the Banks of the River; and so continues its
swift motion until it falls more gently into the Sea, not far distant from
Miletum, now called by the Turks Melas, the true place where Saint Paul landed,
when he sent for the Presbytery of Ephesus, which agrees with what Pliny writes
in his description of the Meander: Amnis Maeander ortus e lacu Aulocrene,
plurimisque affusus oppidis, and repletus fluminibus, crebris ita sinuosus
flexibus, ut saepe credatur reverti, Apamenam primum pervagatur regionem, mox
Eumenicam, ac dein Bargelicos campos; postremo Cariam placidus, omnesque eos
agros fertilissimos rigans, ad decimum a Mileto Stadium lenis illabitur mari.

The first place which we imagined might be Laodicea, was a City called by the
Turks Dingizlee, Dingizlee.
being so esteemed by the Greeks who there inhabit, and are not above 40 in
number; where they have a little Church. But little credit are we to give unto
them, concerning the ancient condition of their Nation; for they who are in
those parts, and have lost their own Language, and speak and understand no
other Tongue than the Turkish, are not competent Judges of the Antiquities
which extend themselves beyond the time of the Turks. Howsoever, the situation
of that place, which is exceedingly pleasant, and not far distant certainly
from the true Laodicea, might yield us Reason sufficient to enquire for it in
that City, which is planted with all sorts of Fruit Trees, watered with
plentiful Streams, and abounds with all Provisions, either necessary or
convenient for livelihood; so that the Turks compare it with the air and
fruitfulness of Damascus: The outward Walls are ancient, but neglected after
the Turkish Custom; the City within built low after the modern Fashion of that
Country, and is chiefly maintained by a Trade of Bogasines. Some few Churches
there are, which appear to have been built by the Christians, now converted
into Moschs, so that nothing appeared in this case, which could induce us to
concur in Opinion with the Greeks, that that place was Laodicea: but being
informed by Turks of certain Ruins about four miles distant from thence,
called by them Eski-hisar, or the Old Castle; curiosity lead us thither, where
being entered, we found a City of a vast Circumference, subverted and
overthrown, situated on three or four small Hills: What first we had sight of,
was an Aquaeduct, which guided us to the rest, beneath which runs a River,
which I call the Lycus, nourished with two other Streams, which I call Asopus
and Caper, that so the situation may agree with the description which Pliny
gives of it. Celeberrima Urbs Laodicea, imposita est Lyco flumini, latera
alluentibus Asopo and Capro. This certainly can have been no other than the
ancient Laodicea, according to the Description of Geographers, anciently called
Diospolis. Here within we found, besides a multitude of other Ruins, three
large Amphitheatres, and a Circus; the three first were of a round form,
consisting of about 50 Seats one above the other, the Stones of which were not
much displaced. The Circus was long, and at the end thereof was a Cave, where
the wild Beasts were kept, designed for the Roman Sports, over the mouth of
which was an Arch with this Inscription, (...) Vespasian's Circus.
Many other Ruins there were of mighty Fabrics, of which we could receive no
knowledge, nor make conjectures, nor could we be guided by Inscriptions; for
time and Earthquakes had so strangely defaced all things, that besides the
Theaters there scarce remained one Stone upon the other.

Strabo says, Laodicea, cum ante esset exilis, nostra, and parentum nostrorum
aetate crevit: quanquam oppugnatione Mithridatis Eupatoris damnum accepisset,
non contemnendum: sed soli praestantia, and laeta civium quorundam fortuna eam
amplicaverunt. It seems that this City suffered much by Mithridates Eupator,
yet the excellency of the soil, and the Riches of the Citizens quickly repaired
the damages, and restored it again to its pristine happiness: For, as I said,
the situation of it is elevated on two or three pleasant Mounts, rather than
Hills, which oversee the most rich and delightful Plains of all Phrygia: It
has to the North the Mountain Cadmus, being distant (as may be conjectured)
about ten English Miles, from whence the Lycus has its source, and over-flows
those Pastures round about, which in the time of Augustus Caesar bred numerous
Flocks of black Sheep, which for the fineness of the Fleece far exceeded the
Milesian Wools. And thus the Riches of their Woollen Manufacture, being added
to the Donative of two thousand Talents, which Hiero bequeathed to that People,
might be a considerable Revenue to the Public, and serve to raise them out of
the dust, when overthrown by Earthquakes. For when Nero was the fourth time
Consul, Laodicea (says Tacitus) tremore terrae prolapsa, ^^llo in nobis
remedio, propriis opibus revaluit: It was then sorely shaken by an Earthquake,
the fate of most of the great Cities of Asia, which notwithstanding was
re-edified by the p^^^^ance of its own Riches; but relapsing again into the
same Calamity, was deserted by its Inhabitants, and became irrecoverably lost,
not only as to its pristine condition of prosperity, but also as to its very
Name, having now no other existence, or being, than what Wise and Learned men
have conserved in the Histories thereof.

Having taken our view of Laodicea, we traversed the Country toward
Philadelphia, and about five Miles on our right hand from Laodicea to the
North, we espied a White Cliff on the side of a Hill, with some Buildings
thereon, which from their Whiteness the Turks call Pambuck or Cotton: And
having received information from the Greeks, that Hierapolis was there to be
seen, Curiosity carried us thither; of which place Strabo reports in this
manner.

Hierapolis is seated over against Laodicea, Hierapolis.
where are to be seen Baths of hot Waters and the Plutonium. The Waters easily
congeal the earth whereon they run into Stone, so that the Channels are firm
Rock: The Plutonium is under the brow of the Hill, the entrance into which is
no wider, than that a man can thrust himself through; yet it is very deep
within, of a quadrangular Form, containing about the compass of half an Acre,
and is filled with such a thick and caliginous air, that the ground cannot be
seen. At the new Moon the poisonous air contains it self within the
circumference of the Cave, so that a man may approach to the mouth of it at
that time without danger: but if any living Creature ventures to go in, it
immediately expires: Cattle which have been put in there have been drawn out
dead, and some Sparrows which we let fly therein, presently dyed. Those which
attend the Temples enter in without danger; because perhaps that they are full
of an Enthusiastical Spirit, and so are preserved by Divine Providence; or else
because they have discovered some Conservatives against the Pestilence of that
air. The Water of Hierapolis, which so abounds, that the whole City is full of
Baths, has an admirable virtue for dying, so that Colors dyed there with the
help of certain Roots, equal the best Scarlets and Purple^ of other places.
Thus far Strabo: but what we our selves saw and observed, was in this manner.

We mounting at first an ascent toward the Ruins, observed the ground to be
covered with a soft brittle Stone, crusted by the hot Waters, which descend
with a full Stream from the Hill. Being come to the top, the first Object which
presented it self to our sight, and to put us in mind of our own mortality, as
well as of the period and subversion of Cities, were certain magnificent Tombs
of entire Stone, I may rather call them Coffins, with Covers of the same cut in
a Cubical Form: one bore the Sculpture as it seemed of Apollo in a Chariot, but
the Charioteer was dismounted, and both he and the other part of the Monument
subverted. Other S^^ pulchres there were, like small Chapels, covered with
ridges of vast Stones, instead of Lead or Tiles to cast off rain: other Vault
and Charnel-Houses lay open, where lay exposed the white Bones of men, light
and dry, and as durable almost as the Walls of the City. Near hereunto was the
Campus Martius, or a place which seemed to have been designed for Exercises and
Feats of Arms. Proceeding farther, we entered into a solitude so dismal, as
affected our minds with a strange confusion, and with the thoughts of the sad
fate of this unhappy City. The Waters which tumbled down the precipice added by
its murmuring sound to the melancholy of the place, and as they run petrifie
all before them, making rude Channels for themselves of Stone; and where
sometimes they overflow they petrifie the earth with a brittle crust. In the
midst of the City is a Bath of ^ot Waters, paved at the bottom w^^th white
Marble; but the Pavement ^s now disordered by the fall of Pilla^s and other
Ornaments which encompass it; for it seems to have been ^et off with Columns
and Arches, agreeable to the Magnificence of antique Buildings, and to the
excellent Virtues of the Waters. For I am of opinion, that the quality of those
Waters at the beginning drew Inhabitants to that place; the situation thereof
not being otherwise advantageous for Trade, no more than the air seems
conducing to health, lying open to a large Plain on the South, and is shut in
to the North with a high Mountain. It might also in probability have had the
Name of Hierapolis from the Medicinal Virtue of those Waters which often have
been accounted sacred, and dedicated to some Deity; or else perhaps the Cures
they operated in many Diseases, might bestow the Name on it of the Holy City,
as Rivers and Fountains have upon less considerable occasions been hallowed,
and accounted sacred by the Gentiles. Not far distant remains the ruin of a
Theater, The Theater.
not very large but sumptuous, of a round Form; the Seats about 23 in number,
one above the other, but it is almost filled with the downfall of vast and
weighty Pillars; the Marble of which is so curiously polished and still smooth,
and not defaced (especially those parts of it which the rubbish and stones have
preserved from the weather) that I have not observed better in the Countries of
Christendom. Some Inscriptions we found, but such as were worn out with time,
and broken off in the midst, only this was very legible on the Portal of a
Gate, which was fallen into the Theater. (...) Some Authors say, that the
multitude of Temples and Fanes with which this City did abound, was the reason
they gave unto it that Name of Hierapolis, or the Holy City. And indeed the
Ruins of vast Fabrics are so numerous, that we may well believe, that the
false Gods had once there a great possession and share of Worship: and as the
Walls and Pillars are the greatest and strongest that I have observed, so the
Coverings or Roofs are the most different from all others that I have seen,
being Stones of an incredible magnitude and weight, which by force of Engines
being carried aloft, are there close cemented, without the help of Timber, and
what is more of arched work, are yet joined so artificially, that unto this day
they remain immovable either by Time or Earthquakes.

In this place is still to be seen the Grota, The pestilential Grota.
or Cayern so much defamed by ancient Writers, and particularly by Strabo, as
before mentioned, for those pestilential or noxious Vapors which it perspires,
infecting the air about it with unwholsom Atoms; the which Pliny confirms, lib.
2. cap. 83. Not. Hist. Simili modo specus est Hierapoli in Asia, matris tantum
^^^ do ^^ in^^^^^^; ^^^^^ Fi^^^hci specus quorum exhalatione temulenti futura
praecinunt. The Turks that have had the curiosity to enter into this Cave,
being ignorant of ill Vapors, have often felt the bad effects of them, having
either suddenly dyed, or else fallen desperately sick: and therefore have a
report generally amongst them, that the place is haunted by Spirits, which
strike men dead that have the boldness to enter into their Region. For my part
I would not go near it; for I ingenuously confess, that Curiosity was never so
prevalent in me, as to make those Experiments, which might hazard either my
life or prejudice my health.

This place which had the honor formerly to be a Metropolis, and Laodicea
which was also the Mother Church of 16 Bishoprics, now lies desolate, not so
much as inhabited by Shephe^^^, and ^^ ^ag from the Ornament of Gods ancient
Worship, which renowned them in former Ages, that they cannot now boast of an
Anchorite or Hermite's Chapel, where Gods Name is praised or invoked.

Passing forward to Philadelphia, about 12 miles distant from Hierapolis, we
saw the Ruins of Tripolis, and thereabouts crossed again the Meander.

Philadelphia now inhabited by Turks, Philadelphia.
and by them called Ala-shahir, or the fair City, is more happy than the other
two Churches before mentioned, viz. Ephesus and Laodicea: For it still retains
the Form of a City, with something of Trade to invite people to it, being the
Road of the Persian Caravans: Though the Walls which encompass it are decayed
in many places, and according to the Custom of the Turks are wholly neglected:
Besides which there is little of Antiquity remaining, unless the Ruins of a
Church dedicated to S. John, which is now made a Dunghill to receive the Offals
of dead Beasts. Howsoever, God has been pleased to preserve some in this place
to make profession of the Christian Faith; for it being inhabited by many
Greeks, is adorned with no less than Twelve Churches, of which S. Mary's and S.
George's are the chief, which we visited; there the Chief Papa's presented
before us some Manuscripts of the Gospel, pretending them to be very ancient,
but we could hardly be persuaded to believe them so, because the Gospel of S.
John, as the prime Apostle of Asia, was prefixed in the first place, and
because the Chapters were not disposed in their due form and order, but
according only to the method observed in their Missals.

The situation of Philadelphia, is on the rising of the Mountain Tmolus, having
a pleasant prospect on the plains beneath well furnished with diverse Villages,
and watered (as I take it) by the Pactolus. The only raritie which the Turks
show in that place to Travelers, is a wall of Men's bones, which they report to
have been erected by the Prince, which first took that City, who having
slaughtered many of the besieged in a sally, for the terror of those which
survived, raised a wall of their bones, which is so well cemented, and the
bones so entire, that I brought a piece thereof with me from thence.

About 27 miles to the Northwest from Philadelphia, lie the ruins of the
Anciently famous City of Sardis, Sardis
one likewise of the seven Churches, of which Strabo gives this account. (...)
(...) etc. The City of Sardis is great and ancient, and yet of later days than
the State of the Trojans. It has a Castle well fortified, and is the Capital
City of the Lydians, called by Homer Maeone: the Mountain Tmolus hangs over
this City, on the top of which is erected a high Tower of white Stone built
after the Persian manner, from whence is a pleasing prospect overall the
adjacent plains; and thence also you may take a view of the Cayister. Out of
the Tmolus flows the Pactolus, whose streams of ancient times carried great
Flakes of Gold with its current, from whence Craesus and his Ancestors amassed
their Riches: But now the springs of Gold are failed. The Rivers Pactolus and
Hyllas fall into the Hermus, and afterward those three joined with more
ignoble streams, empty themselves into the Phocean Sea, now called Fogia, or
rather Fochia. But whatsoever this City was in former days, it is now only a
poor Habitation of Shepherds, living in low and humble Cottages; howsoever the
ancient Pillars and Ruins list up their heads, as unwilling to lose the memory
of their ancient Glory, once the Seat of the rich Craesus. This City is also
seated at the foot of the Tmolus, as Strabo beforementioned has well
described it; the which also Pliny confirms in these words: Celebratur maxim
Sardis in latere Montis Tmoli, etc. The Castle which is erected on a high and
steep Mountain is very difficult to ascend, and almost inaccessible by force of
Arms; but being on the top, there appears the most pleasant prospect that ever
my eyes beheld, to which the Pactolus gives a wonderful embellishment, which
turns and winds so delightfully through all the Plains, watering all parts
about in that manner, as to make that Country exceeding fertile and rich, and
from thence might give occasion of that saying, that the Pactolus ran with
golden streams: Over the Gate I read this Inscription,

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Pergamus, another of those seven Churches of Asia, called by the Turks Bergam,
which was amongst the rest so highly honored with the aforesaid Divine
Epistle, lies about Sixty Miles Northward from Smyrna, once the Regal City
over the Provinces of Mysia, AEolis, Jonia, Lydia, and Caria, and afterward
bequeathed to the Roman Empire by the Will and Testament of Attalus the last
King thereof; whose Antiquity and Fame is celebrated, and recorded in Strabo in
this manner. Lysimachus the Son of Agathocles, one of the successors of
Alexander, kept his Treasure at Pergamus: the situation whereof is on the side
of a small Hill, or Mount, which near the top ends in a Conical Form. The
charge and defense of this City was committed to Philetaetus an Eunuch, who
amidst many Treasons and Revolutions remained faithful to his Prince,
concerning the Government of the Castle for the space of 20 years; during which
time Lysimachus being slain by Seleucus Nicator, the eldest Son of Philetaetus
called Eumenes obtained the Government of the City and Country of Pergamus,
whose Son Eumenes overthrew Antiochus the Son of Seleucus in the plains of
Sardis: him Atta^us succeeded, who was the first that was honored with the
Title of King. After he overcame the Galatae, or Gallo-Grecians, in a bloody
Battle; and was he who joining confederacy with the Romans against King Philip,
was their true and faithful Ally, to whose Son Eumenes, after the victory over
Antiochus in the plains of Magne^^^ at Sipylum, was committed the Government of
all that Country, which extends it self to the Mountain Ta^reo. But that which
I observed of the City Pergamus, as it now stands at present, is this: that its
situation is on the side of a Hill, which Strabo says, is in a Conical Form,
having a prospect into a most pleasant, and fruitful Plain, watered by the
River Caicus, and abounding with all sorts of Fruits the Earth also yielding
with little pains, or industry, causes the people to become lazy and negligent,
which manured with the same care as is practiced in the like naturally happy
Countries would prove one of the most fertile Gardens and Paradises of the
World: for from the top of that small hill which over-shadows the City, (small
I say in respect of the adjacent Mountains) on which stands an ancient Castle,
or rather the Walls thereof ill repaired, so pleasant a prospect discovers it
self on all sides of the Plain, as for some hours may well entertain the Eyes
of a Stranger with great delight. The Inhabitants being slothful, and abhorring
labor, addict themselves principally to Thefts and Robberies, being more
pleased to seize a Booty in their Plains with rapine and violence, than with
honest and religious labor to purchase their Bread by turning up the rich
Clods of their Native Soil; by which means this City goes more and more to
decay and ruin, merely for want of Industry: So that whereas about 10 years
past there were 53 Streets of this Town inhabited, there are now only 22
frequented, the others are deserted, and their Buildings go to ruin. Here are
still many remains and appearances of antique Buildings, such as vast Pillars
of Marble subverted: One place seems to have been the Palace of the Prince
still conserved by Columns of polished Marble, which like Buttresses support
the Wall for at least 50 paces in length. There are also the Ruins of several
Churches, one of which, more spacious and magnificent than the rest, is by
Tradition of the Greeks of that Country, reported to have been dedicated to
Saint John, and to have been the Cathedral of that City. Several other Churches
are possessed by the Mahometans, and employed their superstitious Devotion,
amongst which (as reported by the Greeks and confessed by the Turks) there are
two, one anciently dedicated to S. John, and another to S. Demetrius, both
which the Turks have relinquished, the first because (as report goes) the Walls
fall as much by night as they are built by day; and the other, because the Door
of the Menareh or Steeple, which above where they call to Prayers points always
toward Mecha, which is to the South-East, did in a miraculous manner after it
was built turn it self to the North, to which point that Door now looks, of
which I my self have been an Eyewitness; but what deceit may have been herein
contrived by the Greek Masons, I am not able to aver. There are also vast
Ruins without the City of arched-work, and some remainders of a Theater; but
there wanting Inscriptions and Tradition of the Inhabitants to direct us, we
were wholly in the dark, and could make no certain conjectures or judgment of
what they might have been; only it is probable that such vast Piles of Building
are the Relics of Public Edifices, amongst which this Inscription came to
our view as engraven in a Marble Stone within the Walls of the upper Castle.

(...).

Gaium Antium, Aulum Tullium Auli filium Quadratum, bis Consulem, Proconsulem
Asiae, septem Virum Mepulonis^ Fratrem-Arvalem Legatum, and Propraetorem, and
Bithyniae Legatum, Asiae Legatum Imperialem, Provinciae Capadociae Proconsulem,
Cretae Cypri Legatum Imperialem, Praefectum belli, Lyciae and Pamphyliae
Legatum, Propraetorem Imperatoris Neronis, Trajani, Caesaris Augusti,
Germanici, Dacici, Provinciae Syriae, Senatus and Populus Primorum Procerum
Pergamensium Benefactorem, qui curam suscepit restaurandae Militae.

Through the upper part of this City of Pergamus runs a very plentiful Stream
of Water, which in many places is honored by Antiquity with magnificent Arches
in form of a Bridge; and this Stream I apprehend to have been named Selimus;
Selimus.
according to Pliny, longeque clarissimum Asiae Pergamum, quod intermeat
Selimus, praesluit Cetius, prosusus Pindaso Monte. It is observable, that in
the City are many Vaults under ground, almost under every House and under every
Street, which must have been either Cisterns or conveyances for Water. And thus
much shall serve to have spoken of Pergamus.

And now from this place we shall proceed in our search and enquiry for
Thyatira: for being satisfied (as is said before) that Tyria so called by the
Turks, could not be Thyatira, for those undeniable Reasons before mentioned: We
passed on from Pergamus South-East through the Plains, with hopes to find some
Ruins on the North-side of the Phrygian River, and being guided thereunto by
Ferrarius, who places Thyatira between Sardis and Pergamus, viz. 30 miles from
the first, and 58 miles from the latter Southward: and taking likewise
direction in our journey from Strabo, who says, a Pergamo versus Austrum
montosum est dorsum (on which dorsum, or ridge of a Hill, is a handsome Turkish
Town, called at present Soma) quo superato in itinere versus Sardes, urbs est
Thyatira Macedonum colonia, quam ultimam Mysorum esse sunt qui dicant. In this
journey, when we supposed our selves to draw near to the Place, for which we
searched, we made enquiry of the Turks for ancient Ruins, who directed us to a
certain place which they call Mermer or Marble, called so from the large
Quarries of Marble which arise there, and are the finest and whitest Veins that
ever I beheld, of which there remained certain ruined Houses; but they were so
evidently modern, that they looked nothing like the ancient Thyatira, but
rather the subversion of some Turkish Bui^dings; which, as we understood
afterward, had been deserted by its Inhabitants, and that they removed thence
to a more commodious situation not far distant, which they denominated from the
white Marble-Rocks of their old habitation, calling it Akhisar, or White-Castle.

To that place thence being about five English miles we bended our course, The
true Thyatira.
and found it a City well inhabited, and considerable for the Trade of Cottons.
At our entrance into this City casting our Eyes on Pillars and broken Stones
with rare Sculptures, and on certain Inscriptions, which at a distance were so
fair, that they seemed almost legible, we immediately apprehended, that this
must have been the ancient Thyatira: farther enquiry gave light to our
Conjectures, and changed our probable into arguments of demonstration For
entering now within the Gates of the Town, and espying carved Works in Stone,
more antique than the Turkish Nation it self, and better polished than what was
ever effected by their Art or Industry, we immediately concluded, that we had
certainly found that of which we had been so long in quest; the which was more
assuredly confirmed, so soon as we read this following Inscription, which we
took from the Pedestal of a Pillar in the midst of the Marketplace, which
served to support the new Building.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
In English thus.

The most potent Council of the Thyatyrenians have honored Claudius Aurelius,
Proclus, etc.

This Inscription wherein Thyatira is named put us beyond all doubt of having
found the City for which we looked, and gave us encouragement to make farther
examination herein, so that proceeding forwards we found the Stone of a
Sepulcher, of which a Tanner made use, filled with Hides and Lime, as follows,

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
As this City is named the most Potent and the most great City of Thyatira in
the foregoing Inscriptions, so in this following it is called the most
Excellent City, as we found it wrote on a large Sepulcher, placed in an open
Court belonging to a Turk of Quality, brought thither to adorn it, or for a
Cistern or some other services.

(...).

In this Inscription the Reader ought to pardon somewhat of the barbarousness
of the language, and also make some allowance to him that took it from the
Stone, worn much with time and weather; but the sense thereof is manifest, that
it was erected in memory of Fabius Sosimus, and his Wife Aurelia Pontiana, and
that the most excellent City of Thyatira had laid a Mulct of Prince, where he
has no Subjects of People to obey him: So it is with this Patriarch, who for
Formality only constitutes some Bishops under him with the ancient Titles of
Ephesus and Laodicea, etc. which perhaps lie buried in their Ruins, (as we
have declared in the foregoing Chapter) or at least cannot boast of three
Families of Christians, amongst which the The Greeks call their Bishops by the
name of (...)
Despotical Power may be exercised. Howsoever God Almighty, still mindful of
his promise to his Holy Church, has in a wonderful and miraculous manner
supported and conserved the Jurisdiction of this Patriarch most considerably,
in the Consciences of Millions of Christians, unto this day, diffused over a
large part both of Europe and Asia, which, that the Christian Reader may
observe to the Glory of God, I have here set them down in order as follows.

The Arch-Bishopricks under the Patriarch of Constantinople are in number 13.
Viz.

1. Heraclea, which contains under it five Bishoprics, viz. Callipolis,
Rodesso, Tyriloe, Metrae, Myriophyton,
2. The ssalonica, now called Salonica, contains under it eight Bishoprics,
viz. Kytros, Serveia, Campania, Petra, Ardemerion, Hieroros, or Athos,
Plantamon, Poleane.
3. Athens, under which are four Bishoprics, viz. Talantion, Skirros, Solon,
Mendinitza.
4. Lacedaemonla, under which are three Bishoprics, viz. Caryopolis, Amyela,
Bessena,
5. Larissa, under which are ten Bishoprics, viz. Demetrius, Zetonion, Stagon,
Thaumacos, Gardikion, Radobisdion, Skiathos, Lordorikion, Letza, Agraphon.
6. Adrianople under which is only the Bishopric of Agathopolis. 7. Tornobon,
under which are 3 Bishoprics, viz. Lophitsus, Zenovos, Presilava.
8. Johanna, under which are four Bishoprics, viz. Bothrontos, Vella,
Chimarra, Drumopolis.
9. Monenbasia, under which are four Bishoprics, viz. Elos, Maina, Reon,
Andrusa.
10. Methynna, an Archbishopric. 11. Phanarion, under which is Neochorion.
12. Patras, under which are three Bishoprics, viz. Olene, Morhon, Coron.
13. Proconesus, under which are two Bishoprics, viz. Ganos, Cora.



Other Bishoprics, more immediately depending on the Patriarch, are Caesarea,
Ephesus, Ancyra, Cyzicos, Nicomedia, Nicaea, Chalcedon, Trapezond,
Philippopolis, Philippi and Drama, Thebes, Smyrna, Mitylene, Serra,
Christianopolis, Amasia, Neocaesarea, Iconium, Corintb, under which only is the
Bishopric of Damalon.

Rhodes, Nova Patra, Anus Drystrius, Euripus, Arta Nauplos, Chios, Paronaxia,
Melos, Zia, Siphnos, Samos, Caspathos, Andro, Varna, Coos, Leucas, Media on the
black Sea, Sozopolis not far from Adrianople, Sophia, Praelabon upon the
Danubius, Bindene near Sophia. Capha in Tartary. Gothia Didymitochum Lititza
not far from Adrianople.

Bozia, Selibrea near Constantinople, Zuchna in Macedonia, Neurocopus,
Melenicos, Berrea, Pogogiana in Illyricum, Chaldaea near the black Sea,
Pisidia, Murea, Santorina, Imbros AEgina, Ogeroblachia near the black Sea.

In Moldavia and Valachia are four Bishoprics. The Archbishop of Epikion in
Servia, who has 16 Bishops under him, and of Ocrida which has 18, are not
subject to the Patriarch of Constantinople, the certain reason of which I
cannot assign.

The Island of Cyprus was in its Ecclesiastical Government subjected once to
the Patriarch of Antioch; but afterward by the Council of Ephesus as Canon the
Eighth, and the same again confirmed by the Grace and Favor of Justinian the
Emperor, (whose Mother was a Cypriot by Birth;) this Church was made absolute
and independent of any other, Cyprus.
and a privilege given to Anthemius, the Archbishop in that Age, to subscribe
his Name to all Public Acts in red Letters, which was an honor above that of
any Patriarch, who writes his Name or Firm in black Characters, the which was
afterward confirmed by the Authority of Zeno the Emperor: This Favor and
Indulgence was granted in honor to the Apostle Barnaby, who primarily governed
this Diocese, where now his Sepulcher remains. The Archbishopric, during the
time that it was under the Duke of Savoy and the Republic of Venice, was the
Mother of 32 Bishoprics, but now by the oppression and violence of the Turks
has been reduced to one Archbishopric and three Bishoprics. The first has
its Cathedral Church at Nicosia, and receives its Revenue from Famagosta,
Carpasi, and Tamasea, which are immediately subject thereunto. The Bishoprics
are,

First, that of Paso, and Arsenoia, or Arsinoe.

The Second, that of Cyti, and Amathunta, anciently Cetium or Citium and
Amathusia.

The third, that of Cerinia and Solea, anciently called Salines, or Salamine
from Salamis, and was the most renowned City of all the others.

This Island before it was taken by the Turks, contained 14 thousand Villages:
but after a Rebellion they made against the Turk, Anno 1580. and 1593. the
greatest part of the Inhabitants were either killed or exterminated: to which
the grievous Pestilence which succeeded in the Year 1624. added so irreparable
a desolation, that of the 14 thousand Villages there remain not 700 at this
present time.

The Archbishop of this Island in this year 1678. is named Hilarion, and
surnamed Cicala, created and promoted to this Dignity in the year 1674. a
learned man, and well skilled in the Greek and Latin Tongues. His Revenue or
maintenance arises from the Churches of Famagosta, Carpasi, and Tamasea,
according to the Ecclesiastical Endowments: but from the Villages he receives
nothing, unless at the Visits which he makes twice a year, some Collection is
made of Corn, Oil, Wine, and other Fruits, in the nature of Tithes, but rather
by way of Presents and Free Will Offerings, than of Duties. From the
Monasteries he receives a certain annual Income or Rent, according to the
Abilities and Possessions thereof, and from every Papa, or Priest, a Dollar
yearly per Head: All which will scarce maintain a Patriarch, or yield him other
than a poor livelihood. For when a Patriarch is first constituted, a Purse of
Money or 500 Dollars is exacted, and paid to the Pasha, and as much more to the
Janisaries; besides the ordinary growing charges, which are yearly about 2500
dollars. For to the Pasha every three Months are paid 166 dollars; and to the
Janisary, which is set for a guard to the Partriarch, 20 or 25 dollars, as he
thinks fit to agree: also upon the coming of a new Kadi there is always a new
Expense, who commands what he pleases in Money or Presents; so that with these
Taxes and Exactions the Church is always harassed and made poor.

The Bishop of Pafo, named at present Leontius, who has the City of Arsinoia
under his Jurisdiction, gathers his maintenance after the manner of the
Archbishop. Pafo was anciently a Port of good fame and renown, and is so at
present; from whence is yearly shipped off a considerable quantity of Cottons,
Silk, and other Merchandise; but by the oppression and hard usage of the Turks,
and the covetousness of the Officers, is reduced to poverty and want of people.
The second Diocese governed by its Bishop, is that of Cetium, or after the
Vulgar Cyti, has under its Government the City of Limeson, Cilan, Amathunte,
and another City anciently a Diocese, adjoined to it, called Cyrion: of which
place one Cosma was Bishop some few years past, a person of good Ingenuity and
Learning, born at Tunis in Africa, his Father of Thessalonica, and his Mother
of Cyprus, with whom having some acquaintance, I had the opportunity to make
these Collections relating to the state and condition of that place.

The third Diocese is of Cerinia, the Bishops name at present Leontius, having
three Cities under it, viz. Solea, Pentasia, and Marathusa, the which is
governed and maintained in the same manner as the other Diocesses.

The Names of the Patriarchs in this present year are Dionysius of
Constantinople, 1678.
Paisios of Alexandria, Theositios of Jerusalem, and Macarios of Antioch, which
names they take upon themselves when they first enter into Monasteries or a
Religious life.

The Patriarch of Constantinople The Ceremony in creating the Patriarch of
Constantinople.
is elected by the Metropolites, or Bishops, according to the plurality of
Voices; but afterward constituted and confirmed by the G. Signor, before whom
after his Election he presents himself with all humility: and the G. Signor
after the ancient Custom of the Greek Emperors presents him with a white
Horse, a Manto or black Cool, a pastoral staff, with a Costan or figured Vest:
and being mounted on his Horse with a Train of the Clergy, and principal
Persons of the Greek Nation, and accompanied with a great Number of Turkish
Officers, he returns with all solemnity to the Patriarchal Seat, at the entry
into which he is met and received by the chief Metropolites, and others with
wax Tapers burning in their hands, and by them conducted into the Church; and
there before the Altar is consecrated by the Archbishop of Heraclea, who
habited in his Pontifical Garments takes the Patriarch by the hand, and seats
him in the Patriarchal Chair, sets the Mitre on his Head, and commits the
Crosier to his hand; which being performed, and the Offices sung, the whole
Ceremony is ended.

The Contention Contentions for the Office of Patriarch.
between the Greek Clergy, for the Patriarchal Power at Constantinople, has
begotten many troubles in the Church; for such whom Ambition and Covetousness
excite with a desire of this Ecclesiastical Preferment, and having some Riches
of their own, and Credit to make up the rest at Interest, seldom or never miss
the prize they pursue; for the Arguments of Gifts and Benefits are so prevalent
with the G. Vizier, and the other Turkish Officers, that they can afford easy
admittance to the most frivolous Accusation that may be objected against the
present Incumbent; by which means the Patriarch is often changed, and the Debts
of the Church increased, and the Election rather in the hands of the Turk than
the Bishops; the one being guided by Bribes, and the other by Faction; by which
means the Debts of the Church in the year 1672, (as I was informed by the
Bishop of Smyrna) amounted unto 700 Purses of Money, which makes 350 thousand
Dollars; the Interest of which increasing daily, and rigorously extorted by the
Power of the most covetous and considerable Turkish Officers, who lend or
supply the Money, is the reason and occasion that the Patriarch often summons
all his Archbishops and Bishops to appear at Constantinople, that so they may
consult and agree on an expedient to ease in some measure the present Burden
and Pressure of their Debts; the payment of which is often the occasion of new
Demands: For the Turks, finding this Fountain the fresher, and more plentifully
flowing for being drained, continually suck from this Stream, which is to them
more sweet, for being the Blood of the Poor, and the life of Christians.

It is a remarkable Story, and very pertinent to this place, which the Bishop
of Smyrna, when he once did me the honor to make me a Visit, recounted to me.
That not long since certain Principal Officers amongst the Turks persuaded, or
rather forced, a poor, simple Kaloir to stand Candidate for the Patriarchal
Office, and to cheapen it at the price of 25000 Dollars, which offer the Turks
signified to the Patriarch, that so he might either pay the Money himself, and
thereby purchase his Confirmation, or prepare to give way to a new Successor.
The whole Assembly of the Greek Clergy were greatly perplexed hereat; yet knew
not which way to resolve: For to accept of this Kaloir for Patriarch, who was
poor, and brought nothing with him, besides his contemptible Person and Debt
(which they must at length pay) would bring a scandal and scorn on the Church,
besides the bad Bargain they should make in exchange of their Patriarch.
Wherefore at length applying themselves with great Humility to the Vizier, they
obtained a remission of 5000 Dollars of the price demanded; and on payment of
20000 procured the continuance of their old Patriarch; which matter being thus
accommodated, the Clergy desired that the Kaloir might be delivered into their
hands to receive punishment according to the Canons of their Church; but this
would not be granted, lest such an Example should deter Men from the like
designs, and thereby prejudice the Musselmin Cause and Interest: Nor can the
Laws and Canons in the Church against Simony prevail; for the Clergy are tender
to assert their power of Excommunication in this point, or any other part of
their Spiritual Authority, which the Temporal Power of the Turk, in those Cases
where his Interest commands, over-awes and frustrates; usurping a power more
Ecclesiastical, Supreme, and Pontifical, than that of the Patriarch. But to
evidence the turbulent State of the Greek Church, The late differences in the
Church.
we shall not need to fetch Examples farther back than from the year of our
Lord 1670, when one Mythodius was Patriarch at Constantinople, in which Office
he had not been long seated, before he was forced by one Parthenius to retire,
and hastily to take up his Bag and Baggage and be gone, and fly for Sanctuary
into the House of the English Ambassador; it being usual for the new Patriarch
to seize on the person of his Predecessor, with his Goods and Estate, for
paying the Debts of the Church, and part of that price for which the
Patriarchate was bought by him; for which seldom wants some just Cause, or at
least a seeming pretense; in regard, that not only the real necessity of the
Church Debts, forces the Patriarchs to extort Money from the People, but
likewise a provident care for their future subsistence, prompts them to make
Friendship with the Mammon of Unrighteousness, against that time that they
shall be necessitated to surrender an account of their Stewardship. And I have
heard some say, that this change of Patriarchs is so necessary for the
maintenance of their Metropolites or Bishops, that without it they might
starve; unless they had this pretense for frequent Taxes: For levying Money in
this manner on the people, some of it sticks to their Fingers, providing not
only sufficient to pay the proportion expected from their respective Diocesses,
but also for their own support.

Mythodius having no sooner, as is said, quitted the place, but Parthenius
entered, a person not only of a considerable Estate, but well acquainted and
respected in the Turkish Court: Howsoever he continued not above a year, before
he was forced to give way to Dionysius, Metropolite of Larissa; who being a
monied Man carried his business with a high hand, and entered into the
Patriarchal Seat with all the Ceremonies usual at the Instalment to that
Dignity, procuring not only the Banishment of Parthenius unto Rhodes, but
caused him also to be Anathematized, and the (...) to be pronounced with a loud
Voice, in a full Synod or Convocation of all the Metropolites then present at
Constantinople.

Notwithstanding which, Dionysius did not long sit quietly, before he was
disturbed with some vexations from the Wife of Panaioti, Interpreter to the
Great Vizier, who being a high-spirited Dame, and elevated with the thoughts of
her Husbands Riches and Preferment, comported her self in the Church, toward
the Patriarch, with an arrogance undecent and mis-becoming the gravity of a
principal Matron, which caused Dionysius sometimes to resent her Carriage, and
to discourse contemptibly of her; as is natural for men to speak of those who
assume too much unto themselves: With which this Lady being provoked, made
Complaints to her Husband, who, sympathizing with the grievance of his Wife,
attended an opportunity to satisfy her Feminine Revenge; the which was not
long expected before one Gerasimus, Metropolite of Turnova, on the Borders of
Valachia, presented himself as a Candidate, or one sufficiently qualified for
the Patriarchal Office; and in the first place applied himself to Panaioti, who
being a Greek, and near the G. Vizier, was best able to represent his
qualifications and his offers to the Court, the which he performed, in
complascency to his Wife, with that pressure and heat, that Gerasimus was
speedily invested in the Patriarchal See, and Dionysius deposed, and forced to
content himself with the Bishopric of Phillipopolis, where he remained with
the Title of (...) of that place, which is an honor given to those who have
formerly born the Dignity of Patriarch.

Of all these changes and mutations Parthenius received intelligence, though
far remote in his Exile at Rhodes, which he observed with such attention, as
served to shuffle him into play at the next Game: For having in the time of
being Patriarch amassed a considerable Treasure (soon after the death of
Panaioti the great Patron of Gerasimus) he pushed again for the Patriarchal
Office, and notwithstanding all the resistance made to the contrary, and the
formal Anathema's and Curses used against him at the time of his deposition, he
wrested it again to himself, and enjoyed it in despite of all his Adversaries,
for some Months; until that Dionysius, the (...) of Phillipopolis, observing
what success attended Parthenius in his Restoration, resolved to tread the same
path, the which he prosecuted so effectually, that he crowded out Parthenius
again, and in this year 1678, Dionysius sits in the Patriarchal Throne, there
to remain until some other, who making a new proffer of advantage to the
Turkish Court, shall expel him from thence. In this manner the G. Signor seems
to be Head of the Greek Church, and Arbitrator in all their differences; which
every good Christian ought with sadness to consider, and with compassion to
behold this once glorious Church to tear and rent out her own bowels, and give
them for food to Vultures and Ravens, and to the wild and fierce Creatures of
the World.

In former times the Church paid no more to the G. Signor, at the change of a
Patriarch, than ten thousand Dollars; but the multitude of Pretenders for this
Office, has enhansed the price to 25000 Dollars. Formerly also the Instalment
of a Patriarch was with the Solemnity and Formality before premised; but the
daily contests introduce that confusion and contempt of the Office, as has
left no place for honor or respect, so that a Patriarch ascends his Throne,
and takes hold of the Mitre and Crosier with as little Ceremony, as an ordinary
Priest or Curate takes possession of his Living or Vicaridge, or when he takes
hold of the Ring of the Church door.

The Patriarch cannot act in his Office, nor any other Bishop in his See,
without a Baratz or Commission from the G. Signor: Nor is any Monastery allowed
or protected, nor the Prior or Guardian endued with a power over his Monks, but
by virtue of his Baratz: A Copy of one of which given formerly to the Latin
Bishop of Scio, I have thought fit here to insert, for the better evidence of
the matter and curiosity of the Style.

The Command and Decree of the Noble and Royal Signature of the High State,
Copy of a Patent whereby the G. Signior makes Bishops.
and Sublime Seat of the Fair Imperial Firm, which enforces the Universe, and
through the assistance of God, and defense of the Supreme Benefactor is
received, and obeyed by all, as follows.

The Priest which is named Andrea Soffiano, who has in his hands this Imperial
and Blessed Command, is now by virtue of these Letters Patents of high State,
created Bishop of those who profess to be of the Latin Rite in the Island of
Scio; and having brought with him his old Baratz, and desiring that the same
might be renewed, and having to that end paid into our Treasury 600 Aspers, as
the usual Fee in such Cases, I have therefore granted to this Andrea Soffiano
this Baratz, as the perfection of Felicity. And moreover, I command that he go
and be Bishop of the Christians of the aforesaid Rite, inhabiting that Island,
according to the usual and ancient Custom, and vain and unprofitable
Ceremonies; willing and commanding that all Religious Priests, and all other
Christians both great and small of the same Rite, inhabiting that Island, do
acknowledge the said Priest for their Bishop; and that on every business, which
shall depend or appertain on, or of his Office and Episcopal Jurisdiction, they
have recourse unto him, not deviating from his equitable and just Sentence.
Moreover, that no other do meddle or concern himself, when the said Bishop,
according to his unprofitable and vain Ceremonies, shall constitute or deprive
in or of his Office any Priest or Religious person, as he shall judge him
deserving or undeserving; and that no Priest or Friar of the said Rite presume
to marry any persons without the Consent or License of the said Bishop: And
every Will or Testament, which shall be made by any Priest dying, in favor of
the poor Churches, shall be firm and valid: And if it should happen out, that
any Christian Woman, under the Jurisdiction of this Bishop, should depart from
her Husband, or any Husband should abandon his Wife, none shall have power to
grant the Divorce, nor intermeddle therein, except the aforesaid Bishop. And in
fine, the said Bishop shall enjoy and possess the Vineyards appertaining to his
Church, with Gardens, Orchards, Villages, Fields, Barks, Mills, Monasteries,
and Pious Legacies bequeathed in favor of his other Churches; and all these
Privileges he shall enjoy in the same manner, as anciently the Bishops his
Predecessors have enjoyed before him, and as firmly as ever, without receiving
trouble, molestation, or interruption from any person whatsoever. And so be it
known, and belief be given to this Noble Signature.

The other three Patriarchs, The other three Patriarchs.
being far from Court, and from the Evil and Covetous Eyes of the Turks, are
the farther removed from Jove's Thunder-bold, and therefore are morefreely
elected by the fool Votes and Suffrages of the Bishops, who having chiefly
respect to the welfare and flourishing Estate of the Church, do most commonly
prefer those who are most signal for their Piety and Learning. The Patriarch of
Constantinople, besides the extent of his Jurisdiction, is of greater power, by
reason of his Vicinity to the Court: but the Alexandrian is of greater
Authority in his Ecclesiastical Censures and Civil Regimen, stiling himself
with the Title of (...), or Judge of the world. And the Patriarchs of Antiochia
and Jerusalem, by reason of their poverty, not having sufficient to subsist,
are little reverenced by the Turks, or their own People.

The Patriarch of Constantinople, who was so great and opulent under the
Christian Emperors, is now reduced to a narrow Fortune, being deprived of his
certain and settled Revenue, Revenue of the Patriarchs.
by the violence and sacrilege of the common Enemy to the Church of Christ; so
that the chief income is accidental, arising from the death of Bishops,
Archbishops, and ordinary Priests, and from such as are consecrated and
admitted into their Diocesses and Parishes: What a deceased Priest leaves (not
having Children) accrues to the Patriarch as to the common Father and Heir of
them all, from which arises a considerable Revenue every year.

The other Patriarchal Sees, by reason of the paucity and poverty of the
Christians, are worse provided; but yet, being far from the Court, have not so
many nccessities to satisfy.

The chief subsistence of the secular Priests And of Secular Priests.
is from the charity of the People, but they, being cold in that Virtue, as
well as in their Devotion, contribute faintly on the days of Offering; so that
the Clergy, who are the Guardians of the Holy Mysteries, are forced to sell the
Ordinances of the Church for their own subsistence; none being able to receive
Absolution, or be admitted to Confession, or procure Baptism for their
Children, or enter into a state of Matrimony, or divorce his Wife, or obtain
Excommunication against another, or Communion for the sick, without an
agreement first for the price, which the Priests hold up as they discover the
Zeal and Abilities of the party who cheapens them.

When the Holy Church triumphed in the days of Constantine the Great, the
Bishops of Rome and Constantinople The Bishops of Rome and Constantinople
compared.
were independent each of other, and afterward they were also made of equal
honor and power; but in regard that for better order and distinction, it was
necessary (they two being to meet and concur in the same Council) that the
precedence of place should first be determined: The priority of Order, not of
Authority, was adjudged to the Pope, lest old Rome, which was the ancient
Mistress of the World, should lose her honor in yielding to the new, which was
Constantinople, and had no greater Dignity or Fame than that which she
challenged and borrowed from the presence and brightness of the others
Emperors: and so much Socrates Scholasticus affirms in these words. In the
Council of Constantinople Anno 385. in the Reign of Theodosius the Emperor,
when Nectanius was chosen Bishop, it was decreed, That the Bishop of
Constantinople should possess the next place and prerogative after the Bishop
of Rome: And likewise it was determined in the Council of Chalcedon, Can. 28.
That the Bishops Seat of new Rome, that is Constantinople, should enjoy equal
privileges with old Rome; and in all Ecclesiastical matters to be extolled and
magnified as that of Rome, being the second in order after her; the words are
these, (...) (...) Nor did the Bishop of Rome ever preside in the first six
General Councils (which only are received by the whole Church) either by
himself or his Legates. This, and suchlike honor of precedence, the Church of
Greece may yield unto the Church of Rome, and perhaps now rather in these times
of Oppression, wherein, being humbled by the hand of God, they seek not worldly
Honors, nor swelling Titles, nor Dominions, but are desirous only to govern in
the Hearts and Affections of their people. Ambitio, and cupido gloriae,
faelicium hominum sunt affectus, says Tacitus. However, the Oriental
Confession does not seem to condescend so far, in that it declares, That
notwithstanding the priority of Honor and Antiquity which was formerly given
to Jerusalem and other Churches before that of Constantinople, yet afterward
the Council of Constantinople and Chalcedon did give the primacy of honor unto
new Rome, and to the Clergy thereof, by reason of the Imperial Power, whose
Seat was there. But let us not only hear what the Greeks themselves do utter in
this point, but observe the words of that famous Venetian Father Paul Sarpus,
who in the 25th Chapter of his History of the Inquisition, has these pertinent
and impartial words: The Eastern and Western Churches continued both in
Communion and Christian Charity for the space of nine hundred years, and more;
in which time the Pope of Rome was reverenced and esteemed no less by the
Greeks than by the Latins: He was acknowledged for the Successor of St. Peter,
and chief of all the Eastern Catholic Bishops: In the Persecutions raised by
Heretics, they implored his Aid, and of other Bishops of Italy; and this Peace
was easily kept, because the Supreme Power was in the Canons, to which both
parts acknowledged themselves subject. Ecclesiastical Discipline was severely
maintained in each Country by the Prelates of it, not arbitrarily but
absolutely, according to Order and Canonical Rigor, none putting his hand into
the Government of another, but advised one the other to the observance of the
Canons. In those days never any Pope of Rome did pretend to confer Benefices in
the Diocesses of other Bishops; neither was the custom yet introduced of
getting money out of others by way of Dispensations or Bulls: But as soon as the
Court of Rome began to pretend that it was not subject to Canons, and that she
might, according to her own discretion, alter any Order of the Fathers,
Councils, and of the Apostles themselves; and that she attempted, instead of
the ancient Primacy of the Apostolical See, to bring in an absolute Dominion,
not ruled by any Law, or Canon, then the division grew. And as this division
grew between the Eastern and Western Churches for the causes aforesaid, so the
same Reasons were the causes of division and separation in the Western Church
it self: for, as to considering men, nothing seemed more absurd, than the
Usurpation of Rome over other Churches, independent thereon in secular
Government; so to the people who lived under its Dominion, nothing could be
more Tyrannical and oppressive.

CHAP. IV.
The Opinion of the Greek Church concerning that Article in the Nicene Creed, I
believe one Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church: and what Authority and Power
is given by them thereunto.

THE Sea of Rome taking it for granted that she is the head of the Catholic
Church, would seem to deduce from that Principle, undeniable consequences of
Infallibility, of Privileges, Power, and Jurisdiction, as ample, and as
extensive as the absolute and supreme Authority of our Lord and Master Jesus:
But this being a Foundation rather supposed than real, presumed gratis, and not
granted, that Universal Jurisdiction becomes as empty and airy, as those Titles
which Popes give to those Patriarchs and Bishops whom they constitute over the
several Diocesses of the Eastern Churches, though they neither have a Revenue
from thence, nor Command over any of the Greek persuasion. To evince which with
more Evidence, it will be pertinent to understand what Confession herein the
Oriental Church makes and lays down for Orthodox, viz. That as there is one
Faith, one Baptism, one God, and one Father of all, so the Church of God is
one, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic; which denomination of Catholic (they are
the very words of the Confession) the Church does not take from one particular
place, or See predominant over all others, as from Ephesus, Philadelphia,
Laodicea, Antioch, Rome, Jerusalem, or the like, but from an aggregation of all
the Christian Churches in the World collected into one Body, and united under
one head Christ Jesus. (...).
It is true, says this Confession, that Jerusalem may properly be called the
Mother Church of the World, it having been the Stage whereon the Mystery of
man's Redemption was represented, and the place where the Gospel was first
preached, and the Fountain from whence were derived, through the World, the
Streams of that Holy Doctrine which published the Passion and Resurrection of
our Savior, and made known unto the World the glad Tidings of Repentance and
remission of Sins; but can betermed the Universal Mother with no more right
than any other, though if any particular Church can pretend thereunto, that of
Jerusalem might challenge an Authority and Privilege above others, having in
the Infancy of Religion, Acts II. v. 22. sent forth her Teachers and Pastors
into all places, and was famed for the glorious Blood of the Primitive Martyrs.
Whereby it is evident, that the Greek Faith acknowledges no other Universal
Head or Foundation than Jesus Christ himself, under whom the Patriarchs,
Archbishops, and Bishops of particular Churches, subjected to different Powers
of secular Government, exercise their sway and jurisdiction over Human Souls,
Acts 20. v. 28. (...) (...) Take heed unto your selves, and to all the Flock
over which the Holy Ghost has made you Bishops. By which it appears, That the
Greek Church does not only not esteem the Church of Rome for the sole
Catholic; but also how absurd it is in reason to exclude the Greek, the
Armenian, and many other Christan Churches from the pale of the Universal, and
consequently from the Benefits and Promises purchased by Christ for his Church.
And strange it is, that none besides the Roman, which is not of that extent as
the vast Circumference of the other Christian Churches, should yet have the
sole Power of the Keys of the Divine Ordination, and dispensing the Mysteries
of the Holy Sacraments; and that such who are excluded, or are without her
pale, should be strangers to the Church of God and Aliens from his People.

Whilst in this manner the Oriental Churches believe no particular Church to
have any other Universal Head than Jesus Christ, they bear all obedience and
respect to that Church of which they are members, submitting to all its Orders
and Censures Ecclesiastical; for they believe that those words of our Savior,
Matthew. 18. 27. carry with them some force and authority; and if he shall
neglect to hear them, tell it unto the Church; and if he neglect to hear the
Church, let him be unto thee as a Heathen man, or a Publican. Obedience due to
the Orders of the Church.
On this ground the Interpretation of Scripture made by the holy Synods and
Councils, and the judgments given by Patriarchs, Bishops, and other Priests,
according to Canonical Rites are established, and esteemed of Divine Authority,
(...) (...). The Priests with them are the mouth of their Spiritual Law, and
the Guides of their Souls; on their Doctrine they entrust, and adventure their
safe Pilotage to the everlasting Haven of happiness: And believing that no
Scripture is of private Interpretation, they judge it rational to resign
themselves entirely to the belief of those to whose conduct they are committed;
having that high esteem of obedience, as that which contains an admirable
Virtue and Efficacy to atone for the sins, not only of a misled understanding,
but for Actions of irregular practices.

And that the people may better understand the Precepts and Rules of the
Church, the Oriental Confession has reduced all the commands thereof unto
these nine following.

The first is Prayer to God, attending at the times of the Liturgy, Morning and
Evening on the Lords Day, and holy Festivals of the Church.

The second is the observation of the Fasts and Feasts of the Church.

The third is Obedience and Honor toward their Spiritual Pastors and Teachers.

The fourth is Confession of sins four times a year, to a Priest lawfully
constituted and ordained.

The fifth forbids the Laity to read the Books of Heretics, or any other which
may divert them from the Profession of the Christian Faith.

The sixth enjoins them to pray for all Kings and Princes, for their
Patriarchs, Metropolites, Bishops, and all the Clergy; and for all Souls
departed in the Catholic Faith, and for all Heretics and Schismatics, that
they may return to the true Faith before their passage from this present life.

The seventh enjoins an Obedience to all extraordinary occasional Fasts,
besides the Common or General; namely, such as are appointed and ordained by
the Bishops in their respective Diocesses on occasional Calamities, such as
Famine, War, Pestilence, or the like.

The eighth forbids the Laity to invade the Rights or Spiritual Livings or
Benefices of the Clergy, or convert the Ornaments of the Priest or Altar to
private and profane uses, or sacrilegiously to rob the Poor's Box, and abuse
the charitable Contributions of well-disposed Christians by employing them
contrary to the intention of the Donor.

The ninth forbids the celebration of Marriages in Lent, or during the time of
their other Fasts, or to frequent Theaters, or imitate the Customs of the
Barbarians, or Infidels, that so those who profess the Gospel may be charged
with nothing that is over-sensual, undecent, or of ill report.

CHAP. V.
Of the Fasts of the Greek Church.

THE Principal Fasts or Lents are four. The first begins the 15th day of
November, being forty days before Christmas. The second is the great Lent
before Easter, beginning with ours according to the Old style, the which style
they observe through the whole year. The third begins the Week after Pentecost,
or Whitsontide, called The Fast of the Holy Apostles, being the time in which
they judge that the Apostles prayed and fasted when they prepared themselves to
preach the Gospel, Acts 13. v. 3. which ends the 29th of June, being the
Festival of St. Peter and the other Apostles; so that of this Fast there is no
fixed number of days, but is some years more, some less, according as the
Pentecost falls out, sooner or later.

The fourth begins the first of August, and continues until the 15th, being a
Preparatory to the Grand Festival, which they keep in honor to the Assumption
of our Lady, who they say was bodily transported into Heaven; which Fast is so
strictly observed, that even Oil is forbidden to Kaloires, and few others,
especially of Women, there be, but who observe this prohibition; unless on the
6th of August, which being a Festival in memory of our Saviors
Transfiguration, they have a permission to eat Oil and Fish, but on other days
they return again to their slender Diet.

Besides which Grand Fasts there are some other Fasts, as the 28th of August,
in commemoration of the decollation or beheading of St. John Baptist. Likewise
there is another Fast beginning the first of September, which continues until
the fourteenth, being the Feast of the exaltation of the Holy Cross, in which
time of fourteen days the History of the Passion is preached and represented.
But this last is only observed by Kaloirs, and such as are entered into Vows
and a Monastical life, whose profession is Mortification, and their business
Religion. In all which times, they do not only abstain from Flesh, or
Lacticinia, such as Butter, Cheese, and the like, but also from Fish which have
Scales or Finnes, or Blood; only Shellfish, as Lobsters, Crabs, Oysters, etc.
are lawful, though it is probable that in them there may be more of heat and
nourishment; excepting only in that Lent which begins on the 15th of November
it is lawful for them to eat all sorts of Fish, as also other ordinary and
Weekly Fasts of Wednesday and Friday oblige them only to an abstinence from
Flesh, and what comes from thence, but all sorts of Fish are freely indulged.
And though Wednesdays and Frydays are for the most part Fasts through the whole
year, yet we must except from hence, Wednesday and Friday of the eleventh Week
before Easter, which they call Arzeiburst; the reason whereof, as Christophorus
Angelo reports, was from the dog of certain Heretics so called, whom they used
to send with Letters: At lengh the Dog dying, his Heretical Masters used to
fast that 11th Week before. Easter for sorrow; in opposition to whom, and to
have no conformity with them, the Orthodox appointed that Wednesday and Friday
of that Week should be exempted from any Obligation of abstinence.

On Whitson-Monday they abstain from Flesh and Fast, by reason that the people,
meeting that morning in the Church, ask of God the Communication of his Holy
Spirit, as he gave unto his Holy Apostles, in commemoration of which they eat
Flesh on Wednesday and Friday of that Week. The 25th of March, being the Feast
of the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin, though it happen in Lent, yet they
have a privilege to eat all sorts of Fish; as they have to eat Flesh from
Christmas to Epiphany, Wednesdays and Frydays not being exempted, and the first
Week after Pentecost. In like manner they are permitted to eat Flesh all the
first Week of three before the great Lent, which they call (...), the Sunday of
which answers to our septuagesima. The next Week following, which is called
(...), they are commanded abstinence from Flesh Wednesdays and Frydays; but the
Week immediately before Lent is called (...), which signifies fresh Cheese; it
being a time when they may eat all sorts of Milk, and what is made thereof;
likewise Eggs, and Fish of all kinds, being perhaps a time to prepare their
Stomachs to a leaner and morerigorous Diet. This Lent begins on Monday as ours
does on Wednesday. These Fasts are strictly observed and undergone by them with
no less patience and sobriety than superstition, supposing it a sin not less
heinous, willingly to break this Fast, or transgress the rules of this
Abstinence, and with that the Institution and Rites of the Church, than to
commit Adultery, or invade the possessions of his Neighbor. Education and
Custom has brought them to that Opinion of Fasting, that they believe
Christianity can hardly be professed and subsist without it. It is very
pleasant to be observed what Cyrillus, the Patriarch of Constantinople, reports
of the Armenian Patriarch of Jerusalem, who being desirous to prove the
sanctity of his Church and Religion to be greater than that of the Greeks or
any others, brings it for an Argument, that they did not only abstain from
flesh and fish in Lent, but even also from Beans and Pease, which the Greeks
allowed of, consulting the inclination of their Appetite more than true
Religion. On these grounds they can by no means be induced to believe the
English, and others of the reformed Churches, to be Orthodox Christians,
because they neither use Fasting, nor reverence the sign of the Cross; two
matters of great scandal amongst them; though in point of observation of the
Feasts according to the old style with them, and by their opposition to the
Church of Rome, they are on the other side more unsatisfied and doubtful what
to judge.

The severity of their Lents is more easily supported by the expected enjoyment
of the following Festival; at which time they run into such excesses of mirth
and riot, agreeable to the light and vain humor of that people, that they seem
to be revenged of their late sobriety, and to make compensation to the Devil
for their late temperance and mortification toward God; and this extravagancy
of Mirth and loose Debauchery they practice with so much liberty, that their
Priests reprove them not for it, but rather maintain Drunkenness not to be a
Sin on a Festival, being a hearty memorial of the Holiness of the Saint, or a
Testimony of joy in commemoration of the works of man's Redemption; but this is
spoken rather as a corruption of manners than as a Tenent or Profession of that
Church.

In the observation of these Fasts they are so rigid and superstitiously
strict, that they hold no case of necessity may or can claim a Dispensation;
and that the Patriarch has not power and authority sufficient to give a
License to eat flesh, where the Church has commanded Abstinence. For suppose a
person sick to death, who with Broth made of Flesh, or with an Egg may be
recovered to life; they say it were better he should dye, than eat and sin.
Howsoever perhaps the Ghostly Father will be so far concerned in the others
health, as to advise the sick Penitent in such cases to eat flesh, and
afterward confessing the sin he promises to grant Absolution: and this I have
known to have sometimes been practiced; which perhaps amongst the ignorant
Priests may be esteemed an excellent and an ingenious accommodation, between
humane Necessities and the Institutions of the Church. But such of the wiser
sort who have studied in Italy, and there been seasoned with the Doctrine of
the Latins, believe their own Church endued with as much authority in
Ecclesiastics, as the Roman; and that the difficulty of granting Licenses to
eat flesh, is a scruple grounded on that Government, which is agreeable to the
present state of things, rather than want of power in the Church to grant
Dispensations for it.

CHAP. VI.
Of Feasts observed in the Greek Church.

THE Greeks begin their Year in September, observing the first day thereof with
jollity and feasting, esteeming a cheerful spirit to be a good Omen, that the
succeeding year shall be prosperous; though not being dedicated to the memory
and honor of any Saint, it is no point of Religion to abstain from labor, yet
it is esteemed undecent, arguing either covetousness or a necessitous poverty.

The grand Feast of the Year (as amongst all other Christians) is Easter, or
the Festival of the Resurrection, at which time the Greeks have this ancient
and laudable Custom: When they meet their acquaintance in the Morning, or at
any time within the three days of Easter, they salute with these words, (...),
Christ is risen; and then the other answers, (...), he is risen indeed; and so
they kiss three times, once on each Cheek, and on the Mouth, and so depart.

The second day of September is the Feast of S. John the abstemious, not of
Precept but of Devotion, and therefore is only celebrated by Kaloires, and
other Religious, in honor of the holy S. John Baptist, who by his severe and
abstemious life in the Wilderness set the first Example of holy Fasts, to such
as would be Disciples of the holy Jesus.

The twenty sixth is dedicated with great honor and devotion to the
Translation of the Body of S. John the Evangelist into Heaven: for they
maintain, that this S. John being banished by Trajan the Emperor into the Isle
of Patmos, and there having wrote the Apocalypse, he passed: over unto Ephesus,
where ending his glorious life he was interred; but after some days burial his
Disciples searching for his Body in the Grave, found it not; from whence
immediately arose a belief, that his Body was assumed into Heaven, and placed
in the Mansion of Enoch and Elias, who in company together shall again return
to converse on Earth, before Antichrist is perfectly revealed and made known
unto the World. And this they partly ground on the words of our Savior to S.
Peter, If I will that he stay till I come, what is that to thee?

The Greeks, as they delight in the Histories of their Saints, and recount them
with as much variety and fancy as the Latins do their Legends, so I might in
this place recite long and tedious Histories of them; but because the lives of
most of them are recorded in Holy Scripture, and of the later of them in the
Synaxarion, (of which Book we shall hereafter speak) we shall only here mention
Cosma, and Damianus, Cosma and Damianus.
and St. George the Cappadocian, which are persons, who after the Apostles, and
immediate Disciples of Jesus, with some Fathers of the Church, such as St.
Basil, St. Chrysostom, etc. take up a principal place in the Greek Calendar.

The first two are called the Holy Anargiri, to whom I found a poor Oratory
erected at Ephesus, which was thrown up of late with a few loose stones,
encircling a little Altar without Roof in the place of a more ancient Church,
whither the Greeks resort on the first of November to say Mass, and sing Hymns,
in praise and commemoration of these Saints whom they report to have been born
in Asia, their father a Gentile, and their mother a Christian, called Thedosa,
who educated these her two Sons in Religious Piety, and laudable Sciences; but
they principally addicting themselves to the studies of Physic, did, by the
Divine assistance, cooperating with the means of Herbs and Medicines, become
such perfect Practitioners that they cured all Diseases incident to Man and
Beast without Money or other consideration of Interest; for which cause they
were called the Anargiri, or those that took no Money. They farther report,
That Damianus was so strict in this point, that he dissented greatly from his
Brother Cosma, for having only accepted of two Eggs from a poor Widow, though
employed on her self for an Unguent or Cataplasm for the Sciatica, that he ever
after avoided all society and converse with him, and at his death gave order,
that his Brother should not be interred in the same Vault or Grave with him:
the which resolution of Damianus the Friends of both designed to perform; but
that carrying the Corpse of Cosma to burial, they were met by a Camel, which
opening his mouth as miraculously as Balaam's Ass, admonished the Bearers to
lay the Brothers in the same Tomb together; for that neither the Crime of Cosma
was so great, nor the difference so lasting, but that both their Bodies might
be contained in the same Sepulcher, whose Souls were already united in the same
heavenly Mansion. The Kaloires also farther boasting of the Miracles of these
Saints, tell us, that at Athens there is a Well, adjoining to the Porch of that
Church which is dedicated to them, which is dry the whole year, excepting only
on that day when their Festival is celebrated, and begins to flow at the first
words of the Mass, which seem to have the same Efficacy on this Spring, as
Moses's Rod had upon the Rock, to produce a Flood of sweet and delicious water,
not only pleasant to the taste, but wholesome for the Body, but dries up and
fails with the Evening of the Festival.

St. George S. George.
the Capadocian is in like manner highly reverenced by this People, there being
scarce a Town where are two Churches, but one of them is dedicated to this
Saint, of whom they recount many and various stories; and what is most strange,
they believe them all. They say that he was born of noble Blood, and lived in
the time of Dioclesian the Emperor; under whom, arising a bloody persecution,
this Saint, as a Champion of undaunted Courage, publicly presented himself,
owning and avouching the Gospel to be the only, true, and saving Faith,
inveighing against Idolatry and superstitious Customs, and belief of Gentilism.
This Christian boldness sharpened the Arms of persecution against the Saint, so
that the Executioner struck him into the Belly with a Lance, which though a
great effusion of Blood followed, yet the Wound closed, and immediately became
whole: They tell us of his being thrown into a Pit of Lime, and his walking
barefoot on Planks studded with sharp Nails; of his remaining unconsumed and
untouched amidst the flames; of his raising the dead; of his slaying a Dragon
on the Banks of Euphrates, near a place now called by the Turks Barut, which
the Greeks and Christians of those parts show unto Travelers to this day; by
which variety of Miracles many were converted unto the Christian Faith, amongst
which was the Queen Alexandra, Wife of Dioclesian. At length, the time being
come that this Saint was to dye, the power of his persecutors prevailed against
him, by whom his head being struck off, his soul ascended into Heaven to
receive the Crown of Martyrdom. The Greeks (as I said) have diverse Chapels
dedicated to St. George, amongst which, at an obscure Village called by the
Turks Boschioi, not far from Magnasia, there is one, where, on the 23th of
April, they carry his Picture in Procession, accompanied by Multitudes of Turks
as well as Greeks, who resort thither, the first for pass-time, the others for
mirth, company, and devotion. This Picture, which is drawn in Colors upon a
Board, is much of that bigness as a sign which we hang before a Shop, and much
of that sort of Painting. This Picture (they report, and many believe it,
especially the Women) being carried by a notorious sinner, is endued with so
much mettle and courage of that Champion, as soundly to belabour his Back and
Shoulders, but is more civil and mild to the innocent, or to the less
scandalous in the wickedness of life. I had once the curiosity to see this Fury
in a Board, of which the Greeks related such strange Stories, so that arriving
the Night before at the Village, the next morning all things were provided for
the Solemnity; when one of the Papases took up the Champion on his Shoulder,
accompanied also with two others of the like bigness, (I think one was the
Picture of the Virgin Mary) with these, all the Company proceeded in a
procession with much quietness and gravity, until they came under a large
Chinar Tree, or Platanus, where remained the ruins of an old Chapel dedicated
to this Saint; Mass being here celebrated, and ended, the Priests returning in
their Habiliments, left the Pictures to be carried home by the Laity; when one,
more forward than the rest, with fear and reverence took the Champion on his
Shoulder, which at first began a little to move and turn itself, but at length
came to downright blows, giving the Fellow, who managed the business very
artificially, so many knocks that it seemed to have beat him to the Ground,
when another immediately relieves him, and takes it from him, and then the
other two Pictures begin the like rage, buffeting and beating those that carry
them, with which there is so much noise and confusion, that I never saw any
piece of Bear-Garden-like, or comparable to it. This ridiculous piece of folly
and superstition pleases the humor of the ignorant Greeks, and scandalizes the
Enemies of our Faith; which when I saw, I wondered at it, and blamed the
remissness of the Bishop, in presence of the Priests who managed the solemnity
of the day. I asked one of them in private, whether he really believed that the
Pictures were inspired with life and motion to beat sinners; to which, making
some pause, as being unwilling to impose upon me whom he judged difficult to
give credence to such matters, he answered, that it was a thing doubtful, and
hard to be believed by any other than the Vulgar sort. And in other occasions,
discoursing with the Prelates and Bishops of this Church on the same subject, I
seemed to be concerned, and transported with some little passion, that in the
sight of Turks and Infidels they should give countenance to so great a Cheat,
to the dishonor of our Holy Faith and Gospel, which is supported on a better
foundation than such idle and profane imaginations; to which they gave me this
answer, That Custom had prevailed, and that for some Ages this belief had taken
so deep root in the minds of the ignorant, that it was hard to undeceive them,
without dishonor to the Saint, and danger to the whole Fabric of the
Christian Religion; for this belief being equally fixed with the Doctrins of
necessary Faith, the confutation of this one would bring the others into
question; and perhaps persuade the people that they were now parting with the
main Principles of the Gospel, and that therefore it was thought necessary to
let the Tares of false Doctrine to grow up with the Wheat of Orthodox Belief,
until God, who knows the time, shall separate them, and pluck up the one
without raising or extirpating the other. And now, that the Reader may better
understand the Feasts in the Greek Church without the help of a Calendar, I
shall present him with them, beginning with the first Month according to their
Account.

SEPTEMBER.
8. The Nativity of the Blessed Virgin.

14. The Exaltation of the Cross.

23. The Conception of St. John the Baptist.

26. The Translation of St. John the Evangelist into Heaven.

OCTOBER.
6. St. Thomas.

18. St. Luke the Evangelist.

23. St. James the Brother of John.

26. St. Demetrio, which is a day of great Devotion, noted in the Calendar with
Red Letters, and esteemed amongst the Seamen, both of Greeks and Truks, to be
stormy and tempestuous at Sea; the Turks call it Cassim Gheun, and will not go
to Sea either ten days before, or ten days after; and before this day commonly
the Fleet of Galleys return into Harbor, and lay themselves up for the whole
Winter.

NOVEMBER.
1. The Holy Anargyri, Cosma and Damianus.

8. The Congregation and Seraphical Order of the Holy Angels, noted with red
Letters in the Calendar.

13. St. John Chrysostom.

14. S. Phillip the Apostle, which we celebrate the first of May.

16. S. Matthew the Apostle, which we observe on the 21. of September.

21. The Presentation of the Blessed Virgin in the Temple.

25. S. Katherine Virgin and Martyr, and the Martyr Mercurius.

30. S. Andrew the Apostle.

DECEMBER.
4. S. Barbara, and S. John Damascen.

5. S. Sabba Abbate.

6. S. Nicholas.

* 7. S. Ambrosius Medio-Lanensis.

* 9. The Conception of S. Anne.

12. S. Spiridon.

13. The Martyrs, Eustratius, Auxentius, Eugenius, Mardarius, Orestes, etc.

* 15. S. Liberal, and Eleutherius.

17. The Prophet Daniel, and the three Holy Children, Ananias, Azarias, and
Misaliel.

20. S. Ignatius.

25. The Nativity of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

26. St. Stephen.

JANUARY.
The first day is celebrated in remembrance of the Circumcision of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, and in honor of S. Basil.

6. The Epiphany, and gathering together of Disciples to the Baptist in the
Wilderness. The 5th of January is the Vigil preceding this Festival, dedicated
to the day when Christ was Baptized, wherefore on that day the Priests
consecrate their Waters, and the people drink of the same, to which they are to
come pure, and with fasting.

11. The holy Father Theodosius Caenobiarchus.

17. S. Anthony the Abbot.

16. The adoration of Alysius, and the Apostle S. Peter.

18. S. Athanasius and Cyril, the Patriarchs of Alexandria.

22. Timothy and Anastasius.

25. S. Gregory Nazianzen.

27. The Relics of S. John Crysostom carried in procession.

30. The three holy Ecumenical Divines or Doctors of the Church, viz. Basil
the great, Gregory the Divine, and John Chrysostom.

FEBRUARY.
2. The presentation of Christ in the Temple.

16. Theodorus (...).

23. The invention of the head of S. John Baptist.

MARCH.
9. The 40 holy Martyrs starved with cold in the Valley of Sebastia.

25. The Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin.

26. The Archangel Gabriel.

APRIL.
23. Saint George.

25. Saint Mark the Evangelist.

MAY.
8. S. John the Evangelist, which we keep the 26. of December.

20. Constantine and S. Helena.

JUNE.
19. S. Jude Alpheus, with us observed the 28. of October.

24. The Nativity of S. John Baptist.

29. The Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul.

JULY.
20. Elias the Prophet.

25. S. Anne.

26. S. Parascheve and Panteleemon, who were Martyrs in the time of Dioclesian.

AUGUST.
6. The Transfiguration of Christ.

15. The Assumption of the Blessed Virgin.

29. The Martyrdom of S. John Baptist.

But because that the observation of so many Holy Days would be grievous to the
poor, who live by their day-labour, many of them are retrenched, and are made
obligatory only to the Religious, such as Priests and others in holy Orders;
the which I have marked thus * for the better distinction of them from those
which are kept by all sorts of people; but hereof I have set down very few, the
foregoing being almost all to be observed; and every day in the year has some
relation to a Saint, which the Kaloires, who have nothing else to do, keep with
a particular devotion.

The Rule for canonizing Canonizing Saints used by the Greeks.
Saints is still observed in the Patriarchal See at Constantinople: for though
as we have said, their Menology is already so filled, that one day is assigned
to two or three Saints; yet not to suffer good men and Saints, now so rare in
the world, to lose their esteem amongst men, who have their reward with God,
they sometimes even unto our days enter such into the Canon, whose Miracles and
sanctity of life have raised into the seraphical Order of holy men, which after
their death are to be testified by a 1000 Witnesses^ who have either seen them
or heard their actions recounted by the undoubted Testimonies of credible
persons; of which a diligent Examination being made by the Patriarch and
Archbishops in a full Synod, they admit him or them into the Calendar, and say
his Mass on the day appointed for his Festival, adjoining thereunto Hymns in
honor of that Saint, reading a Relation of his Miracles and Good Works,
entering the History of his life into their Synaxarion, or Book of Saints; but
this Canonization is now seldom practiced, because it cannot be purchased
without much Money, and the Greeks being wicked and poor in these days, few or
none are either so good, or have Friends so piously rich, as to procure their
Enrolment into the Golden List of Saints and Martyrs.

After the Commands of the Church, we are next in order to treat of the
Mysteries, which are seven, and answer to those which the Roman Church calls
Sacramenta. First, Baptism; second, Chrism; third, the Holy Eucharist; fourth,
Priesthood; fifth, Matrimony; sixth, Repentance; seventh, (...), or the Oil of
Prayer.

CHAP. VII.
Of Baptism, and the sealing of Infants, called (...).

IN imitation of Christ's Presentation in the Temple, and the blessing of old
Simeon when he sang his Nunc dimittis, the Greek Church has from long
Antiquity practiced on the eighth day to present their Children at the
Church Porch to receive the blessing of the Priest, who signs them on the
Forehead, Mouth and Breast, with the sign of the Cross, as a Seal of the Divine
Grace, and a disposition to receive the Holy Baptism, which they call, The
sealing of infants; and afterward says this Prayer.

O our God, we beseech thee to infuse the light of thy person on this thy
Servant, and seal the Cross of thy only begotten Son in his heart, and in his
thoughts, that he may fly the vanities of this World, and the snares of the
Enemy, and follow thy Commands: Confirm him, O Lord, in thy name, unite him in
thy good time to thy Holy Church, and perfect him by thy stupendous mysteries,
that so, living according to thy commands, he may obtain the Kingdom of
Beatitude with thine Elect, through the Grace and Mercy of thy only Son, to
whom, with the Life-giving Spirit, be Glory now and for ever, Amen.

Afterward the Priest taking the Child into his Arms before the Gate of the
Church elevates it, and waves it in the form of a Cross, and so ends this
Ceremony, which is the introduction and preparation to Baptism.

Baptism (as the Greek Church defines it) is a cleansing or taking away of
Original Sin, (...)
by thrice dipping or plunging into the Water, the Priest saying at every
dipping, In the name of the Father; Amen; and of the Son, Amen; and of the Holy
Ghost, Amen.

This thrice dipping or plunging into the Water this Church holds to be as
necessary to the form of Baptism, as Water to the matter; for proof whereof is
brought the 50th Canon called Apostolical; which says, Si quis Episcopus aut
Presbyter non trinam dimersionem unius mysterii celebret, sed semel mergat in
Baptismate quod dari videtur in domini morte, damnetur. Non enim dixit vobis
Dominus, In morte mea baptizate, sed Euntes docete omnes gentes in nomine
Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus sancti. In like manner they produce the 42
Chapter of the Apostles Constitutions, wherein they have these words: Ter
mergite vos Episcopi in unum Patrem, and Filium, and Spiritum sanctum. If any
Bishop or Presbyter shall not use a threefold dipping in this one mystery, but
only dips once in Baptism, let him be condemned, etc. In farther favor hereof
are quoted the Homilies of St. Chrysostom, who rhetorically discoursing of the
Virtues and Efficacy of Baptism, he symbolizeth it with the Life, Death and
Resurrection of a Christian; for the first plunging into Water, as he says,
buries the old man of sin; the second regenerates and revives him to a new
Creature; and the third raises him to the perfection of life Eternal; according
to that of S. Paul, We are buried with Christ through Baptism that we might
rise with him: so that the Greek Church, which receives the whole number of the
85 Canons (which for their Antiquity are called Apostolical) as made by the
Apostles themselves, or the next succeeding Apostolical men, does believe them
to carry very great force with them, and therefore the Ter mergite is as
constantly practiced as if it had been the interpretation of Ite Baptizate. The
which Canon, being very ancient, was first ordained against certain Heretics
who denied the Holy Trinity, Baptizing only in the name of Jesus, on those
words of the Apostle before quoted, We are buried with Christ by Baptism, etc.
in opposition to whom these three Immersions were used; for they cannot deny
the Trinity, who in Baptism distinguish three persons in the Divine Nature:
Wherefore, though nothing is essential to Baptism, nor other Precept than to be
dipped or sprinkled in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost; yet to make a more exact Test, to say who were Heretics, and who were
not, it was judged necessary in those days to super-add this Ceremony to the
more material parts of Baptism.

Before Baptism the Priest blows three times upon the Child to dispossess the
Devil of his Seat; then he pours Oil on the Water in form of a Cross, as a
token of peace and reconciliation between God and Man, and of regeneration by
the Spirit, as appears by this Prayer immediately following that Ceremony.

O Lord the God of our Fathers, who sentest to those in Noah's Ark a Dove
bearing in her mouth an Olive-Leafe, (...) etc.
the token of reconciliation, denoting the mystery of Salvation, and Grace by
the flood, and bestowing the fruit of the Olive for perfecting the mysteries of
thy Saints, by which thou satisfyest those who are in the Law of the Holy
Spirit, and in the Grace of Perfection, do thou bless this Oil with Power,
Energy and Illumination of the Holy Spirit, that it may be the Chrism against
all Filthiness, the Armor of Righteousness, and the renewing of the Spirit,
and conversion of the Body from all Diabolical Works.

Immediately before the Act of Baptism, the Priest takes the Child from the
Arms of the Godfather, or Surety (of which the Greek Church requires but one)
and making the sign of the Cross with Oil on the Forehead, Breast and reins of
the back, says, (...), The Servant of the Lord is anointed: when he seals the
Breast, (as they call it) he says, (...), for cure of soul and body; then he
anoints the Ears (...), that by hearing Faith may be received, the Feet, that
they may walk in the ways of God, the hands, that they may perform good
Actions; and thus the Child being anointed the Priest dippeth it three times
into the Water, and looking toward the East, says, (...), The Servant of God
is baptized: And these are the Principal Ceremonies observed in Baptism by the
Greek Church.

In Baptism one Godfather stands at the Font, if it be a Male-child, and one
God-mother if it be a Female, which Gossips or compari, and as they call them
in Greek comparos, esteem themselves to have the same duty incumbent on them in
the Care and Education of the Child, as has the natural Father; and hereby so
great a Friendship is contracted between the two Gossips, that ever after they
are concerned for each others interest; and they fancy that imaginary relation
of a sacred consanguinity arising hence, that the Godfather cannot marry the
Wife of his deceased Compare, nor his Son the Daughter of him, nor can they mix
Blood for several descents after, but under the censure of Incest and
condemnation of the Church; all which did arise at first from the undecency of
the Godfather marrying the Child to which he was a Father in Baptism.

The Georgians, which in some manner depend on the Greek Church, baptize not
their Children until they be eight years of Age; they formerly did not admit
them to Baptism until 14; but by means of such Preachers as the Patriarch of
Antioch sends amongst them yearly, they were taught how necessary it was to
baptize Infants, and how agreeable it was to the practice of the ancient
Church: but these being a people very tenacious of the Doctrines they once
received, could hardly be persuaded out of this error, till at length, being
wearied with the importunate Arguments of the Greeks, they consented as it were
to a middle way, and so came down from 14 to 8 years of Age, and cannot as yet
be persuaded to a nearer compliance.

CHAP. VI.
Of the second Mystery called Chrism, in Greek, (...).

CHRISM, though used in Baptism, is yet different from it, being the Seal or
Confirmation of the party baptized, in order to a performance of those Vows
which he then makes. The Oriental Confession declares, that as the Spirit of
God descended on the Apostles in form of Fire, enduing them with supernatural
graces and gifts agreeable to that employment whereunto they are called; so
this Chrism, which is an anointing of the Infant with Oil in most parts of the
Body, (as before mentioned) using these words, (...), the Seal of the Spirit of
God, is instituted by Gods Church as a means to convey Grace and Strength to
the Receiver, the authority whereof is grounded on the 2 Cor. c. 1. v. 21, 22.
Now he which established us with you in Christ, and has anointed us is God,
who has also sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts. And
as their Oriental Confession has it, (...). That is, as formerly the Spirit of
God was conveyed by the imposition of hands, so now it is by this Chrism, or
anointing with Oil: And the Greeks farther say, That Dionysius the Areopagite,
Scholar of S. Paul, testifies so much. In this manner we may perceive, how
symbolical and proper Oil is esteemed in the Greek Church to represent the
mysteries of Grace, being used in Baptism, Confirmation, in all their solemn
Acts of blessing, in extreme Unction, or (...), as we have already declared;
and it is here to be observed, that the Greeks do baptize and confirm at the
same time, and for that reason this anointing is used.

On Good-Fryday the Archbishop, or Bishop, makes and sanctifies the Chrism, or
(...), hallowing a quantity of Oil sufficient to supply all the manners of
anointing for the whole year, the which is worked to a consistency as thick as
Butter. The Composition of which, together with the Oil, are Xylobalsamum,
Echinanthes, Myrrh, Xylocatia, Carpobalsamum, Ladanum, and several other
odoriferous Gums and Spices.

The manner of the consecration of this (...), is very ceremonious, for the Oil
being as before prepared, the Curate carries it in an AlablasterBox with a
Covering to it, and sets it upon the Altar, being accompanied with his Deacons.
Then the Curate taking it from thence, and being attended likewise with his
Deacons, who carry Lamps in their hands, he meets the Patriarch or Bishop at
the Gate of the Church, and there delivers the Alablaster-Box into his hand,
who having received it, places it at the left hand of the Communion Table; and
then one of the Deacons says, (...), Let us perform our Prayers unto the Lord.
Then the Patriarch, if present, or else the Bishop, ascends to the foot of the
Communion Table, and covering the Holy Oil with a Vail, signs it three times
with the sign of the Cross, adding with a low voice this Prayer.

Merciful Lord and Father of Lights, from whom every perfect good and gift
proceeds, bestow upon us unworthy grace to perform this great and life-giving
Mystery, (...)
in the same manner as thou gave to Moses thy faithful Servant, and Samuel
thy Servant, and all the Holy Apostles: And send thy holy Spirit on this
Ointment: Make it a Royal Chrism, a Spiritual Chrism, conserving life, and an
Oil of joy sanctifying our Souls and Bodies. That which preceeded in the old
Law was made more evident and clear in the new Testament, wherewith the Priests
and high Priests, Prophets and Kings were anointed: Wherewith also thou did
anoint thine Apostles, and all hitherto have been baptized by them, and their
Successors, the Bishops and Presbyters, by the laver of Regeneration. And thou
Almighty Lord God, by the coming of the holy and adored Spirit, make this the
Garment of Incorruption, an efficacious Seal which may imprint on those who are
to be baptized, the Divine Nomination, of thy only Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
that they may be known before thee to be of thy Household, Citizens, Servants,
and thy Children, sanctified in soul and body, and freed from all Malice,
washed from sin, and, being clothed with the Vestment of thy Immortal glory,
may be acknowledged through this signal by the Holy Angels, Archangels, and
all the Heavenly Powers, and may become formidable to all evil and impure
Devils, and may become a peculiar People, a Royal Priesthood, a Holy Nation,
being signed by this thy immaculate Mystery, and having thy Christ in their
hearts, in which thou God the Father, in the holy Ghost may fix thy
habitation; because thou our God art holy, and rests in the Saints, and to thee
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, we return glory for ever and ever,
Amen,

By this Prayer we may collect and observe the Doctrine of Chrism, and for what
reason, and on what grounds it is practiced in this Church.

CHAP. IX.
The third Mystery called the Holy Eucharist, as also of the Blessed Bread, or
Panis Benedictus.

AS the (...), or sealing of Infants, is a preparation to Baptism, so the Panis
Benedictus, or Blessed Bread, called in Greek, (...), is an appendage to the
Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist. In the Eastern Church it has been of ancient
custom to seal the Bread made for the Communion with the form of a Cross, which
is afterward taken off, consecrated and set apart for the Sacrament. The parts
which remain are blessed, and, after the Divine Service is finished, are
distributed in small parcels to the People. The original hereof they deduce
from the Apostles, interpreting those places in Scripture which mention
continuance in Prayer, and breaking Bread, to be no other than the very act and
practice of dealing this blessed Bread. As in Acts 2. v. 42. And they continued
steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread,
and in Prayers. Panis Benedictus.
This Bread they often carry home to the sick, and to such whose employment
engages to their Domestical Affairs at home; as containing therein a Virtue and
Efficacy to remit all venial sins, and to conserve in a pious Soul a constant
devotion to Divine Worship. To this Bread they carry so much respect that they
eat it not, unless fasting; for being a representation or shadow of the Holy
Eucharist, it ought to have a proportionable reverence in its degree; for some
say that it was introduced into the place of the Communion, which in the
infancy of Christianity, being every day celebrated, the frequency thereof in
tract of time begat such a familiarity, as seemed to abate much of the ancient
Devotion and Divine Zeal which formerly adorned that Heavenly and
Incomprehensible Mystery: For which reason the times of Communion being
appointed more seldom, the distribution of this Blessed Bread, was ordained to
supply the remembrance of it, and represent the memorial of that whole duty,
which now by reason of a general coldness and want of love to Religion, was
with more caution and care administered. To the reception of this blessed Bread
it is required, that they should come with a suitable preparation, that they
should received it with Faith^ Repentance, and Charity^ and that the Man and
Wife should abstain from each others society for some time before. As
Christophorus Angelus says, Qui panem sacrum accipit, opus est ut homo and
mulier sit purus, hoc est, ut congressu mulieris abstineat. Nominant hunc panem
(...), h. e. vice-munus, quoniam Sacer dos hunc panem omnibus communicantibus,
and non communicantibus, ut donum divinum exhibet. This Panis Benedictus is
what remains of the Loaf designed for the Communion, and is of the parts which
encompasses the form of a Loaf in the margin, which words are impressed on the
Bread by the Baker, and are (...), or, Jesus Christ has conquered.

The Sacrament of the Holy Communion is, The Eucharist.
as by all the Churches of God, so particularly by the Greeks, celebrated with
singular Devotion; their four Offices or Services relating to the
administration of this Sacrament, being of long Antiquity, the Greeks argue to
be agreeable to the Original Institution of our blessed Savior.

The question about Transubstantiation The question of Transubstantiation, how
determined in the Greek Church.
has not been long controverted in the Greek Church, but like other abstruse
notions, not necessary to be determined, has lain quiet and dissentangled,
wound upon the bottom of its own Thread, until Faction, and Malice, and the
Schools, have so twisted and ravelled the twine, that the end will never be
found: Nor after so many Volumes wrote by the most learned on both sides for
some Ages, until the World be better informed or satisfied; until the wise God
by the illumination of his Divine Grace, disperse those Clouds of Prejudice,
Interest and Ignorance, which blinds the Minds, and prepossesses the Spirits of
the greatest part of Mankind. It has been a question very dubitable, and not
meanly controverted, what side the Greek Church has maintained in this
dispute. For if you will believe Cyrillus the Patriarch of Constantinople, in
the 17th Article of his Confession of Faith wrote about the year 1630, and
printed 1633. his Sense and Words are wholly agreeable to the Tenants of the
Reformed Churches in this particular; from which those, whose Education is
purely of the Greek Literature, instructed, and taught in their own
Monasteries, do not seem much to deviate; for when they carry this Sacrament to
the sick they do not prostrate themselves before it, nor do they expose it
publicly to be adored, unless in the very Act of Administration; nor do they
carry it in procession, nor have they instituted any particular Feast, in
honor of it: all which are Arguments, that had this belief of
Transubstantiation been agreeable to the Faith of the ancient Eastern Councils,
they would not have been less careful in ordaining those particular notes of
honor in the Administration, than the Western have done. Howsoever, such as
have had their Education in Italy, as he who wrote the Oriental Confession,
together with those who subscribed it, seem to concur wholly with the Church of
Rome in this Tenent, having these words, (...), that is, When the Priest
consecrates the Elements, the very substance of the Bread and of the Wine is
transformed into the true substance of the Body and Blood of Christ. And a
little farther they proceed in these words; (...) by which we perceive that the
Greeks have lately formed a word, which is (...), to signify or express
Transubstantiation, which they never read in their ancient Fathers, though they
may have found Metaphorically used in some times before the words (...) and
(...).

But the truth is, it is difficult to make the Greeks understand the right
state of this question, for observing that there is a Sacramental Change
granted to be of the Bread, they immediately consider it as no other than a
change which is substantial: Nor is it a wonder that the Greeks follow the
Latins in this Doctrine, since, (as we have said before) the most learned men
amongst them, taking their Education in Italy, have in all points, wherein
neither custom, nor Councils have determined, taken up their Doctrines
according to the positions of the Roman Schools, whom therefore they name by
the distinction of (...) For really others, which have had their Education in
Greece only, do not follow this Novelty, and they which do, contradict their
own Liturgy; viz. that of S. Chrysostom, which is common to them both, wherein
after the complete consecration, these words follow; (...) That is, that all we
who partake of this Bread and this Cup may be united together in the Fellowship
of the holy Ghost, neither to our damnation, or condemnation, the which agrees
with what the Apostle S. Paul writes in 1 Cor. c. 11. where after the words
which we, and they use for Consecration, v. 24, 25. he adds v. 26. For as often
as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, etc. and V.29. For he that eats and
drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself. Nay in that very
Book where they have formed and used the word (...), they mollify it in a few
lines after in these words, viz. (...) Who gave his own flesh and blood for
meat and drink to the faithful under the Covering of Bread and Wine, (and not
under the covering of Accidents only) as maintained in the Roman Church. And
farther those words before mentioned, viz, (...), cannot be meant of the mere
Accidents, but of the Elementary species of Bread and Wine; as appears by these
words of the same Authors, following the words before cited (...), i.e. the
Communication of the Mystery ought to be celebrated under the two species of
Bread and Wine; and the same words repeated 11 lines after, (...) now no man
ever called the Accidents of Bread and Wine the Objects of our five Senses,
only two Accidents.

The Laity, as well as the Priests, communicate in both kinds, taking the Bread
and the Wine together in a Spoon from the hand of the Priest. The Bread is made
of the finest Wheaten Flower with Leaven, from whence arises a sharp Dispute
between them and the Latins; the latter of which argues, That it ought to be
without Leaven, in regard that it is more than probably presumed, that the
Institution of this Sacrament being ordained at the time of the Passover, it
was administered with unleavened Bread, which was only lawful on that occasion.
The Wine in the Sacrament before Consecration they mix with Water, in
representation of the Blood and Water which issued out of the side of our
blessed Savior, opened by the Spear of the Roman Soldier.

The mixing of Wine with Water in this Holy Sacrament is no question of great
Antiquity in the Church, being acknowledged by most of the ancient Writers, Ep.
6.3.
Fathers, and Councils, and particularly by Cyprian, who believes it to have
been so practiced by Christ himself. Others judge it an Ordinance of the Church
only, but all agree and assent unto it as to a Custom derived from a long
Antiquity. The Modern Writers of the Reformed Religion, such as Vossius and
others^ do not deny but that the Primitive Church mixed Water^ with their Wine
in this Sacrament, because drinking the same Wine at the Agapae, or
Love Feasts, as they did at the Lords Supper, they might give occasion to the
World to censure their Intemperance, were their Wines, which in the Eastern
parts of the World are generous and strong, not tempered, and their force
abated with Water: This probably may be the Reason hereof, rather than any
Inference that can be made from the Example of our Savior, declared in the
Holy Evangelists, or the practice of the Church specified by the Apostles. But
because this Sacrament of the Holy Eucharist is an essential part of the
Christian Worship, and greatly controverted between the Reformed and Roman
Churches, it will not be impertinent to set down distinctly the form and manner
how it is celebrated in the Greek Church.

In the Chancel of every Church near the Altar, is set a Table, called, The
place of preparation, in Greek, (...), where the consecrated Bread and Wine are
prepared for the Communion; thereon is set around Loaf in the form expressed,
which the Priest takes in his hand, and with a small Lance signs it three times
with the sign of the Cross, saying, in the remembrance of our Lord God and
Savior Jesus Christ; The form of the administration of the Eucharist.
then strikes the Lance into that part of the Bread which is on his right hand,
saying, (...), as a Lamb before the shearer was dumb, so he opened not his
mouth. Then striking his Lance into the upper part, he says, in humility his
judgment came, (...). Then thrusting his Lance into the under part, he says,
(...), who shall declare his Generation? and so cuts out that from the other
parts of the Loaf, which is designed for the Communion which he himself is to
receive, and lays it on one side of the Patina. Then he thrusts his Lance again
into the Bread, and says, one of the Soldiers with a Lance opened his side,
and presently came out Water and Blood, at which words the Wine and the Water
are turned into the Chalice and mixed, signifying the passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

In the next place the Priest cuts off a second part from the Loaf before
mentioned, and forms it in the fashion of a Triangle, D saying, In honor and
memory of our blessed Lady, Mother of God, and perpetual Virgin Mary, through
whose Prayers, O Lord, accept this Sacrifice to thy Celestial Altar: and this
Triangular is placed on the left hand of the formen with these words, the Queen
stood by in a Vesture of Gold, etc.

Then the Priest takes the third part of the Loaf, from which, with his Lance
in like manner, he cuts out a small piece, and places it under the first, which
he designed for himself, and says, of the honored and glorious prophet, the
forerunner of Christ, John the Baptist: then takes out a second and places it
under the former, saying, of the holy glorious Prophets, Moses, Aaron, Elias,
and all the other holy Prophets: then taking out a third, places it under the
second, and says, of the holy Apostles Peter and Paul, and of all the twelve
Apostles: and so is finished the first Order.

Next the Priest cuts another small piece from the remaining parts of the
Bread, Offertory to the dead.
and places it near the first part, and says, of our Holy Fathers and Prelates,
of Basil the great, of Gregory the Divine, of John Chrysostom, Athanasius,
Cyril, and of all the Holy Doctors: then he takes another piece and places it
under that immediately before going, and says, of the Apostle, first Martyr,
and Archdeacon, Stephen, and of the holy Martyrs, Demetrius, Gregory, and all
the other Martyrs: then he takes a third and places it under the second,
saying, of the holy Confessors Antonius, Euthymius, Sabba, and Onuphrius.

Then is taken out another particle, and placed under the left Angle of that
part which the Priest is to receive; who proceeds and says, of the holy and
miraculous Anargyri, Cosma, Damianus, Cyrus, and John the merciful: under which
is also placed another particle, of the holy Progenitors, of the blessed Virgin
Joachim and Anna; and last of all is taken out a ninth particle in honor of S.
Chrysostom, whose Liturgy is that day read, naming with him the Saint, whose
Festival is that day celebrated; which nine particles of Bread represent the
nine Hierarchies of Angels, and are adjoined to this Office in honor and
commemoration of the Saints and Martyrs departed.

Then follows the Offertory for the living. Offertory for the living
The Priest taking another small piece from the Bread, says, Remember, O Lord,
who art a Lover of Mankind, every Christian Prelate, naming particularly the
Bishop of the Diocese, and of him who ordained him unto Ecclesiastical Orders,
and places it on his right hand, names all those living which are recommended
to their Prayers, especially those who paid for that Mass.

Then last of all is taken out another small piece of Bread, which is laid on
the left ha^^, in commemoration of the Founders of the Church, and of the
Parents and Friends of those who are departed, which paid for the Mass; the
meaning and nature of which Commemoration we shall declare more particularly,
in the Chapter wherein we treat of the Office for the Dead.

Things thus prepared in order for the Sacrament, the Priest raises the form of
a Star in Silver, and holds it over that Bread which is ordained for
Consecration in the Eucharist, saying (...), the Star stood over the place
where the young Child was; and repeating some short Prayers and Ejaculations,
that God would purify him, and make him worthy to offer this glorious
Sacrifice, he goes forth from the place of the Offertory, and reads the Epistle
and Gospel for the day, in representation of the Apostles going forth into the
world to preach and propagate the Christian Faith. Then the Priest returning
takes the Bread and Wine, covers it, and before the Consecration is completed,
and as they say themselves, not yet transubstantiated, sets it on his head, and
goes in Procession with it through all the Church, at which time the people
bow, worship, and make the Sign of the Cross, casting the sick and infirm in
the way, that the Priest striding over them, they may receive some miraculous
benefit and remedy by the direct beams and influx of the Sacrament: which when
I have objected to some Priests as a thing strange, to see the Elements adored
before Consecration, till which time they could not pretend them to be
transubstantiated; They knew not well how to answer otherwise, than that they
adored the Elements, as being in immediate capacity and disposition to be
converted into the true Body and Blood of Christ.

The Creed, or Symbolum Apostolicum, is next repeated, and then the Cover or
Vail is taken off, called (...), and then over the Bread the air is moved with
a Fan, signifying the wind and breath of the Spirit, which illuminated and
inspired the Apostles, when they composed the Articles of this holy Faith. The
Consecration.
Then are read the same words which we use at the Consecration of the holy
Communion; viz. In the same night when he was betrayed, he took Bread, and when
he had given thanks, he brake it, etc. Then follows this Prayer, with some
Soliloquies.

Lord who in the third hour did send thy holy Spirit, graciously take it not
away from us, but grant it unto us, praying, Lord make clean our hearts within
us.

Which Prayer is repeated three times with the head bowed down, and then the
Priest raising himself again, with an humble voice says, Lord hear my Prayer,
and lifting up his hand by way of blessing, adds, make this Bread the holy Body
of Christ. Amen. And here all the order of Consecration being finished, he thus
proceeds: Thou art my God, thou art my King, I adore thee piously and
faithfully. And so covering again the Chalice, which contains both species, he
elevates it, and the People worship.

The Priest then Communicates, The Administration.
eating that part of the Bread, which in the time of preparation, was divided
into four pieces, and the other three he puts into the Chalice, of which with
great devotion he sups three times, and having himself received, he administers
the rest in a Spoon in both Kinds to the Communicants which being done, the
Chalice is carried to the side-Table of Preparation, called the (...), and
therein are also put the remaining Particles, which were laid aside, and
designed for commemoration of the living and dead, of which when the Priest
has received some himself, the remainder is divided amongst the Communicants.
Thus the Mass being finished, the Priest cleanses the Cup with great care, lest
any thing should remain of the Sacrament to be carelessly and profanely treated.

It is the Custom in this Church to conserve the Sacrament for the use of the
sick; but it is never exposed to the view of the People, unless at the time of
Celebration, and thence also covered in the Chalice with a Vail.

But a most laudable Custom it is in this Church, That those who intend to
Communicate, before they dare to approach the Altar, and receive the Divine
Mystery, they first retire to the bottom of the Church, and there ask
forgiveness of the whole Congregation, desiring their pardon in case they have
offended any particular person whatsoever: If any one at that time acknowledges
himself agrieved or injured, the party abstains and withdraws from the
Sacrament, until such time as he is reconciled, and his Adversary satisfied.
The words they use are these, (...), pardon us, Brethren, for we have sinned in
word and deed: The people answer, (...) God pardon you, Brethren,

Immunis ar am si tetigit manus Non sumptuosa blandior hostia, Mollibit aversos
Deos Far pio, and Saliente Mica.

CHAP. X.
Of the fourth Mystery, called Priesthood, wherewith is treated of their
Monasteries, Orders of Friars and Nuns, and the austerity of their Lives.

P Riesthood amongst the Greeks is accounted one of the seven Mysteries of the
Church, in respect of that Power and Authority the Clergy is endued with for
dispensation of the Mysteries of man's salvation; as the power of the Keys for
loosing and binding sins, the power and energy of Preaching, and interpreting
the holy Scriptures, as Oracles of God, of receiving into the Church,
baptizing, cleansing, and regenerating with water in a mysterious manner, from
the foulness of Original sin, power of administering the Sacrament of the holy
Eucharist, the (...) or Chrism: of healing the body by the (...), or holy Oil,
matters of such deep and profound concernment, beyond the most sublime and
elevated understanding, as cannot proceed from the virtue and efficacy of any
natural calling; but only from that unintelligible and mysterious Character of
the Priesthood; acoording to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. v. 1. Let a man so
account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of
God.

Besides the different Orders of Religious and Secular Priests, there are
others distinctly appointed to administer in the Church and at the Altar;
namely, Anagnostes, who is ordained only to read the Hymns which are sung, and
the Prophets of the Old Testament; the Psaltes, which is appointed to sing the
Psalms of David; the Lampadarios, who has the care to trim the Lamps; the
Deacons and Subdeacons, who read the Epistles and Gospels; all which are
initiated and first blessed by the Bishop, with imposition of hands, who gives
to the Anagnostes a Bible, or Book of the holy Scripture, which they call
(...), and to the Psaltes the Psalms of David, signing and blessing them with
the sign of the Cross: All which after Ordination have the Crowns of their
heads shaven.

Of Priests there are two sorts, Distinction of Priests.
who have the power of Preaching and Administering the Sacraments, viz. Secular
and Religious: The first though married have license to enter into holy Orders;
but their Wives dying, they cannot be admitted to a second Marriage; of which
hard Injunction of their Church, some early Widowers have complained unto me,
with sad remembrances of their past estate, and inabilities for a continent
life. These wear Caps turned up with white, from which hangs a fall of the same
Cloth on their backs, which they call (...), or the Dove, being a Badge of
their innocent life; but this is oftentimes, nay most commonly forfeited, being
cut off by the Bishop for some omission of duty, or commission of sin: so that
few are observed to have continued this evidence of purity, so frail are even
Priests in those appetites which they profess to subdue.

The Religious Priests are called Kaloires, from (...), the good Priest, or
(...), good old Fathers, which are Monks enclosed, or encloistered in
Monasteries, professing chastity and obedience: Their Order is of S. Basil,
besides which there is no other amongst the Greeks: their Habit is a long
Cassock of coarse Cloth girt to them, of Camel color, with a Cap of Felt or
Wool made to cover their ears, and covered with a black Cool called (...). The
severe lives of Kaloires.
Their Government and way of living is very austere and strict; for they wholly
abstain from flesh for all their life. In the Lents, and times of Fasting, they
are nourished with Bread and Fruits; Oil and Fish with blood not being allowed,
which with Lacticinia and Eggs are the Dishes and Delicacies indulged at their
Feasts and times of less austerity. Most of their time is taken up in their
Quires, being obliged every day in Lent to read over the whole Psalter once;
and at the end of every four Psalms is said the Gloria Patri, etc. with three
(...), or Metagnai, or in better Greek, (...), as they call them, which is a
bowing or kissing the ground three times. At the end of every ten Psalms, which
is called (...), are made forty Metagni, or bowings on the knees, kissing the
ground, which every Kaloir has obligation to perform 300 times every 24 hours;
unless any one of them be sick, and then his Santolo, who is the Priest who
first covered him with the habit, is bound to do it for him: The one half of
these Bowings is performed in the two first hours of the Night, and the other
half at midnight before they arise to Mattins, which are to begin four hours
before day, and to end with the dawning of the morning. At that season of the
year when the Nights are long, a great part of the Nocturnal Devotion is spent
in rehearsing the Psalms of David, and at the end of every (...) or ten Psalms,
is read some short relation of the life of some holy man, or devout Hermit, or
some select and choice pieces of St. Chrysostom, or S. Basil, or of some holy
and devout Doctor of the Church. Afterward are read or sung nine Hymns,
consisting of twelve Verses a-piece, six of which are sung in honor of the
blessed Virgin, and three in honor of the Saint to whom the Church is
dedicated, or of him whose Festival is that day celebrated; before which
business is finished, the day, especially in the Summer, breaks upon them, and
the Sun arises before their Devotions are ended, so that they have scarce the
time and liberty of a convenient and natural repose.

The Lent before Easter they commonly begin with three days of Fast without
tasting either Bread or Water, at the end of which time the Kaloirs appear all
before their Prior or Abbot, entering one by one at one door, and bow before
him, and he giving them his blessing, they pass out at the other, where in an
outward room stands a Basket of Bread, of which who will may take, none
observing who eats or who still continues his Fasts, which some of strongest
complexions maintain until the end of five days, not tasting so much as Water.

There are some of this Order who are Reformed, The Reformed of this Order.
or pass into a more strict severity of life, (...), who are as it were dead to
the World, taking no other sustenance than Bread and Water, and that with great
moderation; using moreover much fasting in the times of Lent: but these are
commonly such whom we call Anchorites, or Hermites, living in Caves or Deserts,
of which sort there are many in Mount Athos, called by the Greeks (...), or the
Holy Mountain, of which we shall treat in the following Chapter.

To such strictness of life as this none is admitted, without approbation on
trial first made of his abilities of body for such subjection, in which time he
takes upon him the most servile and laborious Offices, a^ ringing of the Bell,
knocking or calling at the set hours of Prayer, lighting the Lamps, or the
like: I fly knocking, or calling, because in no parts of Turkey, or Dominions
of the G. Signor, unless in Mold^^^^, Valachia, and Mount Athos, are Bells
permitted: Which time of approbation being passed over with the good esteem and
opinion of the Monastery, he is admitted, and e^^^^^^ to be a Kaloir, and
vested with the Habit, with the usual Prayers and Ceremonies.

In these Monasteries they especially respect the Vigils to the principal
Feasts, as of Christmas, Easter, and Pentecost, called by them (...), or
Vigils, which are Watchings beginning at the third hour of the night, and
continue until the morning, in which time the whole Psalter of David is read
over; and the morning being come, the Liturgy begins, which with other parts of
Divine Service continues until Noon.

But because in this manner the Kaloires who live in Convents are obliged to
long attendances in their Churches, and to their Offices, which are so
exceeding prolix and tedious, that they cannot comply therewith, and yet serve
the necessary demands of life, without other assistances. There are therefore
in every Monastery stery certain Lay-Brothers who take on them the Habit,
obliging themselves to the rule of this Order, called (...), or properly (...),
which signifies Converts, men weary of the Vanities of the World, and Penitent,
who having been guilty of some mortal sins, in token of their contrition and
conversion to a better life, confine themselves to the strict Rules of S. Basil.

These govern all the domestic affairs of the Monastery, keep their Sheep and
other Cattle, in which some Monasteries are very rich; and though by obligation
of their Order, they dare not taste the tenderest of their Herds, yet in times
which are not Fasts, they can drink the Milk, and enjoy comfortably the plenty
of their Dairy: these also dig the Vineyards, tread the Wine Press, and the
whole Monastery drinks freely of their own Cellars.

Out of some Monasteries they frequently send forth Messengers, which they call
(...), to collect from distant places the Contribution of charitable people; in
which Employment they continue for the space of five years: after which
returning home, they are separated from the rest, being confined to their Cells
for the space of a Month, in which time they have leisure and opportunity to
consider their omissions, their neglect of Offices, and Duties, and what sins
they committed during the time they were in the World, and accordingly make
satisfaction to God and their Consciences.

Many of this sort of people are long-lived, in regard they are temperate in
eating and drinking, and ever unacquainted with Women. ^ once knew one of them,
who was an (...) of a Monastery in Cyprus, called (...). whereunto belonged 200
Kaloirs, he told me that he was 119 years of age; and the better to assure me
he was not mistaken in his Calculate, he confidently affirmed, that he
remembered the taking of Cyprus by the Turk, when the Channels of his Town ran
with blood, which according to History may be about the space of 107 years
past, and at that time he conceived that he might have been about 12 years of
age, when he remembers, that the cruel Soldiers bloodily massacring all
persons which met them in their fury, his Mother defended him from violence,
for having the fortune to meet with a Soldier more flexible than the rest, she
fell on the body of this her Son, and by her Prayers and Tears prevailed to
rescue him from death^ in commemoration of which deliverance, she afterward
dedicated him to the service of God, speedily entering him into the Order of
Kaloires; he never remembers to have eaten flesh; his Father lived but to 80
years of age, but his Grandfather to 158.

But not only men amongst the Greeks enter into Monastical lives, but likewise
pious and devout maids, who dedicating themselves to the service of God, enter
into Monasteries, vowing Poverty and Chastity: Widows also having fallen into
mortal sins, and desirous to do penance for the same, and to live by a more
strict Rule, oblige themselves to live according to a strict observance of the
Order, and Injunction of S. Basil: but the Regimen or Rule of these Female
Votaries, is not commonly so strict and regular as that of the Kaloirs, of
which we might give for instance the Nuns at Scio and other places.

CHAP. XI.
In which is treated of Mount Athos, called now by the Greeks (...), or the
holy Mountain, and of the Monasteries thereon.

THERE is no place where the Greek Religion is professed, so famous for
Monasteries as that of Mount Athos; and indeed if we consider the number of
them, and of the Religious belonging thereunto, it is not to be paralleled in
all the world: which because it is a place not usually frequented, or known,
and is the grand Conservatory of the Christian Religion in Greece, and ancient
austerity of living, and therefore not unaptly styled by them (...), or the
Holy Mountain, I shall discourse thereof at large, and satisfy therein the
curiosity of our times, with all the Remarks observable in that place.

In the relation of these particulars, I must confess my self to have been much
beholding to that worthy and ingenious person Mr. John Covell late Chaplain to
the Ambassador of his Majesty at Constantinople, for many things related in
this subsequent discourse; and being assisted also by many Informations
received from the Kaloirs belonging to that place, I do not doubt but perfectly
to satisfy the most curious Reader in all points relating to this Treatise.

The Mountain Athos anciently so called, The Description of the Mountain.
has its situation on a Peninsula, or Isthmus of Land annexed to Macedon,
being about a mile and a half broad, and three miles long; it is low land,
arising something toward the foot of the Mountain. And therefore the story of
Xerxes cutting this Mountain from the Main seems a Fable, occasioned perhaps by
opening and enlarging that Ditch or Channel, which to this day appears from Sea
to Sea, and might, once being cleansed, be rendered capable to carry a small
Galley or Brigantine. The whole compass of this Mountain is esteemed to be
about 160 miles. The high Pique or Peer thereof is properly called Athos, and
now (...) by the Inhabitants, and is uneven, craggy, and as horrid as Caueasus;
but somewhat beneath it is covered with Trees, Shrubs, and Boscage, and
produces many Plants and Herbs of admirable Virtue: It is a place full of
little Springs, Rills, and Rivulets, that there can be no part so barren and
unfruitful in the whole circumference of the lower parts of this Mountain,
which may not be capable of great and singular improvement; and in every corner
thereof, there are so many Cells and little Recesses, partly framed by Art and
partly by Nature, that it seems a place of such stupendous solitude, as if the
situation thereof had been designed for the retirement of Monks or the Cells of
Anchorites.

When this place began first to be inhabited by Monks and Religious men it is
hard to determine. The antiquity of the Monasteries on this Mountain.
For though S. Basil was the first Author and Founder of the Order of Greek
Monks, so that before his time, there could be none, who professed this strict
way of living in Convents, and Religious Societies, I mean in Greece; yet
certainly before this time, the convenience of the place, and the situation
thereof might invite Hermites, and persons delighted in solitary devotions, of
which the world in the first and second Century did abound, being men who lived
under severe Rules of Fasting and Self-denial, and therefore at that time as
well as to this day are called (...), and (...). But when the world was
generally converted, and gave it self up to the practice of the Evangelical
Doctrine, the life of Hermites became of less reputation, and the lives of the
Religious in Societies to be esteemed more secure, and more tending to
Edification: So that Monasteries increasing in all parts of the Christian
World, some took their Foundation in this Mountain in the time of Constantine
the Great, and by degrees increased to the number of twenty, besides a little
(...) belonging to (...), wherein are about 30 or 40 Kaloirs or Greek Monks,
whose chief Employment consists in making of Spoons, Crosses, Boxes, Cups, etc.
Of the rest I shall set their Names in order, with the dedication to their
respective Saints: and because they pay a Rent to the G. Signors of a thousand
Dollars a Month, which is more in my opinion than it could have been let out
for to Turkish Farmers on a rack Rent, and is the best improvement that the
Turk could make of it; I shall with the name of the Monasteries, set down also
the several sums, at which they are taxed, and obliged to pay under severe
Penalties.

1. (...), S. Laura, taxed 110 Dollars, dedicated to S. Athanasius, but at
first to the blessed Virgin, whom they report did appear and resign the
Dedication to him. 2. (...), Caracal, taxed 25 Dollars, dedicated to S. Peter
and Paul^^. 3. (...), Philotheus is Kes^im, dedicated to the Ann^nciation Kesim
signifies free from Taxes by reason of poverty, which is a Turkish word. 4.
Ibero taxed 85 Dollars, dedicated to the Assumption of the blessed Virgin. 5.
(...), Stauronichetas, taxed 18 Dollars, dedicated to S. Nicholas. 6. (...),
Pantochratora, taxed 57 Dollars, dedicated to the Transfiguration. 7. (...),
Contlomouses, taxed 55 Dollars, dedicated to the Transfiguration of Christ. 8.
Batopedi, (...), taxed 100 Dollars, dedicated to the Annunciation of the
blessed Virgin. 9. (...), Simeno, taxed 25 Dollars, dedicated to the Ascension
of Christ. 10. Chiliadar, (...), taxed 100 Dollars, dedicated to the
Presentation of Christ in the Temple; the Feast is on November 21. called (...)
(...) vide Synaxarion. 11. (...), Zograph, taxed 35 Dollars, dedicated to S.
George. 12. (...), Kesim, dedicated to S. Stephen. 13. (...), Docharios, taxed
30 Dollars, dedicated to S. Michael Archangel. 14. (...), Zenoph, taxed 30
Dollars, dedicated to S. George. 15. (...), Kesim, dedicated to S.
Pantaleemones. 16. (...), Xeropotame, taxed 56 Dollars, dedicated to the 40
Martyrs called (...). 17. (...), Gregorius, taxed 25 Dollars, dedicated to S.
Nicholas. 18. (...), Simopetra, taxed 54 Dollars, dedicated to the birth of
Christ. 19. (...), Dionysius, taxed 60 Dollars, dedicated to S. John Baptist.
20. (...), S. Paul, taxed 35 Dollars, dedicated to S. George.
All which several sums making together not more than 900 Dollars, there will
want 100 Dollars per Month to complete the Tribute, according to the ancient
Tax of the Monasteries, The manner of taxing the Monasteries.
occasioned by the Poverty of the three Monasteries before denoted, which
remain in the condition, and under notion of Kesim, and rendered unable to pay
the Tax: Wherefore it being necessary to find out the complete sum of an
hundred Dollars more per Month, the other Monasteries were forced to answer for
the inabilities of their Brethren, and to add a new Tax proportionable to the
first estimation of their Revenue and Riches. And now by the Premises it
appears, that Laura, Batopedi, Chiliadar, and Ibero are the four chief and most
flourishing Monasteries, both in respect of their Revenues abroad, as well as
of the limits of Land allotted them on the Mountain: what their Lands and
Vineyards are, and benefits arising from thence, is well known, and may easily
be calculated; but Donatives arising from abroad, which are the charitable
Contributions of well-disposed people, as they are for the most part uncertain,
so they are hidden and concealed, as much as is possible. Howsoever they all
plead misery and poverty, which will be a Riddle and Mystery to any person to
whom they will show or expose their Treasure; unless they be compared to the
condition of the wealthy miser, who is miserable and starving amidst the heaps
of his Gold: for he that sees the various Coverings they have for their Altars,
the rich Ornaments they have for their Churches, will not easily apprehend
those people to be poor. For amongst their other Treasures, they have first a
representation of Christ in the Sepulcher (which they call (...), The Riches of
the Monasteries.
exposed every Good Friday at night) and is very rich with Gold and Precious
Stones. Most of their Monasteries can represent the History of its Foundation,
not in Paint or Colors, but in Embroideries of Gold and Pearl, and other
precious Stones intermixed with singular Art and Curiosity. They have also
variety of rich Vestments for the Priest, especially in the four chief
Monasteries, where are many Chests filled with such Robes as are used at the
celebration of Divine Service: Their Basins, Ewers, Dishes, Plates,
Candlesticks, and Incense-Pots of Silver are not to be reckoned, many of which
are of pure Gold, or Silver gilt. They have Crosses of a vast bigness, edged
with plates of Gold, and studded with precious Stones, from whence hang strings
of Oriental Pearl. The Covers of their Books of the Gospel, Epistles, Psalters,
and Missals, are often embossed with beaten Gold, or curiously bound up with
Cases of Gold, or Silver gilt, or plain Silver. Many of which Utensils and
Ornaments have been the Presents of the Dukes of Moscovy, before the time that
that Country declined, or fell off from their respect to the Patriarch of
Constantinople: howsoever Moldavia, Valachia, and Georgia remaining constant to
that Patriarchate, have been anciently, and still continue to be very liberal,
and splendid in their Presents to these Monasteries, toward one or more of
which some Prince or Princess of those Countries do always evidence an
extraordinary devotion: especially the Georgians, whose Country was anciently
called Iberia, are ever bountiful to the Monastery of Ibero, by whose Charity
it is become as considerable as any of the other Monasteries. With such
Presents and Donatives the Churches of this Mountain are enabled to make very
splendid Processions, which they practice with great state and magnificence on
the high Festivals of the year: and the common (...), or Procession in the time
of Divine Service, is so stately and pompous, that it affects the hearts of the
Vulgar with so much reverence and devotion to the holy Rites, that scarce any
of them will depart, or at least think he receives a blessing by his
attendance, unless he leaves his gift behind him in testimony of his real and
hearty affection, imitating perhaps the ancient Custom in the times of
Gentilism, when every one who approached the Altar was obliged to offer
something, though but a handful of Flower or Salt.

It would be a matter of great work, and something difficult, to trace the
original of these Monasteries, and to render an account of the various
vicissitudes of Fortune which they have undergone. The ancient troubles amongst
the Friars.
We know well, that in the times of the Arians, the divisions of Religion
impoverished these Monasteries: And afterward Michael Paleologus, on a
politic design to maintain and support his Empire, was contented to introduce
the Roman Faith and the Popes Supremacy into the Greek Church, as it happened
about the year 1430, 1430. In the time of the Council of Florence.
in the time of Pope Eugenius the Fourth, which was the cause of great
disturbance and ruin in this Mountain: For the Kaloires remaining resolute
against the Papal Authority, assaulted the Romish Priests at the very Altar,
whereby such dissensions and skirmishes arose, that some Monasteries were
burnt, and others demolished in the Contest; and at length the Romanists being
forced to give way, carried with them some of the holy Spoils, and much of
their Riches. But if you examine the Kaloires concerning these particulars,
they can inform you no otherwise, than that the (...), (Unbelievers) such as
Turks, Saracens, and they know not who, or Iconomachi, oppugners of Pictures,
or such who would place sculptile Images in the place of painted Histories,
being those who brought all those ruins on them, of which Books relate such
sad Stories. Wherefore for knowledge of these matters being obliged to Books of
ancient History, we shall only touch on those Monasteries which are of most
esteem and riches amongst them, and for account thereof shall depend on such
imperfect Relations as they produce; and first of (...),

Hagia Laura was begun at the expense of Nicephorus the Emperor, Laura.
and at the instance of a most devout person in those days called Athanasius:
and though this Emperor was cut off about the year 803, leaving this Structure
imperfect; yet Athanasius continuing his endeavors, persuaded others to finish
this pious Work, and at length obtained such considerable Contributions
thereunto, that the Building was completed, and adorned in an excellent manner:
Since which time not only the main Structure, but many little Chapels and
Oratories have been erected within the Walls, to the number of 19, by means and
assistance of good and well-disposed people, who entertained a particular
devotion for that Monastry; the which though chiefly founded by those
Collections which were made by Athanasius, yet it will be no wonder, that so
many Chapels were added thereunto, if we believe what the Kaloires report,
that when their money failed, the blessed Virgin concerning her self in the
merit, became their Benefactoress, and supplied whatsoever came short in the
account.

The Story of Athanasius Athanasius the Monk.
they report in this manner. He was, as they say, born at Trapezond of a good
Family, of good parts, and of some Learning; and being addicted to a godly
retired life, he applied himself to a certain reverend person called Michael
Maleinus, who was a famous Confessor, and lived in a Desert of that Country;
with him he conversed for diverse years, was his Scholar, and learned his
Discipline, in which he was so great a proficient, that Maleinus growing old,
and being desirous to ease himself of the burden of hearing Confessions,
recommended all comers to Athanasius, who had now for several years lived
according to the method of a severe life. It happened, that Nicephorus General
of the Roman Army, marching toward Candia, for suppressing a Rebellion arisen
in those parts, applied himself to Maleinus to make his Confession, but he
being grown old, desired his excuse, recommending him to his Scholar
Athanasius, on whom he supposed that a double portion of his Spirit did remain.
Nicephorus was so well pleased with the Sanctity of Athanasius, with his
spiritual Doctrine, and with his holy and devout life, that he declared himself
resolved to live with him, and retire from the world; and so in every place
blazing abroad the sanctity of Athanasius, his fame spread generally, and all
people flocked to him from parts far remote: But this good man, being of a true
humble Spirit, and jealous of the danger to which Fame and Glory of the World
might betray him, departed privately from his place of abode and came to Mount
Athos, where, counterfeiting himself a poor illiterate Fellow, he became the
Servant of a Reverend and Godly man, who lived with much retirement and
austerity of life. But Nicephorus, returning afterward from the Wars, enquired
for Athanasius in the same place where he had before left him; but he being
secretly and unknown unto any departed, search was made for him in this Mount
Athos, where Leo the Brother of Nicephorus having found him, embraced and
honored him in presence of all the Monks, and conducting him with joy to the
Emperor, was received with all honor and satisfaction, and in testimony
thereof bestowed on him a considerable sum of money for building this
Monastery. But Nicephorus dying before the same was completed, this Founder was
beholding to the Charity of others, especially to the bounty of Tzimisces This
Athanasius lived ever after in this Monastery a most severe life, where his
Cell still remains, and in which is a white Marble-stone, worn at least four or
five Inches, as they say, with his knees, being the place on which he used to
pray: he commonly wore an Iron-Collar about his neck, to which he fastened a
Wooden Cross weighing six or eight pounds, the which is shown to Strangers, and
used for a Ceremony at the initiation of any Kaloir into that Order. They Say
he eat seldom above three or four times a Week, and that he once lived seven
days without meat or drink, and once nine days, excepting only that he eat and
drank the holy Sacrament twice in that time. And thus much for the Monastery of
Laura.

Of Caracal they give little other account, (...). Caracal
unless in a blind manner, that an old Roman Emperor of that name built it,
perhaps they may mean Antoninus Caracalla; but that is impossible, and may
rather be imputed to some Vayvod of Moldavia, or Valachia, in regard that by an
old Inscription on one of the Walls, it appears that the same was repaired
about 170 years past by certain Vayvods of those Countries, which are now
styled by the name of Bugdania.

Ibero Ibero.
was built by Johannes Turnicius a Georgian, born from the noble Stock of the
Princes of that Country called Iberia, but growing old, and desirous of a
retired life, came to Mount Athos, and there turned Kaloir, and became a
Scholar of Athanasius. But the Prince of Iberia dying, and leaving a young S^^
to Reign, the Persians made an Incursion into that Country; against whom there
being no General so able to lead an Army as this Turnicius, the Queen Mother
sent for him to undertake the Employment, and prevailing with him to accept
thereof for service of his Country, he obtained the success desired, and
returned triumphant to his own Nation: in reward of which the Queen offered him
great Honors and Riches, but he refused more than what served him to complete
his Monastery of Ibero; which though at first designed to receive no other than
Iberians, yet now all others of the Greek Religion are accepted into it without
distinction of Country or Nation.

Stauroniceta was built about 200 years past by Jeremias, (...).
Patriarch of Constantinople, surnamed (...), or the Good, and was for his
piety and virtue esteemed and reverenced ever by the Turks.

Pantocratora was built by Theodosius, (...).
but was much repaired and augmented by Alexius Comnenus, who there lies
buried; after which Barboula and Gabriel, two Vayvods of. Valachia, built the
Tower, and repaired it after its last ruin.

Or Condoulmouses, (...).
was built by Andronicus Paleologus, though it is probable that some great
Personage of his Court or other, who had been a large Benefactor to it, might
have bestowed his name upon it: And now lastly, in the year 1500 it appears by
an Inscription on the Wall, that Johannes Neanchus, and Johannes Randulus,
Vayvods of Valachia, did much repair and enlarge it: This Monastery, though it
stands four miles distant from the Sea, different from the Situation of all
the others, yet it possesses a Tower by the Seaside, and in right thereof has
a peculiar Port or Bay with the privilege and immunity of fishing.

Batopedi (...).
is reported to have been the most ancient of all the Monasteries; it was built
by Constantine the Great, the Church very stately, and the second in those
Countries to Sancta Sophia at Constantinople; it was greatly ruined and defaced
by Julian the Apostate, and suffered also in those heats between the Arians and
the Orthodox, but pious Benefactors repaired the loss and restored it to its
pristine state and condition.

Simeno is a small Monastery founded by some Emperor, (...).
but who he was, or what his name was, the Kaloires can render no account; for
it seems they have no Registers thereof, nor Inscriptions on the Walls to give
us light, nor are they very curious or inquisitive to know their Founders.

Chiliadar is one of the four chiefest Monasteries, (...).
and is the next to Laura, both in respect of its antiquity and structure: it
may be called a Colony from Batopedi, which one Sabbas, Son of Simeon the
Despot, or Prince of Bulgaria, brought out from thence. This Sabbas, being once
a Monk in Batopedi, where the Religious of diverse Nations had their residence;
he judged it most convenient to found a Monastery where one and the same
Language might be only spoken; so that having builded one he carried with him
all the Bulgarians which were in Betopedi which, being many, seemed like a
swarm of Bees lodged in Chiliadar, which in the Bulgarian Language signifies a
Hive of Bees.

Zograph is another Bulgarian Monastery built by one of that Nation, (...).
and so also is Xenoph founded by a Kaloir of the same Nation, who by the Alms
of good and charitable people, gained as much as served to build and endow this
Monastery.

Dochiario was first founded by one Neophytus, (...).
a Kaloir of good Parentage and esteem, who, with his own Estate, and by the
charitable contribution of well-disposed people founded this Monastery, whereof
making himself the (...) or Prior, dedicated it to St. Nicholas, but afterward
the Dedication thereof was changed and made to St. Michael on this occasion. A
poor Boy, attending the little Flocks of this Monastery in the Fields;
accidentally found a Stone with an Inscription thereon, directing to a place of
hidden Treasure; after the reading of which, the Prior sent some Kaloires with
the Boy to discover it, and bring it to the Monastery: which having found, they
designed it for themselves, and appropriate it to their own peculiar benefit,
without other account thereof unto their Prior: to which end they threw the Boy
from a Rock into the Sea, with a Stone about his neck, who falling called upon
S. Michael: which having done, and secured the Treasure, they returned home,
and reported that the Boy had feigned a false Story, and for fear of punishment
was run away. The next morning early the Clerk of the Chapel entering into the
Vestry to light the Lamps, found the Boy cold and wet, and half dead with the
stone about his neck, of which acquainting the Prior, he came in haste, and
learned the whole truth of the Story; for which cause he punished the Kaloires,
recovered the Treasure, and therewith enlarged the Monastery, and again
consecrated it, and dedicated it to Saint Michael, by whose favor and
protection the poor Boy was conserved.

Cheropotame was built by one Andronicus Paleologus, (...).
who afterward turned Monk, or rather it was repaired by him, after the old
Cheropotame was fallen to ruin. For the Kaloires report, that this Monastery
fell down at the time when John Paleologus caused Romish Mass to be there
celebrated.

The last four, viz. Gregorius, Simopetra, Dionysius, and (...) Paulus, were
built by Contributions collected by four Kaloires, they were at first only
(...) or Cells of Hermites, but were afterward enlarged and endowed; they are
all built in the Rocks, and have a craggy and asperous ascent to them.

Gregorius is but small, (...)
and at first was only the Cell of him, who gave his name to it, but the
sanctity of his life invited several Benefactors to favor and perfect his
small beginnings.

Simopetra was founded by one Simeon a Religious Kaloir, (...)
with some reference to the name of Simon Peter; it has been thrice burnt, and
lastly was repaired about forty years past with great expense, and charge of
Presents given to the Turks; for if a Church or a Religious House be burnt
down, or ruined by any accident, according to the Turkish Law it is not to be
repaired but by special Order; and for that Reason, such Licenses or
Dispensations have always been obtained from the Turks at a high expense.

Dionysius was also built by a Kaloir of that Name, (...).
and Alexius Comnenus, in whose time it was erected, contributed liberally
thereunto.

This Monastery of Paulus was built by a Bulgarian of the same Name, (...).
who begged sufficient to build it: he was (as they report) a co-temporary with
the Religious Athanasius, of whom we have already spoken, and one who was
emulous of his sanctity: So that if the Monkish Weed may be capable of such
contention, these Kaloires will persuade us, that these two endeavored to
surpass each other in a holy and seraphical way of serving God.

In this manner we have said something in particular of every Monastery, unless
it be of (...), and (...), which being all three Kesim, or poor Monasteries,
paying nothing of Tribute for maintenance of this Ecclesiastical Body, are not
to be accounted in the number of those which have large and splendid Revenues.
And though the Turks themselves, being sensible of the poverty of these
Monasteries, have declared them Kesim, yet they will not abate one Asper of the
thousand Dollars per Month, but what is wanting in these Monasteries they
impose on the others; to proportion which, the Turks leave it to the Kaloires
to lay the Tax as they think fit; amongst whom though, upon this occasion and
subject, there do often arise great and grievous dissentions and quarrels, yet
they are such as are always composed amongst themselves, being unwilling to
refer themselves to the charge and inequality of the Turkish Justice.

The Revenue of these Monasteries arises partly from the Lands adjoining to
them on the Mountain, The Revenue of the Monasteries.
which are sufficient to maintain, them with Wine, Bread and Olives; and the
Sea yields them Fish in great abundance, every Monastery having its Bay or
place peculiarly appropriated unto it.

Besides which, every Monastery has its (...), or Farms, which are seated some
on the firm Land, and some on Islands, where being Chapels, and Cells for
Friars, are wholly manured by Religious men of the same Order, who have liberty
to sow Corn and Flax, to plant Vineyards, keep Flocks of Sheep and Goats, to
sell the Lambs, Kids, Wool, Milk, and Cheese; and what shall arise in Money
from hence, after their maintenance is deducted, and the Accounts made up,
refunds respectively to the Capital Monastery. I say that these (...) have
liberty to keep Goats and Sheep; which is not lawful on the Mountain, where
according to the ancient institution of this place, no Female Creature is to be
admitted; no not so much as an Ewe-lamb or Hen, in token of that severe
Chastity which these people profess.

But besides all this, they have a greater Revenue coming in from the industry
and travels of their Emissaries, which they call (...), (...)
who are persons sent into all places and Cities of note and esteem, to collect
the benevolence of charitable people toward their Monasteries, especially in
Constantinople, Smyrna, Bulgaria, Servia, Candia, and all other parts where
those of the Greek Church are numerous, but their richest Gifts are from
Moldavia, Valachia, Russia, Moscovy, and Georgia, with which these Emissaries
oftentimes return richly freighted, whom, in reward of their industry, they not
only receive with a hearty welcome, but he who brings the greatest
Contributions is esteemed worthy to be promoted for the year following to be
Prior of the Monastery. Nor are these people less cunning Artists in the skill
of begging, than are the Mendicants in Christendom: I have observed diverse of
them in sundry places, standing with a Box and a little Picture before it, The
Devotion and Charity of the Greeks to these Monasteries.
to receive the Alms for this Mountain and Mount Sina; but these are under
Officers to those who come with the large Commission: And though the Greeks are
now generally poor and narrowhearted; yet there are few but out of pride or
devotion esteem it necessary to bestow Alms on this place. Some who have been
Oppressors, and lived perhaps upon Rapine and Violence, are of Opinion that
they atone for their sins, by sacrificing part of their prey to this Mountain;
by which, and other Offerings, I have heard, that within the space of six
months there stands Registered above 2000 Dollars in the Book of Laura, which
have been given at home, besides the Collections from Foreign Parts.

The number of Kaloires, viz. The number of Kaloires in this Mountain.
Priests, Deacons, and Lay-Brothers belonging to the Mountain, is calculated to
amount unto six thousand; of which commonly two thousand may be abroad, and
employed in making Collections; and this number is reported by Bellonius to
have been in his time, which may have been about a hundred years past; so that
it seems in these late years the number has not been abated, though before the
conquest made by the Turks we may suppose that they were far more numerous.

These Monasteries, having for the most part been founded by Kings and Princes,
Their indepen dency on the Patriarch.
have obtained an Original privilege of being exempted from the jurisdiction
of the Patriarch, so that they are not obliged to make the acknowledgment of
one Asper of benefit unto him: All the power he has, is to constitute an
Archbishop over them, whose Seat is at Careis, and another at Sidero-Capti,
but subordinate to the Metropolite of Thessalonica: The which Bishops are not
farther concerned with them, than to say their Liturgy, and ordain Priests; to
whom, for every Ordination, there is due a Zechin and no more. But all matters
of Rule and Government are solely in the hands of the Chiefs or Priors of the
Monasteries respectively. The reason whereof is, because that the receiving of
members into the Convent, or the passing from a Secular into a Religious or
Regular life, is no part of Priesthood, which requires Ordination or a new
Character, but only the profession of a Vow or Solemn renunciation of the
World, which comes not within the compass of the Episcopal cognizance. Nor yet
has the Patriarch so much power as this over all the Monasteries, for
Batopedi, Laura, Contlomouses, Philotheo, Stauronichetu, Pantocratora, Simeno,
Dochano, and Ibero are exempted, having about 20 or 30 years past purchased
their Enfranchisement from the Patriarch, so that having no power over them,
not so much as to confine them to a particular Bishop for conferring of holy
Orders, they remain at liberty to take and choose what Bishop they think fit.

But in most other places where there are Monasteries another Rule is observed;
A Turkish Aga set over them.
for the Patriarch has not only power to Ordain their Priests, but to
constitute their Priors, and to bestow the Office on him who makes the best
Offering and richest Present to the Patriarchate. I said in most other places,
because the Monastry at Mavra Mola on the Bosphorus, as also the Monasteries of
this Mountain are excepted, having the great Bostangeebashee for their
Protector, who yearly at the beginning of March constitutes some Aga for his
Deputy to collect the yearly Tribute or Rent of 12000 Dollars, out of which he
is allowed ten Purses, or 5000 Dollars for his maintenance, besides a Sheep a
month from each Monastery, besides the Presents of Lambs, Kids, etc. at Easter;
he has a house at Kareis where he is attended with three or four Servants, but
no woman has there admittance.

This Town of Kareis, Kareis.
or Kareais as they write it, is seated about the middle of the Mountain, where
a plentiful Market is held every Saturday, to which great numbers of people (I
mean of the Male Sex) do there meet, where the Friars buy Cheese, Eggs, and as
many MaleSheep and Goats, as may supply them with a sufficient provision of
Wool for working, and for Presents to their Aga. Here also they sell their
Manufactories, such as Iron worked into Shovels, Tongs, Horsshoos etc. also
Boots, Shoos, Beads, Crosses, and what else is the Fruit of their Lands, or
Surplusage of their provisions, for all which they are paid in ready money. At
this place the chief Monasteries have a house, or lodging to receive their
respective members, who have occasions at that place; where formerly did
reside, a Steward, or Representative of every Monastery, though now fix only
which are the chief, remain there for all the rest, viz. of Laura, Ibero,
Batopedi, Chiliadar, Dionysius, and Contlomouses.

Above all, there is a common House or Hall, where Synods or Councils are held
touching the united interest of all the Monasteries, which they call, (...),
whereunto there is near adjoining a very fair Church, built by Constantine the
Great, dedicated to the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin, which they call,
(...), the sleeping of the blessed Virgin, which Church, being very ancient,
was repaired about 164 years past, as appears by an Inscription on one of the
Walls. For maintenance of these public Buildings and the persons which inhabit
them, and for defraying the charges of Candles, Oil, and Lamps, and support of
those who Weekly (that is on Market-days) read the Liturgy; every Monastery is
taxed in proportion to its Revenue. In all which Exercises of Religion, and
performance of Secular Negotiations, they live so free under the Turkish Aga,
that no Turk whatsoever, without his License, can set his Foot upon the
Mountain; which notwithstanding many persons of the best and civillest quality
obtain when in the spring for their health, and in the Antumne, when the Fruits
are ripe, they desire admission for their pleasure and pastime: and at their
departure are free and liberal in their acknowledgments to the Monastery where
they received their Entertainment. This Kareis is now the only Town on this
Mountain, though in the time of Strabo there were five, viz. Dion, Kleones,
Thyssan, Holophyx, and Akres-thous.

We have said that this Town of Kareis being the common Mart, The employment of
the Kaloirs
whereunto the Kaloirs bring their Manufactories; it is observable, that the
Lay-brothers, when they enter into this Religious life, are employed according
to that Trade, and work in which they profess themselves most skillful: without
doors, they plant Vine-yards, ditch and hedge them in, gather Olives, and press
out the Oil, keep, and shear their Sheep, but they neither Plow, nor Sow;
within doors, they have their Black-smiths, who work in Iron to provide them
with Matocks, Spades, and other Instruments of that sort for the Fields: they
have their Tailors, Weavers, Cappers, and Workers in Leather, who having
supplied the Monasteries with conveniences of that Nature, sell the remainder
to Strangers for money, the which accrues to the benefit of the Convent, which
out of the common Stock provides the materials whereon to work, which when they
are wrought, they are then esteemed to be the Goods of the Monastery. For as in
Christendom no Friar is capable of acquiring Wealth unto himself, so neither
here can a Kaloir appropriate the benefit of his own labors; though perhaps an
industrious and skilful Workman shall have more respect and care taken of him,
that he want nothing which is convenient for him, than those who are Drones, or
unskilful in any Art or Trade. Whether such men as these can read, or not, it
matters not much; for there is not one of a hundred of them so well learned; it
is sufficient if he can make his Cross, and his Metagnia before the blessed
Virgin, which is a bowing on their Knees, touching the ground with their
Forehead, which some will do 300 times together, as I have already declared in
the foregoing Chapter.

But the Fathers or Priests are of a Classis or Form above these, The learning
of their Priests.
for they can all read and write, from the Prior to the lowest Deacon; though
very few of them understand the learned or School Greek in any perfection: for
it would puzzle the wisest heads amongst them to interpret every word in their
Liturgy, and yet they are so expert and ready therein, that they can run from
the beginning to the ending without stop or hesitation, and gallop it over at
that rate, that one must have a good ear and some skill in the Greek Language,
to distinguish the different sound of the words which they utter: besides
which, their chief study is of the (...), the Hymns of John Damascen, and to
find out and know the proper Lessons for the day, and the Offices of the
Church, with all the Responses and Suffrages; which is a Learning so intricate,
as requires some practice, and application of the mind: But such as have any
Learning more than the rest, it consists for the most in the knowledge they
have of the Fathers and Councils of their own Church, and in the Ecclesiastical
Authors of the first Century after Constantine the Great. The Latin and Hebrew
Tongues, and any besides the Greek, they contemn and esteem as profane:
Philosophy and Mathematics, being matters of Humane Learning, they account as
unnecessary for men who lead a mortified and spiritual life, to whom also all
Books are unlawful, but such as treat of Divinity, and a holy and devout way of
living.

Every Monastery has its Library of Books, Their Libraries.
which are kept in a lofty Tower, under the custody of one whom they call
(...), who also is their Steward, receives their money, and renders an account
of all their Expenses: but we must not imagine that these Libraries are
conserved in that order, as ours are in the parts of Christendom; that they are
ranked and compiled in method on Shelves, with Labels of the Contents, or that
they are brushed and kept clean, like the Libraries of our Colleges; but they
are piled one on the other without order or method, covered with dust, and
exposed to the Worm. They have few Books amongst them but what treat of
Divinity, and as I have heard they have scarce any of much worth; in regard
that the Emissaries of France and other parts, have by force of money deprived
them of all the choicest Books in their Libraries: Nor have they (as I have
been well informed) one Book that varies in the least from the Doctrine of the
Seventh Council; for there is not one Book to be found of those which were
wrote by those whom they call Heretics, esteeming that the easiest way to
confute a Heretic, and stop his Doctrine in its progress, is to condemn the
same, and burn his Book.

In every Monastery they have Bells: such as they daily use are small, but
those of greatest bigness, are of about 4 or 500 weight, which they ring at
Festivals, when they would make the greatest noise and rejoicing: on these
their Clocks strike, which are fixed like those on our Churches in England;
which are not to be found, as I remember, in any other place in Turkey, unless
at Buda, where I saw one of this sort.

For conclusion, In this manner this Mountain of Athos is inhabited, and this
is the Government amongst these Religious men of the Greek Church, who are for
the most part good simple men of godly lives, given greatly to devotion and
acts of mortification; for as out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks, so these men discoursing with a lively sense of God and of his Service,
we may without overmuch credulity, or easiness of belief, conclude them not
only to be real and moral good men, but such also as are something touched with
the Spirit of God; whose devotion and affection to his Commands and Precepts,
shall carry them farther in their way to Heaven, than the Wisdom of the most
profound Philosophers, or the wisest Clerks. And that such people are found in
the world, endowed with such Privileges, in the Countries of the Grand
Oppressor of Christendom, to God's Name be Glory and Honor now and for ever,

Amen.
CHAP. XII.
Of Confession, Contrition, and the (...), or the sanctified Oil, practiced in
this Church.

BEfore we treat of this last Mystery, which is the Oil of Prayer, let us
premise something touching the Confession of sins, which is to be performed
four times in the year, to a Priest lawfully Constituted and Ordained, that is,
for such who have leisure and convenience of living; Priests and others entered
into holy Orders, or into a life of Regular Devotion, are obliged to a
Confession once a Month. The laboring and common people are enjoined to a
Confession but once a year, and that before their entrance into the great Lent,
which is before Easter: To sick and infirm people, it is recommended as a
Remedy against the Diseases of the Soul, and ease of a burdened Conscience.
Repentance the Greeks call (...), and is by them defined to be, A sorrow of
heart for sin, (...)
of which a man accuses himself before a Priest, with a firm resolution to
correct the errors of his past life, by that which is to come, and with
intention to perform whatsoever shall be enjoined him by his Spiritual Pastor
for his Penance. By which definition it appears how necessary the Greeks esteem
Confession to a Priest, having these words in the Orthodox Doctrine of the
Oriental Church, (...) The Priest cannot release, unless he enquire first what
he is to release: and likewise it is apparent by the foregoing Definition, That
the Priest has power to enjoin Penance, which they call (...), such as Prayers
extraordinary, Alms, Fastings, visiting of holy Places, and the like. When the
Penitent comes to Confession, the Priest utters these words to him; (...).
Behold the Angel of the Lord is at hand to take thy Confession, see therefore
that thou conceal no sin, for fear of shame, for I also am a man and a sinner
as thou art.

To such Penitents who are sick and languishing, (...), or the holy Oil.
and find their Consciences guilty of any mortal sin, as Fornication, Adultery,
or Pride, which tends to the contempt of God, is administered the Sacrament of
(...), or, The Oil of Prayer, which is performed by the Bishop or Archbishop,
assisted by seven Priests, and begins with this Prayer.

O Lord, (...), etc.
who with the Oil of thy Mercies have healed the Wounds of our Souls and of our
Bodies, do thou sanctify this Oil in that manner, that those who are anointed
therewith may be freed from their Infirmities, and from all Corporal and
Spiritual Evils; that the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, may be glorified therein.

This Sacrament, as they call it, of the Holy Oil, is by some said to be
different from that which is called (...), which is administered unto healthful
persons, who are fallen into mortal sins, which pollute the Body as well as the
Soul, and takes its Original from the parable of the good Samaritan in the
Gospel, who poured Oil into the Wounds of him who fell amongst Thieves: But
this Unction is not applicable to those who are guilty of Rapine and Violence,
whose sins are only purged and expiated by Restitution and Satisfaction. This
Oil of Prayer is pure and unmixed Oil, without any other composition; a
quantity whereof, sufficient to serve for the whole year, is consecrated on
Wednesday in the holy Week by the ArchBishop or Bishop, though it may be
administered, or application made thereof by three Priests. This is the same
with that which in the Roman Church is called, Extreme Unction, grounded on the
words of St. James, Cap. 5. 14. Is any sick amongst you? let him call for the
Elders the Church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with Oil in the
name of the Lord.

In the administration of this Oil of Prayer, the Priest dips some Cotton at
the end of a stick into the Oil, and therewith anoints the Penitent, in the
form of a Cross, on the Forehead, on the Chin, on each Cheek, on the backs and
palms of the Hands, and then recites this Prayer.

Holy Father, (...)
Physician of Souls and Bodies, who have sent thine only Son Jesus Christ,
healing infirmities and sins, to free us from death, heal this thy Servant of
corporal and spiritual infirmities, (...)
and give him salvation, and the grace of thy Christ, through the Prayers of
our more than holy Lady the Mother of God, the Eternal Virgin, through the
assistance of the glorious, celestial, and incorporeal Powers, through the
Virtue of the life-giving Cross of the holy and glorious Prophet the
forerunner John the Baptist, and of the holy and glorious Apostles, and
triumphant Martyrs of the holy, and just Fathers, and of the holy and
life-giving Anargiri, Amen.

Confession of Sins verbally, and particularly to a Priest, is esteemed a
necessary duty for constituting a perfect Contrition; though they do not deny
but a person dying in a state of Regeneration, that is to say, with a
Repentance proceeding from the love of God, and having not opportunity by the
suddenness of death, or some other accident, to confess and receive Absolution,
may yet through the mercies of God, and bounty of the Saints, have these
necessary Sacraments conferred, and mysteriously supplied, and the contrite
Soul saved: But yet that the omission thereof, in a place where it may be
obtained, is a sin, which (as they say) can no otherwise be pardoned in the
next World, than by the Prayers, Intercessions of the Saints in Heaven, and by
the Alms and Oblations of good men on Earth; of which Opinion of theirs we
shall have occasion to speak more particularly hereafter.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Power of Excommunication, and upon what frivolous occasions it is made
use of.

THE Third Command of the Church is Obedience toward their Spiritual Pastors
and Teachers, 1 Cor. 4. 1. Let a man so account of us as of the Ministers of
Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God: which is a Text that they often
repeat in their Churches, and raise consequences from thence of the sublimity
of their Office, and of the reverence and honor due from the people toward
their Clergy; so that though they want the advantages of Riches and Ornament to
render them respected in the Eyes of the Vulgar; yet their People being
affected with their divine and separated Qualifications, do not submit only in
Spiritual matters, but even in Temporals refer themselves to the determination
of their Bishop, or Metropolite, according to that of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 6. 1.
Dare any of you having a matter against another, go to Law before the unjust,
and not before the Saints? But that which most enforces this Duty of Obedience,
is a sense of the Power of Excommunication, which rests in the Church, of which
they so generally stand in fear, that the most profligate and obdurate
conscience in other matters startles at this sentence to which whilst any is
subjected, he is not only expelled the limits of the Church, but his
conversation is scandalous, and his person denied the common benefits of
Charity and assistance, to which Christian or Humane duty does oblige us. In
the Exercise of this censure of Excommunication, the Greek Church is so ready
and frequent, that the common use of it might seem to render it the more
contemptible; but that the Sentence is pronounced with so much horror, and the
sad effects which have ensued thereupon, not only to the living, but also to
the Corpse and Carcasses of such who have dyed under Excommunication, are
related with that evidence and certainty as still confirms in the people the
efficacy of that Authority which the Church exercises therein. The form of
Excommunication is either expressive of the party with his name and condition,
secluding him from the use of Divine Ordinances, or otherwise indefinite of any
person who is guilty of such or such a Crime or Misdemeanour. As for Example,
If any person is guilty of Theft, which is not discovered, an Excommunication
is taken out against him, whosoever he be, that has committed the Theft, which
is not to be remitted until Restitution is made; and so the fault is published
and repeated at a full Congregation, and then follows the Sentence of
Excommunication in this form.

If they restore not to him that which is his own, (...)
and possess him peaceably of it, but suffer him to remain injured and
damnifyed; let him be separated from the Lord God Creator, and be accursed,
and unpardoned, and undissolvable after death in this World, and in the other
which is to come. Let Wood, Stones, and Iron be dissolved, but not they: May
they inherit the Leprosy of Gehazi, and the Confusion of Judas; may the Earth
be divided, and devour them like Dathan and Abiram; may they sigh and tremble
on earth like Cain, and the wrath of God be upon their heads and Countenances;
may they see nothing of that for which they labor, and beg their Bread all the
days of their lives; may their Works, Possessions, Labors, and Services be
accursed; always without effect or success, and blown away like dust; may they
have the Curses of the holy and righteous Patriarchs Abram, Isaac and Jacob; of
the 318 Saints who were the Divine Fathers of the Synod of Nice, and of all
other holy Synods; and being without the Church of Christ, let no man
administer unto them the things of the Church, or bless them, or offer
Sacrifice for them, or give them the (...) or the blessed Bread, or eat, or
drink, or work with them, or converse with them; and after death, let no man
bury them, in penalty of being under the same state of Excommunication, for so
let them remain until they have performed what is here written.

The effect of this dreadful Sentence is reported by the Greek Priests to have
been in several instances so evident, that none doubts or disbelieves the
consequences of all those maledictions repeated therein; and particularly, that
the body of an excommunicated person is not capable of returning to its first
Principles until the Sentence of Excommunication is taken off. It would be
esteemed no Curse amongst us to have our Bodies remain uncorrupted and entire
in the Grave, who endeavor by Art, and Aromatic spices, and Gums, to preserve
them from Corruption: And it is also accounted, amongst the Greeks themselves,
as a miracle and particular grace and favor of God to the Bodies of such whom
they have Canonized for Saints to continue unconsumed, and in the moist damps
of a Vault, to dry and desiccate like the Mummies in Egypt, or in the Hot sands
of Arabia. But they believe that the Bodies of the Excommunicated are possessed
in the Grave by some evil spirit, which actuates and preserves them from
Corruption, in the same manner as the Soul informs and animates the living
body; and that they feed in the night, walk, digest, and are nourished, and
have been found ruddy in Complexion, and their Veins, after forty days Burial,
extended with Blood, which, being opened with a Lancet, have yielded a gore as
plentiful, fresh, and quick, as that which issues from the Vessels of young and
sanguine persons. This is so generally believed and discoursed of amongst the
Greeks, that there is scarce one of their Country Villages, but what can
witness and recount several instances of this nature, both by the relation of
their Parents, and Nurses, as well as of their own knowledge, which they tell
with as much variety as we do the Tales of Witches and Enchantments, of which
it is observed in Conversation, that scarce one story is ended before another
begins of like wonder. But to let pass the common and various Reports of the
Vulgar, this one may suffice for all, which was recounted to me with many
asseverations of its truth, by a grave Candiot Kaloir, called Sofronio, a
Preacher, and a person of no mean repute and learning at Smyrna.

I knew, (said he) a certain person, who for some misdemeanors committed in
the Morea, fled over to the Isle of Milo, where though he avoided the hand of
Justice, yet could not avoid the Sentence of Excommunication, from which he
could no more fly, than from the conviction of his own Conscience, or the guilt
which ever attended him; for the fatal hour of his death being come, and the
Sentence of the Church not revoked, the Body was carelessly and without
Solemnity interred in some retired and unfrequented place. In the mean time the
Relations of the deceased were much afflicted, and anxious for the sad estate
of their dead Friend, whilst the Paisants and Islanders were every night
affrighted and disturbed with strange and unusual apparitions, which they
immediately concluded arose from the Grave of the accursed Excommunicant,
which, according to their Custom, they immediately opened, and therein found
the Body uncorrupted, ruddy, and the Veins replete with Blood: The Coffin was
furnished with Grapes, Aples and Nuts, and such fruit as the Season afforded:
Whereupon, Consultation being made, the Kaloires resolved to make use of the
common Remedy in those cases, which was to cut and dismember the Body into
several parts, and to boil it in Wine, as the approved means to dislodge the
evil Spirit, and dispose the body to a dissolution: But the friends of the
deceased, being willing and desirous that the Corpse should rest in peace, and
some ease given to the departed Soul, obtained a Reprieve from the Clergy, and
hopes, that for a sum of Money, (they being persons of a competent Estate) a
Release might be purchased from this Excommunication under the hand of the
Patriarch: In this manner the Corpse were for a while freed from dissection, and
Letters thereupon sent to Constantinople, with this direction, That in case the
Patriarch should condescend to take off the Excommunication, that the day, hour
and minute that he signed the Remission should be inserted in the Date. And now
the Corpse were taken into the Church, (the Country People not being willing
they should remain in the Field) and Prayers and Masses daily said for its
dissolution, and pardon of the Offender: When one day after many Prayers,
Supplications and Offerings (as this Sofronio attested to me with many
protestations) and whilst he himself was performing Divine Service, on a sudden
was heard a rumbling noise in the Coffin of the dead party, to the fear and
astonishment of all persons then present; which when they had opened, they
found the Body consumed and dissolved as far into its first Principles of
Earth, as if it had been seven years interred. The hour and minute of this
dissolution was immediately noted and precisely observed, which being compared
with the Date of the Patriarchs release, when it was signed at Constantinople,
it was found exactly to agree with that moment in which the Body returned to
its Ashes. This story I should not have judged worth relating, but that I heard
it from the mouth of a grave person, who says, That his own eyes were Witnesses
thereof; and though notwithstanding I esteem it a matter not assured enough to
be believed by me, yet let it serve to evidence the esteem they entertain of
the validity and force of Excommunication. I had once the curiosity to be
present at the opening of a Grave of one lately dead, who, as the people of the
Village reported, walked in the night, and affrighted them with strange
Phantasmes; but it was not my fortune to see the Corpse in that nature, nor to
find the Provisions with which the spirit nourishes it, but only such a
Spectacle as is usual after six or seven days Burial in the Grave; howsoever
Turks as well as Christians discourse of these matters with much confidence.

This high esteem and efficacy being put on Excommunication, Excommunications
granted on every trivial occasion.
one would believe that the Priests should endeavor to conserve the reverence
thereof, being the Basis and main support of their Authority; and that
therefore they should not so easily make use thereof on every frivolous
occasion; that so familiarity might not render it contemptible, and the
salvation of men's Souls not seem to be played with on every slight and trivial
Affair: But such is the much to be lamented poverty in this Church, that they
are not only forced to sell Excommucations, but the very Sacraments; and to
expose the most reverend and mysterious Offices of Religion unto sale for
maintenance and support of the Priesthood.

The taking off Excommunications after death has been usual, but the
Excommunicating after death may seem a strange kind of severity; for so we read
that Theodosius, Bishop of Alexandria, excommunicated Origin two hundred years
after his decease.

On the same Authority of Excommunication depends the power of readmission
again into the Church, The manner of receiving into the Church such as have
denied the faith.
which according to the Greek Canon is not to be obtained easily, or at every
cold request of the Penitent, but after proof or trial first made of a hearty
and serious conversion, evidenced by the constant and repeated actions of a
holy life, and the patient and obedient performance of Penance imposed and
enjoined by the Church. Such as have apos^^^tized from the Faith, by becomi^^^
Turks, under the age of 14 years, upon their repentance, and desire of return
to the Church, sought earnestly with tears, signified and attested by 40 days
fasting with bread and water, accompanied with continual Prayer day and night,
are afterward received solemnly into the Church, in presence of the
Congregation, the Priest making a Cross on the Forehead of the Penitent with
the Oil of Chrism, or the (...), usually administered to such who return from
the ways of darkness and mortal sins.

But of such who in riper years fall away from the Faith (as many Greeks do for
the sake of Women, or escape of punishment) their readmission or reception
again into the Church is more difficult; for to some of them there is enjoined
a Penance of six or seven years humbling themselves with extraordinary Fasts,
and continual Prayer; during which time they remain in the nature of
Catechumeni, without the use or comfort of the Eucharist, or Absolution, unless
at the hour of death; in which the Church is so rigorous, that the Patriarch
himself is not able to release a Penance of this nature, imposed only by a
simple Priest; and for receiving Penitents of this nature there is a set Form
or Office in the Greek Liturgy.

But now we have few Examples of those Apostates who return from the Mohammedan
to the Christian faith; for none dares own such a Conversion but he who dares
to dye for it; so that that practice and admirable part of Discipline is become
obsolete and disused. Yet some there have been, even in my time, both of the
Greek and Armenian Churches, who have afforded more Heroic Examples of
Repentance, than any of those who have tried themselves by the Rules and Canons
prescribed; for after that they denied the Faith, and for some years have
carried on their heads the Badge or distinction of a Mohammedan, feeling some
remorses of Conscience, they have so improved the same by the sparks of some
little grace remaining, that nothing could appease or allay the present torment
of their minds, but a return to that Faith from whence they were fallen. In
this manner, having communicated their anguish and desires to some Bishop or
grave person of the Clergy, and signifying withal their Courage and Zeal to dye
for that faith, which they have denied; they have been exhorted, as the most
ready expiation of their sin, to confess Christ at that place where they have
renounced him; and this they have resolutely performed by leaving off their
Tulbants, and boldly presenting themselves in public Assemblies and at the
time of public prayers in the Church: and when the Turks have challenged them
for having revolted or relapsed again from them, they have owned their
Conversion, and boldly declared their resolution to dye in that old Faith
wherein they were baptized; and, as a Token or Demonstration hereof, being
carried before the Justice of the City or Province, they have not only by words
owned the Christian Doctrine, but also trampled their Turkish Tulbants or
Sashes under their Feet, and withstood three times the demand, whether they
would still continue to be Mahometans, according as is required in the
Mohammedan Law: For which, being condemned to dye, they have suffered death with
the same cheerfulness and courage that we read of the Primitive Martyrs, who
daily Sacrificed themselves for the Christian Verity.

Considering which, I have, with some astonishment, beheld in what manner some
poor English men, who have fondly and vilely denied the faith of Christ in
Barbary and the parts of Turkey, and become, as we term them, Renegados, have
afterward (growing weary of the Customs of Turks to which they were
strangers) found means of escape, and returned again into England, and there
entered the Churches, and frequented the Assembly of Gods people, as boldly as
if they had been the most constant and faithful of the Sheepfold: At which
confidence of ignorant and illiterate men, I do not so much admire, as I do at
the negligence of our Ministers, who acquaint not the Bishops herewith, to take
their Counsel and Order herein: But perhaps they have either not learned, or so
far forgot the ancient Discipline of ours, and all other Christian Churches, as
to permit men, after so abominable a Lapse and Apostasy, boldly to intrude
into the Sanctuary of God with the same unhallowed hands, and blasphemous
mouths, with which they denied their Savior and their Country. But what can we
say hereunto? Alas! Many are dissenters from our Church; which, by our
divisions in Religion, has lost much of its Power, Discipline and esteem
amongst us; and men, being grown careless and cold in Religion, little dream or
consider of such methods of Repentance; for whilst men contemn the Authority,
and censures of the Church, and disown the power of the Keys, they seem to
deprive themselves of the ordinary means of Salvation, unless God, by some
extraordinary light and eviction, supplies that in a sublimer manner, which was
anciently effected by a rigorous observation of the Laws and Canons of the
Church.

It is a strange Vulgar Error that we maintain in England, that the Greek
Church does yearly excommunicate the Roman, which is nothing so; and common
reason will tell us, That a Church cannot excommunicate another, or any
particular Member thereof, over which it pretends no Jurisdiction or Authority;
and that the Greek Church has no such Claim of Dominion or Superiority over
the Roman, no more than it owns a subjection to it, is plainly evinced in the
third Chapter of this Book: and this I attest to be so, upon enquiry made into
the truth thereof, and on Testimony of Greek Priests eminent and knowing in the
Canons and Constitutions of their Church: Though we cannot deny but that
anciently one Patriarch might renounce the Communion of another, over whom he
had no Jurisdiction, for his notorious Heresy; as S. Cyril did to Nestorius
before the Assembly of the Council of Ephesus..

CHAP. XIV.
Of the treatment the Greeks use toward their dead, and the Opinion they have
of Purgatory, or the middle state of Souls.

THE Greeks in the time of sickness and mournings for the dead retain not only
Ceremonies, by us accounted superstitious, but also savouring somewhat of
ancient Gentilism. If the headache, or be ill-affected, the Priest binds it
with the Vail of the Sacramental Chalice, and administers to the sick a draught
of consecrated Water, in which is Basil, or Dittamon, or some other odoriferous
Herb, blessed with the touch of a Crucifix, or the Picture of our Lady, and
administered as a spiritual Medicine, as well operative for the benefit of the
Soul, as conducing to the health of the Body. But in case the indisposition
increase, the holy Oil, or extreme Unction is applied, called (...), mixed with
some of that Water which was consecrated at the Sacrament of the Communion; and
some Prayers, proper for that occasion, are rehearsed, together with such
Chapters and Verses out of the new Testament which relate to the resurrection
of the dead. It is likewise usual amongst them, as in the Roman Church, to make
Vows upon recovery; and on the Altar to tender the form of a Leg, Arm, or Eyes,
or some other Member ill-affected in Silver or Gold, in remembrance and
gratitude for the late mercy of Almighty God. But when the party dies, the
lamentations which they make are most barbarous. For after his eyes are shut,
his Corpse are clothed in its best Apparel, and, being stretched on the Floor
with a Taper at the head, and another at the feet, then begins the Scene of
sorrow: the Wife, the Children, and the rest of the Family and Friends entering
with their Hair dishevelled, their Garments loose and torn, pulling their
Locks, and beating their Breasts, and scratching their Faces with their Nails

-- Faedantes unguibus ora. make such deep sighs and sad cries, as might justly
incur the reprehension of the Apostle, who gave them that reasonable Counsel
of, Mourn not like those without hope, 1 These. 4. v. 13. The Body thus dressed
up with a Crucifix on the Breast, attended by the Priests, and Deacons, is
carried to burial, and the Prayers solemnized with Incense, that God would
receive his Soul into the Region of the blessed; the Wife follows her departed
Husband, with such passion to perform the last office of kindness, as if she
intended with violence of her shreeks to force out her own Soul, and to bear
company with the Corpse of her Husband in his Cave of darkness: And where
passion is not found so vigorous and violent in its representation of sorrow,
by reason of the gentle and more even temper of some Wives; there want not
Women, who are perfect Tragedians, that are hired to follow the Corpse of the
dead, and to act in behalf of the Relations, all the distracted postures, and
motions of real grief and confused sorrow. The Corpse being placed in the
Church, and the Office for the dead being ended, the Friends which accompany it
first kiss the Crucifix on the Breast, and then the Mouth, and Forehead of the
deceased, and afterward every one eats a piece of Bread, and drinks a glass of
Wine in the Church, wishing rest to the Soul departed, and consolation to the
afflicted Relations; which done, they attend them home, and so end the
Ceremonies of Burial.

At the end of eight days after the Burial, the friends of the deceased make
their charitable Visits to condole with, and comfort, the nearer Relations, and
accompany them to the Church, to join with them in the Prayers offered for the
quiet and rest of the departed Soul; at which time the men eat and drink again
in the Church, whilst the Women renew their barbarous lamentations with shreeks
and cries, and with all other evidences of distraction and sorrow; but such as
can pay others to act this part of passion, force not themselves with that
violence, but send them to lament and mourn over the Sepulcher for the space of
eight days; the third day after, which they call (...), Or (...). The ^imes
appointed to commemorate the dead.
on which Prayers are said for the Soul departed: In like, manner at the end of
nine days, of forty days, and at the end of six months, and at the conclusion
of the year, Prayers and Masses are said for repose of the Soul, which being
ended, those then present are entertained with boiled Wheat, and Rice, Wine,
and dried fruits, and this is called, (...), which is a custom esteemed by the
Greeks of great Antiquity, which they more devoutly solemnize on the Friday
before their entrance into the Lent of Advent, Good-Fryday, and the Friday
before the Feast of Pentecost, which are special days observed for
Commemoration of the dead, as well such as dyed of violent, as of natural
deaths.

Now as to the Opinion which the Greek Church holds concerning the condition of
Souls departed this life, The Opinion of the Greeks touching the state of Souls
after death.
there is some diversity, being a matter not clearly determined by Councils.
Howsoever the Anatolian Confession, which is generally accepted and approved by
the Greek Divines, does clearly and expressly maintain this Doctrine, That the
Souls, so soon as they are cleared and loosed from the Fetters of the Body, go
either to Heaven or to Hell; the first has the name of Paradise, Abraham's
Bosom, the Kingdom of Heaven, where the Saints sit and intercede for those who
are on Earth, in honor of whom are daily sung Hymns of praise and glory.

Such as go to Hell, called the Grave, the eternal Fire, the Bottomless Pit,
and the like, are of two sorts. The first are such who dye in the state of
Divine anger, on whom are immediately imposed Chains, and Fetters, which can
never be taken off, nor loosed to all Eternity. The second are such who enter
or are introduced into the Mansions of Hell, without those Bonds, Fetters,
Pains and Torments, which for ever enslave and afflict the damned; but
departing this life with dispositions to Justice, Repentance, and a new life,
with the advantageous assistances of Confession and Absolution of the Priest,
though the work of Grace be not thoroughly perfected in them, nor their
resolution of godliness proceeded to action, have yet their resolutions, (...)
dispositions and beginnings of Pietymade acceptable, and brought to maturity
and esteem in the sight of God, not by any works performed in the next World,
according to that of the Psalmist, who shall praise thee in the Grave, or shall
the dead give thanks unto thee in the Pit? but by the Offertories, Oblations,
and Alms, and Prayers of the Church, made in behalf of the dead by the living
on Earth; and this is the meaning of those Prayers. Tu autem Domine repone
animam ejus in loco lucenti, in loco quietis and consolationis, ex quo long
est omnis maestitia, dolor, and suspirium, condonans ei omne peccatum. Do thou
Lord repose his Soul in the Mansions of light, of quietness and consolation,
from whence are banished all sadness, grief, and sighs. But this place (it
seems) they account no different Limbo from Hell, and is no Purgatory, whose
flames purge and cleanse, or whose torments afflict the soul, or make the least
satisfaction for sin, (...)
according to the sentence of the second Council of Constantinople, (...)
which condemned the Opinion of Origin herein: for the soul then becomes
incapable either by its sufferings or repentance to obtain pardon in its own
behalf.

But whatsoever is to be done in this matter, is to be performed by the Soul
united with the Body in this life; afterward, the Bridegroom being entered,
the Gate is shut, and no Path or way is left to repentance, only the Prayers of
the Saints on Earth, their Almsdeeds, and Offertories of frequent Sacrifices
without Blood, with the intercession of the Blessed Martyrs, and Church
triumphant, open the doors of Paradise to languishing and wishing Souls: but
this is not done, until the Judgment of the last day, in which interim the
Greek Church holds, That neither the Sentence of the four Patriarchs, nor the
Decrees of the Universal Synod, nor all the Bishops of the whole World
assembled, are able by their Authority, Bolles or Indulgences, to prescribe a
time for release of one Soul from the confines of Hell; only the Mercies of
God, who vouchsafes to be moved by the Prayers of the Church, can sign this
release and delivery at what time he shall think fit: And that as the Blessed
receive not their repletions of Glory in Heaven until after the day of
Judgment, so neither shall the Damned their fullness of Torment in everlasting
flames: By which it appears, that the Tenants of the Greek Church are in this
point;

First, that the Repository of longing Souls is not locally different from Hell
it self: Secondly, that they endure no other punishment than only the sense of
deprivation from God and Heaven, and are not purged by Fire and Flames: And
thirdly, that no Indulgences nor Pardons of all the Patriarchs, or of the
Universal Bishop, can by their Authority remit one moment of detention to the
imprisoned Souls, farther than as they are Members of the Church Militant, by
whose Prayers and good works only those Souls find ease and benefit; and this
is the true and certain meaning of the Greek Church in this point, against
which and their Tenent about the Pontificial Authority, the Romanists make
their greatest exception.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Fifth Mystery, called Marriage:

MArriage, in the Greek Church, is called a Mystery, being the Union of two
Bodies into one Flesh, which having a Spiritual Benefit as well as a Politic,
the Church, under all Christian Governments, has taken upon it self the power
of tying the Matrimonial Knot, of blessing the Parties, and of giving, or
granting rules and limits thereunto.

The Greek Church, retaining unto these days many of the Precepts and Laws of
ancient severity and mortification, used in the Primitive times of
Christianity, forbids and declares unlawful the fourth Marriage; for though
they are subject to the Turks, with whom Polygamie is allowable, yet they do
not only disapprove it as dissentaneous to the Christian Religion, but likewise
as a matter undecent, and savouring too much of the Flesh and sensuality of
Concupiscence. For a man after he has buried his first Wife, and taken a
second, and being deprived of that also has proceeded to the embraces of a
third, the Church is so far satisfied; but gives a stop here, judging that
where death has three times made a separation from the Matrimonial Bed, there
ought a limitation to be set unto farther proceedings; that so the Widower may
lament and condole the unhappiness of so many deprivements; and, having proved
the troubles and importunities of the Flesh, may find time and leisure for
Prayer and Repentance.

The reason that the Greeks give why the fourth Marriage is unlawful, is
because it would come under the notion of Polygamie, which has been forbidden
by the Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws of Christians; for they understand
Polygamie to be a Conjunction of diverse Copulatives in number, which is not
understood until a person proceeds unto a fourth Wife, which makes more than
one Copulative in the rule of Marriage; but this allegation is so frivolous and
unsatisfactory, that I cannot understand the nicety, and therefore rather
believe that this prohibition was grounded on the ancient Customs of the
Church, when mortifications were more in use, and all luxurious indulgence to
carnality generally condemned and out of fashion; as appears by the Writings of
S. Augustine, lib. 3. cap. 18. de doct. Christ. and lib. 16. contra Faust^^^;
against which also S. Jerome in his Epistles so much inveighs; that he styles
the second Marriage little better than Fornication; what censure then is it
likely that he would pass on the fourth or fifth Marriages; and herein has
been great variety of Opinions in former Ages; as Socrates Schol. says lib. 5.
c. 21. The Novatians in Phrygia allow not of a second Marriage, such as inhabit
Constantinople do neither receive nor reject it; again, such as are in the
Western parts of the World admit it wholly: the Original Authors of so great
diversity were Bishops, who governed the Churches at diverse and at several
times.

How strict soever this Church is esteemed in admitting many degrees of
Marriage, The Greek Church easy to grant divorces.
that is of proceeding farther than to the fourth Marriage, yet through
corruption and poverty of the Clergy, the dissolution of that Knot is with much
more facility obtained, so that it is ordinary for a man to take out a Divorce
from the Patriarch, and to marry another Woman; and the Patriarch afterward to
alter his Sentence, and enjoin the Party to reassume his first Wife, leaving
the ignorant soul as well confused in his love as in his Conscience. The reason
hereof is rather Ignorance in Government than the Authority of any Canon
whereby such a liberty is dispensed; for the Metropolites, as well as the
Priests, being miserably poor, their Divorces, as well as Excommunications, are
made vendible, from whence yearly accrues a considerable benefit to the Church;
and perhaps also this freedom may the more easily be indulged in imitation and
compliance with the Government under which they live.

The Ceremonies used at their Marriages are some of them serious and
significant, and others too light and frivolous for so considerable and
important a part of Religion; for though their Prayers and Collects at this
Service are holy, and full of apt and Divine Expressions, and the use of the
Ring is very decent and becoming; but the changing of Garlands from the
Bridegroom to the Bride, the giving them Wine and sugared Confects in a Spoon,
and tying them with a Garter, and rocking them together, are Ceremonies and
Toys which seem too mean and low, and not aptly fitted to an Institution so
serious and and important as this.

The Greeks, being a people of a merry and sanguine complexion, are wanton and
unconstant in their Amors; so that it is usual (as amongst other Nations) for
them to make Addresses to one Mistress, and pass to the Marriage of another;
for which they commonly give their Sponsalia first, which is the Ring, in token
of their contract. Such as inhabit in or about Constantinople, Smyrna, and
other Capital Cities, look high, and would be a little great, and therefore
imitate the Custom of the Turks in this particular, keeping up their Daughters,
with the same retirement and distance, from the view of men, as if their eyes
were able to pollute and deflower them, calling them Jewels which are not to be
seen before their price and bargain is made; so that the Bridegroom, agreeing
on the terms, prepares the Nuptials, invites the Guests, before he is
acquainted with his Bride by any other Relation, than such as he receives from
the information of his Female Friends, who for this discovery have made her
visits, frequented the Table and Bath with her, to whose judgment and fancy he
submits his own, and becomes perfectly enamoured by the praises they give her;
for any other assurance of her beauty or affections, or harmony of her humor
with his, there can be none until after the Service of Marriage is passed: When
the Parents and Friends conduct the Bride into the Nuptial Chamber, where
having sat for a short space in company of the Female Guests with her Face
covered, as before at the time of Marriage, the Bridegroom enters, and with a
trembling hand lifts up the Vail, and kisses her, being forced to remain
content with his Fortune whether of beauty, or deformity, good nature, or evil
disposition, which oft-times produces a too late repentance.

But the familiarity between the Greeks of the Islands of Archi-pelago admits
not of these niceties, The Islanders of a different humor.
their conversation being more free, for they frequent each others societies,
and, according to the jollity of their natural temper, dance men and Women
together. During the times of such mirth as this, the young people often enter
into Promises and Protestations of Marriage, which the men according to the
levity and unconstancy of their humor as often break, but not without the
revenge of the old Mothers, who, in vindication of the honor of their
Daughters, frequently exercise a piece of Witchcraft which they call (...),
which is the tying up a man from accompanying with any Woman, unless it be with
her to whom he has faultered in his faith; which is so usually practiced, that
all people in those Countries talk of it, and the Bridegrooms complain of the
Tyranny; from which they could in no wise be delivered, until some means or
composition has been made with the old Woman to take off the Bond, or untye
the Knot, which debilitated and infeebled his virile inclinations.

But one thing here is very observable and curious to be inserted: That it has
been usual for the Turks, Greek Women making Kabin with Turks in the Morea and
Romania.
especially in the parts of Greece called now Romania, and in Turkish Rumeli,
to take Greek Women to Wife, marrying them according to the Mohammedan Law;
which Custom was become so frequent, that the Christian Women, little
regarding that Caution given them by the Apostle, of being unequally yoked,
freely entered into Kabin with the Turks, and without scruple designed the
fruit of their Bodies to the service of Antichrist, and by the infidelity of
their Children, seemed half-content to become themselves Apostates. To prevent
and remedy which inconvenience, the Patriarchs and Metropolites often consulted
together, but could contribute little to their redress, whilst the Turks, who
were masters both of their lives and fortunes, made the bodies of the men
subservient to their Labor, and of the Women to their Lusts. Howsoever, of
late years the Patriarch of Constantinople, complaining of these Marriages to
the Muftee, proposed this Query, viz. whether it might be lawful for a Turk to
unite himself to the Body of a Woman which was nourished with Swines flesh and
Wine? for such were the Christian Women: and whether the Children born to
Turks, partaking of those abominable nourishments from which they were
produced, were not in their Births polluted and unfit to be made Musselmen? The
Muftee, startled a while with the novelty of the question, and considering
seriously thereon, replied, That those Marriages were not lawful for Turks.
Then, said the Patriarch, such Marriages as these, which are frequent amongst
you in Romelia, ought to be forbidden; to which the Muftee assented, and
represented the Case to the Vizier, who, concurring in the same Opinion,
ordered, that for the future no Turk should marry a Christian Woman, unless she
first renounced the Christian Faith, and embraced the Mohammedan: Which Order,
to the great honor of the Patriarch, gave a stop to those Marriages in
Romania; for the Parents unwilling or ashamed to permit their Daughters to
abandon their Faith for the sake and advantage of a Husband, have conserved
them ever since for the more equal and lawful Marriages of Christians: But
whether this may not, in course of time, cause Women to relinquish their Faith
which (God knows) in that People is fixed with a tender root, experience, in
the course of time, will best demonstrate: But this happened in the year 1672.
and was related to me from the mouth of the Bishop of Smyrna, and attested by
those present with him.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Liturgies used in the Greek Church, of their length, and when used.

THE Liturgies of the Greek Church are in number four. The first is of S. James
appointed to be read in the Church by Crispus, first Bishop of Jerusalem; but
this being five hours long and tedious, is only used once a year; that is, on
the 23 of October, which is the Festival of that Saint. The second is of S.
John Chrysostom; the third of St. Basil; and the fourth of S. Gregory the great.

The Liturgy of S. Chrysostom is read every day in the year, except Sundays in
Lent, Thursday and Saturday in the holy Week, or Vigil of Easter, and on the
Festival of the Elevation of the holy Cross, falling on the fourteenth of
September, at which times is read the Liturgy of S. Basil, being esteemed
longer than that of S. Chrysostom, and therefore more proper for the times of
Fasting.

The Liturgy of S. Gregory is called (...), or preconsecrated, because it is
said after those of S. Chrysostom or S. Basil, in which already Consecration is
presupposed of the holy Elements, and therefore this contains no preamble, as
others do, touching the Consecration, but is only a Composition of Prayers for
making worthy the Priest, and Communicants for reception of the holy Mysteries.
Nor are the Epistle and Gospel read in this Liturgy, having been read before;
this being like our second Service, when we have no Communion, which is read
later, commonly beginning about Eleven a Clock in the Morning, and is fitted
for their devotion who have least leisure and piety toward Gods service: And
this Liturgy is only repeated Wednesdays and Frydays.

In Monasteries they begin it more early, that is to say, about Nine a Clock,
because that after their slender Dinner, which on those days is only bread and
water (of which also they make but one meal) they are to return betimes to
their Vespers, called (...), to which with an entire rehearsal of the Psalter,
they are daily obliged; and this is that which employs their whole time on days
of Fasting: which tedious and indiscreet length of Liturgies I have observed to
abate so much the heat of true zeal and affection, which ought to be in the
Worship of that pure and incomprehensible Spirit of God Almighty, that the
Priests run over their Offices, as the Schoolboys do their Tasks, pronouncing
their words so swift and thick as renders them inarticulate and unintelligible,
and are of no savor or energy to persons who desire to prosper in Devotion.

To all these Prayers, and Offices, they repeat an additional Lecture of the
life of some Saint, which serves in the place of a Sermon or Homily, of which,
one being read for every day, the whole Summary of that Book may be finished in
the whole course or circle of the year; the which Book is called, (...), or a
Collection of Acts and Histories.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Pictures and Images in the Greek Church.

THE Greeks in their Churches make use of Pictures for Adornment, History, and
Worship; they burn Lamps before them, perfume them with Incense, beginning and
ending their Prayers with reverend bowings and crossings before the
representations and figures of Saints; to which end there is always laid on a
Desk the Picture of the Virgin Mary and S. George, which they kiss at their
coming in, or going out of the Church, and at some grand Period of their
Liturgy. But all carved Images they abhor, and Anathematize the adorers of
Sculptile Representations, because they have formerly been abused to Idolatry,
with the same maledictions as they do those who are Adversaries to both. And
that we may exactly deliver the Tenent of the Greek Church herein, we have
faithfully rendered in the words following, their clear Sentence and Opinion,
being what is delivered as the undoubted faith of the Oriental Churches.

(...)
Great (say they) is the difference between Idols and Representations. For
Idols are figures of man's invention, as the Apostle testifies. We know that an
Idol in the world is nothing, 1 Cor. 8. 4. but an Image is a representation of
some true transaction of what has passed and been transacted in the World, as
the Picture of our Savior, of the holy Virgin Mary, and of all the Saints.
(...)
But different from this, the Gentiles worshipped their Idols who adored them
as Gods, and offered incense unto them, saying, That Gold and Silver were Gods,
as Nebuchadnezar did. But we, when he honor and adore Pictures, do not worship
the Wood, nor Colors, but those Saints whose Representations they are. We
honor them with the reverence of Servants, figuring in our minds the person
and presence of those Saints. As when we bow to a Crucifix, we form in our
minds Christ hanging on the Cross for our salvation to which we incline our
heads and knees with thanksgiving. In like manner when we worship the Image of
the Virgin Mary, we raise our Contemplations unto that holy Mother of God: We
bow our heads and knees to her, and pronounce her blessed above all men or
Women. The same may be said of the ArchAngel Gabriel; by which it appears that
this is not the same Service which we offer unto God. Nor do those of the
Orthodox Faith allow of the graven Workmanship of Images to the life, but only
the Countenances of Saints, whose persons they represent. For as the Cherubims,
over-shadowing the Ark of the Covenant, did represent those true Cherubims in
Heaven which remain in the presence of God, and were honored and adored by the
Israelites without transgression of that Commandment. And when the Children of
Israel worshipped the Tabernacle of the Covenant, and lodged it with decent and
due honor, they committed no sin, nor made invalid the Commands of the
Decalogue, but rather declare that God is wonderful in his Saints. Only it is
requisite that the Image have some lively resemblance of the Saint it
represents, that the mind of him that prays may be the more easily affected
thereby. And for the better confirmation of the worship of holy and sacred
Images, the Church of God in the Seventh Universal Synod, has anathematized
all such as do oppose them, and has authorized and for ever established the
adoration of venerable Images, as appears in the Ninth Canon of that Synod.

Hereby it is evident what Opinion the Greek Church holds concerning the use of
Pictures in Churches, which whilst they pretend to maintain from Antiquity and
the Authority of a Synod, though of late date, and later received amongst them,
they despise the Sentence of their great Doctor and Father St. Basil therein,
Ep. 70^
who in his 70 th Epistle to the Bishops of France and Italy, complains of the
persecution arisen in the Oriental Churches; for that either the faithful were
forced to adore Images, or resign their Bodies to the flames, (...). Nor can
this be understood of the Images of Heathens, in which Divine Worship was
terminated; for he declares a little before, that this persecution was of a
different nature to those in past times, when the Gentiles tormented the
Professors of Christianity: But now those that bear the glorious name of
Christians, condemned the others to banishment, to Flames, to Prison, and all
kind of Torments, for no other Crime than for observance and defense of the
Primitive Tradition. (...) By which it is evident, That Arianism in those days
prevailing, Christian Heretics were then the Persecutors both for the
enforcement of the Doctrine of Arius, and the worship of Images. And howsoever
the Greeks distinguish and moderate their terms in the worship of Pictures, in
which, to speak indifferently, their Churches do not much abound, there being
seldom other Pictures which adorn their Walls, or Portals of their Chancels,
than the representation of our Savior, the Blessed Virgin, S. Michael the
Archangel, and S. George; to which, though they yield much reverence, yet they
are not so apt to attribute the power of working Miracles unto them, as they
are in Spain and Italy. Notwithstanding which, considering the scandal which
Pictures and Images in the Oratories, and places of Gods worship, administer to
Turks, Jews, and other Enemies of the Gospel in the Eastern parts; it were
better that they were wholly taken away, for they not being capable to
comprehend the niceties of distinction in Divine Worship which the Schools and
subtle men have formed to clear themselves in this case from the imputation of
Idolatry, reproach the Professors of the Christian Faith with the Infamy of
that irrational sin, which Christians first preached against, and confounded,
and have thereby taken that Offense, as may with good reason be believed has
in these latter days affrighted many from embracing the Gospel. And though the
Greeks would seem to use some caution herein, by not painting Pictures to the
life, or not using engraven Images, or by not drawing them farther than to the
Waste with an ill-favored sort of flat painting, as if they would thereby
excuse the inconvenience which may be objected: Yet certainly the use of them
is so scandalous amongst Turks, (who have scarce any thing good in their
Religion, but that they profess one God, and are Enemies to Idolatry,) that
though Pictures and Images may be allowed indifferently in other Churches; yet
being no essential part of Gods Worship, they ought wholly to be rejected and
wiped out in Turkey and all the Eastern parts of the World.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Prayers to Saints, and Adoration of Angels.

THE Greek Church in their Prayers to Saints in Heaven, and Angels, which enjoy
the Beatifical Vision of God Almighty, differ little or nothing in Doctrine
from the Roman; which we shall best understand by that which they call, The
Orthodox Confession of the Anatolian Church, in which we have these words.

We crave the intercession of Saints with God, (...)
that they should pray for us, and we invoke them not as Gods, but as his
friends, who serve him, and praise him, and adore him; and we crave their
assistance, not as if they were able to assist us by their own Power, but that
they should procure for us the Grace of God by means of their administrations.

They say farther.

But some will say that they do not know nor understand our Prayers. (...)
To whom we answer, that they of themselves do not know, nor hear our Prayers,
but only by Revelation, and the Divine Grace which God has richly bestowed on
them, they both understand and hear us.

In like manner we invoke Angels that they would mediate for us by their
Ministry with God, (...)
wherefore they offer to the Majesty of God the Prayers, Alms, and good works
of men.

And farther they say, That as God commanded the Friends of Job Job 42. 8.
that they should bring their Sacrifices and offer them for themselves, and
that Job should pray for them, for that him God would accept; so we bringing
our Sacrifices of Prayer to the Footstool of the Throne of Grace, have them
there tendered to the Majesty of God by the Saints and Angels his accepted and
beloved Ministers.

Who sees not here that the Greeks have learned the distinction of (...) and
(...)out of the Roman Schools; of whose Doctrine (as we have said before) they
have extracted the Principles by their studies and Conversation in Italy, which
is the sole Gymnasion and Library of their knowledge and learning; for in most
points of Controversy, where the Patriarchal Authority is not concerned, they
exactly concur with the sense of the Roman Schools. But yet I do not find that
their Prayers to Saints and Angels are so frequently enjoined as they are in
the Roman Offices and Rosaries, but scattered here and there in their
Breviaries, of which, for satisfaction of the Reader, I have made some
Collections.

Forms of Prayers to Saintsused in the Greek Church.

Holy Martyrs, (...)
who have stoutly fought, and are Crowned, pray to the Lord to have mercy on
our souls.

Holy Apostles beseech the merciful God to grant remission of sins to our
souls. (...)


These following are short Prayers appointed to be learned by Children, and are
commonly the Morning and Evening Devotions of private persons.

All holy Lady, (...)
'Mother of God, pray for us Sinners.

All Celestial Powers of Angels and Archangels, (...)
pray for us Sinners.

Holy John, (...)
Prophet, and Forerunner, and Baptist of our Lord Jesus Christ, pray for us
Sinners.

Holy Orthodox Apostles, (...)
Prophets and Martyrs, and all Saints, pray for us Sinners.

O sacred Ministers of God, (...)
our Fathers, Shepherds, and Teachers of the World, pray for us Sinners.

O invincible, (...)
indissolvable and Divine Power of the Reverend and life-giving Cross forsake
us not Sinners.

These particulars shall serve for instances, that in the Greek Church Prayers
are made to Saints in the same manner as in the Roman.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Greek Islands in the AEgean Sea, now called the Arche-Pelago, and the
devision there of Religion between the Greek and Latin Churches.

AMongst the many Isles in the Arche-pelago, since the Conquest of Candia by
the Turks, none remains subjected to Christian Government but only Tino, which
belongs to the Venetians. Tenedos, Myteline, Scio, Negropont, and some others,
are thought worthy of the Fortresses and defense of the Ottoman Sword. The
others lie open and ungarded, and are the possession and prize of every Pyrate
and Rover, but yet, according to the last Peace concluded between Venice and
the G. Signor, they are all annexed to the Dominions of the Turk, to whom they
pay a yearly Harach or Poll-money, which is four Dollars per head, whereas in
the time of the War they paid the same both to the Venetians and the Turk.

The Turk looking on the Inhabitants of those Isles like out-lying Deer lodged
without pale or defense, and rather such, who afford harbor and succor to
Pirates and Enemies, than strength or Riches to the Borders of his Empire, has
of late entered into consultation for dispeopling those Islands, and
transporting the Inhabitants into more secure Enclosures, where they may render
greater benefit and improvement to their Grand Landlord, than they do at
present; but as yet no resolution has been taken therein.

The Greeks are greatly divided in their Religion, and consequently alienated
each from other in their humor and inclinations, some acknowledging the
Patriarchal See at Constantinople, some at Rome. It is not to be doubted but
that the Romanists possessing most of Wit and Money, are always too hard for
the Ignorance and Poverty of the Greeks; by which, and the convenient shortness
of the Latin Mass, they draw many of the Greeks from attendance on their own
tedious Services to better ordered and more easy Devotions; though as yet they
cannot persuade them to renounce their obedience to their Church and Patriarch.
Moreover whilst the Venetians exercised an Authority over many of these
Islands, which was before they were constrained to render them to the Turk, the
Church of Rome enjoyed an opportunity of fixing a deep Foundation for that
Religion, and thereby so far encroached into the possessions of the Greeks,
that their Religion remained under great discouragements, their Rites being
suppressed in all the Isles of that Sea for want of protection and redress of
their aggrievances, until the Greek Bishop, or Metropolite of Scio, called
Ignatius Neochori, in the year 1664, being a person of an active Spirit, and
reported by his Adversaries to be of a proud and haughty disposition, inclined
to Covetousness, and versed in crafty and subtle Arts, endeavored to buckle
with the Power and Jurisdiction of the Latins. To effect which, he at first
cunningly suggested to the Turks the danger of that people by reason of their
nearness and affinity with the Venetians, and constant correspondence with the
Enemies of the Turk, hoping that this Argument might be sufficient to procure
the bannishment of all the Roman Clergy, and that others of the same Sect,
terrifyed with the thoughts of loosing their Estates, and the Country in which
they were born, might be forced to an adherence to this Church, and to an
acknowledgment of the Metropolite's Jurisdiction. To effect which Design the
better, the Bishop associated to himself a Greek Priest, a man of no mean
Capacity, and well practiced in the Turkish Law and Language, and so well
acquainted with the great men amongst the Turks, that the Latins gave him the
Nickname of Papas Mustapha. To help which design forward, the Greek Church at
Scio happened at that time to be indebted to certain great men about the Court,
to whom speedy payment was promised with an unconscionable Interest, if the
Revenue of the Latin Diocese were annexed to the Greek Jurisdiction; with
which benefit these Unbelievers being moved, and valuing more the advantage of
the Money than the justice of the Cause, obtained by their power and interest
at Court, a Command to this effect.

First, That the Latin Bishop at Scio for the future should have no farther
Jurisdiction over those of the Latin Church; but that all should depend in
that Island on the Metropolite. 2. That no Matrimony, or other Ecclesiastical
Rite, should be celebrated without particular License of the Greek Metropolite.
3. That no Priest of the Latin Church should be ordained without his License.
4. That the Metropolite, by virtue of his Command, should take possession of
the greatest part of the Churches which belonged to the Latins. 5. That the
Latin Bishop should render an Account to the Metropolite of all the Proffits
that he has made since his entry into that Diocese; and having surrendered and
made satisfaction, he should depart and commit the Charge of his Flock to the
Government of the Greek Metropolite. These matters being of high concernment,
and seeming intolerable to the Latins at Scio, they with great Fury
unanimously resolved to loose or hazard all, rather than to subject themselves
to the Tyranny of another Church. Wherefore the Bishop, with ten others
appointed by public Election to attend him, departed toward Adrianople,
venting many menacing Speeches and flourishes of their Power to be revenged on
the Greek Metropolite. These took their Journey by way of Constantinople, to
consult with others of the same Religion, and to try in what manner the
Patriarch stood affected to these Practices. The Metropolite on the other side
thought it not time to sit longer quiet, and therefore speedily hastened to
Adrianople, well knowing that the first complaint has the advantage, and
commonly takes the best impression with the Turks; to obtain which, he proceeds
directly, and arrives before his Adversaries; during which time he so
dexterously represented the evil inclinations of the Latin Church to the
Welfare of the Ottoman Empire, their Correspondence with Rome and Venice, their
Designs to extirpate the Greek Church from Scio, and make the whole Island
Latin, toward which, by force of great Collections of Money from several
parts of Christendom, they had made so considerable a progress, that by reason
of the poverty of the Greeks they had bought the best part of those Churches,
which for many years and Ages had been appropriated to their Rites and
Religion: To which Insinuations, and others of the like nature, the Turks lent
an Ear with singular attention, who have always found, That the differences
amongst Christians have ever concluded with gain and benefit unto them;
especially to the Chimacam, called Kara-Mustapha Pasha, a person well qualified
to manage an Intrigue of this kind to the best advantage, blessed and welcomed
the opportunity, designing to improve the business to the best that he was
able. And therefore, as if the Accusation and Crime had been no less than
Treasonable on the side of the Latins, he dispatched Commands in a Turkish
Fury to bring them to Constantinople. The Bishop being advertised hereof,
whilst he was on his way to the Court, made the more haste in By-ways, lest he
should fall into the hands of the Turkish Officers: Howsoever, as soon as they
arrived at Adrianople, as men already convicted, were committed to a severe
Imprisonment, lying for the space of fifteen days and nights with one Leg in
the Stocks, and the other in Chains. But this rigor was not exercised on the
Latins in favor to the Greek Cause, but only as the most expedite means to
extort Money, that so they might both buy their Liberty, and obtain that the
Trial of their Cause might be referred to the legal and ordinary course of
Justice. The Chimacam had likewise well squeezed the Greeks and extracted from
them no less than 4000 Dollars on promise of favor to their Cause and
Interest, by punishing their Adversaries; in which, conceiving that he had
already moderately complied and well deserved the Money from the Greeks he
proceeded to exact other 7000 Dollars from the Latins; and so, being by this
time indifferently disposed toward both Parties, he appointed a day for
judgment of the Cause; in the Method of which Proceedings, and in Conclusion of
this business, we shall find him to act with the same equallity as he has done
in all Affairs, since he has been promoted to the charge of Supreme Vizier.


The day being come, and both sides appearing, the Greek Papas inveighed
furiously against the disaffection of the Latins to the Ottoman Empire; and
that for his own part, though he wore the Cross, yet he could fight under the
Halfmoon, with suchlike terms of flattery and dissimulation. Those on the other
side vindicated themselves of those Aspersions, making professions of their
quietness and obedience to the Power under which they lived; and next proved
the ancient possessions of their Churches, most of which they enjoyed by virtue
of their Capitulations, and the rest by Title of purchase, confirmed by a long
tract of time, beyond the term of any prescription. The Chimacam having been
mollified by both parties, gladly carried an even and moderate hand toward
both; and therefore, as inclining to neither party, adjudged some of those
Churches to the Latins; and as if the Title to the others had been more
intricate and different, he referred the determination thereof to the Pasha and
Kadi of Scio; giving the Greeks a Command underhand, and privately, that what
Churches had not remained in the possession of the Latins for above 60 years,
should, notwithstanding all Reasons to the contrary be adjudged again to the
right of the Greeks. And in this manner both parties setting forward on their
Journey as contented and victorius to Scio, with equal hopes of success; being
there arrived, soon appeared and joined issue together before the Pasha. But
the Metropolite producing his Command, of which his Adversaries had no
knowledge or suspicion, Sentence was given according thereunto; whereby the
Latins were deprived of above 60 Churches. And this was the issue for that
time of this Quarrel between Christians, who in matters of Religious and
Ecclesiastical Concernments, sought Justice from the determination of Turks.

Besides this difference, A difference between the Latins and Greeks at
Jerusalem.
others have arisen of later standing and date; but we shall only instance in
that one, which is very remarkable, happening at Jerusalem about the time of
Easter, in the year 1674. when Monsieur de Nointel, Ambassador for his most
Christian Majesty to the Grand Signor, had a curiosity in his other Travels to
make a Pilgrimage to the Holy Sepulcher, which having been anciently in the
hands of the Latins, at least in equal possession of both one and the other,
was now demanded by the Greeks as their right, and as the true and only lawful
Guardians of that place; the which Title they took the boldness to assert, not
only by words but by force and violence. For some days before Easter, when the
Latins were making their usual preparations to adorn the Sepulcher, the Greek
Priests assaulted them with Clubs, with which the Latins being equally
provided, there followed such a skirmish in the Church, maintained with zeal
and fury, that several both of one side and the other were grievously wounded,
and one of the Greeks killed; but (as one of the Friars of Jerusalem then
present told me,) that he received not his mortal wound from them, but that he
starved himself, obstinately refusing all sustenance, for no other Reason than
that his blood might be required of the Latins; which he imagined to have been
of so great import, as would cause the Latins to be expelled the Holy Land,
being desirous in this good Cause to suffer death, which he esteemed a
Martyrdom for revenge of his Religion and Country. The cause which moved the
Greeks to revive their pretense to the custody of the Holy Sepulcher, with so
much resolution and fervor, is diversely reported. Some say that Panaioti the
Viziers Interpreter, a Christian of the Greek Church, had through the favor of
the Vizier obtained a Hattersheriff for investing the Greeks solely in
possession of the Sepulcher; the which he concealed, and laid by him during his
life time, well considering the opposition and trouble he should encounter by
putting it into execution, from the union of all the Representatives of the
Christian Princes against him; and how far a Contention of this nature might
proceed to the ruin of his life and fortune, at least of his quiet, he was too
prudent and cautious to make the Experiment; but rather chose to conceal it
until the time of his death, when he bequeathed it for a Legacy to the honor
and benefit of his Church. Others say, That Sultan Morat had granted this
Hattersheriff, which at the intercession of all the Christian Ambassadors, had
until now been suspended and lay dormant, being only revived by this Quarrel
between the Latin Fathers and the Greek Kaloirs; for the Vizier, to correct (as
is judged.) the insolence and presumption of the Latins, upon the great
Complaints of the Greeks, renewed the rigor of the ancient Hattersheriff, the
which Dositheus, Patriarch of Jerusalem, an active, bold, and stiring man, put
into execution with that briskness and zeal, as highly provoked the Latins to
an extreme heat of indignation; but their passion was little available in the
Case, whilst they wanted force to right and revenge themselves. For,
notwithstanding all the applications they could make to the G. Vizier, enforced
by the strong and prevailing Arguments of Money, and by the Instances of most
of the Christian. Ambassadors at the Court, the Vizier remained inexorable, and
not to be moved with any Entreaty or Solicitation whatsoever. And when the
English Ambassador, about August 1675. designed to make experience how
successful and powerful his Interest might prove at Court above the Addresses
of other Ministers, he was privately advised by a person of nearest intimacy to
the Public Counsels, not to move in a matter which was so ungrateful, and
which would force the Vizier, against his Will, to give him the first denial of
what he had demanded from him. In this manner for some years this business
remained, in which interim, Addresses were made to the Pope at Rome, and to the
Courts of Christian Princes, for a Remedy; but no Interest of Money or Favor
could incline the Vizier Ahmet Pasha, during his Life and Government, to alter
his Sentence or Judgment in the Case; but now Kara-Mustapha Pasha succeeding to
the Government, a recovery may probably be expected, in case those Arguments of
Money and Presents be applied, which had little power on the resolution and
integrity of the Vizier deceased.

The Greeks of the Islands are men of robustious and well-proportioned Bodies,
The disposition of the Greek Islanders.
strong and fit for War; for which reason the Turks employ them for Levents, or
Soldiers for Sea-service; but being Christians they deny them the privilege
of exercising Arms at Land. They are a people extremely well contented with
their condition, and would not change their Possessions on their little Rocks
and Isles, for all the Antic Glory of the Grecian Empire, where they pipe and
dance promiscuously, Men and Women together, in despite of Enemies, or the
double Duty and Tax which they paid in time of War to the Venenetians on one
side, and to the Turks on the other. But since Peace between the G. Signor and
the Venetian is concluded, all the Isles of the Arche-pelago are solely
allotted to the Dominion of the Turk, except the Isle of Tino (as we have said
before) which by Articles is reserved to the Venetians, who have there a
Proveditor and Castle to defend it. The other Isles are open, having no other
Fortresses than their little Chapels and Oratories; for which cause they are
much infested by Corsaires, or Free-booters, under the Colors of Ligorn,
Malta, Mayorca, etc. to whom these Islanders are so perfectly subject in all
duty and service, that their goods are liable to their rapine, and the bodies
of their Wives and Daughters to their lusts. Notwithstanding which, these poor
people rejoice in their homes, and can dispense with all inconveniences, rather
than abandon their beloved rocks; so powerful is that affection which every one
bears to his own Country: But the entertainment which these Islands afford the
Corsaires, has so far moved the indignation of the Turk, that (as we have said
before) he has more than once taken a resolution entirely to depopulate all
the open or unfortified Islands, by transporting the people to some places on
the Continent, where their industry and labors might bring them more profit
and advantage; but as yet the design has not succeeded, though greatly feared
and sadly expected by that miserable people.

But in no place of the Turks Dominions do Christians enjoy more freedom in
their Religion and Estates, than on the Isle of Xio, Xio.
or Scio, to which they are entitled by an ancient Capitulation made with
Sultan Mahomet the Second, to whom they surrendered themselves, on Composition
and Articles of liberty and enjoyment of their Estates, which to this day is
maintained so faithfully, that a Turk cannot strike or abuse a Christian
without severe Correction: Here the Men wear Hats and Clothes almost after the
Spanish Mode; carry the Crucifix in procession through the Streets, and
exercise their Religion with all freedom. This Island produces the most
excellent Mastick in the World, It proceeds from the Lentiscus, which in other
parts of the world produces the like Gum.
and I think there is no place where it is so good, and so great abundance; and
herein they pay their Tribute to the G. Signor. In this place both the Greek
and Roman Religions are professed, the chief Families of the latter sort are
two, and those of considerable esteem, viz. the Monew, alias, Giustiniani, and
Borghesi; these latter are noble; but the first have been Princes: who having
in the year 1345 been sent thither from Liguria, or parts of Genoua, as
Governors, became afterward Supreme Lords of that Island; which they ruled
with absolute Authority, until the Turk approaching as near to them as
Magnasia, and having possessed himself of that Capital City, they judged their
small City incapable to resist, and therefore, like the remoter parts of
Ragusi, they addressed themselves with all humility and subjection to demand
Peace.

In honor of John Justiniani, the last Prince of that Island, I find a large
Elogium wrote by an Abbot of that name in Italian, who with several Sciotical
Expressions celebrates the fame of the quondam petty Prince of that Island,
which in our times has not gained the reputation of many wise men, whence
comes that Proverb common amongst the Greeks, (...), that is, That a wise man is
as rare amongst them, as a green Horse. Howsoever this place has stoutly
engaged amongst the other Cities and Islands in the contention of Homer's
Birth; and this Giustiniani, though derived originally from a Genoese Family,
was yet born at Scio, and was a person of more than ordinary Parts and
Abilities, if we believe that Author; who writes in Favor of Scio, and most
excellently of Giustiniani, whom he praises in this manner.

John Giustiniani, a noble Genoese, was that sacred Anchor, on whose strength
and force, the whole East laid the stress of her Fortune; at that time when
that horrible Tempest of Arms, raised by the ambition and treachery of impious
Mahomet, conspired to its Shipwreck: he was that shield, who whilst he had
life, covered the head and heart of this Empire from a shower of Asian Arrows,
which rained from a Cloud of most cruel war. At the first rumor of whose most
terrible preparations, by which Mahomet threatened to throw down the Eastern
Diadem from the Christian Head, and thereon plant the Turkish Tulbant; this
Gustiniani prepared himself to sacrifice his life in defense of the Grand
Metropolis; to which end he departed from Scio with a Squadron of Vessels, his
ancient Dominion and Inheritance, and as if the Reins of fortune had remained
in his hands, he conducted his own Fleet securely amidst 300 Sail of the
Mahometans, which pillaged the Propontis, and brought them safe to Constantine
Paleologus, to whom he offered himself an Adventurer for glory. The hopes of
Paleologus being revived with this succor, and finding none to whom he might
commit the defense of the Royal City, but to Giustiniani, he entirely
recommended all unto his faith, courage and conduct. And this Author afterward
proceeds, That the Turks being astonished at so many repulses, at length
discovered that this manly defense proceeded not from the valor of effeminate
Greeks, but that Giustiniani was the Achilles of those Walls, and the living
Palladium of that City: but in the heat of this storm (as this Author says)
our Giustiniani was slain, which turned the fortune of the day, and with the
fall of this eminent person fell the Courage of the Defendants, and this
Imperial City into the hands of a new Tyrant. And so much one of this Country,
a natural born Sciote, writes in honor of his ancient Prince and Compatriot.

In this manner those many Isles in the Arche-Pelago are divided between the
Greek and the Latin Churches, though more follow the Rites of the Greek than
of the other; and as we have said, lying open and unguarded, are subject to the
rapine and violence of the strongest, having no power over the fruits of their
labors, if found out and seized by some unconscionable Pyrate: by which it
appears how happy those Isles are which are governed by good Laws, and defended
by their own force, under the auspicious conduct of a valiant and watchful
Prince. It has been the project of several ingenious and active persons of
Quality, who were Enemies to the Turk, to unite all those Isles in a
Confederacy or League together, obliging themselves to be assistant each to
other, in the repulse of any Robbers or Foreign Enemies, which might undertake
any thing to the prejudice of their public and common welfare. And this, as I
am informed, was principally designed by the Marquess Fleuri, a Savoyard, who
crused and traversed over all the Greek Islands in a Ship of 60 piece of
Ordnance, and armed with 500 men, in which progress he made singular
Observations of the nature, situation, Harbors, commodities, natural strength
and people of every Island: Of the latter of which having made an exact
enquiry, it was brought to my hands by a person who had a familiar acquaintance
with this Marquess, which I judging to be a Curiosity worthy observation, I
have inserted here for better understanding the present state and condition of
these Isles.

The Number of the Inhab^^ants of the several Islands in the Arche-Pelago,
which pay Tribute, or Harach, to the Turks.

has souls in all
San Torino 8000 Policandro 1500 Nio 1000 Sichino 2000 Nanfi 1000 Estoupalia
1500 Nixoro 1500 Pattino or Patmos 6000 Andro 15000 Zia 4000 Termia 3000 Serfou
2000 Sifanto 3000 Argentiera 1500 Milo 7000 Especii 1000 Idra 1000 Egena 2000
Scopolo 5000 Sciladroi 600 SanGeorgio Deschiro 3000 Psara 800 71400 has souls
Naxia 7000 Nicaria 1000 Xamos 10000 Parisi 10000 Antiparisi 800 Micono 2000
Sira 3000 Aijo Strati 2000 Samatrachi 800 Schiaro 1500 Simo 2000 Zaora 3000
Tasso 3000 Cazo 5000 Scarpanto 4000 Scarpantoni 2000 Nissero 3000 Piscopi 4000
Morgo 4000 Lero 3500 Lindo 2000 73600

All which Islands make together 145000 Men, Women, and Children; which though
I do not account for so exact a computation, as if the people had been polled
head by head; yet it is such an estimate as has been made on the places
respectively by the people themselves. In many of these Islands the G. Signor
did formerly put in a Kadi, or an Aga, to be their Rulers, who administered
Justice to them in the best manner he could; but in regard these Turks were
oftentimes surprised and carried away by the Corsaires, few or none would
accept of the Employment; in which case the people of the Islands respectively
make choice of three or four of the richest and wisest Sages amongst, them to
be their (...), as they call them, or Governors, to whom they refer all their
Causes in Civil Differences, and who are the Representatives of the Island, and
gather in the Poll-money, getting it ready against the time that the Turkish
Galleys, and Captain Pasha, come to demand it, which they yearly do. But in
case any person be guilty of a Capital Fault which deserves death, he is
reserved till the arrival of the Commander in chief of the Galleys, who
executes justice upon him. These Governors are chosen yearly by the people, or
they confirm the old ones; which is most commonly done, for amongst them are
few who are ambitious of Rule and Sovereignty. In some of these Islands are
found the most expert Diverse under Water in the World, the best of which are of
Samos and of Simo. One of which I saw employed in very cold Weather, on
occasion of an English Boat, which was sunk by a Ships side laden with Tin and
Lead, in the Port of Smyrna, in about eight fathom of Water, who for want of
heat, rather than breath, the Weather being very cold in the month of January,
was forced to dive four times to fix four Ropes to the Boat; two of which he
hooked within the Rings of the Head and Stern, and two at each side in the
mid-ships; which he acted very dexterously, not missing at any time of that
which he went about. Upon discourse with him afterward he told me, That he was
born at Simo, where at the Age of three or four years, his Father brought him
to the Sea, and taught him to swim, and then to dive, which by degrees he so
well learned, with other young Companions, that their common practice was to
try who could stay longest under the Water, in which they are very emulous to
exceed, because it is the sole trade of their poor Island to cut Spunges, and
he that is the most expert therein gets the handsomest Wife, and the best
Portion. This man farther informed me, That he never could stay under Water
when his Belly was full; but that in a Morning, or at any time of the day
fasting, in warm Weather, and in a calm Sea, he could stay three quarters of an
hour under Water. He never heard of Spunges dipped in Oil to hold in their
mouths, as we vulgarly report, nor used they any other help, than before they
dived into the Water to fill their Lungs with as much Air as they could draw
in. If they staid long under Water they felt a pain in their Ears, and many
times blood issued thence, and from their Noses; their Eyes were always open,
so that they could almost see as well under as above the Water; and indeed I
observed that his Eyes were glazed and burnt with the Sea, that they looked
like Glass, or the Eyes of Fish. And this shall serve at present for what we
have to relate of the Grecian Islands.

CHAP. XX.
Of other Matters and Tenants held by the Greek Church, not comprised in the
premises, and of particular Customs amongst them.

THEY earnestly deny the procession of the Holy Ghost from God the Son, but
only from the Father through the Son, which they argue with more subtlety than
usually they do any other Controverted Point in Religion.

They seem to retain something which savours of ancient Gentilism, particularly
their Belief of a certain holiness in some Fountains, attributing miraculous
operations to Waters, and by reason of the favor of some Saint, to whom the
same is dedicated, in the same manner as the Pagans did, who believed their
Fountains to be guarded by some Nymph or Deity to whom they were consecrated.

When they lay the Foundation of a new Building, the Priest comes and blesses
the Work and Workmen with Prayer, for which they have an Office in their
Liturgy, which is very laudable and becoming Christians. But when the Priest is
departed, the Workmen have another piece of their own Devotion to perform,
which they do by killing a Cock, or a Sheep, the Blood of which they bury under
the first stone they lay: It is not always, but very frequently practiced, in
which they imagine that there is some lucky Magic or some spell to attract
good fortune to the Threshold; they call it, (...) or Sacrifice, and therefore
I believe that this is a piece of ancient Heathenism.

They think it not lawful to eat Blood, or things strangled, though they are
not very nice or scrupulous in the examination of what Provisions are set
before them.

The Apochryphal Books they esteem for Apocryphe, and of no greater Authority
than they are reputed for in England, but yet they hold that some Traditions
are of equal Authority with the written word.

The Doctrine of Justification by faith or good works is not a Problem
controverted amongst them, they are not as yet it seems so far proceeded in
Polemick Learning, but believe that both are very necessary to salvation, and
that he whose faith produces good works, outdoes him whose life is buried in
notions, and arrests it self in a bare disputation. They believe Faith to be an
active and prolifick Grace, and that which cannot remain in idleness, but must
operate and employ that heavenly heat it receives from above; but whether our
Justification be beholding to our Faith, or to our Works, or to both together,
they leave the Query to the discussion of such, who have more leisure, and
money, and perhaps more curiosity than the ordinary Monks of Greece.

Those who have a Malice or Quarrel to any particular person, do oftentimes
bring the breadth and length in Thread or Wood of him, against whom they
entertain Malice, to a Carpenter or Mason, who is ready to lay the Foundation
of a house, the which for a little money is buried under one of the first
stones; after which they say the person dies, or at least macerates away: as
the Thread or Wood decays, which is a most certain piece of Magic of the
ancient Gentilism.

They really believe, that on or about the 15th day of August, which is the day
that they celebrate the Assumption of our Blessed Lady, that all Streams in the
World retire into Egypt, to do homage and obeisance to that Grand River of
Nylus, which is the cause, as they say, of the innundation of that Country. And
of this persuasion they are, because they perceive, that in August the Springs
and Rivers are every where low, and the Nilus full and overflowing its Banks,
which they attribute as a blessing to that River, and its Country, where the
Savior of the World and his Blessed Mother were secured from the Malice and
Treachery of impious Herod. And this fond fancy the Vulgar have taken up, not
considering that the Nilus overflows in June and July, and that the Waters
decrease in August.

I have now done with the History of the Greek Church, to which I shall only
add this remarkable passage in the Conclusion; which, though it be a matter not
more relating to the Greeks than other Christians, or the Turks themselves, yet
treating here of the Oriental Churches, it may be some elucidation of the
premises, to give the Reader an instance, whereby he may understand how
constant the minds of men, living in the East, are to their Traditions, and to
keep up their fancy to any ancient superstition; which particular is
undoubtedly true, being transmitted to me by a worthy and ingenious person,
residing at Aleppo. It is well known how much the Telesmatical Doctrine, which
was anciently the wisdom, or rather folly of the Learned, prevailed in the
Eastern Quarters of the World; in imitation of which, on the 15th of April,
1671, there was brought into Aleppo a little Copper-Vessel of Water, out of a
strong imagination, that it was endued with a Telesmatical Virtue, to draw
thereunto a sort of Birds which feed on Locusts, commonly called by the Arabs,
Smirmar. I have seen them every Summer about the parts of Constantinople and
Smyrna; they are about the bigness of a Starling, and very like it in the Bill
and Legs, but of various Colors on the Head, Breast, Back, and Wings. This
Bird (as they report) has so shrill a note, that the very sound of it will
strike down a thousand Locusts at a time, and are such Acridophagi, that when
they come in great numbers are sufficient to devour and destroy those vast
swarms of Locusts, which in some years consume all the green Corn, Grass,
Herbs, and Plants in the Country, and turn the hopes and expectation of a
plentiful Spring into a barren Autumn, and a Winters Famine; so that to be
freed of this Plague to which the parts about Aleppo are greatly subject, no
more happy or easy remedy could be found than something endued with a power
attracting such beneficial and useful Guests; to perform which nothing was
esteemed more effectual than a certain Water fetched (as they say) from a Pool
in Samarcand, or rather from a holy Well of the Arabs, called Zimzam, the which
Water was not to be carried under any Arch, unless the immediate Arch of
Heaven. This being the Opinion of the Inhabitants of Aleppo, the Water was sent
for and brought into the City with great pomp and solemnity. The procession was
made at the Southern Damascus Gate, every Religion and Sect attending in their
Habits, with the most formal Devotion imaginable, according to their different
Rites and Ceremonies, every Nation bearing before them the respective Badges of
their profession, viz. The Law, the Gospel, and the Alchoran, with Songs in
their mouths according to their several Religions. The Mahometans surpassed all
the others in the Gallantry of their Streamers, their Prophets Banners being
near about a hundred in number, were carried by sheghs, who bellowed most
hideously, till they foamed at the mouth, out-doing themselves with the violent
agitation of their Spirits, being of the Order of Kadri, whose lives and
Institutions we have declared in the Ottoman State. A Dispute happened, before
they entered the City, between the Christians and Jews for precedence, which
they challenged on the score of Antiquity, but after a little striking, and a
greater Avania afterward, it was determined that the Christians were the
better men, and paid most for the exercise of their Religion. The concourse of
all sorts of people was exceeding great, and the Pageantry seven hours in
acting; for the Water was drawn up over the Gate, and over all covered
passages, and finally over the Castle Walls, where in a Mosch it was lodged
with all reverence and devotion.

This kind or species of Birds which resort to this Country, are, according to
the Opinion of all Sects, drawn thither by the virtue of this Water; which
though they have nothing of effectual virtue in them, yet this fancy is so
strongly rooted not only in the Vulgar people, but also with those of greater
quality, that it seems to be a durable remain of the Sabean Superstition.

In this manner, Reader, I have finished this short discourse of the Greek
Church, what is to be amended, or added hereunto, is a work of time, and worthy
the pains and consideration of curious and ingenious Travelers into those
Parts.

FINIS.
THE PRESENT STATE OF THE Armenian CHURCH: CONTAINING
The Tenants, Form, and Manner of Divine Worship in that CHURCH, 1678.

By PAUL RICAUT, Esquire.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey, at the Mitre near Temple Bar, 1679.

READER.
THIS Discourse touching the Armenian Church, may for diverse Reasons probably
delight thee. First, because few have wrote thereof, and I think none so
distinctly as I have done. Secondly, because it is a Christian Church far
remote from us, and therefore their Customs, and Doctrines may be the more
acceptable to the curious. Thirdly, because their Learning and Tenants are
confined within a Language peculiar to that Nation, and known to few of the
Western Christians: Add likewise to this difficulty an Universal Ignorance in
the Armenian Clergy, who are neither very willing to learn themselves, nor
very apt to instruct others. So that what I have here briefly delivered, is the
effect of a difficult Enquiry, and the small fruit of much Labor; in
whatsoever therefore I come short of an exact account of the Armenian Doctrine
and Practice, be pleased (Courteous Reader) to pardon and compassionate the
ignorance and inability of my Teachers, and the difficulty of my Task; for it
seems unreasonable to exact more learning from the Scholar, than what he has
been able to copy from his Master.

Farewell.
THE PRESENT STATE OF THE ARMENIAN CHURCH.
CHAP. I.
Of the Armenian Church in general.

THE Armenian Nation being much dispersed in many Countries of the Turks,
through the encouragement of Trade and Traffic, to which they are much
addicted, I have had the opportunity of conversation and acquaintance with many
of them, by which means, and that curiosity and desire of knowledge which
always guides me, I have penetrated as far as my leisure and abilities would
permit me, into the Humors, Customs, and especially into the Religion of this
People.

It will not be to our purpose, to deduce their lineage from its original, or
recount the various successes of their Princes in past times, or their martial
actions and fortunes against the Romans. It is sufficient as to their Secular
and Temporal Estates to describe them, as men naturally of healthy, strong, and
robustious Bodies, their Countenances commonly grave, their Features well
proportioned, but of a melancholy and Saturnine air: On the contrary, their
Women are commonly ill-shaped, long-nosed, and not one of a thousand so much as
tolerably handsome. The men are in their humors covetous and fordid to a high
degree, heady, and obstinate, hardly to be persuaded to any thing of Reason;
being in most things of a dull and stupid apprehension, unless in Merchandise
and matters of gain, and in that they cannot or will not understand other than
what is agreeable to their advantage. I have never read or heard of any amongst
them famous for Poetry or Romantic Fancies; or that they were of late years
inclined to the Mathematics, or any other Learning; but such as is their diet,
which consists of such things as send up gross fumes to the head, such is their
temper and genius. The Turks give them the name of Bokegees, and the Jews
esteem them to have been of the ancient Race of the Amalekites, being a People
whom they envy, because they will not easily be cheated by them in their
dealings: Howsoever, I have known some of these men, who have received their
Education in Italy, to be well accomplished, and men of an acute understanding,
and pleasing in their behavior. So that some persons, who have traveled
Armenia, ascribe this heaviness of Complexion to the air of their Country,
which is imprisoned in the vast Woods of Mulberry-trees, and thickened by the
Vapors of their Fens and Marshes, and Winds from the Caspian Sea; to which
they add those ungrateful steams which proceed from the Caldrons wherein they
boil their Silkworms; which as they prove noxious, and in time deadly to those
who are employed about them, so do they infuse into the air so malignant a
fume, as even enters into the Veins of men, and possesses them with a strange
stupidity and unactiveness of soul.

Their Country was conquered in the year 1515, by Selimus the First, and
annexed to the Ottoman Dominions, under whose Tyranny and Oppression we are to
consider the afflictions of that Christian Church. Armenia, whilst subjected to
the Roman Empire, was one and the same Church with the Grecian, maintaining the
same Doctrine, and acknowledging the patriarch of Constantinople for their
Primate and head of their Church, to whom the Council of Calcedon assigned it,
as part of his Province and Diocese, until that afterward differences in
Government, and vicissitude of things arising, have divided them one from the
other in their Doctrine and Discipline.

CHAP. II.
Of their Patriarchs, and Government in the Church.

THeir Church is ruled by four Patriarchs, the chiefest of which had formerly
his Residence at Sebastia in Armenia, but now by those Privileges which the
King of Persia has indulged unto them, beyond the Immunities of the Turks, is
removed, and abides at Etchmeasin a principal Monastery near Rivan in Persia.
The second has his abode at Sis in Armenia minor, not far from Canshahar,
sixteen days journey from Etchmeasin Eastward, near Candakar. The third abides
at Canshahar. The fourth patriarch lives at Achtamar. The which four Patriarchs
govern all the Armenian Church, independent of each other, though the priority
of honor and precedence is given to the Patriarch of Etchmeasin, to whom the
others have recourse in all matters of difficulty and Counsel, and the presence
and concurrence of these four, either in person or by their Substitutes, is
necessary to the Constitution or Ordination of a Priest, which is performed as
among us by imposition of hands.

It is true, that at Constantinople, and at Jerusalem, there are those who are
called Armenian Patriarchs, but they are titular only, made to please and
content the Turks: who have judged it necessary and agreeable to the Armenian
Faith, or rather to their own, that patriarchs should remain in those places;
and therefore have enjoined them to constitute such under that notion; by which
means, the Armenian Church maintaining their Representatives at that place,
they may always know from whom they may exact the money and Presents at a new
Investiture, and may charge on him all those Avanias, or false pretenses, which
they find most agreeable to their own advantage: Otherwise, I say, these
Patriarchs are but titular, and are in reality no other than Deputies and
Suffragans of the Patriarch, as are those at Smyrna or Angora, where Trade has
convocated great numbers of the Armenian Nation; or rather, they may be more
properly called Bishops under those Patriarchs, having the name of Martabet,
which in their Language signifies a Superintendent, or Overseer of the Church.
A married person, whilst married, cannot be preferred to this dignity, though
afterward his Wife dying he may be capable thereof. The Patriarchs have for
their maintenance some Revenues in Land, which is augmented by the voluntary
Contributions of the People, who every Sunday and Holy Day bestow something of
their Alms, either more or less, according to their devotion and ability: for
whenever the Church is full, they make three several Collections; the first
for Jerusalem; the second for Etchmeasin, and the third for the Church in which
they are; and these rounds of the Basin never fail; and sometimes a fourth is
ordered on some emergent occasion; especially if strangers be observed to
attend the Ceremony, from whom they expect extraordinary liberality. And in
this kind of begging they are so importunate in some poor Churches, that when I
have been my self present, I have scarce had time to disengage my hand from my
Pocket, so nimbly the turns went about, and so many Briefs for repair of poor
Churches and distressed Brethren. But besides these Collections, the Duties are
great which are paid for the Ordinances of the Church, as Baptism, Marriage,
Burials, etc. only Confession and the Communion are freed from Charge, or such
Exactions: for all others there is no set price, but men are obliged to pay
according to their abilities, and the bargain is driven as hard, and with as
many words, and as much noise, as this Nation does usually practice when they
sell their Silk, or any other Commodity. It was before the English Nation at
Smyrna had purchased their Coemetery, or place of burial for their dead, that
some of our people were buried in the Armenian Churchyard, but the price of
six foot of ground was so hardly obtained, that a whole Field might have been
purchased at a cheaper rate, than a narrow Grave. I have known a poor Armenian
Servant could not be admitted to burial, until his friends had paid 30 or 40
Dollars for the ground, together with the Offices and Ceremonies for the dead.
And in this manner the Clergy gain their maintenance, who are notwithstanding
poor and miserably ignorant.

Their Fashions and Customs are agreeable to the people of the East, or those
amongst whom they live, whether Turks or Persians. They account it a sin to eat
Hares, and their Flesh is almost as abominable to them, as Swines-flesh to a
Jew or Turk. I have asked them the Reason for it; to which they replied, that a
Hare was a melancholy Creature, and therefore unwholsom; besides it was
accounted unlucky, and portending evil to any man who met one; and moreover
that the Female was monthly menstruous and unclean: but how they can make this
good, or where, or how they learned or observed so much, I never could
understand from them.

CHAP. III.
Of Etchmeasin.

THIS Patriarchal Seat is called vulgarly by the name of Etchmeasin, but more
usually in the parts of Turkey by the denomination of Changlee-Chilse, or the
Church with Bells, having a privilege from the Sultan to use them, which is
allowed in no other place (that I have heard of) unless in Moldavia, Valachia,
and Mount Athos. It is also called Ouch Chilse, or the three Churches, because
of the three Churches which are there built in a Triangle; the first of which
(as we have said) is this Etchmeasin; the second Rupsameh; and the third
Gayeneh. The Armenians report, That these three Churches are founded on three
Rocks, placed in a triangular form, under which was a strange hollowness, or
Cavity, replete in the time of Gentilism and Idolatry, with the voices of
Prophetic Spirits or Ghosts, which gave Answers to all Questions that were
made to them, in the same manner as the Oracles of Delphos, or Jupiter Haman,
until such time as Jesus Christ, intending to have his Name worshipped there,
descended from Heaven on that place, and taking his Cross on which he suffered,
struck one blow therewith on each Rock, with which they sunk into the Ground,
and thereby the Diabolical Spirits were displaced; for the word Etchmeasin
signifies one blow or stroke, and there these three Churches were founded,
which are the highest in esteem amongst the Armenians. They have a large
History of the other two Churches called Rupsameh and Gayeneh, wrote by one
Acutanghios, which remains amongst the Registers of Etchmeasin, being to this
purpose: In the time of Dioclesian the Emperor, when a violent Persecution
arose against the Christians at Rome, seventy Virgins, which had taken a
Religious Vow upon them, were by Divine Inspiration directed to the Eastern
parts of the World, of which Rupsameh and Gayeneh, two Sisters and Daughters of
Gohetea, (for so they call their Father) a noble Roman, were the chief, and
arriving first at Alexandria in Egypt, they traveled thence to Jerusalem, and
so into Armenia, where at that time Tyridates governed as King, In which long
Journey forty of the seventy dying, the other thirty designed to build their
Monastery, and therein to serve God according to the Christian Faith and
Discipline. The arrival of these newcome Guests, being of the Female Sex, was
such a Novelty, as filled all that Country with the rumor thereof: and more
particularly, the incomparable beauty of Rupsameh and Gayeneh, was the whole
discourse at the Court of Tyridates; whose heart was so affected therewith,
that he sent for the two Sisters, supposing that the splendor of his Court,
and the greatness of his Authority, was sufficient to command their affections
and consent to his amorous addresses: but they having their hearts enflamed
with divine love, gave no ear to his sensual Courtship, but rather slighted and
contemned all the fine words he could use, and the large proffers he could
make; which applications were daily renewed to these Religious Virgins, until
the Prince disdaining to be so neglected, converted his love into hatred and
fury, in the heat of which he caused an Executioner to cut off both their
heads, which being done accordingly, their Corpse were exposed in the Fields, to
be entombed in the bowels of wild beasts.

This matter happened at that time, when Surp Savorich (as they call S.
Gregory, who converted Armenia to the Christian Faith) by order of Tyridates
was for preaching the Gospel cast into a most profound Dungeon, so damp and
dark that it was a Habitation for none but Bats and Serpents, where ^^r the
space of thirteen years he was most miraculously preserved by the
administration of an Angel, which daily supplied him with bread and water, than
which he received no other sustenance: during which time all the world believed
that Savorich had been long dead, and buried in his loathsome habitation; until
at length the Sister of Tyridates, called Castrovitught, being frequently
disturbed in her sleep by an Angel, which ordered her to supplicate her Brother
for the releasement of Savorich, could find no repose until she revealed the
Vision: which seeming strange, and no other at first than a melancholy Dream,
did afterward upon the trial prove true; Savorich being found alive in the
Dungeon, and strong and healthful: Notwithstanding which Miracle, and the
Petitions made in behalf of Savorich by several Chief Officers, and by his
Sister in particular, yet Tyridates having his heart hardened like Pharaoh,
refused to give license for the liberty of Savorich; which sin of obstinacy so
moved the anger of God against him, that one day appointed for a general
hunting, being in pursuit of a wild Bore, he was on a sudden transformed into
the shape of a Swine, and all his Followers into Hobgoblins and Fairies, such
as the Turks call Gin; which metamorphosis is something like that of Ulysses
and his Companions: This Judgment of God Struck all the people into such an
amazement, that they immediately resolved to free the Saint, begging him to
pray unto God to restore their King and Attendants to their former shapes of
Human Form. Savorich, or S. Gregory, being released, immediately sought for
Tyridates, and having found him, was received by him with as much grace, and in
as good a fashion, as could be expected by a person of so ill a feature; and
having prayed to God for him, both he and all his Followers were transformed
again to their natural shapes: By which Miracle all the Country of Armenia was
converted to the Christian Faith.

After this, Savorich was commanded to gather up the Bodies of Rupsameh and
Gayeneh, preserved by divine Miracle, and carry them to Etchmeasin, to which
place he was conducted by an Angel, where he buried those bodies under the two
Rocks, which are therefore now called by their Names: which place also being
the Sepulcher of Savorich has added much unto that devotion which the
Armenians bear thereunto.

Next to this place of Devotion, Virap, which was the Dungeon of Surp Savorich,
is most in esteem of any in Armenia, over which they have built a famous
monastery, which is seated in the Country of Ardashat, being two days journey
from Etchmeasin, and one from Rivan.

This Savorich, or S. Gregory, is so high in esteem amongst them, that they
take the account of their years from the time of his Preaching, and the
Conversion of that Nation to the Christian Faith, which in this present year is
reckoned to be 1128. which answers to ours of 1679.

To these Churches they commonly make their Pilgrimages, being for their
sanctity, in opinion of this people, esteemed before Jerusalem, and are
accounted so holy, that before a person can be qualified to appear in that
place, he is required to prepare himself seven years beforehand; which is
performed by a Fast or Lent of 40 days in every one of those seven years,
purposely designed for this preparation, besides the usual Fasts and Lents of
the Church, and with a sole intent to render himself worthy to receive the
benefits and endowments which are acquired by this most acceptable and holy
Pilgrimage. For they say, that he who comes thus prepared with humility and
devotion, shall have his desires satisfied in any gift, qualification, or
blessing he expects; unless it be Riches; for Money being the Mammon of this
World, is not to be conferred as a spiritual happiness. But if one desires a
Faculty in singing, dancing, or agility of body, if he desires beauty and
modesty in a Wife, wisdom, sincerity of Friends, or any thing else that is
virtuous or commendable; he shall be endued with a voice like a Seraphim, be
active as an Olympic Gamester, have a Wife as chaste as Penelope, be wife as
Solomon; and in fine, obtain any one thing which he can desire, being of good
report. But in case any one miss of these blessings, as many do who go on these
Errands (as one may well believe) and return as little improved as some of
those do whom we send to Paris, there is something in the way which interrupted
this blessing, and no doubt but the man was either not fitly prepared, or had
not Faith enough to receive the blessing.

They say farther, that some of those Pythonick Spirits, which formerly
inhabited under the cavities of these three Rocks, were permitted by Christ to
keep their Stations, with intention to make them slaves and drudges to the
Monastery; where now invisibly they wash the Dishes, sweep the House, and do
all the Offices of good Servants; so that the good Fathers take no care of
those homely services, for what is in the day fouled and disordered is by next
morning found cleansed and well disposed, by the ministry and diligence of
those careful and officious Spirits. All these things and much more is believed
by the Armenians of Etchmeasin, so easy it is to obtrude vain and
superstitious fancies on ignorant and illiterate people.

In their Monasteries the whole Psalter of David is read over every 24 hours;
but in the Cities and Parochial Churches it is otherwise observed. For the
Psalter is divided into eight divisions, and every division into eight parts;
at the end of every one of which is said the Gloria Patri; and Filio, etc.
Their manner of Worship is performed after the Eastern fashion, by prostrating
their bodies and kissing the ground three times (which the Turks likewise
practice in their Prayers.) At their first entrance into the Church they
uncover their heads, and corss themselves three times, but afterward cover
their heads, and sit cross-leg'd on Carpets, after the manner of the Turks. The
most part of their public Divine Service they perform in the morning before
day, which is very commendable, and I have been greatly pleased to meet
hundreds of Armenians in a Summer morning, about Sunrising, returning from
their Devotions at the Church, wherein perhaps they had spent two hours before,
not only on Festival but on ordinary days of work: in like manner they are very
devout on Vigils to Feasts, and Saturday Evenings, when they all go to Church,
and returning home perfume their Houses with Incense, and adorn their little
Pictures with Lamps.

CHAP. IV.
The Confession of Faith in the Armenian Church.

THEY allow and accept the Articles of Faith according to the Council of Nice,
and are also acquainted with that which we call the Apostles Creed, which
likewise they have in use.

As to the Doctrine concerning the Trinity they accord with the Greeks,
acknowledging three Persons in one Divine Nature, and that the Holy Ghost
proceeds only from the Father.

I have read in many Books, which treat of this Church, an accusation against
it, that it admits but of one Person and one Nature in Christ, according to the
Doctrine of Eutyches; of which I my self was once of opinion, until I read and
well considered of the Articles of their Faith.

They believe that Christ descended into Hell, and that he freed the Souls of
all the damned from thence, by the grace and favor of his glorious presence,
but not for ever, or by a plenary pardon or remission; but only as reprieved
until the end of the World, at which time they shall again be returned unto
Eternal Flames. But that we may take a more clear view of their Faith, I have
thought fit to represent that which they call their Tavananck, or Symbolum,
different from the Apostles and Nicene Creed, which for those words follwing,
viz. where the Deity was mixed with the Humanity without spot, seems to be
calculated for maintenance of the Herisie of Eutyches, and in opposition to the
Catholic Doctrine, as that of Athanasius is to the Heresy of Arrius: But
these words though they look ill at first, yet if well considered and compared
with the same expression which the Greeks use on the same subject, it will
amount unto no more, than what the Greeks declare in the Anatolian Confession,
That the Body of Christ was a true not a fantastic Body, that it was formed in
the Womb of the blessed Virgin, and was made a perfect man, (...) i.e. his
rational Soul mixed with the Divinity. Now the words of their Creed are
Verbatim as follows.

I Consess that I believe with all my heart in God the Father uncreated, and
not begotten, and that God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost,
were from all Eternity: the Son begotten of the Father, and the Holy Ghost
proceeds only from the Father. I believe in God the Son increated and begotten
from Eternity. The Father is Eternal, the Son is Eternal, and equal to the
Father; whatsoever the Father contains, the Son contains. I believe in the Holy
Ghost which was from Eternity, not begotten of the Father but proceeding, three
Persons but one God. Such as the Son as to the Deity such is the Holy Ghost. I
believe in the Holy Trinity, not three Gods, but one God, one in Will, in
Government, and in Judgment, Creator both of visible and invisible. I believe
in the Holy Church, in the remission of sins, and the Communion of Saints. I
believe that of those three persons one was begotten of the Father before all
eternity, but descended in time from Heaven unto Mary, of whom he took blood,
and was formed in her Womb, where the Deity was mixed with the Humanity without
spot or blemish. He patiently remained in the Womb of Mary nine Months, and was
afterward born as man, with soul, intellect, judgment, and body: Having but
one body and one countenance: And of this mixture or union resulted one
composition of Person; God was made man without any change in himself, born
without Humane Generation, his Mother remaining still a Virgin: And as none
knows his eternity, so none can conceive his being or essence; for as he was
Jesus Christ from all eternity, so he is to day, and shall be for ever.

I believe in Jesus Christ, who conversed in this world, and after thirty years
was baptized according to his own good will and pleasure, his Father bearing
witness of him, and said, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, and
the Holy Ghost in form of a Dove descended upon him, he was tempted of the
Devil and overcame, was preached to the Gentiles, was troubled in his body,
being wearied, enduring hunger and thirst, was crucified with his own will,
dyed corporally, and yet was alive as God, was buried, and his Deity was mixed
with him in the Grave; his soul descended into Hell, and was always accompanied
with his Deity; he preached to the souls in Hell, whom after he had released,
he arose again the third day, and appeared to his Apostles. I believe that our
Lord Jesus Christ did with his body ascend into Heaven, and sits at the right
hand of God; and that with the same body by the determination of His Father, He
shall come to judge both the quick and the dead: And that all shall rise again;
such as have done good shall go into life eternal, and such as have done evil
into everlasting fire.

This is the sum of the Armenian Faith, which they teach their Children and
young Scholars, and is repeated by them in the same manner as our Apostles
Creed is in our Divine Service.

CHAP. V.
Of Fasts in the Armenian Church.

THEIR Fasts are the most rigorous of any Nation in the World, for as the
Eastern people have always been more abstemious in their diet, and less
addicted to excess in their Tables and ordinary Banquets, than the Western or
Northern Nations; so by this custom of living they support more easily the
severe Institution of their Lents: who in the time of their Feasts are not so
free in their eating and drinking, as we are in our times of Abstinence and
Fasting; for that which we call a Collation, or Lenten-Table, will serve an
Armenian for an Easter Dinner.

For in the first place they observe the Great Lent before Easter, beginning at
the same time with the Greek Church, following in this particular the Rule
ordained by the Council of Nice, which is observed by all the Christian World.
And in this Lent they eat not Fish with blood, as do the Papists, nor
Shellfish, as do the Greeks, nor yet so much as Oil of Olives, as being
substantial, and that which yields too much nourishment and pleasure to the
Palate: only they may eat the Dregs and Lees of the Oil of Olives, or the Oil
of Sousam, which is pressed from a Seed so called in Turkish, like our
Rape-seed, the smell of which is sufficient to overcome a tender stomach. In
which time of mortification, they account it a sin to accompany with their
Wives, and perhaps they may not have much inclination thereunto, in regard that
at the beginning of Lent, many of them pass three or four days without
receiving any refreshment, either of Bread or Water, into their Stomachs; and
perform the like at the end thereof, not breaking their Fasts until they eat
and drink the Sacrament on Easter Day in the Morning: Besides which they
observe a continued Fast through all the days of Lent, not eating until three
of the Clock in the Afternoon, which some call Cornelius his Fast, and is a
Custom of great Antiquity. But Easter being come, they make some recompense to
the Body for this long abstinence, by a permission to eat flesh till
Ascension-day, without accounting of Frydays, or other days which the Greeks
call days of abstinence: The like indulgence they have for the whole week after
Epiphany, but excepting these Weeks aforesaid, they keep Wednesdays and Frydays
for days of abstinence through the whole year. As to their other Fasts they
observe a short Lent of nine days before the 15 th of August, which is the
Feast of our Ladies Assumption. They have one which begins the Week after the
Feast of Pentecost, that is, on Trinity Monday, being performed in honor to
the Holy Ghost, two Weeks after which they fast one more on the same account;
then after two Weeks they fast one more, then after four Weeks they fast one,
then after one Week they fast another, then after seven Weeks they fast
another, then after two Weeks they fast one, again after three Weeks they fast
the fourth, and seven days before the Epiphany they keep a severe Lent, so that
they always fast in our Christmas till Twelfday. In which manner they mix the
whole course of the year with fasting, but the times seem so confused and
without rule, that they can scarce be recounted, unless by those who live
amongst them, and strictly observe them, it being the chief care of the Priest,
whose Learning principally consists in knowing the appointed times of fasting
and feasting; the which they never omit on Sondays to publish unto the people.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Feasts in the Armenian Church.

THE Feasts of Easter and Pentecost they celebrate according to the Custom of
the Greek Church, and with us, who keep our account according to the Old Style.
But our Christmas Day they observe not, but in lieu thereof they celebrate with
great Solemnity and Commemoration the Birth, Epiphany, and Baptism of our
Savior on the sixth of January, which is our Twelf-day, the which day they
keep with high devotion; and more especially, because they hold that one of the
Wisemen of the East, who came to offer his Gold and Incense, was an Armenian
Prince, with whom they are so well acquainted, that they know him by name to be
Gaspar; before which sixth day of January, which is our Epiphany; they observe
(as we have said) seven days of Fast, according to their usual severity and
rigor. All their other Feasts, unless it be Easter (which through all the
Catholic Church is preceded by the grand Fast of Lent) are ushered in but with
five days of Fast.

As to that of Epiphany it is certainly very ancient, as Dr. Cave learnedly
writes in the first part of his Primitive Christianity, having these words,
Whether the Feast of Christmas was always observed on the same day that we keep
it now, that is on the 25th of December, is uncertain; for it seems probable,
that for a long time in the East, it was kept in January under the name and at
the general time of the Epiphania ( or Theophania) until receiving more light
in the case from the Churches of the West, they changed it to this day. The
other Feasts of the Armenian Church are these which follow.

First of Surp Savorich, which is celebrated in May or June according to the
rule of their Canon, which as I take it is herein governed by the Moon.

Vertevar, or the Transfiguration of our Lord in June or July.

Asfasasin, or the Assumption of our Lady, in August.

Surp Chatch, or the Holy Cross, in September.

Surp Chevorich, or S. Demetrio, in October.

Surp Nicolo, in November; Surp Acop, in December.

Surp Serchis, or S. George, in January or February.

These are the only Feasts in grand request, or of precept amongst them, the
observance of which is strictly enjoined to the Laity; which, if reckoned with
the grand Festivals, will not amount to above ten in the whole year: Howsoever
the Clergy who have nothing more to do but to pray and read, have many other
days enjoined them in commemoration of Saints, which are so many, that there is
not one day in the whole year, which is not either appointed for Fast, or noted
for a Festival.

CHAP. VII.
Of their Monasteries, and Rules observed therein.

BEsides the Monastery of Etchmeasin, of which we have already treated, they
have several others in diverse places of Armenia, Persia, and Dominions of the
Turks. But those of greatest note are these, That of S. John Baptist, called by
them, Surp Carabet, on the Borders of Persia; Varatch, or the Holy Cross,
situated near Van, where they report, that Rupsameh fixed the real Cross of
Christ: Asfasasin, or the Blessed Virgin, is another Monastery near Darbiquier:
Surp Bogas, or S. Paul, at Angora. Their Orders or Rules observed are three,
viz. Surp Savorich, or that of S. Gregory; Surp Parsiach, or that of S. Basil;
and Surp Dominicos, or that of S. Dominick. The first wear Vests of black, with
Hoods of the same, but when they officiate in their Mass they are clothed in
white, with Crowns on their heads. The second are habited like Greek Kaloires
of that Order: And the third are clothed in black, with no other difference
from the first than in the cut and shape of their Hoods. This latter of S.
Dominicos they seem to have taken from the Roman Priests, who have gained
footing and admission amongst them, for otherwise that Western Name, and Modern
Order, could never have found place so far Eastward, nor society with those
other two more ancient Religions, unless by imitation or in conformity to Rome.
They observe almost the same Rules and Orders in their manner of Worship and
Service. They eat no flesh nor drink Wine; yet on Saturdays and Sondays out of
Lent they have liberty to eat Eggs, Milk, Butter, and Fish. They have used
themselves so much to fasting from their Infancy, that it is very curious to
observe what Custom is able to effect in our Bodies, and with how small a
proportion Nature can be contented, in which strict manner of living some have
so far endeavored to exceed, that they have daily diminished of their slender
Diet; and supposing still that Nature might be content with a meaner
proportion, have so extenuated and macerated their Bodies, that at length they
have miserably perished with Famine. They arise from their Beds at Midnight,
and continue in Prayer and Fasting until three a Clock in the Afternoon, during
which time they are obliged to read over the whole Psalter of David.

There are Women likewise in this Country who put themselves into Nunneries,
and live with the same severity and strictness as do the men. They have also
some Hermites, whom they call Gickniahore, who live upon the tops of Rocks,
confined thereunto almost as severely as Simeon Stylites was to his Pillar. Nor
is this Country so remote and obscure, nor the Language so much unknown, but
that the Roman Clergy has gained a considerable footing amongst them; whereby
they have established no less than ten Monasteries in that Country, all of the
Order of S. Dominick, of which I have seen and discoursed with some of the
Friars; and particularly I had once opportunity to discourse with the
Archbishop, who was of the same Order, and constituted by the Pope over this
Church, as he was going to Rome to receive his Consecration, and to obtain a
Stipend of 200 Crowns a year for his maintenance: he told me that he had ten
Monasteries under him, all of the Order of S. Dominick, that his place of
Residence was at Nachavan, three days journey from Tavris, which was the place
where Noah's Ark rested after the flood. These of the Roman as well as of the
Armenian Church, are so wretchedly ignorant, that they are not capable to
render a satisfactory answer to a curious Stranger, in any thing relating to
their own Customs and Manners; but commonly make a reply to his Queries by
begging; for if you ask them Questions, they will demand Alms of you.

The first time that the Roman Religion crept into this Country was about 350
years past, by means of one Ovan de Kurnah, who having a wandering head, and a
genius toward Learning, somewhat more curious than the generallity, traveled
into Poland, and thence into France and Italy, where having comprehended
something of the Western Knowledge and Doctrine, returned into his own Country,
where he preached and instructed them in the material points of their Religion;
which seemed unto them to be all new matters, and high notions, and had not
entered into the consideration and brains of the wisest amongst them: so that
the Doctrines and Tenants of Kurnah began to pass current amongst them, to the
great admiration and applause of this traveling Doctor. But at length touching
on the Popes Supremacy, to the prejudice of the Patriarchal Authority and
Jurisdiction, the whole mass of his Doctrine became leavened, and he forbidden
farther to preach, or the people to hear him: Howsoever a considerable number
adhered to his Doctrine, and to this day rather gain than lose ground in
Armenia: of whom there is a Church licensed at Rome, and the form of their Mass
privileged, and squared according to that of the Latins, but excessive long
and tedious, and much differing from that of the Armenian, as I have seen them
revised and compared together. In the year 1678, when I was passing through
Rome and Italy, in my way from Smyrna into England, it was confidently reported
in the Dominions of the Pope, that the Chief Patriarch of the Armenian Church,
together with many of his Metropolites, were on their journey toward Rome,
with intention to submit themselves to that Church; but having remained in
those parts for some Months after that report began, and neither seeing nor
hearing of their nearer approach, I may confidently conclude, that this
Patriarch is still as far off in his agreement with the Church of Rome, as he
is at a distance by the situation of his Country.

As to the Service Book which belongs to the true and that which is properly
called the Armenian Church, it was compiled (as they report) in part by S.
James, and the rest by S. Chrysostom and S. Basil, whose forms of Prayer and
Service are wholly in use amongst the Eastern Christians; for I have not heard
of any Liturgy of Surp Savorich, or S. Gregory, in this Church, which to me is
very strange.

There not being much Literature amongst these people, we cannot expect to find
great Libraries wrote in their Language, or many Books wherein the retired
Monks may exercise their Studies: That Book which is of most note amongst them,
and agreeable to the design of Religious men, is the Book of one Gregorio of
the Monastery of Stat, which treats of the lives of holy men, and serves in the
place of Homilies read on Festival Days, the study of which is the chief
employment of the Armenian Monks.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the two Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, and Panis Benedictus.

IT would be very difficult to be resolved by Armenian Doctors, whether they
hold seven or two Sacraments in their Church; for that word not being
understood amongst them, it would be impossible to form a definition which may
accord with their capacity; we shall therefore tell you in what manner they
celebrate those two Sacraments in their Church.

The Baptism of Infants they use and esteem necessary, as being that which
washes away their Original sin; in performance of which, the Priest takes the
Child by the Feet and Hands, and dips it three times under Water; which
immersion of three times, these, with the Greeks, esteem essential unto this
Sacrament; so that where the Vessel is shallow, and not capable to recieve the
whole Body, the Priest pours it with his hand, that not Part or Member may
remain unbaptized.

After Baptism they apply the Chrism, anointing the Forehead, Eyes, Ears,
Breast, Palms of the hands, and soals of the feet with consecrated Oil in form
of a Cross; and then they administer unto the Child the Holy Eucharist, which
they do only by rubbing the Lips with it. The distribution of the Panis
Benedictus, which they call Maz, is in use amongst them as with the Greeks.

Surp Usiun, as they call the holy Eucharist, they celebrate only on Sondays
and Festivals, though on other days they perform the public Services of the
Church; whereby it appears, that they have other Morning Services besides that
of the Communion.

They put no Water into the Wine, nor Leaven into the Bread, as do the Greeks.

They hold Transubstantiation as do the Papists, from whom the Priests readily
accepted of such a Doctrine as tends to their Honor and Profit. Christ says,
This is my Body, and This is my Blood, which plain words, these good men are
willing to accept in their litteral sense, that so they may not be put to the
subtilties of the Schools, nor to the interpretation of Mystical and
Sacramental Terms: Let the meaning be how it will, the Church of Rome, which is
more wise and learned than they, has so determined it; and if they err, be
the fault and error upon them.

Howsoever this Tenent of Transubstantiation is held and discussed but of late
years amongst them, and is not altogether Universally accepted; some of them
will pretend to maintain, and others will deny it; and declare that the Epitome
of their faith, which is mentioned only in the 12 th Chapter of this Book, was
subscribed by some few of their Bishops, and extorted from them by threats and
rewards.

Their manner of distributing the Communion is done by sopping the Bread into
Wine, so that the Communicant receives both species together, which is
different from the Form and Custom of the Latin, Greek and reformed Churches.
They differ from the Greeks in that they administer Bread unleavened, made like
a Wafer; they differ from the Romans, in that they give both Species to the
Laity, which the Priest does by putting his Fingers into the Chalice, out of
which he takes the Wafer soaked in the Wine, and delivers that unto the
Communicant. And it is pleasant to observe, that he has no sooner done so, but
that some Boy or young Lad is presently at hand to lick his Fingers; which he
willingly grants him, in regard that they esteem it a kind of initiation or
Pledge to them of receiving the Sacrament hereafter, when they come to years of
understanding, as the rubbing of the Lips of the Infant with the consecrated
Elements, is to Children at the time of their adadmittance to Baptism.

So that when I consider, and observe in what a plain manner our Savior
instituted this Sacrament, how easily understood, and how clearly practiced,
and how facil to be followed and brought into imitation; for it is said, he
took Bread and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to his disciples, etc. in
like manner he took the Cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying,
drink you all of this. Notwithstanding which, we may see how far the Churches
have deviated from this easy and plain rule. The Latins administer it with a
Wafer, and deny the Cup to the Laity; the Greeks give both Species in a Spoon
together; the Armenians soak the Bread in the Wine: Only God has illuminated
the Reformed Churches, and taught them how to follow the Examples of the first
Institution; and yet amongst them likewise there is some difference, and
amongst the Sectaries yet greater; whereby we may judge of the malice and
subtlety of the grand Deceiver, who would render that salutiferous food
unwholesome, and make this principal Instrument of Grace and Salvation, to
become the most dangerous snare and ruin of Humane Souls.

CHAP. IX.
Of Penance and Excommunication.

THEY use Confession in the Ear of a Priest, who is for the most part very
rigorous in the Penance he imposes; for if the Sin be enormous, and very foul,
he is not contented with one bare Act of Penitential satisfaction; but lays a
penance to continue for several years; at the end of which it is seldom that
the Penitent escapes, or obtains absolution, without some pecuniary mulct, by
way of peaceOffering, or Atonement for sin, and by which also the indignation
of the Priest himself may be satisfied and appeased: and this penance once
imposed, no man can remit, no not the Bishop, nor Patriarch himself. Some I
have known who have been enjoined a whole weeks fast, that is from Sunday night
to Sunday Morning following, during which time they have taken nothing into
their Mouths of Meat or drink, only on Wednesday night, they had license to
drink one draught of Sherbet.

Excommunication is made use of as frequently by them, as by the Greeks, by the
abuse of which the Priests procure the most considerable part of their gains.
Nor is any Ecclesiastical Rite (as we have said before) performed, nor a
Benefice conferred without Money; the Oppression, and Exaction under which they
live, both of the Turks and Persian, being a plea, as they suppose,
sufficiently forcible to excuse from the Crime of Simony.

CHAP. X.
Of their Marriages.

MArriage is not only lawful for a Secular Priest, but is esteemed so
necessary, that none can be a Priest unless he enter first into the state of
Matrimony: I say a Secular Priest, because a Bishop, or a Monk, cannot marry,
or rather that state is not inconsistent with the Office of a Bishop, as a
Bishop, but as the Bishops are Monks, being always chosen out of the
Monasteries of Religious men. In case the Wife of the Secular Priest dies, and
he marries again, he is, ipso facto, degraded and suspended from his Sacerdotal
Ministry.

Lay persons are permitted to marry twice, but the third Marriage is
abominable, and esteemed as scandalous and as great a Sin as Fornication.

A Widow cannot marry with other than with a Widow, as one that has not been
married, must take one who is reputed a Virgin, in which they observe the same
degrees of consanguinity as are agreeable to the Canons of the Western Churches.

They usually choose Monday Morning, at or before break a day, for the time to
be married; they begin the Feast on Sunday Evening, and continue it three or
four Days with much jollity, during which time the Bride is kept in her Chair
and State, and almost the whole time waking, and the Bridegroom in like manner
is obliged to keep his distance, and not permitted to consummate the
Matrimonial Duty until Wednesday night, or Thursday morning; when they expose
the signs of Virginity, in the same manner as the Greeks, Turks, and Jews do,
and all other Nations of the East.

CHAP. XI.
Their Opinion of Souls in the state of separation, and their Ceremonies used
toward the dead.

THEY believe that neither the Souls nor Bodies of any Saints or Prophets
departed this life are in Heaven; unless it be the Blessed Virgin, and Elias
the Prophet. They believe that a person dying contrite, goes not immediately to
Heaven, nor a Sinner unto Hell, but are intercepted in the way, and lodged
together in the same place, which they call Gayank, which is the Eighth Heaven,
where the Stars are, and have there no other joy or grief, but what proceeds
from a good or a bad Conscience. Those which dye with the burden of minute
sins, such as the sins of evil thoughts or words, go to the same place, and are
freed from Punishment by the Alms and good works of the Faithful.

They believe, that until after the day of resurrection, the souls of the
Righteous shall not see the face of God, or enjoy the Beatifical Vision, but
only be filled and replenished with certain beams of his glory and Divine
illumination.

Notwithstanding which opinion, That the Saints shall not enter into Heaven,
until the day of judgment, yet by a certain imitation of the Greek and Latin
Churches, they invoke them with prayers, reverence and adore their Pictures or
Images, and burn Lamps to them, and Candles.

The Saints which are commonly invoked by them, are all the Prophets and
Apostles, likewise S. Silvester, S. Savorich, etc.

As to the Ceremonies used toward their Dead, they observe several
particulars. The Corpse of their Bishops and Priests they anoint with
confecrated Oil before they are interred; but the Bodies of the Laity are only
washed after the manner of the Turks, and fashion of the Eastern parts of the
World.

When any dies under the Age of nine years, the Parents or Kindred employ some
Priest for the space of eight days, to make Prayers for the Soul of the
deceased, who during that time have their entertainment of Meat and Drink
defrayed at the charge of such Parents, and on the ninth day a solemn Office is
performed for the Soul of the Deceased. But those who are rich and Religious do
yearly at their expense appoint one day for Commemoration of their departed
Relations, and for performance of those Offices which are instituted and
appointed for the same. Easter Monday is the day ordained by Custom for
visiting the Sepulchers of their deceased Relations; where, having lamented
them a while with howlings and cries after their manner, and the Women with
most barbarous Screeches, they presently change the Scene, and, retiring under
the shadow of some Tree, they eat, drink, and forget their sorrow, which their
Wine soon chases away, and then they become as dissolute in their Mirth, as
they were before undecent and extravagant in their Grief.

This Custom we may suppose to have been derived from those ancient Solemnities
which were at first kept at the Tombs where Martyrs had been buried, which
usually were in the Caemeteria, or the Churchyards, distinct from the Church,
and in the Eastern parts are commonly at some distance without the City. To
these places the people annually resorted to celebrate the memory of Martyrs,
with Prayers, Incense, Psalms, and Sermons, which by the multitude of Martyrs
became afterward so common, that the people began to think it their duty to
perform this Office at the Graves of their Relations; which time has now made
accustomary, and is a great part of the service and pastime of Easter Monday.

CHAP. XII.
Of the manner how some Friars of the Roman Church persuaded the Armenian
Patriarch, and Bishops at Constantinople, to subscribe a Confession agreeable
to the Tenants of the Roman Faith.

THough the great Marshal Turenne (as is credibly reported) had always
inclinations toward the Roman Church, which for many years he concealed, for
reasons best known to himself: Yet being desirous at length to be owned as a
Member thereof, he suffered himself to be wrought upon by such arguments as
were then suggested, amongst which none seemed more convincing or forcible to
him, than that the Eastern Churches concurred with the Roman in all points
wherein there was any difference between the Papists and the Protestants: to
prove which, the Ambassador Resident for his most Christian Majesty at
Constantinople in the year 1674, assembled the Armenian Patriarch, and some of
his Bishops, from whom, without much difficulty, he procured a certain
Confession very agreeable to the sense of the Roman Church.

A Copy of this Confession I saw, and read, as it was delivered to me from the
Martabet, or Armenian Bishop, wrote in the Armenian Language and Character, the
which was faithfully Translated for me: which when I well considered, it
appeared plainly to me, to be origiginally the invention, form, and contrivance
of some Friar of the Roman Church, rather than the thoughts, or Style of an
Armenian Author.

For first, though I understand little of the Armenian Tongue, yet I have some
reasons to persuade me, that there is nothing in the Idiom of that Language,
which corresponds with the word Sacrament, agreeable to that definition,
whereby we would understand the notion of Sacramentum.

Secondly, the professed Armenian Doctrine holds, That there are no other
Saints in Heaven, but the blessed Virgin, and Elias the Prophet; and yet in
this Confession, they seem to place as many in Heaven it self as the Church of
Rome.

Thirdly, in another place, one would believe that to avoid confusion they
meant to set up the Pope for Head of the Universal Church, which when they come
to explicate a little farther, they only condemn those who allow not the
Government of the Church by Bishops, and those who believe that one Preacher is
sufficient, and that one Priest can make another: But who this latter sort of
people is, and where to be found, they would have done well to have declared,
before they had taken so much pains to bestow the Anathema upon them.

This Confession, which I here mention, was in part the Occasion and Ground of
the Report, which in the year 1676 was spread at Constantinople, of a new
reconciliation, which though it was some years after this Confession, yet that
and the Conversion of an Armenian Bishop to the Church of Rome, was the cause
of all the discourse; but he being a person of no greater Revenue than of 200
Dollars yearly Rent, the mistake soon appeared; it being probable that the
acquisition of a poor ignorant person could have no great influence on the
Church, and might have the same effect as if a Country Curate in England were
brought over to the Roman Faith. This Confession is the Cause also, that upon
every small accident of compliance a new reconciliation is presently divulged;
and so it happened in the year 1678. when at Rome for six Months together it
was generally reported, That the Armenian Patriarch, with six and thirty
Bishops, was on their way thither, to submit unto and to acknowledge the
Apostolical See. Howsoever, I persuade my self, that were the particulars,
wherein there is any Controversy between the Church of England and that of
Rome, well stated according to the Capacity of the Armenians, it would not be
difficult to procure another Confession, at least an Explication of their
Doctrine, with little variety from that of the Church of England, so little
Understanding have these People of Controversies; the which perhaps would be
the sense of most good Christians in the World, who laid aside all
prepossessions to a Party or Tenent. Howsoever, I am sure it ought to be the
Desire and Prayer of every good Christian, that God would be pleased to lessen
and close the Differences in the Church of Christ, that we may have one God,
one Faith, one Baptism, and one Head, the Lord Jesus.

Amen.
FINIS
Histories, and other Curious Discourses, Printed for, and sold by John Starkey
in Fleet Street.
1. THE Voyages and Travels of the Duke of Holstein's Ambassadors into
Muscovy, Tartary, and Persia, begun in the year 1633. and finished in the year
1639. containing a complete History of those Countries. Whereunto are added the
Travels of Mand^lslo, from Persia into the East Indies, begun in 1638. and
finished in 1640. The whole illustrated with diverse accurate Maps and Figures.
Written originally by Adam Ol^arius, Secretary to the Embassy. Englished by J.
Davis. The second Edition. In Folio. Price bound 20s. 2. The Works of the
famous Nicholas Machiavel, Citizen and Secretary of Florence; containing the
History of Florence, the Prince, the Original of the Gu^lf and Guibilin; the
Life of C^struccio Castraccani; the Murder of Vi^elli, etc. by Duke Valentine;
the State of France, the State of Germany the Discourses on Titus Livius; the
Art of War; the Marriage of B^lph^g^r. All from the true Original, newly and
faithfully translated into English. In Folio. Price bound 20s. 3. The History
of Barbados, St. Christopher's Mevis, St. Vincent's Anteg^, Martinic^,
Monserrat, and the rest of the Caribby Islands, in all twenty eight: In two
Books; containing the Natural and Moral History of those Islands; illustrated
with diverse Pieces of Sculpture, representing the most considerable Rarities
therein described. In Folio, Price bound 10 s. 4. The History of the Affairs of
Europe in this present Age; but more particularly of the Republic of Venice.
Written in Italia by Battista Na^^, Cavalier, and Procurator of St. Mark.
Englished by Sir Robert Honyw^^d Knight. In Folio. Price bound 14 s. 5. The Present
State of the Ottoma^ Empire, in three Books; containing the Maxims of the
Turkish Polite; their Religion and Military Discipline. Illustrated with diverse
Figures. Written by Paul Ric^^^ Esquire Pat^ Secretary to the English Ambassador
there; now Consul of Smyr^^. The fourth Edition. In Octavo. Price bound 6 s. 6.
The Memoirs of Philip de Comines, Lord of Ag^^^^^; containing the History of
Lewis XI. and Charles VIII. Kings of France; with the most remarkable
Occurrences in their particular Reigns from the year 1464. to 1498. Revised and
Corrected from diverse Manuscripts, and ancient Impressions. By Denis Godfrey,
Counselor and Historiographer to the French King, and from his Edition lately
Printed at Paris. Newly Translated into English. In Octavo. Price bound 6 s. 7.
A Relation of three Embassies, from His Majesty Charles II. to the great Duke
of Muscovy, the King of Sweden, and the King of Denmark. Performed by the Right
Honorable the Earl of Carlisle, in the year 1663. and 1664. By an Attendant on
the Embassies. In Octavo. Price bound 4 s. 8. A Relation of the Siege of
Candia, from the first Expedition of the French Forces to its surrender, the
27th of September, 1669. Written in French by a Gentleman who was a Volunteer
in that service, and faithfully Englished. In Octavo. Price bound 1 s. 9. An
Historical and Geographical Description of the great Country and River of the
Amazones in America; with an exact Map thereof. Translated out of French. In
Octavo. Price bound 1 s. 6 d. 10. The Secret History of the Court of the
Emperor Justinian. Written by Procopius of Caesare^. Faithfully rendered into
English. In Octavo. Price bound 1 s. 6 d. 11. The History of the late
Revolutions of the Empire of the great Mogul; together with the most
considerable Passages for five years following in that Empire; with a new Map
of it; to which is added, an account of the extent of Indostan; the Circulation
of the Gold and Silver of the World to discharge it self there; as also the
Riches, Forces, and Justice of the same; and the principal cause of the decay
of the States of Asia. By Monsieur F. Bernier, Physician of the Faculty of
Montpelier. Englished out of French by H. O. Secretary to the Royal Society. In
two Parts. In Octavo. Price bound 7 s. 12. The History of France under the
Ministry of Cardinal Mazarine, viz. from the death of King Lewis XIII. to the
year 1654. Wherein all the Affairs of State to that time, are exactly related.
By Benj^^^^ Priolo, and faithfully Englished by Christopher Wase, Gent. In
Octavo. Price bound 4 s. 13. The History of the twelve Caesar's, Emperors of
Rome. Written in Latin by C. Suetonius Tranquillus. Newly Translated into
English, and illustrated with all the Caesar's Heads, in Copper Plates. In
Octavo. Price bound 5 s. 14. The complete Gentleman, or Directions for the
Education of Youth, as to their Breeding at Home, and traveling Abroad. In two
Treatises. By J. Gailbard Gent. Who has been Tutor Abroad to several of the
Nobility and Gentry. In Octavo. Price bound 3 s. 6 d. 15. The Present State of
Egypt, or a new Relation of a late Voyage into that Kingdom. Performed in the
years 1672, and 1673. by F. Van^^eb. R. D. Wherein you have an exact and true
Account of many rare and wonderful Particulars of that Ancient Kingdom.
Englished by M. D. B. D. In Octavo. Price bound 3 s. 16. A New Voyage into the
Northern Countries: Being a Description of the Manners, Customs, Superstition,
Buildings, and Habits of the Norwegians, Laplanders, Kilops, Berandians,
Siberians, Samopedes, Zemb^^ns, and Islanders. In Twelves. Price bound 1 s. 17.
The Present State of the United Provinces of the Lo^ Countries, as to the
Government, Laws, Forces, Riches, Manners, Customs, Revenue and Territory of
the Dutch. Collected out of diverse Authors, by W. A. Fellow of the Royal
Society. The second Edition. In Twelves. Price bound 2 s. 6 d. 18. The Present
State of the Princes and Republics of Italy. The second Edition enlarged, with
the manner of Election of Popes; and a Character of Spain. Written originally
in English, by John Gailbard Gent. In Twelves. Price bound 1 s. 6 d. 19. The
Policy and Government of the Venecians, both in Civil and Military Affairs.
Written in French by the Sieur de la H^y; and faithfully Englished. In Twelves.
Price bound 1 s. 20. The Voyage of Italy: or, A Complete Journey through Italy.
In two Parts. With the Character of the People, and a Description of the chief
Towns, Churches, Palaces, Villas, Gardens, Pictures, Statutes, Antiquities; as
also of the Interest, Government, Riches, Force, etc. of all the Princes; with
Instructions concerning ^^^^. By Richard L^ssells Gent. who traveled through
Italy five times, as Tutor to several of the English Nobility, Opus Posthumum,
Corrected and set forth by his old Friend and Fellow-Traveller, S. W. Never
before extant. In Twelves. Price bound 5 s. 21. A Collection of Discourses of
the Vir^^^si of France, upon Questions of all sorts of Philosophy, and other
Natural Knowledge, made in the Assembly of the Bea^x Espri^^ at Paris, by the
most ingenuous Persons of that Nation. Englished by G. Havers. In Folio. Price
bound 12 s. 22. A Justification of the late War against the United Netherlands.
In two Parts. Illustrated with several Sculptures. By Henry St^bb^. In Quarto.
Price bound 4 s. 23. The History of the Government of Venice, wherein the
Policies, Councils, Magistrates, and Laws of that State are fully related, and
the use of the Balloting Box exactly described. Written in the year 1675. By
the Sieur Am^lo^ de la Ho^scai^, Secretary to the French Ambassador at Venice.
In Octavo. Price bound 3 s. 6 d. 24. The Rules of Civility, or certain ways of
Depor^ment observed in France amongst all Persons of Quality^ upon several
occasions. Faithfully Englished. In Twelves. Price bound 2 s. 25. The Art of
Complaisance, or means to oblige in Conversation. In Twelves. Price bound 1 s.
26. Medicina Sta^^^, or Rules of Health; in eight Sections of Aphorisms.
Originally written by Sanct^ri^^, chief Professor of Physic at Padus.
Englished by J. D. In Twelves. Price bound 1 s. 27. The Temperate Man, or the
right way of preserving Life and Health; together with soundness of the Senses,
Judgment, and Memory unto extreme old Age. In three Treatises. The first
written by the Learned L^^^ dus L^^^i^s; the second by L^d^wick Cornaro, a
Noble Gentleman of Venice; the third by a famous Italian, Faithfully Englished.
In Twelves. Price bound 1 s. 4 d.
FINIS.

