A DISCOVRSE, OF THE ORIENTAL TONGVES viz. Ebrew, Samaritan. Calde, Syriac,
Arabic, and Ethiopic.

Together with A General GRAMMAR FOR THE SAID TONGUES.

By CHRISTIAN RAVIS.

LONDON, Printed by W. Wilson for T. Iackson, and are to be sold by him at the
Star in Duck-lane 1649.

TO The right reverend Father in God, James by the Divine Providence Archbishop
of Armagh Primate, and Metropolitan of all Ireland, and of His MAJESTY'S most
Honorable Privy Council.
May it please your Grace,
GReat and manifold are my obligations unto your Grace, not only as a Client
toward a great Patron of studies, but more especially as an adopted Son of
your especial favors. Ten years ago, only upon one humble letter of mine
from hence, unto your Grace residing in Dublin, craving most humbly your
assistance in my purpose toward the Orient; It pleased your Grace to write
unto me (being as then by sight unknown unto you) and most favorably to offer
me a certain annual allowance for my voyage, if I had already left England,
or if not, to invite me to come over to your Grace, and that upon very
honorable terms, upon knowledge whereof, that excellently learned, Hugo
Grotius (unawares to me) commended me and afterward carried me along with him
to the Cardinal De Richelieu then the greatest Minister d'Estate de France,
who, after some discourses inviting me to serve him in the Orient, and my
modest refusal alleging my obligations to this English Nation, but especially
to your Grace, and when upon the second and third reply of his, I did promise
to write unto your Grace about it, but he being unwilling I should do so, did
after a most ample, and large commendation of your Lordship dismiss me with
an honorable donative, in the presence of that renowned Ambassador, with whose
Son, ( Anno. 1636 being a Courtier at the Court of the Queen of Sweden,) had
acquaintance at Stockholme. Out of respect also unto your Grace, Mr. Pocock.
Anno. 1639. at Constantinople became very active on my behalf with my Lord
Ambassador, as also the treasurer his and my host and the consul of Smyrna,
Mr. Edward Stringer a most worthy and excellently learned Gentleman for your
Lordships sake were never weary of affording me all the favor they could,
attesting frequently this humble respect toward your Grace; And after my
return home I received so freely and largely of your Bounty, that I confess
my self to have had all along an exceeding rich supply from you; the
consideration of all this and that it should be done to a stranger one never
seen unto you, only at the motion of those learned men Doctor Elichman, Lud.
De Dieu, Ioh. Gerhardus Vossius, that such unparalled honor I say and bounty
should be done me, lays an unparalleled burden on my shoulders worthily to
testify my thankfulness for the same; your Grace also prevents me even in
that which alone is left me, whereby to testify my thankful remembrance of
your favors; you honorably make mention of me, unknown to me, in that most
learned Epistle to Ger. Ioh. Vossius de Symbolis lately setforth, calling me
yours (Noster Ravius) and truly so I am; I esteem my self your Son, and you
my gracious Father that provides for me, nay more then a Father; A Father
knows his Son for whom he provides, your Grace provided for me as a part of
your heart which you never saw. You have still the same gracious care of me
and my lectures, whereof at all times your Grace is pleased to enquire the
success. I will not excuse or deplore the state of my creeping and weak
studies, Vltra posse nemo obligatur; nor speak for the tuition of this small
offer; If what it conteines be truth (which I have learned under your fatherly
care) the offer of it is great; if the matter of it be false, and the conceit
of a heady brain, the greatest Book of mine would justly be loathsome and
detestable in your sight. Eruditi possunt judicare, rudes discere, scioli
neutrum. I shall be as glad to be taught better if here I have done amise, as
to have written a truth and a beneficial one, wherein I do not amiss. I
confess I never part from your Grace but I return more learned then I came,
but, which I esteem above all things, far more confirmed, and resolved upon
the following of your pious, meek, humble, sincere, unfeigned conversation,
and because I can never attain the learning and exact judgment of your Grace,
I shall endeavor in a higher measure, and nearer proportion to attain your
Christian faith, showed in that unparalled height of humility, wherein your
Lordship outstrips all the Archbishops of the World, and to be truly ready to
follow the steps of your Grace in the Lord Jesus, as your,

Most Humble CHRISTIAN RAVIS.

Paradigma VII Ordinum Verborum et Nominum.


Rules for the Permutation and other Accidents of the three Quiescent letters.
(...)
I For. (...). which is either.
I Changed, I. into (...), 1st having damma, 2^ly having damma after fata at
the end, 3 having fata after damma, 4th after damma at the end, 5th A quiescent
(...) before a quiescent is changed into a moveable (...) II into (...), 1st
having Kosra, 2 having Kesra after fata at the end, 3 having fata after Kosra,
4th after Kesra at the end.

II Cast a way when a (...) or (...) follows in any place even in (...)

III Remaining quiescent, as I that of union or joining if a letter with a
vowel go before, e.g. (...) billa except (...) lilla (...) hism; II the (...)
characteristic of the dual before the nun para gogic with either Gizm or
Teshdid; III the Characteristic of ye Agent. Participle after the first radical
before the second doubled by (...)

II (...) is either.
I Changed into, I (...) quiescent, 1st after (...) being the 3 final letter of
a word; 2 after (...) before a (...) moveable II into (...) moveable, 1st
having (...) 2 ye final after the servil (...), III into (...) quiescent after
(...) being (...) 4th or 5th and final letter of a word, IV into (...)
moveable, 1st having (...) after (...) 2 final after (...) 3 a (...) following
with ye vowells (...), 4th having a vowel and going before a (...) with a,
(...) 5th having a (...) and following a (...) with a vowel.

II Cast away, I when a (...) follows in any place even in (...) (...) after a
quiescent (...); III before a (...) and (...) quiescent.

III Remaining quiescent, I as an (...) being after (...) 2 final after damma,
having damma or Kesra

III (...) is either.
I Changed, I into a moveable (...) 1st final after (...) 2 final after a
servil (...) II into (...) quiescent after a fata before a moveable letter. III
into (...) having (...) after?

II Cast away, I when a (...) follows in any place even in (...) II after a
moveable being quiescent in ye middle of a word III before (...) quiescent. III
Remaining quiescent, I final after (...) II final after (...) having (...) or
(...)

paradigm

Because the Characteristicks which are the cause of all that difference which is
between the following 12 Orders and the first aforegoing with the whole
difference it self sufficiently appears in the first words of each of them
(for the terminations through all the 13. are the same) I thought it need les
to set them down so fully as I have done the first: For it is but adding the
terminations of each person to the first word, and the whole declension of them
all is performed.

paradigm

Because the ninth and eleventh Order in some respect may (...) admit of an
Exeption I have set them down at large.

paradigm paradigm

There are also Verbs of. 4. letters but varyed only through 4 Conjugations;
whereof the. first answers to the. 2. of ye. 3. letter verbs; ye. 2. to ye.
5t. in number of letters; ye. 3. to ye. 7th. in res: (...) of Nun ye. 4th. to
ye. 9th. in that it doubles ye. last radical.

paradigm

(...) follows ye Analogy in all those orders yt have a teshdid for their
character and is declined like (...) as likewise in all those. persons of ye
other orders where ye 3 radical is to have a (...) Gizm. So yt all its Anomaly
(if it may be called Anomaly, it agreing herein with ye 9th. and nth. order)
consists in this yt as often as ye 3. rad: is to have a vowell ye 2. is
inserted into it by (...) teshdid its vowel being cast away if the foregoing
has one as (...) for (...) or going to ye precedent if it have a gizm, (...)
(...) for (...) in the 4th order (...) for (...) etc.

(...) are declined like (...) observing only ye rule, of permutation of (...)
through all ye 13 orders as for example in ye 3 (...) for (...) etc

(...) are Analogicall in all ye last 12 orders except ye (...) where ye 1st.
radical is inserted into ye Characteristicall. (...) by a teshdid. as (...)
for (...) So also in (...) etc

(...) are declined like (...) in ye. 2. 3. 5. 6. 9. 11. 12. 13th. (...) ye. 4.
7. 8. 10th. follow ye rule of the first as appears.

paradigm

(...) and (...) follow ye rule of ye first order in their variation through
ye 12 last, Observing only that (...) changes its last radical (...) into
(...) whereas in ye sst it was changed into. (...) and moreover yt ye, sam
(...) remains and is Sounded like a diythong in ye sst and 2 persons, whereas
in ye sst order ye third radical (...) returned in those persons as (...) etc.

Lastly to conclude this Paradigma it is to be observed that ye termination of
ye future is subject to a 3 fold chang (...). By Apocope which takes away ye
final superfluous Damma and Nuns in ye end of ye words (yt is al except those 2
in the plural feminines which remain because they are formative of ye gender)
instead where of the plural masculines assume a quiescent (...) as sing (...)
dual (...) plur (...) and and this Apocope is ye true Analogy

2 By Antithesis with changes y final 'into' as (...)

3 By Paragoge whereby unto ye form caused by Antithesis is added a Nun with a
fata and a teshdid ye servile (...) in ye singular and (...) in ye plural
falling away, Also in ye plural feminine is inserted an (...) yt so 3 nuns may
not come together all which appears as follows.

paradigm

Sometimes this Nun is added without a teshdid and is only gizm'd but ye
singular only and ye masculine and Common plural are Subject to this form
(...) etc.

In (...) and (...) as often as ye, 3 radical is gizm'd ye 2 quiescent is cast
away as (...) etc (...) and (...) instead of receiving a gizm on ye 3 by reason
of Apocope cast the third away.

Apocope and Antithesis happen by reason of the influence of these particles
vizt'. (...)

To fill up this vacant place I have inserted this Scheme representing in short
ye variation of a perfect Verb the rough the tenses and persons of all the 13
order.

circular paradigm

The Chalde and Syriak manner of forming verbs

paradigm

Observe. that the second order in ye Syriak is the same with the first a Dages
being understood at the Second radical and a vowel at the first. The 3 order
is the same with the Second insecting only an (...) between the first and
Second radical. The fourth order is formed by placing (...) before the P. and
Pr. and (...) before the future The 5t. order is made out of the 2 by
preposing. (...) and the 6t^ out of the third on the same manner the line of
omission under the Second radical is of no moment

In the Chalde the Charactristicall (...) in the sixth order is omitted through
all the persons and tenses.

The Aethiopile manner of forminge verbs having but 4 order.

paradigm

The other. Orders being formed as the first, it shall suffice to set down.
the first words only

paradigm

The Noune and (...) of the first order is (...)

There are also imperfect verbs: yet none but what are likewise declined
perfectly according to ye Analogy, but in regard that some do occur
sometimes defective in one of their radical it may be requisite to know (for
the finding of their roots) that such as double the Second radical, (...) it
in ye Second person Sing foem. and second and third person (...) of the future
and no where else. Those whose first radical is (...) cast it away through the
whole future and present of ye first order and no where else. Those whose
second or third radical is (...) or (...) cast away throughout ye first order
and no where else what other special anomalyes there are may be learnt by
exercise.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the Eastern Tongues; to wit, Ebrew, Calde, Samaritane,
Syriac, Arabic, and Ethiopick.
IF there were not a great dimnesse in our sight, and dullness in the
understanding of our judgments, (which should ordinarily be led by reason,
more than by received opinions,) there is no doubt, but all things would go
far better, and in a higher way, yea whole Nations would be truly honorable,
glorious, magnificent, rich, mighty, powerful, and redoubtable unto their
enemies, spread more large, enjoy far more Kingdoms, then now they possess
shires, govern them with more facility and less trouble, then now a handful
of Cities. The lack of true noble principles spoils all great affairs.
Nothing is easy, because we are childish in our actions. Let us lay a good
foundation, and upon a little ground we may erect an excellent, high and
glorious steeple, which will be seen far abroad. It is not money that gives
splendour to the world, but reason. The sun is that which carries the bravest
sway in the world, discovering all things, seeing all things of any color,
nature and condition, good or bad. And in that vastnes of the heaven it
occupies but a little space, yet gives light and glory unto the whole
Hemisphere; The reason withus mankind, is the sun of our judgment, whereby
we are able to learn all things quickly and easily, because thereby we can
comprehend all things taught us. Let there be never so many actions, it will
easily discern them all. Never so voluminous works, it will lead us through
them, and make way even in the darkest passages of them, and show us what
method it had by the author, when he penned the book, and that it is the same
sun both for his and our Hemisphere, like as we know, that the sun is the
same to them at Jerusalem (and al other parts of the world,) that it is to us
in England. If then these things, that come under our eyes, are so certain,
why should the eyes of our judgment be so dimsighted, as not to discern by
reason such things, as are only to be made easy and delightsome unto us
thereby, except we delight more in ignorance then knowledge. Yet that can never
be said of mankind, wheresoever or whatsoever, but must still be granted, that
indeed it does rather embrace (according to that light of Nature which God has
bestowed upon it) REASON than UNREASON, LIGHT than DARKNESS, LOVE then HATRED.
And thence it comes to pass that yet so many things are done, because reason
leads us on, shows us the hope to come through, the ways whereby to endeavor
how to shun the snares, to avoid the enemies, to embrace the friends, and to
improve all to the best advantage, and thus to come at our journeys end. Only
we confess, that this Honorable Councellor within us, given by God Almighty,
is never, or very seldom heard by the greatest part of men (not out of hatred
but slownesse of spirit, and unwillingnesse of pains, unthankefullnes after
having received good counsel,) but rather subdued or oppressed by vices,
lewdnes, corruption or malice, to the great hurt and grief of this our sun.
This neglect of reason has troubled and made all Learnings uneasy, because
without it we have them all given to us without life. Reason is the life of
all actions, of all learnings. And thence it is, that the Mathematics are the
most true and delightful studies, because the fullest of reason. And where
that lays the groundworke, the fabric will be durable. Thus all Languages
(when they are taught or learned by and with reason,) have an excellent
easiness, and that is the cause why people generally believe, that in Heaven
they shall speak some other than their mother tongue, and yet attain to it
without the least difficulty, because reason will make any tongue easier than a
thousand rules. The principles of all tongues are laid by reason, as well as
the principles of Physic, Metaphysick, Logic, or any other Art whatsoever.
But our opinions and principles not being regulated thereby, do invert all the
ways to learn them, to a difficulty. Whence it comes to pass, that even al
people cry out, Tongues are difficult, and lay that down as a certain
principle. If now people build upon such ground, can we expect any thing from
them but foolish talking and writings. Can we find figs on thorns, or grapes
on thistles, or is it possible for the fruit to be sweet, where the very root
of the tree is bitterness it self. Let us then lay aside, (and that with your
leave) all such principles, and embrace this viz. That Tongues are the easiest
things in the world to learn and that with great delight.

To come then nearer to our Tongues, the subject of this our present discourse,
I confess that still I find among all men (nay the learned themselves) many
strange opinions of them, and such principles, that if they should be truly
scanned, they would make the world to laugh at them. The nearest way that I am
able to show, to speak and judge truly of these Tongues. viz. Ebrew, Calde,
Samaritan, Syriac, Arabic and Ethiopic, is only that you believe all things on
the contrary. If they tell you, there are many; believe them to be but one, If,
hard to be gotten; to be easy. If, without use; there are none more useful.
If, of a hard pronunciation; not much harder than English. Ungracious; the
sweetest expressions in English are found in them. Not many Books in them,
More than any man is able to read through in all his life time. Of no comely
Characters, as neat as English. Of few words, And the more wise, grave,
serious, majestaticall speeches. Contemptible, by none but ignorant and
malicious men. They are lost, no more than the German, French, Italian,
Spanish, Latin, or the English. No good Authors extant in them. The Bible is
originally in this tongue. And if you can forget or slightly pass by that
book, which the spirit of God himself has penned, and sent into your bosom,
you are not worthy to look on any book else, although I would have showed you
only in England about two thousand. None is honored by learning them. True,
because none did truly understand them, No people studied them. Yet all
nations do. The Universities drive more the Arts, than these Tongues. Because
they were taught to be many, and learned men would rather dispute, than become
scholars again and again.

Yet all this spoken in an opposite way is easily done and said, but not easily
believed, because the old principles are so deeply rooted in men's hearts,
therefore is it fit to go on a little more plainly in the declaration of their
nature, then in railing and wrangling about them. Wherefore I will choose to
speak first of their Antiquity; secondly, of their rare virtues; thirdly, of
their largeness; fourthly, of their use; fifthly, of their unity, sixthly and
lastly, of their easines. And all this without much premeditation, but only as
few days labor of using the pen will afford: their being many reasons in the
way, why I could not spend great labor or much time about this business at
this instant.

And first, the Antiquity of them is granted by all, to be before any of the
European Tongues whatsoever. But the Greek Tongue, which spread so sarre in
Europe, that out of Greece it took root in Spain, France, Italy, and in
Africa in all the mediterranean Seashore, and almost into Persia it self by
Alexander the Great (not that it was the only tongue spoken in Asia, Africa,
and Europe, all other Tongues being lost, but that it came in for its
smoothness, by the victoriousnesse of that people, and the activity of their
Kings, and great traffic of their most renouned Merchants and seamen.) this
Greek Tongue only might challenge a great Antiquity, and be competitor with
Calde, Syriac, Samaritan, and Arabic, if not with Ethiopic, whereof we are like
to know almost nothing (with Ebrew no man dare bring it into competition for
antiquity;) but if diversity of names make no distinct matter, and if the
essence be not diverse, because it has many accidents, and if the substance of
any thing be remaining the same in number, although you add never so many
outward pictures and titles, glosses and inscriptions, and if the thing it
self be not changed, in changing the outside only, and if a man remain the
very same, although he should be so foolish, as to change his habit every day
and never wear the same clothes two days together, than let us not despair,
(if we can make it appear, that Ebrew, Calde, Samaritan, Syriac, Arabic and
Etiopic are but one and the same language, as we shall in the fifth part) but
that the argument used for the antiquity of Ebrew will show the very same
antiquity to be in all the said Tongues, because they being all one, began at
one instant together with Adam, given unto him by God Almighty, to talk with
his Creator and afterward with his bedfellow, not with the Devil as she did.
Besides, we know there was a great distance between the Caldean Empire, the
Syrian Gods, the Arabian Rovery, and the Grecian setlement and well grounded
assurance, or full large extent either of the tongue or government, we know
further, that the whole Greek Tongue (no dialect excepted) as big as it now
is,) comes by good natural pedigree from the Ebrew, Calde, Samaritan, Syriac,
Arabic, and I dare say as much out of Ethiopic. I say not only from Ebrew, and
though a great quantity of Greek be already derived by diverse Authors only from
the Ebrew Bible words: (so that if I am not mistaken, there are above six
thousand Greek words clearly derived by diverse learned Authors from thence,
as a son descending from his parents) yet if the very same root and stock be in
the Calde, Samaritan, Syriac, Arabie and Ethiopic Tongue, who can deny (or will
not easily grant) that all these six thousand Greek words already derived out
of Ebrew, are at the same instant derived out of Calde, etc. And than besides,
if many thousand words extant in Greek can (either by me or many hundred men)
be further derived from these Ebrew words extant in the Bible, will not all this
declare more and more a great antiquity not only of Ebrew I say, but also of
Calde, Samaritan, Syriac, Arabic and Ethiopic before the Greek Tongue, it
being a most reasonable principle, that if the parents beget never so many
children in diverse Countries, let these children have never so many and various
names, yet they will never be elder than their parents. Further as it would be a
sinple assertion, that whatsoever word is not extant in the English Bible, is
not English, even so and no less ridiculous do almost all the learned men
hitherto speak, when they say, that whatsoever word they find not in the
Ebrew Bibel, is not any more Ebrew, and therefore then it must be called Calde;
if they find it in the Calde Jewish translation upon the old Testament; or
Syriac, if in a Syrian Author, or Arabic, by an Arabian, and Ethiopic by an
Ethiopian, or Samaritic, in the Samaritan character of the Ebrew five Books of
Meses, in some passages differing from the Ebrew Bibles extant, or in their
Paraphrase upon the text. This as it is unsound, and a sport of dark minds,
led out of the way by neglects of their own learning, so shall it be declared
in the fifth point. And therefore as we grant that there are some words sound
in Calde Syriac, and Arabic books, which are not in the Ebrew Bible, and
besides as we know, that even of them also a great quantity of Greek words are
derived by some, and yet many hundred more will heareafter be derived; all this
does show, that the Greek tongue can not come into competition for antiquity,
either with Ebrew, Calde, Syriac, Arabic, or Ethiopic, Neither is that dream,
as if the Greek tongue had bin hatched at the same instant with Calde,
Samaritan, Syriac, Arabic, and Ethiopic (conceaved to be so many diverse
Tongues) at the confusion of Babel, that dream I say is not with any reason,
but only a blind talk upon suppositions. First, Of a confusion of Tongues in
the plural, where the Scripture clearly speaks only of one tongue, of one
pronuntiation, which tongue was confounded, I grant it, but as the Scripture
says, not unto many tongues, (for so it says not) but many pronunciations of
the very self same tongue, and so much it says, and that is true. Which was
enough to dispersethese builders, when they could not understand one the others
pronunciation, although they spoke the same language. As forinstance,
notwithstanding English, Scottish, Danish, Swedish, Norwagish, Greenlandish, Low
Dutch, and the High German tongue is but one tongue all in all, with many (yet
small) accidental differences, these said nations cannot understand one
another at an instant and new unexpected meeting, (I say not of the nearest but
most remoted nations,) because of the diverse pronunciations of Consonants and
Vowels together with the displacing of the accent. Secondly. Of an immediate
proereation of many tongues (innumber seventy two.) Which old fable has bin
among the Greek fathers, by name in Epiphanius his book of fourscore sects,
(he lived in the time of Basil, Gregory, Chrisostom, and Hie rome) from thence
among the Latins Hierome and Augustine, but before these the Syrians and
Arabians in Orient, and the rest of the Heathen, Jews and Christians, did
afterward disperse it among the Turks and all other religions and sorts of
people, and runs at this day current through the whole world. But concerning
this matter, these things are certain, that there was but one and not many
tongues, and that that one tongue was divided by the diversity of the lips or
pronunciation: and then, that every particular person had not a several
language, nor a several pronunciation, for then there could have bin no
society after the dispersion; but that whole families only had their proper
pronunciation; therefore certain is that also, that neither seventy two
Languages, or more or less, took then beginning, neither every particular
language now used was then founded, but only the Mother and Original tongue,
which we now have under hand, nor that besides this primitive tongue other
mother and original tongues now used or exstinguished, were then founded, out
of which there is should since have bin derived, as many learned think. To what
purpose, I beseech you, at the confusion of Babell was the English tongue, when
there was not yet any English man, at lest not Horsus and Hengistus? then we
might say with more true reason, that the Low Dutch men were at that time,
because in Latin they are called Belgae, which they may say, comes from Peleg,
at whose time this confusion of Babell was, and he therefore called Pelga for
Belga, p. for b. But as these are but fancies, so indeed is it no less a
fancy, when it is so confidently asserted of the Greek tongue. What property is
there in it, that it should have bin at the same time with Ebrew, Calde,
Samaritan, Syriac, Arabic and Ethiopic, at the confusion of Babell and not
English. And where have you read the names of these 72. tongues, that did then
bud out of that mudd? It Is true, that some Modern writers on this point have
followed and did believe Arnobius, (that Africane Heathenish Philosopher, and
professor of Rhetoric, who was afterward a Christian and a Minister of the word
of God, he lived about three hundred years after the nativity of our Lord:)
who upon the 105. Psalm the 8. ver. (He has remembered his covenant for ever,
the word which he commanded to a thousand generations,) conceives, that there
are in the world (besides a thousand ( nations mistaken for generations,) 72.
tongues, to wit beyond Persia Eastwards 406. nations, only 27. tongues: on
this side Persia, all Asta and Africa 394, nations, only 22. tongues; and all
Europe, with the North of Asia, Eastwards 200 nations, 23. tongues. Wherein
partly we find a very great audacity, or confidence as well in the number of
nations, as tongues, yet a greater defect of the proper names of these 72.
tongues, and withal a far more unreasonable assertion, that Jafets 200.
families or nations should yield almost as many tongues in Europe, as Sem's
406. in Asia, and more than Chams 394. in Africa; The reason, why to Europe he
attributes 23. tongues, and but 200 nations to Africa 22. to Asia 27. and yet
800. nations is because Arnobius descending from Roman Parents knew better the
tradition of the Greec and Latin Fathers, than the tongues of Africa,
understanding only the Roman, and unacquainted with the Hebrew etc., or at
least not thoroughly with one tongue of Africa, less of Asia. And yet upon
such rotten buildings, some modern Authors (speaking of tongues (and of those
which they do not understand,) most confidently) tell it as a certain thing,
that in the consusion of Babell there were 72. Languages divided. If than these
72. tongues are not named by this most confident Roman, or Moore, may ye not as
well name the English, as the Greek. I see nothing in it, but only that we are
consident to tell tales far of, where we think no body can inquire whereas in
things at home we are more sparing, because we may be easily intrapped, and
more cautious in believing, because we may discern them for the most part by
our reason, without inquiry; as for instance. Let us but consider that tongues
are only made for man, not for beasts or any other creature, were there at the
confusion of Babel only 72. souls? for from so many persons numbered, as they
will take it in the tenth chapter of Genesis, they derive 72. tongues; which
yet cannot be true, those 72. souls not being all, nor the only builders of
that Tower of Babel. And if many thousands, which is more true and probable,
why only 72. tongues, when every one must needs have his own tongue and
pronunciation if he shall not be able to understand another; or if a thousand
men (after the confusion of Babel) had one pronunciation different from an
other thousand, then partly this confusion of pronunciations (where one could
not understand another) was only temporary, for the purpose of dispersing
those, who against Gods will would live together in one City, and not disperse
themselves: partly no necessity of faigning and coining tongues, and that so
many at one instant, and that to dure till this day, and yet many families and
nations perishing, and others arising, this number of 72. tongues to have
remained till this day, when some of those 1000. Nations, whereof he conceives
David to speak, are now utterly perished, and destroyed. Nay notwithstanding
that a Catalogue of thousand nations which are utterly lost and perished, by me
could easily be brought forth out of ancient Authors, yet till this very day
72. tongues to remain, and none to be lost: from these, and many such
considerations I say it would be easily discovered to be a mere fable. And if
you object, that even I confess, Ebrew, Calde, Samaritan, Syriac, Arabic and
Ethiopic tongues to have bin there, I hope you are not so forgetful, as not to
remember that I promised to show you hereafter the unity of those tongues, and
that it is no more many tongues (notwithstanding that it has diversity of
titles and names) then the Grand Signiour of Constantinople many men, because
of his numerous high and lofty titles, or the King of Spain many Kings, when
he gave himself a whole page of Titles of Kingdoms, and other small places in
Arabia and East Indies in his letter to the King of France. And as the King of
France did more wise in my simple apprehension in giving unto himself only
one Title, and in scorn of that foolery of Spain did repeat it frequently in
his answer (letter of credence,) so I may say in this bunnesse, si magnis licet
componere parva, if we may take an example of that wise King (as I think I may)
in place, where all others speak of many tongues, I say it is but one; and
therefore the antiquity of Calde, Samaritan, Syriac, Arabic and Ethiopic is not
the antiquity of many, but only of one and the self same Ebrew tougue. So
than, that we may come to the conclusion of the first point, I affirm, (and am
able to make it good against all opposers) that Ebrew, Calde, Samaritan,
Syriac, Arabic, and Ethiopic were from the very beginning of Adams creation,
and do remain yet with us in the world, they were before and after the
confusion of Babell, and are therefore the Mother tongue of all tongues in the
world.

The second point is, the rare virtues of these Oriental Tongues, viz. Ebrew,
Calde, Samaritan, Syriac, Arabic, and Ethiopic, whereby they are far more noble
then Greek, Latin or any of the esteemed learned tongues. And here I
confess, I see before me such a vastness of an excellent plain, where my
horse could run, not only a most gallant course, but even out of breath; yet
not to hazard so much, because I must use that my loving creature many times
more, and with more advantage hereafter, than yet I conceive to be at this
race, I will at this time not so much as permit it to a Gallop, but keep it in
a smooth and painles pace, being assured of its willingness upon any other
presented occasion. That most natural simpleness or singleness in the
comportements of this grave Lady does keep me still in a wilful obedience and
a silent admiration, nay adoration of that divinity. You will sinde here a
Divinity in pedigree, a comeliness in attire, a constancy in their nature and
fashions, a gravity in few speeches, a due observation of sensefull ordrings of
words, a brevity in their contractions, an hatted of confusion of the same, a
providence in placing them, no superfluity in servants, a certain office
ordered unto every one of them; even accounted superfluous by men ignorant in
their affairs, have their charge of a good turn. Their constant number of
roots, the easy order to find them out, planted all as in an Orchard, by
square, that wheresoever you send your eyes, you behold the same distance of
each other. Every tree of them of a diverse savor and gracious taste with a
delightful smell. The branches of these trees ordered, yielding hundreds of
fruits, to wit, words, all of the same taste and smell, yet with some
diversity: So that Ebrew, Calde, Samaritan, Syriac, Arabic and Ethiopic
according to many Authors and Books yet extant, have as large an extent, as
the Greek of Latin Tongue. For being a full tongue as well as Latin or Greek,
it must needs follow, that all the Ebrew Language must represent the whole
Latin and Greek: the Calde or Samaritan all the same; Syriac, Arabic and
Ethiopic the same. Neither does it contradict me and my tenants, that the Bible
does not contain the whole Ebrew tongue, therefore this tongue does not
comprehend the whole Latin tongue. For I never said, that this tongue, as it
is extant only in the Ebrew Bible, does contain all the Latin tongue, even
because there is not the whole Ebrew language in the Ebrew Bible, but is partly
yet in Caldean, etc. Authors. The whole Oriental tongue does include the
whole Occidentall be it Greek, Latin, German, English, Spanish, French,
Italien or whatsoever. And there is wonder enough in it. I dare say that those
words which are in the Ebrew Bible do contain most part of the GGreek or
Latin tongue, that is, the greatest part of the Latin or Greek tongue is
expressable by such words, as are in the Ebrew Bible, be they never so few in
comparison of that great voluminous vastity of Latin or English it self. If
we do admire the nature of this tongue, we may justly exclaim even in behalf
of it, as the Apostle in a higher strain concerning the nature of men under
unbelief and confusion, and the capacity of Gods mercyes upon all. O the depth
of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are
his judgments, and his ways past finding out? For God is as well the cause of
this his holy tongue, which he was pleased first to bestow upon mankind, as He
was the Creator of the first Adam, and in him of all mankind. Yet as there was
another state in Adam even after his fall, more liveliness, less dullness,
more simpleness and finglenesse of hearts, less troubles of the affairs of
the world, nearer with God, because less objects from God, more clear sighted
even in natural things, because using more his reason, diligency and industry
on them, and more blessed in his undertakings, because with a more single
heart, so that in many hundreds of things Adam was even after the fall yet so
much more perfect, than we. No less it was with this tongue, partly before the
confusion of Babel as in the state of innocence; Few and full words. Which
fullness is wondrous in all men's eyes, and yet not searched from whence.
Therefore, If I shall not do a miss, I shall rather give a hint at that well
and fountain, to lead you unto it, than at this time to bring you many cups
full of that wholesome living water flowing, nay springing from thence. It is
undeniable, that a thing is but one in essence, and yet has diverse accidents,
more or less, so the word signifying a thing, and but one thing also, which
words we call the root, those words, those roots do only signify that one
tree. And every tree, though never so many, if they are of the same stock, will
have all the same taste; whereby it comes to pass, that 20.50.100. words in
Ebrew, etc. descending from the same root and tree, do yield naturally alike
taste or signification, and yet they are individuals and diverse in number. The
taste then is one and the same, the radical signification is but one, not 2,
3, 4, 6. or more, as hitherto all the Dictionary Writers have falsely asserted,
even against nature it self, yielding unto one and the same root or tree many
and diverse tastes. Which assertion holds yet, because they are all but ill
gardiners, only considering the outward shape of the fruits, and therefore the
taste being a little different, they presently conclude against the nature of
all trees, that one and the same root or tree can have diverse tastes or
significations. When otherwise if they would but search and confer the taste
of this with the taste of the other fruit, they would find a sweet analogy
between them, viz. that there is but one taste in every tree, and so define
that taste or signification. But by what means does the same taste seem to be
diverse, and so dazzle the eyes of learned men, and withdraw their judgment? I
answer, because they think not. 1. That tongues are only proper to men and not
beasts. 2. That men have only a more perfect reason, and that in an infinite
higher degree than the beasts, in so much that for the distance thereof these
are deemed to have almost none at all. 3. That languages have reason in them,
and proceed with reason, out of reason, accompanied and followed by it. 4. That
men have naturally Logic, Rhetoric, Physic, Metaphyfic, Ethic: because all
these (being called Arts) are branches of Reason. 5. That all these Arts
naturally inhabiting in a man, do infould themselves first in that thing,
whereby reason of a reasonable creature is only expressed, that is, in the
language of a man; and secondly all speeches are by reason teinted more or
less, according as man makes use of his reason. 6. That as all men have only
one and the same reason, as the world only one and the same sun, so all
tongues have also one and the same reason. 7. That Logic, Rhetoric, Ethic,
Physic, Metaphysic, (considered as it is in any Philosopher of any part of the
world,) does naturally, first, beautify, amplify, enlarge, determine the
significations of any word and root or tree, how far they may proceed, and not
father; as also, secondly, distinguish and keep them from confusion,
contradiction, implication, and thirdly, join those, and show in what measure,
and how far to join, which otherwise seem to be diverse, and of a clear other
tree and root, 8. That by these means those most ancient tongues, (I speak
now in plural, rather as people speak, than according to the truth) Ebrew,
Calde, Samaritan, Syriac, Arabic and Ethiopic, having but few roots in respect
of Greec and Latin, yet are multiplied beyond all expectation in
significations by Rhetoric, Logic, Physic and Metaphysic; viz. by reason only.
9. That the nature of the Oriental tongue is for the most part the very same
with the nature of the Occidentall, viz. Ebrew it self, Calde, Samaritan,
Syriac, Arabic and Ethiopic has the greatest part of its nature even as
English, it being no way less instructed by reason than these; neither has
Ebrew by way of reason a greater preeminency then English, or any occidentall
tongue. 10. That the same metaphors, metonymies, synecdoches, proper and
translate significations, the same Ironicall expressions are every where,
because there is the same reason in all tongues, and among all men. 11. And
therefore the same metaphorical, metonymical, synecdochical, ironical
significations in words. 12. And that among others we may, and many times can,
nay must frequently consider the significations of one word in Latin, how
manifold they are, as also in many other occidentall tongues, and apply them
in the Oriental, and then proceeding thus with reason, we shall find a nearer
conformity, than hitherto believed, and greater distinction, than hoped for;
and all this, out of a more large ample, and natural well, even that eternal
fountain REASON, than out of the best Jews, Rabbis, Syrians, Arabians and
Ethiopians themselves. 13. That in this tongue is never a compounded word, as
there is in Latin and Greek, and that therefore it must necessarily follow,
that all the compound significations of any simple word in those languages must
also be comprised in that simple Ebrew root. 14. The reason of which assertion
is clear, because that all the compound words, (I understand the compositions,
with the praepositions (...), etc. a, ab, abs, ac, ad, af, ag, al, am, an, ap,
ar, as, at, e, ex, etc.) have still this simple word as that unum tertium, a
natural meeting in that word, whereby all the compound words being joined as
in the body, so in the essence and substance of signification with some small
alteration, addition, or detraction, of and unto that simple and first
substance.

Such and the like things being set down in the general search of tongues,
will show the nature, beauty, and comlines of this Oriential tongue. And if any
man demand of me, what special use may be made of the singlenes of this
surnamed Oriental tongue beyond the Occidental, where there is sar greater
toil in composition, many terminations without any need, as for example in
the Latin, six cases in singular, and as many in plural, so many Declensions
in Nounes, and Conjugations in verbs, diverse terminations for all persons,
various both in Active and Passive, and an infinite of such like conceits,
these being almost al wanting in this Original tongue. I answer, that even
from thence we in the Occident and North may begin to look about us, and from
the corruption of our tongues, (and the great variety of circumstantiall
additions, and detractions, multiplications and divisions, (in Greec and
Latin) in nature clearly superfluous) learn to esteem more of the natural
simplicity of this first tongue, which like unto Adam in his innocence (without
so many garments and additions about his limbs as we now wear about us) is
still the most comely, gracious, goodly, neat, and tractable tongue, and that
which is most agreeable to the nature of man, requiring to be studied more by
reason than an infinity of rules, more trying the use of our reason, than the
strength of our memory. In one word, it makes us (when by the Greec and Latin
we were become beasts, by (...) so tells me my Master Adam) to become Adam our
selves; to be no more under the law but under the sweet yoke of reason:
differing as much from our former condition of studing tongues as reasonable
Adam did from any of his subjected beasts; whereof none, was found to match
with him, being far inferior to his condition. So that this Primitive tongue
(whether in Orthography, Analogy or Syntax) is as single and simple as the
English it self; having (in Orthography) no more letters or consonants,
(although some of them are used in place of vowells) having no case, nor scarce
any masculine or feminine gender, much less neuter, common or Epicene, no
active or passive (much less neuter or Deponent, no Infinity or Terminations
in numbers, much less in persons then commonly is taught. No Declentions at
all in Nownes, nor Conjugations in Verbs, no Modes without any more Tenses then
nature requires, viz. The present, DO THOU and YE, the future I, THOU, HE, WE,
YE, THEY, WILL DO, and Pretertense I, THOU, HE, WE, YE, THEY, HAVE DONE. All
the superfluities of a Presens in Indicative, Optative, and Conjunctive in the
first, second, and third person singular or plural are wisely cut away and not
found. The imperfect and plus quam perfect of the Indicative, Optative, and
Conjunctive are comprised with only one Pretertence, the Future the same. What
an easiness makes this in a language? If you say I speak clear otherwise
then other Gramarians have and do speak of this tongue. I answer, that I
would not have you to regard what either I, this, or that man says concerning
this tongue but what it does afford its self, and when those rules, that are
most confidently set down by former Gramarians, are found by themselves and
others to have so many exceptions, as that the examples of these many times
outreach the number of those, does it not clearly show that that rule is
indeed of no value, use, or authority? Nay the Syntax is that part of Grammar
that will show the necessity or superfluity of things taught in Analogy: For if
there be never so many distinctions and divisions of this or that part in
Analogy, and Syntax authorize it not with the utility, but rather cry it down
by its independency or indifferency of use; we may think it to be rather some
fancy of a man's brain then the nature of the tongue. And of that sort of
adiophoras in this tongue are almost gender, number and person, adjective and
substanstive, etc. The order of the subject and predicate will easily be
observed if you know the simple and single taste or signification of the root,
and have learnt (in other tongues) Rhetoric and Logic, to know how such and
such a signification may (by these Arts) be enlarged, distinguished,
determined and turned into many and diverse fashions, (yet so as that it still
retain the natural, ideall, or radical taste,) and that applied to our Ebrew,
Calde, Samaritan, Syriac, Arabic, and Ethiopic roots and words) will yield all
helps that can be required to know the true sense of that text: contrarily if
we have never so many rules, they will rather confound our understandings,
obscure our reason, undermine our judgment, and in place of helps, bring us
into farther confusion. Reason with few rules and prerequisite signification of
words (which the Dictionaries have hitherto but meanly afforded and must
hereafter be more fully discovered and set down) may be multiplied or
divided, and according to the place soundly applied by the help of Logic,
Rhethorick, and Physic, and Metaphysic,) will contain all Syntax in very few
rules, and then no rules can be expected without reason. Yet more especially to
discribe you in a competent brevity the nature of this tongue you shall have
a^nexed a plain, little, and full grammar, at least fuller then that I
formerly set out in English upon one sheet in three columns in folio for
Orthography Etimology and Syntaxis, according to that brevity, (whereof those
that desired it so short did show me a pattern made before me by some other
learned Author,) and afterward in some measure enlarged by my pains, and
published under the title of THE RVDIMENTS OF THE HEBREW GRAMMAR IN ENGLISH,
etc. this year 1648. but much spoiled in the publication, it not being
according to my will, as the following is.

The third point concerning their largeness, is partly clear in the
largeness of time wherein they continued, partly of place where they have been
and are yet in use. That of time, if it were only for a mean Honor of
Antiquity, we have spoken enough of it in the first particular. But this having
some farther intention, it is not to be pretermitted. Then there is no Ebrew,
Calde, Samaritane, Syriac, Arabic, or Ethiopic so ancient as the Bible and
Moses. Therefore in those Greec Authors that have written of all those
Countries, where this holy Language was naturally and continually in full
course, and having written in the Greec tongue, and thereby confounded almost
all the names of the Oriental places, persons and things in so much, that
without a diligent search of this mother tongue, we shall never be able to
find out what they mean thereby, nor will the Greec paraphrasts, interpreters,
Dictionaries, or any thing else of theirs be able to help us in any thing,
which themselves were as ignorant of, as those Authors they would clear up,
having not themselves that which they would give to others. Now of all these
thousands of Greec Authors, there is not one to be expected, that has not now
and then more or less of some Oriental words, and that so corruptly, that his
sense even thereby becomes obscure, because the sense of those words remain
so. Then to clear them up, there will be no more sure and catholic remedy,
than to learn to reduce all the corrupt Greec words, translated out of this
Oriental tongue, to their proper place, where if once brought, will presently
yield a full and clear commentary upon the said author whatsoever. The same may
be said of many hundred of Latin Authors; as being in the same way of
darkness, and hereby to be brought unto light. Largeness of space at this
present time upwards to about 1000. years ago, is all the same yet, and can be
made good in few words. Whole Africa has had from its very being and beginning
till this day this and the same tongue. If you object, Greec and Latin has bin
there, I answer, yea, I confess it, but only as French and Low dutch is
preached here at London and some other places of England: not being in Africa
as the Mother, but only as the Foreign tongue, exercised by strangers: the
Mother tongue being this primitive of Adam, which in all Authors of many
hundreds of places may be showed, and is partly most excellently conjctured at
by diverse learned Authors. It will be further objected, another tongue to have
bin in Egypt, viz. that which called Josef, Zofnat Faneah (in our English
translation Zaphnath-Paaneah. Genesis 41:45.) which they say is not of this
tongue, but some other called the Coptic tongue, which they would have to be
different from this true Ebrew. I answer, that all that is true, that the Copic
tongue, which was used in that Province of Egypt called Copt or Coptus in Greek
and Latin, naturally and by the true native inhabitants, is the very same
language, which was spoken by Pharaoh, and in which Joseph was thus entitled.
But to call that corrupt, falls Coptic, which was brought in with the Grecians,
when the Pharaonses (or Princes) and Kings of Egypt gave them leave, not only
to dwell here and there in many towns and villages, as Merchants and
Handicraftmen, but also more especially the province and Metropolis of that
province Copt being truly Greec, but now so corrupted with that mingling of
this holy tongue then used from the beginning of the first introduction of it
by Mizrayim (whereof Egypt at this very day has its name being by the
Inhabitants themselves called Misr, not Egypt, a name brought in only by the
Grecians from their more special dwelling place, viz. that shire Copt, Cypt or
Gypt, that it is neither Ebrew nor Greec, but a confusion of both, having many
words of Greec, with an Egyptian or Arabic termination; so far deny I, that
that minglemoos is the true Coptic, natural and native tongue of the
Egyptians. About the Ethiopic there will be more objections. From whence I
have, that that Country has the same tongue in essence, notwithstanding
corrupted by diverse and many hundred of Accidents. I answer, out of their
books, to wit out of the New Testament, and some part of the old (viz. the
Psalms translated into Etiopien, and printed in Germany at Collen by art,
industry and learning of John Potken, Rector of Georg Collen, An. 1508 in 4o.
together with Greec, Latin, and Ebrew; with an in troduction unto this tongue)
we have more clearness and notice concerning it, than from all the voyages
unto it, or passages through it, described by diverse men of Italy, Spain,
France, Engeland, Germany and the Low Country. So that it remains true, that
in whole Africa, the native and true natural tongue is only this same tongue,
yet with some diversity of accidents, which though never so many, are not able
to bring that one essence to a diversity and confusion. And whereas it will be
further objected, that formerly there have bin diverse tongues, but lost; as for
instance; the Punic tongue, wherein Plautus in his Poenulus or Punicien Moor
has left some remainders, and that that passage is attempted to be cleared by
many Authors, yet it still remains in darkness. I answer, that names of this
tongue there have bin, and are at this day many, and may be made many more,
which never the less cannot change the essence of this nor any other tongue,
and they were called Poeni, whereof Poenulus, (as Graeci, Graeculus,) because
they came out of Phoenicia (which you may call also Poenicia) from Tire and
Sydon (whereof is mention made. Mat. 15:21. Mar. 7:24. Luc. 6:17. and else
where) and all the adjacent parts of that very same Mediterranean Sea of the
Phoeniciens with these Poeniciens. Now then, seeing this people (the Poeni in
Latin, or Poeniciens) were the children and new Plantation of those
Phoenicens, that did properly and naturally speak this primitive, holy and
most ancient tongue, no doubt, but they brought with them their own tongue and
pronunciation; and notwithstanding that perhaps they might find a language
there, yet because they found only a new and diverse pronunciation of their
own (even as here in England all along the seashore the pronunciation does
change and vary round about this great Island) it was easily joined with
theirs, and yet the pronunciation for the most part by time might change into
the pronuntiation of that country, not from whence, but unto whom they came. As
for that place of Poenulus by that old Comedian writer Plautus, (a very
excellent Latin Author, but full of such words, as do descend from this
primitive tongue,) no doubt but it is by diverse Authors finely and clearly
enough explicated, and may yet be farther cleared not only by me, but by many
others also: nevertheless if that Poenic or Punic tongue (being all and the
same as I write in Latin Punio and Poena,) there in Plautus will not appear
to be altogether such Ebrew, as we have in the Bible, we must not therefore
deny it to be this tongue, because I say, there are many thousand accidents of
this one tongue, as there are in all the rest of the whole world, viz.
diversity of vowels, changement of Accents unto a diverse syllable, and the
diversity of pronunciation of the Consonants themselves; which changement comes
from the diversity of the Climas, wherein one and the same language is extant.
Besides we must observe, that the Punic Alfabet, being different from that of
the Romans (the diversity whereof you may see in my delineation of the Ebrew
Orthography and Etymology printed in Latin at Amsterdam 1646. 4o. page 3.)
and Plautus himself or others, bringing these words from the Punic Alfabet
into the Roman Letters, (as it is the natural inclination of all men now, to
be careless in a just and due observing of the Orthographie of a strange
tongue natural to, and observed by its nation,) made no great matter about the
expressions in wrong or right and due Roman letters. Thirdly, When we consider
the many faults, which (from Plautus writing till this very day in written or
printed Copies) did frequently incroach, it is no wonder, if we find but small
remainders of Ebrew, nay more wonder, if any at all. The second part of
largeness of space, is less, to wit in Asia, where first this tongue was
given unto Adam, and is yet extant full, pure, and incorrupt from Persia
hetherwards till at the Mediterranian Sea; from the Persian Gulf all the land
enclosed within that and the Arabian Gulf, which is commonly called Arabia, till
Egypt (or Egypt) it self, whole Palestine or all Judea, all Mesopotamia, all
Syria. So that seeing all these Countries of one tract, have all one tongue,
making together from the Persian Sea or Gulf, till the Mediterranian Sea no
more Land, than Germany, which has also but one tongue, (sometimes called the
Saxon, (my own Mother Tongue, the same with that old Saxon here in England;)
also the High and Low German or Duch tongues, though the essence be but one: no
more different, than the English and Scots tongue which commonly by other
nations and strangers (ignorant of the tongue of these two nations) are
esteemed different? because it has two names, English and Scots. Yet as this
tongue on this side the Persian Gulf is incorrupt, so in Persia, Turkey,
Mogul, Tatar, and all the Eastern parts of the great Tatary until China it has
as great an influx authority and use upon them, as Latin or French has upon
English or Saxon here in England. For as the English Nation does write now at
this day all things with Latin Characters, so also do all those foreign
tongues use the Character of the Arabians, which is in essence the same with
Ebrew, only more roundly formed and joined together; with no more difference,
than English written and joined together, with the printed, where the
characters are separate. And as the descent of their Religion, Learning,
Experience and Wit does descend (partly by, partly without books) out of the
hithermost parts of the Persian Gulf unto them, so these things being coined
in this holy primitive tongue, whereof even among the Turks, Persians, Greater
and Less Tatariens is the same esteem of Holiness and Prerogative of it
before theirs and all the tongues of this whole round; they do honor the
tongue and words of it, and use many thousands of them in their speeches, lofty
discourses, sermons, courtings, writings, commands, poems, Romances, teachings,
epistles or letters; with no less ambition to show their learning, than our
writers in Latin do now and than show Ebrue, Calde, Samaritane, Syriac and
Arabic or at least Greek or in English wheare are frequently coined new English
words out of pure Latin. And notwithstanding that the common tongue be
different, being only frequently aspersed and beautified by those flowers and
dainties, yet is this the only tongue, which the learned or learned men do
use, to make known their excellent wit, not only unto their own Nation and
Country, but also unto all Asia over. So that this holy or primitive tongue
does pass among the learned men through Persia, Great Mogul and Malayen
Country till the very Chinas themselves, and that with a great deal higher
repute and respect, than all these common tongues either at home, or else
where. Being the Key, whereby to insinuate ones self into men of repute and
great eminency, who have their great honor as of other excellent parts within
them, so also and most chiefly from this tongue. So that even those, that knew
only this holy Tongue, are accounted to be as Saints and holy men, reputed,
esteemed, adored, glorified, embraced, respected and desired with all prevalent
ways, to grant their conversation and meeting. Nay it is certain, that even
they who have naturally this tongue, (under whatsoever name by us or them, and
whatsoever Religion or sect, whatsoever character of writing,) are looked upon
as those, that God has bin pleased to grant their undoubted descent from Noah,
and so from Adam, because they speak Noah's and Adams tongue; and to have the
prerogative to be of the seed of Abraham either by Sarah or his Concubines, (in
Orient of little less esteem than the true wife,) whereas the rest of the
people did live in Idolatry, so they which have not Abraham's tongue to be borne
extra ecclesiam out of the bounds of the true visible Church, and only brought
unto that glory and happiness by men of his lineage, to wit, Moses, David,
Jesus Christ and Mahomed that Arabian imposter in Chief.

I come now to the fourth part of this Discourse, to show the use of this
primitive tongue in the world yet at this day extant. It is of more use, than
English, Scotch, French, Italian, Spanish, Portugis, Germain, Low Dutch,
Danish, Swedish, or Norwegish. And so much have we showed in the second part,
so that I think no reasonable man can judge that tongue to be of no use, which
so great a part of the world makes use of, except we conceave the heaven not to
be of such use to them, as it is unto us, and that the Sun does not shine there
as clear as here Even as many fools at this very day in Asia and Africa, who
will not believe, that we can have the Sun, or that it shines as bright with us
as them, because it falls into the Sea as soon as it has passed Africa, just
at the west end of it, from whence it is called in Orient Dulmagrib, with some
parts of Spain thereabout so called at this very day; some I say of them do
believe, that within the first mile of that Spanish Sea down falls the Sun and
all the rest of the Northern Countries, (as England, Scotland, Ireland, France
and the Low Countries, etc) have no light, no Sun, no comfort, continual
darkness, storm, winter, rain, snow, night, frost, almost starved, having
no bread, no flesh, chicknes, lamb, sheep, gees, ducks, capons, hearts, beef,
mutton, hens, eggs, doves, feasants, partridges, woodcoks or any sort of
foul, or fish, but that we feed only on grass and herbs of the field, now
and then for a great delicacy a mouse, rat, or cat, dog or fox, etc. Now as we
pity this their blindness and childishness of judgment, so we may this (no
less childish opinion of our own) that this tongue is of no use at all. Why?
because we know none. Away I pray with such childish stuff, and let us talk
like men. Have we in England any profit by our tongue, can we make use of it or
no? The answer is clear. But they say. Nay the strangers must be here
considered, not the people themselves. And what use for us English men of
Ebrew, Calde, Samaritan, Syriac, Arabic and Ethiopic tongues and such rabbles
more. First I say. All these are but one tongue, and it must be a poor brain
that cannot learn one besides his Mother tongue. And England must needs be a
silly Country, if their people never had a heart to go abroad, to see other
Countries. Now there are a thousand ways, whereby English men may fall either
into love or necessity to see those countries; at which accident if you will
know whether the tongue will do you good or not, let us see, if any stranger
coming into England will find comfort by it, if at least he can pratle a
little broken English. Indeed men bereaved of all senses speak thus
childishly, as if there were no use of that tongue for us. What a tongue to be
the only Country tongue in whole Africa, and the third part of Asia, and by the
second third part a Learned tongue, (which always are of a higher esteem than
common tongues) and all this tongue without use? Is their Sun, when it comes to
us, of great use and grace, and can we think, that their tongue will not be
pleasant unto us, if we only will not abhor it? Is not even the Sun
superfluous unto a lasie body, and to him that desires not to stir out of the
bed, when the Sun does shine? Is therefore the Sun of no use because such lasie
bodies would wish it might remain night? Those that buy the nights at a great
price, and when they are overtaken by the arising of the Sun, before they
think, they had enough for their payment, shall (for such filthy stinking
bodies, and whoremasters, and all other unclean persons) the Sun (that
precious creature with its comfortable beams) be stopped and cried out of the
sight? Is whole Africa not many times bigger than England, has not Asia also
every way as rich, nay far more rich Countries than this is? and if some
unlearned men have an ill opinion of these tongues, shall no learned men be
credited to the contrary? There are diverse Authors already extant in English,
which do show the secrets of Merchandise in those two parts of the world,
Africa and Asia, I pray and beseech the Courteous Reader, if thou can love
gold and silver, all sorts of precious stones, and be contented, that thy wife
be richly clothed, her ears and fingers, her hatstring and armrings or
bracelets, her breasts and neck, and all the rest of her body accordingly and
as fashion does desire to be enriched with precious pearls and stones, as
rubies, diamonds, fafirs, turcoises, carbuncles and all sorts of medals, if
these things only or more rare and precious, do fall in Asia and Africa in that
country, where this primitive tongue is spoken, and being always certain,
that a Merchant that can only prattle, shall buy any ware cheaper, and at a
better rate, than he that can speak nothing, but must trust to his interpreter
and fellow, and that hereby he may get greater gains in an hour, than a whole
year by iron and other metal even here in England it self, especially
seeing the Commodity is the more shure, by how much it is less troublesome or
burdensome. Yea farther if whole Companyes trade thitherwards, and will not
send men only with one eye, one hand, one leg, one arm, one ear, but if it
be possible, as good, sound, well shaped honest English factors, as they have
had in their shops and trade, or meet withal, and think you not, that you now
send out no better then such. I say not, that they come not home better, than
they went, for that would be a soul business indeed, if they should go better
with one leg, than with two, and see better with one eye, than two. Only the
question is now, if ye are well contented with their service, if they make you
as good returns from thence, as they did, when you did send them all along
through England, where they knew the tongue? I am shure, you would be content;
and I wish they did so. But I fear, that if the companies do finish, close and
make up their account of some years past, they will find but small profit for
all their dangers and pains. And if they, which the Merchants do send, knew
the tongue, what Ambassadors think you should ye need for a handful of
factors? And these Ambassadors what excellent profit have they brought into
the treasure of any company whatsoever by ignorance of the tongues; whereby
they are not esteemed, disrespected contemned, scorned, kict at, and by their
ill behavior all the Nation does suffer, where some other of less rank and
condition can pass through these strange Nations, without need of
Ambassadors, do his work without resistance, without a protection of an
Ambassador, only because he has God and the Tongue. I will not jarre any
longer on this unpleasant string, where I could show, and it is known and felt,
and smarted enough, what ignorance of the Tongue does, or rather, what it does
not, but suffers. Come not and tell me tale of I know not what hard dealing of
the people of Asia and Africa. Believe me, they are as honest, as courteous,
gracious, friendly, in always as respectfull of you, as mindful of you,
tender toward you, favorable, well fashioned, as any the best Gentlemen in
France, Spain, Italy or Germany, nay England it self. Have not so many
virtues with you, nor so well made of body and mind, soul and heart, age and
actions, if you lack this key of men's hearts, believe me, you will be weary
before you can break them open, for all that they would willingly give you an
entrance into the most inward bowels of their good will. And if you cannot open
them, it is not their fault, (for all men are but in this work passively
wrought on not working) but yours; their virtues are as good as any man's,
easily to be gained, but you are unskilful.

Further, let the whole state come once and fall again upon that mind, which
(...) was on hand, to go as much Eastwards (...) ^^tations of their people and
the Gospel (...) and Savior Jesus Christ, as they have gone (...) westwards,
and let them take courses to meet the Spanish and Portugals and Duchmen in
East Indies, to help them in their way, and to do good for themselves, also, to
send out at least every two years a fleet of 20.30. or 40. sails, to fill
many excellent places of the void part of the world, (which have as good an
air as any part of England or Europe,) with that gracious and fruitful
English blood, rather than to destroy it and the Kingdom with civel war,
thereby to open the general Worlds commerce at a more sure and fast tie, than
hitherto, so that there may be less troubles in England, which for the most
part bud out of that superfluous abundancy of the blood within the narrow
veins of this Kingdom, so that men may be more generally employed, lasinesse
being the Mother of all vices and devices against the Commonwealth and peace
of this Kingdom. Or if that such plantations should be among such people,
whose tongue we do not understand, and yet the profit be great in joining with
them, will these Tongues think you do hurt unto the State of England here or
there? But let that sleep. Unto you most reverend and pious souls of England
and Scotland, unto you I would willingly speak of that subject, if I had
leisure, more largly and exactly, than this discourse will afford. There are
three things that concern every one of what rank, condition, charge, honor,
title or degree soever, and therefore I mean not only the reverend Ministers
(though them truly more especially) but you all in general and I wish no man
may think himself not to be of that number.

First, to have the truth at home, out of the well of truth and life ( viz. the
Ebrew Bible well and perfectly understood without the help of any translations
whatsoever, whenever or by whosoever compiled, excepting only the Calde,
Syriac, Samaritic, and Ethiopic translations, they being the same with Ebrew
the mother tongue it self,) not out of broken cisternes, where into break in
by force an infinity of dirt and mire.

Secondly, to have this truth transported in all our voyages great and small,
East and West, even through the whole world, that is to take still with you
such a man, as is able to satisfy you and your company with the sweet and
fresh water flowing from this well. viz. the Ebrew Bible, instructing you so
far therein that you may be an eye witness of what he teaches, and so able
to withstand any gainesayer: and to hold fast that which your own knowledge
shows you (out of the living fountain of the Ebrew Bible) to be the undoubted
truth, for you will scarcely find this fresh and pure water in any Country
(much less at Sea) but only in the innermost parts of Asia and Africa (and
there your ships arive not) so that you will be forced sometimes to take in
salt or brackish water of unsound translations.

Thirdly, If only in the East Country viz Asia and Africa, there be this well
( viz. that tongue wherein the old Testament was delivered) and that generally
throughout it; every City and village therein sending it forth in plentiful
streams, rushing from them more abundantly, and strongly, more clear, pure,
sweet and tastfull, than we can conceive; why should not our youth (given to
divine study) our young Ministers and Preachers, our young Gentlemen that would
travail for the good of their native Country, choose to go to those places
where this holy primitive tongue is as yet fully spoken, rather than toward
France, Italy, Spain or Germany, the Low countries or any other of less note,
to quench their humerous fancyes with some Roman antiquities, having no life or
salvation in them. Will not these considerations bring you back from a
deceitful opinion of those abundant riches of your English studyes, which
hitherto have been more filled out of translations, than the text it self: out
of annotations of men, than your own eyesight, to make you willing to trade
more diligently by searching the fountain it self, to see with your own
eyes, and taste with your own tongue. I conselfe I praise God Almighty from the
very bottom of my heart and soul, that such riches have flowed out of those
half stopped wells, whereas by ignorance of the true nature of the tongues and
signification of the words in Ebrew, Calde, etc. there is not a verse in the
Bible, but may be made more clear and plain than hitherto; and never a
chapter in the Bible, wherein there are not very gross and foul faults even
in the English translation. Tell me not what other men did or do know, but
tell me what you know; not that others preach out of the text, but that you do
it. It is not enough to say, In the Ebrew it is so and so, it affords this or
that sense, doctrine, admonition, use, reproof, argument, connection,
disjunction, this or that number, gender and person, this or that larger
explication, because of the more large significations of the words of my text;
and that with a confidence, when for the most part all the auditors know, that
it is but borrowed work and only upon heeresay, not from a true and judicial
knowledge many times not knowing so much as the names of the letters, much
less how to read: and your conscience will tell you, that if the dawning has
such a grace in your sermons, the day light will be exceeding more gracious.
Fear not, if our ignorance have done much good by other men's knowledge, but
your knowledge will do more. And therefore stir up your selves to such a holy,
necessary, sweet, comfortable, living, spiritual good work. Let us not be
drowsy, when Gods calls for labor and watching. Why will we sleep, when even
the sleep will bring us unto the danger of eternal plagues. A watchman must be
vigilant, know the language of his General, be able to receive and give it, to
discern whither it be counterfeited by an enemy, or the true Motto. All our
virtues do consist in actions, not wishes. Would God, (you may say) I had
learned it, when I was young. True, but now you are a Minister of it, ye must
learn it, and that necessarily. When ye were young, you might have learned it,
but now you must. Then was it easy, but now profitable; then delightsome, now
reason will sweeten it. Then would it have recommendeth your ingenium, but now
your officium. Then memory was strong, but now the pleasure of God more tying.
Then the knowledge or at least the study of it would have bin honorable before
men: but now is the ignorance shameful. Then you did not understand it. But
now ye do and see the necessity. If ye did not learn it in your youth, you
were, I am shure, careless. But now not learning it, you are inexcusable: nor
age, nor reason, nor necessity, nor office, nor men, nor God, nay your own
conscience can excuse you. There is yet remaining an extraordinary great use of
this tongue, partly among learned men without any relation unto the learned in
Asia and Africa, partly in relation unto them, which is so large, that a great
volume in folio might be filled up only to that purpose, and that also with no
small profit to the Reader. But because this is an Essay, it would be uncomely
to make it to big, and unreasonable to take up the space of remaining
matters; and that use must chiefly be considered in this age, where some
endeavor to make us think, that learning is cried down, which I never yet
could believe, because I find the contrary, and that if learning be not so
richly set forth, the fault is elsewhere, and not where it is given out. Our
lasinesse spoils us. Therefore breefly to say something to that point. No
study is sweeter, than search of nature. Now for the most part all the
Authors that have searched nature formerly and in foreign parts, are written
in Greek, Latin, Arabic and Ebrew among the Rabbines, in all of them is still
at this day an innumerable multitude of very fruitful places, if they could be
rightly understood. But because they speak of things, not properly belonging
to, or extant in England but Asia and Africa, and have written either in those
tongues, or terms, titles, names, descriptions, words or some phrases of Asia
and Africa, what hope have you to learn the full intent of the Author, and to
make profit of that place, Learned men know well enough that I might instance
in hundreds of Authors, and in them many thousands of things and words, which
we understand not at this very day. Now the ignorant people will say, but alas,
what helps us the knowledge of these things. Good people, think not, that what
you cannot have within your deore at home, and see the profit of it there, if
you see no precious stuff (of good use partly to the public good, partly for
private ends and necessity) therefore no body besides must have it? It may be
you know not how to use Pepper, Ginger, Nut-megs, Cloves, etc. shall therefore
no body else use them? The greatest part of all learning does either mediatly
or immediately flow unto these wholesome waters of the fountain of life, the
Bible and the understanding thereof. And because it does so, therefore honor I
all learning, and so, although you cannot come so far as to see the rushing
of all learnings to the public good, by a found and reasonable interpretation
of the Bible (befallen you by many impediments, viz. either by your sloth, or
your parents conceit or deceit) therefore I pray do not cavil at learning. For
it will be as impossible for you, to break down that light, set up within the
reason of a man, as to pull down the sun from the firmament, and to banish her
out of the world. Nay if only for one place of Judea, for one Jerusalem only
there must be learned Geographie, that most excellent art, whereby we know to
divide the whole heaven and earth, according to reason, for quick and distinct
apprehension of an orderly method as well of the stars as countries,
kingdoms, cities, and that great vast Ocean it self, with all the rivers from
and toward it, if we will not live in this world as in a dungeon and dark
prison, but reasonably to know where we are, where that Jerusalem is situated,
in the Scripture so much spoken of, and in what corner of the world our Savior
suffered for our behalf, I would think my labor or time very well bestowed
upon that art. How much more have we then reason to learn it, when in the
Bible there are many hundred of places named, set down, and described by the
rivers, seas, adjacent neighbors, constitution of the nature of it, or some
memorable passage thereabout, yet kept up by Gods providence and wise orderly
government in the memory and relations of the inhabitants till this very day;
when on the contrary without that art almost nothing is rightly in the Bible
understood. Yea for that art we have need of this primitive tongue under the
name of Arabic, there being yet many Arabic Geographers extant, for the most
part not yet printed, and to be found in both Universities, here at London, and
some noble Gentlemen's Libraries, which will afford an incredible bright shining
sunbeame unto that (as yet) very great darkness of our understanding, of the
situation of places named in Scripture. So further, Astronomy, Geomerry,
Music, and Arithmetic, so Logic, Rhetoric, Metaphysick, so the Ethic,
Politic, Oeconomic, so Poesy and all other Arts whatsoever, are honored,
beautified, nobilitated and highly advanced by the Christian faith, more than
ever before in the heathenish Philosophers times, who did embrace them more for
curiosity then Religion sake, but we Christians esteem them because they
willingly give all their assistance and offer up their service to the Bible and
Divinity.

But further, if we would speak of these arts in reference unto othermen, (
viz. the greatest part of those in Asia and Africa) I avow that a more worthy
work cannot be undertaken by a Generous Nation (as England I have experience of
to be) than that the Learned men thereof should not only sit still at home
(referring all things only to themselves and studies,) but also join with
Heathens, Christians, and Jews, to learn from them, teach them, love them,
and to be beloved of them, to meet them, invite, and do them good, not only
with temporal, but also (which they would accept of with more thankful,
humble, devout and earnest minds) with Spiritual refreshments. Are you the
worse for having your Sermons frequented by thousands more then formerly? or
the Exchange with thousands of Merchants more then your selves, every one of
them increasing the commonwealth and riches of the City? or for having store of
spiritual, intellectual, and corporeal goods, wherewith to refresh all Asia,
and Africa, by your writings, and instructions, in their own tongue? but I
must leave this (to me at least) pleasant music, and come to the fifth point,
to show, that these six languages, viz. Ebrew, Calde, Syriac, Samaritic,
Ethiopic, and Arabic, are BUT ONE

Truly I would never have touched that point (either in this my English Essay,
or in any of my latin books and writings) because I know it is displeasing to
some, (who would not willingly hear the truth, or the nature and secrecy of
this tongue discovered, or cannot believe it to be so, or if they do, will not
confess it, but would keep the people still in ignorance and admiration of
unspeakable high matters, whereunto no body is able to attain, but themselves;
nay they think, that I undervalue the Holy tongue, feigning as if I spoke of
it in a contemptible way, because of this unity (as if God were therefore to be
contemned because BUT ONE) and that I loose my own reputation of Learning, by
writing and speaking of it in that way of commendation. Some others are apt to
think and say, that this sort of commendation does only arise out of some
philosophical notions about unity and diverfity (which are also very useful
and necessary) following therein Plato's ways of discoursing of things rather
in high, and witty fancies, than in plain and samiliar way, tending to, and
advancing the easines and utility of the matter under hand) but only that the
truth must be said and written, much profit arising from a true notion of
things (whole Kingdoms being willing to engage in a work according to their
notions be they good or bad) wherefore I thought it reasonable to say something
in behalf of this holy primitive tongue, when so many hundred wits lie and
sleep, out of a false conceit that it is impossible to overcome these Oriental
tongues, because there is no end of studying them, and never (almost) any seen
to get out with credit and honor. Many thousand wits otherwise employed, that
might easily be brought to any tongue, if they were well informed of the
subject. Many thousand study not at all, that would be glad to have some good
subject presented them. In respect of all these, and in love toward the
rongue, I tender to all the English wits of whatsoever profession, honor,
title, degree, and state, this sort of learning, only with this condition, that
they truly love God whom they see not, fear and tremble at his power and
greatness, yet withal faithfully embrace his mercy, kindness, and goodness,
and rejoice in the flourishing condition of their own Kingdom: for if they
cannot do this, I have done with them, and desire not to engage farther with
them. Upon this point, ( viz. that all those hitherto (though falsely) esteemed
diverse tongues are but ONE) I did (partly) before build the usefullnesse, and
shall hereafter also set down the easiness of them, when I have fully
demonstrated that unity which I now speak of.

Unity then is a flower of essence, never of accidents, for they cannot have
that prerogative to become one, whereas let essence be presented with all the
various accoutrements that the wit of man can invent, it cannot be changed, but
will always remain one and the same. Now therefore when we speak of the unity
of these tongues, ( viz. that these six tongues (in my opinion) are only one
and not diverse) it must be understood of their essence, not accidents. Ignorant
people may think, that languages have neither essence nor accidents, but the
learned (and such I speak unto at this time (though in some measure to others
also) know, that not only created matters, but also tongues, may be considered
both in their essence and accidents. And as essence is one, so has it
essential proprieties, viz. Unity, Truth, and Goodness, besides diverse
others: all which are so united with essence, or the essential being of things
(metaphysically) considered, that if they are one and the same, it follows
necessarily, that whatsoever is good and true in one, continues still to be the
same, under whatsoever climate, name, shape, or plantation it be found.

Then if Ebrew be good, holy, and primitive, and Caldaic, Syriac, Samaritic,
Ethiopic, and Arabic (call them by as many names as you please) be the same
primitive tongue: then if you deny, whether with, or without reason, any one of
them, the name of primitive, you may as well deny it to Ebrew it self, the
denying of one being the denying of the other.

Now then I will lay down the foundation of this unity. Ebrew, Calde, Syriac,
Samaritic, Arabic, and Ethiopic, is one tongue, because it has but one matter
and form, whereof it consists, and whereby it differs from all other tongues
whatsoever, none of them having the said properties.

The matter of these, viz. Ebrew, Calde, etc. is 22. sundry letters,
(reduceable unto 20.) used generally by these people in all ages from David the
King and Prophets days until us. Nay further, seeing that David used the very
same words which Moses (the holy penman of the five Books of the Law and story
of the patriarchs before the law,) both before and after the deluge (retayning
the same nature that was observed by Ezra the Scribe) I think we have a good
ground (from reason) to say that Adam himself did use the same tongue.

But because the antiquity of the Ebrew Alphabet (even from Adams days) is
already sufficiently demonstrated against any cavills, I shall go on to show
my unity. It Is true, that there is some diversity in the Arabic, Syriac, and
Ethiopic Alphabet, though not arising from the tongue it self, but only that
the Ethiopians, and Arabians (without any respect had to each other) do alter
their Alphabet by changing their order and name, upon the authority and good
liking of private men or teachers among their country men, but the Jews keep
their order as they found it in the Psalms of David. Now whereas Arabic, and
Ethiopic seems to have many more Letters then Calde, Syriac, Samaritan, and
Ebrew, it comes to pass only by the addition of a point to note some small
diversity of their pronunciation in some places. Yet because that in the Ebrew,
Galde, and Syriac also there is some such point to be added unto so many
letters, as by the Arabians (unto fewer by the Ethiopians) not withstanding not
just the same, thence it comes to pass if ye will reckon up 22. Ebrew letters,
and six of them with a point now and then added, you will make 28 letters, just
as many as the Arabians have. And if from these 28 Arabic letters you will take
off those fix that are twice in the Alphabet, because of one accidental point
more or less, then you have 22 letters in Arabic also, no more nor less. And
that there is in Ebrew and Calde one letter more, than in Syriac and Arabic,
even from thence it is easy to be observed, that that letter is but only
brought in by some accident, and was never at the first, nor esteemed as a
letter a part. The Etiopic Alphabet is in essence also the same with Ebrew; the
names of the letters now and then changed do not argue at all the changing of
the tongue, Alf-Bet, Geml, Dent, Hoi, Vaw, Zai, Haut, Tait, Jaman, Caf, Lavi,
May, Nahas, Savt, Ayin, Af, Zadai, Qaf, Res, Saat, Taui. Who sees not these to
be the very same letters deemed with Alef, Bet, Gimel, Dalet, He, Van, Zayin,
Khet, Thet, Yod, Caf, Lamed, Mem, Nun, Shin, Ayin, Fe, Zadeh, Quf, Res, Sin,
Tau, only that besides these the Ethiopians have another Khet, as the Arabians
have Ha and Kha, which they call Kharam, and another Tzadeh, as the Arabians
likewise, called Zappa; another Fe, pronounced P, Pait, and Ps, Psait; as also a
surperfluous V, after Khet, or Kharm, K or Caf, Geml, or G, Qaf or q, thus gua,
gue, gui, guo, guu, khua, khue, khui, khuo, khuu, kua, kue, kui, kuo, kuu, Jua,
que, qui, quo, quu, just as in some Greek, Latin, ^talian, Spanish, French,
and in some English words. Which additions are all but accidental, not
material. For is this part concerning the matter of the letters of the
Alphabet enough to make it out, that these fix are but one tongue, there must
be the same form also. For not withstanding the Turkish, Persian, Malaie,
Mogul, great and less Tatarian and Greek tongues has the same Alphabet, yet
because these tongues have not the same form, therefore they are not the same
with Ebrew. THREE OF ANY LEITER OF THE ALFABET MAKES A ROOT, FROM WHENCE COMES
A NOUN AND VERB. So that as three the same letters found in diverse tences,
persons, number and gender in sundry places of the Bible, yet for all that do
not make diverse roots, but the selfsame root remains still, so also the same
letters, if under some other accoutrement or fashion under other names, shorter
or bigger than in Ebrew, joined or seperately written, are not for all that new
letters, nor able to make a diversity of roots, but only that one and the self
same root without alteration. The signification or taste of that root does
spread it self as well as the root unto the veth and nounes, and yet as the
root is but one, so also is the radical signification but one, and no more.
This signification having the nature of the soul of the body, which consists
of the matter and form, cannot be but only one, because the body being one,
cannot have more souls to dwell within it, and one soul cannot dwell in two
bodies; yea that one soul is able and active enough to do and perform many
thousand actions by and in this body; so this signification is able to be
active and extending it self into many matters and occasions, and shows its
virtues still the same, and tending to the same effects, only proportionable,
according to the matter, and with a consent. So that if there should be found a
thousand Greek and Latin words, in one and the same Ebrew or Calde, Syriac or
Arabic word, all these would, nor could show a diversity of significations in
the Oriental tongue, but an agreement among themselves, and that a natural or
radical one of all these significations how many soever, tending unto one and
the same thing. And that has been the greatest and hardest block whereon all
the strongest and most learned men did and do stumble, to wit, at the
diversity of the significations, which at the first sight were certainly many;
and secondly, the same learned men lying in a dream of diverse Alphabets of
Ebrew and the rest, (as they speak) of the Tongues, these two fancies did lead
them to that judgment of diverse tongues. Now as it is very true, that there is
only one signification, because only one root, one soul, because only one
body, not as a cause, but a sign of the number of souls; Yet the actions from
one soul being diverse, have caused the Philosophers to make diverse terms and
titles of that soul; so is Rhetoric that Art, which shows, by how many means
a signification in the root, may be divided, differenced, and diversely applied
in diverse members, and yet all this according to reason and nature, without any
the least wrong at all. And learned men know, how that in Ebrew it self many
men have spoken unto that sense, that every root of the Ebrew tongue has only
one radical, effentiall, ideall, abstract and proper signification: only that
that one and necessary work was never yet done by any one. For if that had been
once done, then would it never have made such a great and hard task to
undertake, that the same root in Ebrew and Arabic have one and the very same
radical signification without changings, and those such only as may be and are
certainly and frequently in Ebrew it self. From this fundamental Unity, and
essential Identity either of the root or signification, descends a double
Unity, first in things belonging to the words, which are Nounes and Verbs, in
their matter and form, secondly, in things belonging to their signification.
Because that the root is the same, therefore all Ebrew roots are Arabic,
Ethiopic, Caldaic, Syriac, and Samaritic; and again, all the Arabic or
Ethiopic, Syriac, Samaritic, and Caldaic roots are Ebrew; whether extant in
this or that book, in the Ebrew Bible or not, where I find the same letters,
(because letters make the root, and not the significations;) whence it is that
all the Dictionaries are ordered according to the Alphabet of the Letters, not
according to the significations, therefore am I certain, and fully satisfied,
that I have the same root, be it with the signification as it will, that shall
and will be hereafter better seen and considered. So then Arabic roots are
Syriac and Ethiopic and Ebrew roots, and the Arabic tongue is the Ebrew, Calde,
Syriac, Samaritic, and Ethiopic tongue, no diversity at all under heaven in the
substance and essence, only all the difference is in accidents, and that small
too. And thereby it sollowes necessarily, that the Etymology of all these
falsely esteemed diverse tongues, is the same, to wit, all their derivations of
Nounes and Verbs, Persons and Tenses, which are not in the Ebrew Bible, I may
take them out of Calde, Syriac, and Arabic, or Ethiopic, and write it with the
Ebrew letters, and it is Ebrew, or Ebrew with Arabic letters, and it is Arabic.
And thus have done all the Rabbines, and this is done in the Talmud, and so it
is done in all Arabic Authors whatsoever, so that a fullness of extant Ebrew
Nounes and Verbs, and their diverse forms, is not in the Ebrew Bible, but in
Calde, Syriac, and Arabic, with Ethiopie joined and brought all together. Also
all the Analogy or precepts for the forming of Nouns and Verbs in all Tenses,
Persons, Numbers, Genders, in all respects are the same essentially and
generally. So that from thence the Syntax comes to be the same Summa, from the
Identitie of significations, flows the Identitie of phrases in the Essence of
these tongues, the same Metaphoros, Metonimys, Synecdoches and Ironies, or
Contrarieties: Nay the same Poesy to.

Upon this Unity, I confess, is built that Easiness, which is the sixth and
last point propounded, whereby I dare say, that the Oriental tongues, to wit,
only Ebrew, Calde, Syrias, Samaritic, Arabic, and Ethiopic, or to speak more
properly, that one and Holy Primitive Tongue is made more plain and easy than
hitherto it has been. Notwithstanding that Schindler, that worthy Schindler,
my Countryman, whom all men prefer in point of judgment, before all the
learned men in Europe, that ever meddled with the Oriental tongue, did much on
that behalf, and so much, as never any man before him, nor yet any other after
him till this day, in finding out many hundreds of roots, to be the same in
Ebrew, Calde, Syriac, Arabic, or in the Rabbines. All which is excellently
performed by him, yet he cheefely fails in four forts of letters. First, in
the quiescent letters, which he (with all the rest of the Gramarians and
Dictionary writers) seldom or never takes to be but one in the root, though
they are three or four in the Alphabet: Yet does he no less than all the
rest, show his reader many hundred times the way of one of them unto the other.
Secondly, the greatest and foulest fault he commits, is in confounding (...),
whereby he confounds the root. Thirdly, he brings not all the Arabic, Galde,
and Syriac superfluous or wrong letters, to the right in the root, viz. when t
in Calde and Syriac stands in place of s, which the Arabians (more curious and
circumspect in their writings) have constantly marked with a point, and do
call it tse: which in the root must not be brought to t, but to s, from whence
it descends; and so also in th, descending from tz, the same care of pointing
not being observed in the Galde and Syriac writing, that is in Arabic, which
not considered, is falsely brought to th, when it belongs to tz: whereby also
many false roots are made, and no small confusion caused. Fourthly, he brings
many servil letters to be radical, whereas the first, second, or third radical
being cast away, is compensed by that servil, which then being mistaken for a
radical, does extremely confound the roots and their significations.
Notwithstanding (waving all this,) because he had that opinion of a co^munity
of tongues and dialects, and a neernesse ofsome sweet agreement, he called his
Dictionary Pentaglotton, of five tongues, to wit, Ebrew, Calde, Syriac, Arabic,
and Rabbin or Talmudic tongue, as five diverse dialects, and not as one
natural, corporal, material, undistinct, inseparable body of one, to wit,
essentially one tongue, therefore even with that title he spoils the
business, and leaves in men's brains that opinion, which was before him, viz.
that these tongues were of a near kindred, and this he demonstrated more
clearly than any man in the world, but left as much business to be done, and a
better ground to be laid, than he himself did find before him.

Now it is one work to have found six tongues to be the same in essence, only
disagreeing in some accidents; and another thing, to say they are diverse
tongues, though they come now and then something near one to another; as it
were easy for me here to quote above two hundred testimonies of learned men,
that did, and do as yet speak so. Whereas the contrary is most clear, they
making an analogall thing to be anomalicall, and an anomalicall, to be
analogall; in calling the black white, and whit black, sweet sower and sower
sweet, day night, and night day, light darkness, and darkness light.
Whereas Greek was never hitherto said to be distinct from the Jonien, Attic,
Doric and Aeolic tongues, and therefore States or Universities did never settle
diverse professors for them as we do for Ebrew Syriac and Arabic, etc. So
neither must it be thought, that these are diverse tongues, but only one.
Professors of them, I wish in every University rather to be TEN, than ONE,
because of the fulness of work, that diligent hands will find therein.

Now then only one Grammar, for all these tongues, one Orthography in
essential things, to wit, the essential figure of the characters of Ebrue,
(Calde) Samaritic, Syriack and Arabic, and the greatest part of the Ethiopic,
is the same. One Analogy or precepts and ground rules for the syntax, one
etymology or Dictionary; one syntax through all, and one prosodia on poesy.
All whatsoever is done in behalf of Ebrue, is done at the same instant in all
the rest. So much as ye know in Ebrew and have learnt, and do learn there,
keep it well, because, (if it be true and essential of the tongue,) you have
not need to learn it again in Arabic and Syriac. So that whatsoever ye
observe in one, the same, if true and essential, you will meet withal in the
other. The Arabic tongue will do as much (nay more) good to the understanding
of the Ebrue Bible, then all the Rabbines or the Talmud it self, they being
all sprung up but of late years? And coming far short of the affinity that
is betwixt the Ebrew Bible and the Arabic tongue. In many things Christians go
far beyond them all, as in matter of Logic, Rhetoric, Metaphysiek, Divinity,
Grammar, Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy, Geography, Ethics, Politics and
Physic; in matter of stories and descriptions of Cities, Countries, and any
other thing whatsoever. Whereby I do freely profess, that we have but small
hope to learn great matters from them, yet because they are our eldest
brethren, we must learn to lead them out of their rotten ways, unto our
Sovereign and Redeemer Jesus Christ. And whereas they are a stubborn people,
stifnecked, and not easily yielding unto things differing from their parents
and ancestors Creed, therefore is it very needful to study thoroughly all
their books, and to mark out all the best passages, whereby the blindness of
the living Jews may be taken away by the Medicines found in Records of their
own ancestors; It is otherwise with Arabic and Ethiopic, (the language of the
Inhabitans of Africa and Asia) with which people were we once well acquainted,
it would do us more profit and pleasure to be taught by them their old secrets,
then we them, by teaching our Arts and Sciences.

For Christ is known among the Abossins or Ethiopians, they being for the most
part Christians; And Arabians notwithstanding they are for the most part
Saracens or Turks, (believing by the way of Mahomed one God, one in essence and
person,) yet have they many hundreds of Christian-churches or parishes among
them. And they would stand admiring, when they should see that another people,
which they never heard of (a fine white, gracious, beautiful people) know
their tongue, can read their writings, and is willing to impart them thousands
of Arabic books, which they never saw, or heard of before, and them printed in
a far remote Kingdom, only out of love toward them, to show them a fuller
light, to impart them their libraries gotten unawares from them, whilst they
did sleep. All this would bring them unto the love of our Savior.

Besides, the method in the Grammar, is brought to a far more easy and near
way even by this, that accidentalls are separated from the essential parts,
which hitherto have bin confusedly treated of in diverse parts of speech, by the
least three, by others eight or nine, by me only under a Noun and Verb, as in
nature is only day and night, white and black, light and darkness. And
whereas the greatest difficulties for the Ebrew bible has been in the finding
of the root of any word by an unskilful beginner of the Grammar (so that they
did learn two, four, eight or ten years this tongue, out of diverse Authors, by
diverse Grammarians, still in another new method, because of thousands of
Anomalies, and rules, diversely either framed, delivered or scattered, few of
them being the same in all Authors, many special rules or observations being
set down as general, and generals slighted as common and special ons, without
trial whither there were any use of it or not, never enquiring whither
needful in Syntax, never almost with reason, only upon belief, so says this
and that man, yet they never became true Masters:) which so far forth as a man's
study can and Gods mercy will afford shall be taken away in an Ebrew English
Dixionary, which is to follow.

If the easiness of things in the tongue be naturally (and in it self)
greater than hitherto thought, and if by men who would willingly see the glory
of the Gospel of Christ duly and truly set forth, and have therefore
endeavored (by all their means and power, waving their own occasions, and
diverse callings to an other work, wherewith the world would have been better
pleased) to advance that learning, which has as it were in its bosom the
hidden secrets and counsel of God more unfainedly closed up, why should than
all this be spoiled with the ways of teaching, or learning them? Teaching
requires a love unto the work as well as to the person? The work is from God,
who would never have set us on a hard task for our salvation, or at least, not
harder than we are able to bear with all. God speaks in an easy and plain
way, in such sort of speeches, as the most inward friends to use one to
another. God is truly popular in his deliverance, and his word is plainly to be
understood. It is the fault of the interpreters, that there are now so many
commentators extant on the bible. If they did set down those easy and plain
words in their translations, that they find to surnish their commentaries with
all, there would be no need of such sort of commenting.

But they give the words in the translations not according as their own
natural and reasonable judgment or understanding does clearly dictate, but
according to the Dictionaties; which having but few fignifications, the Authors
thereof not being able, or willing, at least conceiving it needless to give
many, nay if many be given, the life of the work being in the choice of the
best and most qualified signification, but that not being done it comes to
pass that the Text is made obscure, and people led with an opinion of the
difficulty of this tongue. The ground of this fear has been and is yet, and
for ought I know, will be still so, as long as there are not able men set on
the work, (things being as yet but taken upon trust.) I may say it without
hesitation, that the Greek translation (which was drawn from the Ebrew, and
from thence the Latin, from whence almost all the Eureopean translations) has
spoiled all our interpreters whatsoever. They saw many things to be different
and those made them begin to doubt, their own hearts began to show them some
occasions to find out the truth of many places, but the translations extant
before hand did dazzle and corrupt their judgments, so that when they should
see with both eyes to the Ebrew Bible, they (for the most part) upon some
former translations especially upon that which had then the name of the best, did
doote. If they had never looked on the Greec nor Latin, but had studied
earnestly one or two years the Ebrew, and than fallen on the interpretation of
the bible, it had bin better.

Now that being neglected, darkness comes into the translations; which being
spied and observed thousands of doubts arise, making every one desire to have
them mended, but few are found to be able (and that is no wonder) seeing the
Universities teach this kind of learning as if it wear rather for ornament
than use, for pleasure than necessity, for plea, than fighting; because Kings,
Parliaments, Magistrates, and Ministers, do not stand close to the true
reformation of the church, and removal of all Hellish seed sown unawares by
the Devil, not only by night (when the watchmen sleep) but even at noone
day; taking the opportunity of the watchmens carelessenesse: he being very
diligent to take all opportunities to sow the seeds of darkness into the
hearts and opinions of men, concerning this holy tongue, not being able to set
any spots upon the tongue it self. Now when the World has lain in a
drowsinesse for many years; when God comes in and knocl^s at the door of the
church (here in England or else where, whither by persecutions, false
doctrines, or by cratfy gainsayers: all alas! two strong opposers to our weak
and feeble fancies) then on a sudden they arise and will do great wonders,
then men must be appointed, (without considering whither they have knowledge
sufficient (of themselves) in this tongue, or whither they must be feign to
take upon trust what they do;) to make new translations; which must then be
called the Kings bible, and all Sermons grounded thereupon. And when Beza, that
worthy Beza says in his preface, on Mercerus upon Genesis. Quam in ipsa
contextus verborum and phrasium explicatione, necessario and quidem inprimis
sit laborandum res ipsa demonstrat Pendet enim certe a vera and conveniente
ipsius contextus explicatione tota Theologiae (...) inde eruendae ratio, and
quae inde, adhibitis locis, quos vocant, communibus, disputationes,
exhortationes, consolationes usurpantur: quod quicunque vel in semet ipsis, vel
in aliis erudiendis facere negligunt, magnam certe reprehensionem merentur.
Verissimum enim est hic quoque proverbium illud; Nucem frangat oportet, qui
nucleum esse vult.

That is: how necessary it is to labor for the full and right explication of
the whole context of the words and phrases, the work it self will
demonstrate. For from the right, and convenient explication of the context does
depend all the means to draw forth any dogmaticall point of Divinity and all
sorts of disputations, exhortations, and consolations, commonly used by the
help of those which we ordinarily call common places. Which if any man wave in
teaching either himself or others, truly such an one makes himself justly
liable to a great reproof: for no less true is here that common proverb; ye
must krack the nut before ye can get the kernel. Hitherto Beza.

But O good Beza! who believes thy preaching and admonitions? I confess,
sometimes upon a sudden fit a humerous mind will look into the Ebrew bible,
to see what word is there to brag with in the pulpit; but no body talks of a
general reformation in the Church, Universities, and Schools. Quaerenda
pecunia primum; Deus post nummes: First money, and then God.

There is neither love to teach, nor love to learn: it is a wonder to see what
a drowfinesse is in our very Scholars. All things of God go on with a slow and
heavy pace, as if he were not worthy of the best entertainments of our
thoughts; but I am sure God will once meet with them.

Therefore courteous Reader I beseech thee heartily, and (with my most humble,
deep and affectionate defire) tender unto thee, that thou would be pleased to
be truly sensible of that high and unspeakable contempt of Gods word, even by
those that live by it; give good counsel, help, admonish, instruct, act, stir,
nay in some measure, if thou have power in thy hand (as now 4 or 500 able men
have) be vigorous, set Scholars truly on work, and let them not be squandring
away their time, whither in, or out of the University, in Schools, or out of
them, in a Ministry or out of a Ministry, in a public calling, or not yet
called; If they will have any encouragements from the public, from the Altar,
from pious and charitable gifts, houses, dwellings, or revenues; I pray let
them thoroughly work for it.

Now when the water of a general deluge has spoiled all Piety in actions, we
are all become so full of worldly care that the first word we speak in the
Church is, what news? as soon as the Sermon is ended, they ask, what hear
you? And thus gets the Devil away that precious seed, which should grow up in
our hearts and bear fruit in patience and long suffering. I wish that
Ministers would give their minds less to the reading of the daily news, and
more to Gods Word, Work, Tongue, Church and chosen, and bestow that money
(which they usually spend upon such trifles) upon the poor, and left all the
care of state affairs unto the Parliament, themselves fighting only with
prayers, and alms deeds, (wherewith they might find work enough) and teach
others to do good by their examples, and good works; O! what a fine sunshine
would arise and break forth in the midst of these clouds. I beseech the
Ministers as they will answer it at the last day, that they will not any more
ordain such men, as know not Gods Tongue. And if that most reverend order of
men cannot find it within their hearts to do this so necessary a thing, then
beseech I the Magistrate, (he that wears not the sword in vain) to use his
authority, and to provide that there may not be any men ordained, let him have
never so many callings (poor people know not many times what they would have,
what is good for them, whither, what is recommended to them, be good or bad)
except be be able to make good his profession (out of the Ebrew and Greec
tongue in the old and new Testament) against a Jew. And truly to that purpose I
could wish our Magistrates would let them come amongst us, to be taught by us
more closly at home, and to rouse and awaken our drousie and sleepy spirits,
which because they have nothing to do, apply themselves, rather to do hurt than
good. God knows I pray them, I pray for them, I am willing to teach, willing
to offer all my strength, but alas within one year, week after week, labor
after labor, of 300 or 400 Scholars, learned men, and Preachers, now, and
then in the city, I dare not say how few I find to be zealous of gods glory,
and how many unashamed of their filthy and sinking nakedness before many men
that can discern it well enough. But because the Magistrate looks not narrowly
into men's actions, whither good or bad just or unjust, whither the laborious be
rewarded and idly punished, worthy or unworthy ordained; it comes to pass that
all things are at so ill a pass.

The easiness of teaching and propagating the Gospel of God by this tongue
consists in those several things which I will here set down not as a Logician,
but a willing afforder of what I conceave fit for professors.

First, let him pray to God, to show him the nearest way, and God, as he is
able, so is he willing to do it. And I am sure, that such a man, who does pray
to God incessantly within the chamber of his heart, to direct him in his ways
for easiness, God will find him such a way, as no other man thought on before.

Secondly, let him but love his work, have his delight in it, view it most
diligently, even into the innermost part of it, and he will display a greater
easiness, than he is aware of.

Thirdly, let him love his disciples heartily and tenderly, and then I am
either utterly mistaken, or else he will give unto them all possible
explications of the things under hand, and will discuss all the doubts they
are able to propound.

Fourthly, let him thirst after more knowledge, after more good and sound
reason, being certain of that, because God is the knowledge it self,
therefore how much knowledge he gets, the greater apprehension of Gods wonders
and mighty infinity, and infinite wisdom; by whose works he will find out
ways to teach his Scholars more easily.

Fifthly, let him labor willingly, not being forced, not subdued and oppressed
by some superiors, as being certain, every time when he does work, he
makes himself fitter to teach, and the work easier for him, and the Scholar
more disposed toward the work, and himself, which is the easiness.

Sixthly, let him never expect, till he be called, but begin to teach in
private first, then afterward in public before he be called, striving every
day to show himself as willing minded to do the work, as if the whole
Kingdom had called him, and having his heart still in a willingness to work,
if the State would desire his service, as deserving it, not getting it for
money.

Seventhly, let him go still further, than he was desired. If to read but
once, let him do it twice. For as all other great and mighty works must not be
done with a tedious toil somnesse, but with an instancy and pursuance of the
matter, and that the more violent, the less it suffers any delay, so truly he
must have his desires to do good increasing by trust, that thereby he may act
more good, because more free.

Eighthly, let him think and be persuaded, that God will have him do good not
only unto a few Auditors, but even unto the whole Kingdom of England. He may
truly believe, and I am sure he has the warrant of Gods Word and his own
conscience for it; that he does not amiss in teaching Ebrew and this holy
tongue even to the most common sort of people. His Kingdom does not consist in
meat and drink, not in that or this great and wise, or low and despicable man,
but in the power of the will of God revealed in his word (in his own tongue)
toward all and every soul.

Ninthly, let him love the Ministers of the word of God and all pious and
Christian souls with a tender and hearty love, and honor them with all his
strength, mind, affection, expressions, actions. But with a fatherly love,
knowing that he has so many ghostly sons to be instructed, who shall further
instruct others; and the easiness of the work will be seen more fully and
clear.

Tenthly, let him have an undaunted spirit against all opposers in that way of
learning, being sure of that, except there be no God at all, and all this
called Gods Word, to be a meare tale, and his tongue to be unexpressable in
English (all which may be the thoughts and speeches of wicked Atheists;) he
will truly assist him, add to him strength to strength, joy in the spirit,
easines to easines, advance to profit, benifit, and much good in the Church and
Commonwealth, and will make him a blessing and not a curse, to his time and
following ages.

Eleventhly, let him not only be willing to teach privately and publicly, but
also to give in print his thoughts and learning, that whersoever he cannot
reach with his voice, he may reach with his Pen. God blesses those that use
their tongue and pen for the profit of Church and Commonwealth, and not for
the disgrace and dishonor, or tending to the destruction thereof. It is very
needful to have a mind to write as willingly, fast, and carefully, as to teach
heartily. For otherwise he cannot stir up so many drowsy spirits, if he
will not awake them by the trumpets of his holy alarm.

Twelfthly, let him read good Authors, which have labored before him, with all
tenderness, to observe how far they have brought the work, unto what
easnesse, if there can be added, yea or no, without any detraction of their
labors, with a thankful heart: and if he knows of any such, who are truly
profitable, and have bin so to him, let him give notice of it, that many men's
pains may ease the work.

Thirteenthly, and yet if the very ground work be rotten, or if it may be
suspected to be so, because that almost in all parts of learnings the cause and
reason of unsound proceedings in studies, lies at the root, ground and
foundation of the work, let him make clear before all things that place to
himself and others, and than he may build upon it with an easines.

Fourteenthly, let him have still in mind his reason, that nothing must be
done, spoken or taught without it; and still direct his heart, to find out the
reason of the things, he teaches or is taught, to desire and search, if by
Authors reason is given for that or this thing. Being certain, that nothing
makes things easier, than that golden beam of that gracious Sun within our
selves REASON. And therefore must he be skilled in these Arts, that teach to
use it well, and desire it may be enlightened and not obstructed, and to work
by reason unto his Scholars.

Fifteenthly, let him still show to every one of his disciples and cause them
to consider, whither it be possible and reasonable or not, that such a little
book as the Ebrew Bible should be difficult to be learned, nay, not to be
learned in a short time: especially, when out of our translations we have
already given unto us the contents of every Book, Chapter, and Verse: whereby
it is impossible, (if we will but read the Ebrew constantly and diligently,)
considering rationally, how we in such and such a matter use to express our
minds; either I am utterly deceived, or in the most part of the Bibell our own
wit will lead us so, that all people shall agree in it, and shall not, nor may
deem it fancies. In the rest we must go to this holy tongue.

Sixteenthly, let him never be led out of the whole store of Gods provision,
that is, out of this whole tongue Ebrew, Calde, Samaritic, Syriac, Arabic and
Etiopic, as if he might do well enough in learning only Ebrew, or at the
highest Ebrew and Calde; being certain, that that notion is no more
reasonable, than as if a man would be able to expound the first Chapter of
Moses in Ebrew, if he never had any Ebrew more than occurres in that Chapter.
For as he his great need of all the Ebrew, that is in the whole bible, nay
more to, than there is in the Ebrew Bible, how much more then will there be a
necessity of all and the whole tongue to understand so many thousand passages,
which are yet to be cleared up.

Seventeenthly, let him not only wish, but labor to get TEN or TWENTY more
laborers with him, and if it be possible, more rare and choice men; then
himself. Let him be the ablest, most diligent, rare, painful, pious, humble,
meek, courteous, free and loving spirit; yet wish and pray heartily to God and
the Magistrate, to set down with him many laborers more, and if he can hear,
espy, and procure such as are far transcending him, let him rejoice in that,
as a special blessing of God Almighty.

Eighteenthly, let him never forget the poor Brethren in other Countries under
the persecutions of foreign States, within or without the Church. If any
means may be procured, whereby we shall not mock God Almighty any more unto
his face, praying for them, and yet stirring not a hand or foot to help them,
but will work and become working in good earnest for those Christians in Asia
and Africa; let him move or beseech the Magistrate, or at least under hand
work out by friends or whosoever by the States, that they may not be any more
unsensible of the unmeasurable want of their brethren. The Germans, Frenchmen,
Spaniards, Italians, Low Duchmen, nay all sorts almost of the Europians have
helped England by affording us the Ebrew Bibell and other books in great
abundance. Let us see now if we can at length be thankful toward them,
returning good for good: or in doing good with printing thousands of Ebrew,
Calde, Syriac, Arabic, and Etiopic, Bibels; thereby to give as plentifully Gods
Word to Asia and Africa, as by the mercy of God we have it in England.

Ninteenthly, nay let him truly defire the conversion of the Muhammedans, who
are as near Christians, as many others are which bear the name of Christ,
viz. Photinians, Arrians, half Arrians, Socinians, Weigelians, etc. which I
set down under their several names, although their sects are rather one than
more, when they will not suffer Christ, (who came into the flesh of Adam, and
did take upon him the seed of Adam and not of Angels,) to be God and the Son
of God, wherein the Turks come nearest unto them. Some good way should be laid
down by all means for them also, who would bring in a great store of Churches
and of a most flourishing beauty, if once brought to the true acquaintance with
the Gospel of Christ. The fault lies not in them so much as in us; we can
help, but are lasy and desire it not.

Twentieth, The conversion of the Jews, for whom I hear every week so
earnestly prayed, and yet see nothing less endeavored, must be one point of
any christian teacher of Gods Word; What? all to neglect the conversion of
those people, which in Gods eye are still beloved, because under the rod. I
pray, let us not trample upon them, but have mercy on them. Fie for shame, A
christian, and a despiser of Gods counsel. Are men's ways so much toward
goodness, that they will and can forgive their enemies, and should God not
deal so with his creatures? He whose ways are higher than our ways, and
whose thoughts heigher than our thoughts. Even that is a sign to me of Gods
grace toward a Jew, because God stirs up so many christian Ministers to pray
for them. I here it most constantly in Paul's London Or are they all deceived
men. Are they all praying for a thing, which God has never desired or decreed?
I never hear any of them to pray for the Devil that he may be saved, and
there is no body has any thing to plead for him, nay not so much as ignorance,
he knows well enough Jesus, to be the Christ and Son of God they knew him,
and therefore did they themselves acknowledge him. I beseech you heartily, when
you pray for the Jews conversion, do you it only out of fashion, or with your
very earnest desire? If out of fashion? O ye wicked Hypocrite! If out of an
hearty desire, why then so slow? And if we never had any promise of their
conversion in the New Testament (whereof yet we have abundantly) should they
not be as good unto us as the Heathens? Had not the Jews a promise of our
(which were Heathens) conversion? They had, and God has done it; (blessed be
his name for ever;) and no doubt will do it with the Jews also.

There is another sort of easiness of this Oriental tongue, (for those I
spoke of even now, I confess are virtues belonging to a professor, and such
as will facilitate any profession whatsoever, not only of tongues, less only
Oriental) taken out of the very bowels of it, viz.

First, because it is the eldest or primitive, and consequently the most simple
tongue, as God the first founder and giver of it, is the simplenes or
singleness it self; and as Adam (the first speaker of it) in his state of
innocence (when it was given him) was the most true and simple Grammarian,
Rhetorician, Logician, and Metapysician that lived in the world and church,
from whence it begun and continues till our days: whether its glory did ever
increase or decrease, I know not; sure I am, that then it was in its highest
sphere. Yet as all other tongues do not increase and decrease, saving only in
the fancies of men; So neither could it be brought to a confusion at the
confusion of Babel, (which Authors improperly express, viz. It did escape
without ruin) nor at the captivity of Babel, which was of a far less
miraculous power of God from heaven, having no need of repairing after either
of both, nor falling far short from former perfection: as out of natural
grounds, (which hereafter will be laid down) may appear. This singleness is
seen in many things. First, in a constant Trinunity (representing the nature of
its author) in having for a union to a root, a trinity of letters: for a unity
of a conjugation, a trinity of tenses: for a unity to a tense (of things past
or to come) a trinity of persons: for a unity of one letter in the root, a
trinity of (...) auy, for a unity of one tongue, the trinity of the same (...),
and in many things else, where this same trinunity could be showed. 2ly, that
it is only divided into two branches natural unto any essence, as ( Metaphysic
teaches) a finite, which is present, future, and preter, and has a time, nor
can be said to be without time, and in Grammar is called a Verb: An infinite,
which is neither present, future nor preter, and has no time, nor can be said
to be within time, and in Grammar is called a Noun. Thirdly, that it takes single
letters from a matter of 20 the most frequent and necessary words of it, and
puts them in stead of that whole word, before or after another word, to make
fewer words; wherein some other, nay almost all tongues of Europe do imitate it
in their common speaking and writing. Fourthly, that it uses the most simple
and single, easy, natural, common, and vulgar expressions that are obvious in
any common tongue.

II. It becomes easy because of its rationality in all things, whereof we had
already many passages before: but here is observable that infinite wisdom and
depth of reason in every signification of the root communicated to a great
variety of Nounes and Verbs, and yet all these (as by the outward shape of the
Analogy) turning about their one and only center the root, those three radical
letter, so that the signification of them all wind themselves rationally out,
reflecting unto that radical signification, as a swarm of bees go out and
return to their stock.

And thirdly, because in nature there is nothing in vain, it becomes easy by
its Universality or Generality of matters, that whereas there are 8000 roots,
and as many fignifications, which do orderly follow according to the Alphabet,
depending upon one another without interruption, it being impossible that any
should be entered or taken out without the dissolution of the natural chain;
so also do those things hang together which they signify; so that in the
signification of those 8000. roots is contained, nature and idea, or,
compositions and abstractions, physic and metaphysic, and do orderly depend
one upon another, and their natural dependence to be not only demonstrable,
but already demonstrated by this holy primitive tongue, if learned men will
hereafter open their eyes, and use their reason. Whereby we shall be able to
find out many things, the causes whereof we search and cannot find,
(notwithstanding they are extant in the radical signification of the root from
whence they are derived) so that I persuade my self, the only way of a
natural search of hidden things about their causes, dependences, connexions,
separations, proportions, degrees, inlightnings, obscurenes, etc. a priori, not
a posteriori, (which way is very uncertain and toylsom, and yet hitherto only
followed by all the Universities, and so by many millions of witty men, as I
conceive, out of a righteous judgment of God Almighty, pronounced against them
for the contempt of his word and tongue) is only extant in this holy tongue,
and not elsewhere, let men seek it where they will: whereas if they had
returned to Gods gift and way, they would have found if not all, yet the
greatest part.

Fourthly, Easy because of its Abstractions suitable to men's spirits. As all
these 8000. roots orderly bud out of 20. several letters of the Alphabet, so
that the Alphabet is the primum mobile, or the first moving cause of all those
8000. roots, and of their, it may be, 80000. nounes and verbes; (and by them
are expressed all things in heaven and earth expressable and revealed to us;)
So that now as all the words and nouns are reduceable unto 20. fundamental
columns; so also all things are reduceable not only to those 8000. radical
and ideal significations, but those also unto 20. columns of the highest
abstractions (the Metaphysicians speak also of an abstraction major and minor,
bigger or less in some measure analogall hereunto) of things. And whereas many
of these things, nay almost all are not understood hitherto, I know not where
the fault lies, (unless it be in three letters, viz. SIN.) Forasmuch as my
reading can afford me, I am sure, and can make it good against all opposers
(which I suppose will be only younglings in learning, and not wise or learned
men:) that this self same work has been still desired among Christians and
Jews; the Philosophers have used their reason, but not enlightened by Gods word
and tongue, nay they scorn tongues (I wish they would cut out their own, and
then try what they are able to say for themselves) pretending they study
realities. The Philolegers, or those that found in the tongues an admirable
light, use and necessity, do scorn the Philosophers, as knowing, they cannot
but prove ill husbands of their time, reason and labor, having found by
experience this principle to be in the tongues, viz. Verba esse signa rerum,
the words to be the characters of things. Where both should labor together,
and Philosophers be Philologers, and both be one. And if this were done, all
studies would go better, and how higher arising, the more desiring of HEAVEN.

Fifthly, it becomes easy by its Vivacity or livelynesse even at this very
day. Nothing is so burdensome as lead, gold, etc. because they have no air,
spirit, life nor lightsomenesse in them (though the wit of man makes them fly
high enough:) for where there is life, there is a lifted motion, and leaven is
so called, because lifting it self up by that spirit of life within it. Then,
where any thing proves to have a vivacity, life, or livingnes, there is a
certain argument of an easy handling of it. This tongue is not dead, but it
lives: Laugh not at me also, as they in the Gospel at Christ. All the best
Authors do earnestly contend to have Ebrew escape a confusion at Babel, but
suffers it to be led captive in the Babylonian captivity. In the greatest and
most wonderful confusion they keep it in their brain, but in that smaller,
their faith decays to hold it? What reason or courage is there in that their
action or assertion? Nothing. I assure you if it did live after the confusion
of Babel, (there it must either be lost with all the rest, or spring out with
them, or not at all) I warrant you it did live til the time of Plautus, about
1800. years ago. If the Punic tongue of Poenulus in Plautus be the same with
Ebrew or the Cnaan tongue, as they themselves confess, and the natural
pedigree does allow, they being children of the Phoenicians, then their tongue
is yet living in Barbary, when neither Greek nor Latin could overcome the
natural tongue of the Land; nor Arabic, as Leo Africatus (in his description
of Africa, 11. Chapter of the tongue of Africa) will have it; he thinking the
Africans to have a different tongue from the Arabic, wherein he is deceived.
Further, from Plautus it was there till Augustine, and the same with Arabic, as
Gesner, Roccha, Postel, Masius, Bibliander, Schindler, Galeottus and many
others do rightly esteem, having the Phoenicians (their ancestors) the same
tongue with Arabic.

What an easines that gives to any man to learn a tongue, when he can live in
that very Country, whose tongue he defires to learn, is abudantly known. There
is nothing more easy and working than that, because that learning is full of
life; within a year a man may come to a great perfection. Dead tongues get us
many rods at Grammar School, because we will revive them. And living tongues
can give us no gain, because we do contemn them. We smart at school for our
parents and masters soolery, not for our ancestors rebellion at Babel. We are
chastised by foolish Masters, because we have foolish Fathers. These will have
it, and those are willing to do it. The parents loose money, the masters gain
it, but we must cry: and why? because a dead tongue will not become living with
us. Do but offer living tongues unto children, and see how fast they will
learn. There the boys might whip the old men, because they learn not quick.
It is a wonderful dimnesse, not only in special actions of men, but of
General ones. Let England set up Masters out of Arabien, Ethiopien, Persien,
Turkey, Armenian, Malayen, and Chiney Countries, with a whole College for
every Nation apart, there to have its natural tongue spoken and taught in a
Grammatical way (all these tongues having but one General Grammar, with
observations of every one of them in particular) and boys will easier learn
them than Latin. Nay a man travailing in his young years, being well
Grammatically instructed in his own mother tongue, will more easily, and in a
shorter time learn all these mentioned tongues, and with far greater
delight, than the Latin at School.

Sixthly, another easiness arises from the near place toward us. For in
Spain this holy primitive tongue has been near 800. years, as there is good
reason it should, having been always in the possession of the Moors, (and
long before them of the Carthaginians,) until their late expulsion from
thence, and yet in the steepy mountains of Granata, named Al Fukhar Ras, the
Progeny of the Mores do still retain the Arabic tongue, for the Spaniards
themselves call it Araviga. There are diverse Authors, that show the passages of
Cities, Provinces, Rivers, and Castles in Spain, to be named, invested,
occupied, built and repaired by the Phoenicians, and their children the
Carthaginians. Abydenus quoted by Eusebius, Aelianus by Eustathius, M. Agrippa
by Plinius, Appianus, Arrianus, Artemidorus by Stephanus.(...). Avienus,
Eusebius, Eulogius, Eustathius, Homerus (sings thereof.) Isidorus Hispalensis
(who should be acquainted with things concerning his own Country.) Livius,
Megasthenes by Strabo, Mela, Pausanius, Plinius, Polibius, Posidonius, by
Strabo, Ptolomoeus, Scylax, Seneca Cordubensis, (where the Arabic Kings of
Spain had their Court) Silius, Statius, Stephanus (...). Stesichorus by Strabo,
Strabo the principallest of them all, Trogus and diverse others. All the
Antiquities are full of words and names of things in Spain, given by the
Oriental tongues and people. And at this day whole Spain is full of their
Manuscripts, there being above TEN THOUSAND in several of their Libraries,
especially that famous Kingly one at St Laurence in the Escuriall. And in
Minshewes Dictionary, you may see many thousand Arabic words yet in use in
Spain at the end of his book. So near has God brought toward us (in the
West and North) this Holy and Primitive tongue. Nay within less than ten days
sailing you may be in Africa, where this tongue is natural. Truly I say, if
the English Nation would but once fall diligently upon true Divinity, and not
trust so much unto their translations, and (which may be within a year for
ought I know) perceive that Ebrew is Arabic, which being yet living and in use,
is easy to be searnt, and being obtained, will give a more clear and true
interpretation of the Ebrew Bible (and that with greater ease too) than all the
Rabbis, I doubt not but they would hereafter change their course of studying
in dead books unto that of living persons in Asia and Africa, (as Nicolaus
Clenardus did begin, Mr. Pocoke and Mr. Graves those worthy men have followed,
Mr. Golius, who had been there, and I my self had that happiness to live
there, together with Mr. Pocoke for some months) and thus bring Divinity to a
better ground, and fix their interpretations upon the Ebrew Mount Zihon. Now
wheresoever you will go, either in Africa near at hand, or in Asia toward
Ioppe, Sidon, Barut, toward Cyprus, Alexandria, or Alexandretta the Sea Town
toward Haleppo, or to Smyrna, or Constantinople it self, the passage is very
easy; for I my self came in a fortnight from Marseil to Constantinople. The
Ship Sampson, (whereof is Captain Mr. Swanley, that worthy and valiant
Gentleman, that brought the Ambassadors there and here warts,) in going hence
to Smyrna, performed the voyage in 30. days, Anno 1641. and brought me back
again with my Oriental library of above 300 manuscripts in 17 weeks. Thus you
see God will send us thither more speedily than bring us back again. Nay, that
worthy and reverend friend of mine Mr. Pocoke has been twice and a good long
while in that Country, whereby he has so enriched the coffers of his
understanding with that great and manifold knowledge of this orientiall tongue,
that he has none but that excellent and thrice learned Mr. Seldom, Esquire,
equal with him. I honor heartily both these my worthy friends, and
notwithstanding that I shall not be able to amount to the hight of that
quickness, largeness, fullness, perfection and acuratnesse of learning of
these two great shining lights, the present Sun and Moon of our England, it is
a great happiness for me, to have that proportion, which the stars of the
fixed magnitude have toward them: yet I wish, nay hope, that our posterity may
and will outbrave all even the best lights.

This nearness is an unobservable occasion for the Christians to do good to
all the Muhammedans (or Mahumedans as usually they are called here) But a
sleeping Cat never sees a Mouse running by her claws. Front capillata est,
post est occasio calva; There is yet a small remnant of the day, to labor by,
the night of all the World draws on, and like a theife in the night, on
sleepers; We sleep after we have stolen Gods good time of the day, and by
the day we steal. What will become of us? Hang him, is every other word here
in England. God grant that we be not the judges of our selves and posterity.
Is there never a man, that begins to look about, and to see, what he, we and
all this Kingdom do? we confess out sins, to sin the more stubborn and
constantly. Think we not once, that all our toil, running, actions, shists,
prayers, orders and fasts, are but meare hypocrisy? I, because I am a man as
well as they, confess, that I have not need to pry long into my heart, to
find my faults, and hypocrisy; and thereby am I sure they, (that is) every
one of whatsoever condition, may see his hypocrisy in the performance of Gods
worship without great ado; only in the will lies all our woe; The Spirit,
which we call our conscience, does every day and hour speak within us, (and
woe unto him whereunto it speaks no more!) and call us to the Work of God,
(for all this World is but like a dream full of discontents, where even Kings
themselves have the greatest sorrows) to give peace and glory. But because we
despise Gods word and tongue God despises us.

Seventhly, the easines of this tongue consists likewise in the largenes of
those Countries, wherein it is extant. The greater a Kingdom is (if the King
be wise and pious, and will let God have a hand in his commands, the easier
will he withstand his enemies abroad. The greatest enemy that the Church of God
meets with, is our ignorance, whereby we are afraid to deal with a Papist, a
Jew, a Muhammedan or a Heathen When with a formality of prayer we could do
enough in the sight of our consciences, then were we good Christians. But
conscience, conscience, conscience that does gnaw your heart within, and cries
you are but very hypocrites. What Asia will not afford, that Africa will, and
what Africa cannot, Asia can. I confelse there are many different
pronunciations, but never a Dialect, or Idiome in Africa but it will help most
comfortably against the darkness and ignorance of this tongue with us. But we
are blind, and cannot see the clear Sunbeams. Let there be a hundred diverse
pronunciations (which common people presently call tongues) in Africa, yet I
know, there is but one tongue. For it is in Africa as in Europe and Asia. One
cries, a diversity of tongues, they cannot understand one another, another
gives them a diverse name, the third derives them from a very unknown antiquity,
the fourth from the confusion of Babell. My way is contrary. The tongues of
Africa, are brought in by Kham, his sons and nephews and the tongues of Europe
by Yafet, which they foolishly called Jupiter, and his sons and sons sons.
Only in Europe is the Greek immediately from this Oriental tongue; which Greek
is the same with Latin. If nothing else could persuade you; 10000 Latin words
at least, already derived by diverse Authors from thence will suffice to do.
Now from this Latin some affirm Italian, Spanish, and French to descend,
others deny it. If you look upon two narrow a time and space of that tougue,
(viz. Latin) as only in that part of Italy, where Rome is seated, called now
Lo stato Ecclesiastico, and at the time of the Counsuls of Rome, than you must
not bring all these tongues from thence, because all these Countries had
tongues before the said time, but if you can rationally judge, that tongues
breed not out of the earth, nor reign down from Heaven, and are propagated
only by mankind amongst themselves; than reflecting back; that all these men
came from Yafet, all these I say in Germany, Italy France Spain, Poland, etc.
their tongues are without all doubt derived from thence. So that, as Italy had
a tongue at Aeneas coming thither from Troja, and they were descending from
the Grecians, and the Grecians out of Asia (whereof Troja is a Town) then
brought Aeneas the same tongue with him out of that same Fountain, from whence
Evander and all the Grecians before had fetched theirs. So before Aeneas came,
people lived already in France, Spain, Germany, they were children of the
Graecians, had their tongue, which grew different in Italy, so much more in
France, Germany, Spain, and Poland, etc. And so far you may deny them to
descend from the Latin.

There is also further easiness, viz. by way of teaching. First, to teach the
whole Ebrew Bible (every part and Word thereof affording some good ground for
Exhortation, Doctrine and Learning) so that I cannot commend the ordinary way
of teaching only one book of it (notwithstanding it has been the constant
practice hitherto, some teaching Genesis, others the Psalms, or the books of
Samuel, Hoseas, or some of the major or minor Prophets, (and this under
pretense that these books contain in them a great part of the Ebrew Bible)
never going through it all.) For by that means the learner is left to shift
for himself before he be able, whereby he conceaves a greater difficulty to
be in it then indeed there is, and so gives it over; not only himself but
likewise (either by example or persuasion) deterrs others from undertaking it.

I would likewise have you to teach the Caldean, Targum of the three Authors,
Jonathan, Onkelos, and Joseph the blind: together with the Syriac and Arabic
(published at Rome,) but hence it may be objected that the Galdean Targum is
not extant by it self but only in those bibles in folio published by the
Venetians, Buxtorph, both the Kings of Spain and France; To this I answer that
it is true, but if this course were taken that I prescribe, and that there were
professors (established by authority) that would teach them in English, (and
that every day throughout the year) I doubt not but that the Citizens would
most gladly be auditors and buy the books, which the Book sellers would most
willingly get printed so soon as they shall perceive a certain gain to come
in by the plentiful vending of them.

Farther I wish my Oriental Professor would first, teach my General Grammar
with the essential part of it, viz. consonants in Orthography, and Analogy or
Etymology: secondly, teach the whole Ebrew bible without points exercising his
Scholars to depend only upon the consonants, they giving the full sense) and
upon all occasions to tell them that the pronunciation is not material to the
words or sense, and that all tongues differ (amongst themselves) in point of
pronunciation, still increasing by every mile (though not observed) even as the
Sun proceeding every moment upon the dial is not perceived till it has past
some certain time, so here the difference of the pronunciation will not so
well be observed in few miles as in 50, or 100, or more. Yet if the professor
do meet with such as will have the vowells and accents (which indeed is but a
burden without profit unto them) I advize him to ingraft into their minds
that Orthographicall ground work which the Jews did esteem needful to have,
viz. in Ebrew and Calde 15 Vowels (when five (as by the Syrians) would have
served) but in Analogy or Etymology to show diligently their mutation, long
into short, and short into long, permutation, long for short, and short for
long: and contraction or abjection of any of them long or short. And because
he cannot show that perfectly before he have set down what Vowells there were
in this or that place (all the Grammarians having left that out) he may take a
delineation thereof from my Latin delineation, page 73. 74. tit. Anal.
Specialis.

And likewise I advise him to go a different way from that commonly used for
Ebrew (with such disciples) because they will expect a Grammatical Analisis of
the words.) viz. take Buxtorfs Ebrew Dictionary Printed here at London, and
resolve all his examples by these Grammar precepts that I have given and
thereby he will do his Scholars more profit then with the greatest book in
the bible, because in none of them do occur all the Radixes, extant in the
Dixionary; for there is observed not only the Alphabeticall order of the
roots, but also that most necessary Grammatical order of the Tenses, persons,
and orders, (though not in the same order that is in my Grammar) the order
herein doing neither good nor hurt. Or if yet a shorter way must be had, then
take Tossanus little Dictionary upon the Psalms and do therewith as before;
and for the Calde take Buxtorfs Concordance where at the end he has set down
all the Calde words occurrent in the bible. Where you will find the essential
parts, viz. of Consonantes to be according to Grammatical precepts, and for
the Vowells you will find the distinctions of long and short to be forgotten
by those late Jewish punctators. For the Syriac go the same way in Crinesius or
Trostius Dictionaries upon the New Testament In Arabic the Grammatical
Analiticall way is far more easy: and as yet there is not any Dictionary
extant thereof either upon the Bible or Alcoran, but upon the latter I expect
one speedily.

This fundament being once well laid (which will make the following work
easy) let the Scholars first read, and give the interpretation of, 1, 2, 4, 6,
8, 10, or more Chapters every day, beginning with Ebrew, and then with Calde,
Samaritic, and so on until they have gone through the Bible therein, 3 or 4
times, if possible, in a year. Secondly, let them make some small exercises (as
some little story, sentence, fable, or at the highest an Epistle) in every
distinct dialect of this tongue. Thirdly, let them make (...), (as Aphthonius
calls them, in his Progymnasmes) Orations, or Discourses in the Tongue.
Fourthly, let them take some Rabbis works, and bring them into Arts and
Sciences by way of common place referring unto the number of the leaf,
Columns, and line. This work will be very useful hereafter not only for
themselves but also for the public; for thereby Christians may the better show
the Jews their errors in Arts as well as tenants in Divinity, and so bring
them to Christ. Fifthly, the same thing may be done on the Talmud which the
next year will come out at Amsterdam in 4o to be bound up in 6, or 8 volums.

It is further to be made easy by a good way of learning which here is written
in respect of the most who cannot here the Professor, or have a Master at all,
unto those I will give this council; That yea would resolve never to give over
the study of it until you have obtained it perfectly, and you may do it if
you will follow this way. First, (if you understand Latin) take Arias Montanus
Ebrew bible with the interlineary Latin version, good for two reasons 1.
because the order of the Ebrew words are now and then differing from the
English, and common Latin translation, 2. because the root is written in the
margent whereby you will be presently enabled to use any Ebrew Dictionary. If
you understand not Latin then take an Ebrew, and an English bible (without
expecting any English Dictionary, for it will serve in stead thereof) observing
the transpositions of words which will not be difficult because not frequent.
Begin with the first Chapter of Genesis (never with the Psalms for they being
written in a poetical strain are to hard for a young Scholar) thus. The
first verse has seven words: Bresit in the beginning: here B. signifies in:
resit: a, or the beginning, it is a Noune bara created, it is a Verb: (here
you see a transposition) Elohim: God, a Nowne: et: the, a Noune: (which (as is
frequent even in the English tongue) was left out in the first word resit)
hassamayim Heaven a noun: vet: and the, a noun, with u; and, haaretz the earth,
a noun where e or h notes the, in this verse besides six full words, viz. five
Nounes and one Verb, you have three little words, viz. b: in, e, or h: the, v,
and, these three and those six, (together nine) words, will presently carry
you a great way in the Chapter; and so continue till you come thorough the
whole bible; Regard not the Vowells so much as Consonants, for if you find
aretz or eretz, Lamek or Lemek, Habel, or Hebel it is not material. And to
that purpose (if you find your self strong enough) buy the bible without
points for by that means you will have gained half the work which
otherwise you must have with Vowells and Accents. You need not care vvhither
you pronounce it right or vvrong, for at this very day the Jews differ among
themselves therein, and why then should thou bind thy self when thou
may be free? Regard not the Accents at all, for they are but superfluous
fancies. When thou have gone through the first Chapter in the Ebrew Dialect, do
it in Calde, Syriac, etc: therein taking notice that the different words are
Synonyma's, for example bqadmin is synon. to bresit. bra and bara, is the same.
Thovah to Elohim, yat and et the same, (as by this rule: The quiescent Letters,
viz. a, v, y, e or h. do frequently change without altering the
signification.) Smayya the same with Smayim, arha the same with aretz (it may
be that ayin is constantly in Calde mistaken for izade, or else changed
thereinto. The Samaritan is the very same verbatim with the Ebrew throughout
the pentateuch, but only in some places where those Jews which were called
Samaritans (in Luke 10: 33.17: 16. John 4: 9.48. and diverse other places) did
differ from the common reading of the Law. In this way you may exercise your
self in the essential part of the Grammar, viz. Consonants, leaving the
Vowells and Accents: which notwithstanding I have set down in my Grammar, and
(as ye may observe takes up the greatest part thereof, for ad superflua
sudatur, says Seneca) because every body will not be content without them,
though many Scholars have left this study by reasonof these superfluities.

Now thus far I have spoken my mind concerning this. One oriental primitive
tongue, (comprehended under the name of six tongues viz Ebrew, Calde,
Samaritan, Syriac, Arahic, and Ethiopic) the mother tongue of the whole World:
only I desire to leave with the courteous Reader some general notions about
the tongues. First, A torgue may be general and yet not vulgar. Which not
being observed, makes the common people believe that this or that, is the
Mother tongue, here or there, as for instance; The Greek tongue was spoken (as
is recorded by Strabo in his 14 book) by the Galatians, Carians (a people of
16 several Nations) Cataonians, Cappadocians, Galatians, Maeonians, and
Sydians. All Provinces of the said Carians. Yet Hierome and Euphorus affirm,
that Greek was not the vulgar or native language of these parts, but they had
their peculiar and natural tongues, so that of these 21 Nations of the Carians
there were only three Graecians, all the rest used there own native oriental
tongue which (because different from theirs) the proud Grecians called
Barbarous. This being well observed will clear up many doubts about particular
tongues. Secondly, We must look at the writings and not pronunciations of a
people. So that although never so many Authors affirm that this or that tongue
are different from each other, and ground it only upon the pronunciation, they
will not be able to make good their position: for even here in England (as
also in other Countries) there are not any two shiers that pronounce the
Language in every respect alike, and yet no man attributes to every shire a
several language. Thirdly, We must look to the radical writing of a word:
this has been excellently well practiced in the Oriental primitive tongue,
but never yet or very slowly in the derivatives. Which if once performed would
doubtlesly make us able to judge of tongues more rationally in general, to
give the etimology of a word more exactly. Fourthly, The diversity of
Cbaracters make not a different tongue. For even in one and the same tongue
every man writes severally, and as it pleases himself, viz. One man forms
them thus, and another 10. Fifthly, The unity of the Characters make not diverse
tongues become one. As we see in Latin, Italian, Spanish, French, Poland,
Hungary, Irish, English, and the Hurones with other people in the West Indies
who since the coming in of the English, Spaniards and French have learnt the
Latin Alphabet, and it may be in time all the West Indies will get and make
use of the same Character. Yet it cannot be thought that so great a part of
the new World (lying opposite to our three known parts of the old, Asia,
Africa, and Eurepe,) should not have many different tongues. Sixthly; All
tongues will participate in some things with their Neighbors, for as it is in
other actions so it is with man who being (...), asociable and tractable person
is sensible of his own want and others abundance in diverse things: whereby we
are consirained to borrow and lend one of another. This being so common and so
necessary in any society of men, is performed before we take notice of it, and
because it is naturally inscribed in us we do it constantly and willingly
making no scruple at it. And seeing nothing costs us less then the lending of
words, and more needful (to deal with strangers) then borrowing, that makes a
daily trade between tongues and tongues in all the World. Seventhly, Authors,
names, and tongues, will afford good ground for the unity or diversity of them.
As for instance when Gesnerus (that learned, and extraordinary painful man in
Switzerland) Angelus Rocca. Postellus, Masius, Bibliander, Schindler, Mart.
Galeotus. And diverse other learned men do affirm, that the ancient Punic tongue
(spoken in Africa about the time of Plautus and Augustine) was Arabic, viz.
that tongue which is at this day vulgar in Africa; And that many words thereof
extant in several Authors (as that in Plautus his Poeiulus) will appear to be
of the same essence with Arabic, who will hereafter argue that these learned
men were possessed with a phantasy as it has been heretofore done, or that
the name Phoeaicians, and Punics are not juditiously argued to be the same
people for descent, like father and children, and therefore one and the same
tongue, yet in way of weight I will place these three contrary and conclude,
that the Tongue, the name, and the Authors together: do yeald a good ground to
judge of the unity or diversity thereof. Eighthly, The situation of a Country
conduces much to the right judgment of a tongue. As for instance the Persic
tongue is very hardly believed to be of kindred with the German
notwithstanding that many words are the very same, or almost the same with one
another. Ninthly, A Tongue cannot suddenly be made native. For that which is
already in use and every day practiced will not easily give way unto a new one
especially if it be different in essence. Tenthly, A Tongue suddenly arising
is the native Tongue. When a people are quiet and not active either in War,
merchandise or shipping (especially if far distant) men will not regard their
tongue, but let them be active and show themselves abroad, and then they will
be presently taken notice of, when therefore the Arabic tongue (as authors
weakly affirm) had over-runne so vast a space of above 3000 English miles in
length, from its East the Persian Gulf until the last place of Africa West
hitherwards, and that with ease, and without the groaning or murmuring of the
people, as lying under the burden of a new tongue: is not this sufficient to
convince us (Europeans) who are ignorant in our homebred tongues) that without
doubt this has been the natural and native tongue.

Eleventhly. The derived tongues in Europe make up only one body of a tongue,
always varying, but never wholly decaying. As the Original and Primitive
(opposite to the derivative) is yet remaining, so are also the derivatives, and
not yet lost. For as long as the Analogy of Adam remains in men, so long will
the Analogy of the derived tongues remain in Ebrew, the accidentalls whereof
being many in one age, are but one in many ages: And I wish that hereafter it
might be considered how much nature works in this behalf.

Twelfthly. No Country populated is void of a tongue. For where there are men,
there must be a tongue, and hence that proverb is true, Non datur vacuum in
rerum natura, there is nothing void in nature. Wherefore it is unfound to say
that this or that Country having before no tongue, has in time gotten this or
that.

Thirteenthly. We must not rely only upon History. This I confess, belongs
unto the name Authority, so that it should not have made a new propofition. But
because every one looks not upon History as an argument from Authority,
(especially the Author being behind the curtains) and I prosesse not to write
here exactly logically, but only by way of Essay. I thought good to set this
apart from that of Authority, others having done it before me. Neither this nor
that must be looked upon so far as to dote upon either of them, especially
when other men have better grounds (in reason) from the very tongue it self.
As for instance, if Historians assirme it never so confidently that the Punics
were of a different off spring from the Arabians, and that it is only a
thousand years since that tongue was by the Arabians brought into Africa. Yet
because we know that the Arabians, and those from whence the Punics did
descend ( viz. the Phoenicians) were of one tongue, we know that it is an
unsound assertion to say that the ancient Punic tongue is not the same with
Arabic spoken at this day in Africa.

Fourteenthly, The Primitive tongue never alters its nature. This proposition
is not much thought on by Authors, when they conceive that the Oriental tongue
does sometimes change from pure, to impure, from learned, to unlearned and
vulgar, sometimes increasing, and then again decreasing: But this cannot be so
because of its primitivenesse, whereby it is simple, and will not suffer such
gradations and declensions: For by their singleness they are more strictly
bound unto the consonants, and less unto the vowels, their changings and
castings, than the unskilful of them can conceive.

Fifteenthly, All derived tongues are changeable. So that if the Occidentall,
Meridiall, or Septentrionall tongues would consider this, they would not claim
such a prerogative above the primitive. A derived tongue will vary in the
generality, and conceived pureness and elegancie, and cannot remain constant.
Because, First it is derived. And secondly, it has a vast variety of
pronunciation expressed in all their writings, both in vowels and consonants.

Sixteenthly, A strange tongue howsoever it may endure for a time, it cannot
continue for ever. We have an example hereof in the Greek tongue, which spread
very far, especially toward the East, viz. in Syria, Palestina, Cilicia,
part of Mesopotamia, and Arabia as is affirmed by Hierome: the dialect thereof
being taken from Tyrus (for Sir, Sur, Dyr, Dur, Dor) was called Doric. But yet
at the inundations of the Turks or Sarazens it came to ruin; having been a
stranger there for about 7 or 800. years.

Seventeenthly, A tongue that rises in a country, and casts out a known
strange to gue, is the true native tongue though formerly unknown. Hierome in
the Proem upon the second book of his comment upon the Galatians says, that
part of Arabia (which must needs have had the Arabic tongue) spoke Greek: hence
it follows that Arabic was the vulgar speech thereof, as Syriac of Syria.

Eighteenthly, Diversity of a climate, mingling with strangers, and tract of
time, may do much to change a tongue. It is not the confusion of Babell, and
the punishment of the Sinar rebels that is hereditary unto us (in the
multiplicity of speech) as Adams corruptions are, but those three things I set
down in the proposition. For had there never been a confusion at Babel, this
multiplicity of tongues would have been. The Scripture, Calde paraphrasts,
Sibyls and all speak of one tongue, not many. No man will deny that there is a
multitude now, but whither from Babel or not is the question, which I determine
negatively, It is, but not from Babel. Nor is Augustines reason right, pro
peccato dissensionis humanae, for the sin of man disagreeing, not only
different dispositions, but different tongues came into the world. For Cayin
and Habel, (or Hebel) disagreed, (but there was no such punishment) and so by
degrees this disagreement grew hotter and hotter, insomuch that in 1656. years
there grew such a fierce fire, that all the water in the world (much less a
confusion of their tongues) but the whole cataracts from heaven must break out
to quench it. Nay there was rather a contrary nature in those at Babel, for
before the deluge they could not agree, but after it they conspired to be
together in one place. Cum quisque principatum rapit, when every one would
govern, (as Austin thinks) was rather before the deluge then after it, for it
is without warrant of Scripture, for there it is not said that every one did
strive at Babel for dominion. Nor was it (as Abidenus did conceive) to make
them a way unto heaven, a childish conceit. Nor for fear of another (perhaps)
ensuing deluge, as Josephus L. 1. de Ant. Iud. ca. 2. thinks. Nor for fear of
the consumption of the world by fire. Nor upon that false reason of their
certain agreement for Idolatry, (which the Jerusalem translation holds forth)
by the phrase of preparing an everlasting name, a phrase too common in all
languages to be here understood for that fearful name of God Almighty, as is
to be seen in the 2 Samuel 18: 13. Es. 63: 12. and 14. Jer. 32: 20. Dan. 9: 15.
Nor because they feared a confusion or dispersion to come; but because they
would live altogether in one Kingdom, and set up at Sinear the Residence for
their King, and get for themselves an everlasting name, which being against the
counsel of God, (who would have them to fill the earth here and there) he did
disperse them with that temporary variety of pronunciations whereby they were
not able to understand one another, though the tongue remained one and the
same, no new tongues then coined, no new languages then on a sudden arising,
the variety of their pronunciation being abundantly sufficient to disperse
them, which was the intention of God. One tongue being before the confusion of
Babel, one in it, and one after it. For the Ebrew word (...) shafah signifies a
lip, is contradistinct in Genesis 11: 1. to (...) dbatim words. This is the
matter and the form. The tongue speaks, the lip forms it. Yet these two
organs in our mouth are contradistinct, for the tongue is not the lip, nor the
lip the tongue, and the tongue letters are different from the lip letters (as
all Ebrew Grammarians show) and so they are also opposed Psalm. 12.4. Who have
said, with our tongue will we prevail, our lips are our own, who is Lord over
us? and Ps. 140: 3. 1 Corin. 14: 21. We have but one tongue, though two lips:
one tongue, but diverse pronunciations. And the scripture tells us that God did
not confound the tongue (less tongues) but the lips, the instrument forming
the pronunciation, not of coining words. Abydenus by Eusebius and Cyrillus,
expressly oppose these things also. (...) upon those which hitherto had been
of one tongue (...) there was cast upon them a variety of sound or
pronunciation. And the Sibylla by Josephus speaks only of the pronunciation
(...), when all men had but one sound or pronunciation, they built a Tower, so
that in our English the translation should run thus. Further, the whole earth
was of one pronunctation, and that of the same words. 2. Therefore came it to
pass, etc. If this be rightly (and I think it is by me) considered, I am sure
no man will think that I have rondered the least word contrary to the mind of
the holy Ghost in the Scripture, and many false suppositions being thereby
taken away, will make an end of many endless questions about the escape of the
Ebrew, as when, where, and how confounded or lost.

Nay these three reasons have been briefly touched by that worthy and learned
author Edward Brerewood, in his enquiries touching the diversities of languages
in two places first page 51. The Punic tongue seems to me out of question to
have bin the Cnaanitish or old Ebrew language, though (I doubt not) somewhat
altered from the Original pronunciation, as is wont (1) in tract of time to
befall (2) Colonyes planted (3) among strangers far from home. Again page
57. And certainly touching the difference that was between the Ebrew and the
Punic, I make no doubt but (1) their great distance from their primitive
habitation, and (2) their conversation with strangers among whom they were
planted, and (3) together with both the length of time which is wont to bring
alteration to all the languages in the world, were the causes of it.

Nineteenthly, The Ebrews and Ebrew tongue are not denominated from Eber. The
text Genesis 10:21. translated runs thus. Concerning Sem (born to be the
Grandfather of all the progeny beyond the River, brother of Yaset the Elder)
22. The sons of Sem were Elam, and Assure, and Arfacsad, and Lud, and Aram. 23.
But the sons of Aram, Uz, and Khus, and Geter, and Mas. 24. But Arfacsad
begat Salakh, and Selakh begat that Eber. 25. But to Eber was borne a twinling
of sons: the name of the first was Feleg, [division] because in his days
[niflega] there was divided the whole earth, but the name of his brother was
Joqthan [the little one]

Upon this place have the Jews constantly built the title of their name and
tongue, but in my weak judgment, without reason. Nay Abraham in Genesis 14: 13. is
also called (...) Haibrai, the stranger from beyond the River [Frat] which is
unreasonably translated, the Ebrew, as if he also took his name from Eber.
The reasons given for this opinion are these. First, if the word came of Aber,
rather than Eber, the word should have been haabri, not haibri. I answer, it is
true, but there is no such word as Aber a pass, but Eber, that proper name it
self denotes a pass. Secondly, Eugubinus says, because they terminate the
names of nations and kindreds (descending from proper names) in Yod, as Yhudy
from Yhudah a Jew, Amalqy from Amaleq an Amalekite. Therefore this name haibri
is most like to be derived from the proper name Eber, and to signify the
Ebrew. I answer, in the very same chapter, viz. Genesis 10. there are 21 names of
Nations, viz. in the 4. v. Kittim, Dodanim. 6. Mizrayim. 13. Ludim, Anamim,
Lhabim, Naftukhim. 14. Fatrushim, Keshlukhim, Flistim, Caftorim. 16. Ybusi,
Emori, Girgjasi, Khivvi, Arqi, Shini, Arvadi, Zmari, Khamati, Cnaani. Are all
these derived from proper names, and none from appellatives? Thirdly, that
Abraham was called an Ebrew of Eber, because all those, and none but those that
continued in his faith retained the name. I answer, that we have not any place
in Scripture which commends Eber for his faith. And therefore Abram may not
receive this name upon an uncertain conjecture, when we have an infallible
reason why called haibri, and that is this. That Abraham being in Mesopotamia
or Aram Naharayim, (which place he and his servant in Genesis 24: 4.5.7. and 10.
v. called his Country, because he had dwelt there with his then dead father,
and yet living brother Nakhor) was called away from Kharan, from his brother
Nakhor, out of the house of his father to go into Cnaan, where he was a
stranger,; and so all along in Cnaan, Egypt, and Elon Mamreh he was called from
being a stranger, a passenger: the Cnaanites not regarding or happily knowing
any thing of Eber. To be short, Abraham was not esteemed or called by those
Heathenish Cnaanites an Ebrew with respect to Eber (of whom perhaps they knew
nothing) but from his being a stranger, a forrainer, a passenger, a Highlander,
a Sojurner, a beyond-sea-man, whom the Arabians call Ma-waranahny, and in
Latin we find Transylvanus, Trans-Isulanus, and by the Italians Tra-montano.
The reason is rationally drawn. First, from the common fashion of all people
to call a stranger and forraigner, not from his father (who usually they know
not) much less from his seventh Grandfather, and yet least from an unknown
man who was borne 270 years before. Secondly, from the holy Ghost out of the
mouth of a dying Martyr, Acts 7.6. And God spoke on this wise, that his seed
should sojourne in a strange Land. His seed should be called a sojurner why?
Because in a strange Land, Thirdly, none were called Ebrews from Eber before
Abraham. Fourthly, Abraham himself was not called so before he came over the
River into Cnaan, and although he be not called a stranger in all the 12 and
13, and until the 13 Verse of the 14 Chapter, it must not seem strange,
because of his most valiant and strange victory over four Kings, (under one
whereof he was likely borne) and relieveing five Kings of his dwelling Country.
Moses sets down first that contemptible name, which he had before and now
(...) became more renowned. But to make it more clear whither the Nation of
the Jews could be called Ebrews from Eber or no, I will give you all those
places where that name is used in the Old Testament, but before I do that I
would desire you to consider what Joseph's Mistress knew of the 10th Grandfather
of her servant. Whom she loved (not because discending from Eber, nor because a
stranger,) but because beaucifull, that grace in him did suppress all that
contempt usually following a stranger; nor did she aggrevate her accusation
against him to her Husband as being of the race of Eber (of whom I dare say
they knew nothing) but because a servant, and a stranger. The places I give you
here at large, Genesis 14: 13. 39: 14.17. 40: 15. 41: 12. 43: 32. Exodus 1:15,
16, 19. 2: 6, 7, 11 13. 3: 18. 5: 3. 7: 16. 9: 1.13. 21: 2. Deuteronomy. 15: 12.1 Sam.
4: 6.9. 13: 3.7.19. 14: 11. 21. 29: 3. Ier. 34: 9.14. Iona. 1:9. And that Aber
notes a passing over a River (as pasah to pass over a Country) see the place,
1 Samuel 13: 7.

(...) Veibrim aberu et hay-yarden erez gad vgilad. And the Ebrews did pass
over the River Jorda^ into the land of Gad and Gilead. So that I conclude that
neither Abraham, Joseph, nor the Jews (in general) nor their tongue had the
Name of Ebrew from Eber in whose family they will have his faith to remain,
(and when this tongue was divided, it was wholly preserved in his family. A
contradiction of dividing one thing so, as that it yet remains whole) whereas
they also confess and cannot deny that the Yoqthanites, Yismaelites, Ydumites,
Moabites, Ammonites, Madianites, and Amaleqites, do belong to that family, but
have neither his faith nor tongue. So that we see the folly of the new Jews,
and our old Christian Ebrew professors in believing that the Jews speak
Oracles. Twentieth, Ebrew, Calde, Samaritic, Syriac, Arabic and Ethiopic, are of
one and the same antiquity. This proposition takes away many superfluous
questions, and unreasonable answers of many Authors that have hither to handled
this subject. For if Ebrew were chief in Cnaan, then I am sure Arabic would be
the elder, because first inhabited as lying nearer Babylon, but beeause they
are all but one (and using only diverse Synonima's which shows not the
difference but largenes of them) there is none of them elder or younger then
other.

And thus have I done, Courteous Reader, about this, the most excellent,
ancient, primitive and Mother tongue of all the World. And to learn that
tongue is to learn the fundament of all things, as in Histories the names of
Cities, Provinces, Kingdoms, Rivers, Plants, Trees, and Beasts, the ground of
many fables whereof the Romances both old and new are full and too sull. Nay
because I am not able to speak fully enough about the usefullnesse of this
Oriental tongue, I will here set down a part of the very words of our grave
and judicious Ministry of London, in their petition to be humbly presented to
the honorable Court of common counsel, subscribed by the appointment and in
the name of the society of Syon-Colledge, Ian. 12. 1647.

That great and glorious appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ in his Churches,
by his spirit and power (so often foretold in the holy Scriptures) for the
calling of the Jews, which belong to the election of grace, and for bringing
in the fullness of the Gentiles, that all the Kingdoms of the Earth may become
the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, seems to us, to be now coming
upon the wing in the midst of those formidable concussions of all Nations, to
make way for his glory, that the Earth may be filled with knowledge of the
Lord, as the waters over the Sea. As a preludium and preparative to this great
work, we observe, that generally other Kingdoms, Commonwealths, and Cities of
eminency and honor begin to look toward the study, and advancement of the
Oriental Languages with greater care, than in former ages, as it were by a
secret instinct and strong impulsion, making ready to receive of that blessing
and grace which we cannot fully describe yet confidently expect. Hence it is
that not only in Italy and Spain, but in Germany, France, and Switzerland the
Netherlands and other states, the Magistrates are zealous promoters, and
magnificent patrones of the Illustrious Professors, and profession of those
tongues, with honorable maintenance at the public charge. The too great
defects of able and profitable Professors of those tongues in this Kingdom
(except in the Universities) the strong apprehensions of many men of the
difficulties of attaining those Languages, together with the small success of
the various attempts of sundry Smatterers in those studies (which have rendered
them both obscure and contemtible) do plainly declare the great necessity of
public countenancing and advancing more apt and effectual means, to
facilitate and carry on so great a work. Manifold and inestimable are the
benefits of it. Thereby shall industrious men see more clearly with their own
eyes the very mind of GOD in that same Tongue, wherein himself uttered it,
and be not only better settled in the truth of our own Translations, but able
to understand those ancient versions of the holy Bible in those learned
Languages, and other Authors of worth and use, as also with greater advantage
to converse, and traffic with the Eastern Nations in their own Languages,
which marvelously wins upon the Natives of any Kingdom, where ever
Travailors or Merchants come. Besides it will greatly propagate this kind of
learning, whereby not only the present age, but our posterity will be more
capable of the spiritual advantages of the Jews conversion, if not to
contribute to it. So fair that passage of the Reverend Divines, My very much
honored, esteemed and beloved brethren and Friends.

I will add only one word concerning Arabic, viz. because it is the same
tongue with Ebrew, I desire my courteous Reader to lay aside all ill opinions
and preconcept fancies concerning this tongue, because it is the tongue of the
Turcks. For it is not their true and natural tongue but (as they descend from
the Tatars) they have the Tatar for their Mother tongue but because the grand
Signiour or Emperors government spreads over Syria, Arabia, Egypt, and all the
Mediterranian Seashore of Asia and Africa, (except only Asia the less)
speak the Arabic tongue and are for the most part Muhammedans, known to us by
that general name of Turks. Let us not scorn this tongue but rather rejoice
that we have such a considerable progress of it (not only under the name of
Arabic) diligently advanced not only by Germans, French, Italians, and Low
Duchmen, but even by Englishmen themselves, partly by setting up particular
professors for this tongue in both Universities Oxford and Cambridge, the
latter being honorably upheld by that renowned Citizen, And right Worshipful,
Alderman Adams, late Lord Major of London my especially respected and beloved
patron and Friend; partly by giving and bestowing an infinite treasure of this
kind of Manuscripts upon both Universities, lately by the Parliament; and by
that worthy and Honorable Knight Sir Thomas Wroth, unto the Library of Sion
College here in London, partly by elaborating most gallant books in this
kind, partly by the dilligent studying of this juditious Nation in them. Let
therefore the Arabic tongue be commended unto thee, as that wherein lies hid,
greater profit then in all Greek and Roman antiquities. yea as far as piety
has a greater reward then worldly wisdom.

I would I might now prove a true Prophet in this, that God has left all the
innermost parts of Africa, unknown unto us, and us unto them, that when we
come unto them, it may be with the Arabic printed bible in our hands, thereby
to call them to the church of God. England, England, would to God thou knew
the things that belong unto thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes!
Could thou but love the men of Asia and Africa, (as well as thou do their
Sylkes and precious Stones,) give them the Ebrew, and Arabic bible, teach them
thy Art of printing and receave from them their Arabic, and Ethiopic rare
Jewels of books, what joy would arise in the heart of thy children, and what
a thankful mind would thou find amongst these ignorant men. An infinite
treasure is not necessary to bring this to pass, one weeks revenews of the
excise would do it. Nay let but those gifts (dedicated unto pious uses) be
rightly bestowed, and there would be no need of a new supply. All the ports of
Africa, and Asia will admit you with the Arabic bible. And if ye had thousands
thereof, Turks, Jews and Christians would buy them of you in Asia and Africa,
if you would but go unto those parts where the grand Signor of Constantinople
has not so great authority, or else to the Ethiopians (who are Christians like
us) and so from behind the Muhammedans bring in their printed Books.

FINIS.
Postscript.
COurteous Reader, I confess ingeniously, that I have been deceived in the
true Arnobius upon the Psalms, but yet according as I learned it from Erasmus
Roterodamus in his preface to Pope Adrian the VI. set forth at Basil Anno.
1522. in folio. But his Grace, My Lord Primate, was pleased to inform me,
that this Arnobius upon the Psalms was not that Africane Arnobius living about
300 years after Christ. And hence it is that Hierome in whose age he lived,
spoke honorably of his writings adversus gentes, but that upon the Psalms he
could not mention, because this Arnobius the author of it was not then living,
and therefore by Sixtus Senensis called Arnobius Junior, and that Africane,
Arnobius Senior. Nay Erasmus himself confesses, this author upon the Psalms
too be so full of manifest Solecismes, ut vix Holcot and Bricot soloecisset
crassius And then no wonder that this suppositious author should have that
foolish mistake of 1000 Nations for Generations, and of 72 Tongues in the World.

Now does follow a general.

A GENERAL GRAMMAR FOR THE Ebrew, Samaritan, Calde, Syriac, Arabic, and
Ethiopic Tongue.

BY Christian Ravis.

LONDON: Printed by W. Wilson, for T. Iackson, and are to be sold by him at
the Star in Duck-lane, 1648.

paradigm Praxis lectionis
A practice of reading:
paradigm Elementa Primoerae Linguae Sanctae consistunt in
The first elements of the Oriental language consisting of


The Preface.
IF this Tongue shall become easy and common we must lay down good
fundamental Rules for two diverse Books, viz. The Grammar and the Dictionary.
Orthography gives the fundamental Rules for Analogy; for whatsoever is
natural and essential unto this Tongue in the former, will yield essential
Rules for the latter. And whatsoever is only accidental to this tongue (being
brought in by some ingenious invention) will afford Rules only for accidental
observations in Analogy.

Analogy is the second part of Grammar containing Rules for Noun and Verb, and
lays down likewise the fundamental order of the Dictionary.

Upon the inward essential division of the Analogy depends the multitude and
distinction of the Syntacticall Rules.

Every part being of a different Office, Degree, and Action must be kept within
its bounds and limits, as for instance, whatsoever belongs unto Analogy must
not be brought unto Orthography, nor Syntacticall things unto Analogy. We must
first diligently and distinctly consider single Words, before we come to the
joining sense: Therefore in the Dictionary as well as in the Grammar all care
must be had to insert such things as will make the Tongue easy and plain. The
Dictionary will afford greater ease for this Tongue then the Grammar it self,
and it is either General, or Special. The General comprehendes not only all
the Roots of Ebrew, Calde, Samaritan, Syriac, Arabic, and Ethiopic, but also
their diverse forms of Nouns and Verbs Analogall, or Anomall, collected out of
several Authors, and Dictionaries, with all their special significations. The
special containing all the 8000 Roots, with the Ebrew, and Calde forms, so
far only as they are extant in the Ebrew Bible, not only with all the
significations of them as hitherto set down by Authors, but also much enriched
with Calde, Syriac, Arabic, and Ethiopic significations, which will do much
good frequently in the Bible.

A General Grammar for Ebrew, Samaritan, Calde, Syriac, Arabic, and Etiopic.
RULE I.

AS other Tongues may be written forwards or backwards, that is toward the
right or left hand, so this.

Therefore Ebrew, Samaritic, Syriac and Arabic is written toward the left,
Ethiopic toward the right hand, like Greek, and Latin, and all other
European tongues, descending from this primitive.

Rule II. As other Tongues, so this writes the Letters a part, or joins them.

The Jews as they write any tongue with their letters, so did they the bible
and other books of note with Letters a part, (as we do in printing) yet in
their common writings (doubtless) they did (as we do for celerity sake) join
their Letters. And that by a threefold argument, 1. Because it is natural to
all people to write fast, and joining the caracters is the only way. 2. The
heathens contradistinct to the Jews of that Country, viz. the Syrians being
Christians, and Arabians for the most part Muhammedans, do write the Letters
jointly, as other Countries do, when they would write fast. And no doubt, it is
the common course of that Country as well as it is of ours. Only some few
Letters they join not, ( viz. The Syrians a, d, e, u, tz, r, t, or Olaf,
dolat, He, Vau, Tzode, Ris, and Taw. The Arabians, a, d, w, z, and r, or Elif,
Del, (Dsel) vaw, zayin, ra.) with any following Letter, but with the foregoing
they are as well as any other. ^. a, and l, or Aleph, and Lamed are found
joined in one figure by the Jews.

The Etiopians do write every Letter apart like the Jews, which I think is
done by them only in some books of note as the bible, and all Church-books,
yet in common writings I doubt not but that they join them as well as we.
Otherwise they may be thought to want the common sense in writing. I desire
that this may be enquired after, and being found by experience to be so, that
Europe may be acquainted with it.

Rule. 3. The essential duct (or stroke) of the Letters in this whole
primitive Tongue is one and the same.

Ebrew and Calde Letters are the very same, for there are no Caldeans extant,
but the Jews (since the Babilonian captivity) who gave unto that form of
writing and pronunciation (which they learnt there) the name of Calde;
notwithstanding they lived in Jerusalem and the rest of the holy Land. The
Jews use these murabba or square Letters which they call Calde in any tongue
whatsoever, as in Italian, Spanish, German, French, Persian, Arabic, Turkish,
Polonian, or Muscouian tongues.

The Samaritan are the old Ebrew Letters, used by the Jews before the
Babilonian captivity. My reason is this, First, because they are less polished
more crooked, unproportionable, uneven and illfavoured, then the common Ebrew
now in use. For as the Jews (before the captivity) were less civilized, more
proud, stifnecked, rebellious, untractable, and hardhearted, not only to
strangers but to themselves also: (as appears by the general complaint of the
Prophets) so (after that affliction of 70 years captivity) they became more
meek, humble, patient, and tractable: and in that time finding that the
Caldeans had the same Language, in essence, with them, and that their writing
was more neat and comely then their own (by how much those were a better
governed and policy'd people then they) they began not only to learn, but
affect, and that so well that they left their own, crooked, and illfavoured
Character unto those Samaritans, (which they called Cuttims, because descending
from Cuthaya, or Scythia,) out of an hatred of their worship, and religion, and
love of their own religion, and new learned Character, which they found to be
more easy and neat than their old. Secondly, because it is the common course
of all Nations to mend the fashion of their writing, as the Germans, Low-duch,
Polonions, and English themselves have done, and do yet daily.

The Syrian Characters are the same formerly used in Syria, Cnaan, Flistea, or
Palestina, by the Heathens or Christians, not the Jews, and thence it is that
the greatest difference betwixt Calde and Syriac is only in the characters, the
tongue being the same called Calde, when the Jews speak it, and Syriac when
the Christians. Now we know well enough, that religion does not change the
tongue, as when popery was cast out of England, the tongue did remain the
same. And those petty differences between Calde and Syriac taught by Emira,
Ecchellensis, Waserus, Masius, Crinesius, de Dieu, and others following them,
shall all be cleared up, and taken away in their proper, place. Neither do they
write downwards (as Masius etc. affirm) but only some men for their more
perfect and accurate writing, turn first their paper downward, then make they
that basis or fundamental struck, whereby the characters are joined,
downward, and so write the body of the Letters all along upon it; which fully
done, they turn again upwards; Nor do they use many different fashions of
their writings about the lines, but write line for line as we do. And there
are many thousands that do not turn their paper and yet write as fair and
swift as the other. And this I have observed my self by many that have
resolved me that question; The other Syriac Estrangelo Letters are also the
same, but only that they are less polished as being more ancient.

The Arabians as they have the same way of joining, so have they likewise the
essential writing. The names (if fully written) would appear to be, [1.] the
same names, [2.] the same fort of Letters, [3.] the names to be taken out of
the same tongue, and [4.] that their order should be the same with Ebrew
Samaritan, Calde, and the Syriac Alphabet. All the difference may easily be
shown by degrees, going from Samaritan to the old Syriac, hence to the new
Syriac of Trostius his new Testament, or the books printed in Germany and
Leyden by Erpenius, hence to that latter printed at Rome, given out by Gabriel
Sionita, or by that Syriac Old and New Testament lately given out by that same
worthy and learned man at Paris. Hence to some far better Syriac Manuscripts
extant in England, which being compared with the most ancient Arabic writing
(as I have seen it at Ephesus in a table) that hangs there in a Church built
by a Turck to the honor of Jesus Christ called Isa Peigamber; the characters
thereof being like Syriac) you will find them to be almost all one Nay among
my own Manuscripts, I have some pieces of Arabic witten upon Parchment being
the Cufi. writing, which comes very near unto the neatest Syriac extant. There
are here in England above 20000 several fashions of Arabic writings, every
Manuscript being different from other, and some of them being composed of
several tracts, bound up together will afford 10, 20, nay 30, several forms
of writing. And I my self have one Manuscript that contains above an hundred
different sorts. Wherefore you must not stand either upon this or that print,
for even as we our selves differ in writing so do they. And therefore I desire
you to acquaint your selves with the written books as much as possible. Nay
there are some copy books published in sundry countries, wherein (that they
might be thought to be skillfull in strange tongues) they have made such soul
work about the Syriac, Arabic, Turkish, Persian, Malayan, Tatar, and Mogull
Letters that I am ashamed of them. Nay among printed books only France and
Italy have good Arabic characters, those in Germany, and the Low countries are
not good. Nor are Erpenius his characters according to the true and neat Arabic
duct in writing. Nor are those Arabic pieces cut in copper, in the deceased
Crinesius his book called Babel, or Joh. Zechendorfius yet living; (both
Germans) well performed. But I hope we shall shortly make neater work in that
kind here in England then has been done hitherto in Europe.

Rule 4 They have all one and the same consonants in power and by way of
pronouncing: not much different from our English.

The pronunciations, which we have in our English Alfabet of all our letters,
we see to be almost the same with French, High and Low Dutch, and other Nations
of Europe; on the same fashion those of the Orient being as well Men as we,
have not much less, or much diverse soundings of letters. The primitif thus.
(a) b g d h (e) v (u) (...). y (i) k l m n x (sh.) (o) f (p) (rz) q r s t. Our
English is, a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, k, l, m, n, o, p, q, r, s, t, u, w, x,
y, z. just so pronounces the Ebrue, and Samaritic, Calde and Syriac, Arabic and
Etiopic, viz.

A b c, or g as we English pronounce g before e or i, ge, gi, the reason is,
because that c in Italy, from whence we fetch our Alfabet, before e or i, is
pronounced, as if a t were before je, ji, thus tje, tij: and our g is
pronounced as if there were a d before je, ij, thus, dje, dij. So that the
difference is between the Italian or Roman c and the English, Ebrue, Arabic,
Calde aad Syriac g, as the proportion of (...).

D, e, because the Grecians, who did immediately receive their Alfabet from this
primitife Tongue, as the son is the immediate heir of his parents, almost
generally have (...) he and (...) e, yet for the most part even that same (...)
they pronounce as if it were (...) e, hence it is no wonder, that in the Greec,
Latin, English and all occidentall alfabets is a simple e (in place of that
easy, the easiest breath of all the gutturall letters after a,) called by the
Grecians the spiritus lenis and he the spiritus asper.

F is unjustly, yet according to many hundert Nations in the World, arisen in
place of the primitive w, or v co^sonant, which being too hard pronounced by
the Coptites, the Romans, Italians, Spaniards, French, made filius from (...),
with an interpofition of l between two i, viz. u and i; thus is f in place of
w, v.

G is come in place of the primitive easy s; for the pronunciation of zayin, is
as the Grecians, Germans, and Low Country pronounces in the beginning of any
word. And because that some of the Aeolians and old Latins did pronounce g as
the French do, je, ge, hence is it, that they mistaking the second degree of s
(done only by the tongue and the teeth) which is, the tongue not coming at
the teeth, as the teeth closed, and the palate made with a cavity, make z a g,
as the French ge and je. Then the primitive letter requires a single
sibilation, and the Greec letter, from whence the Latins have it, a compound
one.

H, this is from the second fort of h in the primitive tongue, the second
whereof is here the single h; in Ebreu it is of a double pronunciation: first
Kh, easy unto all the Europians almost, except English and French 2. half h
and half kh, almost impossible for all the Europians. Yet by the Jews ye may
learn it the best.

Here follows a letter unknown unto the Latins, from whence the English have
their Alfabet, to wit, th; the Greecs as the nearest unto the Orient and these
parts that did speak this tongue, have it from this primitive tongue, (...)
Thet, theta. And must be pronounced with the breadth of the tongue.

I, is in this primitife tongue the y of the English and French pronunciation.
The Latins mistaking it to be naturally a vowell, when it was a consonant,
made it a vowell. Yet as in this primitive tongue all the letters are
consonants and not vowels, so is also the whole Alfabet of Greec, Latin,
English and of all Europe only consonants, not vowels, whereof now and then
some become to be vowels, yet by a mere accident.

K, l, m, n. are of the same nature in the primitife, that they are in English,
only take heed, that you never pronounce, k as kh, but constantly as ca, co,
cu. Ka ke, ki, ko. ku.

Here comes in another letter, known by the Greecs, Romans and English
(rightly placed only in the Greec Alfabet) (...) x, which all the people
pronounce es, but yet many times must be pronounced sc, or sh: and that by
these following arguments. 1. You have in all tongues the sound of s and sh.
Now if ye pronounce (...) x as cs, and not sc, or sh, then you bereave the
Greec and all other Europian Alfabets of that sh. And yet as you have in this
whole primitife tongue (...) shin and (...), sin, or sh and s, (the names of
these sounds let them be, whatsoever they will) so naturally in all the
occidentall tongues: and if x be pronounced only like cs, then is sh in n one
of our occidentall alfabets, whereby they will become not only shorter then
their parents, the oriental alfabet, but also of their own natural
expression. 2. The name of the letters are not sin and ksin, but sin and shin;
as all the World does agree. Now in the Greec we have (...) syn theo, cum Deo,
being that one name of these two letters, ergo must (...) not be read ksyn, but
shyn theo. 3. cs or ks is a compound sound but sh is not a compound sound. 4.
The Arabic tongue which is spread through whole Africa and almost a third part
of Asia does pronounce sh in most of those words, which in Ebreu, Calde and
Syriac are written with that shamek in whose order and place (...) in the Greec
alfabet expressly stands. 5. The figure of the Greec letter it self shows, that
it is the same with (...), viz. three teeth, only that in the primitife these
teeth stand upright, in the Greec toward the right hand. 6. The name of the
letter in the Greec is not from shamek, but from shin, and n being cut off does
remain shi, which now commonly is called csi. Yet in the Jewish, Calde, and
Christian, Syriac, or Muhammedan Arabic, and Heathenish Greec and Romish tongue
this Letter is not constantly read as sh, but only as s; whereof many it
stances might be made.

O. In this primitife tongue. ayin is and signifies an eye and that form has
it in all the tongues; and as no body in English, Latin or Greec calls it
gno, ngo, hno, nho, or otherwise, so it must neither be pronounced thus in the
primitife. First, because it is a pronunciation of non sense, used by no people
2. Because the Arabians, and Syrians, and Ethiopians do pronounce it only deep
out of the throat. 3. the Latin could not pronounce it. 4. Gn is a compound
sound of g and n; but all the alfabet letters are of a single sound 5. it makes
a confusion of two instiuments of our speech, the palate and tongue, as if
these two made up the throat, when these two are different parts of our mouth
as between themselves, so also with the throat. It is therefore the surest way
for us, to leave it out wholly in our pronunciation.

P. Is never pronounced thus in this holy tongue, but constantly f, nor has yet
whole Africa and that great part of Asia (where this primltife tongue has
continued ever since the Babylonian confusion) any p at all, but f: hence it is
that the Ethiopians have gotten in their Alfabet a new letter to a p, which as
you may see in the words, where it does occur by them, is used only in such
proper names of the Greek Testament and elsewhere, which were pronounced p, as;
Paul, Peter. Nay the Persians and Turcs have some words wherewith they jeare
the Arabians, because they cannot pronounce p. Hence is it that the Romans did
use an h by that p, to sweeten it. The Greecs had both sounds, pe and se, which
they call pi and fi, nor is that Greec fi more than a fingle f. Here comes in
the letter tz, not so much with a t, or d, as different from the hard s by a
broad and obscure pronunciation of it. For the hard s, which follows, is of an
acute sound, and for the most part with the vowels, a, e, i, o, u. but zet, er
zade with the vowels a, o, ou.

Q. This letter the Romans, and also we Northern people have gotten from this
primitife tongue: it has the pronunciation of k, I confess, yet a great deal
deeper out of the throat. The Greecs being unable to pronounce it so hard, left
it out, and put in all places a k instead thereof. The Romans more Northerly
being of a harsher sound than the Grecians retained it, and for difference sake
put constantly an u consonant by it, which yet they did not pronounce, as out
of Ciceros jest is observable, ego coque te adiuvabo, for quoque: and hence is
it that the French never pronounce qu otherwise then a simple k. therefore
should we leave out constantly that u, and never pronounce it neither. For this
our mother tongue shows it to be a superfluous v, and not to be expressed with
a sound, and that q is expressable without the writing or pronouncing of an v.

R. Has nothing to be noted.

S. This is that fifth degree of an s, as we constantly pronounce si sharp at
the end of a word. The first degree thereof being as it is used in the
beginning of German and Low Dutch words pronounced like an English z. the
second degree like sj. the third sh of a more hard pronunciation, the fourth sa.

T. Is that simple t, which all these dialects in the East, and the most of
that offspring in Europe have at the end of their Alfabets: it must never be
pronounced like th, nor written with an h. And because it does frequently
mingle with the s before, and the s with this t, hence it is, that d does also
now and then mingle with s; yet must they be constantly looked upon as diverse
letters. And therefore where the Calde and Syriac does not show the difference
of a natural d and t from a d and t grown out of s, there the Arabic is more
circumspect, and does show it. And where in Arabic it should be left out, or
superfluous added, that must not be ascribed to the tongue, but the Authors of
them, who do fail therein.

Rule 5. The consonants are either of a hard, or of an easy and sweet
pronuneiation.

This is to be observed in all these dialects, howsoever set down only in the
Arabic, the observation whereof does frequently open the eyes of the Jews and
Christians in the Ebrew, Calde, Samaritic and Syriac. It being the old
question, why so many s, so many d and t, h and g, k and a. The answer is,
because they have in the orient for an easy, sweet, and acute pronunciation an
easy a, d, h, g, k, and t, for a hard one, an hard a, da, ha, ga, qa, ta. The
easy letters are following, 1.2.3.4.5.7. 10.11.12.13.14.15.17. 21.22. the hard
letters are 6.8.9.16.18.19.20. In the Arabic names you may easily discern
them, for all those that are of a sweet pronunciation, are with e, i or u:
Elif, be, te, the, gim, del, dsel, ze, sin, shin, fe, kef, lem, min, nun, he,
ye. The hard with an a, ha, kha, ra sad, dad, ta, da, ayin, gayin, qaf, vaw.

Rule 6. They number by the order of the Alfabet.

The first nine begin from one, still adding a unity, arise till nine. The
second nine begin from ten and still adding ten, arise to ninty: in the third
nine, which is not as yet half, they begin from one hundert, and arise to four
hundert: and so further as in the table. The Arabians have the same order and
numbering from whence it is clearly seen, that they had formerly the same order
with the Ebrue Alfabet. Yet they have also another sort of figures for those
nine numerall figures, which as commonly esteemed, they received out of the
East Indies, but that is but an old fable. For they do arise from the Ebrue or
Arabic letters. You have them at the end of the table. The Etiopians use the
Greec letters but of a very old and rude stamp, whereof you may learn by the
way from the Etiopians an old kind of Greec letters.

Rule 7. The number of them is two and twenty.

The whole tongue has 22 letters; for so many, and no more are in Ebrue and
Samaritic, Calde and Syriac, Arabic and Etiopic, confessed by all the
Grammarians, who do agree about that number. Yet there are some objections. 1.
There are 23 consonants because Shamek or Samek, Shemkat or Semkat is a letter
a part, Shin and sin being two diverse letters, which make up that number of 22.
Answer, Shamek or Shemkat is only a surname of Shin, and by accident of Sin,
as the figure of it in Syriac shows, which is the same with the Ebrue (...)
only closed above by quick writing performed with one stroke, and joined with
the following, which joining the Jews have not observed in their Ebrue Text,
and Calde paraphrast, where for more perfection sake they do write all their
letters a part, as we in our print. The number (as likewise the order in the
following rule) is to be demonstrated out of the Psalms of David and the
Lamentation of Jeremy. The space of time between them both is 450 years
almost, whereof we see the constancy of that number and order of the Alfabet.
In the 25 Psalm (...) and (...) is joined in the 2 verse, (...) and (...) in
the 5 verse, no verse begins with (...) contrary has two verses, and thus to
make up the number of 22, (...) is placed at the end. In the 34 Psalm (...)
begins again the 2 verse, (...) and (...) are in the 6 verse, and to make up
the number 22, (...) does it, yet it has (...) for the conclusion as in the
Psalm before. In the 37 Psalm every letter has two verses, excepting only
(...) which have but one, whereof the second does lack. The 28 verse must end
in (...), and the 29th begin with (...) for (...) sake, whereunto belongs the
30th beginning with (...), which is now the 29th, the sum of the verses then
being 41, and adding those 3 lacking, it shows plainly that the Psalm then
would have 44 verses, the half of it 22, the sum of the Letters. In the
112th Psalm there are joined two letters in one verse as (...) and (...) in the
25 and 34 Psalms, and thus would the number of the verfes be 11, but now
seeing (...) is cast to the ninth and (...) to the 10th, there are but 10
verses. Yet in all these Psalms there is no (...) beginning any verse, but
(...) Samek or Shamek is constantly there. In the 119 Psalm there are besides
8 verses from (...) in his order, three sh (...) among 5 s (...) in its order,
which is the only confusion I find in these Psalms in this Letter. In the 145
Psalm it seems as if the verse beginning from Nun, were loft, whence it is,
that this Psalm has only 21 verses. In the first Chapter of the Lamentation
(made as I say 450 years, or thereabouts after the Psalms) there are 22 Verses
according to the number of the Letters.

Now to answer unto that great objection, which out of all these Psalms may be
made, I say here only, that in all the Dictionaris of this tongue, already
extant, is to be seen, a great part of the words with (...) in the 1.2. and 3.
radical to be written with (...) and not with (...), and those with (...) to
be written by the Jews in their Rabbinicall books with (...), yet these two
names, Shin and Sin to be all along this tongue, except in Syriac. And that the
greatest part of those roots which have our Ebrew, Calde, and Syriac, to be
written with (...) of three points, which expressly is called Shin; Yet some words
with (...) have only in Arabic (...) of no point: which is an exception. For
that which has the greatest weight, makes by me the rule; and that which has
the fewest examples, makes by me the exception. I have also observed in some
christian Manuscripts in Arabic written among the Muhammedans for our
christians sake, that they frequently write (...) with 3 points in place of
Ebrew (...), which they do, as I was told of them, only that the Turks should
not presently understand the christian books, for fear of finding something
written against their faith, they might begin a persecution. But I believe it
to be rather out of ignorance of Orthography then such reason, the Turcs
knowing it before hand, that Christians have other principles, and that they do
write something now and then in their books to retain them Christians, and
avert them from the Turkish faith. Summa, even this letter (...) not being
esteemed to be the same with (...), and anomalically with (...), has made that
great obstacle, that learned men could not find that unity of those six
tongues; And that what Wemmer says in his Etiopie Grammar, that Saut and Saat
be of the same sound, both pronounced likes, is false; no tongue in the World
lacking these two degrees of s and sh: not Ebrew, Samaritic, Calde, Syriac and
Arabic, why than Etiopic? But so men do speak and write, when they learn and
teach without reason, and trial.

Nor 24; as if Vau quiescent or pronounced were two diverse letters, which is
false, and yet thus set down by Elias Hutter, in his Cubus, forceably brought
in only to fill up the number of 24, and so to make a right square or cubas:
where as there is a double vau there must then be given also a double alef
movable or quiescent, a double he movable or quiscent, and a double yod movable
or quiescent.

Nor 27; as Abraham de Balmes a Jew will have it in his Grammar, faigning the
five final letters in Ebrue to be new letters besides these 22.

Nor 28; as the new Arabians have it in their Garmmar; and as all the Christian
Grammarians do follow them; because that six letters do receave a point for a
double pronunciation sake: which fix letters added to those 22, should make up
28. For upon the same ground in Ebrue also six letters receaving a point dages
(constantly asserted to be for a double pronunciation sake of them, which is
false, yet in the interim admitted) would make also in Ebrue 28 letters; whereas
in both dialects this point not regarded leaves only 22 letters.

Nor 29, because the new Arabians have joined two letters in one, Lam Elif, and
the Syrians, Lomad olas or claf lomad, and the Rabbines Alef Lamed; for this
combination of two letters of the Alfabet makes no new letter, otherwise would
the Arabians and Syrians have thousands of letters more, according the
variation of joining two, three, four, five, six nay seven consonants; from
which it is, that the Greec combinations of Letters in the Greec Royal at
Paris in the Louvre do amount unto 600 and odd, where there are only 24
letters.

Nor 30; as Wemmer and all those, that have written about the Etiopic Alfabet
at Rome and elsewhere, do falsely assert: some of the former being doubled in
pronunciation, as by the Arabians, and some new Latin or Greec Letters added,
who made a new Alfabet.

Rule. 8. Their order only one, of a divine authority, of Gods wisdom and of a
secret connection of things signified by them.

The Arabians have formerly changed this order, which is clearly of divine
authority and evident unto any one that looks upon the 25.34.37.112.119 and
145 Psalms together with the first Chapter of the Lamentation of Jeremy, where
always is observed one and the same order, never changed or altered. Now this
holy tongue being given by God Almighty to Adam, and being retained till David,
and 450 years further till Jeremy, should not that make us consider, that as
God orders all things wisely, so truly there is Gods wisdom in this order
also. But mankind is so blind, that thousands cannot see, what easily is
seen by others, thousands think themselves to see something, which others
perceive to be nothing at all, some seeing to much, others, to little. Yet if
they see with reason, notwithstanding esteemed to see to much, see and look
more truly into things, than those that will not use the eyes of their mind,
or reasen. And further, because that the consonants in this tongue make the
root, and give them the signification, it is clear, that the consonants have
to signify things, and consonants following according to Gods order, here is,
no doubt, a secret connection of those things, which either the consonants,
(before they come into the root,) do signify or their names import. A thing
necessary to be studied, inquired, deeply searched, and in many hundert places
easily observable, by hundreds observed, and formerly inquired.

Yet it is clear and evident, that the Arabians of old had the very same order
of the consonants with Ebrue, Samaritic, Calde, and Syriac, because the same
letters with Arabic do signify the same number with the Ebrue letter. Which
numbering arises from their order; And the numbering being the same, the order is
the same. Notwithstanding this divine order, some Arabic Grammers, and Masters
of their Schools and children ignorant of Gods Word in the old Testament not
looking upon this order as a divine thing, did change their Alfabeticall order
according to the changement of their figure, and brought b and t together, g
and kh, r and z, shin or samek and sin ( sh or or x and s) f and q; yet did
retain some small remainders of the old Alfabet, a, b, g, d, z, x, tz, e, f,
q, k, l, m, n, v, y. Which changing of the figure did immediately descend from
the rounder writing of the Siriac letters, as any body may observe. And yet the
Etiopians have changed their order a great deal more thus (...) (again) (...)
Whereof having nothing to say, when, by whom, why, how this change of that old
divine order came to pass, we rest, till we learn some thing out of Etiopia
thereabout. In the Ebrue, Calde and Siriac dictionaries is this order happily
observed, and is to be observed still, only that upon one rule quiescentes
alternant, the quiescent (...) auy do change among themselves without
alteration) all the words of v and y the 1.2. and 3. radical are to be brought
to a; which hitherto is not done. And that excellent Man Mr. Bedwell as also
Mr. Schindler in Germany did both right well, to bring all the Arabic roots to
the Ebrue order. And I wish heartily, that England would remember its honor in
that man of this Country.

Rule. 9. The words are usually left wholly and rot brok in two diverse lines, as
we do in our writings and printings.

I confess this not to be of the essential part of things in this tongue
about the writings thereof, yet it presents the most diligent and curious
cautions of writing, whereof in the whole orient they are a great deal more
curious and accurate, then we or any others that have the art of printing. The
writing of their books being very chargeable, they perform it with as great
diligency, as formerly the Monks did among us, whereof we have at this very
day many great, precious, and beautiful remainders in public, and glorious
libraries of private Gentlemen. Hence it is, that the letters are dilated or
contracted, are longer or shorter, are of many and different forms even as
among us every one writes diversely: And yet if the line be filled, they write
the rest in the margent, parallel with the line, or write it above the last
word or syllable: scarce ever break the word so, as to put the rest in the
following line.

Rule 10. Constantly these Consonants do begin the syllable.

It is not in this tongue as it seems to be in ours, where many hundrets of
words begin with the vowell, not with the consonant: so that if any syllable in
this tongue be heard to begin with a, e, i, o, u, you must still imagine an
alif or ayin to be before that vowell. And yet, if ye rightly scanne our
English, Latin and Greec Alfaber, it is in our tongues as in theirs, in
theirs, as in ours, because that notwithstanding some of our Alfabet, viz. a e,
i, o, u, being true consonants (which appears out of this primitife tongue,
from whence our Alfabet arises) yet are they taken to be vowells, even so in
this primitife tongue, these six (...) and (...) a, e, i, o, u, and y,
notwithstanding that they are true consonants yet many times they are esteemed
in place of vowels, and therefore called matres lectionis, to read by them.

Rule 11. The alfabet is divided into letters of the throat, lip, palate, teeth
and tongue.

And this division as it holds in all tongues of the World, so here in this
whole tongue, not that the teeth and tongue letters are formed by the teeth and
tongue only, as the throat, lip and palate letters are by them, which 12.
letters the Arabic Grammarians ascribe to the Moon, but the tongue is the
chiefest instrument with the teeth in the tongue letters, as the teeth the
chiefest instrument with the tongue in the teeth letters: which tongue and
teeth letters are by the Arabic Grammarians ascribed unto the Sun. Therefore
alef, he, Khet, ayin are of the throat. bet, vav, mem, fe, are of the lip,
gimel, yod, kaf, quf, are of the palate; zayin, shin or Shamek, Tzade, Res and
sin are of the teeth principally, besides the tongue; and dalet, thet, lamed,
nun, and tau are of the tongue principally, besides the teeth.

Rule 12. The figure of the consonants are for the most part a little changed
at the end of a word.

And thereby you may easily observe the end of every word almost, especially in
Arabic, where you have very many of letters written with some confident struck
at the end, more than in Syriac, Calde, and Ebrue, where there is only five
such, kaf, mem, nun, fe, tzade. Besides them in Arabic bet, gimel, he, khet,
yod, lamed, shin, ayin, quf, sin, tau. Whereof we see, that the Jews in the
Ebrue, Samaritic, and Calde, the Christians in the Siriac and Ethiopic have had
many more final letters, than now are seen, nay in Samaritic and Etiopic as
yet we see none at all. But those are such adiaforas, and indifferent things,
that they as mere triffles cannot make a real diverfity of these tongues.

Rule 13. Many of the letters are very like one another and therefore well to
be distinguished.

In Ebrew and Calde, 1. b, k, n, (...) b has a sharp corner within, (...) k
more round. (...) n has the upper and lower struck shorter, than (...) and
(...) 2. d, k final, 1. (...) d is not longer than the rest of the letters,
(...) k final is longer, and has in books with pricks either (:) or qamez
within. (...) d is with a sharp corner, (...) r with a more round one. Hierome
says of d and r excepto larvo apice similes sunt, they are like one another
except a little point: this point we shall find in the Siriac Alfabet. 3. h,
kh (...) h is open, (...) kh is close, 4. v, z, n final. (...); vau does
denote a hook, and so it is shaped, (...) is the Latin z, whereof the sound
is almost the same within the Latin S. (...) n final is longer than the rest
of the letters, (...) z of the same length with the rest. 5. sh, m final,
(...) sh is round. (...) m square, 6 kh, t. (...) kh is made with a direct
stroke downwards, (...) t with a crooked one. The rest are easily discerned
(...) ft, vy, ng, sh m th, tz, a.

In Siriac. 1. ayin and lamed. ayin is not so high as lamed. 2. nun and yod as
they have the same figure in Arabic, so in Siriac. Yet for some distinction
sake the n is higher, and the y lower. Though, as reason will teach, every man
that writes, does not constantly make the strokes so perfect as it should be,
thence comes it, that n is frequently mistaken for y, which has afterward
caused a false rule by all the Syrians and Calde Grammarians as if n were the
formative letter of the third Masculine singular and plural in the future:
which exception in Calde and Syriac from Ebrew Arabic and Etiopic being false
(only a mistake in writing) can make no different tongue, r a point above d
beneath.

In Arabic you have in the table my nine figures, whereby all the distinction
is easily observed.

And so far have you the first Elements of the essential parts, viz.
Consonants (of this Oriental and primitive tongue, viz. Ebrue, Calde,
Samaritick, Etiopic, Siriac and Arabic, their uniforme found, number, order,
name, form either Biblic, or Rabbinic in Italy or Germany, either capital,
middle or final letters, separated, or joined, either through the whole
Alfabet, or of some among themselves: and how that all the letters are joined
both with the forgoing, and following, except in Siriac and Arabic five, Elif,
del, (dsel) ra ze, vau. Whereunto is added in Siriac three others more (...).
In the Arabic table they are showed separated and joined, according to the
order of the latter Arabians, which Erpenius, and others did propound: yet it
had bin better not to follow it so closely. And finally you have by mine
invention nine figures of those 22 Arabic letters, whereby you may better
understand the reason and essential struck of their shape.

APPENDIX. Follows now the second part, viz. of Pricks, and Strooks. The
accidental parts of this whole Tongue.
RULE I. Pricks and Strocks are either in place of Vowels, disting uishing, or
Accents.
IT is a great question, and mightily debated by two learned men of this time,
whether any of these pricks and strooks, representing the Vowels,
Characteristics and Accents, were from the beginning of the use of the tongue,
and so in the Ebrue Bibel a part of Gods Word and tongue, without which almost
no place in Scripture could be rightly understood or no, I deny them to be
coaeva consonis, to have bin written by Moses the holy Penman of the Law, and
punctually fet unto the consonants, as we now see them printed; nor the rest
of the books where by any author of theirs so ill and silly handled, as to
have cast so many unnecessary, idle, unreasonable, superfluous, useless
fancies upon them. I confess, we cannot punctually set down the time, place,
method, authors, and other circumstances of these pricks, strokes and crooked
knots, there creeping in in all writings many things, whereof the year,
authors, place and reason was never set down. Yet the chiefest reason, (for
here I would have nothing simply rejected without grave reasons) is, because if
they were essential to this tongue, then would they be constantly the same in
Ebrew, Samaritic, Calde and Syriac, Arabic and Etiopic. I beseech the Reader to
consider, 1. that it is as old a fashion to have Bibles without pricks as with
prics, and in my apprehension, older to; yet here I do speak only of a time
of 1300 years or thereabout. If we confess, Hierome to make mention now and
then of points, yet we see also, that there is a great quantity of places
otherwise rendered by him, or at least, the proper names otherwise read, than
now the prics will suffer. And though Zoar (that very old Rabbinicall book)
makes mention of the Names of the Vowells, who will not confess, that those
names might be very easily written by some other in some copy of Zoar, which
either by transcription, or impression is now in the Text. Have we not
thousands of such incroachings upon the Text in hunderts of Authors. But if
that were not so, and that some of them were named, does it therefore follow
that they have bin all at that time? If the Grecians could be content with a,
e, o, for vowells, as Plato says, and the Arabians had nor have any more, but
these three from Plates time till this very day: and if the Sirians could be
content without vowells, till they becoming Christians, and translating many
books out of Greec in their tongue, did in proper names first, afterward also
in other Nounes and Verbs assume the Greec a, e, i, o, u, and if the Persians,
Turcs, Tatars great and little all Mogull and Malaye could be content from
their very beginning till this day to be without prics instead of Vowels, what
think you was there then a curse of God upon the Jews and all the Prophets,
that they could nor would understand the writing of one another without so many
superfluities. Is a, e, i, o, u, y, enough for us in all occident to read by,
and is not (...) and (...) enough to do the same, when these do as well
represent Consonants and Vowells as those do. And what a malediction will you
cast upon Gods Word, that when many hundreds can understand, and that without
any hesitation at all, thousands of other books without these prics, they
should not be able to understand Gods Book without such a do. If that Word of
God were written with all that infinity of pricking and stroaking every line
and letter, were it not the greatest injury that could be done to it, to have
it once printed without them? How think ye would the Jews once dare to offer
such an unexpressable sacrilege? Or by what means are the Jews wiser, then
God himself, who could not find out an easy way for his Word to be read and
fully understood, till the Jews found it out? Why must only the Jews have 15
Vowells, and 20 or 30 Accents, but no characteristicall points between a Verb
and a Noun, the second and the third person, active and passive, as the Syrians
are said to have? What a strange thing is it, that the Sirians have never a
sva, never a dages forte (as Emira and Ludoyic de Dien do rightly affirm) that
there should never be found any dages lene in Arabic, but all dages forte, and
contrary, no forte but all lene in Syriac. In Etiopic and Samaritic nothing; in
Ebrew Bibles without points nor dages forte nor lene; Nay in the Samaritic the
whole Law without Vowells and any pricks or strokes of Accents. No Accents in
Etiopic, Arabic and Syriac, no Accents in any other Ebrue book, nor in my
Calde Manuscript, being Questions and Answers upon the Law. No Accents nor
Vowells in the Arabic and Syriac old Testament given out in the King of France
his Bible, until added by Gabriel Siouite, as he publicly confesses. And
whence that infinity of anomalies in Vowells, in Accents, and what an absurdity
is in all the Accents, not one only except. What has atnakh the Duke to make a
determination of 25 Verses, otherwise to be done by Silluq the King, when He
stands in hundert of places as a boy and servant, which nor the Text, nor
reason regardes. What a boys trick and childish punctation of atnakh is in the
third word of the bible, In the beginning created God. Is it sense or nonsense?
And yet there must be the Duke Arnakh. Truly I pity all those great Man, that
are become boys and children, playing thus for the Vowels, Accents, and
diacriticall Notes, that they write whole books about fancies, and childish
stuff, given over unto reprobate minds and labor without the blessing of God.

Rule 2. The Pricks, added unto Consonant Vowells, instead of Vowells, are
various, according to the fancy of the inventours in various Countries of the
Orient.

In Ebrue, Samaritic, Calde, Arabic, and Eticpic are there naturally none,
because superfluous, the same letters by them being the true Vowels, a, e, t,
o, u, which are used by us in English; look only to the table and observe their
order. Yet with all according to the traditions of Grammarians of several
dialects here will we speak distinctly of every one of them separatly.

First in the Ebrue.
1. The sounds a, e, i, o, u, are naturally in every language, and therefore in
this primitive tongue by all means. 2. Because the sound will be heard more
long, when it stands at the end of a syllable, as va, ve vi, vo, vu, sva, sve,
svi, svo, svu; and shorter, when after that sound follows a Consonant, vas,
ves, vis, vos, vus, therefore did some Jews, Masters of children, or
Grammarians for their Disciples sake invent a double sort of pricks for that
double syllable, which I call long and short, (as the Vowells are of late called
long and short, otherwise called great and little) viz. for the long syllable
qumez, zeri, hireq, holem, sureq. For the short syllable; fatah, segol, hireq,
qomez, qubbutz. 3. Those that have but one name as qametz or qomets, and hireq,
have also but one shape: which breeding a confusion does show us the silliness
of these Grammarians (God being able to make better work in his primitise
tongue) that they were not able to invent two pricks more, thereby to prevent
all confusion, which hitherto lies as a plague upon those, who will learn this
Ebrue with these pricks, and not otherwise, and being almost impossible to
overcome, casts them of from Gods tongue. 4. The difference between the long
and short hireq is not greatly needful, because both is an i.

1. If their follow immediately the same or any other of these pricks which I
named, then is it qamez. Why? because the syllable is long? Why long? because
the following Consonants having its proper prick, (WHICH WE FOR FASHION SAKE
RATHER THAN WITH REASON CALL VOWELS) or Vowell, concludes a syllable, if none of
those but some others, which are called svas, then is it qomez. Yet because there
is great trouble with the accent, which changes all this work, and makes new
troubles, therefore the true easiness is. 2. If you pronounce a or o according
to your pleasure. 1. Because the greatest distinction between the
pronunciation of Ebrew and Arabic, Syriac and Ebrue, Syriac and Arabic, is
that the former loves rather o, the latter a, where the Ebrew says foqed, the
Arabic says faqed. 2. The Ebrew it selfedoth change a and o srequently, foqed
and faqed, yacoy and ucal, Ros and Rasim, Enos, Anasim. 3. The same change is
in Calde, Syriac, Arabic and Etiopic, and that in the same words, which do so
change in Ebrew, that the unity of this tongue is even in the unity of a vowell
by this or that letter to be observed in thousands of examples. 5. And because
in no language at all just every consonant or letter has its Vowell, and
having none must go either to the forgoing or following letter which has a
Vowell; as: sva, vas; these Jewish Masters thought it necessary now and then to
prick such letters, that had no vowell, yet not always, with two pricks (:)
which they justly called sva (to wit troubles, falsehood, vanity, without need
and reason, a lie, the Latins, frustra, gratis, mendacium, tumultus, falsum;
the Greec LXX (...)) with sav of the same root and fignification. Where observe
again following confusions.

I. That they put it not under the last letter, and that again with a
threefold exception 1. The letter kaf shall have it. 2. and the letters (...) b
g d th f q t, if the letter going before have not a Vowell but a sva. 3. That
second has again exceptions in some words in the Bible.

II. That they make a distinction between a movable and a quiescent. The
movable they conceive to sound ordinarily e; and yet 1. they can never
pronounce it so short as they say it must be, to wit, as quick as a lightning
from Heaven; but sound it as long as the best e in the Bible. 2. They find in
the Greec LXX translation in many names, (where now in the Ebrue Bible a letter
has no Vowell,) an a, e, i, o, u, which confounds again that tenant, 3. Some
allege diverse Authors which held that opinion, that sva was pronounced
according to the following Vowell. The quiescent sva to have no sound, and
therefore frequently and almost always in the final to be left out as
superfluous: and yet 1. Now and then left out on the midst also under the
quiescent letters. 2. It is frequently written where any reasonable man might
observe; 1. That it is impossible that one and the same thing should naturally
both have and not have a sound. And if they bring in the distinction of places,
where it is sounded, to wit, in all, where it is called movable, and of others
where not; I answer. 1. That that distinction is broken down by many examples
in Nounes and Verbs, where in place of the quiescent as well as the movable is
any Vowell a e i o u in the same proper names pronounced and written. 1. By the
Greecs. 2. By the Latins. 3. In Calde. 4. Syriac 5. Arabic. 6. Etiopic. 7. By
the Persians. 8. Tutcks. 9. Copticks. 10. In the Ebrue Bibel it self in diverse
places. 2. that the Arabians, who have, I confess, a quiescent, which they
call gezme (writing it continually, never leaving it out from under the last
letter, nor in the middle under the letters (...), when they are to be
pronounced, better than those silly Jewish Masters with their sva quiescent)
but they have no gezme movable, but set any Vowell of theirs in such a case.
Yet in hundreds of places, where Ebrue has a sva quiescent they put in any
Vowell; whereof, being the self same tongue with Ebrue, and having in Ebrue it
self frequently a Vowell, for the most part an I, men of reason should
conclude, that the punctation of the Jews in the Ebrue Bible and Calde Targum
is not authentic, it being so full of variations, incertitudes, confusions,
that hitherto there has been no end at all found in these things.

About Holem and Sureq these Jews have many silly ways, whereby they obstruct
and make difficult the reason of this tongue. First, Holem, 1. must never be
set upon the right shoulder of the following letter, as hitherto has bin
constantly done by the Jews (from whom the Christian Printers got it,) but
upon the left shoulder of its own proper letter, as (...) Moze, in place of
(...) for both is as broad as long, only that is confused and difficult, this
proper and easy. In the casting, or cutting the Mattresse of one will cost as
much and no more then the other. 2. It should be written and cast, or cut at
the left band of its proper letter, within the line, not above, and than we
had no need to distinguish it from the point. 1. Of Sin. 2. of the Accent
Rbia. 3 It should never be included in the point of shin and sin. Because, 1.
that gets no reasonable compendious way in writing. 2. It puts the beginner to
a great deal of trouble. 3. It makes a great deal of difficulty in the
reading of this holy tongue. For here is to be observed.

1. That ((...) being sh, and (...) s,) when the foregoing letter has no
Holem, but (...) having a Vowell, that point denotes an o of the forgoing
letter as (...) Mose. 2. That (...) having no other vowell but o, gets two.
points (...) so. 3. (...) Having no vowell, this point signifies also o; sho.
4. (...) Having a vowell, and that point besides, must be read (...) oshe,
because then the forgoing letter does constantly lack a vowell. Yet all these
precepts may be avoided only by making better Mattresses.
The greatest troubles about Sureq is that, that these filly Jews did not
invent a long u, without the adjection of the consonant v, which does so
perplex the Analogy and Etimology of this tongue, that many places and words do
thereby become of a dark and obscure explication, notion and interpretation,
causing men many times to miss of the true root: insomuch that this prick
alone were enough to confound all the tongue, to indarken all oriental Ebrue
Authors, and to breed thousands of unnecessary and endless questions in the
Ebrue Bible and Divinity; therefore (...) v being the consonant, and the point
the vowell u, as Grammarians do usely speak, hence (...) is in the beginning
not to be read u but vu. Or otherwise we run on into eighteen confusions and
errors, which I have set down in my Grammar Delin. Printed in Latin at
Amsterdam, p. 18. Number. 34.

4. Further in sva there is yet a greater imperfection, viz. that whereas it
has naturally no sound (for thereby it is distinguished from the vowels, who
have a sound) these Jewish Masters would give it one by joining thereunto the
shorter vowels fatah, segol, hireq, qomez, qubbuz. Which Doctrine destroys
that position of sua mobile; for if it be movable and to be pronounced like an
e, what need is there to join it with segol to make up e? and if it were an e
before, has it not the sound of two e now? and is it not with fatah, ea, or
ae? with hireq ei, or, ie, with qomez eo, or oe. With qubbuz eu, or ue? And yet
they set it only a simple a, e, o, And if it may be joined with a, e, o, why
not with i and u? What have these two short vowels sinned? only the wit failed
these Grammarians. Or if they did it (to avoid confusion) because sva joined
with hireq, would make up the form of segol, for three points sake, and sva
qubbus would get five points, and so make up the same form with sva segol, it
is clear again, that they had not wit enough, to make such forms of hireq
and qubbuz, that sva hireq and sva qubbuz might not make a confusion either
with sva segol or segol. And yet where is that compound sva in Syriac, Arabic,
and Etiopic, for in the Samaritic, the whole Talmud, and diverse Rabbines, and
thousands of Arabic books, you find neither it nor any vowell; And if you say,
that the Caldeans have all these vowels and these svas, I say, either they had
them from the Jews before the Babilonian captivity or during the time of it:
now if any man can produce any one line in any Author (warrantable or not, I
care not) showing us so much as one line only of the true Calde writings, with
vowels and suas and then I will yeald. If you say, in Daniel and Esra we see it
plainly; I answer, do ye not remember, that they were Jews, nor did they
write and point their books with the Calde letters and points, but with their
own.

For every one of those dialects have a peculiar manner of vowelling differing
from the other. Samaritic has none. Syriac has assumed the Greec, (...) or v,
and afterward some who did nor like to take the vowels of the Grecians to
their books, and to spoil their own writing therewith, invented an other sort
of points. And as true as it is, that these Greec vowels are the proper vowels
of the Syrians, so true is it, that these Ebrew Jewish vowels were once the
Heathenish Caldean vowels also. Arabic has diverse vowels from Syriac, Etiopic
has diverse from Arabic and Syriac and Ebrue; so that we find every dialect of
this tongue to be different from the other in the matter of this accidental
work of pricks for vowels, from whence it clearly appears, that neither these
are proper to the Caldean, or not proper to the Ebrew. Either of them must
fall. And we see that the nature of the Jews constantly is, first: to change
the Consonants, secondly: the vowels of any tongue whatsoever. We have example
of it in the Persian, Turc, Arabic, Greec, Spanish, Italien, French, German,
and Polonian tongues, when there is none of these vowels of theirs, no svas at
all; and yet for all that, they have printed them so; and printed not with our
letters, but with theirs. Will you now go and say, that Latin has the Ebrue
consonants, and those 15 vowels? And that the Caldeans had the same points with
the Ebrew? It is to be pitied, that that excellently learned Man, and My
worthily honored Friend Dr. John Buxtorf at Basil Professor of Divinity and of
this tongue, has thus far deviated from all reason, as to play for the
primitivenes of these points, and to write a great book in quarto in defense of
it, being condemned to such a vaste and yet superfluous labor, that stone of
Sisifus. The whole tongue reclaimes their antiquity. Those that look a little
farther then the Ebrue Bible, may easily see, that whereas there is an
agreement amongst the Consonants in these dialects, there is none in the
vowels. I pray let not authority make here slaves of us, and keep us still in
a fear, and give us an infinite toil of anomalies in the Ebrue Bible, whereby
we shall never be able to get the Siriac, Arabic, and Etiopic tongue.

One only of these compound suas, viz. sva fatah read after its Consonant, as
it does stand under it, looses under (...) final the sua, because that sua is
not admitted under the last letter, as is said here before: which fatah makes
no syllable, being neither a long vowell, nor a short one, but only a part of
sua. It might have been left away together with the sua, only they thought it
requisite; that (...) and (...) might be pronounced with an a being gutturall
letters, and not easily to be pronounced without it. And because taken away
from sua, it was called gnuba, or taken: which the latter Jews and our
Christian Gammarians not rightly understanding thought, it fignified that it
must be pronounced before its consonant. A false assertion and of such gross
an error, that it overthrowes the nature of this tongue, wherein every
syllable begins with a consonant, and yet is here neither reason nor a
powerful cause, why this fatah gnuba should begin a syllables; when it cannot
so much as make a syllable. This gnuba is superfluous, when (...) is its
letter, because that sounds hi that point within being hireq, as that excellent
learned Schindler it has in his Grammar, and is frequently underwritten,
coming from (...). This gnuba falls away, if a letter follow (...). As (...)
elohim, God, etc. and is only after a long e^ i o^ u^, never a long a. You may
leave out the gnuba in your reading.

These compound suas are frequently in the Ebrue Bibell not under the throat
letters, (for the use whereof they are said to be invented,) but under the
non-gutturals. b. (...) Genesis 31.39. (...), Number. 10.36. z. (...) Genesis 2.12. q.
(...) very freqently, (...) Nehe. 10.34. And contrary there are above 200 of
examples, where a single sua is under a throat or gutturall letter. (...) and
(...) I well desist. Job. 16.6. Iud. 15.7. Out of which confusion, multitudes
of exceptions; and exceptions upon exceptions, and that in the Ebrue Bible
also, not only in the Calde part of it, and that all printed and written
copies of the Ebrue Bible never do agree herein, we may clearly see, that this
Monster and mishape of creating and destroying, this inconstancy and fury of
building up and leveling to the ground, will descry unto any wise eye the
madness of the Authors thereof: whence it is, that if ye take the Calde in
the Ebrue Bible, you will find more examples for anomaly than analogy.

And that all this madness of the sua simple and compound, and the fatah gnuba
are only invented by the filly Jewish brains is also seen (besides that
inconstancy in all things, which is their one and only lest constancy) by the
Syriac, Arabic and Etiopic, where they have neither single nor compound suas,
less a fatah gnuba. I confess, the Arabians have a gezme, but that is only
in the place of sua quiescent: where is here a sua movable? So in Etiopic John
Potken and Wemmer will give us besides ba be by bo bu, a b with a short a, and
a short e, yet that cannot argue, that that short e is sua quiescent, which
has no sound at all, but if any thing, rather a sua movable, and the short a,
with a sua fatah. But why is than that figure of the letter with that sua fatah
(in the mean while supposed) singler than that with a single sua? Therefore
whatsoever that short e, (which Potken calls a short o) may be by the
Etiopians, certain I am, that the short a is not the sua fatah, nor have they
any sua at all, single or compound, whole or gnuba.

By the Syrians, to wit, those that from Jews became Christians after Chrisis
Passion, Resurrection and Ascension at the preaching of the Gospel by the
Apostles, who did retain the vulgar custom of writing at Christ's time, (that
of the single letters being only used, as is probable, in the Law of Moses
with the rest of the Bible) in joining the letters, had never any vowells or
sua in their writing: and that by these arguments. 1 Because we find no sua at
all, either single or compound, movable or quiescent, in their writing; here
the eye is witness. 2. The Greec vowels are surely none of their own; and
that is manifest. 3. The Samaritans, who did and do live in the same Country
have no vowels at all. 4. The Sirians leave many times a way the vowell, which
otherwise they write. As (...) Marci. 9.34. (...) Marci. 1.6 (...) Marci. 7 6.
(...) Marci. 7.30 which vowell in this form of the Noune is never left away by
the Arabians, nor always by the Syrians (and the Jewish Calde constantly)
because that the first radical must have no vowell, but because the vowell of
it is so generally known and certain, that if not written yet there will not
remain so much as the least doubt of it; which the Grammarians of Calde and
Syriac do not so much as understand, and make a false form (...) for (...). 5
These points or pricks, which they have above and below the Consonants are yet
newer by them, han the Greec vowels; which is demonstrated by the greater
variety thereof than of the Greec vowells in their writings: Nor is there any
Syriac Manuscript to be seen only with those points instead of the Greec
vowells: contrarly, we have many of them, which have neither the Greec vowels,
nor those pricks. 6. Nor are the names of them the same with the Calde (falsely
supposed) names of vowells, except only one ftoho, which is fatah of the Ebrue
and Arabic, the rest: e is called rboso, the i, Khboso, the o, sqofo, the u
asoso: expressed in the following proper names. Abrohom, Esayo, Ishoq, Odom
(Adam) Vriyo.

They have no long, or short vowels, nor the suas. Whereby we see, that the
whole Bible may be understood. 1. Without all these five suas. Because Siriac
Samaritic and Etiopic may be understood without them. 2. Without that
difference of the long and short vowels. Because Syriac, Arabic and Etiopic
may; nor has Etiopic long or short-vowels but only a, e, i, o, u, the name of
long being superfluous, where there are none short. 2. The Calde punctation is
not precisely made after the rate of that distinction, which was set upon the
Ebrue Text; and yet for all that may as well be understood, as the Ebrue Text.

The Arabians have other prics for vowels different from the Ebrue Syriac, and
Etiopic: And as the Gretians (by Plate in Cratylo) had only 3 vowels, ^, v, o,
(for o is a double o) and as there are only three quiescent letters (...) a,
v, y, and as Ebrue has only three compound suas, so also has Arabic only
three vowels, e, v, o, or fatah, kesra, damma. Fatah is a or e kesra i, Damma o
or u. The true pronunciation is in these Orientalls not to be had, because
Ebrue, Samaritan, Calde, and Syriac are dialects, which are passed, and no more
extant in the World, in respect of 2000 years ago (the tongue being one and as
yet still remaining,) and Arabic with Etiopic have occupied all Africa and a
fixth part of Asia, and contains above a hundred different pronunciations,
insomuch that you can not well follow any pronunciation of those dialects,; and
therefore if ye cannot learn the pronunciation used by them in their Country,
here in England you may pronounce them as ye will: yet if ye will follow
Erpenis his pronunciation, ye must observe: to pronounce fatab like (a) upon,
(and sometime before) the hard letters (the names whereof I have given before)
and upon (or before) the easy letters (e): Damma upon (and before) the hard
letters (o) and upon (or before) the easy letters (u). If Gab. Sionites, then
pronounce fatah constantly like (a) Kesra (e,) and following the (ye) quiescent
(i) Damma (o) and following (vau) quiescent (u) These three vowels they do now
and then pronounce as if there were an (n) but that is only at the end of a
word. As an, on, in, the note whereof is, that it has that vowell doubled;
except only that on has the form of (69) for (99) which they think to be
neater written. Fatha and Damma is written above the letter, Kesra beneath.
Fatha and Kesra has but one figure, so that there are only two figures of all
the Arabic vowels. By the Etiopians there is a great deal of difficulty to
make certain Rules for the vowells apart: out of their printed books, and the
written Etiopic books are very rare; in so much that I believe there are none
in all England, which is a shame for us Christians so to slight other
Christians in such a manner, as not to care for their learning and books. And
as Wemmer and Potken number the letters, there are 202 by which way if we go,
we shall never easily learn to read Etiopic. And yet as we have the letters
apart, to also should we have the pricks or strokes apart, whereby the vowels
are pronounced. Ordinarily it is as follows. 1. A is marked with the stroke
of the letter toward the right hand more downward, then ordinarily. 2. E the
round circle at the right hand below. 3. I. a little i joined there where e. 4.
O. an o joined for the most part with the upper part of the letter at the right
hand. 5. V a stroke, like the i was, in the midst of the letter; The first
standing by Potken and Wemmer being only the most simple figure of the letter,
I have brought into the Alfabet among the letters, as the essential part of
the tongue and word. And every letter with these five vowels, together with the
sixth standing among the accidental parts of the word, the vowels. Yet what
abstract precept properly to give to that sixth standing I know not for the
great variation sake. And to express it only by the sua is so unreasonable
that thereby you will have many words, that will consist only of the fixth
standing, and if that be constantly by sua, what pronunciation can be had in
them. There are also many exceptions in the Alfabet about every vowell a, e, i,
o, u, as the Table shows. Therefore I wish again that some man or other
would give us hereafter better instruction out of Etiopia it self.

Rule. 3. These pricks are uncertain to make up Syllables, and to further the
reading of any of these dialects.

1. Ebrue and Calde have the most perplexed work, though not by their nature,
which is as plain as English consisting only of letters, without other
additions of Pricks for Vowells and Accents (the Vowels being extant already in
the Alfabet,) but by the filly brain of the inventors. Every letter has not
naturally a Vowell a, e, i, o, u, as for example London, l has the Vowell o,
but n following has none, d has the Vowell, o, but again n following has
none; again, in saying, a prime man. P. has no vowell, r has i; So you see
there are in every word letters, which have vowells; and others that have none.
The Masters of the children observing it, did put a sua underneath such letters
as have no vowell. Now I conceave that the inventors of those pricks were able
men, honest, willing, good, and careful teachers, yet too too accurate about a
thing of no great matter, but only for childrens play. Therefore, I confess,
it is truly said, that every letter has either a vowell or sua, viz. every
consonant a part, or two together make a syllable, yet I avow it to be a very
simple assertion, to make that, which is in thousands of places left alone, and
has no vowell by its proper nature and constitution (following a letter with a
vowell, or going before) to become that very mark and sign of no vowell, a
vowell and a non-vowell, to sound and not to sound, to live and not to live.

And because. 1. a long vowell has a long pronunciation, a short vowell a
short one; 2. There is required a long vowell, when a syllable ends in a
vowell; a short when it ends in a consonant, 3. a syllable ending in a
consonant, many times has naturally a long sound; and ending in a vowell, a
short sound; Hence did the Ebrue Masters consider four sorts of syllables.

1. A long ending in a vowell, sa, se, si, so, su; sua, sue, sui, suo, svu. 2.
A short ending in a consonant, vas, ves, vis, vos, vus. 3. A long, ending in a
consonant, vas, ves, vis, vos, vus. 4. A short, ending (in a vowell; in Latin
perdore) as e in darkness, i in syllines.
Yet they did not propound it so naturally, and with a reasonable apprehension,
nor did they speak of long and short vowels and syllables; of little and great
ones.

Therefore a letter without a Vowell does go to a letter which has a Vowell,
either
Forgoing, 1. The last letter (...) Melek (...) sefer. 2. The letter before one
without a Vowell (...) dibbru, the first b. 3. Any letters which should be
written twice but compensed with Dages or Teshdid as (...). 4. After a short
vowell, as Dib in (...) dibru. 5. After a long vowell with a Mediator accent,
as (...) lay la.

or Following. 1. The first Letter (...) fri. 2. The letter after one without a
vowell (...) dib bru the last b. 3. Any letter which should be written twice
but compensed with dages or Teshdid as (...). 4. After a long; as da, in in
(...) dabru. 5. After a short Vowell with a Mediator Accent, as (...) la ylah.

All this (except in the three first numbers) are unconstant in the Jewish
Caldean Translation made at Jerusalem or some other places of Jury. Whereby I
conclude, that in no tongue under Heaven there is observed such a strict
disruption of the syllables, nay for the most part the love of joining of
consonants, prevails against the Laws of the Jewish Grammar, as for example;
in English the Grammar teaching to pronounce Tru-stees the tongue pronounces
Trustees. So in Ebrue, the Grammar says pa-qda, the pronunciation paq-da.
Hence it is, that in the whole Caldean tongue, and in the Ebrue Bible in
hundreds of places that distinction between the long and short vowels is never
strictly observed, the reason is, because this distinction is forced and not
natural.

In Syriac having no sua, it is reasonable, that we conceave, in all Ebrue and
Calde sua reasonably to be left away in thousands of places and wheresoever it
is, there not to be requisite. Has Greec, Latin, English, or any occidentall
tongue a sua? and conceiving that the letter may not go unto the following and
forgoing, except it have a note and character, then are all the European
tongues imperfect, nay all the orientalls, and of all the World, except only
Arabic (besides the Jewish Ebrue and Calde) having for a sua quiescent a gezma,
which even it self might be left away in Arabic.

In Etiopic, I confess, the letters with the vowels, and suas to be so
confounded, that three, four letters having no vowell may not be pronounced,
as (...): put these three letters, b l v together without a vowell, and see
what pronounciation they will yield.

Here is the question to be discussed, if the oriental tongues have any
diphthongues; I answer; yea. Ai, ei, oi, ui, au, eu; are expressly in all these
dialects: by the following arguments. 1. You will hear them in these dialects
yet extant. 2. In all tongues, and therefore in your own mother tongue. 3.
Because as consonants may be joined, so vowels; neither one nor the other
being against the nature or practice of any tongue, reather both constantly
used. 4. And the chiefest against the denyers that the Alfabet does not consist
only of consonants, but also of vowels, having 19 consonants, and three
letters for five vowels a, e, i, o, u. 5. Because these three (...) a u y are
not simply consonants, as it is conceaved here, but also in place of vowells
which all the occidentall European tongues confirm.

Rule 4. The Pricks for distinction, jointure, and other designs are diverse
but useless.

In Ebrue and Calde. 1. Maffiq which is only a point within (...), when it is
the last letter, in steed of being below it (...), being such a superfluous
thing, that, 1. Though the Dictionary writers themselves have it (yet they
uniustly) confound, it with (...) quiescent; as deriving (...) God from (...)
forswearing. 2. In many places of the Bible this point is lost in that letter
(...), when it is the affix of the three person signifying he, his, him. 3. In
Syriac, Arabic and Etiopic it is never found. 4. It is not pronounced in the
orient as a syllable a part, and yet the Grammar would have it so. 5. It is
superfluous because when the (...) has a fatah gnuba it is sounded ha, what
need then of hi too, either ha must be left out or hi. 6. Because it falls
away, as the Grammarians say, when the letter receaves a hireq, but observe
that even this maffiq is that hireq, and that hireq is that maffiq. 7. It is a
non necessary thing upon a non-necessary ground, raised by those unhappy
builders the Jews, who invented these pricks because they conceived a
necessity of a (...) quiescent: whereas if there had been none but moveable
(...) in Ebrew, as it is in Syriac, Arabic, Etiopic and Samaritic, there had
been no need of that invention of maffiq. It is never in Jod, for that point
which is in it, is dages, which is now to be spoken of. 2. Dages a point with
in any letter whatsoever, except (...) and (...) and does double the letter if
there go immediately a vowell before, but if a sua either expressed or
understood under the last letter of a word go before, than is its power of
dubling superfluous. Whereby you may see the superfluity of this point. 1. In
all places of the Bible without doubling wheresoever it is in any of these
letters as bgd kft (...) being the first in the word, the last letter of the
word forgoing not being (...). 2. In the same letters, in the middle of a word
an express sua going before. All the euphonics are superfluous as not being
now observed either by the Jews, or Christians, in their pronunciation: the
true nature condition and use of them being unknown to both parties alike. 4.
The Characteristicall are superfluous as being left out in many places. 5. The
compensative are superfluous, as being omitted in as many. 6. In Syriac,
Samaritic and Etiopic it is generally omitted. 7. The distinction of forte and
lene is unknown to the Sirians and Arabians. 8. It is many times easily
mistaken in Ebrue for Sureq.

In Siriac they have two names qusoy and rukok. yet the Grammarians, nay those
natural ones, which do yet live Sionita, Ecchellensis and Emira, as I take
it, do deny, that the Syrians ever had a dages forte. But if not, what is than
that qusoy and rukok.? both cannot be lene, both cannot be forte, nay it is
denied that there is any forte at all: this point does almost never appear: but
if it be of a great use, why does it not appear, if of none, why is there in
the Ebrew such a stir about it. If it doubles, why is it not forte, if not,
why is there qusoy and rukok both. If superfluous, what need have we than to
trouble us with it?

Farther the Syrians do many times use a point above or beneath the letters,
(as in the forgoing to denote a, e, i, o, u, above) distinguish betwixt
certain words of a diverse signification. Below, the letter d. (...) ido a
hand, (...) hu, he (...) hi she (...) sento sleep (...) khadto new in Masc.
(...) abdo a servant (...) ulo a babe (...) biso base (belg. boos) (...) henun
they m. (...) henen they f. (...) min of or from: the same with the point above
are pronounced otherwise, and do signify; aido what Women? hau that Man, hoi
that Woman, santo year, the letter r. Khadto new in f, abodo service avolo
wicked. (without it aulo wickedness) boiso miserable honun they Men honen
they Women: Men who? But alas is any man so bereaved of reason, that he
thinks, he shall not be able to discern these words without a point? Take
from me these three observations. 1. The Masculine and Feminine genders are
adiaforas, and let them not trouble you. 2. Abstract and concrete notions will
easily be discerned by the Text. 3. The farther the signification of one is
from the signification of the other word, so much the easier will it be
discerned in the Text without a point. The same is to be observed in the point
which is in the Verbs. 1. Below, it denotes the whole pretertense except the
first singular; and the third sem. sing. has it sometimes above at the left
hand of t. 2. It stands frequently with the singular and imperative. 3. All the
persons in future tense, except the first person in both numbers. 2. above. 1.
The first of the pretertense. 2. the noune agent, otherwise called participle
bnoni, denoting together o or a. Yet in the fourth order it is below, the
second radical being (...). 3. The first singular and plural in the future.
4. Two do denote the plural as (...) ktobe Books the boto goods in Plural, or
in the Verbs of the Feminine gender only fqadei they did visit, fqadon do you
visit nefqdon they shall visit, refqden ye shall visit. If an r be in the
word, then is one point unto that of r, added sufficient, to make up two. Where
three do occur (besides these two of the plural number) the third denotes
the vowell, or qusoy, or the tense. In the verbs of a radicail r, one point is
for the letter, and one for the first person of the future tense, as (...)
qriyt, I have cried and called, not qrayt, thou did cry and call. Yet all these
points are added out of a childish fear, that the people will not let reason
have the soveraignity, rather then for necessity sake; nor is it to be
esteemed, that they are of such necessity or of the essence of the tongue.

In the Arabic the points difference some letters, one, above as Kh, ds, z, dh,
th, gh, f, and by the Turcks and Persians at k pronounced as gh. one below as
b, and by the African Arabians about Fes, Marocco, and Algir sometime the f,
that which is above denoting by them the q. two above t, at the end sometimes
shaped as an h, only by the contraction of writing. q. which the Africane
Arabians frequently and almost at all times do write above with only one
point: two below y. Three above is descending from s, one point coming unto
those two naturalls of the t, for difference sake, sh, and by the Turks and
Persians the k pronounced as, ng kitabung of the book. 3. below by the Turks
and Persians the b then pronounced as p g. then pronounced as tie; and; s for a
difference from sh. Yet are these three points frequently to be seen above s
in Arabic books written at Jerusalem, and elsewhere by the Christians in their
Bibles and Service-books, the reason whereof I have given above, yet many
hundred Manuscripts are to be seen even without these diacriticall and
superfluous points, for them that know perfectly this their mother or learned
tongue.

STROACS.
1. In Ebrew and Calde Meteg: Fsiq and Maqqef, the two first are put downwards,
the third in the breadth: meteg between any vowell and a following sua, to
keep them asunder, from being read in one syllable. A thing clearly
superfluous, partly in all our Eastern now yet living tongues, where the boys
are able enough to learn the separation of syllables without such troubles;
partly in the Bible it self, there being such a variety of it in all Prints,
that it is past belief: it was invented so short (instead of a longer, which
should have begun above the letters and passed between them and the vowels
underneath them) because the inventors thought it more gentile as it is now,
whereas the other would have showed more plainly their intention. Fsiq such as
meteg, between two words, to show that you must rest there a little, not by the
force of sense, but only to observe the thing following the more accuratly.
Maqqef joins two or three words together, and is placed evidently at random,
no reason in the World being found, why written or (...). Therefore are these
strokes also in vain, superfluous, and unnecessary.

2. By the Syrians ye have but one, viz. Maqqef, called Marhothno under neath a
letter which they say shall not be read or heard in the pronunciation: as the
first (...) in (...) ana. I (...) akhrino another in (...) f (...) akhroyo the
last (...) f (...) akhyono a brother in Law, Kinsman, Cosen, (...) enoso, Men,
(...) erozo a secrecy. Yet this line is in many coppies frequently left out. 2.
(...) d in (...) idto a Congregation, (...) khadto new. 3. (...) h in (...)
yhab he did give (...) r humayo a Roman (...) thobhu, it is good, (...)
Malkauhi his kings. 4. (...) l in ezelet I went away, ezalt, she went away. 5.
(...) in (...) yamme the Seas. 6. (...) n (...) santo a year, (...) zba to at
a time, (...) mdinto a City, (...) zbi to redeemed shfinto or Sfinto a ship.
Any word which is to be read with a meditation its point is called Mhagyono III.
above the letters, signifying the number. This last is of the best use: but
Marhothno and Mhagyono, are not worthy to be observed, it being mere fancy,
that those letters should never be pronounced in that tongue: it being
certain, and I my self have many times heard it at Constantinople, (where
there were many Kershuni, (for so are those called that retain the Syriac books
in their religious service) that they did most constantly pronounce every
letter of those: but only when they were posting through, then I confess for
celerity sake they leave out many letters, as even among us; and what la France
leaves out of letters, those are pronounced in the Province and elsewhere:
therefore I beseech the Reader, not to think these precepts to be absolutely
true and needful.

3. By the Arabiens ye have medda, wesl, hamz, gezm, and Teshdid. Medd, they
use over the letters signifying numbers, as in all Astronomicall books is to
be seen. 2. Signifying the circle and lines by the Geometriciens described by
letters. 3. It stands in stead of the circumflex of the Greecs to pronounce
that syllable with (...) quiescent more long. Wesl only upon (...) quiescent
in the beginning of a word, joining its word with the forging, as if it were
only one, line as Maqqef by the Ebrwes. Hamz only upon (...) showing them to
be radical and naturally moveable, they being sometime and that more
frequently quiescent also. Yet over, or under (...) they do write it more
frequently, whither it be radical or servile when the word is written with the
vowels. Yet in old coppies of the Alcoran, and in printed books the hamza is
in the latter case justly and most frequently left away Gezm is a round circle
either whole or half, and stands above that letter, which is to be joined
with the forgoing: not so frequent upon (...) as the rest. Teshdid is made of
two Gesmes, and is the dages by the Ebrewes, only one, and yet representing
all, that was falsely esteemed proper unto two, lene and forte.

Rule 5. The strokes and pricks for the accents are not of the essence of this
tongue, and therefore only in the Ebrue Bible and the Calde translation of
Aquila (or Onqelos) on Moses.

As all the rest of things, so truly these strokes and pricks for accents are
set to the Bible without necefity, only I wished, that the vowels and suas had
got no greater credit, than the Accents have, which by the most learned of
Europe for almost 150 years, were still left out as not cared for even by them,
that took upon them the translation of the Ebrue Bible. Nor can or will I
blame them, as if they had mightily mistaken in the translation, because of the
ignorance of these Accents, as if only by their order the true connection and
disjunction of senses could be had. Wherein we see a more general and
natural inclination in these, that did strive so eagerly for the vowels (and
yet confess the Accents to be of the same divine Authority,) not to care much
for an additionall thing in this tongue: the most of them never working so much
in such an idle thing, as Munsterus, Claius, Neander, Buxtorfius, but
especially of late Mr. Symson a Scotch man Anno 1617. Mr. Bohlius (deceased) my
condisciple under Mr. Trostius, An. 1630. and Mr. Ledebuhr his disciple (both
Germans out of Pommeren) in a book of 36 sheets printed in Octavo at Leyden by
Le Mair 1647. called salselet hammiqra, as he out of a high conceit thinks it
to be a chain of the Scripture (catena Scripturae) written in Latin, as if
without the accents the Scripture would fall asunder. If that were so, how was
it possible, that the Lxx, Hierome, and all our interpreters for 200 years and
upwards could so nearly interpret the Bible, that all these new raised great
Masters of Israel are not able to show a sensible, foul and faulty
translation, arising from the ignorance of the Accents, whereas we know they
had no knowledge of these high mysteries, which these three late Authors would
have the World to believe they have found before all the rest, and brag of it
in their books almost intollerably.

Therefore let no Englishman think, that he has not learned the Ebrue tongue,
if he know not these Accents, and the infinity of work in them; and rather
with me pity the pains of those painful Germans and Scotchman upon such
rotten principles, and learn hereafter of them, to labor upon a sure ground,
or to think, that God has laid a curse upon his labor fisyphi saxum, a
stone, that will give him an endless and unprofitable work; and I wish this
painful man, and Buxtorf, and all those, that are so busy about the pricks,
(and will not believe that excellently and exceedingly learned Author Mr.
Capell a Frenchman professor at Saumur, whose learned book in Latin Arcanum
punctorum revelatum, that judicious and illustrious Author Erpenius caused to
be Printed at its own charge in his own most excellent oriental Printing
house at Leyden, Anno 1625.) that they may bestow their pains upon better
work than about these triffles of the point, and the Samaritic Characters, if
they or those, wherewith now the Bible is commonly printed, be the true old
Ebrue Characters, whereas both are of the same essence, and one no more true
than the other, as I have showed before. Yet all that can be said for these
strokes and pricks of the accents (and for those that will care for them) as
very necessary is only this. 1. That one accent may do the business. 2. That
it stands at the syllable, which is to be lifted up in the pronunciation. 3.
That it stands at a certain letter also. 4. That that letter must have a
vowell, because it cannot otherwise be elevated. 5. By consequence, never at a
letter with sva. 6. That their form is either simple, opposite, or compound.
7. That in Ebrue they do give in (...) val (that is after along vowell, when
the following letter has no vowel but sva) the nature of a short vowell, that
anothe letter may follow this long vowell in the same syllable, whereas
otherwise it should go the following syllable or word, the long vowell
naturally desiring to end the syllable. And again in (...) va^le^, the nature
of a long to a short vowell when the following letter goes away to the
following syllable, having its own vowell (long or short) when the short
vowell had need of it to rely upon; as being of a short pronunciation. 8. That
it is the nature of every accent to change (upon such conditions) the nature of
the short and long vowels. 9. Those conditions failing it does not change that
nature of the vowells. 10. And yet as that nature of the vowels does not hold
constantly, so neither are these stroacks constantly of that nature. 11. There
are no euphonic accents, for meteg, who is only called so, I showed to be only
a stroack keeping two letters asunder. 12. To call accents tonics is a
tautology, both words descending from one root, and signifying one thing. 13.
That meteg with silluq is improvidently made of the same figure. 14. That rbia
and holem also are improvidently almost confounded, whereby arises a necessity
of new and many Rules. 15. The Accents are unreasonably and without sense called
Grammatical and Retoricall, for Retoric has never any accents, nor does
speak of them. 16. It is without profit to give in the Grammar a title and
term for a word, which has the accents in the last syllable, or the last but
one. Notwithstanding the Grecians did the same, perispomenos, barytonos and
oxytonos in the last, properispomenos and paroxytonos in the last syllable but
one. 17. It matters not if ye call the words milra, below the last syllable,
milel, above in the last but one, Calde or Ebrue words. 18. To show the union
or disjunction of words by Accents is the invention of men also. 19. As the
union of words belong to Syntax, so the sign thereof by the Accents. 20. For
that purpose those are invented which ye have in the table with the Names.

THE END OF ORTHOGRAFY.
FIRST RVLE. THE SECOND PART OF GRAMMAR is, called Etymology, and Analogy.
ETymology is a part of the second part of the Grammar, whereunto all the
rules, mediatly or immediately have their respects, and reference. For
whatsoever word occurres in the Bible or any oriental Author whatsoever, the
question about it is, I confess (as in the Greec and Latin tongue) what
signifies it, and (to know that) whence is it derived? The first part is again
either of the simple and abstract signification, viz. Etymology (that is the
Lexicas and Dictionaries, which handles the first more properly) where if
possible. 1. The reason why this root signifies this and not that should be
showed, but has bin hitherto neglected by them all. 2. That signification
should (according to Retoric, Logic, Fisic, and Metafisic) be distinguished
unto all its branches. 3. The division (with the reason thereof) should be
clearly set down. 4. The Authority, as not superfluous should be added, that
we might see it to be truly humane, good, sound and satisfactory reason: which
all Authors hitherto want. Or of the signs of the signification whereof as
also of their reasonable and analogicall reducement unto this or that root, the
other part of the second part of Grammar does speak, to wit analogy. From the
principal office thereof Authors call it Etymology, yet from the nearest part
in respect to us, (as all concrets are more suitable to our apprehensions and
the nearest to our senses then abstracts) the old Romans did rather call it
Analogy, as Vossius shows in his Latin Grammar, or great and good book about
the Latin Grammar. The first part considers the root, without any the least
consideeration of the parts of a speech, unto how many parts of a speech every
root is dividable. The second lays down certain rules, into how many parts
all the words of this or that or any tongue may be divided, and than applies
every word, or lays down certain rules, to which they may be applied. The
first is mightily abstract, as a new Metafisic, the second is merely concret,
as a new Fisic. Yet the first part has the greatest abstraction in the letters
and their signification, and the most concretion in the multiplication of that
signification and division by Logic, of these multiplied significations by
Rhetoric, Fisic, and Metafisic. Both parts hang together, yet so that Analogy
is the easiest, grounded and built upon the natural precepts of any tongue
whatsoever, viz. a general Grammar, which ground and foundation is not yet
laid down by any learned man of the whole Universe (how necessary soever)
because it requires an excellent wit, a perfect Philosophy, a good
Arithmetician, a Retorician, in one word, the most perfect Aristoteles that
ever yet lived on earth. Yet before we come to Analogy we will hear lay
down only the precepts for the root according to the Letters, not
significations either of the root or words radical or accidental, proper or
improper, first or second, ideall or natural, Metafisicall or Fisicall, which
things shall be laid down in the Dictionary, which is, God willing to follow.

Rule. 2. All words, (none excepted) of this tongue may, nay must be brought to
a certain root.

As this tongue is the primitive from Adam the first man, and remaining yet
till our days in all Africa and a great part of Asia so is it the most simple
(or if we will call it) single and accurate of any other tongue in the World,
that I could ever yet attain any skill in. The Greec Dictionary Writers, and
after them the Latins did never lay down such certain Rules in their tongue
(for the finding such accuratenesse) as this tongue has. The remainders of
Greec and Latin Authors (which two Nations are the most accurate writers (as
in other things so about their tongue) of all other Nations, whatsoever) do
show that they did not arise to the hight of this perfection. For what out of
this tongue may be demonstrated to be a derivative, they took for a
primitive; and a primitive, for a derivative. The title they had, but for the
thing it self to bring to a right stay, so far they never came. The benefit
of this Rule will be made manifest, when in the Dictionary certain Rules will
be laid down for the abstract signification of the letters: the inquisition and
determination whereof does only belong to the Dictionaries. And truly without
that principle of the inward and natural signification, which every letter of
the Alfabet (being as a natural dowry bestowed upon it by God) brings to the
root, I see not, why we should make any Analogy or Grammatical rules at all,
to bring every word to a root. For as the rules show that so many words, (which
otherwise would seem not to be of one and the same family,) belong unto this
or that one root, ^o is the root required for its natural, ideall, and
abstract signification, different from any other whatsoever signification,
because proper to another root. And because the root is required and that by
all men, that shows plainly and evidently, that indeed there is something in
the root, for which it is so sought after and desired, viz. The signification.
And that denies none. But another question and that more necessary and before
others to be determined is, from whence this signification comes; If they say,
from the people, that is false; for Adam alone in the World had the whole
tongue and the signification of all roots. If ex impositione humana by Adams
pleasure; that is false, because as Adam was not the orator of himself, his
reason, wit and tongue, whereby he spoke to God, so neither did he invent the
significations of every root, he being enabled by God Almighty with the
consequence the words themselves, not a priori, to coin roots, and from thence
words, and then to speak with his creator. So that this question is almost
Analogall to that in Fisic, if the soul be ex traduce or per traducem. I
determine it thus, that as nothing makes the root, but the letters, so nothing
makes the signification of the root, but the signification of those letters.

Rule 3 A root consists of three consonants, not of 2, 4, 5 or more, much less
of one only.

This is the formal part, whereby this holy primitive and oriental tongue
(for perfection) excels all the tongues in the World, because all the other
are derived from this. It may be, that some learned men have studied to find
out several ways, whereby to bring this or that tongue, which they did most
affect, unto this or that more ancient, and for the most part unto this
primitive tongue; and therefore from hence they take a most cautious way to
find out first the root of every word in that tongue, and to bring many words
to a most simle and abstract way. Yet I am sure and certain, that no tongue in
the World, but this has such an extraordinary, holy trinunity and unitrinity:
as first, that every word (of how many letters soever, proper or accidental,
natural or adjectitious) may, nay must be brought to certain radical
letters. 2. That the least as well as the biggest word has its equal portion
in the root, the least not having fewer letters than three, nor the biggest any
more. So that whatsoever lacks or aboundes, must necessarily be made up or
detracted by certain Etimoligy and Rules of Analogy.

And this Rule is not now invented by me, or a principle of my stamp, but the
generality of Grammarians in whatsoever dialect of this tongue give this very
same Rule. And yet a man would wonder to behold the inconstancy, sloth, and
irregularity partly of the Grammarians and partly of the Dictionary or Lexica
writers, who do not observe this their own and all men's rule, as making no
conscience to confound the art of this tongue, by not closly adhering to the
principles of it, and thus themselves unloose that ty and knot, wherewith they
professed to keep all roots in a strict order, when by their practice it is
observable, that they never intended any such thing. And which is the worst of
all, none of the Lexicas extant are without that great fault. And so long as
the Dictionaries are not brought (amongst many other things yet lacking) to
that strict, observation of things propounded by the Grammar, (which is
expected and presupposed to lay down no falfe precepts) there will never be
that clearnes and eaisinesse of the tongue, as there would be if the art of the
Grammar and the art of the dictionaries were brought to a greater perfection. I
persuade my self, that there are very few, that can believe me: but it is no
wonder, for ignorance and prejudicated opinions are never able to judge well of
any thing.

Rule. 4. Every root consists of letters only, not of letters and pricks
joined together.

By this Rule all roots as also all letters none excepted are included, and all
pricks even excluded.

Whereby many questions are resolved, which hitherto have troubled the brains
of the learned. First, it shows, that there is a unity in the nature of roots
whither in Ebrue, Calde, Samaritan, Syriac, Arabic or Etiopic; whereas if you
ask a man skillful in Ebrue (but not in the other dialects) what the nature of
the roots in these dialectsare, he will doubt, not being able to give a
determinate answer. Thus learned men make themselves seem to be unlearned; and
whereas I can make them more learned, viz. by giving them a good and true
notion, (whereby they may enlarge the use of their knowledge, and that without
their pains,) invented as I may term it by my own industry, and yet I know
not whither I shall ever have thanks for it or not, sure I am, hereafter it
will do much good. Secondly, it is against those tenants, that the root is
either in the Noune or Verb, and herein the most excellent men do disagree:
some will have it in the Noune, others in the Verb, and by some again it is
attributed to the Noune in Siriac, others deny it, thus they strive one against
another, and that neither de lana caprina, of the Woole of a Goat, who has
none, for whatsoever party has the prerogative, will give Law unto others, and
all the rest, if there be more than two. And it is a great matter in a Kingdom,
who swayes the Scepter, the Verb being Sovereign in Ebrue, will be so in
Siriac, and yet Emira will have it by the Nounes. De Dieu thinks the Verb has
it by the Syrians, and yet begins with the Noune. In this manner I could name
above 300 men, the most whereof (I consesse) do give the radical dignity and
sovereignty unto the verb, yet many unto the Noun. But they all fail herein;
for the root is neither in the Verb, nor Noune, nor in any other part of speech
(if there wear any, as there are not, which I shall make more clear
hereafter) but absolutely in the letters, though not considered as yet, if a
Noune or Verb; less if active, passive, neuter, deponent, Masculine,
Feminine, singular, plural, present, preter or future, participle or pronoun,
etc. The reason for this assertion is, because it contradicts the nature of a
root, which is never the tree it self, the branches, the leaves, the blosomes,
the fruits, nor the tronke or body of the tree, but that part which lies under
ground, and none of all these is called the root, and is the first principle and
cause of all these. Thirdly, it shows that the letters only, (and not joined
with the pricks,) make the root. The reason is plain, for if it be pronounced
by putting the vowells thereunto, it is no longer a root, but a Noune or Verb;
for the letters only and not the pricks (esteemed Vowels) are in the Alfabet,
much less the third singular in the pretertense, or the infinitive, or
imperative or any Noune. And therefore it is a false assertion, to say, that
because the third person singular in pretertense is not found in the Bible,
ergo the root is not extant in Ebrue, Calde, etc. Whereas if there be but one
form found of any root whatsoever in any dialect, person, gender, number,
declination, or conjugation, nay if but only one radical be extant, so that
either the first or second or third, first or third, or any two of them be cast
away, yet if there be but one radical letter to be found, so that by Grammar
rules the two dissident may be recovered, the root is truly extant in this
Oriental Tongue.

Thereby it is also clear, that the division of the letters (into radical and
servile) is false, because all the letters are radical, viz. They have all one
and the same right, to make a root, not only this but every one of them.
Otherwise the Alfabet had not the same honor in the Etymology, which it has
in the Orthography. For as all letters are used in the reading, so all letters
are used, in the constitution of any word: and than you might with all reason
say, that these 11 Members of the Alfabet, viz. msh v k l b a tyn (...) might
be also questioned, whither they had any right at all in the pronounciation or
not, if they have none in the constitution of the root. 3. Then would the
practice of all the Lexicas be false, who have roots not only forth first but
also second and third radical, of every letter of the Alfabet, none excluded.
4. There must then be given sufficient reason, how it came, that those 11
letters were not radical, nay, why never radical; which is impossible to
give. But if ye say, the Grammarians do not conceave that they are never
radical, but always servile, and the radicalls never servile but always
radical. I answer; that I wish they would then speak plainer and clearer; but
when, I dare say, above an hundred Grammarians make that distinction, that 11
are radicalls, and 11 servile, why should I not believe them to speak proper?
Why do they not then call all the letters radical, and then give a
distinction, which of those are for the most part radicalls, though many times
servile, and why do they never set down, what servise those 11 letters (by
them called perpetual radicals) do perform, when they are now and then found
in the Ebrue Bible not to be radical? As if it were not as easy to speak
proper and plain, as well in the Rule, as in the explication of the Rule.

Rule. 5. The three quiescent letters (...) do change among themselves without
alteration of the essence of the Root.

As these three letters in the Alfabet are opposite to all the other 19 letters
in Orthography, and stand only as one man, representing the five Vowels, so
here in Etymology, they do stand as one man too, and represent but one letter,
not three. And that by these following arguments. 1. You see no practice in any
Grammar of any of these dialects to the contrary, but you may find a multitude
of examples in every one, and out of many, many thousands; not only in the
permutation of the radical letters, but even, when they are but servile, and
do stand to wait upon radicals in any respect whatsoever of place, part of the
word or speech. Open but any Grammar (if ye have skill to understand its
precepts) and ye will find it. And yet of all those Grammarians there is not
one, that says they are but one letter in respect of Etymology. 2. It is the
practice in all Dictionary and Lexicas of whatsoever dialect of this tongue:
that in truth I pity all the Authors of Dixionaries, not one excepted, that out
of so many examples they could not see so much. 3, That this rule does show in
a very great measure, that all the dialects of this tongue, none excluded, have
one and the same nature with each other; if not in other things, (which
hereafter will be seen,) yet in this particular. 4. Because all the Authors
speak of that changement of the quiescents, only I reduce them, 1. From four
unto three, and 2. Unto a unity, not a Trinity.

Now whereas it might be objected, that in Ebrue and Calde there were four not
three, and in the rest three, and that even this diversity of: the number of
these do show the diversity of the nature of the dialect, and therefore no
unity; I answer.

1. That a potiori fit denominatio^ You must look to the highest and greatest
number, and then you have Syriac, Arabic, and Eriopic, the Grammars whereof in
general have but these three (and of a Samaritic Grammar you cannot produce
any Author).

2. The Calde is not the true Calde (of those Heathens, amongst whom the Jews
were dispersed in the Babilonian captivity) but only a rabble and mingle mangle
made and corruptly made by the Jews in Jury.

3. The Ebrue tongue it self stands against the number of four 1. For the
first radical (...) is not changed with (...) quiesent. 2. Because (...) the
first radical is never quiescent but always moveable. 3. That (...) the first
radical is almost never changed with (...) there being scarce ten examples in
all the tongue, and you know unica hirundo one Swallow makes no new spring. 4.
All the second radical (...) remains and never changes into (...), onr (...)
the second into (...). 5. The third radical (...) is naturally movable as you
may see in Siriac, Arabic, and Etiopic. But the Jews have spoiled their root,
by bringing in only once the quiescent (...) in place of the third radical
(...). 6. Because the Jews themselves confess a distinction between (...) in
the third radical movable and quiescent, which they never do in the 3 (...)
movable and quiescent. 7. They never made that distinction in the first, or
second radical (...) as movable and quiescent, being constantly one way
movable. 8. (...) the 1, 2, and 3. radical movable or quiescent never made any
distinction of a root by any one of all the Grammars and Dictionaries.

Rule 6. The order and number of the Roots are easily to be known, and of a
Divine authority.

Both of these things are either never rightly inquired after, as being
esteemed not worthy of inquiry, and esteemed necessary. And yet if that
principle be true, that. 1. The letters only make up the root. 2. Every
letter. 3. And that the order and number of them in the Alfabet be of a Divine
Authority, then the things laid down in this rule, necessarily follow. Now as
the order of the Alfabet is not laid down by the Spirit of God at random, so
neither is the order of the roots to be esteemed of a slight and small
consequence: whereof partly in the principles before the Dictionary will be
spoken something concerning the connection of the roots through the whole
tongue; partly here must be said, that as it is showed in the rule before,
that these three quiescent letters (...) are but one, so therefore all the
roots beginning (in Ebrue, Calde, Syriac, Arabic, and Etiopic) with ye or yod
and vau must be brought to (...); and all that have the second radical vau
and yod must be brought to (...), and all that have the third radical (...)
and (...) quiescent, must be brought to (...); which done there will follow a
double benefit. first, there will be no need of that infinity of the
remissions by all the Authors none excepted, from one of these letters, to the
other; secondly, (which is of the greatest and best use, and for which this
right and due ordering is desired) that as the roots which are naturally not
diverse but one, are joined and made whole, and brought to their life (whereas
by that unhappy disruption they were torn in pieces and spoiled of their life)
so their soul comes now again to that right, true, and one signification,
which without that joining no man is able to show the way to get necessarily.
So likewise when (...) comes to be the 1, 2, or 3, radical it must be reduced
to (...) in the 15th order.

The number is easily cleared by the number of the Alfabet (containing here in
Etymology no more then 20 letters,) which must be understood to be the 20,
first laid down in the Alfabet, and so as we proceed in Arithmetic from the
right hand to the left (which is just contrary to our manner of writing) even
so in this we must proceed (contrary to their manner of writing) from the
left to the right, always beginning with the third radical, varying it
through the whole Alfabet (the first and second remaining the same) thus (...)
a a a, (...), a a b, (...), a a g, (...), a a d, etc. which being done will
make 20 Roots for the third radical only. Then after the same manner vary
the second radical through all the Alfabet, and that will make 20 Roots more
for the second radical, which being multiplied with the 20 of the third
raradicall (the first as yet remaining the same) will make 400 for the first
radical (...), as many for (...) and as many for every one of the letters
throughout the Alfabet; which will in all make up the number of 8000 neither
more nor less, as will appear more plainly by this adjoined Cube.

CUBUS OCTO MILL RARDICUM TRILITERABIC


Whatsoever Dialects have the same number and order of the Alfabet, and the
same sormall principle, that three letters do make the Root, have the same
number, and order of Roots with Ebrue. Now Orthography shows, that Samaritic,
Calde, Syriac, Arabic and Etiopic has the same number and order in the
Alfabet, whence it follows, that all these dialects have also the same number
and order of the Roots. And if the same letters throughout, then also the same
Roots throughout. Which is the foundation of that unity, where of we speak.
Nor must we look here, what order the Syrians, Arabians, Etiopians or Jews
themselves set down in the Alfabet in the Orthography, or number or order of
roots in Etymology; for that which they set down, is rather an unartificiall
then Grammatical proceeding, for Grammar, Rhetoric, Logic, and Phisic with
Metafisic proceeds juxta artem by artificial not mechanical ways. And
therefore it must not seem strange unto any man, that I leave the order and
number of the Roots of all the Authors already extant, (as being merely
mechanical) and follow the art of the Grammar, setting them down altogether
different from those that have preceded me.

Rule 7. The first Root has 36 more special Roots all of one and the same
essence.

The first letter in the Alfabet being (...), without doubt the first root must
be (...), yet (as is said) because these three quiescent letters (...) (and in
Ebrue only (...) when it is the third radical) do stand in Etymology only
for one letter, those three Aleffs cannot make up the first root alone, but the
following thirthy five do also belong unto it, viz. 2 (...), 3, (...). 4,
(...), 5. (...), 6. (...), 7. (...), 8. (...), 9. (...), 10. (...), 11, (...),
12 (...), 13. (...), 14. (...), 15. (...), 16. (...), 17. (...), 18. (...), 19.
(...), 20. (...), 21. (...), 22. (...), 23. (...), 24. (...), 25. (...), 26.
(...), 27. (...), 28. (...), 29. (...), 30, (...), 31. (...), 32. (...), 33.
(...), 34. (...), 35. (...), 36. (...). Yet in Siriac, Arabic, and Ethiopic,
there, are only 27 special roots, because they use not (...) quiescent in the
3 radical.

Rule 8. The first and third, or second and third radical only being
quiescent, such a Root has 12 special Roots in Ebrue, etc. but in Syriac,
Arabic, and Etiopick only nine, all of one, and the same ess nce.

I will instance first in those that have the first and third radical
quiescent: as (...), now because the quiescents do change among themselves all
these following belong unto the same root, viz, (...). Secondly, in those that
have the second and third quiescent, as, (...), unto which belong these
following, viz. (...).

Rule. 9. The first and second radical quiescent has nine special roots all
of one and the same essence.

Because in the first and second radical there comes not that (...) quiescent
which does in the third radical, it comes to pass that (as it was in Syriac,
Arabic, and Etiopic, in the first and third, or second and third radical
quiescent,) here in Ebrue, Calde, Samaritic, Syriac, Arabic, and Etiopic, in
the first and second radical quiescent only these nine following, 8 (...) 7
(...) 6 (...) 5 (...) 4 (...) 3 (...) 2 (...) 1. (...) 9 (...).

Rule to Where the third radical is only quiescent there are only four
special roots, in Ebrue, in Syriac, Arabic and Etiopic only three all of one
and the same essence, viz.

(...) 4. (...) 3. (...) 2. (...) 1.

Rule. 11. Where either the first or second radical only are quiescent, there
are only three special

(...) 3. (...) 2. (...) 1. or (...) 3. (...) 2. (...) 1.

Rule 12. Where there is no quiescent letter in the first second or third
radical, there is only one root without any special roots of the same
essence as (...)

Rule 13. The quiescent letters changing their place (and the moveable
retayning theirs) make a root of the nearest kindered.

As (...) 3. (...) 2 (...), with (...) 3 (...) 2 (...) 1.

(...) 4 (...) 3. (...) 2 (...) 1. And Which roots ye must not confound with
these ten following (...) 7 (...) 6 (...) 5 (...) 4 (...) 3 (...) 2 (...) 1.
(...) 10 (...) 9 (...) 8

Which are among themselves of the same affinity, that the first ten are among
them selves, but I say the second ten must not be confound with the first,
because the moveable letters have changed their place.

Rule, 14. These quiescent letters are naturally falling away in any of their
roots.

This rule (here in Etymology) though left away by all the Grammarians and
Dixionary writers whatsoever, is very necessary; for if we give that rule here
at the root, then have we not need to set it down in Analogy either in Noune of
Verb: for this falling away is common both in Noune and Verb. And herein is
all the anomalie that they make, viz. When they are cast away; for when they
yet appear in their changing, than the root is still full and present, which
is defective, if one or two quiescents be cast away. If they are quiescents or
moveable in their appearance, makes no anomaly; and the 12th. rule tells you,
that seeing two radicalls ye may choose to put the quiescent at the 1. 2. or 3
radical without any sensible error.

Rule 15. The roots of the 1. 2. or 3. radical quiescent are of a near
kindred with the second and third the same.

Because that according to the 13 rule the quiescents are easily and frequently
cast away, two non quiescent letters only remaining, the second of them is
doubled or written twice, in place of that quiescent, so that the roots of the
second quiescent more frequently, the others of the first and third quiescent
sometimes do change with the roots of the second and third the same, in many
tenses, persons, and genders, nay in whole orders: as for instance 1 (...) 2
(...) 3 (...) in the third and sixth order has (...) and (...), signifying no
less, than that the root also is (...) not only (...).

Rule. 16. The roots in general are of the same proportion between
themselves, that their letters are between themselves.

What all the Grammarians say, concerning those letters of the same organe (to
wit, of the throat, lippalat, tongue and teeth) that they do frequently
interchange is true, and because roots do consist of letters and not of vowels,
it comes to pass, that the roots do interchange in like manner: the effect
being of the same nature with the ca^fe.

Rule 17. Some teeth letters easily become tongue letters, yet retayning their
own nature, different from that of those tongue letters.

The reason is, because these two instruments do frequently and most
constantly concur unto the pronunciation of their ten letters, whereof five
are more especial teeth and the other five more especial tongue letters. Zayin
is many times changed into d, sade into thet, sin into t, yet they do retain
their nature, so that these d, th and t arising from zayin, sade, and sin must
be distinguished from these letters d, th and t when they are natural, and of
their one stock.

Rule 18. Such roots as have the 2 and 3 radical one and the same, do
frequently double the first, and put it between the 2 and 3.

The reason of this transposition, as is conceived is for Euphony sake: as
(...) from (...). and many other the like.

Rule 18. Some roots take in certain epenthetick letters, whereby they seem
not to be any more of three radical Letters only, but of four, five or six.

As for instance 1. The letter R, the root is (...) sebeth a Scepter, which is
sound with (...) and (...), Sarbith whence is the Greek word (...) and (...)
and (...), whence is that falsely esteemed persian word parasange (or miles)
etc. 2. the letter (...). the root is (...) g m d which we find thus (...) and
(...), etc.

3. N. the root is (...) sur but does assume n, as (...) bassanvertm in Gen
19.11. 2 Reg. 6.18.

4. M. the root is (...) but assumes m as (...) in Cant. 2.13.15.5. The three
quiescents are frequently in erted after the second or third radical as (...),
in Arabic, (...); with diverse others.

Rule 20. Some roots seem to be of more than three letters, whereas the fault
is in the letters.

As (...) instead of (...) Gen 2.12. Number. 11.7. (...) instead of (...) Ier.
44.30. (...) instead of (...) Genesis 41.45. (...) instead of (...) Gen 2.14.

Rule 21. Some roots seeming to have more letters than three are easily (by
many ways) reduced to that number

As (...) a band, n in l by the Latins balteus nine times (...) in the Ebrue
Bible has the root (...). instead of (...) band by the Arabians, a rope, cable
cord, (...) has the root (...) a flame; thus (...), etc.

Rule 22. Some words are compounded of two or three roots together,

As (...) compounded from (...) teeth and (...) an Elefant, 1 Reg. 10.22. 2
Chr. 9.21. (...) from (...) and (...) Dan. 3.5. from (...) and (...) and so in
all other dialects.

An observation for Etymology.
ALl these rules will be a great deal clearer made out by the ensuing
dixionary. And therefore I beseech the courteous and gentle Reader not to judge
upon half done work. For the chiefest reason, why we cannot see that more
perfect unity and identitie, (which is given us by Metafisick) of these
dialects, and that they are no otherwise diverse tongues than Eolic, Attic,
Doric, Jonic are diverse from the Greec, is because neither the Grammar nor the
Dictionary were ever made to join them, except in the Grammar of Lud. de Dieu,
Anno 1626. Mr. Gerhard the year past. In the Dictionaries, only that
excellently learned Schindler in his Pentaglo^t^n (given out after his death
1612) made up long before the smatterings in that kind of Rapheleng in his
Arabic Dictionary Anno 1613. and of Calasius in his Ebrue concordance 1621 And
I doubt not, that when hereafter many excellent wits do fall upon such
general Grammars and Dixionaris or Lexicas, they will make a great deal bette
work, than ever hitherto is dreamed of. The said Mr. Gerhard is now about such
a Dictionary. And I hope, that (besides him) I shall give some further light,
and perhaps open a door, where no body did expect one; beseeching only in the
mean time my Reader, to help and assist me with whatsoever he is able,
assuring him, he shall find me a thankful man.

Analogy or the second part of Etymology.
Rule 1. From each of these 8000 roots may be derived all sorts of words, of
whatsoever part of speech.

BEcause that every speech may be the better understood and considered, the
art of Grammar does divide all speeches into certain parts, in some tongues
more, in some less, according to the greater or less variety of the
terminations in every tongue. For the less variety of the terminations of
words there is in a tongue, the fewer parts of speech in that tongue, and the
greater variety, the more. That tongue which has the fewest parts of speech is
the most perfect, and that which has the most, less perfect. The parts of
speech in this primitive tongue is by all set down and made too many, there
being only two, viz. a Noune and Verb, the greatest part of them have also
made particles as the third part. Other 8 parts, some (but very unreasonably)
have made nine, and that ninth only for one letter sake: as if it were to be
conceaved that one letter could make a ninth part of speech; for then there
would be ninteen, eight ordinary, and eleven extraordinary for those several
Letters (...) for if the (...) (one letter of these eleven) be worthy to make a
part of speech, all the rest may be worthy also. Yet more specially of that in
the second rule. Here it is enough to observe that any kind of word
whatsoever, none excepted, comes from a root, seeing that the root it self
never stands in any book, as the root, but the words descending from the
roots. This first rule of Analogy shows us likewise, by what liberty, and yet
with a regularity, words may be multiplied, to wit, (as we say in Latin and
Greec, Analogice,) according to analogy, the right whereof is to form words in
a decent way; For otherwise if there were not such lawfulness, then we might
never make bold to form any new word in this oriental primitive tongue, where
we had none before. As for instance. In Ebrue I may make a verb of any person
and tense, although we have it not in the Ebrue Bible. And that is
demonstrable a priori by this first rule, and a posteriori by the practice of
the Jews, who have made many Nounes and Verbs not extant in the Bible, which
they never could have done, if it were not lawful. And thus all the tongues
become more full and copious. Secondly, it is practiced by the Jews in the
Calde translation, in the Talmud, in all Rabbinicall books; so that it is a
mere fancy to call those formed Nounes and Verbs, we find with the rabbines,
and not in the Ebrue Bible, rabbinicall words, and rabbinismes or Talmudicall
words, and Talmudisines. Thirdly, the same is done by the Syrians Arabians, and
Etiopians, who have many Nounes and Verbs, which are not in the Ebrue Bible.

Rule 2. This the simplest tongue has only a Noune and Verb, and no more
parts of speech.

As God is the singleness and uncompoundednesse it self, so it is no wonder
that his tongue, which he (by reason) gave unto Adam, is the most simple and
least compounded tongue. Neither can any tongue be brought to a greater
singleness, than this, which has the greatest, to wit, only two parts of
speech according to nature it self, which goes almost constantly upon a
division of two, in an opposite way. One part cannoe make up a whole story,
discourse, descrip^ion, or opem but Noune and Verb, (taken in th^^ sense as
here) may. For here in Analogy we consider them for the most part only with
relation to their terminations, not significations. Therefore notwithstanding
the Greecks and Latins have made 8 or 9 parts, and some Grammarians in this
tongue have unreasonably followed them, yet the Arabians and Jews in their
Grammars have the nearest way, that they could find, and that is a Noune, a
Verb, and a participle. I confess, a threefould distinction is frequently
used in nature, by the third to jovne or separate the better the opposites; as
Comenius goes much upon that ground: And so in Logic in every proposition we
have a Noune, and Verb, and the Copulative, so that considering the nature of
speeches, they go upon a Noune, Verb and Participles as Copulations. Yet
because here we consider them not logically nor rhetorically, neither
Syntactically, or poetically, therefore when all the Nounes and Participles may
be coucht as one part, as they are one by termination only, and that both
Nounes and Participles are unvariable, and thereby a more compendious way may
be found for Syntax, I think not, that I have done amiss, in leaving away
the third part, being in outward show all one the Nounes in all tongues
becoming adverbs, and here, because undeclinable, also prepositions,
conjunctions, and interiections, to show that singleness, (whereunto the
Arabians and Jews came very near) to be yet more fingle, and that without
any hurt to them, remembering that saying of the Jews; before all things let a
Master teach his Disciples the nearest way. And as the Syntax by many excellent
men is already brought to a more compendious way by this trinity of the parts
of speech in analogy (whereas Buxtorf has 22 Chapters in Syntax, because built
upon those 8 parts a Noun, Verb, Pronoun, Participle, Adverb, Preposition,
Conjunction and Interjection, and Hottinger has 12 Chapters with an Appendix
of three seciall anamalies in the Ebrue Syntax, printed 1647, at Zurich in 80
and many others of that stuff) so is it certain that it may be brought into
a nearer way by cutting away the third part, and making it all one with the
first which is generally for Ebrew, Samaritic, Calde, Syriac, Arabic and
Etiopic; whereof I have given (the year past, viz. 1647.) The proof in that
little English Grammar. and shall show it in the following Syntax.

A Noun is defined by all the Logicians, (and that very exactly), to be a word
of no tense or time, yet with capacity of any tense, as present, preter, or
future. Those Nounes that are substantive Nounes, as (...) Bench, Stool,
House, Mouse, Man, Wife, Woman, Table or Cloth are all without a notion of
Tense, The adiectives also, have yet a capacity of an Adverbe, as well, good,
ill, base, right just, etc. But the Nounes of action as, drinking, sleeping,
walking, etc. drink, sleep, walk, etc. Have the capacity of any tense of a
Verb; whence, they are surnamed participles, as participating of the
signification of a Verb by any of those three tenses. But about a Noune and
all the differences of Nounes as their significations, etc. must be spoken in a
general Grammar, which things you may take out of other Authors, and are in
the mean while here presupposed.

A Verb cannot be without the signification of a time present, preter, or
future. And thereby it is distinguished from a Noune, and the Noune from a
Vorbe. So that as in nature there is only the Masculine and Feminine sex, each
having its difference, ( and regimen being a mishape in nature) so here these
two sexes a Noun and Verb.

Rule 3. Both have two Genders, Masc. and Feminine.

This rule is general for all tongues in the apprication, though not in the
termination. For innalice, he writes, she writes; the first is Masculine, the
other Feminine, and yet there is no difference in termination. Even so in this
Oriental tongue (to speak the truth) there is no more difference betwixt
Masculine and Feminine in Verbs: then there is with us; In the Pretertense (of
Ebrue and Calde) the third person both Maseuline and Feminine are the same, for
wheresoever you find (...) written with (...) paragogick it is Masculine, and
when it is with (...) formative it is Feminine. Now who is able (at the first
aspect) to see into the heart of that (...) whither it be paragogic, and
superfluous, or formative and necessary. The second person Masculine and
Feminine have both but one letter as (...). The first has but one termination,
viz. (...) and is therefore called common, which does not detract any thing
from what I say; for the common gender includes both Masculine and Feminine
under one termination. So likewise is the first and third plural in Ebrue as
(...), and the second plural in Calde and Syriac as (...). Therefore the
Masculine and Feminine gender in Verbs is to be understood rather for
application then termination, yet by the pricks (whereof I shall speak in the
Appendix) there is I confess more difference made, but in common speech there
is not half so much difference made as is conceaved, as for instance when
(...) is written with pricks the Masculine is lathasta the Feminine lathast,
but in common speech whither it be to man or woman it is pronounced only
lathast: It being clear enough to the eye wither it be a man or woman that is
spoken to. Also in the Nounes it is the same, as Malkeka, thy King (to a man)
and Malkek, thy King (to a Woman) yet both are commonly expressed only Malkek.
And this distinction in dead things, as Sun, Moon, Soul, Day, Night, etc. is
not material, for it will not alter the sense at all whither yea put them in
the Masculine or Feminine. And hence it is that there are so many exceptions
about it, so that in Buxtorfs Thesaurus ye have no less then 6 or 8 pages
full of rules and exceptions about the gender. And in living things only men
and women are of that worth, to be accuratly distinguished, all the rest
deserve not that honor. And again that must be a silly brain, which
(understanding the sense of the Nounes) should not be able to know whither the
Verb be Masculine or Feminine, whereas if it speaks of a woman, it cannot but
be Feminine, and of a man, Masculine. Yet for the most part every Noune and
Verb that ends upon the third radical is Masculine. A common gender and a
neuter are without neid, this excludes and that includes both.

Rule 4. There is neither Active nor Passive extant.

I confess it is otherwise laid down by all the Grammarians that have written
of these Dialects, except Samaritic, whereof we have no Grammar necessary: in
all the rest this is laid down as very necessary. Nor do I deny it to be
natural, but that in this tongue there is a certain termination and changing
of Consonants for it, that I deny. And the reason is, because it is so
naturally sensible unto every one to feel, whither he gives or receaves
blows, whither he smites or is smitten. So that if we only know the
signification of the Verbs and Nounes, reason, nature, the antecedent and
consequence, will easily show whither Active or Passive must be understood,
although there be no distinction at all for it. Yet in the Appendix, when we
come to speak of accidental things in this tongue, there we shall have some
more trouble, because we cannot be contented with ease, and that which is
sufficient in our tongues for the very children (as those that have not such a
great quickness of reason and understanding) will not be sufficient for our
high learned great Scholars, but they must have (besides the Sun) some petty
little candles with them in their hand for fear they might miss the Exchange,
Church, or Tavern at noone day. Or as if their legs would not serve them well
enough to go abroad, but they must have go-carts (whereby children learn to
walk,) with them in the street, for fear of falling. I cannot give a better
comparison of the madness of all the Grammarians, when they (forgetting their
and our own natural strength in such triffles) make such a great matter to
find out, whither the Noun and Verb be of an active, or passive
signification, as if nature had not made distinction enough to know whither a
man carry, or is carried. And why should nature have been so provident by the
senses of every man to distinguish between active and passive, and yet that to
be esteemed nothing, except it have a special termination or punctation all
along.

Rule 5. There are no moods in this tongue.

I deny not that there are in tongues an indicative, subjunctive, optative,
potentiall, imperative (and by all superfluously added infinitive) yet as the
most Latin Grammars extant did reject the old way of the former Latin
Grammars (who did imitate and follow the steps of the Greec Grammars, yet
without reason) in leaving away the oprative and potentiall mood, because of
the same termination with the subjunctive, (as in English I teach, the
indicative, that I teach or might teach: the optative, when I teach the
potentiall, the Verb teach remaining without distinction in respect of these
three moods,) so here in this oriental tongue the subjunctive must be taken
away, because no special termination for it here. The imperative (as in all
other tongues) leaves the expressions of i, he, we, they, as unnatural and
unreasonable in commands, being don only to the second person, one or more;
Which unity is incapable of distinction, and less, to be an accidental
mannen, or mood. And is therefore by me called the commanding present; and
referred to the tenses. The Infinitive is in all tongues a Noun; as in English,
(an) act, (to) act, in this oriental tongue (...) mori, mors; to die, a death.

So then there remains only one free mood, viz. the indicative: yet when
there is no more but one, you need not give unto it a title, (the titles for
the most part being given for distinction sake) nor call it a mood; as we use
not ordinarily the number one, two, three, in things but one in nature, as Sun,
Moon, World, or Matter, a Book, a Pen; etc. saying one, when there are either
more, or supposed to be more; one God, one Book. Hereby gaining a shorter way
toward our purpose by cutting of that whole long street called mood, we fall
directly into the next street called tenses.

Rule 6. Tenses or times are only three; present, future and preter.

The present or first position of a time in nature is either commanding some
body, or declaring. Which cannot be but to the second person only, one or
more this is of three persons expressed either by the future or preter, or by
the Noune agent with the verb substantive. The future has its temporal
distinction by the first or third radical of the 1. 2. or 3. personal Nounes
singular or plural, prefixed before the root. The terminations of the present
remaining here, because it gives the being unto the future. The first of both
numbers, the second masculine singular and the third singular ends upon the
third radical. The second Feminine singular here as in the present, upon y,
the 2 and 3 masculine as the second masculine plural in the present upon u.
The second and third feminine plural as the second feminine plural upon n.
The preter (under which is comprised imperfect and plusperfect) as nicer
distinctions of the time past, the perfect expressing both sufficiently,
because reason will distinguish, where the eye reaches not, either for want of
a distinct object, or defect of its power. In Syriac, most frequent, in other
dialects now and then the preter with the Verb substantive makes the
plusperfect, and the Noune agent with the Verb substantive, the imperfect. Yet
such a constancy is not here to be expected or that the imperfect may be
plusperfect, or both to have that verb substantive only for fashion, as a
certain emphaticall confirmation of the thing past, as sufficient or its 1. or
3. radical by the Arabians before the future, a certain emphaticall
confirmation of the thing coming. The termination it has is t in all the
singular of all persons and genders except the third Masculine which ends upon
the third radical; the second Feminine does frequently put before the affix
personal letter a y paragogic, as in Ebrue there is in the 1. singular. The
third plural has an u in both genders, (the third radical of (...)
signifying two or more,) which, u has bin already in the present and future.
The second plural has t as in singular with that paragogic m from (...) in
Masculine by Ebrue and Arabic, and in the rest of the dialects with n the
Feminine with n from (...) throughout. Whereby Calde, Syriac, and Etiopic takes
away that distinction between Masculine and Feminine, as we have also examples
in the Ebrue Bible, m for the Feminine and n for Masculine. The first plural
with the last syllable (...) from (...) nakhnu, we. All these Letters and.
Syllables put behind the root.

Rule 7. As persons are three, 1.2.3. So numbers are only two, singular and
plural.

There are ten or 12 personal, and as many numerall Nounes, the catalogue
whereof ought not to be set down in the Grammar, because what can be said of
them must be done in the Dictionary (under their proper root,) which hitherto
has not being observed, and thereby the Grammarians become big and confused by
heterogene all and superfluous things. The personal Nounes are otherwise called
Pronounes, and have made almost (by all Authors) a separate part of speech.
Which if according to reason, why was not the same done for the numerall Nouns,
viz. 1.2.3. 4 5.6.7.8.9.10.100.1000. Person and Number, number and person
having the same right in a Noune and Verber. And if the Nounes of person make
up a part of speech, then the Nounes of Numbers should do it likewise, and then
there would be made 19, (or one being added unto the 19, I spoke of before,
20) Or if the numerall Nounes make no part of speech, (as no Grammarians have
allotted to them) the personal Nounes make none neither, the former being
justly left away by all, the last by many. Here in Analogy they are both to be
made mention of so far forth as there come any certain several letters from
them, to serve in their steed retaining the signification of the whole word.
And that shall be done in the following rules of letters. So that we see, the
Nouns do not only denote the third person (be they personal, proper, or
appellative, as Grammarians conceave) but also the first person, if the speaker
speaks of himself, as there are in all tongues infinite examples of; or the
second, speaking to some other present or absent supposed to be present,
whereof as many examples may be shown.

That the present commanding, otherwise called the imperative, is only found in
the second person, I said before; and that all the three persons of the present
declaring were made good by other ways in the future and preter, (an
extravagant way from all Europe) or by our ways in the Noun agent with the
Verb substantive, I said also: and that future and pretertenses have their
three full persons; it being without loss or gain whither ye begin from the
first, and so go through the second unto the third (as for the most part the
Grammarians set in the future) or from the third; and so passing through the
second unto the first, (as for the most part Grammarians set in the preter) or
whither you begin both alike from the first, or third; or change it so, that
ye begin the future from the third, (as, some did,) and the pretertense from
the first as others, for that, or this order, will not alter the case.

Of the numbers there is more work, viz. whither there be not three numbers
also, as well as three persons, viz. singular, plural, and duall, (as all the
Authors affirm) I answer no, 1. Because only one and the same letter serves
for the duall, that does for the plural, it being one and the same numerall
Noune, viz. (...), which fignifies two, or more from whence the third radical
being cut off is employed instead of the whole word to form the duall and
plural. 2. Because that in the very personal Nounes there are none distinct
for the duall and plural, in the second or third person. 3. Ebrue, Calde,
Samaritic and Syriac with Etiopic, have it not in Verbs. 4. Syriac, Samaritic
and Etiopic have it not in Nounes. 5. Because the same letters, which in Arabic
make the duall in Nounes and Verbs, makes the plural in Ebrue, Calde, etc. 6.
Because there is only singular and plural in the most of our European
tongues, Greec seeming to have the duall, but the examples are so few in
respect of the plural, that you will say it is either superfluous or
ridiculous. The n, which in Arabic is joined unto (...) and in Greec to o, or
on, is paragogic.

Rule 8. Masculines are for the most part the Names of, 1. Men. 2. People, 3.
Mountains, Rivers. 6. Months.

The names are either proper, or appellative, therefore we understand here not
only the proper, but also the appellative names of Men, etc. 1. Men as Adam,
Qayin, Hebel, Set. A King, A Duke, A Prince, A Freeborne, A Slave. 2. An
Egyptian, Ebrue. German. Frenchman Spaniard. 3. Carmel, Hor (...) by way of
Excellency known only by the appellative name, the Mountain, for that
signifies the name Hor, from whence the Greec (...) signifying a Mountain. 4.
Fison, Gihun, Degel, or Deqel, or Hiddeqel, and Frat, (not Eufrat) the four
rivers in Paradise, or Garden of pleasure. 5. Beginning from March, nisan or
Abib, April Ayir (others read iyyar, but falsely) or Avir, whence our name
April. in the Bible surnamed siv. 1. Reg. 6.1. May shivan. June tammus a name
only occurrent by the rabbines taken from the Latin name Junius by putting i
for t, and ni in m, mistaken in their writings and copies. July, Ab. August.
Elul. September Etanim, or Tisri. October Bull, Mercheshvan. November Kisleu.
December Thebet. January Sbath. February. Adar.

Rule 9. Feminines are for the most part the names of 1. Women, 2. Countries,
3. Cities, 4. Any opposite part of the World, or things.

1. Women, Havva, Ada, Zilla, Naamah, Noemi, Rut, Rahel, Leah, Bilha, Zilfah,
Sharah, ribqah. Hannah or Johanna, or Anna. Fninnah or Margret, etc. Wife,
Mother, Daughter, Queen, Princes, Midwife, concubine, etc. 2. Egypt, or Misr.
Persia, or Fars, Media, or Midyan, Arabia. 3. Babel, Kharan, Somron or Samaria,
Yrikho. 4. The opposite parts of the World, South and North, East and West, of
things. two hands, seet, legs, shouldiers, arms, ears, eyes, knees, cheeks.

Yet some of them are to be found in Masculine also.

Rule 10. By termination, any words ending on the third Radical are Masculine.

Except (...).

All these I have taken out of that excellent learned Mr. Buxtorf his great
Grammatical treasure p. 73. 74. 75. 76. 77. 78. (Whereof the most part are of
both genders, and many of them only feminine. The reason whereof leyes in the
two rules going before. The significations of them you may find there, or in
any Dixionary. I was therefore so large with them, because the same holds in
Calde, Samaritic, Syriac, Arabic and Etiopic. Nay of all these you will find
the most part in Arabic (which Dialect of all these six is unto us the best
known, because the fullest of books) first agreeing in the same gender with
Ebrue. secondly, in the same variation of the gender, thirdly, not only
generally in other words, besides these occurrent in Scripture, but even in all
these reckoned up, there being not one of them not to be found in the Arabic
tongue, (as ye call it,) or Dialect. And further if that the other words which
are ordinarily Masculine and ending upon the third radical, should be found in
Arabic, Syriac and Etiopic at a variance from the Masculine toward the
Feminine, as there are many, that you may wonder the less at it, having in the
Ebrew Bible it self the same variation. Finally, that ye learn hence, not to
stand so highly amazed at the frequency of these and other excepted words, nor
think, that you dare or cannot go without stumbling through the Ebrue Bible or
whatsoever, Calde, Samaritic, Syriac, Arabic and Etiopic books because of this
great block, but rather learn hence to judge, that even this multitude of
exceptions demolishes that distinction of Masculine and Feminine, and these two
great Mountains of Grizzim (not Gerizzim, or Garizzim) Deuteronomy. 11:29.27:12. Ios.
8:33 Jid. 9.7. and Ebal, Deuteronomy. 11:29.27:4.13. Ios. 8:30.33 upon which formerly
it seemed the blessing and curse were put by the former Grammarians.

Rule 11. Feminine has a t (...) after the Root in singular and the Letter of
the plural, and sometimes by accident an (...) quiescent.

In these the (...) t is servile, and not radical; and yet this servile is not
constantly Feminine neither, partly in singular as (...) partly in plural, as
(...); and all the infinitives with the third radical (...) or (...) are many
times Masculine: and yet is that (...) t servile, and they are also otherwise
frequently Feminine. So also ending on a (...) quiescent, as the same word
(...) before, written with (...), item, (...), because all these end on the
third radical (...) quiescent by accident in place of the third radical
(...), which is clear in (...), and several others. Now because it is so full
of difficulty, to distinguish (...) servile from the (...) radical, and also
(...) servile from the (...) radical, and the (...) and (...) paragogic,
(being then for the most part Masculine both in Verbs and Noanes,) from the
(...) and (...) necessary and formative, these distinctions being so full of
difficulties, that not only the greatest Grammarians of the Christians, (but
all the greatest Masters of Yishrael, among whom the Massoretes are by no
means of the least rank) did so frequently stumble at, that it is a wonder to
behold; and observed partly by some others of them, and partly by the
Christians, and there are daily many discoveries more about such mishaps. And
why should we chide and trouble young Scholars, when they did not know the
distinction, or that they should know it, or else go no further. That has bin
the crosses, and exceeding great stumbling blocks, which those blockheads the
Jewish Masters did lay in the way for themselves and us; and yet their
authority is so highly cried up. The same is true (in Syriac and Calde) of the
words ending in (...) natural or accidental, of a hard task to be
demonstrated, and proved to be this and not that. And God be praised, who
raises us out of the dust, by opening unto us the eyes of the vanity of this
terrible bufinesse, and Babel. And I hope, I shall have hereafter in some
Latin books fuller and larger occasion, to answer unto several doubts arising
in Scripture, and elsewhere by not greatly regarding the Masculine and Feminine
Gender, which I will gladly perform, if God will spare me my life, and great
learned men will be pleased in the mean time to set themselves on that
labor, as to seek together all the doubts, which either are all ready made in
the behalf of the Gender, or themselves might be able to make, so that
sparing that labor (which otherwise I could perform as well as they) I
finding it ready and done unto my hand, may the easier go through the
resolutions thereof.

Rule 12. Any of the Letters (...) are for the most part the note of the
plural number.

This rule is to be understood to hold. 1. In the duall, (which as we said
before appartains to the plural.) 2. Both in Masculine and Feminine as well of
Nounes as Verbs. 3. Both in present, future and preter. 4. With or without the
affixes following. 5. That they are frequently cast away in all these Dialects,
as I said in the 14 Rule of Etymology. And than in books without points there
is no difference between singular and plural, whence is to be seen, that that
distinction is not so constantly observed in this tongue, as we imagine. And
therefore we must go higher, to wit, unto reason (led by the signification of
the word, the Syntax, Retoric, Logic, Fisic and Metafific.) And if you think
to shun it here or there, yet you must resolve some time or other to step
forward thereunto by your own reasonable strength, because all these letters
will fail you in many particulars. And is it not better to do that willingly,
which otherwise you will be forced unto; and to do it quickly, when it is so
that you must do it, not being able to avoid it, and when ye have done it,
will give you a great joy? viz. that ye are rid of that infinite toil of the
pricks and points, whereupon you set your hope as upon that which would lead
you through all difficulties and doubts, though as yet they never performed any
such thing in matters of consequence, (where your reason could not have led you
thorough without them) but only in easy things, where reason would have done
you as good service, and that with as much ease too; But if it be so that ye
did never (and as yet are loath to) try your reason, nor will grant that those
(which have done, and do use theirs,) can see as much nay more with reason
(though without these pricks) than you without it (though having them.) I say
plainly, you are no reasonable Creature.

Therefore these following Nounes (...) are ordinarily plural (and so without
anomaly) and so Aquilas (in his Calde Parastase) renders them. And yet Raze or
R Slomo Yarkhi takes them all for singular with a yod superfluous, as he
writes upon the word (...), Es. 20:14. which is with a (...) movable, because
the letter before it (as it is also in all the other Nounes) has a fatah
sounding, ay: And so Buxtorf has it in his Grammar and Concordance; yet in his
great Bible, as also in the King of Spains Bible, with the interlineary
translation of Pagninus the letter before it has a zere e, whereby that (...)
comes to be quiescent: the Masoretic note (...), viz. (...), that it is not
found in Scripture any more is true, whither ye point it with fatah or zere.
Therefore I pray answer me to one question: do you think, that the Bible is
now utterly spoiled, because it has a zere and not a fatah? if you do, then
let all Buxtorfs, the Kings of Spaines Bible and many other Editions, (which I
doubt, will not have observed this fatah) be burned, nay if ye will be so
zealous, and punctual, we shall not leave one Bible in all the World, which
would be the ruin both of Jews and Christians. Or if you think, that you
cannot understand that place, except it be pointed with a fatah, who do you
think is in the right Aquilas or Raze, Buxtorf or Aben Esra, for he will also
have them for the most part to be singular, which he makes very plain by
showing that the word (...) shaday is joined with (...) bo an affix singular in
the 96, Psa. 12. verse and that by that general Grammar rule, (...) quiescent,
do alter among themselves without changing either the Root, signification, or
form of the word, whither singular or plural, etc.

Now if others as Raze say, it is a yod formative and not superfluous, they
have as much reason. And besides (...) and (...) (the first word in the first
Psalm. in Ebrue, and Calde) in Arabic are both pricked with a farah, and is set
by all the Arabic Grammarians for the singular feminine, vix. A blessing,
goodness, felicity prosperity, And where is than that filly observation of a
Ebrisme, blessednesses in the plural So rendered by men, that are not thoroughly
grounded in this Oriental tongue, but sing and prate like Parats, never
learning well that which they were taught; So that you may see either of these
three letters are the note of the plural, yet with this caution, 1. That you
must not be punctual upon the points. 2. That ye must not be punctual in
saying it is either the plural or singular, when (...) is added. Whither it
be a superfluous or formative (...), and finally, whither it be the third
Radical, or (that being cast away) the yod servile: but rather be content. 1.
To read it as it pleases you. 2. To understand it in either number, singular
or plural: and if the sense will clearly have it, to be singular, then let it
be so, if plural, then let it be plural, and that will make an end of many
thousands of questions and disputes, or endless doubts.

Rule 13. (...) Is for the most part ( and (...) also sometimes) put after
(...) formative or superfluous in singular, and plural.

This (...) is constant in Calde, Syriac, Arabic and Etiopic, in the duall and
plural number, but in the Ebrue the (...) is more frequent, as (...), with
diverse others; yet many times you shall find them in the Ebrue Bible with
(...) even as they are in the other Dialects, as for example (...), and
compounded as (...) Benyamyn a Son of old age, Genesis 35:16. as it is expressed
Genesis 37:3. (...).

This paragogic (...) is therefore. 1. After (...) in the duall, and Plural of
Nounes, 2. After (...) in the plural of Verbs whither present, future or
preter: and in the Arabic after (...) formative of the plural as well in
Nounes as Verbs as (...) Ragilun men. 3. After (...) in the duall Number of
Nounes and Verbs in the present (or imperative Mood) and future Tense of
Arabic. 4. After (...) in the singular present and future.

(...) Is only in the Noune duall and Plural (ending in (...)) in the Ebrue
Dialect; Now because these mems and nuns are only additions, it makes no
anomaly, when they are left out in any of the Dialects: but on the contrary the
irregularity lies in these superfluities, and the regularity or Analogy in
taking them away, as they are most commonly but not always (in such Nounes as
follow a Noune of relation to the forgoing) in Ebrue, and Calde: but indeed in
Syriac and Arabic it is not considered, as being esteemed an unnecessary
observation. And so we have in Ebrue (...) or (...) twelve: the Mem remaining
in the former word two whereunto ten has relation to make up twelve, hereunto
are to be referred two personal Nounes, viz. (...) thou and (...) be, she
which have in the plural Masculine (...), Feminine (...) you, Masculine (...)
Feminine (...) they or both, with an (...) paragogic. (...) hemmah (...) hennah
(and also hinneh) look them there: yet in Calde, Syriac and Arabic, nay also
in Ebrew this distinction of gender is not observed by mem and nun; mem being
now and then found in Feminine, and nun in Masculine. The reason is because
they are only additionall letters and not formatives of the gender, for the
distinction thereof is not observed so strictly in this tongue.

Rule. 14. In place of the plural number (as in all tongues, so in this
oriental) the collective singular, are used.

The collective Nounes and Speeches, to wit, when the singular Noune or Verb
is put for the plural, are natural in all tongues. And are either in the same
tongue, or in translations into any other tongue, rendered by the plural. As
for instance. Work Genesis 2.2. in the new Testament work, Ebr. 4 4. and again
the singular Psa. 95.9. in the new Testament, works Ebr. 3.9. Him the people.
Exodus 7.8. the Lxx, and Acts 7.34. them soul Genesis 12.5. Lxx every soul,
dweller Genesis 4.20. Lxx dwellers. Heart Psa. 95.8. hearts Ebr. 3.8. Jebusite
Genesis 10.16. (Aquilas in Calde) Iebusites: parable, Psalm. 78.2. parables Mat.
13.35. (In Ebrue both fingular and plural, because the fignification is
plural as man, 1 Cor. 10.1. men, 1 Samuel 31.1. Jebufite the inhabitant 2 Samuel
5.6. inhabitants. 1 Cor. 11.4. enemy, 1 King. 8.37.44. enemies 2 Cor. 6.28.34.
spear, 2 Ki. 11, 10. spears. 2 C. 23.9. ship. 1 Kioto. 22 ships, 2 C. 9.21.
dweller. 2. Sam. 5.6. dwellert 1. C. 1.4. wizard 2 C. 33.6. wizards. 2. Ki.
21.6. so tree Genesis 3.2. for trees. And figtree in Ebr. always singular, in the
English translation is seventeene times rendered in singular, and four times
in plural, viz. Deuteronomy. 8.8. Psa. 10.33. Ier. 5.17. Hos. 2:12. (but that place
Nahu: 3.12. speaks not of the tree, as it is falsely rendered, but of the fruit,
of the figs themselves, and contrary Number. 20.5. the fruit is falsely taken for
the tree, as it was rightly taken, Deuteronomy. 8.8.) Leaf Genesis 3.7. for Leaves. And
an infinity of such examples more, in all Dialects, in all tongues in our
English as frequent, as elsewhere, if it please you to observe it.

In the Syriac and Arabic dialects (because in both there are the collective
Nounes as frequent, as these pluralls ending on (...) in Masculine or
Feminine.) Those that did formerly put the points unto certain books, did add
two points as a sign, that it should and must be taken in the plural,
notwithstanding it be singular by form. But what must be done where the
points are not added? Truly I would not always rely upon him (in poynted
books) that has I know not what skill in the tongue, nor in unpointed books
despair of my own reason, but to use that well I would bestow all diligency,
to learn a great quantity of Nounes and Verbs with their significations, and
that my greatest study should fiercely fall upon the New Testament, thence to
the old; thence to other Authors. In Arabic there has bin the greatest puzling
about this plural number in the Nounes. And there things were set down so
obscurely, partly by the Arabic Grammarians, who are exceeding large, and
unskilful in this work, partly by the Christians, as Erpenius, Guadagnolus
and some others, that it may be thought, they left more to be cleared up,
than they cleared in the Arabian method, because they gave us their terms, and
titles, which are so strange, that no body knows what to make of them, some
Nouns were sound, others broken, whereof no sound sense can be made at this
very day in all England, unless it be by three or four learned men. The
business is; what they called sound, there those three letters (...) were extant
in Masculine or Feminine, and do follow the common road of this tongue: and
that was easy to be understood, but what these broken Nounes were, none did
understand. I say they are collective Nounes, singular by termination and
plural in fignification. Erpenius sets down 22 forms of these collective
Nounes, but that is a superfluous toil; because the easiness of learning
them, lies not in knowing their forms, which are the same with the sound
Nounes, which in fingular termination have but the fingular signification, and
not plural; 2. one sound or common singular, having two or three collective
singulars of diverse forms, as (...) an ey pl. (...) and (...), a servant (...)
and (...) the Sea. pl. (...), and (...); nay the same (...) without pricks is a
collective plural, and what distinction then? (...) a witness (...) and
(...), a soul (...) and (...) a Boy whence is (...) Maid Es. 7.14. The
collective is (...) (the same in outward form with the Feminine a Maid) (...).
Here you may say, alas how shall I get out of that mingle mangle of a Boy and
Maid, many and one. I shall help you shortly, stay a little. Therefore here
the knowledge of forms nothing helps us, if you know the fignification of
every Noune and Verb, you have before you in the Text. I warrant you, as our
English translators could translate Figtrees in plural in four places,
notwithstanding the Noune be singular in Ebrew, even so they could do in
hundreds of other places, understanding the word and context, and seeing by
reason, that the plural must be understood; and that not only the English
translators, but every one that did meddle with the translation of the Bible
either in part or wholly, or did make observations upon the translations; so
may you (or any body else, that has reason) see well enough, when the Text
desires singular or plural, be they never so much confounded by the
termination. And yet here the Arabic Dixionares already extant, and which are
to come abroad do help and are to help you, telling you in every root these
forms, wherein besides the common singular the collective plural are extant,
and that is enough. The Masculine or Feminine sex is clear by the
circumstances in persons, and in things is not very necessary. And here ye
must know, before we part, that all these collectives are Feminine, and the
refore construed constantly with a Noune or Verb Feminine singular.

Rule 15. The personal Nounes do yeald one, or two of their Letters to stand
in place of themselves.

For the composition of words (thereby to avoid the multitude of words which
would otherwise ensue, by frequent repeating the whole Nounes) here is common
that contraction which in other tongues is now and then begun, but not finished
and constantly used.

1. (...) any I or me yealds (...), or (...), or (...) not only in Ebrue,
Calde, and Samaritic, but also in all the other Dialects, notwithstanding the
third radical as well as the first be (...), they retain the Letter (...),
or the syllable (...) to denote the first person.

2. (...) thou (in singular) (...) Masculine and (...) Feminine ye (in
Plural) yealds (...) the third radical in singular, but (...) Masculine and
(...) feminine in plural; which being to signify not the personal but
possessive Nounes, as in singular thing, in plural yours. For distinction sake
changes the (...) into (...) as (...), and (...).

3. (...), he, his, him she her, it, or its, and (...) masculine (...)
feminine (in plural) does yeald in singular either (...) or (...) or both, in
plural they remain as they are.

4. (...), or (...) we, us, yealds (...) or (...). our, ours.

5. (...) that, which, he, who, by casting away the first ladicall Aleph,
(according to the 14 rule in in Etymology there remains (...) the third
radical whereof (viz res) being either left out in writing, or cast away their
remains only (...) in the beginning of diverse words in Ebrue, Calde and
Siriac.

6. (...), (or (...) in (...)) (...) Masculine and (...), feminine: this, that,
these, those, theirs, them. yeald (...), or (...).

7. (...) yealds (...) in all the Dialects yea many times it remains entire in
the Bible (but in Arabic most constantly) as Psa. 2.7. (...) the truth Ez.
13.11. 13.38.22. (...) the pearl, metaph: the hail as big us pearl,
compounded of that (...), and (...) extant in Yob. 28.18. and sundry other
examples. The Jews using constantly (insteede thereof) (...), the Etiopians
(...), the Caldeans and Syrians, (...).

Rule 16. Some other words most frequently used in speech do the fame.

1. (...) vau a hook (of the first root) signifyes to attend, to long or
desire or wish for joining, coming. fetching; the first letter there of being
put before a Noune or Verb signifying: and, but, both, for, if, and if,
namely, or, that, that is, that, which, then, therefore, who and which. To be
brief it denotes all the Greek and Latin conjunctions of whatsoever
signification; whereby you may see the playnnesse of this tongue and the
easiness to know how ye shall tender van in this or has place, it being
absolutely left unto your reason, wisdom, and learning so that if you tender it
ill the fault is not in the difficulty of this tongue, but in your self, viz.
your ignorance, and onreasonable discretion.

2. (...) (...) (of the 420 (...)) signifyes to lodge, yealds the first better
which is put only her sore a Noune, (never, before a Verb) and denotes the
greatest quantity of prepositions, I will set them down here in Latin (you
may put them into english at your leisure) ad, ante, spud, comra, cum, de, e,
ex, in, inter, intra, juxta, per, prope, propier, etc. whereby you may see
again the easmere of this tougue.

3. (...) koh: or (...) ki: so, why, (of the, 3201 root) it signifyes to
clear, it yealds the first letter and puts it for the most part before a Noune
very seldom before a Verb, it denotes (from (...)) sic ut, quod, uts, sicut,
sicuti, silicet; (and before (...)) si, nisi, quia, liun, (...) quom, quamvis,
nam, certe, etc.

4. (...) Min, of from, (of the 4232 root) it signisyes graciously to give and
take, and is placed before any Noune, never before a Verb, and should be
written apart as it is constantly in other Dialects; only the Ebrews
delighting in a compendious way of writing when they put it before a word do
always cast away the nun, (whereunto they seem to be cruel enemies) and in
compensation of it do double the following letter, which sancy cannot make
Ebrew a tongue apart notwithstanding none of the other Dialects do the same,
which is easily enough observed. 1. In regard all the other dialects disclaim
it. a Because reason shows it not to be a compendium of such value as to be
worthily esteemed a principle or a rule, (as some Grammarians have made it)
whereby to separate Ebrue from the other dialects as if it were a tongue a
part, and more accurate then the rest.

5. In Arabie (besides these four) there is an other word, viz. (...) suf,
(from the 7215 root) signifying, further, certainty, and is set either whole
before the future, (whereby to restrain it to the determinate signification of
a future because otherwise it would be now and then taken for a present, or
preter.) or the letters su, or s alone, or f only, signifying further, then,
and relates constantly to something which went before, whereby it differs from
the plain vau, which is only a pure conjunction.

Observation.
From hence came the occasion of those 11 servill letters, which the
Grammarians constantly take by mere accident to be radical. whereas on the
contrary we see them to become servile merely by accident, viz. upon occasion
of the junction of some particular, the most frequent words in this tongue with
others less frequent, and that in a contract manner. And yet neither are they
just 11, for there are two more, viz. (...) nun and (...) fe; and in the 19
rule of Etymology we had, (...) res, in the twntieth (...) khet, and I am
certain all the Letters of the Alfabet, none excepted, will in such respect
be found servile.

Rule. 17. Nounes and Verbs are distinguished into 7 degrees or orders of an
external form, and internal signification.

The first order is presented only by the third radical, (the serviles of
present, preter, and future, as also of certain Nounes are not to be reckoned
here) so that naturally there are no serviles between them, but all the
servils are either after, or before the root, except a superfluous vau between
the second and third radical in present, preter, and future.

The second order is the same with the first, only that it has the second
radical twice pronounced, and if not twice written, compensed (with an
invention called dages and Teshdid,) which in Ebrue is only a point in the
middle of the letter, to signify an emphaticall expression.

The third order is the same, only with (...) (or some one of them) put in
between the first and second radical.

The fourth order is by putting (...) or (...) before the root in present, and
pretertence; but in future that (...) is never, (but the (...) is sometimes)
expressed, and when neither he nor alef is expressed, then that order (in the
external form of it) is like unto the first, unless vau and yod be now and
then put in between the second and third radical, or when the second is alef,
vau, or yod, the yod constantly appearing.

The fifth order is the same with the second, only that it has (...), or
(...), or (...) prefixed, yet in the future that he and alef (except it be
alef in the first person) do constantly fall away, and we see by the taw, that
the taw is only the characteristicall letter of this order, because constant
in all tenses.

The sixth order is the same with the third only observing the same things (in
general) that are to be observed in the fifth order.

The seventh order has nun prefixed before the root; either alone or with the
same he or alef, put before it in the present and pretertense. By the Jews
the nun is not expressed in future, and present, but then the following is for
the most part doubled by compensation. The Arabians do constantly write it,
but only when the first radical is a nun also, then they write it not, but in
stead of it, they double the radical nun with a mark called Teshdid.

Rule 18. Besides these seven there are six other orders, which because more
rare, I put asunder.

The eigth order (but the first of these six) is known by putting taw after
the first radical; but when the first radical is a taw (whither natural or
taken in for sin, whereof is spoken in the 17 rule of Etymology) or alef, vau,
yod, when any of these is the first radical, it is cast away, and the servile
taw doubled instead thereof.

The ninth order is the very same with the first, only that it has the third
radical doubled either by setting the letter down twice, or else by that mark
called Dages or Teshdid.

The tenth order is known by putting (...) is it (an old Arabic and thence a
Turkish word signifying desire) before the root; the alef is put away in the
future Tense, excepting only in the first person singular, which will have it
even as the fourth Order has.

The eleventh order is the same with the ninth only it has alef, vau, or yod,
put before the third radical doubled.

The twelfth order is known by putting a vaw (doubled by Dages or Teshdid.)
after the second radical.

The thirteenth order has the second radical doubled and a vaw movable put
between it,

In the 7.8.9.10.11.12. and 13. Orders there is an alef superfluous in the
present and preter, which (as is said) is cast away in the future (but only in
the first person of the future, whereof it is formative) as well as in the
fourth, where the alef (or he) is the Character of the order.

Observation.
The signification and special respects of each of them in changing the orders
belongs properly unto the Dictionary (where it must and may be set down) and
not unto the Grammar; it being altogether unfit and useless therein.

Rule 19. The termination of the present, future and preter Tense of any Number
and Gender does hold through all the 13 Orders.

This rule does show. 1. That there are no Moods or manners, as indicative,
optative, potentiall, and subjunctive, as in Greec and Latin. 2. That there
are not 4, 6 or more conjugations in this tongue, as there is in Latin and
Greec, where there are diverse terminations not only in the indicative, but
also imperative and conjunctive, in active and and passive for those four or
more conjugations. All which is not here in this tongue, where all the Verbs
through all the Dialects are formed after one general, fundamental,
essential manner; and the termination of the pretertense is the same for all
Verbs through all the 13. Orders, the same in the future and present tense. Nay
the terminatives of the present and future being one, there are only two sorts
of terminations through all the 13 orders for all Verbs, through all the six
Dialects, one for the present and future, the second for the preter tense. In
the present (...) and the third radical, in the preter (...), or (...) and the
third radical, so that it could not be almost more simple than it is, except
that (...) or (...) might have only a (...) which would have been enough, and
(...) only either (...) or (...), which would suffice. Nor must ye look upon
the Vowell, (which we do not here speak of) but only upon the letters,
neither that the third radical (...) and (...) are sometimes cast away, or
(...) changed among themselves, or superfluously added.

Rule 20. The same 13. Orders, belong unto the Nouns as well as Verbs.

That is the greatest task in this Oriental tongue, to sinde out the
signification of the Nouns according to those thirteen orders, whereof we say
the same, that Seneca did of the Latin Cases of the Nouns, not that every Noun
has them all, but that none have any more. To find out the reason a priori,
what this or that order signifyes in the Verbs is an easy thing, and what
respect, proportion, degree or reason one order has to the other is easier to
be found then in the Nounes. And yet the same is in the Nouns also. Which (as
I promised) we shall observe as in the Verbs, so also in the Nouns, in the
following Dictionary; (if the public wealth and the private aid will
sufficiently assist me in that, which no Learned man, whosoever that has any
understanding in this tongue, and observes the obscurity in the translations of
the most excellent places in Scripture, and which are framed by the Holy Ghost
in a Poetical way,) can deny to be the only way, whereby to cure all these
diseases, wherewith our translation is burdened (it being full of nonsense,
and falsehoods,) and to advance a more perfect, clear, certain, and
reasonable knowledge of the whole tongue, (which is not only Ebrue and Calde,
nor yet only Samaritic, and Syriac, but also Arabic, and Etiopic) both in the
true Grammar and Dictionary, except our Ministers will preach and quote
nonsense and falsehood, and the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons Assembled
in the High Court of Parliament, (the expected Great Reformers of the Church)
will not have it otherwise. For many godly Ministers see and find it well
enough, that the translation is as yet very full of nonsense, and almost in
every Chapter some falsehood, nay very many pious, religious, and only worthy
Members of the Church of England do heartily and instantly wish for this work,
which is as yet not laid to heart, nor so much as once moved to the Parliament.
God grant we may become thankful after such infinite mercies, and not lay
aside, (I will not say trample under our feet,) that exceeding bright shining
light of this holy tongue, which God has first allighted in our Neighbor
Countries, where they did and do labor heartily for it, spending not only
much labor, but money also in the midst of the War; that they might have
clearer expositions of the Word of God, than heretofore, and do print Ebrue,
Calde, Syriac, Arabic Samaritic and Eticpic parts of the Bible, procure all
forts of books in this tongue, entertain the laborious scholars, nay the best
Gentlemen, Princes, Earls, Dukes, States, and Kings have a delight to study or
to promote these tongues; and God blesses them and prospers their good and
Christian duties and works; whereas we might reap the fruit of their labor
without labor, if we will prove living Christians.

APPENDIX OF ANALOGY For the Pricks and Strokes.
Rules 1. Any of the letters being cast away, are for the most part compensed,
or as yet remaining by virtue of Dages and Teshdid.
IN the Orthography it is told us, that there are two conditions, that you must
rely upon (in Ebrue, Calde and Arabic) to see the Dages or Teshdid expressed.
1. That the former syllable end upon a Vowell. 2. That the letter which is to
have Dages or Teshid have a vowell, or go to the following letter with a
Vowell. If any of those two conditions fail there is no Dages or Teshdid to be
expected, and if it be there, it wants almost all its virtue and power. Yet ye
must not expect to find this Dages constantly in any Manuscripts without
pricks, and yet you will find it in some places of those Manuscripts that are
written with the least care. And therefore it must be denied to the Samaritic,
Syriac, and Etiopic in some measure, because they have not written it, except
in Syriac now and then, and in some measure ye must confess it to be not
only in Syriac (for if it be but once written in the book, it is enough to
demonstrate that it is extant;) but also in Samaritic and Etiopic to.
Wheresoever you find it in Ebrue, Calde and Arabic, you will either find it
(or else must understand it to be) in Syriac, Samaritic and Etiopic. The profit
of this Rule is; that it takes away all these anomalicall examples, in Ebrue
Syriac, Calde, and Arabic, where any Radical or servil letter is compensed;
for than that letter is yet extant, it being only a compendious way in
writing, not observed in all places or Dialects. As (...) at thou, in Syriac
and Arabic ant, (...) mibbne, n Syriac and Arabic min bne.

Rule 2. The Dages or Teshdid is either characteristicall, eufonic, or
superfluous.

This Rule is by all Grammarians given in Orthography, where it is not proper.
For I would only know of them whither a beginner be able to read Ebrue, etc.
without this distinction; or whither he must needs know it? I am sure he may
read Ebrue, Calde Syriac and Arabic without it. And why than must it be put
there, where nothing is taught, but only that which belongs to reading. Tell
the beginner, that Dages and Teshdid double the letter, and thou have done all
that is needful in Orthography. But as for Analogy, here these differences,
(if there be any) which express the inward nature of it, are to be set down.
And for that purpose, the Grammarians have allowed unto Ebrue and Calde, a
compensative, a characteristic and an Euphonic, whereunto R. D. Qimhi in his
mielol puts one which he calls Atemerakhiq, a forraigner, stranger, coming
from foreign unexpected, unprovided way of reason. The Eufonic is by Erpenius
subdistinguished into Deltale, Lambdale and Initiale. Deltale is the Teshdid
upon the letter t after the letter d without a Vowell. Lambdale is upon the
teeth and tongue letter after the letter l in the personal Noune (...) (ille,
a, ud) without a Vowell. Initiale or that Teshdid written upon the first
letter, is only upon (...) when the letter n is the last without a Vowell in
the foregoing word, either express or in the Vowell, an, on, in. And thus much
they say.

I give my judgment thus, that I esteem, the title of compensative to be
superfluous, it being the nature or intention of all the species of Dages and
Teshdid to compense the letter before, left out in writing or pronounciating,
with doubling of that following letter, that has a Vowell.

The characteristic is only that which is written in the second Radical when
the first is not cast away; and that both in Nounes and Verbs in the second,
fifth, ninth, and eleventh order. Now this is also compensative, for (...), and
(...) are only for a compendious writing contracted into (...) and (...), not
for any virtue residing in this Dages or Teshdid. Whereby is to be observed. 1.
That the title of characteristic is not necessary. 2. That this doubling of the
second and third radical is a mere accident. And therefore in thousands of
Ebrue, Calde, Syriac and Arabic words left away. 3. That the doubling of the
second or third radical depends upon the pleasure of the Reader 4. That
leaving the Dages or Teshdid out of the second or third Radical the first,
second and ninth Order has one and the same external form; and hence it is
that there are so few examples for the ninth order in Ebrue, where
notwithstanding there are some. 5. The same reason may be given for Syriac
where there are none, because Dages is almost never written. 6. That there is
no essential alteration in the signification of the word with or without the
Dages or Teshdid characteristic. 7. Why some word have the same letter doubled,
as (...) yisshakar which is now in the Ebrue Bible (...) not to be read
yisshashkar; the name of the fifth son of Jacob by Leah. And so in many other
words. 8. That this doubling of a letter is used in every tongue (as well as in
this primitive,) where a man will expressesome emfaticall pronunciation. 9.
That a man may easily add such an emfaticall pronunciation unto the Ebrue,
when he observes the matter, as Jud. 14: 6. of Simson when he with force tore
in pieces the Lion. (...) which the punctatours considering, (to express that
force) did write the radical twice, or which is the same, did prick it, to be
pronounced twice. And so far of the characteristicall dages or Teshdid

The Eufonic is no new species of Dages, or Teshdid, because every one of them
are for eufony in the sweet pronunciation with an emfaticall expression. Here
is to be observed that the Grammarians call that Dages or Teshdid (in the
third radical eufonicr which I call characteristic, Erpenins compensative.
Compensative and Eufonic are general names, appliable also to the
characteristic. Therefore is it not to be esteemed, as if I were at variance
with them. That which Qimhi calls Ate merakhiq, is also eufonic. not
contradistinct unto it; and is the same, which otherwise the Grammarians call
Dages lene in (...) b g d k f t, when the forgoing word ends on a Vowell with
or without an (...) quiescent intercurring. As for instance. (...)
hayahbbayyom, which quiescent h does nothing against that eufonic joining of
these two words by this Dages, falsely called lene: and this Qimhi calls
atemerakhiq, when it is in any other letter besides bgdkft, (...) Mahzzot
Ashitalli Lamma Lo Higgadtalli. What need is there to call this Dages by a new
fancied name out of the Calde Dialect, when it is the same with that falsely
esteemed lene? Further that which Erpenis calls eafonic, 1. In (...) after
(...), that is called Dages lene in Ebrue (...) saqatta or faqadta) I call
superfluous. Because it is of no purpose in the pronunciation of it. 2. After n
without a Vowel in lvnmir, is the same with the other letters bgdkft, for if t
after d without a Vowell receives a Dages or Teshdid the other five, viz. bgdkf
in Ebrue and Calde, and six more. viz. lvnmyr in Arabic do so also. Ergo that
lene is not only in six, but 12. letters. And if it be not lene but forte in
Arabic, neither is it in Ebrue, but forte. 3 five letters more (besiders some
of those 12) have it after l (of the personal Noune (...)) without a Vowell.
Ergo summa summarum, that Dages lene, or superfluous is in 17 letters if ye
will pronounce the letter before, which by the Arabians is not always left
away, as Erpenius and others teach.

Rule 3. There is a certain Analogy of the five Vowels.

The paradigmes of Ebrue, Calde, Syriac, Arabic, and Etiopic in Nounes, and
Verbs made with the Vowels or pricks, will give these particulars 1 That you
may observe in every Dialect which letter has a Vowell, and which has not. 2.
Whither it has a, e, i, o, or u. 3. That the uncertainty of them in the
several Dialects does show their fallibilty. 4. That the rules in Ebrue,
Calde, Syriac, Arabic and Etiopic are too many. 5. That Arabic has a Vowell on
a letter, where Ebrue, etc. has none. 5. and Ebrue, etc. has it where the
Arabic has none. 6. That this general variation (when the essencialls are
unanimous) shows these pricks to be only accidentals. 7. That that rule or
observation which sets down diversity of Vowels, Accents, or Dages, in any of
these Dialects for distinction sake, is not sound. 8. That it is convenient for
beginners to know these paradigmes, as a help for hereafter to read without
these Vowels. That there is some small accidental agreement in these pricks in
some certain words throughout every dialect; And therefore the Analogy of the
place of these pricks, (that is, either this or that Vowell stands for the most
part in this or that dialect) is to be set down. 10. That this Anomaly ought
to be distinguished from the Analogy. And many such other observations, which
may be deduced out from them by a diligent and industrious mind and memory.
The special explication of every dialect I will set down here as short as may
be, and give some reasons for these alterations, which I use, (and have
formerly introduced,) to the end, you may observe, that I constantly intend and
endeavor a facility.

Of the Paradigme for Ebrue.
OF the seven Orders of the Verbs and Nounes I have spoken before. These seven
Orders become so many rather by the pricks, than consonants, or letters. In the
present Masculine singular the second radical has only a Vowell, and that
threefould, a, e (whereunder is comprehended i) or o (whereunder is placed u)
for the expressing whereof you have fatah, zere, and Holem in the point of sin
(...). By this multiplication of the Vowell under the second radical is taken
away many hundred anomalicall observations extant by Buxtorf, and the greatest
part of the Grammarians, who setting only fatah, the examples of zere and Holem
must necessarily become anomalies. The same holds in the future, and in the
pretertense, so long as the accent is at that second radical. So is it than,
that the first and third Radical for the most part has not a vowel nor
accent. The same variation of the second radical, does hold in the first and
third, if it receaves a Vowell: the variation thereof will be generally under
any letter whatsoever, yet which Vowels are the most frequent in the Ebrue
Bible, you see out of the Paradigme. Only you must remember that this extends
only unto Ebrue, not to Calde, Syriac, Etiopic and Arabic. For in these
dialects the changings and variations are a great deal less frequent, then in
Ebrue; as for instance, that the letter has never a sva movable, but always a
Vowell: that the letter has neither constantly a gezm or sva quiescent, but in
many places in steed of that, a Vowell. So that all these petty observations,
which Buxtorf and the rest have in a great quantity, concerning the Vowels (not
the letters) and accents, are not considerable. Under the name of the
infinitive only in the first order there are expressed forms of a Noune, that
you may see and observe the same multiplication in the following orders. 1.
(...), 2. (...), 3. (...), 4. (...), 5. (...), 6. (...), viz. six with the
qamez under the first radical six with zere, six with Hireq. etc and in so
doing we have brought in the greatest part of all the forms of the Nounes,
which are to be found in qimbi his miklol, and in Abram de Balmes, nay many of
these also, which Buxtorf and other Grammarians think to be mere Rabbinicall
and Talmudicall, not Biblicall forms of them, an opinion of no worth, because
false, among whom there are many of those, which miklol has as Biblicall forms
of Nounes. And in truth, whatsoever Author teaches and speaks of the
Rabbinicall and Talmudicall Dialects, and thinks those forms and many other
things do not belong to the Ebrue, and does include the Ebrue into so narrow a
compass as the Bible, he sees not that forms of words (Nounes and Verbs,
Frases and Speeches) may be Latin and of the true Latin tongue, though not
extant in Cicero: and the same of Greek words not extant in Demosthenes.

In this Paradigme of the seven first orders you may see the distinction of
Active and Passive only in the second and fourth Order, by the distinct prick
under the first Radical in the second, and the servile of the fourth Order.
And according to the received rule and opinion of all Grammarians, the present
passive in the second and fourth Order is left away. Yet the reason given by
them, because it is impossible or at least improper in the passive to be
commanded by himself, is false, whereas we find. 1. Nifqad to be for the
most part (as all Grammarians, agree) the passive of qal, or the first Order,
and yet it has a present commanding or imperative. And it has the same among
the Arabians. 2. Hitpael or Hitfaqqed, Hitlatthas, the fifth Order (by all the
forgoing Authors the fourth conjugation ('is to have the active signification,
and reciprocal; and yet we find many places of Scripture, where it is the
passive; nay the reciprocal signification is that which is both active and
passive, as, I love my self, there I am the same man that loves, and is
beloved: so that in this form the Arabians look more for the passive
signification, then the active, using it almost constantly for the passive: and
notwithstanding all this, it has the second person of the present commanding
or the imperative in singular and plural, not only in Ebrue, but also in
Calde, Syriac, Arabic and Etiopic. Whence it is clear and evident that, that
exception of the Ebrue Grammarians, that only Pual and Hofal (as they call the
second and fourth Order) because pasive have no imperative, is false, I warrant
you, if nifal and hitpaelitpeal and itpael in Ebrue, Calde, and Syric, and
tefaal in Arabic may have the present commanding being passive, then pual and
Hofal may have it to.

In the Nounes there is not that diversity introduced by the Grammarians,
notwithstanding in all tongues, the Nounes appellative or substantive are of
diverse sorts, 1. The ability of the act, to write or drink. 2. The act it
self. Writing or drinking. 3. The actor, writer, drinker. 4. The abstraction
of the act, drunkenness, and by Analogy, writnesse. 5. The instrument
wherewith is acted, ink, drink. 6. The place appointed or accustomary to the
action, whereunto in English for the most part is added house, place, room, yet
in some words the very latin termination of it is taken as Oratorium, and
Oratory, auditorium an auditory, so by Analogy printery, writery, drinkery. 7.
The inclination in a person, drunkard, sluggard, by Analogy writard, or with a
circunscription by adding the word Master, whoremaster, etc. 8. The abstraction
of that inclination; as we say hardness, so drunkardnesse, sluggardnesse,
writhardnesse. 9. Special Man, Woman, Husband, Wife, Father, Mother, Brother,
Sister, Son, Daughter, Child, etc. 10. individual, Adam, Havva, Qayin, Hebel,
Set, Enos, Ada, Zilla, Lemek, etc.

Now as all these are in many tongues clearly distinguished by diverse forms,
so were it well, if our Grammarians or the Jews had done so; but because they
have not done it, therefore it follows not, that we must leave it undon. And
yet if this tongue does not afford a clear distinction of forms by this or
that Letter and Vowell unto every sort, as we see, other tongues do not, why
should we than be so mightily vexed with near 350, or 400 forms of Nounes,
the greatest part whereof are set down by Qimhi in his Miklol, the rest by
others, as well Jews as Christians; or at least with those, 311. forms, or
several scapes of dwelling-houses of the Nounes, which are divided into 26
streets by Abraham de Balmes p. h. 8. li. 25. and 28. when these things are
merely superfluous, if they do not so much as distinguishe unto us 10 or 12
sorts of several accidents of a signification of the root, except to do that,
whereunto he leads us by his Motto, (which does comprehend the number of 311,
((...)), which is seven times in the Bible,) to set all these 26 streets and
311 Houses on a lusty huge, great fire, (as the name of the Lord in little
less than a blasphemy is taken by these Jews, to enlarge, and amplify a thing
by) and to make a good fire at the victory of such a terrible enemy.

The special Analogy in Ebrue, is to be observed in these following joints.

1. Qamez the long a, is for the most part found in the Noune of the first
Order, under the first Radical, as (...), in the second of the whole first
preter tense, without or with the affix letters of the personal Nounes as
(...). These are the examples of the first preter with qamez, when they receave
the personal Nouns by their letters only, wherein (...) have a long qamez a,
as all other persons in that first preter without the affixes, but with the
affixes they yield constantly no qamez, (and therefore left it away,) except
(...) and (...) has a qamez a in any person, but that comes not within the
compass of the first second or third Radical.

Except where the second radical has a kholem, there it turns into a short
qamez o, because the mediator does fly from the second to the third. As for
instance, under the second radical k (...) of the preter (...) yakol we have
(...), Ex. 18.23. vyacolta (...), Esa. 13.5. the reason of that changing of the
o long in a short o, I give, because the mediator accent does leave the Vowell:
and in the manual concordance in Ebrue it will be plainly seen, whither a
verb has really or is capable to have the kholem at the second radical,
which is easily seen, if it have kholem in any Person, number, Tense, Order
and Gender, at least in one place, for then it may have it in all places.

2. This long qamez is in the whole first preter without affixes, as ye see in
the paradigme. 3. The same in nifal the seventh present and future under the
first radical, as is also to be seen by the paradigme. 4. Under almost any
letter following (...), and frequently following (...), as you partly see by
the paradigme in (...), etc. And an abundance of such examples through the
whole paradigma.

Zere a long e; 1. Under the second radical of whatsoever verb, conjugation
or order, tense, person, number, and gender. For what I said of qamez, and of
kholem, the same I say of zere. If ye find only one example among a hundert
in the Bible through all the orders, etc. which has a zere, that is warrant
enough to admit it in all the rest of the places and persons, if it please you,
for this liberty is used in all the rest of the Dialects; so that ye need not
fear to wrong the tongue: and good reason for it: such a foundation being laid
by God in nature for a variety of pronunciation of every tongue (not only of
tongues, 5.6. 700 or a 1000 miles distant from each other, but even in every
tongue) insomuch that there is not one tongue under the Sun, that does not
change within every 20 miles (I confess insensible,) but sensible within 40,
or 50, and odd miles; which holds also in this Oriental tongue; whence it
is, that this primitife mother tongue to whole Africa, and a fifth part of Asia
being but one and the same, and seeing that the greatest changing and
alteration of the sound (besides the letters) being in the vowells and that
within so narrow a compass, viz. only five, a, e, i, o, u, it is no wonder at
all, that there is a greater harmony of the very vowels, (being only the 19th
part of the Alfabet) then is believed or esteemed.

Secondly, Zere before the letter (...) is a note of the plural (the duall
included) in such words, as have relation to the following, where the m and n
being ordinarily superfluous as (...) malke haarez the Kings of the Earth are
cast away: which the Gramarians call in statu constructo. But without vowels
there is no matter, whither ye pronounce, e or i, even as we see in Latin it
self such a variation of a, e, i, pango, pepigi, compingo, compegi, in one and
the same word changing a, e, i.

Thirdly, Zere is under the first radical, where the second being the same
with the thirdis cast away, and that in the fourth order (...) yasseb: because
the root is (...); but this holds not constantly, for there is (...) yassim
yirm. 49.20. (...) vannassim, Number. 21.30. and yet the root is (...). And some
such more. Whereby we see, that even this observation of the Grammarians about
zere, is not constant. And the truth is, there is not one constant without
exceptions, whereby we see the instability of them, the inconstancy of those
that did put these pricks unto the Bible. And good reason for the anomaly of
this third is, because the second radical (...), viz. (...), is of the nearest
kindred with (...), as we told in Etymology rule 14.

3. Hireq the long i is under the second radical, in the fourth order active
as (...) hilthis or (...), (...) or (...) malthis (...) David or (...). And
this the Grammarians take to be constant in the roots that have the second
(...). But in the same conjugation we have the present commanding for the most
part with zere; and in Syriac and Arabic the second radical has in that
fourth Order a. e, i, o, as well in active as passive. And that neither
accidentally, but one and the same root in Ebrue, Calde, Syriac and Arabic has
frequently one and the same vowell in the second radical in the fourth Order:
ergo all the variation is here without prejudice unto Ebrue because it is
without prejudice in Arabic: and as the Arabic has a, so the Ebrue (...)
higlah, so that zere or hireq is not the characte risticall vowell of this
order in active.

Second, under the letter before the following (...) servile in plural, (duall
encluded) out of construction, as they call it, that is when the following
substantive has no relation to this foregoing, or stands absolutely for it
self as for instance (...) m l a k i m Kings. Yod is the true formative of the
plural, (...) only the paragogic: and in such a case we have a long hireq
before the Letter (...) quiescent: yet one word (...) masculine (...) feminine
two, has a zere. Nay where that yod is left away as (...) and sometimes a
segol or short e as (...) and (...) otherwise written (...) in which, with many
other examples we see a variety, which teaches us, not to stand too precisly
upon pricks.

The same hireq we have also when a (...) follows a (...) as (...), etc.

Holem first, with a following vau quiescent either radical or servile, 1.
After the first radical throughout the third and sixth Order as well in Nounes
as Verbs. 2. Before the vau quiescent in the plural Feminine (a (...) for the
most part following) or masculine a (...) paragogic following as (...); both
the quiescent vaus have a kholem before them. Thirdly, after the second
radical in the present commanding, future and preter tense as (...) fqod visit
(...) efqod I will visit, I do visit, (...) yacol he may or can; yet this vau
is superfluous and should not be there.

Secondly, without a following vau quiescent, as 1. In all present, future, and
preters in all Orders, and persons, and members, and so (...) efqod is better
written than (...), etc. but where the second radical has ormay have a kholem
will be easily seen in the Ebrew concordance, for if we have but one example,
that will show for all the rest, and in Arabic there are many Dictionaries
only for that purpose to show what verbs, whither perfect or imperfect have a
fatah a, or Kesra e, or damma o, in which vowell Ebrue, Calde, Syriac, and
Arabic do marveilously agree. And in many other places.

Sureq is never written without Vau, from whence many times a confusion of
Roots proceeds, the Vau sureq servile not being discernable from the Radical,
where it comes to pass that many Grammarians, and all Dictionary writters,
none except, have set down false roots. Now whereas the root is as it were the
House, wherein a certain signification does constantly dwell, and is not to
be found else where, it must necessarily follow, that when the root is
mistaken, the signification must be mistaken also. Therefore I set down first
the sureq as without that vau. 1. In the letter vau servile, signifying all
sorts of conjunctions be, fore a word beginning from (...), as (...) vubderek,
and in the way. (...) vumiyyom and from the day. (...) Vufetakh, and the door.
2. In the formative Letter vav of the plural number in the verbs as (...) la
thsu where the point sureq should stand before the letter (...) belonging to
(...) sin, not to vau. 3. When that letter is the third radical: as (...)
tohu, (...) bohu, (...) vayyis takhu. (...) hit-u. (...) higlu. 4. When it is
the servile at the end of a Noune, as (...) malku. 5. Where the second radical
is vau, in all the first Order, as (...) aqum, etc. 6. When it is elther
between the second and third radical, the second and servile, (the third
(...) being cast away) or the third and servile. As (...) lathus 7. When it is
in the first Radical (...) quiescent, as (...) ucal J can. 8. When it is
before the first radical at the servile letter (...) the fourth Order passive
as (...) huqam, where that vau is clearly superfluous, and should not be
there. And in many other places.

Fatah: first, under the Letter (...) demonstratives as (...) hayyom to day,
this day. 2. under (...), when that (...) is put away, for yet understood, as
(...) bayyom, cayyom, layyom. 3. Under the servile letter before the root in
the present and suture of the fourth order active. As (...) halthis, althis. 4.
Under the first radical in the second present and future active, in all the
fifth order. As (...) latthes, alatthes, hitlatthes, etlatthes, under the
second radical of any Verb, Order, Tense, Person and Number. As (...) lathas,
etc. 6. Before the yod in duall with an accent, As (...) samayim. 7. Under the
second radical in some (though few) Nouns. As (...) dbas Honey (...) mah. 8.
Before the affix (...) with an accent very frevently (...) fqadani. 9. Before a
letter with a sva fatah, its letter being to give a sua or short hireq, and no
other Vowell, As (...) rakhazu (...) for (...) rikhzu. And in many other
places. Segol. 1. under (...) the preformative of the first person, in the
first and seventh future. As (...) elthas. (...) ellathas. 2. In Nounes it is
very frequent in the last syllable. As (...) sefer. (...) attem (...) atten
(...) meh (...) yrusalem. 3. In some few Verbs, in lac of zere under the second
radical (...) kiffer (...) kibbes. Yet constantly in the future, when the
third radical is (...). As (...) yaasheh. 4. Before the (...) servile which is
afformative of the Feminine Gender. As (...) nkhoset frequently also a double
segol before it, as (...) mneqet (...) foqedet, and in many Nounes, as (...)
melek. And in other places.

Rule 4. The greatest Anomaly is in Ebrue, in the rest of the dialects there is
less according to the quantity of the vowel prics.

This part of the inward variance, anomaly, or mutation of points and prics,
which are wrongly called vowels, depends in method upon Orthografy in matter
upon Orthografy and analogy. The method of their variance arises from their
variety in Orthografy, from whence it comes that where there are fewest, there
is the easier and less variance. In Arabic where there are only three vowels
and one sua, it is impossible that the anomaly of them should be so great, as
that of the Ethiopians and Syriac, where there are six or five, and the
Caldeans, where there are as many as in Ebrue, but yet without intent of such a
strictness, as is observed by the Jews, where the fifteen pricks are divided
into three orders, long, short, and shortest, for certain several uses, not
observed in Calde Orthografy.

The Anomaly of them in Ebrue.
This is threefold, 1. When any one long vowell is changed for any other long
vowell: as for instance. (...) ben, a son (...) banim, sons. Nor is it
needful to make a new and unusual singular, (so called, because never found in
the Ebrue Bible) as R. D. qimhi in his Miklol in this and many other examples
would have it, viz. (...), baneh item, (...) fen, a face, (whence (...) fen,
least otherwise) (...) fanim from (...) faneh, because this permutation of e^
into a^ will do as much as a coin of a new unufuall singular: the like is in
(...) ros a Head, (...) rasim, Heads. (...) ir a City, (...) arim and (...)
ayarim Cities.

2. Or short for short. As (...) lekhem and (...) as the Calde, Syriac and
Arabic also has, whence (...) bet lakhem from Betlehem. Lemek and Lamek, (...)
and (...) from (...).

3. Or the shortest among themselves, the fingle instead of the compound, or
compound instead of the single: or one compound in stead of another.

Yet to speak more fully of every one, we shall follow the orders laid down
in Orthografy, viz. qamez, zeri, hirek, the long kholem surek, fatah, segol,
hireq the short, qomez the short, qubbuz, sva, sva fatah, sva segol, sva qomez.

1. Qamez for zere, and zere for qamez in one and the same word, viz. (...)
rasim, and (...) resit, the letter (...) has both a and e, so (...) bayit, pl.
(...) battim, and (...) with the affixes (...) beti, (...) betka.

2. Qamez for Hireq, and Hireq for qamez both long. As (...) rasim and (...)
rison, (...) ir and (...) arim. Item where there should be a hireq (as under
the second radical in the fourth order active) when the thi^ Radical is (...),
as (...) for (...)

3. Qamez, for Holem, and Holem for qamez. As (...) ros, (...) rasim (...) enos
(...) anasim (...) ziffor, (...) ziffarim. (...) misor, (...) mesarim.

4. Qamez for surek, and sureq for qamez. In the first person of the future. As
(...) ucal and (...) aqul here the (...) has a or u: so under the same
radical in diverse tenses, as (...) qam, and (...), qum.

5. Zere for hirek the long, and hireq the long for zere. As (...) hafqed (...)
or (...) hafqid. (...) tomek (...) tomick, (...) yosef, (...) yosif, (...)
misor and (...) mesarim.

6 Zere for Holem, and Holem for zere. As (...) ros (...) resit. (...) et (...)
ot (whence (...) oti, (...) otka (...) otam (...) otan, etc.

7. Zere for sureq, and sureq for zere. As (...) faqed and (...) faqud. Which
two forms have one and the same signification.

8 Hireq the long for Holem, and Holem for Hireq the long. As (...) mot, mors,
mortis, with an interposition of r, more, death, and in many other places and
forms that (...) with Hireq, As (...) hemit. And many more.

9. Hireq the long for sureq, and sureq for Hireq the long, As (...) Rakhim,
and (...) Rakhum (...) faqid, and (...) faqud, which two forms have one and
the same signification.

10. Holem for sureq and sureq for Holem, is the last among the long Vowels,
and is very frequent. As (...) yarom (...) yarum Because that (...) does
quiesce both in o and u.

There are ten changings also among the short vowels where either two sorts of
short vowels are found either in diverse forms, at the same letter, or in the
same form at the same letter.

1. Fatah for segol and segol for fatah. Here all the Grammarians do give many
examples; especially if the last or one before the last be a guttural letter,
and the accent at the syllable before the last: in place of one or two segols
is for the most part a fatah and do call that a fata vicar for segol, whereas
they should call all Vowels vicar, none of them being exempt from that
changing, as we saw in the long.

2. Fatah for short Hireq, and short Hireq for Fatah As (...) for (...), and
all those, that have the first radical (...), Also (...) for (...) for (...).

3. Fatah for short qomez or qubbuz, and short qomez or qubbus for fatah is not
frequent but rare: except in the active of the second order, where there is
fatah or short hireq, in the passive there is qubbuz at the first radical, As
(...) fiqqad, pass. (...) fuqqad. An unnecessary alteration because of the
vowels, our reason discernes the gender.

4. Segol for short hireq, and hireq for segol. As (...) whence (...) for (...)
for (...) this permutation is constant in the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh
future, where (...) has segol, and (...), hireq. Except (...) and so (...) in
all the Verbs that have the first radical vau and yod.

5. Segol for short qomez or qubbuz, and short qomez, or qubbuz for Segol is
not frequent, but rare: The examples of that alteration ye must put herein.

6. Short hireq for short qomez or qubbuz, and the short qomez or qubbuz, for
the short hireq. As (...) for (...). B N Add hereto

Fatah for segol p. 217. As (...) the letter Res will have it also, as (...) the
last (...) regards it not, as (...) also cares not for it sometimes, as (...)
never, but sometimes (...) the fatah before the (...) being made long for any
great vowell sake, as (...) frequently, (...) seldom. By these many examples,
you see that whither you read a or e: it is all one. And, segol for fatah: when
the gutturall Letters have a long a, or sva qamez. As (...) from (...) the
(...) with fatah, because (...) has no qamez a^. (...) for (...) so (...) for
(...) and (...), except (...) which before the Nounes has for the most part
qamez not segol. As (...) for (...) and many more. By which you may again
perceive the liberty ye have to pronounce, and to point otherwise than the
bible now is in every word, there being almost none example for any form,
person, tense, or order, where ye will not easily find many exceptions. And I
wonder that all the learned men should not have bin able to make that necessary
conclusion out of such an innumerable multitude of anomalicall punctations,
that there was no need at all to seek for and observe that punctation.

The shortest do interchange among themselves. 1. Under gurturall letters in
place of a single sva is assumed a compounded. Instead of fqod (...) the first
letter (without a vowell) because no gutturall has no compound but a single
sva; whereas in the same form (...) has sva fatah, because gutturall: (...) a
sva segol, because gutturall; (...) fri, fruit with a single sva, but (...)
Kholi, with a sva qemez, (because a gutturall letter,) in stead of (...) khli.
So (...) adonay because gutturall has sva fatah, and (...) yhovah, because no
gutturall, a single sva. That name does not so much as once take the vowels or
pricks of the name adonay, neither does adonay admit of these belonging to
yhovah: there being a great diversity between (...) yhovah and (...) adonay,
as there is between (...) abod to perish, and (...) eloh God, or (...) fqod to
visit, and (...) thom, an abyss. And (...) bahovah, (...) lahovah has not
the points of (...), for then it must be (...) and so we never find is, nor
is it regularly capable of these points; but looses its single sva, and the
letter before has fa ah for hireq only by permutation of one short vowell for
another. Where with we determine that great question about the pronounciation
of the name yhovah (...) saying, that it has always its own vowels, and
never those of adonay, nor does it loose a compound but a single sva in the
compositions with (...), (and those who say it has the pricks of adonay are
either blind, or unskilful in Grammar;) and therefore it is never to be
pronounced adonay, nor to be esteemed unutterable by the pricks, it has, or
by the loss of its proper pricks, which are as proper now to it, as zere and
Hireq were or are to the word (...) brefit, and so, no ignorance, nor mystery
is there to be conceaved about the pronounciation of it. And if the Jews did
it because they would not have that name profained by pronouncing it, then is
it partly a childish, (nay impious) invention, where the command of God
Almighty for not profaining is precedent, and more binding the consciences,
partly blasphemous, striving thereby never to have it pronounced at all,
whereas God forbids only the irreverent and vain using thereof. But to
excommunicate them that should offer to pronounce it, as if they (by the
abolition of Gods proper Name out of men's hearts) desired to pull the very
memory of God himself out of the heart of men, that God forbid we Christians
should allow of in them or us, or any sort of people.

Secondly, instead of one compound sva, there is another by the same
pronunciation. As for instance (...) and (...) and (...) for (...) and once
(...) the rest always (...).

Thirdly, in many places under these gutturall letters there is a single sva in
place of a compound, as (...) instead of (...).

Fourthly, under a non gutturall a compound for a single sva, as (...) and many
others. The use whereof is, that this sva whither single or compound is a mere
fancy, without any the lest use, as being in none of all the tongues in the
World, except brought here into by these Jewsh dreamers and high philosofers in
needles things.

The second degree is the true mutation for necessity sake, and is fourefold, a
long vowell is precisely changed into its contrary short one, viz a^ in a^, e^,
e^, i, i, o^, o^, u^, u^:

1. When that syllable which was a long one, he comes a short one. As (...)
into (...) (...) (...) bell (...) by (...) bis (...) ba (...) (...) (...) bull:
as for instance. (...) bhe^ma^h: the long syllable man, becoming mat instatu
constructe, (or with a relation to the following word) getting in stead of
(...) a (...) is (...) bhemat: and again the first long bhe^, becoming bhem,
as in (...) bhem tka gets a segol: the reason is, because the long syllable
becomes a short, therefore the long vowell a short.

2. Constantly, a short vowell becomes long, when the short syllable becomes
long. As (...) bal into (...) ba, (...) bell into (...) be, (...) bil into (...)
by, (...) bell into (...) bo, (...) bull into (...) bu. As for instance (...) fa
qad with the affix (...) fqa do. Also (...) for (...) in (...) for (...) in
(...) as (...) written with the sva expressed or understood under the final
non gutturall letters, but never under (...) and (...), when a long vowell
goes before, but when a short one preceeds it, is there also understood. As
(...) ehyeh (...), etc. Again the long vowell becomes short.

Thirdly, when standing in a short syllable with a Mediator, that Mediator does
sall away: as (...) bil into (...) bal, (...) bell into (...) bell, (...) bil
into (...) bil, (...) bol into (...) bol, (...) bull into (...) bull. For
instance (...) bt, (...) the accent being taken away by the following maqqef.
So (...) col becoming (...) col.

Again 4. the short vowel becomes a long if either the Mediator leave its
syllable, or being a lower, do become one of the higher degrees, which they
call the kingly accents: as for instance; (...) hassamayim, the accent is
Mediator, and thereby the short vowell is able to make up a long syllable: but
in (...) hassamayma: the same Mediator is a great Duke, called atnakh, hence the
short vowell is changed into a long: so (...) faqad with a Kingly accent is
(...) faqad. In statu constructo, (or in relation to the following
substantive.) he accent is understood to be gone, which is all one, as if it
were really gone, and has the same virtue, notwithstanding the accent be
present. As (...) from (...) from (...) from (...) from (...) from (...) from
(...) instead of (...) becoming (...) because the quiescent letter makes the
vowell long for long to change by permutation.

Observation.
WHere this down right opposite change (from a long a, into a short a, or
short into long) is not found, but some other not so opposite, as for example
e, i, o, u, for a, or a, i, o, u, for e, or a, e, o, u, for i, or a, e, i, u,
for (...), or a, e, i, o, for u, ye must conceave first that the down right
opposite mutation has been there, and then that the other permutation came
in, and brought an e, i, o, u, for a: a, i, o, u, for e: a, e, o, u, for i: a,
e, i, u, for o: a, e, i, o, for u: and then the thing is well, and rules
remain constant.

Four exceptions about the Rule.

As the true mutation is sourefold, so the exception is four fould. 1. Where a
short vowell (without a following moveable letter in the same syllable, or
without dages, or an accent mediator,) absolves a long syllable: as, (...) for
(...) by permutation of a short fatah for a short hireq. (...), etc. N. B. that
false conceit of the Grammarians, as if all the compound svas were movable,
viz. constantly to go to the following letter, has made them to put a meteg by
the short vowell before, whereby they raise another error, teaching that meteg
has the same authority, that the true accents have, viz. to keep short
vowells in a long syllable by its mediation, and so make meteg a true accent.
Three salse things, for meteg is no accent, nor has the propriety of a
mediator, nor is necessary by (...). For instance in (...) ohlo (...) eshe.

2. That long vowels may stand in a short syllable, as (...) and that
constantly in the last syllable ending on (...) and (...) with a nun paragogic,
but without a mediator. 3. In relation, or statu constructo the long vowell is
not changed, as for instance (...) ctab (...) mibtah (...) mattan, etc. 4. Of
the fourth except, that a short vowell does not change into a long,
notwithstanding the word be in statu constructo, or in relation to the
following, and thereby the accent is esteemed to be lost, as (...) 1 Kings
4.5. instead of (...).
The third sort of Anomaly is the contraction of syllables, viz. when one or
two syllabies (more then there more before) some into the word. This
contraction of fillables cannot be done by casting away any letters, (whither
necessary or unnecessary) of that word, but rather by casting away of these
pricks esteemed vowels: whither long or short, none excepted. After which
casting away of any vowell, the fashion of these masters is to put the sva
simple or compound underneath that letter, (as you had it in Orthografy.) The
reason or sign of this casting away of vowels is, when the accent loses its
place, going from its letter to the next, or the next save one or two
following: As for instance. (...) lathas, lathes, lathos, the accent is at the
second radical, which has either fatah, zere or kholem. Now if a (...), or
(...), with a vowell given unto the third radical, do come unto this word,
then the accent must go toward that third radical, as ye shall have it in
the following rules of accents. Which being done thus (...) all sorts of
vowells (none excepted) that are at the second radical fall away and then it
becomes thus, (...) viz. Only of two syllables, whereas otherwise it would have
bin of three.

Many more examples might be given for this kind of casting away, it being so
frequent that there is scarce one line in the Ebrue Bible without it. Further,
because there may arise a doubt, which of two vowells is cast away, the first,
or the second, and why in that example not as well the first as the second, I
must give here some small directions, when the first or second, or both vowels
are cast away. (Yet for a beginner these are unneedfull, for he will see well
enough, if he has the full word before him, which is there cast away; if not,
let not that trouble him.) 1. Without affixes (in all orders, tenses and
persons ending on these letters, (...) (so that the foregoing letter receive a
vowell, in all verbs without (...) the third, or (...) the first and second
radical,) the second vowell is cast away, as we saw it in three letters: one
example more for (...), viz. (...) lthas, lthes, lthos, (I confess it is only
one syllable, yet it is the same case as if (...) the first radical had a
vowell) I say (...) lithsi, as (...) lithsu: where you see the second radical
has lost its vowel. But why? because it has lost its accent, which is gone to
the third radical and it went thither, because that has got the vowel. 2. The
same persons, and tenses which have two vowels, if they get the affixes, loose
the first vowell: (...) becomes (...) lthasor and thus with all affixes, the
same in these following and the like Nounes, viz. (...) gadol (...) maor, etc.
3. Both Vowels, in Nounes ending on a short Syllable as (...) melek (...)
sayit, etc.

All the monosyllables, both Nounes and Verbs: in the Noun is comprehended the
infinitive of the first order; in the Verbs, the imperative or present
commanding of the first order. As (...), Or look to my Grammatical
delineation in Latin. 1646. at Amsterdam printed in quarto, where you find it
in the paradigmes, therein more clear, because I did put there black next to
white, that is, whereas in the Bible, or other Grammars you should only find
the anomaly without the show of analogy, where, that it might be clearer, (a
thing very necessary for all beginners in Ebrue only, and that for those, who
will not go on in this tongue without these pricks, unjustly called vowels,)
there I did set the analogy by it.

The exceptions of this third sort of anomaly is, when the vowels remain,
where otherwise they are usually cast away (in Ebrue only, for this speech of
the pricks does extend no further for the present) as for instance. 1. When the
accent is not falling away, for its going downward to the following Letter or
syllable, was the requisite condition, ergo that not being performed, the
casting away of these vowels cannot be expected: for instance. (...) abi a
father, hence (...) also, abi my Father instead of (...), and so (...) a
brother and my brother, (...) a father in Law, and my father in Law. (...) and
(...) but (...) because the accent is gone from b to k in abikem, hence is that
qamez fallen away from under the (...); the like in (...) etc. So (...) instead
of (...) and (...) instead of (...) which for the most part is so at those
accents, which are of some higher rank, as silluq, atnakh, rbia, saqefqathon,
etc. Because they love not to stand at the last syllable, but for the rest sake
choose rather the last syllable save one. 2. No short vowell in a short
syllable can be cast away; for instance, hireq and fatah in (...) hitfaqqadtem:
because it is said, that all vowels long or short may be cast away, when the
accent descendes, with provision that the short or long vovvel be in a long
syllable, or the syllable before short, become now long.

The reason of the necessity of the long and not of the short syllable is,
because that in the short syllable there being already one sva, if that short
vowel should also fall away, there must needs come in its place another sva Now
two svas in the beginning of a word cannot be pronounced, or to speak more
accuratly, in this tongue no Letter with a Vowell does take before it self two
Letters without one, as we do in English, in spring time, where only r has
the Vowell i, s and p has none, and yet both these Letters without a Vowell
are pronounced together with ri, saying, spring; but this I say is not used in
this tongue, for in place of sva under the first Letter (if it ever had a
Vowell) a Vowell must return, so that it is better not to cast it away at all,
then after such casting away to fetch it, and place it there again.

3. A short vowell in a long syllable as (...) in (...) hassamayim cannot be
cast away: because the accent must first be gone; and a short vowell in a long
syllable does presuppose the presence of the accent. Now the presence and
absence of the accent at one and the same time, are contrarieties, and cannot
be expected; therefore the short vowel cannot be cast away being in a long
syllable.

4. Upon the same ground a long vowel cannot be east away in a short syllable,
because the accent is required together with the long vowel in a short
syllable, and here is required the accents loss.

5. Neither can a long vowel be cast out of a long syllable, which having (...)
quiescens, stands in stead of a short syllable: for instance: if in
hitfaqqadtem (...) none of these short vowels can be cast away, by the reason
given, ergo neither if the second letter of any short syllable should loose its
moveablenesse or sva, the vowell notwithstanding by the necessary mutation
becoming long, could be cast away, let the accent go never so far: as for
instance; if (...) lo do stand in place of (...) live, this is a short syllable,
that a long, there are in both alike two Letters, only here the second is
movable, and so makes a short syllable, there the second is quiescent, and
makes a long; I say, that the vowel cannot be cast away either in the one or
the other, when the accent goes away, notwithstanding the long stays in a long
syllable, because it is in place of a short one, as (...) not (...) from (...).

6. If (...) quiescent be cast away, yet because they are in certain places
necessarily understood, the long vowel in such a long syllable cannot be cast
away, as (...) lothsim.

7. Where there goes before the long vowel in a long syllable a sva either
belonging to that long syllable or not, as for instance (...) in (...). And
this fasshion of sva is in this tongue. 1. Expressly in the same syllable: as
(...). 2. In the syllable before as (...) ascara. 3. In dages. (...) baqqasa in
stead of (...). 4. understood under the quiescent going before. As (...)
motzaim the same observation is about the long vowel zere, hirec, holem, surec,
and other short vowels, if such examples are to be had. Except (...) sabuim
(...) salisim instead of (...) sbu, sli, for distinctio sake, as Grammarians
will have it, from (...), but I believe no such distinction to be in the pricks,
but only by a mere accident in these and sundry other words this long vowell
is not fallen or cast away, notwithstanding the accents removal from (...) and
(...) sabu, salis.

Analogall unto this contraction is the combination of two letters without a
vowel into one syllable, which the Grammarians in Latin give by this rule:
duobus svayim concurrentibus pro priori assumitur hireq: that is; if two svas
come together for the first is put a hireq: for instance (...) fqod; (...) has
a sva, and (...) the second radical has both a vowell and an accent: in the
feminine gender this fqod receaves an i, to say, di, whence the accent goes to
the third radical d, because it receaves a vowel, hence is that o of qo cast
away, and q remaining without a vowel receives a sva, thus (...). In such a
case the first letter receaves a hireq and then I say (...) fiqdi, because here
in this tongue three consonants before one vowell the masters do not allow, but
after the vowel it may be. About this rule are to be observed these following
things. 1. The Letters that have no vowell must go before that letter that has
one in the same syllable, so that no vowel go before these two svas, for then
each of these two vowels take to them the nearest Lettre without a vowel as
(...) yifqdu (...) are without vowels, d (...) and yod have vowels, therefore
(...) takes the nearest (...) f, and (...) d the nearest (...). 2. there comes
not in only hireq, and sometimes fatah and segol as the Grammarians say, but
also qomez the short; as (...) hofqad (...) holtas, instead of (...) hfqad,
(...) hlthas; and qubbuz. As (...) fuqqad instead of (...) fqqad, (...) lutthas
instead of (...) ltthas: so that the rule must be more general, duobus svayim
concurrentibus assumitur vocalis brevis. Two svas coming together before a
vowel in the same syllable, assume any of the short vowels in stead of the
first sva. 3. No long vowel can be taken instead of the first sva, because it
is against the nature of a long vowel to stand with a sva following in the same
syllable without a mediator accent, as is showed in Orthografy. 4. That it must
not be understood to be meant only of a singlesva, but also of a compound one,
not only under a non gutturall, but also under a gutturall Letter: as (...)
Kholyo, in stead of (...) from (...) as (...) firyo in stead of (...) from
(...) fri. 5. If the second letter be a gutturall, look what vowell it does
then assum to its single sva to make a compound one, such a vowel is constantly
taken under the soregoing letter with a sva, which the Grammarians give by some
other new rule, viz. gutturales punctuant se and praecedentem, whereas that
rule is superfluous, being already enclosed in that rule; svayim concurrentibus
propriori assumitur vocalis parva: as (...) in yamod receives fatah, because
(...) has sva fatah. 6. Nor is here any exception to be made as if sva qomez
gave to the foregoing letter a long qamez, as some Grammarians fasly assert,
reading (...) vakholi, where you may nay must read vokholi: so (...)
oholibamah, not aholibamah, as in the English translation. 7. If three svas
come together, as from (...) gberet, with the affix of the first person in
stead of (...) for the middle or second sva is put a short vowell, gbirti (...).

Oppofite to this contraction is a frequency of remaning vowels, because the
Accent remains at its place, and notwithstanding one or two syllables are
joined unto that words end, yet the accent remaining, where it was before, the
vowell, either at the accent or before, is not cast away. 1. Nounes and Verbs
ending in (...) without the affix letters of the personal Nounes: for instance
in Verbs. (...) for (...) for (...) for (...) in Nounes. (...) Sebi for (...)
Sbi (...) any for (...) ni, (...) yofi for (...) yfi: also (...) kholi for
(...) khli or with affixes, in stead of sva is set qamez, fatah, zere or segol
before (...) Zareka for (...) Zarka. (...) yiraseka for (...) yiraska. Before
which Letter (...) ka in some words one syllable remains by transposition
(...) for (...) etc. 2. More especially in the 1. and 2. person of the 1. and
4. preterrense in verbs that have the 2. and 3. Radical the same, there is
constantly a holem in stead of sva, the accent remaining or going down to the
new fillables: of (...) zmm is (...) zammota for (...) zammta of (...) mqq, is
(...) nmaqqotem for (...) nmaqqtem: of (...) khll is hakhillota (...) for (...)
hakhillta 3 The same is always in the seventh pretertense, but in the fourth
pretertense only sometimes in verbs of the Radical (...); of (...) fuz, is
(...) vunfozotem, for (...) vunfoz tem. Of (...) qum (...) vahaqimoti, for
(...) vahaqimti. 4. In the fourth order active in all persons ending with (...)
and (...) paragogic, the second Radical has a vowel in stead of sva, because
the accent remains. As (...) hafqidu, for (...) hafqdu. (...) tafqidu for
(...) tafqdu. (...) hifqida for (...) hifqdah. 5. In verbs of the second
Radical (...) in the same persons and tenses of the same termination (...) in
in any order whatsoever: of (...) qum is (...) qamu for (...) qmu (...) qumu
for (...) qumu. The same. 6. when the 2 and third Radical are the same; viz.
of (...) sbb. is (...) sabbu for (...) sabbu. 7. of the personal Noune (...)
or (...) taken only (...), either with vau (...), or without it (...) hi, with
hirec the long, as it had it in the whole Noune. This notwithstanding by no
Grammarians is esteemed a syllable, yet it is a good, full, and true long
syllable; hi, as the word (...) hi is a true full word, This hirec is sir-named
maffiq, because it brings its letter to be heard, no letter without a sound or
vowell being capable of a pronunciation, as by, so hi, and as b without ae i ou
is not pronounced, so neither h. Notwithstanding this syllable (...) or (...),
(or (...) as it is now most frequently and only yet falsely written) the accent
not tending to the vowel, is not cast away, nor the syllables contracted, as
being a thing of no great importance, if one syllable be more or less. This
maffiq or hirec is most frequently cast away and leaves the (...) as if it were
quiescent, as (...) heirs, for (...) lahi: (...) sicmah, for (...) sicmahi,
which is constantly in the affix (...) for (...). Observation. These three
sorts of permutation, mutation and contraction of syllables, or Alternation,
Alteration and Abjection do comprehend all that infinity of Rules, whereof a
man might easily collect above a thousand out of diverse (...). And yet the
whole sense of Scripture is not better or clearer, if ye know them, nor worse,
if ye know them not.

Rule 5. The Analogy of the vowels in Calde is not much different from Ebrue.

Qamez the long a. is 1. In the affix personal Noun of the second person. As
(...) osifca. 2. Before (...) and (...) and (...) ana I, (...) anakhna nos,
we. 3. Under the first radical in the Nounes. (...) qathel, killing (...)
qathil. killed, for it is a mere tale and fancy, to say, that the participle
peil under the first radical has no vowels but a sva. For the fashion of
writing in the Orient is, that in their Manuscripts they leave away for the
most part that vowel, which is so well known, that whither it be written or
not, no body does doubt of it. Therefore in the Syriac we have examples of the
vowel under the first radical. 4. Instead of a fatah, where the following
Letter (in place of a sva) does receive a vowel, as (...) aqim, instead of
(...) aqyim, etc.

Zere e^, 1. Under the second radical very constantly in all the orders,
especially in the fourth. As (...) abrek, to bow the knees. 2. In the plural
instatu constructo following or not following (...) paragogic (...) tren two,
Masc. and Neuter (...) tree and (...) tarve the same, (...) tarren duae, o, two,
feminine and Neuter. 3 Under the first radical in Nounes and Verbs, where the
second or third is cast away, As (...) em, a Mother. 4. A (...) quiescent
following without the plural, As (...) lelvan neights, 5. Instead of the segol
in the second plural of the pretertense in any orders, as in (...) Ithasten
instead of Ebrue (...) Ithasten, etc.

Hireq the long is for the most part, where yod quiescent is following. As
(...) obida, (...) osifka, (...) yyethib (...) yhosia (...) himsiv instead of
(...) himsu. etc.

Holem, for the most part where it is in Ebrue, especially when there follows a
vau quiescent. As (...) obida (...) mhuqzaot.

Surek is as in Ebrue (...) heeznikhu.

Patah is before (...) the Character of the feminine gender, as in Ebrue
constantly before the Nounes, and in some Verbes, As (...) azlat he went.
(...) helat he wearyed. (...) hoglat, it is cast out, (...) vashat, but these
3 by anomaly are written constantly with a long qamez, not fatah, as (...)
fiqdat, (...) lithsat. And good reason, because here the syllable at is short,
therefore a short vowel, but in Ebrue ordinarily the syllable is long, As (...)
lathsa, therefore a long vowel. And that this (...) is the true formative of
the third Feminine, and (...) only by accident, we may easily see by the
constancy of it in Syric, Arabic and Etiopic; item in Ebrue in the examples we
gave, and many other, when any Letter is joined to the end of that person
either paragogic superfluous, or formatiue: item from the second Feminine, when
(...) forms the Feminine constantly, as a (...) also (but of another Noune)
the second Masculine, item the first person fingular being of a common gender,
has a (...) both in Masculine and Feminine in all orders, in all dialects. 2.
Fatakh is under the second radical, as in Ebrue (...) etkhabbar. 3. under the
first radical in pael and etpael, or the second and fifth order in all tenses,
(...), etc.

Segol is almost in all places, as in Ebrue (...) heezinu they have heard: so
in Calde. (...) vheeznikhu Es. 16.9. they have cast far of. (...) elthas, (...)
etkhabbar, etc.

Hireq the short is unjustly come in under the first radical in the first
Preterrense, instead of qamez a by Ebrue, and Fatah a, by Arabic upon that
false principle, as if the first radical in the first pretertense had no
vowel, which I say is false: (...) from (...) instead of (...). Nor esteem I
the punctators of the Ebrue Bible, and consequently Daniel so very old, less
or far less the punctators of the Calde Targum, as they call it, it being
done, written and used after the Babylonian captivity, but points a long time
since Christ. 2. In many other places, as in Ebrue. Qomez the short, and Qubbuz
just as in Ebrue. (...) hoglat (...) mhuqzaot, etc.

Rule 6. The Anomaly of these pricks may in some measure (but not constantly)
be reduced to the Ebrue Anomaly

Because the punctation of the Targum is latter, and not done with such
accuratenes, nor by such learned Jews, less upon such principles as the Ebrue
for the generality is, hence is it, that the punctation is very anomalicall in
all places. Now these five Reasons by me given. 1. Not the same principles. 2.
Not the same learning. 3. Not the same accuratenesse 4. Not the same Authors
and. 5. Not the same time; thew well enough the Roo^e of that disagreeing of
the Ebrue and Calde punctation. And how greater that difference is, the easier
it has bin to persuade the common sort of learned men in this tongue, that
they are either two diverse tongues (for so many Authors do ignorantly speak)
or at least dialects of a great distance one from another; whereas it is
known, and clear, that Ebrue and this Calde was spoken in one and the same
Jury, nay City of Jerusalem, only the time differing, Ebrue before the
Babylonian captivity, Calde after it. And if a diversity of punctation makes a
diverse tongue or dialect, then am I sure, that Abraham de Balmes (a Jew
Grammarian,) who wrote an hundred years since in Italy, has a diverse
dialect, for if any would scanne that punctation of his Grammar, he would
neither find true Ebrue, nor true Calde. The same might we say of that late
Edition of Mis^ayot pointed by a Jew in the Low Countries and Pointed at
Amsterdam by R. Mnasse ben Yishrael Theresore I desire the Reader to believe
the pricks to be but mere fancies.

Rule 7. In Siriac, Arabic and Ettopic the ancmaly is no more to be regarded,
than in Ebrue and Calde.

To shorten all the long and tedious, (though unusefull) observations either of
mine, or all the rest of the Authors before me, seeing that the greatest part
of them are individual, and the same of them nothing worth at all, for the
Syriac Manuscripts that are at this day extant, are without prics, and stroacs,
and among the Arabic Books not one of a thousand is to be found pricked or
pointed, and in the Ettopic there are none found amongst us, except the New
Testament printed at Rome, and Psalms at Colen, and both of them fully to be
understood by letters out of the generality of this tongue, without the
observation of the standings or diverse vowels, I shall here shut up, that
which would otherwise scarce be comprehended in an hundred leaves, and yet do
nothing to the sense of the Text, and so consequently instead of the easing the
Reader, burden him excesfively.

Rule 8. All the Observations of the variety of the forms in the Syntax are
needless.

The forms are either in Nounes or Verbs, both are considered in the outward
form either as they stand a part without reference to the foregoing or
following word in the Text, or in reference to them, this the Grammarians call
Syntax, supposing the pricks to be of the nature of this tongue, (as if by them
only the sense were clear, without them impossible to be had) hence are all
books full of such like Observations, and Directions: all which (though in
number they cannot amount, to less then fifthy thousand) yet are superfluous,
the pricks being only brought in by some Jews, the names whereof are uncertain
to them and us, and they are given by them only to show us, what they thought
to be now and then in a Syntax; whereas we may see, (if we know the
significations of the words and phrases) the same thing without them, and that
they many times have mistaken, and from their mistakes arise many examples for
Anomaly, so that the diverse forms either in Nounes or Verbs in the Treasure of
the Ebrue Grammar, written by that excellently leatned and painful Grammarian
John Buxtorf are needless, also two Chapters of his Syntax, to wit, the
seventh and seventeenth are absolutely superfluous concerning the points or
pricks, which they call vowels.

Rule 9. Whatsoever Observations are or may be made upon the Bible, Calde,
Targum, Syric, Arabic, and Etiopic Authors only in reference to their pricks,
are of no use.

The Jews and Christian Authors have made upon the Bible an infinity of
observations, whereof that body of the Masoreticall notes is no small part of,
almost all which are to be rejected, as of no use. Hence also the very
concordances of D. John Buxtorf are of no more authority and use, (if the
eafinesse, truth, and nature of the tongue be only the maine scope and drift
of him,) than R Natans concordance, who follows without regard of prics the
order of the Ebrue Text without points.

Rule 10. The Accents not being of the nature of this tongue, are in Ftymology
and Analogy of no use.

To Analogy (or otherwise called Etymology) belongs the greatest part of Doctor
John Buxtorf his Observations in his Grammatical Treasure about them, by him
set down in Orthografy, which fault is also frequent by others. The substance
of whatsoever can be said of them concerning Analogy, is, that their place is
to be considered, and that not only in respect of the syllable either in the
last of a word, or one before the last, but also in words only of one
syllable; and there of the concurrence of two Accents. Therefore more
especially in reference to every Letter, at what Letter of two, three or four
in one syllable, to wit, that they do stand only at a Letter with one of the
prick vowels long or short, not at the Letter with a single or compound sva And
that every Accent may go to the following Letter. Or come back to the forgoing
Letter. Or be wholly cast away. Whereof maqqef is the sign nor the cause. or
understood to be absent in the first of two Nouns joint together in relation of
possession, not of appellation or apposition. And because the second radical
has before others the vowel, therefore the Accents do stand more regularly
and frequently at the second radical From whence it does remove to the first
radical, if the first radical only have the vowel. As (...) yoma day, the
first radicll y has the Accent, because the second radical vau is quiescent,
and has no vowel, nor has the third radical m any vowel; therefore only the
first having the vowel o, yo, has the Accent: so also in (...), Khet, Nerd,
Qost. Or if the third radical be cast away. As (...) Vaicall, (...) Vaizav
(...) Vattqas (...) Vayyitgal (...) vattitcas the accent in these is at the
first radical, k, z, q, g; and many and many hundred such like. Or where the
third radical has no vowel, and the second a short vowel, whereby the two
last radicals make up a short syllable. As (...) sefer, (...) melek, (...) erez
or (...) arez. To the third radical, if it does receive a vowel. As (...)
Sfarim by r. (...) malka by k (...) arazot, by z. To the serviie Praefix, when
the third being cast away, the first and second does make a short syllable: as
for instance. (...) vayyaan, by y, the Root being (...). To the service
suffix, if it do make a short syllable with the following servile: e. g. (...)
fqadtem, by t, the Root being fqd. And yet all these foregoing Rules are so
many times violated, or not observed by the Authors of them, that you will
find many sorts of Anomalicall places of them, where they are at the right
syllable, yet not at the right Letter, or at the false syllable, before or
after the right Letter and Syllable, whereof I have set down some Observations
in my Notes on P. Martinius Ebru Grammar Englished, Printed at Amsterdam twice,
both Anno 1645. and 1646. Item in my Latin Deline ation of the Ebrue Grammar
Printed at Amsterdam in 4o 1646. page 80.

Rule 11. The accents are supposed to join and disjoyne words for the making
up a true and right sense.

Before I have fully done about these accents, there is as yet one use of them
remaining to be handled, which is assigned unto them by all the Grammarians
that have written hitherto, to wit, that they have the power of a Syntacticall
combination of words, and disjunctions of them, that is, to show which words
are to be joined together to make up a plain sense such as is intended by the
Holy Ghost in every place, and in every verse of the Bible, whereon also for
the most part depends distinction of verses, which according to the best
observation of mine and others upon such a supposall (notwithstanding I am not
of the mind that it is truly in them, So that I do disclaim here what
formerly I have preceptically set down either in my English or Latin Books
concerning it, yet if some men will stand to it, be it right or wrong I will
shortly repeal it here) is as follows.

1. That they are the accidental sign of a Conjunction or disjunction of
words. 2 That they signify; first, a greater or fuller point; secondly, a
lesser point; thirdly, two little points; fourthly, a little point with a
Comma; fifthly, the stroke Comma; sixthly, yet they never show where there is an
exclamation or interogation, neither which words together belong to a comma,
comma with a point, two little points, the less and the greater or full point.
3. All this in a natural order, where a sense is full either of one word, or
of two joynd, or of three, whereof the two first or last be more nearly
joined, yet in respect to the third or fourth words, where also the two or
three former or latter more nearly to be joined with relation to the body of
fewer or of many more with none greater, or greater distinction; now by reason
these five degrees of distinctions which are in all manner of speech in any
tongue whatsoever used here in the occident and the North, though not in the
whole Orient. 4 The accents are of five degrees thus call d by the Grammarians.
1 One King, Silluq. 2 Dukes, Atnah, and compound merca. 3 Earls, zaqef,
sgolta, and tifha. 4 Lords, salselet, rbia single or compound with a silluq,
sasta, zarqa, tbir, a double merca, ytib, five Knights, fazr, qarnefarah, t
lisa geres. 5 These make up whole senses according to those five degrees of
senses. 6 The rest are called servants, because they only join words, two
three or four, to bring them to the following Knight, Lord, Earl, Duke or
King, to make up the full sense. 7 Every one of these according to his degree
makes a greater or lesser joynr, and has before him first a great
distinguisher: secondly, a lesser, (but Knights have none of both before them;)
thirdly, a joyner, each with his servants of a greater or lesser distinguisher
before him: and finally follows the fourth, the King. 8 Yet whereas in the
whole Bible there is almost one and the same order observed) three books, viz.
Job, the Proverbs, and the Psalms have no Earls, and do differ in some small
matter besides, as to the following fiame. 9 They are generally in the Bible
thus.

4. Kingssilluc, 3 joyner merca. 2 the lesser distinguisher tifha. 1 the
greater distinguisher zaqef.

4. Duke Atnah. 3 munah. 2 tifqa. 1 zahef or sgolta.

4. Earl, either the higher zaqef, sgolta, or the lower, tifqa. 3 munah or
merca. 2 fasta, zarca, tbir, 1 Rbia.

4. Lord, either the higher, salselet, rbia, or the lower, fastha zarca, tbir,
mercayim, ytib. 3 munah, mahfac, merca, darga. 2 (fsic) geres. 1 tlisa, fazr.

4. Knight, Fazr, qarnefara, tlisa, geres. 3 munch, yerah, qadma, tlisa, merca.
2 and 1 none.

10 But in the said three Books there is such an order as is in some sort
differing.

3. King, silluc, 2 munah, merca, 1 rbia compound with zaqef, or salselet.

3. Duke Higher, compound merca. 2 yrah, (zarqa) 1 rbia. 3. Duke Lower, atnah,
2 munah, merca (tifha) 1 rbia. 3 Lord Higher, rbia fingle or compound, salselet
2 merca, mahfac, munah. 1 none. 3 Lord Lower, zarca. 2 merca, munah. 1 fazr, or
the lower, tifha. 2 munah. 1 fazr.
3. Knights, Fazr. 2 Yerah. 1 none.

This is that feigned commonwealth which was set up by the Jews, which for the
matter I esteem to be against the fundamental laws of that tongue: and for
the manner this palpable vast difference is not only in three books by which
notwitstanding we may perceive one and the same spirit did not frame and order
all, but there are above ten thousand examples, where neither in the general,
nor in this particular agreement is kept: so that I utterly disclaim it from
being either natural, moral, political or juris divini. And so I conclude
the Etymology or Analogy.

FINIS.

