THE HUE and CRY OF CONSCIENCE AFTER Secure Sinners; OR THE ALARM of CONSCIENCE
In order to the Discovery of HIDDEN GUILT

The Heaven shall reveal his Iniquity, and the Earth shall rise up against him.

Job 20.27 Thou have set our Iniquities before thee, our secret Sins in the
light of thy Countenance

Psalm. 90.8. By JOHN RYTHER Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for John White, at the Three Bibles in the Minories,
1680.

TO THE Serious and Impartial READER.
THe present Day cannot but be looked upon to be an evil Day, (even by those
who have but their Eyes half opened.) That which makes a Day evil, is the Sin
of the Day; which brings on the dangers of the Day, and God's threatenings to
cause our Sun to go down at Noon, and to darken the earth in the clear Day. And
I will turn your Feasts into Mourning, and all your Songs into Lamentations;
and I will bring up Sackcloth upon all Loins, and Baldness upon every Head; and
I will make it as the mourning of an only Son, and the end thereof as a bitter
Day. Now when the evils of our Sins abound among us, and the evils of God's
Threatenings impend over us, it is a seasonable time to contribute to a check of
the one, and to a preventing of the other; which must be by some awakening, or
searching Calls and Cries to sleepy and drowzy Consciences, which is the sole
Design of this small Treatise.

Three sorts of Readers it is like to fall into the Hands of.

1. Of awakened or it may be startled Consciences, but half awakened. Or,

2. Into the hands of such who are sprinkled from an evil Conscience. Or,

3. Into the hands of such whose Consciences are seared.

Now for the first of these, I would offer some things to serious
Consideration. 1. Whatever thou find'st here to concern thee, do not put it
off: Know, is a renewed Call of God to thee, and say, as in that case, Lo this
we have fearched, Job 5.27.
so it is, hear it, and know it for thy good: [Or as it is in the Hebrew] for
thy self. Know it to a practical and profitable improvement of it. Do thou
know what thou may find in following the Search? Had not thou better search
Truth, to set thee upon a diligent search for Guilt, that has laid long hid,
than let God find it out to thy shame, sorrow, and confusion of Face? O, be not
thou troubled that thy Conscience is startled, and begins to fly in thy Face!
Know now, it is a Call of Christ, Ephesians 5.14.
saying, Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the Dead, and Christ shall
give thee Light. Little do Sinners know the danger of putting off Christ's
renewed Calls.

2. Carry what concerns thee in this Treatise, to God in Prayer: Conviction
looks well, when it puts upon Supplication. O, this is the great Reason, why so
many awakenings by the Ministry of the Word, or by Providential Dispensations,
die and come to nothing, because they are not prayed over. O, how hard is it to
bring guilty obstinate Sinners upon their Knees! We find when Ephraim bemoaned
himself, and lay under Conviction, he then presently fell on praying: Jer.
31.18.
Turn thou me, and I shall be turned; for thou art the Lord, my God. O Sinners!
know that such Convictions as are not attended with Prayer, will but prove
aggravations of your Sin and Guilt another day. As soon as ever God had wrought
thoroughly upon Paul, it was said Behold, he prays. Prayer is the first breath
of the new Creature.

3. What concerns thee here, consider it well, weigh it in the balance of the
Sanctuary, prove whether it be according to the standard of the Sanctuary. Poor
Souls hear much, and it may be read much, but this marrs all, they consider
little: Now it is the considerate Reader that is the profitable Reader.
Consider what thou read, 2 Timothy 2.7.
and the Lord give thee understanding.

1. Consider the Word thou hear, and thou read, shall judge thee at the
last Day: All thou have heard, all thou have read, shall come in as witness
against thee; And can thou stand before such a Testimony?

2. Consider thy own Conscience in that Day will be a thousand witnesses: And
can thou then lift up thy Head when the Books shall be opened, Rev. 20.12.
and amongst the rest, this sealed Book of thy own guilty Conscience? where thy
Iniquity that has been sewed up, shall be brought to light; Job 14.1.
and thy Transgression that has been sealed up in a Bag, shall be openly
detected and discovered.

3. Consider the Day is bastening upon thee, that the iniquities of thy heels
shall compass thee about. Psalm. 19.5.
O how will thou, poor Sinner, be entangled and perplexed with thy Sin and
Guilt! Some understand by Heel, the last part of a Man's life toward his Death;
And does not such a day hasten upon you? O what work will Guilt make in the
Conscience in a day of Distress! consider by Joseph's Brethren.

4. Consider how thy Conscience consents as thou read. Is not this true,
says Conscience? Have not thou found and felt it so, says Conscience? Is not
thy Conscience put to silence as thou read? Consider that the Truths are
commended to thy Conscience.

5. Consider how sad it would be for all thy awakenings, all thy touches, all
thy impressions, all thy Convictions to be lost at last. O Sinners, how will
such be condemned out of their own Mouths! Can these be lost, and your Souls
saved? of all your losses you may reckon these among your grea est losses.

4. What concerns thee here, remark, and remember; you may read much, and
remark little, and this marrs all you read: this remarking is Conscience taking
Notes, and making Animadversions upon Truths. You do not bring your Consciences
to read Books: say as you read, O my Conscience, mark this! this nearly
concerns thee! You know Men mark and observe what concerns them.

The second sort of Readers this little Tract may fall into their Hands, are
such who are sprinkled from an evil Conscience, upon whose Door-posts the Blood
of the Paschal Lamb is sprinkled; who with Paul, daily exercise themselves in
all good Conscience, both toward God and Man.

1. O do you read, and bless God that you have to all Chalenges and Questions,
the answer of a good Conscience; that you can silence all your Objections and
Accusations by Faith in the Blood of Christ; and can sing that triumphant Song
even in your Militant State, Romans 8.33.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect? etc. Can every one say
so? can every Professon say so? can every Child of God say so? Are there not
many that have been a long time learning to sing this Song, and have not learnt
it to this day?

2. Let this be your care to preserve the tenderness of your Consciences. You
may by guilt (Sirs) benum your Consciences, as you find by what you here read:
A smiting checking Conscience is a very great Mercy, tho little prized, or
esteemed by the most.

3. Remember how bitter Sin was to you, before you came to know what peace of
Conscience meant, how many a bitter Tear it fetched from your Eyes? how many
deep and bitter sighs from your Hearts? yea, even to the breaking of your
Loins? O what Gall and Wormwood was it to your Souls! How often did you say,
will it not be bitterness in the latter end? How often did you take up that
Language to your own Souls, This is thy way and thy doings? because it is
bitter, it reaches to thy Heart, etc. But yet as you read, do you remember how
sweetly all this ended, in God's speaking peace to your Souls, and you no more
turning to Folly.

4. Tremble to think of losing the Peace that God has spoken to your
Consciences, under sense of Guilt, when you meet with that guilt which concerns
you. O, let the loss of your peace be like Hell to your Souls! O, blot not that
Pardon your Redeemer has written so legibly in his own Blood! Blurring off
your Pardon may cost you dear.

5. Be afraid of the least Guilt, the least Sin, because it is Sin. When Satan
cannot prevail with you to venture upon greater Sins, then he will tempt to
lesser Sins: But know you not that the least Sin is Soul. defiling, yea, the
least Sin is Soul damning, unless the Blood of Christ sprinkle your
Consciences? How have many Souls groaned under the guilt of such Sins for many
Years, when God has set them home upon your Consciences?

The third sort of Readers, into whose hands this little piece may fall, are
such whose Consciences are seared (such the Apostle mentions) these are in
sensible, 1 Timothy 4.2.
Truths make no impression upon them, Ephesians. 4.19.
they are be nummed: The Apostle expresses it, by being past feeling. And when
they are arrived at such an height of Sin, what do such do? The Text tells you,
They commit all Uncleanness with greediness. Now to such I would say,

1. The day is coming, thy seared and insensible Conscience shall condemn, and
rise up in judgment against thee. And, O, then who can stand before the witness
of an awakned Conscience! You may as well think to dwell with everlasting
Burnings, and tormenting Flames, as avoid or evade the Testimony of a tormented
and awakened Conscience. Nay, know that sometimes this Hell has begun here.
Will not Cain tell you, while he cries out, My punishment is greater than I can
bear, No torment like the torment of a guilty Conscience? Nay, ask Adam, and he
will tell you when he was afraid, and hid himself from the presence of God. O,
Guilt, you know, cannot endure the presence of the Judge. O, does not Pashur's
case speak forth this truth! What a terror to himself was he? Did not Judas
preach this Doctrine when he cried out, I have finned in betraying innocent
Blood. Nero, that Monster, when he had killed his Mother Agrippina, and his
Wife, and set Rome on fire; after all this Guilt, at last felt an Hell in his
Conscience, and could not rest Day nor Night; so that when he died, he cried
out, his Mother, Wife, and Father, all willed him to die. Richard the 3d, O
what a guilty tormenting Conscience had he after the Murder of his Nephews in
the Tower? and the Night before he was slain at Bosworth, he dreamed he thought
all the Devils in Hell were halling him in most hideous and ugly Shapes. What
says Judge Morgan to this case, after he had unrighteously passed Sentence upon
the Lady Jane, afterward feeling an Hell in his Conscience, cried out, O, take
away the Lady Jane, take away the Lady Jane! Which made one say, The Guilt
which from unseen Pollution springs,
Pale sweating Horror in the Bosom brings.


2. What tho your Consciences, be seared upon the account of your Guilt being
undiscovered; Yet know, God many times has found out Guilt, in an
extraordinary way. Providence treads not always the same Paths in discovering
hidden Guilt, Eccles. 10. ult.
he can cause a Bird of the Air to carry the Voice, and that which has Wings
to tell the matter. He can reveal In quity from Heaven. The Heavens shall
reveal his Iniquity, Job 20.7.
and the Earth shall rise up against him. One of our Lord St. John.
Judges riding his Circuit of late Years, met with this Passage: One being
Murdered, and the Murderer not being discovered, the Murderer being brought to
the dead Corpse, the Corpse opened his Eyes at the Murderer, and fell into a
Sweat. This the Judge related to a godly Minister then living. History is full
of such Providential bringing hidden Guilt to light.

3. Know, poor Sinners, while your Consciences are seared, you are Satan's
marked Slaves. In Ancient Times they used to mark their Slaves; and the Holy
Ghost alludes to it, when we read of the Mark of the Beast in the Forehead, or
in the Hand. This Searing-Iron puts Satan's Brand upon you, you are his. And, O
poor Sinners, did you but, as you read this, believe it, what restless Days
and Nights would you have, until you had some hopes of your escape from this
House of Bondage? Can you be content to live and die in the Devil's Drudgery?
Can you be content to be his bored and marked Slaves, his Servants for ever?
Then you must have the Wages of such Servants, and such a Service. The Wages of
Sin is Death. Death Spiritual, Death Eternal.

4. Know, poor Sinners, there is not so much as one seared Conscience in Hell;
they are sadly awakened that are awakened with Hells flames about their Ears.
If you could hear the Cries and Shrieks of tormented Souls, you would say Hell
is full of sense of Guilt. But alas, now it is too late, then Repentance is too
late. They are all saying, This and this has their own Ways and Doings
procured unto them. O, it is bitter! O, it reaches to their Heart! But, O
Sinners, this should have been sooner!

5. Know, poor Sinners, what you read here, if you go on in Sin, you will feel
another day for an aggravation of Sin, yea, and Condemnation too. What, read
what may prevent your Ruin, and yet run on! What, split your Souls upon these
Rocks and Sands, you saw such Seamarks before to keep you off? O, is not this
to be wilful in your Perdition? Is not this to run headlong to Destruction? O
Sinners, hear God calling out of Heaven to you by his Servants Preaching to
you, Printing for you, why will you die? why will you perish? why will you run
on in Sin, when you know that when Lust has conceived, it brings forth Sin,
Jam. 1.15.
and Sin when it is finished, brings forth Death. O then, poor Soul, Read,
and Hear, and Pray, that thou may prosit by all, bless God for all, and
bring forth the Fruits of all.

Thus prays thy Servant for thy Soul, J. R.

Genesis 42.21. And they said one unto another, Verily we are guilty concerning
our Brother, in that we saw the anguish of his Soul, when he besought us, and
we would not hear: therefore this distress is come upon us.


THe Text refers to the Tragical story of Joseph's sale by his Brethren. The
occasion of which severity toward him, you have mentioned, (viz.) Their envy
to him upon the account of the Dream he had of his Advancement and Preferment
above them. And likewise their way they took to prevent the accomplishment of
his Dream, (viz.) Their selling of him, tho this was the way to bring it to
pass: Therefore (says he) it was not you, but God that sent me hither. -- It is
to be observed, that the Ways and Methods God takes many times to bring to pass
his Designs, are strange and improbable to us. This was a most unlikely way in
an Eye of Reason to Joseph's advancement, yet it was God's way.

When Joseph was advanced, the Lord brings a Famine upon Canaan, the Land of
his Father and Brethren, and they came now down to Egypt to buy Corn; and
little did they know it was their sold Brother Joseph that they bowed to for
Bread, according to his Dream, in the bowing of the Sheaves. God now brings
Affliction upon them, and Joseph he deals roughly with them, by way of
Probation and Temptation, and now they find themselves bryer'd, and plunged
into a pit of Distress. They all jointly reflect upon themselves, to search and
make a discovery of the Matter, as the Text tells us.

In which we have 1. Their Reflection.

2. We have the Occasion of it.

1. We have their Self-Reflection and Accusation: And they said one to another,
We are verily guilty, etc. (As one says well upon it). We have here the force
of Conscience, and the fruits of Affliction. Conscience calling old Sins to a
new Reckoning; faithful in Recording, and fearful in Accusing.

2. We have the occasion of it. Joseph handling them severely, and putting them
in Ward three days, and binding them to the terms of bringing down their
younger Brother: which they knew were hard Terms, because their Father's Life
was bound up in him.

3. We have farther in the Text, their Justification of God in all this:
Therefore this Distress is come upon us. -- O now the Lord has found us out,
and is reckoning with us for our guilt, and all his Procedures with us are very
Righteous, in what he suffers to come upon us.

The Reflection is that part of the Text, I principally aim at.

I. We have the Reflection it self: In that we saw the Anguish of his Soul,
when he besought us. O now Conscience is busy and active! O now their Guilt
lies uppermost, and they presently reflect upon it. -- As if they should say, O
what hard Hearts had we to him in his distress! O what bloody cruel Brethren
were we to him! What Wretches were we to sin against the Law of Nature, against
the Law of God, against our own Consciences! Here is an Asseveration in the
Accusation, Verily we are guilty; and it has a Verily written upon the head of
it. They no ways hesitate, or doubt in the leaft about it.

2. Here is in the Reflection, or Accusation, the aggravation of their Guilt.
1. In that it was to their own Brother; and now this they reflect upon. -- We
are guilty concerning our Brother. It was their own Brother, and so a piece of
Unnatural Guilt for one Brother to do thus by another. It is not only Guilt,
but circumstances of Guilt, that will fly in the faces of our Consciences in a
day of Distress.

II. Aggravation in it was, that their Eyes did not affect their hearts. We saw
the anguish of his Soul. O! now it rises in their Consciences.

3. Aggravation of Guilt in their Reflection: He besought us. His cries and
prayers should have pitied and melted their Hearts.

4. Aggravation, We would not hear. They turned a deaf Ear to their Brother's
cries. O! now all this comes fresh to their Minds, in the day of their Distress.

5. Aggravation. It was a deliberate consulted Case. Come let us kill him. It
was an advised Act.

III. As we have the Reflection it self, and the Aggravations of it; So also we
have observable, that it was by joint consent. This Reflecting, it was not one
or two of them, but They said one unto another. It was a joint confession
(Nemine contradicente) they differed not in the case, their Sentiments were the
same; therefore they jointly conclude, that they were all Guilty concerning
their Brother.

IV. The occasion of this joint Reflection, and Accusation, was their distress;
Therefore is this distress come upon us.

The whole of the Text resolves into these two Practical Truths.

First, That Guilt will walk in Sinners Consciences a great while after the
Fact committed.

Secondly, That in a Day of Affliction, Conscience is often quick and active in
its Reflections. Thus it was with them; Therefore is this Distress come upon us.

1. Guilt will walk in the Consciences of Sinners a great while after the Fact
committed.

This is plain from the Text. Joseph had been a great while sold by his
Brethren. Joseph did certainly spend many Years in Potiphar's House. Some say
ten Years, some say eleven Years, before he was cast into Prison. It is true,
it is said ( Chap. 39.7.) after these things, his Master's Wife cast her Eyes
upon Joseph. -- (It is thought by some Expositors, it is a mistake to read it)
After these things. The Latin Translation reads it, After many days. It must
be reckoned thus, He was 17 years of Age when he was sold, Genesis 37.2. And, He
was 30 years of Age when he expounded Pharaoh 's Dream, and was delivered by
him. So that that time was 13 Years [or 14, as you reckon the 17th Year when he
was sold either begun or ended] Genesis 41.46. During which time it is supposed he
spent 10 or 11 in the House of Potiphar, and 3 in the Prison. Now to these 13
Years, from the time of his Sale, to the time of his Advancement by Pharaoh,
you must add the 7 Years of Plenty that was in the Land of Egypt before the
Famine began, (the time when his Brethren came to him for Corn, and when he
dealt thus with them, (as in the Story) and this distress was upon them,
mentioned in the Text.) So that the whole, from the Sale to this time, was 20,
or 21 As Dr. Lightfoot, and others,
Years, (if you reckon the 17th Year of his Age but to be begun when he was
Sold, and the time of this their Distress, to be the first year of the Famine)
and 22, As Mr. Buroughs and others.
if the first year of Famine was expired (as some think) so that it was now 20
Years at the least, or 22 at the most, that this Guilt had slept in their
Consciences, and now God awakens it.

Guilt now rises and walks in their Consciences after so many Years being
forgotten. As we say of Murder, It will out; so we may say of other Sins, They
will out. That is a great Text: When the two Tribes and an half were to take up
their Habitations on the other side Jordan: Moses preaches a very home Sermen
to them, counselling them so and so, and concludes: But if you will not do so,
Numb. 32.23.
behold, you have sinned against the Lord; and be sure your Sin will find you
out. A Metaphor (Expositors say) taken from a Blood-hound, that follows the
Thief by scent, and discovers him. Ah, Sinners, Guilt is a Blood-hound that
will pursue you, and in time make a discovery of your Sins. Psalm. 40.12.
Mine iniquities (says David) take hold upon me, that I cannot look up; as a
Blood-hound lays hold upon the Thief, which has stolen the Goods, or as an Hue
and Cry follows the Malefactor, and apprehends him, upon which he confesses the
Fact. It was said to Gain, If thou do well, shall not thou be accepted? But
if thou do ill, Sin lies at thy Door; -- Lurks as a Blood-hound, ready to
fly upon the guilty Thief, as soon as he appears; and many times it lies there
a long time together. Guilt lay at David's Door three quarters of a Year.
Considering David was a good Man, considering his Fact to be so deliberate as
it was, it was a long time for such an heinous piece of Guilt to sleep in his
Conscience, whose Heart was once so tender, that it smote him for the cutting
off of Readiness Garment, his implacable Enemy. Conscience may reckon with poor
Souls after a long time: Christ may reckon with Souls many Years after. It is
said, After a long time, Mat. 25.19.
the Lord of the Servants reckoned with them. Long forbearance; as we say, is
no forgiveness.

So Conscience may reckon with a Sinner, and God may reckon with a Sinner after
a long time. It is true, God may keep silence, but yet (says he) I will reprove
thee, and set thy sins in order before thee. Psalm. 50.21.
(viz.) Thy Guilt shall come out, I will discover all.

But before we proceed further, I shall premise these things:

1. Guilt may be hid from the World a long time, it may lie incognito a long
time; the shame of many a Persons nakedness may not appear for many a Year. Who
can accuse them? Many Murders have lain hid a long time together, that God has
brought to light afterward. Hidden works of Darkness have been concealed long,
as here Guilt for many years lay dormant. It is said at Paris, There was a
young Woman Brained with a Hammer: A Smith from whom the Hammer was stolen was
suspected, and tortured till he was Lame. But twenty Years after the Murderer
was Arraigned, and Condemned for another Offense, and confessed this Murder.
Twenty years Guilt was here hid. Many Instances might be given in our own
Country, but I forbear.

2. Guilt may be hid from Conscience a long time. Conscience may be silent,
stupid, and insensible a great while together. So was David: So were these
Brethren of Joseph's, several Years. This is evident, until either God by his
Word, or Rod, awaken Conscience, and then it preaches cuttingly to the Soul of
a guilty Sinner: Did not thou play the Wretch at such a time? and was Drunk
at such a time? And did not thou commit Filthiness at such a time? O!
Conscience is a most faithful Recorder. Thy Sins may lie and lurk a great while
in secret, yet they will speak out one Day.

3. Some Men's Sins are not discovered, until the Revelation of the Great Day: 1 Timothy 5.24.
Some Men's Sins go before hand to Judgment, and some follow after. The
Hypocrisy of the foolish Virgins was not discovered until Christ came. 1 Cor. 4
5.
We read of the hidden things of Darkness, then being made manifest: Then are
the secrets of Hearts judged. Romans 2.16.


4. God, when he has a design of Pardoning-Grace and Mercy upon a poor guilty
Sinner, he will discover his Guilt. 1. Sometimes to the World to shame him, in
order to humble him. And O poor Sinner! had not thou better be shamed here in
order to be humbled, than damned hereafter. Ah! many Sinners had gone on in Sin
to the far end, (it may be as far as Hell) if God had not found them out and
shamed them. 2. He always when he has a design of Pardoning-Grace and Mercy,
discovers hidden Guilt to the Soul it self; he searches for it, and finds it
out: For the Lord sets before us even our secret sins. Thus now he set the
Consciences of Joseph's Brethren at work.

Now our Work will be to enquire into the grounds to evince this truth: That
Sin and Guilt often walk in the Consciences of Sinners, long after the Fact is
committed. 2 Rim. 4.2.
1. Because when the Fact is committed, the Conscience is seared. We read of
seared Consciences, a Metaphor taken from that part which is Cauterized by an
hot Iron, and so made brawny and insensible. Alas poor Sinner! it may be
Satan's Searing-Iron has cauterized thy Conscience, Ephesians. 4.16.
that at present it is past feeling (as we read of some) and then the Sinner
goes on merrily; questions nothing, all is well with him, he is fast sleep,
like Jonah, with all ^s Guilt upon him. But now ^^e Day comes, that God has
design of Grace, it may be upon him, or however a design of Glorifying himself;
and now he finds out a way ^ awaken Conscience, to set ^^s Guilt before it: I
will set by Sins in order before thee. Psalm. 50.21.
and now the Conscience be^ins to be tender, and relent, and confess Sin, and
say as they in the Text: Verily, we are guilty concerning our Brother. O! now
Sin begins to heigh heavy upon the Soul, and the Sinner begins to be restless,
being pricked in the seart. Now being pricked in the Conscience, O! how it ^leeds!

2. Reason is, Because when the Sin was committed, was in hot Blood (as we say
O! many a poor Soul commits that in hot Blood, (...) repents of in cold. By
h^ Blood (I mean) an Hurry and heat of Temptation, ^ in the hot blood of
Passion. Is not this hot Blood? In t^^ hot blood of Lust? Is n^^ this hot
Blood? O! wh^^ hot Blood was David in, whe^^ he in Anger boiled so again Nabal!
And what hot Blood was he in, when he boyle^ so in Lust against Bathsheha But
when in cold Blood, h^^ was another manner of Man Men in cold Blood are
confederate, composed, and cal^ in Spirits and Thoughts. Now the Guilty Sinner
take himself to his second thought and, upon a review of the Fact; O then Sin
begins (...) appear in its proper co^^urs, and, as in Paul's phrase, Romans 7.9.
Revives, has a Resurrection in the guilty Man's Consence. And now as [a
pectrum] it appears and ^alks, and haunts the Sinner ^^at he cannot be quiet
Night or Day. It is with Sinners (...) this respect, as it is with a ^an in a
Fight, that gets a ^ot, but, being warm, at pre^nt feels it not; but afterward
the loss of Blood causes ^^m to faint. Persons engaged in their Temptations, do
^^t feel the fiery Darts, that ^atan shoots at them. O! but in cold Blood, how
do ^^ey cry out! When they ^ome to a feeling of themselves, what they have done
against God, and against their own Souls. Remember Si^ners, what you commit
(...) your hot Blood, you will (...) pent in your cold; and it w^^ walk in your
Consciences afterward: Prove. 28.23.
He that rebukes Man, afterward shall f^^ favor, more than he that flatereth
with his Tongue (say Solomon) viz. When a Man is in cold Blood, composed (...)
his Spirit, then he cousider this friendly rebuke was (...) Love.

3. Reason, Why Guilt often walks in the Conscience after the Fact is
committed, is, Because the custom of Sin takes away the conscience of Sin.
Custom in Sin is a very hardni^^ thing, when Sinners have gotten habits of Sin;
one (...) being Drunk, another of being Unclean, another of being Proud; now
all sense of Sin is lost. Jer. 13.23.
Can the Ethiopian change his Skin, or the Leopard his Spots? No more can they
that are accustomed to do evil, do good. O! but now when the Lord musters up
the Sins of a poor guilty Wretch, in order to bring him to Repentance, then the
Lord makes this Sin walk in his Conscience, and the other Sin is brought to
remembrance. O! now the Soul cries out, Men and Brethren, what shall I do? My
Sin is ever before me. O how was David haunted with his guilt! How did it now
walk in his Conscience!

4. Reason, Sinners are ignorant of the sad effects and consequences of Sin,
until afterward. Alas, many times Sinners know not what they do when they
commit Sin. 1. They know not what they do in sinning against God. David in his
heat of Temptation did not consider it, until afterward (...) then he cried
out, Psalm. 50.4.
Against thee, against thee only have (...) sinned. The Prodigal did no^ know
what he did, in the going from his Father; but afterward how did he cry out,
Luke 14.21.
I have sinned against Heaven, and in thy sight. Now Guilt did walk in his
Conscience. Now Sinners cry out with them in the Prophet, Isa. 59.12.
For our Transgressions are multiplied before thee, and our Sins testify
against us, for our Transgressions are with us (...) and as for our Iniquities
we know them. 2. Now the Eyes of the Sinner being opened, he sees the sad
consequences of Sin, that he has sinned against his own Soul. Pro. 8.36.
He that sins, wrongeth his own Soul. O now, what work is there in the
Conscience, when the poor Guilty Sinner sees how he has wronged his own Soul?
yea, without Mercy from God, undone it for ever? nay, without Repentance, thou
have not only wronged thy own Soul, but damned thy own Soul. O now the Sinner
sees the reward and wages of Sin is Death. The first Death, and the second
Death, Temporal Death, and Eternal Death; and now it begins to appear in its
proper Colors; but alas this is not until afterward.

5. Sin walks after the Fact committed, because the aggravations of Sin
ordinarily do not appear until afterward. That which makes Sin stand up in the
Conscience of a Sinner, is the aggravation of Sin, which is laid before it
usually by Reflecting Acts; therefore the work of Repentance is set forth, by
these Reflecting Acts: O, says the penitent Sinner, Jer. 8.6.
What have I done? Alas! a Sinner in an hour of Temptation, does not take time
to deliberate upon it, to look into the Aggravations of it; but all these come
in as After-claps: These are Conscience's After-claps. Oh! what aggravations
undoubtedly did appear in this case of their Guilt against their Brother
Joseph! 1. They speak like Persons aggravating their Guilt. O now they cry out,
Genesis 37.26, 27.
We are verily guilty concerning our Brother! O now they see the aggravation of
their Sin against their Brother, against the Law of Relation. To make a Slave
of a Stranger, had been a great Sin; but to make a Slave of a Brother, this was
an higher aggravation, and we find this consideration startled Judah, Let not
our hand be upon him, for he is our Brother. This was a sin against the Law of
Nature, and the Law of Relation, as well as the Law of Religion. 2. They have
this aggravation of the matter of Fact, it was committed against Warning. Thus
you see Reuben rubs them with it in their distress: Genesis 42.22.
Spoke I not unto you, saying, do not sin against the Child, and you would not
hear? therefore, behold, his Blood is required. O now (all comes out, as we
say) to sin against Warning, is a great aggravation: O now, says the guilty
Conscience once awakened, how fairly were thou warned! nay, how frequently were
thou warned! O says Conscience, did not I speak to thee, and tell thee
solemnly, thou should answer for it, and God would require it? 3. There was
this aggravation in it, there was Theft, yea, the highest Theft in it; it was
Man-stealing, (as Joseph says himself) I was stolen away out of the Land of the
Hebrews. Genesis 40.15.
Now this kind of Theft was punishable by death. Exodus 21.16.
He that steals a Man and sells him, shall surely be put to death. And, O
then what an aggravation of Sin was this, to sell their own Brother! 4. There
was this aggravation of Guilt stood up in their Consciences, it was a
deliberate Act, (as was hinted before) an Act of Counsel and Conspiracy (the
Text is express in it) And when they saw him afar off, Genesis 37.18.
even before he came near them, they conspired against him to slay him. And as
they joined in their Conspiracy, now upon guilt walking in their Consciences,
they in my Text, join in their Consession. O! so it is with Sinners, when Sin
is laid home to the charge of Conscience. O, but was it not a plotted piece of
Guilt, a contrived piece of Guilt, a deliberate Act? David tells us, he said,
He would confess his Sin, and God forgave the Iniquity of his Sin. Psalm. 32.5.
(viz.) The deliberateness of it; it may be he points at that particular
aggravation. 5. Aggravation that stood up in the Consciences of Joseph's
Brethren, was their hiding of it; and this put them upon dreadful Lying and
Dissembling with their Father. Genesis 37.30.
And we will say, Some evil Beast has devoured him. This have we found, know
whether it be thy Son's Goat or no. O what dreadful work was here! This is the
fruit of Sin, to cover and hide all with Lies to their own Father. 6.
Aggravation was there Cruelty, and Hard-heartedness. The Text tells you, They
would not hear when he besought them. And now this cuts them to the Heart. So
will Conscience one day, say to the guilty Sinner: O! did not I beseech thee to
hearken to me! Did not I beseech thee not to do this abominable thing which God
hates! Did not I tell thee the sad effects of it, but thou would not hear. 7.
Aggravation, it was their envy to their Brother. They hated him because of his
Dream, of their Sheaves bowing to his; and now they see the fruit of this their
Envy. O now, when the aggravations of Sin are set home by God upon the
Conscience, O then Sin appears (as the Apostle phrases it) to be exceeding
sinful. Sin appears as a walking Ghost, or Spectrum, that haunts the Soul.

Now I shall proceed to the improvement of this Practical Truth. Then, 1. It
affords us this Instruction, that Sin leaves its sting behind it. It may be the
sting of Sin does not appear at first: It may seem to the Sinner to be an
harmless thing, but it always leaves some thing behind it, that will torment
the Soul at one time or another; and this (Sinners) is a thing called Guilt.
There is a Worm that is bred by Sin; and this is a guilty Conscience. And the
Worm, O how terribly does it gnaw! No Torment like the gnawing of a guilty
Conscience; it is no less than an Hell on Earth; it is to be in Hell's flames
beforehand. If you could ask Cain, he would tell you what a Torment an
awakened guilty Conscience is. If you could ask Joseph's Brethren, they would
tell you. If you could ask Francis Spira, he would tell you. If you could ask
Judas, he would tell you, whether Sin after its commission, does not leave a
sting behind it. Nay, to come down to your latter Times, ask Butler, the
penitent Murderer. Nay, ask Savage, and they will tell you, that Guilt walks in
the Conscience afterward. O how has this sting of Guilt made many poor Souls
cry out, and roar again. We all mourn like Doves, and roar all like Bears: What
was the matter? Isa. 59.72.
Their iniquities testified against them. O what despair it has brought many
into! Therefore it was good Counsel of the Philosopher, Look not upon Pleasure
coming, but going. And as he said, when asked, so much for lying with a famous
Harlot: I will not buy Repentance at so dear a Rate. O! Will! not such
Philosophers shame thousands of Christians? O! What a dear bargain will your
pleasurable or profitable Lusts be to you, either here or hereafter?

2. Learn we hence, that though Conscience be dumb and silent now, yet it will
not always be so. It may be thy silent Conscience is a seared Conscience, but
the day may come, as silent as it is now, it will open at thee; though it now
be a sleeping Lion, yet it may be a Roaring Lion. Joseph's Brethren had their
Consciences silent many Years, twenty Years together, but now it speaks to
them, and charges their guilt home upon them; and they could not stand before
the Charge and Indictment, but plead Guilty. David's Conscience was strangely
benumbed for three quarters of a Year together; as you have heard: But when it
was awakened, O how it roared upon him! Psalm. 38.8.
I am feeble and sore broken, I have roared by reason of the disquietness of
mine heart.

3. Learn we hence that the worst is not past, because Sin at present is not
discovered. Many poor Sinners think, O! their guilt is so secret and concealed,
that the World knows not of it; their Christian Acquaintance know not of it;
their near and dear Relations know not of it; by this they flatter themselves,
and think the worst is past. O poor Sinners! consider with your selves, God
knows of it, and Conscience knows of it, and it will and must come out sooner
or later: O then the worst is to come, when Sin shall either be charged upon
you by an awakened Conscience, or by a Revenging God. Ezekiel. 22.14.
Ah Sinners! What Hearts can endure, or what Hands can be made strong in the
day the Lord shall deal with you.

4. Learn hence, God is not only an Holy God, but an Omniscient God; he is
Holy, and by no means will he clear the Guilty. This is a piece of his Name:
But he is also an Omniscient God, knows where all the Sinners secret Guilt
lies: Psalm. 90.8.
Our secret Sins are set before the Light of his Countenance. The Lord saw all
this secret Guilt of Joseph's Brethren; it was (as is said) laid up with him,
Deuteronomy. 32.33.
and hid amongst his Treasures. What, poor Sinners! though your Relations see
it not, nor the World see it not, yet God sees it, Conscience sees it; you can
do nothing out of the sight of Conscience.

5. Learn we hence the reason of that sorrow that many times follows Sin, so
that the Sinner knows not where to rest. Thus Butler, the penitent Murderer.
Thus poor Savage, whose Case was the greatest Sermon ever preached at
Ratcliff-Gross. The reason of this Sorrow is the guilt that sticks in the
Conscience; this fills the Soul with Horror and Sorrow. O now the Soul becomes
a terror to itself, and it may be a terror to all that are round about him.
When you are tempted to Sin, O that you did but think this Sin will end in
sorrow! Will it not be bitterness in the latter end? O how would this tend to
the breaking of the power of a Temptation!

The 2d. Improvement of the Truth, is by way of Caution. If Sin leave Guilt
behind, O then take heed of Sin! Then poor Sinners, this may well be a Sermon
to you against Sin. O then, 1. Take heed of Sins that make deep Wounds in the
Conscience, such Sins as do (Vastare Conscientiam) make havoc of Conscience,
sins against Light, against the Light of Nature; as thy own Conscience will
accuse thee of, if thou did not sit under the Light of the Gospel. Joseph's
Brethrens was such a Sin; David's was such a Sin: And, O how did it therefore
break his Bones! What are your secret Drunkennesses, Uncleanness, your secret
Night-haunts, will they not all come out one day, and be brought to light? Are
they not sins against Light? Yea, against the Light of Nature? Could you sin
without control of Conscience, if you^ did not put your Finger in the Eye of
Nature?

2. Take heed then of secret Sins also, be they never so hidden, they will walk
in your Consciences another day. Take heed of the works of Darkness, they will
come to light. Did Joseph's Brethren think when they sold their Brother, it
would have come out thus? Let not Satan, and your own Hearts flatter you, to
think your sins will always be hid, because at present they are so.

3. Take heed of being hardened in sins. Because God seems by his Providence to
^ink at it: Many do so. Psalm. 50.22.
Because (says God) I kept si^nce, thou thoughtst I was altogether like thy
self. Like ^^nose, Eccles. 8.11.
that Because Sentence ^^as not speedily executed, their ^^^rts were fully set
in them to (...). Whereas they should ^nake this use of it: God's for^^earance
is to be the space of ^^ny Repentance.

4. Take heed of flattering your selves, that your Sins will never come out
all, because they have been a long time hid. You see to the contrary: Many have
come at last to condign Punishment for long hidden and concealed Iniquities. It
may be, Sinner, God's time is not yet come, to make a discovery of thy
Wickedness. It may be thou art not ripe enough in Sin. It may be the Lo^^^ is
all this while letting the^ alone to fill up thy Measure It may be thy impunity
from Temporal Judgments, is th^^ Spiritual Judgment. God i^^ his wrath
threatens some, The he will not punish their (...) and Daughters, Hos. 4.14.
when they com^^ mit Adultery. Sinners, you^ think it a brave thing for God to
let you alone in you^ Sin, and spare you: And alas all this he may do in the
hottest Wrath and Displeasure.

5. Take heed of sinful excusing and covering your Sin^^ He that covers his
Sin shall not prosper, Prove. 28.13.
but he that confesses and forsakes his Sin shall find Mercy. O! now Joseph's
Brethren do not excuse and cover their Sin. O! now conscience is awakned and
they ^ead guilty with one consent.

III. The next improve^ent of the Truth, is this, ^ word of Counsel and
Ex^ortation: Then let us all ^and clear of Sin, if it leave Sting behind it; O!
then ^a^^^ in awe, and sin not. O ^ay this with Joseph, in the ^ase of his
Mistress: Genesis 39.9.
How can ^ do this great Wickedness, and ^in against God?

1. Stand clear of Sin, it ^eaves that behind, will torment you. Alas, poor
Sinners, they consult at present only the pleasure of Sin, only the
satisfaction of a present Lust, and the profit of Sin, but they do not consider
the guilt of Sin. Did the Thief consider, O! but this sin will leave a Sting
behind it, and it will expose him to the danger of (...) Law, it will end in
Tybur^ O! how this would awe (...) check him: so did but S(...) ners argue with
themselv^ O this wicked Trade of mi^^ this sinful Course of mi^^^ what will it
end in? ^ill not end in Hell? Does not expose me to the wra^^ of a Righteous
God? (...) would not such a consider^tion cool the boiling he^ of many a
Sinner's Lust? is the misery of Sinners, the look not to an afterward^ but only
at present consu^^ either their Pleasure or the Profit.

2. Stand clear of Sin, f^^ it will be very terrible to yo^^ when it shall
haunt you^ Consciences. There is (...) such terrible Spectrum in th^^ (...)
^orld, as the walking of ^pardoned Sin in the Con^ence. O what horror and
^azement did this Sin of Jo^^h's Brethren make in their ^onsciences! And O,
what ^^ad case was David in, when (...) said, My Sin is ever be^^re me! As if
he had seen ^^me Spectrum, or Appariti^^ haunting him. You would ^^ot live in
an haunted House, ^^nd yet how many Sinners ^^ve with haunted Conscien^^es?
They are Magor-missa^^bs, Terrors to themselves, ^^^ea, and to those that
stand about them. O! how did Judas's guilt haunt him? And Spira his guilt haunt
him?

3. Stand off from Sin, for ^^ne Sin will beget another. Thus did the Sin of
Joseph's Brethren, they now must c^^^ ver it with his Coat, they no^^ must lie
to their aged Father and say, an evil Beast has d^^ voured him. O! where wi^^
Sin have an end! Sinners you know the beginning (...) Sin, but who knows the
en^^ thereof? Who knows whe^^ Sin will stop? Sinners, yo^^ know not what you
do, whe^^ you meddle with Sin. Sin'^^ chain has many Links, and they all
depend one upon an^ other. And I must tell you^ one Sin is so close linkt to
another, that they lead one to another. Thieving leads to Lying, Lying to
Denying with Appeals to God, and so on to Swearing, and from Swearing on to
Hardening.

4. Stand clear of Sin, for^ God will visit your Sin upon ^ou sooner or later.
Though it ^as long first, yet you see God punishes this Sin of Jo^ph's
Brethren; now God ^as visiting for it. O (Sirs) ^^e visiting of God for Sin, is
terrible thing! Do you not ^ear the Lord say, Jer. 5.9.
Shall I not ^isit for these things? O poor ^inners! though God let ^ou alone
at present, yet the ^ears of your Visitation shall ^ome.

5. Stand clear of Sin, there ^s a worse thing than all this follows it, (viz.)
Wrath to ^ome. O, may it not be said ^o any one of you, nay, to every one of
you, John 5.14.
as was said to her, Go your ways, sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto
you. A worse thing? O, what can that be? Wrath to come, Hell and eternal
Torments, the Worm tha^ never dies, the Fire that n^^ver goes out.

Second Counsel is to stan^^ clear of secret Guilt, the mo^^ covert Guilt
whatsoever This Sin of Joseph's Brethre^^ was a covered Sin for man^^ years
together. This is (...) that tempts many a poor So^ to sin. Who sees it? Wh^
knows it? It shall never come to light: All will b^ wrapped up in clean Linne^^
and rest in darkness and (...) lence all my days. And upon this very account,
man^ poor Souls, they fall into th^^ Snares, because laid in the dark and
secret for them.

1. Consider poor Sinner^ God looks on when you com^ mit secret Sins, there is
no^ thing hid from him. He (...) all Eye: He is an Omniscient God. O poor
Sinner! Did but thou think God looks on, O how would this startle thee in the
act of Sin! Shall the Eye of Men make Sinners afraid, and shall not the Eye of
God much more? Would Joseph's Brethren thus secretly and perfidiously have sold
their Brother, if they had considered God saw them at the Bargain making, if
they had considered God looked on?

2. Poor Sinners, stand off from secret Sins, for the eye of Conscience looks
on; and Conscience is a thousand witnesses. Conscience in Joseph's Brethren,
could very well remember their Guilt. O (Sirs) Conscience has a strange
Memory. O if a Sinner did but solemnly debate the Matter with himself and say,
O, but if I commi^^ this sin never so secretly, my Conscience is Witness, and
will tell me of it another day, and gripe me for it another day. O how would
these thoughts be an Impediment in the way of many Sinner!

3. Poor sinners, stand o^ from secret sins, for secre^ sins have many times
strang^ly come to light: Eccles. 10.20.
A Bird the Air shall tell the Matte^ (says Solomon); viz. Sin sha^^ be
discovered by improbab^ and unlikely means. W^ read of others, that Heaven
shall reveal their Iniquity The Heaven shall reveal h^^ iniquity, and the Earth
sha^^ rise up against him. Job 20.27.
Rather than it shall be hid, Heaven and Earth shall conspire to bring it to
light. God has of late given us notable Instances, in deceiving wicked Men's
Plots and Projects against these poor Nations.

4. Stand off from secret Sins. They are most dangerous, because they go a
great while undiscovered, and the concealment of them often is an occasion of
being hardened in them, and putting off Repentance for them. God often makes use
of Shame upon discovery of some secret Sin, to be a means to lead to Repentance.

5. The longer Guilt lies hid, the louder will it roar in the Conscience when
discovered; thus you see it did with Joseph's Brethren. O, now their guilty
Consciences roar upon them, though it had been hid so long. O, what work will
Sin make in thy Conscience, when it shall walk there after thou thoughtst it
had been buried twenty or thirty years! O then, who would not stand off from
secret Sins!

Third word of Counsel. O then repent of sin, if guilt stay behind after the
Fact be committed. Is it not then high time that your sin should be blotted out
upon your Repentance? I must tell you, Sinners, the guilt of sin is upon your
Consciences, until your Repentance. You lie under Guilt, if it be twenty years
after. What the you have escaped the Revenging Hands of God hitherto, yet the
Guilt is upon you, and that binds you; therefore you see, Repentance and
Remission of Sin goes together. O poor Sinners, until you sincerely Repent, all
your Guilt is upon you: Yea, it is marked before the Lord, and O how sad is
this to have the guilt of all thy Sins that thou have committed to this very
day, upon the back of thy Soul!

Fourth word of Counsel. O then fly to the Blood of Chr^^! Guilt will walk in
your Consciences when once awakened, until the Blood of Christ be sprinkled
upon them: Until you by an eye of Faith, behold the Lamb of God, who takes away
the Sins of the World. What though Guilt has laid long upon you? What though
the Sin be of old standing, yet the Blood of Christ takes it away. It cleanses
from all Sin, Heb. 12.24.
new or old, great or small, Inormities or Infirmities; sins against Light, or
sins against Love. O then come, Sinners, come to the Blood of Sprinkling.

Fifth word of Counsel is, O then do not lie long in your Guilt! To fall into
Sin is dangerous, but to lie long when fallen is much more dangerous. These
B^^^^en of Joseph's laid long in their Sin and Guilt. O poor Sinners, when you
fall by Sin, make haste to get up by Repentance.

1. What if you should be hardened in Guilt? and do you not run the hazard of
being hardened in Sin when you lie in it? It may be before you commit it, you
think you may repent of it when you will; but alas, you may soon be hardened
through the deceitfulness of Sin. Dr. Preston, speaking of the deceitfulness of
Sin, O, says he, Sin in the first temptation to the Sinner seems little; commit
but this once, and thou may afterward repent of it, and thou need never
commit this Sin again. But alas (says he) every Sin committed leaves the Spawn
of another Sin upon the Soul, and after once, the Soul is easily led into
another Act, until it be hardened through the deceitfulness of Sin.

2. What if you die in it? You may lie in it, and die in it. O, what if God say
such a word to you in your Guilt unrepented of, as he did to those Jews, You
shall die in your Sins --? O, is not this a dreadful thing to die in Sin! You
think it sad to die in Debt to Men; what is it then to die in Sin, which is
debt to God, with all your sins upon the back of your Souls? What, if thou
die an unpardoned Sinner, art thou not damned if thou had ten thousand
Souls? And, O what a venture do thou run that lie in Sin!

3. O do not lie in Sin. The longer it is laid in, the harder it will be to
repent of: The longer a Sinner lies in his Fall, the harder he is to Rise. As
the larger a Disease is upon a Person, the more difficult is the Cure. A Man
feels not at first when he lies upon the Ground, but if he lies a while, he
grows stiff, and can very hardly rise. Thus it will be with a Soul that lies
long in Sin: O then repent speedily of Sin.

GENESIS xlii. 21. Therefore is this Distress come upon us.


WE are now come to the second part of the Text, (viz.) The Reflection, or
Accusation of Joseph's Brethren, their Consciences now being awakened by their
Affliction, they now jointly draw up this Conolusion and Indictment against
themselves: O, Therefore is this Distress come upon us.

1. We have the Reflection it self. O how quick was Conscience now! What quick
work sometimes does, sense of Guilt make? O now they cry out with an
Asseveration, Verily we are guilty, etc.

2. We have the occasion of this Reflection, (viz.) Their present Distress. Now
they were under Affliction. (For their being all this while in the hand of
Joseph was an unknown Business to them). Their distress and strait was great,
and now they as one Man conclude for their guilt, this Distress was come upon
them.

The Truth the Text presents us with, is this: In a day of Affliction,
Gonscience is very quick and active in its Reflections. This is a profitable
Truth, and worth inquiring into, such Days as these, when so many are hardened
in their sins. Poor Sinners ruffle it out, and stout it out against God in a a
day of Prosperity. O who but they! with Pharaoh, saying, Who is the Lord? Thus
he swaggers it out: but stay until an Hand of God be upon him, and then you
will find him of another mind; O then, Send for Moses to pray for me! Then he
confesses, I and my People are wicked. Thus the Prophet Jeremiah makes the wild
Ass an Emblem (and that very fitly) of a wicked Man in his prosperous
condition, running on in Sin: As the wild Ass snuffs up the Wind at her
pleasure. Jer. 2.24.
All Counsel, all Instruction, all Advice is lost: All that seek her, do but
weary themselves. But stay until her Months of Affliction and Distress come,
and then they may be spoken with. In their Months one shall find them. O now
Conscience begins to talk with them, and call them to a serious debate
concerning their past lives and Transactions, God often sets Conscience to
discourse with Sinners, in the day of their Distress. We have plentiful
Instances of this Truth in holy Writ. You may find it proved of the worst of
Men, as well as of God's own People. The case of Gain, what a quick Reflection
was that of his, All that meet me will slay me. His sin and guilt walked in his
Conscience. Abel's Ghost (as I may say) he haunted Gain's Conscience. Alas! Who
was in the World to slay him? It was only the conclusion of his guilty
Conscience. Ahab had sinned highly against the Lord, he was a Non-such for a
Sinner. 1 King. 21.24.
There was none like unto Ahab, which did set himself to work wickedness in the
sight of God. Yet when this poor Wretch came to hear of God's Threatenings, how
quick was Conscience in making Reflections upon him, he humbled himself before
the Lord. Manasseh for all his Abominations, when God brought him into the
Briars, then Conscience fell to work; O now Manasseh came to know the Lord! O
now he humbled himself! How ordinary is this? How many wicked Men sometimes
upon a supposed Deathbed, sometimes upon a real Deathbed, have confessed that
guilt which has laid dormant in their Consciences a very long time? How have
they had all their Sins set in order before their Eyes? O how have all their
former committed Wickednesses (though never so secret) taken hold of them!

Now for the Proof of it, as to the Godly in particular, they contribute
witness abundantly to this Truth; therefore when we find them under the Hand of
God, what confession do they make to God? What supplications do they pour out
to God at such times? How do they mourn like Doves? and, as the Church says,
roar like Bears, accusing themselves now in a day of Distress: Isa. 59.12, 13.
As for our Iniquities, they testify against us, etc. It is said of Israel,
That God slew the fattest of them, and smote the chosen Men of Israel. O, what
did they then in this sad day? Then they returned to the Lord. Psalm. 78.31, 34.
But alas, all this was but while the Affliction was upon them. David, when
under Affliction, O how he Reflects, There was no rest in his Bones, because of
God's Anger, and his Sin. And Jonah, guilty Jonah! when God had found him out,
how quick was Conscience with him? For my sake is this evil come upon you: Gast
me overboard. He acknowledges himself to be the Storm-breeder.

Now, First, We shall enquire what a Reflection of Conscience is.

Secondly, What Conscience does Reflect upon in a day of Distress.

Thirdly, What kind of Reflections these reflections of guilty Consciences are.

Fourthly, Why Conscience is so quick with Sinners, in a day of Affliction and
Distress.

Fifthly, We shall improve all by way of Application.

First, What a Reflection of Conscience is. Here we must enquire what
Conscience (...). We read often of it in Scripture: Heb. 10.22.
Having our Hearts ^rinkled from an evil Conscience. Heb. 9.14.
And Consciences pur^^ed from dead Works, to serve the Living God. I will not
^rouble you with any Nicity about Conscience, because ^he Truth is purely
practical. It is indeed disputed, whether Conscience be a Power, or in Habit,
or an Act only. Some of late have called it an justinct, or a Principle in Man
impressing upon his Mind a future Judgment. Dr. Barthog in his Causa Dei page
404.
Or an Habit, a Natural Habit. [An Habit] because it was at first in
Adventitious Impression. [Natural] because now it is Original, and transmitted
in ^he same way as other Natural Qualities, (thus one upon it). But I will
apply my self to those things that have no perplexity in them to understand.

Conscience is a very busy faculty in the Soul of Man, or a Practick and
Reflexive Power of the Mind; and its Operations are these.

1. It takes notice of Men's Actions, what we do we do under the Eye of
Conscience. A Heathen could say, It is God's Register, and a strict Observer of
our ways.

2. It does testify either with us, or against us; so it acts the part of a
Witness. And so it is said to Excuse, or Accuse. Romans 2.15.
It speaks sometimes for poor Souls; this is our rejoicing, 2 Cor, 1.12.
the testimony of our Consciences. I does sometimes Accuse. Thus it did in
Joseph's Brethren, then they cried out of their Guilt.

3. It does torment. O what ^orment like that of a griping ^uilty Conscience!
How did Cain's Conscience torment him? and Judas his Conscience torment him?
How did Spira his Conscience torment him? This is a piece of Hells Torments
begun here. This Conscience in Men, is Judge, Witness, and Executioner.

Now we must understand, ^here is a twofold Conscience.

1. A seared Conscience, Having their Consciences seared with an hot Iron: 1 Timothy 4.2.
Cauterized (as has been hinted before) whereby it is made brawny and
insensible. Now while thus, it is not a Reflecting Conscience. Here is no
walking Guilt, though abundance of dormant and sleepy Guilt And for the
present, had no Joseph's Brethren seared Consciences, when they did (...) down
to eat after such a Fact as casting their Brother into the Pit: Genesis 37.25.
And they took him and cast him into a Pit: and the Pit was empty, there was no
Water in it. And they sa^ down to eat Bread, etc. Her was little Sense upon
them no Reflection yet upon them.

2. There is a soft and tender Conscience, and this is the Conscience that make
Reflections Conscience is awakened before it be thus softened. It must know i^
has dove evil, before it say What have I done? David's Conscience was thus
tender, when it smote him for cutting off the Lap of Readiness Garment.

Now for the better understanding, what is meant by these Reflections of
Conscience, we must inquire by what Expressions the Scripture sets them out.

1. Reflections of Conscience are set forth by Conviction. We read of them
that brought the Woman to Christ taken in Adultery: They were convicted in
their Consciences, John 8.9.
they went out one by one. -- It is a Law-term, The Prisoner stands Convict.
Now these Persons applied Guilt to themselves, They were guilty in their
Consciences. Thus Joseph's Brethren were guilty, and cried out as Men convict
in their own Consciences. Convictions (say one) is the light of the
Understanding reflecting upon the Guilt discovered to it whereby it makes a
deep impression upon the Spirit. S^ that one piece of Reflection consists in
conviction (...) Guilt.

2. Another expression setting forth the Reflections (...) guilty Consciences,
is wounded Spirit: It is now wounded Conscience. Now Joseph's Brethren were
wounded in their Consciences: (...) wounded Spirit, Prove. 18.14.
who can bea^ or lift up (as some read it) A Metaphor taken from Bodily
Wounds. O, how will a Wound smart and throb So does Guilt in an awakened
Sinners Conscience when it makes Reflections, O! now it is pained under the
sense of Guilt. Thus David, Psalm. 38.5.
My Wounds stink, and are corrupt.

3. Another expression setting forth the Reflections of guilty Consciences, is
the reproaching of Conscience: My Heart shall not upbraid me, as long as I
live, Job 27.6.
(or from my days). Concerning my manner of Living, my Heart shall take no
shame from my Days (says Mr. Broughton). Viz. From those things I have done in
my Days, or from my whole Conversation. He had lived in good Conscience before
God and Man: Acts 23.1.
But now when Conscience reflects upon a Man under sense of Guilt, it
reproaches him, it upbraids him, it is always chiding him.

4. Another expression setting forth the Reflections o^ guilty Consciences, is,
Th^^ Conscience smiting him. A^ David his Heart smote him when he cut off the
Lap o^ Readiness Garment. Tende^ Consciences find this inwar^ smiting, either upon
the commission of Evil, or the omission of Good. Ah! now how did Joseph's
Brethren's Consciences smite them? It is set forth by the poor Publican smiting
on his Breast And sometimes with Ephraim's smiting upon his Thigh. O, now
Sinners reflect upon their Sins, as tha^ word, No Man repented, and said, what
have I done?

5. It is set forth by bringing again to mind, which is the proper notion of
Reflection: Remember, and show your selves Men: Isa. 46.8.
and bring it again to mind, O ye Transgressors. Therefore we have frequently
such Expressions. Remembering their evil ways: 1 Kings 8.47.
and if my People shall bethink themselves. These are properly the Reflex Acts
of the Mind and Conscience.

6. It is set forth by Accusing: The Conscience draws up an Accusation against
the Sinner, as here Joseph's Brethren did: it Reflects when it Accuses. We
read of the Gentiles, who only had the Law of Nature, and yet their
Consciences did accuse them.

7. It is set forth by Condemning, which is higher than Accusing; it passes
Judgment, as well as it witnesses: If our own Hearts condemn us, 1 John 3.20.
God is greater than our Hearts, (viz.) our Consciences. We may spell out of
all these, some things of the nature of Reflection of Conscience.

Second Inquiry is, What this awakened Conscience reflects upon. For we must
understand that Conscience does never bear false Witness, for in this case the
voice of Conscience is the Voice God. Conscience's Testimony holds true in the
case of Joseph's Brethren.

1. Conscience in a day of Affliction, reflects upon matters of Fact. It may be
at the present commission of the Sin, the Sinner takes no notice of it; in an
hurry and huff of Temptation, all is forgotten. O! but there is (...) Book of
Remembrance that Conscience keeps, and all your Sins are registered there; and
though it be a sealed Book at present, you know not ^ow soon it may be opened,
and you judged out of it, according to what you have ^one. O, how many Sinners
may now deny matter of fact, but when Conscience shall be awakened to lay it
^ome, and charge them plain^ith it (saying as Nathan to David) Thou art the
Man: Then there will be no denying of it. The witness of ^^es own Conscience,
is an ^deniable Testimony. Cain ^ould not deny this Testimony, therefore his
Guilt cried, all that meet me will slay me. (...) aoh could not deny this
Testimony, I and my People are wicked. Judas could nodeny this Testimony, I
have sinned in betraying innocent Blood. The People of God could not deny this
Testimony, when they cried out Our Iniquities testify again us, etc.

2. Conscience does no only reflect upon matter o^ Fact, but upon Circumstances
and Aggravations of the Fact, Conscience when awakened becomes tender, and
calls every particular Circumstance to remembrance that did heighten, or any
way aggravate the matter and thus did they in the Text: Wherein lay the
aggravation of the Guilt? You have heard hinted before [I that we saw the
anguish of h^^ Soul, and he besought us, yet we would not hear].

1. They saw the anguish of his Soul, and yet their Eyes did not affect their
Hearts. 2. It was their Brother too. 3. He besought us. 4. They would not hear.
All of them great Aggravations. Saw it. The anguish of a Brothers Soul. A
beseeching Brother, and would not hear. Deasned their Ears to his lamentable
Cries. O, how do their Consciences Reflect upon all these!
There are several things that Conscience when awakened, reflects upon, with
reference to the Circumstances of matter of Fact.

1. Sometimes Conscience tells the Sinner, it is against Light: Thou had so
much Light as to conceive this before commission, that it was a Sin, that it
was a Violation and Transgression of an holy Law; and says Conscience, this
thou knew, yea, this thou knew beforehand, and yet contrary to the
discovery of this Light, thou did run violently into it, and rebelledst
against the Light (as Job's phrase is). Job 24.13.


2. Sometimes Conscience tells the Sinner, he has sinned against Resolutions;
and this is an aggravating Circumstance. O how often (says Conscience) have
thou broken thy serious Purposes and Vows, when it may be you have been in
imminent dangers and distresses. Now Conscience registers and records the very
Resolutions of poor Sinners, it being privy to all the secret Purposes. When
some of you are at Sea, ready to be swallowed up of the Belly of Hell (as Jonah
phrases it) O then you pray to God, and purpose against Sin, if God will bring
you off with your Lives at this time. Or, it may be, others of you at Land,
upon a supposed Deathbed, O, if God will spare you, How do you resolve against
Sin, yea, against those Sins that sting your Consciences most? But alas, after
all this, do not you break your Bonds? Now Conscience books all, and at one
time or other, will remember you of all these things.

3. Sometimes Conscience in its Reflections, tells the Sinner of sinning
against its Warnings and Dictates. To sin against the dictates of Conscience,
is a very great Aggravation. O Sinners! how often has Conscience warned you?
As you love your Peace, as you love your Souls, as you will answer it at the
great Tribunal of God, that you go not on in such a Course, or that you commit
not such a Sin at your Peril (says Conscience): but not withstanding all this,
the Sinner blunders on. I tell you Sinners (from the Lord) there is never a
Warning an awakened Conscience has given any of you, but it will rise up
against you another Day; either here or, hereafter.

4. Sometimes Conscience in its Reflections, tells Sinners of their sinning
against its Reproofs; which is an aggravating Circumstance. To run into Sin
after long reproved, hence you have that terrible word, Proy. 28.1.
He that being of ten reproved, hardens his Heart, shall suddenly be destroyed,
and that without remedy. O, says Conscience, is not this thy Case? Have thou
not often been reproved? Have not I often reproved thee, and God often reproved
thee? and Ministers often reproved thee? Yet have thou gone on, etc. And will
not every Reproof walk in your Consciences another day, that you sin against
now?

5. Sometimes Conscience in its Reflections, tells Sinners of sinning against
Mercy, which is another aggravating Circumstance. How many Mercies (says
Conscience) have you sinned against? sparing Mercy at Sea, and at Land?
preventing Mercy, preserving Mercy? O what a life of Mercy has thy Life seen!
Nothing but a Series of Mercy, a large Tract of Mercy, a Line of Mercy, and yet
thou have sinned against all. This will grieve thee another Day, when thou
shall have all thy Mercies as well as Sins, set in order before thee.

Thirdly, Conscience reflects upon the dishonor Sin brings to God, as well as
upon the Fact, and the circumstances of the Fact. When Conscience begins to be
enlightened and awakened, O then it begins to think what dishonor Sin has
brought upon God; for as Sin brings guilt upon the Soul, so it brings dishonor
upon the Name of God. And thus David's Conscience reflects, Against thee,
against thee have I sinned; this laid uppermost on the Heart of David. He
sinned against his Soul, he sinned against his own Body, he sinned against
Bathsheba, he sinned against the whole Church of God; but of all (says he)
Against Thee, against Thee have I sinned. O, says Conscience to the Sinner, how
have thou opened the Mouths of the Enemies of God and his People, to blaspheme?
and caused the Ways of God to be evil spoken of? Thou have wounded and stabbed
the Honorable and Blessed Name of God: and should not the Honor of that God
that created thee be dear to thee? who has preserved thee in a thousand
Dangers, and has provided for thee in a thousand Wants, should not his Honor
lie near thy Heart? Did not this make Joseph say, How can I do this Wickedness,
and sin against God?

Fourthly, Conscience when awakened reflects upon Times and junctures of Time,
in which Persons have sinned. There is a great deal in the Time of Sin, as well
as the Act of Sin, to reflect upon. Therefore it was taken notice of in that
black Brand upon Ahaz: 2 Chronicles, 28.22.
This is that King Ahaz that sinned more and more, in the time of his Distress.
O what a monstrous thing was it to sin then? There are three Times that
Conscience takes special notice to reflect upon, when we sin in them.

1. A time of common Calamity, when God's Judgments are abroad. To sin when God
is smiting for Sin, when God smites on, and Sinners they sin on, They returned
not unto the Lord that smote them. O now, cries Conscience, did not you commit
such a Sin in the time of the Plague? in the time of the Fire? How durst you
sin when God's Sword was drawn, and sheathed in the Bowels of so many thousand
Sinners? This was to sin when the Judge was upon the Bench. And while he was
passing Sentence against poor guilty Malefactors, and O what impudence was this
in Sinners!

2. A time of Personal Affliction. This is a Juncture of Time for an awakened
Conscience to reflect upon, and tell you of, when any of you have laid under
the Hands of God; and what! then to lift up your Heel against God? This is not
only Sinning, but daring Sin, and Conscience takes notice that that was your
Sinning Time, which should have been your Humbling Time for Sin.

3. A Time of receiving eminent and particular Mercies from God, then to Sin
against God; O! how will Conscience take its opportunity and tell you of it
another Day? For Hezekiah to sin against God, when God had so lately raised him
up, and recovered him from a Sentence of Death: O what will Conscience say to
this, when Hezekiah comes to be humbled for it? What! for David to sin after
God had brought him through all his Dangers and Difficulties, and put him in
possession of the Kingdom, for him to say, Thou have made my Mountain strong,
and I shall not be moved; O how will David's Conscience reflect upon this
another Day!

4. When God has graciously visited the Soul, with smiles of his Love, then to
sin, Conscience will be sure to reflect upon this. To return to Folly after God
has spoken Peace, O! how will Conscience tell thee of this another Day, and
tell thee what Disingenuity and Ingratitude there was in it. Is this a time to
sin? Is not this like a foolish People, to requite the Lord with evil, for so
much Good as you have received from him?

5. To sin after thou have humbled thy self for Sin, this is a time Conscience
will Reflect upon. What will Conscience say to these things? Is this thou that
lately were upon thy Knees, bemoaning thy Sin before the Lord? What, thou who
have so lately confessed and acknowledged thy Sin, and now running into Sin,
yea, into the same Sins you have mourned over, and repented of? O! how will
Conscience sadly animadvert upon these things, in the day of its dealing with
you, poor Sinners!

Fifthly, Conscience when awakened, will Reflect upon lost means and seasons of
Grace. Christ considered this, when he preached that doleful Sermon to
Jerusalem: O! Luke 19.29.
that thou had known in this thy day, the things that concern thy Peace. He
knew it would cut to the Conscience to tell them of lost Seasons, and lost
Advantages for Heaven and Eternity. And indeed this makes up much of the
Torments of Hell. These Reflections upon the last motions of the Spirit, last
convictions of Conscience last Sermons, Ordinances, and Sabbaths. Nay, when God
comes to awaken Conscience how does it reflect upon these things in this
present Life. As one said when a Ministe^ came to comfort her, Call Time again,
call Time again. Implying, she thought it was as impossible to apply Come fort
to her, as to call time again. So, poor Sinners, how sad will this be for you
another Day, to cry, Call Sabbaths again, Ministry again a day of Grace again,
motions of the Spirit again. Alas (Sirs) now you think these things may be
dallied and trifled with, and it is indifferent whether you lay hold of such
opportunities to improve them, or no. O, but when they are gone, how will these
things sting? A Man who has been under good opportunities to arrive at a great
Estate in the World, and when he is brought by his bad Husbandry and
Prodigality, to Penury and Poverty, O! how does he then Reflect upon himself
(if he be sensible) and upon his fair Opportunities that now are past
recalling. O then, what a Madman was I? What fair Opportunities have I lost?
Thus it is in this Case with Guilty Consciences, when awakened. O, what a fair
way was I once in for Heaven, and eternal Life! What Seasons had I to enrich my
Soul in Grace? O! what a Fool was I, that had so many Prizes put into my Hand,
and had not an Heart to make use of them! these will be sad Reflections.

Sixthly, An awakened Conscience will Reflect in a day of Affliction, upon the
sad Effects and Consequences of Sin; what Sin brings along with it, what
follows and treads upon the Heels of it.

1. Sad effect of Sin Conscience reflects upon, is God's displeasure. O! who
can bear it? Angels could not it cast them out of Heaven. Adam could not, it
cast him out of Paradise: He drove out the Man. Nay, the most holy Servants of
God could not bear it: It made David cry out, Psalm. 38.3.
There was no rest in his Bones, because of God's Anger. Nay more, It made the
Lord Jesus Christ cry out, when he endured it for our Sins, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? And, says Conscience, can you bear it? can you stand
under his Anger? According to thy Power, so is thine Anger.

2. Conscience reflects upon the Soul's Pollution and Defilement; another sad
effect of Sin. That a Soul which came out of the Hand of God so pure, so
spotless a Being, should be so deformed and defiled: O, how sad is this!

3. Another sad effect of Sin, that the awakened Conscience reflects upon in a
day of Affliction, is the withdrawment of God's comfortable Presence from the
Soul. O! how did the Spouses Conscience Reflect, when she said, My Beloved has
withdrawn himself. Sin makes God hide himself from his dearest Children. And, O
what temptations are God's Children exposed unto, when their Father is
withdrawn. O, how easily then are they drawn in to think hardly of God, to be
jealous of God, to question his Promise! I might name many other sad Effects
and Consequences of Sin, that awakened Consciences Reflects upon. (But I will
forbear).

The Third Query is this, What kind of Reflections these Reflections of
awakened Consciences are?

1. These Reflections are home Reflections. O Sinners! when Conscience Reflects
and charges it home, (this was the case of my Text) it was a home charge,
Verily, we are guilty concerning our Brother. O, how quick was Conscience now
with them! And so when David reflected upon his Sin, charged upon him by
Nathan: Thou art the Man, (says Nathan). I have sineed (says David). It may be
for the present, your Consciences say little to you, are very silent; but stay
until God shall awaken them, O then, until your Sin be pardoned, it will be a
Terror to you, and cause you to mediate Terror. What though this Lion sleep,
day will come that God will rouse him up, and then he will be a Roaring Lion.
O, what an home Reflection was that of Judas I have sinned, in betraying
innocent Blood. And surely Peter's Conscience charged him home, when he went
out and wept bitterly.

3. These Reflections of awakened Consciences, they are just and righteous
Reflections. O! Conscience does not reflect without a Cause; does not accuse or
sting without a Cause. Was then not a Righteous Cause for this Reflection in
the Consciences of Joseph's Brethren. Was there not great Guilt a the bottom?
Did Cain's Conscience afright him without a cause? had not he killed h^ Brother
Abel? Did David Conscience smite him with out a cause, when he cried out, I
have sinned? Did Jud^ his Conscience torment him without a cause, when he cried
out, I have sinned, in betraying Innocent Blood? Oh Sinners! When you look into
your past Lives, and turn over the Book of your Conversations Page by Page,
Leaf by Leaf, and observe Page and Margin well, you will sind both full of
causes for these Reflections: May not you charge your selves for this Sin and
the other? for this unknown Guilt to the World, and the other? O then you will
say, it is a righteous thing that Conscience should Condemn, and that the
Sentence thereof is a just and righteous ^entence. We read of him that had not
on the Wedding Garment, his Mouth was stopped, he stood speechless. So will it be
in this Day, with all poor guilty Sinners, they will not have a word to say for
themselves, why Sentence should not be Executed upon them. Romans 2.19.
Every Mouth must be stopped, that all the World may become Guilty before God.

3. These Reflections are full of Horror and Dread. Fear naturally results
from them, and you know Fear has Torment in it. These Reflections become great
Torments to guilty Consciences; the inward gnawings of this Worm are very
terririble. Alas, what can arise out of Guilt (Sinners) but Dread and Horror?
Guilt we say, makes a Man afraid of his own Shadow. O, what a torment is this
when a Man ^omes to be dogged and haunted wherever he goes, with with his own
guilty Conscience! He needs no other Executioner, or Tormentor. The ^ase of
Spira is a dreadful ^anding Instance. Herod heard ^f the Fame of Jesus, and ^id
unto his Servants, Mat. 14.2, 3.
This (...) John Baptist, he is risen ^^m the Dead, therefore might. Works do
show themselves in (...). What was the matter ^ith Herod, that he was thus
^^^tled, and cries it was ^^hn? He had killed John, ^^d now John, though dead,
^^lk'd in his guilty Conscience, and as a Spectrum ^eadfully affrighted him.

4. These Reflections of ^^ty awakened Conscience are not easily quieted.
Conscience is not easily pacified. Luther has this passage, It is as hard a
thing t^ comfort an afflicted Conscience^ as it is to create a World. God says
he, Isa. 57.19.
created the fruits of the Lips, Peace, peace; (viz.) in his Minister's Mouths
when they are Barnabasses Sons of Consolation to troubled Souls. O! Who ca^
speak Peace to a Wounde^ Conscience, but God? H^ only can say to poor Souls i^
danger of being Shipwrack^ with these Storms of Conscience's Troubles, Peace,
and b^ still. The Lord Jesus can only command these Wind and Storms to obey
him. Thus it was with David, the the Lord had sent Natha^ the Prophet to him,
to te^ him, God had put away h^^ Sin, yet all this would not do, until the Lord
told him so himself; which occasioned that Prayer of his: Lord, make the Bones
which thou have broken, to rejoice: Psalm. 51.8
Make thou me to hear the Voice of Joy and Gladness.

5. These Reflections of awakened Consciences, are such as constrain the Sinner
to seek out for ease. Poor Souls now dwell in little ease, they are disquieted
and distressed, and therefore look out for a Remedy. A wounded Spirit, who can
bear? Wounded Men, you know, groan for ease: So do these wounded Souls. Hence
it was that Cain, under the horror of his awakened Conscience, begins to build
Cities, to divert the rage of his throbing Conscience. Many Sinners, when
awakened and troubled, they go to the Music (with Saul) to play the evil
Spirit down. It is said of Charles the 9th, King of France, after that dreadful
Massacre in Paris, which was in his Reign; He never durst awake out of his
sleep without Music. So many go to sinful Company, and sinful Recreations, to
make use of them as a sleepy Sop, to allay the rage of an accusing tormenting
Conscience, as tho they had a design to Conjure down the Guilt that walks in
their Consciences. But now, when a poor Soul is truly awakened with a clear
sight of Guilt in the Glass of the Gospel, O then he begins to pray, to seek
out after Christ, to enquire what he shall do to be saved, to be pardoned. O!
how do such poor Souls, like the stung Israelites, under the smart and pain of
the Wound, run up and down to look toward the Brazen Serpent for Healing? And
like those pricked in the Heart, cry out, Men and Brethren, what shall we do?

First Reason, Why Conscience in a day of Affliction, is quick at Reflections:
Because days of Affliction, are days of Remembrance. Conscience sets Memory now
at work, and now Memory turns over the whole past Life of a Sinner. O, says
Conscience in the day of Distress, Did not thou commit such a Sin at such a
time? in such a place? Do thou not remember it? And did not thou think thou
should never hear of it again, though I told thee, and warned thee to the
contrary? but now I am come to call thy Faults into remembrance this day. In a
day of Affliction, Conscience is our Monitor, and Remembrancer. It remembers
the Sinner of two things, 1. Of his past Convictions. 2. Of his broken
Resolutions. And it is upon this account, that Repentance is called, A
remembering of our evil ways.


You have, Sinners, committed many a Sin, and forgotten it, and buried many a
piece of Guilt in the grave of Oblivion; and because you had forgotten these
things, you thought God had forgotten them too, and Conscience had forgotten
them, but you will find your selves mistaken. When a day of Affliction comes,
then Conscience will remember you of all, and set all in order before your
Eyes. David calls some of his Psalms, Psalms of Remembrance; To call to
Remembrance. So Conscience will sing you a sad Song of Remembrance (as I may
say); it will remember some of you, how often you were Drunk, and where; how
often others of you have been Unclean, and where; with all the Circumstances of
matters of Fact.

Secondly, Because in a day of Affliction, Conscience is awakened, at other
times it is asleep, and so cannot be quick and active. Men lull Conscience
asleep with their Enjoyments, or with their Affairs and Employments; but now in
a day of Affliction, the Lord takes them off these. They then are at leisure to
reckon with their Consciences: as they awake, they begin to call themselves to
an Account. Afflictions are great Awakeners. It may be, the poor Sinner is like
Peter, asleep between two Soldiers, when the Angel came and smote him. So
Conscience does with Sinners. O! how quick is Conscience with them, when they
are awakened? O! what a sleepy Fit for three quarters of a Year did David fall
into, until God made use of Affliction to awaken him? Joseph's Brethren, what a
Lethargy were their Consciences in for many years together, until this
Affliction awakened them? And so, How did Manasseh his Afflictions awaken his
guilty Conscience?

Thirdly, Because a day of Affliction is a day of serious Consideration; Men go
on inconsiderately in the Ruff of their Prosperity, while they are (as I may
say) in their hot Blood: but when they consider with themselves better, then
they change both their Minds and Courses. I considered my Ways, Psalm. 119.59.
and turned my Feet to thy Testimonies. But now, What brings in this day of
Consideration? Is it not a day of Affliction? In a day of Adversity, Eccles.
7.14.
consider. What brought the poor inconsiderate Prodigal to a stand and so to a
return, was it not a day of Affliction? His consideration is expressed by this:
He came to himself. Now Conscience being awakened, Sinners begin to come to
themselves, and then they say, Jer. 8.6.
What have I done? Whither have I been going? O! what will follow upon this
Course of mine? what will be the effects of this Sin and Guilt? If Men did
consider these things, and ask their Souls such Questions, how would it be a
means to stop them in their carreer and course of Sin? O now, 1. A Sinner
begins to think how he has dishonored God. 2. How he has displeased God. 3.
How he has wounded his own Conscience. 4. How he has led others into Sin by
his example. 5. How he has aggravated his Sin, by sinning against Mercies and
Deliverances.


These, and many more, Considerations are called over in the Conscience, when
awakened in a day of Distress and Affliction.

Fourthly, Because a day of Affliction, is a Day that puts the Sinner upon a
diligent search. O, how quick is Conscience upon the search! Now Sinners are
set upon searching and trying their ways (with the Church): Let us search and
try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord. Lam. 3.
This put Heman upon a diligent search: I communed with my own Heart, Psalm.
77.5, 6.
and made a diligent search. As the Woman did seek for her lost Groat, did
sweep the House, and lighted a Candle: So now, the Soul in a day of Affliction,
seeks and searches for this Sin, and the other. Surely (says the awakened
Conscience) there is some Provocation, there is some Wedge of Gold, some
allured Thing, some right Eye, some right Hand, which puts the Lord upon
contending with me, and upon thus afflicting of me. Thus Josepb's Brethren,
they search and find out their Guilt in the day of their Distress and
Affliction.

Fifthly, Because a day of Affliction, is a Day of plain and impartial dealing
with ones own Soul. We are prone to be Partial at other times, and flatter our
selves; but now Conscience being awakened, it deals faithfully, as the Matter
requires. O! now Conscience in the day of Affliction, tells the Sinner a plain
story. Sinner, thou have sinned, and thou can not deny it; and thou must
repent of it, or else perish to all Eternity: Except you repent, you shall
likewise perish. Now this is a plain Sermon; and thus did Joseph's Brethren,
Their Consciences in their Affliction, told them a very plain Story: We are
verily guilty concerning our Brother, etc. And, ah Sinners! had not your
Consciences better be plain with you now, than be plain with you in Hell; O
what plain Sermons does Conscience preach to the Damned! You will not, many of
you, bear plain Preaching now; But, O remember, what a plain Preacher
Conscience will be when awakened in a day of Affliction!

Now we come to the Improvement of what has been said upon all the Doctrinal
part. Application.


Is it so that Conscience is so quick and active in a day of Affliction? Then

1. Learn we hence that many Souls have great cause to bless God for
Afflictions. They may say (with David) Before they were afflicted, Psalm. 119.67.
they went astray. Joseph's Brethren (for any thing I know) had died under this
Guilt, if God had not brought them into this Distress. Had not Manasseh cause
to bless God for his Affliction? They were blessed Briars he was caught (...).
Has not the Lord o^ened the Ears of many by Affliction? and commanded them to
return from Iniquity? Yea, great Persons, when they have been bound in Fetters,
Job 36.8, 9, 10.
and holden in Cords of Affliction, then God shows them their Work and their
Transgressions, that they have exceeded. O! what a Mercy was it to the Church,
when God hedged up her. Ways with Thorns? Is it not a merry to be kept from
drowning (...) a Pit, though it be by a Thorn Hedge? How many ^inners had gone
on in Sin, and had been drowned in ^ell, if God had not stopped them by a sharp
Thorn Hedge of Affliction? O! What would have become of the Prodigal in a far
Country, it the Lord had not found him out by Affliction? It is said There is
an antipathy betwixt the Serpent and the Nightingal; and while the Serpenlies
in wait for the Nightingal, she sets a sharp Thorn to her Breast, lest she
should sleep and so be surprised, and when ever she is heavy, the Thorn pricks
her, and make her sing with renewed Chear^ fullness. O poor Souls! how many have
cause to bless God for putting a sharp Thorn to their Breasts, to keep them
awake, lest they should be surprised by the wily Serpent that lies in wait for
precious Souls.

2. Learn we hence not to conclude, because Conscience sleeps at present, that
it will always do so. Though it sleep now, a day of Affliction will come, and
then it may awake, and tell you many a sad story. You think, poor Sinners, all
is well after the Fact is committed, if Conscience say nothing to you: But
alas, the worst is to come, the Reckoning Day is yet to come. Stay until God
bring thee into the Briars, or upon a Deathbed, and it may be thou will then
tell another story: The longer Conscience sleeps, the louder will its Noise be
when once it awakes. But what if it do not awake at all here? Then it will
awake hereafter, it will awake in Hell. There is not one sleepy Conscience
science there. But, O Sinners! had not your Consciences ten thousand times
better awake here, when and while there is Hope?

3. Learn we hence what a sad Judgment a seared Conscience is, which makes no
Reflection at all; which never smites a poor Sinner, but lets him run headlong
to Hell. O what Wrath like this! what Plague like this! to have an hardened
Conscience, a Conscience past feeling? Such as can boast of Sinning, and their
Conscience, never trouble them, God has said to such, as once to Ephraim, He
is joined to Idols, Hos. 4.17.
let him alone. And, O what a Judgment is this, for God to wink at Sinners
Damnation! (as Luther says) Woe to that Man whose Sins God winks at.

4. Learn we hence, what a Mercy a tender Conscience is; a Conscience that
reflects in a day of Affliction, that smites a Man for what he does. These
Smitings and Reflections are great Mercies, for they are in order to bring
Souls to Repentance, whereas you might else have died in your Guilt unpardoned.
O! Bless God when your Consciences recoil upon you, and tell you, you have
Sinned. It was the commendation of Josiah, that he had a tender Heart. 2 Chronicles.
34.27.


5. Learn we hence the Reason why many Sinners have confessed that under
Affliction, that they never did, nor never would confess before. Conscience
would not let them alone, they could not be quiet. Guilt was like Poison to
them, if the Party do not Vomit, he dies for it; all comes out in a day of
Affliction, that lay hid before. Afflictions are great Discoverers. Nay, how do
some guilty Sinners in this case, like Seamen, that cast that overboard in a
Storm, that they wish for again in a Calm. O, do not many confess and discover
that in a storm of Conscience, that they wish they had concealed and kept in?
Horror of Conscience extorts many a Confession from guilty Sinners.

The second Use. Is it so that Conscience is very quick and active in its
Reflections in a day of Distress and Affliction? Then it is a word of Caution:

1. Take heed of not heartening in a day of Affliction ^o the voice of
Conscience. O, take heed of turning a deaf Ear to a speaking Conscience! If
ever it will speak in this Life, it will speak then when thou art in a day of
Affliction. Do not as these Brethren did, who heartened not to the anguish of
their Brother's Soul, when he besought them. O, do not so with your
Consciences! O, do not say in this matter, as he did to Paul, Come again at a
more convenient time, and I will hear thee. O poor Sinners! there can be no
more convenient time in the World than a day of Affliction.

1. Sinners, know if you hear it not now, it may be it will speak no more.
Hearken to it while it is to Day the Oracle will be silent to Morrow. O! What
if this should be the last time, the las^ words that ever your Conscience will
speak to you, and yet you should be deaf to it would not this be sad?

2. Sinners, what if the next time that Conscienc^ should speak to you, it
should be in another World? What i^ thou should hear a voic^ from the Damned,
say, a^ was said to Saul, To Morrow thou shall be with us? What if thou
should not live til^ to Morrow, and thou be dea^ to Conscience to day? Had
not you better hear you^ Consciences now, than hea^ them in Hell?

3. Sinners, know the Voice of Conscience is the Voice of God, it has its
Commission from God. He has bid Conscience speak to you, convince you, warn
you, caution you, smite you. Go (says God) to Conscience, and talk with such a
poor Sinner, who has wronged and wounded his own Soul, and dishonored my
Name, and warn him from ^e: And tell him from Me, Except he repent, he shall
^erish in his Sins. And will ^ou refuse to hear such a ^^essage from God in a
day ^f Affliction?

4. Sinners, know this, It ^ill aggravate your Guilt exceedingly, to be deaf to
^^e Voice of Conscience in a ^y of Affliction. Indeed it is so at any time, but
much more in a day of Distress. Such Reflections as you have turned a deaf Ear
to, will be great Aggravations against you another day. John 15.22.
If I had not come and spoken to them (says Christ) they had not had Sin. Their
Sin had not been so circumstantiated; as may be said in this case. If
Conscience had not Reflected upon you, convinced you, reproved you, you had not
had Sin, but now your Sin remains.

5. Sinners, if you hearken not unto your Consciences in a day of Distress, it
i^ an argument you are hardened in your Sins; if thus deafned, then hardened: If
(...) deafned Wretch, thou will prove an hardened Wretch O now, if Sinners would
put all these together, they would see need of this Caution, to take heed lest
they should turn a deaf Ear to Conscience in a day of Distress.

Second Branch of the Caution. Take heed of stifling and strangling the
Reflection of Conscience in a day of Affliction: This is very dangerous, and
yet very ordinary. The Lord made Man Righteous, but he has found out many
Inventions. And some of these Inventions are to stisle and strangle Conscience,
to overlay the Reflections of awakened Conscience; as the Woman overlaid the
Child. O, how many Sinners have overlaid their Convictions! Some go to their
Comforts, some to their Cares, some to their Pleasures, and all to smother
Conscience. Some Sinners take these following Courses to murder their
Convictions.

1. They run further into Sin. Will this ever prove a Remedy? Will not this
make the Wound to bleed so much the more? To run into sinful Company when
wounded in your Consciences, will not this inflame the Reckoning? Is not this
to run so much the more upon the score with God? O, Sinners, let me tell you,
all these Arrears must at the long run be reckoned for.

2. Others they run to lawful Comforts and Enjoyments, and so labor to stifle
the Reflections of their guilty Consciences.

3. Others they run to their lawful Employments, as Cain did to build Cities;
so some go to their Trades to their Shops, on purpose to drown the convictions
of their own guilty Consciences.

4. Others go to their sinful Recreations, Carding, and Dicing, and Gaming.

5. Others make Charms of their Duties and Forms, as Papists go to their [Pater
Nosters], and their [Ave Marys]; nay may not this piece of refined Popery be in
the Heart of such as call themselves Protestants? But alas, all these cannot
bear down an awakened Conscience when God sets Guilt on.

The Third Use, Is a word of Exhortation to poor guilty Sinners: O! then yield
an Ear to the Reflections of your own Consciences. Many a Man's Conscience
cannot be heard by him; it checks him, and chides him, and reproves him, but
yet all this while the Sinner stops his Ear, as the deaf Adder, of which some
write, That she claps one Ear to the Earth, and covers the other with her Tail.
O, hear Sinners, then what Conscience has to say. Hearken to the Preacher in
your Bosoms. Turn you about, Sinners, once before you die, and listen to this
Preacher.

1. Sinners, if you will not hear it now, you must hear it whether you will or
no hereafter: And, O how sad will it be to hear it there, Where the Worm never
dies, and the Fire never goes out. This Worm is the guilty Conscience, which
Sinners must hear in Hell, if they will not hear it here. Guilty Consciences
preach in Hell, and the Sermon is as long as Eternity it self; Maak 9.44.
and happy were the Damned, if they could run away from these Sermons. O
Sinners! you cannot stop your Ears in the other World against your guilty
Consciences, as you do in this.

2. Sinners, hearken to the Reflections of your own Consciences; for your
hearing them will be in order to the getting of your Sins pardoned. Its
Reflections are in order to your Repentance, and your Repentance will be in
order to your Remission. They are both put together, and preached in the Name
of Christ together: And would not you be glad to have your Sins pardoned? Would
not you be glad to have your Sins washed away in the Blood of Christ? Would not
you be glad to have this heavy and insupportable burden of Guilt removed off
the back of your Consciences? Are your Sins gone over your Heads as a Burden,
yea, as too heavy a Burden for you to bear, and would not you rejoice to be led
to Safety and Rest, under all your Loads and Pressures?

3. Be sure you attend to the Reflections of your Consciences, for the Rod
joins issue with Conscience; the Rod sets Conscience on work, and they preach
the same Doctrine. Therefore we are called, and strictly charged to hear the
Rod. It may be, Sinners, Mic. 6.9.
God has tried other Preachers, and they have done little good, to make you
sensible of your Guilt, then God commissions these Preachers, Conscience, and
the Rod. If a Man cannot come abroad and hear a Minister, then Affliction shall
preach to him at Home. Now the Rod is assistant to Conscience, Job 24.13.
the Preacher in your Bosoms.

4. Sinners, be not deaf to the Reflections of your Consciences; this is to sin
against your Light, nay, to ^ebel against your Light. And is not this sad? and
the guilt of this Rebellion you will be charged with another day.

5. (Poor Sinners!) Be not deaf to the Reflections of your own Consciences;
usually God follows such with his severest Judgments.

1. Sometimes Temporal. Many times God makes that threatening good upon such: I
will wound the hoary Scalp of every one that goes on in his Trespasses. Psalm.
68.21.
If Men will walk on in their Sins, contrary to all checks and convictions of
Conscience, let them look for some severe blow of the Hand of God upon them,
sooner or later; for tho the Sentence be not speedily executed, it is not said,
it never shall. Tho Execution day be for a while deferred yet it will come.

2. Spiritual Judgments, which are the worst and saddest of Judgments. Many
times Sinners deaf to their Consciences, are given up to a seared Conscience,
to a reprobate Mind, to vile Affection, to their own Lusts, to hardness of
Heart: And is not the judicially hardened Sinner, the half-damned Sinner?

The Second Branch of Exhortation is, To such as have Reflecting tender
Consciences. O then, bless the Lord for such awakened Consciences! It is a
greater Mercy than you think of, to have such a Monitor and Remembrancer in
your Bosoms.

1. Is it not a Mercy to be waylaid in a sinful Course? To be prevented in
Sin? To be stopped in a Carreer and full Gallop for Hell? This, this is the end
why God sets Conscience at work with a poor Sinner; Had not many poor Sinners
run headlong to utter Destruction and Damnation else. May not many a poor
Sinner say to Conscience, as David did to Abigail, Blessed be the God of
Israel, 1 Samuel 25.32, 33.
that sent thee this day, to prevent me from shedding innocent Blood. When thou
have had rebukes of Conscience, have thou not said, Numb. 22.34.
as Balaam to the Angel, in his way to stop him, If my way be perverse before
the Lord, and displease thee, I will get me back again. And is not this a Mercy?

2. Is it not a Mercy to be raised to Re entance after falling into Sin? The
Sinner's Sinning is his Fall, the Sinner's Repentance is his Rising. And are
not all Conscience's Reflections, when it is awakened in order to Repentance?
(as has been already hinted): and is not this a Mercy to be plucked as a
Firebrand out of the midst of the burning? O! how does Conscience give many a
pull at some Sinners, to get them out of the Fire, lest it should prove the
Fire that never goes out!

3. Is not this a Mercy to have thy Soul lie in the way of a Pardon? Can
thou, O poor Sinner! expect Remission without Repentance? Have thou any Promise
for it in all the Bible? Produce it if thou can? O! whoever told thee so, but
Satan and thy own deluding Heart? Do not all Offenders that receive Pardons
from their Princes, receive them upon their Knees? Whither is it thy awakened
guilty Conscience would send thee, but to the King of Israel, that Merciful
King, with Sackcloth upon thy Loins, and an Halter about thy Neck, in order to
the receiving of thy Pardon?

Third Branch of the Exhortation. O then, bless the Lord for days of Affliction
and Distress! Because these are the especial times when Conscience makes such q
^ck Reflections upon Souls. Are not such afflictions great Mercies, as are
sanctified means in the Hand of God, to awaken poor guilty Souls? Had not you
better be awakened by Afflictions, than perish in your Sins? O, how many poor
Souls had run headlong to Hell, if a Thorn Hedge of smarting Affliction, had not
stopped them? (as has been noted already) Are not Afflictions Mercies which are
means to awaken sleepy Consciences, which otherwise might have slept on to Hell
else? Is it not a Mercy to be rouzed out of our Security? Suppose a Man sleep
upon the Bank of the River, had not he been better awakened, tho it be by
pinching, than sleep on until he drop in and be Drowned? Is not this the Case?
There are many poor Souls that lie asleep on the brink of the Pit, one turn by
Death on the other side, and the Sinner is gone, and gone for ever.

But, methinks, I hear a poor Soul say, What shall I do? what Course shall I
take? The guilt of my Conscience lies like an heavy Load and Weight upon me. I
am dogged with the sense of my guilt Day and Night. My Sin is ever before me.
Let such troubled Consciences take these Directions.

1. Freely confess thy guilt to God. Thus Joseph's Brethren did in the day of
their Distress. Thus all Consciences when wounded, should bleed by Confession.
Thus David: I have sinned, etc. Thus the poor Prodigal: Father, I have sinned
against Heaven, and against thee, etc. The Promise runs to confession of Sin:
Prove. 28.13.
He that confesses, and forsakes his Sin, shall find Mercy. 1 John 1.9.
If we confess our Sins, God is Faithful and Just to forgive us our Sins.

2. Be much upon your Knees, praying for Pardon. O, what will make a Man pray,
if sense of Guilt will ^ot! Need any put words unto the Mouth of a condemned
Malefactor, to beg the judge to be good unto him? How ready is he to cry, Good
^y Lord, have Mercy? O, that Petitioning will there ^e to the Judge! O, poor
^uilty Sinner, see this Course ^^ken by David; Lord, have ^dercy upon me, etc.

3. O, run believingly to ^^e Blood of Christ! Your ^onfessions, your Prayers,
^ur Tears, will not do without the Blood of Christ; thou must get further
(viz.) To the Blood of Sprinkling. This is the Blood that cleanses from all
Sin, and all Unrighteousness. Here, here is the Fountain for guilty and for
filthy Souls to wash in.

4. Defer not your Repentance, this is dangerous when under sense of Guilt. You
can say in other Cases, there is danger in delays: O, why do not you say so in
this? O, poor Sinners, sleep not in your Guilt! A wounded Spirit must be taken
betimes, a^ well as a Wound in the Body the Wound will get win^ else, and will
fester; thi^ will make dreadful work i^ once Guilt gangreen and fester. O, how
hard will gangreen'd Conscience be t^ Cure.

5. Direction is, Lay hold by an hand of Faith, upon your precious Promises in
the Gospel held out to you. O, poor guilty Sinners are all for application of
Threatenings, and alas, this makes the Wound deeper and wider. O, how do such
Sinners when they neglect Gospel-Promises! Has Christ purchased such precious
Promises to lie by you? O, what a sin is Unbelief, to null the Promises of God!
to make them void, and of none effect. Are these Cordials provided for Sin-sick
Souls, and will they not so much as taste of them? Will not God take this ill
at your Hands? Is not a Gospel-Promise, a proper Plaster for a wounded
Conscience? O, that all guilty Sinners were well studied in Gospel-Promises!
Might not they then epsy a door of Hope, Isa. 1.
concerning their pardon of Sin and Guilt? Yea, tho their Sins were as Scarlet,
(such were Joseph's Brethren, in my Text) yet they should be as white as Snow.
And the they were as Crimson, they should be as white as Wool O, what a Mercy,
poor Sinners, would this be, to be awakened by the Reflections of your own
guilty Consciences in a day of Affliction and for all to end and issue in
Remission and Pardon!

FINIS.

