REFLECTIONS ON Aristotle's TREATISE OF POESY. CONTAINING The Necessary,
Rational, and Universal RULES for Epick, Dramatick, and the other sorts of
POETRY.

With Reflections on the Works of the Ancient and Modern POETS, And their
Faults Noted.

By R. RAPIN.

Licensed June 26, 1674. Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for H. Herringman, at the Anchor in the Lower Walk of
the New Exchange. 1674.

THE PREFACE OF THE TRANSLATOR.
THE Artist would not take pains to polish a Diamond, if none besides himself
were quick-sighted enough to discern the flaw; And Poets would grow negligent,
if the Critics had not a strict eye over their miscarriages. Yet it often
happens, that this eye is so distorted by envy or ill nature, that it sees
nothing aright. Some Critics are like Wasps, that rather annoy the Bees, than
terrisie the Drones.

For this sort of Learning, our Neighbor Nations have got far the start of us;
in the last Century, Italy swarmed with Critics, where, amongst many of less
note, Castelvetro opposed all comers; and the famous Academy LaCrusca was
always impeaching some or other of the best Authors. Spain, in those days,
bred great Wits, but, I think, was never so crowded, that they needed to fall
out and quarrel amongst themselves. But from Italy, France took the Cudgels;
and though some light strokes passed in the days of Marot, Baif, etc. yet they
fell not to it in earnest, nor was any noble Contest amongst them, till the
Royal Academy was founded, and Cardinal Richlieu encouraged and rallied all the
scattered Wits under his Banner. Then Malherb reformed their ancient licentious
Poetry; and Corneille's Cid raised many Factions amongst them. At this time
with us many great Wits flourished, but Ben Johnson, I think, had all the
Critical learning to himself; and till of late years England was as free from
Critics, as it is from Wolves, that a harmless well-meaning Book might pass
without any danger. But now this privilege, whatever extraordinary Talent it
requires, is usurped by the most ignorant: and they who are least acquainted
with the game, are aptest to bark at every thing that comes in their way. Our
fortune is, Aristotle, on whom our Author makes these Reflections, came to this
great work better accomplished. He who Criticis'd on the ancient and his
contemporary Philosophers; on Pythagoras, Democritus, Empedocles, Heraclitus,
Epicharmus, Parmenides, Xenophanes, Melissus, Anaxagoras, Protagoras, Eudoxus,
Solon, Anaximander, Anaximenes, Plato, Speusippus; who examined and censured
the Laws and Polities of Minos, Lycurgus, Solon, Hippodamus, Phaleas, and all
the other Commonwealths; it is he, I say, that undertakes this Province, to pass
a judgment on the Poets, and their Works; and him Antiquity first honored with
the name of Critic.

It is indeed suspected that he dealt not always fairly with the Philosophers,
misreciting sometimes, and misinterpreting their opinions. But I find him not
taxed of that injustice to the Poets, in whose favor he is so ingenious, that
to the disadvantage of his own profession, he declares, That Tragedy more
conduces to the instruction of Mankind, than even Philosophy it self. And
however cried down in the Schools, and vilisied by some modern Philosophers;
since Men have had a taste for good sense, and could discern the beauties of
correct writing, he is preferred in the politest Courts of Europe, and by the
Poets held in great veneration. Not that these can servilely yield to his
Authority, who, of all men living, affect liberty. The truth is, what Aristotle
writes on this Subject, are not the dictates of his own magisterial will, or
dry deductions of his Metaphysics: But the Poets were his Masters, and what
was their practice, he reduced to principles. Nor would the modern Poets
blindly resign to this practice of the Ancients, were not the Reasons
convincing and clear as any demonstration in Mathematics. It Is only needful
that we understand them, for our consent to the truth of them. The Arabians,
it is confessed, who glory in their Poets and Poetry, more than all the world
besides; and who, I suppose, first brought the art of Riming into Europe,
observe but little these Laws of Aristotle: On Arist. de Poet.
yet Averois rather chooses to blame the practice of his Countrymen as
vicious, than to allow any imputation on the doctrine of this Philosopher as
imperfect. Fancy with them is predominant, is wild, vast and unbridled, over
which their judgment has little command or authority: hence their conceptions
are monstrous, and have nothing of exactue^s, nothing of resemblance or
proportion.

The Author of these Reflections is as well known amongst the Critics, as
Aristotle to the Philosophers: never man gave his judgment so generally, and
never was judgment more free and impartial. He might be thought an enemy to the
Spaniards, were he not as sharpon the Italians; and he might be suspected to
envy the Italians, were he not as severe on his own Countrymen. These Nations
make it a Problem, whether a Dutchman or German may be a Wit or no; and our
Author finds none worthy of his Censure amongst them, except Heinsius and
Grotius. Amongst us he gives Buchanan a particular Character: but for such as
writ in the English Tongue, he has not, I presume, understood the language so
well, to pass a judgment on them: only in general he confesses, that we have a
Genius for Tragedy above all other people; one reason he gives we cannot allow
of, viz. The disposition of our Nation, which, he says is delighted with cruel
things. It Is ordinary to judge of Peoples manners and inclinations, by their
public diversions; and Travelers, who see some of our Tragedies, may conclude
us certainly the cruellest minded people in Christendom.

In another place this Author says of us, That we are men in an I stand,
divided from the rest of the world, and that we love blood in our sports. And,
perhaps, it may be true, that on our Stage are more Murders than on all the
Theaters in Europe. And they who have not time to learn our Language, or be
acquainted with our Conversation, may there in three hours time behold so much
bloodshed as may affright them from the inhospitable shore, as from the Cyclops
Den. Let our Tragedy-makers consider this, and examine whether it be the
disposition of the People, or their own Caprice that brings this Censure on the
best natured Nation under the Sun.

His other Reason is our Language which, he says, is proper for great
expressions. The Spanish is big and fastuous, proper only for Rodomontades, and
compared with other Languages, is like the Kettle drum to Music.

The Italian is fittest for Burlesque, and better becomes the mouth of Petrolin
and Arloquin in their Farces, than any Heroic character. The perpetual
termination in vowels is childish, and themselves confess, rather sweet than
grave.

The French wants sinews for great and heroic Subjects, and even in
Love-matters, by their own confession, is a very Infant; Mesna^dir^. and al.
Lenga di Masseritie.
the Italians call it the Kitchin-language, it being so copious and flowing on
those occasions.

The German still continues rude and unpolisht, not yet filed and civilized by
the commerce and intermixture with strangers to that smoothness and humanity
which the English may boast of.

The dissyllable Rimes force the Italians and Spaniards on the Stanza in
Heroicks; which, besides many other disadvantages, renders the Language unfit
for Tragedy.

The French now only use the long Alexandrins, and would make up in length
what they want in strength and substance; yet are they too faint and
languishing, and attain not that numerosity which the dignity of Heroic Verse
requires, and which is ordinary in an English Verse of ten syllables. But I
shall not here examine the weight, the fullness, the vigor, force, gravity, and
the sitness of the English for Heroic Poesy above all other Languages; the
world expecting these matters learnedly and largely discussed Shering^am.
in a particular Treatise on that Subject.

But from our Language proceed to our Writers, and with the freedom of this
Author, examine how unhappy the greatest English Poets have been through their
ignorance or negligence of these fundamental Rules and Laws of Aristotle. (...)
pre^er^ him to the bent of (...).
I shall leave the Author of the Romance of the Rose (whom Sir Richard Baker
makes an Englishman) for the French to boalt of, because he writ in their
Language. Nor shall I speak of Chaucer, in whose time our Language, I presume,
was not capable of any Heroic Character. Nor indeed was the most polite Wit of
Europe in that Age sufficient for a great design. That was the Age of Tales,
Ballads, and Roundelays. Petrarch in those days attempted the Epick strain in
his Africa; but though most happy in his Sonnets and Madrigals, was far too
feeble for a work of that weight and importance.

Spencer, I think, may be reckoned the first of our Heroic Poets; he had a
large spirit, a sharp judgment, and a Genius for Her^ick Poes^e, perhaps above
any that ever writ since Virgil. But our misfortune is, he wanted a true Idea;
and lost himself, by following an unfaithful guide. Though besides Homer and
Virgil he had read Tasso, yet he rather suffered himself to be misled by
Ariosto; with whom blindly rambling on mavelous Adventures, he makes no
Conscience of Probability. All is fanciful and chimerical, without any
uniformity, without any foundation in truth; his Poem is perfect Fairy-land.

They who can love Ariosto, will be ravished with Spencer; whilst men of juster
thoughts lament that such great Wits have miscarried in their Travels for want
of direction to set them in the right way. But the truth is, in Spencer's time,
Italy it self was not well satisfied with Tasso; and few amongst them would
then allow that he had excelled their divine Ariosto. And it was the vice of
those Times to affect superstitiously the Allegory; and nothing would then be
current without a mystical meaning. We must blame the Italians for debauching
great Spencer's judgment; and they cast him on the unlucky choice of the
Stanza, which in no wise is proper for our Language.

The next for Epick Poes^e, is Sir William D'avenant, his Wit is well known;
and in the Preface to his Gondibert, appear some strokes of an extraordinary
judgment. He is for unbeaten tracks, and new ways of thinking; but certainly
in his untried Seas he is no great discoverer.

One design of the Epick Poets before him was to adorn their own Country,
there finding their Heroes, Et Pater Aeneas and Avunculus excitet Hector.
and patterns of Virtue; whose example (as they thought) would have greatest
influence and power over Posterity; but this Poet steers a different course,
his Heroes are all Foreigners: He cultivates a Country that is nothing akin
to him, it is Lombardy that reaps the honor of all.

Other Poets chose some Action or Hero so illustrious, that the name of the
Poem prepared the Reader, and made way for its reception: but in this Poem none
can divine, what great action he intended to celebrate; nor is the Reader
obliged to know whether the Hero be Turk or Christian. Nor do the first lines
give any light or prospect into his design. Methinks. though his Religion could
not dispense with an Invocation, he needed not have scrupled at the
Proposition: yet he rather chooses to enter in at the top of an house, because
the mortals of mean and satisfied minds go in at the door. And I believe the
Reader is not well pleased to find his Poem begin with the praises of Aribert,
when the Title had promised a Gondibert. But before he falls on any other
business, he presents the Reader with a description of each particular Hero,
not trusting their actions to speak for them; as former Poets had done. Their
practice was fine and artificial, his (he tells us) is a new way. Many of his
Characters have but little of the Heroic in them; Dalga is a Jilt, proper
only for Comedy; Birtha for a Pastoral; and Astragon, in the manner here
described, yields no very great ornament to an Heroic Poem; nor are his
Battles less liable to Censure, than those of Homer.

He dares not, as other Heroic Poets, heighten the action by making Heaven and
Hell interess'd, for fear of offending against probability; and yet he tells of
-- Threads by patient Parcae slowly spun.
And for being dead, his phrase is, Heaven called him, where peacefully he
rules a star.
And the Emerald he gives to Birtha, has a stronger tang of the old Woman, and
is a greater improbability than all the enchantments in Tasso. A just medium
reconciles the farthest extremes, and due preparation may give credit to the
most unlikely Fiction. In Marino, Adonis is presented with a Diamond Ring,
where, indeed, the stone is much-what of the same nature; but this Present is
made by Venus: and from a Goddess could not be expected a gift of ordinary
virtue.

Although a Poet is obliged to know all Arts and Sciences, yet he ought
discreetly to manage this knowledge. He must have judgment to select what is
noble or beautiful, and proper for his occasion. He must by a particular
Chemistry extract the essence of things, without soiling his Wit with the gross
and trumpery. But some Poets labor to appear skilful with that wretched
affectation, they dote on the very terms and jargon: exposing themselves rather
to be laughed at by the Apprentices, than to be admired by Philosophers: But
whether D' Avenant be one of those, I leave others to examine.

The sort of Verse he makes choice of, might, I suppose, contribute much to the
vitiating of his style; for thereby he obliges himself to stretch every period
to the end of four lines. Thus the sense is broken perpetually with
parentheses, the words jumbl'd in confusion, and a darkness spread over all;
that the sense is either not discerned, or found not sufficient for one just
Verse, which is sprinkled on the whole tetrastick.

In the Italian and Spanish, where all the Rimes are dissyllable, and the
percussion stronger, this kind of Verse may be necessary; and yet to temper
that grave march, they repeat the same Rhyme over again, and then they close the
Stanza with a Couplet further to sweeten the severity. But in French and
English, where we rhyme generally with only one syllable, the Stanza is not
allowed, much less the alternate Rhyme in long Verse; for the ^ound of the
monosyllable Rhyme is either lost ere we come to its correspondent, or we are in
pain by the so long expectation and suspense.

This alternate Rhyme, and the downright Morality throughout whole Canto's
together, show him better acquainted with the quatrains of Pybrach, which he
speaks of, than with any true Models of Epick Poes^e.

After all, he is said to have a particular Talent for the Manners: his
thoughts are great, and there appears something roughly Noble throughout this
fragment; which, had he been pleased to finish it, would, doubtless, not have
been left so open to the attack of Critics.

A more happy Genius for Heroic Poes^e, appears in Cowley. He understood the
purity, the perspicuity, the majesty of style, and the virtue of numbers. He
could discern what was beautiful and pleasant in Nature, and could express his
Thoughts without the least difficulty or constraint. He understood to dispose
of the matters, and to manage his Digressions. In short, he understood Homer
and Virgil, and as prudently made his advantage of them.

Yet as it may be lamented, that he carried not on the work so far as he
designed, so it might be wished that he had lived to revise what he did leave
us: I think the Troubles of David is neither title nor matter proper for an
Heroic Poem; seeing it is rather the actions, than his sufferings, that make
an Hero: nor can it be defended by Homer's Odysseis, since Vlysse's sufferings
conclude with one great and perfect action.

After all the heavy Censures that jointly from all Critics have fallen on
Lucan, I do a little wonder that this Author should choose History for the
Subject of his Poem; and a History where he is so strictly tied up to the
Truth. Aristotle tells us, That Poetry is something more excellent, and more
philosophical, than History, and does not inform us what has been done; but
teaches what may, and what ought to be done. And since many particulars in
Sacred Story are neither Heroic, nor indeed consistent with the common
principles of Morality, but of a singular, extraordinary, and unaccountable
dispensation; and since in the principal actions all is carried on by Machine;
how can these examples be proposed for great persons to imitate? or what
foundation for their hopes in impossibilities? Poetry has no life, nor can have
any operation without probability: it may indeed amuse the People, but moves
not the Wise, (...) etc. Stob.
for whom alone (according to Pythagoras) it is ordained.

Instead of one illustrious and perfect action, which properly is the subject
of an Epick Poem; Cowley proposes to adorn some several particulars of David's
life: and these particulars have no necessary relation to the end, nor in any
wise lead to the great revolution; David is made King, but this is the work of
Heaven, not any achievement of his own. He neither did, nor ought to lif^ a
finger for gaining the Crown: he is amongst the Amalekites, whilst his work is
done without him. This ill choice of a Subject forces the Poet (how excellent
otherwise soever) perpetually on digressions: and David is the least part of
the Poem.

Some, perhaps, may object, That he begins not his Poem with all the art and
address as might be desired. Homer would make us believe the drawing of
Achilles, adorned with all his glorious actions, a design too vast and
impossible: and therefore only proposes his resentment of the affront given him
by Agamemnon; as if any one particular of his life were sufficient to employ
the greatest humane Wit with all its Muses and divine assistance. Achilles
could not be angry, but Heaven and Earth are engaged, and just matter given for
an Heroic Poem. Thus whilst he proposes but one passage, we conceive a greater
Idea of the rest than any words could express; and whilst he promises so
little, his performances are the more admirable and surprising. But in the
Davideis we have all the Herve at the first: in the Proposition, he is the best
Poet, and the best King; now all the Author could do afterward, is only to
make good his word, and make us conceive of his Hero the same Idea at the end
of the Poem, which was given us in the beginning; whereas Homer calls the man
he designs to celebrate barely Achilles, son of Peleus, and recording his
actions, leaves others to conclude from them what a great Captain, Prince and
Hero this Achilles was.

Tasso left the Episode of Sophonia out of his Poem, because it was Troppo
Lyrico.

co. Yet Mr. Cowley is not content to mix matters that are purely lyrical in
this Heroic Poem, but employs the measures also.

Yet, notwithstanding what has been said, we cannot now approve the reason
(which Sir Philip Sidney gives) why Poets are less esteemed in England, than in
the other famous Nations, to be want of merit: nor be of their opinion, who
say, that Wit and Wine are not of the growth of our Country. Valor they allow
us; but what we gain by our Arms, we lose by the weakness of our Heads: our
good Ale, and English Beef, they say, may make us Soldiers; but are no very
good Friends to Speculation. Were it proper here to handle this Argument, and
to make comparisons with our Neighbors, it might easily, by our Poetry be
evinced, that our Wit was never inferior to theirs, though, perhaps, our
honesty made us worse Politicians. Wit and Valor have always gone together,
and Poetry been the companion of Camps. The Hero and Poet were inspired with
the same Enthusiasm, acted with the same heat, and both were crowned with the
same laurel. Had our Tongue been as generally known, and those who felt our
blows, understood our Language; they would confess that our Poets had likewise
done their part, and that our Pens had been as successful as our Swords. And
certainly if Sir Philip Sidney had seen the Poets who succeeded him, he would
not have judged the English less deserving than their Neighbors. In the
Davideis (fragment and imperfect as it is) there shines something of a more
fine, more free, more new, and more noble air, than appears in the Jerusalem
of Tasso, which for all his care, is scarce perfectly purged from Pedantry. But
in the Lyrick way however, Cowley far exceeds him, and all the rest of the
Italians: though Lyrick Poes^e is their principal glory, and Pope Urban VIII,
had the honor a little before him to enrich modern Poes^e with the Pindarick
strains. Many the greatest Wits of France have attempted the Fpick, but their
performance answered not expectation; our fragments are more worth than their
finished pieces. And though, perhaps, want of encouragement has hindered our
labors in the Epic, yet for the Drama, the World has nothing to be compared
with us. But a debate of this importance is not the work of a Preface: I shall
only here on the behalf of our English Poetry, give one single instance, and
leave the Reader to judge of Hercules by his foot.

Amongst the common places (by which Scaliger, and before him Macrobius,
Agellius, and the other Critics have compared the Poets, and examined their
worth) none has been more generally, and more happily handled, and in none have
the Noblest wits both ancient and modern more contended with each other for
victory, than in the description of the right. Yet in this the English has the
advantage, and has even outdone them where they have outdone themselves. The
first, I meet with, who had the lucky hit, is Apollonius in his Argonautiques.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
Here we have variety of matter, yet rather many, than choice thoughts. He
gives us the face of things both by Land and Sea, City and Country, the
Mariner, the Traveller, the Doorkeeper, the Mistress of the Family, her Child
and Dog; but loses himself amongst his particulars, and seems to forget for
what occasion he mentions them. He would say that all the world is fast asleep
but only Medea; and then his Mariners, who are gazing from their ships on
Helice and Orion, can serve but little for his purpose; unless they may be
supposed to sleep with their eyes open. Neither dares he say that the Traveller
and Porter are yet taking a Nap, but only that they have a good mind to it. And
after all, we find none but the good Woman who had lost her Child (and she
indeed is fast) asleep, unless the Dogs may likewise be supposed so, because
they had left off barking. And these, methinks, were scarce worthy to be taken
notice of in an Heroic Poem, except we may believe that in the old time, or
that in Greek they bark Heroically. Scaliger, as his manner is, to prefer
Virgil, calls this description mean and vulgar. Virgil well saw the levity and
trifling of the Greeks, and from him we may expect something better digested.
Nox erat, and placidum carpebant fessa soporem
Corpora per terras, sylvaeque and saeva quierant
Aequora, cum Medio volvuntur sydera lapsu:
Cum tacet omnis ager, pecudes piciaeque volucres
Quaeque lacus late liquidos, quaeque aspera dumis
Rura tenent, somno positae sub nocte silenti
Lenibant curas, and corda oblita laborum.
[Aen. l. 4.]

Against this may be objected, That sleep being of such a soft and gentle
nature, that it is said to steal upon our senses, the word [ carpe^ant] suits
but ill with it; this word seeming to imply a force, and might rather express
the violence of Robbers, than the slieness of a Thief. Nor can it be pretended
that [ sopor] signifies a kind of violent and snoring sleep, for here we have
it placidum soporem. Instead of Woods and Seas, Tasso rather chooses to join
Winds and Seas, as of a nearer relation, and going more naturally together; the
Commentators being certainly mistaken, who would have a Metonymie in this
place. The third Verse I can scarce believe legitimate: the words speak nothing
but motion, and the numbers are so rattling, that nothing can be more repugnant
to the general repose and silence which the Poet describes: or, if any Copies
might favor the conjecture, I should rather read -- Cum medio librantur sydera
cursu.


For nothing can be more Poetical, than to suppose the Stars rest (as it were
poised) in their Meridian; and this would not only express it to be Midnight,
but heighten the Poets design, which by the common reading is absolutely
destroyed. The fifth line seems to bear a doubtful face, and looks not unlike
something of equivocation: an ordinary Grammarian ^ould seek no further than
the antecedent [ volucres] to refer these relatives to; and might construe Wild
ducks, and Woodcocks, what the Poet intended for Fish in the Sea, and the wild
Beasts of the Forest.

Besides this, I find none amongst the Latins that deserves to be brought into
comparison. In the Italian, Ariosto (whose every description is said to be a
masterpiece) in this is not over-fortunate; he is easy and smooth, but
produces nothing of his own invention. He only enlarges on a thought of
Virgils; which yet he leaves without that turn which might give it perfection.
What I think is more considerable, is this of Tasso.

Era la notte all'hor, ch' alto riposo
Ha^ l'onde, e i venti, e parea muto il mondo:
Gli animai lassi, e quei, che'l mar ondoso,
O de' liquidi lagbi alberga il fondo,
E chi sigiace in tana, o in mandra ascoso,
E i pinti augelli ne l' oblio profondo,
Sotto il silentio de' secreti horrori,
Sopian gli affanni, e raddolciano i cori.
Tasso, when he reformed his Poem, could mend nothing in this description, but
repeats it entire in his Jerusalem liberata, without any alternation. It Is
well nigh word for word taken out of Virgil, and (to give it its due) is a most
excellent Translation. He most judiciously leaves out that Hemistick, volvuntur
sydera lapsu, the place whereof is (perhaps from Statius) supplied with parea
muto il mondo. Achilleidos l. 1. mutuinque amplectitur orbem.
Yet on the other hand, here seems to be some superfluity of Fish: those in the
Sea, and those at the bottom of the Lakes, are more by half than Virgil, or,
perhaps than Tasso had occasion for in this place.

But that we may have something new from the Italians on this Subject, Marino
has taken care in his Adonis, Canto 13.

Notte era, allhor che dal diurno moto
Ha requie ogni pensier, tregna ogni duolo,
L'onde giacean, tacean zefiro, e Noto,
E cedeva il quadrante a l' hurivolo,
Sopra l' huom la fatica, il pesce il nuoto,
La fera il Corso, e l' augelletto il volo.
Aspettando il tornar del novo lume
Tra l' alghe, o tra rami, o su le pi^me.
In these we have more of the fancy, than of the judgment; variety of matter,
rather than exquisite sense, Marino is perfectly himself throughout; the
thoughts diurnal motion, I fear, will scarce pass for a very pathetical
expression, nor will it satisfy, that he makes Zephyrus and the South Wind
silent; if he particularize these, he should also name the rest, otherwise the
East Wind and Boreas have leave to bluster. But, above all, he tells us that
the Clocks have got the better of the Sun-dials. A thought purely New, and
strangely Heroic. What could come more sudden or surprising? in the latter
part of the Stanza, we have some strokes of Ariosto, but far more lame and
imperfect than the original. Neither ought he in this place to speak of any
expecting the return of the light; omnia noctis crant.

But I hasten to the French, amongst whom none more eminent than Chapelain, nor
was ever a Poem of greater expectation. His description is thus: Cependant la
nuit vole, and sous son aile obscure
Invite a sommeiller l' agissante Nature.
Dans les plains des airs tient les vents en repose,
Et sur les champs sales fait reposer les flots,
A tout ce qui se meant, a tout ce qui respire
Dans les pres, dans les hois le repos elle inspire,
Elle suspend par tout les travaux and les bruits,
Et par tout dans les caeurs assoupit les ennuis.
Charles seul esveille --


This description is perfect French. There is scarce any coming at a little
sense, it is so encompassed about with words. What Virgil or Tasso would have
dispatched in half a Verse, here fills out the measures of two whole
Alexandrins.

Some Caviller would object, That since the Night flies, there is little sleep
to be got under her wing, unless for such as can walk in their sleep. And that
the Night might have spared this invitation, seeing those she invites are
asleep already: Charles alone is awake, and for that reason, was the only
thing fit to be invited; and doubtless the Night was as free of her invitation
to him, as to any others, 'twas his fault that he had no stomach to it. And here
is much power given to the Night, which she has no claim or title to: it is not
the Night that makes the Waves and Winds, and all the things that move and
breath in Meads and Woods to repose. She only invites them to sleep, and it is
sleep that makes them rest. In the space of four lines, we meet with repos,
reposer, repos, which argue the language very batren, or else the Poet
extremely negligent, and a lover of repose. He tells us, that the Night
inspires repose. But certainly motion is a more likely thing to be inspired,
than rest, as more properly the effect of breath.

But without examining this further, let us try if Le Moyne (whom our Critic
prefers before all others of the French Epick Poets) be more fortunate.
Cependant le soleil se couche dans son lit,
Que luymesme de ponrpre and de laque embellit:
Et la nuit qui survient aussi triste que sombre,
De toute les co^leurs ne fuit que ^^e grand ombre;
Aveque le sommeil le silence la suit,
L'un amy du repos, l'autre ennemy du bruit:
Et quoiqne sous leur pas la tempeste se taise,
Quoique le vent s' endorme and que l'onde s' appaise:
[St. Louys.]

Here again are words in abundance. He cannot tell us that it is Midnight, till
he first have informed us that the Sun is gone to Bed, to a fine Bed of his own
trimming: and this is matter enough for the first two Verses. Then we are told,
that the Night of all Colors makes but one great shade, and this suffices for
the second Couplet. Aussi triste que sombre, is an expression the French are so
delighted with, they can scarce name any thing of Night without it. The third
Couplet is much-what as in a Bill of Fare: Item -- Beef and Mustard,
That Friend to the Stomach, this a Foe to the Nose.
The second line in both being alike impertinent.

Any further Reflections, or more examples would be superfluous. What has been
noted, rather concerns the Niceties of Poetry, than any the little trifles of
Grammar. We have seen what the noblest Wits both ancient and modern have done
in other Languages, and observed that in their very Masterpieces they
sometimes trip, or are however liable to Cavils. It now remains that our
English be exposed to the like impartial Censure. All things are hushed, as
Nature's self lay dead,
The Mountains seem to Nod their drowsy head,
The little Birds in dreams their Songs repeat,
And Sleeping flowers beneath the Night-dew sweat,
Even Lust and Envy sleep.
[In the Conquest of Mexico.]

In this description, four lines yield greater variety of matter, and more
choice thoughts than twice the number of any other Language. Here is something
more fortunate than the boldest fancy has yet reached, and something more just,
than the severest reason has observed. Here are the flights of Statius and
Marino tempered with a more discerning judgment, and the judgment of Virgil and
Tasso animated with a more sprightly Wit. Nothing has been said so expressive
and so home in any other Language as the first Verse in this description. The
second is Statius improved. Et simulant fessos curvata cacumina somnos.


Says Statius, where simulant is a bold word in comparison of our English word
Seem, being of an active signification; and cacumina may as well be taken for
the tops of Trees, as the tops of Mountains, which doubtful meaning does not so
well content the Reader, as the certainty.

In the third Verse, it is not said that the Birds sleep, but what is more new,
and more Poetical, their sleep is implied, by their dreams. Somewhat like to
the Fourth we have in Marino. -- Elanguidetti i fiori
Giaceano a l'herba genitrice in seno.
[Adonis Canto 20.]

Which is a pretty image, but has not so near a resemblance with truth, nor can
so generally be applied to all flowers. Our Author here dares not say directly
that the flowers sleep, which might sound a little harsh, but slurs it over in
the participle, as taken for granted, and affirms only that they sweat, which
the Night-d^w makes very easy.

In the last Half-verse, we may see how far our Author has outdone Apollonius.
'Twas no such strange thing in the sorrowful Woman when she had spent her
tears, for sleep to close her eyes: but here we have the most raging and
watchful passions Lust and Envy. And these too instead of the lustful and the
envious, for the greater force and emphasis, in the abstract.

Some may object, That the third Verse does contradict the first. How can all
things be hushed, if Birds in dreams repeat their Songs? Is not this like the
indiscretion of Marino, who says, That the Winds and all things are hushed, and
the Seas so fast asleep, that they snore. [Canto 20.]

It may be answered, That in this place it is not the Poet that speaks, but
another person; and that the Poet here truly represents the nature of man,
whose first thoughts break out in bold and more general terms, which by the
second thoughts are more correct and limited. As if one should say, all things
are silent, or asleep however; if there is any noise, it is still but the effect
of sleep, as the dreams of Birds, etc. This comparison might be much further
improved to our advantage, and more observations made, which are left to the
Readers ingenuity.

ADVERTISEMENT.
SInce it is not so much to instruct, as to exercise the Wits, that I make
these Reflections public; I am not so vain to think them necessary, nor yet
humble enough to believe them altogether unprofitable. This Treatise is no New
Model of Poesy; for that of Aristotle only is to be adhered to, as the
exactest Rule for governing the Wit. In effect this Treatise of Poesy, to
Speak properly, is nothing else, but nature put in method, and good sense
reduced to principles. There is no arriving at perfection but by these Rules,
and they certainly go astray that take a different course. What faults have not
most of the Italian, Spanish, and other Poets fallen into, through their
ignorance of these principles. And if a Poem made by these Rules fails of
success, the fault lies not in the Art, but in the Artist; all who have writ of
this Art have followed no other Idea but that of Aristotle.

Horace was the first who proposed this great Model to the Romans. And by this
all the great men in the Court of Augustus formed their Wits, who applied
themselves to make Verse. Petronius (whom no man of modesty dares name, unless
on the account of those directions be gave for writing) amongst the Ordures of
his Satyr, gives certain precepts for Poetry that are admirable. He is
disgusted with the style of Seneca and Lucan, which to him seemed affected, and
contrary to the principles of Aristotle. It Is at them he levels with those
glances, that slip from him against the Poetasters, and false Declamators.
Nothing more judicious was writ in those days, yet himself had not that easy
and natural way, which he requires so much in others. He gives the best Rules
in the World against affectation, which he never observes himself. For he
commends even to the simplicity of style, whereas his own is not always
natural. To say the truth, what is good on this Subject, is all taken from
Aristotle; who is the only source whence good sense is to be drawn, when one
goes about to write.

We have had no Books of Poesy till this last Age; when that of Aristotle,
with his other Works, were brought from Constantinople to Italy; where
immediately appeared a great number of Commentators, who writ upon this Book of
Poesy: the chief whereof were Victorius, Robortellus, Madius, who literally
enough interpreted the Text of this Philosopher, without diving much into his
meaning. These were followed by Castelvetro, Piccolomini, Beni, Riccobon,
Majoragius, Minturnus, Vida, Patricius, Andre Gili, Vossius, and many others.
But Vossius has commented on him merely as a Scholiast, Gili as a Rhetorician,
Patricius as an Historian, Vida as a Poet, who endeavors more to please, than
to instruct; Minturnus as an Orator, Majoragius and Riccobon as Logicians, Beni
as a Doctor who has a sound judgment when the honor of his Country is not
concerned. For he compares Ariosto with Homer, and Tasso with Virgil, in a
Treatise made expressly on that subject. Castelvetro and Piccolomini have
acquitted themselves as able Critics, and much better than the rest.
Piccolomini deals with Aristotle more fairly than Castelvetro: who is naturally
of a morose Wit, and out of a cross humor makes it always his business to
contradict Aristotle, and, for the most part, confounds the Text, instead of
explaining it. Notwithstanding all this, he is the most subtle of all the
Commentators, and the Man from whom most may be learned.

In fine, Lope de Vega was the only person that undertook, on the good fortune
of his old reputation, to hazard a new method of Poesy, which he calls El Art
Nuevo, wholly different from this of Aristotle. to justify the fabric of his
Comedies, which the Wits of his Country incessantly Criticiz'd upon; which
Treatise succeeded so ill, that it was not judged worthy of a place amongst the
rest, in the Collection of his Works, because he followed not Aristotle. Which
I have precisely done in these Reflections: where I bring only examples to
confirm the Rules he gives us. And I take occasion to tell what we ought to
judge of all those who have writ in Verse for more than these Two thousand
years. I dispense with my self for speaking of those who are yet living: for I
am not in humor to mount the Stage, and distribute Laurels; I had rather rely
on the Public, for the opinion we ought to have of their merit.

For the rest, I choose rather to write by way of Reflections, to avoid all
those words which are necessary for Connection in a continued Discourse. And
since these Reflections may, peradventure, be offensive to some persons of a
different Genius, I expect from them to hear of my mistakes, that I may make my
profit thereof.

REFLECTIONS ON ARISTOTLE's TREATISE OF POESY In General.
I.
THe true value of Poetry is ordinarily so little known, that scarce ever is
made a true judgment of it. It Is the talent of wits only that are above the
common rank to esteem of it according to its merit: and one cannot consider,
how Alexander, Scipio, Julius Caesar, Augustus, and all the great men of
Antiquity have been affected therewith, without conceiving a Noble Idea of it.
In effect, Poesy, of all Arts, is the most perfect: for the perfection of
other Arts is limited, but this of Poesy has no bounds; to be excellent
therein, one must know all things: but this value will best appear, by giving a
particular of the qualities necessary for a Poet.

II.
HE must have a Genius extraordinary, great Natural gifts; a Wit just,
fruitful, piercing, solid, universal; an Understanding clean and distinct; an
Imagination neat and pleasant; an elevation of Soul that depends not on art nor
study, and which is purely a gift of Heaven, and must be sustained by a lively
sense and vivacity; a great Judgment to consider wisely of things, and a
vivacity to express them with that grace and abundance which gives them beauty.
But as Judgment without Wit is cold and heavy, so Wit without Judgment is blind
and extravagant. Hence it is that Lucan often in his Pharsalia grows flat for
want of Wit. And Ovid in his Metamorphosis sometimes loses himself through his
defect of judgment. Ariosto has too much flame. Dante has none at all.
Boccace's wit is just, but not copious: the Cavalier Marino is luxuriant, but
wants that justness; for in fine; to accomplish a Poet, is required a
temperament of wit and of fancy, of strength and of sweetness, of penetration
and of delicacy: and above all things, he must have a sovereign eloquence, and
a profound capacity. These are the qualities that must concur together to form
the Genius of a Poet, and sustain his Character.

III.
BUt the first injustice that Poets suffer, is, that commonly what is merely
the effect of Fancy, is mistaken for Wit. Thus an ignorant person shall start
up, and be thought a Poet in the world, for a lucky hit in a Song or Catch,
where is only the empty flash of an imagination heated perhaps by a debauch,
and nothing of that celestial fire which only is the portion of an
extraordinary Genius. One must be careful (says Horace) of profaning that
Name, by bestowing it without distinction on all those who undertake to
versifie. For (says he) there must be a greatness of Soul, and something
divine in the spirit. There must be lofty expressions, and noble thoughts, and
an air of majesty to deserve that name. A Sonnet, Ode, Elegy, Epigram, and
those little kind of Verses that often make so much noise in the world, are
ordinarily no more then the mere productions of imagination, a superficial wit,
with a little conversation of the world is capable of these things. True Poetry
requires other qualifications, a Genius for War, or for Business, comes nothing
near it; a little phlegm, with a competency of experience, may fit a man for an
important Negotiation: and an opportunity well managed, joined with a little
hazard, may make the success of a Battle, and all the good fortune of a
Campaign; but to excite these emotions of the Soul, and transports of
admiration that are expected from Poetry, all the wit that the Soul of man is
capable of, is scarce sufficient. For example.

IV.
HOmer, who had a Genius accomplished for Poetry, had the vastest, sublimest,
profoundest, and most universal wit that ever was; 'twas by his Poems that all
the Worthies of Antiquity were formed: from hence the Lawmakers took the first
platform of the Laws they gave to Mankind; the founders of Monarchies and
Commonwealths from hence took the Model of their Polities. Hence the
Philosophers found the first principals of Morality which they have taught the
People. Hence Phys^ians have studied Diseases, and their Cures. Astronomers
have learned the knowledge of Heaven, and Geometricians of the Earth. Kings and
Princes have learned the art to govern, and Captains to form a Battle to encamp
an Army, to besiege Towns, to fight and to gain Victories. From this great
original Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, came to be Philosophers. Sophocles and
Euripides took the haughty air of the Theater and Idea's of Tragedy. Zeuxes,
Apelles, Polygnotus, became such excellent Painters; and Alexander the Great so
valiant. In fine, Homer has been (if I may so say) the first Founder of all
Arts and Sciences, and the pattern of the wise men in all Ages. And as he has
been in some manner the Author of Paganism, the Religion whereof he established
by his Poems, one may say that never Prophet had so many followers as he: yet
notwithstanding this so universal Genius, this wit capable of all things,
applied himself only to Poetry, which he made his business.

V.
It Is in no wise true, what most believe, That some little mixture of Madness
goes to make up the character of a Poet; for though his Discourse ought in some
manner to resemble that of one inspired: yet his mind must always be serene,
that he may discern when to let his Muse run mad, and when to govern his
Transports* And this serenity of spirit which makes the judgment, is one of the
most essential parts of a Poets Genius, it is with this that he must be
possessed. Aristotle allows that there is something Divine in his character,
but nothing of Madness. These the Vulgar always confound, and it is their
ignorance joined with the extravagance of some particular Poets that made way
for this opinion, to the disrespect of the profession, which is not considered
in the world as it ought to be, by reason of the little care to distinguish
those that are Poets, from those that are not.

VI.
ONe may be an Orator without the natural gift of Eloquence, because Art may
supply that defect; but no man can be a Poet without a Genius: the want of
which, no art or industry is capable to repair. This Genius is that celestial
fire intended by the Fable, which enlarges and heightens the Soul, and makes it
express things with a lofty air. Happy is he to whom Nature has made this
present, by this he is raised above himself; whereas others are always low and
creeping, and never speak but what is mean and common. He that has a Genius,
appears a Poet on the smallest Subjects, by the turn he gives them* and the
noble manner in which he expresses himself. This Character the French gave
their Monsieur R^can, but in truth where shall we find all these qualities I
have mentioned? where is that sparkling Wit. and that solid Judgment? That
flame and that phlegm? That rapture and that moderation which constitute that
Genius we enquire after? it is the little Wits always who think they versifie
the best; the greatest Poets are the most modest. 'Twas with trembling that
Virgil under the covert of the Night, went to fix on the gate of the Emperors
Palace, those two Verses which caused so much admiration all over Rome. This
great man concealed himself, when Augustus so earnestly made search after the
Author of that admirable Distich, and he was the last that understood the value
of his own work: it is certain that the great Wits never have a very good
opinion of what they compose, by reason of the too great Idea of perfection
they propose to themselves in their works. Happy Age, when Poets were so
modest, when shall we see those days again! nothing is more troublesome than a
Scribler conceited of his own Merit, he tyres all the world, eternally showing
his labors: and no sooner is he able to make a Rhyme at the end of a line, but
all the world must be made to know his Talent; whereas the great men are in
pain whilst they show themselves, and industriously labor to be concealed.

VII.
IT is not easily decided what the Nature, and what precisely is the End of
this Art, the interpreters of Aristotle differ in their opinions. Some will
have the End to be Delight, and that it is on this account it labors to move
the passions, all whose motions are delightful, because nothing is more sweet
to the Soul then agitation, it pleases it self in changing the objects, to
satisfy the immensity of its desires. It Is true, delight is the end Poetry
aims at, but not the principal end, as others pretend. In effect, Poetry being
an Art, ought to be profitable by the quality of its own nature, and by the
essential subordination that all Arts should have to Polity, whose end in
general is the public good. This is the judgment of Aristotle, and of Horace,
his chief Interpreter.

VIII.
AFter all, since the design of Poetry is to delight, it omits nothing that may
contribute thereto; it is to this intent that it makes use of Numbers and
Harmony, which are naturally delightful, and animates its Discourse with more
lively draughts, and more strong expressions, than are allowed in Prose; and
does affranchize it self from that constraint and reservedness that is ordinary
with Orators, and permits a great liberty to imagination, and makes frequent
images of what is most agreeable in nature; and never speaks but with figures,
to give a greater luster to the Discourse; and is noble in its Idea's, sublime
in the Expressions, bold in the Words passionate in the Motions, and takes
pleasure in relating extraordinary Adventures to give the most common and
natural things a fabulous gloss, to render them more admirable, and heighten
Truth by Fiction. It Is finally for this, that it employs whatever Art has that
is pleasant, because its end is to delight. Empedocles who used not this art in
his Poems, as Homer, nor Lucretius, as Virgil, are not true Poets Homer is
delight^ul even in the de^cription of Laertes Sw^^eherds lodge in his Odyssis,
and Virgil in the Dung and Thistles in his Georgicks, as he expresses himself;
for every thing becomes beautiful and slowry in the hands of a Poet who has a
Genius.

IX.
HOwever the principal end of Poesy, is to pro^it; not only by refreshing the
mind, to render it more capable of the ordinary functions, and by assuaging the
troubles of the Soul with its harmony, and all the elegancies of expression.
But furthermore, by purging the manners with wholesome instructions which it
professes to administer to humane kind; for Virtue being naturally austere, by
the constraint it imposes on the heart, in repressing the desires: Morality,
which undertakes to regulate the motions of the heart by its precepts, ought to
make it self delightful that it may be listened to, which can by no means be so
happily effected as by Poetry: It Is by this, that Morality in curing the
Maladies of men, makes use of the same artifice that Physicians have recourse
to in the sickness of children, they mingle Honey with the Medicine to take off
the bitterness. The principal design therefore of this Art, is to render
pleasant that which is wholesome; in which it is more wise then other Arts, which
endeavor to profit without any care to please. Eloquence it self, by its most
passionate Discourse, is not always capable to persuade men to Virtue with that
success, as Poetry; because men are more sensible and sooner impressed upon by
what is pleasant, than by reason. For this cause, all Poetry that tends to the
corruption of Manners, is irregular and vicious; and Poets are to be looked on
as a public Contagion, whose Morals are not pure: and it is these dissolute and
debauched Poets that Plato banished his Commonwealth. And true it is, that the
petty Wits only are ordinarily subject to say what is impious or obscene.
Homer and Virgil were never guilty in this kind, they were sweet and virtuous
as Philosophers; the Muses of true Poets are as chaste as Vestals.

X.
FOr no other end is Poetry delightful, then that it may be profitable.
Pleasure is only the means by which the profit is conveyed; and all Poetry,
when it is perfect, ought of necessity to be a public Lesson of good Manners
for the instruction of the world. Heroic Poesy proposes the example of great
Virtues, and great Vices, to excite men to abhor these, and to be in love with
the other: it gives us an esteem for Achilles in Homer, and contempt for
Thersites: it begets in us a veneration for the piety of Aeneas in Virgil, and
horror for the profaness of Mezentius. Tragedy rectifies the use of Passions,
by moderating our fear, and our pity, which are obstacles of Virtue; it lets
men see that Vice never escapes unpunished, when it represents Aegisthus in the
Electra of Sophocles, punished after the Ten years enjoyment of his Crime. It
teaches us, that the favors of Fortune, and the grandeurs of the World, are
not always true Goods, when it shows on the Theater a Queen so unhappy as
Hecuba deploring with that pathetick air her misfortunes in Euripides Comedy,
which is an image of common conversation, corrects the public Vices, by
letting us see how ridiculous they are in particulars. Aristophanes does not
mock at the foolish vanity of Praxagora (in his Parliament of Women) but to
cure the vanity of the other Athenian Women; and 'twas only to teach the Roman
Soldiers in what consisted true Valor, that Plautus exposed in public the
extravagance of false Bravery in his Braggadocio Captain, in that Comedy of the
Glorious Soldier.

XI.
BUt because Poetry is only profitable so far as it is delightful, it is of
greatest importance in this Art to please; the only certain way to please, is
by Rules: these therefore are to be established, that a Poet may not be left to
confound all things, imitating those Extravagances which Horace so much blames;
that is to say, by joining things naturally incompatible, mixing Tigers with
Lambs, Birds with Serpents, to make one body of different species, and thereby
authorize Fancies more indigested than the Dreams of sick men; for unless a man
adhere to Principles, he is obnoxious to all Extravagances and Absurdities
imaginable: unless he go by Rule, he slips at every step toward Wit, and falls
into Errors as often as he sets out. Into what Enormities has Petrarch run in
his Africa; Ariosto in his Orlando Furioso; Cavalier Marino in his Adonis, and
all the other Italians who were ignorant of Aristotle's Rules; and followed no
other guides but their own Genius and capricious Fancy: Truth is, the Wits of
Italy were so prepossessed in favor of the Romantic Poetry of Pulci, Boyardo,
and Ariosto, that they regarded no other Rules than what the heat of their
Genius inspired. The first Italian Poet who let the World see that the Art was
not altogether unknown to him, was Giorgio Trissino in his Poem of Italy
delivered from the Goths, under the Pontificats of Leo X. and Clement VIII. in
this Poem appeared some kind of imitation of Homers Ilias. This Model was
followed with success by Tasso in his Jerusalem delivered; though one Oliviero
had essayed the same before him, but not so happily; in his Poem of Germany,
Victorius, Madius, Robertellus, and after them Castelvetno, and Picolomini were
the first that made Europe acquainted with Aristotle's Rules, which were
brought over by the Grecians from Constantinople into Italy: and these were
followed by Beni, Minturno, Ricobon, Vida, Gallutio, and many others.

XII.
ARistotle drew the platform of these Rules from the Poems of Homer, and other
Poets of his time, by the Reflections he had a long time made on their Works. I
pretend not by a long Discourse to justify the necessity, the justness, and
the truth of these Rules; nor to make an History of Aristotle's Treatise of
Poesy; or examine whether it is complete, which many others have done, all
these things I suppose: only I affirm, That these Rules well considered one
shall find them made only to reduce Nature into method, to trace it step by
step, and not suffer the least mark of it to escape us. It Is only by these
Rules that the verifimility in Fictions is maintained, which is the soul of
Poesy. For unless there be the unity of place, of time, and of the action in
the great Poems, there can be no verisimility. In fine, it is by these Rules
that all becomes just, proportionate, and natural; for they are founded upon
good Sense, and sound Reason, rather than on Authority and Example. Horace's
book of Poesy, which is but an interpretation of that of Aristotle, discovers
sufficiently the necessity of being subject to Rules, by the ridiculous
Absurdities one is apt to fall into, who follows only his fancy; for though
Poesy be the effect of fancy, yet if this fancy be not regulated, it is a mere
Caprice, not capable of producing any thing reasonable.

XIII.
BUt if the Genius must indispensibly be subjected to the servitude of Rules,
'twill not easily be decided whether Art or Nature contributes more to Poetry;
it is one of those questions unresolved which might be proper for a declamation,
and the decision is of small importance: it suffices that we know both the one
and the other are of that moment, that none can attain to any sovereign
perfection in Poetry, if he be defective in either: So that both (says Horace)
must mutually assist each other, and conspire to make a Poet accomplished. But
though Nature be of little value without the help of Art, yet we may approve of
Quintilian's opinion, who believed that Art did less contribute to that
perfection, than Nature. And by the comparison that Longinus makes betwixt
Apollonius and Homer, Erastathenes and Archilochus, Bacchilides and Pindar, Ion
and Sophocles, the former of all which never transgressed against the Rules of
Art, whereas these other did; it appears that the advantage of Wit is always
preferred before that of Art.

XIV.
It Is not enough to have a Genius: one must know that he has it, and be sure by
the experience he ought to have of it: and he must know well of what it is most
capable* and of what it is not, lest he force it contrary to the precept of
Horace: which yet cannot be known without a long time making reflections on
himself: and though Nature is always ready to discover it self, yet we are not
to rely on that, but study it with great attention, to learn its strength.
There are universal Genius's capable of all things by the immensity of their
wit, as Horace and Virgil, and there are others that are limited. Demetrius
Phalereus says, That Archilochus had not that greatness of Soul proper for an
Heroic Poem, which Homer was endu'd withal. Anacreon, whose delicacy of Wit
was admirable, had not that loftiness. Propertius affirms of himself, That he
was not fit to sing the Wars of Augustus, nor describe the Genealogy of Caesar.
Horace peradventure, by the strength of his Genius, might have been capable of
a great Poem, if his inclination and nature had not determined him to Lyrick
Verse. Fracastorius, who with so good success writ his Syphilis, the most
excellent Poem in Latin Verse that these latter Ages has produced in Italy, and
which is writ in imitation of Virgil's Georgicks, was not so happy in his Epick
Poem of Joseph Viceroy of Egypt, a fragment whereof is extant; for this Poem is
of a poor Genius, and low Character. Ronsard who had a Talent for Lyrick Verse
in Scaliger's opinion, and who got Reputation by his Odes, fell short extremely
in his Franciad, which is dry and barren throughout, and has nothing of an
Heroic air in it.

XV.
BUt it is not so much to discover its strength, that we must know our Genius,
as that we may be diligent to form it by the help of Art, and not go astray in
the way we take to bring it to perfection. 'Twas thus that Horace, whose Genius
was capable of all things, chiefly applied himself to Satyr, by the
inclination of his Natural gayetie, which made him Rallee so pleasantly on all
occasions. He had found in his Nature the seeds of this Character, which he
afterward cultivated with so much success: And what loftiness he found in his
Nature, he confined to Lyrick Poesy, for which he had an Inclination. For
though he had a Genius for greater things, yet by a certain love of ease, which
was natural to him, he only applied himself to the little, for that he was not
of an humor to strain, or give himself trouble. Ovid finding in himself a
capacity of expressing things naturally, left Heroic Verse to write Elegies,
in which he was more happy. Virgil, who perceived himself more strong, and had
a greater elevation of Soul, took Trumpet in hand, and raised himself by his
Eglogues, and Georgicks, as by so many steps to the most sublime Character of
Heroic Verse. It Is therefore by reflecting a long time on a man's self, and by
continual study of his Nature, joined with the care and exercise of Composing,
that he does accomplish his Genius, and arrives to perfection.

XVI.
NOthing can more contribute to this perfection, than a judgment proportioned
to the Wit; for the greater that the Wit is, and the more strength and vigor
that the imagination has to form these Idea's that enrich Poesy; the more
wisdom and discretion is requisite to moderate that heat, and govern its
natural Fury. For Reason ought to be much stronger than the Fancy, to discern
how far the Transports may be carried. It Is a great Talent to forbear speaking
all one thinks, and to leave something for others to employ their thoughts.
It Is not ordinarily known how far matters should be carried; a man of an
accomplished Genius stops regularly where he ought to stop, and retrenches
boldly what ought to be omitted. It Is a great fault not to leave a thing when
it is well, for which Apelles so much blamed Protogenes. This moderation is the
character of a great Wit, the Vulgar understand it not; and (what ever is
alleged to the contrary) never any, save Homer and Virgil, had the discretion
to leave a thing when 'twas well.

XVII.
THis Natural discernment which is necessary for a Poet to accomplish him,
ought it self to be improved, and to attain to perfection by the ministry of
Art, without which, nothing exact or regular can be produced. A Poet that
designs to write nothing but what is just and accurate, above all things ought
to apply himself with great attention to the precepts of Aristotle as the best
Master that ever writ of this Art; but because his method is nothing exact,
though his matter be solid, I rather attend his Rules, than the order in which
he has left them. Horace, who was the first Interpreter of Aristotle, in his
Book on this Subject, has observed as little method, because peradventure it
was writ in an Epistle, whose Character ought to be free, and without
constraint. This is what may be said in general of subjecting the Wit to Rules
of Art, which the Italian and Spanish Poets scarce ever were acquainted
withal: hereafter follows what may be observed in particular of this Art.

XVIII.
THe Art of Poetry in general, comprehends the matters of which a Poet treats,
and the manner in which he handles them; the invention, the contrivance, the
design, the proportion and symmetry of parts, the general disposition of
matters, and whatever regards the invention, belong to the matters of which
this Art ought to treat. The Fable, the Manners, the Sentiments, the Words, the
Figures, the Numbers, the Harmony, the Versification regard the manner in which
the matters are to be handled: So that the Art is (as it were) the instrument
of the Genius, because it contains essentially all the different parts which
are employed in the management. So that those who are furnished with a naked
Wit only, and who, to be great Poets, rely principally on their Fancy, as
Cavalier Marino among the Italians, Theophile among the French, and those
likewise who place the essence of Poetry in big and pompous words, as Statius
among the Latins, and Du Bartas among the French, are much mistaken in their
account, when they aspire to the glory of Poetry by such feeble means.

XIX.
Among the particulars of this Art, (...) the Subject and Design ought to (...)
the first place, because it is, as it (...) the first production of the Wit;
(...) design in a Poem is, what they call the Ordonnance in a picture. The
great Painters only are capable of a great design in their draughts, such as a
Raphael, a Julius Romanus, a Poussin, and only great Poets are capable of a
great Subject in their Poetry. An indifferent Wit may form a vast design in his
Imagination, but it must be an extraordinary Genius that can work this design,
and fashion it according to justness and proportion. For it is necessary that
the same spirit reign throughout, that all contribute to the same end, and that
all the parts bear a secret relation to each other, all depend on this relation
and alliance; and this general design is nothing else but the form which a Poet
gives to his work. This also is the most difficult part, being the effect of an
accomplished judgment, and because judgment is not the ordinary Talent of the
French, it is generally in the contrivance of their design, that their Poets are
defective, and nothing is more rare among them, than a design that is great,
just, and well conceived* They pretend to be more happy in the Talents of Wit
and Fancy, as likewise the Italians. The most perfect design of all modern
Poems, is that of Tasso, nothing more complete has appeared in Italy, though
great faults are in the conduct of it. And the most judicious, the most
admirable, the most perfect design of all Antiquity, is that of Virgil in his
Aeneads; all there is great and noble, all proportionable to the Subject, which
is the establishment of the Empire of Rome, to the Hero who is Aene^s, to the
glory of Augustus and the Romans, for whom it was composed. Nothing is weak or
defective in the execution, all there is happy, all is just, all is perfect.
But the sovereign perfection of a design, in the opinion of Horace, is to be
simple, and that all turn on the same Center. Which is so true, that even in
little things, that is to say, in an Eglogue, Elegy, Song or Epigram, and in
the meanest Compositions there ought to be a just cast, and that all of it turn
on the same point. Ovid did much violence to himself to unite his
Metamorphoses, and close them in one design, in which he was not altogether so
happy, as afterward in his Elegies, where well nigh always one may find a
certain turn which binds the design, and makes thereof a work that is just by
the dependence and relation of its parts. In this the ancient Poets were
always more exact than the modern; for most of the modern express their
thoughts higgle piggle, without any Order or Connection. If there be design,
it is never with that scrupulous unity, which is the principal virtue that
should be predominant, to make it just and complete. I know there are a kind of
works which, by the quality of their Character, ought to be writ with a free
air, without other design than that of writing things naturally, and without
constraint, such are the Hymns of Orpheus, Homer, Callimachus; and such are
certain Odes of Pindar, Anacreon, and Horace, that have no other Rule but
Enthusiasm: and such likewise are the most part of the Elegies of Tibullus and
Propertius. But it must be granted, that these are not the best and most
beautiful; and who reflects on the Elegies of Ovid, shall always there
perceive a secret turn which makes the design, and this is ordinarily the
principal beauty in these little works of Verse, as may be seen in most
Epigrams of the Anthology, in those of Catullus, in the correct Odes of Horace,
and in the Phalensiacks of Bonefons, who within this last Age, has writ in
Latin Verse with all the softness and delicacy possible. Thus every sort of
Poesy ought to have its proportionable design; a great design, in great Poems;
and in little, a little design: But of this, the ordinary Wits know nothing;
their Works, which generally are mere productions of Imagination, have scarce
ever any design, unless it be by chance. It must be the work of an accomplished
Genius, to close his thoughts in a design, whence results an agreement and
proportion of parts, that makes the harmony perfect.

XX.
THe design of a Poem must consist of two Parts, of Truth, and of Fiction;
Truth is the foundation, Fiction makes the accomplishment. And Aristotle calls
the mixture of these two, the constitution of things: or the Fable, which is no
other than the subject of a Poem, as the Design or Fable of the Andria in
Terence, are the Loves of Pamphilus and Glycerium. The Fable of Hyppolitus in
Euripides, is the passion of* Phaedra for her Son-in-law; this passion causes
the misfortunes of Hyppolitus, and the disorders of Theseus's house. The Fable
of Homer's Iliad is the anger of Achilles, who by his presence, or by his
absence from the Grecian Army, determines the good or ill success of all his
party; the anger of this Prince, which proceeds of the discontent he received
from Agamemnon, is the truth of the History, which is adorned with all the
Episodes and variety of Adventures that enrich this Poem: and the Poet fills
not his Poem with that variety of extraordinary Events, but to give delight;
which he could never perform, if he had nothing to say but truth; and he would
never be regarded, if all were fabulous: therefore History and Fiction must
necessarily enter the composition of the Subject.

XXI.
ARistotle divides the Fable, which serves for Argument to a Poem, into simple
and compound. The simple is that which has no change of Fortune, as is the
Prometheus of Eschylus, and the Hercules of Seneca. The compound Fable is that
which has a turn from bad Fortune to good, or from good to bad, as the Oedipus
of Sophocles. And the contrivance of each Fable must have two parts, the
Intrigue, and the Discovery. The Intrigue embroyls matters, casting troubles
and confusion among the Affairs. The Discovery remits all into a calm again.
Whatever goes before the change of Fortune, is called the Intrigue; all that
makes the change, or follows it, is the Discovery. The Intrigue in the
Andromache of Euripides, is, that this Princess, after she had lost Hector her
Husband, had seen her Father Priam murdered, the chief City of his Kingdom
burnt, became a slave to Neoptolemus. Hermione the Wife of this Prince, pricked
with jealousy against Andromache, was minded to kill her. Menelaus Father of
Hermione, causes her with her son Astyanax to be dragged to execution; this is
the Intrigue. Now she is rescued from death by Tethys and Peleus, who prefer
the Son to be King of the Molossians, and the Mother to be Queen by a Marriage
with Helenus; this is the Discovery. And every Fable must have these two parts,
to be the subject of a just Poem. Thus Aeneas chased from his Country, spoiled
of all that he possessed, beaten by Tempests, wandering from Coast to Coast,
destitute of all Succors, persecuted by Juno, and the other Deities of her
Cabal; After all these disgraces, became the Founder of the greatest Monarchy
in the world* This is the Fable of the Aeneid with its Intrigue, and its
Discovery. And it is to be observed, that only by this change of Fortune the
Fable pleases, and has its effect, in which the simple Fable is defective in
Aristotle's opinion, because it wants variety.

XXII.
FAble is so essential to Poetry, that there is no Poetry without it; it is the
form and the distinction; for the Fable to a Poem, is what the Figure is to
Marble in a Statue: but the Fable, besides the two parts already mentioned that
compose it, must yet have two qualities to be perfect; it must be admirable,
and it must be probable. By the first of these qualities it becomes worthy of
admiration, and by the second it becomes worthy of belief. However admirable
the Fable be, it can have no effect unless it be probable. The truth is, it
strikes the Soul, because it is extraordinary, but it never enters, nor can
make any impression, by reason it appears incredible* Probability alone is too
faint and dull for Poetry, and what is only admirable, is too dazzling. It Is
true, whatever appears incredible, is strongly relished by the couriosity of
the people; for the People, says Synesius, despises whatever seems common and
ordinary; they love nothing but what is prodigious, but the Wise cannot endure
what is incredible; the public being composed of the one and the other, is
delighted with what is admirable, so be, it is credible; therefore it most
imports to know so to mingle these in such a just temperament as may please the
fancy without shocking the reason; but to learn this secret, it must be known
what it is to be admirable, and what it is to be probable.

XXIII.
THe admirable is all that which is against the ordinary course of (...) is
what ever suits with common opinion. The changing of Niobe into a stone, is an
event that holds of the admirable; yet this becomes probable, when a Deity, to
whose power this change was possible, is engaged. Aeneas in the Twelfth Book of
the Aeneid, lifts, by himself, a stone, that Ten men could scarce remove; this
Prodigy is made probable by the assistance of the Gods that took his part
against Turnus. But most part of those that make Verse, by too great a passion
they have to create admiration, take not sufficient care to temper it with
probability. Against this rock most ordinarily fall the Poets, who are too
easily carried to say incredible things, that they may be admirable. Thus
Homer, in the Fifteenth Book of his Iliad, makes Stentors voice more loud than
that of Fifty men. And Virgil makes a bough of Gold to grow on a Tree, in the
Sixth of his Aeneid. And Boreas demands of Eolus, in the Argonauticks of
Valerius Flaccus, the permission to destroy the ship of the Argonaules, where
his two Sons Zethus and Calais were embarked. Almost all the ancient Poets,
however judicious otherwise, have been guilty of this fault; not to speak of
the modern, and especially Ari^sto, for that Hippogrife or winged Horse of
Roger, those Giants, those Monsters, that wonderful Ring of Angelica; which
renders her invisible, the Combats of Marfisa, Bradamante and Olympia, and all
the bravery of that Sex, which he makes valiant in War, contrary to their
Natural timidity; those Visions, Enchantments, and prodigious Adventures, are
like the vain imaginations of a sick brain, and are pitied by all men of Sense,
because they have no color of likelihood. The same judgment must be pronounced
of the other Italian and Spanish Poets, who suffer their Wits to ramble in the
Romantic way: it is too great Honor to call them Poets, they are for the most
part but Rimesters.

XXIV.
BEsides, that probability serves to give credit to whatever Poesy has the
most fabulous; it serves also to give, to whatever the Poet says, a greater
luster and air of perfection, than Truth it self can do, though probability is
but the Copy. For Truth represents things only as they are, but probability
renders them as they ought to be. Truth is well nigh always defective, by the
mixture of particular conditions that compose it. Nothing is brought into the
world that is not remote from the perfection of its Idea from the very birth.
Originals and Models are to be searched for in probability* and in the
universal principles of things, where nothing that is material and singular
enters to corrupt them; for this reason the portracts of History are less
perfect than the portracts of Poesy; and Sophocles, who in his Tragedies
represents men as they ought to be, is, in the opinion of Aristotle, to be
preferred before Euripides, who represents Men as really they are; and Horace
makes less account of the Lessons of Crantor and Chrysippus, for the manners*
than of those of Homer.

XXV.
AFter the Design or Fable, Aristotle places the Manners for the second Part;
he calls the Manners the cause of the action, for it is from these that a Man
begins to act. Achilles retires from the Grecian Army in Homer, because he is
discontent, Aeneas in Virgil carries his gods into Italy, because he is pious.
Medea kills her children in Seneca, because she is revengeful; so the Manners
are, as it were, the first springs of all humane actions. The Painter draws
Faces by their features; but the Poet represents the minds of Men by their
Manners: and the most general Rule for painting the Manners, is to exhibit
every person in his proper Character. A Slave, with base thoughts, and servile
inclinations. A Prince, with a liberal heart, and air of Majesty. A Soldier,
fierce, insolent, surly, inconstant. An old Man, covetous, wary, jealous. It Is
in describing the Manners, that Terence triumphed over all the Poets of his
time, in Varro's opinion, for his persons are never found out of their
Characters. He observes their Manners in all the Niceties and Rigours of
decorum, which Homer himself has not always done, as some pretend. Longinus
cannot endure the wounds, the adulteries, the hatred, and all the other
weaknesses to which he makes the gods obnoxious, contrary to, their Character.
Philostratus finds much to object against his portracts: but Justin Martyr
excuses him, alleging, That he took these Notions from Orpheus, and that he
had followed the opinion that publicly prevailed in those days. However it
be, it may be granted that Homer has not treated the Gods with all the respect
due to their condition. Aristotle condemns Euripides for introducing Menalippa
to speak too much like a Philosopher of the Sect of Anaxagoras, whose opinions
were then new in his time. Theon the Sophist cannot e^^^re the unseasonable
discourses of (...) on her misfortunes, in the same Author. Sophocles makes
Oedipus too weak and low-spirited in his Exile, after he had bestowed on him
that Character of constancy and resolution before his disgrace. Seneca, for his
part, knows nothing of the Manners. He is a fine Speaker, who is eternally
uttering pretty sayings, but is in no wise Natural in what he speaks, and
whatever persons he makes to speak, they always have the mien of Actors. The
Angelica of Ariosto is too immodest. The Armida of Tasso is too free and
impudent; these two Poets rob Women of their Character, which is Modesty.
Rinaldo is soft and effeminate in the one, Orlando is too tender and passionate
in the other: these weaknesses in no wise agree with Heroes; they are degraded
from the Nobless of their condition, to make them guilty of Folly. The
sovereign Rule for treating of Manners, is to copy them after Nature, and above
all to study well the heart of Man, to know how to distinguish all its motions.
It Is this which none are acquainted with: the heart of man is an abyss, where
none can sound the bottom: it is a mystery, which the most quick-sighted cannot
pierce into, and in which the most cunning are mistaken; at the worst the Poet
is obliged to speak of Manners according to the common opinion. Ajax mus^ be
represented grum, as Sop^ocles; Polyxena and Iphigenia gen^rous, as Euripides
has represented them. Finally, the Manners must be proportionable to the Age,
to the Sex, to the Quality, to the E^ployment, and to the Fortune of the
persons* and it is particularly in the Second Book of Aristotle's Rhetoric,
and in Horace's Book of P^^try, that this secret may be learned; whatever
agrees not with his principles, is false; nothing tolerable can be performed in
Poetry without this knowledge, and with it all becomes admirable. And Horace in
that place of his Book of Poetry, where he makes distinction of Ages to draw
their Portracts, affirms, That it is only by the representation of Manners that
any can have success on the Stage; for there all is frivolous, if the Manners
be not observed.

XXVI.
THe third part of the Art consists in the Thoughts, of sentiments, which are
properly the expressions of the Manners, as words are the expressions of the
Thoughts. Their office, says Aristotle, is to approve or dislike, to stir or
to calm the passions, to magnify or diminish things. Thus Polyxena in the
Hecuba of Euripides, cannot approve the thoughts of her Mother, which directed
her to throw her self at the feet of Ulysses to move him to pity, who demanded
her in the name of the Grecian Army to be sacrificed, for Virtue inspired this
genero^s Princess with other sentiments. It Is thus that Drances in Virgil
amplifies (at the Council of King Latinus) the danger, the injustice, the ill
consequences of the War they waged with Aeneas, being fearful and cowardly: and
that Turnus confutes so strongly the sentiments of this Speaker, being himself
valiant, and a despiser of dangers. Thoughts must not only be conformable to
the Persons to whom they are given, but likewise to the Subject treated of;
that is to say, on great Subjects are required great Thoughts, as those of
Evadne in the suppliants of Euripides; there this Queen, after the death of her
husband Capaneus, may be seen to express all the extremity of her grief, by
force of a sorrow the most generous that ever was; her affliction oppresses
her, without extorting from her one word that betrays any thing of weakness.
The Greek Poets are full of these great Thoughts: and it is much by this
greatness of their sentiments, that they are particularly signalized in their
Works. Demetrius and Longinus perpetually propose them for Models to those who
study the sublime style; and it is in these great originals that our modern
Poets ought to consult Nature, to learn how to raise their Wits, and be lofty.
We may flatter our felves with our Wit, and the Genius of our (the French)
Nation; but our Soul is not enough exalted to frame great Idea's, we are busied
with petty Subjects, and by that means it is that we prove so cold in the
great; and that in our works ^carce appears any shadow of that sublime Poesy,
of which the ancient Poets have left such excellent Models, and above all Homer
and Virgil; for great Poetry must be animated and sustained by great thoughts,
and great sentiments, but these we ordinarily want, either because our Wit is
too much limited, or because we take not care to exercise on important matters.
Thus we are low on high Subjects. For example, how feeble are we, when we speak
of the Conquests of a King? our Poets make their expressions swell, to supply
the want of Noble sentiments: but it is not only the greatness of the Subjects,
and the thoughts that give this air of majesty to Poetry, there is likewise
required lofty words, and noble expressions.

XXVII.
THe last part is the Expression, and whatever regards the language; it must
have five qualities, to have all the perfection Poetry demands: it must be apt,
clear, natural, splendid, and numerous. The language must in the first place be
apt, and have nothing impure or barbarous: for though one may speak what is
great, noble, and ad^irable, all is despicable and odious, if the purity be be
wanting: the greatest thoughts in the World have not any grace, if the
construction be defective. This purity of writing is of late so strongly
established among the French, that he must be very hardy, that will make Verse
in an Age so delicate, unless he understand the tongue perfectly. Secondly, the
language must be clear, that it may be intelligible, for one of the greatest
faults in discourse is obscurity: in this Camoens, whom the Portuguese call
their Virgil, is extremely blameable; for his Verse are so obscure, that they
may pass for mysteries: and the thoughts of Dante are so profound, that much
art is required to dive into them. Poetry demands a more clear air, and what is
less incomprehensible. The third quality, is that it be natural, without
affectation, according to rules of decorum, and goodsense. Studied phrases, a
too florid style, fine words, terms strained and remote, and all extraordinary
expressions are insupportable to the true Poesy; only simplicity pleases,
provided it be sustained with greatness and majesty: but this simplicity is not
known, except by great Souls, the little Wits understand nothing of it; it is
the Masterpiece of Poesy, and the Character of Homer and Virgil. The ignorant
hunt after Wit, and fine thoughts, because they are ignorant. The language must
be lofty and splendid, which is the fourth quality, for the common and ordinary
terms are not proper for a Poet, he must use words that partake nothing of the
base and vulgar, they must be noble and magnificent; the expressions strong,
the colors lively, the draughts bold: his discourse must be such as may equal
the greatness of the Idea's of a Workman, who is the Creator of his work. The
fifth quality, is that it be numerous, to uphold that greatness and air of
majesty which reigns throughout in Poesy, and to express all the force and
dignity of the great things it speaks: terms that go off roundly from the
mouth, and that fill the ears, are sufficient to render all admirable, as
Poesy requires. But this is not enough that the expressions be stately and
great, there must likewise be heat and vehemence: and above all, there must
shine throughout the discourse a certain grace and delicacy, which makes the
principal ornament, and most universal beauty.

XXVIII.
IT may be affirmed that never person in any language possessed all these
qualities in such eminent degree as Homer; he is the first Model a Poet must
propose to himself, to write as he ought; for never person writ more purely,
nor more naturally than he: it is he alone that ever found the secret of joining
to the purity of style all the sublimity and grea^ness that Heroic Poesy is
capable of; for this reason, Longinus always proposes him as the most just and
exact rule for the sublime style. It was formerly on this original, that
Euphranor formed his Idea for drawing the image of Jupiter, for that he might
be more successful therein, he travailed to Athens to consult a Professor that
read Homer to his Scholars; upon the description the Poet gives in the first
Book of his Iliad, of a Jupiter with black eyebrows, a brow covered with
clouds, and a head environed with all that majesty has most terrible, this
Painter made a portract that after was the wonder of his age, as Appion the
Grammarian has reported. The same happened to Phidias in that admirable Statue of
Jupiter he made, after the Model he found in the same place in Homer, as
Eustathius affirms. And one of the most famous Painters of this Age, made Homer
be read to him to heighten his Fancy, when he disposed himself to draw. The
same judgment is to be made of the expressions of Virgil, especially in his
Georgicks.

XXIX.
THis loftiness of expression is so important, that for the attaining it, it is
not enough to propose Homer and Virgil, it must be searched in Pindar, in
Sophocles, in Euripides; and it must be had in grave and serious Subjects,
that, of themselves, are capable to furnish with great thoughts, as the great
thoughts are capable to furnish with noble expressions. But the way to heighten
Discourse, says Aristotle, is to make good use of Metaphors, and to understand
perfectly their Nature, that they may not be abused: Poet. c. 2. 22.
and he adds in the same place, That this discernment is the mark of an
excellent Wit; and because, as says Quintilian, Lib. 8. cap. 6.
this loftiness which is aimed at by the boldness of a Metaphor, is dangerous,
insomuch that it comes nigh to rashness, Aristotle must be consulted on this
matter, to employ them with discretion, as Virgil has done: who, treating of
Bees, in the Fourth Book of his Georgicks* that he might heighten the meanness
of his Subject speaks not of them but in metaphorical terms, of a Court, of
Legions, of Armies, of Combats, pitched Fields, Kings, Captains, Soldiers: and
by this admirable Art, forms a noble image of the lowest Subject; for after
all, they are still but Flies. Finally, the Poet must above all things know
what Eloquence has of art and method for the use of Figures: for it is only by
the Figures that he gives force to the passions, luster to the discourses,
weight to the reasons, and makes delightful all he speaks. It Is only by the
most lively Figures of Eloquence that all the emotions of the Soul become
fervent and passionate: Nature must be the only guide that can be proposed in
the use of these Figures and Metaphors, and must therefore be well understood,
that it may be traced and followed without mistake: for no protracts can be
drawn that have resemblance without it, and all the images that Poetry employs
in expressing it self, are false, unless they be natural.

XXX.
BUt this sublime style is the Rock to the mean Wits: they fly out in too vast
and boisterous terms, from what is natural, when they endeavor to be high and
lofty. For this haughty and pompous kind of speech becomes vain and cold, if
not supported with great thoughts; and the great words that are indiscreetly
affected to heighten the discourse, for the most part, only make a noise. The
Emperor Nero who had the Worm in his Head, and conceited himself a Wit, ran
into this Character with that extravagance, that he became a Subject of
Raillery to the Satyrists of his time. Statius, who had a better Genius, would
imitate this kind of writing in his Poems, by an affection of great words, and
swelling expressions: but seeing he swells into fustian, he fills the ears
without touching the heart; and all those universally, who in the decline of
the Empire affected to be lofty, and wanted Wit, by a too great boldness of
language, became obscure, as Persius in his Satyrs: or cold and flat, as
Valerius Flaccus in his Argonauticks: or fell into the impropriety, as Sidonius
Apollinaris, and the others. For the most essential virtue of Speech, next to
the clearness and perspicuity, is that it be chaste and modest, as Demetrius
Phalerius observes; There must be (says he) a proportion betwixt the words and
the things: and nothing is more ridiculous, than to handle a frivolous Subject
in a sublime style; for whatsoever is disproportionate, is either altogether
false, or at the least, Plut. Georg.
is trifling and childish. This by Socrates is objected to the Sophist Gorgias
Leontinus, whom he pleasantly plays upon for affecting to speak petty things
with a great and solemn mien. Most French Poets fall into this vice, for want
of Genius; their verses where Logic is much neglected, most commonly, are
either Pedantry, or Nonsense. Should I cite Examples, there would be no end.
Dubartas and Ronsard, who would heighten their Conceits with great words after
their fashion, compounded according to the manner of the Greek, and of which
the French Tongue is not capable, were guilty of impropriety, and made
themselves barbarous; who succeeded them, committed the same fault. Malherb was
the first that joined purity to the lofty style; but being the beginner, he
could not carry it to perfection, there is good store of Prose amongst his
Verse. Theophile, who followed him, by too great affectation of the easy
style, degenerated into trifling and puerility: the truth is, the foundation of
his Character was a luxuriant fancy, rather than a fruitful wit. The Pharsale
of Brebeuf corrupted afterward much of the youth, who were dazzled at the pomp
of his Verse. It Is true, they have splendor: but after all, whatever seemed
great and sublime in this Poem, when it is viewed near hand, will not pass with
the intelligent, but for a false luster full of affectation. The small Wits
were transported with the noise this Poem made formerly, which at the bottom
has nothing in it natur^l*

XXXI.
OF late some have fallen into another extremity, by a too scrupulous care of
purity of language: they have begun to take from Poesy all it^ nerves, and all
its majesty, by a too timorous reservedness, and false modesty, which some
thought to make the Character of the French Tongue, by robbing it of all those
wise and judicious boldnesses that Poesy demands: they would retrench, without
reason, the use of Metaphors, and of all those Figures that give life and
luster to the expressions: and study to confine all the excellency of this
admirable Art within the bounds of a pure and correct Discourse, without
exposing it to the danger of any high and bold flight. The gust of the Age,
which loved purity; the women, who naturally are modest, the Court, which then
had sca^^ any Commerce with the great men of Antiquity, through their ordinary
antipathy to learning, and the general ignorance in the persons of Quality,
gave reputation to this way of writing* But nothing more authorized it, than
the Verses of Voiture and Sarazin, the Metamorphosis of the eyes of phyllis
into stars, the Temple of Death, the Eglogues of Lane, and some other works of
that Character, that came abroad at that time with a success which
distinguished them from the Vulgar. In this way they were polite, and writ good
sense; and it agreed with the gust of the Age, and was followed: and who
succeeded therein, would make a new kind of refinement in Poetry; as if the Art
consisted only in the purity and exactness of language. This indeed pleased
well, and was much to the advantage of Women that had a mind to be tampering
and writing in Verse; they found it their concern to give vogue to this kind of
writing, of which they were as capable as the most part of men; for all the
secret was no more but to make some little easy Verses, in which they were
content, if they could close some kind of delicateness of sweet and passionate
thoughts, which they made the essence of Poetry. The ill fortune is, Horace was
not of their mind; It is not enough (says he) to write with purity to make ^
Poet: he must have other qualities. But there are now living, Authors, of a
more strong and noble Genius than those I have mentioned; who, at this day, let
us see in their Works, that purity of language may be joined with greatness of
thoughts, and with all the elevation, whereof Heroic Poesy can be capable;
but there is not in the French Tongue any work, wherein is so much Poetry, as
in the Poem of Saint Louis; yet the Author is not reserved enough, he gives his
Wit too much scope, and his Fancy always carries him too far.

XXXII.
BUt examining well, one shall find that Heroic Poetry is not so much in use
among the French, as some would persuade us: either by the application of them
to little and frivolous Subjects, or by a natural difficulty in them, which
clogs and suffers them not to rise in the matters of which they treat: or by
reason they want a Genius for that Character they ought to bear; or that, in
effect, their Models are defective. He is but capable of very little, who
governs himself, and is directed only by the modern Poems; whereas nothing
nobl^ and sublime can be made without consulting the Ancients. The greatest
flights of Latin Poetry are in some certain excellent places of Virgil's
Georgicks* and everywhere in his Aeneid, that are capable of great Figures. The
modern Latin Poets afford but few; most whereof have only copied Virgil's
phrases, without expressing his spirit. Fracastorius, Vida, Cardinal Sadolet,
Sannazarius, have some touches of that noble air, but not many: they fall and
return again to their own Genius, when they have strein'd a little to reach
that of Virgil: and amidst the vain efforts of a servile imitation, there
continually escapes from them some strokes of their own natural spirit. It may
be affirmed likewise, that the best modern Poets have the advantage more by
their words, than by their thoughts: what they say, would be very little worth,
were it divested of the expression.

XXXIII.
THe most important and most necessary part for a Poet, to make him succeed
well on high Subjects, is to know well to distinguish what there is of
beautiful and pleasant in Nature, that he may form thereof perpetual images:
for Poetry is an Art where every thing should please. It is not enough to
exhibit Nature, which in certain places is rude and unpleasant; he must choose
in her what is beautiful, from what is not: she has her secret graces in
Subjects, which he must discover. How clear-sighted must a Poet be, to discern
what to choose, and what to refuse, without mistaking, that he may avoid the
object that will not please, and retain what will? Nicander, Aratus, Lucretius,
in the description they have made of natural things, wanted this admirable
secret, which Virgil afterward found out: he had the Art to give delight
whilst he instructed by the pleasant images, and most exquisite strokes of
Poetry, which adorn his Georgicks, and sweeten the harshness of those precepts
he gives on a Subject, in it self austere and flat. It is true, Lucretius has
beautiful draughts, and Virgil understood well to copy them without losing
ought of their perfection, because he had a judgment to discern them; which
knowledge cannot be attained, but by a long commerce with the good Authors of
Antiquity, whose Works are the only true sourc^s, whence these riches so
necessary to Poetry may be drawn, and whence is derived that good sense, and
that just discernment which distinguishes the true from the false in natural
beauties: and a Poet that has found in his Works these happy hits, which are
born to please, may rejoice as much, as the Workman that has found a precious
jewel. It is not, but by the help of his Genius, that he finds these beauties,
and they are made by the turn given to the things he writes.

XXXIV.
THere is a particular Rhetoric for Poetry, which the Modern Poets scarce
understand at all; this Art consists in discerning very precisely what ought to
be said figuratively, and what to be spoken simply: and in knowing well where
ornament is required, and where not. Tasso understood not well this secret, he
is too trim and too polite in places, where the gravity of the Subject demanded
a more simple and serious style: as for example, where Tancred comes near the
Tomb of Clorinda; he makes the unfortunate Lover, who came from slaying his
Mistress, speak points, instead of expressing his sorrow naturally, he commits
this fault in many other places. Guarini in his Pastor Fido, and Bonarelli in
his Phillis, are often guilty of this vice, they always think rather to speak
things wittily, than naturally: this is the most ordinary Rock to mean Wits,
who suffer their fancy to fl^e out after the pleasing images they find in their
way: they rush into the descriptions of Groves, Rivers, Fountains, and Temples,
which Horace calls Childish in his Book of Poesy. It Is only the talent of
great men to know to speak, and to be silent; to be florid, and to be plain; to
be lofty; and to be low; to use figures, and to speak simply* to mingle fiction
and ornament, as the Subject requires: finally, to manage all well in his
Subject, without pretending to give delight, where he should only instruct, and
without rising in great thoughts, where natural and common sentiments are
required, a simple thought in its proper place, is more worth than all the most
exquisite words and wit out of season. Fancy, which is all the wit of common
Writers, apprehends not this; this discernment, and this particular Rhetoric,
which is proper to Poetry, is a pure effect of the judgment.

XXXV.
YEt is there in Poetry, as in other Arts, certain things that cannot be
expressed, which are (as it were) mysteries. There are no precepts, to teach
the hidden graces, the insensible charms, and all that secret power of Poetry
which passes to the heart, as there is no method to teach to please, it is a
pure effect of Nature. However, Nature alone can never please regularly, unless
in the small compositions: there must be the assistance of Art to succeed well
in the great Poems. It Is by this help that a Genius a little cultivated, shall
range his thoughts in that admirable order which makes the greatest beauty in
the productions of Wit; by this order every thing becomes delightful, because,
as Horace says, it is in its place; but this is the work of judgment, as
invention the work of imagination; and this order that keeps all right, and
without which the most beautiful become deformed, is a mystery but little known
to modern Poets.

XXXVI.
NExt to Order, the greatest delight of Poetry comes from the Manners, and from
the Passions, when they are well handled. If you would have applause, says
Horace to the Poets, learn well to distinguish the Manners of every Age, and
the Characters proper to them in general and in particular. It was by this
great secret that Menander got that high reputation at Athens, as appears by
the testimony of Plutarch, and that Terence so exceedingly pleased the Romans;
never Poet better understood the Manners, than these two. Plato affirms, in the
Ninth Book of his Commonwealth, that Homer had particularly signalized himself
by the Manners of men which he had described in his Poems to the life. But that
I may not repeat what has been said in the Twenty fifth Reflection, I proceed
to the Passions which give no less grace to Poetry, than the Manners: when the
Poet has found the Art to make them move by their natural springs. Without the
Passio^^, all is cold and flat in the discourse, says Quintilian: for they
are, as it were, the so^l and life of it; but the secret is to express them
according to the several estates and different degrees from their birth: and in
this distinction consists all the delicacy, wherewith the Passions ar^ to be
handled, to give them that Character which renders them admirable by the secret
motions they impress on the Soul. Hecuba in Euripides falls into a Swound on
the Stage, the better to express all the weight of her sorrow that could not be
represented by words. But Achilles appears with too much calmness and
tranquillity at the sacrifice of Iphigenia, designed for him in marriage by
Agamemnon: his grief has expressions too little suiting to the natural
impetuosity of his heart. Clytemnestra much better preserves her Character, she
discovers all the Passion of a Mother in the loss of a Daughter so lovely as
was this unfortunate Princess, whom they were about to sacrifice, to appease
the Gods: and Agamemnon generously lays asid^ the tenderness of a Father, to
take, as he ought, the sentiments of a King; he neglected his own interest, to
provide for the public. Seneca, so little natural as he is, omits not to have
of these strokes that distinguish the passion, as that of Phaeara in the second
Act of his Hippolitus; for the affects a negligence of her person, and
considered it as not very proper to please a Hunter, who hated ornament and
neatness. It Is finally this exact distinction of the different degrees of
passion, that is of most effect in Poetry: for this gives the draught of
Nature, and is the most infallible spring for moving the Soul; but it is good
to observe that the most ardent and lively passions become cold and dead, if
they be not well managed, or be not in their place. The Poet must judge when
there must be a calm, and when there must be trouble; for nothing is more
ridiculous, than passion out of season. But it is not enough to move a passion
by a notable incident, there must be Art to conduct it, so far as it should go;
for by a passion that is imperfect and abortive, the Soul of the Spectator may
be shaken; but this is not enough, it must be ravished.

XXXVII.
BEsides the graces that Poetry finds in displaying the Manners and the
Passions: there is a certain I know not what in the Numbers, which is
understood by few, and notwithstanding gives great del^ght in Poetry. Homer
has excelled generally all the Poets by this Art; whether the nature of his
language was favorable to him, by the variety in the numbers, and by the noble
sound of the words: or that the delicacy of his ear made him perceive this
grace, whereof the other Poets of his time were not sensible; for his Verse
sound the most harmoniously that can be imagined. Atheneus pretends that
nothing is more proper to be sung than the verses of Homer, so natural is the
harmo^y of them; it is true, I never read this Poet, or hear him read, but I
feel, what is found in a Battle, when the Trumpets are heard. Virgil, who had a
nice ear, did not imitate Homer in this, further than the harshness, or rather
the heaviness of the Latin Tongue permitted him. Ennius had not then in his
days discovered this grace, which is in the numbers, whereof appears no
footstep in his verse. Lucretius perceived it first, but gave only the
imperfect strokes of this beauty in versification, which Virgil finished so far
as the language was capable. The other Poets, as Ovid in his Metamorphoses,
Statius in his two Poems, Valerius Flaccus in his Argonautes, Silius Italicu^
in his Hannibal, Claudian in his Ravishment of Proserpina never went so far.
Among the modern Poets that have writ in Latin of late days, those who could
attain to the numbers and cadence of Virgil in the turn of their verse, have
had most reputation; and because that Buchanan, who otherwise had wit, fancy,
and a pure style, perceived not this grace, or neglected it, he has lost much
of his price: perhaps nothing was wanting to make him an accomplished Poet, but
this perfection, which most certainly is not Chi^erical; and whoever shall
reflect a little on the power of the Dorian, Lydian and Phrygian Ayrs, whereof
Aristotle speaks in his Problems* and Athenaeus in his Banquets, he may
acknowledge what virtue there is in number and harmony: It is a beauty unknown
to the French Tongue, where all the syllables are counted in the verses, and
where there is no dive^sity of cadence.

XXXVIII.
THere yet remains beauties and ornaments whereof each Tongue, is capable, and
these the Poet must understand, and must not confound, when he writes in
another Tongue, than those he proposes for Models, which Virgil has well
observed in imitating Ho^er; for he did not give himself over to follow him
servilely in the exact turn of his versification: he knew withal that those
big words which make a beauty at the end of the Greek verses, would have been
no elegancy in the Latin: because, in effect, this succeeds not with Lucretius.
Virgil found that the character of the Latin Tongue required numbers too
severe, as Martial observes, to allow of that licentious cadence, which was
familiar with the Greek* Horace, who proposed the Odes of Pindar for the model
of those he writ in Latin, quitted immediately the numbers and the turn of that
Authors verse, of which he found the Latin Tongue incapable, as the French
Poetry is not accomodated to the numbers of the Spanish and Italian, because
every language is con^^n'd within certain bounds, which makes the beauty of
their Character. It Is a great Art to know these beauties, and well to
distinguish them each from other; but besides the numbers that are particular
to each Tongue, there is also a certain turn of the period which makes the
cadence and the harmony, of which none ought to be ignorant. How many are there
of the modern Poets, who have endeavored to imitate Virgil, without beingable
to attain this admirable turn, which renders him so majestic* Sannazarius,
Fracastorius, Sadoletus, Saint Marthe come somewhat nigh it, the others never
so much as understood it. This cast off the period which is proper to each kind
of verse* is necessary for expressing their Character: it must be grave, and
the numbers thick in Heroic, in Tragic verse, and in Odes: it must be soft
and easy in the little verse and delicate subjects.

XXXIX.
BEsides all the Rules taken from Aristotle, there remains one mentioned by
Horace, to which all the other Rules must ^e subject, as to the most essential,
which is the decorum. Without which the other Rules of Poetry are false: it
being the most solid foundation of that probability so essential to this Art.
Because it is only by the decorum that this probaility gains its effect; all
becomes probable, where the decorum is strictly preserved in all circumstances.
One ordinarily transgresses this Rule, either by confounding the serious with
the pleasant, as Pulci has done in his Poem of Morgante; or by giving Manners
disproportionate to the condition of the persons, as Guarini has done to his
Shepherds, which are too polite: in like manner as those of Ronsard are too
gross; or because no regard is had to make the wonderful Adventures probable,
whereof Ariosto is guilty in his Orlando; or that a due preparation is not made
for the great Events by a natural Conduct, in which Bernardo Tasso transgressed
in his Poem of Amadis, and in his Floridante; or by want of care to sustain the
Characters of persons, as Theophile in his Tragedy of Pyramus and Thisbe; or by
following rather a capricious Genius than Nature, as Lope de Vega, who gives
his wit too much swinge, and is ever foisting in his own Fancies on all
occasions; or by want of Modesty, as Dante, who invokes his own wit for his
Deity; and as Boccace, who is perpetually speaking of himself: or by saying
every thing indifferently without shame, as Cavalier Marino in his Adonis.
Finally, whatever is against the Rules of Time, of Manners, of Thoughts, of
Expression, is contrary to the decorum, which is the most universal of all the
Rules.

XL.
ANd to close, in a last Reflection, all the others that can be made, the Poet
must understand that the great secret of the Art is to work his matter well,
and to execute happily what he had designed with all the attention his Subject
requires; that he know always, that in great works he may be negligent in
certain places, which regularly ought to be neglected; that all may not be
finished alike, and what is finished may appear so the more, among the studied
negligences. These strokes less perfect then the rest, and these inequalities
of expression which Art requires, are as necessary to Poesy, as the s^ades to
a Painter, which serve to give luster to the other parts of his work. It Is the
fault of the mean wits, to express things more high than they ought to be
expressed. So, the Poet must take heed that he run not with the young Writers
into the florid style, by his excessive ornaments, and far-fetch't beauties;
that he retrench boldly what is too luxuriant, for all becomes false in Poetry,
that glitters too much. The Poet is in no wise natural, who will be always
speaking fine things: he will not be so prodig^l of his wit, when he has wit
formed as it ought to be; for all he speaks is worth nothing, if he will be
speaking too finely. The course he must take to come at good sense, is to have
yet a greater care in his expression of things, than in his words, because it
is in the things he must search the principal graces of his discourse. The
discourse must be diversi^^'d by the variety of expressions, because the same
images tire the mind of the Reader: and there must not only be frequent ^igures
in the words, but also different turns in the thoughts. The narrow and limited
wits are always sinding themselves, and by the barrenness of their Genius,
become like that player of the Lute in Horace, who could only strike on one
string. For the rest, it is good to be mindful, that none must meddle with
making Verses, who does not make them excellently, and does not distinguish
himself from others. For since none is obliged to make them, to what end should
he crack his brain, and hazard his Reputation, unless he acquit himself well?
he may know likewise that Poetry will be no honor to men of little sense; and
that the appetite of ^^rse-making is a dangerous malady, when it seizes on an
indifferent wit: that he is liable to all extravagancies imaginable, who is
taken therewith and wants a Genius: that he should be endu'd with submission*
and be docible, that he fall not into this misfortune. For after the manner men
live at present, he may ^ind everywhere some or other who out of charity or ill
humor, are always ready to give him advice: that the greatest fault of a Poet
is to be indocible; and that nothing has made so many b^d Poets, as Flattery,
which will be continually buzzing in his ears, and daub^ng him on that
occasion, so soon as he begins to tamper with writing Verse; especially it is
to be considered, that he should apply himself betimes to this mystery, to
attain any perfection: that he may ^orm his imagination to that d^licate air,
which is not to be had, but from the first Idea's of our youth. Julius and
Joseph Scaliger could not succeed herein, for having begun this study too late,
neither of them could overcome the stiffness of their Genius, which had before
bent their wit another way: and though the Son was more polite than his Father,
yet had he nothing of elegancy, or graceful in his Poetry, no more than the
other learned men of his time; and that he who aspires to the glory of this
profession, may reckon that he has much more to lose, than to gain* by writing
Verse, in an Age so squeamish as this of ours. We are no longer in that Age,
when men got reputation by their foolhardy writing: then it was no difficult
matter to impose, seeing what glittered, was more respected than what was
solid: and one may reflect that nothing can now succeed in Poetry, unless it be
delicately conceived, and formed with the utmost regularity, and set off with
all the grace and happiness of expression: that Verse are not tolerable, if but
indifferent; and are ridiculous, unless they be admirable. That finally, true
Poetry is not perceived* but by the impression it makes on the Soul; it is not
as it should be, unless it go to the heart: hence it is that Homer animates me,
Virgil heats me, and all the rest freez me, so cold and flat they are.

This is what may be said in General of Poetry, after follows the Particular.

REFLECTIONS ON ARISTOTLE's BOOK OF POESY In Particular.
I.
ARistotle distinguishes Poesy into three diverse kinds of perfect Poems, the
Epick, the Tragic, and the Comic, Horace reduces these three into two only,
one whereof consists in Action, the other in Narration; all the other kinds
whereof Aristotle makes mention may be brought to these two, the Comedy to the
Drammatick, the Satire to the Comedy, the Ode and Eglogue to the Heroic Poem;
for the Sonnet, Madrigal, Epigram, etc. are only a sort of imperfect Poems; it
is the Poets part to consult his strength in the different ways he must hold
in the different Characters of Verse, that he may not do violence to his Genius.

II.
THe Epick Poem is that which is the greatest and most Noble in Poesy; it is
the greatest work that humane wit is capable of. All the Nobleness, and all the
elevation of the most perfect Genius, can hardly suffice to form one such as is
requisite for an Heroic Poet; the difficulty of finding together fancy and
judgment, heat of imagination, and sobriety of reason, precipitation of spirit,
and solidity of mind, causes the rareness of this Character, and of this happy
temperament which makes a Poet accomplished; it requires great images, and yet
a greater wit to form them. Finally, there must be a judgment so solid, a
discernment so exquisite, such perfect knowledge of the language, in which he
writes; such obstinate study, profound meditation, vast capacity, that scarce
whole Ages can produce one Genius fit for an Epick Poem. And it is an
enterprise so bold, that it cannot fall into a wise Man's thoughts, but
affright him. Yet how many Poets have we seen of late days, who, without
capacity, and without study, have dared to undertake these sort of Poems;
having no other foundation for all, but the only heat of their imagination,
and some briskness of spirit.

III.
BUt another hinderance to this Character, is to have a Wit too vast; for such
will make nothing exact in these kind of works, whose chief perfection is the
justness. These Wits that strike at all, are apt to pass the bounds: the swinge
of their Genius carries them to irregularity; nothing they do is exact, because
their wit is not: all that they say, and all that they imagine, is always
vast; they neither have proportion in the design, nor justness in the thought,
nor exactness in the expression. This fault is common to the most of the modern
Poets, especially to the Spaniards, as Diego Ximenes in his Poem of Cid Ruydias
de Bivar, Camo^ns in his Conquest of the Indians by the Portuguese: and among
the Italians, Boiardo, Ariosto, Cavalier Marino, and Chiabrera, whose Works are
very ill patterns for an Epick Poem: they perpetually digress, yet there is
always wit in their digressions. The French, who pretend to wit, and love wit
even in trifles, suffered themselves to be blinded with the Poems of Ariosto
and Cavalier Marino. The beauty of their Verse, their expression, the pleasant
images they make of things they treat of, and the charms of their Verse, have
so enchanted most part of these French Poets, that they have not seen the gross
enormities of judgment those Authors run into. This is ordinary with Poets that
have wit, and little judgment: they endeavor to hide what is irregular in
their Works by glittering faults, and false beauties; but they must have a
great judgment and wisdom to sustain a great design in the utmost regularity.

IV.
THe value of Heroic Poesy is yet more high by the matter, and by its end,
than by its form; it discourses not but of Kings and Princes; it gives not
Lessons but to the Grandees to govern the People, and sets before them the Idea
of a virtue much more perfect than History can do; for History proposes not
virtue but imperfect, as it is found in the particulars; and Poetry proposes it
free from all imperfections, and as it ought to be in general, and in the
abstract. This made Aristotle confess that Poesy is a better School of virtue,
than Philosophy it self, Arist. Poct. ^. 10.
because it goes more directly to perfection by the verisimility, than
Philosophy can do with the naked truth. And because the Poet gives not reason
for what he says, as the Philosopher, but the reason must be perceived without
his speaking it.

V.
Poesy in general, is a picture or imitation of an action; and Heroic Poesy
is the imitation or picture of an Heroic action, as Aristotle informs us. The
qualifications he gives to this action, are, that it be one and simple, true,
or that passes for true, and that it ought to be happy, commendable, and
entire. He believes that it must be one and simple, to avoid confusion; that it
must be true, to deserve credit; happy and commendable, to serve for a pattern
and instruction to the Grandees, and to be a public example of virtue.
Finally, it must be entire, that there may be nothing in it imperfect. These
conditions are so essential to the action, which is to serve for the Subject of
an Heroic Poem, that it is altogether defective, if any one of them be
wanting; but to the end the action may be entirely perfect in a Poem, all must
go in a direct line to establish the merit of the Heroc, and to distinguish him
from all others: as the figures in a Table ought to have nothing so shining
either by the colors, or by the lights that may divert the eyes from the
principal figure. It Is in this that Tasso was mistaken, who in his Poem of the
Conquest of Jerusalem, makes Rinaldo do all that is shining and extraordinary;
it is Rinaldo that slays Adrastus, Tysapharnes, Solomon, and all the principal
Leaders of the Enemy: It Is he that breaks the Charm of the Enchanted Forest;
the most important Episodes are reserved for him; nothing is done in his
absence: he alone is called out to all the great actions. Godfrey, who is the
Hero, has nothing to do; and it is in vain that Tasso would excuse this fault
by the Allegory, in a long Treatise made to that end; that is to justify one
Chimera with another. Homer, whose sense was more right, by a spirit altogether
contrary, makes Achilles, who is his Hero, do all; though it is true, he
strayes sometimes too far from him, and forgets him. Virgil never falls into
this fault: one shall never lose the sight of Aeneas in the Aeneid, as they do
of Achilles in the Iliad.

VI.
THe action must neither be too vast, nor too much limited, it must have a just
greatness within the natural proportion of an heroic action, to be perfect.
The War of Troy that lasted ten years, had been a matter disproportioned for a
Poem; so great an object had tired the wit, and a natural action of the same
man cannot regularly be of that continuance; but neither ought it to be too
much limited, lest it become despicable by the littleness. Hence it is that the
Poem of Gabriel Chiabrera on the the Conquest of Rhodes by Amedee of Savoy, is
in some measures defective in the action, which lasts but four days. For great
atchievments, to be extraordinary, are not performed but by slow means, and
intrigues wrought and woven with a long thread: with persons often absent and
remote: more time is necessary to move the springs of great designs. Besides in
the precipitation of so short time, the Events cannot be prepared, the
Characters sustained the Incidents managed, the Manners observed, and nothing
works as it should do in these great Machines; and the probability is
throughout destroyed.

VII.
THe unity of the action, however simple and scrupulous it ought to be, is no
enemy to those delights which naturally arise from variety, when the variety is
attended with that order and that proportion which makes uniformity; as one
Palace may contain the various ornaments of Architecture, and a great diversity
of parts, provided it be built in the same order, and after the same design.
This variety has a large field in Heroic Poesy; the Enterprises of War, the
Treaties of Peace, Ambassies, Negotiations, Voyages, Councils, Debates,
building of Palaces and Towns, Manners, Passions, unexpected Discoveries,
unforeseen and surprising Revolutions, and the different images of all that
happens in the life of great Men, may there be employed, so be that all go to
the same end; without this order, the most beautiful figures become monstrous,
and like those extravagances that Horace taxes as ridiculous, in the beginning
of his Book of Poesy.

VIII.
IT is particularly by the Art of Episodes, that this great variey of matters
which adorn a Poem, is brought into the principal action; but though the
Episodes are a kind of digression from the subject, being an adventure wholly
foreign, that is added to the principal action to adorn it; yet, however, it
ought to have a natural relation to the principal action, to make thereof a
work that has order and proportion: and therefore must the decorum of persons,
of time, and of place, be preserved. without this condition the Episode is no
longer probable, and there appears an air of affectation, which becomes
ridiculous. Which Horace reproaches to the witless Poets, who would be gay on
grave subjects, and search foreign ornaments, where only the natural were
proper. The Episodes of Lucan, who makes long Scholastic dissertations and
disputes merely speculative, on things that fall in his way, show much of
constraint and affectation. But besides, that the Episode must be natural, and
never farfetch't; it is to be handled with a certain management and dexterity,
that it may not lie in the way to make confusion, nor burden the subject with
too much action. It Is for this cause Aristotle so greatly blames the Episodical
Fables; and it is also in this that the art of Homer principally appears, who
never confounds any thing in the throng of objects he represents: never was
Poem more charged with matter than the Iliad, yet never any thing appeared more
simple or more natural; for every thing there is in due order. Any too
licentious Paracronism may render an Episode defective and imperfect, though
that of Dido in the fourth of the Aeneid is pardonable, by the admirable effect
it produces; and in so great an elongation of times as those of Aeneas and
Dido, the Poet need not be a slave to Chronology. The most natural Episodes are
most proper to circumstantiate the principal action best, that are the causes,
the effects, the beginning, and the consequences of it; but we find not always
these qualifications in Tasso, who seeks to please often by passages that are
too glittering; and much less in Ariosta, whose Episodes are too affected,
never probable, never prepared, and often without any dependence on his
subject, as than of King Agramante and Marfis^^ but these things are not to be
expected from a Poem, where the Heroes are Pal^dius: and where predominates an
air of Ghimerical and Romantic Knight-errantry, rather than any Heroic spirit.

IX.
THough all must be natural in an E^pick Poem, yet the order that is observed
in relating things, ought not so to be; for were it natural, and according to
the succession of time, it would be a History, and not a Poem; and thereby one
would fall into the same fault with the impertinent scribler, whom Horace makes
ridiculous, who begun his Poem of the Trojan War, with the loves of Jupiter and
Leda, and with the birth of Helen, who was the cause of the War. For to render
the Narration more insinuating, delightful, and surprising, the Poet must
confound the natural order of times and things, to make thereof one purely
artificial. It Is by this Maxim, that the Poem of Nonnus upon Bacchus, the
Thebaid of Statius, and the Poems of the first Italians, who writ before they
knew the Rules of Aristotle; and some Spanish Poems, as that of Diego Ximenes,
on the Conquest of Valencia, are so defective.

X.
THe principal Character of an Heroic Poem, consists in the Narration; it is in
this that it is opposed to the Dramatick, which consists altogether in the
action: but as nothing is more difficult than to relate things, as one ought,
the Poet must employ all his art to succeed herein. The qualities a Narration
must have, to be perfect, are these; it must be short and succinct, that
nothing may be idle, flat, or tedious; it must be lively, quick, and
delightful, that it may have nothing but what is attractive: finally, it must
be simple and natural; but it is a great art, to know to relate things simply
and yet the simplicity not appear. The most ordinary graces of a Narration must
come from the figures, the transitions, and from all those delicate turns, that
carry the Reader from one thing to another, without his regarding it; and in
this chiefly consists all the artifice of the Narration. It must never pour out
all the matter, that some place may always be left for the natural Reflections
of the Reader; it must likewise avoid the particulars and the length of
affected description. Homer, great speaker as he is, amuses not himself, says
Lucian, to discourse of the torments of the unhappy in Hell, when Ulysses
descended thither; though this was a fair occasion for him. But the Poet, when
he is judicious, makes no descriptions but to clear the matters, and never to
show his Wit. Finally, the Narration must be delightsom, not only by the
variety of things it relates, but likewise by the variety of the numbers. It Is
this variety that makes the Greek versification more harmonious, and more
proper for Narration, than the Latin; and though Tasso has been successful
enough in the Narrations of his Poem, and likewise Ariosto, who, to me, seems
more natural than he; yet the pauses and interruptions to which the Italian
Poesy is subjected, by the Stanza's, do weaken, methinks, and enervate that
force and vigor, which makes one part of the Character of Heroic Verse. That
Monotomie of the Alexandrin Verse which can suffer no difference, nor any
variety of numbers, seems, to me, likewise a great weakness in the French
Poetry: and though the vigor of the Verse might be sustained either by the
great Subjects, or by an extraordinary Genius and Wit above the common rate,
yet this sort of Verse will grow tedious and irksom in a long Poem. For the
rest, one shall scarce ever meet with Narrations that are continued with the
same force and the same spirit, except in Homer and Virgil. It is true, the
Narration of the death of Polyxena in the Hecuba of Euripides, is the most
lively and most moving in the world; and that of Tecmessa in the Ajax of
Sephocles, is the most tender and most passionate that can be imagined. It Is by
these great Models that a Poet must learn to be pathetical in what he relates,
without amusing himself to make subtle and witty Narrations, by ridiculous
affectations. In the other Greek and Latin Poets, are found only some
imperfect essays of Narrations. He, among the Moderns, who has the best Genius
to sustain all the Nobleness of a Narration in Heroic Verse, is Hierom Vida
Bishop of Alba, in his Poem on the death of Jesus Christ; and if sometimes he
fell not into low expressions, and harshnesses like those of Lucretius, his
style had been incomparable. Scaliger objects against the long Narrations,
which Homer makes his Heroes speak in the heat and fury of a Battle, in effect
this is neither natural nor probable; neither can I approve the descriptions of
Alcina's Palace in Ariosto, nor of Armida's in Tasso, no more than the
particulars of the pleasant things which both of them mix in their Narrations;
hereby they degenerate from their Character, and show a kind of puerility, that
is in no wise conformable to the gravity of an Heroic Poem, where all ought to
be majestic.

XI.
NOthing is more essential to an Epick Poem than Fiction, which ought to reign
throughout, Fiction being it is soul. It Is by this that the most common things
take a Character of greatness and sublimity, which renders them extraordinary
and admirable. Aristotle gave but the shadow of this precept, which Petronius
has drawn more fully, by these words, per ambages deorumque ministeria
praecipitandus est liber spiritus. It Is thus that meanest things become Noble;
that Thetis in Homer, throws herself at the feet of Jupiter, that the Gods
assemble in Council, where arise great debates, their spirits grow warm, and
all heaven is divided into parties; for what? because, indeed, Achilles's
Mistress was taken from him, which at the bottom is but a trifle. It Is by this
great Art, that all the Voyages, and indeed every step that Telemachus made in
the Odyssis, to seek his father Ulysses, became considerable, because Minerv^
is of his Retinue, and of his Council; and all became remarkable, by the
impression they received from the conduct of a Deity, that presides over
wisdom. It Is finally by this that Virgil gives greatness and luster to the
meanest things he speaks. If Aeneas break a bough, in the third of his Aeneid,
to pay a pious duty to a Tomb that he finds accidentally in his way, the ghost
of Polydorus speaks to him from the bottom of the Tomb, and this makes an
Episode. If Aruns draw an Arrow in the eleventh Book, it is by the direction of
Apollo, who does interess himself therein to kill Camilla. Finally, all has
relation to the Gods and their Ministry, even to the least actions that are
described in this Poem, to heighten the luster of all that is there done, in
that mavelous way, whereof Aristotle gives so admirable Lessons.

XII.
BUt the importance is, as I before have observed, that this admirable be
probable, by a just mixture, and temperament of the one and the other. For the
Heroic action which the Poet proposes to imitate, must be rendered not only
worthy of admiration, but also of credit, to attain its end. The Poets
ordinarily are carried without consideration to speak incredible things, whilst
they aim too much at the mavelous; they thrust imprudently into the Fable,
without managing the truth, because they would please, without taking care to
persuade; and they scarce ever think of the preparations, and all the colors
of decency that must be employed whereon to ground the verisimility. And it is
thus that by a false Idea they have of Poesy, they place its beauty in the
pleasant surprises of something extraordinary wonderful: whereas in truth it is
not regularly to be found, but in what is natural and probable. For the sure
way to the heart, is not by surprising the spirit; and all becomes incredible
in Poetry, that appears incomprehensible. Scarce any of the Poets but Virgil,
had the Art, by the preparation of incidents, to manage the probability in all
the circumstances of an heroic action. Homer is not altogether so scrupulous
and regular in his contrivances; his Machins are less just, and all the
measures he takes, to save the probability, are, less exact; I shall not give a
particular in a Subject where I only allow my self to make Reflections on the
general principles of P^esie. Many Reflections may be made in the works of both
the ancient and modern Poets, on the subject of this observation; for the
necessity of probability is a great check to the Poets; who think to make the
incidents the more heroic, by how much more wonderful and more surprising they
be, without regarding whether they be natural.

XIII.
FInally, the sovereign perfection of an Epick Poem, in the opinion of
Aristotle, consists in the just proportion of all the parts. The mavelous of
Tragedy consists in the pathetical style; but the mavelous of an Heroic
Poem, is that perfect connection, that just agreement, and the admirable
relation, that the parts of this great work have each to other, as the
perfection of a great Palace, consists in the uniformity of design, and in the
proportion of parts. It is this sy^^etry that Horace so much commends in the
beginning of his Book of Poesy, where he taxes the ridiculousness of the
extravagant disproportions in the Picture he speaks of; and which he compares
to the prodigious Adventures of Dolphins in the Fores^s, and wild Bores in the
Sea, and all the other images he so much blames, because disproportionable to
the subject. And this proportion that Aristotle demands, is not only in the
quantity of the parts, but likewise in the quality. In which point Tasso is
very faulty, who mixes in his Poem the light Character with the serious, and
all the force and majesty of Heroic, with the softness and delicacy of the
Eglogue and Lyrick Poesy. For the Shepherds adventures with Herminia in the
seventh Canto, and the Letters of her lovers Name, which she carved on the bark
of bays and beeches, the moan she made to the Trees and Rocks, the purli^^
streams, the embroidered meadows; the singing of Birds, in which the Poet
himself took so much pleasure: the enchanted wood in the thirteenth Canto; the
songs of Ar^^da in the fourteenth to inspire Rinaldo with love, the caresses
this Sorceress made him, the description of her Palace, where nothing is
breathed but softness and effeminacy, and those other affected descriptions
have nothing of that grave and majestic Character, which is proper for Heroic
Verse. It Is thus that Saunazarius, in his Poem de partu virginis, has
injudiciously mingled the Fables of Paganism with the mysteries of Christian
Religion; as also Camae^s, who speaks without discretion of Venus and ^acchus,
and the other profane Deities in a Christian Poem. It is not sufficient that
all be grand and magnificent in an Epick Poem, all must be just, uniform,
proportionable in the different parts that compose it.

XIV.
THis proportion of parts is so essential to heroic, that it ought likewise to
be (if I may so say) the soul of all little Poems; as are Epithalumiums,
Panegyricks, and others that are made on the birth; and brave actions of great
men; and these Poems are so far perfect, as they have that unity and proportion
of parts, requisite for a complete work, In this ordinarily are faulty the
Panegyrists, and all those pretended Poets, that seek to make their fortune, by
making their Court to great persons. For besides that there is nothing more
difficult, than to praise, and that by so bold an enterprise, one ordinarily
exposes himself to be rendered ridiculous, as well as those he commends,
because he does it ill; the common undertakers, in this kind, who have not
force to form handsomely a design, loose the reins to their fancy; and after
they have pil'd a heap of gross and deformed praises without order or connection
one upon another, this, forsooth, must be called a Panegyric. It Is thus that
Claudian has praised the Emperor Honorius and the Consuls, Probinus, Olybrius,
Stilicon, and the other illustrious persons of his time. Throughout all his
Panegyricks reigns an air of youthfulness, that has nothing of what is solid,
though there appear some wit. I speak not of Ausonius, nor Prudentius, and the
Latin Poets, who have writ Panegyricks; because all of them have writ after
this manner, and yet more feebly, according to the decline of the Ages in which
they writ. Tibullus himself, otherwise so exact and polite in his Elegies,
falls short in his Panegyric of Messala; so hard is it to praise well. And
nothing perhaps has contributed more to render the Character of a Poet a little
ridiculous, than the vile and unmanly flatteries whereby most part of those
that professed Poetry have debased themselves. For a man always praises ill,
when he praises for interest; and there is nothing but these sottish praises
that bring a disparagement on Poets. What art, what springs, what turns, what
wit must be employed, to praise well, and how few are capable to do it? for
praise has always something gross in it, if it lie too open, and go in a
direct line. Voiture, one of the most delicate Wits of these latter Ages, never
scarce, commended any but in drollery, and it may be said that of a long time
none has done it with more success. The true Models, that ought to be taken, to
praise well, are the Poems of Homer and Virgil; Homer praises not Achilles, but
by the simple and bare relation of his actions; and never was man praised so
delicately as Augustus, by Virgil; it is not but, as it were, by covert paths
that he conducts him to glory. There was not a Roman that had any thing of
understanding, who knew not well that Virgil commended not the piety of Aeneas,
but to honor that of Augustus, whose portract he draws in his Hero; for
whatever the Poet says of the one, is only for the other. Whereby, one may
say, that never man knew better the art of praising; for he saves all the
modesty of the person he praises, even whilst he overwhelms him with praise.
Finally, the true art of praising, is to say laudable things simply, but
delicately; for praises are not to be endured, unless they be fine and hidden.
The truth is, it is so hard a thing to praise as one ought, that it is a Rock
which they that are wise should shun. And since the Poets are ordinarily too
lavish in this kind, they may make advantage sometimes of this Reflection, to
save their Reputation, that whilst they pretend to give honor to particulars,
themselves be not pitied by the public. This is all that can be observed most
essential to an Epick Poem; and now follows a judgment that may be made of
those who have writ in this kind of Poesy.

XV.
HOmer is the most perfect Model of the Heroic Poesy; and he only, says
Aristotle, deserves the name of Poet; it is certain, never man had a more happy
Genius. Dionysius Halicarnasseus commends him chiefly for the contrivance of
his design, the greatness and majesty of his expression, the sweet and
passionate motions of his sentiments. Hestod, says he, was content to be
delightful, and to speak well. All the other Greek Poets that writ in this sort
of Verse, have acquitted themselves so meanly, that they have gained with
posterity a reputation only proportionable to the poorness of their Genius,
Coluthus in his Poem of the rape of Helen, has nothing considerable, the design
is shallow, the style cold and flat. The Poem of Tryphiodor^^ on the taking of
Troy, is of a gross and low character, as likewise the History of Leander by
Musaeus. The Poem of Apollonius Rhodius, on the expedition of the Argonauts, is
of a slender character, and has nothing of that nobleness of expression of
Homer; the Fable is ill invented, and the list of the Argonauts in the first
Book is flat. Quintus Calaber who would undertake to write the supplement to
the Iliad and Odysseis, without having the least sprinkling of Homers easy and
natural vein, has nothing exact or regular. Nicander is hard, Oppian dry; and
the Poem of Nonnus, not so much a Poem, as a Romance, or History of the Birth,
Adventures, Victories, and Apotheosis of Bacchus. The design is too vast, the
Fable ill wrought, without art, without order, without probability, the style
is obscure and cumber'd. For the Latins, never any possessed all the graces of
Poesy in so eminent a degree, as Virgil; he has an admirable taste for what is
natural, an exquisite judgment for the contrivance, an incomparable delicacy
for the numbers and harmony of versification. The design of his Poem, well
considered in all the circumstances, is the most judicious and the best devised
that ever was, or ever will be. Ovid has wit, art, design in his Metamorphosis;
but he has youthfulnesses that could hardly be pardoned, but for the vivacity
of his wit, and a certain happiness of fancy. Lucan is great and sublime, but
has little judgment. Scaliger blames his continual Transports, for, in effect,
he is excessive in his discourse, where he affects rather to appear a
Philosopher, than a Poet. Petronius in his little Poem of the corruption of
Rome, falls into all the faults that he condemns; never man gave more ^udicious
Rules for Poetry, and never man observed them worse. Statius is as fantastical
in his Idea's as in his expressions; the greatness that appears in his style is
more in the words, than in the things: his two Poems have nothing in them
regular, all is vast and disproportionable. Silius Italicus is much more
regular; he owes more to his industry, than to his nature, there seems some
judgment and conduct in his design, but nothing of greatness and nobleness in
his expression; and if one may rely on the younger Pliny's judgment, there is
more art than wit in his Poem; it is rather the History of the second punick
War, than a Poem. That of Valerius Flaccus on the Argonauts, is incomparably
mean; the fable, the contrivance, the conduct, all there are of a very low
character. Claudian has wit and fancy; but no taste for that delicacy of the
numbers, and that turn of the Verse, that the skilful admire in Virgil; he
falls perpetually into the same cadence; for that cause, one can hardly read
him without being wearied; and he has no elevation in any manner. Ansonius and
Prudentius had not a Genius strong enough, to overcome the grosness of the Age
they lived in.

XVI.
FOr the modern, this judgment may be given. In the Ages succeeding, when
Letters passed from Italy into Africa, the Arabians, though lovers of Poetry,
produced nothing of Heroic, That barbarous air of the Goths which then was
spread in Europe over all Arts, did also mingle with Poetry; as appears by the
works of Sidonius, Mamercus, Nemesianus and others, who writ then after a dry,
jejune, and insipid manner. Some Ages after these, Poesy began to flourish
again in Italy by the Poems of Dante, Petrarch, and Boccace. The Poem of Dante,
which the Italians of those days, called a Comedy, passes for an Epick Poem in
the opinion of Castelvetro; but it is of a sad and woeful contrivance. And
speaking generally Dante has a strain too profound, Petrarch too vast, Boccace
too trivial and familiar, to deserve the name of Heroic Poets: though they
have writ with much purity in their own Tongue, especially Petrarch and
Boccace. These were followed some time after by the Comte of Scandian, Matthieu
Boyardo, who made the Poem of the loves of Orlando and Angelica; by Oliviero
who writ a Poem on Germany; by Pulci in his Morgante; by Ariosto in his War of
the Moors under their King Agramante against Charlemagne; who all suffered
their wit to be squandered on the Books of Chevalry and Romances of those
times. Ariosto has I know not what of an Epick Poem more than the others,
because he had read Homer and Virgil; he is pure, great, sublime, admirable in
the expression; his descriptions are masterpieces: but he has no judgment at
all; his wit is like the fruitful ground that together produces flowers and
thistles; he speaks well, but thinks ill; and though all the pieces of his Poem
are pretty, yet the whole work together is nothing worth, for an Epick Poem: he
had not then seen the Rules of Aristotle; as Tasso did afterward, who is
better than Ariosto, whatever the Academy of Florence say to the contrary. For
Tasso is more correct in his design, more regular in the contrivance of his
Fable, and more com^^ete in all the parts of his Poem, than (...) other
Italians; but he mingles so much ^^llantry in it, and affectation, that he
often forgets the gravity of his design, and the dignity of his character. I
speak not of Cavalier Marino in his Adonis; it is a very ill Model, though he
have as much, and perhaps more wit than the others; yet it is a sort of wild
wit that runs loose with such eagerness after what is pleasant and glittering
throughout his whole work, that, it seems, he has not any relish for solid
things. Sannazarius and Vida, who were famous much about the same time among
the Italian Poets, one for his Poem de partu virginis, the other for his of the
passion of our Savior, made appear a good Genius for writing in Latin; for the
purity of their style is admirable; but the contrivance of their Fable has no
delicateness, their manner is in no wise proportionable to the dignity of their
Subject. Pontanus, Politian, Cardinal Sadolet, Pal^otti, Strozzi, Cardinal
bembo, and many other Italians, writ at the same time, in Latin pure enough,
but with a very indifferent wit. Camoens, who is the only Heroic Poet of
Portugal, regarded only to express the haughtiness of his Nation in his Poem of
the Conquest of the Indies. For he is fierce and fastuous in his composition,
but has little discernment, and little conduct. Buchanan, who is a Scotch Poet,
has a character composed of ^ any characters; his wit is easy, delicate,
natural, but not great or losty. Hugo Grotius, and Daniel Heinsius, both
Hollanders, have writ nobly enough in Latin Verse; but the great Learning
wherewith they were fraught, hindered them from thinking things in that
delicate manner, which makes the beauty. For the French Poets who have writ in
Heroic Verse, Dubartas and Ronsard, had all the Genius their Age was capable
of; but the French Poets being ignorant, they both affected to appear learned,
to distinguish them from the common; and corrupted their wit, by an imitation
of the Greek Poets ill understood: they were not skilful enough to place the
sublime manner of the Heroic Verse in things, rather than in words; nor were
so happy to apprehend that the French Tongue is not capable of those compounded
words, which they made after the example of the Greek, and with which they
stufft their Poems; and it was by this indiscreet affectation to imitate the
Aneients, that both became barbarous; but besides, that the contrivance of the
Fable of Ronsard in his Franciad is not natural, the sort of Verse he took is
not enough Majestic, for an Heroic Poem, I speak not of other Poems whose
Authors are living, they have, perhaps, their desert; but time must make proof.
Now let us see what Reflections may be made on Dramatick Poeste, which
Aristotle divides into Tragedy and Comedy.

XVII.
TRagedy, of all parts of Poesy, is that which Aristotle has most discussed;
and where he appears most exact. He alleges that Tragedy is a public Lecture,
without comparison more instructive than Philosophy; because it teaches the
mind by the sense, and rectifies the passions, by the passions themselves, in
calming by their emotion the troubles they excite in the heart. The Philosopher
had observed two important faults in man to be regulated, pride, and hardness
of heart, and he found for both Vices a cure in Tragedy. For it makes man
modest, by representing the great masters of the earth humbled; and it makes
him tender and merciful, by showing him on the Theater the strange accidents of
life, and the unforeseen disgraces to which the most important persons are
subject. But because man is naturally timorous, and compassionate, he may fall
into another extreme, to be either too fearful, or too full of pity; the too
much fear may shake the constancy of mind, and the too great compassion may
enfeeble the equity. It Is the business of Tragedy to regulate these too
weaknesses; it prepares and arms him against disgraces, by showing them so
frequent in the most considerable persons; and he shallcease to fear ordinary
accidents, when he sees such extraordinary happen to the highest part of
Mankind. But as the end of Tragedy is to teach men not to fear too weakly the
common misfortunes, and manage their fear; it makes account also to teach them
to spare their compassion, for objects that deserve it. For there is an
injustice in being moved at the afflictions of those who deserve to be
miserable. One may see without pity Clytemnestra slain by her son Orestes in
Eschylus, because she had cut the throat of Agamemnon her husband; and one
cannot see Hippolytus dye by the plot of his stepmother Phedra in Euripides,
without compassion; because he dyed not but for being chaste and virtuous. This
to me seems, in short, the design of Tragedy, according to the system of
Aristotle, which to me appears admirable, but which has not been explained as
it ought by his Interpreters; they have not, it may seem, sufficiently
understood the mystery, to unfold it well.

XVIII.
BUt it is not enough that Tragedy be furnished with all the most moving and
terrible Adventures, that History can afford, to stir in the heart those
motions it pretends, to the end, it may cure the mind of those vain fears that
may annoy it, and of those childish compassions that may soften it. It Is also
necessary, says the Philosopher, that every Poet employ these great objects of
terror and pity, as the two most powerful springs, in art, to produce that
pleasure which Tragedy may yield. And this pleasure which is properly of the
mind, consists in the agitation of the Soul moved by the passions. Tragedy
cannot be delightful to the Spectator, unless he become sensible to all that is
represented, he must enter into all the different thoughts of the Actors,
interest himself in their Adventures, fear, hope, afflict himself, and rejoice
with them. The Theater is dull and languid, when it ceases to produce these
motions in the Soul of those that stand by. But as of all passions fear and
pity are those that make the strongest impressions on the heart of man, by the
natural disposition he has of being afraid, and of being mollifi'd; Aristotle
has chosen these amongst the rest, to move more powerfully the Soul, by the
tender sentiments they cause, when the heart admits, and is pierced by them. In
effect, when the Soul is shaken, by motions so natural and so humane, all the
impressions it feels, become delightful; its trou^le pleases, and the emotion
it finds, is a kind of charm to it, which does cast it into a sweet and
profound meditation, and which insensibly does engage it in all the interests
that are managed on the Theater. It Is then that the heart yields it self over
to all the objects that are proposed, that all images strike it, that it
espouses the sentiments of all those that speak, and becomes susceptible of all
the passions that are presented, because it is moved. And in this agitation
consists all the pleasure that one is capable to receive from Tragedy; for the
spirit of man does please it self with the different situations, caused by the
different objects, and the various passions that are represented.

XIX.
IT is by this admirable spring, that the Oedipus of Sophocles (of which
Aristotle speaks continually, as of the most perfect Model of a Tragedy)
wrought such great effects on the people of Athens, when it was represented.
The truth is, all is terrible in that piece, and all there is moving. See the
Subject. The Plague destroying Thebes, Oedipus the King concerned at the loss
of his Subjects, causes the Oracle to be consulted, for a remedy. The Oracle
ordains him to revenge the affassinat committed on the person of his
Predccessor King Laius. Oedipus rages in horrible imprecations against the
author of the crime, without knowing him; he himself makes a strict search to
discover him; he questions Creon, Tiresias, Jocasta, and a man of Corinth for
intelligence; and it appeared by the account that this Prince received, that he
himself committed the murder, he would punish. The minds of the Spectators are
in a perpetual suspense; all the words of Tire^ias, Iocasta, and the
Corinthian, as they give light to the discovery, cause terrors and surprises;
and clear it by little and little. Oedipus finding it to be himself that was
Author of the assassinat, by evidence of the testimonies, at the same time
understood that Laius whom he had slain, was his Father; and that Iocasta, whom
he had married, is his Mother, which he knew not till then; because he had from
his Infancy been brought up in the Court of the King of Corinth. This discovery
is like a Thunderclap that obliged him to abandon himself to all the despair
that his Conscience inspired; he tears out both his eyes, to punish himself the
more cruelly with his own hands. But this Criminal whom all the world abhors
before he is known, by a return of pity and tenderness, becomes an object of
compassion to all the Assembly; now he is bemoaned, who a moment before passed
for execrable; and they melt at the misfortunes of the person they had in
horror; and excuse the most abominable of all Crimes, because the Author is an
Innocent unfortunate, and fell into this crime, that was foretold him,
notwithstanding all the precautions he had taken to avoid it; and what is most
strange, is, that all the steps he made to carry him from the murder, brought
him to commit it. Finally, this flux and reflux of indignation, and of pity,
this revolution of horror and of tenderness, has such a wonderful effect on the
minds of the Audience; all in this piece moves with an air so delicate and
passionate, all is unravel'd with so much art, the suspensions managed with so
much probability; there is made such an universal emotion of the Soul, by the
surprises, astonishments, admirations; the sole incident that is formed in all
the piece, is so natural, and all tends so in a direct line to the discovery
and catastrophe; that it may not only be said, that never Subject has been
better devised than this, but that never can be invented a better, for Tragedy.
And thus also it was that the Andromeda of Euripides (so much boasted of in
Atheneus, and an Episode whereof Alexander sung in the last Banquet of his
life) wrought those wonderful effects in the City Abdera; when it was acted
there by Archelaus under the Reign of Lysimachus. The two parts of Perseus and
Andromeda, the misfortunes of this Princess exposed to the Sea Monster, and all
that moved terror and pity in this representation, made so strong and violent
impression on the people, That they departed, says Lucian, from the Theater,
possessed (as it were) with the spectacle, and this became a public malady,
wherewith the imaginations of the Spectators were seized. Something of a
grosser stroke of this sort of impressions made by Tragedy, has even happened
in our days. When Mondory acted the Mariamne of Tristan, the people never went
away but sad and pensive, making reflection on what they had seen, and struck
with great pleasure at the same time. These are the two great springs of the
Greek Tragedy, and all that is mavelous in Dramatick Poems, results
principally from what there is of pity and terror in the objects represented.

XX.
Modern Tragedy turns on other principles; the Genius of our (the French)
Nation is not strong enough, to sustain an action on the Theater by moving only
terror and pity. These are Machins that will not play as they ought, but by
great thoughts, and noble expressions, of which we are not indeed altogether so
capable, as the Greeks. Perhaps our Nation, which is naturally gallant, has
been obliged by the necessity of our Character to frame for our selves a new
system of Tragedy to suit with our humor. The Greeks, who were popular
Estates, and who hated Monarchy, took delight in their spectacles, to see Kings
humbled, and high Fortunes cast down, because the exaltation grieved them. The
English, our Neighbors, love blood in their sports, by the quality of their
temperament: these are Insulaires, separated from the rest of men; we are more
humane. Gallantry moreover agrees with our Manners; and our Poets believed that
they could not succeed well on the Theater, but by sweet and tender sentiments;
in which, perhaps, they had some reason: for, in effect, the passions
represented become deformed and insipid, unless they are founded on sentiments
conformable to those of the Spectator. It Is this that obliges our Poets to
stand up so strongly for the privilege of Gallantry on the Theater, and to
bend all their Subjects to love and tenderness; the rather, to please the
Women, who have made themselves Judges of these divertisements, and usurped the
right to pass sentence. And some besides have suffered themselves to be
prepossessed, and led by the Spaniards, who make all their Cavaliers amorous.
It Is by them that Tragedy began to degenerate; and we by little and little
accustomed to see Heroes on the Theater, smitten with another love than that of
glory; and that by degrees all the great men of Antiquity have lost their
characters in our hands. It Is likewise perhaps by this gallantry that our Age
would devise a color to excuse the feebleness of our wit; not being able to
sustain always the same action by the greatness of words and thoughts. However
it be; for I am not hardy enough, to declare my self against the public; it is
to degrade Tragedy from that majesty which is proper to it, to mingle in it
love, which is of a character always light, and little suitable to that gravity
of which Tragedy makes profession. Hence it proceeds, that these Tragedies
mixed with gallantries, never make such admirable impressions on the spirit, as
did those of Sophocles and Euripides; for all the bowels were moved by the
great objects of terror and pity which they proposed. It Is likewise for this,
that the reputation of our modern Tragedies so soon decays, and yield but small
delight at two years end; whereas the Greek please yet to those that have a
good taste, after two thousand years; because what is not grave and serious on
the Theater, though it give delight at present, after a short time grows
distasteful, and unpleasant; and because, what is not proper for great thoughts
and great figures in Tragedy cannot support it self. The Ancients who perceived
this, did not interweave their gallantry and love, save in Comedy. For love is
of a character that always degenerates from that Heroic air, of which Tragedy
must nev^r divest it self. And nothing to me shows so mean and senseless, as for
one to amuse himself with whining about frivolous kindnesses, when he may be
admirable by great and noble thoughts, and sublime expressions. But I dare not
presume so far on my own capacity and credit, to oppose my self of my own head
against a usage so ^stablished. I must be content modestly to propose my
doubts; and that may serve to exercise the Wits, in an Age that only wants
matter. But to end this Reflection with a touch of Christianism, I am
persuaded, that the innocence of the Theater might be better preserved
according to the Idea of the ancient Tragedy: because the new is become too
effeminate, by the softness of latter Ages; and the Prince de Conty who
signalized his zeal against the modern Traged^, by his Treatise on that
Subject, would, without doubt, have allowed the ancient, because that has
nothing that may seem dangerous.

XXI.
THe other faults of modern Tragedy are ordinarily that either the subjects
which are chosen are mean and frivolous; or the Fable is not well wrought, and
the contrivance not regular; or that they are too much crowded with Episodes;
or that the Characters are not preserved and sustained; or that the incidents
are not well prepared; or that the Machins are forced; or that, what is
admirable fails in the probability, or the probability is too plain and flat;
or that the surprises are ill managed, the knots ill tied, the loosing them not
natural, the Catastrophe's precipitated, the Thoughts without elevation, the
Expressions without majesty, the Figures without grace, the Passions without
color, the Discourse without life, the Narrations cold, the Words low, the
Language improper, and all the Beauties false. They speak not enough to the
heart of the Audience, which is the only Art of the Theater, where nothing can
be delightful but that which moves the affections, and which makes impression
on the Soul; little known is that Rhetoric which can lay open the passions by
all the natural degrees of their birth, and of their progress: nor are those
Morals at all in use, which are proper to mingle these different interests,
those opposite glances, those clashing maxims, those reasons that destroy each
other, to ground the incertitudes and irresolutions, and to animate the
Theater. For the Theater being essentially destined for action, nothing ought
to be idle, but all in agitation, by the thwarting of passions that are founded
on the different interests, that arise; or by the embroilment that follows from
the intrigue. Likewise there ought to appear no Actor, that carries not some
design in his head, either to cross the designs of others, or to support his
own; all ought to be in trouble, and no calm to appear, till the action be
ended by the Catastrophe. Nor finally, is it well understood that it is not the
admirable intrigue, the surprising and wonderful events, the extraordinary
incidents that make the beauty of a Tragedy, it is the discourses when they are
natural and passionate. Sophocles was not more successful than Euripides on the
Theater at Athens, but by the discourse, though the Tragedies of Euripides have
more of action, of morality, of wonderful incidents, than those of Sophocles.
It is by these faults, more or less great, that Tragedy in these days has so
little e^fect on the mind; that we no longer feel those agreeable trances, that
make the pleasure of the Soul, nor ^ind those suspensions, those ravishments,
those surprises* those admirations that the ancient Tragedy caused; because the
modern have nothing of those astonishing and terrible objects that affrighted,
whilst they pleased, the Spectators, and made those great impressions on the
Soul, by the mini^^ry of the passions. In these days men go from the Theater
as little moved as when they went in* and carry their heart along with them,
untoucht as they brought it: so that the pleasure they receive there, is become
as superficial, as that of Comedy, and our gravest Tragedies are (to speak
properly) no more but height^n'd Comedies.

XXII.
IT is not but that the Ancients had likewise their faults. ^schylus had scarce
any principle for manners, and for the decencies; his Falls are too simple,
the contrivance wretched, the expression obscure and blunder'd; scarce ought
can be understood of his Tragedy of Agame^non. But because he believed that the
secret of the Theater is to speak pompously, he bestowed all his art on the
words without any regard to the thoughts. Quintilian says, that he is sublime
and lofty to extravagance: in effect, he never speaks in cold^lood, and says
the most indifferent things in a tragic hu^s; likewise in the images that he
draws, the colors are too glaring* and the strokes too gross. He, who writes
his life, relates that in one of the Chorus's of his Tragedy of the Eumenides,
he so horribly frighted the Audience, that the spectacle made the children
swound, and the Women with child suffer abortion* Finally, his Enthusiasm, it
seems, never left him, he is so exalted, and so little natural. Sophocles is
too elaborate in his discourse, his Art is not enough hidden, in some of his
pieces, it lies too open and near the day; he sometimes becomes obscure, by his
too great affectation to be sublime; and the nobleness of his expression, is
injurious to the perspicuity; his plots are not all so happily unravel'd, as
that of the Oedipus. The discovery in the Ajax answers not to the intrigue; the
Author ought not to have ended a spectacle of that terror and pity with a dull
and frivolous contest about the Sepulture of Ajax, who then had slain himself.
And in the same piece that Machin of Minerva is too violent, who casts an
ench^ntment over the eyes of Ajax, to save Ulysses, whom Ajax would have
killed, if he had known him. Oedipus ought not to have been ignorant of the
assassinat of the King of Thebes; the ignorance he is in of the murder, which
makes all the beauty of the intrigue, is not probable* Euripides is not exact
in the contrivance of his Fables; his Characters want variety, he falls often
into the same thoughts, on the same adventures; he is not enough a religious
observer of decencies; and by a too great affectation to be moral and
sententious, he is not so ardent and passionate as he ought to be; for this
reason he goes not to the heart, so much as Sophocles; there are precipitations
in the preparation of his Incidents, as in the Suppliants, where Theseus levies
an Army, marches from Athens to Thebes, and returns on the same day. The
discoveries of his Plots are nothing natural, these are perpetual Machins;
Diana makes the discovery in the Tragedy of Hippolitus; Minerva that of the
Iphigenia in Taurica; Thetis that of Andromache; Castor and Pollux that of
Helena, and that of Electra; and so of others. After all, as these three
Authors are the first Models of Tragedy, they are great in their designs,
judicious in their fables, passionate in their expressions; throughout in their
Works predominates a genius, nature, and good sense. And though they are guilty
of their faults, yet it may be said, that all which is of them is original. The
latter Greeks, whereof Ephestion speaks, as Lycophron, Sosi^heus, and the
others that flourished under King Ptolomy Philodelphus; and the first Latins,
as Livius Andronicus, A^cius Pacuvius, who applied themselves to Tragedy, had
not any success in that way. The Romans, for some time, took delight in Comedy.
But so soon as the polite Learning was a little established at Rome, most part
of the great men employed themselves in writing Tragedies. Catullus made one
Tragedy of Alcmeon, out of which Cicero cites some Verses in his Lucullus;
^ra^chus made Thyestes, whereof Censorinus makes mention; Caesar made Adras^us
whereof Festus speaks; Rut^^^us made Astyanax, of which Fulgentius speaks;
Mecaenas made Octavia, which Priscian mentions; Ovid made Medea, of which
Quintilian gives some account; and seeing that these Tragedies are lost, no
judgment can be made of them, but by the merit of their Authors. But the esteem
these great men had for this sort of Poem then in a time when good s^nse so
much swayed, may sufficiently justify Cardinal Richelieu, who was so
infinitely affected with it; and he little authorizes the ignorance at Court in
these things, which is so much the mode at this day. The only Tragedies that
remain of the Latins, are those of Seneca* who speaks always well, but never
speaks naturally; his Verse are pompous, his Thoughts lofty, because he would
dazzle; but the contrivance of his Fables are of no great character. This
Author pleases himself too much in giving his Idea's, instead of real objects;
and he represents not always very regularly, what is to be represented. But it
is not only in the composition of Tragedy that the Greeks have excelled the
Romans; it is also in the magnificence of their Theater, these people, however
conquered they have been, have had greater thoughts than their Conquerors; and
Plutarch assures us, that the Athenians have been at greater expenses in the
representation of their Tragedies, and in the rewards they proposed to those
Poets that succeeded well, than in all the Wars that ever they undertook for
the defense of their Republic; and they believed not this expense
unprofitable, since it was to inspire the people with thoughts conformable to
the good of their estate.

XXIII.
THe following Ages became successively so gross one after another, that they
could produce nothing in this kind of Poes^e worthy of an^ reflection. The
Italians and Spaniards of latter Ages, had their wit too much corrupted with
Romances, to sustain the greatness of the character of Tragedy: notwithstanding
Trissino would make his Sophonisbe, and ^as^o his Torismondo, after the pattern
of the Tragedies of Sophocles: but they could not reach that character. The
Iephthes, and Bapti^^es of Buchanan, contain little considerable, except the
purity of style in which these Tragedies are written. The Sedecias of
Malapertus, the Crispus of Stephonius, the Josephus of ^rotius, the Herod of
Heins^us, and the other Tragedies of the learned men of the last Age, have
almost all of them a contrivance too simple, the Incidents are cold, the
Narrations tedious, the Passions forced, the Style constrained. The Tragedies
of Garnier, Rotrou, Serr^, and others of that time, are yet of a far meaner
character. The English have more of Genius for Tragedy than other people, as
well by the spirit of their Nation which delights in cruelty, as also by the
character of their language, which is proper for great expressions. But the
French, who have applied themselves to Tragedy more than any others, have
likewise writ with more success; and this success does strongly authorize the
use, as may be seen by so many great men amongst us, who daily signalize
themselves on the Theater. But the whimsi^ of these opera of Music, wherewith
the Public are infatuated, will, perhaps, be capable to discourage them, if
they be regarded. It remains to speak of Comedy, that of a Lecture of virtue
which it is essentially; is become, by the licentiousness of these latter
Times, a School of debauchery: it is only to re-establish it in its natural
estate, as it ought to be, according to Aristotle, that I pretend to speak. The
rest I leave to the zeal of the Preachers, who are a little slack on this
Subject.

XXIV.
SOme pretend that Aristotle, who has scarce said any thing of Comedy, has said
all, making a remark, that the ridiculous is to be handled in the same manner,
as he has discoursed of the grave and serious; by the rule of proportion, that
must be observed betwixt Comedy and Tragedy. That is to say, there must be
observed in Comedy, as well as in Tragedy, the decencies of places, of times,
of persons; that there must be employed all the colors, which ought to be the
seeds and the principles of the decency; that the preparations of the Incidents
ought to be conducted in such sort, that they serve not to render the events
cold, by taking from them what they may have of advantage and grace by the
surprise. For it is of importance to consider, that to prepare an Incident
well, is not altogether to say things, that may discover; but it is to say so
much only as may give place to the Audience, to divine: which also ought to be
sparingly done. For the pleasure of the Spectators is to expect always
something that may surprise, and that is contrary to their prejudgments. And
nothing ought to be predominant on the Theater so much as the suspension;
because the chief delight to be received there, is the surprise.

XXV.
COmedy is an image of common life; its end is to show on the Stage the f^ults
of particulars, in order to amend the faults of the Public, and to corr^ct the
people through a fear of being rendered ridiculous. So that which is most
proper to excite laughter, is that which is most essential to Comedy. One may
be ridiculous in words, or ridiculous in things: there is an honest laughter*
and a bu^^oon laughter. It Is merely a gift of Nature to make every thing
ridiculous. For all the actions of humane life have their fair and their wrong
side, their serious and their ridiculous. But Aristotle, who gives precepts to
make men weep, leaves none to make them laugh. This proceeds purely from the
Genius; Art and Method have little to do with it, it is the work of Nature
alone. The Spaniards have a Genius to discern the ridiculous of things much
better than the French; and the Italians, who are naturally Comedians, express
it better; their Tongue is more proper for it, by a drolling tone peculiar to
them. The French may be capable of it, when their Language has attained its
perfection. Finally, that pleasant turn, that gayetie which can sustain the
delicacy of his character, without falling into coldness, nor into buf^oonry:
that ^ine raillery, which is the flower of wit, is the Talent which Comedy
demands: but it must always be observed, that the true ridiculous of Art, f^r
the entertainment on the Theater, ought to be no other but the Copy of the
ridiculous that is found in Nature. Comedy is as it should be, when the
Spectator believes himself really in the company of such persons as he has
represented, and takes himself to be in a Family whilst he is at the Theater;
and that he there sees nothing but what he sees in the world. For Comedy is
worth nothing at all, unless he know, and can compare the manners that are
exhibited on the Stage, with those of such persons as he has conversation
withal. 'Twas by this that Menander had so great success amongst the Grecians;
and the Romans thought themselves in Conversation, whilst they sat beholding
the Comedies of Terence; for they perceived nothing but what they had been
accustomed to find in ordinary Companies. It Is the great Art of Comedy, to keep
close to Nature, and never leave it; to have common thoughts and expressions
fitted to the capacity of all the world: For it is most certainly true, that
the most gross strokes of Nature, whatever they be, please always more, than
the most delicate, that are not Natural: nevertheless base and vulgar terms are
not to be permitted on the Theater, unless supported by some kind of wit. The
proverbs and wise sayings of the People ought not to be suffered, unless they
have some pleasant meaning, and unless they are Natural. This is the most
general principle of Comedy; by which, whatever is represented, cannot fail to
please; but without it, nothing. It Is only by adhering to Nature, that the
probability can be maintained, which is the sole infallible guide, that may be
followed on the Theater. Without probability all is lame and faulty, with it
all goes well: none can run astray who follow it; and the most ordinary faults
of Comedy happen from thence, that the decencies are not well observed, nor the
incidents enough prepared. It Is likewise necessary to take heed that the
colors employed to prepare the incidents, be not too gross, to leave to the
Spectator the pleasure of finding out himself what they signify. But the most
ordinary weakness of our Comedies is the unravelling; scarce ever any succeed
well in that, by the difficulty there is in untying happily that knot which had
been tied. It is easy to wind up an intrigue, it is only the work of fancy; but
the unravelling is the pure and perfect work of the judgment. It Is this that
makes the success difficult, and if one would thereon make a little reflection,
he might find that the most universal fault of Comedies, is, that the
Catastrophe of it is not Natural. It rests to examine, Whether in Comedy the
Images may be drawn greater than the Natural, the more to move the minds of the
Spectators, by more shining portracts, and by stronger impressions? That is to
say, Whether a Poet may make a Miser, more covetous; a morose Man, more morose
and troublesome than the original? To which I answer, That Plautus, who studied
to pleas^ the common People, made them so; but Terence, who would please the
better sort, confined himself within the bounds of Nature, and he represented
Vices, without making them either better o^ worse. Notwithstanding, these
extravagant characters, such as the Citizen turned Gentleman, and the sick in
imagination of Moliere, failed not of success a little while ago at Court,
where all the tastes are so delicate; but all things ther^ are well received,
even to the divertisements of the Provinces, if they have any air of
Plaisanterie; for th^re they love to laugh, rather than to admire. These are
the most important Rules of Comedy. Now see those who have been famous for this
kind of writing.

XXVI.
THe principal amongst the Greeks, are Aristophanes and Menander; the chief
amongst the Latins, are Plautus and Terence. Aristophanes is not exact in the
contrivance of his Fables, his Fictions are not very probable; he mocks persons
too grossly, and too openly. So^rates whom he plays upon so eagerly in his
Comedies, had a more delicate air of Raillery than he; but was not so shameless.
It is true, Aristophanes writ during the disorder and licen^^ousness of the old
Comedy, and that he understood the humor of the Athenian people, who were
easily disgusted with the merit of extraordinary persons, whom he set his wit
to abuse, that he might please that people. After all, he often is no otherwise
pleasant than by his Buffoonry. That Ragoust composed of Seventy-six syllables
in the last Scene of his Comedy the Eccles^asousai, would not go down with us
in our Age. His language is often ob^cure, blunder'd, low, trivial, and his
frequent jingling upon words, his contradictions of opposite terms each to
other; the ho^chpotch of his style, of Tragic and Comic, of serious and
buffoon, of grave and familiar, is ugly; and his witticisms, often when near
examined, prove false. Menander is pleasant in a more commendable manner; his
style is pure, neat, shining, natural; he persuades like an Orator, and
instructs like a Philosopher. And if one may ground a true judgment on the
fragments that remain of this Author, one may find that he made very pleasant
images of the civil life; that he makes men speak according to their character;
that one may find himself in the portracts he made of Manners, because he keeps
close to Nature, and enters into the thoughts of the persons he makes to speak.
Finally, Plutarch, in the comparison he has made of these two Authors, says,
that the Muse of Aristophanes is like an impudent, and that of Menander
resembles a virtuous woman. For the two Latin Comic Poets, Plautus is
ingenious in his designs, happy in his imaginations, fruitful in his invention;
yet there are some insipid jests that escape from him in the taste of Horace;
and his good sayings that make the people laugh, make sometimes the honester
sort to pity him: it is true, he says the best things in the world; and yet
very often he sa^es the most wretched; this a man is subject to, when he
endeavors to be too witty; he will make laughter by extravagant expressions,
and hyperboles, when he cannot be successful to make it by things. Plautus is
not altogether so regular in the contrivance of his pieces, nor in the
distribution of the acts; but he is more simple in his subjects: for the Fables
of Tere^ce are ordinarily compounded, as is seen in the Andria which contains
two loves. This is what was objected to Terence, that he made one Latin Comedy
of two Greek, the more to animate his Theater. But then the Plots are more
naturally unravel'd, than those of Plautus; as those of Plautus are more
natural than those of Aristophanes. And though Caesar call Terence a diminutive
Menander, because he only had the sweetness and the smoothness, but had not
the force and vigor, yet he has writ in a manner so natural, and so judicious,
that of a Copy, as he was, he i^ become an original; for never man had so clear
an insight into Nature* I shall speak nothing of Lucilius, of whom nothing now
is left but fragmen^s. All we know of him, is what Varro relates, that he was
happy in the Subjects that he chose: but never person had a better Genius for
Comedy, than the Spaniard Lope de Vega; he had copious Wit joined with great
advantages of Nature, and an admirable facility; for he has composed more than
Three hundred Comedies; his Name alone gave applause to his pieces, so strongly
was his reputation established: and it was sufficient that a work came from his
hands, to merit the public approbation. But he had a Wit too vast to be
confined to Rules, or admit of any bounds; 'twas this obliged him to abandon
himself to the swing of his Genius, because he might always rely on it. He
never consulted other Commentary but the gust of his Auditors, and governed
himself by the success of his pieces, rather than by reason. Thus he dise^gag'd
himself of all the scruples of unity, and the superstitions of probability. But
as most commonly he is for re^ining upon the ridiculous, and would be too
witty, his fancies are often more fortunate, than they are just* and have more
of the droll, than they have of what is natural; for by too much sub^lety in
his drollery, his Wit becomes false, by reason it is forced to be too delicate;
and his graces become cold, by being too fin^: but amongst the French, never
any carried Comedy so high as Moliere. For the ancient Comic Poets had only
the f^lk of the Family to make mirth with on the Theater; but Moliere's fools
in the Play are the M^rquises, and the persons of Quality; others have been
content to play upon the common and Country conversation in their Comedies,
Moliere has made bold with all Paris and the Co^rt. He is ^he only man amongst
them who has discovered those lines of Nature that distinguish and make her
known. ^he beauties of the portracts he draws are so natural, that they make
themselves perceived by the grossest apprehensions: and his talent of being
pleasant, is improved one half the more, by that he has of counter^eiting to
the life. His Misantrope, in my opinion, is the most complete character, and
withal, the most singular that ever appeared on the Theater. But the
contrivance of his Comedies is always defective in something, and his Plots
are never handsomely unraveld. This is what may be said in general of Comedy.

XXVII.
THe Eglogue is the most considerable of the little Poems; it is an image of
the life of Shepherds. Therefore the matter is low, and nothing great is in the
Genius of it; it is business is to describe the loves, the sports, the piques,
the jealousies, the disputes* the quarrels, the intrigues, the passions, the
adventures, and all the little ^ffairs of She^herds* So that its character must
be simple, the wit easy, the expression common; it must have nothing that is
exquisite, neither in the thoughts, nor in the words, nor in any fashions of
speech; in which the Italians, who have writ in this kind of Verse, have been
mistaken: for they alw^yes aim at being witty, and to say things too finely.
The true character of the Eglogue is simplicity, and modesty: its figures are
sweet, the passions tender, the motions easy; and though sometimes it may be
passionate, and have little transports, and little despairs, yet it never rises
so high as to be fierce or violent; its Narrations are short, Descriptions
little, the Thoughts ingenious, the Manners innocent, the Language pure, the
Verse flowing, the Expressions plain, and all the Discourse natural; for this
is not a great talker that loves to make a noise. The Models to be proposed to
write well in this sort of Poes^e, are Theocritus and Virgil. Theocritus is
more sweet, more natural, more delicate, by the character of the Greek Tongue.
Virgil is more judicious, more exact, more regular, more modest, by the
character of his own Wit, and by the Genius of the Latin Tongue Theocritus has
more of all the graces that make the ordinary beauty of Poetry; Virgil has more
of good sense, more vigor, more nobleness, more modesty. After all, Theocritus
is the Original, Virgil is only the Copy: though some things he has Copied so
happily, that they equal the Original in many places. Mos^hus and Bion, who
writ in this sort of Verse, have likewise great excellencies, and very great
delicacies in their Idyllia. The other Poets who have writ Eglogues, as
Nemesianus, who was an Affrican, and Calphurnius the Sicilian writ very meanly.
The Italians, as Bonarelli, Guarini, Cavalier Marino; the Spaniards, as Luis de
Gongora, Camoens have little of Natural in their Pastorals, their Idyllia, and
their Eglogues; and Ronsard, amongst the French, has nothing tender or
delicate. The French Tongue, however perfect it pretends to be, has produced
nothing in this kind of Verse, comparable to the Eglogues of Virgil; neither
yet, it seems, has it force enough to express things so naturally to the life,
and to sustain that great simplicity of the Bucolique Verse, so nobly as the
Greek and Latin Tongue; for the Greek and Latin have a certain character of
majesty that shines even in the smallest things* The Idea of Pastoral Comedies
for which the Italians have had so great liking, is taken from the C^clops of
Euripides. The Greeks, says Horace, began to bring Satyrs on the Theater, to
temper the austerity of their Tragedy.

XXVIII.
THe principal end of Satyr, is to instruct the People by discrediting Vice. It
may therefore be of great advantage in a State, when taught to keep within its
bounds. But as Flatterers embroil themselves with the public, whilst they
strive too much to please particulars; so it happens* that the Writers of Satyr
disoblige sometimes particulars, whilst they endeavor too much to please the
public: and as downright praises* are too gross* Satyr that takes off the
mask, and reprehends Vice too openly* is not very delicate; but though it be
more difficult to pra^se, than to blame, because it is easier to discover in
People what may be turned into ridiculous, than to understand their merit; it is
requisite notwithstanding equally to have a wit for the one, as for the other.
For the same delicacies of wit, that is necessary to him who praises to purge
his praises from what is deformed, is necessary ^o him who blames to clear the
Satyr from what is bitter in it. And this delicacy which properly gives the
relish to Satyr, was heretofore the character of Horace, for it was only by the
way of jest and merriment that he exercised his Censure. For he knew full well,
that the sporting of wit, has more effect than the strongest reasons, and the
most sententious discourse, to render Vice ridiculous. In which Iuvenal, with
all his seriousness, has so much ado to succeed. For indeed that violent manner
of declamation which throughout he makes use of, has, most commonly, but very
little effect, he scarce persuades at all; because he is always in choler, and
never speaks in cold blood. It Is true, he has some common places of Morality
that may serve to dazzle the weaker sort of apprehensions. But with all his
strong expressions, energetick terms, and great flashes of eloquence, he makes
little impression; because he has nothing that is delicate, or that is natural.
It is not a true zeal that makes him talk against the misdemeanors of his Age,
it is a spirit of vanity and ostentation. Pers^us who to the gravity and
veh^mence of Iuvenal had joined obscurity caused by the affectation he had to
appear learned, has no better success; because he yields no delight: not but
that he has, however, some touches of an hidden delicacy; but these strokes are
always wrapped up in such a profound Learning, that there needs a Comment to
unfold them; he speaks not but with sadness, what by Horace is said with the
greatest mirth imaginable, whom sometimes he would imitate; his moroseness
scarce ever leaves him; he speaks not of the least things but in a heat; and he
never sports, but after the most serious manner in the world. The Satyr which
Seneca made on the Apotheosis of the Emperor Claudius, is of a much different
character, it is one of the most delicate pieces of Antiquity: and the Author
who otherwise throughout sustain^ the gravity of a Philosopher by the cold
blood of his temperament, and by all the grimaces and severity of his Morals:
seems so much the more pleasant in this, as he is more grave and more serious
in all his other Works. Most part of the Dialogues of Lucian, are Satyrs of
this kind; the Author is a pleasant Buffoon, who makes sport with the most
serious matters, and insolently plays upon whatever is great in the world: he
is on all occasions infinitely witty; but this, I confess, is a kind of foolish
Character. We have two modern Satyrs writ in Prose, much-what of the same air,
which surpass all that has been writ of this kind in these latter Ages. The
first is Spanish, composed by Cervantes, Secretary to the Duke of Alva. This
great man having been slighted, and received some disgrace by the Duke of Lerma
chief Minister of State to Philip III, who had no respect for Men of Learning,
writ the Romance of Don Quixot, which is a most fine and ingenious Satyr on his
own Country; because the Nobility of Spain, whom he renders ridiculous by this
work, were all bit in the head and intoxicated with Knight^rrantry. This is a
Tradition I have from one of my friends, who learned this secret from Don Lope
whom Cervantes had made the Confident of his ^esentment. The other Satyr is
French, made in the time of the League, where the Author very pleas^ntly
teaches the Public the intentions of the House of Guise for the Religion:
throughout this work is spread a delicacy of wit, that fails not to shine
amongst the rude and grosser ways of expressions of those Times: and the
little Verses scattered here and there in the work, are of a Character that is
most fine, and most natural. The Satyr of Rablais, however witty it be;
nevertheless is stuffed with so much Ribaldry, and is so little conformable to
the refinedness of this present Age we live in, that I think it not worthy to
be read by Gentlemen, no more than the Satyrs of Regni^r, though he has wit
enough; for he is too impudent, and observes no decency.

XXIX.
THe Elegy, by the quality of its name, is destined to Tears and Complaints:
and therefore ought to be of a doleful Character. But afterward it has been
used in Subjects of Tenderness, as in Lov^-matters, and the like. The Latins
have been more successful therein (by what appears to us) than the Greeks. For
little remains to us of Philetas and Tyrtues, who were famous in Greece for
this kind of Verse. They who have writ Elegy best amongst the Latins, are
Tibullus, Propertius, Ovid. Tibullus is elegant and polite, Propertius noble
and high; but Ovid is to be preferred to both; because he is more natural, more
moving, and more passionate; and thereby he has better expressed the Character
of Elegy, than the others. Some Elegies are left us of Catullus, of Mecaenas,
and Cornelius Gallus, which are of a great purity, and are exceedingly
delicate; but the Verse of Catullus and Me^aenas have too much softness, and a
negligence too affected: those of Cornelius Gallus are more round* and support
themselves better. In these latter Ages have appeared a German named Lotichius,
an Italian called Molsa, a Flemming called Sidronius, who have writ Elegies
with great elegancy. I speak not of the French Elegies, it is a kind of Verse
which they distinguish not from Heroic; and they call indifferently Elegy,
what they please, whereby the distinction of the tru^ Character of this Verse
seems not yet well established amongst them.

XXX.
THe Ode ought to have as much nobleness, elevation, and transport, as the
Eglogue has of simplicity and modesty. It Is not only the wit that heightens it,
but likewise the ^atter. For its use is to sing the praises of the gods, and to
celebrate the illustrious actions of great men, so it requires to sustain all
the majesty of its Character, an exalted nature, a great wit, a daring fancy,
an expression noble and sparkling, yet pure, and correct. All the briskness and
life which Art has by its Figures, is not sufficient to heighten Ode so far as
its Character requires. But the reading alone of Pindar, is more capable to
inspire this Genius, than all my Reflections. He is great in his designs, vast
in his thoughts, bold in his imaginations, happy in his expressions, eloquent
in his discourse: but his great vivacity hurries him sometimes past his
judgment, he gives himself too much swing; his Panegyricks are perpetual
digressions, where rambling from his Subject, he carries the Readers from
Fables to Fables, from Allusions to Allusions, from Chimera's to Chimera's; for
it is the most unbridled and irregular fancy in the world. But this irregularity
is one part of the Character of the Ode, the Nature and Genius of it requiring
Transport. Pindar likewise is the only person amongst the Greeks, that
acquired glory by this sort of writing, for little is remaining of the other
nine Lyrick Poets, whereof Petronius speaks. Nevertheless it may be avowed by
that which is left us of the fragments of Sappho, that Demetrius and Longinus
have great reason to boast so highly in their Works of the admirable Genius of
this Woman; for there are found some strokes of delicacy the most fine, and the
most passionate in the world. None can judge with any certainty of the others,
of whom we have so little. Anacreon alone is capable to comfort us for the loss
of their Works. For his Odes are flowers, beauties and graces perpetual: it is
so familiar to him to write what is natural, and to the life; and he has an air
so delicate, so easy, and so graceful; that there is nothing comparable in all
Antiquity in the way he took, and in that kind of writing he followed. Horace
found the Art to join all the force and high flights of Pindar, to all the
sweetness and delicacy of Anacreon, to make himself a new Character by uniting
the perfections of the other two. For besides that he had a Wit naturally
pleasant, it was also great, solid, and sublime; he had nobleness in his
conceits, and delicacy in his thoughts and sentiments: the parts of his Odes
that he was willing to finish, are always Masterpieces; but it requires a
very clear apprehension to discern all his Wit; for there are many secret
graces, and hidden beauties in his Verse, that very few can discover; he also
is the only Latin Author who writ well in that Verse amongst the Ancients; and
none could ever follow him, his Genius went so high. Boethius made some little
Odes, which he scattered in his Work of the Consolation of Philosophy. But for
all the politeness of his Wit, he could not surmount the bad air that was then
predominant; and what is most elegant in him, is only a false beauty, suitable
to the Genius of the Age in which he writ. Amongst the Latin ^yricks of latter
times. I find three, that distinguish themselves from the rest, Casimire
Sarbieuski a Pole, Dunkan de Cerisantes and Magdalenet, both French. Sarbieuski
is lofty, but not pure; Magdalenet is pu^e, but not lofty; Cerisantes in his
Odes has joined both, for he writes nobly, and in a style sufficiently pure:
but he has not so much flame as Casimire, who had a great deal of Wit; and of
that happy Wit, which makes Poets. Buchanan has Odes comparable to those of
Antiquity; but he has great unevennesses by the mixture of his Character,
which is not uniform enough* Muret and Vida have a fancy too limited; and their
Idea seems constrained, whilst too scrupulously they are addicted to Latinity.
Chiabrera has had great reputation by his Odes amongst the Italians; and
Ronsard amongst the French, for Ronsard is noble and great; but thi^ greatness
becomes deformed and odious, by his affectation to appear learned; for he
displayes his Scholarship even to his Mistress. M^lherb is exact and correct;
but he ventures nothing: and affecting to be too discreet, is often cold.
Theophil^ has a great fancy, and little sense. H^ has some fortunate
boldnesses, because he permits himself all. Voiture and Sarazin have gay things
in their Odes; for they have the art of drolling pleasantly on mean Subjects,
and they sustain th^^ Character well enough, but they have not vigor and
sublimity for high matters; most part of the others who have writ after them in
Lyrick Verse, of which have been made so many Collections, have pitched upon a
false delicacy of expression, which carries them afar off from the true
Character of the Ode, which is the greatness and majesty of discourse, and they
flag in a shameful mediocrity: their Verses were flat, and had nothing of that
heat, and that noble air so essential to the Ode, which ought to say nothing
low or common. I might speak with more advantage of those who write at this
present, if I had not imposed a Law on my self not to intermeddle in giving
judgment of the living, which would be too much confidence in me, besides the
indiscretion.

XXXI.
THe Epigram, of all the works in Verse that Antiquity has produced, is the
least considerable; yet this too has its beauty. This beauty consists either in
the delicate turn, or in a lucky word. The Greeks have understood this sort of
Poesy otherwise than the Latins. The Greek Epigram runs upon the turn of a
thought that is natural, but fine and subtle. The Latin Epigram, by a false
taste that swayed in the beginning of the decay of the pure Latinity,
endeavors to surprise the mind by some nipping word, which is called a point.
Catullus writ after the former manner, which is of a finer Character; for he
endeavors to close a natural thought within a delicate turn of words, and
within the simplicity of a very soft expression. Martial was in some manner the
Author of this other way, that is to say, to terminate an ordinary thought by
some word that is surprising. After all, Men of a good taste, preferred the way
of Catullus, before that of Martial; there being more of true delicacy in that,
than in this. And in these latter Ages we have seen a noble Venetian named
Andreas Naug^rius, who had an exquisite discernment, and who by a natural
antipathy against all that which is called point, which he judged to be of an
ill relish, sacrificed every year in Ceremony a Volume of Martial's Epigrams to
the Manes of Catullus, in honor to his Character, which he judged was to be
preferred to that of Martial. I find nothing to say considerable on the
Epigramists of latter Ages. It Is one of the sorts of Verse, in which a man has
little success; for it is a mere luckie hit, if it prove well. An Epigram is
little worth, unless it be admirable; and it is so rare to make them admirable,
that it is sufficient to have made one in a man's life.

XXXII.
IT remains to speak of the Madrigal, the Rondelay, the Sonnet, the Ballad, and
all the other little Verse, that are the invention of these latter Ages; but as
a little fancy may suffice, to be succesful in these kind of Works, without any
Genius, I shall not amuse my self in making Reflections on the method that is
to be observed in composing them: not but that he who has a Genius, would have
a much different success, either by a more happy turn he gives to what he
writes, or by a more lively air, or by more natural beauties; or finally, by
more delicate fashions of speech; and generally, the Genius makes the greatest
distinction in whatsoever work a man undertakes. The Character of the smaller
Verse, and of all the little Works of Poesy, requires that they be natural,
together with a delic^cy; for seeing the little Subjects afford no beauty of
themselves, the wit of the Poet must supply that want out of its own stock. The
sonnet is of a Character that may receive more of greatness in its expression
than the other little pieces; but nothing is more essential to it, than the
happy and natural turn of the thought that composes it. The Rondelay and
Madrigal are most wretched, if they be not most elegant; and all their beauty
consists in the turn that is given them. But it suffices to know what this
delicacy is, that ought to be the Character of these small pieces, to
understand all that belongs to them. A word may be delicate several ways;
either by a subtle equivocation, which contains a mystery in the ambiguity; or
by a hidden meaning, which speaks all out, whilst it pretends to say nothing;
or by some fierce and bold stroke under modest terms; or by something brisk and
pleasant, under a serious air; or, lastly, by some fine thought, under a
simple and homely expression. We find all these manners of delicacy in some of
the Ancients, as in the Socrates of Plato, in Sapho, in Theocritus, in
Anacreon, in Horace, in Catullus, in Petronius, and in Martial, these are all
great Models of this Character; of which the French have only in their Tongue
Marot, Gentleman of the Chamber to Frances the first. He had an admirable
Genius for this way of writing; and whoever have been successful in it since,
have only copied him. Voiture had a nature for this Character; if he had not a
little corrupted his Wit by the reading of the Spaniards and Italians. If these
words are affected, they lose their grace, because they become cold and flat,
when they are far-fetched. But the most general fault in these little pieces of
Verse, is, when one would cram them with too much Wit. This is the ordinary
Vice of the Spaniards and Italians, who labor always to say things finely.
This is no very good Character; for they cease to be natural, whilst they take
care to be witty. This is the fault of Quevedo in his work of the nine Muses,
of Gongora in his Romances, of Preti and Testi in their little Verse, of Marino
in his Idyllia, of Acquillini in his Madrigals, and of all the other strangers,
who would refine by false Idea's of far-fetched ornaments, and by affectations
of Wit, which have nothing of the solid Character, and the good sense of the
Ancients. Every small Genius is apt to run into this Vice, of which the late
Collections of the French Poesies are full; where the Poets force themselves to
be witty in spite of their Genius; for they either there never say things as
they ought to be said; or they say nothing in the great discourses; or they
load with ornaments Subjects that are not capable to suffer any; or they
discover all their Art, when it should be conce^l'd; or they give themselves
over to the beauty of their Nature without method; or finally, they lose
themselves in their Idea's, because they have not strength to execute handsomely
what their fancy dictates to them.

XXXIII.
WEre I of a humor to decide, I might add to these Reflections the solution of
some difficulties in the use of French Poesy, that to me seem worthy to be
cleared. The first is concerning the transposition of words, which some Poets
seem to affect in the great Poems, as a kind of figure, which they pretend to
make use of to give more force and nobleness to their discourse. But Ronsard in
the Preface of his Poem of the Franciad, is not of that opinion. For he
believes not the French Tongue to have a Character proper to bear in its
expression, that sort of Transpositions. In effect, it is too simple and too
plain to wind about the words, and give them another order than that of the
natural sense, which they ought to have. I refer to those who understand good
speaking, better than I do. The second difficulty, is the use of thou and thee,
which the Poets employ when they speak to God, or to the King. This use to me
seems neither founded on Authority, nor on Reason. For besides that the
authority of the Latin Tongue, on which they build, is a false foundation;
because that Tongue equally uses thou and thee in Prose and in Verse, for all
sort of persons; our Tongue is of it self of a Character so respectful, that it
cannot be content with those terms, for persons to whom it would give honor.
But nothing to me appears more strong against this use, than the manner which
the Poets themselves practice. For those who say thou and thee to God, and to
great persons; never speak so to their Mistresses, because they believe that
would want respect. It Is true, that Theophile has said so to his; but this was
said no more, after the Language became polished; and Voiture never used it.
This (...) a scruple I have, and which I leave to the Critics to examine. The
third difficulty, is the use of Metaphors; for the French Tongue is essentially
so scrupulous, that it allows nothing but what is modest, and the least thing
of boldness offends its modesty. But this would be too great a delicacy to
forbid Metaphors to Poets, with the same rigor as to Orators. There are
Metaphors authorized by use, which Poesy cannot pass by. It behooves a Poet to
use them discreetly, without shocking the modesty of our Language. It require^
a great judgment to distinguish what ought to be said in proper therms, and
what in metaphorical. The same Censure may be passed on the boldness of
compounding, and coining new words. Du-bartas has made himself ridiculous, by
attempting to imitate Homer and Pindar in the invention of these kind of words.
The fourth difficulty, is the constraint of Rhyme: but this can only be a
difficulty to the weaker sort of Wits, who suffer themselves to be mastered by
this servitude, which a great Genius employes, to give the more force to his
thoughts, and more greatness to his sentiments: The last difficulty, and the
most important of all the rest, is to know whether one may please in Poetry
against the Rules? I apply this to the French Poetry particularly, though it be
common to Poetry in general; because most part of our French make a false
liberty of this bad principle. It Is only by this that Moliere would salve the
ordinary irreg^^arity of his Comedies. It Is true, that his rashness has been
successful; and that he has pleased in his pieces against Art. But I pretend
that neither he, nor any others shall ever please, but by the Rules: they have
some natural draughts whereby they are successful, and these draughts are the
stroke^ of Art; for Art, as I have said, is nothing else, but good sense
reduced to method. It Is only these strokes that are taking in irregular pieces,
where what is irregular never pleases, because it is never natural.

XXXIV.
FInally, to conclude with a touch of Morality. Since the reputation of being
modest, is more worth than that of making Verses; were I to make any, I would
never forsake honesty nor modesty. For if nothing renders Men more ridiculous,
than the kind opinion they conceive of themselves, and of their performances;
the Poets are yet more ridiculous than other Men, when their vanity rises from
the difficulty of succeeding well in their Mystery. But if I made Verse better
tha^ another, I would not force any man to find them good, I would not have a
greater opinion of my self, though all the world applauded them; nor should the
success blind me: amongst the praises that were bestowed on me, I could not
persuade my self to suffer those, where appeared ought of favor; and I would
impose silence on them, who in commending me, spoke further than my Conscience;
to save my self from that ridiculousness, which some vain spirits fall into,
who would have p^aises and admirations eternally for every thing they do. I
would employ all my reason, and all my wit* to gai^ more docility, and more
submission, to the advice my Friends should give me; I would borrow their
lights, to supply the weakness of mine; and I would listen to all the world,
that I might not be ignorant of any of my faults. In the pra^ses that I gave to
thos^ I found worthy, I would be so conscientious, that for no interest
whatsoever, would I speak against my opinion; and there should never enter into
any thing that went from my hands, any of those mercenary glances, which so
greatly debase the Character of a Poet. Lastly, I would rid myself of all the
ridiculous vanities, to which those who make Verse are ordinarily obnoxious:
and by this prudent Conduct I would endeavor to destroy those Fripperies which
by custom are said of a profession that might continue honorable, were it only
exercised by men of honorable principles.

Names of the AUTHORS whose POEMS are mentioned and Censured in this Book.
APollon. Rhodius Aristophanes Acquillini Aratus Archilochus Ausonius Ariosto
Anacreon Acti^s. BAcchylides Bembo Boccace Boyardo Bonnefons Bonarelli Brebeuf
Buchanan Du-B^rtas Boethius. CAlphurnius Cat^llus Casar Callimachus Claudian
Camoens Chiabrera Calaber Cervantes Cerisantes Casimire Coluthus DAnte Diego
Xime^e^ ENnius Euripide^ Eschylus Erastothenes FRacastorius GAllus Garnier
Gracchus Grotius Guarini Gongara HOmer Heslod Horace Heinsius Habert IOn Live.
Andronicus Lotichius Lope de Vega Lucretius Lucilius Lucan Lycophron Lane
MAgdelenet Marot Malapertus Mecaenas Menander Martial Malherb Moliere Molza L^
Moy^e Marino Muret Musaeus Mamercus NEmesianu^ Nicandor Nonnus OVid Oppian
Orpheus Oliviero PRudentius Pontanus Politianus Paleotti Philetas Preti Pindar
Plautus Properti^s Persius Petrarch Pulci Petronius Pacuvius QVevedo RAblais
Racan Ronsard Rotro^ Reignier Rutilius SAppho Sophocles Seneca Sidonius
Apollinaris Sidronius Stephonius Statius Silius Italicu^ Scaliger Julius
Scaliger Josephus Sadolet Sanazarius Sarazin Sositheus Serres Sancte Marthe
TAsso Bernardo Tasso Torqua^o Tryphiodorus Theoritus Terence Tibullus Testi
Tyrtaeus Tristan Trissino Theophile Valor. Flaccu^ Virgil Vida Voiture
FINIS.

