THE RAPPAREE SAINT. A FUNERAL SERMON UPON THE DEATH OF MONSIEUR STRUTH,
Preached at Gallaway, a little after the Late Fight.
By Mac OLERO, a Friar of the New Order, of the Raparees.
To which is added St. RUTH'S Last SPEECH to the Irish Army.

The Text -- Dam these Heretic: or, These Dam Heretic -- (which you please.)

IT is not proper for me (Dear Joys) to tell you where the Text is, because
Shaint Patrick has made it a forbid to read into the Bible. -- But it is a very
good Text, for a Bible Text, though not to make a Compare with Shaint Patrick's
Texts; who, you do very well know was a true Catolick Shaint in all this
Country. Dam these Heretic! -- A very fine Text; and I am wonder, that Shaint
Patrick did not took it out of the Bible, with the Purgadoree, Mass, and Holy
Ceremonee, and the other all fine Things, which these Dam Heretic never heard
of; But it was because they should not be profane it, and take ill ways, -- I
don't mean, toward Gallway or Limerick; No, the Devil a bit: But I will not
make no Passion upon these Dam Heretics; though it is enough, if Shaint Patrick
was alive, to make him in a mighty Passion with all of them every one.

I will tell you one Storee. -- There was an Heretic lived at home, and a
Catolick lived over the way of this Heretic: Now, because this Catolick did
lived so near this Heretic, the poor Catolick was put into Hell among the
Devils, every one of them all together -- Do ye see. (Dear Joys) what a very
sad thing it is, to make company with one (Mark me) with one Heretic?

By my Shoul, (Dear Joys) this is very true; and, I will say one, a great deal
truer. -- Clen O pen, the fine Lady of Monsieur Shaint Ruth, as she was sitting
in his Tent a little before the Storming of Athlent by these Dam Heretic Dogs;
I do say. (Dear Joys) as she was sitting in the Tent, reading upon the Life of
Shaint Patrick, and taking a Pipe of Tobacco, she was thinking how these
Heretics would make pass the Shannon; she b^gan, to pity 'em, and said O
hone, poor Heretic! But, by my Should, she had no sooner shutted her Mouths,
but a Heretic Bullet sho^ it self into the bigger End of the Pipe, and run all
along into her Mouth^ and Choked her, for pitying the Dam Heredick Dogs. --
Here is the Pipe out of my Pocket; look here (my Dear Joys,) and here is the
Bullet too! By my Shoul, they are very Holy Relics, for I will tell you the
Miracle: -- When first I got 'em (by (...), and Shaint Patrick, it is true) she
did opened her Eyes, and told me, that she was in the Purgadoree, for pitying
the Dam Heretic; and bid me tell all our Dear Catolick Joys o^ it; who must
every one of 'em all together, say Ten Ave Mary's, and make a Kill upon Five
Heretics; and in the mean time, I must carry the Bullet, and the Pipe, in
Pilgrimage, to lay 'em in the Lap of the Blessed La^ to hatch them in a Relick;
And when I am return again, you shall all o^ you have part of these Holy
Relics and go to Shaint Patrick.

By my Shoul, (Dear Joys) these are great promise; and yet beside a^ this, I
will forgive your Absolution to Kill about Five Dam Heretics a peic^ and
speak to the Blessed Lady my self, to make a Paper, that shall Pe^ on Shaint
Patrick, for those that Kill but Four Dam Heretic a piece. -- This is some
great Encouragement (Dear Joys) -- and this a fine Sermon; for I have been
making it ever since the Great Tin Gun was carry against the Dam
Inniskilling-Men, who fought like the Devil at our Bog Trenches and Catolick
Fortifications.

But O hone! O hone! Did I make a Say of Guns and Fortifications; and not be
tremble, to see the Brave Monsieur St. Ruth made up in his Coffin: -- There
(alas!) he lies -- But yet he made a Dye in the Breast of the Mother Church,
and is now a huge great Shaint. -- He was Sainth Ruth before; but now he is
double Saint Ruth, and will be put in the Calendar the next Year. -- Oh this
double Shaint, by my Shoul, is very great Shaint, and has done great Miracles
in France land; and he did one great Miracle, since he came into our Country.
-- When the Heretic did carried the Powder and Ball over the Shannon, this
Monsieur St. Ruth did made himself so Invisible, that the Heretic Bullet could
never find him; and being thristy in that Invisible Chase after Heretic, he
turned a Bog into Bonny Clapper and Vsquebaugh, whilst Tyrconnel and Sharsfield
did make more Miracles; Tyrconnel raised a new Army out of the Ground; and
Sharsfield did make a Detatchment out of the Garrisons and Castles in the Air;
Brave old Catolick Boys; and sit for Service, being of those that did Kill Dam
Heretic in 44. But I know not where they are if they did not make a go to
Lymerick, to get some Vittles -- But Courage, (Dear Joys!) we shall have
Vittles and Shuccours too, from the French King, to tame these Wild Heretic;
and in the mean time, we must every one of us altogether, make a pray to Clen O
pen, and to this double Shaint, to deliver us from the dam Saucy. Heretic --
And say, -- Oh -- Clen O pen, Pray for us! O Clen O pen, by thy Pipe and
Bullet, deliver us -- O double Monsieur St. Ruth, pray for us! By thy
Miraculous Bonny. Clapper and Vsquebaugh, deliver us, Oh hone! (Dear Joys) What
did aile these holy Shaint to make a dye, when they had a great very deal of
Brass Money, and power over Miracles? Was it a Bullet, a dam Heretic Bullet?
But, by my Shoul, it is now a Holy Relick, and that is another Miracle (Dear
Joys!)

This great Shaint when he made his last say unto his Shouldiers, about their
ALL lying at the stake, me thought he spoke like the Son of the Blessed Virgin,
especially when did made Arguings about the Interest of the Holy Religion of
Shaint Patrick, and those Laws and Liberties he left to this Country, to be
Defended by K. James, and Monsieur Shaint Ruth, but this was not his bigest
Saint-ship, no, by my Shoul, he was Shaint in, deed when he did made Orders for
all and every one of the Pious Jesuits, and Priest to forgive you all an
Absolution of your Shins* if you should be dyed in defense of Chreist and
Shaint Patrick, by unlucky Heretic Bullers, or bob end of Rebellious Masket.
And who can help, that this Great Shaint is deaded; but by my Shoul, he was
deaded bravely, the little Bullet durst not come near him when he held up the
Shinge of the Cross, and bid the Catolick Joys be Courage. It was a great
Bullet that did shoot it self at him to make him a double Shaint, with his Name
all over Red Letters, among the rest of Shaint Patrick's good Catolicks Shaints.

But to make a Say again upon this great Shaint, now lying all in his Coffin,
and to think upon those other Brave Soldiers, that are all dyed with Bullets;
What do you think (Dear Joy) was the Cause? By my Shoul, I will make you tell
it to every of you all: -- You be all to wiched (Dear Joys) and have not kept
Shaint Patrik's Day, nor Good Friday, as you should; You all be Drunken upon a
Good Friday; You pitry the Heretic; You Pray not for the Dead in Purgadoree;
and see what come on it all. -- Shaint Patrick is angry, and will not let you
have a Pope again, to forgive you Absolutions, by the Holy Priests, and
Jesuits, till you be better Catolicks. And this is the reason, that these Holy
Shaints are take away from amongst all of every one of you. -- O hone! O hone!
(Dear Joys) you must do all the Penance, and Pray a great very deal to the
Shaints, to be better Catolicks; and then you will do Miracles amongst those
Dam Heritick Dogs.

Now, to Shaint Patrick, and every one of all the Bl^ushed Shaints, etc.

FINIS
Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh, in the Year, 169^.


